P2746A [ocm]27930339 205784
THE GALANTS Or the Reciprocal Confidents, A NOVEL. Translated out of French by a Person of Quality. LONDON: Printed for Joseph Knight and Francis Saunders, at the Blew Anchor in the New-Exchange MDCLXXXV.
THE FRENCH Bookseller TO THE READER. THat which has given the the Title to this Book was not a Confidence of imagi∣nary accidents: It has been effectually perform'd, and the Ladies, whose adventures you here find; have made too much noise in the World by their mis∣fortunes, to remain unknown. From one of them 'tis that the Memoirs of the Actions of their Lives was taken: They
have been faithfully follow'd; and the Author, who has only endeavoured to put 'em in order, thought he should have spoil'd a piece of such Variety as this is, if he had added any thing of his own. They are acti∣ons upon actions related in few words, and without any mix∣ture of those studied Conversa∣tions, that Embellish Stories invented only for the Readers pleasure. Those who doubt of the truth of 'em, may with lit∣tle pains be freed from their suspicions, have they but never so little Curiosity to inform themselves of what has pass'd in the World a few Years since.
THE Reciprocal Confidents A NOVEL. THe Garden of the Tuille∣ries had not long been fi∣nish'd, before the Countess of Marignan had a desire to take the Air there. After she had taken some few turns she rested her self upon a Seat, where she found a Woman, whose face seem'd not to be unknown to her; notwithstand∣ing the Idea she had conserv'd of it, she could not agree with her self whom it should be; nevertheless af∣ter she had condesir'd a long time,
the Lady who for her part look't very attentively upon the Countess of Marignan, they knew one the o∣ther, and made all the Endearments that could pass betwixt two Per∣sons who had extreamly lov'd, and had the pleasure to meet after a long absence. These two Ladies were strict∣ly engag'd together before they were Marryed; and had often talk'd un∣der the Names of Iris and Climene: 'Twas for this reason that the Coun∣tess beginning; cry'd ah my dear Iris! what joy have I to see you? and how must I complain of you at the same time for expecting, till chance has taken care to bring us together? my misfortunes have been so great answer'd Iris, that they have left me no Friend free from Calumny, and Strangeness; so that, Madam, I durst not flatter my self, that you would be favoura∣ble to me, when all the World did me so much Injustice. I always
thought, replyed the Countess, that your Enemies had a greater share than you, in the reports that were spread abroad of your Conduct: Madam, answered Iris, I never yet sin'd essentially against true Glory; but I ought to confess to you, I have often hazarded the ap∣pearance; the same Ascendant that dispos'd the Men to have some good wishes for me, made me rejoyce to be belov'd by 'em: I must confess to you also, that I forgot nothing that might please 'em; and that the desire of making them in Love, was the whole application of my Life. A crow'd of Adorers appear'd to me, the chiefest good, and I knew no Merit but that of being Environ'd by 'em. I was that in fine, Madam, which they call a perfect Coquette. This is the Cha∣racter reply'd the Countess of Ma∣rignan, of all Women that are hand∣some enough to deserve it; the
youngest and most amiable, are of∣ten the least guilty; their Vanity is more general, to make Lovers is their only design; and their con∣quest follow each other so close, that they have not the time to make a sincere application; they that have more Years and fewer Charms, almost always engage themselves under the appearance of a Counter∣sit passion, and often drive the ad∣venture to a Crime. It is always dangerous, answered Iris, to fol∣low this inclination; for it seldome happens but the disorder of the heart is the occasion of it in the Conduct, and thereby are caused an infinite number of misfortunes. Then, said the Countess, I would willingly have you tell me what has happen'd to you, for I have had an imperfect relation only of it; what we have not from the first hand, is never truly known. I can stay in this garden as long as I
will; I have no Engagement from any body to be gon so soon. I there∣fore, conjure you to make me a con∣fident to your adventures; I ask it with an intention to discover mine to you; upon these conditions Iris could not defend her self from Satisfying the Curiosity of the Countess, and thus she began her recital.
The Relation of IRIS Yow know, Madam, in what con∣straint my Mother brought me up, and how hardly she gave me the liberty to improve the Friendship you had for me; and it is also true that after you was married and your husband had carried you into Provence, I had then no commerce with the World, the tiresome life I led made me imagine there was a great deal of pleasure in being no longer subject to my Mothers vexatious reprimands, and to com∣mands so opposite to my inclinati∣ons: I foolishly thought that when I was married I should be Mistress of my actions which made me accept of the first proposition of a Husband, my Mother made me, and with∣out examining whether my heart consented to the choice of my Fa∣mily, I marry'd the Viscount
De— In the mean time my Mo∣ther, who would have her severity follow me every where, gave Les∣sons to my Husband about what he should defend me from, or prescribe me; there are few but approve of these kind of Maxims: So that in few days after our Marriage, he made me know his intentions, which appear'd to me very different from what I had propos'd to my self; my visits were limited either to my Family, or to some devout Friends of my Mothers; the hours were assign'd me, I was to employ in Piety, but none were left me for pleasure. Admire, Madam, if you please how strangely things will happen; my Husband told me one day that the President of —'s Lady had ask'd him how I did, desiring him that he would suffer me to make her a sit. She pass'd in the World o a Woman of a trouble∣some
Vertue; and as this character was not much to my likeing. I had no great desire to goe see her, but it was ordered me so precisely that I was forc't to obey. I had form'd to my self so disagreeable an Idea of her, that I should scarcely have de∣stroy'd, if I had not found in that house a great resort of Company, and a very free Conversation. The Presidents Lady receiv'd me with a thousands welcomes, gave me a great many praises, and told me in the most obliging manner in the World she would have me be one of her Friends, and visit her often. Her Husband look't extreamly upon me, and as I was just disposing my self to be gone, the Prince de— and the Duke de—came in, the first propos'd to the Presidents Lady to go see a general review of the Kings Household, that was that day made at Vincennes; at first she made some difficulty, but at last
consented, upon condition I would be of the Company, we went into his Coach, for the Duke had his reasons to be in another, the Pre∣sident had a Meen Grave, and Se∣rious, and a constraint in all his actions, that was not to my relish, not that you could say he wanted witt; but his way appear'd to me so contrary to those of the Court that were at his house, that altho' I had no experience in the World, I fail'd not to make a great diffe∣rence betwixt 'em. I must confess to you also, Madam, ever since that first visit I thought the Prince very aimable; he had a free Air, lively Witt, he made delightful thoughts of things, and express'd 'em with Justice; I remark'd too that I did not displease him, and he often took the opportunity to say very oblige∣ing things to me I was very well sa∣tisfied with the journey, because I never had made any so agreeably;
but when I was alone with my Hus∣band, (my mind wholy taken up with the thoughts of the Prince) the Idea I preserv'd of him in despite of my self, rendered his presence more troublesome to me than it had hitherto been. The inclinations I had for the Prince made me proceed far in a little time; it was impossible for me to resist the Temptations that made me love him, and I believe the passi∣on he had for me was very instru∣mental to my having one for him. One day the Presidents Lady desi∣red me to go to sup at her house, and not doubting but the Prince would be there, I spar'd no care to dress my self, I knew that black Patches gave a little agreement to young People; but I was not igno∣rant also that my Husband would not suffer me to wear 'em; I carri∣ed a few in a little Box, and I plac't 'em by the light of the Flambeau,
that lighted my Coach; I found the Prince just arriv'd at the Presi∣dents as I came. I am extreamly Fortunate Madam, says he, as he help'd me out of my Coach, to hap∣pen here at a time I can render you a little Service, till an occasion ar∣rives of giving you greater signs of the Passion I have for you; I do not remember what I answer'd for I was young, and without ex∣perience; but I know very well I answer'd him like a true Innocent, and that this Declaration rais'd a great trouble in my heart. He has told me since, that he was not at all angry at that disorder, and that my simplicity pleas'd him more than  I had answer'd with more Art. The President made me take notice that the sight of me gave him a great deal of joy, and that he desir'd a particular conversation with me; in fine, Madam in less than an hour, I found my self in a
necessity to harken to another De∣claration of Love, to which I made no better answer than to the first, although it was for different rea∣sons; for if the inclination I had for the Prince, made me speechless, the indifference I had, for the President did not inspire me with any thing to answer him. After Supper followed a Consort of Voi∣ces and Musick, which did not last long, because there was some Women there who lov'd play; you know, Madam, they who have a Passion for that, are insensible to all other Divertisements. The Presi∣dent, seeing I did not play, told me he would take care of my pleasure, if I would do the like for his; and to give me some conformable to my inclination, he commanded the Violins should be sent for; I then sound my self in a ticklish conjun∣cture, for a young Woman so little instructed in the Commerce of Love,
for the Prince and the President be∣seig'd me by turns, when the first took me out to dance, the other told me that Courtiers knew not how to Love, and that they were more sensible of the pleasure of ru∣ening a Womans reputation, than of the favours they might receive from 'em. This truth did not hin∣der me from loving the Prince; this Lesson on the contrary augmented the aversion I had for him that gave it; I continued to see the Presidents Lady with great assiduity; my Hus∣band was very glad of it, and de∣sir'd that I would make all my acti∣ons conformable to those of so Vir∣tuous a Lady, these were the terms he us'd to make me know his plea∣sure; I saw the Prince almost every day at her house, but as yet, it was not with liberty enough to enter∣tain our selves with the thoughts we had for each other; he took a design to write me his, and gave
me this Letter one day as I was at the Presidents. SHall I never see you, Madam, but amongst a thousand People who beseige you? And will you not give me an opportunity to tell you of the Passion you have inspir'd me with? Alas! Madam! I fear the worst, I have no hopes, and you do not so much as take the care to give me the Consolation of one look; and what∣ever mine may say to you, you do not love me enough to understand their Language, if you would have this great mistery continue secret, take care to use it with some signs of com∣passion; for if you give me no assist∣ance I very well find, it will be im∣possible for me to hinder it from ap∣pearing. I read this Letter a hundred times, but I found my self in a great trouble when I would answer it.
My Mother was a Woman of the Age past, she thought that a young Girl should not know how to write; and according to this Maxim, she made me be taught only enough to sign the Contract of Marriage; ne∣vertheless I determin'd to write, but I could not do it, without mak∣ing a Gentlewoman who serv'd me call'd Limdville a Confident to it, because she writ indifferently well, and I would make use of her hand and council in this important dis∣patch: After I had began several Letters which I did not like, at last I stuck to this. IT is not without hardship that I resolved to write to you; and I have not less to explain my self, but I would not have you doubt one mo∣ment of the acknowledgment I have for the Sentiments you have discover'd to me, and 'tis you alone that must teach me after what manner I am to
explain my self upon the subject of Love. All the morning being past in writing this Note, I thought of nothing but sealing it, and this was but just done when my Husband came in, I held the Letter yet in my hand, and striving in hast to put it in my pocket, unhappily let it fall; my Husband who saw a Pa∣per fall betwixt Limdville and I, dextrously seiz'd of it; and as he is naturally suspicious, at the same time went out to read what he had taken up. I as soon perceiv'd the loss I had. I look't for the Letter to no purpose, and you may guess what fears I had. As there was no time to be lost in reflection, we consulted what was to be done to draw me out of this misfortune. The Note was of Limdvilles writing, and she acquitted her self with as much address, as assurance in the part
she had agreed to act: And I was instructing of her in it, when she perceived my Husband gently ap∣proach us to over hear what we said. Yes, Madam, says she, raising her Voice, give me back if you please the Note you have taken from me, or give me my discharge; there is no fault in the writing to a Man I pretend to marry, and I humbly de∣sire you to leave me no longer in the inquietude you see me; to keep up the part, I swore to her I had not seen her Note; but the more I assur'd her, the more she pretended to believe it was in my hands. My Husband took an extream pleasure to overhear this discourse. Limdville desir'd him he would en∣deavour to oblige me to return the Note, and did it with signs of an∣ger, which appear'd so sincere, that he was perswaded, and at last gave back the Note to Limdville, quarel∣ling with her for holding so tender correspondence with a Man.
She put it off with a false confi∣dence; and this very Note which had been some time in my Hus∣bands hands, past that night into the Prince's, to whom I gave it at the Presidents; since this time I have had no occasion either for a Secre∣tary or Interpreter, my passion taught me more in Eight days, than I should have learn't in six Months, if love had not been concern'd; but yet I was very little at quiet on the part of the President, he was al∣ways telling me of his tenderness, and perswading me that I ought not to forget it. As he advanc'd not in my favour, and that he believ'd my Husband was an Obstacle to his de∣sires, he impatiently expected till the return of the Spring should o∣blige him to go to the Army. I often saw his Wife, and did not find her so severe as she was Ima∣gin'd by the World: She willingly suffer'd the Duke to praise her
Hands, and Breasts, which she did not take too much care to hide. The King who does not stay for fair Weather to enlarge his Conquests, parted in the Month of February, for the French Court; my Husband had orders to go to his Regiment, and I was left alone at Paris, and it seem'd as if every thing would con∣tribute to my happiness, my Mo∣ther went into Burgundy. And I for∣got to tell you, Madam, that my Husband desir'd the President and his Wife to take care of my Con∣duct, and that he order'd me to do nothing without their advice. The first use I made of my Liberty after my Husbands departure, was to ad∣vertise the Prince of it, and to pro∣mise him a meeting in the Kings Garden. I was preparing to go thi∣ther, when the President arriv'd at my House, he began his visit by a long discourse of the obligation I was under, to live retiredly whil'st
my Husband was expos'd to the chance of War, and 'twas this the World expected from me, for the Establishment of my Reputation: He added that he was desir'd to take care of it; but when after these wise Advertisements he would speak to me of his love, I maliciously ask'd him if that Article was comprehend∣ed in the right he pretended over my actions; no reply'd he, but if you do not consider me, I know ve∣ry well how to be reveng'd for the indifference you have always shew'd me; I was in a very bad humour, for I past very ill that time I could have imploy'd in a more agreeable Entertainment; nevertheless I was to endure this tiresome Conversati∣on for two hours, and I know not if it had been ended all the day, with∣out the arrival of his Lady. He left us alone, as I have something; said she, particularly to tell you, I desire no body may interrupt us. I bid
my Porter should be commanded to deny me to those who came to see me, and we immediately reti∣red to my Closet, where the Lady spoke to me much after this sort. You are not ignorant, my dear Child, (for so she call'd me) that I have a sincere kindness for you, and I should be ravish't to see you hap∣py; for this reason I will give you some advice that may not be un∣useful to your quiet; for 'tis a great one, to be esteem'd in the World a Person of a Regular and Wise Conduct. A Woman there∣fore of understanding, must consi∣der how to establish her Reputation before she thinks of her pleasure. To arrive to it, there must be a great deal in outward appearance, re∣trenching the idle part to improve the solid with surety. Such as these have great priviledges, and there is always an advantagious Explication given to all their Actions. 'Tis thus
that I have happily succeeded, hav∣ing sacrific'd the best time of my Life, to enjoy the other with more freedom. Besides I should not have enter'd into so strict a Confidence with you, if I had not remarqu'd that you do not want discreti∣tion. Fix therefore your looks and your heart, set bounds to your desires, and take heed least the desire of pleasing all Men does not bring you to be despis'd by 'em. 'Tis a Foolish thought for a Woman to have such wandring pretentions; she always ruin's her self by it, and never prospers in her design. The Friendship I have for you, shall give you an advantage will help to save you much from the general Cen∣sure; and whilst we shall live thus united, every thing will pass on this part with great secrecy; whilst we enjoy an agreeable and pleasant Life. But, my Child, continued she,
I believe you must resolve to shew a little Complaisance to Mr. the Pre∣sident. I find that he loves you, and I shall not be displeased at this Amusement, that it may hinder him the more from penetrating in∣to the mystery of my Conduct. After this long preamble, the President's Lady confes'd to me that she lov'd the Duke and was belov'd by him. She added, that not to make Confidents of her Women, she should be glad of a Friend, that she should not suspect, when she made her appointments of taking the Air, and that the Prince should be of the Society, because she well under∣stood, we had (that which they call) an Affair, together. I approv'd very well of all the Presidents Lady said, expecting that I could not a∣gree with my self, to stop my de∣sires at a single Object. I always reserv'd my self the liberty of my looks upon the General. She also
told me that the Chievalier Du— and the Count De la— whom I had seen at her house, were not fit to be of our Secret, and that she desir'd me not to see 'em. I pro∣mis'd what she desir'd and kept my word. This Conversation ended, the Presidents Lady would have me go to Supper with her. And as I was going out, my Porter told me the Prince had been to see me. I thought that the impatience of be∣ing alone at the place of meeting, had brought him to know the rea∣son I had disappointed him. The President receiv'd me with great signs of joy, and gave me a thou∣sand Testimonies of Friendship. I shew'd him some slight Complaisan∣ces that pleas'd him, and he was so much the more charm'd by 'em, as he thought 'em free from affectation. You will wonder, Madam, says he to see me in a little time, so enlighten'd
in the Affairs of Gallantry; Love is no sooner felt but it teaches us all that we ought to know to enter into its Mysteries, and I have re∣ceiv'd so many Lessons from him as sure not to forget all. When I was return'd home, I found there this Billet from the Prince. Billet. YOu are more knowing then I imagin'd, and I find that you are able to instruct me. Yet, Madam, it is not so easie to abuse me as you think, and I almost understand the meaning of your proceedings with me. You make me an Assignation and disappoint me; I go to your house to know the reason, your Servants say you are abroad; and the Presidents Coach is in your Court. I yield you to that Happy and Worthy Rival, and am extreamly oblig'd to you for the favour you do me of restoring me to my self.
I could not resolve to leave the Prince in the error he was. Tho' it was almost Midnight, I immediate∣ly writ him this answer. THey that have good sence ne∣ver judge of things, by ap∣pearances, and I am far from being guilty; but you are extreamly so for conceiving so disadvantagious an o∣pinion of me. Take care to discover the truth, for I am not Friend e∣nough to you this Night, to make you know my innocence, and I perceive it will cost you more pains to repair the injury you do me, than it will be to perswade you that I hate the Presi∣dent, and that I had a great deal of disposition to love you. If Lovers quickly take slight su∣spitions, they are subject to lose 'em with the same easiness. The Prince came to see me on the mor∣row, we clear'd our selves, and the
Peace was made. Altho' the Win∣ter was not quite past, yet we had fine weather, of which I took care to profit. In spight of the Presi∣dents Ladies advice, I went to the Vincennes, where the young Com∣pany that was left at Paris did not fail to meet. I met there the Che∣valier Du— whom I had seen seve∣ral times at the Presidents. He drove near my Coach, we got out and walk'd some time. You may imagine, Madam, he said many plea∣sing things to me, and I did not refuse to hearken to 'em. We be∣gan a kind of an Affair, but no∣thing came of it, because he went the next day to the Army, and was kill'd in that Campagne, I made a great many more of this kind, that I shall not mention, applying my self only to those that have been the occasion of the misfortunes of my life.
I told the Presidents Wife of the quarrel I had had with the Prince. She generously offer'd her self to recon∣cile us, but my heart had prevented her Cares. We talk'd very familiar∣ly, and she told me she had never had any falling out with the Duke. It does not make me, said I, have the greater opinion either of your kindness or his, a Passion without any disturbance resembles marriage too much; there must be quarrels for the pleasure of Reconcilements; there must be difficulties for the glo∣ry of overcoming 'em; there must be Mystery not to divide with any the sweetness of a tender Com∣merce. What would you have me say to you, continued I? I should not hate a Lover that out of a prin∣ciple of jealousie should be carry'd into a little Violence. As for that the Presidents Lady, said there's none can as you do without having an ill tast of things. Do not let us enter
into a dispute of this said I, but I am very well perswaded that no Woman of Gallantry will be displeas'd at what I say. A great importment is always a sign of Love. But, my dear, reply'd the Presidents Lady, I find you very knowing for a Woman who was marry'd young, and to a severe Husband, for I suppose upon this occasion you do not confound the Husband with the Lover: No certainly, returned I, for the very thing which seems insupportable in the first would be a Charm in the latter. You have had the experi∣ence of both, then answer'd the Presidents Lady? Not at all, re∣ply'd I, 'tis my imagination only makes the differences, 'twas to little purpose to uphold my opinion, the Presidents Lady would not consent to it. We past for two Months our time peaceably enough, at least in our Society, for in my particular I was not without Chagrins and Plea∣sures.
You may remember, Madam, if you please, that I told you I had walk'd with the Chevalier Du— at Vincennes, and that we had be∣gan an Adventure for his return. The poor Man was kill'd at the Seige of Dole; and the Count De la— brought me the news. I cry'd bitterly at it, and by my Tears the Count imagin'd I had a heart capable of a true kindness. upon these thoughts he undertook to Comfort me, he spoke to me, I remember, more then two hours without being able to make me un∣derstand reason, but when, having fix'd his eyes upon me, he told me how happy they were that were be∣lov'd by me, and that he assur'd me he would use all endeavours to ac∣quire that Glory, I hearkened to him, look't upon him, and did not forbid him from hoping. Some days past without my seeing of him, but I was nevertheless rejoyc'd at
his coming from the Army. Since I had the President, his Lady and the Prince to Mannage, I told the Count he must not come so often to me. I had an Intimacy with some Ladies who were his Friends, at whose house I gave him some meet∣ings, and it was a great pleasure to me to find him always first at the place appointed. He is certainly a Man of great Penetration, and for that reason he perceived by all my ways, that I had no solidity in my mind. He made a journey into the Country, and was forgot before he return'd. He had made sure but little impression in my heart, be∣cause it has said nothing in his fa∣vour since. I made a reflexion one day upon this half-adventure, and I said to my self; this is the Fate of calm Amours. If I had met with great Obstacles to overcome, great quarrels to appear, and that both my wit and my heart were
busied, I should not seek after (as I do) fresh occasions of an Affair. In the mean time my good For∣tune seem'd to be well establish'd. Neither my Husband, Nor Mother talk'd of returning, and I manag'd the President with such Address, that he thought my Vertue was the cause of all the Chagrins my indifference made him suffer. There happen'd nevertheless some change in my Affairs, and I should have had some troublesome minutes to pass if I had been capable of it. The Princes's Relations oblig'd him to marry. I be∣lieve that if this engagement did not altogether break off our Commerce, I must at least give him the liberty to appear so. But yet every thing had another turn: He marry'd a Woman without Beauty and Me∣rit, and only considerable for her Riches; so that finding nothing in her Person, or Wit that could in∣gage him to her, he soon dispenc'd
with those Cares that are requir'd in a suitable Marriage, and I had not reason to suspect she had rob'd me of his heart. I determined to see the Princess, and she gave me reason enough to commend her. But, Madam, the pleasures of love are establish't upon so little solid foun∣dations, that they are subject to great revolutions. I had slept hi∣therto in the bosom of prosperity (if it be lawful to say so) but now it was time to Experiment to what trouble Gallantry exposes the Wo∣men. The President who began to be weary of my resistance, and who would not see that he ought to im∣pute the reason of it, to nothing but his want of desert, resolved to en∣deavour to penetrate into my heart. And to do it with the greater ease, he had prevail'd upon that Gentle∣woman that drew me so well out of the trouble of the first Letter. Per∣fidious
Limelville discover'd to him all that you have heard from me, and did not forget what past betwixt me and the Chevalier Du—and the Count De la— But the Love the President had for me making him continue his prudence, he desir'd to be convinc'd of my Intrigues by his own eyes. One Evening when the Prince was with me in my Closet, Limelville adver∣tiz'd the President of it. The knowledge of it caus'd him some disturbance; but as there are few Lovers but love to flatter themselves he thought I took but little pleasure in the Princes Visit; and to be satisfi¦ed in it, he bid his Wife send to desire me to come and play with her at Ombre. I told the Messenger I could not possibly go, because I was to answer a long Letter I had receiv'd from my Husband. I thought that this would have made my excuse, but it only serv'd to anger the Pre∣sident,
he found I sought an oppor∣tunity of being alone with the Prince; and to make me blush at it he made a proposition to his Wife and the Duke to go to my house. I had taken no care to receive them, and I did not hear 'em before they were in my Antichamber. I went hastily to them, and would have had 'em gone into another Apart∣ment; but the President shov'd me back, and went with a Light into my Closet, where he found the Prince in some disorder. You may easily imagine with what Air they saluted each other, and they went together to the Room where the Presidents Lady stay'd with the Duke; after which the President oblig'd me to go with him into the Chamber he had refus'd to go but a minute before. I had not the time to reflect upon what I should alledge for not com∣ing to his house, and for staying alone
with the Prince. Shall I tell you Madam his jealousie was so violent that he gave me a blow on the Ear with all his force. After this hor∣rible Carriage, he said every thing to me that might load me with shame. I know not how I was able to endure these Violences; but the little sence I had of 'em, made me contented to receive a beating for a pleasure. But far from repul∣sing Concern by Concern, I ima∣gin'd the President a Man of the greatest moderation in the World, was carryed to this injurous Vio∣lence by an excess of jealousie only, which is never without Love. When he had left off speaking, I was go∣ing to justifie my self, by telling him, I durst not refuse to entertain the Prince, least he should think 'twas some Affair of my heart had hindred me from shewing him that Complaisance. Hold your tongue, perfidious Woman, cry'd he, I know
the whole Intrigue. He told me in effect what had happen'd to me with the Prince, the Chevalier, and the Count, and made me know that Limelville had advertised him of all. Submission was the only course I could take after this, and certainly the safest for me. Whil'st I endeavour'd to dissipate the doubts of the President, his Lady and the Prince enjoy'd but unhappy Minutes. The last was afraid least at the cost of my Fidelity I should reconcile my self with the President; and the first was dead with fear, that I should Sacrifice to her Hus∣band all the Secrets she had confided to me. Nothing of this nature happen'd. I only endeavour'd to convince him that he was in the wrong to be jealous; and the inte∣rest I had to prevail upon him, made me think of so good reasons, and find such Eloquent words, that at last I brought him to ask me pardon.
So that we rejoyn'd the Company in a good reconcilement, consider∣ing we had had so great a falling out. The Prince and the Presidents Lady appear'd a little surpris'd, that so great a trouble should be so soon appeas'd. I look't to see if I could discover their thoughts by their Eyes; but they were so busie in looking upon one the other, that they did not perceive the meaning of mine. As play was the pretence of the visit, and that the time for it was past in other things, we parted. I discharg'd Limelville, and the President would no longer hearken to her. I thought then I was very well got out of so dange∣rous an Affair; but I was mista∣ken, for there were great alterations in our Commerce. Limelville told all that she knew to the Presidents Lady, and did not so much as con∣ceal it from the Prince. I was very
much surpris'd to find a great cold∣ness in their proceedings the next day, they did not tell me the reason of it. And I confess to you, I was not very inquisitive to discover it. We walk'd at the Arsenal, and the Duke came to us, he gave the Pre∣sidents Lady his hand, and the Prince began so forc't a Conversati∣on with me, that I soon perceiv'd he was angry at the Adventure of the day before. His frozen Air made me conceive certain Conje∣ctures of his alteration. The Duke was no more satisfi'd with the pro∣cedure of the Presidents Lady, and we had very near the same thoughts 'twas in this occasion, Madam, that I remembred what the President had told me concerning the Prince's disposition. He began to appear less worthy of my Esteem. And what before appear'd excellent, was now like the common way of the World; on the contrary the Acti∣ons
of the President became more taking and Graceful I must confess that these thoughts were destroy'd as fast as they came, but they re∣turn'd too often, that tho' I had not a design to make him a happy Lover, I had at least a desire to make him a Friend to me for my whole life. To speak truth, I did not know my self yet, and I was very uncapable of a Conduct fit for such a Project. The Presidents Lady on her side was tired with the long undisturb'd enjoyment of the Duke, and had tasted of the insinuating Wit of the Prince, she had likewise made I suppose some Advances; for he is of that humour, I know, not to love a Lady that may be call'd a Mother or a Governess. I saw very well she did not stand less in fear of me, then the Duke. She thought with reason if she should oppose me, that I would acquaint the World in Ge∣neral,
and her Husband in particu∣lar, how they were mistaken in the false opinion of her Vertue; but as she had Wit and a young Amour was concern'd in it, she took the course to abuse me. I was one day walking alone with her in her Garden. I had the pleasure to see her take two or three turns in great hast, and to hear her sigh as if she had had some extream Melancholy. I expected with impatience where all this would end, when she began to tell me that the opinion of the World was the most dangerous enemy to Women; that it was inconsistent with quiet; that she had tasted more pleasures in the austerity of her retirement, than she had ever found in the liberty she had given her self. In fine Madam, said she to me, it was not in my power to hide from you this Melancholy and these Sighs, which are the effects of
a Combat in my breast, betwixt the remainder of a little inclinati∣on for the World, and a resolution of leaving it without return. I said nothing to oppose her Re∣solutions. I knew very well they were affected, and that she was al∣ways too strictly ty'd to the World. I commended her extreamly for ap∣plying her self to the solid part; and when she told me experience con∣firm'd her in these thoughts, I assur'd her, that when I had as much as she, I would willingly take the Resolution she was about. This Subject serv'd to entertain us five or six days, during which time I often met the Duke, who endea∣vour'd to make me consent to go halves with him in Revenge; but I would have all the honour of it my self, and 'twould have troubled me to have shar'd it with any o∣ther.
I heard in the mean time that the Presidents Lady often saw the Prince at his Wives house, where she visited under the pretence of a Friend, to reconcile their differen∣ces, and that she did it by Sacrifi∣cing me. I resolv'd she should be∣come a Victim to my resentment, but I found it an unworthiness un∣becoming me to betray the secrets she had confided to me, and there∣fore I establisht my Revenge upon a more curious foundation. I was at the Presidents, and he had in particular entertain'd me a good while. She ask'd me accord∣ing to her Custom what he had said for me. He spoke to me, said I, about the night he found the Prince with me, and represented to me the injury a Woman does her self by having a Commerce with a Man of that Character. It is not better, said she, to have it with my Husband than the Prince. As
things have not been alter'd since you establisht 'em as they are, re∣ply'd I, I do not see what reason you have to condemn 'em now. The scruple of having contributed to it, answer'd the Presidents Lady. I take it upon my self, said I, and you will not think it amiss if I pre∣serve a Friend I infinitely esteem. The ill will she had for me, and I for her made a great progress in a little time: I also learnt that the inclination she had for the Prince did not move at a slower rate. I had no jealousie upon it; but it is certain that a Woman who pretends to Beauty, can't see without trou∣ble one of more years, and less Fair, have the advantage to engage her Lover. The Curiosity I had to know what past betwixt the Presi∣dents Lady and the Prince, inspir'd me with a desire to bribe one of the Prince's Foot-men; it was not hard to seduce him, and 'twas he
that told me the Presidents Lady and her new Gallant were to go for a day, to a house of the Presidents, five or six Leagues from Paris, where he had often solicited me to pass some few days. I had deny'd it till now; but at this time I prest him to it, as well as to keep the Secret of our Design without tel∣ling him the reason of it; I desir'd him to approve of ingageing the Princess to be of the Company, for she began to disabuse her self about the Calumnies had been rais'd on me. I went to her house and pro∣pos'd to her to take the Air at Ruel. I thought it was best thus to put the change upon her, because she is not a Woman to be proceeded with in down right Measures. I did not ill to make use of this way, for she told her Husband she was to go the next day to Ruel; he was not angry at it, in the thoughts she would go away different from
what he intended. And the Presi∣dent had not less joy, when his Wife told him she was to go the next day to the Abby of St. Cyr, to see Madam Arangonnis who was retir'd thither. And as I would have nothing wanting in my re∣venge, I writ a Note to the Duke and pray'd him to meet me there, but I despair'd of his coming, be∣cause I was told he was at Ver∣sailles. I saw with great joy the day ar∣rive that was to yeild me so much pleasure, and give such confusion to my Rival. The President had not less, for he perswaded himself he should draw great advantages from this meeting. He had order'd his Servants to go expect him at his Country house, and to get ready a Treat for us; but I took such order that one of my Footmen amus'd 'em on the way, and undertaking to appease the President if he should
be angry at it, I went to take up the Princess whom I told we would not go to Ruel, because the Dut∣chess of Aiguillon was there. She suffer'd us to conduct her whether we pleas'd, for she is a Woman of an easie perswasion. We went to find the President, who stay'd for us at the Gate, St. Antoine with the Abbot B— and we began our Journey with a great deal of Gaye∣ty, the President by hopes that were vain, the Princess by a desire of diverting her self, and I in thoughts of a full revenge upon the Presidents Lady and my perfidious Lover. The Abbot B— for his part was not without pleasure, since he gave himself that of rehearsing a whole peice for the Stage, he had but lately finished; in the mean time envious joys came into my mind that made me break out into Laughters, which no body could penetrate into the cause off. We
discover'd at last the House, and enter'd into it without being per∣ceiv'd, for this Journey was taken in a Season, when every body was busied in the Field; and the Presi∣dents Lady's People were employ'd in making ready a little Entertain∣ment. From the Ante-Court, we walk'd into the Court of Honour, where the President and the Princess had the pleasure to see some of the Prin∣ces's his Foot-men, and the Presidents Lady's Coach. What surprise so∣ever the sight of this gave, it was not sufficient for my satisfaction, I would have 'em see more; and that no time might be given to any to advertise the Lovers, of the Com∣pany that was arriv'd, I went be∣fore, whilst the President was ask∣ing his Lady's Foot-men some que∣stions. The Princess follow'd me, and we went with all the diligence imaginable into a low Apartment
we found open, we cros'd a great Hall and several Chambers with∣out meeting any body. I began to think we were mistaken; but at last I open'd the door of a Closet, where the Princess, the President and I discover'd the Prince and the Presi∣dents Lady alone together. She did not seem the least mov'd or surpriz'd at it, but said to me with an astonish'd confidence, you did not think, Madam, to have met here so good Company. I would not have you come to a house where I have any share, without finding me there to pay you my Service. I confess, Madam, I thought the man∣ner the Presidents Lady spoke to me in, would have made me forget I only came to surprise her: She bore the adventure without disor∣der; and her free Air, that had no concern upon it appear'd like inno∣cence it self. She afterwards said a thousand extravagant things to the
President, to the Princess and to me, not sparing so much as the Abbot B— and when the poor Hus∣band ask'd her what had hindred her from going to St. Cyr, and why she was shut up with the prince, she answered she had a mind to be satisfied of my Conduct, and to see her self that I was unworthy of her Friendship. Whilst the Pre∣sidents Lady and her Husband were saying what boldness and jealousie could inspire, the Princess thought her self oblig'd to reason with her Husband in the same nature, and without having respect to his high quality, she said a thousand things that obscur'd a little his Shining Title. The discovery had not been regular nor my revenge perfect, if the Duke had neglected coming; he receiv'd my Note as he was re∣turning from Versailles, 'twas easie for him to comprehend that I writ to him with a design to clear the
doubts he had about the infidelity of the Presidents Lady, who not long since made him understand, that a true remorse of Conscience prest her to break off a Commerce, she could not in Piety consent too. The Duke not believing her of this Sentiment, had a desire to be convinc'd of it. For this reason he only stay'd the time to change his Cloaths, and mounting on Horse∣back with one Page only, he came full speed where he was sure to find me. He could not arrive at a fitter time for his instruction. A little attention would soon teach him what he was ignorant off. It was the Princess that took the care to inform him. The Duke is not a Man that easily forgives faults of that nature; and if he did not spare the innocent, you may judge what he did to the guilty, he did not intend to consider, but abandon'd himself to the pleasure of revenge;
and taking no notice of the Hus∣bands and Lovers over hearing him, he sell into the way of rallery which you know is Natural to him. Madam says he, addressing himself to the Pre∣sidents Lady, I am come to partici∣patein the sweetness of your Medita∣tions to ask you what Fruit you have reap'd by 'em, and whether they have utterly destroy'd the Love you have so often swore for me; but I very well see, that your new Dire∣ctor has a greater part in the change of your Conduct, than those holy resolutions you oppos'd me with, and that he has quite put out a fire that in my opinion I had very well entertain'd for a year, I must tell you likewise that without the least Chagrin I saw you follow a course I thought I had drawn you from; but I should be guilty of all the Crimes in your new Commerce, if in my turn I did not Exhort you to be more faithful to Mr. the Presi∣dent,
than you have hitherto been, and if I did not advertize him to be no longer blinded by the false shew of an imaginary Vertue. Whilst the Duke spoke thus, the unhappy Husband, his Wife and the Prince kept a silence full of Con∣fusion, not but that they all had e∣nough to say, but there is seldome Eloquence when such parts, as these three had, were to be play'd. The Princess who hearken'd to the Duke with an inceavable plea∣sure, could not forbear crying out when he had ended, Ah! what a great deal of wit has the Duke! It was not necessary she should excite him to recommence a discourse wherein there was such Subject to debate. What Mr. the President, reply'd he, are you insensible or the Conduct of your Wife? And will you never see the injustices she does you? Do not you know, that at the same time you had a Law Suit
with a Man of your own profession, with whom you would have no Ac∣commodation, she liv'd with him without any quarrel, and sacrifis'd your Honour and her own, to her irregular Passion? Have you been ignorant that the Marquess of St— has been very great with her? And how come you not to perceive, that I was not ill with her? You see well, Madam, that what the Duke said was sufficient to give the President great light into the counterfeit carriage of his Wife; but when he could yet have said more, the Presidents Lady inter∣rupted him to answer, as she said, his impostures, for so she call'd the ralliry he made upon his intrigues. The Prince appearing irritated, I was afraid least he would quarrel with the Duke, and I reproach'd with being the occasion of this diffe∣rence, I drew the last apart, let us go Mr. the Duke said I, and leave
these marry'd People in peace; they may terminate their difference with∣out us. In effect I oblig'd the Duke to go, and we walk'd in a very fine Garden, whilst the Abbot B— undertook to reconcile the Hus∣bands and Wives. Although the Duke knew very well there was a great deal of jealousie in my pro∣ceeding, and did not doubt but I had had a true love for the Prince, he did not then make any reflection upon it, he made me understand that he was ravish't at the infidelity of the Presidents Lady; and that it only had prevented a design he had in a few days, to sorsake her to apply himself to me; that what he had said did not proceed from a true Chagrin or disquiet at her al∣teration, but from a secret Com∣plaisance he had to all my Sen∣timents.
The Duke was well made, Li∣beral and Magnificent, and I very well fore-saw that after this adven∣ture I should lose both the Prince, the President and his Wife. Infine, Madam, I must confess, I was pre∣vail'd upon by the thoughts that the Merit of a young Person was di∣stinguish'd only by the number of Lovers, and that to pass the life a∣greeably, she ought at least to have one. I therefore hearken'd to the Duke, without answering never∣theless the protestations he made to love me till death, but I did not repulse him so much as to make him believe those protestations were in∣different to me. I had a very great desire to see the Court, with all the agreements that accompany those who are well born, have great Re∣venues, and eminent Dignities. As he had a penetrating wit, and knew the desire I had to appear amongst the People of great Quality, so he
flatter'd me by assuring me I should not see any thing there so handsome as my self. The Abbot B — found me very much employ'd in hearing what was said to me; I learn't from him that the President endeavour'd to justifie his Wife; that they laid to my charge the unhappiness of that journey; and that they both re∣solv'd to ruin me at my Husbands return. The Duke who was dis∣pleas'd at this threatning, out of the interest he began to have in my Person, desir'd the Abbot to go to the Presidents Lady and tell her he would answer for the event, and that he would publish to the World what he knew of her good disposi∣tions. The Abbot acquitted him∣self in his mediation with an ex∣quesite Address, and all was pacified in appearance, but the President could never resolve with himself to pardon me; in earnest, although Ma∣dam, all that I have said to you has
much of the Air of a Romance, and that the Fabulous Heroes have never had occasion to eat, you must ob∣serve if you please, that this is a true Story, and that they who com∣pose it are not exempt from that ne∣cessity, for my part I found my self much dispos'd to it; I desir'd the Abbot to remember the President of it; his Servants that were ar∣riv'd had prepar'd a very pretty En∣tertainment. Whilst they were at Table, the Abbot thought fit to dis∣course about the rules of Tragedy, and the opinion of the Abbot of Aubignac concerning Dramatique Poetry. He undertook perhaps this Subject, because he had writ some Peices himself, and perhaps to hinder the discoursing of those di∣fferences were but just appeas'd. Since that day I saw none of that Society, and I thought of nothing but shewing my self at Court, where I went with one of the Dukes Sist∣ers.
My Face and my Shape made more noise than they deserved, but you know, Madam, that a Novelty is of great value in the World, and that there is scarcely any but she has the art to impose upon; 'tis therefore to that I ought to attri∣bute all the pleasing things were said to me by the Duke de Saux and the Marquess de Villeroy. The Va∣nity I shew'd at it, gave the Duke occasion to repent he had conducted me to breath that Air; and that which ruin'd me quite was that be∣ing one day at Trianon, I perceiv'd the King ask'd him who I was, and look't upon me after a manner that made me understand he did not think me disagreeable. The Duke told me I was not deceiv'd. I must confess, Madam, that when a Woman is fild with false Glory, and has the mind of a perfect Co∣quet, she is subject to strange wan∣drings. The Duke having assur'd
that I did not displease the King; I conceiv'd ridiculous Idea's of an imaginary Felicity, and I believed I might arrive to touch the heart of a Monarch. I never shew'd my self but I was dres'd as if I was to ap∣pear before him; and took great care of my Conduct, that it might not be an obstacle to my vain hopes. I say vain because it is certain all these projects past only in my ima∣gination, as fast as these illusions were dissipated, I began to be more humane, and the Duke took the care to give me many divertise∣ments, to destroy, as he said, the Chimoera that had so per∣secuted me. He lov'd Feasting, and scarce a day past but he made me some great Entertainment. I car∣ried a hundred Women rather out of Vanity than esteem, for it is cer∣tain Coquets never love any thing; but I did not fore-see that this noise which I vainly esteemed an honour,
advanc'd my undoing, and would soon plung me into great misfor∣tunes. My Husband had Orders from the King to go to the Count De Vig∣nory, who was then Governour of Binch, upon a secret expedition. Some difficulty's happen'd which retarded their Designs, and oblig'd my Husband to make a longer stay at Binch than he imagin'd. Vignory endeavoured to divert him, and shew him perhaps that he was a Man of good Fortune, carry'd him to a Lady's a Neighbour to his Go∣vernment, by whom he seem'd not to be ill receiv'd; and to make his credit in the house appear yet grea∣ter, he told him that having under∣stood from the Lady that she had occasion for a Gentlewoman to wait on her, he had prefer'd one from Paris, who had belong'd to me. Nothing ingag'd my Husband more to make the visit they propos'd to
him than the desire to know after what manner I liv'd during his ab∣sence. That Gentlewoman whom Vignory spoke of, was the treacherous Limelville. My Husband saw her, and you may very well think that out of an intention to revenge her self on me for discharging her, she told him every thing that might raise his jea∣lousie. And as she had the Art of en∣larging Objects, and giving the ap∣pearance of a great Crime to what was but a Trifle, she did not forget to tell him that I was fal'n out with the Prince, the President, and his Lady, and all that she knew concerning my Intrigues. He desir'd her not to dis∣cover so important a Secret to any other body, and assur'd her that af∣ter he had giv'n me a punishment, he would recall her to employ her in the government of his House. After Limelville had so well in∣structed him, he had no other thoughts then to execute the Orders
he had receiv'd, that he might have an opportunity to return and give an account of it to the King. They both succeeded indifferently well in their Enterprise, a conside∣rable party of the Enemies was de∣feated, and my Husband came back to Paris, with so good news, that he did not fear an ill reception from his Majesty, altho' he had no parti∣cular order for his coming. Whilst these things past, I was not without trouble, for the Duke is not a Man of an easie Commerce. Every thing created suspisions; the most innocent actions appear'd to him to be Criminal, and I liv'd in a Constraint that began to be insup∣portable. One Evening (and it was the most terrible of my life) I resolv'd to take the Air at the point of the Isle; this was the quarter where I Lodg'd. You must remember, Ma∣dam, the Duke reproach'd the Pre∣sidents
Lady for having an Affair of Gallantry, with the Marquess De Saint— 'twas unhappily that Marquess I met, and I could not dispence with my self from suffer∣ing him to give me his hand to lead me. He had seen me in divers pla∣ces, and not long since at Versailles, and my ingaging manner had caus'd in him an inclination for me. I took pleasure in having a Conversa∣tion with a Man that did not scold at me, for the Duke had behav'd himself towards me like the worst Husband in the World. I gave him attention for a long time, and when he had spoke what he desir'd to say, I told him of the disgust I had for all Men in general, and I paint∣ed him the Character of such a Lo∣ver I should have wish'd for. Then I increas'd the punishment must be endur'd in managing a jealous dis∣position, and the torment of being capable of the same passion. I told
him under false Names the discon∣tents my Husband and the Duke gave me, and the reasons of com∣plaint I had receiv'd from all that had shew'd me any passion. I open'd my heart, in fine, to the Marquess without imagining I was overheard, the Night was dark, and I did not observe the Duke was at our heels, with a Cloak thrown over his Face. I took some few more turns and re∣tired without suffering the Marquess to conduct me home. When I ar∣riv'd I heard the Duke expected me. I very well comprehended he was not preparing for me an agreeable reception. I was not deceiv'd, af∣ter he had told me all the conversa∣tion I had had with the Marquess, he past from words to actions, and altho' my fault consisted only in a great imprudence, he gave me as Rigorous a punishment, as if it had been an effectual Crime.
Yet, as it is natural to complain on the like occasions, I found no little eloquence for that purpose. And I was reproaching the Duke with the injuries he did me, when I heard a great noise in the Street. I was concern'd too much at my own Affairs to be able to think af∣ter the cares of others. The Duke look't out of the window to see if the disorder was caused by his Footmen. They did not begin it, but hearing from far, that it hap∣pen'd before my Door, they run thither, and not discovering the Attaquers from the Attaqu'd fell in∣differently upon all they met. Du∣ring this quarel, I discern'd a voice that was not unknown to me, and call'd upon all those Servants my Husband had left with me by their several Names. They could not answer since I had turn'd 'em a∣way. You must judge what sur∣prize this was to me. I could not
imagine whom it should be, but that Night was full of surprises and unlucky adventures to me. Whilst I was hearkning to the Voice, I saw my Husband come in like one who had lost his reason with anger. He took what was next his hand, and without having any re∣gard to the Person of the Duke, had fell furiously upon him, had not his loss of blood thrown him into a great weakness: When he had re∣cover'd from this fainting fit they carryed him to his Chamber; his Servants put him to bed, and I heard by his Valet de Chambre, that he had been two days at Paris, and came alone with intention to sur∣prize me. I could not learn more from this Valet, who apparently knew not what he told me. This was enough to make me believe I had occasion of the protection of the Duke. He promis'd it me, and I sent to desire a relation of my
Husbands to come, and know from him the reason of his emportment. This Relation, who had always a great kindness for me, arriv'd as the Chirurgions had made the first Ap∣plication of their Remedies to his Wounds. To what danger soever speaking much, expos'd my Hus∣bands Life, he told his Relation ne∣vertheless all that he knew, he de∣sir'd him I might be shut up, till he had resolv'd with my Family in what manner to treat me. But, Madam, it is time I should let you know what had animated him so furiously against me. I have told you he was return'd to give an ac∣count of his Expedition to the King. His Majesty receiv'd him very fa∣vourably, and permitted him to stay Eight days at Paris. He had past two entirely at the Presidents who had omitted nothing might fully me in his opinion; and to render me yet more culpable to the eyes of
the World, they consulted my Hus∣band should make himself be at∣tack'd by People hir'd for that pur∣pose, that so they might have an opportunity to report, that I had caus'd him to be assasinated: Chance permitted the Dukes Footman to Wound him, whilst his Master was at my House. He thought never∣theless to make no other use of this imposture than to my disadvantage, and complaining of so criminal a design, he notwithstanding justified the Duke; being satisfied that al∣though he should accuse him of a share in it, 'twould be difficult to make it believ'd. My Husbands relation prudently advis'd me to retire, before he should receive fresh orders to secure me. I follow'd his counsel; I brought away my Jewels and some Mony, and went to the countess's de — who re∣ceiv'd me very generously: after she had said what might replace
some tranquility in my mind, she dexterously took the time to speak of the little care I had had to pre∣serve my Reputation, but in so good and sweet a manner, that she made me repent of it without con∣fusion. My Husband's Wound was not found so dangerous as was imagin'd; but as his illness diminisht, his an∣ger became more violent, and I saw my self in a necessity of leaving not only Paris but the whole Kingdom. I therefore resolved to put my self under the Protection of the Dutchess of Savoy. The Duke approved my design, and the Charitable Countess gave me Letters for all the Court, where were the great Habitudes. I made my self be call'd Madam de Courcilly, and I departed in Ly∣on Coach, with a Maid I never saw before. I got into the Coach, and a Man call'd Bernard whose fidelity and discretion I was satis∣fied
in. We took up Three places, and the other were fill'd by the Abbess de Bly, Two Nuns, and a Rich Banker of Genova call'd Hie∣ronymo Spichetti. You may guess, Madam, by all that I have told you, how my mind was busied in these sad adventures, and those I was to be exposed too; but it anger'd me when I reflected how easily the Duke had left me, which was more insupportable to me, than all my Husbands ill usage. The thoughts of seeing my self without Lovers discomforted me, for by the cold∣ness of his Adieu, I reckon'd him no longer in the number of those that were so. These foolish reflections kept me in a profound consideration, when the Abbess de Bly had a fancy to re∣gal the Company with a Story of me. I had the pleasure to hear her tell it from one end to the other with such false and ridiculous cir∣cumstances,
that I thought Twenty times to interrupt her and inform her of the truth. Judge in what concern I was when she addrest her words to me, to make me yield my self the most culpable Woman in the World. In fine I was reduced to tell a story full of invented ad∣ventures, to force 'em to end an entertainment gave me so much punishment to her. Here, Madam, is the place that you must mark the fatality of my Stars. Scarce were we arriv'd at the first Dining place, when I saw the Marquess de Saint — com∣ing in. You may imagin perhaps he came by my Order. No assu∣redly, Madam, chance alone was concern'd in it. He went to Savoy from the King to compliment their Royal Highnesses upon the recovery of the Dutchess of Savoy from a Sickness, 'twas thought she would have dy'd of. 'Twas true that he
understanding there was place for another in the Coach, he took it and left the Post, not know∣ing he should there meet me. When I heard this News I reason'd with Bernard, whether I ought to discover my self, and we concluded that what care soever I should take 'twas impossible to hide my self from his penetration. I got again nevertheless into the Coach, without discovering my self to him, and least he should know my Voice, I did not speak. But the Abbess de Bly did not the like; we had not gone half a League before she had ask'd the Marquess if he had not heard the Story of that Lady who would have assasinated her Husband. He Answer'd that he had not. The good Abbess who could say it by Heart, began it again, not omit∣ting one word from the manner I had heard her tell it before. When she came to name me, the
Marquis impos'd silence upon her, saying, that if she had a mind to tell Stories, there was Subject e∣nough in her convent, without searching in another place. This Answer had all the effect that I could hope for. The Abbess held her Tongue, and there was a great si∣lence that lasted the rest of the day. I confess to you, Madam, I found my self very much oblig'd to the Marquis to have freed me so honest∣ly from the falsities of the Abbess. Chance would have it, that before we arriv'd to the place where we was to lie, the company was oblig'd to get out of the Coach to pass a dif∣ficult place, because it was night. I remain'd in the Coach and the Man descended. The Marquis apprehending, by the manner of behaviour Bernard shew'd me, that he was my Ser∣vant, ask't him who I was, and 'twas impossible to have more joy
than appear'd in him, when he learnt that I was the same person for whom he had so much esteem, and inclination, and on whose side he had engag'd against the Abbess. He was too discreet to speak to me be∣fore a favourable opportunity. When we arriv'd where we were to pass the Night, the Marquis gave me his hand as to an unknown Lady, to help me out of the Coach, and conducting me to the Chamber where the Nuns and I were to rest, he told me very softly of the joy he had to meet me, and the desire he had to serve me. Hieronymo Spichetti did not shew less care for me than the Marquis, but I received 'em not with so much complaisance. This gave occasion enough to the Abbess de Bly and her Nuns to talk, who found with Chagrin, they had more time allow'd 'em for their Prayers than they desir'd. At last we arriv'd at Lyons, where
having no acquaintance, the Mar∣quess and I went to lodge at Belle-Cour a good handsome place, that the Italian carry'd us to. This Man according to the maxims of his Country observ'd us carefully; and judging both by the way of the Marquess and my proceedings with him, that we had been before ac∣quainted did not doubt but we had agreed upon this rencounter. He dissembled it, as well as the senti∣ments which rendr'd him so curious about my Affairs, and there grew a friendship between him and the Marquess. As it would not have been decent I should have arriv'd at Turin with the Marquess, Spichetti told him he would take care of my Journy, and save me the satigue of passing the Mountains, which on the side of France are very inconvenient for their height, and excessive cold. Altho he had not an entire know∣ledge
of my Affairs he nevertheless knew that I fled from the persecuti∣on of my Husband. So that joyn∣ing to it the opinion he had of my silence whilst the Abbess was telling my Story, he doubted no longer of the truth. He did not explain his thoughts, neither to me nor the Marquess, to whom he only said he would conduct me through Pro∣vence, and enter Savoy by Italy, and that leaving Lyon at the same time, and taking our passage on the Rhône we should get to Turin a Fortnight after his arrival. I was not sorry to see Provence, and so much the more willingly I accepted of Spichetti's proposition, because he told me his Affairs call'd him likewise to Turin, at the same time I intended to be there. We embarqu'd upon the Rhône as far as Avignon. I must not forget to tell you, Ma∣dam, Bernard was not a little trou∣bled
to see me yield my self so ea∣sily to the conduct of Spichetti. The Affection he had for me made him see what was my interest, and murmur more than once at my im∣prudence, but I could not escape fulfilling my destiny. When we were at Avignon, Spi∣chetti lodg'd me in a very fine Building belonging to a Friend of his. 'Twas situated in the Pope's Territories two Miles from the Town, whose splendour he took care to shew me. When Three Days were pas'd I let him know it was time to be gone. I shall not take the care, Madam, said he, to deliver you my self into my Rivals Arms. I was struck at these words like a Tunder∣bolt, and they made me call to mind all the Mischiefs I could fear. They were follow'd by an infi∣nite number of others, which Spi∣chetti made use of to declare his
passion for me, and that there was no difficulty but he would under∣take to make himself be belov'd by me, nor no violence that he should not be carry'd to, if I was not touch'd at his Passion. I seem'd as if I did not believe he spoke sinceerly, I turn'd what he said into Gallantry, but I had not much time to rally, for he never left me, and his persecution went so far, that I sound my self oblig'd more than once to run to the worst ex∣tremities, thereby to escape the ef∣fects of a Brutal emportment he shew'd towards me. Till now, Madam I had been but too sensible of the pleasures of Loving and being Be∣lov'd; I was now to be punish'd for it by the torment an aversion causes. I had a Mortal hatred for Spi∣chetti, and if I made him any appear∣ance of satisfaction it enlarg'd his hopes, he grew very much irritat∣ed and I saw that nothing but a Mi∣racle,
or the end of my life could terminate my misfortunes. Bernard who had establish't himself a right of advising in all my Actions, per∣secuted me on his side for not following his counsel, and I con∣fess to you, I never found my self in so ill a condition. In fine Hieronymo, calling me one day by my true Name, told me he was instructed in all my adven∣tures, and if I determined not to acknowledg the Passion he had for me, he would advertise my Hus∣band I was in his hands, and whilst he was expected I should be so carefully observ'd, that it was impossible for me to escape. I obstinately told him he was mistaken in me, but I could not perswade him so. He was igno∣rant of nothing in my Affairs, and I have not yet known from whence he had so perfect an intel∣ligence. The miserable condition
I was reduc'd to made me think of nothing but death: and I resolv'd it rather than consent to satisfie the Brutal Passion of the Italian: yet as I was not ignorant of being ob∣lig'd to undergo any thing might free me from his persuit, before I abandon'd my life to my despair, I examin'd what might contribute to my liberty. I immediately took my Jewels out of my cabinet, and Bills of Exchange for a considerable Sum, with what Mony I had lest, and the Letters of recommenda∣tion to the Dutchess of Savoy. I put all into Bernards hands, Spichetti not perceiving it, and telling him that he should for the future regulate my conduct, desir'd him to find out some means to guard me from the violences my Tyrant menac'd me with. We agreed, that to do it with more ease, he should seem to leave me, he did it in appearance, and brib'd the Gardiner of the House to
give me intelligence of what he should advance towards my quiet. The time that Spichetti had appointed was approaching and I saw not my Affairs in a better condition, when it came in my mind to demand of him yet some few days. He ought to accord 'em me he thought, because I made him understand the Conti∣nuance of his Love began to concern me. 'Twas at this time that imagining to perswade me by his Riches, he made me conceive Ideas that with those of another dispo∣sition might have serv'd instead of merit; but I was not to be prevail'd upon by the offers he made me. There was but one Day to arrive before that which Spichetti expected with so much impetience, when I was inform'd every thing was ready for my escape, and I had only to descend by a Ladder of Ropes should be
fasten'd to my Window that lookt into the Garden, and that I should find in the Gardiners House the Habits of Two Men for me and my Chamber-maid, and that Ber∣nard would expect me with Two Horses a Hundred paces from the Garden. Altho this project was well laid, the success might have been thought more difficult then it appear'd, if we had reflected that Hieronyme was an Italian in Love, Jealous, and Suspitious, and that they are terrible Monsters to allay in an affair of this impor∣tance; but in great dangers great resolutions must be taken. An accident happen'd which smooth'd the difficulty. Spichetti was ta∣ken with a violent Feavour, and tho he was light-headed did not want reason enough to order, that I should be close lockt up in my Chamber. This care did not hinder me from escaping the way
that was propos'd, and we rid all Night without knowing which way we went, at last when Day began to break, we found our selves on the top of a High Mountain from whence we dis∣cover'd a number of others, that made a very agreeable solitude. We travell'd till Sun rise a Road very little beaten, which not long after led us to a Hermitage in a solitary Situation. The Charitable Hermits I sound there, receiv'd me as well as possi∣bly they could. I had never before been on Horseback; I was tyr'd, and in necessity to repose my self, I de∣manded a place proper for it, and the most ancient of the Hermits car∣ried me into a neat Cell, where I slept for some time. When the In∣quietudes that employ'd my mind had waken'd me, I rejoyn'd the Hermits who had provided a little repast of Hearbs and Fruits, and the
neatness of it supply'd the abund∣ance. 'Twas in the beginning of Summer; if I had had the least incli∣nation to have pas'd my life in a De∣sart, free from the Noise and Com∣merce of the World, I should have thought this solitude very delight∣ful; but I was not in a condition to hearken peaceably to the singing of the Birds, and the eccho's of the ad∣jacent places, or yet to contemplate the Beauty of the Rocks. Cares of another nature had sufficiently fill'd my breast. The Hermit that undertook to entertain me, had soon perceiv'd I had great Chagrins; he took the opportunity to say what he thought proper to Administer Con∣solation to me. I observ'd more un∣derstanding and politeness in his discourse than the Hermits com∣monly have; but that which sur∣pris'd me most was, that after he had attentively look't upon me, he told me I wore a Habit that did not be∣long
to my Sex; I might have thought that he had discover'd it by my Face and Shape; but continu∣ing to look upon me, he added, that Love had been the occasion of all the misfortunes of my life; I gave him the minute of my Birth ac∣cording to his command, and he told me a great many things in general that he advis'd me to endeavour to escape. Although he spoke to me after the most serious manner, I made it a subject of Laughter, not being able to ima∣gine that being born a minute soo∣ner or later would make me ei∣ther happy, or miserable, never∣theless he told me much of the time to come, and his Predictions were not false. After this I was thinking to leave the Hermit, and ask him to what place it was best for me to retire, to have intelli∣gence of my Affairs, when my Chamber-maid who fell a sleep
upon the Ground, was stung by a Scorpion: This accident oblig'd me to pass two days in the Desert, during which time this Hermit had so much consideration for me as to tell me the story of his life, and made himself appear a Man of Quality. His Life was compos'd of a number of strange accidents; but I have so much to tell you that concerns me that I shall only speak of the Her∣mit in matters necessary to my reci∣tal. In fine, my dear Child, said he, you see an unhappy man who gave him∣self entirely over to the World, and that when he remembers it, has a true sorrow, for the wandrings were occasion'd by those dangerous Max∣ims. The knowledge I have of the disgraces accompany those who are not disgusted with it, makes me have a great Compassion for you, and inspires me with a design to serve you. I have a Woman my
Friend two Leagues from hence, at whose House you may pass your time with more Convenience, and Decency than in this retirement. 'Tis there that I would advise you to attend the News of what you desire to be informed in, and I in the mean time will go spend some few days at Avignon; I will learn what is become of Spichetti, and will establish a Commerce with a Friend of his, who is mine also, that I may know what steps he follows. I must tell you likewise that the place I ad∣vise you to make your Sanctuary, is not less agreeable than this, and that it is famous in above one particular. The Name of it ought not to be unknown to you; 'tis Vaucluse which was formerly the abode of the famous Petrarque, of the Charming Laura. You will see that marvellous Spring, which has been the occasion of
so many sine Verses; but if these Objects give you so much concern as to recall into your memory the Amours of the Poet and his Mistress, those very same Objects, whereof nothing remains but sad foot-steps, and confusion, may let you know that every thing in the World is perishable. I desir'd the Hermit to tell me the story of Petrarque's Amours, and when I had heard it I had then a greater desire to see the place of his abode. We parted; I took a Letter he gave me for his Friend, and Petrarque's Poems in Italian, and gave him in a thousand thanks the acknow∣ledgment I had of his goodness. He very much advis'd Bernard not to abandon me, and shew'd him the way we were to take to Vaucluse. In the Evening we arriv'd at Madam de Maselons, whose house is but a quarter of a League from
the Fountain. This Lady though advanc'd in Years, had yet a good Meen, and some remains of Beauty that shew'd what an a∣greeable Person she had been; She was decent without magnifi∣cence, and had a great deal of politness without any affectati∣on. I had sent Bernard to deliver her the Letter from her Friend, and she had receiv'd it with great joy. I had the good fortune not to displease her, and she shew'd me a thousand signs of respect. The good Hermite, who had told her by the Letter what I had consided to him about my Qua∣lity, discover'd also my disguise, and ingag'd her to keep both with secresie. She promis'd it me, and I have not had reason to com∣plain of her want of discreti∣on. When I arriv'd at her house,
she presented her Daughter to me, whom I saluted en Cavalier, with the Embertass, you may imagine a Compliment gave me I had not been accustom'd to. She was of a surprising Beauty, and I after∣wards knew that there was not fewer Charms in her Wit than Face; yet the first Civilities be∣ing agreeably pass'd on all sides, I remarqu'd a profound melan∣choly both in the Mother and Daughter, that extreamly surpris'd me; I was not long ignorant of the reason, for the Daughter was in mourning, and the Mother could not think of her disquiet without shedding Tears at every Moment. 'Twas for the death of a Son that was kill'd at Candia; they both spoke of him as a Man of an extraordinary Me∣rit. The Habitude I had contracted together by melancholy having
given a little moderation to my natural Gaiety, I had a little con∣formity to the condition Madam de Mezelon and her amiable Daugh∣ter were in. 'Twas this that made a strict Friendship amongst us, but truely out of different Motives, for the Mother knew who I was; but the Daughter was ignorant of it, and suffer'd her self to be surpris'd with a violent inclination for me, which she strove against with all the reasons that might repulse it; was rather with my Stars than my merit that made me meet with Love in any shape that I took. When we had pass'd a few days at Madam Me∣zelon's, I sent Bernard to Turin, to hear some news of the Marquess de St.— and to see if there was any appear∣ance of the passing my time agreea∣bly during my Exile. I writ also to Paris, and Madam de Mezelon gave me an Address to Sorgues to receive the answers of my Letters.
Poor Bernard could not leave me without shewing a sensible re∣gret at it; he came back Twenty times from my Anti-Chamber to take his leave, and Ten times from places more distant, his affection always furnishing him with new Counsels either about my health, safety, or conduct. I went to see Vaucluse; and his lovely Seat made me have great re∣flections upon all the places, Pe∣trarque and Laura had made choice of to pass in a happy Retirement the sweetest moments of their Loves and Life. I was saying to my self I never injoy'd any true happiness; that the only desire of pleasing had always buried me, and I never knew the delightful Charms were caused by the Union of two hearts, sincerely concern'd for each other. The lovely Feliza (for so Madam de Mezelon's Daughter was call'd)
was serv'd by a Gentlewoman of wit enough, and whose Name was Thé∣résia, these young Women took all the care imaginable that I should not be tired in their Company, and we went every day to Vaucluse, because this place inspir'd us with very agreeable Conversation upon what had formerly pass'd here as was reported. I understood Italian, which Feliza and Thérésia did not well enough, for Petrarques Poems I explain'd to 'em, with no little pleasure, what he had writ with the greatest tenderness. Feliza who discover'd not less in hearkning to me; often cast such languishing looks at me, that I was learned e∣nough in that dumb language, to comprehend without any other ex∣plication the meaning of her Eyes; but I countersitted not to under∣stand 'em, and a thousand times I wish'd, she might never have a de∣sire to make more open discovery of her Sentiments.
All my wishes were to no pur∣pose, and the too kind Feliza could not hinder her self from declaring she lov'd me. I receiv'd it with as much confusion as she had to tell it me; and as Lovers are very inge∣nious towards their own torment, she perswaded her self my heart was prevented by another Object, so that adding Jealousie to Love, she contracted a Chagrin, that dimi∣nish't a little of her Beauty, and made me sensible of a true Com∣passion. Madam de Mezelon perceiv'd as well as I the reason of her melancholy, for that Lady was not ignorant in the Mysteries of Love; but seeing nothing redoubtable in that her Daughter had for me, was unwilling to deceive her at the cost of my Se∣cret. I could not for my part resolve to abuse her any longer, I went one day into her Chamber, after I had desir'd Madam Mezelon to employ
Thérésia during my discourse with Feliza. I sound her alone, her head leaning on her left Arm, and her Eyes fixed upon the ground, and in a po∣sture insine altogether sit for the De∣scription of a very melancholy Crea∣ture. The habit that covered my Sex, causing her to be a little scrupulous of remaining alone with me as I desir'd, she rose to call Thérésia; but I stopt her by her Gown. I conjure you, my dear Feliza, said I, by all the marks of Friendship you have hitherto shew'd me, to grant me one audience that none may be a witness to. Alass! answer'd Feliza, what can you tell me that my misfortune has not al∣ready foreseen? I will, reply'd I, alter the opinion you have that I am not sensible enough of the kind∣ness you have made appear to me, and give you the greatest confirma∣tion of mine that you can ever re∣ceive.
At these words she look't upon me to see if she could discover by my Eyes what I had to say, and by the languishing of hers, 'twas easie for me to know, that her heart was truly concern'd: At last I confest to her I could answer her love only with Friendship, and discover'd that I was a woman; but, Madam, this secret was so far from reestablishing a Calm in her breast, that at this Moment it rais'd a greater trouble; the confusion she had for discovering me her Senti∣ments, made her blush; and by a particular Novelty, she shew'd a regret for a passion she found it impossible to get rid off, though she had tasted nothing but the ri∣gours of it, and which she knew very well I was incapable to an∣swer. I did my utmost to con∣vince her, that a reciprocal Friend∣ship was the greatest and most solid pleasure. She could scarcely be∣lieve
me; nevertheless her reason in a few days brought that to pass my advice could not obtain in this Conversation. She overcame the force of her inclination, but I knew when I saw her next, it had cost her some Tears. Since this time she accustom'd her self to my Sex, we past more than a Fortnight in Tranquility and Pleasure. One Evening as we were at the Fountain of Vaucluse, after we had entertain'd our selves upon different Subjects, I fell a sleep, my head upon Feliza's knees, when two Cavaliers were passing by; Feliza knew 'em not because their heads were a little turn'd from us, and they were not quite so near as we might discern their Features; one of 'em nevertheless recall'd in her the Idea she had of her dear Brother, whom she lov'd with such tenderness. She wakened me to see him, and tho'
he was at a distance, he seem'd to me very handsome. When we came back to our Ap∣partment, we went into Madam de Mezelons Chamber, and found her loaded with grief. Ah Knight, said she (for so I made my self be call'd) am not I very unhappy? my affliction began to yield to the power of time, and I was making a reason of necessity to suffer pati∣ently the loss of my Son, when it was renew'd by telling me he was seen to pass by not a hundred pa∣ces from my House. He was describ'd to me in the same guarb he had when he left me; this ten∣der Mother could not restrain her tears from so sad and dear a re∣membrance. We acquainted her with what we saw, and that quite disconsolated her; I had much a∣doe to appease her trouble when I told her there were many People so like, that every day some body
or other was deceiv'd. I had en∣tertain'd her till Midnight, when retiring to my Chamber, the Por∣ter brought me this Note that was put into his hands to deliver to me. This was the Contents. I Will not enter into a House that you have dishonour'd, before I have taken away your life to punish you for your Ingratitude. My Eyes have convinc'd me of the shame which honour obliges me to wash out with your Blood, and I have from other hands too certain testimonys of your loose Conduct to be deceiv'd. I will expect you to morrow at Sun rise at the place where you was yester∣day with my unworthy Sister. Do not fail to be there, and give me an opportunity for my just Revenge; if you would not have me take a more violent resolution.
Judge, Madam, with what sur∣prize I found I had an Affair upon my hands. I easily apprehended what had drawn it upon me; I went immediately to shew the Pa∣per to Madam de Mezelon, who receiv'd all joy imaginable by it; she expected day-light with great impatience that she might go to the place of Combat. She went thither alone; for all she was his Mother, She was fond to suffer the reproaches of her Son, for it was he himself; she smilingly hearken∣ed to 'em, and you may believe she was not angry to find her Son so sensible of Honour. After she had suffer'd him to continue some time in his error, she clear'd it by tel∣ling him some part of my Adven∣tures, and made him a Confident in the Secret of my Sex, known now to the Mother, the Daughter, and the Son. He increast very much the anger he had conceiv'd
to see his Sister suffer a Man to sleep upon her knees; and added that he was coming to kill us both, but thinking that his Sister might be marryed in his absence, he de∣termin'd to inform himself before he should commit an action of such consequence, and that for that purpose he had addrest himself to one who had formerly been a Ser∣vant in the House, and that this Man had told him that I was seen every day with Feliza about Vau∣cluse, and every body began to raise scandals upon it. Madam de Mezelon told her Son a thousand things to my advantage, and she presented him to me when she had brought him home. The pleasantest thing that happen'd in all this was, that there was a re∣port among the Servants that Me∣zelon had sent me a Challenge; so that when he came to embrace me, the same People that thought
we were Enemies, fancy'd I was marry'd to his Sister, and that the thing was to be kept se∣cret. After this first interview, Me∣zelon took some minutes to refresh himself, and to put himself into a condition to appear before me. In fine, Madam, what shall I say to you? The Brother was pro∣vided with the same sentiments the Sister had for me when I first sought a retirement. I was in Feliza's Chamber when he came in, and this charming Creature either by fore-knowledge or out of rallery, told me she was very sure her Brother would not see me long, without rendring Homage to my charms. As soon as he was sate down, well Bro∣ther said she, would not you think me to day as culpable as yester∣day, were you not inform'd of the truth of it? remember, Sister,
answer'd Mezelon, my anger did not fall upon you, and I believe I inwardly excus'd you. But I know not if I have not yet more reason to complain of that handsome Ca∣valier then I had, and whether I shall not drive my resentment so far as to give him a second assignation at Petrarque's Fountain. As my Courage is not return'd since the last night, said I, you may come back and not find me there as you did this Morning. Seriously, Ma∣dam, reply'd Mezelon I believe you would have done as much had you been in my place. I saw a hand∣some Cavalier with my Sister, and in a very familiar posture. I enquir'd if they are Marry'd, and am told not. After this me∣thinks — I do not blame your proceeding, said I interrupting him, I only desire it may serve to let you know, that you must never make any Judgment from appearances, let 'em be never so great.
This conversation which lasted long, made me know that Mezelon had an infinite deal of Wit, and those I have had since did not per∣mit me to doubt that he had a true Passion for me. How was it pos∣sible, Madam, to breath the Air of Vaucluse for Five or Six Months and not be touch'd with Love? What then pas'd in my Breast, made me agree, that I had never yet Lov'd any thing, and suffer'd only people to admire me. I had not hitherto been sensible of the agree∣able inquietudes the Heart possesses, when 'tis not yet fully determin'd to abandon it self to Love. I had been ignorant of those sensi∣ble pleasures it is penetrated with at the beginning of an Amour; those nothings that cause such great ef∣fects, and all those things, in fine that the indifferent call follies, and the Lovers esteem their most a∣greeable entertainment. I had for∣got
all my misfortunes, and the only one I fear'd, was to be ob∣lig'd to part from Mezelon. I would not so much as think that Bernards return might engage me to make a journey; and I accomodat∣ed my Morality to my Love. And said often to my self, that the hatred my Husband had shew'd me, rendred the conjugal Vow a dispensable ob∣ligation. In a word, Madam I only forbid what concern'd mine own Honour as well as his, and the rest I esteem'd as nothing. Most of the Women of the World if they were sinceer would confess ingeniously as I do, for I do not believe I am the first of this kind. Mezelon's return drew a great many considerable Persons to their House. He was Extreamly be∣lov'd, and every one who saw him, took pleasure to make him tell the Story of his false Death and Re∣surrection, but we had not yet de∣sir'd him.
One Evening when I was with his Mother, his Sister and another Relation, he was engag'd to make a recital of what happen'd to him in his Journey to Candia; he did it after this fashion. MEZELON's Relation. IEmbarqu'd in the Duke of Beau∣fort's Vessel, and I cannot tell your Ladies if the Sea was calm or agitated; I know only I was Sick as long as I was upon the Sea, that I never appear'd up∣on the Deck before I arriv'd at Candia, and in the interval, what
I endur'd employ'd me so much that it did not permit me to learn one single Sea tearm. When I Landed my health was perfectly establish't, and I appli'd my self much to the Person of the Ge∣neral, whose example gave suf∣ficient emulation to those who would profit by it. The Common reports have ta∣ken care to inform you of all that pas'd during that Siege, so that I shall not enter into a de∣scription of things that must of ne∣cessity be tiresome when they are already known; and I am perswad∣ed 'tis neither the History of the Turks, nor Venetians, but mine you desire to know. Learn then, I was dangerously Wounded the last Day. I was near, as I said, to the Duke of Beaufort, who had sent his adjutants to carry Orders in several places; he Commanded me also to go Order some Troops
to advance, for the relief of a Bat∣talion that began to yield to the Enemy. I did not find him at my return, and at the same time a report of his being kil'd was spread abroad amongst us. I threw my self into the crowd to satisfie me; but I got only by it a blow on the Head with a Scymiter, and another on my Shoulders, which hinder'd me not nevertheless from staying with those that enter'd last into the place. The ill fortune of this day was the reason they would not receive me at my lodging. There was no choice to make, I found my self in great pain; my Wounds had not been drest, and I began to grow very weak. The Patriarch of Candia, and his Eldest Daugh∣ter meeting me in this condition, charitably carry'd me to their House, the succour they gave me
deliver'd me from a great embar∣rasment; but that which was lucky to me at that moment, became afterwards my greatest misfortune. The Patriarch's Daughter, whose Name was Eustochia, drest my Wounds, and gave me occasion to Commend her cares; but I al∣ways held it for a Maxim, that the good turns which are receiv'd from a fair hand, oblige much more than those which come from a deform'd Object. Eustochia was of the number of the latter, I never saw so frightful a Face; she kept me as secret as was pos∣sible, and the French were on Board when she had told me no∣thing of it. I was reported dead, because I had not appear'd in the Town since the Day of the Battle, and my
Landlord durst not say he had refus'd me. Our Troops in fine were March'd away, and I stay'd behind. When I was cur'd, Eustochia pretended I should pay with my Heart, the good Offices she had render'd me; but the bounds of my acknowledgments were not in her opinion so far extended. Eustochia had a Sister to whom I should have been very glad to have ow'd my Life; and without this obligation I would have wil∣lingly pay'd her, what was due to her Sister. I lookt upon her with pleasure; Eustochia perceiv'd it, and judging of the Sentiments her Sister had inspir'd me with, she fell immediately from Love to Hatred, and to a desire of ru∣ining me. As there are no Hearts more capable of Love than the
Greeks, so there is nothing more Violent than their Hatred. The Town was surrended you know, and the Turks enter'd it victori∣ously. Eustochia made an acquain∣tance with a Janizary, who regretted extreamly a Brother he had lost in the last Battle. She inform'd her self how he was made, what Command he had in the Army, and told him some few Days after, she believ'd it was I who had kil'd him. The Janizary without making reflection that there was no like∣lyhood she could know what she told him, thought of nothing but revenging his Brothers death, and shew'd her the desire he had to have me in his Power; she en∣gag'd to deliver me, but her cha∣ritable Sister having discover'd it, could not consent to see me pe∣rish so unjustly; and as there was
no time to be omitted for my safe¦ty, she took a resolution equally Bold and Generous. She knew that her Father had not Force enough to resist Eustochia's pleasure, and that the measure she shall take on that side would be to no purpose; she was not ignorant also that the Grand-Vizier would not suf∣fer any Violence to be commit∣ted against the treaty of Capitu∣lation, particularly upon the Per∣son of a French-man. These rea∣sons oblig'd her to cause her self to be carry'd before the Vizier, and in Greek which he understood as well as the fair one perfectly spoke, said to him to this purpose. I come, Great Lord, to demand Justice of you, not against the Souldiers or Officers of your Ar∣my, but against my own Sister, who by a base Sentiment has been seduc'd to commit so black
an action that I cannot think of it without horror. A young French-man remain'd in my Fa∣thers House; it is true that my Sister seeing him in danger took a great deal of care of him, and has cur'd him of Two dangerous Wounds, but would now make the Life she has preserv'd be ta∣ken from him, by a return as shameful as dangerous to the French-man; and joyning Impo∣sture to Resentment, she has made the Janizary Achidec believe that the unhappy French-man had kil'd his Brother in the last Battle, and has promis'd to deliver him the innocent Victim, which she Sacri∣fices rather to her own revenge than the grief of Achidec. Be∣gin to establish here, Great Lord, Laws of equity, and let my Sister receive your Orders from you, before she has leisure to execute her cruel resolutions.
Augusta (which was the Name of my deliverer) spoke these words with so much Zeal and Grace, that the Grand-Vizier was perswaded. He sent immediately to me an Officer with Twenty Souldiers, and they arriv'd very luckily for me; since an hour later the Compassion of Agusta had been to no purpose. I appear'd before the Grand-Vizier whom I did not displease. He un∣derstands French well enough but does not speak it. Altho I did not Sing very well, Eustochia and Au∣gusta had often found my Voice a∣greeable enough to be satisfied with it, the last of these knowing that the Grand-Vizier lov'd Musick, made him be acquainted that if he would make me Sing I was capable to give him some pleasure; so after he had ask'd me several questions about the Person and Conquests of our great Master, he fell insensibly to talk about the address of the French, and
the advancement they had made in all Arts, and particularly in Poetry and Musick. From hence he pas'd to what concern'd me, and told me in an obliging manner, that surpris'd me, that he knew I could Sing, and he believ'd I would not refuse him the satisfaction to hear me. I had learnt some Airs from the fa∣mous I ambert, which I Sung him the best I could. I had wounded without doubt the most critical Ears; but the Vizier was contented. He made Achidec be sent for, and Commanded him not to think of doing me any mischief; and he gave himself the touble to tell him, that what Eustochia had said to him, was only to make him assistant to her revenge, and that it was impossible for her toknow whether I had kil'd his Brother.
After this the Grand Vizier gave me leave to be gone, presenting me with a rich Symeter. You know perhaps it was one of the Articles of the Capitulation, that those of Candia, who would not remain under the Government of the Turks, should have a Months Liberty to retire where they pleas'd. Some went to Sicily, others to I∣taly. I for my part resolv'd to embark with those who went to Sicily, where the Messineses began to rise, but when I propos'd it to the lovely Augusta, her fears and sighs overcame my resolutions. I consented not to depart, and I assur'd her she should always dis∣pose of as she pleas'd, a life she had so generously preserv'd; the furi∣ous Eustochia rais'd every day some new Affair to destroy me, and I am going to tell you one that was within a very little of producing the effect she expected. You may
well imagine that when I was once got out of the Patriarch's House, I came no more into it. Augusta desir'd one of her Relati∣ons to find me a House, where I might stay till my departure. Eustochia had intelligence of it. She dextrously brib'd a Turk for my destruction, and told him he was to get acquainted with me, and take me up upon the account of Religion: this Turk understood Italian, she knew that I spoke it, and for that purpose had made choice of him; and as it was an unpardonable Crime for a Christian to talk Religion to a Turk, she thought a snare was laid for me, that I could not possibly escape. The Turk having receiv'd these instructions took his measures to make me acquainted with him: he took every opportunity to ren∣der me little Services, to insinuate into me, and oblige me to speak to
him with more confidence. At last after several entertainments about indifferent matters, he in∣sensibly engag'd me to reason with him about the Mysteries of our Faith. I did it without the least imagination to convince him of the truths I should speak, because he had always seemed to me very averse to any Maxims but those of the Alcoran. But yet he so well remembred what I had told him concerning our Religion, that he did not forget a single Word; and according to his bargain with the Cruel Eustochia, he went to the Grand Vizier and told him, that I would have perswaded him to turn Christian. I thought of no∣thing less than the design was form'd against me, and I had just left the fair Augusta, when I was seiz'd on by twelve Turks, who violently dragg'd me into a dark Prison, in all likelyhood abusing
me all the way, for I did not un∣derstand their Language; but by the manner they us'd me I could have no better hopes. Augusta having learnt my misfortune, went again to the Grand Vizier, and en∣deavour'd to make him know it was another effect of my Sister's Animosity. She describ'd me ve∣ry uncapable of the Crime was imputed to me, and beseech'd him to suspend his Judgment, till she had found out the means to dis∣cover the truth. My Person and my Voice were not displeasing to the Grand Vizi∣er. He happily for me did not for∣get it, and granted Augusta twelve days for my justification: but as she doubted her Sister would make use of the Patriarch's Authority to hinder her from assisting me, so she retir'd to Relations, for fear she should not have the Liberty to go abroad. Some days had past without a∣ny
discovery of what might assist her in that she had undertaken for me; and the time the Grand Vi∣zier had given her being almost expired, they were even preparing in the Town to see me suffer, when a young Maid a Servant in the Pa∣triarch's House, came to see Au∣gusta where she was retir'd, and told her that Eustochia often dis∣cours'd with the Turk, who had suffered himself to be brib'd. Augusta engaged this Maid to de∣clare before the Grand Vizier what she knew of it, and desir'd at the same time it would please him to bring me face to face with my Ac∣cuser. He as soon made me be sent for out of Prison before him, and Eustochia and the Turk being brought to hear what they would say, she he commanded the last by Alla, to tell the truth, and for what motive he had charg'd me with this fault. My Presence and
the Oath the Turk was oblig'd to take, shook his resolution so much, that he confess'd Eustochia had en∣gag'd him to say what he had said against me; that truly I had spoke to him concerning the Christian Religion, but that he first had be∣gan the discourse, and that far from using any Arguments to perswade him to be of it, I was contented to answer the questions he had deman∣ded of me: the Grand Vizier sa∣tisfy'd of my Innocency, con∣demn'd the Turk to the same Pu∣nishment was design'd for me; he seriously reprimanded Eustochia, prais'd Augusta's generosity, and set me at liberty: and as he knew the Patriarch was angry with Augusta, for retiring from his House, with∣out his consent, he oblig'd the Fa∣ther to pardon the generous Maid. I desir'd several times favour for the Turk; but what instances so∣ever I could make on that Subject
he continually answer'd me there was no pardon for faults of that nature. Since this day, Augusta was the first who desir'd me to leave a place where soon or late some ill acci∣dent would happen to me. I par∣ted from her with an extreme re∣gret, to leave her expos'd to the hatred of her Sister, and I shew'd her, when I took my leave, all the acknowledgments she could expect from a heart sensibly penetrated by the obligations she had done me. I embark'd with some of Candia, who made choice of Sicily for their retreat, and I happily arriv'd there. I staid but eight Days, and I took the opportunity to pass into France, in a Merchant's Vessel, that had brought Silks from Messina. You may think my Equipage was none of the most Magnificent: the one∣ly Riches I had was the Symeter,
the Grand Vizier had given me When I was at Thoulon I onely thought how to put my self into a condition to go to Marcilles, where I found a Merchant that ac∣commodated me with Money, Clothes and Horses for my self and my Valet; after I had made some lit∣tle stay there, I took my way to∣wards this place, where, since the report of my death was spread a∣broad, I do not doubt but my re∣turn has been the occasion of much surprise. Mezelon having ended his recital, some time was past in asking him a number of questions, to which he always answer'd with a great deal of Wit, and it surnish'd us with Subject for Conversation, for we did not soon pass over what con∣cern'd Augusta. In fine, Madam, Bernard came back to me, he went strait to Tu∣nin, but not Meeting there with
the Marquess de Saint * * * he re∣solved to go to Paris, although he had no order for it; but the affection he had for me gave him some Authority, People of his sort doe not use to take; he told me my Husband was gone from thence, and no body knew which way; he afterwards let me know, that the President was dead, and his Wife retired into a Covent, and that the Prince lived peaceably with his; that the Marquess de Saint † † † was extremely sick, and that the Duke appeared very in∣different in what he told him con∣cerning my Adventures. I was so at least asmuch as he, for every thing that Bernard told me; they neither instructed me in what was passed, nor in what I had to doe; but the Arrival of the good Hermite gave a little distur∣bance to my pleasures: he excused himself that I had not heard from
him, by reason of a Journey he was obliged to make to the Char∣treuses at Grenoble, and told me that at his return, he had heard that Spichetti was ready to dye with grief when he knew I was escaped; that after his recovery from his feaver, he had writ to my Husband that he would deliver me into his Hands, if he would come to Avignon; that my Husband was arrived with all diligence, and that both took what care they could to discover where I was; that the Gardiner being suspected to con∣tribute to my flight, had been ve∣ry ill used, and confessed what he knew; and I believe, added the Hermite, that by carefull search, it is not impossible but you may be here discovered. I was willing he should speak before Madam de Mezelon and her Children, who told me in the best manner of the world, that I ought
not to apprehend they would suf∣fer any Violence to be shewn to me. Mernard could not approve the informing so many of my affairs, and the chagrin he had at it, made me endure more than one ridicu∣lous reasoning with him; he per∣ceived also, there was a great in∣telligence between Mezelon and me, and therefore saw nothing could bring a remedy to it but distance: 'twas for this reason he advised me to goe from Mezelon, but it must be an Argument stronger than his advice to drag me from him, not but that I knew, if my Husband should discover me there, it might occasion great Misfortunes, but I could not resolve to leave a place where I loved and knew I was be∣loved, the Hermite entertained me, and we were reasoning one day a∣bout what he thought fit for me to doe, when Madam de Mezelon
and her Son were advertized, that some unknown Cavaleers desired to speak with 'em. Feliza's Cham∣ber lookt upon the Draw-bridge, and from thence I saw 'twas my Husband at the gate, conducted thither by the Italian. I shall not tell you, Madam, what words he made use of to perswade Madam de Mezelon, she ought to deliver me into his Power, or what menaces he employed to frighten her, and oblige her to doe what he desired; this Lady sustained all with an equal firmness, and neither suf∣fering her self to be overcome, nor frightened by what she said, she remained, resolved to guard me, till the anger he discovered at me, had giv'n place to reason. My Hus∣band having no occasion to com∣plain at these proceedings, would make her a Mediatrix in our diffe∣rences, and submit 'em to her Judg∣ment, Wch she would not accept till I had given my consent. You may imagine, Madam, my concerns were
into good Hands to refuse the con∣fiding of 'em to her; 'twas agreed at this interview, my Husband should retire, that it might appear this was a Voluntary Accommo∣dation; that he should return a few days after, and have a confe∣rence with me, at which Madam de Mezelon was to be present. That in the mean time Monsieur de Me∣zelon should promise my Husband, that I should not leave his House, till the conclusion or rupture of this Accommodation. The good Hermite who was yet here, would not depart before he knew how this affair would end. He was not a little necessary in winning and disposing my Husband to peace; but whether out of instinct or par∣ticular knowledge, he desired him when he took his leave to manage better his confidence of People, and that it was not to be impos'd on all. The Italian had an inconceiva∣ble vexation at the disposition he saw to our reunion, and to hinder
my Husband from having greater, he would have obliged him not to return to Mezelon's, but whatever he could say or whatsoever reasons he employ'd, my Husband came the day that was assign'd. I assure you, Madam, what con∣cern soever I had for Mezelon, I was nevertheless very sensible of the abatement I observ'd in my Husband. He found me in a Fe∣male habit, and I was so modestly adjusted, that he had reason to be pleas'd at it. The Testimony Madam de Mezelon gave of my good Conduct, appeas'd his mind extreamly, and I had more reason to pity than fear his Resentment. I therefore began to justifie my self upon all that had been told him concerning me. I gently follow∣ed the things I had been accus'd of: but that which surpriz'd him most was when I demanded Justice for his counterfeited Assassination. I
confest to him ingeniously, that I had heard with too much easiness the Gallantry of the Prince, the President, and the Duke; but when I had told him after what manner the President's Lady had engag'd me in this commerce, and every thing as it really was, he repented to have left me to the mercy of the false vertue of a Woman, and ex∣pos'd me to the love of the Husband. He ascribed all the faults of my Youth to the over severe regulation he had prescribed me, and upon the obstinacy he had to make me visit continually the President's Lady. I forgot to tell you, Madam, that Spichetti could not suffer the Eclaircisment he well foresaw I should give my Husband about his persecutions. And the perfidious had yet stronger reasons to oblige him not to Accompany him to Me∣zelon's: But when to end my jus∣tification,
I discover'd to him the proceedings of the Italian and made his impudence to me, he attested, both by the Hermite, who had heard of his importments, and by my Servants, who had been Wit∣nesses of his Violence, he appear'd extreamly troubled, and I had but little to say to obtain that he should forget my faults. This entertainment, which was onely designed the prelude to our Reconcilement, had almost entire∣ly effected it. And I repented me in earnest of all my imprudencies, and was disposing my self to pass my days with my Husband after such a manner as should blot out the ill impression was received of me, when he fell into a weakness was attributed to his sensibleness of our interview. The sentiments of it was changed when after he was a little recovered, he fell into unconceivable torment. There
Accidents returned so often that at last he died, when he had suffer∣ed for two days all that could be endured. He made a will, wherein he justi∣fied me in every thing he had ac∣cused me, she gave me also all that the Law permitted him to dispose of, upon condition I should marry Mezelon. He had heard how faith∣fully Bernard and my Chamber Maid had serv'd me, and took care to recompence 'em for it. The more they examined into his Sickness, the more reason there was to believe he was Poyson'd; and he said something of it to him who was called to receive his last Breath. He was opened and there was seen the visible effects of the Poyson that the Traytour Spichetti had given him. I sent to Avignon to have him taken, but Heaven had not so long defer'd his punishment. He that I sent for that purpose,
brought me word back, that the reputation he had of being and possessing many Jewels, had temp∣ted a Servant of his to kill him and run away with the Plunder. I cried sincerely for the death of my Husband, but time, and the Consolations I received on all sides calmed my affliction at last. I would not marry nevertheless till his will was executed, and what∣soever Mezelon could do would not prevail with me to marry him till after I had been a Widow for a whole year. 'Twas accomplish't with the great joy of his Mother and Sister. Since that time I have had no care but to please my Hus∣band, and thereby to establish me a life as pleasant as Innocent. I have some business which I am come to regulate, and when it is ended I will return to him with hopes never to be more seperated from him.
Madam de Mezelon having ended her recital, the Countess de Ma∣rignan appear'd extreamly satisfied at it. She admired the several ac∣cidents, and the night approaching, she took leave of her Friend, pro∣mising to meet at the same place the next day, and to discover to her the adventures she was con∣cern'd in. FINIS.
THE GALLANTS, OR Reciprocal Confidents. A NOVEL. PART II. LONDON, Printed for Joseph Knight and Francis Saunders, at the Blue Anchor in the New Exchange. MDCLXXXV.
THE Reciprocal Confidents. The Second Part. THE Countess of Marignan, and Madam de Mezelon, met the next Day in the Tuilleries according to their engagements; and after half an hours walking, during which time they entertain'd themselves in gene∣ral upon the Changes that are com∣monly occasion'd by Marriage, they retir'd into a private Walk, and sit∣ting down, the Countess acquitted her self of her promise, and made this relation of her Adventures.
The Countess de Marignan's Relation. I Will say nothing to you, Ma∣dam, of the first Years of my Life; we pass'd 'em together, and you remember, without doubt, how unwillingly I marryed the Marquess de Mondanar; but as you went in∣to the Country, some Days before that fatal engagement, I must begin my recital with some things that pre∣ceded it, to give you the greater light into those that follow'd. As soon as the Articles of our Marriage were sign'd, the Marquess de Mondanar's Relations came to Visit me, and amongst the rest he presented to me the Count de Ble∣sinac as his greatest Friend, and de∣sired me to look upon him as such. What imprudence has such a Man as Mondanar committed, in engag∣ing
his Mistress to have an esteem for Blesinac. The first, as you know, Madam, was more than threescore; and you may remember that the infirmities he had, render'd him decayed for his Age. His way of Dressing did not repair the defects of his Person; and, to keep no secret from you, I must confess to you, his Humour, and Wit, were yet more disagreeable. He was Covetous, Severe, Contra∣dictory, and the knowledge he had of Pleasure only serv'd him to fly the enjoyment of it, and defer'd it from those over whom he had any power. In fine, my destiny com∣pell'd me to marry this Man, for whom I had almost an invincible aversion. Our Relations, you know, do not reason after our manner, when our establishment is in question. The Quality and great Riches of the Marquess was the Cause they did not
consult me in what was so contrary to my inclination; they assur'd me a considerable Quality and Joyn∣ture, and that was all they desired. Though the Marquess was attack'd by his continual pains, he would not long defer our Marriage, at Night it was celebrated. My old Hus∣band return'd home, and I to my Mothers, with a great deal of joy on my side, but not without extream surprise to my Relations, whose a∣stonishment and Chagrin were more augmented the next Day, when he came to desire my Mother to ap∣prove of my going for Languedoc. He came into my Chamber, and ex∣plain'd himself to me after the same manner. Well, Madam, said he, are you not resolv'd to accompany me to Morrow to Provence? That word of to Morrow frighted me, and it was impossible for me to hinder the alteration that appear'd in
my face. What makes you blush, con∣tinued he? Do you think I'll spend my Estate at Paris? No, Madam, I'm sick and not pleas'd with the place; I once more tell you, Make ready to go with me. I told him with a melancholy air, that I was rea∣dy to do what he pleas'd. After this he chuck'd me under the Chin, kiss'd my Forehead, and went to take order for his departure. I saw him no more that Day. This proceeding made my Mother judge I should not be very happy; the good Lady repented for having a greater consideration for the Rich∣es than the Person, and she desired the Count de Blesinac not to forget to endeavour what he could for my consolation. You may guess in what a condition I left Paris. Blesinac went with us, and I per∣ceiv'd, when he suffered himself to be engag'd in this Journey by my Husband, he renounc'd all other
pleasures for that of accompanying me. When we were a little way out of Town, the Marquess made the Coach stop upon a Hill, from whence it might be wholly disco∣vered, and then said in a cruel voice, Look well upon Paris, Ma∣dam, for 'tis the last time you shall see it whilst I live. I know too well the consequences of so dangerous an abode, ever to permit it you, and I must tell you that a young Woman ought to think of it no otherwise than the most terrible burying place of her Vertue. I made no answer to this discourse, but contented my self with thinking what my sense furnish'd me with on that occasion. You say nothing, replyed my Husband, do you pre∣tend to return? As I am not quite gone from it yet, said I, it is not time to think of returning. I advise you not, replyed the Marquess, for it will be to no purpose.
The Coach driving forward, he began to consider what the journey would cost him, and from that cal∣culation he soon pass'd to regret the charge. During these impertinent Discourses, the Count was in great constraint, and durst not look upon me; but I often created an occasi∣on to go out of the Coach, some∣times with pretence to ease the Hor∣ses, sometimes for fear of over turn∣ing, but 'twas always to escape the fatigueing conversation of my Hus∣band. I remember one Day that being alighted, I walk'd, and the Count gave me his hand. I was troubled at the ill humour of his relation, and this thought joyn'd to the little in∣clination I had to merriment, kept me in a deep thoughtfulness. The Count could not hinder him∣self from demanding of me the rea∣son. 'Tis so little a time, said I, since I left the Persons who were most dear
to me; and, all that I foresee fills my mind with such sad Ideas, that 'tis impossible I should think with∣out melancholy upon what I have lost, or upon that which my Duty obliges me to follow. I confess, Madam, said Blesinac, Monsieur de Mondanar does not know his happi∣ness, and makes an ill use of what would be a blessing to the most de∣serving Man in the World. I do not agree with you, answered I, that it is altogether as you say, but I am perswaded, if I do not occasion his felicity, he will be the cause of my ill fortune. I never desired, conti∣nued I, a life loaded with continu∣al Pleasures, but I have been always very apprehensive of misfortunes, and all that I should have ask'd of Heaven would have been to pass my Days in a tranquillity, that I well see I must not now pretend to. I agree, Madam, says Blesinac, that an undisturb'd Life is agreeable; but
it may sometimes be molested by sentiments that may be the occasion of as great a degree of Pleasure. If I had once acquired it, replyed I, I could know no recompence for the loss of it; and I would not for any thing, answered Blesinac, have preserv'd that in which I liv'd in till the time I had the honour to see you. Do not accuse me, said I, of doing you so great a mischief, for I fear, 'twould be never in my power to repair it, and I have no design to do you any; but by this Discourse I find you seek a pretence to avoid the care of giving me con∣solation, and forget what my Mo∣ther desir'd you. I do not forget it, Madam, but what comfort can you expect from an unhappy Man who suffers your punishments and his own, and has himself occasion for what you demand of him. I had form'd to my self a terrible Idea of a declaration of love, but I
found nothing in this but what was respectful and decent, I thought my self not obliged to be angry at it. We happily arriv'd where the Coach stay'd for us, for I knew not well what answer I should make to Ble∣sinac. An accident happened the next Day that more augmented the aver∣sion I had for the Marquess, and gave me a better knowledge of the Counts Inclinations for me; we were over-turn'd, and I receiv'd a consi∣derable hurt in my Head. I was vex'd to hear my Husband, who took no notice of the pain I en∣dur'd, vent his affliction for the breaking of his Coach. He had lit∣tle care of me, but I receiv'd very many from the Count de Blesinac. Although I was wounded, we were to leave Châteauroux as soon as the equipage was mended. There would be no end, should I tell you all the subjects of complaint
the Marquess gave me in this Jour∣ney. Blesinac repair'd all I receiv'd, by signs of his Passion. We arriv'd at last at Mondanar, where our re∣ception was very doleful. The Count pass'd a fortnight there, whilst I often said to my self that I might surely have an innocent Pas∣sion for him, and that it was the on∣ly remedy I had to allay my misfor∣tunes. What would you have, Ma∣dam? the Heart never wants reasons to abandon it self to a desire that flatters it. I insensibly accustom'd my self to hear the assurances the Count gave me of his tenderness and fidelity, and I permitted him to believe that I was not insensible of his merit and affection. Well, Madam, said he sometimes, are you still for tran∣quillity? and do not you perceive at all that agreeable trouble which Love raises in the Breast? I know so little what it is (answered I to
him one Day when he discours'd in that kind to me) that I can∣not well unravel what I feel, but I believe in the humour I am, I shall suffer all it will bring upon me. I begin to be afraid of absence, and lest it be followed by forgetfulness. I fear lest you should grow Incon∣stant, Perfidious, Unfaithful. Judge, pursued I, if these thoughts will suffer my mind to be in a perfect re∣pose. Blesinac took great care to sa∣tisfie me in all my doubts, and I ve∣ry well found he was also not a little in fear of absence. He sung agree∣ably enough, and I had no very ill Voice, so that we sung sometimes to∣gether; but when my Husband heard us, he told me in the rudest manner you can imagine, that the Af∣fairs of the House were not perform∣ed by singing. In fine, he was trou∣bled to hear me, and forbid me that diversion, as if it had been a Crime; and he likewise made his Relations
know, he should not be sorry at his departure. The Count was obliged to go on the Morrow, and I remain∣ed at Mondanar. All the mischiefs I endur'd were nothing in compari∣son to what I suffer'd by the ill hu∣mour of my Husband, and the parting from Blesinac. I had yet the liberty to imploy my thoughts all the Day long on a Person whose remembrance alone was sufficient to sweeten all my pains, but I was not so happy to preserve it long. My Husband had a Sister who dy'd, and left an only Daughter to his Guar∣dianship; before he brought her near me, he took great care to for∣bid her ingaging in my concerns; and I can assure you, she was ever far from it. She had the same mind, and the same ways with her Uncle, but more emportment. She was outwardly very disagreeable, the sight of her displeas'd me, and 'twas a punishment for me to look upon her.
The Death of my Sister-in-Law was a pretence for Blesinac to come to the Marquess's; but although Crisante (for so my Niece was call'd) was of a rude and savage disposition, she took care I perceiv∣ed to appear more humane towards the Count; one would have thought she had never seen any other Body, she discovered so much earnestness to look upon him. I cannot better describe the motion of her Eyes. She knew not the World, and there∣fore you must not wonder if she was ignorant of the manner of it. I would have given her some ad∣vice, which she refus'd with great disdain. I know not how Blesinac happen'd to tell her one Day that she had fine Teeth, she believ'd it; and since never any one has told her so much, she imagin'd she found her very aimable. This ridiculous opini∣on join'd to her rusty behaviour,
made her a pleasant Character; but I was not of the humour to make sport at it; and the disagreements she had in other things, made her insupportable to me. Crisante was rich, both in her own fortune, and the hopes she had to inherit my Husband's, which made the Count de Blesinac's Father de∣mand her in Marriage for his Son. The Marquess easily consented to this desire, and, to speak sincerely to you, I was not very much trou∣bled at the choice was made for Cri∣sante, because she was as I would wish, not to be in danger of rob∣bing me of the Counts Affection. And 'twas with difficulty I perswad∣ed him to it, he reproach'd me that I did not love him since I would have him Marry; but as the establishment was considerable for him, so he at last overcame his disgust to it, and declar'd him∣self Crisante's Lover. When he said
any obliging things to her, 'twas with a constraint, 'tis true, that was ve∣ry visible. In the mean time, out of an odd humour which surpris'd us all, my Husband refus'd to conclude the Marriage. Blesinac's Father prest him either to break off, or conclude, because there was another Party pro∣pos'd, that would not be of less Ad∣vantage to the Count than the Mar∣quess's Niece. I had also my reasons to desire that Blesinac should Marry Crisante, but all our Wishes were without Effect. The Marquess follow'd his own, which were contrary to ours; and when one of the Counts Relati∣ons came to speak to him about the Articles, which it was time to seal, he would do nothing in it, he said, and that his mind was alter'd. This refusal gave me many Cha∣grins, and you may imagine it gave not fewer to the Count; he ex∣treamly
complained of it, and the quarrel was so great between him and my Husband, as to resolve ne∣ver to see one the other again. I made no shew, though I was con∣cern'd at it, but left all to Crisante's violent humour, which forgot not a∣ny thing I could say, had it been law∣ful for me to have explain'd my self. Blesinac thought I was not very much engag'd for his Interest, and I might have spoke more in his Favour. I made him see the Injustice of his Complaints, by telling him, that a greater Zeal for his Concerns would have render'd me suspected by my Husband, and that the least suspici∣on would have destroy'd our Com∣merce. He approved my Reasons, and we parted well enough con∣tented. I apprehended nevertheless that there was some mystery between Crisante and the Count. I could not discover it, and the things re∣main'd
for some time in this condi∣tion. Blesinac's Relations reported a∣broad that he was to be Married to a Gentlewoman their Neighbour, who was both Rich and Beautiful. This News gave me no alarms. I believed it false, because I was per∣swaded he would make no resoluti∣ons without my consent, but he had nevertheless design'd an enterprise that I was far from suspecting. My Husband was incomoded with his Pains. I had watch'd with him late, and I wondered that my Niece was retir'd before me, not imagin∣ing any design in it, for she knew not her Duty enough to follow it; I thought only that the Chagrin she had at the breaking off her Mar∣riage was the reason she wanted complaisance, and might make her heedless, and I went to Bed without making other reflections. The Day began to break, and I
was very fast asleep when they came to wake me and tell me the Castle was a Fire, without knowing who was the occasion of it: They told me also that the Bridge was found down, and the Gates open. I im∣mediately sent into Crisante's Cham∣ber; 'twas to no purpose to look for her, she was escap'd. I must con∣fess to you, Madam, that notwith∣standing the fright I had from the Fire, I grew very angry at Blesinac that he had told me nothing of his Designs, for I did not doubt but he was concern'd in Crisante's flight, and that it was he who had stole her a∣way. I soon got up, and went to discover it to my Husband, who had all the resentment at it imaginable. He drove it so far, that Blesinac was condemn'd to lose his Head; for the Parliament of Tholouse is very se∣vere in faults of this nature, and it was not hard for him to bring the Affair to this pass.
I was till now of no esteem in the Marquess's House, it seem'd as if this accident had open'd his Eyes, to see the Injustice he had done me, and make him repent to have lived with me after that manner. It might be perhaps to revenge him∣self of the disobedience of his Niece, and the little consideration Blesinac had for him, that he began to use me much better. I receiv'd from him many proofs of his kindness; and if I had not had in my Heart those Sentiments for Blesinac, I should have been, I believe, very Happy. Alas! 'twas impossible for me to be so, since, angry as I was, that the Count had hid his Design from me, I nevertheless lov'd him more than ever, when it was not in my power to overcome the sad∣ness that deprest me, notwithstand∣ing all the care that the Marquess took to divert me. He liv'd with me after a manner, had reason to give
me all content; but I observ'd that his Grief encreas'd, and his Health continually diminish'd. I imagin'd his Death would be the occasion of Troubles; I was in fear of it, and took great care to preserve it; he fell at last very Sick, and dyed after he had given me all, to hinder the Disputes might arise from those who were to inherit, and to deprive his Niece of it, who was run away. I receiv'd no Civilities from Ble∣sinac upon his Death; on the con∣trary, his Father declar'd against me, and ingaging in his Affairs with∣out communicating any thing to me, he follow'd all the indirect ways that might be a hinderance to mine. It serv'd nevertheless to advance them. You may think perhaps, Madam, that the condition of be∣ing a rich Widow had made me ex∣treamly dispos'd to Joy? You must not imagine it, 'twas only a trouble to my mind, and I never found my self so melancholy.
The advantages my Husband had made me, gave me a true Grief for the loss of him. I was on the o∣ther side perswaded that Blesinac no longer lov'd me. His proceedings left me no reason to doubt of it; and although I had been satisfied with him, I could no longer pretend to him because he was Marryed; These thoughts gave me not the li∣berty to taste the Pleasures of a free Condition. Every thing that I saw at Mondanar, entertain'd my melan∣choly, which made me take a re∣solution to return to Paris, where I receiv'd no more satisfaction than in Languedoc. I carried my affli∣ction with me, and though I thought I had done a great deal toward my quiet by flying far from Blesinac, I found no repose where I sought it. But, Madam, a Heart truly con∣cern'd does not so soon resolve to be indifferent. We Hate and Love very often by turns, before we can
arrive at that happy insensibility. The Reputation I had of being rich, and of never wandring from a regu∣lar conduct whilst my Husband li∣ved, made me be courted by many of great Quality. I accepted of none of the Propositions were made me, and led to a retired life, that 'twas thought I should not easily be perswaded to change it. I saw some∣times the Marchioness de Montaigre, because she had the same opinion of the World as I, and she saw no bo∣dy, (her Brother the Chevalier de Marignan excepted.) What was most extraordinary in it, was, That we often pass'd whole hours without saying any thing: She lov'd to read, and I had a great deal of pleasure to hear her; and 'tis certain, what was our divertisement, would have been very tiresome to those they call the Ladies of the World. Neither did her Brother visit her often, because he lov'd merriment, and 'twas not
to be found with us: But at last, he insensibly accustomed himself to our manner of living. He told me, that I was the most proper to reclaim people from the idle follies of the World, and that I had inspired him with thoughts he had been hitherto free from. I had so little inclination to be∣lieve him, that I propos'd to the Marchioness of Montaigre to marry him to a rich woman that was my Relation. He gave no ear to his Sister, but persisted always to give me signs of his esteem. I was per∣swaded that I hated Blesinac, and that I should vex him extremely if I marry'd. For this reason it was, that I shew'd some complaisance for Marignan; but fearing lest there should be more of interest than love in his protestations, I was resolved to be satisfied. I caus'd a counterfeit Letter to be writ to me, as if it came from Lan∣guedoc;
wherein I was advertised, That some of my Husband's Relati∣ons had a design to exclude me, from the advantages he gave me when he dy'd, by some Deeds that gave 'em Title to inherit. This diminish'd nothing from the obliging Senti∣ments the Chevalier de Marignan had for me; and that which fully perswaded me that he truly lov'd me for my own sake, was, that his Elder Brother being kill'd at the Army, he became Heir, and then press'd me more than ever to give my consent to his passion. He dis∣cours'd with my Relations about it; and whatsoever his own could do, to turn him from that Design, he marry'd me, and had a Quarrel with the Marchioness de Montaigre who was not more willingly dispos'd to it than the others. I thought I had lov'd him, Ma∣dam, and I had many reasons for it: But I was no sooner marry'd than I
made a scruple of it. What! said I to my self, ought Blesinac's fault to inspire me with other Sentiments, than those that are the occasion of grief? A heart may be concern'd once in its life; but it is an inex∣cusable weakness to suffer it to be guilty of a second Engagement: What have I done! Ought I to pardon my self for thinking I could be happy with any but Blesinac? In vain I endeavoured to live content∣edly; nothing could free my mind from these sad thoughts. I was not born for quiet, Madam; and if it were your destiny to be belov'd, it has always been mine to discover in my self a continual source of trouble and inquietude. What care soever I took to hide it, the Count de Marignan perceiv'd it. He said nothing to me of it, and sought rather to remedy than disco∣ver my grief. He gave me all the divertisements he thought capable
to dissipate my melancholy: But I had made a custom of it, to which he was forc'd to yield. He saw that I was always melancholy, and I had thereby less pains to perswade him 'twas the effect of my temper. The greatest affliction was, that I heard the Countess de Blesinac was dead. I was told, She was very little re∣gretted by her Husband, and that he had not shewn such indifference to my Marriage as I imagin'd. The Reflections I made upon this death encreas'd my melancholy; but not to draw more Questions from my Husband in a Subject, I should have been sorry to enlighten him, I of∣ten walk'd alone, finding it a plea∣sure to fly the Conversation of the World. Not long after this, one of my Relations, who had a very fine house near Paris, desir'd me to go and pass two or three days there, assuring me, I should have the liber∣ty to think as much as I pleas'd. I
told my Husband of it, who gave me leave to go this Journey, whilst he took this time to hunt with the Marquess de Marcilly. I went to this house in my Rela∣tions Coach, and I took with me a Gentlewoman and a Foot man only. When I was arriv'd, my Relation left me, and return'd as soon. Shall we go, says she, into a Summer-house in the Garden, whence there is a fine Prospect? Let us go, said I; but upon condition you give me the liberty to Think there some time. My Relation smil'd; and told me, as she brought me to the Garden, She imagin'd thoughtfulness would please me less than I mention'd. We were soon at the Summer-house, and she open'd the Door. I enter'd first, thinking to find no Body, and was surpriz'd to see Blesinac, in a Habit very agreeable to the deject∣ed Air of his Face. I lookt upon my Relation, to reproach her with
the trick she had play'd me, and was retiring, the engagement, under which I was, not permitting me to expose my self to such a dangerous Conversation: But they both stopt me; and I could not exempt my self from seeing and hearing Blesinac, in whom I discovered the marks of a profound Sadness. I must confess, Madam, I grew pale at the fight of him, and it put me into so great a perplexity, that it is impossible for me to give you an account of my thoughts, or of those things which he at that instant said to me. I on∣ly know, that he threw himself at my feet, and that his eyes said more than his mouth. As I was fearful in this occasion of nothing so much as my self, I turn'd from him as much as I could, to shun the force of his eyes. Ah! Madam, said he, what have you more to do to me? and why have you resolv'd my revenge before you were certain of my guilt?
'Tis to no purpose, answered I, to know whether you're innocent, or no; but 'twas a crime for me to see you; and though you should remain whole days the object of my eyes, and I should be fully convinc'd you gave me not the least occasion of complaint, you would be but lit∣tle the happier for it. Suffer me, therefore, to believe that you have offended me; and think for your part what outrages I have commit∣ted against you, and let us not ex∣pose our selves to a reconcilement that must be attended by a train of Consequences fatal to our repose. Well, Madam! reply'd he, since you desire it, I will never see you more; but if this must be the last minute, suffer me at least to make an explication to you of my acti∣ons, that I may not leave you lon∣ger in an errour, my honour obli∣ges me to undeceive.
Whilst Blesinac spoke to me, I perceived my feeble Heart was ta∣king his part against me; and my Relation on her side told me I might hearken to him without a Crime. Pardon me, Madam, continued he, if I begin my justification by re∣proaching you. You accuse me of Inconstancy; tell me, Madam, what convincing Argument of your Affection did you ever give me? You made me so much your Friend, to confide in me the secret of your Misfortunes. You suffered me some∣times to vent my Passion for you, and you did not forbid me to be∣lieve that you had a little tender∣ness for me; but Words were my only happiness, Words of too slight a force to hinder those thoughts of my establishment, to which (un∣kindly) you your self engaged me. Since this time, Madam, I have been, as well as you, deceived by appear∣ances, and I pretend to convince
you that I have had a thousand Reasons to complain of your pro∣ceedings. I made no answer to Blesinac, because I began privately to accuse my self, and impute to me all the errours in his Conduct. I neverthe∣less told him the condition of our Affairs, and he was equally indiffe∣rent whether we should be angry or have compassion one for the other. There is no Punishment so cruel as the reconciling Duty and Inclina∣tion. They have each their tyran∣nical Rights, one imposes by Au∣thority, but the other draws by Force. I knew well what I owed to my Husband, but I knew better what power a long habitude of Lo∣ving exercis'd over a sensible Soul. I marryed the Count de Marignan to be reveng'd of Blesinac, and in hopes his Merit and Friendship would banish from my Heart a Ten∣derness I thought so ill acknowledg'd.
Blesinac had not forgot that Ho∣nour engag'd him in his Justificati∣on, and that it could not be effected without discovering all that hap∣pen'd to him. I had likewise a great desire to hear it; and I no sooner gave him leave to make a Relation of them, but he began in these Words. You know, Madam, how my Fa∣ther commanded me to court Cri∣sante, and you are not ignorant of those things that preceded Mon∣sieur de Mondanar's refusal. A Principle of Honour made me con∣ceive that when I had once declar'd my self, I was oblig'd to pursue my pretensions. All of our Family en∣couraged me to it, and I was even engag'd to it by Crisante, who had an ill opinion of the consideration I had for her Uncle. I was told by her also, that she perceiv'd you was not for my Interest, and would never consent that I should carry
her away. And methoughts on the other side you had acted but very indifferently for the effecting my Designs with your Husband; the knowledge I had, compared with her opinion, made me resolve to discover nothing of it to you; and add to this, that the stealing of her away being the thing in hand, you would not be angry I imagin'd to ignore it; and since you was once so earnest for our Marriage, I could not perswade my self your senti∣ments about it should be so soon alter'd. These are the Reasons, Ma∣dam, I had not to conside this se∣cret to you. I had every Day In∣telligence from Crisante by so many ways that it will be tiresome to tell; neither is the remembrance of it so agreeable to make me desire it. She found an opportunity to steal the Key of the Draw-Bridge, and take the Impresson of it on Wax, which she sent to me; I caus'd one
to be made, which I gave her, and we agreed that on a certain Day I should be at the end of the avenue to the Castle. She undertook the care to get forth, and 'twas my bu∣siness to expect her. I do not question, Madam, but you were very much surpris'd when you were told the Castle was a Fire. This is the Reason obliged her to it. You had watch'd very late, and the Day breaking when you went to Bed, if by chance the Bridge should be seen down, and it was suspected that she was gone out, she thought you would send after us, unless you had some more pressing engagement. There∣fore, without having any further concern for what might happen, she follow'd her own instinct; and when she and her Maid came to me, they both told me (almost break∣ing their Hearts with laughing) that they had burnt the Quarters. I
found but too much easiness to exe∣cute this Melancholy Design; we took our way towards Roüergue, where I was assured of the Baron de Goustignac's House, whose Wife is my Aunt. They receiv'd us very well, but I knew afterwards I was mistaken, when I thought to find there a perfect Sanctuary. The Baron had a Son just return'd from Paris, who was a Musqueteer in the first Company. He had a ve∣ry gay and brisk Air, and this his Father call'd the way of the Court. The Musqueteer fancyed, that Cri∣sante being Rich, her Fortune would not at all incommode him; and f he could but arrive to please her, there was no reason the scruple of deceiving a Relation should be an obstacle to his Designs. After I had pass'd some Days at Goustignac, I desired my Aunt to take what measures she thought necessary to Marry us at her House; but her
Husband finding always some difficul∣ty in it, she told me at last with Tears in her Eyes, that I could expect no∣thing from his assistance; that she found her Husband and Son had great Designs upon Crisante, and therefore advis'd me to retire before they had time to execute their reso∣lutions. I made use of this Coun∣sel, and that Evening (after we had supp'd, and the Baron and Musque∣teer were retir'd to rest) we parted from Goustignac. My only Design being to leave that House, we fol∣low'd no certain way; but after we had walk'd all Night, my Valet de Chambre discovered we were not far off from a Forest, wherein there was a Glass-House, and that he was acquainted with the Master, and se∣veral Gentlemen who belong'd to it. He told us we might pass there some Days very conveniently, till we had determin'd which way to re∣tire. I propos'd it to Crisante, but
she always took Pleasure in being of an opposite Opinion to the rest; and if at last she yielded, 'twas not till she had given us the trouble of making long and tedious Disputes. We were but two Leagues from the Mountains of Roüergue when we were set upon by twelve Thieves. I at first thought we had been discove∣red, and that they were sent after us by Monsieur de Goustignac, but they had only a Design upon our Money, as we found by their first Comple∣ments. They robb'd us without Quarter, that is, they took away all our Cloaths, and left us scarce any thing to cover us. I had now no occasion of Eloquence to per∣swade Crisante to go to the Glass-House; but 'twas now a question how to get thither, and to make our selves be received, which ap∣pear'd very doubtful, in the Equi∣page we were left.
The Person of Crisante spoke lit∣tle in her favour, and I had not so good an opinion of my own as to hope from it any better effect; but Rusat (thus my Valet was call'd) undertook for the event, and we began a long walk for People not accustomed to go a-foot. We of∣ten in the Forest met with little Habitations, where we receiv'd some slight repasts compos'd of Bread and Water, which ne∣vertheless we rellish'd very well, and we were very happy to meet at Night with one of these Cottages, for Crisante was quite tir'd, and 'twas with great punishment the next Day she got to the Glass-House. As the dispositions of few Peo∣ple resemble, so we were different∣ly receiv'd by the Gentlemen. Some laught at us, others pityed us, and some endeavoured to make discove∣ries into our Adventure, the most
reasonable us'd us civilly, judging by our Language, our Manners, and the Cloaths we had left, that we were not unworthy of it. We were offer'd by these to lodge in their Cabins (for their Houses de∣serve no better names) Crisante staid at the Masters of the Glass-House, whose name was Fergonce, and I went to lodge at a Gentlemans call'd Mondany. I sent the next Day Rusat to my Fathers to let him know what had happen'd to us, and to ask him for what assistance was re∣quisite to carry us farther if neces∣sary, or to bring us back to him if he thought it convenient. I com∣manded Rusat to enquire also after you, and to take care to deliver to you a Letter I privately gave him. I forgot to let you know that he had told Fergonce we were People of Quality. We discover'd by what misfortune we came to him
in so ill a condition, and he had the goodness to accommodate us with Cloaths proper enough for the place we were in. Crisante urg'd me to marry her; but though I intended to do it, a se∣cret sentiment made me ever find some reasons either true or false, to defer our Marriage. She reason'd about it with Fergonce. He spoke to me of it, and made me so sensi∣ble of the obligation I had to give this satisfaction to a person who had shewn so much passion as to follow me, that we were privately married at night by a Brother of his, who was a Clergy-man. Ah, Madam, if you had seen with what Melan∣choly I past that hideous frightful night, and the days that soon fol∣low'd it, you would have justified me your self. I thought of nothing but you, and the consideration of Riches, which had inveigled me in∣to Wedlock, appeared to me then
the cause of all my misfortunes. Crisante made not so strict an ex∣amination of my thoughts, she took me as I was, and I had not little to suffer from her Caresses and ill Hu∣mour, since they were both in ex∣treams. But my repentance was not sufficient for your revenge; love must to perfect it, draw me into more persecutions. I have told you, methinks, I lodg'd at Monda∣ny's, but I have not mentioned a Si∣ster who liv'd with him. This maid, who was call'd Diana, fansyed I should be her Endymion, and made many advances to a Commerce, of which I took no notice, because I was not in a humour for pleasures of that nature. But she was not discouraged at the first signs of in∣difference I shewed her, she was handsome, and well knew was capa∣ble of generating Love in a heart that was not already engaged. She ap∣rehended then if I had any en∣gagement
with Crisante, it could be only upon the score of interest, and it would not be difficult for her to break it. She often told me that I had not a curious judgment, and if I wanted good reasons to convali∣date my choice, 'twould be hard for me to save the reputation of my discretion. I would not give her any occasi∣on of trouble, but in complaisance, flattered her weakness, which after∣wards, had like to have cost me my life. She told her Brother therefore that I lov'd her, and if he would dis∣cover it to Crisante, perhaps he might gain her affections. She was of a humour to refuse nothing to her Pas∣sion. Mondany was full of what his Sister told him; they knew I had stole away Crisante, but they did not suspect we were marryed, so that Mondany flatter'd himself with success. He made her many little Presents of his own Workmanship,
and often gave her concerts of Haut∣boys and Flutes; neither was I an∣gry she should be employ'd in these divertisements, that I might have the more leisure to be pensive. She told me one Day with a kind of joy, that Mondany had made a discovery to her, that I lov'd his Si∣ster, which was followed by a de∣claration of his Passion. I advis'd her to turn it into diversion, and be sure not to confess any thing of our Marriage. Mondany was as handsome as his Sister was fair. He was not igno∣rant of his value; and looking up∣on me as the only obstacle to his de∣signs, he had a mind to be rid of me. He desir'd his Sister to endea∣vour what she could to encrease my passion that he might have the more time to engage Crisante, by whom he said, he was not ill recei∣ved. Diana serv'd her Brother accord∣ing
to his desires; and this artificial Maid very dexterously discovered to me, that Crisante entertain'd him after a manner favourable enough to perswade she had a design to mar∣ry him. Whilst Diana did what was possible to make her self be be∣lov'd by me, Mondany was taking measures to make me not capable to dispute Crisante with him. I saw one Morning a man come into his house, who lookt upon me with such earnestness, as if he had thought to have seen me in another place. I retir'd not to give him the time to recal his memory, and I went to Fergonce's to see Crisante, who was not very well that day. The fear of discovering our Marriage was the reason we lodg'd not together. I staid with her till the Evening, when there was a great noise heard not far from the Furnace, and a report that Mondany was kill'd. I went to know the truth of the acci∣dent,
and I saw a man dragg'd vio∣lently along, as the Author of the Murder. I knew it was him who lookt so earnestly upon me in the Morning, and I told them who us'd him so roughly, I believ'd he was not guilty, because I took him for Mondany's Friend. Mondany was at the same time brought hither. I approach'd to see him; and find∣ing but little life remaining, I fol∣low'd the rest who carry'd him into his house, and employ'd my self, like them, in endeavouring to bring him to himself: But as he recover'd his Senses, he seem'd more disturb'd at the sight of me. I fansi'd my presence afflicted him, and upon this thought I went out. He that had wounded him, call'd me (seeing me go by) to tell me the truth of the misfortune. I know not, says he, for what mo∣tive Mondany would take away your life; but he sent for me, I
know well, from the Mountains with that intent; he shew'd me this Morning a place, where in the E∣vening, he said, you us'd to walk; and there we had made choice of a Tree, from whence I was hired to shoot you. He caus'd me to ob∣serve your Person and Cloaths, lest I should mistake; and 'tis an hour since he told me 'twas time to take my Post. He help'd me up in∣to the Tree; and was giving me my Gun, the Muzzle towards him, which by accident he discharg'd, and kill'd himself. Whilst this miserable Man was telling this story to me, Mondany did the like, and I no longer wondered why my sight should be troublesome to him. He dyed, and his imprudent Sister finding her self concern'd a little in this misfortune, fled away, no one knowing what was become of her. I was unwilling to have my name nois'd about in this Affair, which
made me expect Rusat with great impatience, when at last he arri∣ved. My first care was for you, Ma∣dam; I shew'd no earnestness but to enquire after you, and how you had receiv'd my Letter. He told me that you refus'd to read it, and had tore it in a thousand pieces, ne∣ver giving him any attention when he spoke about my Affairs, by which he guess'd you very much dispos'd to pardon me the taking a∣way of Crisante; and added, that many things which anger made you utter, gave him reason to believe you had won the good opinion of Mondanar, by the hatred only you made appear to me. What shall I say, Madam? I had not the least Cha∣grin at your anger, I stood more in fear of your indifference. After Rusat had given me an ac∣count of your concerns, he told me my Affairs were in an ill condition,
that there was no hopes of return∣ing to my Father, much dejected by my misfortunes. He sent me a Lit∣ter, and every thing that was neces∣sary for a long Journey, the difficul∣ty was in finding a place to retreat to. I had many Friends would have received me, but I had some Reasons not to desire it. I would not trou∣ble my Friends with the ill disposi∣tion and humour of Madam de Ble∣sinac; she had continual quarrels with Fergonce's Wife and Daugh∣ters, I delivered them from it at last, after I had acquitted in part the obligations they had done me, and resolv'd to go towards Pompidour. We had been two Months at this Place, when passing by the Door of a Covenant, I saw a crowd of People: curiosity made me enter, and I soon perceived some young Woman in∣tended to take the habit. I went forwards with many others to see with what Courage she would re∣nounce
the World, and never was there a surprise like mine, when I perceiv'd it was Diana, that Diana whom I have been mentioning to you. Although she was much bu∣sied in acting her part, she cast her Eyes upon me, and the sight of me struck her with such concern, that she fell in a swound, and the Cere∣mony was oblig'd to cease, never to be begun again. Diana not ima∣gining but I came to Pompidour in pursuit of her. Love was not so dead in her Heart but my presence reviv'd it. I was therefore no soon∣er return'd to my Lodgings, but a Man desir'd to speak with me, and gave me a note from Diana, which conjur'd me to come and see her. I should have denied it, had not the Messenger told me, she was re∣solv'd to come in case I refus'd her a Visit. I ask'd him if she had any Relations at Pompidour, he told me an Aunt. I went to the Convent
where Diana was, who said very near the same things to me she had done at the Glass-House, told me her manner of conduct with her Brother, and that it was not so much his Death as my indifferency was the occasion of her turning Nun: but I no sooner saw you, continued she, then I chang'd my intentions, in hopes you had more favourable thoughts for me. This Discourse was accompa∣ny'd with so many Tears, that I thought I should have been forc'd to pity her; but the remembrance of her artifices before very much enabled me to resist it. I also, Madam, made use of your Idea, and these considerations oblig'd me to tell her, 'twas in vain she gave me these kind wishes, that being no longer in my own disposal, 'twas impossible for me to be hers. She easily understood I was mar∣ryed,
and dissembled so well the an∣ger she conceived at it, that I thought she began to hearken to Reason. I left her, and 'twas some∣time since I had heard of her. I knew only that she had forsaken the Con∣vent and lived with her Aunt. But admire, Madam, to what extremities she was brought by her Despair; one Evening when some Company of the Town were at Cards with Ma∣dam de Blesinac, I was told that one desired to speak with me about an important affair; it was not dark e∣nough to have occasion for a light, and yet it was so obscure, that I could not at first discern the Person that spoke to me; 'twas Diana in Mans Apparel. She spoke some confus'd words to me, whilst she was preparing for her Design. 'Twas in such perplexity that I was per∣swaded she was mad; but she soon explain'd her meaning, for when
my Head was turn'd to call for lights, I felt my self stabb'd with a Dagger. She intended to do it to purpose, but her Hand faltered, and gave me notwithstanding a con∣siderable Wound, striking afterward the Dagger into her own Breast. I call'd out, they came to me, and you may well guess how every one was astonished at this horrid spe∣ctacle. Diana was faln on the ground, and raved like one that had lost her reason. I was unwilling the occasion of this should be known, I agreed with the Aunt, and it was to pass for distinction. This unhappy Creature would not suffer her Wounds to be dress'd, she fell into a Feaver and dyed. As it is impossible to conceal long, acci∣dents of this nature: so I was afraid this might discover where I was; and for this reason I left Pompidour sooner than I intended. My Wounds were not healed. Madam de Blesi∣nac
was almost always indispos'd, and I was extremely weary of the Life I led, I took therefore a resolu∣tion to return to my Fathers in spight of all mischanges. I carryed Ma∣dam de Blesinac with me, and I found my Affairs were very much altered since these three Months that I had heard nothing. My Father gave us a very cold reception: for the advantages you receiv'd by the Marquess de Monda∣nar's Death, having very much di∣minish'd the hopes of my Wises Fortune, had put him out of hu∣mour. He took no great care, I observed, to hide the reason of it. For my part, Madam, I was only concern'd at the distance we were from you, and for fear my Marri∣age had displeas'd you. Till now I did not know precisely what thoughts Madam de Blesinac had of you; but when she saw with what indif∣ference I received the News of the
loss of her Estate, she told me that I desir'd it rather in your Hands, and that she was not ignorant of the Affection I profess'd to you. I did my endeavours to undeceive her, but she flew into a violent Passon, and told me she had convincing Proofs of my Insidelity, which she would not mention during our Journey. In fine, Madam, she shew'd me the Letter I writ to you, and confess'd she had compell'd Rusat to put it into her Hands, and give me that answer when he came back. You may imagine how angry I was at Rusat's perfidiousness, and I made him as sensible of it as he de∣serv'd. He told me for his excuse, that Madam de Blesinac assur'd him she would give me a reason why I should approve the not delivering the Letter, and that she would take an opportunity to tell me of it when I should not be angry. 'Tis impossble, Madam, to think with
what dissimulation she kept this se∣cret; but when it was once discove∣red, she incessantly reproach'd me that I was an Enemy to her Inte∣rests, and only regarded yours. Dis∣agreements by degrees insinuated in∣to our conversations, and disorders began to arise. But that which compleated our falling out was, being not able to suffer Rusat any longer, since his per∣fidiousness, I discharg'd him not∣withstanding the intreaties of Ma∣dam de Blesinac to pardon him. From this time we were never of a mind, and she often drove her vi∣olence to extremity. I have alrea∣dy told you that her Health was ve∣ry doubtful, her continual Melan∣choly alter'd her extreamly, and she fell into a Feaver that carryed her off in six Days. She refus'd to see me in her Sick∣ness: I granted her desires, and suf∣fer'd her to dye in quiet. I shew'd
moderation in this change, and, not discovering much joy nor great sor∣row, kept a conduct which was ap∣prov'd. But, Madam, your Marri∣age with the Count de Marignan put me beyond my reason. 'Twas at this News I gave such marks of a sensible and true grief, that I aban∣don'd my self to despair. I fell sick, and for two months every Body thought I should have dy'd. I know not, Madam, for what reason I liv'd, my life was a trouble to me, and I took no remedy to preserve it. Scarce had I left my Bed, when I was very impatient to be at Paris, without knowing precisely why I desired it. It could not be hopes that drew me, since nothing was to be expected from your anger, which had exe∣cuted the most cruel Sentence up∣on me. 'Twas only to be in the same place with you, that I might sometimes have the joy to see you either by chance, or the great indu∣stry
I would use to contrive it. The deaths of Monsieur de Mon∣danar, and Madam de Blesinac, made me end my affairs with more ease, and put me into a condition to appear in the World. I parted from Languedoe for Pa∣ris, where I have seen none but your Relation, whom, after many con∣versations, I made so sensible of my miserable condition, that she pro∣mis'd me to deceive you, and bring you here, to procure me the only consolation I am capable of. Thus Blesinac ended his Relation, and so firmly perswaded me, that I no longer doubted his fidelity. We were not nevertheless the more hap∣py: I could do nothing for his qui∣et, but would disturb mine. I ap∣prehended also that these kind of in∣terviews were indecent, and might prove of ill consequence. In fine, Madam, I was unwilling to enter∣tain an affection so dangerous for my
honour; but what power is there in the fears of an Admirer who de∣serves to be belov'd! Blesinac appear'd so concern'd, that I cou'd not refuse to see him sometimes with my Relation, nor cover my heart so heart so close, but he might discover I lov'd him more than became me. I restor'd him sighs for sighs, tears for tears, and we appear'd to be in more need of pity, than before we met. 'Twas late before this first Conversation was ended. My Kinswoman would not permit Blesinac to return that Evening to Paris; and because she thought it not fit for him to be seen in the house, he remain'd in the Summer-room, where he had a Sup∣per privately carry'd him by a Gen∣tlewoman in whom she had an intire confidence. She also bid his Ser∣vants stay for their Master at a Neighbouring Village. After Sup∣per we return'd to the Summer∣house,
where we pass'd the greatest part of the Night. I insensibly for∣got to tell Blesinac I would have him return the next Day, and I left him without mentioning it. When I propos'd it to my Kinswoman to bid him, Be gone early, she said, That he must stay till Night, lest he be seen; and I was not angry, that there was a good reason to keep him: The unhappy have few Days of quiet. My Kinswoman and I went in the Morning to see Blesi∣nac: He was very desirous to know all that had happen'd to me. I granted his Request, and had rela∣ted the passages as far as the trouble of my mind when I took a reso∣lution to marry the Count de Ma∣rignan. The remembrance was the occasion of some tears, which in spight of me were shedding, when my Kinswoman, who was at the Window, saw my Husband coming, he was already so near us, that it
was impossible to get out before he was at the Door. Blesinac threw himself hastily up∣on the Bed, and we met the Count, but with what concern you may imagine. He observ'd it, and drawing Symptoms for this, and from my eyes, that were not yet dry, he enter'd into Suspicions, which nevertheless he so covered, as to shew no sign of 'em to us. 'Twas Dinner-time, and a Foot-man came to tell us it was upon the Table. This forc'd the Count to go with us to Dinner; and he obligingly told me, as we cross'd the Garden, that every place without me, was tire∣some to him. He had left hunting to come to me; and this instance of his tenderness made me angry with my self for having so little acknow∣ledgment. There was little Dis∣course at Dinner; and my Kinswo∣man, whom my Husband strictly observ'd, had scarcely an opportu∣nity
to tell me in a low Voice, I should propose to go to Paris that Day, to shew my indifference for the place; but my Husband, whose Eyes were always on the Summer-House in the Garden, would not go before he had satisfyed his Curi∣osity, which we soon discovered, when he told us we might first pass some hours in the Garden. My Relations Gentlewoman, who was very dextrous, and knew the reason of our inquietude, had ap∣ply'd a remedy. She had walk'd round the outside of the Garden, and had brought a Ladder to one of the Windows of the Summer-House, by which Blesinac descended, then she conducted him to a Country∣mans House to stay there till he heard from her. I was in a horrible fear, and ignorant of the good turn she did me. No sooner had we din'd, but my Husband was for going to the Sum∣mer-House.
My Kinswoman, who had the Key, thought to absent her self for some moments that she might not give it him, but it was as dange∣rous to refuse it, as to deliver it with too much assuredness. Then she resolv'd to put something into it, to hinder it from turning in the lock; but this invention did not prosper, My Husband remedyed it, open'd the Door, and went directly to the Bed, and threw himself there∣on, to discover no suspicion; but seeing the Window that look'd from the Garden open, he shak'd his Head, I observ'd, to my great ap∣prehension. I began to recover, when he found upon the Beds head Blesinac's Crape Hatband; he was consider∣ing upon it some time, and my Kinswoman pretending to guess whose it should be, said so many came to the House in her absence, that it was impossible for her to di∣vine it.
This did not clear the Count's sus∣picious, it rather increas'd them, and he resolv'd henceforward to observe me so strictly, as to justifie me or condemn me without incertitude. We return'd that Night to Paris, and I since knew Blesinac did the like. My Kinswoman, who often came to see me, brought me News of him; and though she was suspect∣ed by my Husband, he gave us the liberty of a free conversation. She had the art to perswade me, and we agreed upon a second meet∣ing at a Painters call'd Agar in Rich∣elieu-street. My Husband had me dogg'd; and, when he was told where I was, went privately to a Neighbouring House to observe us. We pass'd two Hours at Agar's be∣fore we thought of parting. Ble∣sinac went first, he was in Mourn∣ing; and my Husband, remembring the Crape Hat-band, did not doubt but it was left there by the same Man
came out from the Painters House; he did what he could to remark his Face, but could not distinguish his Features. He had heard much of Blesinac, and the esteem he had for me; he knew that his Wife was Dead, and there wanted no more to ascertain his doubts; he came not to Agar's, but retir'd before us. I found my Mother at our house; she expected me, to let me know, that my Husband had been making his complaints to her. I had not much hardship in justifying my self to her, and to perswade her that the complaisance to see Blesinac was not a Crime capable of bringing me in∣to great misfortunes. It is true, said my Mother, but Husbands perceive not so soon the justifications as the accusations; and I advise you to leave off all Commerce with a Man that is suspected by the Count de Ma∣rignan.
I promis'd my Mother, and she remained with me to endeavour to dissipate the ill Humour of my Husband; but notwithstanding all her endeavours, we must go the next Day towards Estajac, an Estate of his near the Pyrenean Mountains. And he had the precaution to turn away all my old Servants both Wo∣men and Men, and to give me new ones I had never seen. The pre∣parations for this Journey were made with such diligence, that we went precisely at the hour he in∣tended. We were to go by Bour∣deaux, and we neither spoke all the way of his Chagrin, or any thing else; so that we pass'd two Hundred Leagues without saying a Word. You may believe for my part I thought often on the Count de Blesinac, and reflected upon the passages of my Life. I shew'd no melancholy to leave Paris; and I parted from it with
such indifference, that my Husband ought to have believed I design'd to sacrifice my Pleasures to my Duty. When we arriv'd at Estajac, he bid me chuse an apartment in the house, which he design'd I should not come out of. I did what he desir'd, went into my Prison, and accustom'd my self to it without much difficulty. My Husband pass'd his days very mournfully, the house was unplea∣santly situated, and he had the only pleasure of keeping me Pris'ner; he was continually troubled with the thoughts of Blesinac and me; and when by chance he has cast his eyes towards my Chamber-Win∣dow, if I happen'd to be there, he turn'd 'em off with indignation. He had a fancy to adorn an A∣partment; and I believe had also an intention to learn to design: I knew by one of the Women who waited upon me, that he had sent to Paris for a Painter; and let the
charge be never so great, would have one of the most excellent. I never left my Chamber but when Company came; and I must con∣fess, the dejected condition he seem'd to have, as he pass'd by my Window, rais'd my pity, and I determin'd to reason with him about it. I ask'd his permission to do it, which after much pains he accord∣ed. I spoke to him as the Condition of Affairs requir'd, and always with great submission. He gave me no interruption: but afterwards look∣ing upon me with indignation, You drive the boldness too far, said he, to expose your self to the reproaches I may justly give you: Is it possi∣ble that you should think I am ig∣norant of your insidelity? and be∣cause I suffer, as a man of courage ought, an outrage of this nature, do you think I am less sensible of the abuse you have committed? I
thought to have justify'd my self by a sincere confestion of what had pass'd between Blesinac and me, from the first day of our acquain∣tance, till my departure from Pa∣ris. But it gave him more reason to have me than pardon me. He fansy'd I marry'd him only to be re∣veng'd on Blesinac; and these thoughts carry'd him into Violen∣ces, made me apprehend his anger. He should rather excuse me, he said, to have made an affair since Marriage, than to have consented to that, when my heart was full of passion for another. He refus'd me the permission to speak to him, since this day; and I only knew he was fall'n into a deep Melancholy. He was for several Months in this Condition; and I was so much the more disturb'd by it, as I imagin'd, by what they told me, I had reason to fear some dau∣gerous resolution against my life.
But two Painters arriv'd at last from Paris, who assisted very much to his diversion: the one was a great Artist, the other had divers Talents to please; He not only painted, but had Wit, he was a Poet, Musici∣an, Comedian, and was always mer∣ry. It is true, my Husband was surpriz'd to see so many Excellencies in a man of his condition; but he was afterwards more, when he found he had besides, a great deal of solid Knowledge, and that the Qualities of his Soul surpass'd those outward appearances. These made so great an impression upon the Count de Marignan, that in a little time he began to return to his natural Gaiety. Dormont (so was the Painter call'd) gave him every day some new diversion. Sometimes he would repeat a Play, and perform'd the Parts so well, that Floridor ne∣ver succeeded better in a Passionate, nor Povison in a Comical Part.
Sometimes he would imitate the Ita∣lians, and sing to the Guitarre, and danc'd with such Art and Air as was altogether Charming. I had a Woman who was not confin'd with me; and had ne∣vertheless the liberty to come into my Apartment. She was call'd Rose; she often talk'd to me about the Painter; and I had reason to believe, by what she said, she did not hate him. Ah! Madam, said she to me one day, if you knew but what wit, and how many desirable qualities Dormont possesses, you would not be surpriz'd at Monsieur de Marignan's Opinion of him. I know not, I must confess, any Bo∣dy so capable to inspire love; but I doubt he will be otherwise to receive it: for generally people who are so handsom, have so good thoughts of themselves, that they are indif∣ferent for others. Not that Dor∣mont is so to me, added she, he
pays many civilities to me; but I believe 'em rather the effects of good breeding, than the marks of an in∣clination. But, Rose, said I, is it impossible to see this Painter? He dyes with desire to be brought to you, reply'd she. He has ask'd me a thousand Questions about your manner of living, and what diver∣sions you us'd to mitigate your melancholy. You should already have seen him more than once, had not I been afraid of displeasing you. I told Rose, I did not think ill of it; and she went to acquaint him with what she had obtain'd from me. He accompany'd her the next day into my Chamber: But judge, Ma∣dam, if you please, how I was sur∣priz'd, when I found Dormont to be the Count de Blesinac. 'Twas a happiness for me, that Rose was so prepossess'd with her sentiments that she did not perceive my trouble. I
took but little pleasure to see the Count, my heart was full of fear for the consequence of that interview, and the dangers he was expos'd to. When I was recover'd a little from the astonishment to see him, I was extremely oblig'd to him, I said, for the care he took to divert my Hus∣band in this solitude. He answer'd me with much respect; but durst not speak to me privately: Yet hearing me call for a Basket where∣in was my Work, he run to fetch it me, and very dextrously slip'd into it a Letter. And after I had dis∣cours'd with him aloud, a minute longer, I made him a Sign to be gone. Rose and he went out; I shut my Chamber-door, and open'd Blesi∣nac's Letter, which acquainted me with the vexation he had at my Husband's forcing me in that man∣ner to leave Paris, the resolution he had taken to come and share in
my misfortunes, and to undertake any thing, might put an end to 'em. He told me afterwards what he did to accompany the Painter to Esta∣jac, that he conceal'd his birth, and perswaded him he had an intention to perfect himself in that Art; he told me also what progress he had made in the good opinion of the Count de Marignan, and how much he had suffered this month he was here, for not seeing me. But re∣solving not to hazard any thing im∣prudently, he chose rather to be de∣priv'd of that pleasure, than to ex∣pose me to any new disorder. And the Letter ended with tender pro∣testations of an inviolable passion. I had Paper that serv'd me to cover my Work; but I had neither Ink nor Pen, and I could not make Ble∣sinac an Answer; yet Love, that is ingenious, made me remember a Composition, that left no stain up∣on the Paper; and the Letters
could not be discern'd, till it was held near the Fire. I made use of it, to let Dormont know, I would absolutely have him depart from E∣stajac. The difficulty was to teach him the Secret to read what I writ: I therefore told Rose, I had a mind to learn to design, and that she should bring Dormont privately to give me the first instructions. She did what I desir'd her; but as the affection she had, made her always near him, I had only the opportunity to tell him how he might read what I writ to him. The danger I underwent in these interviews made me intend to forbid them, permitting him to write to me with the composition I us'd. Rose brought me his Letters, think∣ing she had brought me nothing but a Paper upon which she saw some Flowers drawn. I endeavour∣ed underneath to imitate them, and sent him his Paper back. He was at
first contented with this intelligence, but Love, that is continually form∣ing new Projects, made him find out a sure means to open the Doors of my Prison. He often sought an opportunity to talk with the Count de Marignan about me, and at last it arrived. There was an Echo in the Garden, where my Husband us'd to make Dormont sing. I remember as I was at my Win∣dow to hear him, my Husband per∣ceived me, and told Dormont, if he had a mind to please me, he must sing a melancholy compassionate Air that should express the rigour of a long vexatious separation; if you have none melancholy enough, make one ex tempore. Dormont thought for some time, and after∣wards sung these Words. Such tedious absence who did e're en∣dure? And not allay'd with thoughts of a return:
Flattery can never make me hope a Cure, But thus resolve perpetually to burn. In other Breasts let meaner grief be plac'd, Whilst I am pleas'd with mine by its degree; Such mighty sufferings never any grac'd, And Death and Love my only Ob∣jects be. But Sir, says Dormont, after he had sung, since you are pleas'd with these words, why may not I ask you the reason your Lady is so solitary, for methinks Rose told me she is fair enough to be seen? Don't you know, answered my Husband, that the finest Creatures are least famili∣ar; and the more seldom they are seen, the more they are respected? I think, Sir, replyed Dormont, that is acustom very prudently establish∣ed
by the Kings of Ormus, in re∣gard of their Subjects who see them but once a Year; but I never knew it practised betwixt a Husband and a Wife in any other place but Esta∣jac. I find, answered the Count, that you would not be angry to see her, and I consent upon condition you abuse not the easiness with which I grant it, and side not with her in the complaints she may make to you of me. Dormont fearing least, if he should have the time to reflect upon the liberty he gave him, he should change his opinion, desired him not to put off till another Day the fa∣vour he made him hope for. My Husband call'd Rose, and ordered her to carry Dormont into my apart∣ment. I was pleas'd at it, but I ne∣ver tasted any perfect joy; for this was not so, since I durst not flatter my self with its long continu∣ance.
Dormont told me by what means he had obtained the permission to see me, and turn'd the Conversation so adroitly, that he made himself an opportunity to speak low to me. You may very well think he made use of that priviledge to express to me those passionate things Love had inspired him with. I gave him the liberty to tell my Husband what he thought fit of our Discourse, and I would not suffer him to remain long with me. The Count de Marignan no soon∣er saw him come out of my Cham∣ber, but he ask'd him his opinion of my Person and Humour. She is cer∣tainly extremely handsome, replyed Dormont; but without penetrating into the occasion of her Sorrow, I believe her naturally Melancholy. But, answered my Husband, what did she say to you? She describ'd to me, said Dormont, the Beauty of this solitude, and told me the desire
she had I should make her a Land∣skip, wherein were painted only Rocks and Torrents, wild Beasts, leaveless Trees, and dark Caverns. She mentioned every thing that could proceed from a melancholy Fancy, except a Tomb which I sup∣pose she did not think of, and fill'd me with so many sad Ideas, that I am afraid I shall not banish so soon as I wish. My Husband told him in a smile, that all my Melancholy did not pro∣ceed from my Constitution, and perhaps had told the whole series of my Affairs to Dormont, if a Servant had not advertis'd him, that a Neighbour of his call'd the Cheva∣lier de Monserolle was come to visit him. This was the only Friend he had in this Country. They had a private Discourse together for half an hour, after which the Chevalier took his leave, leaving the Count thoughtful.
When he was gone, my Hus∣band sent for Dormont, who in re∣spect was retir'd. If Madam de Ma∣rignan has inspir'd you with Melan∣choly, said he, we shall see this Night a fine Creature will perhaps restore your good humour. 'Tis Madam d' Ecugy, who is run away with the Chevalier de Monserolle; and because it is decent my Wife should entertain her, I shall be forc'd to make her forsake her soli∣tude; but I would have her owe the obligation to you. Ah, Sir, reply∣ed Dormont, do not take from her, if you please, the satisfaction of ow∣ing it to your self; and take heed you do not spoil me by a presumpti∣on is unlawful for me to think of, I will have it so, answered my Hus∣band, and I pray, bid her presently come down, and make the same Figure she should have done always, had her Conduct been better.
I saw Dormont enter with a joy∣ful Countenance, he told me all the conversation had pass'd for two Hours since he left me. Every Bo∣dy but I would have received this News with joy; nothing could raise me to that Passion, fear pre∣vailing over the tender sentiments I had for Blesinac; not but I had many instances of being in an agree∣able condition. I lov'd and was be∣lov'd, and the pleasantness of the secret heightned the charms of our Commerce; and if I had had an in∣clination to Pleasure, I ought to have been contented with so unex∣pected a change; but I had not yet pass'd all the misfortunes fate assign'd me; and when I felt some motions to Joy, a certain fore-knowledge I could not overcome, soon threw me into my wonted Sadness. As soon as I was at liberty I went to the Count de Marignan's Closet, to know what Orders he would pre∣scribe
me. I found him better drest than generally he is, and kinder to me than I imagin'd; he told me with moderation, he would have me make my self some amusements that might drive Blesinac out of my me∣mory. He told me likewise, That he could not refuse a sanctuary to the Chevalier de Monserolle, who had stole away one of the Baron d' Ecu∣gy's Daughters, and desired me to give them an agreeable reception. I had not time to answer him; se∣veral Cavaliers came at that instant into the Castle Court, with a young sprightly Lady. I went to receive them at the Door, where I pay'd her all the civilities imaginable, and expected some return, but she scarce∣ly took any notice of me. My Husbands civilities were better re∣ceiv'd, and I was very busie com∣plementing them who had conduct∣ed Madam d Ecugy, and observing the carriage of the Lover, his Mi∣stress,
my Husband, and one nam'd Arbanantes. As my thoughts were never dissi∣pated by joy, so I thought my self more proper to penetrate into their Character, who were not of a be∣coming deportment. My Observa∣tions were, that the Chevalier de Monserolle had a true affection for his Mistress; that she had not the same Sentiments for him, but had consented to be stoln out of a fool∣ish Vanity, which gave her Pleasure to make her self be talk'd of in the World. As these sort of slips are never committed without relapsing extremely from what dcy re∣quires, she seemed to me to have utterly forgot the prescripn of it. I found so much libertinage in all her disposition, that I have wonde∣red a hundred times the Chevalier would run the hazard to Marry a Person guilty of so many rregular actions. I always though for my
part, that it was not an ill rule to make a judgment of a Womans Vir∣tue by the outward appearance. E∣very action of this Lady was contra∣ry to this Maxim. She was pleas'd to imagine that any one had a Passi∣on for her, but more to hear it from any that really had, or pretended to have. Being of this Character, you need not wonder if she took for an honour the Cares my Husband shew'd for her, and forgot that she came away with Monserolle. She remember'd it so little, that she often pass'd whole Days, not suffering him to speak to her. My Husbands Actions were not more constrained than hers, he knew, that what I fear'd from him, would not suffer me to engage against his In∣clinations; and in the great Pleasure he took to pursue them, the rules of Hospitality did not so far intrude, as to make him scrupulous of em∣ploying his best endeavours to make
himself be beloved by the Mistress of his Friend. It was to be considered, in the mean time, what Monserolle should determine. Madam d' Ecugy was in no great haste of the solemnizing the Marriage. My Husband was in fear it should be concluded. Dormont was not angry he was busied in a Passion would impede his penetra∣ting into our Commerce, and Arba∣nantes apprehended lest he should be obliged to go from Estajac. All having the same Interests, it was not difficult to agree. The Count de Morignan would have Dormont of the Council, where they determin'd, That Monserolle should go for Paris to obtain the protection of the Ma∣reschal de Gramont, by whom he was very well known. The absence of Monserolle made no alterations at Estajac, but new Pleasures were invented every Day; and though the Count de Marignan
deserv'd some acknowledgment for the Passion he shew'd to Madam d'E∣cugy, he had the displeasure to per∣ceive her dislike to him increast every Day, and that she suffer'd him now not without some Punishment. And here, Madam, is the part of my relation that brings back into my memory sad remembrances, you will see my misfortunes in their greatest extremity. Madam d' Ecugy fell in Love with Dormont, and had the im∣prudence to discover her Passion. My Husband perceiv'd it the first; but as he so carefully observ'd Dor∣mont as to be assur'd he would make no return to it, he continued his good esteem for him, and recom∣mended the interest of his Heart to him after a manner that discovered the great confidence he had in him; but Dormont had not perceived nei∣ther the intentions of the Lady, nor the doubts of the Lover.
One Evening, when she would have us divert our selves at Blind-mans-buff, she would by all means that Dormont should be blinded. As he was seeking about, he felt a Note put into his hand; and com∣plaisance having oblig'd me to be one at the sport, Dormont thought it might come from me; and some∣times he fansy'd from Rose, who had always lov'd him; not dreaming that Madam d' Ecugy was of so my∣sterious a conduct, as to find that way to explain her self. He was in great impatience to see it; and he had no sooner taken another per∣son, who was to be blinded, but he went out of the Chamber to read the Note, which was express'd in these words: If you were a man of Quality, I should think you had affronted me, by making no return to the honour I have done you, to prefer you before
the Master of the House, and a man in whom I heretofore found so much desert as to be willing to marry. But I find I must break the Ice: Know then, I forget all the reasons I have to keep a distance from you, and that I intend to follow only the inclination of my heart, which speaks in your fa∣vour. Make your best profit of a Confession may be of too much advan∣tage for you to neglect; but remember, it is on condition, that you always shew me the respects you owe me. This Letter made Dormont truly melancholy. He was unwilling to be so often my Husband's Rival; or to give me occasion to doubt his insidelity, and was besides afraid of the imprudence of Madam d' Ecugy. Here were many circumstances to raise trouble in his mind; and he was obliged to take a particular care, that she might not penetrate into the intelligence betwixt us: and he
concluded he ought to dread no∣thing so much as the giving me any reason of inquietude. He there∣fore sacrific'd his discretion to his faithfulness, and found an opportu∣nity to tell me what had happen'd. I in a minute discovered the sad con∣sequences of it, and with a painful Chagrin saw, the heavy misfortunes that Amour would bring upon me. Madam d' Ecugy pass'd the residue of the Day in such restless moti∣ons as could proceed from a violent passion only. I know not why Chance would have it, that we two should meet together; for we both of us were very careful to prevent it. I saw her then disturb'd by an inquietude, that gave her not a rest∣ful moment; I thought my self ob∣liged to take notice of it, and inquire the occasion. I am, says she brikly, in a condition that does not permit me to be at quiet. I did not perceive till this day, answer'd I, that you
was so disturbed at your Affairs; and I know not of any change has happen'd to give you fresh occasion. Perhaps, continu'd I, that Monse∣rolle is longer absent than you ima∣gin'd. Not in the least, reply'd she, his absence gives me neither joy, nor sorrow. As for that, Madam, reply'd I, give me leave to doubt whether you speak sincerely: there is little appearance you would have run away with Monserolle, had not Love engag'd you to that bold re∣solution. You have taken some, said she, without such good preten∣ces: but I find very well what you would discover, and what lyes so heavy upon your heart: You be∣lieve your Husband does not hate me; and if I thought it brought you any trouble, I would study to augment it. But 'tis your Husband, Madam, and not Blesinac. Mistake not, Madam, if you please, reply'd I, I must have more esteem for you
than I have, to apprehend there should be so much merit found in you, to give me the least reason of melancholy. At this instant my Husband en∣ter'd; She gave him her hand, and went to see an Apartment that was painting. This was the pretence at least; for she went to look for Dor∣mont. As soon as she was come in, she feign'd an intention of learning to draw; and desir'd him to give her some instructions. My Hus∣band, who was not very well pleas'd at this, told her, Dormont knew not enough to be her Master. She grew so violent against the Count, that he was oblig'd to let her a∣lone. I told you before, I suppose, that Monserolle had left at Estajac Arba∣nantes, who was a little related to Madam d' Ecugy, to observe her carriage. He had particular interests, be∣sides
that of being a Relation, which engag'd him to take notice of Dormont's Actions. He found he had more knowledge of the World than is common to that professon. In effect Dormont had something so great and easie, which he could not get rid of, and was not so well cover'd by his disguise, but Arba∣nantes suspected him to be another than he appeared; and after he was well confirm'd in these thoughts, he resolv'd to put every thing in Execution to clear this doubt. He perceived by many opportuni∣ties that Dormont was not hated by Rose, and that he had for her but a study'd complaisance at most, which did not proceed from the Heart. He therefore grew by degrees very intimate with this Maid, and making use of the weakness (these kind of Persons generally have when you promise to tell them their Fortune) he propos'd to set a Figure for her.
He knew a little the Terms of Art; he talk'd boldly of the House of Ju∣piter, the Angle of Fortune, of Trines, Sextiles, Aspects, and 'twas more than enough to draw Rose in∣to the toils. He then told her, she lov'd a Man whom he describ'd as like as he could to Dormont, and assur'd her she would have been belov'd by him, had not an ascendent greater than hers compell'd him to be anothers. He afterwards ask'd her if she had known Dormont long, and how he came to Estajac. He ask'd, in fine, so many questions, which she so innocently answer'd, that compa∣ring what he learnt from Rose, with what he already knew concerning me and Blesinac, he made no que∣stion but Blesinac and Dormont were the same; it was not enough to be assur'd of this, if at the same time he did not draw the benefit from it he propos'd. It is time to confess
it to you, Madam, Arbanantes had a Passion for me, and if I had not been busied in a tenderness for ano∣ther, I should have discovered his Sentiments, notwithstanding the pro∣found respect they were cover'd with. There are few people more poli∣tick than those of this Country: wherefore do not imagine, that Ar∣banantes discover'd to me the bot∣tom of his heart. On the contrary, he often rally'd pleasantly upon what vanity Dormont might draw from the good thoughts Madam d' Ecugy had for him; but he medi∣tated a hidden path, by which he should arrive infallibly at the end desired. His design was to have Dormont sent away; and in pro∣spect of this, he had insinuated into Madam d' Ecugy, that it would be an agreeable diversion for her to learn to draw, and not to employ any of those hours she had assign'd to other pleasures, the Morning and
the Evening might be a proper Sea∣son to receive instructions. She ap∣prov'd of following this advice, which flatter'd her passion; and she had us'd all the power she had o∣ver my Husband, to oblige him to command Dormont to be diligent in teaching what she seem'd to have a desire to learn. Arbanantes remain'd sometimes in Madam d' Ecugy's Chamber, whilst she learnt. And sometimes he went out to give Dormont the opportuni∣ty to explain his Sentiments, in case he found his heart toucht by the kindness she had for him. One day, when Arbanantes was with drawn into the Anti-Chamber, Madam d'Ecugy left her Crayon; and looking upon Dormont with eyes full of anger and love; You are either very vain, or very stupid, not to answer the Note I gave you some days past. I knew not, Madam, says Dormont, that it was you who did me that honour;
and if I had, I durst not have shewn so much temerity. I had taken suf∣ficient care, replyed she, to clear your scruples of an unbecoming boldness; but now you know the Note was mine, since I declare it to you: and what Answer do you make me? Dormont found himself in a great trouble: 'twould have been a shame to be insensible. Madam d' Ecugy was a very fine person, and 'twould have been too great a danger to have confest, that a former engagement did not permit him to make any re∣turns to her passion. He therefore pretended not to give any credit to what she said, nor perceive the trou∣ble appear'd in her face. I should be beyond despair, Madam, said he, if I had presumption enough to be blinded by your raillery. I take it as I ought; and say what you please, I know how I must believe it. Re∣main then, Madam, if you please
in the Character you have, since I cannot leave mine without growing mad, or declaring my self culpable. Dormont pronounc'd these words with so visible an indifference, that from this instant Madam d' Ecugy resolv'd to ruine him; but he had no suspicion of it, and at last she told him, that she had only a desire to divert her self at his cost. When she had taken her Lesson, Dormont went; and Madam d' E∣cugy sent to call Arbanantes. When he came in, she made all the gri∣maces of a young Woman asham'd to express her self in affairs of Gal∣lantry; and looking upon him with eyes full of concern, The confidence, says she, that my Husband and I have in you, will not let me hide any longer an outrage I have just receiv'd from this Painter, whom you would have teach me to design. Because I shew'd him some Civili∣ties, he has been so audacious to tell
me that he loves me. If the Count de Marignan does not sacrifice him to my anger, I won't stay a minute in his house. Arbanantes was ravish'd with joy for such an opportunity to get rid of a man he esteem'd his Rival. He concern'd himself in Madam d' Ecugy's melancholy; he prais'd her for supporting so resolutely the interest of her honour: but yet, added he, we must manage our selves with prudence in this occasi∣on. It will be very difficult, I fore∣see, to perswade the Count de Ma∣rignan, that this man, in whom he has had so intire a confidence, should forget himself so much, as to dare to rival him in an inclination, which he knows he had to love you. 'Tis by this, says Madam d' Ecugy, that I pretend to engage the Count de Marignan to revenge me on Dor∣mont. He has an equal concern with me in the injury is done me.
Arbanantes discovered very well by the conduct of his Kinswoman, that she was not of so scrupulous a Vertue to be very angry at a decla∣ration of Love. He also perceiv'd, she had made a thousand slips, which were but too convincing she had no aversion for Dormont; so that comparing this with the thoughts he had that Dormont was Blesinac, and that I had authoriz'd his dis∣guise, which could not be without my Knowledge; he thought himself oblig'd to engage Madam d' Ecugy to make an intire Confession of her Sentiments. He having wit, and she being imprudent, wheadled her with such Art, that she soon con∣fess'd the truth. He blam'd her weakness, and repeated all the faults that inconsideration made her com∣mit: But in sine, after he had pro∣vok'd her tears and blushes more than once, he pretended, that though it rais'd her anger, he did
it only to make her avoid the oppor∣tunity of ruining her self. You must, said he, get out of Dormont's hands the Note you writ to him. It can do me no injury, answer'd she, since I have so disguis'd my writing, that no Body can know it. Well then, said Arbanantes, we have only to con∣trive some Stratagem, which he may not discover. He composes perfect∣ly: I will make the words of a Song, and deliver 'em to him, it will not be difficult to perswade him to write 'em out to make an Air to 'em. Madam d' Ecugy would not refuse an occasion to punish Dormont for the despicable thoughts he shew'd for her. The resentment she had, made her look with pleasure upon what was prepar'd for her revenge. Arbanantes desired her only to give him leave to manage the affair, and to act nothing but by his advice. She agreed to it, bid him not forget the Verses he was to make, and re∣mained
in an indifferent tranquil condition. Whilst Arbanantes and she were taking these dangerous mea∣sures to ruine Dormont, my Husband had sent for him to give an account of the Lesson he taught Madam d' Ecugy. He did not think she had been alone with him; and he only desired to know if he found her very apt to learn; and as she had no disposition to it, Dormont desi∣red the Count to disswade her from that design, and to propose her some asements might take away her de∣sire to imploy her time in a thing of so little use. The Count was in a condition ve∣ry much to be pityed; he was troubled at the manner of Madam d' Ecugy's usage; he could neither despise her, nor value her, though he lov'd her much; her Person, tis true, was very amiable, but her Wit and her Heart were so defe∣ctive, that my Husband could not
resolve whether she was most worthy of his hatred or his Love. This De∣bate, which was the cause of some unhappy minutes, produc'd these Verses, which I still remember. Come to my rescue, just disdain, My Honour waits you, and my Rea∣son calls, 'Tis by your help that the unfaithful falls. You end my mis'ries and her tedious Reign. But should I on your force rely Then my revenge would scarcely be sc∣cure, What now y' advise you soon do fly, Doubtful would be from her or you my Cure. Dormont having seen the Verses, made a Tune very suitable to 'em, and my Husband, who sung very well, learnt it that Night, though it was late; Dormont, who would not
lose any opportunity to see me, came into my Chamber, with a Pretence to shew me the Song he had made; and gave me in few words an account of what had pass'd this Evening. The relation of the Countess de Marignan, was broke off in this Place, by the Sighs and Tears, which she could not refrain. Ah, Madam, said she, falling again into her Rela∣tion, how ingenious was my Ima∣gination, in representing to me the Misfortunes that were just upon the point of arriving, and tormenting me when I was asleep, by the most mournful Dreams that ever were. the Night was so terrible, that not being able any longer to endure the cruel Thoughts that disturb'd my Soul, I was forc'd to awaken the Women who waited upon me, and call 'em to my assistance. Rose, who lay in my Chamber, remark'd that since Dormont was here, I had vented many doleful
Sighs, and that little Sleep, which I took, was not without disturbance. She had reason'd according to her sense of it, and was extremely desi∣rous of an opportunity to go forth to tell Arbanantes her thoughts. I knew by the Sequel, she did not fail in this intent; but whilst I had this lively foreknowledge of my disgraces, Arbanantes was labouring to execute the most black and trea∣cherous action ever was in the capa∣city of man. He lookt for Dormont, and found him early enough to be at leisure to make a Tune to the words he had made for Madam d' Ecugy, to whom he pretended he would carry 'em so soon as she should be awake, Dormont foreseeing not the Conse∣quence, thought some little time, and writ down the words with the Tune he had made to 'em. Arba∣nantes, who design'd to have 'em of his writing, told him he would sing
'em by the Notes; and in this pre∣tence kept the Song. He thank'd Dormont, and left him very content∣ed to have so well succeeded. Joy, which is no quiet passion, would not suffer Madam d' Ecugy to sleep. He went into her Chamber, and gave her the Song, writ fair, and prickt by Dormont's own hand. She read it with great earnestness, and found these words: O're all the World let's It is boast Your passion, and my flame, And let no glittering rays be lost, To shew it in our eyes, and souls the same; And when our minds these transports move, Then let us sing by turns, Ah, Iris, how I burst with love! Ah, Thirsis, how I burn! Arbanantes gave her many instru∣ctions about the management of the
design of her revenge, and left her at liberty to dress her self, with impa∣tience to see the Count de Marignan to make complaints to him concern∣ing Dormont. My Husband had not a less desire to entertain her with the Song he made, so agreeable to the condition he found himself in. As soon as she was at liberty to be seen, he went singing into her Chamber. Certainly, says Madam d' Ecugy, this is a new Air; but though you have had the advantage to learn it before me, I have the good luck to know one is yet newer than yours, since it was made but this Morning. You may know the Author by the Writing; but you will be surpriz'd to hear that they had the boldness to declare it was made for me. The affront, I believe, is great enough to require you to re∣venge me. The Count de Marignan receiving the Song from Madam d' Ecugy, read
it with transports of anger, that could be inspired by no less than an extreme jealousie. He read it over twenty times, without having the power to pronounce the words. Yes, Madam, cry'd he, after he had thought some minutes, I will revenge you, and not forget to punish this rash man; and 'tis a greater crime to me than you. Then the malici∣ous Creature looking upon the Count with kinder eyes than before, I see, says she, that you love me; and I will acknowledge to you the interest you shew for my honour; but remember, if you please, in the state things are, a publick revenge would do me an injury not to be repair'd. Arbanantes, fearing the impru∣dence of his Kinswoman might make her say more or less them was requisite, came into the Chamoor, and joining in their conversation a little appeas'd my Husband's anger;
but though he hindred him from committing a violence, whose con∣sequences might be redoubted, he nevertheless infinuated into his mind, that the Painters should immediately be sent away. As it would not have been diffi∣cult for Dormont to have justify'd himself to my Husband, had he but the opportunity; Arbanantes was of Opinion, that they should go, and not be seen. His advice was taken. Pardon me, Madam, if I do not en∣ter into the Particulars of so cruel a separation. Dormont receiv'd or∣ders for it, with all the surprize and melancholy that it is possible to con∣ceive. He came into my Chamber, to take his leave; but Arbanantes, who came in with him, gave us not the liberty to express our Sentiments. Grief, which is lessen'd by com∣plaint, when it is covered, becomes insupportable. I had been in this condition, had I not call'd all my
reason to assist me to overcome my displeasure. And 'tis true, my na∣tural melancholy hindred 'em from perceiving that which was caus'd for Dormont's departure. The two Painters left us; and we knew not which way they went. Madam d' Ecugy repented she was the occasion of their banishment from Estajac. She had a great Quar∣rel about it with Arbanantes; and spoke not to my Husband of two days, but only to tell him she would leave his house. He was very much troubled at her conduct, because he began to unriddle it, and to be more satisfy'd of Dormont; but he had not time to reflect long. The Baron d' Ecugy hearing that Monserolle was returned from Paris, went with some of his Friends to besiege him, whilst his Son with an∣other Party came to surprize the Castle of Estajac. This News al∣ter'd not the resolutions of my Hus∣band;
he prepared to assist the in∣terest of his Friend, and to preserve his Mistress, he gathered together as many as the little time would per∣mit him, and left Arbanantes at E∣stajac to command in his absence. I was sensibly concern'd to see my Husband go in an expedition, whose event was so doubtful; but in the midst of this grief, it was some con∣solation to think that Dormont's ab∣sence would free him from this dan∣ger, and I mingled at this Instant the sentiments of a lawful Duty with those inspired by an Inclinati∣on, since at the same time, that I prayed for my Husbands return, I rendered thanks to Heaven for guarding Dormont from this peril. Madam d' Ecugy received no di∣sturbance at it, and expected the e∣vent with as much tranquillity as if she had no concern in it. Two Days were spent since my Husbands de∣parture, and I was very impatient
to know the success of the Journey, when I was told he was returned. I ran haslily to receive him; but Madam, I cannot call back into my remembrance that frightful minute, without renewing my past affliction. 'Twas then I saw the Count de Ma∣rignan by one of his Servants support∣ed on his Horse, his Cloaths begor'd with Blood, his Visage pale, and Eyes half clos'd, and scarcely strength enough left to complain. My grief can hardly be imagined. I employed all my cares for him, to acquit my self of what my Duty engaged me. When he was first wounded Chi∣rurgeons were sent for, who came there as soon as he. They drest his Wounds, which were found dange∣rous. He had lost much Blood, and the weak condition he was in, hin∣dered him from speaking; but it was easie to perceive, he had a de∣sire to say something. I imagin'd so, and ask'd him his Pleasure; he an∣swered
me in a dying Voice, That Dormont should be taken care off. I took him to be light-headed, not thinking it likely that Dormont, who was to return to Paris, should be in this engagement. After I had made a little reflection, I took notice that neither Madam d' Ecugy, nor Rose were in my Husbands Chamber, and that it must be something of greater concern retain'd them elsewhere. I was busied with these cruel doubts when I perceived Rose in Tears. She came to require some assistance for Dormont, who would soon Dye, if they staid much longer, before any Remedies were apply'd to his Wounds. I must confess to you this raised so piercing a Grief in my Breast, that nothing could augment it. I hastened the Chirurgeons to go to the relief of the poor unhap∣py Dormont, and I staid by my Hus∣band. Although he was advis'd to rest, he appear'd disturb'd, and
could not forbear asking me if Ma∣dam d' Ecugy was yet at Estajac. He believed nothing of the assuran∣ces I gave him that she was here. He desired to see her, but 'twas not without trouble that she left Dor∣mont's Chamber to come to the Count de Marignan. A Heart less concern'd than his would have re∣triev'd its liberty by the indiffe∣rence Madam d' Ecugy discovered to him. He had the strength to com∣plain of it, and the weakness not to make it instrumental to his cure. She gave me not the opportunity to tell my Husband be ought not to speak so much, preventing me by suddainly leaving him, and return∣ing to Dormont. As these Accidents obliged me to keep some measures, I inform'd my self how the engagement happened; and not doubting but Dormont had given proofs of his Courage, I did not affect to talk of him. I fansyed he
had performed some Actions I should hear of; and a Gentleman, a Neigh∣bour of ours named Plassac, took the pains to instruct me in it. He told me that the Baron d' Ecugy ha∣ving laid siege to Monseroll's House, sent his Son with fifty Horse to sur∣prise Estajac; and that my Husband meeting him with a Party much in∣feriour in number to his Enemies, began a Combat wherein you might well perceive, that some fought for Love, and others for Honour. But now added Plassac, we began to yield to the number that attack'd us, and the Count de Marignan, who had forced his way into the midst of the Enemies, would either have been taken or kill'd, when Dormont's ar∣rival with five or six Men gave fresh Hearts to our discouraged Party. The Chevalier d' Ecugy made what resistance he could, but to little pur∣pose, he was attack'd so vigorously by Dormont, who abandon'd his
Life to force himself a passage to the place where he saw the Count de Marignan encompass'd. And Dor∣mont would scarcely have effected it, had he not kill'd the Chevalier d' Ecugy; but by misfortune the Count was wounded before Dormont could get to him, and 'twas he that hin∣dered the Enemies from taking away his Life. Dormont received several Wounds by defending the Count, and I never saw a Combat perform'd with more Courage and Judgment. The Death of the Chevalier d' Ecu∣gy soon allay'd the Courage of his Friends. They retired with the News to his Father, and we having kill'd thirty of the Enemies, and lost few of our own, became Masters of the Place, where we did not think fit to stay long; but I sent for Chi∣rurgeons, and returned hither with our Party. After this recital, Plassac made me understand this business would be of
ill consequence, if we did not take some measures to stop its course, and that there were none more sure than to advertize Monserolle either to make an accommodation with the Baron d' Ecugy, or not to take it ill, if his Mistris was delivered in∣to her Relations hands. Plassac un∣dertook this Commission; but as he was just ready to depart, Monserolle arriv'd. None could be more con∣cern'd for the misfortunes of the Count de Marignan than he ap∣pear'd. He spoke very handsomly about it to me; but whatever he could say, my Husband and Lover were in danger of their lives, and I did not receive agreeably the excuses he made me, who was the cause of it. Plassac acquainted him with our resolutions. A little Point of Ho∣nour hindred him from consenting; but he thought of an Expedient was approv'd by all who were of the Council: Which was to put Ma∣dam
d' Ecugy in a Convent, till dif∣ferences were accommodated. She had a relation at Carcassone, who was Abbess of a Monastery, and 'twas resolv'd she should be carry'd thi∣ther, when they were assured there would be no difficulty to receive her; but as they knew she was ne∣ver much dispos'd to a Nunnery, it was kept secret from her. She shew'd so little esteem for Monseroll, that he overcame the Scruples he had to abandon her. And Plassac went to make sure of Madam d' Ecugy's Kinswoman. One Evening, when I was by my Husband's Bed, grieving to see his Wounds had brought him to that ill condition, they came to tell me, Dormont was worse than usual. The Count de Marignan desir'd I wou'd go into his Chamber, to see what re∣medies he had occasion for, and 'twas impossible for me to refuse. When I enter'd, I found Arbanan∣tes
listning to what the extremi∣ty of his Fever made him say. And as it is not one of the least signs of reason to be able to keep a Secret the heart and the mind is fill'd with, we need not wonder if Dormont could not retain the Mysteries of our Commerce, during the ravings of his Fever. He ask'd where I was, complain'd that he did not see me; and would dye because I left him. Hitherto his extravagances had not frightned me; but a fiercer Fit made him raise himself in the Bed; and putting his hands upon his eyes, violently cry'd out, Ah! unhappy Blesinac, since the Countess de Ma∣rignan makes no longer acknow∣ledgments to your tenderness, go dye in some place where the Image of her may be less present. After this, he left speaking, and fell into a sleep. Arbanantes, who had not forgot one Syllable that Blesinac said, came to me, and
looking upon me with eyes full of chagrin and malice; pardon me, Madam, said he, if I tell you, it is not very much for the honour of your Family, to give a reception to Blesinac under the name of Dor∣mont. I confess to you, Madam, conti∣nu'd the Countess de Marignan, I found my self in a great straight: I saw well the consequence of an∣gring Arbanantes. And I was not ignorant it was not less dangerous to flatter him. I argued it was impos∣sible for a raving man to use his rea∣son. He believ'd me not, and had the boldness to tell me, if I had not the same sentiments for him as for Blesinac, he knew very well how to revenge himself of my indifference. I left Arbanantes in Dormont's Chamber, and returned to the Count's, to hinder any from co∣ming, and discovering Blesinac's con∣fession, I found Monserolle there,
to whom I told it, because it was known by so many, that I thought he would not be long ignorant of it. And I spoke to him, with per∣swasion enough to obtain, that he would make Madam d' Ecugy, with Arbanantes and the rest who con∣ducted her, depart that Night from Estajac. The Count de Marignan's Apart∣ment, was some distance from the other Lodgings, which made our de∣sign the easier. I caus'd all the pas∣sages to it to be shut up, and I re∣main'd in the Chamber, whilst Mon∣serolle went to acquaint Madam d' E∣cugy 'twas necessary she should leave Estajac; and that her Father would besiege the Castle to take it, and force her to a Nunnery, and she should now go to Carcassonne, where she would better divert her self. Al∣though what Monserolle said to her appear'd reasonable, she oppos'd it so violently, that they were oblig'd
to tell her she should be forc'd to do what was thought best for her affairs. She cry'd out terribly, and they were heard into my Husband's Apartment. He thought she had been laughing, which made him sigh, and say with sadness, that her mirth was very unseasonable. I did not undeceive him; but added, without shewing affectation, what I thought might contribute to cure him from a passion so ill plac'd. Whilst I was with him, Arbanantes and Madam d' Ecugy were forming a thousand Obstacles to their depar∣ture, especially Arbanantes. He must needs speak to the Count de Marignan, he would take his leave of me; but none of these succeeded, and they both parted from Estajac. Monserolle staid for his safety, and out of affection to my Husband, of the recovery of whose wounds, as well as Blesinac's, we began to have some hopes.
I had a great curiosity to know by what accident this last was in the engagement from whence he came so wounded. I desired him to tell me one Day when I visited him, and did not think it sit to let him know what he had discovered in the heighth of his Fever, lest he should grow too Melancholy at it. He told me then, that when he parted from Paris, he ordered one of his most trusty Servants to stay for him with two Hor∣ses at a Place not far from Estajac, till he should hear from him; that when he went from the Count de Marignan's, the true Painter took his way towards Paris, and he to the Place where his Servant expected him; that when he came to him he found him dangerously sick; and he resolv'd to stay till his recovery, and to find out a means to let me know what was become of him; that whilst he was in these conside∣rations,
he heard my Husband had assembled his Friends for Monserolle's assistance, that he had not too pru∣dently consulted, but had followed the advice of his Love only, that made him interests himself in any thing that might be grateful to me; and to do the Count the better ser∣vice, he took what Men he could get, and obliged them to follow him; and that, in sine, he arrived at a proper time to encourage the Counts Party, and free him from the hands of his Enemies. I therefore acknowledged all the obligations my Husband and I had to Blesinac for that good Office, but at the same time prepared him to leave Estajac as soon as his Health would give him leave. 'Twas two or three Days after Madam d' Ecugy was gone, before my Husband ask'd what she was doing. Monserolle took upon him the answer, and told him he could not hinder her from
leaving Estajac with Arbanantes, and was retired to Carcassonne to a Rela∣tion's. This News did not seem to make any impression upon the Count; he bore it with courage, and I bad reason to believe the Lady was now indifferent to him. Every thing was very calm at E∣stajac, the Baron d' Ecugy was cast down with Grief, and the loss of his Son had rendered him careless of his Daughters Conduct. She past the way to Carcassonne in resolutions to be revenged of Monserolle, Ble∣sinac, and me; for Arbanantes had acquainted her that Dormont was a counterfeited name for Blesinac. The desire she had to undo us all had a little moderated her anger; but when, arriving at Carcassonne, Plassac shewing them the way into the House, Arbanantes and she were both equally surprised to find it a Convent. Arbanantes would have resisted, but Monserolle had given
orders to Plassac to use force if they met with opposition, for which pur∣pose he had a Party with him he was well assured of. She therefore was forc'd to enter the Convent, and Plassac told Arbanantes, that the Count de Marignan desired him to return no more to his House. When Plassac had acquitted himself of his Commission, he returned to Estajac, where he gave us this ac∣count you have from me. Although Blesinac was more wounded than the Count de Ma∣rignan, he was sooner well; and he began to come out of his Cham∣ber when Plassac arrived from Carcassonne. Rose had let him know that the extremity of his Fever had made him discover the truth of his Quality, and the fear of causing new Disturbances had obliged him to prepare for his departure from Estajac. I seldom left my Husband, and Blesinac sent to let me know
he would speak with me. I thought I owed him that com∣plaisance. When the Heart is tru∣ly concerned, that fore-knowledge which is occasioned by Love is in∣fallible. I was not sensible in talk∣ing to him, of that exquisite Plea∣sure we receive in the Conversati∣on of those we love; and though I was resolved not to suffer him to remain at Estajac, I received Grief and Inquietude at his parting, and yet durst not press him to stay; but he would go, and I did not hinder him. He thought it not sit to leave Esta∣jac, and not bid adieu to the Count de Marignan. The Count, who was obliged to him, made many endeavours to retain him, but to no purpose. I must confess I was forced to call all my Reason and Duty to assist me to endure this parting. I took my leave of him in my Husbands Chamber, that I
might not expose my self to the re∣newing our Endearments, and keep him longer with me. Monserolle could not forbear to tell me, he admired the Power I had over my self in an occasion where the great∣est Reason is subject to a failure. It is true my outward Actions had a good appearance, but my Heart was not the less afflicted. I pass'd two Days in this condition, which appeared more sad and tedious to me than my whole Life; but you shall see to what misfortunes I was destined. One Morning when I slept very sound, sitting up late over Night, I was waked with such melancholy thricks and horrid noise, that touch'd me to the very Heart. I hastily got up, and run to a Window which look'd into the Castle Court. I heard Rose's Voice, and saw her with the rest of our Servants encompassing a Dead Man.
O what a sad spectacle, and how horrid it was to me! Death, al∣though it be so terrible, does not blot out the Characters of Love, and the poor Dead Man was but too well known by me; he was, Madam, the unhappy Blesinac. I was but just awake, and astonish∣ment suspended for some time the effects of my Grief; and I was in the midst of them, when Monse∣rolle came in to tell me the cir∣cumstances of that woful misfor∣tune. He was using some circum∣locutions to prepare me to it, not to strike me Dead at a blow, but he judged by the condition I was in, that I was but too well in∣formed; he said nothing to me, his Tears spoke for him, and mine gave to the memory of Blesinac, what his Love required of my Passion. As those who are truly so, ne∣ver believe they are enough af∣flicted,
I endeavouring to augment mine, ask'd Monserolle what they heard of the Count de Blesinac's Death. He told me, that when the Castle Gate was opened, they saw a Man there with a Horse, upon which was Blesinac Dead, and covered with a Cloak; and that this Man had a Letter for me, and another for the Count de Marignan, as it was very expedient for me to receive both the Letters. Monserolle caus'd the Man to be sent for, who was not of so ill a Physiognomy to be thought by me an Accomplice in so base an Action. He told me with many signs of Sorrow, that a Man on Horse back, whom he did not know, had forc'd him by great threats to carry the Body to my House, and to be assured he should not deceive him, he ac∣companyed him to the Gate, and absconded in a Place from whence
he might discern all his Actions; after this the Man gave me the Letter he was ordered to deliver into my Hands. Monserolle knew by the Writing it came from the treacherous Arbanantes. I had not the power to read it, and Monse∣rolle did not think fit the Messen∣ger should know the Contents, but asking him for that which was directed for the Count de Marignan, he delivered it very honestly. Monserolle caused him to be stopp'd, but no ill usage to be offered to him, and then broke open the Letter Arbanantes writ to me, and found these Words. Here, Madam, is the Object of your Love and my Hatred; we have each of us satisfied our Pas∣sions; and if I have but little con∣sulted my Honour in taking away his Life, you have renounced
yours as much by your continual Conduct towards him. I wish that the sight of a Man, once so Dear to you, may now be your eternal Reproach, and may serve as much to your Punish∣ment, as it adds to my Re∣venge; and that being the occa∣sion of my Crime, you may be as well charg'd with the Remorse I ought to have at it, as with that of having always been so un∣faithful to your Husband. I forgot to tell you, Madam, that Monserolle had sent after Ar∣banantes, either to take him, or discover, at least, which way he went; and if I had been capable of any Consolation, it had been in hopes this Wretch might suffer the Punishment he deserved. This Letter adding nothing to his Crime or my Resentment. I de∣sired Monserolle to read that di∣rected
to my Husband. These were the Words. Do not think it strange, that I have kill'd a man who had sav'd your life. What acknowledgments soe∣ver you imagin'd you ow'd him, I must let you know you are more o∣blig'd to me, since when I took a∣way his life, I reveng'd you on a man who dishonour'd you. As Ble∣sinac he abus'd your good Nature, and as Dormont came to insult over your honour in your own house. And I have too good an Opinion of you, to believe any otherwise than that you will partake with great pleasure in my revenge. Monserolle discovered great trans∣ports of anger at the reading of this Note; and he assur'd me this crime should not be unpunish'd. As we knew not the formalities are observ'd in these occasions, so Plas∣sac follow'd what measures he thought necessary, whilst Monserolle
undertook to acquaint the Count de Marignan with what was pro∣per for him to know about this accident. He was extremely trou∣bled at it; and the more, be∣cause he thought it had been the Baron d' Ecugy, who had caus'd Dormont to be assassinated, nei∣ther did we undeceive him. My Husband caus'd as great ho∣nours to be done to his Corps, as could have been perform'd, had he known his birth. My displeasure was the less discernible, for the grief my Husband Monserolle, Plassac, and indeed all our Servants shew'd at this misfortune. But that which proceeds from a compassion only, seeks consolation, and finds it in the necessity to endure what can't be prevented. But from this Rule we must except the Count de Marignan, who gave himself wholly up to me∣lancholy for the loss of a man who had so generously sav'd his life. His
heart shew'd him nothing of com∣fort, but representing to him all that was good and amiable in Dormont, he insensibly fell into a deep concern; which in a few days chang'd the hopes of his recovery, and brought him at last to death. The first thought it inspir'd me with, was the reproach of not be∣ing dead as well as he; and to see friendship effect that in my Husband, which love could not produce in me. I reckon'd up after this, all the misfortunes had happen'd to me; and found my self depress'd with so violent a grief, that for some time I thought I should have retir'd to my Husband and my Lover. After I had paid my Duty to the Memory of the Count de Marignan, I told Monserolle I was oblig'd to deprive my self of all opportunities
of consolation. He offer'd me to partake in my afflictions all his life. But knowing how little my heart was my own, he did not press me to what was not in my power to accord. We parted, and I designed to go to Paris for some Concerns: But before I left Esta∣jac, I had the comfort to hear the perfidious Arbanantes was perished in a River he would have cross'd, to avoid Monserolle, who pursu'd him. After this, I parted from Estajac, with a resolution to re∣tire into a Convent, for the bet∣ter opportunity to mourn my misfortunes. The Countess de Marignan ended her Story with so many Sighs and Tears, that Madam de Mezelon had not the power to hinder the flowing of her Eyes. They renew'd a tender friend∣ship, with engagements it should
last eternally, though Madam de Marignan was to go very sud∣denly for Bayonne, and Madam de Mezelon to Vaucluse. FINIS.
Books Printed for H. Herringman, and are to be Sold by Jo. Knight, and F. Saunders. Folio, Large. SIR William Dugdale's Baronage of England. —'s Origines Judiciales. —'s Monasticon Anglicanum. Shakespear's Comedies, Histories, and Tragedies. Published according to the true Original Copies. Unto which is ad∣ded seven Plays never before Printed in Folio. The fourth Edition. Beaumont and Fletcher's Plays, all that were formerly Quarto and Folio, put to∣gether into one Volume. Davila's History of the Civil Wars of France. The History of the Council of Trent, Written by Father Paul, with his Life, and the History of the Inquisition, ad∣ded to it. Sir William D' Avenant's Works. Dr. William Howell's History of the World to Constantine the Great. Henry the Eighth, Written by the Lord Herbert.
Parthenissa, a Romance in six Parts, Written by the Earl of Orrery. The Art of War, by the Earl of Orrery. Clelia, a Romance in sive Parts. Small Folio. Mr. Abraham Cowley's Poems. Philip de Commines. Madam Philips Poems. The Earl of Orrery, four Plays. Blount's Law Dictionary. Dea Valle's Travels. Paula Paruta's History of Venice. Grand Scipio, a Romance. Ben Johnson's second Volume. Sir Robert Howard's four Plays. Astrea, a Romance. Dom John de Castro. Bishop Andrew's Lectures. Howell's History of Venice. Mr. Tho. Killigrew's Plays. Olaus Magnus Wall Flowers, a Romance. Pinto's Travels Quarto Books. Mr. Robert Boyles Philosophical Essays. —'s Tracts. Blount's Art of making Devises.
Dr. Charlton's Stonohenge. —'s natural History. —'s Immortality of the Soul. Civil Right of Tithes. Sir Will. D' Avenant's Poem to the King. Mr. Dryden's Poem to the King. —'s Dramatique Essay of Poetry. Large Octavo. Mr. Robert Boyles Reflections. —'s History of Colours. —'s Stile of Scriptures. —'s Seraphick Love. —'s Theology. —'s Account of Reason. Lord Bacon's Essays. The Life of Buscon the witty Spaniard. Bergerack's Letters. Lord Brook's Remains. Broome's Horace. British Princes. A Poem. Sir Robert Howard's Poems. Sir John Denham's Poems. —'s Cato Major. Carter's Heraldry. Conversations of the French. Sir John Suckling's Works. Characters of the Passions. Crashaw's Divine Poems.
Carew's Poems. Dr. d'Espagno's Essays. Differences of France and Spain. Duke of Guise's Memoirs. Dr. Donn's Poems. Epicurus's Morals. Discourse of Gods Judgment. Hudibrass, first and second parts. Henry the fourth, of France. Written by the Bishop of Rodez. Human Industry: or, The History of the Manual Arts. Human Soul. Poems by Sir Tho. Higgons. Hero and Leander, a Poem in Burlesqne. Pastor Fido, by Sir Richard Fanshaw. Journey into Spain. Idea of Painting, by Mr. Evelyn. Mr. Dryden's Annus Mirabilis. A French Grammar. call'd, The Prince∣ly way to the French Tongue, Compos'd at first for the use of her Highness the Lady Mary, and since taught to her Royal Si∣ster the Lady Anne. By Monsieur Peter de Lanie, Tutor for the French to both their Highnesses. Mystagogus Poeticus. Sir Tobias Matthews Letters Moral State of England.
Quevedo's Visions. Englished by Sir Roger L'Estrange. Reflections on the Poets by Mr. Rymer. Voyage to Athens, giving an account of the Ancient and Modern State of that once famous City, with the Life of this present Emperour Mahomet the fourth, and the Ministry of the Grand Vizier Cop∣rogli Achmett Pacha, and the most memo∣rable Passages at the Siege of Candia. Novels in Octavo. Scarron's City of Romance. The Drudge, or the jealous Extravagant. The Loves of Charles Duke of Mantua, and Margaret Countess of Rovera. The Ephesian and Cemerian Matrons. The Husband forced to be jealous, or, the good Fortune of those Women that have jealous Husbands. The Loves of several Philosophers and great Men. English. Adventures, in two parts. By a Person of Honour. Novels in Twelves. Don Carlos, Prince of Spain. Prince of Conde. The Gallants, or, the Reciprocal Consi∣dents, in 2 parts, by a Person of Quality. The End of the Catalogue.
