10634.6 29733692 28092
AN EXTRACT Translated out of the French Copie, and taken out of the Registers of the French Kings Priuie Councell. BEtweene Iohn Potter, William Woollestone, Henry Morris, and Thomas Church, English Marchants, as well for them∣selues, as for the other English Marchants, trading in the towne of Rouan, appealing from the sentence giuen by the Bay∣liffe of the said towne, the seuenth of Aprill 1598. on the one partie, and the Masters and Wardens of the Art and Misterie of the Companie of the Drapers, as well in the whole sale, as retaile, Cloth-workers, & Shearemen of the said towne intima∣ted, on the other partie, By the King in his Councell being seene the said sentence, whereof appeale is made, the aduertisements & eui∣dences of the said parties, the decree of the said Councell, by the which the examining of the said appeale is referred to the said Councell of the foure and twentieth of Nouember 99. the producto of the said parties, on the which the said sentence is made, Another decree of the said Councell, by the which it is ordained, that the Masters & Wardens of the art and misterie of the Companie of the Drapers of the towne of Paris, shall bee called before the Commissioners in that behalfe appointed, to giue their aduise on the difference of the said parties, and articles by them deliuered, to the end that this being done, and their aduice seene, right to bee done vnto them according to reason, of the seuenteenth of March 1600. the verball plea of the said Commissioners contayning the sayd aduice, the request of the Ambassador of the Queene of England to moderate the said sute, the meanes of the moderation of the saide Ambassador, and all that which by the said parties hath beene produced before the Commissioners thereunto appointed. His report being heard, The King in his Councell hath made, and doth make voyde the appellation, and that whereof appeale is made, and in mending the Iudgement, hath ordained, and oth ordaine, that within three moneths after the signification which shall be made of this present decree, all sorts of woollen cloth which, shall be brought by the said Englishmen or Strangers, white, or died, in wooll, & not otherwise, before entering into this Realme, shal be wet & shrunke, not drawne out vpon the Tenters with pullies, engines, wheeles, not made of diuers sorts of woolles, barred, striped, cockled, & filled with flocks, on paine of confiscation, according to the ordinances. Which marchandizes being loyall, & of such condition as is aforesaid, may bee solde in whole-sale by the sayde English or Forraine Marchants, after hauing beene duely vi∣sited by the said Masters and Wardens of the sayd art and misterie of the Companie of the Drapers and none others: which marchan∣dizes shall bee put in the halles and publike places, if there bee any, and not else-where. And if in case it should bee found, that there were no publike place, (visitation beeing formerly made) a place shall bee demaunded of the Iudges of the places: and it shall not bee lawfull for the said English or Forraine Marchants to open their Bales, before they haue called thereunto the said Masters & Wardens of the sayd art and misterie of Drapers, who also shall bee subiect within twice foure and twentie houres, to make the saide visitation gratis. And in case the said Marchants doe not sell their said marchandizes in the same places, after the said visitation, and after three mar∣ket dayes, in the which the halles shall haue beene opened, and that the said marchandizes shall haue bene exposed to sale, it shall be law∣full for the said Marchants to carrie them where they shall thinke good, for to make sale of them: And touching the measuring of the sayde marchandises, the saide Councell hath ordained, and doth ordaine, that the Edict thereupon made in the yeere 1543. shall be kept and obserued, & without expences. Done in the priuie Councell of the King, holden at Paris, the one and twentieth day of Aprill, 1600. subscribed thus, Des baigneaulx. Imprinted at London by Simon Stafford, dwelling on Adling hill, neere Carter-lane.
