10644 99852090 17395
A SERMON PREACHED AT ASHBY DE-LA-ZOVCH IN THE COVNTIE OF LEICESTER: At the Funerall of the Truely Noble and Vertuous Lady ELIZABETH STANLEY one of the Daughters and Coheires of the Right Honourable FERDINAND late Earle of Derby and late Wife to HENRIE Earle of Huntingdon the Fifth Earle of that Familie. The 9. of February. Anno Dom. 1633. By I. F. LONDON. Printed by William Iones dwelling in Red-crosse streete. 1635.
AN EPITAPH VPON THE EXCELLENT COVNTESSE OF HVNTJNGDON. THE cheife perfections of both Sexes joyn'd, With neithers vice nor vanity combin'd. Of this our age the wonder, loue, and care, The example of the following, and dispaire. Such beauty, that from all hearts loue must flow: Such maiesty, that none durst tell her so. A wisdome of so large and potent sway, Romes Senare might haue wisht, her Conclaue may. Which did to earthly thoughts so seldome bow, Aliue She scarce was lesse in heaven, then now. So voyd of the least pride, to her alone These radiant excellencies seem'd vnknowne. Such once there was: but let thy greife appeare Reader, there is not: Huntingdon lies here. By him who saies what he saw FALKLAND.
A FVNERALL SERMON. Iohn. XI. XXV. He that Beleiveth in mee though he were Dead yet shall he liue. THE hopes of those which are strangers unto the Covenants of promise, cannot fixe any setled ayme, and expectancie beyond the short line of life: when that is drawne out unto the utmost point, Death at the best is apprehended by them, but as it was by Adrian, to be incerta Peregrinatio, a Race of very doubtfull issue, doubt∣full whether in the end thereof, the
head shall be crowned or cut off; so that of all men most miserable that they are, their hope is onely in this life. Tantisper sperant dum spirant; But the hope of the children of the pro∣mise, doth not vanish into emptines with their breath, etiam dum expirant sperant; Though there be no more breath in their mouthes and their no∣strills, yet their hope is layd vp in their bosome. Iob 29. Though we die, yet saith Job, We know, that our Redeemer Iob. 29. 17. liveth. Though we be hid and closed vn∣der the ground, like the seed in the garden bed, yet he whom Mary saw Iob. 20. 15. like the Gardiner, this Gardiner, will looke, that the seede shall have its spring againe: He will, saith the Pro∣phet, poure vpon vs a dew, like the dew of bearbes, and the earth shall yeeld forth Es. 16. 19. her dead And of thus much doth he here assre the sister of Mary, who was almost as deepely swallowed vp of griefe, as her deceased brother
Lazarus was of the Grave. Comfort thy selfe Martha, he shall rise againe; and doubt not Martha, I my selfe am the Resurrection, and the life, the issues of Death belong unto me. The keyes of Psal. 68. 20. the Grave are at my Girdle, and he that beleeveth in me, Though he were dead yet shall he live. The wordes are in summe, a Stipula∣tio Conventionalis, consi∣sting of a 1. condition. 2. promise. 1. First, the Condition thus insinu∣ated, He that beleeveth. 2. the promise thus proposed and pronounced, though he were dead yet shall he live. First, The Condition upon which the promise is suspended, is faith, that  that fulnesse of our hopes, that  that solace of our lives, as Philo calleth it, nay that our life it selfe, or at least that upon which our life lies; for by it the just shall live, or by nothing, He that belee∣veth in me, and he onely that beleeveth, he shall live.
And here seeing this Action is so pro∣perly specified, by its object; we may observe, That the principall obiect of our faith, is God, considered in the u∣nitie of his essence and a Trinity of persons, and therefore in the Symboll of our beleife, the Creede, is there a particular Credo, or at least the particle (in) premitted apart before every one of the three persons, importing, that upon them we fixe, and build, our first assent, and assurance. As for those other subordinate prin∣ciples of our faith, such as concerne the Catholique Church, the Communion of Saints, these being but Creatures, are not assented unto for themselves, but for God, the uncreate, and first truth, and therefore have no such Cre∣do, nor particle set apart before them, but onely prefixed before one of the three persons. Now, this obiect of our faith is con∣sidered diversly; either, as the Act of beliefe and assent hath respect unto
the understanding, and in that consi∣deration, the obiect of faith is two∣fold, either formall, in which respect the Act of Faith is credere Deo, we be∣leeving God as the first truth, and for him fixing a setled assent upon all se∣cond and subordinate truthes, they be the maine Characters of divinity Power, and wisdome imprinted on them, apparently manifesting, the hand, the finger of the Lord to have written them. Or else it is materiall, and so the Act of faith is credere Deum; we that beleeve beleeve that God is, and that he is a rewarder of those that seeke him. Or secondly, the obiect of faith is considered, as the Act of beleefe and assent hath respect unto the will move∣ing the understanding to render its as∣sent, and in this respect the Act of faith is Credere in Deum, as it is here delive∣red; for the will having pitched the end of all its hopes, in the goodnesse of this exceeding rich and precious pro∣mise
uncessantly plyeth the understan∣ding to give its assent to the truth of that which so much imports and con∣cernes its peace and satisfaction. And these different considerations, doe not importe any such various dif∣ference of the Acts of faith, but rather signifie the divers respects of one and the same Act unto the obiect of faith. The summe of all may be collected thus. First, we beleeve that God is, and a rewarder of all those that seeke him: 2. We beleeve his counsells and Covenants manifested, and dispensed unto us. 3. We beleeve in him, adhaere unto him, relie on him; our Soule be∣ing with absolute Complacencie satis∣fied in him, cryeth out, Pars mea Domi∣nus, It is enough the Lord is my porti∣on, how then can I lacke any thing? we give our assent unto his counsells, and Covenants, because we are assured that in what he delivereth, or promi∣seth, he is wise and cannot be deceived himselfe, he is faithfull and will not
deceive us; Though we discerne a propension, and flexiblenesse in our selves to waver with every contrarie Ayre, yet let God be true, though all men Rom. 3. be lyars. The Aegyptians as Aquinas notes adventured to make the promise alte∣rable; I know not what feates they had, like unto those of their moderne counterfeits, to play fast, and loose with such a firme, and sealed knot as this. But whatsoever they! we, saith the Apostle, beleeve what we know, and we know whom we have belee∣ved, and if we be deceived, certainely as the Prophet saith, Thou Lord hast de∣ceived Ier. 20. us; But God for bid saith Abraham the father of all beleevers, that the Iudge of all the world, should not do righteously; And unto this well-grounded Gen: 17. assent, succeedes our firme adhaerence unto the covenants of promise, by which we cleave unto, and close with our Redeemer in this manner. The proposition of the promise is
furnished by the Gospell; The Redee∣mer died for those that are dead unto sin & rose againe for the justification of them which are planted into the similitude of his resurrection. Now an assumption must be fitted unto the proposition by that assent which our understandings give unto the truth, and that adherence which our wills fasten upon the goodnesse of these exceeding rich and precious promi∣ses. If we be able thus to limit the generall proposition, I am dead unto the world by the Crosse of Christ, or I was dead, but now I am alive in Ie∣sus Christ, the conclusion will follow inevitably. I doe not alwayes expect in such a limitation certitudinem Evidentiae: where I finde but certitudinem adhae∣rentiae, such a one as sometime feeles some  some declinati∣ons and abatements of its firmenesse, and fervor. Even that faith howsoe∣ver it seeme to come no neerer unto
Christ then the very hemme of his garment yet is able to derive vertue from him. Thus have I in a verie narrow mo∣dell represented unto you the whole figure of that grace, which gives us Title unto this promise. Give me then leave to question you, as the Apostle did Agrippa, Beleevest thou the pro∣phets? Beleeve you in the Lord Iesus? I would I could answer for all, as he did for Agrippa. I know that you be∣leeve. But this I know: Many will make a boast of faith (saith Salomon) but Prov. 20. 6. where shall we finde a faithfull man? If you beleeve indeed, your faith will give evidence of it selfe by the exer∣cise of an adhering and an apprehen∣ding vertue: By the first we are inser∣ted into him; by the second we de∣rive a quickening influence from him Doest thou then beleeve in the Lord Iesus? shew mee then the power of the Lord Iesus. The Angell gave a rea∣son
of his name, He shall be called Ie∣sus, saith he, for he shall save his peo∣ple from their sinnes. But art thou yet in thy sinnes? I cannot then beleeve that thou beleevest: No! It is fitter for thee (according to that elegant ob∣servation of St. Bernard) to feare the name of Christ, then to be confident upon the name of Iesus. It is fitter for thee in such a case to dread him as he is Christ, a King, a Iudge, then to pre∣sume upon him as he is Iesus, a Savi∣our, a Redeemer. Doest thou beleeve in the death of Iesus Christ? shew me then the pow∣er of his death, whether it worke in thee mightilie, as it did in the Apostle to the subduing of every corrupt affe∣ction. Doest thou beleeve in his Re∣surrection? shew me then the power of his resurrection, Resurrectio Christi habet virtutem in se, sed operationem in nobis, shew me then what new effect it hath wrought, what new life it hath quickened in thee. No man came un∣to
Christ, that went away in the same estate that he came in: Some came lame, and paralytike, and went backe restored to the integri∣tie of their limmes and strength; some came leprous and were dismissed cleane some came blinde and deafe, and went went away restored to the integritie of their sences, None were dismissed in the same estate wherein they came: And hast thou beene so neere unto Christ, as to say, I am in him, and of him, and yet art neither cleansed, nor enlightened, nor healed, who can be∣leeve it? Whatsoever thou boastest of beleeving, I cannot beleeve that thou beleevest at all, no certainely thou ne∣ver wert so neere him, as the very skirts of his clothing, thou never camest so neere, as the very smell of the oynt∣ments of this our Aaron, If thou hadst certainely that name, which is as an oyntment powred forth, that name, wherein thou pretendest to beleeve, would powerfully have healed all
these wounds and sores, and swellings But doest thou indeed beleeve, and art able to give evidence thereof by such comfortable Testimonies, as are here implied? Then doubt not of the promise as Christ said unto Martha. Be∣leevest thou this? why then he that beleeveth in me, though he were dead yet shall he live; and so I passe from the con∣dition, to the consideration of the pro∣mise suspended upon the condition, Though he were dead, yet shall he live. The labour of man in this life, is, to turne up the face of the Earth in the sweate of his owne face, seeking for foode and fewell in her bowells, and in the closing up of the weary day of his Travell, the earth receiveth man him∣selfe for a recompence into her bosome to fill up those wounds and rents, But the earth receaveth back no more then it lent, . Naz: Nazian: The spirit breathed from above, re∣turneth to God that gave it. Dissolutio Aug: corporis, est Absolutio animae. As the snare
being broken the Bird escapeth, so the bodie being dissolved, evadit intus in∣clusa Columba, our soule is esca∣ped Col. 3. 1. as a Bird out of the snare of the fowler; so that in our departure we suffer but aliquid mortis, not a whole death. Our life is not lost, but hid. The Serpent which hath the power of death can doe no more, but manducare terram nostram, licke our dust; and in∣deed but licke it; devoure it, consume it, annihilate it he cannot, there must still be ex defectione refectio, after a de∣cay a reparation. The Earth indeed receiveth the dust backe againe, which it lent, but yet it receiveth it not as payed, but as lent; it must be given up, and returned backe againe; It receiveth our bodies to make up those wounds and wants, which partly our wants, partly our wantonnesse have made in her face, and wombe; and it retaineth them for a recompense of her sufferings and losses, till in the generall restoration, it
selfe be restored. But then when it selfe is renewed, when there is a new heaven, and a new Earth what need hath the Earth to reteine our bodies any longer for satisfaction? In that day Oh Earth, Earth, Earth, thou shalt heare the voice of the Lord, and render up thy dead, and even the dead them∣selves shall heare the voyce of the son Ioh. 5. 25. of God, and they that heare it shall live. This is the hope of Israell, and indeed the hope of all the world, after al those evills which presse and persecute man to the last earthly evill death, there is yet this hope left in the botteme of the Grave, as in the bottome of Pando∣ra's Boxe But it is but hope, not sight, and therefore the doctrine which con∣cerned this hope, received such sleight intertainment; for whereas the Apo∣stle saith, hope that is seene is not hope, cleane contrary with him that lookes onely with the eye of nature, hope that is not seene, is no hope at all. Hope that is not founded upon the Evidence
of reason is with him but a  a citie in the cloudes, a Castle in the ayre; hence was it that the doctrine of the Resurrection, amongst the Epicu∣reans & Pithagoreans of Athens was rece∣ved Act. 17. . but as a mater of mockery; though the Iudgement seate were in the Arco∣pagus, yet they sate downe in the seate of scorners, not as Iudges of Paules Ser∣mon; But allowing that the Athenians had some reason to be ignorant, as per∣haps, had they not so much reason, they would not have had so litle faith. It is not strange that in the first 300. years after Christ, divers even in Christ should gainesay this hope of all the world being spoyled through the same vaine Philosophy. Many of those ages, having not seen any example of a Resurrection, but only received it upon relation and reading, began to scanne the possibility of such a restoration ac∣cording to the principles of Nature, & reason. It is well observed of Minutius non minoris est sceleris ignorare quamsaedere
These men sinne as highly by de∣nying Gods Power through their ig∣norance, as if by their disobedience they had resisted it: Malè Deum norunt qui illum putant non posse quod non putant; I may pronounce them ignorant which conceive, that God is able to do no more, then they are able in reason to conceive. But though they, though all the world gainsay this hope of all the world, yet this is the victory that overcometh all the world, even our faith: we will not draw all unto reason but leave something for faith. Our contemplation of matters of this straine which are above the com∣prehension of reason, and beyond the bounds of experience doth not arrive at knowledge but at wonder: which is nothing els but Contemplation bro∣ken off, or loosing it selfe; It was aptly said by one of Platoes schoole, the sense of man resembleth the Sunne, which openeth and reveileth the Ter∣restiall Globe, but obscureth and con∣cealeth
the Celestiall, so doeth the sense discover naturall things, but darken, and shut up, those which are beyond the verge of nature: for all things pro∣ceeding in the Invention of knowledg is by similitude, but those things are onely selfe like and have nothing in common with naturall things other∣wise then in shadow, and trope. Give therefore unto faith, that which unto faith belongeth; for indeed it is more worthy to beleeve then to thinke or know; considering that in know∣ledge the minde suffereth from the im∣pression of inferior natures; but in all beliefe, the minde suffereth from a spi∣rit which it holdeth superior, & more Aug. authorised thē it selfe; Nolumus igitur in∣telligere ut credamus, sed credereut inteliga∣mus, we wil not therfore seeke to under stand that we may beleeve, but beleve that it may be given us to understand The mystery of the Resurrection was delivered not by Pihlosophers, but by simple fishermen: and here the
most subtill of us, must leave to be dis∣putants, and learne to be disciples. And yet if any list to dispute, let me aske as St. Paul did, why should it seeme an impossible thing, to raise up one that is dead? It was well argued by the Iew Pesisa, Si quod fuit, est, ergo, quod fuit erit. whether is it har∣der to restore a body mouldred into the dust from whence it was taken, then to creat all things out of nothing! Is it thought impossible in nature? why, nature her selfe is a mistrisse able enough to informe us of the contra∣rie. Operibus Resurrectionem perscripsit antequam literis, viribus praedicavit antequam vocibus: se we not the vicissi∣tudes of night and day, the revoluti∣ons of winter and summer, the rise∣ing and setting of the Starres, the wane and increases of the Moone, the Quickening of the dead graine under the Clod, to beare a live∣ly resemblance of this Restora∣tion.
The whole Creation which grones for the generall resurrection, practi∣seth a yeerely, a monthly, yea a dai∣ly Resurrection in its severall parts. And all this for Man! And shall man onely not rise, for whom all these things rise in their periods and seasons? what should with∣hold him from being restored? The powers of the grave are shaken, and disabled, Christ himselfe hath bro∣ken open the Gates thereof, and loosed his Prisoners from the brinkes of the pit: death it selfe hath by his last con∣flict received its deaths wound: he had foiled it before, by the ministry of his servants, by Eliah recalling the Sareph∣tans son, by Elisha recovering the Shu∣namits son. So David foiled his enemies of Ammon by the valour of his servants Ioab, and Abisha, but himselfe was faine 2 Sam 12. to appeare before Rabbah for the per∣fecting of the victory and conclusion of the warre; so the Sonne of David appeared personally to give his
Enemie the last stroke to swallow up death in an utter victory. The victo∣ry is thus atcheived. Death it selfe though he be the King of feare, and have as many Provinces of his domi∣nion, as there be paines, perills and snares of death, yet hath no more do∣minion over us, then what our sinne betrayeth us unto. The arrowes of death are fledged with the feathers which grow upon our owne wings. Now therefore if we conceive man to be without sinne, death hath no more dominion over him: Death then have∣ing seized upon our Saviour, who was without staine or guilt, it was found equall in the Iudgement of God, that it should loose all power over us that were sinfull, because it exercised a po∣wer which it had not over him that was innocent. For in regard of the in∣iury offered unto him and patiently susteined by him, God adjudged him all power over him that had the power of death, giveing him liberty
to restore unto liberty the Prisoners of the Grave. And indeed he hath reason thus to restore them, for according to that of Bernard, Christus solus resurrexit, sed non totus; Christ alone is risen, but all Christ is not risen, till all that are of, and in Christ be risen likewise. Thus though other Graves be the houses of death, this of Christ is unto us, (now the stone is removed from it) the Gate of everlasting life; Although death be the king of feare yet we see of his king∣dome there is an end, he raigned in∣deed under the law, but now the Scep∣ter of righteousnesse is transferred unto one, of whose kingdome there is no end. And observe the procession and Pompe of his Triumph over his van∣quished foe: Death, saith the Prophet, shall goe before his face pale and trem∣bling as a Prisoner before his Trium∣phall chariot. He saith no longer now as he did once, O Death, I will be thy Death, It is not seasonable to threaten
now, death hath already felt his van∣quishing armes, he spareth not now therefore to reproch him with this glorious insultation, O death where is thy Sting? O grave, where is thy victorie? Since thou didst once loose thy sting upon mine innocency, I have taken a∣way the sinnes of the world, so that now thou canst not fit thy selfe with any new sting, to wound either mee, or mine. Thus death it selfe is dead, and the dead live againe; death is swal∣lowed up, and the dead are rendered up: this is the hope of humaneflesh: but he must be more then flesh, whosoever attaineth to the end of this hope, for flesh and bloud shall never inherit the 1 Cor. 15. kingdome of heaven. As there is a flesh which shall see the salvation of God, so there is a flesh Es. 52. Es. 4. 1 Thes. 4. 17 which is as grasse. Grasse which groweth to day, and tomorow perhaps is to be cast into the fornace, there to be tormented in aeterno Dei, because it sinned in aeterno suo. During the eter∣nall
pleasure of God, because of its owne eternall pleasure it tooke in dis∣pleasing of God; As there are some qui rapientur in occursum, so there are some qui convertentur retrorsum. Those which have turned their backes unto me, and not their face, those shall be Ps. 9. 17. turned backward. They shall rise a∣gaine, but it shall be for their greater de∣pression. Their bodies shall be delive∣red from the first death, but it shall be to be delivered up unto the second death, their soules and bodies shall be united, but both devided from God, in such manner that they shall wish the bodie had beene rather extingui∣shed, then thus united. Sed ad augmen∣tum Grg. tormenti, ut hic de corpore nolens edu∣citur, itidem et illic in corpore tenetur in vitus. To aggravate the vengeance, as here the soule parted out of the bodie against its will; so there its held in the body against its will. Marveile not at it, though  be de suo optomus, yet he is de nostro Iustus. As he is gracious by the Tertull: propriety of his nature; so he is iust for
the necessity of the cause. And it is e∣quall and iust, that if we taste of the sweetnesse of sinne against the will of God, we shall taste of the bitternesse of punishment against our owne will. . &c. It is equall if we be here subiected unto that evill one, that we should hereafter be pos∣sessed of him, saith that excellent Ho∣milist Hom: Macarius. If we make our bodies Prostibula and not Templa, rather Tem∣ples of Chemosh and Ashtaroth then Do∣mus patris mei, they will become rather blockes of hell-fire then Pillars in the Temple and the Courtes of the house of our God. Let us therefore spare our Bodies (my beloved) and not use them as if they were borrowed gar∣ments, we must give accompts of things done in them. And as the scarrs of wounds, so the scarrs of sins will appeare therin after death, which will be Characters of evidence plaine e∣nough to testifie their unblenesse of Glorie, let us therefore here seeke
to take them away, by taking the Cyrill. ca∣tech. 18.  by being washed, by being sanctified here. Would we so rise from death, that we may not sinke into the second death, let us remem∣ber, that Corpora nostra huic Resur∣rectioni per Regenerationem Spiritus Tertull: inaugurantur, Our bodies must be here intituled unto the Resurrection of glory, by the Resurrection of Grace. Nature exposeth us all dead, dead in the uncircumcision of the flesh, dead in the dead workes of the flesh; Man, who had not knowne sinne, should have felt no power of death in his Bodie, by sinne contracted a death even of his soule, for as the soule is the life of the bodie, so is grace the life of the Soule; As then when the soule departeth the bodie dies, so Grace having aban∣doned the soule, the spirit it selfe is dead. And how many doe we discerne everie where, in whom
the tokens of this death are sensibly apparent, men dead in themselves, one∣ly Satan moveth in them, Satan wal∣keth in them, so that they move but like prodigies, like the bodies of those which Satan is said to make use of for the atcheiving of his wicked illusions. St. Aug: observes three sorts of dead persons whom Christ raised up unto life, representing three distinct sorts of his spirituall death: first the daugh∣ter of the Ruler of the Synagogue, which was dead in the house, resem∣bling those that are dead-hearted, sense∣lesse of the impressions of life & grace, such as sit as dead in these Assemblies, as if we were preaching at their fune∣ralls. Secondly, The young man which was caryed out of the Gates of Natin, resembling those whose hearts and hands are engaged in the outward practise of the dead workes of the flesh Thirdly, Lazarus that had layen long putryfying in the grave represent∣ing
those that have layen from the ve∣ry wombe, overwhelmed with the body of death and over-set with a cloud of ignorance, & insensiblenes so many dead in all these conditions and degrees do we observe every where that we have reason to wish as Ieremie did: oh that our eyes were as Rivers of water, that we might weepe for the dead, for the slaine of our people, now then oh wretched men that we are, who shall deliver us from the body of this death? If we be raised, we must be raised by the voice, and vertue of the same Christ which raised up these he that in the Gospel bad the yong man, arise, must by his Gospel bid the new man arise in us. As we are sūmoned unto the second Resurrection, by the voice of an Archangel, so are we here unto this, by the voice of the Angel of the covenant, in the mouths of the an∣gels of the churches, the ministers. & here both that voice which sounded from mount Sinai, and that which sounded
from mount Sion, have their part in the action. The law startleth, the Gospell awaketh & quickneth us. Christ sent the law by his servant, as Elisha sent his staffe, by which yet the dead child was not raised up till Elisha himselfe came in persō. The terrors of the law quicken in us so much sence, as may make us sigh for our restoration, the refreshings of the gospel quickē in us so much light, & life as to make us se and run into the arms of our Restorer The law seemes to remove the stone from the mouth of our hearts, as it was removed from the mouth of La∣zarus Sepulchre; but the voice of Christ in the Gospel sumoneth us to awake & arise that he may give us light, wher∣in we may be enabled to know & fol∣low him, that hath visited us, & done so great things for us & now I would that we had made such an advantage of our Attention, to that powerfull voice, that I might have occasiont  after a visible, & evi∣dent
Resurrection to loose you, as La∣zarus was, from the bondes of the Grave, or to say with the father of the prodigall, loe these my sonnes were dead, but now they live: we were dead saith the Apostle, but now we are alive in Iesus Christ, now we feele the pulse of spirituall life beate in the Arteries of our faith, which assureth us that our life is prepared for us; of our hope which is resolute that it is preserved for us; of our love, which upon these well-grounded perswasions, is conti∣nually running in a cheerefull prose∣cution and chase thereof. My beloved though we have  earth to our father and dust to our Sire, yet let us not have  dust-creeping soules: surely our hope is higher then the dust, let our conversa∣tion then be as high as our hope is. Though we be made of the earth, yet we are not made for the Earth. We may observe, that he that requires the erection of our affections, doth
with great iealousie withdraw from us all those ensnarements upon which they may fasten here below. He is such a Bridegrome, as will not that we pre∣ferre the king before himselfe; this cir∣cle the world, before the compasse of his Armes. All these counterfeit de∣lights, which this empty dust is able to yeeld us, they are as of purpose, made either not to rellish at all with us, by reason of their shortnesse and flee∣tingnesse, or to distate us by the ad∣mixture of some calamitie and Bitter∣nesse: for if we will be children in un∣derstanding insteed of being children in Innocency, if we will still be suc∣king here, we must be used as  great babes, we must have the breast be smeared and sowred, to weane out childish longing from it. But the withdrawing of any of these earthly things from us, doth not so much withdraw us from the Earth as the calling away of those deare-ones in whose bloud, or love we have any in∣terest,
the wives of our youthes, the children of our delight. These are they with whom we reioyced and they being gone, the remainder of our life seemes bitter unto us, and we thinke with our selves, what further use is there of us? or what portion have we left upon the Earth? we crie like chil∣dren, that have their delights and rat∣tles taken from them. And at last as when the nurse makes the child beleev she hath layed them in the Cradle to sleepe, the childe cries to sleepe like∣wise, that he may be neere them: so we when our deare ones are layed downe and composed in their beds of dust, we are weary of waking any longer, our eyes grow as heavy as our hearts, we see nothing to reioyce in, or take comfort in; we desire as Iacob, to goe downe to the grave to our sonnes, we desire to sleepe by the sides of our be∣loved ones, that with them we may awake againe, after the likenesse of him who layeth us and them unto our rest,
and shall raise us againe unto our re∣freshing. Thus should ye (Right Honorable) looke after this renowned Ladie, who is now composed unto her rest in the Bed of Earth; suspiring and longing after the same refreshing, the same hope that hope which is now no lōger hope with her but sight and sense, & posses∣sion it selfe. But if you would have your soule find the same rest with hers, let your soule seek it as she did. If with her you would find the kingdome of God seek with her the Righteousnes therof. Let us awhile looke into the Grave with which these deare ashes are en∣trusted, for in that house  as the Septuagint reades that of Eccles: 13. Though the Grave be the house of death, yet we Septuag. shall derive from hence, an example of a gracious life, and of such a death as undoubtedly ushers in a glorious life. Anciently there were great treasures hid in the Sepulchres of great ones, &
if we looke into this we shall finde a treasure too, a treasure of rich exam∣ple to us all. As she was derived of a very noble princely extraction, so she ennobled her selfe much more by endevouring to as∣sure her selfe of her regeneration and adoption, than by her birth. That was the honor by which she va∣lued her selfe, and indeede the true and genuine Honor of you all, Right Honorable. He that called Abraham fa∣ther was everlastingly accursed because Luke. 16. God was not his father. It is a good ob∣servation of Philo, upon that of Gen: 6. These are the Generations of Noah, Noah was a iust man and walked with God. &c. Moses, saith he, setting downe Noahs Genealogie insteed of recounting his Ancestors, reckoneth his vertues. It were easie for me to name many noble names like unto these, to prove that no∣bility by which she esteemed her selfe principally honored. She had a mind of a most excellent cōposure, of a noble &
generous height, but attempered with an admirable sweetnesse, and humili∣ty, so that I may affirme, that she made use of the greatnesse of her Spirit in nothing so much, as either in the mag∣nanimous contempt of unworthy in∣iuries, (for some such were aymed at her though none could fasten, her ver∣tue had so Oyled her name, that no Inke would sticke upon it) or else in the pa∣tient tollerating of worldly occurren∣ces, and afflictions, and of them she made this happy advantage that as a thred besmeared with any filth, must be drawne through some narrow hole for the cleering of it, so the pressure of some afflictions seemed to cleere her from many corruptions, through which nature, & custome, and fashion and greatnesse, do yet draw the lines of others lives. Her understanding was of great perspicacity, and as she fayled not to imploy the same for the comprehen∣ding of such occasions and affaires, as
might advantage & susteine the estate of her house, and procure and reinforce the content and comfort of her noble Lord: So principally she directed the strength thereof for the enabling her selfe with the knowledg of the misteries of Redemption, her delight was in the law of God, she was an unwearied reader of the Oracles of Gods sacred word, she that aimed at a living againe though she must die, sought not the tree of the knowledge of good and e∣vill, which made us all obnoxious to die, but the Tree of the knowledge of God, which is  the Tree of life it selfe, as Thalaius calls it in Bi∣blioth. Patrum. And as she had the know∣ledge of truth to give light unto her Religion, so she had the truth of Reli∣gion, to give life unto her knowledge. I make no doubt but the State thereof hath beene much advanced, by her in∣struction and incouragement in this house, which hath beene long honou∣red, for honouring of God. It hath
pleased her Lord more then once to make profession, not onely what re∣freshing her comforts, what support her Counsells have brought him, but now much he hath in the estate of the minde beene bettered by her. I am perswaded, they have beene  yoke-fellowes in this worke, & I trust they shal be hereafter  fellow heires of one and the same Grace. From him, and her selfe, she made a diffusion of her goodnesse to all hers, educating them in such pu∣ritie, and inocency, as is admirable, in those, who (I know not how) are lya∣ble to be betraved by their Birthes and fortunes unto great depravations, and exorbitancies, so that we may say of her as Greg: Naz: said of his Sister Gorgonia, . Nazian. She made the fruite of her Bodie, to become the fruite of the spirit. And of the same goodnesse there was a pro∣portionable diffusion amongst those
that depended on her. How many that lived neere her, hath the Elixar of the same goodnesse, rendered of the same qualitie, and propertie? her charitie and Courtesie was large and open unto all. I name these as strictures of that fire of zeale, which she had to good∣nesse. She was not like those which esteeme themselves onely members, and others but  apostems congenite and connaturall partes with themselves, her zeale was farre from being  a bitter zeale, such as we see in some, like a salt-light, which burnes indeed but spits withall; while she had health she made advantage ther∣of thus to demeane her selfe, not defer∣ring the taking up of good purposes  &c. Greg: Naz: till the artlesse Physitian takes upon him to Greg: Naz: dispense what houres of life and conti∣nance he pleaseth unto us, weighing us out either sicknesse or health with his severe-rod, and commonly discour∣sing and concluding of the disease that
brought death, after death it selfe. But the greatest part of her life was a Para∣sceue, a preparation to her dissolution, as if she had beene sensible, that as Christ dyed upon the parasceue, the day of preparation; so none have any advantage by the death of Christ, but those which premit such a preparati∣on before their owne death, and disso∣lution. Is it not admirable that she who had runne through some hard les∣sons, in the Schoole of affliction, lo∣ved the rod so, for the healing, and sanctifying benefit, which she found in it, that it was her frequent prayer, that God would be pleased when he called her hence, he would be pleased to call her by a consumption, rather then by any other way. And accor∣dingly it was so: she conceived, that many had been shaken with the whirl∣winde of a convulsion, and perhaps the Lord God was not in that winde: ma∣ny consumed with the fire of adustion and choller, & perhaps the Lord God
was not in that fire: but whereas many have beene summoned away by the still soft voice of consumption, the Lord God is frequently in that voyce. And certainly the Lord supported her, the Lord perfected his strength in her weaknes, for she susteined that afflictiō with such admirable moderation, with such strength and vigour of spirit that if any man had entred her Chamber, if he had not read the truth of her suffe∣rings in the decayes and weaknesse of her person, hee would have thought there had been none sicke there; what∣soever she suffered, there was nothing in her mouth, but thanks to that gra∣cious hand which lay so light vpon her, and made her suffer no more. As before, so in her sicknesse especi∣ally, it was her uncessant practise, to commend her selfe continually unto God, and that in the most conceived, and feeling formes in , Words winged with affection, and zeale not like those Estriches wings
wherewith our sluggish devotions are usually fledged, which as the estriches make a faire offer at flying toward hea∣ven, but are held down by the grossnes of their bodies, so howsoever we seeme to soare, yet are we restrained by our carnall heavinesse. But her wordes were winged so, as to carry her spirit there where her hope was, farre above the reach of Satan, though he be plan∣ted high too, as high as a Prince of the aire So that no marvell if her spirit du∣ring her last affliction, were in such a composed settlednesse, it was out of the enemies reach. She was not in the aire lyable to be shaken with Tem∣pests, and windes, but even in hea∣ven it selfe, which cannot be turmoy∣led with any such agitations. She vsed  to seale vp her bosome against temptation by conti∣nuall prayer, so that Satan durst not at∣tempt her, seeing what impression see∣ing whose Image, and superscription, she bore; Hence was that often com∣fortable
profession, how firme and stedfast she found her faith! yet shee was iealous of her selfe because shee seemed to finde no greater measure of sorrow in her selfe when shee looked backe from her future to her former life: Put she ever used to accuse her want of sorrow with such a measure of sorrow, as well witnessed the truth thereof. For this respect she did with exceeding diligence search, and with great Iudgement choose, whatsoever the Scripture could afford her for the establishing of her Spirit, and the building up of her assurance in the Lord Iesus, committing with her owne hand, even in at weake∣nese, to writing what she had obser∣ved, and contining that prctise till within very few dayes before her death, before which she became most peaceably setled, and rsolved, that God according to that of Greg: Naz:  Greg: Naz:  God desireth that our
hearts should be pricked, but not stab∣bed thorough; And her faith being thus strengthened, and established, by continuall prayer and hearing, and by frequent communicating that Sa∣crament which Ignatius calls  she preserved it in such strength and vigor, that the day of Ignatius. her dissolution, I comming to her, she professed, that whatsoever her suffe∣rings were, yet she did nothing but claspe her selfe about her-sweet Savi∣our. And againe the same day, I see Satan hovering over me, but though he be the Prince of the Ayre (they are her owne words) yet he doth but ho∣ver like a bird in the Ayre not being a∣ble to seize upon me, I still feele the ad∣vantage. And thus she passed as she was passing away, in the same calme behaviour that she had ever shewed, rendering her selfe into the Armes of her redeemer: And she having lived thus, and died thus, now she is dead, shall we thinke she doth not live; No
no! It is not impertinent what I have read in Spartian of Hadrian. Signa mor∣tis Epus: de char: chap: 27. haec habuit. Annulus sponte de digito de∣lapsus est, but the Ring of faith as Ber∣nard calls it, never slipped from her, she tooke it with her, to be maried for ever in it, unto the Lambe, who hath graven her in the palmes of his hands, and hath set her as a Scale upon his Arme there to remaine for ever. Vnto which honor the Lord with her bring us all that we may so live, & so die, & then so live for ever, without dying any more Amen. FINIS.
PErlegi hanc concionem funebrem in Cap. 11. St. Ioha 1. ver. 25. in quâ nihil reperio bonis moribus, aut sauae doctri∣nae contrarium quo minus cumutilitate pu∣blicâ imprimatur; ita tamen, ut si non in∣tra tres menses proximè sequentes typis mandetur, haec licentia sit omninò irrita. Prid: Calend. Iunii. 1635 Guil: Bray.
