11037.5 99855862 21370
THE CONDVIT of Comfort. Containing sundrie comfortable Prayers, to the strengthening of the faith of a weak Christian. By Abr. Fleming. The fifth Jmpression. Printed at London by A. M. and are to be sold by Fr. Groue at his shop with∣out Newgate. 1624.
To the Christian Reader. TO auoyd all doubt of de∣ceit (Christian Reader) which might bee thought to lie lurking vnder this glorious title, The Conduit of Com∣fort, we will make an Ana∣tomie of this Encheridion, or Manuel, opening the very body, & laying out the bowels thereof before the eyes of thy iudgement. Note therefore euery member, for thy full sa∣tisfaction, as followeth.
The Anatomie of this Manuell. The Conduit of Comfort. The Contemplation of a Christian. The Lords Prayer expounded by Sentence, and Example. The Common Creed expounded by Sentence, and Example. The Ten Comman∣dements. expounded by Sentence, and Example. The Appurtenances to this Conduit. The Cesterne is Conscience. The Pipe is Peace. The Locke is Loue. The Key is Knowledge.
THE CONDVIT OF COMFORT. A Morning Prayer for a Family MOst grati∣ous God, and omni∣potent Fa∣ther, which dost from the Throne of thy grace be∣hold
all the wickednesse of mortall Men; pardon wee beseech thee our most la∣mentable and grieuous sinnes, and wash them a∣way by the precious blood of thy most blessed Sonne Christ Iesus, who dyed to saue vs sinful men, of which sort we are the most mise∣rable and wicked. We giue thee most hearty thankes (O Lord) that thou hast brought vs safe to the be∣ginning of this day, and
raysed vs from the sinne of Sloth and Ignorance; and grant (O Lord) that wee may so spend this day that it may be most to thy glory, & the comfort of our owne Soules; giue vs grace most heauenly Father, that wee may follow our vocations wherevnto thou hast called vs, and that we may doe al∣wayes those things which may bee righteous in thy sight; Graunt these our humble petitions most hea∣uenly
Father, & all things necessary for vs, for thy deere Sonnes sake Christ Iesus, to whom with thee and the blessed Trinity, be all Honour and Glory both now and for euer more, Amen. An Euening Prayer for a Familie. OH Euerlasting Lord God, and mercifull Father, wee thy poore and
wretched Creatures from the bottome of our hearts, giue thee most humble and hearty thankes, that of thy mercy thou hast vouchsafed to nourish vs with thy goodnesse, & by thy power preserued vs from all dan∣gers and perils that might haue befalne vs this day, yea and at all times of our life heeretofore: We most humbly beseech thee in the merits of thy Sonn Christ Iesus our blessed Lord and
Sauiour, not to respect our vnworthynesse, but in his graue to bury our misdeeds which we either wittingly or ignorantly haue done. Especially those sins which this day we haue commited against thy diuine Maiesty, either in thought, word or deed. O Lord bee merci∣full vnto vs, and forgiue vs the euill that we haue com¦mitted, and supply the good which wee haue omitted; Lord restore what we haue
lost, lighten our darknesse, and alter the whole course of our mindes, that nothing may bee wanting in vs to the setting forth of thy prayse. Wée beseech thee (O Lord) according to thy goodnesse, to defend vs this night from all perills and dangers: keepe vs from feareful dreames and vaine cogitations: preserue our bodies from eternall death, and our soules from euer∣lasting damnation. Grant
these things O Lord, and all other thy graces requi∣site for vs, euen for thy Son Christ Iesus sake: In whose name we conclude this our vnworthy prayer, in that forme of prayer which hée in his Gospell hath taught vs saying, Our Father, &c.
A Prayer for the obtai∣ning of Grace. In this wicked world, O Christ whiles I liue, To gouerne and guide me, thy spirit of grace giue. WOrship, Praise, Ho∣nour, Glory, & Maie∣stie, be giuen vnto thee, O God, my Creator; to thée, O Christ, my Redéemer, and to thee, O holy Ghost,
my Sanctifier; for all the blessings of thy grace most plentifully powred vpon mee: for my election, my Creation, my Redemption, my sanctification, and for all other thy good giftes and benefites: beséeching thée (O swéet Sauiour,) that as by thy bitter death and passion, the power of sinne was suppressed, the concu∣piscence of the flesh sub∣dued, the wickednes of the world asswaged, and the
maliciousnesse of Satan quenched; so it would please thee to ouer-shadow mee with the Shield of thy fa∣uour, that I a painefull pil∣grim, and weary wanderer in the world, may passe my pilgrimage in peace of con∣science: comforting me with the hope of thy promises, which wilt & canst refresh the fainting soule, and re∣store it when it is attainted with any dāgerous disease. O Christ, my Phisician, so
prepare the thoughts of my heart vnto thee, that I may be swallowed vp in the con∣templation of Heauen, and heauenly ioyes, not regar∣ding the vanities of this world, which are but baits and snares to intangle vs, and to make vs lothsome in thy sight. Giue me grace (O thou Son of Dauid) to liue in the world, as ready to leaue the world. Let the world continue as thou did∣dest make it, euen a seruant
for the maintenance of men: and not a soueraign to rule and haue them at comman∣dement. And because thy Kingdome, O Christ, is not of this world, giue me (I be∣séech thee) such a renewed heart, such a sanctified soule such a godly desire, and such an earnest endeauour to do thy wil, that I contemning this wicked world, with all the transitory pleasures of the same, may raigne with thee in thy kingdome, pur∣chased
for the faithful, euen by thy precious Blood, Death & Passion: Graunt this, O Christ, my Media∣tor, at the appointed time of thy good will and pleasure. Amen. A Prayer for thankefulnesse to God for his gifts. For Wisedome and Wealth, with other gifts more, Lord, giue me the grace To thanke thee therefore. IEsus Christ, thou which art the Wisedome of thy
Father, I thy poore creature sometimes a slaue to sinne, and a firebrand of Hell: but now a child of election and grace, (as I hope and con∣stantly beleeue,) giue thee hearty thanks for thy good∣nesse, diuers and sundry wayes testified vnto mée. And because it hath pleased thee to be so bountifull, as to endue mée with Wise∣dome, whereas thou migh∣test haue made mée a sense∣lesse and vnreasonable crea∣ture;
beside that, blessed me with worldly wealth: I beséech thee, be so gracious vnto me, as to shew me the way how to vse this Wise∣dome to thy glory, and the comfort of other: not boa∣sting therein, because it is thy free gift: nor abusing it, because it is thy blessing. Also (O swéete Sauiour, and Sonne of the eternall God) because wealth with∣out thée, is but wretched∣nesse: riches, pouerty, and
all earthly pleasures, but méere miseries: I beséech thée, to shine into my heart with the bright beames of thy Spirit, that I may like a faithfull Steward, not only dispose and lay out the talent, which thou hast lent me: but also increase the same: making thy glory the marke wherat to direct all my doings: and thy word the rule to kéepe me within the compasse of thy will. O Christ heare me, O heare
me sweet Sauiour,) which art the Well of life, where∣of whosoeuer tasteth, hee shall neuer see Death: Heare me, O gracious Re∣déemer, and let me féele in∣wardly the fruits of my faithfull prayer, Amen. A Prayer for Loue, and Vnitie with all men. To liue in loue, all men among,
Giue grace, O Christ, to old and young LOrd Iesus, thou Pat∣terne of true and vnfei∣ned loue: yea, of loue lead∣ing to life euerlasting▪ with∣out whom there can bee no loue or concord amōg men: I beseech thee, to heare the prayer of me thy poore ser∣uant: and that which I aske in spirit, vouchsafe to giue me of thy free mercy. And because loue is the fulfilling
of the Law, and the seale of saluation to the consciences of all Christians. Further∣more, for so much as thou hast commaunded vs to doe good to all men, which can∣not be, vnlesse loue be the lampe to giue vs light: I beséech thée, to fill my heart with that loue; yea, to poure that loue abundantly into the hearts of all, both old and yong, that we may first and principally loue Al∣mightie God the Father:
thée, O Christ the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, with such a loue as is loath to turne the fauor of God into displeasure, his gentlenesse into rigour, his mercy into iudgement, and his forbea∣rance into vengeance. Se∣condly, to loue my Soue∣raigne Prince, whom I am bound in conscience to obey: to loue my superiors, to loue mine equals, to loue mine inferiors, to loue mine ene∣mies: Finally, to loue all,
and hate none, that by this meanes I may dwel in God the Fountaine of loue: who of méere loue for the salua∣tion of the soule of man, sent thee (O my Sauiour) into the world to suffer death vp on the crosse, euen in the face of his enimies and persecu∣tors. Grant this, O Christ, to whom with the Father and the holie Ghost, be all praise and glory for euer∣more, Amen.
A Prayer for the hearing and true vnderstanding of the word of God. To heare thy word, and liue therein, Vs to renew, O Lord begin. LIghten my heart, O Lord GOD, with the lampe of thy holy and bles∣sed word, which is the wea∣pon of euery true Christian souldier, and the sword of the spirit, to cut off all the temptations of the Diuell,
the world, and the flesh, if it be vsed according to thy wil, O Lord which art the giuer and author of the same. And for so much, O Lord, as thy worde is the rule, whereby wée are bound to direct all our doings: and the square, whereat to frame the whole course of our life: I beséech thée, to circumcise my heart, that all carnall cogitations and thoughtes expelled and driuen out, I may betake my selfe wholy vnto the rea∣ding,
hearing, studying, & fo∣lowing of thy word, which is the food of our soules: the comfortable bread, which killeth hunger and the plea∣sant drinke, which quench∣eth thirst: not the hunger & thirst of the body, against the which, it hath pleased thée to prouide most health∣full remedies: but the hun∣ger and thirst of the soule, which are no way else as∣swaged, but by the vertue and heauenly working of
thy word. This word, O Lord, vouchsafe to make florish and fruitifie in vs, that thereby wee may bée wonne to the worshipping of thée, in true feare, vn∣fained faith, and perfect ho∣linesse of life, through Iesus Christ our Sauiour, A∣men.
A Praier to God for forgiue∣nesse of manifold and grieuous sinnes. My heart vncleane, Lord circumcise: And make my soule thy sacrifice. IN sinne, O Lord, was my conception, in sinne my e∣ducation, in sinne the whole course of my life. Nothing is cleane and vnspotted in mée: nothing is sound, no∣thing perfect, nothing holy,
nothing sanctified. I am full of sinne and iniquitie, my thoughts & desires are at∣tainted with sinne: my la∣bours and handy works are defiled with wickednes, my words and communicati∣ons are tempered with the leauen of iniquity: my hart is corrupt & putrified; there is nothing sound in me, but all mine entrails are infec∣ted, and poysoned with sin, the high way to euerlasting shame, death, and condem∣nation.
O miserable wretch that I am, to whom shall I run for succour: To whom shall I make my sorrowes knowne: Before whom shall I powre my plaintes: Art not thou the Samari∣tane, which with the oyle of mercie souplest my festered woundes: Art not thou the good Sephearde, which bringest home the straying Shéepe to the shéepefold: Art not thou the good Cap∣taine, which fightest in de∣fence
of thy Souldiers: O, yes Lord, thou art euen he: and doubtlesse, had not the oyle of thy mercy healed my filthy Botches: had not thy hand fetcht me home to the flocke: had not thy loue and grace ouer shadowed me in danger, I had rotted in my filthinesse; I had perished in my wandering, and I had béen vtterly ouerthrowne in combate. O Lord my God, circumcise my heart, and clense it from all euill
thoughts, deuises, imagina∣tions, & consentes to sinne. Sanctifie my soule, renew my spirit, and garnish mée with the garment of rege∣neration, that I may be∣come a swéete smelling sa∣crifice before thée a sacrifice of acceptable incense, a sacri∣fice of holines, & righteous∣nes: so shall I prayse thée in the assemblie of the iust, & extoll thy glorious name among thy people. Amen.
A Prayer for to be setled in the Truth. Thy Truth send downe, Lord from aboue, And giue me grace the same to loue. ACcording to thy louing kindnesse, O Christ, heare the praiers of thy ser∣uant; & that request which Hope inboldeneth mee to make, vouchsafe in mercy to grant. And because the De∣uill is the father of all fals∣hood and lying; and thou the
fountaine of all truth and righteousnes; as thou saiest of thy selfe; I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life: therefore I beseech thee (O gracious God & Sauiour) to plant in me the Trueth; without the which, all en∣trance into heauenly ioy is stopt vp: & to banish out of my heart, (which by nature is a nest of wickednesse) all maner of sinne, resisting the Truth. And for so much as Truth is a pearle of price,
and a Iewell of great value to the godly, the ornament of the faythful, and the trea∣sure of the true Christian: therefore I beséech thée, O Christ, giue me grace, to thirst after truth, & to hun∣ger after the taste of that heauenly foode: that my de∣siring soule may be succou∣red, & my longing heart re∣freshed euen with the ful∣nes of ye same. And wheras by nature we are bōdslaues of sinne, and by that meanes
vtter enemies of truth: we beseech thee notwithstan∣ding, to make vs partakers of mercy, and not of iudge∣ment: remembring that thy death and bloodshed paid the price of redemption for all mankinde. Thou God of truth, heare my prayer, and let the suite of me thy poore Seruant, come before thy presence: and that which I haue asked with boldnesse, vouchsafe to graunt of thy speciall goodnesse, Amen.
A Prayer to leade our life according to the will of God. To doe thy will, teach me, O Lord, And let my life thereto accord. MOst mighty, most iust most mercifull, most louing, most tender & deare Father; forsomuch as there is no way to heauen, but by doing thy wil: we say with humblenes of heart, as Ie∣sus hrist thy Sonne, and
my swéete Sauiour hath taught: Fiat voluntas tua, sicut in Coelo, & in Terra; Thy will be done in earth, as it is in Heauen And, be∣cause it is thy will, that we should walk in holines and righteousnes before thée, all the dayes of our life; we be∣séech thée, to be the Schoole∣master of our Soules and Spirites, that thy Wise∣dome instructing and teach∣ing vs, to make a difference betwéene good and bad, we
may follow the one, and forsake the other: conside∣ring, that the doers of thy wil, and not the knowers of the same, shal be partakers of the promises of life and saluation. For thy Sonne Iesus Christes sake, my onely Sauiour and Redee∣mer, grant this request (O most gracious God, both vnto mee, and to all thy people. Amen.
A Prayer to fast, and ab∣staine from sinne. To fast from Sinne, is Christians ioy: My heart thereto, O Lord employ. LOrd God, maker of heauen & earth, Iudge of the quicke and the dead; thou that by wisedome séest all things, and by thy pro∣uidence orderest all crea∣tures; wee beséech thée, to cast thine eyes of care and
compassion vpon vs misera∣ble sinners, who from the day of our birth, haue liued in wantonnes, and all kind of wickednes, therby kind∣ling thy wrath and Iustice against vs to our confusion. O let vs yet at length, haue our eyes opened, and sée the brightnesse of thy glorie, which the blindnesse of our minds, will not suffer vs to behold. Let vs not pamper our selues in securitie, ly∣uing out of rule, and aban∣doning
all godlinesse; which is a kinde of surfetting in iniquity, and ouercharging our hearts with heapes of abominations: but let vs become new Schollers in the Schoole of Christiani∣tie, walking warily, redee∣ming the time, louing light, and detesting darknesse. O Lord, vouchsafe to be mind∣full of vs thy creatures, and of thine owne glory, which art our Creator. Teach vs to fast aright, not supersti∣tiously,
in abstaining from this or that kind of meate, vsing a vaine order in dyet, and differences of meates: but as thine holy ones haue in times past, fasted the true Fast, which thou in thy Word requirest: so grant, I beséech thee, that I, and all people, may fast after the same fashion: to fast from sin & wickednes, that the flesh may bee brought into subiection, and the spi∣rit quickened. Graunt this,
O Lord, for thy Sons sake, Iesus Christ my Redéemer and Sauiour. Amen. A Praier for grace to forsake euill, and to follow that which is good. From Heauen▪ O God, send vs thy grace, Ill to forsake, and good t'imbrace. ALmightie God, I be∣seech thee to giue mee true vnderstanding & know∣ledge, not onely to confesse
thée a most mercifull Fa∣ther, but also an vpright Iudge; fauouring thy chil∣dren, which liue within the compasse of thy Comman∣dements: and punishing of∣fendours, which run head∣long into all mischiefe, not once looking backe to the written Tables of the law. And, because it standeth not with the frailtie of man, to fulfill the summe of the law; vpon the breach whereof, condemnation doth insue:
we beseech thée, to inrich our harts with the treasure of thy Grace, that we wax∣ing wealthy therewith, may be able to withstand all the assaults of Satan, our sub∣tile aduersarie. Moreouer, good GOD, forsomuch as this Grace of thine, is the badge of thy fatherly af∣fection; and guydeth the thoughts, the words, & the déedes of euery Christian: wée besech thée, to shield vs with the same, that wée
may follow, and stand sted∣fastly in that, which is ac∣ceptable in thy sight; re∣nouncing the Deuill, and his workes of darknesse: and betaking our selues body and soule, to the healthfull guiding of thy grace. Amen.
A Prayer for the assistance of the Holy Ghost. Th'assistance of the Holy Ghost, Sweete Iesus spread in euery Coast. MOst comfortable Sa∣uiour, most victorious Captaine, most triumphant Redéemer, most mercifull Mediatour, Iesus Christ, thou beloued Sonne of the eternall God spread abroad
the brightnesse of thy Maie∣stie, to the consolation of all people. And, forsomuch as without thée, the whole world is nothing else but a solitarie Wildernesse, desti∣tute of faith, hope, charitie, loue, gentlenes, compassion, forbearance, and all other workes of Christianitie: we beséech thée, to be a graci∣ous God, as thou art an om∣nipotent God; that where thy power is séene, thy mer∣cie may likewise be percei∣ued.
Let not thy creatures continue in ignorance of thée their Sauiour, but so assist them with the present aide of thy comforting Spi∣rit and the holy Ghost, that they may sée in what by-wayes of destruction & dan∣gers they trauerse. Let thy holy Ghost be their lodes∣man, let the holy Ghost be their teacher, let the holy Ghost be their right hand, and their left: let the holy Ghost be to them all in all;
that they being thus inspi∣red, & filled with the power of thy sanctifying Spirit, may feele in themselues a spiritual inclination & wor∣king, all desires of the flesh being cut off, & cast away: and may also be receiued in∣to thy shéepfold, & be recko∣ned among the number of the faithfull. Graunt this, O Christ, thou tender Sa∣uiour of our soules. Amen.
A Prayer against Wrath and Malice. From hatefull heart, and fraught with ire: Saue vs, O Lord, wee thee desire. BOuntifull God, which hast giuen vs comman∣dement to loue all men, and to hate none: to be angry, but not to sinne: to be dis∣pleased a little, but not to let the Sunne set vpon our
wrath: wée beséech thée, to purge our heartes cleane from all hatred, from all en∣uie, from all malice, from al vncharitablenesse, from all vntowardnesse, from all bit∣ternesse, from all quarrel∣ling, from all misreporting, from all backbyting, from all reuengement seeking: sinally, from al the motions of a wicked spirit. Let loue banish hate, let friendlines displace vnkindnes, let cha∣ritie remooue ouerthwart∣nes,
let forbearance dispos∣sesse maliciousnes: al which are most shamefull sinnes, and so hatefull in thy sight, O God, that he is no Chri∣stian, but an Antichristian; no child of blisse, but of Ba∣all, no heire of Heauen, but of Hell; no vessell of electi∣on, but of reprobation; no partaker of ioy, but of woe; no souldier of the Church, but of the Synagogue, in whom they beare rule. And therefore (most gracious
God (root out of our hearts all such wéedes of wicked∣nesse, that we may become new griftes of righteous∣nesse, through Iesus Christ our Sauiour, Amen. A Praier for obedience to the keeping of Gods Com∣mandements. To liue within the rule of Law, keepe vs, O Lord, in feare & awe. EVerlasting God, whose name is so glorious, that it passeth the capacitie of
man, to giue it due aduance∣ment: we beséech thée, of thine infinite goodnes, thou soueraigne Law-giuer, to arme our harts with the ful furniture of obedience, that we may first and principal∣ly feare thée, which art our Creatour: and in thée, thy Sonne our Redéemer: and in both the holy Ghost, our Comforter. This if we do, (as it is not vnlike we shal▪ if thy grace gouerne vs) our wils & wits shalbe brought
into such subiection, that whatsoeuer duties earthly Magistrates bind vs vnto by Law & commandement, (so the same be not to thy dishonour) there shall want no readinesse in vs to fulfill and accomplish. Vouchsafe therefore (O heauenly Fa∣ther) to keepe vs in thy feare, to limit vs within the bounds of true obedience, both to thée, O our GOD, and also to our superiours and betters, that whatsoe∣uer
is required of vs in the way of godly submisson and reuerence, we murmur not thereat, but doe our endea∣uours therin, with all zeale and earnestnesse. Amen. A Prayer for true and hearty repentance. Repentance for our foule misdeeds, Graunt vs, O God, whose grace exceeds. WE wretched outlaws O Lord God, cast our
selus along before thy mer∣cie seate, beséeching thée to inspire our minds with per∣fect wisedome, and to arme vs with the true and liuely knowledge of thy Law: that both in body, & also in soule, we may walke the way of thy Commandementes and Testimonies. So gouerne vs by thy Grace, O God, and so conduct vs by thy lo∣uing kindnesse, that being throughly informed, and re∣formed to thy Law, we may
be stricken inwardly with a godly feare, and Christian trembling of transgressing thy preceptes, which thou hast appoynted vnto vs, in this darke & palpable time of securitie, and wickednes, (when all people and nati∣ons for the most part stum∣ble at the blockes of their owne sinnes) to be a lan∣terne to lighten our féete, and the day starre to direct all our doings. And though wée can not of our selues,
(such is the infirmitie of our nature, and weaknes of our flesh) but fall into the snares of sinne: yet, wée humbly beséech thée, (for thy belo¦ued Sonnes sake Iesus Christ our Sauiour,) to touch our guiltie conscien∣ces with the finger of thy grace, that through a sor∣rowfull féeling of them, we may by fayth, take sure and fast hold of the staffe of thy promises, who made a vow to haue mercy on the ssnner,
repenting him of his lewd life, and forsaking his ini∣quity. Grant this, O God, for the comfort of thy cho∣sen, and for thy Sonnes sake Iesus Christ our Mediatour, and Aduocate, Amen.
A prayer to the Lord, to turn his wrathfull displeasure away from vs. Thy wrath, O Lord, remember not, Though such desert, my sinnes allot. IVdge me not, O Lord, in the heate of thine indig∣nation: O consume me not in the furie of thy rage. I confesse, that mine offences cry out for vengeance, euen as a dry & sandy soyle ga¦peth
for raine. Howbeit (O most mercifull Father) re∣member thy mercy, and let not sentence passe in iudge∣ment to my condemnation: my sinnes haue laid out my lot, euen thy vengeance, O Lord, I cannot say the con∣trary: but thou hast Mercy in store, which pleadeth a∣gainst Iustice; so that thy Wrath (I hope) shall not ouerthrow me, though my wickednesses (like waues) ouerwhelme my soule. O
Lord, heare my prayer, and for the honour of thy name, turne from me the punish∣ments which thou hast de∣nounced against mee in iudgement. I am a worme, and no man; yea, the off∣scowring of men, a wretch, and forsaken, an outcast, and an alien frō the Com∣mon wealth of Israel: my sinnes haue made a separa∣tion of thy fauour from me: but the death of thy Sonne hath put out the handwri∣ting,
and broken downe the partition wall betwixt thée and mee. And therefore I come with boldnesse and confidence to thee, hoping to taste the swéetnes of thy Mercy, though I haue de∣serued the sharpnes of thy Iustice. As thou wilt, O Lord, so be it. Amen.
A Prayer for a cleare and quiet Conscience. A Conscience cleare from all vnrest, Graunt vs, O God: whose name be blest. LEt the light of thy coū∣tenance shine vpon vs, (most mercifull Father,) let the comfort of thy spirit drop into our hearts, let thy fauour & louing kindnesse be vnto vs a pauilion in the
warfare of this life. Bee thou vnto vs a gracious God, and a Father inclined to compassion: that where∣as the horror of our sinnes, and their haynousnesse, to∣gether with the manifold∣nesse of our offences, kind∣leth in vs a kind of feare vnto death, disquieting our consciences, and raising vp within vs accusers to giue in euidence against vs, for the violating & breaking of thy commaundements: it
would please thee, like a Father, tenderly to deale with vs as with thy chil∣dren, and not like a seuere Iudge to handle vs, as guilty persons, giuing vs ouer, and leauing vs to the spoyle of our mortall ene∣mies. Our conscience in∣deed, layeth dayly to our charge, that we haue playd the back-sliders, that we haue not kept vs within the compasse of thy holy pre∣cepts, that wee haue with∣stood
thy heauenly will, and like stubborne rebels, denied thée the honour due vnto thy Name: neuerthe∣lesse (O Lord God) cast vs not off into confusion, nei∣ther leaue vs to continuall torment, and vexation of conscience for our sinnes: but looke vpon vs with the eyes of mercy, that the ter∣rour of conscience which we feele for sinne, may bee turned into rest and quiet∣nesse: least if it happen
otherwise, wee be driuen (with Iudas) into despera∣tion: From the which we beseech thee to deliuer vs, for the honour of thy name (O GOD Almighty, Amen.
A Prayer to be Zealous in the hearing of the word of God. To heare thy Word, and loue the same, Vouchsafe, O Lord, our hearts to frame. LOuing Father & graci∣ous God, forsomuch as thy word is the rule of life, and the high way to happi∣nes, we beséech thee, to kin∣dle in vs an earnest desire
to heare the same, and that not only with the outward eares of the body, but with the inward eares of the heart: which is the hearing in deed, whereby profit and comfort is gathered. Thy Word is the Sword to cut downe sinne; thy Word is the weapon which thy Mi∣nisters vse, to conquer the kingdome of Satan: It is the felicitie of the faithfull in this life: it is the stumbling blocke of of∣fence
to the wicked: yea, to the vncircumcised Phili∣stine, it is the sauour of death vnto death: but to the circumcised Israelite, it is the sauour of life vnto life. Vouchsafe therefore, (O bountifull God) to kin∣dle in mee the fire of zeale vnto thy word, that I may so estéeme and count there∣of, as of the chiefest trea∣sure of a Christian in this vale of misery, hauing mine eares alwayes open to
heare it, and my hart ready to receiue it: my tongue plyant to speake of it, and my mind earnest to medi∣tate in it: so shall I reape such profit thereby, as thou hast prepared for them that come reuerently therunto. This, and all things néed∣full for this life, graunt (O most mercifull Father) for thy Sonnes sake our onely Mediatour and Aduocate. Amen.
A Prayer for a patient Minde in trouble. In trouble, Lord, to thee we call, A patient Spirit to giue vs all. IN all afflictions and tri∣bulations (O GOD Fa¦ther of all mercy and conso∣lation) wée beséech thee to looke vpon vs. & in the bo∣wels of compassiō to mitti∣gate
and asswage our mise∣ries. And as it hath pleased thée of thy fatherly pitty, to call vs to thée the running Riuer of all refection and comfort; so we beséech thée, euen then specially to heare our cryes & lamentations, when we lie groning vnder the heauie burthen of af∣fliction and trouble. Thou hast commanded vs, to make our meane vnto thée, saying; Call vpon me in the time of thy trouble, and I
will heare thee. O bounti∣full and gracious God, doe therefore with thy seruāts according to thy word: and as thou art faithfull in thy promises; so I humbly be∣séech thée, that I, among the rest of thy people, may féele and tast the swéetnes of thy fauour and grace; which is the most soue∣raigne succour that can be, in al necessities and distres∣ses. To thee therefore which art the rich treasure,
of all goodnes, & the health∣full welspring of all perfect peace, we approch; submit∣ting our selues before thy face, and crauing at thy handes the spirit of pati∣ence, wherwith, as with an vnpeaceable target being defended, we may constant∣ly abide and weare out any kind of crosse and tribulati∣on, wayting the good time of thy pleasure for our de∣liuerance. Amen.
A Prayer in time of Pro∣speritie, or Aduer∣sitie. If Poore, or Rich, O Lord, we bee, Teach vs to know, all comes from thee. ALmightie GOD, Fa∣ther of our Lord Iesus Christ, which madest Hea∣uen and earth, the sea, & all the wonders of the Déepe: wée confesse, that thou art
the author of al things, and that vpon thee the whole estate of man doth depend: humbly beséeching thée, of thy goodnes, to guide vs so farre with thy grace, that if we sée our selues blessed with the Wealth of this world, which winneth wor∣ship and credit among peo∣ple: or oppressed with po∣uerty, which bréedeth con∣tempt and abasement: we may notwithstanding, nei∣ther by the one wax proud
or insolent: neither yet by the other become mistrust∣full, or desperate: but re∣ferring all to thee, which distributest thy giftes to thine owne liking vpon the tryall of thy seruants, wée may learne this; that as thou art able to make the rich poore, & the poore rich: so in thée it is, to giue euery man an inward knowledge and assurance of thy will, whatsoeuer estate it hath pleased thée to place him, or
them in: the which inward knowledge, I beséech thee, powre into my spirit, that as well in pouerty, as in riches, I may glorifie thy name: vsing my riches as thy blessing, in signe of thy careful prouidence; and not repining, but well conten∣ting my selfe with pouerty, as thy chastisement, to kéepe me vnder awe and o∣bedience: thy will, and not my will, O Lord, be done and fulfilled. Amen.
A praier for patience in time of losse of Goods, or Landes. The losse of Life, of Goods, and Lands, O gracious God, is in thy hands. MOst mighty God, and merciful father▪ from whō all good things do pro∣céed, as tokens of thy kind∣nesse: and all punishments
for sinne▪ as signes of thy displeasure: which giuest life, & takest away the same againe at thine appoynted time: which inrichest thy seruants with goods of sundry sorts, and changest their condition in a mo∣ment: which blessest thy creatures with Lands and Possessions, and turnest all in an instant, into extreame need and nakednesse; as thou didst deale with Iob. that perfect paterne of pa∣tience:
We beséech thee, to inspire vs with an vn∣derstanding heart, that we may so liue, as willing to die: that we may enioy our goods, as not grudging to forgoe them: and that wée may hold vs to our Lands, as not loth to loose them; considering, that as they came from thée, so in thée it is to dispose them as thou wilt, either to blessing, or to cursing. O gracious God, let vs not grow in forget∣fulnesse
of the life to come, by too much louing this present transitorie Life, which is but a shadow, a smoke, and a dreame. Let vs not bee drowned in the desires and delights of worldly goods, least wee neglect the riches of Para∣dise; which nothing can purchase, but Faith in the blood and death of Christ: let vs not wed our willes and witts to Landes and Possessions, which are but
momentany maintenances▪ least in ouerliking them, wee loose the sweet inheri∣tance of the holy land, Ie∣rusalem, not built with hands, but glorious and triumphant: wherto bring vs, O God, for his sake that bought vs, Ie∣sus Christ the righteous, Amen.
A thankes-giuing for Meat, Drinke, and Clothing. For Meate and Drinke, and Cloth to weare, Wee praise thy name, O God, with feare. LORD Iesus, the Re∣déemer of all mankind, which vouchsafedst to shed thine owne heart Blood vpon the Crosse, for the sal∣uation of our soules, which else through sinne had mi∣serably
perished; we praise thée, we magnifie thée, we worship thée, we glorifie thee, wee giue thankes to thée, for thy great kindnes, for thy tender loue, for they zealous affection, and for thine excéeding goodnesse, in caring for vs, in louing vs, in tendering vs, in su∣steining vs, in relieuing vs, and in supplying all our wantes and necessities. Thou numbrest all the haires of our head; and
without thy wil, they waxe not one lesse. Thou giuest vs food & nourishment, to comfort and strengthen our bodyes. Thou giuest vs Garments of sundry wea∣ring, both for the safegard of health, & also for comeli∣nes. Thou giuest vs Hou∣ses to harbour in: & what∣soeuer wee stande in need of, thou of thine abundant grace, pourest the same most plentifully into our bosomes. Thou féedest the
young Sparrowes, thou cloathest the Lillies of the field, thou garnishest ye trées of the Forrest with gréene leaues, thou inrichest the se¦cretes of the earth, and the sea, with precious treasure, & is it like, that thou wilt not haue an eye to man, a creature fashiōed after thy owne image and likenesse, for whom all these thinges were made and created? No, no, thy loue is euerla∣sting, and thy mercie excée∣deth
all measure. They shall lacke nothing, that pitch the pauilion of their pilgrimage vpon thy Pro∣uidence: which that wee may euer do, and so be bles∣sed with aboundance; wee beséech thee, giue vs thy Grace, so shall we laude and magnifie thee with heart and voyce, for euermore, Amen.
A Prayer for ayde and helpe in all extreami∣ties and need. Helpe vs, O Lord, in all our needes: And guide our thoughts, our wordes, and deedes. ALl glory, honor, praise, dominion, & thankes, be giuen vnto thée, O King euerlasting, which hast made me a reasonable crea∣ture, furnished mee with discretion and iudgement,
indued me with knowledge and vnderstanding, and be∣stowed vpon me benefits of most singular excellencie. Like glory and thankes be giuen vnto thée, for thy pro∣uidence and care for me, vile créeping worme of the earth, who in comparison of thée, am much woorse than stinking doung, and filthy offscowring of the earth. Thou dayly assistest me, thou cōtinually regar∣dest me, thou euermore de∣fendest
me from dangers, both bodily and ghostly: for had not thy hand ouer∣shadowed me, I had sunke long since in mine owne shame and confusion. And because, Lord, manifold are the calamities belonging to this life, hurtful to the out∣ward man, & noisome to the inner man, I beséech thée stretch out the shield of saf∣ty in full breadth ouer me, that I may walke without feare, not troubled with
wicked thoughtes, not tempted with euill words, not prouoked to deedes of darknes: but keeping my feete in the path of light, looking alway to the lampe of thy word, which shineth vnto sinners sitting in the shadow of death, and lea∣deth the righteous and true repentant to life euerlasting, Amen.
A Prayer against slaunde∣rous and euill tongues. From euill Tongues, which poyson spit, Vouchsafe, O Lord, thy flocke t'acquit. MOst truely spake thy seruant Saint Iames, (O my swéete Sauiour,) that the Tongue being but a little member, was not∣withstanding a world of wickednesse. Which to be
so, thou knowest in thy se∣cret counsell, and thou thy selfe haddest proofe there∣of, whiles thou keptst thy standing in the faire of this life. It pleased thée there∣fore to instruct and teach thine Apostles before hand, what they should be sub∣iect vnto in time to come: namely, to backbitings, slanders, acursed spéeches, tauntes, & controlments: yea, to reuilings, buffet∣tings, & imprisonments.
For if they spared not the Lord and Master, much lesse will it sinke into their hearts to fauour the Ser∣uāts; whom they hate vn∣to the death, for their ma∣sters sake. From euill Tongues therefore, O Lord wee beseech thee, to saue vs: not from suffe∣ring the bitternesse which procéedeth from them; for we are content to tast that which thou hast tasted be∣fore vs: but from offending
in our tongue, which often∣times woundeth the very soule. O Lord, giue vs grace, to set a watch before our Tongue, that we trip not in our talke, & hurt not onely them, against whom wee are maliciously min∣ded; but also our selues, whom we cānot but great∣ly annoy, whiles we séeke, either in thought, word, or deed, to wreake our wrath vpon others, considering that thou hast reserued all
vengeance to thine owne selfe. O Lord, be gracious vnto vs; and as thou art the Shepheard of our soules, feeding vs in the sweete pastures of thy grace: so we beséech thee, to kéepe vs from all manner of spi∣rituall diseases: vs (wee say) which are thy peo∣ple, and the sheepe of thy pasture. Amen.
A Prayer for Peace in time of Warre, or other vexations. In time of Warre, to pray for Peace, A zeale in vs, O Lord increase. BOuntiful Sauiour, thou Sonne of the eternall God, thou God of peace-vnitie, and concord: thou that in stead of Peace, pla∣guest men with Warre, tu∣multes,
and vprors: We beseech thee, to prolong peace & quietnesse amongst vs; not onely peace be∣twéene people and people, but peace of Conscience, that precious peace; which who so wanteth, he is no member of the Common∣wealth of Christianitie. Not onely for this peace of minde, but for the other al∣so of body, we beséech thée, O Lord, frame our heartes aright to pray vnto thee:
knowing that by Prayer, that thing is obtained at thine hands, which is not else where to bee sought. And because thou art the Author of peace, without whom the whole world is set on Warre: we humbly beseech thée, to prosper that peace, which thou hast planted in all Christian kingdomes, which because thou hast for our sinnes sake, taken from vs for a time, sending vs in place
thereof, Warres and Tu∣mults: Wée giue thee thankes notwithstanding, acknowledging the same to bee a punishment layd vpon vs for our sinnes, and specially for abusing that Peace; the benefite where∣of, whiles we might haue vsed to our true comfort, we turned the same (as we feele by due proofe at this present) into bitternesse. Neuerthelesse, to thee we come, and before thy face
we fall, not onely praying for the withdrawing of Warre, and the restoring of our former Peace: but also beséeching thée, to kin∣dle & increase in vs a zeale to pray▪ not only for Peace, but for all other thy good Giftes needfull and be∣longing to this life: to the honour and glory of thy name Amen.
A Prayer for deliuerance from Foes spirituall and temporall. From feare, and force, of all our Foes: Preserue vs Lord, and them depose EVerlasting God, whose right hand is the shield of safegard to the faythfull: we beséech thée, of thine vnspeakable goodnesse, to looke vpon vs, who are in∣compast round about with
enemies, not onely of the body, but also of the soule: Of the body, as with swea∣rers, backbiters, slaunde∣rers, fighters, brawlers, quarellers, murtherers, &c Al which, we that are Chri¦stians, account our Foes, insomuch as they are the enemies of Christ thy be∣loued Sonne, and sworne aduersaries of thy holy Gospell: Of the Soule, as with Satan, sinne, the flesh the world, the Diuell, Hel,
death, and damnation: and that which we through our weakenesse, cannot fulfill, doe thou by thy strength, supply and bring to passe, that we may not onely be defended from theire force, but that they, and euery of them, féeling the weight and greatnes of thy power, may lie vanquished vnder foote, & cease their further assaultes: for Iesus Chri∣stes sake, our onely Saui∣our and Redeemer, Amen.
A prayer of a penitent soule ouerburdened with sinne. A silly soule, to sinne in thrall, For mercy, Lord, to thee doe call. WOunderfull, wise, & excéeding righteous art thou in thy iudgments; O God, a punisher of the vngodly, and a iust rewar∣der of the faithfull. O looke vpon mée silly soule, ouer∣whelmed with wickednes
looke vpon mée, O Lord. and deliuer me. For I am in thrall: yea, in thrall am I vnto sinne, the wages whereof is death. O suc∣cour me, succour me: Oh assist me, assist me: Oh saue me, saue me. Bitterly I complaine and am sorry for my misdeedes, heauily I lament for mine iniquities, vnfeignedly I repent me of my life wickedly ledde. Appease thine anger. O God, asswage thy wrath:
Oh let mee be reconciled vnto thee. Cast me not a∣way, whom thou hast crea∣ted: let not Satan triumph ouer me, whom thy Son hath redeemed. Be graci∣ous, O be gracious, (most mercifull Father) and let the moystning riuer of thy Mercy, quench the boyling fornace of thy Iustice, that I being comforted in this life with assured taste of thy clemency, may glorifie thy name, with consent of heart
and voice; and that by mine example, others may do the like. Graunt this, O God, in Christ thy Sonne, mine onely Sauiour, Amen. A Prayer to be freed from all Ʋices. From Vices all defend vs, Sweet Iesus, and amend vs. IEsus Christ, thou imma∣culat Lambe, which wast slaine for the sinnes of the whole world, that by thy
death, we might all be deli∣uered from death yea, from eternall death, due vnto vs by deserte of sinne. And be∣cause this world is like a Wildernesse replenished with wild beasts, or rather Monsters (vices I meane, diuelish and damnable, as pride, adulterie, flatterie, idolatrie, blasphemie, diso∣bedience, stubbernesse, ex∣tortion, vsuries, hipocrisie, dissimulation. enuie, ran∣cour, malice, murther, let∣cherie,
surfetting, wanton∣nesse, and an infinite num∣ber of the like hellish rable) whereto we are dayly en∣dangered; insomuch, that oftentimes we are ready to be deuowred. Stretch out (O swéete Iesus) the ar∣ming sword of thy Spirit, cut them off by the wast, that they may haue no po∣wer to assault vs: and after this conquest wrought in vs, frame vs anew, by the word of regeneration, that
our liues being amended, we may (like Sheaues of pure Corne) be bound vp, & brought into thy Barne. Heare our Prayers, O Christ, and let our cries come vnto thée, for thy name sake, Amen.
A Prayer against vaine delights, and worldly pleasures. From vaine delights, Lord turne mine eyes, And saue my soule, in losse which lyes. LOrd God, Creator of all things, illuminate my heart with the Lampe of true vnderstanding and knowledge; that although mine outward eyes slum∣ber and sléep in the shadow
of death: yet the eyes of my soule may he kept waking in the way of life. Direct me, O Lord in thy feare, & guid me by thy grace: turne mine eies from all vaine de∣lights of this world, pre∣serue me from al the sweet entismēts of the flattering flesh; fortifie & strengthen me against all the craftie temptations of Satan. And wheras my soule lieth vpō losse, & is not like but to be lost, if if be left vnto it selfe
I beseech thee (O Father of mercy, & God of all con∣solation) to take vpon thée the safety of the same, that neither Satan my subtile aduersary; nor the flesh, ye alluring harlot; nor the world, that foule ill fauor'd monster, may preuayle a∣gainst it: but by thy power may vtterly be vanquished put to shame & confusion. Grant this, O God▪ for thy sonnes sake, Iesus Christ my Sauiour. Amen.
A prayer of a penitent sinner lamenting his former life so ill spent. My life misse-led▪ I doe lament, And of my sinnes, I mee repent. LOoke on mée, (O hea∣uenly Father and gra∣cious God,) with thy fa∣uourable countenance, and in the fulnes of thine euer∣lasting compassion, comfort mée, which am swallowed
vp with heauinesse. And though my Sinnes sur∣mount in thy sight, the Sandes of the Seas; yet I beséech thee, haue an eye to thy Son Iesus Christ, whom thou didst send into the world, to take vpon his shoulders the whole bur∣den of our sinnes; and by his death, to make satis∣faction vnto thee for the same. And albeit, O Lord, by my deserts. I am the child of wrath, of death, and
condemnatiō: yet notwith∣standing, I beseech thée, O God, giue eare vnto the voyce of my Mediatour Christ Iesus, who maketh continuall intercessiō vnto thee, not only for mee, but also for al such as constant∣ly beleeue in him, & make him the sure ground work of their saluation. Looke not Lord vpon my defor∣mities, but vpon his inno∣cencie: not vpon mine ini∣quitie, but vpon his righte∣ousnes:
not vpon the mul∣titude of my misdeedes, but vpon the manifoldnesse of thy mercies. Remem∣ber the bleeding stripes and woundes of thy Sonne my Sauiour, in whom alone, by the increasing of a liuely & iustifying fayth, I am a new creature, re∣generate, and made cleane; not with Water, but by Grace: thy Mercie, O Father, being the foun∣tayne of this Heauenlie
benefit. O heare the praier of thy poore seruant, and for thy Sonnes sake Iesus Christ grant my petition. Amen. A Prayer of a sorrowfull sinner, laying his heart open, praying for a firme fayth. My heart, O Lord, wide ope I lay, And vnto thee, for Faith I pray, I Beséech thée (O Father of endles mercy) to looke
vpon me thy poore crea∣ture: poore indeed, and de∣solate; naked and bare of spirituall riches. I lay my heart wide open before thee, which hath no good thing dwelling in it. Lord, I beseech thee, plough it vp with the Plough of thy Spirit, and sow there∣in the seeds of a true Chri∣stian faith, such a fayth as may haue attending and wayting vpon it Hope and Charitie, as handmaides.
Also, O Lord GOD, I humbly beseech thee, that as thou hast made me thy Steward, and put mee in trust with a Talent of thy blessing; namely, Riches, worldly Wealth, & tran∣sitory Treasures: so I may be furnisht with the instrument which is able to informe me how to imploy the same aright, euen faith: not an idle faith, barren, and vnfruitfull; but a busie fayth, flowing full of good
workes; that thereby I may be as a Citie builded vpon an Hill, amiable and beautifull: and like a Lan∣terne of light vnto all men, who seeing my good works may glorifie thee, O Fa∣ther: to whom all glory belongeth both in Heauen, and in Earth. Amen.
A Prayer desiring mercy and forgiuenesse. Of thee, O Lord, Mercy I craue, For Iesus sake▪ his life which gaue. AS thou art a gracious God (O thou Iudg of Israel,) as thou art fayth∣full in thy promise, and iust in thy word: so I beseech thee, deale fauourably with me poore sinner, who bend the knees of my heart be∣fore
thee, crauing that with teares; which if I obtaine not, alas what shal become of me but death & damna∣tion? In thee is my hope, in thee my trust, in thée my confidence: let me not be a∣shamed, let me not be forsa∣ken, nor confounded: but for thy sonne Iesus Christ his sake, who suffered a re∣prochfull death, in the face of his sworne and deadly e∣nemies; haue mercy vpon me, haue mercy vpon me,
vpon mee miserable soule; on whom vnlesse thou haue mercy, Satan with his whole power, is ready to ouerrun me. In time there∣fore, O Lord, helpe me; in time assist me, in time suc∣cour me, or else I am a cast∣away, and the child of re∣probation. Let thy mercy stand betweene my sinnes and thy iudgement: for Iesus sake my sweete Sa∣uiour, succour mee misera∣ble sinner, who neuer cease
crying: O Father, which art in Heauen, O our Fa∣ther which art in Heauen, haue mercy, O haue mercy Lord in time. Amen. A Prayer, to be prepared against the houre of death. Lord at my death, the iewell chiefe, Which I desire, is true beliefe. MOst mightie God, and mercifull Father, as thou hast created and made
me of the mould of ye earth, and inspired into the grosse lumpe of my body, a liuing and quickning soule: so, O Lord I beseech thee, to indue me with such know∣ledge and vnderstanding: yea, with such an earnest zeale, & burning desire of thy heauenly dwelling, and immortall mantion, that I may loath this life, which is but a span long: and thirst after death; which is the entrance to endlesse ioy
and happinesse. Also, O Lord, I most humbly be∣seech thee, when it shall please thee to visit me with sicknesse, or otherwise to call me out of this life, that I may féele working in my heart, an vnfained Fayth, and a true Christian Be∣liefe, whereby euen in the nipping agonies, and pin∣ching passions of death I may lay fast hold vpon Ie∣sus Christ my Sauiour, hoping in him to liue, who
by his death purchased euerlasting life, for all the faythfull. O heare my pray∣er, O God, and let my cry come vnto thee, for Iesus sake: vnto whom, with thee, and the holy Ghost, be all laude, honour and prayse, for euermore. Amen.
A Prayer to leade our liues according to the law and will of God. Giue me, O Lord, a mind and will, To loue thy Law, and it fulfill. LOuing Lord, and most mercifull Father, thou that art righteous in thy workes, & iust in thy iudge∣ments: faithfull in thy words, & true in thy pro∣mises: make me (I hearti∣ly
beseech thee) alwayes plyant (like Waxe) both in mind and will to loue thy Law, and to liue after the same. Giue my heart the cleere light of true Chri∣stian knowledge, that I hauing the eies of my soule broad waking, may dis∣cerne betweene light and darknesse, Christ and Be∣liall, God and the Diuell, Hell and Heauen, the Flesh and the Spirit. Guide thou, O Lord, all my go∣ings
by thy grace, that all my thoughtes may rest vp∣on thée. Gouerne thou my will, and all mine affecti∣ons, that they may keepe within the limits of thy ho∣lie Law and Commaunde∣ments: that all my endea∣uour may be directed to the accomplishment and fulfil∣ling of thy Statutes and Ordinances, so farre foorth as my weaknesse can wade through the rough waues of this most wicked world.
let thy spirit lead me to doe those things that please thy diuine maiestie, that at the last day, whē thou shalt sit vpon the Raine bowe, treading the Cloudes of the skies vnder thy féete, and compassed round about with legions of Angels, Cherubim and Seraphim, armies of Saintes, and ho∣ly Martyres, I may be re∣ceiued into the number of the elect, and enter into possession of that inheri∣taunce,
which neither Gold nor Siluer, but the preci∣ous Blood of thy beloued Sonne, my swéete Saui∣our Iesus Christ, bought and purchased: Grant this most mercifull Father, for thy mercies sake, which are vnmeasurable: and for thy kindnesse sake, which is vn∣searchable, and for thy ten∣der loue sake, which is vnspeakable, Amen.
A Prayer to keepe our tongue from speaking ill. From an ill tongue. Lord make me cleane: To great and small, good fayrh to meane. ALmighty God, which canst not away with a double heart, and to whom an euill tongue is fowle dishonour; giue me grace, (I beséech thée) to speake nothing but that which is true, right, and iust; not
hurting any with my tōgue which thou hast giuen mee to doe all men good, and to vse as an instrument for the sounding foorth of thy prayse and glory. And be, cause a lying and an euill Tongue, draweth the soul into death and destruction, put backe (I beséech thée) from my lippes, all guile∣full speaches, all deceitfull communications, and al ly∣ing wordes. Moreouer, be∣cause thou. O Lord, art
truth it selfe, and therefore delightest in truth & inno∣cencie, giue me grace al∣wayes to enure my tongue vnto truth, abhorring all such talke as may offende thy diuine Maiestie, and di∣minish the honour due vnto thy holy name. Let thy sanctifying Spirit take charge ouer my heart, that I may doe good vnto all, and hurt vnto none: vtte∣ring yt with tongue, which I meane in heart, purpo∣sing
as well in déede as in word, nothing but good fayth & true christianitie. Grant this, O God, for Iesus Christs sake. Amen. A Prayer to fast, and pray aright. To Fast aright, teach vs the way, O Sauiour Christ, we humbly pray. MOst bountifull Iesu, most sweet Iesu, most louing Iesu, which by thine
example diddest teach vs to Faste aright, not after the painted fashon of Phari∣sies and Hypocrites; but according to the plaine manner of vnfeigned Chri¦stians: I heartily & humb∣ly beséech thée, to giue me grace, to exercise my selfe in godly Fasting & Prayer that the man of sinne, may be subdued and brought vnder: that my heart may be cleansed from all sinne and vnrighteousnesse, that
my thoughtes and cogita∣tions may be scoured from corruption and filthinesse: that my wordes may not smell of Heathenish vnho∣linesse & wickednesse; that my déedes may not be lea∣uened with beastly wan∣tonnesse: but that the course of my whole life, may be seasoned with the sauorie salt of sanctification, that whatsoeuer I thinke, what∣soeuer I say, or whatsoe∣uer I do, it may carry with
it some signe of the true Fast; namely, the fast from sin: vnto which fast, who∣soeuer apply themselues, they are sure to be thy chil∣dren, and are builded vpon a stedfast hope, to inherite that place of endlesse hap∣pinesse, which thou bough∣test with thy precious blod. This fasting (I beseech thee) O sweete Sauiour, giue me grace to exercise; so shall my sinfull flesh bee kept in awe, as a seruant,
and my Spirit shall beare rule ouer it, and kéepe it in subiection. This, O Christ, and whatsoeuer else is ne∣cessary, vouchsafe of thy goodnesse, to grant vnto me thy poore creature, who aske it euen in zealous and hearty prayer. Amen.
A Prayer against wilfull sins and snares of Satan. From wilfull sinne, Lord saue vs, That Satan may not haue vs. Be vnto vs a brasen wale (most mercifull Father) against all the assaults of sinne, specially preserue vs from wilfull offences, and from transgressing of very malice, which is a wheting of thy wrath against vs, and a kindling of our owne confusion, without hope
of mercy at thy heauenly hands. O Lord, let vs not be so farre estranged from obedience, as of set purpose to runne into contempt of thy glorious name: let not our hearts become so flin∣tie, as to be void of all fee∣ling of sorrow for sinne: yea as to be emboldened to heape sinne vpon sinne, to our vtter shame. We know this is Satans séeking; we are assured this is the Di∣uels drift, we cannot be ig∣norant
that this is Belse∣bubs intent, therby to haue vs wiped (in thy wrath) out of the Booke of life, and so he to haue full sway ouer vs, as children of condem∣nation; But thou, O Lord, art mercifull, thou art gra∣tious, thou art carefull o∣uer vs: defend vs therefore from all sinn, and chiefely from the sin of wilfulnes and malice, for the honour of thy name. Amen.
A Prayer for the feare of the Lord, and loue of his word. Increase in me. O Lord, thy feare, That to thy word, I may giue eare. ETernall God, & omni∣potent Creatour, whose word layd the foundation of the whole world, & fur∣nished the same with all things behoofefull for the
maintenance of man: wee humbly beseech thee, in∣crease in vs a louing feare of thee, and thy word: that whatsoeuer we are inioy∣ned and commanded to doe therein, wee may rather neglect life, lands, goods; & all precious possessions, then to leaue it vndone: knowing, that by hearing thy word, wee vnderstand thy will; which who so kée∣peth, they are assured in spi∣rit, to be thy faithfull ser∣uants▪
So fill vs therefore, O God, with this godlie feare, that we stopping our eares, and waxing dull a∣gainst all worldly vanities, may bee rauished in heart and mind with the sweete∣nesse of thy word, wherein the comfortable promises of life & saluation are con∣teined: that wee may exer∣cise our selues therein day and night: that wee may reuerently vse it, as the healthfull foode of our
soules: that we may bring vp our children & seruants, in the knowledge of the same: being fully perswa∣ded, that there is nothing in the world comparable thereunto; for it exceedeth al treasure, & whē al things are consumed, thy word shall continue in glory, brightnesse, & perfection. O Lord, heare our praiers, and for the honour of thy name, heare the suites of thy poore seruants, euen
for thy beloued Sonne his sake▪ Iesus Christ our Sauiour: vnto whom, with thee, and the holy Ghost, one Deitie in Trinitie, be all laude, honour, prayse, dominion, power, glory, and maiestie, both now and world without end. Amen.
The Contemplation of a Christian. The misery, of euery man, Through Satans guile, by sinne began: But Christ vouchsaft mans thrall t'asswage; His power supprest, old Satans rage. WHen Sinne had blemished the happy estate of our first Pa∣rents, their whole race felt
the smart of their punnish∣ment, and are at this day subiect vnto miserie. Iniquitie made a gappe for many calamities, sun∣dry kinds of sicknesses, ma∣nifold maladies, & infinite tribulations: which we had neuer tasted, if our first Pa∣rents had not offended. Lamentable is our case, by theire meanes: for the Lord of life hath punished their sins in their posteri∣tie, by degrees of genera∣ons,
throughout many a∣ges. Little hope of health is in our selues: nay, there is in vs no hope of saluation at all: for by the subtiltie of Satan, sinne got dominion ouer vs, & by sin, death. Iustly therefore are we subiect to so many mise∣ries; & in that we feele the heauy hand of God laying load vpon vs, it is for our offences, and our disorde∣red life.
According as our deserts haue beene, so GOD hath dealt with vs: nay, he hath handled vs far better then we deserued; who by nature are the children of wrath and confusion. Most mercifully hath he looked vpon vs, and of his plentifull compassion, hee sent his boloued Sonne Christ Iesus into the world, that he by his blood∣shed, might worke our re∣leasement.
Like reprobates and con∣demned persons, wee had been plunged into the déep pit of hell, had not the death of Christ made full satis∣faction for vs, & wrought our Redemption. A Lion of the tribe of Iu∣da, a brāch springing from the stocke of Iesse, pittying vs poore desolate soules, by the vertue of his power suppressed Satans rage. Maruelous mightily did he vanquish the Diuel, our
mortall enemy; who inten∣ded our destruction and vt∣ter ouerthrow, had not he in time brought our deliue∣rance to passe. Be ioyfull therefore, all nations, and lift vp your heads: extoll this Lambe of God; whose innocencie tooke away our iniquitie: and whose heauinesse, was our hapinesse. Euerlasting prayse and thankes be ascribed vnto his name, by whose death,
we are receiued to life: yea to eternall life: O prayse his glorious name for euer. Amen. Death ouer vs possest such power. That meanes he sought, vs to deuower: But Iesus Christ did set vs free: To whom all prayse and thankes giue wee. WEe are iustly subiect vnto death: for death is the reward of sinne and iniquitie.
Iniquitie hath changed our order of creatiō, which was perfect and Angeilcal. Life vnto vs, through sinne, is turned vnto death, and the mercy of God into iudgement. Lord haue mercy vpon vs; for in vs there is no hope of health: for Death hath power ouer vs. Increase of new calami∣ties doe light vpon vs day∣ly; and we see our selues forsaken.
Among our enemies we walke continually, euen in the face of the Flesh, the World, and the Diuell. Miserable were wee, if Iesus Christ, with the shield of safetie should not ouershadow vs. Little should wee differ from the children of wrath: nay, our case were as com∣fortlesse as theirs. A most mercifull Saui∣our, art thou, O Christ; A most mercifull Redeemer,
and Aduocate. Make vs thankfull vnto thee for thy goodnesse: for thou didst set vs free from all misfortune. Blessed be thy name, and great be thy glory, through out all the world, for this thy kindnesse. Early & late, thou art to be praysed: yea, in ye assem∣blies & cōgregations of the faythfull & righteous, thou in thy greatnes, O God, shalt be gloryfied, Amen.
The World is vaine, and all therein; Yea, man is vile, because of sinne: Yet Iesus Christ redeemed all, To Death, and Hell that were in thrall. WOe be to this world, for it is as vaine as smoke: yea, it is more vaine then vanitie it selfe. In riches, there is shame: and in pleasure, there is pu∣nishment, because of sinne and iniquitie. Like a dreame is the life
of man: his dayes are but a spanne long, and his time tarryeth not, Like a Fansie, or a May∣game; which hath but an houres delight & recreatiō. In the world there is no∣thing more common then wickednesse: in the world there is no goodnesse. Al are bent vnto mischiefe and villanie: the sonnes of men haue set their heartes vpon euill. Mightie men, and poore
slaues, all haue troden the path of sinne: and vanitie is in all their wayes. Like Sheepe without a Shepheard, they are gone astray: and had beene lost, if Christ had not holpen. All were in the mouth of Hell gates, and had sunke in their owne shame and destruction. Miserably had they peri∣shed, if that good shepheard of our soules had not taken vpon him our deliuerance.
Bring Frankinsence vn∣to his Altas (O ye people) prayse him, who is prayse worthy, for his power and magnificence. Enter into his Temple and Sanctuary, sing songs all with one consent to the honour of his name, for all the benefits and goodnesse, which hee hath plentifully bestowed vpon vs at all times: & let al the faithfull answer, and say, Amen.
Gods prouidence is wonderfull: He shewes himselfe most merciful In all our wayes defending vs, And by his grace amending vs. WIthout th'assistance of Gods spirit, mise∣rable were the condition of all mankind: yea, most mi∣serable. In sinne we are concei∣ued, in sin we are brought vp, and the whole course of our life is full of iniquitie. Like a menstruous cloth,
so is our conuersotion in the sight of God, and his holy Angels. Like a filthy and loath∣some Sinke, so is our be∣hauiour before the face of the faithfull. Iudgment is more méete for vs, then mercy: yet it hath pleafed God, to deale with vs in mercy. And that doth daily ex∣perience testifie: for we sée manifest proofes of his pro∣uidence.
Meate and cloathing, and whatsoeuer is necessary to∣ward the maintenance of man, he hath giuen vs. Like a Father, he tende∣reth vs, and esteemeth vs as Children, begotten a new by free Grace. As a Henue hoouering ouer her Chickens; so doth he defend vs in all our wayes, day by day. Mercie is on his right hand: Mercie goeth before him; and vpon Mercy, is
the seate of his Maiestie built. Be glad therefore, and clappe your hands, all peo∣ple: for God is gratious and fauourable. Euermore shall his praise bée in my mouth; I will talke of his goodnesse euen among mine enemies: yea without ceasing, I will ex∣toll and prayse his name. Amen.
The holy Ghost doth sanctifie, Such as in faith doth fructifie: The wicked stil wax worse & wors, And run into Gods heauy curse. WOrship and honour, bee giuen vnto God the holy Ghost, by whom we are sancctified vnto life euerlasting. Infinite is thy working; in holinesse he doth renew the flintie heart, & maketh it relent at Gods iudge∣mentes.
Least Satan should tri∣umph ouer vs, therefore hath he vouchsafed to clense and purifie our spirit. Let vs therefore ascribe vnto him all honour: for through sanctification, wee are made heires of saluatiō Iniquitie defiled our soules: but through fayth increasing in vs, we felt an inward reformation. And hauing our eyes ope∣ned, we saw our filthinesse; and by the gift of grace be∣came
new creatures. Many were the enormi∣ties which reigned in vs; but the holy Ghost purged vs of all, and set vs free. Long wandred we in by∣wayes of wickednesse but are now restored againe vnto righteousnesse. As for the vngodly, they haue no part of this sancti∣fying Spirite: but dayly waxe worse and worse. Much like vnto such as GOD hath cursed in his
wrath and denounced sen∣tence of death against thē. Be glad, O yee iust: for you are they whom God loueth, & in whom he mag∣nifieth his owne name. Excellent & wonderfull in working is God the ho∣lie Ghost: who with the Father and the Sonne, be praysed and magnified for euer. Amen.
It is not wealth, to haue at will, That can vs keepe, and saue from ill: Gods grace it is which worketh that: Let vs reioyce, therefore thereat. WHat is the Wealth of this world, but Winde? and what Riches, but the shadow of Smoke? In Wealth to trust, is to trust to a broken réede: and in Riches to boast, is to boast in a thing of naught.
Lay wealth to the grace of God, and what is it? Euen filthy Dunge, and a worse thing. Lay Riches to Gods Grace, and what are they? Euen painted shewes of transitory vanities. In Wealth therefore glory not; for there is in it, no power to preserue from the euill day. And of Riches brag not, for in them is no hope of health in the dangerous
time of trouble. Make the grace of God, the perfect ioy of thy heart, and trust thereunto, as vn∣to a Brazen wall. Looke for safetie from thence, in the perilous sea∣son: for the grace of God is a strong refuge. Arme thy soule there∣with, as with Iron-plate Armour: so shall the as∣saultes of thy aduersaries doe thee no harme. Make thy moue vnto the
Almightie in the time of tribulation: & he shall fur∣nish thee with his grace. Be thankfull vnto him, when thou hast receiued it: and shew not thy selfe in a∣ny case vnkind. Euery day prayse him for his goodnesse, and extol his greatnesse among the multitude: for he is good and gratious to his chosen: O magnifie and prayse him all people. Amen.
To loue to liue, in peace and ease, The Lord of life, doth much displease: Let such as lacke, and comfort craue. Thy helping hand, in hazard haue. WHen God hath bles∣sed thée with abun∣daunce of Benefites▪ so vse them as God may be well pleased. In peace pamper not thy
selfe: for that is the way to minister cause of courage and loftinesse to the flesh. Looke vnto the Lord, who hath giuen thee these good giftes: and become not slouthfull with ease. Life commeth from the Lord: and whatsoeuer be∣longeth therevnto, it pro∣ceedeth from his goodnes. In prosperitie, be mind∣full of aduersitie: and let not the plentie of thy peace make thee proud.
A Father of the father∣les, shew thy selfe in neces∣sity: & shut not vp the sluces of mercy against the poore. Make not thy Mony thy God: and hoord it not vp for thine owne profit onely, not regarding others need. Let not the poore lie comfortlesse: let not them starue and perish, whom it is in thee to helpe. Apply thy selfe to works of mercy: and stretch out thy hand to them that are
needy and succourlesse. Mooue not God (who gaue thee these giftes) to wrath; least in his anger, he turne all to thy shame. Beware therefore, and let Wisedome rule thee in thy wayes: so shalt thou not offend, or doe amisse. Extoll thy Creator, and say, that he is gracious & mercifull: a louing God, and a most bountifull Fa∣ther vnto his Children. Amen.
Looke ere thou leape, and vse thine eyes: Else shalt thou shew, thy selfe vnwise; The simple sort, with councell ayde: Thus ought thy talent out be layde. WIsedome is the bles∣sing of God, and it is much more excellent then Gold, Siluer, or precious Stones. In time of necessitie, it is a present remedie, and a sufficient refuge in perill
and ieobadie. Little auayleth worldly policie, where this Wise∣dome wanteth: O happie is he, whom God hath ar∣med therewith. Leaue riches, forsake ho∣nor, set pleasure at naught to come to the enioying of this preacious treasure, Immortalitie followeth this wisdome: and such as haue it are sure to grow in estimation and fame. Aske it of him, who is the
Well of Wisedome, from whom it commeth, euen the Lord God Almighty. Make not thy boast there∣of, neither apply it to thy priuate profite: but extend the same to the succour of the simple. Learne this lesson, That it is but lent vnto thee of the Lord: thou art the Ste∣ward therof but for a time. Abuse it not, lest it turne to thine owne cōfusion: for as it is the gift of God, so
will be he honored therein. Make it not an instrumēt of follie, least God ouer∣throw thée in the vanitie of thine owne mind. Be a counseller to the vn∣learned, and teach the ideot vnderstanding: so shalt thou glorifie GOD in thy wisedome. Enterprise nothing vn∣aduisedly: in all thy begin∣nings, procéedings, and endings, remember God. Amen.
If thou be poore, hold thee content, It is a crosse▪ which God hath sent Remember Iob, a man most iust, From stately seat, cast downe to dust▪ WIth thine estate not to be contented, it is to repine and murmure at the appoyntment and or∣dinance of God. In pouertie be not des∣perate: but fixe all thy hope vpon the rocke of Gods
prouidence: for he is faith∣full. Lament thy sin, and bée sorry for the same: consider also with thy selfe, that po∣uertie is Gods chastise∣ment. Let not pouerty therfore so pull thee downe, that thou shouldest thereupon mistrust the Lord God to be mercifull. It is a crosse layd vpon thee in this life, to keepe thee in subiection, and to
make thee know thine owne estate. A happy child art thou, that canst reforme thy selfe, and amend that which is amisse in thee, by his fa∣therly correction. Marke the example of Iob, a man so iust, so faith∣full, & so righteous, that the Diuell of Hell could not preuaile against him. Look vpon him, how he was tormented, how hee was brought low, being
sometimes placed in excee∣ding great prosperity. All the blessings of God, belonging to this life, hee had them in abundāce: yet all turned into neede and beggerie. Miserable was his estate yea, most vile and filthy, in the face of the world: yet God cast vpon him a care∣full eye. Bee mindfull of these things; for profite insueth therevpon: and in thy po∣uerty
arso learne to be pa∣tient and méeke. End not thy dayes in des∣paire as the wicked doe: seeke not by vnpatience & violence, to preuent Gods appoynment: tarrie the time which thy Creatour hath ordeyned; it is thine, mine, and all our duties, to yeeld our willes to Gods will. waite his leasure therefore whose name be praysed for euermore. Amen.
Loue euery man, owe no man grudge: God sits aboue, as soueraigne Iudge: He seeth all thinges, aboue, below: And euery where an eye doth throw, WRath is the way to vengeance: a foule and diuelish vice disallow∣ed of God, and horrible a∣mong men. It is a Fire which consu∣meth, a Canker which ea∣teth, a Mouth which fret∣teth:
the marke whereat it shooteth, is Mischiefe. Let not thy heart lie open therevnto, least the Diuell thereby getting entraunce, possesse thée, and carry thée headlong into confusion. Lay apart all occasions of grudge; hate no man, loue al men: knowing this, That Loue is the fulfilling of Gods law. Iudge ill of none, thinke well of all: for God reser∣ueth iudgement and venge∣ance,
vnto himselfe. Against thine enemies vse not violence: but rather in charity (as thou art com∣maunded) vse forbearance. Make the best of that which is amisse, for therein thou shalt shew thy selfe méeke: howbeit, winke not at wickednesse. Looke vp vnto Heauen, and thinke vpon him that sits aboue▪ séeing and mar∣king the thoughts & déeds of all men.
All thinges are manifest vnto him; yea, whatsoeuer we doe in corners, he séeth as plainly as at noone day. Mocke not thy selfe ther∣fore with thine owne ima∣ginations, neither be thou seduced in the vanitie of thine owne fantasies· Be not forgetfull of him, who vttered this voyce: Heauen is my seate, and the Earth my footstole. Euerlasting prayse be as∣cribed vnto his name glo∣rie,
maiestie, and power, belongeth vnto him, for e∣uermore. Amen. In that we haue, the world at will, And take delight, to follow ill; Neglecting God in holy word: Against our soules, we whet a sword WHat doth it profit a man to be Lord ouer the whole World, and yet to be the seruant and slaue of sinne.
It is euen as if we should mingle poyson with swéet dainties, & in tasting them, to swellowe downe our owne death. Let not thy minde there∣fore, be drowned in ye vaine delights of this world: but vse them as they are made, euen with modestie. Lay not inwait for them, to enioy them with excesse: least they turne thée to de∣struction & vtter vndoing. In the Rich man, view a
patterne of wantonesse: who forgetting mercie, felt the heate of Gods heauie iudgement. Amidest the scorching flames, he lay crying with∣out comfort; because he a∣bused the benefits of Gods creation. Making them instru∣mentes to serue his beastly appetites, neglecting in the meane time, all deedes of Christian charitie. Let not vs be so rauished
with worldly pleasures▪ that we forgetting GOD, should disherite our selues of th'heauenly inheritance. As the rich man did, who in the midst of his banquet∣ting viandes, and pleasant melodie despised the poore. Most mortall enemies to our selues are we in so do∣ing: and stopping our eares at the word of God, wee weaue our owne woe, Because the word of life, through our default, is
made vnto vs the sword of death, which doth strike downe to hell. Eternall God, and most mercifull Father, illumi∣nate our vnderstandinges, inspire vs with heauenly knowledge, lighten our wittes, and giue vs grace to be spiritually minded, that we may vse thy giftes, blessinges and benefites, to the glory of thy name. Amen.
A day there is, when all shall rise, Out of their Graues, in wonderous wise: The elect of God, long for that day: Come, come, O Christ, come soone, we say. WRetched were wee, if there were not an other World, besides this wicked World, transitorie and corruptible. In a miserable case were we, if the children of God, (whom we hope our selues
to be) wayted in vaine for another world. Lamentable were our lot; yea, accursed our condi∣tion, if our happinesse were not the life to come: Looke we in wast for the comming of our Christ? No, no; he will come at the sound of the last Trumpe from Heauen. In maiestie will he come, to iudge the whole world, and to giue generall sen∣tence against the wicked
and vnrighteous. All shall rise out of their graues, and shall see him with their bodily eyes: the iust to their ioy, the vngod∣ly to their paine. Many legions of Angels shall attent vpon him, and shall shew the brightenesse of his glory, maiestie, and celestiall power. Lord Iesus; thy chosen children long to see that day: yea, they labour and are in trauel, vntill that day
of comfort come. Abridge & shorten these troublesome times, where∣in thy children are set at naught, and hasten the day of their resurrection. Make speed, sweet Ie∣sus, come quicklie, that the kingdome of Satan may be ouerthrowne, and the powers infernall suppres∣ed. Be mindefull of thy faith∣full flocke, which wander vp and downe in this wil∣dernesse,
like Lambes a∣mong venomous wolues. Ende the daies of this our mortalitie, and let vs heare that sweete voyce: Come yee blessed, possesse the Kingdome, prepared for you from the beginning of the world. Amen, Amen.
The Seauen Petitions of the Lords Prayer, with a briefe exposition thereof, drawne out of holy Scripture. Our Father, which art in Heauen. DOubtlesse thou art our Father: Al∣though Abraham bee ignorant of vs, (or would refuse vs, to bee
his children,) and Israell know vs not: yet thou, O Lord, art our Father, and our Redéemer: thy name is for euer. Esay. 63.16. There is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptisme, one God & Father of all, which is aboue all, in power, (& through all) by his proui∣dence,) & in vs all, (by his grace,) Ephes. 4.5.6. The Lord is in his holie palace, the Lords throne is in the heauen, his eies will
consider the poore, and his eie-lids will trie the chil∣dren of men. Psal. 11.4. The heaurn is my throne and the earth is my foot∣stoole, (such is the great∣nesse of Gods Maiestie,) Esaie. 66.1.. But our conuersation is in Heauen, (in minde and affection,) from whence also we looke for the Saui∣our, euen the Lord Iesus Christ. Philip. 3.22.
1. Halowed be thy name OVr help is in the name of the Lord, which hath made Heauen and Earth. Psal. 124.8. The Lords name be prai∣sed from the rising of the Sunn, to the going downe of the same. Psal. 113.3. Kinges of the earth, and all people; Princes and all Iudges of the World: Young men, and Maydes:
also, Old men, and Chil∣dren, let them prayse the name of the Lord; for his name only is to be exalted, and his prayse aboue the earth & the heauens. Psal. 148.11.12.13. 2. Thy Kingdome come, THe kingdome of God is not meat nor drink; but righteousnes & peace, and ioy in the holy Ghost. Rom. 14.17.
But rather séeke ye after the kingdome of God, & all these things, (which are but accessaries, and com∣mon as wel to the wicked, as the godlie,) shalbe mini∣stred vnto you. Luke. 12.31 Feare not little flocke, for it is your Fathers pleasure to giue you the kingdome, (which is the chefest thing that can be giuen. (Luke. 12.32 In my Fathers house are manie dwelling places: I goe to prepare a
place for you, (So that there is not onely a place for Christ, but for all that are his.) John. 14.2. 3. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heauen, IN the roll of the booke it is written of me, I desi∣red to doe thy good will, O my God: yea, thy law is within my hart Psal 40.7.8 That seruant that knew
his Maisters will & prepa: red not himselfe, neither did according to his will, shalbe beaten with many stripes. Luk. 12 47. For this is the will of God, euen your sanctifica∣tion: and that ye should ab∣staine from fornication, (And dedicate your selues wholy to God) that euery one of you should know, how to possesse his vessell in holinesse and honour: (His body that is pro∣phaned
by such filthi∣nesse.) 1. Thes 4.3, 4. And fashion not your sel∣ues like vnto this world, but be ye chāged by the re∣newing of your mind, that ye may prooue what is the good will of GOD, and acceptable, and perfect. (Whatsoeuer is not agree∣able to Gods will, is euill, displeasant, & vnperfect.) Rom. 12.2. Wherefore, be ye not vn∣wise, but vnderstand what,
the will of the Lord is. Ephes. 5.17. 4. Giue vs this day our daily bread. BEhold, the eye of the Lord is vpon them that feare him, (he worketh that in mercy, which man by no meanes can com∣passe,) and vpon them that trust in his mercie: to deli∣uer their soule from death,
and to preserue them in fa∣mine. Psal. 33, 18.19. The eyes of all waight vpon thee, and thou giuest them their meate in due season: thou openest thine hand, and fillest all things liuing with thy good plea∣sure. (Gods prouidence stretcheth both to man and beast.) Psal. 145.15. Man shall not liue by bread only, but by euery word that proceedeth out of the mouth of GOD.
(The order that God hath ordeined to maintaine his creatures by, is here ment) Deut. 8.3. Matth 4.4. The cheefe thing of life, is water & bread, & cloth∣ing, & lodging to couer thy shame. Eccles. 29.23. Two things haue I re∣quired of thee: denie mee them not before I die. Re∣moue far from me vanitie & lies, giue me not pouerty nor riches: feede me with foode conuenient for mee,
least I bee full, & deny thee, and say: Who is the Lord? (For Riches make men forget their Maker.) Or least I be poore, and steale, & take the name of my God in vaine Prou. 30.7.8.9. When we haue foode and raiment, let vs therwith be content. 1. Tim. 6.8.
5. And forgiue vs our trespasses as we forgiue them that trespasse a∣gainst vs. FOrgiue thy neighbour the hurt that hée hath don to thee: (for man ought not to seeke venge∣ance,) so shall thy sinnes be forgiuē thée also when thou prayest. Should a man beare hatred against a man, and desire forgiuenesse of the Lord: He will shewe
no mercy to a man which is like himselfe, and will hée aske forgiuenesse of his owne sinnes: Eccles. 28.2.3.4. Iudge not, and ye shall not be iudged: condemne not, and ye shall not be con∣demned: forgiue, and ye shall be forgiuen. Giue, and it shall be giuen vnto you, a good measure, pressed downe, shaked togeather, and running ouer, shal men giue into your bosome.
For, with what measure you meate, with the same shall men meate vnto you againe. Luke. 6.37.38. Loue your enemies, doe well to them which hate you. Luke. 6.27. There shall be iudge∣ment mercilesse, to him that sheweth no mercy: and mer∣cie reioyceth against iudge∣ment: (and feareth it not.) Iam. 2.13.
6. And lead vs not into temptation. BE sober and watch; for your aduersarie the Di∣uell, as a roring Lion, wal∣keth about, séeking whom he may deuour. 1. Pet. 5.8. In whom the God of this world, (euen Satan,) hath blinded the mindes, that is, of infidels, that the light of the glorious Gospell of Christ, which is the image of God, (in respect of his
office,) should not shine vnto them. 2. Cor. 4.4. Whensoeuer a man hea∣reth the word of the king∣dome, and vnderstandeth it not, the euill one commeth. (euen the Diuell,) and ta∣keth away that, which was sowen in his hart. Mat. 13, 19. The Prince that ruleth in the aire, euen the spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience. Ephes. 2.2.
Loue not the world, (as it is aduersarie to God:) nei∣ther the thinges that are in the world. If any man loue the world, the loue of the Father is not in him, &c. 1. Iohn. 3.15.16.17. We know that we are of God, & the whole world li∣eth in wickednesse, (al men, as of them selues, lie as it were busied in euill.) 1. Iohn. 15.19. Know ye not that the a∣mitie of the world, is the
enmitie of god? Whoso∣euer therefore, will be a friend of the world, maketh himselfe the enimie of God. Iam. 4.4. For all that is borne of God, ouercōmeth ye world: and this is the victorie that ouercommeth the world; e∣uen our fayth. Who is it that ouercommeth the worlde, but hee which be∣leeueth that Iesus is the sonne of GOD: 1. Iohn. 5.4.5.
That the righteousnesse of the law, (that, which the law requireth,) might be fulfilled in vs, which walke not after the flesh, but after the spirit: For they that are after the flesh, sauour the thinges of the flesh, (their will, vnderstanding, rea∣son, wit, & all, is fleshlie.) The wisdome of the flesh is death, it is enmitie a∣gainst God: They that are in the flesh, can not please God. Rom. 8·4
7. But deliuer vs from euill. Amen. HElpe vs, O GOD, of our saluation, (seeing we haue none other Saui∣our,) for the glory of thy name, and deliuer vs. Psal. 69.8. In the day of my trouble, I will call vpon thée, for thou hearest me. Psal. 86.7. There shall none euill come vnto thée. He shall
giue his Angels charge ouer thée, to keepe thee in all thy wayes: they shall beare thee in their hands, that thou hurt not thy foote against a stone. Because he hath loued me, (Gods pro∣tection promised,) there∣fore will I deliuer him, I will exalt him, because he hath (known my name. He shall call vpon me, and I will heare him: I will be with him in trouble: I will deliuer him, and glorifie
him. &c. Psal. 91.9.10.11.12. &c. O Lord, giue vs grace to learne this, and liue thereafter, Amen.
The beliefe of a Chri∣stian, commonly called the Apostles Creede; diuided into twelue Articles and ex∣pounded. 1. I beleeue in God the Fa∣ther Almighty, maker of heauen and earth. HEare, O Israel, the LORD our God, is Lord one∣ly. Deut. 6.4. Blessed be GOD, euen the Father of our Lord Ie∣sus
Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort. 2. Cor. 1.3. Thou Lord in the begin∣ing hast stablished th'earth, and the heauens are the works of thine hands. Psal. 102.25. Heb. 1.10. Haue we not all one Fa∣ther: Hath not one GOD made vs: Malach. 2.10. By the word of the Lord were the heauens made and all the hoast of them by the breath of his mouth. Psal▪ 33.6.
2. And in Iesus Christ, his onely Sonne our Lord. THere is but one GOD, which is the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him: And one Lord Iesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him. 1. Cor. 8 6. If we walke in the light, as he is in the light, we haue fellowship one with ano∣ther, Christ with vs, and we with our selues,) & the blood of Iesus Christ his
Sonne, cleanseth vs from all our sinnes. 1. Ioh. 1.7. Who hath deliuered vs from the power of darknes and hath translated vs into the kingdome of his deare Sonne, in whom wée haue redemption, through his blood, that is, the forgiue∣nesse of sinnes. Colos. 1.13.14. This is my beloued Sonne, in whom I am wel pleased. Math. 3.17.
3. Which was conceiued by the holy Ghost, borne of the Ʋirgin Mary. BVt when the fulnesse of time was come, God sent foorth his Sonne made of a woman, & made vnder the Law (or subiect to the law,) that he might redéeme them which were vnder the Law; that wee might receiue the adoption of the sonnes Galat. 4.4.5. And the Word was made
flesh, (Christ was formed, and made man, by the operation of the holy Ghost, without the work∣ing of man,) and dwelt a∣mong vs, and we saw the glory thereof, as the glorie of the onely begotten sonne of the Father, full of grace and truth. Ioh. 1.14. The holy Ghost shall come vpon thée, (This was spoken to Mary,) and the power of the most high shal ouershadow thée:) it shall
be a secret operation of the holy Ghost:) therefore also, that holy thing which shall be borne of thée, shall be called, the Sonne of God. (Hee must be with∣out sinne, which must take away sinne.) Luke 1.35. Behold, a Virgin shalbe with child, and shal beare a Sonne, and they shall call his name Emanuel, which is by interpretation, God with vs. Matth. 1.23. Esaie. 7.14.
When Marie was be∣trothed to Ioseph, before they came togeather, (be∣fore he tooke her home to him,) she was found with Child by the holy Ghost. Math. 1.18. 4. Suffred vnder Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, buried, and descended into Hell. FOr Christ also suffered for vs, leauing vs an ex∣ample, that we should fol∣low
his steps. Who his owne selfe bare our sinnes in his body, on the trée, that we being deliuered from sinne, should liue in righte∣ousnesse, by whose stripes we are healed. 1. Pet. 2.21.24. They scourged Iesus, they stripped him, they put vpon him a Scarlet robe, (to deride and mocke him, because he called himselfe a King,) they gaue him Vineger to drinke, ming∣led
with Gall, (to open his veines, & so to hasten his death: this was giuen him hanging vpon the crosse,) they crucified him betwéen two théeues, they cast lots for the parting of his gar∣ments they set a scornefull writing ouer his head, they reuiled him, & ceassed not, till he gaue vp the Ghost- Matth. 27.26, 28, 29, 30, 34 35, 37, 50. So Ioseph tooke the body, and wrapped it in a
cleane Linnen cloth, and put it in his new Tombe, (Christs burying doth so much the more verifie his death and resurrection,) which he had heawen in a rocke, and rolled a great stone to the doore of the sepulchre, and departed. Matth. 27.59 60. I know that ye seeke Iesus, which was crucifi∣ed: he is not heere, for he is risen, as he sayd. Come, see the place where the
Lord was layd. &c. Matth. 28.5.6. God made him to be sinn for vs, which knew no sinne, (a sacrifice for sinne,) that we should be made the righteousnesse of God in him, (By inputation, when wee shall bee clad with Christes righteousnesse.) 2. Cor. 5.21. Hee destroyed, through death, him that had the power of death, that is the Diuell: and that he might
deliuer all them, which for feare of death, (and Gods anger,) were all their life time subiect to bondage. Heb. 2.14.15. Christ hath abolished death, & brought life and im∣mortalitie to light, through the Gospell. 2. Tim. 1.10. Death is swallowed vp in victory, O death, where is thy sting: O graue, where is thy victory: 1 Cor. 15.55.
5. And the third day he rose againe from the dead. IEsus Christ was deli∣uered to death for our sinnes, and is risen againe for our iustification, (to accomplish and make perfect our iustification▪) Rom. 4.25. Goe quickly; and tell his Disciples that he is risen from the dead: and behold he goeth before you into Galilie, there ye shall see
him: loe, I haue told you. (The Angell assureth the women, that come to see Christes Sepulchre, of his resurrection.) Math. 28.7. Mark. 16.6.7. Luke. 24.6. Joh 1, 20.1. Act 1.21.22. But now Christ is risen from the dead, & was made the first fruites of them that sleept: (by his resurrecti∣on, being the first, we are all assured of our resurrec∣tion.) 1 Cor. 15.20. Destroy this Temple,
and in three dayes I will rise it vp againe. (This he meant of his body, which should die, and did rise a∣gaine the third day after his death.) Iohn. 2.19.21. First of all, I deliuered vnto you that which I re∣ceiued, (or, learned by Gods worde,) how yt Christ died for our sinnes, accor∣ding to the scriptures, and that he was buried, rose againe the third day, and was seene of Cephas then
of the twelue, (though Iudas wanted, yet they were so called still:) after that, of more then fiue hun∣dred brethren at once, &c. 1. Cor. 15.3.4.5.6▪ 6. He ascended into heauen, and sitteth on the right hand of God the Father Almightie. ANd it came to passe, that as he blessed them, he departed from them and was caried vp into heauen. Luke. 24.51.
So, after the Lord had spoken vnto them, he was receiued into Heauen, and sate at the right hand of God. Mark. 16.19. And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was taken vp, (whereby they knew cer∣tainely whither he went,) for a cloude tooke him vp out of their sight, Act. 1.9. It is Christ which is dead: yea or rather, which is risen againe, who is also
at the right hand of God, and maketh request for vs. Rom. 8.34. 7. From thence he shall come againe to iudge the quike and the dead. THis Iesus: which is ta∣ken vp from you into heauen, shall so come, as ye haue séene him go into hea∣uen: (euen the true Redee∣mer, to gather vs vnto him.) Acts. 1.11.
And when the Sonne of man commeth in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then shall hee fit vpon the throne of his glo∣rie. Math. 25.31. And then shall they see the Sonne of man com∣ming in the cloudes, with great power and glorie. Mark. 13.26. And when these thinges begin to come to passe, then looke vp, and lift vp your heades, for your redempti∣on
draweth neere. (The ef∣fect of that redemption shall appeare, which Iesus Christ hath purchased.) Luk. 21.27.28. 8. I beleeue in the holy Ghost. GOe therefore and teach all nations, baptising them in the name of the Fa∣ther, and the Sonne, & the holy Ghost. Matth. 28.19. But the Comforter, which is the holy Ghost, whom the Father wil send
in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all thinges to your remem∣brance, which I haue told you. Iohn 14.26. This holy Ghost, is cal∣led somtime, The spirit of truth, proceeding from the Father, (because hee worketh the truth in vs.) Iohn. 14.17 &. 15.26. some time, the Spirit of the Father, speaking in his Ministers. Matth. 10.20. sometime, the Spirit of the
Sonne. Rom. 8.9. some∣time the good Spirit. Psal. 143.10. sometime, an holy Oyntment. 1. Iohn. 2.20. sometime, a Comfor∣ter. Iohn. 14.16. & 15.26. & 16.7. sometime, the ear∣nest of our Inheritaunce, (The holy Ghost is the gage or pledge of our se∣cond redemption, which shall be at the possession of our inheritance in hea∣ued. (Ephes. 1.14 somtime, the earnest of the Spirit in
our heartes. 2. Cor. 1.22. No man can say, that Ie∣sus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost 1. Cor. 12.3. 9. The holy Catholik Church the Communion of Saints. CHrist loued his Church, and gaue himselfe for it, that he might sanctifie it, and cleanse it, by the wash∣ing of water, through the word, (Baptisme is a token of the Churches consecra∣tion,) that he might make
it vnto himselfe a glorious Church, not hauing spot or wrinckle, (because it is co∣uered and clad with his righteousnesse and holi∣nesse,) that it should be ho∣lie, and without blame. Ephes. 5.27. I am the Rose of the field, and the Lillie of the vallies: like a Lillie among the thornes, so is my Loue among the doughters, &c. (Christ preferreth his Church aboue all other
thinges) Cant. 2.1.2 For other foundation can no man lay, then that which is layd, which is Ie∣sus Christ. 1. Cor. 3.11. Know ye not, that ye are the temple of God, & that the spirit of God dwelleth in you: 1. Cor. 3.16. In this Church are many mem∣bers, but one body in Christ Rom. 12.4.5. 1 Cor. 6.15. Let vs follow the truth in loue: and in al things grow vp into him, which is the
head that is Christ. Christ being head o his Church. nourisheth his members, and ioyneth them togea∣ther by ioynts, &c. (Ephe. 4.15. Christ is the head of the bo∣dy of the Church Col. 1.18. Now reioyce I in my sufferings for you, (or your commoditie,) and fulfil the rest of the afflicti∣ons of Christ in my flesh, (for Christ suffereth day∣ly in his members, as par∣taker
of their infirmities and therefore a reuenger of their iniuries,) for his body sake, which is the Church, Coloss. 1.24. (the edification of the Church is heere ment.) There are many mem∣bers, but one body. 1. Cor. 12 20. Now ye are the body of Christ, and members for your part. (For all Chur∣ches dispersed through∣out the world, are diuers,
members of one bodie.) 1. Cor. 12.27. God is not the author of confusion, but of peace; as we see in all the Churches of the Saints. 1. Cor. 14.33 10 The forgiuenes of sinnes. WHose sinnes so euer ye remit, they are re∣mitted: and whose sinnes soeuer ye retaine, they are retained. Iohn. 20.23. He that shall beleeue, and be baptised shall be saued:
but he that will not beléeue shal be damned. Luk. 16.16 It behoued Christ to suf∣fer, and to rise againe from the dead the third day: and that repentance and remis∣sion of sinnes should be preached in his name a∣mong all nations. Luk. 24.46.47. And GOD saw their workes, that they turned from their euil wayes: (the fruites of their repentance proceeding of fayth, plan∣ted
by the Prophets prea∣ching to the people of Ni∣niueth:) and God repented of the euill that he had said, that hee would doe vnto them, and hee did it not. Ionah. 3.10. Stand in the wayes, and behold, and aske for the old way, (wherein the Patriar∣ches and prophets walked, directed by the word of God, signifying, that there is no true way, but that which God prescribeth,)
which is the good way, and walke therein, and ye shall finde rest for your soules. Ierem. 6.16. 11. The resurection of the body. FOr since by Man came death, by Man came also the resurrectiō of the dead. 1. Cor. 15.21. Behold, I shew you a secret thing, We shall not all sleepe, but we shall all be changed in a moment, in
the twinckling of an eye at the last trumpet: for the trumpet shall blow, and the dead shall be raysed vp in∣corruptible, & we shall be changed. (When the Lord commeth to iudgement, some of the Saints shall be aliue, whō he will change, euen as if they were dead; so that this change shall be to them in stead of death. 1. Cor. 15.51.52. The Lord himselfe shall descend from heauen with
a shoute, and with the voice of Th'archangel and with the trumpet of God, & the dead in Christ shal rise first Then shall we which liue, & remaine, (euen we which are aliue, or shall be then found liuing,) be brought vp with them also in the cloudes to meete the Lord in the ayre▪ and so shall wée be euer with the Lord. (In this sodaine taking vp, there shall be a kinde of change of the qualities of
our body; which shallbe as a kind of death.) 1. Thes. 16.17. And he shall send his An∣gels, with a great sound of a trumpet▪ and they shal ga∣ther togeather his elect, from the foure windes, and from the one end of the hea∣uen vnto the other, &c. Matth▪ 24.31. And though after my skin, Wormes destroy my body, yet shall I sée God in my flesh: whom I my
selfe shall sée, and mine eies shall behold▪ and none other for me, though my reines are consumed within mee. (Iobs full hope, that both soule and body should en∣ioy the presence of God, in the last resurrection. Iob. 19.26.27. I know that he shall rise againe in the resurrection at the last day. (The words of Martha to Iesus, concer∣ning dead Lazarus. The errour of the Sadduces,
(men marueilous quiddi∣tiue) concerning the re∣surrection, is here confu∣ted.) Iohn. 11.14. 12. And the life euer∣lasting, Amen. I Am the resurrection, and the life, (Christ restoreth vs from death, to giue vs euerlasting life,) hée that beléeueth in me, though he were dead, yet shal he liue. And whosoeuer liueth, and beleeueth in me, shall ne∣uer die. Iohn 11.25.26.
I am the liuing bread, (which giue life to the world,) which came downe from heaven: if any man eate of this bread, hée shall liue for euer; and the bread that I giue you, is my flesh, which I will giue for the life of the world. Iohn. 9.51. Thou hast the wordes of eternall life. (Then with∣out Christ, there is but death: for his word onely leadeth vs to life. Joh. 6.68.
This is the will of him that sent me, that euery one which séeth the Sonne, and beleeueth in him, should haue euerlasting life, and I will raise him vp at the last day. Iohn. 6.40 Verily, verily, I say vn∣to you, hée that heareth my word, and beléeueth in him that sent me, hath euerlast∣ing life, and shall not come into condemnation, but hath passed from death vn∣to life. Iohn. 5.24.25.26.
The houre shall come, in the which, al that are in the graues, shall heare his voyce, and they shall come foorth, that haue done good, vnto the resurrection of life: but they that haue done euill, vnto the resur∣rection of condemnation. Iohn 5.8.29. Search the Scriptures, for in them yee thinke to haue eternal life. Ioh. 5.39 If thou knewest the gift of God, (Christ ment him∣selfe,
who was sent of his Father, to conuert the wo∣man of Samaria,) and who is he that saith vnto thee, Giue mee drinke, thou wouldest haue asked of him, and he would haue gi∣uen thee Water of life. (which is the loue of God in his Sonne, powred into our heartes by the holy Ghost, vnto euerlasting life.) Iohn. 4.10. Whosoeuer drinketh of the water that I shall giue
him, (euen spirituall grace) shal neuer be more a thirst, (shall neuer be dried vp, destitute, or forsaken:) but the water that I shall giue him▪ shall be in him a well of water, springing vp into euerlasting life. Ioh. 4.14. Come ye blessed of my Father, (for our saluation commeth of the blessing and fauour of God,) inhe∣rite ye the kingdome pre∣pared for you from the foundations of the world.
(Note the certantie of our predestination to sal∣uation. Matth. 25.34. And these shall goe into euerlasting paine, (which followeth mens fantasies, neglecting the will of God, and his commande∣ments,) and the righteous into life eternall. Math. 25.46. And many of them that sléepe in the dust of the earth, shall awake, (all shal rise at the generall resur∣rection,)
some to euerla∣sting life, & some to shame and perpetuall contempt. Dan. 12.2. And they shal come foorth that haue done good vnto the resurrection of life: but they that haue done euill, vnto the resurrection of condemnation. Iohn. 5.29. For the Lambe,) Iesus Christ our Mediatour and Redeemer, (Which is in the midest of the throne, (being very God,) shall
gouerne them, & lead them vnto the liuely Fountaines of waters. Hee shall giue them euerlasting life.) Apo. 7.17. O Lord giue vs grace, to beleeue this, and to liue thereafter. Amen.
The ten Commaun∣dements of Almighty God, called: The two Tables of the Law. The first Table. 1. J am the Lord thy God, thou shalt haue none other Gods but mee. HEare, O Israel. The LORD our God, is the onely Lord: Thou shalt
therefore loue the Lord thy God, with all thine heart, and with all thy soule, and with all thy minde, (or thought,) and with all thy strength. Marke. 12.29.30 Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, & him onely shalt thou serue. Math. 4.10. Luk, 4.14. I am the Lord thy God, thou shalt haue none other Gods before my face (God bindeth vs to serue him lonely, without superstiti∣on,
or idolatry.) Deu. 5.6.7. I am the Lord your God, ye shall keepe my Sabbathes, and reuerence my Sanctuarie: I am the Lord. Leuit. 26.1.2. Come, let vs worship, and fall downe before the Lord our maker (We must wholly giue our selues to the seruice of GOD.) Psa. 95.6. All the Gods of the peo∣ple, are Idols: but the Lord made the Heauens.
(Idols therefore, or what∣soeuer made not the Hea∣uens, are not God.) Psal. 96.6, 2. Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any grauen Jmage, nor the liknesse of any thing that is in heauen aboue, nor in the earth beneath nor in the wa∣ter vnder the earth; thou shalt not bow downe to them, nor worship them: For J the Lord thy God, am a ielous God, and visite the sinne of
the fathers vpon the chil∣dren, vnto the third and fourth generation, of them that hate me; and shew mercy vnto thousands, in them that loue me, & keepe my commaundements. NO man hath séene God at any time, the onely begotten Sonne of God, which is in the bosome of the Father, (hee is most deare and straitly ioyned to his Father, not onely in
loue, but also in nature and vnion.) hee hath deliuered him. (God was made visi∣ble, as it were, in Christ.) Iohn. 1.18. God is a Spirit, and they that worshipe him, must worship him in spirit and truth,) God being of a spi∣rituall nature, requireth a∣spirituall seruice, and a∣greeable to his nature. Ioh. 4.24. For somuch then, as we are the generation of God
we ought not to thinke, that the Godhead is like vnto Gold, or Siluer, or Stone, grauen by art, and the inuention of man. Act. 17.29. The worshipping of Idoles, which ought not to be named, in the begin∣ning, and the cause, and the end of all euill. Sapi. 14 26 The inuenting of Idols, was ye beginning of whore∣dome: and the finding of them, is the corruption of
life. Sapien. 14.12. Better therefore is the iust man, that hath none Idols: for he shall be farre from reproofe. Baruc. 6.72 Confounded be all they that serue grauen Ima∣ges, & that glory in Idols: worship him all ye Gods. (Let all that is of estima∣tion in the world, fall downe before the Lord.) Psal. 97.7, Thou shalt make thée no gods of Mettal. Exo. 34.17
Babes, keepe your selues from Idols. (From euery forme and fashion of thing, which is set vp for any de∣uotion to worship God.) 1. Iohn. 5.29. 3. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vaine: for the Lord will not hold him guilt lesse, that taketh his name in vaine. YEe haue heard how it was said to them of old time. Thou shalt not for∣sweare
thy selfe, but shalt performe thine othes to the Lord. But I say vnto you, Sweare not at all, neither by heauen, (all superfluous oathes are debared,) for it is the Throne of God: nor yet by the Earth, for it is his Footstoole: neither by Hierusalem, for it is the Citie of the great King. Neither shalt thou sweare by thine head, because thou canst not make one Haire white or blacke: But let
your communication be, Yea yea: Nay, nay: (let simplicitie and truth, be in your wordes; and then ye shall not be so light, & ready to sweare:) For whatsoeuer is more then these, commeth of euill. (when one speaketh other∣wise, then he thinketh in heart, it commeth of an e∣uill conscience, and of the Diuell. (Matth. 5.33.34.35.36.37. This is the curse that
goeth foorth ouer all the whole earth. &c. And euery one that sweareth, (he that transgresseth the first Ta∣ble, and serueth not God aright, but abuseth Gods name) shall be cut off, as wel on this side, as on that: I will bring it foorth, saith the Lord of Hoasts, and it shal enter, &c. into the house of him yt falsely sweareth by my name; and it shal re∣maine in the middest of his house, and shall consume it,
with the timber thereof, & stones thereof, Zach. 4.3.4. Accustome not thy selfe to swearing, (for in it there are many falles:) neither take vp for a custome, the naming of the holy one (for, thou shalt not be vnpuni∣shed for such things.) For, as a seruant which is oft punished, cannot be with∣out some scarre: so he that sweareth, and nameth God continually, shall not be faultlesse, &c. (Read the
Chapter, it is notable.) Eccles. 23.9.10.11. 4 Remember that thou keepe holy the Sabbath day Sixe dayes shalt thou labour and doe all that thou hast to doe but the seuenth day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. In it, thou shalt do no manner of worke, thou, and thy sonne, and thy daughter, the man-seruant, & thy mayd-seruant thy cattell, and the stranger that is within thy gates. For
in sixe dayes, the Lord made Heauen, and Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seuenth day: where∣fore the Lord blessed the se∣uenth day and hallowed it. IT is lawfull to doe wel, (or doe a good deed,) on the Sbbath day Matth. 12 12. The Sabbath was made for Man, and not Man for the Sabbath: wherefore the Sonne of man is Lord
euen of the Sabbath. Mar. 2.27.28. If thou turne away thy foote from the Sabbath, (If thou refraine thy selfe from thy wicked works,) from doing thy will on my Holy day, and call the Sab∣bath a delight, to consecrat it, as glorious to the Lord and shalt honour him, not doing thine owne wayes nor séeking thine own wil, nor speaking a vaine word: then shalt thou delight in
the Lord, and I will cause thee to mount vpon the high places of the earth, (I will aduance thee, & make thee honourable, (and féed thée with the heritage of Iacob thy Father, (and blesse thee with plentie of all things, to thy full con∣tentation:) for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. Esai. 58.13.14. Keepe the Sabbath day to sanctifie it, as the Lord thy God hath commaun∣ded.
Since God permit∣teth sixe dayes to our la∣bours, we ought willingly to dedicate the seauenth, to serue him wholly. The keeping of the Sabbath, consisteth not in our sel∣ues, but it commeth from aboue, euen from God the authour of the Sabbath.) Deut. 5.12.
The second Table 5. Honour thy Father, and thy Mother that thy dayes may be long in the lād, which the Lord thy God giueth thee HOnour thy Father, and Mother: (And) He that cursoth Father, or Mother let him die, (without any hope of pardon) Mat. 15 4. Mark 7.10. Honour thy Father, and Mother, (which is the first Commaundement, with
promise,) that it may be well, with thée, & that thou mayst liue long on earth. (The Promise is conditi∣onall, for if we neglect the dutie to vs enioyned, we make the Promise voyde, and of none effect, Ephes. 6.23. The Lord will haue the Father honoured of the Children, (for hee hath so commaunded,) and hath confirmed the authority of the Mother, ouer the Chil∣dren,
Who so honoureth his Father, his sinnes shal be forgiuen him; and he shall abstaine from them, and shall haue his dayly de∣sires, (God will be so gra∣cious vnto him, and so guide him, that he shall not doe amisse:) And he that honoureth his Mo∣ther, is like one that gathe∣reth treasure. Eccle. 3.2.34
6. Thou shalt doe no murder. YEe haue heard that it was said to them of old time, Thou shalt not kill; for whosoeuer killeth, shall be culpaple of Iudgment, (or subiect to puni∣shmēt:) but I say vnto you. Whosoeuer is angry with his brother vnaduisedly, shall be culpable of Iudge∣ment, (for God knowing his secreat malice, will punish him.) And whoso∣euer
saith vnto his brother, Raca, (Idle braine, a biword spoken in contempt, and despight,) shall be worthy to by punished by the Coū∣cell, (by Iudges thereto appoynted.) And whosoe∣uer shall say, Foole, shall be worthy to be punished with hell fire, Matth. 5 21.22. Loue your enemies, blesse them that curse you, doe good to them that hate you, and pray for them which hurt you, and perse∣cute
you: and vnto him that smiteth thee on the one cheeke, offer also the other, (Rather endure more in∣iurie, then reuenge your selues.) Luk. 7.27.28.29. 7. Thou shalt not commit Adulterie YEe haue heard that it was sayd to them of old time, Thou shalt not com∣mit Adulterie: But I say vnto you, that whosoeuer looketh on a Woman, to
lust after her, hath commit∣ted adultery with her al∣ready in his heart. (Chasti∣tie is required both in bo∣die and minde.) Math. 5.27.28. Flee Fornication. Eue∣ry sinne that a man doth, is without the body: but he that committeth Forni∣cation sinneth against his owne body. (He more pol∣luteth & defileth his owne body, then he that com∣mitteth any other sinne.)
1. Cor. 6.18. Know ye not, that your bodyes are the members of Christ: shall I then take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an Harlot: God forbid. 1. Cor. 6.15. Mariage is honourable, (and a remedie ordeined of God, against incontinen∣cie,) among all, and the bed vndefiled but: Whoremon∣gers and Adulterers, God will iudge. Heb. 13.4
8. Thou shalt not Steale. THou knowest the Com∣maundements: Thou shalt not steale Mat. 10.19 Why rather suffer yée not wrong: Nay, ye your selues doe wrong, and that to your bretheren: (hatred grudges, wrongfull dea∣lings, and desires of re∣uenge, &c. are forbidden.) Know ye not, that the vn∣righteous shal not inherite the kingdome of God: Be
not deceiued; neither adul∣rerers nor théeues, &c. shall inherite the kingdome of God: and such were some of you &c. 1. Cor. 6 7 8.9.10 Let him that stoale, steale no more; but let him rather labour, and worke with his handes, the thing which is good that he may haue to giue vnto him that néedeth Ephes. 4 28.
9. Thou shalt not beare false witnesse against thy neigh∣bour. THese sixe things doth the Lord hate: yea, his soule abhorreth seauen. 1. The hauty Eyes: 2. a ly∣ing Tongue: 3. Handes that shed innocent blood: 4 an Heart that imagineth wicked enterprises: 5. féete that be swift in running to mischiefe, (that is, affecti∣ons
which carry a man a∣way in such sort, that hee can not tell what he doth.) 6. a False witnesse: 7. him that rayseth vp Contenti∣ons among brethren, (or neighbours.) Prou. 6.16.17 Wherefore, cast off ly∣ing, and speake euery man truth vnto his neighbour; for we are members one of another Ephes. 4.25. A wicked witnesse moc∣keth at iudgement, and the mouth of the wicked, swal∣loweth
vp iniquitie. (Ta∣keth a pleasure, and deligh∣teth therein. as gluttons and drunkards, in dilicate meates and drinkes) Pro. 19.28. A false witnesse shall not be vnpunished: and he that speaketh lyes, shall perish. Prou. 19.9. 10. Thou shalt not couet thy neighbours house, thou shalt not couet thy neighbours wife nor his seruant, nor his mayd,
nor his oxe, nor his asse, nor any thing, that is his. WHatsoeuer ye would that men should doe to you, euen so doe to them: for this is the lawe and the Prophets. (The whole Law and the Scriptures, set foorth and commend charitie vnto vs.) Matth. 6.12 Luke. 6.31. Tob 4.15 To loue a mans neigh∣bour as himselfe, is more than all burnt offeringes
and sacrifices. (Than all the ceremonies of the Lawe, wherein Hipocrites put great holinesse.) Mark. 12.31.33. Let your conuersation be without couetousnesse, & be content with those thinges that ye haue Heb. 13 5. Godlinesse is great gaine, if a man be content with that he hath. (Religion is the true riches (1. Tim. 6.6 A foolish mans foote is soone in his neighbours
house: but a man of experi∣ence is ashamed to looke in. Eccles. 21.22. Follow not thy lusts, but turne thee from thine owne appetites: for if thou giuest thy soule her desires it shall make thine enimies that enuie thee, to laugh thee to scorne. Eccle. 18.30 Let not sinne therefore reigne in your mortall bo∣dy, that ye should obey it in the lustes thereof. (The mind first ministreth euill
motions, wherby mans will is enticed: thence burst foorth the lustes, by them the body is prouoked, and the body by his actions doth sollicite the minde, therfore we are comman∣ded, at the least to rule our bodies.) Rom. 6.12. Sit not at al with another mans wife, neither ly with her vpon the bed, nor ban∣quet with her, least thine heart incline vnto her, and so through thy desire, fall
into destruccion. Eccl. 9 11. Giue me thy vineyard, that I may make me a gar∣den of hearbes thereof, &c. (Achabs inordinate lust, after Naboths inheritance, sharpely punished.) 1. Kin. 21.2.4.6 &c. If mine heart hath been deceiued by a woman, (to lust after her,) or, if I haue laid waite at the doore of my neighbour, let my wife grinde vnto another man and let other men bowe
downe vpon her. To a∣buse her. Iob. 31.9.10 The leprosie therefore of Naaman, shall cleaue vnto thee, & to thy séed for euer. (To be an example to all such, as by whose coue∣tousnes, Gods word might be slaundered,) because Gehazi was the seruant of Elisha the Prophet, named in Scripture, The man of God.) 2. King. 5.27. Lord haue mercie vpon vs and by the operation of thy holy Spirit, incline our heartes to keepe these Lawes Amen.
The necessarie appurte∣nances belonging to this Conduit. The Cesterne to this Conduit. A Cesterne to this Conduit, of Comfort must haue, The water thence flowing, vnsoyled to saue. Of this vnprouided, no Christian should bee, The nature and vertue thereof, if they see; And therefore neglect not, so precious a thing: Which (beside other benefites) Gods blessing doth bring.
A Cesterne is, required heere, To keepe this Conduit-water cleere. For precious Pearles, and Oyntment sweet, Must places haue, for them most meete. Haue care to keepe thy Conscience cleane, This is the Cesterne which I meane. It must be swept, it must be scowrd, Before this water in be powrd. Pure wine which hath, a fragrant in all, Into a Pot, not sauouring well
The Wine will change, the vertue gon, This hurt doth follow therevpon: Euen so a Conscience. soyld with sinne. Corrupt and cankred all within, With diuelish thoughts vngodly lusts, Vile auarice, in wealth which trustes: Neglecting God, the well of wealth, And vnto his. the horne of health. A Conscience staind, and blemisht thus: If we perceiue to lodge in vs,
The grace of God, ecclipsed is, So that we must, needs doe amisse. For le vs learne, and beare away, Our conscience doth our deedes bewray: And layeth load, with heaue and shoue, At vs before: the Lord aboue. And as in Courtes, where Iudges sit. The custome is. not to acquit, Vh'offender of his foule offence, Except there come in euidence:
And make his caue, vpright and good, Dischargd is he, trueth vnderstood: Euen so it fares, with euerie one, whose sinnes to such, excesse is growne, That in themselues, their conscience sits, And Serpent like, against them spits. Ten thousand thousand sore complaintes. And with sharpe torments, them attaines. Thus doth their conscience them arraine, And to confesse, doth them constraine,
All such misdeedes, as they haue done: So that into Gods curse they runne: Which threatens death and hell to such, As of this world haue made so much, That truth contemnd, lies vnder foote: The plants thereof, rent vp by roote, Gods word, and will, is set at nought. An euill conscience, this hath wrought: A conscience voyd of Gods good grace: Not hell it selfe, so ill a place,
This is the worme. which euer gnawes The corsiue salue, which sharply drawes: This is the fire which fiercely burnes And all our ioyes, to torments turnes. In such a place, no rest can dwell And why? it is a verie Hell O well are they, that liue vpright, Pleasing the Lord, with all their mi Keeping his law, hearing his word, (To cut downe sinne, the spirituall sword.)
For why? all such. shall feele within, A conscience cleare, from spots of sinne: And puifide. it may persume, The fragrant flowers. and sweete perfume, Of godlie praier, vnto the Lord, To sacrifice, with heartie accord. This is the Cesterne, (marke it well) Of dregs or leeze, which must not smell: For if it doe, this Conduit spout, No drop of comfort, yeeldeth out,
A conscience pure, therefore possesse, And things amisse, with speed redresse, Least this sweete Conduit: being shut, From hope of comfort thou be put. In summe, if thou Gods child wilt be, And wouldst that prayer, should comfort thee. Prepare thy heart, thy minde apply: Thy conscience seeke to sanctifie. Amend thy life, imbrace that's good, And fire thy fayth on Christes blood:
Then shall thy prayers sweetly smell, Before the Lord, and like him well: And thou shalt haue thy hearts desire, And vnto hope of health aspire. Which grant, O God, vnto vs all: To whom by fayth, for grace we call. That we may pray; and praying please Thy Godhead, and thy wrath appease, O people we, thrice happy then: Graunt this O God, Amen, Amen
The Pipe to this Conduit. A Pipe to this Conduit, by leuell is layd, where through pleasant liquor of life is conuaid: This Pipe, and the Cesterne. are ioyned in one: Both must be imbraced, or both let alone; Which that with reoycing each christian may doe, Th'almightie by prayer, must be sued nto,
THe Pipe is peace, more worth then Gold: A Iewell for no riches sold. It is not peace twit King and King, (Although this be a precious thing:) For where in peace, Kings weare the Crowne There all dissention is cast downe: There people liue in hearty loue There is no cause, to fend and proue, Their high estates such dutie haue, As their degrees and callings craue:
Th'inferiour knowes, and vnderstands, What their superiours state demaunds: The baser to the better bowes, And seruice due, likewise allowes. There is no grudge, there is no strife. Where people passe in peace their life. The seedes which we in soyle doe sow. Spring vp, and spread, increase and grow. Vnto our charge, we haue an eye, Our labours doe our lackes supply.
We worship God. His name we feare, And to our Prince true heartes we beare. Among our selues in loue we liue These are the fruits, which peace doth giue But yet the peace which doth surmount All precious thinges that we can count, It is not peace, twixt man and man: Which no long time▪ continue can: It is that peace, which bringeth blisse: Their precious peace, perpetuall is.
The authour of This peace, is God: Who for our sinnes, with vs was od, For as we know, through Adams fall, To God his wrath, We were in thrall: So that hereby this gaine we got, Euen death for life, (ah hellish lot:) Our owne misdeedes deserueth death: And God, who giueth life and breath, Suppressing peace, became our foe: And from the heauens aloft, did throw
His thunderbolts of fearefull threates, And in his heate, his sword he wheats: Even warriour like, to strike vs downe, (For man doth melt when God doth frowne.) Thus with the Lord, we were at ods, Ours was the smart the vengeance Gods: Which whiles it did endure and last, All hope of peace. was gone and past: Till he from heauen beholding vs, With wrethednesse inclosed thus:
Prouided in this heauy case, T'amend our state, by his good grace: This he vouchaft to bring to passe: (A wonderous work of his it was:) From mercie seate, he sent his Sonne, At whose corruption. peace begunn. God did ordaine, that Christ should die, Vpon a Crosse reard vp on hie: By losse of life, to purchase peace. True Christian comfort, to increase:
Among the Iewes betrayd, he fell: One of the twelue, presumd to sell. For thirtie pence, his Maisters life: The losse whereof, abolisht strife. The Iewes did lay on him their hands, His limbs and ioynts they bound with hands: They scoft and mockt him too too bad: Their wish and will on him they laid: Vpon the Crosse he made his end, His soule to God he did commend.
This sacrifice God highly pleasd, And this his rigorous rage apeasd. Heere reconcilement first began, And peace was made twixt God and man. The price of this most perfect peace. Which Christian comfort doth increase: Declares thereof the dignitie: This peace remaynes immortally This peace confirmd twixt God and vs, And true attonement sealed thus;
That through this Pipe of peace, may spout, And pleasantly in streames run out, Such comfort as in thee doe dwel, Which are the fountaine and the well, The Conduit and, the liuely spring, Of euery good and healthfull thing. Thus (Lord) if thou vouchafe to worke: Ingratitude, which loues to lurke Whithin our heartes them to possesse, Shall banisht be by thankfullnesse,
and we shall praise Iehouah then. Grant this, O God, Amen, Amen.
The Locke to this Conduit. A Locke to this Conduit, of right doth belong, Prouided of purpose, substantiall and strong. Of this Locke tis needfull, Christs sheepe to haue skill, That opening this Conduit, their hearts they might fill, With true ioy and gladnesse, with peace and with rest, And all kind of comfort, that we can request.
FIrst loue the Lord. who formed thee. And like himselfe created thee. Loue Iesus Christ, who thee redeemd: So precious he thy soule esteemd. Loue him, whose loue with losse of life, Twixt God and vs, cut of the strife. Loue him aboue all earthly treasure: And lone with loue, most kindly measure, Loue thou his Saints, and holy ones. As of his Church, the liuely stones:
Whose head is he, his members they: Who hates his Saints, doe him betray· Loue thou Gods word, his Gospell heare, Therein of life are riuers cleare: It is the pearle whereby was wrought A wonder worthy, dayly thought. loue vnto all thy neighbours beare. And let thy loue shine euery where: To all and some, to friend and foe: To them that seeke thine ouerthrow.
Loue all hate none; to christ commaunds: Herein the Law consistes and standes. Loue Strangers well, no gaudge them beare, Remembring once, we strangers were. Though Denizons now by Gods good grace▪ His loue restord vs to this place. Loue vertuous life, and goodnesse seeke, And like to Christ, learne to be meeke. Loue lowlinesse, and spit at pride, Gods spirit in such, will not abide,
Loue to forgiue. and to forbeare: This is a signe of Christian feare. Thy brothers fault, though worthy blame Dissemble thou and hide his shame. Thus armd with loue, thou mayst be hold. Sinne, Satan, Death, our enimies old Shall not haue power to doe thee harme, God is thy helpe, he is thine arme: This is the Locke. which thou and I, And euery one, (before we die)
Ought set vpon our hearts and mindes, Where treasure lie, of sundry kindes. Which Locke if we, doe seeke to haue, It is not Death. nor yet the graue, Thou shalt abridge our heauenly blisse, In Christ our Conduit, kept it is. Of all therefore, this is the summe, If to this Conduit we will comme: And thence fetch comfort at our need. (This is) if we to pray proceed:
And aske of God, the things we want, Beseeching him the same to graunt: For Iesus sake, his onely Sonne. By loue this worke must be begonne. Which if we haue, then sure we may Before the Lord, approch and pray: For otherwise, all that we doe, Is sinne and death belonges thereto. This locke of loue. O graunt vs then, Sweet Sauiour Christ. Amen, Amen.
The Key to this Conduit A Key to this Conduit, of Comfort pertaines. Whose vse and due seruice, whosoeuer disdaines, Aloofe from this Conduit them selues let them keepe, Christ is not their Shepheard, nor they of his Sheepe. This Key therefore learne we, to vse, and possesse: Our Shepheard Christ Iesus, then may we confesse.
FIrst, now thy selfe but flesh and blood. Nay, nay; but art thou halfe so good? Know rather this, thou art but dust, From Earth thou camst, to Earth thou must. Know thine estate by Adams fall, Exild from life, to death in thrall: To sinne a slaue, to Hell a pray: Know this, and cast all pride away, Knowst thou thy selfe a blast of winde, And hearst about a lofty winde?
Knowst thou thy state to be but nought, Thy life a threed but slightly wrought, And settest vp the Peacocks plume, As though nothing should thee consume? This knowledge but fond and vaine, A better knowledge doth remaine: A knowledge which from God proceedes This knowledge guides our thoughtes and deedes: This knowledge shewes (as in a Glasse) That sinne in vs had brought to passe,
Eternall death. and endlesse paine In Hell where damned soules remaine· This knowledge, learnes vs likewise this: That albeit we did amisse. And kindled Gods consuming ire: Yet Christ his blood hath quencht that fire: So that this knowledge marked well, May be supposed to excell All earthly things. which passe away, As Flowers in hate of Summers day,
This knowledge, leades vs to the Lord, And makes our willes, with his t'accord Know God aright, know Christ his sonne: Know thou the thing he will haue done: Know him that made the heauen and earth, Ad fed thee since thy day of birth: Know him that gies thee in thy need, Conuenient Victuals,, thee to feed: Know him in Christ, his Sonne first orne, The sauiour of our soules forlorne:
Know God the Father onely wise, Know him in heart. with faythfull eyes: Know him, whom heauen and earth obey, Whose word ordain'd both night and day: The world, and all. that is therein, Are lessons where we may beginn, To learne to know him as he is: The God of peace, and endlesse blisse: None other knowledge is required: By this, great numbers haue aspired
Vnto the top of ioyfull state: Such knowledge neuer comes too late. Know that to stand in feare and awe, Are meanes and wayes, to keepe the Law. This knowledge is the very Kay, Without the which, we can not pray: No comfort can, this Conduit giue: Looke for no liquor, whiles we liue, Vnlesse this Key, of Knowledg come. That is (in briefe, to shew the summe,)
Except we know the Lord of Host, And Christ his Sonn. and th'holy Ghost: Our selues, our wants, and dayly neede: And pray, in hope that we shall speed▪ Our prayers turne to little good. (Let this be learnd, and vnderstood.) True knowledge, Lord, Giue vs therfore: Which is the Key, to ope the doore Of perfect Prayer, gushing out, With comforts sweet, like to a Spout,
Beginning at the Conduit head: (For at the Fountaine it is feed.) This Knowledge, graunt vs, Iesus, then, Say people all, Amen. Amen.
The Summe, or Conclusion. POssesse a good Conscience, in running thy race: Seeke peace and attonement, with Gods diuine grace: Let Loue be the Iewell, and ioy of thy heart: And Knowledge instruct thee, to learne what thou art: Then enter Gods Temple, and there humbly pray, In hope what thou crauest, to carry away. Amen. FJNIS.
Graces to be sayde before and after Meate. Before Meate O Lord God heauenly Father, Creator and feeder of all liuing creatures, we humbly and heartily thanke thee for these thy creatures as pledges of thy fauor, for the nourishing of our bodies, beseeching thee to sanctifie them vnto vs, and vs vnto thy selfe, that we receiuing them as from thee, our soules may also be nourished and fedde with spirituall Manna from Heauen. Amen.
After Meate. WEe thanke thee, O Lord God Almighty, for satis∣fying and feeding vs with thy blessing at this, & all other times: sanctifie and blesse vs, we beseech thee, with thy holy spirit: & grant that wee being refreshed with these thy cretures, may follow our lawfull vocation in thy feare and true obedience, that when soeuer we die, we may die in thy fauour. Amen. Before Meate. BLesse these thy giftes, most gracious God. From whom all goodnes springs: Make cleane our hearts,
And feede our soules With good and needfull thinges: A thankfull heart renew in vs, According to thy will: Aboue our strength, Lord proue vs not, But saue vs from all ill. Amen. After Meate. WEe thanke thee, most gra∣cious God, for this thy feeding our thirsty Bodies: so vouchsafe to feede our silly soules with the bread of eternall life: that after this life ended, we may ascend where Christ is gone be∣fore vs. Amen. FJNIS.
The chiefe Poyntes, or summarie Contentes of this Booke. FIrst, a Prayer for Morning and Euening. A Prayer▪ A Prayer for the obtei∣ning of Grace. For thākfulnes to God for his graces & gifts. For loue & vnitie with all men. For the hearing, & true Vnderstanding of the word of God. To God for forgiuenes of manifold & grie¦uous sinnes. To bee setled in the truth.
To lead our life accor∣ding to the will of God. To fast, and abstaine from sinne. For grace to forsake e∣uill & to follow that which is good. For the assistance of the holy Ghost. Against wrath & malice For obedience to the keeping of Gods com∣mandements. For true & hearty re∣pentance To the Lord, to turne his wrathful displea∣sure
away from vs. For a cleare and quiet conscience. To be zealous in the hearing of the worde of God. For a patient mind in trouble. In time of prosperitie, or aduerstie. For patience in time of los of goods or lands A thankes giuing for meate, dainke, & clo∣thing. For ayde & helpe in all extremities & neede. Against slaunderous &
euill tongues. For peace in time of Warre, or other vexa∣tion. For deliuerance from foes spirituall & tem∣porall. Of a penitent soule o∣uer turned with sin. To be feed from al vi∣ces. Against vaine delights & worldly pleasures. Of a penitent sinner, la∣menting his former life so ill spent. Of a sorrowfull sinner, laying his heart open,
praying for a firme faith. Desiring mercy & for∣giuenesse. To bee prepared a∣gainst the houre of death To lead our liues accor¦ding to the Law, and will of God. To keepe our tongue from speaking ill. To fast & pray aright. Against wilfull sins & snares of Satan. For feare of the Lord, and loue of his word. The Contemplation of a sinner.
The seauen Petitions of the Lords prayer, with a briefe exposition thereof, drawne out of holy Scripture. The Beliefe of a Christian, com∣monly called, The Apostles Creede; deuided into twelue Articles, and expounded. The ten Commandements of Almighty God▪ called; The two Tables of the Law, expounded by sentences and examples. The necessary appurtenances be∣longing to this Conduit: and first, of the Cesterne to this Con∣duit is Conscience. The Pipe to this Conduit of com∣fort, is Peace.
The Locke to this Conduit of Comfort, is Loue. The Key to this Conduit of Com∣fort, is Knowledge. Godly Graces to be sayd before, and after meate. FINIS.
