12245 99852791 18140
GREENES, GROATS-VVORTH of witte, bought with a million of Repentance. Describing the follie of youth, the falshood of make∣shifte flatterers, the miserie of the negligent, and mischiefes of deceiuing Courtezans. Written before his death and published at his dyeing request. Foelicem fuisse infaustum. LONDON Imprinted for William Wright. 1592.
The Printer to the Gentle Readers. I Haue published here Gentle men for your mirth and be∣nefite Greenes groates worth of wit. VVith sundry of his pleasant discourses, ye haue beene before delighted: But nowe hath death giuen a period to his pen? onely this happened into my handes which I haue published for your pleasures: Accept it fauourably because it was his last birth and not least worth? In my poore opinion. But I will cease to praise that which is aboue my conceipt, & leaue it selfe to speak for it selfe? and so abide your learned censuring. Yours VV. VV.
To the Gentlemen Readers. GEntlemen. The Swan sings melodiously before death, that in all his life time v∣seth but a iarring sound. Greene though able inough to write, yet deeplyer serched with sicknes than euer heeretofore, sendes you his Swanne like songe, for that he feares he shall nener againe carroll to you woonted loue layes, neuer againe discouer to you youths plea∣sures. How euer yet sicknesse, riot, Incon∣tinence, haue at once shown their extremitie yet if I recouer, you shall all see, more fresh sprigs, then euer sprang from me, direct∣ing you how to liue, yet not diswading ye fro loue. This is the last I haue writ, and I feare me the last I shall writ. And how euer I haue beene censured for some of my former bookes, yet Gentlemen I protest, they were as I had speciall information. But passing them, I commend this to your fauourable censures, that like an Embrion
without shape, I feare me will be thrust in∣to the world. If I liue to end it, it shall be otherwise: if not, yet will I commend it to your courtesies, that you may as well be ac∣quainted with my repentant death, as you haue lamented my careles course of life. But as Nemo ante obitum felix, so Acta Ex∣itus probat: Beseeching therefore so to be deemed heereof as I deserue, I leaue the worke to your likinges, and leaue you to your delightes.
GREENES GROATES-VVORTH OF WIT. IN an Iland bounded with the Ocean. there was somtime a Cittie situated, made riche by Marchandize, and populous by long peace, the name is not mentioned in the Antiquarie, or els worne out by times An∣tiquitie, what it was it greatly skilles not, but therein thus it happened. An old new made Gen∣tleman herein dwelt, of no small credit, exceeding wealth, and large conscience: hee had gathered from many to bestow vpon one, for though he had two sonnes he esteemed but one, that being as him∣selfe, brought vp to be golds bondman, was there∣fore held heire apparant of his il gathered goods. The other was a Scholler, and maried to a pro∣per Gentlewoman and therfore least regarded, for tis an old sayd saw: To learning & law, thers no greater foe than they that nothing know: yet
was not the father altogether vnlettered, for he had good experience in a Nouerint, and by the vniuer∣sall tearmes therein contained, had driuen many a yoong Gentleman to séeke vnknowen countries, wise he was, for he boare office in his parish and sat as formally in his foxfurd gowne, as if he had been a very vpright dealing Burges: he was religious too, neuer without a booke at his belt, and a bolt in his mouthe, readye to shoote through his sinfull neighbor. And Latin hee had some where learned, which though it were but little, yet was it profitable, for he had this Philosophye written in a ring, Tu tibi cura, which precept he curiously obserued, being in selfeloue so religious, as he held it no poynt of cha∣ritie to part with any thing, of whiche hee liuing might make vse. But as all mortall thinges are momentanie, and no certaintie can bee-found in this vncertaine world: so Gorinius, (for that shall bee this vsurers name) after manye a gowtie pang that had pincht his exterior partes, many a curse of the people that moūted into heuens presence, was at last with his last summons, by a deadly disease arrested, wher∣against when hee had long contended, and was by Phisitions giuen ouer, he cald his two sonnes be∣fore him: and willing to performe the old prouerb Qualis vita finis Ita, he thus prepard himselfe, and admonished them. My sonnes (for so your mother sayde ye were) and so I assure my selfe one of you is, and of the other I will make no doubt. You se the time is com, which I thought would
neuer haue aproched and we must now be sepera∣ted, I feare neuer to meete againe. This sixteene yeares dayly haue I liude vexed with disease: and might I liue sixteene more, howe euer miserably, I should thinke it happye. But death is relentlesse, and will not be intreated witles: and knowes not what good my gold might doo him: senseles, & hath no pleasure in the delightfull places I would offer him. In briefe, I thinke he hath with this foole my eldest sonne been brought vp in the vniuersitie, and therefore accounts that in riches is no vertue. But thou my son, (laying then his hand on the yongers head) haue thou another spirit: for without wealth, life is a death: what is gentry if welth be wanting, but bace seruile beggerie. Some comfort yet it is vnto me, to thinke how many Gallants sprunge of noble parents, haue croucht to Gorinius to haue sight of his gold: O gold, desired gold, admired gold? and haue lost their patrimonies to Gorinius, because they haue not returned by their day that a∣dored creature? How manye Schollers haue writ∣ten rymes in Gorinius praise, and receiued (after long capping and reuerence) a sixpeny reward in signe of my superficial liberality. Breefly my yong Lucanio how I haue beene reurenst thou seest, when honester men I confesse haue been sett farre off: for to bee rich is to bee any thing, wise, honest, worshipful, or what not. I tel thee my sonne: when I came first to this Citie my whole wardrop was onely a sute of white sheepe skins, my wealth an old groat, my woonning, the wide world. At this instant (o greefe to part with it) I haue in ready
coine thréescore thousand pound, in plate and Ie∣wels xv. thousand; in Bondes and specialties as much, in land nine hundred pound by the yeere: all which, Lucanio I bequeath to thee, only I reserue for Roberto thy wel red brother an old groat, (be∣ing ye stocke I first began with (wherewith I wish him to buy a groats-worth of wit: for he in my life hath reprooud my manner of life, and therefore at my death, shall not be contaminated with corrupt gaine. Here by the way Gentlemen must I digresse to shewe the reason of Gorinius present speach: Roberto being come from the Academie, to visit his father, there was a great feast prouided: where for table talke, Roberto knowing his father and most of the company to be execrable vsurers, in∣uayed mightely against that abhorred vice, inso∣muche that hee vrged teares from diuers of their eyes, and compunction in some of their harts. Din∣ner being past, he comes to his father, requesting him to take no offence at his liberall speach, seeing what he had vttred was truth. Angry sonne (said he) no by my honestie (and that is som what I may say to you) but vse it still, and if thou canst per∣swade any of my neighbours from lending vppon vsurie I shuld haue the more customers: to which when Roberto would haue replyde hee shut him∣selfe into his studdy, and fell to tell ouer his mony. This was Robertos offence: now returne, wee to sicke Gorinius, who after he had thus vnequal∣ly distributed his goods and possessions, began to aske his sonnes how they liked his bequestes, ei∣ther séemed agréed, and Roberto vrged him with
nothing more than repentance of his sinnloke: to thine owne said he, fonde boy, & come my Lucanio, let me giue thee good counsell before my death: as for you sir, your bookes are your counsellors, and therefore to them I bequeathe you. Ah Lucanio, my onely comfort, because I hope thou wilt as thy father be a gatherer, let me blesse thee before I dye. Multiply in welth my sonne by any meanes thou maist, onely flye Alchymie, for therein are more deceites than her beggerlye Artistes haue words, and yet are the wretches more talkatiue than women. But my meaning is, thou shouldest not stand on conscience in causes of profit, but heap treasure vpon treasure, for the time of néede: yet séem to be deuout, els shalt thou be held vyle, fre¦quent holy excercises graue companie, and aboue al vse the conuersation of yoong Gentlemen, who are so wedded to prodigalitie, that once in a quarter ne∣cissitie knocks at their chamber doores: profer them kindnesse to relieue theirwants, but be sure of good assurance: giue faire wordes till dayes of paiment come, & then vse my course, spare none: what though they tell of conscience (as a number will talke) looks but into the dealinges of the world, and thou shalt see it is but idle words. Seest thou not many pe∣rish in the streetes, and fall to theft for néede: whom small succor woulde releeue, then where is consci∣ence, and why art thou bound to vse it more than o∣ther men? Seest thou not daylie forgeries periu∣ries, oppressions, rackinges of the poore, raisinges of rents, inhauncing of duties euen by them that should be al conscience, if they ment as they speake:
but Lucanio if thou read well this booke (and with that hee reacht him Machiauels workes at large) thou shalt se, what tis to be so foole-holy as to make scruple of conscience where profit presents it selfe. Besides, thou hast an instance by the threed bare brother here, who willing to do no worng, hath lost his childes right: for who woulde wish any thinge to him, that knowes not how to vse it. So much Lucanio for conscience: & yet I know not whats the reason, but some-what stinges mee inwardly when I speake of it. I father said Rober∣to, it is the worme of conscience, that vrges you at the last houre to remember your life, that eternall life may followe your repentance. Out foole (sayd this miserable father, I féele it now, it was onelye a stitch. I will forwarde with my exhortation to Lucanio. As I said my sonne, make spoyle of yoong Gallants, by insinuating thy selfe amongst them, & be not mooued to thinke their Auncestors were fa∣mous, but consider thine were obscure, and that thy father was the first Gentleman of the Name: Lu∣canio, thou art yet a Bacheler, and soe keepe thee till thou méete with one that is thy equal, I meane in wealth: regarde not beautie, it is but a bayte to entice thine neighbors eye: and the most faire are commonlye most fond, vse not too many familiars, for few prooue frendes, and as easie it is to weigh the wind, as to diue into the thoughtes of world∣lye glosers. I tell thee Lucanio, I haue seene four-scoore winters besides the od seuen, yet saw I neuer him, that I estéemed as my friend but gold, that desired creature, whom I haue so déerly loued,
and found so firme a frind, as nothing to me hauing it hath béene wanting. No man but may thinke déerly of a true frend, & so do I of it laying it vnder sure locks, and lodging my heart there-with. But now (Ah my Lucanio) now must I leaue it, and to thée I leaue it with this lessen, loue none but thy selfe, if thou wilt liue estéemd. So turning him to his studdy, where his cheife treasure lay, he loud cryde out in the wise mans woords, O mors quam amara, O death how bitter is thy memory to him that hath al pleasures in this life, & so with two or thrée lamentable grones hee left his life: and to make short worke, was by Lucanio his sonne in∣terd, as the custome is with some solemnitie: But leauing him that hath left the world to him that censureth of euery worldly man, passe wee to his sonnes: and se how his long laid vp store is by Lu∣canio lookyd into. The youth was of condition sim¦ple, shamfast, & flexible to any counfaile, which Ro∣berto perceiuing, and pondering howe little was lefte to him, grew into an inward contempt of his fathers vnequall legacie, and determinate resolu∣tion to work Lucanio al possible iniurie, here vpon thus conuerting the swéetnes of his studdye to the sharpe thirst of reuenge, he (as Enuie is seldome idle) sought out fit companions to effect his vn∣brotherly resolution. Neither in such a case is ill company far to séek, for ye Sea hath scarce so ieoper∣dies, as populous Citties haue deceiuing Syrens, whose eies are Adamants, whose words are witch∣craftes, whose doores lead downe to death. With one of these female serpents Roberto consorts, and
they conclude what euer they compassed equally to sharre to their contentes. This match made, Lu∣canio was by his brother brought to the bush, where he had scarse pruned his winges, but hee was fast limd, and Roberto had what he expected. But that wee may keepe forme, you shall heare howe it fortuned. Lucanio being on a time verie pensiue, his brother brake with him in these termes. I won∣der Lucanio why you are disconsolate, that want not any thinge in the worlde that may worke your content. If wealth may delight a man, you are with that sufficently furnisht: if credit may pro∣cure any comfort, your word I knowe well, is as well accepted as any mans obligation: in this Ci∣tie, are faire buildings and pleasant gardens, and cause of solace, of them I am assured you haue your choyce. Consider brother you are yoong, then plod not altogether in meditating on our fathers pre∣cepts: which howseuer they sauored of profit, were most vnsauerly to one of your yeares applied. You must not thinke but sundrye marchants of this Ci∣tie expect your company, sundry Gentlemen desire your familiaritie, & by cōuersing with such, you wil be accounted a Gentleman: otherwise a pesant, if ye liue thus obscurely. Besides, which I had al∣most forgot and then had al the rest beene nothing, you are a man by nature furnished with all exqui∣site proportion, worthy the loue of any courtly lady, be she neuer so amorous: you haue wealth to main taine her, of women not little longed for: wordes to court her you shall not want, for my selfe will be
your secretarie. Bréefely why stand I to distinguish abilitie in perticularities, when in one word it may be said which no man can gainsay, Lucanio lacketh nothing to delight a wife, nor any thing but a wife to delight him? My yoong maister being thus clawd, and pufft vp with his owne praise, made no longer delay, but hauing on his holidaie hose hee trickt himselfe vp and like a fellowe that meant good sooth, he clapt hys brother on the shoulder and said. Faith brother Roberto, and ye say the worde lets goe seeke a wife while tis hoat, both of vs together, Ile pay well, and I dare tourne you loose to say as well as any of them all, well Ile doo my best said Roberto and since ye are so for∣warde lets goe nowe and try your good fortune. With this foorth they walke, and Roberto went directly toward the house where Lamilia (for so wee call the Curtizan) kept her hospitall, which was in the suburbes of the Citie, pleasantly seated, and made more delectable by a pleasaunt garden wherin it was scituate. No soner come they within ken, but Mistris Lamilia like a cunning angler made readye her change of baytes that shee might effect Lucanios bane: and to begin she di∣scouered from her window her beauteous enticing face, and taking a lute in her hand that shee might the rather allure, shee soung this sonnet with a delicious voyce,
Lamilias song. Fie fie on blind fancie, It hinders youths ioy: Faire virgins learne by me, To count loue a toy. When loue learnd first the ABC of delight, And knew no figures, nor conceited phrase: He simply gaue to due desert her right, He lead not louers in darke winding wayes, He plainely wild to loue, or flatly answerd no, But now who lists to proue shall find it nothing so, Fie fie then on fancie, It hinders youths ioy, Faire virgins learne by me, To count loue a toy. For since he learnd to vse the Poets pen, He learnd likewise with smoothing words to faine, Witching chast eares with trothles tungs of men, And wronged faith with falshood and disdaine. He giues a promise now, anon he sweareth no, Who listeth for to proue shall find his changings so, Fie fie then on fancie, It hinders youthes ioy, Faire virgins learne by me, To count loue a toy.
While this painted sepulcher was shadowing her corrupting guilt, Hiena-like alluring to destruction, Roberto and Lucanio vnder her windowe kept euen pace with euery stop of her instrument, but especially my yoong Ruffler, (that before time like a birde in a cage had beene prentise for thrée liues or one and twentie yeares at lest to extreame A∣varice his deceased father) O twas a world to see howe hee sometyme simperd it, striuing to sett a countenance on his new turnd face, that it might seeme of wainscot proofe, to behold her face without blushing: anone he would stroke his bow-bent-leg, as if he ment to shoote loue arrows from his shins: then wypt his chin (for his beard was not yet gro∣wen) with a gold wrought handkercher, whence of purpose he let fall a handfull of Angels. This golden shower was no sooner raind, but Lamilia ceast her song, and Roberto (assureing himselfe the foole was caught) came to Lucanio (that stood now as one that had stard Medusa in the face) and awaked him from his amazement with these wordes. What in a traunce brother? whence springs these dumps? are ye amazd at this obiect? or long ye to become loues subiect? Is there not difference betweene this delectable life, and the imprisonment you haue all your life hether too in∣dured? If the sight and hearing of this harmony∣ous beautie worke in you effects of wonder, what will the possession of so deuine an effence, wherein beautie & Art dwell in their perfectest excellence. Brother said Lucanio lets vse fewe wordes, and shee be no more then a woman, I trust youle helpe
me to win her? and if you doe, well, I say no more but I am yours till death vs depart, and what is mine shall be yours world without end A men. Roberto smiling at his simplenes helpte him to gather vppe his dropt gold, and without anye more circumstance, led him to Lamilias house: for of such places it may be said as of hell. Noctes atque dies patet atri ianua ditis. So their dores are euer open to entice youth to distruction. They were no sooner entred but La∣milia her selfe like a seconde Helen, court like be∣gins to salute Roberto, yet did her wandring eie glance often at Lucanio: the effect of her intertain∣ment consisted in these tearmes, that to her simple house Signor Roberto was welcome, & his bro∣ther the better welcom for his sake: albeit his good report confirmde by his present demeaner were of it selfe enough to giue him deserued entertaine∣ment in any place how honorable soeuer: mutuall thankes returnd, they lead this prodigall child into a parlor garnished with goodly portratures of amiable personages: nere which an excellent con∣sort of musike began at their entraunce to play. Lamilia seeing Lucanio shamefast, tooke him by the hand, and tenderly wringing him vsed these wordes. Beleeue me Gentleman, I am very sorie that our rude entertainment is such, as no way may worke your content, for this I haue noted since your first entering that your countenance hath beene heauie, and the face being the glasse of the hart, assures me the same is not quiet: would ye wish any thing heere that might content you, say
but the word, and assure ye of present diligence to effect your full delight. Lucanio being so farre in loue, as he perswaded himselfe without her grant he could not liue, had a good meaninge to vtter his minde but wanting fit wordes, he stood like a tre∣want that lackt a prompter, or a plaier that being out of his part at his first entrance, is faine to haue the booke to speak what he should performe. Which Roberto perceiuing, replied thus in his behalfe: Madame the Sunnes brightnesse daisleth the be∣holders eies, the maiestie of Gods, amazeth hu∣mane men, Tullie Prince of Orators once fainted though his cause were good, and hee that tamed monsters stoode amated at Beauties ornaments: Then blame not this yoong man though he replied not, for he is blinded with the beautie of your sunne darkening eies, made mute with the celestiall or∣gane of your voyce, and feare of that rich ambush of amber colored dartes, whose poyntes are leueld against his hart. Well Signor Roberto said shee, how euer you interpret their sharpe leuell, be sure they are not bent to doo him hurt, and but that modestie blindes vs poore maydens from vttering the inward sorrow of our mindes, perchance the cause of greefe is ours how euer men do colour, for as I am a virgin I protest, (and there withall shée tainted her cheekes with a vermilion blush) I ne∣uer saw Gentleman in my life in my eie so gratio∣us as is Lucanio only this is my greefe, that either I am dispised for that he scornes to speak, or els (which is my greater sorrow) I feare he can∣not speake. Not speake Gentlewoman quoth Lu∣canio?
that were a iest indéed, yes I thanke God I am sound of wind and lym, only my hart is not as it was wont: but and you be as good as your word that will soone be well, and so crauing ye of more acquaintance, in token of my plaine meaning re∣ceiue this diamond, which my old father loud déere∣ly: and with that deliuered her a ringe wherein was a poynted diamonde of wonderfull worth. Which she accepting with a lowe conge, returnd him a silke Riband for a fauour tyde with a true loues knot, which he fastened vnder a faire Iewel on his Beuer felt. After this Diomedis & Glauci permutatio, my yong master waxed crancke, and the musike conti∣nuing, was very forward in dauncing, to shew his cunning: and so desiring them to play on a horne∣pipe, laid on the pauement lustely with his leaden héeles, cornetting, like a stéede of Signor Roccoes teaching, & wanted nothing but bels, to be a hobby∣horse in a morrice. Yet was he soothed in his folly, and what euer he did Lamilia counted excellent: her prayse made him proude, in so much that if hee had not beene intreated, hee would rather haue died in his daunce, then left off to shew his mistris delight. At last reasonably perswaded, séeing the table fur∣nished, hee was content to cease, and settle him to his victuals, on which (hauing before labored) hee fed lustely, especially of a Woodcocke pye, where∣with Lamilia his caruer, plentifully plied him. Full dishes hauing furnisht empty stomackes, and Lu∣canio therby got leisure to talke, falles to discourse of his wealth, his landes, his bondes, his ability,
and how himselfe with all he had, was at madame Lamilias disposing: desiring her afore his brother to tell him simply what she meant. Lamilia replied My swéet Lucanio, how I estéeme of thée mine eies do witnes, that like handmaides, haue attended thy beauteous face, euer since I firste behelde thée: yet séeing loue that lasteth, gathereth by degrées his li∣king: let this for that suffice, if I finde thée firme, Lamilia wilbe faithfull: if fléeting, shée must of ne∣cessity be infortunate: that hauing neuer séene any whome before she could affect, she should be of him iniuriously forsaken. Nay said Lucanio, I dare say my brother here will giue his woord forth at I ac∣cept your own said Lamilia: for with me your cre∣dite is better than your brothers. Roberto brake off their amorous prattle with this spéech. Sith either of you are of other so fond at the first sight, I doubt not but time will make your loue more firme. Yet madame Lamilia although my brother and you bée thus forward, some crosse chaunce may come: for Multa cadunt inter calicem suprema{que} labe. And for a warning to teach you both wit, Ile tell you an old wiues tale. Before ye goe on with our tale (qd Mistris La∣milia) let me giue ye a caueat by the wy, which shall be figured in a fable. Lamilias Fable. THe Foxe on a time came to visite the Gray, partly for kindered cheefly for craft: and finding the hole emptie of all other company, sauing only one Bad∣ger enquired the cause of his solitarinesse: hee dis∣cribed
the sodaine death of his dam and sire with the rest of his consortes. The Fox made a Friday face, counterfeiting sorrow: but concludinge that deaths stroke was vneuitable perswaded him to séeke som fit mate wherwith to match. The badger soone agreed, so forth they went, and in their way met with a wāton ewe stragling from the fold: the foxe bad the Badger play the tall stripling, & strout on his tiptoes: for (qd he) this ewe is lady of al these lawnds and her brother cheefe belweather of sun∣dry flockes. To bee short by the Foxes per swasion there would bee a perpetuall league, betweene her harmeles kindred, and all other deuouring beastes, for that the Badger was to them all allied: sedu∣ced she yeelded, and the Fox conducted them to the Badgers habitation. Wher drawing her aside vn∣der color of exhortation, puld out her throat to satis∣fie his greedy thirst. Here I shoulde note, a yoonge whelpe that viewed their walke, infourmed the shepheardes of what hapned. They followed, and trained the Foxe and Badger to the hole, the Foxe afore had craftely conuaid himselfe away, the shep∣heards found the Badger rauing for the ewes mur ther, his lamētation being held for counterfet, was by the shepherds dogs werried. The Foxe escaped: the Ewe was spoiled, and euer since betweene the Badgers and dogs hath continued a mortall enmi∣tie: And now be aduized, Roberto (qd she) go for∣ward with your tale, seek not by sl y insinuation to turne our mirth to sorrow. Go to Lamilia (qd he) you feare what I meane not, but howe euer yee take it, Ile forward with my tale.
Robertoes Tale. IN the North partes there dwelt an olde Squier, that had a young daughter his heire; who had (as I knowe Madam La∣milia you haue had) many youthfull Gen∣tlemen that long time sued to obtaine her loue. But she knowing her own perfections (as women are by nature proud) would not to any of them vouch∣safe fauour: insomuch that they perceiuing her relent∣lesse, shewed themselues not altogether witlesse, but left her to her fortune, when they found her frowardnes. At last it fortuned among other strangers, a Farmers sonne visited her Fathers house: on whom at the first sight she was enamoured, he likewise on her. Tokens of loue past betweene them, either acquainted others parentes of their choise, and they kindly gaue their consent. Short tale to make, married they were, and great solempnitie was at the wedding feast. A yong Gentleman, that had beene long a suiter to her, vexing that the Sonne of a Farmer should bee so preferd, cast in his minde by what meanes (to marre their merriment) hee might steale a∣way the Bride. Hereupon he confers with an olde Bel∣dam, called Mother Gunby, dwelling thereby, whose counsell hauing taken, he fell to his practise, and procee∣ded thus. In the after noone, when dauncers were verie busie, he takes the Bride by the hande, and after a turne or two, tels her in her eare, he had a secret to impart vn∣to her, appointing her in any wise in the euening to sind a time to confer with him: she promist she would, and so they parted. Then goes hee to the Bridegroome, & with
protestations of entire affect, protests that the great sor∣rowe hee takes at that which hee must vtter, wheron depended his especiall credit, if it were known the mat∣ter by him should be discouered. After the Bridegrooms promise of secrecie, the gentleman tels him, that a frend of his receiued that morning from the Bride a Letter, wherein shee willed him with some sixteene horse to a∣wait her comming at a Parke side, for that she detested him in her heart as a base countrey hynde, with whome her Father compeld her to marry. The Bridegroome almost out of his wits, began to bite his lip. Nay, sayth the Gentleman, if you will by me bee aduizde, you shall salue her credit, win her by kindnes, and yet preuent her wanton complot. As how said the Bridegroome: Mary thus saide the Gentleman: In the euening (for till the guests be gone, she intends not to gad) get you on horse∣backe, and seeme to bee of the companie that attendes her comming, I am appoynted to bring her from the house to the Parke, and from thence fetch a winding compasse of a mile about, but to turne vnto olde Mother Gunbyes house, where her Louer my friend abydes: when she alights, I will conduct her to a chamber farre from his lodging; but when the lights are out, and shee expects her adulterous copesmate, your selfe (as reason is) shall proue her bedfellow, where priuately you may reprooue her, and in the morning earely returne home without trouble. As for the Gentleman my friend, I will excuse her absence to him, by saying, she mockt me with her Mayde in steade of her selfe, whome when I knew at her alighting, I disdained to bring her vnto his presence. The Bridegroome gaue his hand eit shoulde be so.
Now by the way you must vnderstand, this Mother Gunby had a daughter, who all that day sate heauily at home with a willow garland, for that the Bridegroome (if hee had dealt faithfully) should haue wedded her be∣fore any other. But men (Lamilia) are vnconstant, mo∣ney now a dayes makes the match, or else the match is marde. But to the matter: the Bridegroome and the Gen∣tleman thus agreedh: e tooke his time, conferd with the Bride, perswaded her that her husband (notwithstan∣ding his faire shew at the marriage) had sworne to his olde sweet heart, their neighbour Gunbyes daughter, to bee that night her bedfellow: and if she would bring her Father, his Father, and other friendes to the house at midnight, they should find it so. At this the young Gentlewoman inwardly vext to bee by a peasant so abusde, promist if she saw likelyhood of his slipping away, that then she would doo according as he directed. All this thus sorting, the old womans daughter was trickly attyrde ready to furnish this pageant, for her old mother prouided all things necessary. Well, Supper past, dauncing ended, and the guests would home, and the Bridegroome pretending to bring some friend of his home, got his horse, and to the Parke side he rode, and staide with the horsemen that attended the Gentleman. Anon came Marian like mistris Bride, and mounted behind the Gentleman, away they post, fetch their com∣passe, & at last alight at the olde wiues house, where so∣denly she is conuayd to her chamber, & the bridegroome sent to kéép her company, wher he had scarse deuisd how
to begin his exhortation: but the Father of his Bryde knockt at the chamber doore. At which being somewhat amazed, yet thinking to turne it to a ieast, sith his Wife (as hee thought) was in bed with him, hee opened the doore, saying: Father, you are hartily welcome, I won∣der how you found vs out heere; this deuise to remooue our selues, was with my wiues consent, that wee might rest quietly without the Maides and Batchelers distur∣bing. But wheres your Wife said the Gentleman? why heere in bed saide hee. I thought (quoth the other) my daughter had beene your wife, for sure I am to day shee was giuen you in marriage. You are merrely disposed, said the Bridegroome, what thinke you I haue another wife: I thinke but as you speake quoth the Gentleman, for my daughter is below, and you say your wife is in the bed. Below (said he) you are a merry man, and with that casting on a night gowne, hee went downe, where when he saw his wife, the Gentleman his Father, and a num∣ber of his friends assembled, hee was so confounded, that how to behaue himselfe he knew not; onely he cryde out that he was deceiued. At this the old woman arises, and making her selfe ignoraunt of all the whole matter, in∣quires the cause of that sodayne tumult. When she was told the new Bridegroome was founde in bed with her daughter, she exclaimd against so great an iniurie. Mari∣an was calde in quorum: shee iustified, it was by his al∣lurement: he being condemnd by all their consents, was adiudged vnworthy to haue the Gentlewoman vnto his Wife, and compeld (for escaping of punishment) to mar∣rie Marian: and the young Gentleman (for his care in discouering the Farmers sonnes lewdnes) was recom∣penst with the Gentlewomans euer during loue.
Quoth Lamilia, and what of this? Nay nothing said Roberto, but that I haue told you the effects of sodaine loue: yet the best is, my brother is a maidenly Batchler; and for your selfe, you haue not beene troubled with ma∣ny suiters. The fewer the better, said Lucanio. But bro∣ther, I con you little thanke for this tale, heereafter I pray you vse other table talke. Lets then end talk, quoth Lamilia, and you (signior Lucanio) and I will go to the Chesse. To Chesse, said he, what meane you by that? It is a game, said she, that the first daunger is but a checke, the worst, the giuing of a mate. Well, said Roberto, that game yee haue beene at already then, for you checkt him first with your beauty, & gaue your selfe for mate to him by your bounty. Thats wel taken brother, said Lucanio, so haue we past our game at Chesse. Wil ye play at Ta∣bles then, said she: I cannot, quoth hee, for I can goe no further with my game, if I be once taken. Will ye play then at cards. I said he, so it bee at one and thirtie. That fooles game, said she? Wele all to hazard, said Roberto, and brother you shall make one for an houre or two: con∣tent quoth he. So to dice they went, and fortune so fauo∣red Lucanio, that while they continued square play, hee was no looser. Anone coosenage came about, and his An∣gels being double winged, flew clean from before him. Lamilia being the winner, preparde a banquet; which finished, Roberto aduisde his brother to departe home, and to furnish himselfe with more Crownes, least hee were outcrackt with new commers. Lucanio loath to be outcountenanst, followed his ad∣uise, desiring to attend his returue, which hee before had determined vnrequested: For as soone as his brothers backe was turned, Roberto begins to recken with La∣milia,
to bee a sharer as well in the money deceitfully wonne, as in the Diamond so wilfully giuen. But she, secundum mores meretricis, iested thus with the schol∣ler. Why Roberto, are you so well read, and yet shewe your selfe so shallow witted, to deeme women so weake of conceit, that they see not into mens demerites. Sup∣pose (to make you my stale to catch the woodcocke your brother) that my tongue ouer-running myne intent, I spake of liberall rewarde: but what I promist, theres the point; at least what I part with I will be well ad∣uisde. It may be you will thus reason: Had not Rober∣to traind Lucanio vnto Lamilias lure, Lucanio had not now beene Lamilias pray: therefore sith by Roberto she possesseth the prize, Roberto merites an equal part. Monstrous absurd if so you reason; as wel you may rea∣son thus: Lamilias dog hath kild her a Deere, therefore his Mistris must make him a pastie. No poore pennilesse Poet, thou art beguilde in mee, and yet I wonder how thou couldst, thou hast beene so often beguilde. But it fa∣reth with licentious men, as with the chased Bore in the stream, who being greatly refresht with swimming, neuer feeleth anie smart vntill hee perish recurelessy wounded with his owne weapons. Reasonlesse Rober∣to, that hauing but a brokers place, askest a lenders re∣ward. Faithles Roberto, that hast attempted to betray thy brother, irreligiously forsaken thy Wife, deseruedly been in thy fathers eie an abiect: thinkst thou Lamilia so loose, to consort with one so lewd. No hypocrite, the sweet Gentleman thy brother, I will till death loue, & thee while I liue, loath. This share Lamilia giues thee, other getst thou none. As Roberto would haue replide, Lucanio approcht:
to whom Lamilia discourst the whole deceipt of his bro∣ther, & neuer rested intimating malitious arguments, til Lucanio vtterly refusde Roberto for his brother, & for euer forbad him his house. And when he would haue yeelded reasons, and formed excuse, Lucanios impati∣ence (vrgd by her importunate malice) forbad all reaso∣ning with them that was reasonlesse, and so giuing him Iacke Drums intertainment, shut him out of doores: whom we will follow, & leaue Lucanio to the mercie of Lamilia. Roberto in an extreme extasie, rent his haire, curst his destenie, blamd his trechery, but most of all ex∣claimd against Lamilia: and in her against all enticing Curtizans, in these tearms. What meant the Poets in inuectiue verse, To sing Medeas shame, and Scillas pride, Calipsoes charmes, by which so many dyde? Onely for this their vices they rehearse, That curious wits which in this world conuerse, May shun the dangers and enticing shoes, Of such false Syrens, those home-breeding foes, That from the eyes their venim do disperse. So soone kils not the Basiliske with sight, The Vipers tooth is not so venemous, The Adders tung not halfe so dangerous, As they that beare the shadow of delight, Who chaine blind youths in tramels of their haire, Till wast bring woe, and sorrow hast despaire. With this he laid his head on his hand, and leant his elbow on the earth, sighing out sadly, Heu patior telis vulner a factameis! On the other side of the hedge sate one that heard his sorrow: who getting ouer, came towards him, and
brake off his passion. When hee approached, hee saluted Roberto in this sort. Gentleman quoth hee (for so you seeme) I haue by chaunce heard you discourse some part of your greefe; which appeareth to be more than you will discouer, or I can conceipt. But if you vouchsafe such simple comforte as my abilitie may yeeld, assure your selfe, that I wil in∣deuour to doe the best, that either may procure you pro∣fite, or bring you pleasure: the rather, for that I suppose you are a scholler, and pittie it is men of learning should liue in lacke. Roberto wondring to heare such good wordes, for that this iron age affoordes few that esteeme of vertue; returnd him thankfull gratulations, and (vrgde by ne∣cessitie) vttered his present griefe, beseeching his aduise how he might be imployed. Why, easily quoth hee, and greatly to your benefite: for men of my profession gette by schollers their whole liuing. What is your professi∣on, said Roberto? Truly sir, saide hee, I am a player. A player, quoth Roberto, I tooke you rather for a Gentle∣man of great liuing, for if by outward habit men should be censured, I tell you, you would bee taken for a sub∣stantiall man. So am I where I dwell (quoth the play∣er) reputed able at my proper cost to build a Wind∣mill. What though the world once went hard with me, when I was faine to carry my playing Fardle a foote∣backe; Temporamutantur, I know you know the mea∣ning of it better than I, but I thus conster it, its other∣wise now; for my very share in playing apparell will not be sold for two hundred pounds. Truly (said Rober∣to) tis straunge, that you should so prosper in that vayne practise, for that it seemes to mee your voice is nothing
gratious. Nay then, saide the Player, I mislike your iudgement: why, I am as famous for Delphrigus, & the King of Fairies, as euer was any of my time. The twelue labors of Hercules haue I terribly thundred on the Stage, and plaid thrée Scenes of the Deuill in the High way to heauen. Haue ye so (saide Roberto?) then I pray you pardon me. Nay more (quoth the Player) I can serue to make a pretie speech, for I was a countrey Author, passing at a Morrall, for twas I that pende the Morrall of mans witte, the Dialogue of Diues, and for seuen yéers space was absolute Interpreter to the pup∣pets. But now my Almanacke is out of date: The people make no estimation, Of Morrals teaching education. Was not this prettie for a plaine rime extempore? if ye will ye shall haue more. Nay its enough, said Ro∣berto, but how meane you to vse mée? Why sir, in ma∣king Playes, said the other, for which you shall be well paid, if you will take the paines. Roberto perceiuing no remedie, thought best in re∣spect of his present necessitie, to try his wit, & went with him willingly: who lodgd him at the Townes end in a house of retayle, where what happened our Poet, you shall after heare. There by conuersing with bad compa∣ny, he grew A malo in peius, falling from one vice to an other: and so hauing founde a vaine to finger crowns, he grew cranker than Lucanio, who by this time began to droope, béeing thus dealt with by Laminia. Shee ha∣uing bewitched him with hir enticing wiles, caused him to consume in lesse than two yéeres that infinite treasure gathered by his father with so many a poore mās curse. His lands sold, his iewels pawnd, his money wasted, he
was casséerd by Lamilia, that had coossend him of all. Then walkt he like one of Duke Humfreys Squires, in a thread-bare cloake, his hose drawne out with his héeles, his shooes vnseamed, least his feete should sweate with heat: now (as witlesse as hee was) he remembred his Fathers words, his vnkindnes to his brother, his carelesnes of himselfe. In this sorrowhe sate down on pennilesse bench; where when Opus and Vsus told him by the chymes in his stomacke it was time to fall vnto meat, he was faine with the Camelion to féed vpon the aire, and make patience his best repast. While he was at this feast, Lamilia came flaunting by, garnished with the iewels wherof she beguiled him, which sight serued to close his stomacke after his cold cheare. Roberto hearing of his brothers beggery, al∣beit he had little remorse of his miserable state, yet did séeke him out, to vse him as a propertie, whereby Luca∣nio was somewhat prouided for. But béeing of simple nature, hee serued but for a blocke to whet Robertoes wit on: which the poore foole perceiuing, he for sooke all other hopes of life, and fell to be a notorious Pandar, in which detested course he continued till death. But Roberto now famozed for an Arch-plaimaking-poet, his purse like the sea somtime sweld; anon like the same sea fell to a low ebbe; yet seldom he wanted, his labors were so well estéemed. Marry this rule he kept, what e∣uer he fingerd afore hand, was the certaine meanes to vnbinde a bargaine, and being askt why hee so slightly dealt with them that did him good? It becoms me, saith hee, to bee contrary to the worlde; for commonly when vulgar men receiue earnest, they doo performe, when I am paid any thing afore-hand, I breake my promise.
He had shift of lodgings, where in euery place his Ho∣stesse writ vp the wofull remembrance of him, his laun∣dresse, and his boy; for they were euer his in houshold, beside retainers in sundry other places. His companie were lightly the lewdest persons in the land, apt for pil∣ferie, periurie, forgerie, or any villainy. Of these hee knew the casts to cog at cards, coossen at Dice; by these he learnd the le gerdemaines of nips, foystes, connycat∣chers, crosbyters, lifts, high Lawyers, and all the rab∣ble of that vncleane generation of vipers: and pithily could he paint out their whole courses of craft: So cun∣ning he was in all craftes, as nothing rested in him al∣most but craftines. How often the Gentlewoman his Wife labored vainely to recall him, is lamentable to note: but as one giuen ouer to all lewdnes, he commu∣nicated her sorrowfull lines among his loose truls, that iested at her bootlesse laments. If he could any way get credite on scres, he would then brag his creditors car∣ried stones, comparing euery round circle to a groning O procured by a painfull burden. The shamefull ende of sundry his consorts deseruedly punished for their a∣misse, wrought no compunction in his heart: of which one, brother to a Brothell hee kept, was trust vnder a trée as round as a Ball. To some of his swearing companions thus it hap∣pened: A crue of them sitting in a Tauerne carowsing, it fortuned an honest Gentleman and his friend, to en∣ter their roome: some of them béeing acquainted with him, in their dominéering drunken vaine would haue no nay but downe hee must néedes sitte with them; bée∣ing placed, no remedie there was, but he must needes keepe euen compasse with their vnseemely carowsing.
Which he refusing, they fell from high words to sound strokes, so that with much adoo the Gentleman saued his owne, and shifted from their company. Being gone one of these tiplers for sooth lackt a gold Ring, the other sware they sée the Gentleman take it from his hande. Upon this the Gentleman was indited before a Judge, these honest men are deposde: whose wisedome weigh∣ing the time of the braule, gaue light to the Jury, what power wine-washing poyson had, they according vnto conscience found the Gentleman not guiltie, and God released by that verdit the innocent. With his accusers thus it fared: One of them for murder was worthily executed: the other neuer since prospered: the third, sitting not long after vpon a lustie horse, the beast sodenly dyde vnder him, God amend the man. Roberto euery day acquainted with these examples, was notwithstanding nothing bettered, bur rather har∣dened in wickednesse. At last was that place iustified, God warnethmen by dreams and visions in the night, and by knowne examples in the day, but if hee returne not, hee comes vppon him with iudgement that shall bée felt. For now when the number of deceites caused Ro∣berto bee hatefull almost to all men, his immeasurable drinking had made him the perfect Image of the drop∣sie, and the loathsome scourge of Lust tyrannized in his bones: lying in extreame pouerty, and hauing nothing to pay but chalke, which now his Host accepted not for currant, this miserable man lay comfortlesly languish∣ing, hauing but one groat left (the iust proportion of his Fathers Legacie) which looking on, he cryed: O now it is too late, too late to buy witte with thée: and therefore
will I sée if I can sell to carelesse youth what I negli∣gently forgot to buy. Héere (Gentlemen) breake I off Robertoes speach; whose life in most parts agraéing with mine, found one selfe punishment as I haue doone. Héereafter suppose me the saide Roberto, and I will goe on with that hee promised: Greene will send you now his groats-worth of wit, that neuer shewed a mites-worth in his life: & though no man now bee by to doo mée good: yet ere I die I will by my repentaunce indeuour to doo all men good. Deceiuing world, that with alluring toyes, Hast made my life the subiect of thy scorne: And scornest now to lend thy fading ioyes, To length my life, whom friends haue left forlorne. How well are they that die ere they be borne, And neuer see thy sleights, which few men shun, Till vnawares they helpelesse are vndone. Oft haue Isung of Loue, and of his fire, But now I finde that Poet was aduizde; Which made full feasts increasers of desire, And proues weake loue was with the poore despizde. For when the life with food is not suffizde, What thought of Loue; what motion of delight; VVhat pleasance can proceed from such a wight? VVitnesse my want, the murderer of my wit; My rauisht sence of wonted furie reft; VVants such conceit, as should in Poems fit Set downe the sorrow wherein I am left:
ut therefore haue high heauens their gifts bereft: Because so long they lent them mee to vse, And I so long their bountie did abuse. O that a yeare were graunted me to liue, And for that yeare my former wits restorde: VVhat rules of life, what counsell would I giue? How should my sinne with sorrow be deplorde? But I must die of euery man abhorde. Time loosely spent will not againe be wonne, My time is loosely spent, and I vndone. O horrenda fames, how terrible are thy assaults? but vermis conscientiae, more woūding are thy stings. Ah Gentlemen, that liue to read my broken and confu∣sed lines, looke not I should (as I was wont) delight you with vaine fantasies, but gather my follies altoge∣ther; and as yee would deale with so many parricides, cast them into the fire: call them Telegones, for now they kil their Father, and euery lewd line in them writ∣ten, is a deepe piercing wound to my heart; euery idle houre spent by any in reading them, brings a million of sorrowes to my soule. O that the teares of a miserable man (for neuer any man was yet more miserable) might wash their memorie out with my death; and that those works with mee together might bee interd. But sith they cannot, let this my last worke witnes against them with mee, how I detest them. Blacke is the re∣membrance of my blacke workes, blacker than night, blacker than death, blacker than hell. Learne wit by my repentance (Gentlemen) and let these few rules following be regarded in your liues.
1 First in al your actions set God before your eies; for the feare of the Lord is the beginning of wisdome: Let his word be a lanterne to your féet, and a light vn∣to your paths, then shall you stand as firme rocks, and not be mocked. 2 Beware of looking backe, for God will not bee mocked; and of him that hath receiued much, much shal be demaunded. 3 If thou be single, and canst abstain turne thy eies from vanitie; for there is a kinde of women bearing the faces of Angels, but the hearts of Deuils, able to intrap the elect if it were possible. 4 If thou bee married, forsake not the wife of thy youth to follow straunge flesh; for whoremongers and adulterers the Lord will iudge. The doore of a harlot leadeth downe to death, and in her lips there dwels de∣struction; her face is decked with odors, but she bring∣eth a man to a morsell of bread and nakednes: of which my selfe am instance. 5 If thou be left rich, remember those that want, & so deale, that by thy wilfulnes thy selfe want not: Let not Tauerners and Uictuallers be thy Executors; for they will bring thee to a dishonorable graue. 6 Oppresse no man; for the crie of the wronged as∣cendeth to the eares of the Lord: ney ther delight to in∣crease by Usurie, least thou loose thy habitation in the euerlasting Tabernacle. 7 Beware of building thy house to thy neighbors hurt; for the stones will crie to the timber; Wee were laid together in bloud: and those that so erect houses, calling them by their names, shall lie in the graue lyke Sheépe, and death shall gnaw vpon their soules.
8 If thou be poore, be also patient, and strine not to grow rich by indirect meanes; for goods so gotten shal vanish like smoke. 9 If thou bee a Father, Maister, or Teacher, ioyne good example with good counsaile; else little auaile pre∣cepts, where life is different. 10 If thou be a Sonne or Seruant, despise not re∣proofe; for though correction bee bitter at the first, it bringeth pleasure in the end. Had I regarded the first of these rules, or béene o∣bedient to the last; I had not now at my last ende, béene left thus desolate. But now, though to my selfe I giue Consilium postfacta; yet to others they may serue for timely precepts. And therefore (while life giues leaue) I will send warning to my olde consorts, which haue liued as loosely as my selfe, albeit weaknesse will scarse suffer me to write, yet to my fellow Schollers a∣bout this Cittie, will I direct these few insuing lines. To those Gentlemen his Quondam acquaintance, that spend their wits in making plaies, R.G. wisheth a better exercise, and wisdome to preuent his extremities. IF wofull experience may moue you (Gentlemen) to beware, or vnheard of wretchednes intreate you to take héed: I doubt not but you wil looke backe with sorrow on your time past, and indeuour with repen∣tance to spend that which is to come. Wonder not, (for with thée wil I first begin) thou famous gracer of Tra∣gedians, that Greene, who hath said with thée (like the foole in his heart) There is no God, shoulde now giue
glorie vnto his greatnes: for penetrating is his power, his hand lyes heauie vpon me, hee hath spoken vnto mee with a voice of thunder, and I haue felt he is a God that can punish enemies. Why should thy excellent wit, his gift, bee so blinded, that thou shouldst giue no glorie to the giuer: Is it pestilent Machiuilian pollicy that thou hast studied? O peeuish follie! What are his rules but meere confused mockeries, able to extirpate in small time the generation of mankind. For if Sic volo, sic iu∣beo, hold in those that are able to commaund: and if it be lawfull Fas & nefas to do any thing that is benefici∣all; onely Tyrants should possesse the earth, and they striuing to exceed in tyrannie, should each to other be a slaughter man; till the mightiest outliuing all, one stroke were lefte for Death, that in one age mans life should end. The brocher of this Diabolicall Atheisme is dead, and in his life had neuer the felicitie hee aymed at: but as he began in craft; liued in feare, and ended in despaire. Quàm inscrutabilia sunt Dei iudicia? This murderer of many brethren, had his conscience seared like Caine: this betrayer of him that gaue his life for him, inherited the portion of Iudas: this Apostata peri∣shed as ill as Iulian: and wilt thou my friend be his dis∣ciple? Looke but to me, by him perswaded to that liber∣tie, and thou shalt find it an infernall bondage. I knowe the least of my demerits merit this miserable death, but wilfull striuing against knowne truth, exceedeth all the terrors of my soule. Defer not (with me) till this last point of extremitie; for litle knowst thou how in the end thou shalt be visited. With thee I ioyne yong Iuuenall, that byting Sa∣tyrist, that lastly with mee together writ a Comedie.
Sweet boy, might I aduise thee, be aduisde, and get not many enemies by bitter wordes: inueigh against vaine men, for thou canst do it, no man better, no man so well: thou hast a libertie to reprooue all, and name none; for one being spoken to, all are offended; none being blamed no man is iniured. Stop shallow water still running, it will rage, or tread on a worme and it will turne: then blame not Schollers vexed with sharpe lines, if they re∣proue thy too much liberty of reproofe. And thou no lesse deseruing than the other two, in some things rarer, in nothing inferiour; driuen (as my selfe) to extreme shifts, a litle haue I to say to thee: and were it not an idolatrous oth, I would sweare by sweet S. George, thou art vnworthy better hap, sith thou de∣pendest on so meane a stay. Base minded men all three of you, if by my miserie you be not warnd: for vnto none of you (like mee) sought those burres to cleaue: those Puppets (I meane) that spake from our mouths, those Anticks garnisht in our colours. Is it not strange, that I, to whom they all haue beene beholding: is it not like that you, to whome they all haue beene beholding, shall (were yee in that case as I am now) bee both at once of them forsaken? Yes trust them not: for there is an vp∣start Crow, beautified with our feathers, that with his Tygers hart wrapt in a Players hyde, supposes he is as well able to bombast out a blanke verse as the best of you: and beeing an absolute Iohannes fac totum, is in his owne conceit the onely Shake-scene in a countrey. O that I might intreat your rare wits to be imploied in more profitable courses: & let those Apes imitate your past excellence, and neuer more acquaint them with your admired inuentions. I knowe the best husband of
you all will neuer proue an Usurer, and the kindest of them all will neuer proue a kind nurse: yet whilest you may, seeke you better Maisters; for it is pittie men of such rare wits, should be subiect to the pleasure of such rude groomes. In this I might insert two more, that both haue writ against these buckram Gentlemen: but lette their owne workes serue to witnesse against their owne wic∣kednesse, if they perseuere to maintaine any more such peasants. For other new-commers, I leaue them to the mercie of these painted monsters, who (I doubt not) will driue the best minded to despise them: for the rest, it skils not though they make a ieast at them. But now returne I againe to you three, knowing my miserie is to you no newes: and let mee hartily in∣treat you to be warned by my harms. Delight not (as I haue done) in irreligious oathes; for from the blasphe∣mers house, a curse shall not depart. Despise drunken∣nes, which wasteth the wit, and maketh men all equall vnto beasts. Flie lust, as the deathsman of the soule, and defile not the Temple of the holy Ghost. Abhorre those Epicures, whose loose life hath made religion lothsome to your eares: and when they sooth you with tearms of Maistership, remember Robert Greene, whome they haue often so flattered, perishes now for want of com∣fort. Remember Gentlemen, your liues are like so ma∣ny lighted Tapers, that are with care deliuered to all of you to maintaine: these with wind-puft wrath may be extinguisht, which drunkennes put out, which negli∣gence let fall: for mans time is not of it selfe so short, but it is more shortned by sinne. The fire of my light is now at the last snuffe, and for want of wherewith to su∣staine
it, there is no substance lefte for life to feede on. Trust not then (I beseech ye) to such weake staies: for they are as changeable in minde, as in many attyres. Wel, my hand is tyrde, and I am forst to leaue where I would begin: for a whole booke cannot containe their wrongs, which I am forst to knit vp in some fewe lines of words. Desirous that you should liue, though himselfe be dying: Robert Greene. Now to all men I bid farewel in like sort, with this conceited Fable of that olde Comedian Aesope. AN Ant and a Grashopper walking together on a Greene, the one carelesly skipping, the other care∣fully prying what winters prouision was scattered in the way: the Grashopper scorning (as wantons will) this needlesse thrift (as hee tearmed it) reprooued him thus: The greedy miser thirsteth still for gaine, His thrift is theft, his weale works others woe: That foole is fond which will in caues remaine, VVhen mongst faire sweets he may at pleasure goe. To this the Ant perceiuing the Grashoppers mea∣king, quickly replyde: The thriftie husband spares what vnthrift spends, His thrift no theft, for dangers to prouide: Trust to thy selfe, small hope in vvant yeeld friends, A caue is better than the deserts wide.
In short time these two parted, the one to his plea∣sure, the other to his labour. Anon Haruest grew on, and reft from the Grashopper his woonted moysture. Then weakly skipt hee to the medowes brinks: where till fell winter he abode. But storms continually pow∣ring, hee went for succour to the Ant his olde acquain∣tance, to whom hee had scarce discouered his estate, but the waspish little worme made this reply. Packe hence (quoth he) thou idle lazie worme, My house doth harbor no vnthriftie mates: Thou scorndst to toile, & now thou feelst the storme, And starust for food while I am fed with cates. Vse no intreats, I will relentlesse rest, For toyling labour hates an idle guest. The Grashopper foodlesse, helplesse and strengthles, got into the next brooke, and in the yeelding sand digde for himselfe a pit: by which hee likewise ingrau'de this Epitaph. When Springs greene prime arrayd me with delight, And euery power with youthfull vigor fild, Gaue strength to worke what euer fancie wild: I neuer feard the force of winters spight. When first I saw the sunne the day begin, And dry the Mornings tears from hearbs and grasse; I little thought his chearefull light would passe, Till vgly night with darknes enterd in. And then day lost I mournd, spring past I wayld, But neither teares for this or that auailde.
Then too too late I praifd the Emmets paine, That sought in spring a harbor gainst the heate: And in the haruest gathered winters meat, Preuenting famine, frosts, and stormy raine. My wretched end may warn Greene springing youth To vse delights, as toyes that will deceiue, And scorne the world before the world them leaue: For all worlds trust, is ruine without ruth. Then blest are they that like the toyling Ant, Prouide in time gainst winters wofull want. With this the Grashopper yéelding to the wethers ex∣tremit, died comfortles without remedy. Like him my selfe: like me, shall all that trust to friends or times in∣constancie. Now faint I of my last infirmity, beseeching them that shall burie my bodie, to publish this last fare∣well written with my wretched hand. Foelicem fuisse infaustum. A letter written to his wife, founde with this booke after his death. THe remembrance of the many wrongs offred thée, and thy vnreproued vertues, adde greater sorrow to my miserable state, than I can vtter or thou conceiue. Neither is it lessened by consideration of thy absence, (though shame would hardly let me behold thy face) but exceedingly aggrauated, for that I cannot (as I ought) to thy owne selfe reconcile my selfe, that thou mightst witnes my inward woe at this instant, that haue made
thee a wofull wife for so long a time. But equall hea∣uen hath denide that comfort, giuing at my last neede like succour as I haue sought all my life: being in this extremitie as voide of helpe, as thou hast beene of hope. Reason would, that after so long wast, I should not send thee a child to bring thee greater charge: but consider he is the fruit of thy wombe, in whose face regarde not the Fathers faults so much, as thy owne perfections. He is yet Greene, and may grow straight, if he be carefully tended: otherwise, apt enough (I feare mee) to follow his Fathers folly. That I haue offended thee highly I knowe, that thou canst forget my iniuries I hardly be∣leeue: yet perswade I my selfe, if thou saw my wret∣ched estate, thou couldst not but lament it: nay certain∣ly I know thou wouldst. All my wrongs muster them∣selues before mee, euery euill at once plagues mee. For my contempt of God, I am contemned of men: for my swearing and forswearing, no man will beleeue me: for my gluttony, I suffer hunger: for my drunkennes, thirst: for my adultery, vlcerous sores. Thus God hath cast me downe, that I might be humbled: and punished me for example of other sinners: and although he strangely suf∣fers me in this world to perish without succor, yet trust I in the world to come to find mercie, by the merites of my Sauiour to whom I commend thée, and commit my soule. Thy repentant husband for his dis∣loyaltie, Robert Greene. Foelicem fuisse infaustum. FINIS.
