14613 99843502 8241
❧ THE TRVE COPIES OF THE LET∣ters betwene the reuerend fa∣ther in God Iohn Bisshop of Sa∣rum and D. Cole, vpon occasion of a Sermon that the said Bishop preached before the Quenes Maiestie, and hir most honorable Counsel. 1560. ¶ Set forthe and allowed, ac∣cording to the order appointed in the Quenes Maiesties Iniunctions. ¶ Cum gratia & priuilegio Regiae Ma∣iestatis per septennium.
THE COPIE OF a letter sente from D. Cole to the Bishop of Sarum, vpon occa∣sion of a Sermon that the saide Bishop had preached in the Courte before the Quenes Ma∣iesty. IT ru  I shall not need many wordes to make my entree with you. You hau made so large and gentill an offer, that my request beynge employed wyth the compasse of the same, shall haue an answere I hope to my comforte. Where in these Articles you seeme very resolute, & as it is thought so well armed, that you haue wh withto per∣suade any reasonable mā to be in them of  opiniō: may it therfore like you to sende me the chiefe places, in these atters not written, (for that were to mutche paines for you) but noted, or, as they terme it, coted whiche & where
they be. And I promise you by yt aith I beare to God, I shall yelde fo farre as you shall giue me cause. I wold wishe it might please you to write herein againe, for talke will not so well further, that you should herein entende. Yf happely it shall lyke you to wryte any more then the places, whiche ye accompte will throughly proue your opinion, I pray you do it rather, diale∣cticè, then otherwise. For the weght of these matters, more requireth learning then wordes. Yf the places that you haue in these Artiles, be but such as are already an∣sweared by learued men on our side, or but suche as Caluine, Bueer, or other of the protestauntes haue laide for them selfe, then I trust you will laye more weght or reason to them. For suche as they be, in them, I haue already sene. I repute them percase somwat able to do with yonge folke, or the simple and vn∣learned people, other, I wene, weigh them no better then they be worthy. Yet one thing more I long muche to be answeared in, why ye rather offer
othe in your Sermon yesterday in the Courte, & at all other times at Powles Crosse, to dispute in these iiii. pointes, then in the chiefe matters that lye in question betwixte the Church of Rome and the Protestaūtes. Yt semith to me farre the nearer way to compasse that you would so faine winne, if ye began not with suche matters which we deny not, but a generall Coūsell might take order that they shoulde be practised as ye woulde haue it. Mary the Article of the presence of Christes Body & bludde in the Sacrament, the article of our Iu∣stification, the valewe of a Christian mans good workes, whether the Masse sed in the churche of Rome be tolera∣ble yea or no, yea whether that ye masse be not a verye sacrifice acceptable to God in dede, and good bothe for the quicke and the dead, whether any Scri∣pture forbiddeth a manne to dere the blessed Apostles and Martyrs in hea∣uen to pray for vs, whether it be lefull to honour them, and whether it be le∣full for vs, and good for them, to pray for all christian Soules: I wene if ye
ad the vpper hande but in one of these questions, the world might wel thinke we were smally to be trusted in all the est. For we make a platte and playne answere to them, without if, or and. So do we not, whether the Seruice ought to be in Englishe or not. Or whether the people ought to receaue in bothe kindes or no. Or whether any priuate▪ Masse ought to be saide in the Churche or no. I ha eoparded to wade this farre with you, for no worse purpose then I haue vttered at the beginning. For of trouh, if you shew me good cause why, I shal yelde as I haue promised. M aduenture in this case syalbe so taken I trust, as no aduātage be sought against me, as for breache of any parte of my  one way or other. Where∣fore I pray you constrewe my doynges by the meaning I had in them. I haue here set in writynge the  that you haue so gentelly ofd o e resonable, in suche sorte in   y  ported  your mouth  me.
1. Whether there remayne any substance of Bread and Wyne after the consecration done as the Churche appoin∣teth? 2. Whether it be tolerable that y• people should receaue vnder one kinde or no? 3. Whether it be any offēce before God that the common Seruice shoulde be saide in a tonge that the people vnder∣standeth not? 4. Whether it be any offēce before God a Prieste to saye Masse, onles one or other re∣ceaue with him? 18. Martij. Henricus. Cole.
The Bishop of Salisburies answere vnto the letter afore written. I Perceyue by youre let∣ters that ye were not present your selfe at my Sermon in the Court, but only herde of it by the reporte of others. And where you desire to be answered in certain pointes touchinge the same, considerynge both my calling and also the place where I spake, I stāde in doubte whether I may safely wythoute further licence geue a rekening of my doctrine, being vttered before the Prince, the Counsell, and the whole state of the Realme, speci∣ally to a subiecte, and sutch a sub∣iecte as mistiketh all Sermons, and yet will not vouchesaue to heare one. Notwithstandyng for∣asmuche as I am persuaded that you charitably desire to be resol∣ued▪
I can also charitably be con∣tented, as a frende with a frende, or a scholar with a scholar, to con∣ferre with you herein, reseruinge alway my former protestation. Touching y• quotations of the special points & groundes that I stand vpō, if you had herde y• ma∣ner of my doctrine your selfe, I be leue, you would not haue required thē. For your reporterhath altered the whole forme of my speakyng. For I stoode only vpon the ne∣gatiue, which as you saide, when time was, in the disputation, that should haue ben at Westminster, is not possible to be proued. My offer was this, that if any one of all those thinges that I thē rehearsed, could be proued of you side by any sufficient authoritie o∣ther of the Scriptures, or of the olde Doctours, or of the auncient
Councels, or by any one allowed example of the primitiue churche, that then I woulde be content to yelde vnto you. I say you haue none of al those helpes, nor Scriptures, nor Coū∣cels, nor doctours, nor any other aniguitye, & this is the negatiue. Now it stādeth you vpon to proue but one affirmatiue to ye contrarie, and so to require my promisse. The articles y• I said could not be proued of your parte wer thee▪ That it can not appeare by ay authoritie other of the olde Doc∣tours, or of the auncient Coūcels that there was any priuate masse in the whole Churche of Christ, at that time. Or yt there was then any com∣munion ministred in the church to the people vnder one kinde only. Or yt the commen prayers were
then pronoūced in a straūge tōge, that the people vnderstoode not. Or that the Bishoppe of Rome was then called Vniuersalis Epi∣scopus, or Caput Vniuersalis Eccle¦siae an vniuersall Bishoppe of the whole world, or els the head of the vniuersall Churche, Or that the people was then taught to beleue that in the Sa∣crament after the cōsecration, the substaūce of Bread and wyne de∣parteth awaye, and that there re∣mayneth nothing els but only the accidentes of Bread and wine. Or that then it was thoughte lawfull to say, x. xx. or. xxx. masses in one churche in one day. Or that the people was thē for∣bidden to praye, or to reade the scriptures in theyr mother tonge. And other o Articles a great number I rekened vp then at
Poules Crosse, which it were lōg now to rehearse. And if any one of all these arti∣cles can bee sufficiently proued by such authoritie as I haue said, & as ye haue borne y• people in hāde ye can proue them by: I am well content to stande to my promisse. f you saye these are but smal matters in comparison of others, yet as small as ye wolde haue thē seeme now▪ sum men haue felte no small smarte for them, And where you merueile why I began not rather with the reall presence, with Justification, with the valew of good workes, with the sacrifice of the Masse, wyth praying vnto sainctes: with pray∣inge for the dead: althoughe in deede it maye seeme very mutche for me to be appointed by others what order I shoulde take in my
preachinge, yet to answeare the truth, why I passed by these ma∣ters at the first, and rather began with other, the cause was, not for that I doubted in any of the pre∣misses, but only for that I knewe the matters that you ue questiō of, might at least haue sum colour or shadow of the doctours. But I thought it best to make my entree  such thinges, as wherin I was well assured y lde be able to finde not so mutche as any colour at all. And if ye will firste graunt this to be trewe, as I beleue you will, notwithstandinge the people haue ben longe told the conrary, afterwarde I am well content to trauel with you father in the rest. Further I merueile mutche ye write, yt touching a priuate masse, or the receiuing vnder one kinde, or the comme prayers to be had
in an vnknowen tongue or other∣wise, ye are not resolued to ans∣wear precisely without, if, or and▪ For where ye saye ye are cōtent to be ordered herein by a generall Councell, first I woulde  what general Councel of any an∣tiquitie euer decreed any of those matters against vs,  perhap es ye wil say the councel of Coū∣stauce, that of late yeres pronoun∣ced oy against Christ himselfe▪ and all the primit churche, that it shoulde be a  disor∣der, if the people should comm cate vnder both kindes. And ha∣g no  coūcel, that  was to alledge, in these matters, I maru how ye can iustly say, ye are altogether ordered by coū∣celles. And yet farther woulde I learne, what warrant any gene∣ral Coūcel can haue to decree any
thinge contrary to goddes word. Where ye say, ye haue sene mai∣ster Caluines, and maister Bucers reasons, & haue founde them very weake, and not able to moue any other then yonge , and vn∣learned people, me thinketh that answeare is so commen and so ge∣neral, that it ma erue our tourne as well as yours. For we haue reade Coclaeus, Eckius, Pigghius, , and such others, & haue found such reasōs and answeares in them, as I beleue you your selfe are not mche moued withall. Where you saye that maister Calues, an master Bucrs rea∣sons haue benne answeared, I graunt in deede they haue  answeared, but not so muche by learninge, as by other meanes, as you know. But your reasōs haue  answered by reason ▪
as now, God be thanked, the whole worlde knoweth. But to conclude, as I began I answeare that in these articles I holde only the negatiue, and ther∣fore I loke howe you will be able to affirme the contrarie, and that, as I said afore, by sufficient au∣thoritie. Whiche if ye do not you shal cause me the more to be resolued, & others, to stande the more in doubt of the rest of your lear∣ning. 20. Martij. Io. Sarum▪
❧ D. Coles seconde Letter to the Bishop of Sarum. I Shall for this tyme pass ouer all other partes of your answeare, and re∣new my former suite vnto you, in most hartye and humble wise desiring you to giue eare vnto me in the same. Remember or goddes sake howe I began with you, not for other entent then to be instructed, why I shoulde be accompted obstinate for standing in cō∣trary opinion with you. Nowe when I weighe your answere sent me lately in writinge, I thinke you do mistake my doyng, supposing that the same cōmeth not of such grounde as it doth. My letter sent to your declareth in my first entree with you, what my meaning was, and wherof it proceded. I hearde by reporte of manie that bothe at Powles & other where, ye openly wished that one man thinkinge otherwise then you do, would charitably talke with you, whom you would with like charitie answeare and ndeuour to satisfye. And although yo
had not so protestd, yet is it the parte of a common and publike preacher to per∣forme no lesse when occasion is geuē. With whyche cause I was moued to write as I did, entendinge if I might to learne of you that I knew not, and that coulde by learning perswade a man not wholy vnlarned to yelde therunto, ac∣cording to the wordes of my writinge, and rotestation. But I nde not this meanynge in your writīg sente vnto me, wherin you she your selfe isposed only to defede your teaching as confessed and take fr trew, & n to giue any accpte throf, or to satisfye any y• doubteth. And there you  me allage to the contrarye and proue your saying, which neither rea∣son, nor lawe, can driue me to. Rason, icause the doctrine being yet dbtfull and standinge vpon proufe, the teacher shoulde firste approue it vnto suche as doubte. Which the custome of learning in all vniuersities proueth true. Where the oppent, when atter is enied, as your doctrine is by vs, alleageth or y• parte which he would haue sme rew.
An    ou to disproue that do  which lone time hath benne    more when any man pro∣fessed a rformation of doctrine, as you d,   hath euer alleaged causes wly they so did,  so take  hande▪ to proue that they taught▪ agaist such as did and woulde thinke otherwise. But bicause you ae a Bishop and   tche an , ye doubt  ou ought  shewe cause of y• you  or no, and therfore ye spake by . Where at I do utche  for the person  the place ma∣keth ereuce wo shoulde proue or disproue▪ The greater personage you beae, the lesse cause haue ye to be put to answeare. You haue not yet I wene all forgot the trade in reforde which you and I were broughte vp in. In scoles of philosphie a maister of arte is the highest degree, where the maister is ra∣ther put to oppose, thē to answeare. And like wise in diuinitie in ordinarie dispu∣tation y• doctour opposeth, the meaner mā answeareth▪ And what reasō should leade you to to think y• a Bishop should
not rather shew cause of ye he teacheth, the any other. Saet Paul requireth in a Bishop that he be , a man before all other meete and able to teche. And it is a reule in Bishops that they be eady to giue an accōpte of theyr beleue. And maye reasons are there why it should be so. You can not say I am an heretique, or obstinate, and therby put me of. For I offer to yelde in all that ye proue to me. I stand in place and case to learne, and you a man appoynted to teache. I come for no other purpose but to learne more then I knowe. I come to you for councell in those pointes ye seeme very resolute in, I meane you no harme nor guile. Cast me not of for Goddes loue, as men doe beggers, when they mynde to doe them no good. Yf ye haue Scriptures, Councels. &c. with you, I desire to know them. Yf ye haue none, lette me & my felowes alone in your Sermons. We trouble you not, nor giue you cause to deale so vnmerci∣full with vs, as some of your side dothe, as thoughe we were the most vnreaso∣nable men in the world.
By lawe vpon good groundes no manne shoulde be put to reason where matters are once agreed on. I and my felowes are in bandes to auoide sutche kinde of reasoning as ye woulde put me to. Wherein wise men se, when ye opē∣ly prouoke vs to disproue that ye teach, ye fare as if you should saye to one that is bounde hande and foote, come strike me & thou darest. We are as I sayde in place of learners, & ye in place to teache. We are defendauntes, and ye y• plainti∣fes. We continew in the faith we pro∣fessed sithe our Baptisme, ye pretende a chaunge in the same. We haue with vs an Aposticall churche, ye haue none yet approued. We make no innouation, for, In rebus nouis constituendis, saieth y• law, euidens debet esse vtilitas: and all new at∣temptes are to be suspected. Ye seeme to mistike in manner all y• hitherto hath ben receiued. But ye saye ye bringe vs againe to the Primitiue Church. It is a fowle fal in reasoning, to bring that for proufe, which lieth yet in questiō or plainly denied. We are in possession, ye come to put vs from it.
Ye meane to drawe vs to you, we desire to knowe caut why. What rea  a∣deth you to put a negatiue in qun therby to greu your aduersary (yet haue you none of me, for I seke on you to be taught) where in Lawe a person  a∣ted can be put to no more but to defede. Wher a negatiue implieth in it a yea or affirmatiou, there the plaintife is put to his proufe. But I protest once agayne, I come not to dispute, but to learne. u will happely say that both ur side and yours hath already sa euē so muche in the maers y• be in qustion betwirte, vs, that as ye can say no more for your parte th hath ben  aleady no more can we neither, and  as good neur a whit as neuer the b f the reasons that Calu, Bucer, & ot Protesrants dothe make, can not  you, what auaileth any moe .  the case be suche in dde, that  parte can go further, but all is syd tht maketh for eyther parte, then eyther lt both partes let other alone, vntill suche a generall Councell be assembled as ye will agree to stande by, whiche will not
be I trow whiles I liue, nor seuē yeares after for oughte I se yet. And yet I se other folke thike that not reasonable, because the chiefest poines we striue on are already determined. And here it boteth not to saye as ye do of e Councell of Constance slaunde∣rouy, till ye had proued that e saye. I am som what bould with you in this terme, but pardon me I pray you, thys case requireh the same. It boteth not I say, to saye th Churche hath walked in blindnes, so as ye make none accompte of suche determination. Remember ye haue not yet proued the errour of one generall Councell. Yf  be as you saye all is saide y• can be, then you and I now shoulde do well to weighe the reasons of bothe sides. ere if ye saye what weghtes or balaū∣ce will ye weigh them by, let vs hardely do herein, as men do when the quēstion is whiche of two pieces of gold or two pieces of cloth is best, then they take a fine pece of Golde or Clothe and that y• goeth nerest the best, that ought to be so taken for best. Let you and me weyghe
your mennes reasons & ours by the fa∣thers weghtes aud balance, & see who reasoneth most like S. Augustine, S. Basil, S. Cyprian, Tertulliā, Ireneus, and ionysium, the Councelles, & suche other weghtes fit for that purpose. Thus we see there is yet good cause ynough, why men may soberly learne one of an other. And if it misfortune y•, for lacke of insight, we can not agree whiche balance wegheth heauiest, let vs borow eyes of our neighbours. And if ye begin handsomly with me, I mistrust not but men shall at length get more li∣bertie for so good a purpose, when good meaning is well knowen. By this ye see I meane no guile, nor attempt no new practise. Yf ye refuse me at this request, fore see what may be thought. You are not all withont ene∣mies pardie. Sum will percase constrew ye refuse Conscientia imbecillitatis, &c. Well, if ye sende worde yeare at a pointe, & wil goo no further, thē I pray you that of all this incoūter there grow no farther breache of amitye, or harm other wayes. I mean and deal plainly,
and trust vpon your open promis to go harmeles againe from you as I began. Here repeting again my former prote∣station, that I am not nor wilbe against any Article that learning or reason can she we I ought to beleue, beyng ready without malice to heare and take what may be alleaged to driue me to that y teache, and desiring you here withall to constrew my sayinges by the intent I bad in them, and also to tender my suite: I shal here make and ende, and trouble you no further, onles I see more cōforte at your hande. I had once made readie to be sente you an other answeare, whiche vpon beter aduise I thought good to staye. I ment in both one thinge but my first was somdeale sower, and woulde haue bene as bitter as a medicine, or in tyme of Lent, penaunce. I striue with nature, the les to offende you, and so I trust you see cause to forgiue me, if in any parte of my writing I seeme ouer ager. 24. Martij. Henricus Cole
❧ The answere of Jo. Bis∣shop of Sarum vnto D. Coles second letter. IN your se∣cond  letters I finde ma∣nye wordes to litle pur∣pose. It had bene better for you to haue allea∣ged one sufficient authority wher∣by  I mighte haue learned that I loked for. For in my Sermon at Powles and els where, I required you to bring forthe on your parte eyther sum Scripture, or sum olde Doc∣tour, or sum auncient Councell, or  els sum alowed example of the Primatiue Church. For these are good groundes to buylde vpon.
And I woulde haue merueiled y• you brought nothing al this while, soning yt I knew ye had nothyng to being. But nowe for asmutche as you  see shiftes, and will not cum to answere, I count him vnwise that knoweth not your meaning. Ye aske why ye shoulde be cal∣led  obstinate. Doubtles I haue a better opinion of you, and trust ye be ot so. But if a man withstand an open trueth, hauing nothinge wherwith to efende him selfe, I remit him to your owne iudge∣ment, whether he may be called obstinate or no? You put me in remembraunce  of mine office, that for asmutch as I am a Bishoppe, I shoulde be , that is ready to yelde ac∣cōpte of suche thinges as I teach:
I thanke God, so I doo and haue done hitherto to my power, bothe priuately and openly. But if this be my dewtie, & re∣quired  at my handes, what priue∣ledge haue you, that you only may not alow one poore sentence to the confirmation of your learning. ou wold haue men thinke I  flie answearinge bycause I am a Bishop. This in logique is called Paralogismus, A nō causa, vt causa. I alleaged the place & audience  where I spake, & not only mine office, for that I thought it might appeare sum want of discretion to call ye doctrine into questiō, which I knew was grounded vpō god des worde, and authorised and set forth by the uenes Maiestye, & by the assent of the whole Realme. But as touching my callyng, I
am not only readie to answeare any man in any thing that I pro∣fesse, but also vpon sufficient alle∣gation, as I haue promised, very well content to yelde vnto you. But I beseche you, what reason  of your faith in these maters gaue you stime when ye were inplace? Scriptures, doctours, councelles, ye had none, as it now appeareth by your silence. Therfore ye ground of your pet∣swasion  must then needes be, Nos habemus legē, & secundū legē. &c. You knowe what foloweth, for  as truely as god is god, if ye wold haue vouchsaued to folow either y• scriptures, or y• aunciēt doctours, & Councels, ye wolde neuer haue restored againe the Supremacye of Rome after it was once abolis∣shed, or the priuate Masse, or the
Communion vnder one kinde▪ & ▪ It geueth you that I shoulde rest vpon the negatiue, and  put you to your proufes. Wherin not∣withstanding ye alleage against me the custome of the Schooles, yet, ye know. Christ vsed the same  kinde of reasoning in his schoole. As whē he said to the Pharisees, Hoc Abraham non fecit, thys thyng Abraham neuer did. And agayne when he answeared them in the ase of matrimonie, A pincipio non fuit sic, it was not so from the beginning: he stode only vpon the negatiue. herein if the Phari∣sies had ben able to  but one affiratiue, eyther that Abraham had donne so: or that the lawe of diuorse had bene so from the be∣ginninge, Christ wt hys negatue might sone haue ben confounded.
Euen so when the Bishoppe of Constātinople had taken vpon hi to be alled the vnivesal bishop of the whole Churche, which title af∣ter warde the Bishop of Rome be∣gan to  to himself, & for the  of the same had   disquieted and shaken the  world, but whē the Bishop of Constantinople first begā to vse this stile, Gregorye being then the Bishop of Rome confounded hym  only with the negatiue: Nemo, said he, decessorum meorum ho profano vocabulo vti voluit, none of my predecessours woulde euer vse this  and lew name. Lib. 4. Epist. 80. And gain. Epist. 92. Sancti ante legem. Sancti in lege. Sācti sub gratia, omnes per∣ficientes Corpus Domini in mēbris sunt constituti. At nemo se vniuer∣salem
dici voluit. The holye men before the law, the holie mē vnder the lawe, the holie men vnder the grace of the Gospel altogether ma∣king vp one bodie of the Lord, are placed amōgest his members: but none of them wold euer suffer hym self to be called vniuersall. I haue chosen especially these exāples, bicause they seeme to serue me to double purpose. Thus Gre∣gorye reasoned thē as we do now, only vpon the negatiue. And if thē the Bishop of Constantinople had ben able to proue but one affirma∣tiue, y• any Bishop of Rome afore time had vsed yt stile or that euer any man, other before the Law or vnder the lawe, or vnder y• Gospel, had suffred him self to be called v∣niuersall Bishop, then had Grego∣rie ben confounded.
But as touching the custome of  the Scholes, I trust ye haue not yet forgottē, that Aristotle geueth order to y• opponēt in many cases to require an instāt, as I do now at your hand. And what is y• els, but in the deniall to defende the negatiue, & to drie the aduersarie to auouch the affirmatiue. But y• wil ye not do, & ye know why al∣though ye dissemble it. But sooner ye require to see our groundes. And what better groūd can we  haue on our side, thē yt D. Cole the chiefest mā on y• other side, cā find no grounde to stande against vs? He that will make any innoua  tiō, saye you, must giue a reason of his doinges. O maister Doctour this reason fighteth  against your selfe. For you haue  and put awaye the most parte of
the order of the primatiue church, and yet ye neuer gaue anye good reason of your doinges. You saye you are in possession. No, ye were sumtimes, you are not now. And when you were, ye had no right title nor good eui∣dence, no more thē they that sum∣time sate in Moses chayre, or they that sayd. Nos sumus filii Abrahā, we are the children of Abraham, and thereby claymed theyr posses∣sion. Therfore ye were possessores malae fidei, and for that cause ye are now iustly remoued. Now if ye thinke ye haue wrōg, shewe your euidence out of y• doe∣tours, the Councelles, or Scrip∣tures, that ye may haue your right and reentre. I require you to no greate paine one good sentence shalbe sufficient.
You would haue your priuate  masse, the Bishop of Romes Su∣premarie, the Commen prayer in an vnknowen tongue: and for the defence of the same, ye haue made no sinal adoo. Me thinketh it rea∣sonable ye bryng sum one authori∣tie, beside your owne, to auouche the same withall. Ye haue made y• vnlearned people beleue ye had al the Doctours, al the Coūcelles, & fiften hūdred yeres on your side. For your credites sake, let not all these great vaūts come to naught. Where ye say ye are in place of  a learner, and gladly cum to be taught, you must pardon me, it se∣meth very hard to beleue. For if you were desirous to learne as you would seme, ye would cum to the Church, ye would resort to the les∣sons, ye would abide to hear a ser∣mon,
for these are the Scholes if a man list to learn. It is a token the scholer passeth  for his Boke, ye wil neuer be brought to Schole. Ye desyre ye may not be put of, but yt your suit may be considered. And yet this half yere long I haue desired of you, & of your brethe, but one sentence, and still, I know not how, I am cast of, and can get nothing at your handes. You call for the speciall proufes  of our doctrine, whiche would re∣quire a whole Boke, where as if you of your part could vouchesaue to bring but two lines, the whole matter were concluded. Yet lest I should seme to flie re∣kening  as ye do, or to folow you in discourtesie, I wil perfourme sum part of your request, although in dede it be vnreasonable.
Agayust your new dese of trā∣substantiatiō, besides many others whom I wil now passe by, ye haue the old father & doctour Gelasius, whose iudgement I beleue ye will regarde the more, bicause he was sōtime bishop of Rome, which See as you haue taught can never . And is alleaged in the decries: his wordes be plaine. Non desinit esse substantia panis, & natura vini. It leaueth not to be the substance of bread and the nature of wine. But to auoid this authoritie sum  men of your side haue ben forced to expound these words in this sorte: Non desinit esse substantia, hoc est, non desinit esse accidēs. It leaueth not to be the substāce of bread, yt is to saye, it leaueth not to be the acci∣dence, or the fourme, or the shape of Bread. A very miserable shift.
Euen as right as the Scholie  expoundeth the Text. Dist. 4. Sta∣tuimus, id est, abrogamus. Yet doc∣tor Smith of Oxford toke a wiser way. For his answear is, that Ge∣lasius neuer wrote those wordes, and that they hange not together, and that there is no sence nor rea∣son in them. Here haue you that after the cō, secration there remaineth the sub stance of bread and Wine. Now bryng ye but one doctour  that will say as ye saye, that there remayneth only the accidentes, or shapes of bread and wyne, and I will yelde. As touching a priuate Masse, Gregorie saieth in his dialogues, that before the time of the Cōmu∣nion, the Deacon was oute in his time to crie vnto the people,
Qui non communicat locum cedat alteri, who so will not receaue the Communion, let him departe and giue place to others. To breake the ordinaunce of  Christ, and to communicate vnder one kinde only, your own doctour Gelasius calleth it Sacrilegiū. And Theophilus Alexandrinus sayeth, Si Christus mortuus fuisset pro Diabolo, non negaretur illi pocu∣lum sanguinis. f Christ had died for the Deuil, the cup of the bloud should not be denied him. That the Cōmen prayers were vsed in the commen tongue, you haue S. Basil, S, Hierome, S. Augustin, S. Chrisostome. Saint Ambrose, and the Emperour Iu∣stiniam, the places be knowen. You see I disaduantage my self  of many thinges that mighte be
spoken. For at this present I haue no leisure to write Bokes. Now must I needes likewyse  desire you forasmuche as I haue folowed your minde so far, ether to bryng me one olde doctour of your side, or els to giue vs leaue to thinke as the trueth is, ye haue none to bryng, You desire vs to leaue  agaynst you, and no more to  so  with you in the pulpittes. O maister Doctour, call you  this vnmercifull dealyng? when you were in authoritye ye neuer coulde call vs other then ∣tours, and heretiques: and yet besides all that, vsed our Bodies as you know. We only tell the people, as our   is, that you withstand the
manifest trueth, and yet haue ne∣ther Doctour, nor Councell, nor Scripture for you, and that you haue shewed such extremitye, as y• like hathe not ben sene: and nowe can giue no rekenyng why. Or if ye can let it appeare. You saye our doctrine is yet in  doubt, I answere you, to vs it is most certein and out of all doubt. But if you for your parte be yet in doubt, reason and charitie would ye had bene quite resolued & out of doubt, before ye had dealt so vn∣mercifully for it wt your brethern. You are bound, you say, & may  not dispute, yet god be thāked, you are not so bound as ye haue boūd others. But I wold wish yt Que∣nes maiestie wold not only set you at  in that behalf, but also commaunde you to shewe your
groundes. But when ye were at liberty▪ and a free disputatiō was offred you at Westminster before the Quenes most honorable coū∣cel, & the whole estate of y• Realm▪ I pray you whether parte was it that then gaue ouer? And yet thē you know ye were not bound. Ye say ye remayne still in the  faith ye were baptised in. O good maister doctor stand not to much in that point. You knowe ye haue alreadie for saken a great number of suche thinges as were thought necessarie whē ye were Baptised, and yet be sides that, how many times haue sū of you altered your faith within the space of twenty yeares. Remember your self, who wrote the Boke A. De vera obediē▪  tia, against the Supremacie of . Rome? B who commended it with
his preface?C who set it forth withBonner. solemne Sermons?D who confir∣med  it with open othe?Tonstall. You haue ecclesiam Apostol▪  Cole. And in maner  the rest. cam, ye saye, and we haue none. Nowbeit in all these matters that we nowe entreat of, we haue, as you know, & must needes confesse  the olde doctors church, the aun∣tient Councelles Church, the Pri∣mitiue church, S. Peters church, S.  Church, and Christs Church, and this, I beleue, ought of good right to be called the Apo stelles Churche. And I  mutch, that you knowing ye haue none of all these, yet should say, ye haue ecclesiam Apostolicam. Where ye say ye make no inno∣uation, it is no marueile, for in manner all thinges were altered afore to your hands, as may most
uidently appear by all these mat∣ters that be nowe in question be∣twene vs, wherin ye haue vtterly chaunged and abolished the order of the olde church, and do nothing but the contrarie. And what eui∣dent profet ye Church of God hath gotten by it, I thinke it a harde matter to declare. You woulde haue the matter  tourned ouer co sum general coū∣sell as we would be cōtend to stād by, howbeit, that you thinke wyll not be in your time. Notwithstanding I dare bold∣ly  say such a Coūcel wbe a great while before ye shalbe able to find any doctor, or old councel to serue your purpose. But though there were neuer suche a Councell, yet trueth wilbe trueth notwithstan∣ding, for the Con̄ell can not make
the falshed trueth, but the thing y• is taken to be rew, it certifyeth only to be trew. But what redresse can there be loked for of sutche a Councel, where as no man shalbe udge or suffred to speak one way or other, but only sutch as be opē∣ly and iustly accused & fon̄d falt, and where as he that is himselfe most out of order, shalbe head and refourmer of the whole. Both parties, ye say, haue wa∣ded  so re , ye now  an go no further, & therfore ye wolde haue eyther parte let other alone. If you of your parte wolde haue done so, when time was, many a godly man had now bene alie. Where as you saye you would  haue the sayinges of both parties weighed by the ballāte of the old hoctours, ye see, yt is oure only re∣quest,
and ye in ye matters ye w of, I desyre euen so to betried. But why throwe you awaye  these balance, and beyng so ear∣nestly required, why be ye so loth to shew forth but one old doctour of your side? ye make me beleue, ye wolde not haue the mater cum to trial. Only ye set forth the emptye names of S Augustine, of sainte Hierome, of S. Chrisostome, of s∣Basil, of s. Ciprian, of Tertullian, of Treneus, of Dionysius, of the Councels, &c. as the Apothecaries oftentimes set forth their painted Boxes, and nothing in them, you shewe me onlye the names of the doctours, whiche I knew afore, but ye shewe me not one worde in them of the priuate masse, or of the rest of the matters that lie betwen
vs if ye coulde haue founde any thinge in them for your purpose, I beleue you woulde not haue brought them emptie. But that is a policie in the time of Seige whē the Souldiers within beginne to want vitales, to throwe forthe a feweloues ouer the walles, that the enemie without maye thynke they haue stoore inough, & so geue ouer the Siege. You say. I slaunderously misre∣porte  the late Coūcel of Constāce. O sir, these words sauour to much of your cholar, and might better haue ben spared. I speake more fa∣uourably of that Councell then I might haue done. For the wordes of the Councel  be these, speaking namely of y• Cō∣munion vnder bothe kindes. Per∣ asserentes oppositum, tan∣quam Haeretici arcendi sunt, that
is, they, that stubburnly defende & maintain the contrarie, that is to say, they that stande in defence of that, that Christ cōmaunded to be done & the Apostelles, whiche all the olde Catholik doctors and the whole Primitiue Church obser∣ued, ought to be punished so, as is miet for Heretiks. By these words they are called not Schihnatiks, as I said, but stubburn heretikes, which is a great deal more odious you see therfore my reporte was more gētle then yt coūcel deserued. Where as you say we could ne∣uer  yet proue the error of one gene al Councel, I think your memo∣ry doth som what deceiue you. For to passe by al other maters, Alber∣tus Pighius the greatest learned man as it is thought of your side, hath founde sutch errours to ou
hands, for in his Ecclesia Hierar∣chia, speking of ye ii. Councel  at Ephesus, which you cā not denie but it was general, & yet toke part with the hereike Abbat Eutyches against the catholike father Fla∣anus, he wryteth thus: Concilia vniuersalia etiam congregata legi∣timè, vt benè, ita perperam iniustè, impiéque iudicare & definire pos∣sunt. Generall Councelles; sayeth he, yea euen suche as be lawfully summoned, as they may conclude thinges wel, so may they  iudge and determine thinges ra∣shely, vniustly, and wickedly. And of the two Coūcelles hol∣den  of late yeres at Constance, & at Basil, where as Pope Iohn, & Pope Eugenius were deposed, he sayth plainly, that they decreed bothe against reason and against
nature, and against all examples of antiquitie, & against the worde of God. And yet bothe these coun∣celles were called generall. e presse me sore that if I write  you not a Book of my profes, it wilbe thought I do it Conscientia imbecillitatis. For the distruste of the weakenes of my parte. Bilike you haue forgotten wherfore you with all your company ot longe sence openly refused to enter dis∣putatiō with vs at Westminster. Doubtles y• gretest part thought it was (as it was in dede) Con∣scientia imbecillitatisi, euen for di∣strust of y• weakenes of your part. And what thinke ye is there now iudged of you, y• beyng so lōg time required, yet can not be won to bring one sentence in your own defence. I haue afore alleaged a few▪
reasons of my parte, which by or∣der of disputatiō, I was not boūd to do, now let y• world iudg which of vs two flieth conference. I pro∣test before God, bring me but one sufficient authority in the matters I haue required, and afterward I wil gently & quietly cōfer with you farther at your pleasure. Wherfore forasmutche as it is  goddes cause, if ye meane simply, deal simply, betray not your right, if ye may saue it by the speakinge of one worde. The people must needes muse  somwhat at your silence and mi∣strust your doctrin, if it shal appear to haue no ground, neither of the olde Coūceiles, nor of the doctors, nor of the Scripture, nor anye alowed example of the primitiue Church to stande vpō and so your
fiftene hundred yeres, & the cōsent of antiquitie and generalitie, that ye haue so long, and so much talkt of, shal come to nothing. For think not that anye wise man wilbe so much your frende, y• in so weghtie matters, wilbe satisfied with your silence. Where as you saye I am not  altogether without enemyes, I assuere you who so euer be enemie vnto me, I for my part, am enemy vnto no man, but only wyshe that goddes trueth may be knowen of al mē. But he that is enemye vnto me in this behalfe, I feare me, is enemy vnto sum other, whome he wolde be lothe to name. You suppressed ye say your first  letters for that you saw they were to sower. That had ben all one co me: for sower words a not inough
to quail the trueth. Howebeit to my knowledg I gaue you no euill worde to encrese y• humour. But  ye will still striue against nature, as ye say ye haue done nowe, and cōquere the reste of your affectiōs to, I doubt not but we shall sone agrie. Here I leaue, putting you ∣sones  gently in remembrance, that beyng so often and so openly desi∣red to shew forth one Doctour, or Councell &c. in the matters afore mentioned, yet hitherto ye haue brought nothinge: and that if ye stande so still, it must niedes be thought ye do it Conscientia imbecillitatis, for that there was nothing to be brought. ▪ 20. Martij. Io Sarum
▪ Doctour Coles answere to certaine parcelles of the Seconde Letters of the Bishop of Sarum set forthe in such sorte as it came from the Author. 8. Aprilis. Anno▪ 1560. IT liketh you thus to say  that youre readers maye think you touch me very sore, where you discouer great vntrueth in youre wryting. For my purpose was to be taught, & to this marke only I shot. You for lacke of good matter an∣swer, I speak not to the purpose, not to your purpose, but to . Howe oftentimes must I tell you, I  cum not to teach, but to be taught. You require that is daungerous for  me to do, as you know. Well railed, you shall finde that we  haue more then all you shalbe able to answere, when time shall require. These wordes glistered golde like, and discloseth in you no will to satisfye my demaund, I wene for lack of stuffe. You say mutch, and proue nothyng,
your trueths be so open that none seeth them but your own side. I haue no priuiledg, when reason, &  lawe, shal wil me to do it, you shal finde it, now I stande bound to the contrarie, as you know. I must nedes think sum parte of your  writings made by sum smatterer, as here for a shewe of skill in Logique, brought in a place of Logique out of al purpose. How frame you this to your purpose, and you shall finde me therin trew. As I shal happely make you to se, if you driue me to it. So did I to. Your doctrine against  transubstantiation is yet to be proued, and no man bound to beleue it. And yet beynge as trew as you would haue it seme, yet may you enfurme the weak & willyng to learn. That you are required, that you re∣fuse, & make large offer to no purpose. We brought more then ye were able  to answer, al were it no Scriptures, nor Councelles, nor Doctours. This argument woulde I fayne see  proued.
Stout and bolde asseueration, maketh no prouf in the lawe. Here is againe one place that I rekē ye put not in your selfe, for it maketh quite against you. For Christe proued y• Pharises were not Abrahams children, and that a man may not put away  wife for euery cause. Two purposes against your selfe. Gregorie proueth a negatiue,  none of his forefathers euer vsed y• title. As one might say, that you preach is aught, byause men in times pae taught not so. his parte of Gregorie serueth no whit to disproue the Soue∣raintie, as Driedo will teache you, if you vouchsaue to reade him. Yf you read again y• place in Aristo∣tles  Topikes, you shall there see y• bet∣ter to vnderstād it. He speketh it where men dispute Dialecticê, in suche sorte as we do not, & therore it serued not your purpoe. But I tel you yet once agayn, I cum not to dispute, but to learn. Ridetur, chorda qui semper aberrat eadem▪ D Cole will  it when it  to his turne.
In the end of this writing ye shall  finde mine answer to that you here say. The last answere. When you meddle wt lawe, you shew  your skill. I am still in possession of all that euer I thought, & if you put me out of possession by force, I ought to be re∣stored. Had not the Priestes in the olde lawe good title to sit in Moses chaire? What you forget your self, yes perdie. The Lawe accompteth no man Malae fidei possessorem, after that he hath conti∣nued in possession an hundred yeres. But I pardon you for mistaking y• law, it is not your facultie. I enter no suit against you, & it were  oly to shew mine euidence vntil  may serue & take place. I craue only to be n∣formed, which I can not . Patiētia. When I commence law against you, then this speach may serue you to unt purpose. Why I cum not to your Sermons? This question is captius, and yet you are not herewith diharged why you ould not enstruct me. As mn  theyr , so thouse they  tea∣cers.
S. Augustine, S. Chrisostome. &c. Sermons tende more to teache, then to conuince. We stand not in case like, what nede  so much of one thing. All that I required may be couched  in six lines, and for aught that I see yet, in lesse to. It is no disconrtesie to refuse to doo  that, wherwith I might forfeit my reco∣gnisaunce. I se well ye write much, & read litle. Gelasius is ful answered by Tapper▪ in ar∣ticulo de transsubstantiatione. You alledge his wordes otherwyse  then you finde them, wyich fault I trust groweth on ouersight. Shew what they are, that it be not  thought yt you deuise this of your owne phantasie. This glose you mislike, bicause you  vnderstand not to glosers meaninge. It may stande ful wel. Soft and fayr, you haue not rede the  answere. Reede Roiarde and you shal see more. At my cue I shalbe redy for you.
Ye haue better stuffe thā this I trow. For this is sumwhat weak. The decries, where you learned thys  of Gelafius, telleth you howe you should vnderstand it. Theophilus shalbe answered, when I cum to dispute with you. Whether the Grek & the Latin tong, were then vnderstand of the common people, remaineth yet vpon prouf. Well I trowe S. Basil &c. proueth not very well▪ Here I remaine stil in doubt. I praye you take good leisure, & write  affectually. I wis you know I may not, nor y• case  I stand in requireth it not. You ∣porte I said if. &c. Men of your side vsed thē selfes tray▪  terously to Quene Marie, as none of vs do nowe. Not manifest, vntil it be better pro∣ued. You had but the Law, you require more thē any Law wil beare against vs. I doubted more then I do. You geue  me good cause to be well confirmed. At Westminster we came to disput, and we were answeared there was
none appointed, where we reused not to write neither. But when our Boke could not be redde as yours was, we re∣fused not vtterly to diute, but only this case, if our boke could not be suffred to be red as indifferently as yours was. Now hardly weighe whether you haue indifferently reported, that we vtterly refused to dispute with you or no. What one thing am I gone from: you say much, & proue litle. You meane the olde Bishop of ynchester, who re peed at the hour of his death. And whear you mean I condescented to the Prmacie of king Henry at my first cū∣ming home or I had laboured y• matter, you did the like your self. For in Quene Maries time you subscribe to the Arti∣cles, sum of thē we are entred to talk in, to your no lesse blame thē mine. There be in the Town that both saw you sub∣scribe, and can bring forth your hand. To this and som parte of the te  article, you shalbe answered in the end of this writing, as I before said. What nedeth so  of one thing, this serth you to se to ay  much▪
I graunt. Such fond excuses mē lay, how trew  let other iudg. You forget your self, I say not thus  pardie, loke berter in the place. Then begin, if you think y• time will  serue or put it ouer till another time. All these be but wordes often repea∣ted, and answered alredy. ede the place again. I say not so, &  thē you shall se lesse cause to complain. You say the councel at Cōstance ope∣ly  promoued against Christ hym self, wherin I praye you? bicause the fathers there , who sayth it is of necessitie to receaue vnder both kinds, & that the ap∣proued custome of the Church, is Sacri∣ledg, to be taken for an Heretik, and  no heretik, but in a wrong opinion. Then bilike you can bring in sum Texte where Christ commaūded it should not be receiued, but vnder both kinds, which you can neuer do. So is your reporte of this councel very aunderous still. eed 4. Canonem Concilij Constantiensis. You ground your prouf vpon Pighius rour. For Pighius oldeth the Coūcell
of Ephesus was generall, which the coū∣cell of Calcedon denieth. So y• I merueil much herein of you, that you alledg that for a Councel, which hath no place in y• Boke of Councelles. Wherin doth Pighius proue y• Coū∣celles  of Constance, and Basill, to haue erred? Mary, bicause they decried y• ge∣nerall Councell to be aboue the Pope. If ye take these two Coūcelles to haue erred in this pointe, you are a greater Papist then I am, for I holde herin ra∣ther wt Gerson. I trow this be one place that you wrote not your self. Yet I kē no errour proued in any geuerall Coū∣cell, by that you haue said. To this I haue answered alredy to  you. I haue answered to this alredy, what  order of disputation dischargeth you of prouf? yet remember I came not to dis∣pute, but to be taught. Yf you refuse to enstruct me, onle I bring sum prouf of my parte, you bid me to my cost. You bid me to a feaste▪ where, while I shoulde take on me to proue your doctrin naught: I were like
orfeit my Recognisaunce whiche you guilfully allure me vnto. God wot I passe litle in these mat∣ters  what the poore selie soules diem of my doinges. Wherin you haue no cause to complain sith they be edietd toward you. Wise men, I doubt not, see what iust cause I haue to doo as I do. You wold beare folke in hand that  they that agree not in doctrine wyth you, are not the Quenes frende, which you gather by your own side in Quene Maries raigne, but I neuer brake ami∣tie with any man for discent in religion. I keape still mine olde frendes, be they Religion good or bad. As though mine affectiō only caused  me to discēt from you in religiō. Which argument maye serue you happely in Rhetorik, but no wher els I wene. This place is aboue answered. NOw forasmuch as you make this a great foundation against vs, that we varie from y• Primitiue Church, and therby make y• simple soules wene that we were in the wronge side, here I pray you shew your opinion wether we are bounde to doo all thinges whyche
we finde by sufficient authority were in vre in y• Primitiue Church. And bicause you shall not be herein squemish, I shall here begin to shew you mine. I am of the opinion that the Coūcell of Constāce was in this matter. I think it an errour, I am bound to do as y• Pri∣mitiue Church did, where the Churche customably vsed the contrarie. I eken an rāple no bond. I deny not, but those examples were to be folowed, & not to be broken at euery mans will and plea∣sure, vntil by commē assent, othr order were takē. But if you seke olde writers and finde me that the Churche these sire hūdred yeres obserued no many thigs. which were practised, and accompted for good, holesun, and holy, in the Pri∣mitiue Church, and therby dieme vs in errour, this were a wrong iudgmēt. For the church of Christ hath his childhode, his manhod, and his hoorheares: and as that that is miet for aman in one age, is vnmiet in another: So were many thigs miet, requisite, & necessarie, in the primi∣tiue church, which in our daies were like to do more har then good.
This is no new deuised phantasie, but vttered. xi.C. yeres agoo by Saint Am∣brose, without reproche. I shewed you, & red you the place at estminster (as you may remember) and it were to long to make rehersall of his wordes here. We might by taking the contrarie o∣pinion herein, be lede to think we ought to receiue the Sacramēt euermore after Supper, & not fasting. But S. Augustin saith, that Christ left this to his church, to take order how, and in what sort, his Sacramets should be receiued and vsed, wherein he saith it is a meruelous inso∣lent kind of madnes, to misike y• which is receiued in the Church, where yt custō is not against any commaundement in the Scripture. S. Peter aused (as Dam sus saith) a commaundement to be giuē, that no woman should cum bare faced to the Church. S. Clement toke order, that the Clergie should haue all thinges in common, and to line together, as in the late refourmed order of sainct Bentes Monkes dothe most godly appear. And not many yeres since, the saide order in all Cathedrall churches was obserued.
Yet I wene it wer an errour to hold, of necessitie it should be so still, or to say yt Church were in errour, bicause it hath suffred a contrary custome to criep in. Then if y• custom of yt church may break y• was in the Primitiue church cōmaun∣ded, it is lesse offence to leaue vndone y• was at yt beginning practised, & no cō∣maundement geuen for other to folow the same. Thus much I thought to put you in remembrance of, for such matters as you thouch in the 17. 42. 43. nō∣bers. 8. Aprilis. Henricus. Cole,
❧ A Letter sent from the Bishoppe of Sarum to doctour Cole, wherin he requireth of him a true and a full Copie of the former answer. I Understand by the re∣porte of diers that ap pearinge of late before y• Quenes Maiesties visitours at Lambeth, and beyng there demaunded of a Letter that was then abroade in your name, as aunswere vnto me, whether ye woulde acknowledge thesame as your owne, or no, and so much the more for that ye had vsed the matter vnder couert, and sent your copies abrod into al pla∣ces, euen into mine own dioces, & yet not vnto me, therby to discredit me in corners at my irst cuming, wherof I haue the greater cause to complain of your doynges, ye
made answere not onlye that it was your own, but also y• it was much abridged, & that y• originall was twise asmuch. Yf it be so, the fault is your own, that would so vnaduisedly bestowe your wri∣tinges. As for my part, as they came to me not by your sendinge, but by very chaunce, euen so did I cause them to be copied out iustly, and truely, without adding or di∣minishing of one letter, and accor∣ding haue I made out mine an∣swere to the whole. Nowe foras∣much as I vnderstand there  certeine both honorable, and wor∣shipful, yt would gladly haue our doinges to the print, and so publi∣shed, these shalbe to desire you, for the bettering of your own cause, to send me your own copie ful and
large, as ye say ye gaue it out at ye first, yt I may do as I shal thinke good, and you haue no cause to to think your self iniuried if I an∣swer one parcell of your letters, and not to the whole. I pray you let me here from you with expedi∣tiō, for I mean plainly, & therfore haue caused the print to staie vpon your answere. Thus I bid you farwell. From Shireburn. ye xxii. of July. An. 1560. Io. Sarum.
VNto this Letter D. Cole, beynge bisides by mes∣senger arnestlye required, would make no answere one waye or other. Therfore vpon hys refusall, it was thought good to answere his Letters as they were.
❧ The Reply of the Bishop of Sarum to the Letter aboue writ∣ten, which D. Cole contrarie to euen dealing had geuen out and sent abroad, not to the said Bishop to whom he wrote it, but priuely and secret∣ly vnto certain of hys own frendes. THere came to my hābs of late by chaunce a Scroul set forthe in short broken sentences conteining an answer to the second Letters that I had sent vnto you before, which as by certain familiar Phrases, by that date, by the subscription of your own name, & by other tokens, ap∣peared to me to be yours: So by the vsinge & ordering of thesame, I had sum cause to think it shold not be yours, & especially for that beyng, as it appeared, writtē vn∣to me, it was sent priuely abroad
vnto others and not to me. For I thought y• you being a mā of this age & credit, would not haue bene ashamed of your own writinges, or would haue concealed them frō him, to whom you had directed thē, or haue soght for a false light to set forth your matters in, as Marchaūtes sumtimes vse to do, y• better to vtter their sorie wares. Moreouer I saw yt your words throughout were heaped vp with tauntes & scornes, and were som∣what to much steined with cholar, to haue proceded frō a sober graue man, as I euer toke you to be. Thus being vncerteine of the trueth herein, after I had sent of∣tētimes to you, to know whether you would auouch it for your own or no, & could neuer get word frō you, by reason y• you shifted your
self & would not be foūd. I thoght it good to staie my selfe from an∣swering, vntil I might get certein knowledg of the authour. At the last, after I had assayed many waies, & could by no mea∣nes hear frō you, hauing no  continuaunce in the Citie to staye the vntrue reportes which I herd werscattered by sū of your frēds. I could not, but before my depar∣ture hence, make out mine answer vnto you, as hauig cause to thinke the letters that were brought me, should be his in whose name they were geuen abroad. Firste where you haue made your answers seuerall, & set them so far of from the parcelles of my letters, I gesse you did yt of very purpose, that your reader might see your answer, but not see what
it was wherunto you answered. Therefore I haue ioyned my sayinges & your simply, & plainly, both together, without coulour or shadow, that the indifferēt reader may haue all before his eyes, and  be y• better able to iudg aright. ¶ Sarum. IN your second Letters I finde many words to small purpose. It had bene  better for you to haue alledged one sufficiēt authority wherby I might haue learned that I loked for. ¶ Cole IT liketh you thus to say, that your Readers may thinke you touch me very sore, where you discouer a great vntrueth in your wrytynge.  my purpose was to be taught, & to this mark onely I shot. You for lack of good matter ans∣. I speak not to the purpose, not to your pur pose, but to mine. How oftentimes must I  you, I come not to teach but to learn. The Reply of the Bishop of Sarum. COntrarie to y• Rueles of Rhe∣torik, I sie you begin to
and to enflame all your affections euen at the first. Sobernes were much fitter for a doctor. But your heats be such, yt your frēdes haue shewed me you must be born wtal. I neither discouer, nor couer a∣ny vntrueth in my writing, but as you know, only vtter y• very trueth For at Paules Crosse I required you, or any of you, to shewe the groundes of your religion, if you had any, that by indifferent confe∣rence the trueth the better might appear. And this had bene to your purpose, if ye had ment plainly, & to mine to. But you run away in the myst, and  the net, lest hap∣pely ye should be takē, and so pur∣posly go about to blear your rea∣ders , & to couer the truth and hauing in very died nothing to al∣ledg for your self, yet ye make a
countenaunce as though ye lackt nothig. And so I graūt you folow your purpose, and not mine. Where you say, ye cum only to learn, and not to quarell, he must niedes be your very frende y• will beleue you. Nowbeit the pretence of a learner may kepe your credite for a while, & saue you frō shewig what ye can say. And therfore I read you, vse it still. But by your scoffes & scornes it may pppeare, you cum to controlle, soner thē to learn. God send vs both humble∣esse of hart, that we may content our selues to be taught. ¶ Sarum. IN my Sermons aswell at Powles Crosse, as els where, I required you to bryng forth of your parte, eyther sum Scripture, or sum olde Doctour, or sum ncient generall Councell, or els sum llowed example of y•  church. For these are good groundes to builde
vpon. And I would haue merueiled that you broght forth nothing al this while, sauing that I knewe you had nothing to bring. ¶ Cole. YOu require that is daungerous for me,  you knowe. Thereply. Sarum. it be daungerous to you bi∣cause you stande bounde, why do you not put it ouer to sum other of your syd that is not bod. This shadow wil serue well before your endes, that will wink when you bid them, and see no more thē you wil haue them see. But forasmuch as ye haue vsed this excuse so oftē, and so few wise men wil beleue it. I wold think it good that now ye wold deuise sum other.
¶ Sarum. BUt now forasmuch as ye seke shifts, and will not cum to answere, I ac∣cōpt him vnwise that knoweth not your meaning. ¶ Cole. WEll rayled, you shal finde that we haue more then all you shal be able to answer when time shall require. The Reply. Sarum. THis answer notwithstāding it is bitter, yet bicause it is vntrue, and beareth more smoke thē flame, it moueth me the lesse. Here I misse in you sum part of your courtesie. These maters would be tried by reasonig, better then by scoldyng. By likelihod sum other mā had moued your cholar, for my words be as far from ray∣ling, as yours are from modestie. Where you write that you haue more thē all we shalbe able to an∣swere, if euery crake were a good
substātial argument, I were cōfu ted. But notwtstandinge these ter∣rible threates, yet in cōclusion, as your custom is, ye bring nothing. The arguments that you say we shall neuer be able to answere, are sweard & fyre, suche as of late dayes ye vsed so plentiously for lacke of others. And yet as strong & as forcible as they were (God be thanked) they haue ben fully an∣swered to the great & vnspeakable comfort of goddes people, and to your shame & confusion for euer. As touching the olde doctours and Councelles, I wold ye had a terme assigned you, ad exhibendū. In the meane season for lacke of other witnes, ye maye write teste , as Princes doo. Sarum.
YE aske me why ye should be counted obstinate. Doubtles I for my parte haue a better opinion of you, and trust you are not so. But if a man withstand and open trueth, hauing nothing wher∣with to defend him self, I remit him to your own iudgement, whether he maye be counted obstinate, or no. ¶ Cole. THese wordes glittereth Golde like, and dis∣close in you no will to  my , I  for lack of . The reply. Sarum. IT pleaseth you to make yourself mery with these words. I alled∣ged vnto you s. Augnstin, S. Am∣brose, S. Basill, S. Chrisostome, S, Nierome, Gelasius, Theophi∣lus, and S. Gregorie. Therfore it is vntrue that ye saye. I had no wil to satisfy your demaūd. Now bringe you but one of all these, or any other of your syd in y• matters that lie now betwene vs, to satisfy
my demaūd, and as I haue said, you shal haue the victory. You say we lack stufe to proue out pourpose. O woulde to God your stufe and ours might be laid together, thē should it sone appear howe true it is that ye say, & how faithfully ye haue vsed the people of God. ¶ Sarum. YOu put me well in remembrance of mine office, that forasmuch as I am a Bishop should be , that is redy to yelde an accōpt of such things as I teach, I thank God so I do, & haue done to my power, both priuately and openly. But if this be my deutie, and required at my hands, what priueledge haue you, that you only may not allowe out one sentence to the confirmation of your doctrine? ¶ Cole. YOu say much and proue nothing. Your trueth is so open, that no man can sie it, but your own side. I haue no priuilege, when reason and Law
shall will me to do it, you shall finde it. Now I stande bound to the contrarie as you know. The reply. Sarum. I Speake not to muche as your selfe can witnesse. Nowe muche I proue shall reste vpon the wisedome and iudgement of the reader, bothe the trueth of oure parte, and the vntruth of your parte is so open, that now God be thanked the whole world is able to see it, onlesse there be sum such as hath eyes and will not see. Yet Iustificata est sapientia Dei, à filiis suis. Ye saye you will speake when reason and lawe shall will you to doo it. Of the lawe I will say no∣thing, but only this by the waye, bicause you are a doctour of law, what Law haue you that  driue
a man to prone a negatiue: or if ye haue no Lawe▪ what reason haue you that I should do it? But me thinketh both reason and humani∣tie wold ye should haue answered me sumwhat specially being so of∣ten and so openly required. At the least you should haue alledged Au gustine, Ambrose, Chrisostome, Nierome, as ye did sumtimes al∣ledge the decrie of the Councell of Ephesus, the first, for the Commu∣nion vnder one kinde, whiche de∣crie neuer was yet found, nor ne∣uer wilbe. Nowebeit bicause you speake of reason, wheras a man hath nothing to say, it is good rea∣son he kepe silence, as you do. ¶ Sarum. YOu woulde haue men thinke I  answeringe bicause I am a Bishop.
This in Sophistry is called Paralogis∣mus, a non causa vt causa. I alledged the place and audience where I spake, and not only mine office. For I thought it might appeare sum want or discretion, to call that doctrine into questriō, which I knew was groūded vpon gods word and authorized & set forth by y• Quenes Maiesty, & by y• assēte of y• whole realm. ¶ Cole. I Must niedes think sum parte of your writing made by sum smatterer: as here, for a shewe of skill in Logik, brought in a place of Logik out of al purpose. How frame you this to your purpose, nd you shall finde me therin true, as happely I shall make you to sie, if your driue me to it. Your  against transubstantiation is yet to be proued, and no man boūd to beleue it. And being as true as ye would haue it seme, yet may you nforme the weak and willing to learn. The Reply. Sarum. YE do me to much wrong, that will not allow me thus much Logik of mine own. But it was euer your grace, to beare the people in hand that all we are al∣together vnlearned, and knowe
nothing. Whiche thing if it were rew, it wer y• more to your shame, thus openlye to be confounded through the whole world, by men of so smal learning. Howbeit thus it pleased you to talk, for want of better reason. Ye cal me a smatterer in Logik, as if your self wer as perfit in Lo∣gik as Aristotle. And yet I remē∣ber well I vnderstode as muche logik as this cumeth to, and sum deale more, for twenty yeres ago, ywis when you, by your own re∣porte, were but a simple smatterer in diuinitie. Neither did I bringe it in for a she we of skil, as you say, but to declare your ouersight, & lacke of skil, which appeareth now not only in diuinitie, but also in lo∣gik. For where you say I brought it in out of all purpose, me thinke
you haue forgotten sum parte of your olde rueles, and know not what Paralogismus à non causa, vt causa▪ meaneth. Which is when so euer in reasoninge the very true cause is suppressed, and an other cause of purpose set in place. For example I say, I confer with you vnder protestation, lest I shoulde seme to call yt doetrine into doubt, which I knew to be established by gods word, & by sufficient autho∣rity thronghout this ealm. And you would haue it taken that I do it, bicause I am a Bishop. Which indede is of your syd a sophistica∣tion, à non causa, vt causa, So like∣wise I say, you alledg no dectors, nor scriptures, nor generall Coū∣celles, as true it is, bicause ye haue none to alledge. But you woulde make men beleue ye dare not al∣ledg
thē, bicause ye stand bound in Recognisaunce to y• cōtrary. And this of your syd is another Sophi stication, à non causa, vt causa. Where you saye, ye will shewe me that I brought this in out o all purpose, it had bene more for your credit, if ye would haue done it out ofhand. But forasmuche as ye fairest shew of your learning hā∣geth on the futurtens, & standeth only vpō promis. I trust you will bring forth your olde Doctours, and Councels, and perfurme this bothe together: whiche wilbe ye know when. The trueth of our Doctrine a∣gainst trāsubstantiation was pro∣ued sufficiently, and well allowed, before your doctrine with tran∣substantiation was euer heard of. For you are not able to shewe me,
not so much as the very name of transubstantiation in any kind of wryter, new or old, before the late Councell of Laterane: whiche as you know, was holden in Rome. M. CCxv. yeres after Christ. So longe the Church of God, and the Catholik faith was able to stande without your transubstantiation. Whiche, if it were so true, as ye would haue men think it, I mer∣neile, it coulde neuer be knowen before. ¶ Sarum. BUt as touching my callinge, I am not only readie to answer anye man in any thing that, I professe, but also vpon snfficiēt allegatiō, as I haue pro∣sed, very wel cōtēt to yelde vnto you. ¶ Cole. THat you are required that you refuse, & make large offer to no purpose. The reply. Sarum▪
THat you required me I haue partly perfourmed, euen in my last Letters, as you your self do know right well, and that not altogether from the purpose, as it shall appeare. Brig you forth asmuch of your syd, and I wil say ye cumme wel to the purpose. ¶ Sarum BUt I besech you what reason of your faith in these matters, gaue you sū∣time, when you wer in place? Scrip∣tures, Doctors, Coūcelles, ye had none, as now appeareth by your silence. ¶ Cole. VVE brought more then ye were able to an∣swer, all were it not Scriptures, nor doc∣tours, nor councelles. The Reply. Sarum. IN steed of scriptures, Doctors, and Councelles, ye brought such extremity, as the world hath not sene the lyke, and as you are now
loth to heare of. And yet it pleased god that the same should be an∣wered sufficiently, with patience & sufferance, But here am I glad ye confesse one trueth by the waye, that ye brought in all that tyme, nether scriptures, nor Doctours, nor generall Councelles of your syde, and yet I trow ye were frie from Recognisāce. This I beleue passed you vnwares and not of purpose▪ As your Proloqutor in the disputation at Oxforde, gaue out one trueth by chaunce vndad. uisedly, as he gaue knowledge to the audience in the diuinitie schole of what matters they would dis∣pute. For thus he said, and that in your owne hearinge, Vir , conuenimus hûc holdiè disputaturi contra horribilem illam Haeresim, de veritate Corporis, & Sanguinis
Christi, in Eucharistia. Brethern, saide he, we cume hither this daye to dispute against that horrible Heresie, of the veritie of Christes body and blud in the Sacrament. God wolde haue him vtter sume trueth then, as you doo nowe, bi∣cause he was Pontifex illius anni. But forasmuch as you confesse ye brought nether Scriptures, nor Doctours, nor Councelles, Ire∣mit the matter to your own reader to consider what ye brought. Sarum. THerfore the ground of your persua∣sion must then needes be, Nos habe∣mus legem, & secūdum legem. &c. Yo know what foloweth, that is, we haue a law, & accordiug to our law he must die. ¶ Cole This argument I would faine see proued. The Reply. Sarum.
YOur whole practise, and the order of your doiuges for sixe yeres together hath proued it suf∣ficiently. And besides yt, a Bishop of yours, euen in that tune, sittyng in iudgement vpon a pore man in a case of Religiō, and hearing him alledge the Scripturs, and other authorities for him self, rounded a geutlemā in the ear that sate next to him, with these wordes. Naye if we stryue with them in Scrip∣tures & reasoning, we shall neuer haue done. We must proced agaīst them with the Law. ¶ Sarum. FOr as truly as God, is God, if ye would haue vouchsaued to folow ey∣ther the Scriptures, or the ncient Doctours, or the Cocelles, ye wolde neuer haue restored again eyther y• sup∣premacie of Rome after it was once a∣bolished, or the priuate Masse, or y• com∣munion
vnder one kynd, &c. ¶ Cole. and bold asseeration, maketh no pro in the Law. The Reply, Sarum. TRue and ernest asseueration maketh a proufe sufficient in y• law, as lōg as e haue nothinge to the contrarie, as in ded ye haue not, nor neuer shall haue. But wt∣out question your terrible garde of Billes & halbardes, your grin∣ning and skoffing, with other like your demeanour, as ye vsed in the disputations at Oxforde against the marirs, and faithfull witnes∣ses of goddes trueth, and as now your crakes of many things, and bringing forth of nothing, I beleue to any wise man maketh but smal proufe in diuinity. But if ye wold haue had any wise man myslik my asseueratiō, ye should haue shewed
by what scriptures, by what Coū∣celles, or by what doctours, ye re∣stored these thinges again. ¶ Sarum. IT greaueth you that I should rest vpō the negatiue, and so put you to your proufes. Wherin notwithstandinge ye alledg against methe custom of y• scholes yet you know Christ vsed the same kind of reasoning in his schole. As when he said to the Pharisies, Hoc Abraham non fecit. This thing, Abrahā neuer did. And again when be answered them in ye case of diuorse, A principio non fuit sic, it was not so from the beginning, he stode only vpon the negatiue. ¶ Cole. HEreis againe one place that I reken you put not in your selfe. For it maketh quyt against you. For Christ proued the Pharisies were not Abrahams Children, and that a man maye not put away his  for euery cause. The Reply. Sarum. I See you would faine put me out of credit, as thogh I wer not able to answere your let∣ters
without conference. But this I reken you do for a ioly policie, that while your reader is lokig v∣pon me, he should forget the whole matter that we talk of. Y y• erā∣ples that I alledge be against my self, then are you the more behol∣ding to me. For they can not light∣ly make against me in this case, but they must nedes make for you. Yet I praye you shewe me by all your Logik, howe holdeth this ar∣gument of yours. Christ proued that the Pha∣tisees were not Abrahams Chil∣dren, & that a man may not put away his wyfe for euery cause. Ergo. this matter maketh quite against me. ME thiketh here is a very shorte. Sillogismus. I merueil where you lefte your Medius terminus.
You should haue squared it bet∣ter, before it had past your hands. As for the allegation, it maketh e∣uidently for me. For as I saide, Christ stode then vpon the nega∣tiue against the Pharisies, as we do now against you. ¶ Sarum. EUen so when Iohn the Bishop of Constantinople had taken vpō him to be called vniuersall Bishop of the whole Church, which title afterwarde the bishop of Rome began to vsurpe to him self, & for the maintenāce of y• same, hath oftentimes disquieted and shaken the whole world, but when the Bishop of Constatinople first began to vse this title, Gregorie beinge then Bishop of Rome, confounded him only with the negatiue. Nemo, said he, decessorum meorū hoc profano vocabulo vti voluit. None of my predecessours (which had continued from Peter downward, for the space of sir hundred yeres after Christ) wolde e∣uer vse this vnchristianlik & lewd name.
Lib. 4. Epist. 80. And againe. Epist. 9▪ Sancti ante egm, Sancti in ege, Sancti sub gratia, omnes perficientes corpus domini in membris sunt constituti. The holy men be∣fore the Law, the holy men vnder the law, the holy men vnder the grace of y• Gospell, altogether makīg vp one body of the Lord, are placed amongst his mē∣bers. But none of them wold euer suffer him selfe to be called vniuersall. I haue chosen me specially these examples, bi∣cause they seme to serue me to double purpose Thus Gregorie reasoned then, as we do now, only vpon the negat: and if the Bishop of Constātinople had ben able to proue but one affirmatiue, y• any Bishop of Rome afore time had v∣sed that title, or that euer any mā other before the law, or vnder the law, or vn∣der the Gospel had suffred him self to be called vniuersall bishop, then had Gre∣gorie bene confounded. ¶ Cole. TWo purposes against your self. Gregorie pro∣uedD. Cole cōfesseth y• no Bi∣shoppe of Rome be∣ore Gre∣ory, that s, for the pace of ▪ hun∣dred yers fter Christ. wolde e∣uer take vpon him the title of vniuersal Bishop. a negatiue bicause none of his forefathers euer vsed that title. As one might say, that you preach is naught bicause mē in times past taught not so. This parre of Gregory serueth no whit to
dispro the Soeraintie, as Drdo   you,  you vouchesaue to read him. The reply. Sarum. YOu saye I bringe Gregorie against my selfe. God be thā∣ked you are able to bring ne∣her Gregorye, nor any els, that in anye of these matters may but seeme to make with you. But if Gregorye stande vpon the nega∣tiue, as I doo, and as you your selfe confesse, he maketh sufficiēt∣ly to my purpose. Nowe iudg you whether these proufes be nega∣tiues, or no. Nemo decessorū meorū hoc pro∣ano vocabulo vti voluit. Or this. Nemo se vniuersalem dici voluit. And say not I alledg matter a∣gainst my self, onls ye haue wher with to disproue it better. You answer farther, yt one might
say y• lyke against vs, ye we preach this day is naught, bicause mē in times past taught not so. Like as Gregorye found fault with Iohn the Bishop of Constantinople, for yt he titled him self an vniuersall Bishop of y• whole Church, where as none of his prederssours durst euer-take that name vpon him. In dede this aunswer mighte haue sum shew, if mē in times past had neuer taught so, as we teachnow. But I doubt not but herein your owne learning & conscience crieth out against you. For you knowe that the matters that lie in que∣stiō betwene vs, haue ben taught, as we now teache them, bothe by Christe him selfe, and by his Apo∣stles, and by the olde Doctours, and by the auneient generall co∣celles: and that you, hauing no
of these or lyke anthorities, haue set vp a Religion of your own, & built it only vpon your self. Ther∣fore I may iustly and truely con∣clude, y• you now teach and of lōg time haue taught the people, tou∣ching the Masie, y• Supremacie, the Commē prayer. &c. is naught: for neither Christ, nor his Apo∣stles, nor the olde Doctours, Ter∣tullian, Ciprian, S. Hierom, S. Augustin, S. Ambrose, S. Chri∣om, &c. euer taught the people  as you haue taught them. You say this place serueth me nothing against the supremacie, I marueil muche you say not, it ferueth you to proue the Supre∣macie. Gregory saith no Bishop of Rome vntill  time, which was vi. r; yeres after: Christ, wold euer be called the vuiuerial Bishop.
He saieth, that Leo his predeces∣sour reused yt name, notwithstan∣ding it were offred vnto him in y• generall Councell of Chalcedon. He saith, it is a proud, & a pro∣phane title, and a name meere for Antichrist. He saith, who so euer will take y• name vpon him, is Antichristes forerunner. He saieth to consent to suche a name is the denyall of y• faith. And yet saye you, he speketh not one word against the Supremacie. Here would I  be answe∣red one thinge by the waye, if no Bishop of Rome would euer take vpon him to be called the vniuer∣sall Bishop, or head of the whole Church, for the space of vi. c. yeres after Christ, where then was the head of the vniuersall Church all
that while? Or howe could it then continewe without a head, more then now? For nowe you say it is vnpossible. Or if the Church had no vniuersall head in the earth for so lōg a time after Christ, why do you now fournish out the Bishop of Romes authoritie in y• hearing of y• vnlearned, with such a glorye & face of antiquitie? As if the Bi∣shop of Rome had euer bene na∣med the head of the Church, sence the tyme that Peter came first to Rome. But bicause your self were not able to auoid the force of Gre∣gories words, you did wel to  me oner to Doctour Drdo. ¶ Sarum. BUt as thouching the custome of the Scholes, I trust ye haue not yet for gotten, that Aristotle geueth order to the opponent in many cases to require an instant of the respondent, ap
I do now at your handes. And what is that els, but in denial to defend the ne∣tiue? and to driue y• aduersary to  the affirmatiue? ¶ Cole. If you read again the place in Aristotles , you shall see there the better to vnder∣stand it. He speaheth it, wher men dispute Di∣etice, in such   we do not. And therfore it serueth not your purpose. But I tel you yet  , I cum not to disputo, but to learn. The Reply. Sarum. I Neuer thought it had bene so high a misterie to vnderstand y• nature of all Instāt. Childrē were wōt to haue it in their cōmon dis∣putatiōs in y• paruise Scholes in Oxford yf it serue only for them y• dispute dialecticè, & ye (as ye pre∣tend) be are the person onely of a lerner & cum not to dispute, why thē did ye alledge against me the custome of the Scholes, & the dis∣putation o maisters of art in the vniuersities? ye knowe they vse
there to   dialecticè, & none otherwise. And that I spake herein, I spake onely vpon occa∣sion of your own wordes. Howe shall I thinke ye remember your Aristotle, if ye so   your own letters? ¶ Sarum. BUt that ye wil not do, and ye knowe why,  ye  . But  ye rquire to se our groundes. And what better ground can we haue on our side, then that Doctour   man on the other side, can  no ground to stand against ? ¶ Cole. RIdetur, chorda qui semper aberrat eadē. Doctor Col proue it, whē it  to his turn. Thereply. Sarum. SEing for lacke of Doctoures ye answere me with Poetes, it shall do well to answere you
again with the same. Decies repe∣ placebunt. And yet when ye come so often with the pretence of desire to be taught, and of your re∣, if I liste to  as ye do, why may not I as wel say to you, Ridetur chorda qui semper aberrat eadem? As for the prouing herof, ye do wel to take a day. In the mean season geue others leaue to think the trueth. ¶ Sarum. HE that wil make any Innoarion say ye, must geue a reason of hys . O master doctor, this rea∣son  most against your selfe, for ye haue misliked and put away the most part of the order of y• Primitiue church, and yet ye neuer gaue good reason of your doinges. ¶ Cole. IN the end of my  ye   mine     ye  .   .
The reply. Sarum. ANd there shall you fynde the Reply. ¶ Sarum. YE say ye are in possession. No, ye were sometime, ye are not nowe and when ye were ye had no right title or good euidence to claime by. No more then they which sometime sate in Moses chaire, or they yt saide. Nos sumus  Abrahami, we are the children of A∣braham, & therby claimed their posses∣sion. Therfore ye were possessores  , and for that cause ye ar now , and orderly remoued. ¶ Cole. VVHen ye meddle with , ye shewe . I am  in possession of all that euer I taught, and if you put me out of possession by . I ought to be restored. Had not the   the olde law̄ good title to sit in Moses chaire? What ye forget your self, yes perbie. The  ccompted no man, maloe fidei possessorem, after that he hath continued in possession an ∣ored yeres. But I pardon you for mistaking  , it is not your . The Reply. Sarum.
I Haue not so litle skil in ye law but I vnderstand what are malae fi. dei possessores. And as now (gods name be praised) it is wel knowen yt ye haue been they, ye are put out of possessiō not by violence of mā, but by ye very force of gods trueth, which so deuoureth & consumeth  error & falshed, as Moyses  deuoured & swalowed vp the fained serpēts of yt Sorcerers. If ye claime to be restored be not agreued to shew your euidence. Where ye say the Bishops and Priests yt wer in Christs time had good title to sit in Moyses chaire. I graunt you they had euen as good title, as ye had to sit and beat rule in the Church of Christ. And therfore your example misliketh me neuer a whyte.  ye knowe Christ called them Fures & latro∣nes, theues and robers: and saide
vnto them, Vos ex patre diabolo estis, ye are y• children of the deuil. Ye say the law accompteth no man possessorem malae fidei. yt hath continued in possession one hun∣dred yeares. Which thing notwt∣standing I can be content to gaūt you to be true in the ciuile law, yet is it not true in the law of God, & that, as ye know is proued by di∣uers authorities euē in your own decrees. Dist. 8. There is alleged s. Augustin, whose words are these. Veritate manifestata, cedat con∣suetudo veritati. Nemo cousuetu∣dinem rationi, & veritati praeponat: quia consuetudinem ratio & veri∣tas semper excludit. After y• trueth is once found out, let custom geue place vnto the truth. Let no man set custom before truth and reasō, for reason and trueth euermore
put custom to silence. Likewise S. Gregory, and his wordes are these. Si consuetudinem opponas, ad∣uertendum est, quod Domin{us} dicit, Ego sum via, veritas, & vita: non dicit, Ego sum . Et certè quaelibet consuetudo quantumuis vetusta, quantumuis vulgata, veri∣tati omnino est postponenda. Yf ye lay custō for your selfe, ye must re∣member that Christ faith. I am the way the trueth, and the lyfe: he saith not I am custó: And doubt∣les any custom, be it neuer so aun∣cient, neuer so commen, yet muste it nedes yelde to the trueth. Likewise. S. Ciprian, whose wordes be these. Si solus Christus audiendus est, on debemus attēdere, quid aliquis ante nos faciēdum putarit, sed quid,
qui ante omnes est, Christus prior fecerit. Neque enim hominis con∣suetudinem sequi debemus, sed ve∣ritatem Dei, cum per Esaiam Pro∣phetam Deu▪ loquatur, & dicat, sine causa colunt me docentes mandaa, & doctrinas hominum. If onely Christ must be herd, we may not wey what anye man hath thoght good to do, that hath been before vs, but what Christ ath first done y• is before all men. For we may not folowe the cu∣stomes of man, but the trueth of God: specially for that God sayeth by the Prophet Esay: They wor∣ship me in vain teaching the com∣maundementes and doctrines of men. Thus ye see, euen by youre own decrees, that custom against the trueth is a very simple groūde to build vpon. And like as ye vse to say. Nul∣lum
tempus praescribit Regi, Som thynketh, of good right▪ cye ought as well to saye, Nullum tempus praescribit Deo. Otherwise Anti∣christ shall cum, and sit in posses∣sion of the holy place, and beare himself as if he were God, & that, God knoweth, howe many hun∣dred yeres together. And yet at the last he shalbe but. Antichrist, sit he neuer so high. For prescrip∣tion of an hundred yeares, can not make the falshode be to the trueth nor can any prescription be auayl∣able in your own lawe, onlesse it haue bonum titulum: and that in Religion must nedes be the word of God. Which word, forasmuche as ye haue not to alledge (as ye your selfe knowe, no man better) all the face of your prescripcion is but vayne. And therfore ye were
as I said, possessores màlae fidei. And ye haue a rule of your lawe, possessor malae fidei, nulla temporis longinquitate praescribit. And therfore Christ in the case of diuorse rested not vpon the custō that was thē receiued, but appea∣led vnto the first institutiō of ma∣riage and folde the Pharisies thē, as we nowe tell you, A principio non fuit sic. It was not so at the beginning. Wheras ye say I mistake your law, I graunt it is possible I may so do, as well as you. Nowbe it, I am weassured in this place I mi∣stake it not. I would to God you being a doctour of the law, did no worse mistake the Scriptures. ¶ Sarum. NOw if ye thinke ye haue wronge, shew your euidence out of y• Scrip∣tures, the Doctours, or Councels,
that  maye haue youre right again and so reenter. I require you to no gret paines, one good sentence shalbe ∣ent. Ye would haue your priuate masse∣the, Byshoppe of Romes , the commen praers in an vnknowen tongue, and for defence of the , ye haue made no small a do, me thinketh it were reason ye should bring sum autho∣ritie besides your own: to auouch the same withal. Ye haue made the unlear∣ned people beleue that ye haue all the doctors, al the counsels, and. rd. . yeres of your syde. For your credites sake, let not al these great bates cum to noght. ¶ Cole. IEnter no suit against you, and it were   shew my euidence vntill it may , and take place. I crue only to be , which I can not obtaine, when I cōmence law against you, then this speach may serue you to sum pur∣pose. The Reply. Sarum. IF you will not prosequute your suite, it is reason ye be cast in a non suit. But ye do best to make
a delay, for ye know ye haue to do  thē that haue sene your euidēce Ye saye ye kepe your proufes vntil some better tym, when they may serue, and take place. When Pompei, a noble gentilman of Rome, was marching forth to fight in yt field against his enemy Iulius Cesar, and ato an olde graue Senatour, one of the same partie, had shewed him he wted men, tushe quoth he, I shall haue men inough, for as sone as I shal but stamp the grounde with my force, ye shal se spring up a swarm of Souldiers. Afterward whē the field was sought & Pompei discō∣fited, and began to flie with much dishonour, O sir said Cato, where is now your promisse, why stamp ye not the ground, when shall we se your swarm of souldiers? euen
somay I say to you, notwithstan∣ding your great vauntes that ye haue made, ye se nowe ye are dis∣comfeited, ye se the field is al most lost, where are now your crakes of doctours, and councels? Why stampe ye not your bokes? why cum ye not forth wt your euidence? Now ye stand in nede of it, nowe it will serue and take place, if ye haue any. But ye learned this pol∣licy of your Tully, Scitum est, saith he, causā cōiicere in tēpus, cum ad∣ferre plura, cum velis, non queas, when ye haue no more to say, it is wisedom to lay the faut in time. Sarum. WHere ye say ye are in place of a learner, and gladly cum to be taught, ye must pardō me to saye the trueth, I taken your very frendes, in this point, wyll hardely beleue you. For if ye werde ∣rous
to learne, as ye would seme to be, ye would cum to the church, ye woulde resort to the lessons, ye would abyde to hear the Sermōs, for these are yq scholes if a man list to learne. It is a token the scholer setteth little by his , yt will  be brought to . ¶ Cole. VVHy I cum not to your Sermons? thys question is captious: and yet ye are  discharged why  should not  me. As men chouse their wiues, so chouse they theyr teachers. S. Augustines and S. , Sermons  more to teach, then to conuince. The Reply Sarum. I Meant not to be captious, but onely to put you in remēbraunce that your pretence of learninge is but femed, & that you are not in dede so willing to be taught as ye would seme to be Whensoeuer ye shall shew me by your lawe that a man may be required to proue a  negatiue, I wilbe content to confer with you, and to shewe you
the reast of my proues. Ye say ye chouse your teacher as men do theyr wiues, many mē are led by folly & phansy in chou∣sing theyr wyues. I woulde your luk should be better in chousinge your teacher. But S. Paule pro∣phesied in his time, yt there should come scholars with titling eares & chouse them selues teachers ac∣cording to their owne appetites yt shoulde turne away theyr eares from the trueth, and geue them∣selfe to the hearing of fables. The Prophete Esay saith, there were scholars in his time that woulde saye to their teachers. Loquimini nobis placentia, videte nobis erro∣res. Auferte a nobis viam, declinate semitā, cesser à facie nostra  Israell. That is speake to vs suche things as may like vs, See vs er∣rours,
leade vs out of the waye, bring vs out of the path. Let vs haue no more of the holye God of Israel before our face. And shal I thinke you chouse me for loue, as men do their wyues? I can as yet litle finde it in your talke. But be∣cause I came nere to the matter, and with my negatiue declared ye weakenes of your syde, more then some others did, therfore ye brake out first vpon me, & laid in a claim without euidence. And hauing nothing to say, ye would seme to haue somwhat. As women yt woulde seme to be with child, sometimes rear vp their bel∣lies with a cushion. ¶ Sarum. Y desire, ye maye not be caste of, but that your suite may be . And yet this halfe yere long. I haue  of you, and all your brethren, but
one pore sentence, and still, I know not how, I am cast of, and can get nothinge at your andes. ¶ Cole. VVE stand not in case like. What  so much ot one thing. The reply. Sarum. YE are much beholdē to your re∣cognisaūce, ye make much a do, and yet bring nothing. ¶ Sarum. YE call for the speciall proufes of our doctrine, which thing requi∣reth a whole boke. Wheras if ye of your parte, would bouchsafe to bring but two lines, the whole mater were concluded. ¶ Cole. that I required may be couched in  and for ought I see in lesse to. The reply. Sarum. LEt the rest of youre trueth be tryed by this. Ye knowe that
the olde father. Theodoretus, had more then sixe lynes of oure syde, and therfore D. Clement tare the whole plate out of his boke, and burnte it, thinking there had ben no more copies, least perhappes it hould cum to light. Ye know, that Occam, one of your owne doctoures, hath more then sixe lynes against you. And therfore the last Pope condemned him as an heretike. knowe, there is sumwhat besyde in S. Augustin, in s. Hie∣rome, in S. . &c. I be∣leue more then Royarde, or Tap∣, could euer answer. Ye knowe, that ye your selfe in your last answer graunted me yt the exāples of y• primatiue church are of our syde & therfore ye rest  an  point that the Pri∣mitiue
churche in the Apostles, & old doctours tyme was but an in∣fant and a babe in comparison of your Church of Rome. Therfore me thinketh, sauinge that it was your pleasure, ye were sumwhat ouer seen to say, that all our alle∣gations may be couched in syxe lines. But as I haue offred you oftē times, bring ye but two lines of your syd, and the field is yours. ¶ Sarum. YEt lest I should seme to flye confe∣rece and trial, which in dede in this case I most desire, or to folowe you in discourtesy, I will perfourme sume part of your request, although in dede it be vnreasonable. ¶ Cole IT is no discourtesy, to refuse to do that, wher∣with I might forfeit my recognisaunce. The Reply. Sarum. YOur recognisaunce doth you good seruice to saue your cre∣dit,
ye fly away like a faint Soul∣diour, and yet hold vp your shield as if ye wer fighting still. ¶ Sarum. AGainst your new deuise of transub∣stantiation (besides manye others whō I nowe passe by) ye haue ye olde fa∣ther, and doctour, Gelasius, whose iud∣gement, I beleue, ye wil regard yt , because he was sometymes a Bishop of Rome, which See, as ye  taught,  neuer erre. And is alledged in yt de∣crees, his wordes be plaine. Non desinit esse substantia panis, & natura vini. ¶ Cole. I Se  ye write much, and read litle.   is ful answered by Tapper, in articulo de . Ye alledge his words other∣wise then ye find them. Which fault I trust go∣weth  ouer sight. The Reply. Sarum. HOwe are ye so priuie to my reading▪ Wyse men auouch no more then they knowe,
ye lackte shift when ye were dri∣uen to wryt thus. I assure you I haue not been so slacke a student these. xx. yeares, but that besydes other old wryters of diuers sorts Grek and Latine, I haue not spa∣red to reade ouer, euen suche as haue wrytten of youre syde, as , Pigghius, Hosmaste∣rus, , Hossius, and suche o∣thers, and yet, vmil this day I ne∣uer set abroad in prynte. xx. lynes. But this is youre olde wont, to make the people thinke that we reade nothinge els but. ii. penny doctoures, as ye call them. As in the disputation at Westminster, ye would seme to stand in doubt, whether we were able to vnder∣stande you or no, when ye speake a little Latine: and as of late ye doubted not to saye, that mayster
doctour Martyr was not abl to make a Sillogismus, which thing in dede, is as true, as the rest of your religion. But I praye you, what had Stephen Gardiner red, when he alledged the third voke of S. Au∣gustin, de sermone domini in moe and yet S. Augustin neuer wrote but two. What had the same Stephen Gardiner rede, when he alledged Theophilactus, and called hym Theophilus Alexandrinus, who was before Theophylactus well nere fyue hndred yeres: What had doctour Smith of Dron. red, that openly in the dis∣putatiōs there, An. Domini. 1554. alledged the coucell of Nice to proue the phansy of your transub∣stantiation: and when he came to
shew the place, was not able to fynd one worde, other in that coū∣cell, or in any other of antiquitie, that might seme to make for it. What had he red, that being a Judg in y• same disputations cried out so bitterly vpon ye man of god, the Archebishop of Canterburie, and that foure or fyue times toge∣ther,D. Ogl∣throp. ostēde mihi qualis corpus fuit? qualis corpus fuit? & was not hable to vtter his mind in cōgrue latin. This thing I trust ye wil recorde with me, for it was spokē in your own hearing. Your importunitie hath caused me, contrary to myn own nature, to vtter these things, which other∣wise I coulde haue conceiled. O, bost not our self to much of your great reading. When ye bring me any olde Doctour, or councell, for
your purpose in the matters ye we now talke of, then will I saye, ye haue read muche. As for Gelasius how soeuer it pleaseth. D. Tapper to cotue him, he sayeth plainly, that in the Sacrament there remaineth the substaunce, and nature, of breade and wyne. But ye say, I alledge Gelasius otherwise then I fynde him, and hereof your frends haue made much a do. I se, it muste be a very small fault that shall escape your eyes. Gelasius wordes be these. Non desinit esse substātia pa∣nis, vel natura vin. Which words, hauing not the boke at hand, I re ported thus: Non desinit esse sub∣stantia panis, & natura vini. I be∣sech you, howe far went I  from the words, or from the mea∣ning of the authour? I se it was
not for nought, that childrē in the Scholes were wonte to fynde a difference betwene these two pro∣posicions comedi bis panē, and bis panem comedi. But I perceine the faut was such that ye were loth to make mater of it. If I had alte∣red any part of the sence and mea∣ning of the wryter, I trow, I had ben lyke to heare more of it. I remember what a clappinge of handes, and stamping of fete, ye made at Oxen. agaynst that notable godlye learned man, the Archebishop of Cantorburye, for that he, alledging a place oute of Saint Hilarie, had chaunged but one letter, and wrytten, verò, in stende of verè, Ye triumphed ouer hym, and poynted hym to the people, and called hym a falsarie, a wrester, a corrupter of the Doc∣tours.
And yet afterward it was founde, and wil yet appere ye two of your owne doctours Steuen Gardiner, & Smith in their owne printed bokes had chaunged the same letter, & written, vero, aswel as he. Howbeit, God be thanked ye will not geue me cause to fynde such fault with your allegations, for ye are able to alledge nothing at all. But it were to lōg to shew how many times, and how shamefully, the wryters of your syd haue cor∣rupted the old doctours. Yet for example sake, of a great nomber to shew you one or two, how thinke ye by your doctour Pighius, that violētly altereth both the words, and the meaning of S. Augustin. For where S. Augustine wryteth
thus. Quid tam grate offerri, aut ab illo suscipi potest, quam caro sacri∣ficiiDe. Tr. libro. 4. capi. 14. nostri, corpus effectum Sacer∣dotis nostri, meaninge the Sacri∣fice that Christ offered vpon the Crosse. Pighius putteth in of hys own A nobis, which S. Augustin had not, and made vp the sentence of this sorte. Quid tam gratè offerri à nobis, aut ab illo suscipi, potest, quam caro sacrificii nostri, corpus effectum Sacerdotis nostri, and so perforce, turned it to the pretensed Sacrifice of your masse. How thinke ye by Steuen Gar∣diner, that in his boke of ye deuels sophistrie, was not afraied to cor∣rupt ye wordes of ye holy Prophet▪ for wher as dauid had writte. Escā dedid timentibus se, he doubled the pronoune, and wrote it thus. Escā se dedit timentibus se. This muste
nedes appear to be somwhat more then an ouersight. But what ne∣deth mo examples? Camotensis a doctour of your own, saith in ge∣nerall of all your syd. Vim faciunt Scripturis vt habeant plenitudinem potestatis, they wreste, sayth he, ye Scriptures violently yt they may haue the fulnes of their power. ¶ Sarum. BUt to auoid this authoritie, sum mē, of your syde, haue ben driuen to er∣pound these plaine wordes of Gela∣sius, in this sort: Non desinit esse substatnia, hoc est, non definit esse accidens. Euen as right as the glose expoundeth y• Texte. Dist. 4. Statuimus, id est abrogamus. ¶ Cole. what they are, that it be not thought y• ye deuise this of your own fantasy. This glose ye . because ye vnderstand not y• Glosers . It may stande ful wel. The Reply. Sarum. WHat if I should say Doctoure Cole hath expounded it so? If
not, then I pray you imagin with your selfe howe ye may be able to shift away Gelasius otherwise. Yet because ye will nedes put me to my proufes, in a matter that ye knowe is plaine, I pray you take the paines to read Steuen Gar∣diner, in his boke that is answe∣red by the Archebishop of Cantor∣bury Thomas Cranmer, ye shall finde these wordes. Gelasius saith he, speaking of the bread and wyn, reciteth not precysely the substan∣ce to remayne, but sayeth the sub∣staunce or nature: whiche nature he calleth after the property. Here by this doctoures mynde, substan∣tia, is latine for propertie, whyche as ye knowe, is nothinge els but accidens. And againe in his boke that he calleth. Marcus Antonius Con∣stantius,
written in latine, ye shall finde these wordes: Quod ait panē in sua substantia, vel natura manere, vel substantiam sentit Accidentiū, vel naturae proprietatē. It is a very straūg phrase of speach to say sub∣stantia accidentium. But it is as straunge to say, as he saith in ano∣ther place, Accidentia sunt substan∣tiarū partes. Howbeit after ye had once deuised a new religiō, it was mete that ye shuld deuise out also some new phrases of speache, that neuer had bē heard afore. And yet is not this the grossest part of your learning neither. Now I trust, ye se I deuised not this of myn own phantasye. I marueil sum what that ye say I vnderstand not y• Glosers mea∣ning. For me thiketh there is not so high nor misticall learninge in
it, but that a meane learned man may sone reach vnto it. But I se, it must be a desperate sore, but ye will fynde sum salue for it. I pray you first read the text, and then cō∣sider how handsumly the glose wil frame vnto it. The text is this: Statuimus, vt septem hebdomadas plenas ante sanctum Pascha, omnes Clerici, id est, in sortem Domini vo eati à carne ieiunēt. Now foloweth your glose, Statuimus, id est, abro∣gamus. And because ye vnderstād the glose better then I, as ye say, and lyke it so wel, reade the texte accordingly, and say thus, Abro∣gamus vt ptem hebdomadas ple∣nas ante sanctum Pascha, omnes cle∣rici à carne ieiunent And I beleue what soeuer meaninge ye make of it, ye shal make but vnhandsom la∣tin. Nowe let your reader iudge,
whether of vs two better vnder∣standeth the glosers meaning. ¶ Sarum. HEre ye haue, that after the words of consecraciō, there remaineth in the Sacrament the substance of bread & wyne. Now bring ye but one doctoure, that wil say, as ye say, that there remat∣nesh onely the Accidentes, and shewes of bread and wine and I will yeide. ¶ Cole. SOft and , ye hau not read y• answer.  , and ye shall se more.  my  I shalbe ready for ye. The Reply. Sarum. IF Royardes answere had been worth the hearing, ye would not haue been ashamed to haue al∣ledged his words. At your ue ye wilbe as ready, as S George a horse backe, euermore ryding, & yet euermore standing stil, ye wil be a very euill Auditour, y• lay downe so litle, & reken so much. But bring
sum olde councell, or doctour, with you at your cue, or els folke wyll say, ye haue none to bring. ¶ Sarum AS touching a priuate masse, Gre∣gorye saith in his dialogues, that before the tyme of the communion the Deacon was wont, euē in his tyme, to crye vnto the people on this wyse. Qui non communicat, locum cedat al∣teri. Who so wil not receiue, let him de∣part, and geue place to others. ¶ Cole. YE haue better  then this. I , for thi  some what weake. The Reply. Sarum. WHatsoeuer thys stufe se∣meth to you, your answer semeth to me very weak. f ye be no better able to answere this, howe wyll ye be able to an∣swere the reast: It appeareth by these wordes of Sainet Gregory,
that in his time; which was six hundred yeares after. Christ. who so would not communicate wyth the Prist, at the communion was commaunded out of the Ehurche. Wherby it is cleare they had then a communion, and that al the con∣gregation present, receiued toge∣ther. Nowe eyther shew ye me so much for your priuate masse or els say nomore, this stufe is weake. ¶ Sarum. TO breake y• ordinaunce of Christ, and the people to communicate vnder one kinde only, your owne dotout Gelasius calleth it Sacri∣legium. And Theophilus  of y• sa matter,  : Si Chri∣st  fuisset pro Diolo, non ∣tur illi poculum sanguinis. ¶ Cole. THe , where   this of Gelasius     should  it. Theo∣ shalbe , when I cuine to dispute with you.
The reply. Sarum. HEre, I trow, your memory de∣ceiued you, ye mean the glose, and not the decree. For the words of Gelasius in y• decree, are plaine: Diuisio vnius eiusdémque mysterii sine grandi sacrilegio non potest {per}∣uenire. And the wordes y• he vseth further: vt integra Sacramenta per∣cipiant, aut ab integris arceantur: seme not so much to pertaine to the Priestes as to the people. But ye did wel to turn ouer Theophilus vntill sum other tyme, for I wene ye had no answer ready made. ¶ Sarum. THat the common praiers were vsed in the common knowen tonge y∣haue. S. Basill, S. Hierom, S. Am∣brose, S. Augustin, S. Chrisostome and the Emperour Iustinian, & many others. The plares be knowen. ¶ Cole.
WHether the Greke, and Latin tuug, were then vnderstand of the common people re∣maineth yet vpon proue▪ wel. I trowe. S. Basill aproueth not very well. Here I remain  in doubt. The Reply. Sarum. I Matueile muche that any lear∣ned mā shuld doubt at this. For if the common Greke people vn∣derstode not the Greke tong, nor the common Latin people, y• latin tong, then woulde I sain knowe what tong they vnderstode? I can see no greate cause why they shuld forgeat their own tong, and learn another. But Arnobius, in his tim called the latin tong, Sermonem I∣talū, because it was vsed through∣out all Italy. S. Ambrose in his tyme, prea∣thed to the people of Italy in la∣tin, and as it is to be thought, the people vnderstode him.
S. Augnstin, in his sermons to y• commen people in Aphrica hath diuerse times these wordes. Nunc loquar latinè vt omnes intelligatis. Now wil I speak latin saith saint Augustin to the commen people, that ye may al vnderstand me. S. Gregory, in his sermons vsed the latin tong to the people, & I trow he spake not al in vain. I marueil why ye doubt not aswel, whether the commen Greke people vnder∣stod Demosthenes, or Aeschines: or the commē latin people vnder∣stode Cicero, or Hortensius, when they spake vnto them in their mo∣ther tong. Now, that the cōmen prayers, in S. Basiles, S. Ambrose, & S. Augustines tym were in the com∣men bulgare tong, marke howe well it maye be proued. S Basil
saith thus of the vsage of the com∣men prayer in his tym. Coniūctus sonus virorum, mulierum, paruulo∣rum, tanquam fluctus feciētis litto∣ra, in nostris ad Deum precibus ex∣citatur. In our praiers yt we make to God, we raise vp such a soūd of the voices of men wemen, & chil∣drē praying together, as if it wer y• noise of the waues beating agaīst the sea bankes. Wherby it appea∣reth that in S. Basiles tym, men, women, and children, sang in the Churches altogether. Chrisostom of his tym sayth thus: Ne mireris, si in sacris nostris, popu∣lus, cum sacerdote colloquatur? Maruil not, saith he, if that in our prayers the Priest and the people talke together. Augustin of his tym, saith thus: Non est opus loquutione cum ora∣mus,
id est, sonantibus verbis, nisi forte sicut Sacerdotes faciunt, signi∣ficādae mētis suae causa, non vt deus, sed vt homines audiant. We nede not, saith he, to vse words, or sound of voice, whē we pray onlesse it be, as the Priestes do, to declare their meaning, not to the entēt that god may therfore heare them, but that they may be heard of men. But, because ye be a doctoure of law, I would not haue you forget Iustinian the Emperour, the first compyler of your lawes. He, if ye be remembred, commaunded the Bishops that they should set forth the commen prayers in opē voice, and that, as he sayeth: Vt maiori deuotione audientium animi effe∣rantur. That is, that the mindes of the heares may be striken wt more deuocion. He thought then that y•
vnderstanding of y• praiers should enkendle deuocion in the hartes of y• hearers. For I beleue, he had neuer heard say, that ignoraunce shoulde be the cause of true deuo∣cion, as ye boldely auouched in the disputtacion at westminster, in the hearinge, and wonderinge, of the most part of the honourable, and worshipful of this realm. I know not by what secrete Reuelation ye learned this first. For your owne Counsels say. Ignorantia mater est cuuctorum errorū. That is to say, ignoraunce is y• mother of all ma∣ner errours. And the same words ye haue alledged in your own de∣crees. Distin. 38. & are very agrea∣ble vnto Christes wordes in the Gospel. Erratis nescientes Scriptu∣ras: ye are in errour, because ye vn∣derstand not the Scriptures.
Origenes, one of the oldest doc∣tours of y• Church, saith thus: Tor∣mentum est Diabolo, si quem videat legere sacras literas: possidet enim omnes qui versantur in ignorantia. It is a skourge (saith he) & a tor∣ment to the deuell, if he se any mā read the Scriptures: for he hath power vpon all them that  in ignoraunce. S. Cyril saith, Pueri nostri le∣gunt sacras literas, & ex eo fiunt re∣ligiosissimi. Our childrē, saith he, read scriptures, and therof they be cum deuout and holy. And what needeth mo allega∣tions? your owne Doctour, Lyra, saith. Si populus intelligat ratio∣nem sacerdotis, melius reducitur in Deum, & maiori deuotione respon∣det, Amen. That is, if the people vnderstande the Priest, they are
better brought to God, and with more deuotion they answer. Amē. It muste needes be a miserable cause that is grounded only vpon ignorance, for no man hateth the light, but he that doth euel. Christ said to the Pharisies, this is your time, and the power of Darkenes yf the people had vnderstandyng of the truth, they wolde not suffer you thus to leade them into error as ye do, and haue done. But I re∣member Plinius wryteth, yt, not∣withstanding the Lyon be a mar∣uelous fierce & courragious beast, yet if he may once hodwinck him, or make him blīd, ye may lead him whither ye list. Thus much by the way, I thought good to put you in remembrance, for that the stran∣genes of your doctrine so requi∣red, yf ye had asmuch to shewe of
your syd, I beleue, of your courte∣sy, ye wold not hyde it. ¶ Sarum. YE se I disaduātage my self of many things that might be spoken for at this present, I haue not  to wryte Bokes. ¶ Cole I pray you take good leysure, & writ affectually. The Reply Sarum. A Doctour of Lawe, and a man of wisedō, should bring more learning, and fewer skornes. ¶ Sarum. NOw must I needes desire you for∣asmuche as I haue folowed your mynd so far, eyther to bring me one Doctour of your syde, or els to giue vs leaue to thinke ye haue none. ¶ Cole. I wis, ye know I may not,  the case I  in,  it not. The reply. Sarum. I wis, ye know ye can not, & ther∣fore
ye do best to say ye may not. ¶ Sarum. YE desyre vs to leaue talking against you, and no more to deale so vnmer∣cifully with you in the Pulpittes. Alas maister doctour, cal ye this vnmer∣cifull dealing? what was then your dea∣ling, when ye wer in place? if ye remem∣ber ye could neuer vouchsaue to call vs other then Schimatikes, Heretikes, or Traitours, in yur Pulpittes. And yet besides al that, ye vsed our Bodies as ye know. We only tel the people, as our dewty is, that ye withstand the manifest truth, and yet haue neitherscripture, nor doctour, nor councel for you. And that ye haue shewed suche extremitye, as the lyke hath not bene sene. And nowe can geue no rekning why, or if ye can, let it appeare. ¶ Cole. YE misreporteme. I said  men of your syde  sed thē seltes traiterously to Quene Mary as none of vs do now, not manifest, vntill it be bet∣ter proued. ye had but the Law, ye require more then any Law will  against vs.
The reply. Sarum. IF they wer Traitours, why did ye burne thē, as Heretikes? The matter woulde bee to odious to shewe what hath ben wrought by men of youre syde against theyr Princes. But as I then neuer liked thē, that drew their sword a∣gainst their souerain: euē so now I pray god cōfoūd thē, whosoeuer they be, yt shal first begin the same. What lawe ye ministred vs in those dayes, I remit it vnto you that are a lawier. But I am well assured, ye shewed vs neither di∣uinitye, nor humanitye. But I pray you, what law had ye, to im∣prison sutche euen as had broken no lawe? and so to kepe them in your cole houses, in stokes, and fetters, with all extremitye and exueltye, vntil ye had made a lawe
for them, and to do with them, as Cyril saieth the Jewes did with Christ, primum ligant, deinde cau∣sas in eum quaerunt▪ prius captū ha∣bent, quàm accusatum. First, they bind him fast, saith Cyrill, and thē they deuise matter agaiust hym: They lay handes vpon him before any man accuse him. What law had ye, to burne the Quenes subiectes handes wt can∣delles, or torches, before they were condemned to dye by any law? What law had ye, to ascite a man to appeare, peremptoriè, at Rome within lxxx. dayes, and yet that not withstanding to kepe him still in prison in Oxforde? and after∣warde for not appearinge at hys day, at Rome, to condemne hym there as obstinate? Or what law had ye, to put the
same man to death against the ex∣presse wordes of your own lawe after he had subscribed vnto you, and was founde in no relapse? I trust ye can say some what herein. For that you being then a lawier and in commission, had the execu∣cion of yt law. But I beleue, when ye haue searched your bkes thro∣ugh, ye shall fynde ye had not so much law, as they that sayd. Nos habemus legem, & secundum legē debet mori. Sarum. WHere ye say, our doctrine is yet in doubt. I assure you, to vs it is most certain, and out of doubt. But if ye for youre part be yet in doubt, reason and charity would ye had been better resolued, and qyut out of doubt, before ye had dealt so unmercifully with your brethren. ¶ Cole.
I Doubted more thē I do now, ye geue me good cause to be well confirmed. The reply. Sarum. THis is a faire shift of retorike when other help faileth you: Euen thus the Pharises af∣ter they had ben lōg in a mamme∣ring, and in doubt of Christ, at the last were fully confirmed and out of doubt, and saied vnto him,  scimus te habere daemonum. As if they shoulde then haue sayed vnto Christ, as you say nowe to vs: we doubted more before then we do nowe, for nowe ye geue vs good cause to be well confirmed▪ But if I haue confirmed you bringynge such proufes as ye are not able to answer, how then (thinke ye) haue others cause to be confirmed at your handes, that haue vsed suche extremity, and yet ar able to bring nothing at all,
¶ Sarum. YE are bounde ye say, and maye not dispute: yet are ye not so bounde as ye haue bounde others. But when  wer at libertie, and a  disputation was graunted and offered at Westmin∣ster before the Quenes maesties moste honorable councell, and the whole state of the Realm, I pray you, whether part was it that then gaue ouer? And yet the, ye knowe, ye were not bounde, onlesse it were to lence because ye had nothing to say. ¶ Cole AT Westminster we came to dispute. & were answered that there was non appointed, wher we refused not to write neyther. But when our boke could not be read as yours was, we refused not vtterly to dispute, but onely in the case if oure boke could not be suffered to be red as indifferētly as yours was. Now hardely weigh whether ye haue indifferently reported, that we vtterly refu∣sed to dispute with you, or no. The reply. Sarum. YE could not lightly haue got∣ten so many vntruethes toge∣ther, without sume sty. Where
ye saye, ye were answered, there was no disputation appointed at Westminster, if I should aske you who made you that answer, I re∣kē ye would be to siek. For I trust ye haue not yet forgotten, that ye your selfe were the first man that began to dispute there that day, & spake there an whole houre toge∣ther without interruption. But I marueil ye say not, that we of our part gaue you ouer, and refused to dispute. Ye say, ye refused not to wryte your allegaciōs, and answeares as ye had promised to do, and ear∣nestly required it might be so, and yet contrary to your request and promise, ye could not begotten, as ye know, to writ one line. Ye saye, your boke could not be read as ours was, & yet ye knowe
ye had no boke there to be read at all, as we had. As for the indifferent ordering and hearing of the matters, I re∣mit that to them that wer the or∣derers of it, of whom ye can not in any wise complain, but both your own, and the hearers consciences, must nedes accuse you. The order of the disputaion was that both partes shoulde the fyrst day bring in their assertion al in writing and that the nexte day, eyther party should answer the o∣thers boke, and that also by wry∣tig: which was your own request, as it wil apperre by your protesta∣tion sent to the councell in that be∣halfe. The first day, ye came with∣out any boke at all, contrary to the order taken, and also, as I haue sayd, to your own request. The se∣cond
day, ye refused to procede any father, and stode onely vpon this point, that onlesse ye might haue the last word, ye would not disput. For ye said whosoeuer might haue that, wer like to discedere cum ap∣plausu: for these very wordes two of your own company vttered in latin, euen by the same termes asD. Skot. d Fec∣. I do now. Otherwise ye sayd ye would not dispute. Which answer was so vain, that not onelye y• rest of the hearers, but olso y• Bishop, that thē was, of Yorke, your own frend, foūd faulte with it and was ashamed of it, & bad you procede. In conclusion, contrary to al mēs loking for, onely vpon your refu∣sall, the disputacion was sodenlye broken of: And I am contente to stande to the iudgement of all the heaers herein, whether I haue
reported indifferently, or no. ¶ Sarum. YE say ye remayne still in the faith ye wer baptised in. O mater doctour, stande not to much vpon that point. Ye know ye haue already forsaken a great number of thinges that were thought necessary when ye were baptised. And yet besides that, how many tymes haue sum of you altered your faith within the space of xx. yeres. Remeber wel your self. who wrote the boke, de vera obedientia, against the supremacy of Rome?Boner. Who commended it with his preface?Tūstal Who set it forth in solemne Sermōs?D. Col. & almost al ther Who confirmed it with open othe? ¶ Cole. VVHat one thinge am I gone from? ye saye muche, and proue little. Ye meane the  Bishop of winchester, who repented at the houre of his death. nd where ye meane I condescēded to the  of king Henry at  first com∣ming home, or I had laboured the matter, ye dyd the ke your selfe. For in Quene Maries tyme▪ ye subscribed to the , sume of them we are entred to talke in,  youre no les blame then
mine. There be in this town that both saw yo subscryb, and can bryng forth you hand. The Reply. Sarum. YEs, I thinke ye are gone frō one thing at the least, besides pardons, and pilgrimeges. I ment not D. Gardiner to pul him out of his graue, & to tormēt him being dead: as ye did master Bu∣cer, master Fagius, in Cambridg, Doctour Peter martirs wyfe in Oxon. & others mo: but onely that I woulde not haue you builde to much vpon your constancy, which hitherto hath en fond to be  as the pleasure of the prince. But he repented him, ye saye, when he saw he shoulde nedes dye. I trust he did so, for he had good cause so to do. But if he repented himselfe of his boke y• he had writ∣ten so stoutly against y• pope, why
did he not recant it in all his lyfe tyme? why did he not reoke hys errour openly? why helde he hys peace? why dissēbled he so depely, for the space of xx. yeares together. e say, it was onely at youre first comming home from Italy, that ye condescended to the Pry∣macie of king Henry. Here muste I put you in remembraunce that ye continewed therin still all king Henries time out, euen vntill the death of king Edward, and y• cum∣ming in of Quene Mary. And yf her grace had continewed out to haue entitled her selfe y• Supreme head of the church of England, as she did a great whyl after her first entry, and y• (as it is to bethought) without burthen of her conscience, I doubt not then but ye woulde haue talkt better with your selfe, &
continewed so still. At this meane whyle ye came to the churche, ye sayed and heard ye cōmen praiers, ye ministred, and receiued the cō∣munion, and in all your doinges bare your selfe as any other sub∣iecte of this realm. And thus held out, as I said, for the space of xx∣yeres, I may say to you this was a good long cumming home. Ther∣fore I may well thus conclude,  ye must nedes confesse the same, yt either ye deceiued the people then by your example, and conformitye of all your doinges, allowing that religion for good, whiche in youre conscience ye knew to be nought, or els that ye be a dissembler, and deceyue the people nowe, making them, asmuche as in you lyeth, by your example, to thynke this rel∣gion to be nought, whiche in your
cōscience, and knowledge ye find to be godly, and good. So yt what soeuer iudgement ye haue now, or hertofore haue had of this religiō, it must nedes appeare, that eyther ye be nowe, or els haue ben a de∣ceiuer of the people. But after ye had laboured the matter better, and, as ye saye had red the doctours, I pray you what doctour found ye, y• euer told you, either that y• Pope ought to haue the supremacy of y• whole church, or yt the Prince in his own church ought not to haue it. But I haue subscribed, ye saye, aswel as ye, and my hand is to be seene, and there be sume that sawe me when I did it. These proufes were nedefull, if I had denied the fact. But I haue cōfessed it open∣ly, and vnrequired in the mides of
the congregation. The argumēts that ye made were so terrible, ye concluded altogether with fyer & fagot. I confesse I shoulde haue done otherwyse: But if I had not done, as I did, I had not bene her now to encounter with you, if ye should now be apposed with ye like conclusions, I doubte not but ye woulde be glad to do, as bothe ye your self, and your felowes haue done heretofore. ¶ Sarum. YE haue Ecclesiam Apostolicam, ye saye and we haue none, yet ye knowe in all these matters yt we now entreat of, we haue the olde doctours churche, y• auncient councels church, the primatiue church. S. Peters church, Saint Paules church, and Christes church. And this  beleue, onlesse ye can brig me good rea∣son to the cōtrary, may be called y• Apo∣stles church. And I marueil muche that ye hauing, as ye know, none of all these
churchs, or any shadow or token of th yet shold so boldely saye, ye haue Ecclesi Apostolicam. ¶ Cole. TO this, and sume part of the Article ye shalbe answered in the ende of this writing, as I be∣fore sayed. ¶ Sarum. WHere ye say, ye make no innonatiōs it is no maruell, for in a maner all thinges were altered to your hande, as may most euidently appeare by all these matters yt be now in question. Wherin ye haue vtterly chaunged and abolished the order of the Primatiue church, and do nothing els but y• cōtrary. And what euident profit the Church of God hath gotten by it, I thinke it a harde matter for you to declare. ¶ Cole. VVHat nedeth so much of one thinge? Thys serueth you to seme to say to much. The Reply. Sarum▪ THis answer is so shorte, that it concludeth nothing. ¶ Sarum
YE would haue the matter turned ouer to sume suche generall coun∣cell, as we woulde be contente to stand vnto. Howit that ye think will not be in your time. Notwithstan∣ding this I dare boldely saye, suche a councell wilbe, a great whyle before  shall finde any doctour, or olde councel, to serue your purpose. But if there ne∣uer be suche a councell, yet trueth will be trueth, notwithstanding. For y• coū∣cell can not make falhed trueth, but that thinge that it taketh for trueth, it certifieth only to be true. ¶ Cole I . ¶ Sarum. BUt what redresse can there be  for at such a councel, wheras no mā shall be iudg or suffered to speak  way or other, but onely such as be open∣ly, and iustly accused, and found faultie? And whereas he that is himselfe moste out of order, shalbe head and reformer of the whole? ¶ Cole.
excuses men laye, how , let   . The reply. Sarum. YE knowe, that in youre owne law there was euermore, Ex∣ceptio iudicis incompetentis. And by what lawe can ye fynde, that a man maye be a competente iudge in his own cause? if the indifferent vsing of the matter maye be tryed by experyence, in thys youre laste generall councell holden at Try∣dent, ye knowe, that not one man of oure syde, notwythstandynge there wer a great nomber of them there, seute thether of purpose by theyr Prynces, coulde be suffered to sit amonge the rest or to haue a voyce, or to yelde a reason of hys faith. And y• Pope, Iulius third, gau out vnder his bryeue, that
none of them all shoulde be heard there, vnlesse it were▪ as he sayed, to recant their errours. And notwstandinge, Pighius himself had confessed ther wer opē errours in the masse, notwithstā∣ding Latomus, a doctour of your own, had confessed a great abuse in the Cōmunion vnder one kind▪ notwitstanding Pius. ii. Bishop of Rome had sene and confessed great abuse in the restrainynge of Priestes mariage: yet in the same councel they concluded among thē selues, yt no maner of thing should be changed at all, that had bene once receiued in their Curch. Therfore these be not fond excu∣ses, y• world seeth they be to true. ¶ Sarum BOth parties, ye say, haue waded so far herein, that nowe they can go no farther, and therfore ye would haue
ther partye let other alone. This ye say now, because ye see ye are called to an audit, and are not able to make your ac∣compte. But if ye of your part had been so indifferent when time was, many a godly man had now been alyue. ¶ Cole. YE forget your self, I say not so , loke bet  in the place. The Reply. Sarum. IF ye meant not so, it skilleth not greatly. It is to small purpose. Consider it well, and ye shall finde my conclusion true. ¶ Sarum. WHere ye say, ye would haue the say∣inges of both parties weed by y• ba∣launce of the olde doctors, ye se, that is our speciall request vnto you. And that in the matters you wryt of, I   so to be tryed. But why throw ye away these Balance? And being so oftē times required, why be ye so loth to shew forth but one old doctor of your   make  beleue, ye would not haue the ma∣
cum to tryall. Only ye set forth the empty names of S. Augustine, of sainct , of S. Chrisostome, of S. Ba∣stll, of S. Ciprian, of Tertulliā, of Ire∣neus, of Dionysius, of the coūcelles. &c. As y• Apothearyes set forh theyr pain∣ted Bores, and oftentymes nothinge in them. Ye shewe me onely the names of the doctors, which I knew before. But ye shewe me not one worde in them of the priuate masse, or of the  of the matters that lye betwen vs. If ye could haue found any thing in them for your purpose, I beleue ye wolde not haue brought them empty. Ye say all these matters be already de∣termined. But where I pray you? or in what generall councell? This is it that I would so gladly knowe at your hand, and that ye say, ye haue, and yet so vn∣gently kepe it from me. ¶ Cole. THen begin, if ye think the tyme will serue,  put it ouer till another tym. All these be but wordes often repeted, and answered alredy. The Reply. Sarum.
I Haue offered and begon in vain. For ye kepe your selfe of, and wil not come to answer. These words I graunt haue ben vpon good oc∣casion oftentimes repeted, and I thinke ye would say some what to them, if ye were able. ¶ Sarum. YE say, I  misreporte the late Councell of Constance. O good master doctor, these words sa∣ to much of your choller, and might better haue been spared. I spake more fauourably of y• councell, then I might haue done. The words of the councel be these speaking namely of y• communion vnder both kinds. Pertinaciter asserētes  pofitum, tanquam Heretici rcendi sunt. By these wordes they that maintein the manifest ordinaunce of Christ, & the practise of the Apostles, are not called , as I sayd, but  & wilful heretikes. Ye se therfore, my re∣porte was more fauourable, then y• coū∣ deserued.
¶ Cole. YE say, the councell of Constance openly pro∣nounced against Christ. Wherein Ipray you?  the fathers there sayd, who so sayth it is of necessity to receiue vnder both kindes, and the  custom of the churche is sacriledge,  to be taken as an : & yet non heretik, but in a wrong opini. Then be like ye can bringe in sum text, where Christ cōmaunded it should not be receiued but vnder both kinds which ye cā ne∣uer do. So is youre report of this councel slan∣derous still. Read. 4. Canonem concil Con∣stantienfis. The Reply. Sarum. IT grcueth you that I should say, y• councell decreed against christ. But consider it a right & ye shall find it. Christ as ye know, appoin∣ted the Communion vnder bothe kindes, and commaunded his dis∣ciples to do y• same as he had done it. Therfore he that commaūdeth the contrary, and that vnder the paine of heresy, pronounceth opēly against Christ. Ye call it an approued custome
of the church. Yet ye remembers. Ciprians wordes that be alledged in your own decrees, Christus non dicit, ego sum consuetudo, sed ego sum veritas: that is to say, Chryst saith not, I am custum, but I am the trueth, But if custume might iustly preuayle agaynste an open and playne truethe, I praye you where was youre Communyon vnder one kynd euer at any tyme, sence the beginning of the world, allowed for a generall custome Or being but a particuler custō, as it is, and that receiued onely o your selse, in what generall coun∣cel was it euer allowed? Ye say, your own ordinaunces may not be broken, without y• an∣thority of a general Councel. And dare ye without any suche autho∣rity, only vpon a vain and parti∣culer
custome, to break the vni∣uersall ordenaunce of Christ? Ye saye, men are not to be iud∣ged heretikes, that withstād your order herein, but onely to be in a wrong opinion. Here I se that ye, and your brethren, agree not in iudgemēt both together. And ther∣fore ye shall the lesse marueile, yf we disagree, from you, & mistrust you both. For Hossius, a doctoure of your syde, is not afrayed to call it heresy, and sacrilege, his words be plaine. Nunc haeresin profert, séque pol∣licetur ostensurum, omnes esse im∣pios, qui vtrius{que} speciei cōmunio∣nem laicis denegāt. And again. An autem idem in regno tuo factū non vidimus? vbi Calix per summum sacrilegium vsurpatur? And agayn: vellem autem vnam mihi terram a∣liquam
ostendi, vbi priuata libidine, calix vsurpari coeptus est in quanō, è vestigio, multae sint aliae & quidē horribiles haereses consequute. Thus, to do that thinge that Christ and his Apostles, and all the olde fathers did in the primi∣tiue Churche, without exception, this doctour concludeth it to be an horrible heresy. And if it were taken for no he∣resye, as ye saye it was not, then was your Councell to muche to blame that gaue so cruell sentence againste the people of Bohema, for that they thought it necessary to vse both kindes, accordingee to the institucion of Christ, and pro∣nounced thus against them: Tan∣quam Haeretici arcendi sunt. For yf they take them for no heretikes▪ they did them great wrong to pu∣nishe
them as heretikes. And yet is your doctour  to muche to blame, to condemne any thing for heresy, without any word of God, and speciallye without the autho∣rity of any olde doctor, or any ge∣nerall councell. Ye ask me what text I cā bring forth wherin Christ commaūded that the communion should be re∣ceyued vnder both kinds. The in∣stitucion of Christ, and his com∣maundement thereunto annexed, as me thinketh, is texte good i∣ought to him that wilbe ruled by Chryst. I will not aske ye, what text ye can brynge wherin Chryst hath commaūded you to minister the communion in one kind. But this only would I knowe, what text ye can bring wher by a Priest ministring the Sacrament, is cō∣maūded
to receiue it in both kids, more then any other lay man. I know your answer, ye must nedes say, the institution of Christ. And yet by your own interpretaion, if a priest communicate himself vn∣der one kinde, Gelasius calleth it Sacrilegium which thyng I reken he would not haue sayd, if he had not thought it contrary to the opē words and institucion of Chryst. Againe, what texte can ye bryng wherbi as touching this point the Priest hath any priueledg aboue the people. If ye can fynd none, as in dede ye shall neuer be able, thē yt, that is sacriledg in the Priest, is also sactiledge in the people. Again, what text can ye bryng, wherby Christ hath precisely for∣bidden any man to baptise onlye in the name of the holy gost? vn▪ doubtedly ye can fynd none, in all
the Scripturs, but onely Christs institution. And yet whosoeuer woulde decree that suche kynde of Baptisme shoulde be vsed, I trowe ye woulde saye he decr against Christ, because he brea∣keth the institucion of Christ. Euen so doth your Councell o Constance, in the matter we last talkt of. Therfore my wordes are true still, and yet ye (ye must gue me leue to say the trueth) haue cō∣cluded with a slaunder. Touching the thing it selfe, ye are so certaine of it, yt none of you all can tell at what tyme it fyrste began. But this ye knowe well, if ye lyst to be knowen of it, that it began nother in Chrystes tyme, nor in the Apostles tyme, nor wythin the olde Doctoures tyme, nor wythin the Compasse of seuen
hundred yeares after Christ. And therfore if a man should aske you of your cōmunion vnder onekind, De coelo est, an ex hominibus? ye must nedes answere, it came not from heauē, forasmuch as it hath no testimony of gods worde but onely crept in (as Sten Gardi∣ner confesseth) by a supersticious negligence in the people. Sarum. WHere ye say, ye could neuer yet  the error of one generall councell, I trowe this escaped you, for default of memory. Albertus Pighius, the grea∣test learned man of your fide, hath foū ut such errors to our handes, namely in his boke that he calleth,  Hierarchia, speakynge of the second coū∣tell holden at phesus, which ye cā ot  but it was generall, and yet tok parte wyth the Heretike, Abbat Euty∣ches, agaynst the godlye man, : he wryteth thus,  ,
congregata legitimê, vt benê, ita perpe∣ram, iniustè, impie{que} iudicare, ac definire pos∣sunt, that is, generall councels, yea euē such as be lawfully summoned, as they may conclude thinges well, so may they likewyse iudge and determine thynges rashely , and wickedly. ¶ Cole. YE ground your self vppon Pigghius ▪ For Pigghius holdeth the councell of Ephe∣suo was general, which the Councel of , . So that I marueil muche herein of you, that ye alledg that for a councell, whyc hath no place in the oke of councels. The Reply. Sarum. IN Pigghius wordes there are two thīgs to be noted. The one is, that he saith a general coūcel may erre in faith The other, that he saith, the second councell of E∣phesus was generall. And foras∣muche as ye chalenge hym onely for y• latter, I thinke ye wil agree with him in the first, which to my purpose is sufficient.
But here ye cause me to mar∣ueile, what ye meane to make so little accompt of Pighius, for he, as ye know, hath been taken for y• chiefest champion of your syde. Pighius sayth, the councell o Ephesus was generall, and ye say it was not so. Ye muste geue me leaue to say the trueth, if ye matter come to a, quid dicunt, Pigghius wil be taken in yr cuntry for a  as wel learned, and as skilfull in yr counsels, as D. Cole. Ye shoulde not so little esteme the doctours of your own syde, least that beīg not able to alledge any olde doctoure, and refusing the new, it may hap∣pely be thought ye haue neyther old, nor new. And yet whē ye  before the Quenes maiesties cō∣missioners, at Lambeth, ye sayd o∣penly there, that Pighius is ful of
erroures. But forasmuche as ye your self haue begon to find faulte wyth your own doctours, I trust hereafter ye wyll the better beare wyth vs, if we sometyme shall do the same. Here ye dryue me to vse the moe words, partly to defende Pighius in hys right, and partely to make you se howe, wilfully ye wythstande an open trueth, ha∣uyng so little to the contrary. And as ye shalbe founde true in thys, euen so am I wel content to take you in all the reast. First Nicephorus, & Euagrius, that wryte the whole Storye and order of the councell of Ephesus, neuer denied it to be generall. the Emperoure, that summoned the Bishops together, as it may appeare by hys words, toke it to be generall. For thus he
wryteth to ye councell, Cogitantes non esse tutum absque vestra sancta Synodo, & vbique sanctarū Eccle∣siarum praesulibus, huiusmodi quae∣stionem de fide renouari, necessariū duximus vestram sanctitatem con∣uenire. These wordes: Sanctarum Ecclesiarum, quae vbique sunt, im∣porte a generalitie of all churches through the worlde. Farther, ther was the emperours authority the Bishop of Romes legate, whyche, as sume men thinke maketh vp al together, and other Bishops of all nations. And howe could suche a councell not be generall. You doctours of Payse, haue concluded thus, Articulo XXII. Quod autem magistri nostri dicū de legitima congregatione, notan∣dum est ad hoc, vt concilium legiti∣mè congregetur, sufficere, quod so∣lemnitas
& forma iuris solemniter sit seruata. Quia si quis trahere vel∣let hoc in disputationem, vtrū prae∣lati, qui ibi sedent, habeant rectam intentionem: & vtrum sint docti, & vtrum habeant scientiam sacrarum literarum, & animū obediendi sanae doctrinae, esset processus in infinitū. That is to say, where as our doc∣tours speake of a lawfull councel, we must marke, that to this, that the councel be lawfully gathered, it shalbe sufficient that the solem∣nity, and fourme of law be solemly obserued. For if we shoulde moue question, whether the Bishops ye sit in councell, haue a godly mea∣ning, & whether they be learned, and whether they haue vnder stā∣ding of the scriptures, and whe∣ther they mind to submit them sel∣ues to sound doctrine, then should
we neuer haue done. Thus it is decreed by your doctours, that ne∣ther godly meaning, nor learnig, nor knowledge of the Scriptu∣res, nor obedience vnto sound doc∣trine, is to be weyed in y• Bishops that rule the councell, but onely a certaine solemnity, and fourme of law. Dioscorus, that was Presi∣dent of the same councel, and hys wordes be reported in the coun∣cell of Chalcedō, saith thus. Theo∣dosius confirmauit omnia quae iu∣dicata sunt à sancta & vniuersali sy∣nodo generali. Theodosius, saith he, hath confirmed all such things as were determined by this vni∣uersall and generall councel. Here ye see, it is called an vni∣uerlall, and a generall councell. And afterward in the same coun∣cell of Chalcedon, ye shall fynde
these wordes. Sanctissimae, & Do∣mino amantissimae, vniuersalli Sy∣nodo congregatae in Epheso metro poli To the holy, beloued vnto the Lord, y• vniuersal coūcel gathered in the mother City of Ephesus. But if perhappes ye doubte of these wordes, because the one was Eutyches, the other was Diosco∣rus, by whom they were spoken (howbeit notwithstandinge they were heretikes, yet could they not lightly make an open lye in a mat∣ter that was so euident) then rea ye the olde father Liberatus, that was, Archidiacon{us} Carthaginiē, and liued vnder igilius Bishop of Rome, at the least a thousande yeares ago, and wryteth the very story of this councell, his wordes be these. Fit Ephesi generale conci∣lium, ad quod conuenerunt, Flauia∣nus,
& Eutyches, tanquam iudicādi. There is appointed, saieth he, at Ephesus a generall councel, in the whych Flauianus and Eutyches, made theyr appearaunce, as men standyng to be iudged. Nowe if ye wyll say, that generale concilium, is not in English a general coūcel, then I woulde it mighte be put ouer to some other courte. O mai∣ster doctour, if ye meure nothynge els but trueth, ye woulde not do, s ye do. Thus much haue I written in the defence of your doctour Pig∣ghius, for that I saw him accused of you without cause. ¶ Sarum. ANd of the councels holden of la yeares at Constance and asile▪ whereas Pop John, and Pop ugenius wer deposed, he sayth plain∣ly, that they decreed both against reason
and against nature, and against all er∣amples of antiquity, and also agaynst the worde of God. And yet both thes councels were called generall. ¶ Cole. WHerin doeth Pighius proue the councels  Constance, and Basil, to haue erred? Mary because they decreed the generall councell to be aboue the Pope. Ifye take these two coūcels to haue erred in these points, ye are a greater pa∣pist, then I am. For I holde herein rather with Gerson, I trow this be one place  ye wrote not yourself. Yet, I reken no errour proued in anye generall councell by that ye haue yet sayd. The Reply Sarum. YEs, I assure you, master doc∣tour, I put in this place, & all the reast my selfe alone without conference. And yet God be than∣ked. I can finde nothing in your wrytinges but suche as any man may sone geasse it came onely frō your selfe alone. Ye take exception before with yt I alledged the coū∣cell of Basil, & sent me worde that no such thing could be found. But
now I see ye are better aduised. As touching Pighius, I vsed his authority herein, as S. Paul, to reproue them that denied the re∣surrection, vsed the authoritye of them that baptised for the dead, not for that, he thought such bap∣tisme wel ministred, but onlye for that it serueth to his purpose. For I shewed you not what I thoght my selfe, but what Pighius, your great doctour, thought and what ye your selfe must needes thinke, vnlesse ye wil pul down your own doctrine, and set the Pope hym∣selfe, and all his adhetentes vpon your top. But if ye take part with Gersō as ye saye ye do, marke howe the chiefe piller of your buildinge be∣gynnes to shake. If the Pope be head of y• church
as ye say, and the councell be but, Ecclesia representatiua, that is a re∣semblance of the churche, as your Canonistes and schole men saye▪ howe an it be but y• Pope by your own saying (whether Gerson wyl ornyll) must des be head of the councell? for he that is head of the whole) must also be head of y• part: onlesse perhappes ye will saye, the parte is greater then the whole. Of these grauntes of yours there foloweth consequentlye great ∣conuenience against your selfe, ye say: The pope is not aboue the councell. Ergo. May som other mā say▪ He is muche lesse aboue the hole church. Again. The Pope is not aboue the church. Ergo. He is not head of the church.
But all this notwithstandinge ye saye the counceli is aboue the Pope. And yet ye know, that euen now whatsoeuer is decreed in any generall coūcell, there is euermore deuoluciō made to y• Pope as vn∣to him, yt is thought to be aboue the councell, and without whom nothing may be concluded. Haue ye forgotten, that Pope Pius, and Pope Julius, of late yeres commaūded there should no appeale be made from the Pope to any councell. Haue ye forgotten, that the last general councel holden at Tridēt concluded thus at the cude, Salua semper in omnibus, Sedis Aposto∣lcae authoritate: as confessing opē∣ly, that they toke the Pope to be aboue the councel. Haue ye forgotten, that youre
own doctoures say. Papa est fo omnis iuris, the Pope is the foun∣taine of all maner law. And Pa∣pa habet omnia iura in scrinio pc∣ctoris sui, the Pope hath all lawe vnder the secrete of his breast. Haue ye forgottē, what is writ∣ten in the Popes own decretales? Extra, de electione, & electi pote∣state. Si totus mundus sentiet in ali∣quo contra Papam, videtur quod standum sit sententiae Pape. If all the world should geue sentence in any matter against the Pope, it appeareth for all that, we ought to stande to the determinacion of the Pope. Haue ye forgotten, that is writ∣ten in your own councels, Papa à nemine iudicatur, the Pope is iud∣ged of no man. And a ioly reason ioyned to the same. Quia non est
discipulus supra magistrū: for there is no scholer aboue his master. Haue ye forgotten, that, that is wrytten in your decrees, Neque ab Augusto, neque a regibus, neque a toto clero, neque a populo, Iudex iudicabitur. The iudge, that is to say, yt Pope, shalbe iudged, nother by the Emperor, nother by kings, nor by the whole clergye, nor by the people. And again, Aliorum hominum causas voluit Deus per homines ter minare: sed huius sedis praesulē, suo sine questione seruauit arbitrio. Other mens causes God woulde haue to be determined and ruled by men. But the Bishop of thys See, out of all doubt, he reserued only to his owne iudgement. And again, Facta subditorum iudican∣tur à nobis, nostra autem a solo Deo,
the doinges of our subiectes are iudged by vs: but our doinges are iudged onely by God. Haue ye forgotten, yt your schole men say, Papa habet ius infragabile, de quo non licet disputare. The Pope hath a right yt no man maye withstand, of wiche ryght no man may dispute? Haue ye forgotten, that is writ∣ten in your decretales. De transla∣tione episcopi, in the glose. Papa na∣turam rerum immutat, substantia vnius rei applicando alteri: Et de nullo potest facere aliquid: Et sente∣tiam quae nulla est, facit aliquam. Quia in his quae vult, ei est pro ra∣tione voluntas. Nec est qui illi , cur ita facis. That is he chan∣geth the nature of thyngs, apply∣ing the substantiall partes of one thing, to another: And of nothinge
he is able to make sumwhat. And that yt is no sentence, he maketh a good sencence. For in any thinge that he willeth, his wil standeth in steade of reason. And there is no man, that may say vnto him, why doest thou thus? Haue ye forgotten, the wordes of your owne councels, Papa non potest iudicari, the Pope can not be iudged. And the same fortefied wyth a good reason, oute of the wordes of the Prophet Esay who spake in the parson of God, Quia scriptum est, Nunquid gloriabitur securis aduersus eum qui secat cum ? shall the axe boaste himselfe a∣geinst hym that heweth wyth it? Or haue ye forgotten, that Nosti∣ensis, your owne doctoure wry∣teth, Papa est omnia & super om∣nia. The Pope is al, and aboue al,
whych words S. Paule speaketh only of Christ. So reuerently the doctoures of your syde vse gods holy Scriptures. Yet I passe by a great a nūber of the lyke sentences to the same purpose. Thus ye se, if ye tak part with Gersō, a great many of your own frends wil fall out with you, and ye wilbe in hasard to be cal∣led an heretike. Ye se by this, that the councell of Constance, & Basil, beinge both generall, as Pighius saith decred a falshead, and were in errour, as ye your selfe must nedes confesse, as well as Pighius if ye wil stād to your own doctryne. And ther∣fore, Cardinalis Caietanus, one of your own syde, saith, yt both these councelles were afterward iustly abrogate, I thynke for that they
were thought to haue decreed a∣misse. And so both Gerson and ye, by the iudgement of all your bre∣thren, remain still in errour. And when ye haue sought out y• bottome of your learning, I be∣leue it wylbe harde for you to find any good sufficiēt cause, why a ge∣nerall councell may not aswel be deceiued, as a particuler. For Christes promises. Ecce ego vo∣biscū sum, and, vbicunque duo aut tres conuenerint in nomine meo, ibi sum ego in medio illorum, are made aswell to y• particular coun∣cel, as to the generall. Howbeit, whether the councell may erre or no, ye know it avay∣leth you but little to stand greatly to the defence of councels in these points, onlesse ye had sum coūcell to make for you. But lyke as the
Romaines, in old tymes, worship∣ped theyr god Uulcanus, wyth al godly honour, and yet woulde ne∣uer vouchsaue to geue him a chap∣pel within their towne: euen so ye, as it appeareth can content your selfe to honoure the councels, and to haue them euer in mouth, yet wyll ye not vouchesafe to take thē neare to you, and to be ordered by them. And therefore these wordes of yours, are onely of office, and of course, that the very countenaum∣ce ye geue the matter, might make your reader beleue, that ye haue all the councels of yoursyde, & w haue none. Bnt alas what reuerence, or regarde, haue ye to the councels? The councell of Nice, appointed iii. Patriarches to rule the hole churche, eche of them wythin hys
precinctes of lyke authority. Ye haue broken this councell, & geuē al y• whole authority to one alon. The councell holden at Eliberis, decreed, that ther shold be, no kind of Image, of any thing y• is wor∣shiped, painted in the churche. Ye haue broken this councell▪ and fil∣led your churches ful of Images. The councell of Antioch, decreed, that such as came into the church, and heard the Scriptures read, and abstained from the commu∣nion, should be excommunicate frō the church. Ye haue broken thys councel, and nether do ye read the Scriptures in such sorte as y• peo∣ple maye perceyue them, nor once ehorte them to the communion. The councell of Charthage, com∣maunded, there should nothynge be rede in the church, but only the
Scriptures of God.  haue bro∣ken this councel, and red such Le∣gendes, and fables, vnto the peo∣ple, as ye your self know, were ma nifest and open lyes. The councell of Rome vnder Pope Nicolas, commaundeth, that no man  present at y• masse of a pryest, whō he knoweth vndoubtedly to kepe a concubine, and that vnder yt ayne of , yet he, whom ye would se fayn haue to be taken for the head of your churche, not onely hath broken this councell, but also, for a certein ordenary tri∣bute to be yerely paied, geueth hys Priestes free licence, and dispen∣sacions vnder hys great seal, ∣ly to kepe concubines without cō∣trolment. And what nede we  examples?  make the coūcelles wey as ye wil: whē ye list, as hea∣uy
as golde: again, when ye list, as light as fethers. Pope Julius, the second called a councell at Rome, onely to ouerthrow the counceil of Pisa. And the whole order of S. Dominiks freers cried out shame vpon the councel of Basil, for that the Bishops there, had taken part with the Scotistes, against the Chomistes, touchinge originall syn in our Lady. The councell of Paris was scott at, and iested out of all partes, and vntill this daye kept of no parte. For our Doctors of England sayd, it had no power to sayle ouer the See▪ Egidius of Rom saith, it was to heauy to clim ouer the Alpes. Thus muche, for that ye seme to stand so  to the defence of councels, hauing in these points not one coūcel to al ledge for your self.
Sarum. YE presse me sore, that if I write you not a boke of my proufes, it wilbe, thought I do it, conscientia imbecilli∣tatis. By lyke ye haue forgotten, why ye withall your companye not long sence refused to enter into disputacion wt vs at Westminster. Doubtles the greatest part thought it was, as it was in dede, conscientia imbecillitatis. And what thinke ye is there now thought in you, y• being so often required, yet can not be won to bryng so much as one pore sentence in your own defence? I haue before alled∣ged a few reasons of my part, which, by order of disputacion, I was not bounde to do. Now let the worlde iudge, whe∣ther of vs both flyeth conference. Colo. I haue answered to thi already. What order of  dischargeth you of proufe. Yet re∣member, I came not to dispute, but to be taught. The Reply Sarum. YE haue answered me by say∣ing nothing, whiche I thinke ye would not haue done, if ye had
any thynge els to answere, from proufe in thys matter I am suffi∣ciently discharged, by the lawe of impossibility. For, as ye sayd, opēly at Westminster (and once agayne I put you in remembraunce of the same, because it is your own law) it is impossible to proue a nega∣tiue. All your helpe is in the sha∣dow & pretence of learning wher∣by it appeareth well ye flye dispu∣tation. e were best to get some better cloke to hyde you vnder, for these be but fyg leaues, and couer not your shame. Sarum. I Proteste before God, brynge me but one sufficient sentence or authoritye, in the matters I haue required, and afterwarde I will gently, and quy∣tly conferre with you farther at youre pleasurs. Wherfore forasmuch as it is Gods cause, if ye meane simply deale
mply, betray not your right, if ye may saue it by speaking one worde. ¶ Cole. IF ye refuse to enstruct me, vnlsse I bring som proufe of my part, ye bid me to my coste. Ye bit e to a east, where, whil I should take on me to proue your doctryn naught, I were lyke to for∣eit my recognisance, whiche ye guylefullye allute me vnto. Thereply. Sarum. YE hyde your selfe vnder youre Recognisaunce, and thinke ye walke inuisible, as the Oystriche, whē he hath once touched his head vnder a little bough, though the rest of his body whiche is great & large stande open and vncouered yet he thinketh no man can esp him. Although ye be sanded, & set a ground, yet ye kepe vp the sail stil, as if ye had water at your will. e say, ye may not dispute, lest ye should forfeit your recognisaū∣ce. I would wysh you to remēber
your selfe, and to let the people vn∣derstand the trueth. e knowe ye are not bound in Recognisaunce for disputinge with any man, but for that being required to disputa∣cions by the Quenes most hono∣rable councell & the place appoin∣ted, & great and worthy audience assembled to y• same, ye gaue ouer, as ye know, vpon the sudden, and would not dispute at al. And ther∣fore for your disobediēce, & tontēp ye were bound in recognisance. But I pray you, were ye thus bound in Quene Maries tyme o, as well as now? Or if ye were not bounde, how happened it that ye neuer durst alledg one aunciēt doctor in these matters al yt while? Remember your own wordes.  said a little before, that ye brought more thē we were able to answer,
notwithstandinge it were, as ye sayd, nor Scriptures nor coūcels, nor doctours. And farther, I pray you, were all y• rest of the doctours of your syde, Pighius, Eckius, Hofmasterus, Būderius &c. boūd in Recognisaunce aswel as ye? Or if they were not bound, why were they sodeinty of theyr doctoures, that in these matters they coulde neuer vouchsaue to alledge one. Loke better vpon your Recogni∣saunce, I can not beleue ye should be so free to scoe & to scorne, more then eyther diuinitye, or good hu∣manitye woulde beare wythall, and onely be forbydden to do that thyng, which of al good reason, ye ought most to do. Or y• ye shoulde be restrained from the alledginge ofs. Augustin, S. Hierome. s. Am∣brose, S. Chrisostom, s. Basil. &c.
and haue a priueledge only to al∣ledge Aristotle, Horace, y• decrees, the decretales, the Glose, Gerson, Driedo, Royard, & Tapper, suche mē as I neuer could, haue thoght had been canonized and allowed for doctours of the church. Augu∣stus Cesar on a tyme as he was passing through Rome & saw cer∣tain straung women luling apes, & whelpes in theyr armes, what, sayd he, haue the women of these countries none other childrē? So may I saye vnto you that make so much of Gersō, Driedo, Royard, & Tapper haue yt learned mē ofyour syde none other doctors? for alas, these that ye alledge are scarcelye worthy to bee allowed amongest the blacke garde. Hilarus sayeth vnto the Arrians, Cedo aliud Euā∣geliū, shewe me sume other gospel,
for this that ye bringe helpeth you not. Euē so wil I say to you, Cedo alios doctores, shew me sum other doctoures, for these that ye bringe are not worthy the hearing. I ho∣yed ye would haue cume in wyth sum fresher bande. It must nedes be sum myserable cause, that can find no better Patrones to cleaue vnto. I know it was not for lacke of good will of your part ye would haue brought other doctours, if ye could haue found them. ¶ Sarum THe people must needes thinke m what of your silence, and mistrust your doctrine, if it shall appeare to haue no manner of ground, neither of y• counsels, nor of the doctours, nor of the Scriptures, nor any one allowed exāple of the Primitiue church, to stand vpon. And so your fyftene hūdred yeres, whith the consent of antiquity, and geneality, shall come to nothing.
¶ Cole. GOd wote, I passe little in these matters what the pore sely soules deme of my doings. Wher∣in ye haue no cause to complain syth they ve edi∣fied towardes you. Wyse men I doubt not, see, what iust cause I haue to do, as I do. The Reply. Sarum. NOwe God wote, then are the pore sely soules litle beholden to you, that haue been so long and so worshipfully maintained by the sweat of theyr browes and nowe seyng them, as ye say, deceyued, & perish before your eyes, ye cā hold your peace and let al alone. Saint Paule sayd, Quis infirmatur, & ego non infirmor? quis offenditur, & ego non vror? Cupio Anathema esse à Christo, pro fratribus mes. And so would ye say to, ifye were so sure of y• matter, as s. Paul was, or if ye had the spirite of S. Paul. Wise men, ye say, know that ye
haue iuste cause to doe, as ye doe. Doubtlesse: for he yt can fynde no∣thinge to saye, hath a reasonable cause to holde his peace. And yet I thinke, a meane wise man may see, yt by y• vertue of your recogni∣saunce ye might as well haue al∣iedged s. Augustin, & s. Hierom, as Royard, & Tapper. But ye know, the matter is such, that if ye once cum to allegations, whatsoeuer ye say, it will be the worse. As for my part, so that both the wyse, & the vn wyse may see your errours, and howe litle ye haue to say for your selfe. I passe not greatlye whether yeconfesse the same by speking, or by holding your peace. For, qui ta∣cet consentire videtur, as ye youre selfe are wont to ay. O master doctour, deale simply in gods causes, & say ye haue doc∣tours.
when ye haue them in dede: & when ye haue thē not, neuer lay the fault in your Recognisaunce. ¶ Sarum. WHere ye saye, I am not altogether wythout enemies. I assure you who soeuer he be that is enemie vnto me, I for my part, am enemy vnto no mā but only wyshe that gods trueth maye be∣knowen of all men. But he that is ene∣my vnto me, in this behalfe, I feare me is enemy vnto sum other, whō be would be loth to name. ¶ Cole. YE woulde beare olke in hanbe that they that agree not in doctryne with you▪ are not the Quens frendes, whyche ye gather by pour owne syde in Quene Maries rygne. But I neuer brake aity with any man for dissent  rligion, I epe still my olde frendes be theyr re∣ligion good or bad. The reply, Sarum. TO the first part therof, I wyll not saye so muche as▪ I were able, God sone confounde al them
that be, or shalbe otherwise. If ye loue your frendes, notwithstan∣dine theyr religion, ye are more itable then sume of your bre∣thren. For ye remember how vn∣frēdly sume of you haue vsed their frends, onely for dissent in religiō, onlesse perhaps ye will say ye im∣prisoned thm, and burnte them, euen for very loue. ¶ Sarum. YE suppressed, ye saye, your first let∣ters, for that they were to sow That had bene all one to me, for sowre wordes are not inought to quail the trueth. Howbeit, to my knowledge, I gau you no ill wordes to encrease that hu∣mour. But if ye striue stil agaist nature, as ye say ye haue done nowe, & conquere the reast of your affections to, I doubt not but we shall sone agree. ¶ Cole.
AS though myn affection only, caused me to dissent from you in religion. Whiche argu∣ment may  you well in Rhtorike, but no where els I wene. The reply. Sarum. WHen ye shal bring me any such authority as I haue required of you, wherfore ye should dissent from vs in these pointes, then wil I graunt ye dis∣sent not only for affection. If ye be able to bring norhing, I truste ye will pardon me to saye, as I saye. This argument, ye saye, woulde serue me in rethorike, & no where els. Thus ye wryt to make youre reader bele (as ye haue reported in places) that the grounde of my Sermons is rhethorike, and not diuinitye. Wherein ye were sum∣what to blame for your so light cre dit. For if ye had heard me youre selfe, as ye neuer did, I thynke ye
might haue hard sumwhat els thē rhetorike. But it appeareth ye hūt very narowly for faultes yt accōpt learning for a fault. If I wer skil full in rhetorike, as ye woulde haue me appeare, onelye to discre∣dite me with the people, yet can I not vnderstande wherefore that thing shoulde be so faultye in me, that was sumtymes commenda∣ble in S. Augustin, in saint Chri∣sostome, in saint Hierom, in Arno∣bius, in Lactantius, in Cypryane, in Tertullian, and in many other olde godly fathers: for all these, as ye know, were great rhetoriciās. But as in the boke of the kinges, the Assyrians, when they were ouerthrowen by the Iewes, cried out, Dii mōtium sunt dii illorum, the gods of the hils, be theyr gods as though Siluanus, or Pan, or
Faunus, had conquered them, and not the true lyuing God of Isra∣ell, Euen so ye at this tyme after ye see your selfe scattered, and put to flight, cry out, it is rhetorik and eloquence, that hath ouerthrowen you, and not the force of the gospel of Iesus Christ, Likwise was Porphirius wōt to say that S. Paule perswaded so farre, and won so many to the faith of Christ, not for that he had any trueth of his side, but only for that with his eloquence, and other subtility, he was able to abuse the simplicity of the people. But, alas, smal rhetorike wold suffice to shew how little ye haue of your syde to alledg for your self. ¶ Sarum. HEre I leue, putting you etsones in remēbraūce, yt being so oft, & so opē
desired to shew forth one Scripture, or one allowed example of the Primatiue church, or one olde doctour, or one aun∣cient councel, in the matters before na∣med, yet hetherto ye haue kept back and brought nothing. And that if ye stande so still, it maye well be thought ye do it, conscientia imbecillitatis. For that ther was nothing to be brought. ¶ Cole. This place is aboue answered. The Reply. Sarum. Doutles, by sayīg nothing, as all the reast. ¶ Cole. NO we forasinuche as ye make this a great foundation against vs, that we varye from the Primitiue church. and therfore Make simple soules wene that we were in the wronge syde, here, I praye you, shew̄e me youre opinion, whether we are bounde to do all thinges whyche we fnde, by sufficient authority, were in  in the Primitiue Church? And because ye shall not be herein squemi. I shall here my selfe begin to shew you mine. I  of the pinion that the councell of Constance was in this matter. I thinke it an errour, I am boūd to do as the Primitiue Church did. Where the  customa vseth the ontrary, I
an example, and no bonde. I dny not, but these examples were to be fo∣lowed, and not to ye broken at euery mans wyll, and pleasure, vntill by coen assent other order were aken. But if ye seke olde wryters, and find me that the church this sixe hundred yeares obrued  many thinges which were praciysed, and accōy∣ for good, holesome, and holy in the Primitiue church, and thereb  vs in error, this were a wrong . For the church of Christ, hath his childhod, his manhod, & his hoarheares: and as to one man that is mete to  in one age, is not mete for him in another: So where manye thinges requisire and necessary in the Primitiue church, which in our dayes, were lyke to do more harme then good. This is no new  phan∣tasy, but  1100. yeares ago by   morose, without reproch. I shewed you and read you the place at , as ye may , and it were to long to make rehearsall of  wordes here. We might by taking contrary opinion her∣in,  led to thinke we ought to rece the Sa∣crament euermore after supper, and not astinge. But S. Augustin sayth, that Christ  thys to his church, to take order how, and in what sort the Sacramentes should be receyued and vsed. Wherin he sayth, it is a marucous insolent kind of mandnes to  that, which is receyued in the church, where the custome is not against an▪ commaundement in Scripture. S. Peter, cau∣ed (as Damasus saith) a comma that  womā should come  to the churche. S.   order, that the  shoulde
haue al thinges in commen, and so liue : as in the late reformed order of Saint Benets munkes doth most godly appeare. And not many yeares sence, the same order in all Cathedrall Churches was obscrued. Yet I wene it were an erroure to holde of necessity it should be so still. Or to say, the church were in an errour because it hath suffered a contrary custume to cree in. Then, if the  of the church maye break tha was in the Primitiue church commaunded it is lesse offence to leaue vndone that was at the beginning practised and no commaundement ge∣uen for other to folow the same. Thus much I thought to put you in remem∣braunce of for such matters as ye touche in. 1. 7. 42. 43. nombers. The Reply. Sarum. IN the conclusion ye take greate aduātage to answer many thīgs in one Wherein your wordes, be∣cause they came flowing down in aboundaunce lyke a Streame, they caryed away a great deale of ime and baggage with them. First where ye graunte that ye of your syde haue varied, and do yet vary, from the custome of the
Primitiue churche, I can not but commend your plaines therin in telling the trueth. But where then is your anti∣quitie becum? where be your aun∣cient doctoures? Where be the fif∣tene hundred yeares, that ye haue so much talked of? If ye woulde graunt the same in the pulpit opē∣ly before ye people, that we require the vse and order of the Primitiue churche, and that ye, of your parte maintain your priuate masse, your supremacy, your vnknowen pray∣ers, and the most parte of your re∣ligion, contrary to thesame, that our doctrin is olde, and that yours is new. If ye woulde but graunte this simply, & plainly before the people, we woulde desyer no more at your handes. But ye say further, that the ex∣amples
of the Apostles, and doc∣tours, vinde you not: that in theyr tyme the church was but an infāt and that many thinges that were good for her in that age, would be hurtfull to her in this age: And therto, notwithstanding your re∣cognisaunce, ye alledge S. Augu∣stin, and S. Ambrose, wherin I haue cause sumwhat to  at your doinges, that nowe can so franckely bring in your doctoures to so smal purpose, & afore in mat∣ters of weght, touching the grea∣test part of the contencion yt stan∣deth etwene vs, durst not once name one doctor for feare of youre Recognisaunce. At the last ye con∣clude, that it were an error to say, we are boūd of necessity, to folow the vse of the Primitiue churche. To make you a full and a clear
answer hereunto, I must nedes vse this distinction. There were sum orders in ye Primitiue church commaunded by God, and sum o∣ther were deuised by men, for the better trainyng of ye people. Such orders as were commaunded by God, may not be chaunged in any case, only because God commaun∣ded thē. For as God is euerlasting so is hys worde and commaunde∣ment euerlasting. Of the other syde, suche orders as haue ben deuised by men, may be brokē, vpon sum good conside∣racion, onelye because they were men that deuised thē. For as men them selfe be mortall, so all theyr wisedomes and inuentions be but mortall. As that the communion should be vsed in the mornynge, or at night. That womē should cum
to the church ether couered or opē faced, wherin ye say. Saint Peter toke order. That the ministers goods shoulde be all in comen, or otherwyse. &c. These & other lyke, were things appointed and orde∣red by men, and therfore were ne∣uer vsed in all places of one sorte. But as they were brought in by men, so might they be dissolued & brokē by men. In these things, I graunt, the exāples of ye doctours, or Apostles, bynd vs not. In these thinges it were an errour to saye we are bounde of necessitie, to fo∣low the vse of ye Primitiue church. These and other like thinges they be, that. S. Ambrose speaketh of, whom ye at Westminster alled∣ged in the case ye then entreated of directly making against youre selfe. And we, when we heard you
name him first, marueled muche what ye ment to medle with hym aboue al others. For as touching yt commen prayers to be had in a straunge tong (whiche matter we had then in hād.) S. Ambrose se∣meth of purpose to controlle both you & your brethren, in maner one whole chapter through wrytinge vpon yt. xiiii. chap. 1. Cor. And far∣ther, the examples that he vseth, in the place, where ye alledged hym, are these. That the deacon, in the Primitiue churche, vsed to preache, and in his tyme preached not: and that women in the Pri∣mitiu churche, vsed to baptyse, & in his  baptysed not: and that in  tiue church, the Sa∣crament of Baptysme was mini∣stred at all tymes indifferentlye, without difference of dayes, and
that in his time it was ministred onely vpon certain daies. And yet in your church, contra∣ry to the order of s. Ambrose, both women baptise, & deacons preach, and children are baptised euerye day without difference of tyme. Thus ye would seme to folow S. Ambrose, and yet alledge hym in suche places, where youre selfe moste of all varye from hym. But perhaps your mind was occupied, or ye had not thē leysure to marke hym better. Hetherto, I thinke we agree, yt touchīg such things as haue been ordeyned by men, we are not boūd of necessity to the order of yt Pri∣mitiue church. But of the other parte. I say, yt such thinges as God  cōmaū∣ded precisely by hys word, may ne∣uer
be broken by any custome, or consent And such be the thynges yt we now require at your hands, not deuised by men, but commaū∣ded by God to last for euer. On∣lesse ye wil happely say, as Mon∣tanus did, that God hath reuealed both mo thinges, and also better thinges vnto you, then euer he did vnto his Apostles: or els, as Ma∣nicheus said, that the Apostle sawe nothing, but onely in speculo, & in aenigmate: or as your doctour Sil∣uester Prierias saith, Indulgentiae non habent authoritatem ex verbo Dei, sed habent authoritatem ab Ec∣clesia Romana, quia maior est. Par∣dons, sayth he, haue no ground of gods worde, but they haue theyr groūd of ye church of Rome, which is a great deale more. The cup which ye haue takē frō the people,
is not a ceremony, but a part of the Sacrament. And as good right as ye had to take that part away, so good right had ye to take away also the other, and so to leaue the people nothing atal. And therfore yt old father Gelasius, saith, aut in∣tegra percipiant, aut ab integris ar∣ceantur, ether let thē receine ye hole Sacramēt, yt is to say, vnder both kindes, or els let thē be put from ye hole. By which words of the olde doctor Gelasius, it may appeare, yt onlesse both partes of the Sacra∣mēt be receiued together, the Sa∣crament is mangled, & not whole. Again, to pray in such a tong as the people may vnderstande, and therby be edified, is not a ceremo∣ny to be changed at mans plea∣sure, but the commaundement of God, for Paul, whē he had spoken
long therof, concludeth at the end. Si quis est Propheta, aut spiritualis sciat, quod quae scribo, domini sunt praecepta. If any mā be a Prophet or spiritual, let him wel knowe, ye the things ye I wryt, are the com∣maundemēts of God. Prayer in yt vulgare & knowē tong. S. Paule saith, is the cōmaundemēt of God, and not an order taken by man. Again, for any one man to take vpon him to be vniuersal Bishop of the hole churche. S. Gregorye sayth, it is both against the Gos∣pel of Christ, and also against the olde canons, and acient orders of the churche, his words be these. Quis est iste, qui contra Statuta E∣uangelica, cona Canonū decreta,  sibi nomē vsurpare praesumit, what man is this that taketh vpō un this new fangled name, to be
called the vniuersal Bishop of the hole church, cōrtary to the lawes of the gospel, & contrary to the de∣crees of the Canons. And farther he saith, Consentite in hoc nomen est fidem amittere. To agree vnto this name, is o go frō the fayth. These thinges, and other lyke, be∣cause they haue their foundation in gods word, may not be chaun∣ged by any order of ye churche. For the church, as she is Ladye of her own lawes: so is she but a hande∣mayd, to the lawes of Christ. But here would I faine know what smatterer taughte you to frame this argument? The churche hath power to break sum orders. Ergo. She hath power to breke all orders, where, & when she listeth.
As perte a Logiciō as ye make your self, yet here ye haue made a sophistication, A secundum quid ad simpliciter. Which, as ye know in Logik is a foul error in reasonīg. But it is a world, to cōsider the reasō ye vse to proue your purpose withal. For ye say the Churche in Christs, & the Apostles tym, was but an infant, but now she is well strikē in age, therfore she must be otherwise dieted now, thē she was then. This is not the handsomest cōparison yt I haue herd of. For I neuer herd before now, yt Christ & his Apostles, wet called infants. Or yt euer any man before nowe toke vpon him to set thē to schole. Esay saith yt Christ shold be, pater futuri seculi, yt is, the sather of the world to cum, which is ye tym of yt gospel. And s. Hierō, in your owne decrees, calleth yt Apostles, patres
that is, not infāts, but the fathers of y• church. And I beleue, though ye would study and labor for it, yet would it be very hard for you, ey∣ther to find out any good substan∣tial reasō, wherfore ye wt your bre¦thren ought to be called y• fathers of gods church, or Christ and hys apostles ought to be called babes. O yt ye wold indifferētly compare the one wt the other. Ye shold find, that as lyke as ye & your Bishops are to the Apostles, so lyke is your church to the Apostles church. But if I would graūt you your comparyson, that Chryst and hys Apostles are vnto you, as childrē to old fatherly mē, yet how could ye make thys argument good by al your Logike. The churche is now be cū old and auncient. Ergo. The people must pray in
a straunge laguage, they know not what. Or this. The church is old. Ergo. The people must receyue the Sacramēt but vnder one kynd. Or this. The church is olde. Ergo. The people may not be exhorted to the holy com∣munion, but only content thē self wt a priuate masse. If these argumentes seme to be good in law, yet I assure you they seme to me very weak, ether in lo∣gik, or in diuinity. Howbeit of such reasōs ye haue stoar ynough, as I were able to shew you at large, if nede so required. As where ye say.Ext  Maior∣tate, & obedie∣tia. Cap▪ vn Sāct. Quae sunt potestates. à Deo ordinatae sunt. The powers that be ar ordered by god. Ergo. The Pope is aboue the Emperour.
Spiritualis, à nemine iudi∣catur. The mā that is ru∣led by gods sprite, is iud∣ged of no man. Ergo. No man may iudge the Pope. Sancti estote, quonian egoInnocen∣tius dist. 82. pro∣posuisti. sanctus sum. Be you holy, for I am holy, saith y• lord Ergo. No maried man maye b a Priest. Christ said vnto Peter,. Solue pro me, & te, pay y• tribut mony for me & thee. Ergo. The Pope is head of the church. Ecclesiasticus sayth,. In medio ecclesiae aperut o suum. He opened hys mouth in the mids of the congregacion. Ergo. The Priest must turne rounde at the midst of the aulter.
Fecit Deus hominē ad imaConciliīs    sub.  ginem & similitudinē suā. God made man to the I. mag & likenes of himself. Ergo. There must be Images in the church. Papa iuratur in fidem A∣postolicam.Concili Basi. sub Euge The Pope is sworn to ye Apostles saith. Ergo. The church can not erre. Non est discipulus supraConcili Rom. sub Siluestro magistrum. There is no scholar aboue his master. Ergo, No man may iudg the Pope. Papa est dominus omniumThe Ca∣nonistes▪ beneficiorum. The Pope is Lord of al benefices. Ergo He can not commit Si∣mony, though he would. Domini est terra & ple∣nitudo eius. The earth is the Lordes, and the ∣nes
therof. Ergo. The communion cake must be ounde. Omnis spiritus laudet Do. minū. Let al sprits praise the Lord. Ergo. Ye must haue Organs in the churche. Lac vobis potū▪ dedi. OrD. Col  West∣nster. Ignorantia est mater pieta∣tis. I gaue you mylke to drinke, or Ignoraunce is the mother of deuocion. Ergo. The people must make theyr prayers in a strange tung. Logike was good cheape,  these argumentes were allowed. But these and a greate many o∣thers, as good as these, haue been made of your syde, as ye knowe. But iudge ye whether they seme to, you to be of such warrant, that
vpon the syghte of them, we may safely breake y• cōmaundementes of God, or no. Very loth I was so muche to open the weakenes of your syde. But for as muche as ye wryte that maister Calins & master Bucers reasons be such, as none, but yung folke and children wil be moued with thē: your importunity herein hath caused me to do otherwys then I would. Therfore out of a great nomber of lyke arguments of yours, I haue laied forth a few And I beleue▪ nether chylde, nor yong bodye, nor your selfe wylbe greatly moued with them. Where ye say these things may not be broken by any pryuate au∣thoritie, but onely by a generall consente: This is but a dilatorye plee to defraude your aduersarye. Pe know all the Princes of chri∣sten▪
endom are not so sone brought to together. In the mene whyle per∣haps ye wil say to your selfe, as ye know whosaith, Interea fiet aliquid spero. But for asmuche as ye geue such credit to a general consent I woulde fain learne at your hand, where this custume of yours first began, or by what consent it was euer allowed. Steuen Gardiner in his boke of the deuels Sophistry, touching the communion vnder one kynde, imagineth that first sum good de∣uout body, for reuerence he had to the Sacrament, thought himselfe not worthy to receyue the cup and so absteined. And then folowed a∣nother, and so another, & after ano ther, and so at length it became, as he saith, a generall consent. Thus he imagineth, only vpon is own gesse. For therwas neuer
anye man y• so wrote before hym. Nether was he able to shewe nor whence, nor where this custume  began, nor how farre it went abroad. But if any one man begā it first, & so another, why did not y• Priests and Bishops then speake against it? Why did they suffer one singular man, only vpō a singular phāsy to breake the general order, yt was geuen by Christ, & obser∣ued by generall consent through the hole church? fit it had bē staid at the first in one, it had neuer past afterward to so many. f it be a wickednesse as ye say, for one man of his own vain phāsy to alter the general order of the whole church then ye see, euen by Steuen Gar∣diners confession, yt your generall cōsent, wherunto ye lene so much. proceded at the first only of wyc∣kednes: And being so, ye remēber
ye haue a rule in your own lawe. Quae à principio malè inchoata fuit institutio, temporis tractu non con∣ualescit, that is, the thing that was naught at the beginninge, can not be made good by processe of tyme. O master doctour, let vs laye asyde all selfe will and contention and haue recourse onely vnto the trueth, that God hath reueyled to vs in his holy worde. For therby shall ye be able to knowe whether y• church do right, or no. And ther∣by shall ye be able to reforme her▪ if she happen to do amisse▪ For it is possible the church may erre but it is not possible the Scriptures may erre. And the Scriptures of God, haue authority to reforme y• churche, but I neuer hearde y• the church hath authority to reforme the Scriptures. Thus Christ reformed the er∣rours
of the churche in his tyme brought in by the Scribes & Pha∣risees, and said vnto them, Scriptū est. Thus S. Paule refourmed y• Corinthians for misusing the holy communion in his tyme, and tolde them. Quod accepi à Domino, hoc tradidi vobis, I deliuered you that thing, that I receiued of the lord. Thus the olde father Ireneus, to stay the erroures of his tyme, bad the parties haue a recourse to the most auncient churchs, frō whence religion sprange fyrst. Thus saith Tertullian, to redresse he errors of his tyme. Hoc cōtra omnes Hae∣reticos praeiudicat, id esse veum, quodcunque primum id esse adulte∣rum, quodcunque posterius. This saying sayth the preuayleth against all heretikes, yt the thynge that was fyrste ordeyned, is to be taken for true, and whatsoeuer
was deuised afterwarde, is to be taken for false. Thus saith S. Hierome, of the abuses of his tyme. Quae absque testimonio scripturarum, quasi tra∣dita ab Apostolis asseruntur, percu∣tiūtur malleo verbi Dei. The thigs that are fathered vppon the Apo∣stles, & haue no testimonye of the Scriptures, are beaten down  the hammer of gods word. Thus saith S. Ciprian, to stay the schismes and sectes of his tym. Hinc Schismata ortur, quia caput non quaeritur, & ad fontem non re∣ditur, & caelestis magistri praecepta non obseruantur. Hereof springe Schismes and diuisions, for y• we haue no recourse to the first insti∣tutiō, and go not backward to the spring, and kepe not the cōmaun∣ments of the heauenly maister. Thus saith S. Augustin, to re∣fourme
y• errours of his tyme: N audiatur, hoc ego dico, hoc tu dicis: sed haec dicit Domin{us}. Ibi quaeratur Ecclesia. Let not these wordes be heard betwene vs, thus say I, or thus say ye, but thus saith y• Lord. And there let vs seke for y• churche of God. Thus saith S. Ciprian. Si ad diunae traditionis caput, & originē reuertaris, cessat omnis error huma∣nus. If ye wil retourne to y• head, and beginning of Gods ordinaū∣ce, all erroures of man wyll sone geue place. Theodosius, the Emperour, pro∣nounceth that they onely are to be taken for Catholik, y• folowe the doctrine that Peter deliuered at the first to the churche of Rome, and so examined he the matter by the originall. Wherfore it standeth you nowe
vpon, to proue that your pryuate masse, your communiō vnder one kynde, your prayers in an vnkno∣wen tong, and your Supremacy, was deliuered at the fyrst by Pe∣ter to the churche of Rome, or els to confesse, that these things be not Catholike. To conclude, lyke as the errors of the clock be reueiled by the con∣stant course of the sonne, euen so the errours of the churche are re∣ueiled by the euerlastinge and in∣fallible worde of God. But to say, as sum of you haue sayd, the church is the only rule of our faith, & whatsoeuer God saith in is worde, she can neuer erre, is asmuche as if a man woulde saye: howe soeuer the sonne go, yet the clock must neds go true. For gods trueth is an euerlastinge trueth, & hangeth not vpon the pleasure or
determinacion of men: but beynge once true, is true for euer. God o∣pen the eies of our hartes, that we may se it, and reioyce in it, that the trueth may deliuer vs. Thus much I thought it good to say to your letters, before my de parture hence, not for y• I knewe precisely they wer yours, but only because they bare your name. If ye thinke I haue bene sum what long, specially youre answeres being so short, ye shall remember, that a little poison requireth oft times a great deale of Triale. Here once agayne I conclude as before, puttyng you in remem∣braunce, that thys longe I haue desyred you to brynge forth sum sufficiente authoritye, for proufe of youre partye, and yet hetherto can obtein nothing. Which thinge I muste nedes nowe pronounce,
symplye and playnlye, because it is true, wythout, if, or, and, ye do Conscientia imbecillitatis, because as ye knowe, there is nothynge to be brought. All these thynges considered, if I might be so bolde with you. I would say frend ly to you, as S. Augustin saith to S. Hierome, Arripe seueritatem Christianam, & cane palino∣diam. 18. Maye. 1560. Iohn. Sarum.
The copie of a Sermon pronounced by the Byshop of Salisburie at Paules Crosse, the second Sondaye before E∣ster in the yere of our Lord. 1560. wher∣vpon D. Cole first sought occasion to encounter: shortly set forthe as nere as the authour could call it to remembraunce without any alteration or addition. TERTVLLIANVS. Praeiudicatum est aduersus omnes haereses: id esse verum, quodcunque primum: id esse adulterum, quod∣cunque posterius. ¶ This is a preiudice against all here∣sles: that that thinge is true, what soe∣uer was first: that is corrupt, whatsoe∣uer came after. Concilium Nicenum. . Mores antiqui obtineant.
THE COPIE OF a Sermon pronounced by the Bisshop of Salisbury at Paules Crosse the. ii. Sondaye before E∣ster, in the yeare of our Lord God. 1560. Wherupon D Cole first sought occasiō to encoūter: shortly set forth, as nere as the authoure could call it to remembraunce without a∣ny alteration or addiciō. 1. Cor. ii. Ego accepi a domino, quod et tradidi uobis: quoniam Dominus Ies{us} in qua nocte tradebatur accepit panem. &c. I haue receyued of the lord, that thīg whiche I also haue deliuered vnto you: that is, that the Lord Jesus in the nyghte that he was betrayed, tooke breade. &c. SAint aule after he was once appoynted oute by God to bee hys chosē vessel, to cary his name a monge al people, hauing occasion to make his abode for a
long tyme in the Citie of Corinth, began there to instructe the peo∣ple, to drawe them from the foltes, and errours, that they, and theyr Fathers had longe lyued in afore tyme, and to leade them to the gos∣pell of Christ, whyche then God of his mercie had newly shewed vnto the worlde. And therwithall he deliuered vnto them the sacra∣ment or holy misterye of Christes laste supper, to be practised and continewed amongest them, as a most certein pleadge and testimo∣ny of the same. But after that, throughe the wickednes of the Iewes, he was driuen to depart thēce, and to saile into Siria, the faise Prophetes. men full of pryde, and vayne glo∣ry, taking occasion at his absence, sought meanes to discredit what
so euer he had taught or don: and caused the people not only to mis∣lyke the gospel of Christ, that they had receyued at Sainet Paules hand, but also to missence the sa∣cramentes. For as touchinge the Gospell, they were fallen from it in to sundrye great and horrible heresies, concerning the resurrec∣tion, and other speciall pointes of Chrystes religion. And as tou∣ching the sacramentes, where as S. Paule had appointed thē the holy misteries of the breaking of Christes bodye, and sheddynge of his bloud, that they shoulde al eat and drynke together wyth feare and reuerence in remembraunce of his deathe and passion, and so cleue together in brotherlye cha∣ritie, as being all the members of one body, they forgetting the very
vse and institution therof, made small accompt of Christes death, toke eche mā to him self seuerally his own supper, despised their pore bretherne, rent and deuided the church of God and so make ye holy sacrament of loue and charitie, to serue them as an instrumente of discord, and dissension, Therfore saith S. Paule vn∣to thē: shall I praise you for thus doing? in this thing surely I may not praise you. For I see your con∣gregations & comen metings are not to the better, but to the worse. For a redresse hereof he calleth them back to the first originall, & to the institution of Christe from whence they were fallen▪ For I, (saith he▪) being amongst you de∣lyuered you none other thinge thē that I had receiued of the Lorde.
That thinge he thought meetest for you. And therfore with ye same ought you also to be contented. Thus, when soeuer any order geuen by God is broken or abu∣sed, the best redresse therof is, to restore it again into the state that it first was in at the beginning. Thus when the Temple of god at Hierusalem was so shamfullye difordred by the priestes and Le∣uites▪ that it was become a caue of theues. Christe for reformation therof, called them backe again to the first erection of the temple. Scriptum est: Domus mea Domus orationis vocabitur. It is written (saith Christ) in the Scriptures: My house shalbe called the house of prayer. Thus was the temple of God vsed at the beginning and thus ought it to be vsed now.
Thus when Christ was appo∣sed by the Scribes and Pharises in the case of diuorse, whether he thought it lawful for a man to put his wyfe from him for euery light cause, & to mary another, he made them answer by the first institutiō & ordinaunce of mariage. A prin∣cipio non fuit ita. Scriptum est: Erūt duo in carne vna. It was not so (saith Christ) at ye beginninge. It is written. They shalbe two in one fleshe. Now therefore they are not two, but one fleshe. As if he shoulde haue said: This is the or∣dinaunce of God my father. Thys may not be broken for your plea∣sures sake, but must remayne in strength, and last for euer. This S. Paule, that the Co∣rinthians might the better vnder∣stand, that they had vnreuerently
missensed the Lords supper, & be the more willynge to redresse the same▪ laied Christes first institutiō before theyr eyes, as a true patern whereby the sooner they might re∣dresse it. Lokes (aith he) what thig I receiued of the Lorde, the same thing I delyuered cuer faithfully vnto you. I gaue you not any phāsy, or deuise of mine own, but that thing only that Christ had before deliuered me. This rule is infalli∣ble. Hereby your doings may best be tryed? This, I iudge, to be the very true meaning of these words of S. Paule. Nowe for as muche as in this laste age of the worlde, the▪ same holy sacrament or miste∣rie of Christes last supper hath ben lykewyse stayned wt diuerse foule abuses, & speciallie for that, not∣withstandinge it hath pleased al∣mighty
God of his great mercye, in these our daies to remoue away all suche deformities, and to re∣store agayn the same hly miste∣ries to the first original: yet there be diuers that wilfully remain in ignoraunce and not only, be vn∣thankfull vnto almighty God for his great benefites, but also take pleasure in the erroures, wherin they haue of long tyme ben tray∣ned. And that not only the pore & ignorant, but also the riche, & such as should be learned, & know god. I haue thought it good therfore, at this tyme, to stande the longer vpon the same words of S. Paul: that we may the more clearly see the firste institution of the holye sacramente, & how far in these lat∣ter dayes we haue straied from it. It was to be oyed, for as muche
s the glorius light of the Gospell of Christ is nowe so mightely an so farre spread abrode, that no m would lightly misse his way, (as afore in the time of darknes) and perishe wilfully. But we may remember when the Iewes were deliuered out of Egypt, and had ben wonderfully conducted through the redsea, and set at liberty, & were passing quiet ly into the land of promisse, a land flowyg with mylke and honye: yet we there diuers wery of their beyng there, and fayne would re∣turne againe into Egypt to be in bondage, in thraldome and in mi∣sery as they had ben before. We maye remember, when the Iewes were deliuered from I∣dolatry, wherin they and theyr fa∣thers had long continued, & were
brought to the true knowledge & worship of the euerliuing God of Israell, notwithstāding they were in dede the people of God, yet wer there many amongest thē yt misly∣ked the tyme, and as it is reported by the Prophet Hieremye, cryed   him. Sermonē, quem locutus es nobis in nomine domini, non audiemus ex te▪ sed facientes faciemus omne ver∣bum quod egreditur ex ore nostro vt facri ficemus reginae coeli, & libe∣mus ei libamina: sicut fecimus nos & patres nostri, reges nostri, & prin cipes nostri in vrbibus Iudae, & in plateis HierusalēL & saturati sumus panibus & bene nobis erat, & malū non vidimus. That is: We wyll not heare the word, that thou spe∣kest vto vs in the name of yt lord, but we wyll do euery thinge that
shall procede oute from our owne mouth, as to burne incense to the Quene of Heauen, and to offer vp Drinke offerynges vnto her, as both we haue done, and oure fa∣thers, and our kinges & our prin∣ces in the citie of Iuda, and in the streates of Hierusalem. For then had we plentie of victualles, and were wel, and felt no euyl. We remember, when the Gos∣pel of Christ was preached by. S. Paule at Ephesus, & the deuels mouth was therby stopped, & all his force and power taken from him, yet there was a great n∣ber that rose vp against Paule & violently withstode his doctryne, and cryed out wyth mayn voyte agaynst him, Magna est diana Ephe siorum. Great is Diana the God∣desse of the Ephesians.
Euē so in these dayes, notwith∣standing the comparisō may hap∣pely seme somwhat odous, where as the holy Communion is resto∣red to the vse and fourme of y• pri∣mitiue church, to the same order y• was deliuered and appointed by Christ, and after practised by the Apostles, and continued by ye holy doctoures and fathers, for ye space of fyue or sixe hundred yeares, throughout all the whole Catho∣lick churche of Christ without ex∣ception, or any one sufficient exā∣ple to be shewed to the contrarye, yet are there sum this day that re∣fuse it, and shun it, & vnaduisedlye. and wilfullye run hedlong to the Masse: of a good zele (I hope) but not according vnto knowledg. For alas, they vnderstande not what▪ they do, they know not neither the
communion, neyther the Masse: neyther wil they harkē, or inquire to come to knowledg. And so in yt middest of the light they remayne stil in darknes. Wherfore as I said afore I haue thought it nedefull to intre at sum∣what herof at this tyme, & haue good hope through Goddes grace so to laye forth the whole matter, not with eloquence of words, but wt simplicity of the truth, yt it maye be plaine both vnto thē that haue forsaken the masse, for what cause, and howe iustly they haue forsakē it, and also vnto them that as yet delite in it, what maner of thinge it is that they delyte in. I knowe, sum man wil saye, for as much as y• sacrament is a holy thing, the ordinaūce of Christ, the high mistery of his death, & of our
saluation, to remain in the church for euer. Therfore it cannot possi∣bly be abused, & all that we speake this day in this behalfe, we speak of malice, and not of truth. True it is the sacrament is an holy thing, y• ordinaunce of Christ, the mistery of our saluation: yet is there nothing so good, no ordinaū∣ce so holy, no mistery so heauenly, but through y• foly, & frowardnes of man, it may be abused. The Serpent that was set vp by Moises in the wildernes was an holy thinge, for it was a sacra∣ment, & a figure of Christ hang∣ing on the crosse: yet was it abu∣sed. The Gospell of Christe is an holy thynge, yet S. Paule sayth to the Philippians, there were sum then that preached it for ma∣lice and contention, doing therby
seruice not vnto Jesus Chryste, whō they professed in their mouth, but vnto theyr owne bellye. And thus beyng holy in it self, yet was it shamefully abused. And what thing is there s ho∣lye as the name of God? and yet what thing is there so often taken in vain, or somuch abused? But to cum neare to our pur∣pose, the sacrament of Baptyme is an holy thinge: yet hath it ben abused, and that in the churche of God: yea, euen at the beginnynge of the churche: euen when the A∣postles of Christ were yet a lyue, and the bloude of Chryste, as yet fresh & greene before theyr eyes. In S. Paules tyme there wer sum that baptised for y• dead: after that, there were sum that baptised such as wer alredy dead: & sprink∣led
thē with water in the name of the father of the sonne and of the holy gost, laied their handes ouer them, & called thē by their names, as if they had ben alyue. Whyche thing was reproued & forbiddē in the councell of Carthage. Others there were that bapti∣sed childrē before they were borne, beynge as yet in theyr mothers womb. Which thing is mencioned and reproued by S. Augustin. All these as may sone appeare, were gret abuses. Thus the sacrament of Bap∣tisme, not withstanding it were a holy thing yet was abused. The sacrament of the brekinge of Christs body, & the sheading of his bloud is an heauenly mistery, and an holy thing, yet hath it oftē tymes ben abused, and that in the
Primitiue churche, when the re∣ligion of Chryste semed to be in hyghest perfection. In the time of Tertullian, and of S. Ciprian, which was athou∣sand and four hundred yeres ago, wemen commenly toke the sacra∣ment home with thē in theyr nap∣kins, & layed it vp in theyr chests, and receiued a portion of it in the morning before other meats. This was an abuse of the sa∣crament, & therfore was it brokē. In S. Ciprians and S. Augu∣stines tyme, yong babes, as sone as they were Baptised, receyued the Communion. But that was a great abuse. For by the doctryne of S. Paule, the holy misteryes ought to be geuen vnto none, but onely vnto suche, as be able to vn∣derstand the meanyng therof, to
sudge the Lordes body, and to de∣clare his death. And therfore now infantes, when they be baptised, receyue not the Communion. In the tyme of S. Hierom, sum por∣tion of the holy Communiō was sent from the churche to the newe maried man, and to his wyfe to be receyued at home. This was a disorder of the sa∣crament, and therfore now is not vsed. S. Ireneus (sayth) that one Marcus a necromanser was wōt to enchaunte the cup of the sacra∣ment of Christes bloud, so that the liquour should seeme to increase & multiplie, & from a litle to growe to a great quantitie. This also was an horrible abuse of Christes holy sacraments. Summe of late tyme, haue re∣ceyued the communion for theyr
purgation to cleare them selfe a∣gainste sum notorious slaunder. And then the priest chaunged the wordes which comenly be vsed at the ministration, (and said thus:) Corpus domini nostri Iesu Christi sit tibi ad purgationem. Sum o∣thers haue vsed to hang the Sa∣crament, as an Agnus Dei, before theyr breastes, for a protection a∣gainst the assaultes of the deuel, & all other wordly enemies. S. Be∣net ministred the communiō vnto a woman that was dead, & it may well be thought that other did so as well as he: For it is forbidden by generall consent, in two coun∣selles, thone holden at Antifrodo∣rum the other at Carthage. No man can lightly denye but these were greate abuses. For Christ appointed not the Sacra∣ment
of his laste supper that we∣men should beare it home, & kepe it in their chests nor that it shulde be sent home to new maryed men and wemen, to be receyued in se∣uerall, nor that it shuld be mini∣stred to babes and infates, that knewe not what it ment: nor that Inchaunters or Necromansers shoulde therby auaunt their dete∣stable practises: nor yt men shoulde therby discharg them selues from slaunder: nor that it shuld be han∣ged before mens brestes, and ca∣ried about as a shielde against the Deuel, nor that it should be mini∣stred vnto dead men or women, & losed vp in theyr mouthes, & layd with them in theyr graues. But yt such as bare the name of Chryst, & trusted to be saued by his bloude, shoulde communicate together, &
solace them selues in the remem∣braunce of his death. This Christ himselfe hath in∣structed vs▪ do this, he saith, in re∣membraunce of me. Thys is the very true & lawfull vse of the holy Communion of Christes body and bloud, and all others are abuses. We se therefore, that albeit the sacrament be an holy thinge, and an heauenly mistery, yet that not∣withstanding it may many waies be abused. But what nede we so manye proues in a thinge that is so eui∣dent. Saint Paule hymselfe saw the abuses thereof in his tyme. S. Paule hymself, euen in the be∣ginnyng of the Churche, wythin forty yeares after Christes death, withnesseth, that euen then there were abuses crept into y• sacramēt,
and therfore reproeth the Corin∣thians. And for redresse therof cal∣leth them backe to the example & fyrste institution of Christ. That same selfe thyng, (sayth he) that I receyued of the Lord, that I dely∣uered vnto you, in suche sort as I had receyued it. Let that be a pa∣terne for you to folow. Summe man, perhappes, wil heare reply: notwithstanding the sacrament in it self, either through the wickednes, or through ye foly of man, may be, and haue benabu∣sed, yet neyther was there euer, nor can there be any such abuse, in the masse. For it standeth of foure special parts, godly doctrine, god∣ly consecration, godly receyuinge of the sacrament, and godly pray∣ers. In conclusion, it is so heauen∣ly & so godly a thing, that no foly,
or wickednes can enter into it. These thinges, good brethern, I know haue ben oftē times spo∣ken out of such places as this is, & stoutly auoutched in your hea∣ring. And therfore, after that the masse had ben once abolished, by y• noble prince of godly memory kind Edward the sixt, & the next prince for that she knew none other reli∣gion, aud thought well of ye thyng that she had ben so lōg trained in would nedes haue it put in vre a∣gain, through all her dominions, it was forthwith restored, in lyke māner, in all points, as it had ben vsed before, without any kynde of alteratiō, or chaung: as I beleue, that theyr verye doinges therein might stand for proufe sufficient, that neyther the masse it selfe, nor any parsel or point therof, had euer ben abused.
But alas, what if they that most of all other defend the masse, thē∣selues fynd faultes and abuses in ye masse? Mark (I pray you) what I say: what if the very maintey∣ners, and proctours of the masse, confesse plainly vnto the worlde in theyr bokes openly printed, & set abrode, yt there haue ben, & be abuses & errours in the Masse? Albertus Pigghius, the greatest piller of that parte, in a litle trea∣ise that he writeth of the Masse, hath these wordes: Quod si qui a∣busus in rem sacratissimam, & salu∣berrimam irrepserunt, vt irrepsisse pleros{que} non diffitemur, scimus ad quem, & ad quos pertineat eosdem corrigere. That is to say, if there haue certein abuses crepte into y• holy and holsom thing, that is the Masse, as I graunt, there haue
crept in very manye, yet we know, to what man, & men the redresse thereof doth apperteine. Here Pig∣gius graunteth simply wythout colour, that diuerse abuses haue at sundry tymes priuily crept into y• Masse. And yet I beleue, he was no such enemy to the cause, that he would euer haue graūted somuch, specially against ye same self thyng that he defended, vnlesse he had knowen it perfectly, to be true. It any man doubt of this man Alber∣tus Pigghius, and knowe not hys authority, nor what he was, let hym vnderstand yt when I speake of him, I speake of all, for thys is he, that all the rest haue chosen to follow as their captain: The grea∣test learned mā, as it is supposed, and as he hymselfe thought, that uer wrote in y• quarrell. He hath
founde out errours, and abuses, in the masse, and is not abashed opē∣ly to confesse the same. Of these errours I haue inten∣ded sumwhat to intreate at thys tyme, not of all, for that would be an infinite labour, but of so many and so taeforth as the tyme shal suffer me. I wyll not here enter to speake, eyther of transubstātiation, either of the real presence, eyther of y• sa∣crifice, eyther of the comen sale or vtteraunce, eyther of the supersti∣tious ceremonies of the Masse, which are for the most parte both verie vayne, and also in maner wythout number. Of these thinges I am content to disaduauntage myselfe at thys tyme, and bryefly to touche two or thre pointes, as of the latin tong,
wherin commenly the masse hath ben vsed: of the Communion vn∣der one kynd: of the Canon: of the adoration of the sacramente: and of the priuate masse. And of these things I intēd to speak, although not so largely, and with so manye words, as y• cause would require: yet, by Goddes grace, so simply & so truely, that who so will be mo∣ued with truth or reason, shal sone perceiue there hath ben abuses in the Masse. And if there were but one of these abuses in it, yet were it worthy to be spoken of, and to be amēded. But if we shall plainly see with our eyes, that all the er, rours, & disorders, besyde a great number els, whyche I wyllingly passe by, haue ben in the masse, (O good bretherne,) let vs not then thinke, that so many godly men, in
these our dayes, haue spokēagainst it without cause. First, as touching y• vnknown and straung tong yt hath ben vsed in the Masse, S. Paules counsel and commaundement, is in gene∣rall, that what so euer is done, or sayd, in the congregation shoulde so be done and sayd, that the hea∣rets may haue confort thereby, & yelde thankes vnto God, and saye Amen. But the same saint Paul saith, if thou make thy prayer in y• congregation with thy spirite, or noyce of a straung wordes, howe shal the vnlearned man thereunto saye Amen? For he knoweth not what thou sayest. For not withstā∣dig thy praier, perhappes be good, pet hath the other no cōfort or pro∣fit by it. And therefore (he saith)▪ farther, I had leuer vtter fyue
words in the congregation wyth vnderstanding of my meaning, so that the reast may haue instructiō therby, then ten thousand wordes in a straunge & knowen tong. Saint Angustine wrytynge vpon the Psalmes (sayth) thus. Oportet nos humano more, non a∣uicularum ratione cantare, nam & Merulae, & Psipttaci, & Corui do∣centur sonare quod nesciunt. We must, (sayth S. Augustin) in the prayers that we make to god, not chirpe lyke birdes, but synge lyke men. For Popinioyes, & Rauens, and other birdes are taughte to syng, they know not what. Iustinian a christian Emperor made a strait constitution, that all Bishops and priestes should pro∣nounce the words of the ministra∣tion, with open voyce, y• the people might say. Amen.
And to passe by all other authory∣ties and examples in thys behalf, before the church grew to corrup∣tion, all christian men through∣out the worlde made theyr com∣mon prayers, and had the holy cō∣munion in theyr owne commen and known tong. But in y• masse, as it hath ben vsed in thys later age of the worlde, the priest vtte∣reth the holye misteries in suche a language, as neyther the people, nor oftentymes himself vnderstā∣deth the meanynge. And thus the death of Christ, and hys passion, is setforthe in suche sorte, as the poore people can haue no conforte or frute therby, nor geue thankes vnto God, nor saye, Amen. Of all that holy supper, and most confor∣table ordinaunce of Chryst, there was nothing for the simple soules
to consider, but only a number of gestures and countenaunces, and yet neither they, nor the Pryeste knewe, what they mente. Thinke you this was Christes meanyng when he ordeyned the cōmunion fyrst? Thinke you that s. Paule re∣ceyued these thynges of the Lorde and deliuered the same to the Co∣rinthiās? O good brethern, Christ ordeyned the holy sacramente for our sakes, that we might therby, remēber ye misteries of his death, & know the price of his bloud. Touchinge the second abuse of the communion vnder one kind it would be long to say, so muche as the place woulde seme to require. For, besydes the Institution of Christ, & the wordes of S. Paul, whyche to a christian man maye seme sufficiēt, it was vsed through
out the whole catholike churche, sixe hundred yeares after Christs ascension, vnder both kinds with∣out exception. But in one word, to say, that may be sufficiēt for a wise man to consider: Gelasius, an olde father of the churche, and a bishop of Rome, sayth that to minister the cōmunion vnder one kind, is open sacriledge. His wordes be these: Diuisio vnius eiusdémque mysterii sine grādi sacrilegio non potest per∣uenire. I trust I shall nede no far∣ther euidence, to proue yt the masse, in this part, hath ben abused. The third point y• I promised to speake of, is the canon, a thing, for many causes, very vain in it self, & so vn∣certein, that no man can readilye tel, on whō to father it. S. Paule saith, scio cui credidi, & cerus sum. I know whom I haue beleued, &
I am certein, And vnto Timothe he sayth, permane in his quae didici∣sti, sciens a quo didiceris. Stande stedfastly in such thinges as thou hast learned, knowinge of whom thou hast learned them. Yet many men, this day, stande to the Canō, as vnto the holiest part of all the masse, and know not of whō they haue learned it. Summe saye A∣lexander the first made it: summe saye Leo: summe say Gelasius: summe say Gregorius the fyrste: Gregorius (sayth) one Scholasti∣cus: summe others say Gregorius the third: But Innocenius ter∣tius, to put the matter quyte out of doubt, said plainely, it came frō Christe, and from hys Apostles. Howe be it, who soeuer was the yrste deuiser of it, it forceth not. The substaunce of it, and the mea∣nyng
is more material▪ & therof I think it nedeful to touch sum part in as few words, as I maye. For notwtstanding, I haue small plea∣sure in opening suche maters, as may seme odious, yet is it behoue∣ful. for euery man, to vnderstand, of that thynge that was compted so high & holy, what maner a thig it was, and what it conteyned. First the priest in the Cannon, desyreth God to blesse Chrysts bo∣dy, as though it were not sufficiēt∣ly blessed alredi. Further (he saith) that he offereth and presenteth vp Christ vnto his father, whiche is an open blasphemy. For contrary∣wyse, Christ presenteth vp vs, and maketh vs a swete oblation in the sight of God his father. Moreouer he desyreth God so to accept the body of his sonne Iesus
Christ, as he once accepted the sa∣crifyce of Abel, or the oblacion of Melchisedech. It is knowen that Abel offered vp of the fruit of hys flock a lamb or a shepe: and that Melchisedech offred vnto Abrahā, and his companie, returning from the battaile, bread and wyne. And thynk we that Christ ye son of God standeth so far in hys fathers dis∣pleasure, that he nedeth a mortall, and a miserable man to be his spo∣kesman to procure him fauour, or think we that God receiueth the body of his only begotten son non otherwise, then he once receyued a shepe or a lambe at the handes of Abel? or thē Abrahā receiued bred and wyn of Melchsedech? If no? why then maketh the Priest thys prayer, in the canon immediately afther the conecration, supra quae
propitio ac sereno vultu respicere digneris, & accepta habere, sicuti ac∣cepta habere dignatus es munera pueri tui iusti Abel, & sacrificiū pa∣triarchae nostri Abraham, & quod tibi obtulit summus sacerdos tuus Melchisedech. That is to say, loke down with merciful countenaūce, vpon these sacrifises, (that is the body of Christ thy son, and the cup hys bloude) and vouchsafe to re∣ceyue thē as thou sumtyme vouch∣sauedst to receyue the oblatiōs of thy chyld Abel the iuste, and y• sa∣crifice of our patriarch Abraham, and that thinge yt was offred vnto the by thy hygh pryest Melchise∣dech. Besides thys he desyreth God y• an angel maye come & cary Christes body away into heauen. This is y• prayer that he maketh. ube hec perferri per manus sancti
angeli tui in sublime altare tuum▪ what a fable is this that Chryst shuld be borne vpon an angel, & so caried vp away intoheuē? I would not stand so long vpō these folies, if force draue me not therunto. Therfore I leaue to speake far∣ther of the Canon, geuing you oc∣casion, by these few thinges, ye bet∣ter to bet∣ter to idge of the reast. The fourth matter, that remay∣neth to be touched, is yt adoration, a great matter full of daūger, and ful of ieopardie, and so muche the more daūgerous, for that it is an honou bēlōging onely vnto God, and yet without any warraunt of Goddes worde. Christ that best knew what ought to be done here in, when he ordeyned, and deliue∣red the sacramēt of his body and bloud, gaue no commaundemente
that any man shuld fall downe to it, or worship it. S. Paul that toke the sacrament at Christes hande, and as he had takē it, deliuered it to the Corinthians, neuer willed adoration, or godly honoure to be geuen vnto it. The olde doctours, & holy fathers of the church, s. Ci∣prian, S. Chrisostom, s▪ Ambrose, S. Hierom, s. Augustin, & others, that receiued the sacrament, at the Apostles hands, and as it may be thought, continewed the same in suche sort, as they had receiued it, neuer make mention, in any of all theyr bokes of adouring, or wor∣shipping of the sacrament. It is a very new deuise, and as it is well knowne, came but lately into the church. About thre hundred yeres past, Honorius beynge then Bi∣shop of Rome, commaunded the
sacramēt to be lifted vp, & the peo∣ple, reuerently, to bow down to it▪ After hym, Urbanus, the fourth appointed a holy daye of Corpus Christi, and graunted out large pardons to the kepers of it, that the people shuld with better wyll resorte to the churche, and kepe it holy. This is the greatest ntiqui∣ty of the whole mater, aboute tre hundred yeares ago, it was fire found out, and put in pracise. But Christ, and his Apostles, the hoy fathers in the primitiue curche, y• doctours that folowed them, and other learned and godly mē, what soeuer for the space of. M. cc. yeres after Christ, neuer heard of it. Once again I say, for the space of M. cc. yeres, after Christes ascen∣sion into heauen, this worshipping of y• sacramēt was neuer known,
or practised, in any place within y• whole catholike churche of Christ throughout the whole world. But after it was once receyued & put in vse, and the people began to worship the sacrament, wt godlye honour, the learned men, & schole doctours, that then were, sawe it coulde not stande withoute great daunger, & cōfessed that the igno∣rant sort, therby, might sone be led into idolatry. Marke I beseche you, what I say, for I know, vnto sum men it semeth not possible, yt there may be any kind of daunger, in worshipping the sacramente of Christes body. And therfore, sum haue alledged Saint Augustius words in this behalfe: Nemo mā∣ducat nisi prius adoret, No mon eateth Christes body, but first he doth worship it. And agayn, Non
peccamus adorando, sed mags p∣caremus non adorando. offende not, in worshippinge the fleshe of Christ, but  we shoulde offence, if we shoulde not worship it. But in dede, the schole doctours, and learned men sawe, there might be daunger in wor∣shipping the sacrament, and ther∣fore gaue warning of it. Ion Duns, and william Du∣rand say thus, if there remayned the substaunce of bread, after con∣secration, the people would therof take occasion of Idolatry, and in steade of Christes bodye, woulde geue godly worship vnto y• bread. And therfore, they thought it best to remoue away the bread▪ and to bring in transubstātiation a word nely deuised▪ & neuer once herd, or spoken of, before the councel of
Laterane, holden at Rome, in the yere of our Lorde. M. ccxv. But the olde doctours, & fathers, which fyrste planted the churche, and to whome more credit is to be geuē, wryte plainlye, that in the sacra∣mente, after consecration, there re∣mayneth styll, very bread, & wyne in nature, and substaunce as be∣fore. And to alleadg one or two in stead of many, Saint Augustine (sayeth) in a sermon ad infantes. Quod videtis in mnsa, panis est. That thynge that ye see, vpon the table, is bred. Gelasius also sayth; in lyke sort. Non desinit esse substā∣tia panis, vel natura vini: sed manē in suae proprietate naturae. It lea∣ueth not to be the substaunce of bread, or the nature of wyne, but they remayne, in the propertie of theyr own nature.
Theodoretus, and olde doctour of the church, likwyse saith: Chri∣stus ea sy mbola, quae videntur, cor. poris & sanguinis sui appelatione honorauit, non naturam transmu∣tans, sed naturae adiiciens gratiam. Christ (saith) Theodoretus hono∣ted the bread ad wyne, which we see, with the names of hys bodye and bloud: not chaunging the na∣ture therof, but vnto the same na∣ture ioyninge his grace. I knowe not▪ what maye be more clearlye . Saint Augustin sayth, it is bread: Gelasius saith, it leaueth not to be the substaunce, & nature of bread, and wyne: Theodoretus sayth, Christ honoured the bread and wyne, with the natures of his body, and bloud▪ but yet chaunged not theyr nature▪ Thus, the olde godly bishops, and fathers of the churche, acknowledge, and affirm
that bread remayneth in the sacra∣ment, after cōsecratiō. But Duns, and Durand, and sum others of y• yong fathers, and doctours say, if the people worship the sacrament, and bread remain, then must they nedes be, in great daunger of ido∣latry. Wherfore we may wel con∣clude of them both, for as much as it is cleare, by the olde doctours y• bread remaineth, that the people resortinge to the masse, and ther worshipping the sacrament, must nedes be in daunger of idolatrye. Fartherthey say, Idolatry may be done to ye sacrament, if a man hap∣pen to worship the accidents of the bread, (that is to say,) y• whitenes, or roūdnes or other such outward fourmes, or shewes of breade, as he seeth with his eye, and geue the honoure vnto in yt stede of Christs
body. O miserable people, yt thus is lead, to worship they know not what. For alas, how many of thē vnderstandeth these distincions, or care for them? how many of thē vnderstand after what sorte acci∣dentia may be sine subiecto? or how whytenes is founded in the sacra∣mente, or what is the difference, betwene substantia and accidens? Or what priest, when he went to masse, euer taughte the people to knowe these thynges, & to auoyde the daunger? Undoubtedlye, I could neuer yet perceyue, by any readinge, eyther of the scriptures, or els of other prophane writings, but that ye people of all ages hath euer more ben redier, to receyue idolatrye, then to learne ye distinc∣tions, and quiddities of Logike or Philosophye.
Thus we see, euen by the con∣fession of Duns & Durand, & other theyr owne doctours, that he that goeth to the masse, & worshippeth the sacramēt, onlese he be learned, and take good hede, maye soone commit idolatrye. The doctrine of it selfe is newe: ye prosite of it such, as the churche of god for the space of twelue hundred yeares, was well hable to be without it. The ieopardy of it, great and horrible, & scarcely, possible, to be auoided. I speake not these thinges (good bretherne) to thentente to spoyle Chryst of the honour, that is due vnto hym. I knowe, and confesse, that Christes blessed body is most worthy of al honour. I know  the flesh of the son of God, is not therfore the lesse honourable, be∣cause it is now become glorious,
and sytteth in heauen, at the right hand of God his father. The body of Christ, sitting aboue al heauēs, is worshipped of vs, beynge here beneath in earth. Therefore the priest at the Communion, before he enter into y• holy misteries, ge∣ueth warninge vnto the people, to mount vp wyth theyr mynds into heauen, and crieth vnto them, Sur∣sum corda: Lift vp your heartes, according to y• doctrin of s. Paule.os. 3. Si vna surrexistis cum Christo, ea quae sursum sunt quaerite, vbi Chri∣stus est sedens ad dexteram patris. If ye be risen again with Chryst, seke for those thinges, y• be aboue, where as Christ is, sittinge at the right hand of his father. And a∣gain: Nostra  est in coe∣lis,bili. 3. vnde Saluatorem expectamus. Our conuersation, or dwelling is
in heauen: from whence we loke for our . Therfore S. Augustine speake the wordes yt I before alledged. Nemo manducat nisi prius adoret: No man eateth Chrystes fleshe, but fyrste he doth worship it. The eating therof, & the worshipynge must ioyne together. But where we eate it, there must we worshyp it? Therfore must we worshyp it syttyng in heauen. So sayth the olde doctour, & father, s. Chrisostō. Vbi cadauer, ibi aquilae, Cadauer, do mini corpus est: Aquillas autem nos appellat: vt ostendat, oportere illum ad alta contendere, qui ad hoc cor∣pus accedit. Aquilarum enim non graculorū est haec mēsa. That is to saye. Where soeuer is the carcase, there be the Egles: The carcase is Christes bodye: vs he calleth the
Egles: to declare, that, whosoeuer wil, approche neare to that bodye must geat a lofte. For this is a banket for Egles, y• soare a high, not for Iayes, yt kepe the ground. Christes body is in heauen. The∣ther therefore must we direct our hartes: there must we feede: there must we refrcshe our selfe: & there must we worship it. So sayth, S. Hierome. Ascen∣damus cum eo in caenaculum ma∣gnumAd He∣bidiam. stratum: ibi accipiamus ab eo sursum calicē noui testamenti: Let vs get vp, sayth S Hierom wyth him, into the great dyninge cham∣ber, that is already prepared, and there let vs receyue of him aboue, the cup of the new testament. So sayth saint Ambrose. Non super terram, nec in terra, nec secun∣dumIn Lucā Ca. 2. 4. terram te quaerere debemus, si
volumus inuenire. We maye not leke for the, neither vpon ye earth, nor in yt earth, nor about ye earth, if we list to find yt. And to cōclude so sayth Eusebius Emissemus. Exaltata mente adora corpus Dei tui. That is, lyfting vp thy minde vnto heauen there worshyp and adour the body of thy God. Thus did the olde Catholike fathers worship y• bodye of Christ. Thus may we also worship it sa∣fely, and without perill. But to geue Goddes honor to y• sacrament is a thing both latelye brought into y• churche, vnknown & straunge, to the aunciēt doctors, and as the scholemen, and the greatest mainteiners of it, haue them selues confessed, an occasion of idolatry, and full of daunger. For what if the priest happen
not to cōsecrate? what if he leaue out of the words of consecration, & neuer speake thē? as it is known, that sum priests haue done manye yeares together. Or what if the priest haue no intentiō or mynd to consecrate? what case standeth the pore people thē in? Or what thing is it that they worshyp? Chrystes body cannot be there without cō∣secration: Consecration there can be none as they them selues haue taught, if there misse ether pronū∣tiation, an vtteraunce of ye words, or elles purpose to cōsecrate & in∣tenton. And howe can the people know, wt what intentiō or mynd y priest goth to the masse? Or whe∣ther he hath duly pronounced the wordes? Or whether he hath cōse∣crated or no? And knowinge none of these things, which in very dede
is not possible for thē to know, how can they be wel assured, yt it is the body of Christ yt the priest holdeth vp? & wherunto they fall downe, & geue godly honor? Thus, by theyr own learnīg, ye people must nedes stand stil in doubt, & neer knowe certēli what they worship? O good people, think not yt I imagin these things of my self. Our own aduer saries, yt stand against vs in thys cause, euen, the famoust, and best learned of them al, haue sene, and wrytten, and confessed the same. Alexander, a Bishop of Rome, wryting vpon the master of ye sen∣tences, taketh vp the mater on this sorte: for as much as ye priests pur∣pose, & his priuie  about y• consecration, cannot be knowen, yt therfore no man ought to wor∣ship the sacrament, when it is hol∣den
vp, but with this condition, si ille consecrauerit. That is, If the Priest hath consecrated. That is to say, when ye se ye a∣crament lifted vp, ye must saye, or thinke thus wt your self. If this priesthath cōsecrated, thēdo I wor ship it: If he hath not consecrated, thē do I not worship it. This saith Alexander a Bishop of Rome. But Thomas of Aquine, leaueth the mater a litle more at large▪ He saith. Ista conditio non semper actu requiritur: satis est habere habitū. That is to say: It shall not be ne∣defull at euery tyme, to saye or to thinke thus, whensoeuer ye knele down to worship: but it shalbe suf∣ficient if ye haue a certein redines, in your mynd to say or to thynke so. Yet Holcot, writynge like∣wyse vpon the master of the sen∣tences,
saith thus: Laicus adorat hostiam non consecratam: ista fides sufficit illi ad saluationem: tamē est erronea. The lay mā, saith he, as it may sumtymes happen, worshyp∣peth a wafer y• is not consecrate. This faith is sufficient vnto hym to his saluatiō, and yet is it a false faith, and erronious. And farther he cōcludeth in this sort. Homo po∣test mereri per fidē erroneam, etiāsi cōtīgat, vt adoret diabolū. By these words, we may se, such as wil not content, thē selues to be ordred by Gods wisdom, how daungerously they runne headlong at the last. Holcot was not the wurst lear∣ned man amongste them. Yet to vpholde the erroure, that he had once taken in hande to defende, he was dryuen to confese that a mā maye meede at Goddes hande by
an erroneous and false fayth, yea althoughe he worshyp the deuell. This is the certēy of ye doctrine that ye people of God of long tyme hath ben led in. In ye highest & he∣auenliest point of religiō, yt is in ye worshippinge of God, they them selues know not what they do: It is true, of them, that Chryst saith to the woman of Samaria, ye worship ye know not what. Alas▪ is this the honour yt is due to Christ? Is this the worshipinge of God in spirit & truth? Is this y• seking of Christ inheauē? But sum man will say, these be  and light maters and proue nothynge. Such reportes, I know are geuē abrode, of all that is preached and taught this day, that what soeuer is spokē by any of vs, is light, and childish, and not worth y• hearing.
But the reporters hereof are they, to whom the authority of the olde doctours, the authority of y• primi∣tiue Churche, the authority of the scriptures, the authority of Christ himselfe semeth lyght, & not great∣ly worth the hearing. Loth I am here to rip vp, & to open vnto you the high misteries, & secretes of theyr learning, & the force & strength of theyr reasons. Yet at this tyme the importunitye of them forceth me so to do: y• after ye haue once taken aswel sum tast of theyr arguments, as ye haue of ours: ye may the better, and more indifferently, iudg of both. And let not them, yt priuilie and vntrulye fynd fault with our reasons, be a∣greued, if they heare openlye, and truly, sumwhat of their own. And first to begin with the head: marke
ye well and wey this argument. God made two lightes in heauen, the greater lyght to rule the daye, the lesse light to rule the night: Er∣go, there be two powers to rule the world, the Pope, that resembleth the sonne, and the Emperour that is farre lesse then he, and is likned vnto the moone. And howe muche the Emperour is lesse, the glose de∣clareth by Mathematical cōputatiō, saying yt the earth is seuen tymeg greater then the moone, and the son. viii. tymes greater then the earth: So foloweth it, yt the Po∣pes dignity is sixe and fiftie tymes greater then the dignitye of Thē∣perour.De Ma∣iori. & obed. ca.  & in glos. ibidem. This is an argumente of theirs vsed by Innocentius tertius vnto the Emperour of Constanti∣uople. In principio creauit Deus coelum & terram, non in prineipiis.
God created heauen and earth, in the beginning, as in one, not in yt beginnings, as in many. Ergo the Pope hath the souerainty ouer all kinges and Prynces. This is an argument of theyrs vsed by Pope Bonifacius the. viii. Extra de ma∣ioritate & obedientia: vnam sanctā. Cum transierit ad Dominum tolle∣tur velamen. That is, when the in∣fidel shal cumme to Christ, y• veile of darknes shalbe taken from hys hart. Ergo, he yt becumeth a priest, must shaue his crown. This is an argument of theyrs, to be founde in Isidorus. There is but one o∣ly God: Ergo, al nations, through∣out the worlde, must pray to hym in one toūg. This is an argument of theyrs, made by Gerson sum∣tyme chauncelour of Parise. Ecce duo gladii hic: Beholde here
be two swordes: Ergo, the Bishop of Rome hathe power of boothe sweardes, both spirituall and tem∣porall. This is an argumente of theirs vsed by Bonifatius, ye. viii. Extra de maioritate, & obedientia, as aboue. The Bishop of Rome graunteth out pardōs, Ergo, there must nedes be a Purgatory. This is an argumente of theirs vsed by Iohn Fisher Bishop of Rochester. Euntes docete omnes gentes: Go & teach all nations. And againe: Quam speciosi pedes euangelizan∣rumEsa. 52. pacem, euangelizantiū bona. O, how bewtiful be the feet, of thē y• preach peace, of them that preach good things. And again▪ CalciatiEe. 6. pedes in preparationem Euangelii pacis. Hauing your fete shod to the preparation of ye Gospell of peace. Ergo, the Bishop must weare pur∣ple
sandales. Aspergam super vos aquam mundam. I wil sprinclevpō you cleane water. Ergo, the priest must sprīkel the people with holy water. Sine me nihil potestis facere Without me you can do nothing: Ergo, the Bishop onely must con∣secrate the churche, & no man els. All these, with a number more of the lyke, be theyr arguments, vsed by Willian Durand in his Ratio∣nali diuinorum. But let vs cumme neare, & se the arguments. Wher∣upon the Masse is builte, Nolite sanctū dare canibus. Geue not holy thinges to dogs. Ergo, the priest at Masse, & other where, maye no speake to ye people, but in a strag tong. The title of Christes death, was written vpon the crosse, in Greke, Hebrue, & Latin. Ergo, all comen prayers in the church, must
be vsed in one of the same toūges, y• is, ether in Greke, or in Hebrue, or in Latine. These argumentes haue ben vsed by manye, deuised first, as may he thought by Ma∣ster Eckius. Christ was buried in a shroud of linnē cloth. Ergo, ye corporll must be made of fyne linnē. This argu ment may be found in Syluester. Many of the lay people haue the palsey, & many haue long beardes. Ergo, they must all receyue the cō∣munion vnder one kinde. This is a commen argument, vsed in ma∣ner, by all them that haue wrytten in this behalf. Petra erat Christus. Christ was the rok. Ergo, the al∣tare must be made of stone. Domini est terra & plenitudo eius. The earth is the Lordes and the fulnes thereof. And veritas tua in
circuitu tno. Thy truth is in thy compasse. The money for whiche Iudas solde Christ was rounde. Ergo, the host or the sacramentall bread must be round. Calix aureus Babilon in manu mea. Babilon is a cup of gold in my hand, sayth the Lord. Ergo, the chalice must be of siluer or gold. This is an argu∣ment of theirs vsed by M. Williā Durand. When Uirgil saith, C faciam vitula, he vseth facere, for sa∣crificare. That is, he vseth thys word doing, for this word sacrify∣cing. Ergo, when Christ said to his disciples, Hoc facite in me memo∣riam, Do this in remembraunce of me, he ment sacrifice this in the re mēbraunce of me. This argumēt is fashioned out by M. Clitouey. And to be short, the Angel lo∣ked into the graue: Ergo, the priest
must take of the paten, and loke into the Chalice. Pilate washed his hands before the people. Ergo, the priest must likewise wash hys hands, when he is at Masse. Iu∣das kissed Christ: Ergo, the yriest must kisse the altare. The thefe, on the crosse, repented hymself of hys wicked lyfe: Ergo, the priest, at masse, must fetch a sigh, & knocke his breast. These, and other lyke be theyr reasons. And who so li∣steth to se them, may fynd them, & other more, as good as these in Wylliam Durand. Nowe, good people, iudge ye in your conscience indifferently, vs both, whether of vs, bringeth you the better & soun∣der arguments. We bryng you no∣thing but Gods holy word, which is a sure rocke to builde vpon, and will neuer flete, or shrynke. And
therfore, are we able truly to saye with saint Paule: Quod accepim{us} à Domino, hoc tradidimus vobis. We haue deliuered vnto you, the same thinges, that we haue recey∣ued, of the Lorde. For concerninge the last mat∣ter, that I promised to touche, it cannot be denyed, by any man, be he neuer so wilfull, but Christe in his last supper ordeyned a cōmu∣nion, & shewed no maner token of a priuate Masse, as may plainlye appeare, both by the wordes yt he spake, and also by the order of his doings. For he toke the breade, brake it, deuided it, and gaue it to his disciples: and sayd. Drinke ye all hereof, not vnto one alone, but vnto the whole. He said farther, by way of charge do this: That is to say: Practise this that I haue here
done, aud that in such fourme and sort, as ye haue sene me do it. S. Paule lykewyse, when he sawe▪ that the vse of the sacrament was growen to disorder, yt euerye man toke his own supper priuate∣ly to himselfe, & that therby, both the holy communion, and also bro∣therly loue, and vnity was dispi∣sed, as it hath ben, in the west part of the church, now a great meany of yeares, in this latter tyme: he called them bak again, to the be∣ginning thereof, & to the institu∣tion of Christ: as geuing thē ther∣by to vnderstande, that the sacra∣ment cannot be better vsed, then Christe himselfe vsed it. This he saith. Cum conueneritis in vnum locum, non potestis dominicam cae∣nam manducare: vnusquis{que} enim praesumit caenam suam: when ye re∣sort
together into one place, ye cā∣not eat ye Lords supper: For euery one of you eateth his own supper afore hand. Therefore he sayth vnto thē, Alter alterum expectate: Tary ye & wait, one for an other: & so receiue the holy communion altogether. For this is it▪ yt I deli∣uered vnto you, and the same self thing, I receyued of the Lorde. Here haue I brefely shewed, the disorder of the priuate masse, by y• fyrste institution of the sacrament, and by the commaundement, and authority of S. Paul. Nowe will I, by Goddes grace, also declare, and open the same, by the exam∣ples, and whole practise of the pri∣mitiue churche, and by the aun∣cient Dctours, and other lear∣ned fathers, that followed after ye Apostles tyme, for the space of sixe
hundred yeares, or more. And I trust, ye shall clearly se, that for so long tyme, there was no priuate masse, in the catholike Churche of Christ, in anye countrye or cost, through oute the worlde. For all the writers, that were within the compasse of that tyme, haue lefte behynde them witnesse sufficient of a Communiō: but not one of them all could euer tel vs, of any priuat masse. Clemēs, who, as they say, was scholar to Saint Peter, wryteth thus in an epistle to S. Iames. Tot in altare holo∣causta offerantur quot populo suffi∣cere debeant. Let there be so many hostes offred vpō y• altare, as may be sufficiēt, for y• people to receyue. Dionysius an auncient writer, and as sum haue thought, disciple vnto S. Paul, (although the con∣trary
may appeare, plainly by hys own wordes) in a litel boke, that he hath made of the whole order of the church in his tyme, settynge forth the maner of the Lords sup∣per, wryteth thus: Tum sacerdos ad sacram communionem, & ipse conuertitur, & reliquos, vt vnà co∣municēt hortatur. That is: y• priest both turneth him self to the Com∣munion, & also exhorteth the reast to cōmunicate, and receyue wyth him. And farther he saith: sumpta demum atque omnib{us} tradita com∣munione diuina, gratias referens, fi∣nem misteriis imponit. That is, The priest, whē he hath receyued himself, & deliuered the holy com∣munion to al y• people, geueth God thanks, & maketh an ende of the misteries. Hitherto we finde plain tokens of a communion: But not
one word of the priuate Masse. Iustinus martyr, in his apol∣logie, or defence of the Chrystian faith, sheweth in what sorte the Lordes supper was vsed in hys tyme. Diaconus (saith he) hortatur populum, vt illorum, quae proposita sunt, velint esse participes. That is, the deacon exhorteth the people, y• they will be partakers, of those things, y• be laid forth before thē. Farther he saith. Diaconi distribu∣unt, ad participandum praesentium, vnicui{que}, ex cōsecrato pane, & vino & aqua, illis vero, qui non adsunt, deferunt domum: That is, y• dea∣cons deliuer of ye consecrate bread and wyne & water, to euery one y• is there present. And if there be any away they cary it home to thē Here also we fynd a communion, but no priuate masse.
S. Ambrose rebuketh his peo∣ple, yt were then growen negligēt, in reciuyng the Lordes supper, & vsed to excuse the mater, for yt they thought themself not worthie. Si non es dignus quotidiè, ergo nec se∣mel dignus es in toto anno. If thou be not worthy, saith s. Ambrose, euery day, then art thou not worthy once in a yeare. And agayne, the same S. Am∣brose expounding these wordes of S. Paule: Alius alium expectate, wryteth thus. Expectandum dicit, vt multorū oblatio simul celebret, & omnibus ministretur. That is, he cōmaundeth them, to tarye one for an other, that the oblation of many may be celebrate, or done to∣gether, and so be ministred vnto thē al. These wordes also sauer al∣together of a Communion, and
nothing of a priuate Masse. Saint Hierom, S. Augustyn, & the ecclesiasticall historie, wyt∣nesseth, that vntill yt tyme cōmenly euery wher (but specialli in Rome) ye people vsed to cōmunicate euery day. Leo wrytig vnto Dioscorus, the Bishop of Alexandria, gaue him this aduise, yt wher the church was so litle, that it was not able to receyue all the whole people to communicate altogether: thē the priest should minister two or thre communions in one day: yt as the people came in & had once filled y• church, so they shoulde receyne the communion, and afterward geue place to others. S. Hierom, wryting vpon the xi. chapter, of the fyrst to the Co∣rinthians, hath these words. Caena dominica omnibus debe esse com∣munis,
quia ille omnibus discipulis suis qui aderant, aequaliter tradidit sacramenta. That is▪ the supper of the Lord must be comen to all the people. For Christ gaue his sacra∣ments to all his disciples, y• were present. I leaue out other autho∣rities for shortnes sake, for it wold be to long, to say as much herein, as might be sayd. All these holye doctours, & godly fathers geue vs most perfyt euidence of a commu∣nion, without mention making of any priuate Masse. Thus the catholike churche of Christ vsed the holy communion at the beginning. And euen thus, the most parte of Christian peo∣ple, throughout the whole world, the Iudians, the Mauritanians, the Egiptians, the Persians, the Arabians, the Armenians, y• Gre∣anst
and as many as beare the name of Christ, hath kept, and cō∣tinued y• same, amongst thēselues, from the fyrst tyme they receyued the Gospell, vntil thys daye: And neuer receyued, or vsed the Pri∣uate Masse. But what better witnesse may we vse in this behalf, thē the very masse boke it self. whiche is ye rule and direction of the masse. If the masse boke it selfe beare witnes against the priuat masse, then I trust our cause shall appeare sum∣what better, then it hath ben takē heretofore. Firste by the way, before I en∣ter nere into the matter, y• praiers that be vsed in the Masse be com∣men, aswell to ye people, as to the priest. The priest saith. Orem{us}, let vs pray. And so goeth forth in hys
collecte. And at the ende thereof, the whole people by ye masse boke, are taught to say, Amē. The priest saith, the Lorde be with you, the people, by ye masse boke: is taught to answer, And with thy spirite. The priest saith, lift vp your harts the people, by ye Masse boke shuld answere, we lyfte them vp to the Lorde? The priest turneth him to the people, & saith: Orate prome fratres & sorores. Pray for me bro∣thers, & sisters. And, by the verye order of y• masse boke, ye peple shuld know what he saith, and at his re∣quest shuld pray for him. Herby we se, yt what soeuer praters be vsed about the ministration of the sa∣crament, ought to be the commen requestes of all y• people. Therfore saith Iustinus, an olde godly fa∣ther, & a holy martyr: Vbi gratias
egit praepositus, vniuersus populus acclamat. Amen. That is, whē the priest hath geuen thanks, y• whole people say, Amen. And Chrisostō likwyse saith. Ne mireris, si popul{us} in mysteriis nostris, cum sacerdote colloquatur. Marueile not sayth Chrisostom, though the people and the priest, in our misteries, talke together. For in the commen pray∣ers, that be vsed about the mini∣stration, the priest and the people both in voyce & hart shoulde ioyne together. And whē the priest hath once done the consecration, & the people should, at his hand receiue the communion, the Masse boke it selfe, biddeth him to breake the breade in three parts. And therof haue idle heads, of late lym, phan∣sied out many misticall follies: as though one parte therof were of∣fred
for them that be in heauen, the other for thē, that they saye, be in purgatorie: The third for them that be alyue. These be fantasies, and very folies, wout any groūd, ether of the holye scriptures, or of the doctors, or of the olde catholik church. But in very dede, the brea∣king and diuiding of the bread is a remainent of the true, and the olde communion, that was in vse in the tyme of the doctoures of the church, and of the holy catholike fathers. For to that end, the bread is broken, that it may be deuyded amonge the people. And therfore, the supper of the Lorde is called, Fractio panis, that is the breaking of breade. Moreouer the, priest, by the Masse boke, is taught to saye. Accipite, edite. Take ye, eate ye. And, habete vinculum charitatis, v apti
sitis sacrosanctis mysters. That is, haue ye the bond of cha∣rity, that ye may be mete for ye holy misteries. And to whom shall we thynke the priest speaketh these wordes? It were to vaine a thyng for him in the open congregation, to speake to him self, and specially in the plural nūber. Yet were it a great deale more vayne for hym, to speake the same wordes to the breade and wyne, and to say vto them: Take ye, eate ye, or haue ye the bande of charitie, that ye may be meete for the holye misteryes. Therfore it is euident, that these words shuld be spoken to the peo∣ple. And that in suche sort, as they might well vnderstand them, and prepare thē selfe to the cōmunion. And to conclude, the priest by his own Masse boke, is bidden to
say these words immediately after the. Agnus Dei. Hec sacro sancta cō∣mixtio, & consecratio corporis, & sanguinis domini nostri Iesu Chri∣sti, fiat mihi & omnibus sumentib{us}, salus mentis, & corporis. That is to say, this commition and con∣secration, of the body and bloud of our Lorde Jesus Christ, be vnto me, and to al that receiue it, health of body & soule Thus in the masse boke it self, which as I said afore, is the verye rule and direction of the Masse, if it were vsed accor∣dingly, we fynde a Communion for the whole congregation to re∣teine together, & no priuate masse. Perhaps there may be sum that wyl say, we graunte these things be spoken of the cōmunion in the old doctors: but there be as many thinges or  spoken by them of
the priuate masse, and all that you dissemble and passe by. I knowe, such replies haue bene made by diuerse. But, good bretherne, I wyll make it plaine vnto you tho∣row gods grace, by y• most aūciēt wryters, that were in, and after, the Apostles tyme, and by the or∣der of the first & primitiue church, that then there could be no priuate masse, and that who so would not communicat with the priest, was then commaunded out of the con∣gregation. In the canons of the Apostles, there is a decree made, against al suche, as would be pre∣sent at the communiō, and yet not receyue the sacramēt. The words be these: Fideles qui in ecclesiā in∣grediuntur, & scripturas audiunt, et communionem sanctam non reci∣piunt, tanquam ecclesiasticae pacis
perturbatores, à communione ar∣ceantur. That is: suche christian men, as come to the churche, and heare the scriptures, and receyue not the holy communion, let them be excommunicated, as men that disquiet the whole Churche. Calixtus, a Bishop of Rome, not long after the Apostles tyme, geueth out the lyke commaunde∣ment in y• same behalf: His words be these. Peracta consecratione, om∣nes communicent, qui noluerint ca∣rere ecclesiasticis liminib{us}, sic enim Apostoli statuerunt, & sancta Ro∣mana tenet ecclesia. That is: when the consecration is done, let euery man receyue the communion, vn∣lesse he will be put of from the en∣try of the churche. For this thyng haue the Apostles ordeyned, & the holy churche of Rome continueth
the same. S. Chrisostom, vpon the epistle of S. Paule to the Ephe∣sians, sharpely rebuketh the peo∣ple, for refrainyng the holy Com∣munion. Thus he saith. Nones dignus communione: ergo nec pre∣cib{us}: Qua ratione preco dicit abite: tu vero imprudenter perstas. Thou wilt say (saith s. Chrisostome) that thou arte not worthye to receyue the Communion. Then art thou not worthy to be present at the co∣men praiers. The deacō saith vn∣to you, that will not cōmunicate, geat you hence: and yet thou lyke an impudent man standest stil. S Gregorye, in his dialogues, shewed the maner of the Cōmu∣nion in his tyme, to the like pur∣pose. Diaconus clamat, si quis non communicat, exeat, & locum cedat alteri. The deacon, saith S. Gre∣gory,
speaketh out a loud. Who so will not communicate, let him de∣parte awaye and geue place to o∣thers. This was the order of the olde tyme. The Deacō gaue war∣ning to the people. Exeunto cate∣chumeni: Exeunto paenitentes. Let such, as be yong nouices in y• saith, go forth, let such as are in theyr pe naunce go forth. That they that might not communicat with the reast, shoulde departe from the church, & not be present at the cō∣munion. And this order continued still, vntill the tyme of S. Grego∣ry. which was sixe hundred yeares after Christ. Who was there thē that consecrated the bread & wine, and receyued altogether, to hym∣selfe alone? where then was the priuate masse? where thē was the single Communion al this while?
Yet are there sum, that whisper in corners, that the masse is ables∣sed, & a catholike thing, and y• the holy Communion, which now god of his great mercy hathe restored to vs, is wicked, and scismaticall, & therefore they murmure against it, therfore they refrayne it, & wyll not, come to it. O mercifull God, who woulde thynke, there coulde be so muche wilfulnes in the heart of man? O Gregorye? O Augustine? O Hie∣rome? O Chrisostome? O Leo? O Dionyse? O Anacletus? O sixtus? O Paule? O Christ? If we be de∣ceyued herein, ye are they y• haue deceyued vs. You haue taught vs these scines, & diuisions, ye haue taught vs these heresies. Thus ye ordred the holy com∣muniō in your tyme, the same w
receyued at your hand, and haue faithfullye delyuered it vnto the people. And that ye may the more meruell, at the wylfulnes of suche men, they stande this day against so manye olde fathers, so manye doctoures, so many examples of the primitiue churche, so manifest, and so plaine words of the holye scriptures, & yet haue they herein, not one father, not one doctor, not one allowed example of the pry∣mitiue churche to make for them. And when I say, not one, I speak not this in vehemencie of spirite, or heate of talke, but euen, as be∣fore God, by the way of simplicity and truth, lest any of you shoulde, happely, be deceyued, and thynke, there is more weyght in the other syde, thē, in cōclusion, there shalbe found. And therfore once agayne
I say: of all the words of the holye scriptures: of all the examples of y• primitiue churche: of all the olde fathers: of all the aunciēt doctors: in these causes they haue not one. Here the mater it selfe, that I haue nowe in hand, putteth me in remembraunce of certein thinges that I vttered vnto you, to y• same purpose, at my last beynge in thys place. I remember, I layed out then here before you, a number of thinges that are nowe in contro∣nersie, wherunto our aduersaries will not yelde. And I said, per∣happes boldely, as it might then seeme to sum man. But as I my self, and the learned of our aduer∣saries thēselues do wel know, sin∣cerely and trulye, that none of all them, that this day stande against vs, are able, or shall euer be able
to proue against vs, any one of all those points, ether by y• scriptures, or by exāple of yt primitiue church, or by the olde doctours, or by the auncient generall councelles. Since that tyme, it hathe ben reported in places, that I spake then, more then I was able to iu∣stifye and make good. Howe beit, these reportes were onely made in corners, and therefore ought the lesse to trouble me. But if, my say∣inges had ben so weake, & myght so easelye haue ben reproued: I meruayle that the partyes neuer yet came to the lyght, to take the aduauntage. For my promise was, and that openly, here before you all. That if anye man were able, to proue the contrary, I woulde yelde, and subscribe to hym. And he shoulde
depart with the victorye. Loth I am to trouble you, with rehersall of suche thinges, as I haue spokē afore, and yet, because the case so requireth, I shall desire you that haue alredy hearde me, to beare y• more with me in this behalf. Bet∣ter it were, to trouble your eares with twyse hearing of one thyng, then to betray the truth of God. The words, that I then spake, as nere as I can call them to mynd, were these. If any learned man of all our aduersaries, or if all ye lear∣ned men that be alyue be able to bring, any one sufficient sentence, out of any olde catholike doctour, or father: Or out of any olde ge∣nerall counsell: Or out of y• holye scriptures of God: Or any one ex∣ample of the primitiue Churche, wherby it may be clearly & plainly
proued, yt there was any priuate masse in the whole worlde at that tyme, for the space of sixe hundred yeres after Christ: Or that there was then any Communion mini∣stred vnto the people vnder one kind: Or that, the people had thr commē prayers then in a straūge toung, that they vnderstode not: Or that, the Bishop of Rome was then called, an vniuersal Bishop, or the head of y• vniuersal churche: Or that, y• people was then taught to beleue that Christes bodye is really, substantially, corporally, carnally or naturally in the sacra∣ment: Or that, his body is or maye be in a thousand places, or mo, at one tyme: Or that, the priest did then holde vp the sacrament ouer hys head: Or that, the people dyd then fall down and worship it wt
godly honour: Or that, the sacra∣ment was then, or nowe oughte, tobe hanged vp vnder a canopie: Or that, in the Sacrament after the wordes of consecration there remaineth only the accidents and shewes without the substaunce of bread and wyne: Or that the priest then deuyded the Sacramente in three partes and afterward recey∣ued him selfe all alone: Or y•, wh so euer had said the sacramente is a figure, a pledge, a token, or a re∣membraunce of Christes bodye, had therefore been iudged for an heretike: Or that, it was lawfull then, to haue. xxx. xx. xv. x. or v. Masses said in one Churche, in one day: Or that Images were then set vp in the churches, to the entente the people might worship them: Or that the lay people was
then, forbidden, to reade the word of God in theyr owne toung. If any man alyue wer able to proue, any of these articles, by anye one cleare, or plaine clause, or sentēce, ether of the scriptures: or of the olde doctours: or of any olde gene∣rall Counsell: or by any example of the primitiue chuech: I promi∣sed then that I would geue ouer and subscribe vnto hym. These words are the very lyke I remember I spake here openly before you all. And these be the things, that sum men say I haue spoken, and cannot iustify. But I for my part, will not only, not call in, any thinge that I then sayd, (beinge well assured of the truth therein) but also, will laye more mater to y• same. That if they, that seeke occasion, haue any thing to y•
contrary, they may haue the lar∣ger scope to replye againstme. Wherfore, besyde al that I haue said alredy, I wil say farther, and yet nothing so much, as might be sayd. If any one of all our aduer∣saries, be able clearly and plainlye to proue, by such authority of the scriptures, the olde doctoures, & councelles, as I said before, that it was then lawfull, for the priest, to pronounce the wordes, of con∣secration closely, and in sylence to him self: Or that, the priest had th authority, to offer vp Christ vnto his father: Or to, communicate & receyue the sacramēt for an other, as they do: Or to apply the vertue of Christes, death and passion, to any man by the meane of y• masse: Or, that, it was then thought a sound doctrine, to teache the peo∣ple,
that y• masse ex opere operato: That is, euen for that it is sayd, & done, is able to remoue any parte of our synne: Or yt then any chry∣stian man ealied the sacramēt hys Lord and God: Or that, the peo∣ple was thē taught to beleue, that the bodye of Christ remayneth in the sacrament as long as the acci∣dents of the bread remayne there wythout cortuption: Or that, a mouse, or any other worme, or best may eate the body of Christ: (for so sum of our aduersaries haue sayd and taught) Or that, when Christ said. Hoc est corpus meum. Thys word, Hoc, pointeth not the bread, but Indiuiduum vagum, as sum of them say: Or that, the accidens, or formes, or shewes, or breade and wyne, be the sacramēts of Christs body and blode, & not rather the
very bread and wyne it self: Or y•, the sacrament is a sygne or token of the body of Christ y• lyeth hiddē vnderneath it: Or that ignoraūce is the mother and cause of true de∣notion, and obedience: These be the highest misteries, and greatest keyes of theyr religion, & without them, theyr doctrine can neuer be mainteyned and stande vp ryght. If any one, of al our aduersaries, be able to auouche any one of all these articles, by any such sufficiēt authority of scriptures, doctours, or Councelles, as I haue requi∣red as I sayd before, so say I now agayn, I am content to yelde vn∣to him and to subscribe. But I am well assured, they shall neuer be able, truly to alleadge one senten∣ce. And because I knowe it, ther∣fore I speake it, lest ye happelye
shoulde be deceyned. All this notwithstandynge ye hau ehearde men, in tymes paste, alledge vnto you councelles, doc∣tours, antiquities, successions, and long continuaunce of tyme, to the contrarye. And an easye mater it was so to do, speciallye before them, that lacke eyther leysure, or iudgement to examine theyr prou∣fes. On a tyme Mithridates the kynge of Pontus layed syege to Cizicum, a towne ioyned in frend∣ship to the Citye of Rome. Whych thynge the Romanes hearynge, made out a gentleman of theyrs, named Lucullus, to rayse y• siege, After yt Lucullus was within the sight of yt towne, & shewed himself with his company, vpon the syde of an hill, thence to geue courage to the Citizens within, that were
hesseged: Mithridates to cast th into despaire, and to cause thē the rather to yelde to hym, made if to be noysed, and bare them in hand that al that new company of soul∣diers was his, sent for purposely, by him, against the Citye. All that notwythstandynge the Citizens within, kepte the walles and yel∣ded not. Lucullus came on, raised the siege, wanquished Mithrida∣tes, and slew hys men. Euen so, good people, is there now a siege layde to your walles: an armie of doctours and councelles, shewe them selues vpon an hill: The ad∣uersary, yt would haue you yelde, beareth you in hand, that they are their souldiers, & stande on theyr syde. But kepe your hold, the doc∣tours and olde catholike fathers, in the pointes that I haue spoken
of, are yours, ye shall se the siege raised, ye shall se your aduersaries discomfeited, & put to flight. The Pelagians were able to alleadge S. Augustin, as for them felf, yet when the mater came to profe, he was against them. Heluidius was able to alleadge Tertullian, as making for him selfe, but, in trial he was against him. Eutyches alleadged Iulius Ro∣manus for him selfe, yet in dede, was Iulius most againste hym. The same Eutiches alleadged for him self, Athanasius, & Cyprian, but in conclusion, they stode both against him. Nestorius alleadged the counsel of Nice, yet, was the same councell found against him. Euen so they, that haue auaun∣ted them selues, of doctoures, and Councelles, and continuaunce of
tyme in any of these pointes, wh they shalbe called to tryal, to shew theyr profes, they shall open theyr handes & fynd nothing. I speake not this, of arrogācy, (thou Lord knowest it best, that knowest all thynges) But for as much, as it is Goddes cause, and the truth of God, I shoulde do God greate in∣iurye, if I shoulde concele it. But to returne againe to our mater. There be sum that say, y• no masse is priuate, or to be taken, as y• ac∣tion of one priuate man. For they say, y• priest that saith masse here, doth communicate, with an other priest, that saith Masse sum other where, where so euer it be, the di∣stance beyng neuer so great. Thys commissiō semeth very large. For so, may the priest that saith masse in Englande, or Scotland com∣municate
with the priest that is in Calicute, or in the farther moste part of India. And by thys mea∣nes, should there be no excommu∣nication at all, for the partie excō∣municate might say, he wold com∣municat with the prest whether he would or no. But Saint Paul gloseth not y• matter on this sort, but saith. Alter alterum expectate. That is, tary ye one for an other. And again he saith, when ye cum together, ye cannot eate y• Lordes supper, for euery one of you taketh his own supper aforehand. Sum others say, the prieste maye communicate for the people, and that is as meritorious vnto them, as if they had communicate them selfe. But what commission hath the prieste so to do? or from whō? or what certeyne knowledg
hath he, that his receyuinge of the communion shalbe auailable for the people, for if it be so what ne∣ded it then Christ to say: Accipite, bibite, ex hoc omnes▪ Or if we may receyue the sacrament of Christes body one for an other, why maye not we aswell be baptised one for an other? Why may we not aswel, confesse our faultes before the cō∣gregation and receyue absolucion on for an other? Whi may we not, heare the Gospell, and beleue one for an other. O that these folies so weake and so vain, without shew, or shadowe of any truth, shoulde euer synke into a Christian heart, or take place in Goddes religion. S. Paule saith: Qui manducat, & bibit indignè, iudicium sibi mādu∣cat, & bibit. Who so eateth or drin∣keth vnworthely, eateth & drīketh
iudgement, not vnto others (sayth S. Paul) but to him selfe. Againe S. Paul saith, who so beleueth in him y• iustifieth the wicked, not the faith of any other man, but hys own faith is rekened to him vnto iustice. S. Chrisostom saith: It is the heresie of the Martionites, to thinke that any one man maye re∣ceyue the sacrament for an other, & therfore he maketh light of such disorder of the sacramentes & cal∣leth them Sacramenta vicaria. Ori∣gene saith. Ille est sacerdos & pro∣pitiatio, & hostia. Est enim Agnus Dei qui tollit peccata mundi▪ Quae propitiatio ad vnumquem{que} venit, per viā fidei: He is our priest saith Origene, he is our attonement, he is our sacrifice. For he is y• lamb of God that taketh away the sins of the world. Whiche attonement,
(saith he) cōmeth vnto vs, (ot by the application of the masse,) but by the way of faith, S. Augustin like wise saith. Si non obliuiscimur mundi saluatoris, quotidi nobis Christus immola∣tur. Ex ipsis reliquis cogitationis, id est ex memoria, Christ{us} nobis quo∣tidiè immolatur. If we forget not the sauioure of the worlde. Christ is euery day sacrificed vnto vs. Euen by the remeinentes of oure cogitaions: that is, by our remē∣braunce of his death. Christe is made a sacrifice vnto vs euerye daye. It is not therefore neyther the faith, neither the doinge of the priest, but our owne doing, & our own faith, that applieth, vnto vs, the vertue and merites of Christs death, Sum other say, that s. Pe∣ter said masse at Rome, & Saint Iames at Hierusalem. And why
say they not rather, that Christe himselfe said masse? for that were the nere way to brynge the masse into credite. Or why, say they not soner, that Aaron & his chpleins said masse▪ For in dede▪ as it hath ben vsed, y• church hath had much more of the robes, of the ceremo∣nies, and of the sacrifices of Aarō, then of the institucion or orina∣unce of Christ: But this haue mē tolde you, and with such thinges, as they haue found out them selfe, they haue , and fathered the Aposties of Christ. So com∣menly,  and sorcerers make theyr vaūtes that they haue al theyr bokes and theyr cunnyng from Athanasius, from Moyses, from Abel, from Adam, from Ra∣phel the Archangell. Thus the people of God is de∣ceiued
and mocked, and in steade of precious stones, dryuen to take counterfeites. For I assure you brethern, in the tyme of Peter & Iames, nether was there any mā that euer heard the name of masse, (for Missa was neuer named, vn∣till iiii. hūdred yeres after Christ▪ And yet then was it no Priuate masse nether, but a Communion) nor yet were the peces and partes of y• masse, as we in our tyme haue sene them, set together. And what masse could that be, yt as yet, had neyther her owne name, nor her partes. But, for as muche as they affirme so constantly, that Saint Iames said masse at Hierusalem: and what soeuer it were that he sayd, will nedes haue it called, by the name of a masse: let vs cōpare theyr masse, and S. Iames masse,
both together. S. Iames said his masse in the commen tounge, as y• people myght vnderstande hym: They, say, their masse in a straūge latin toung, that the people should not knowe what they meane. S. Iames spake out the words of cō∣secration distinctly and plainlye: They in theyr masse, suppresse the same wordes and kepe them close. Saint Iames in his masse mini∣stred the communion vnto y• peo∣ple: They, in theyr masse, receyue them selfe al alone. S. Iames, in his Masse, ministred the sacra∣ment vnto the people vnder both kyndes: They in theyr masse, mi∣nister the sacramēt vnto y• people in one kynd only. Saint Iames in his masse, preached and setforth the death of Christ: They, in theyr masse, haue onely a nūber of dum
gestures, and ceremonies, whych they themselfe vnderstand not, & make no maner mētion of Christs death. Saint Iames Masse was full of knowledge: Theyr Masse is full of ignoraunce. S. Iames masse was full of consolation. Theyr masse is ful of superstition. When S. Iames said Masse, the people resorted to receyue the sacrament. Whē they say Masse, the people resorteth to loke vpon onely, and to beholde the sacramente. And to conclude. S. Iames in his masse, had chri∣stes institution: They, in theyr masse, haue welnere nothing els but mannes inuention. Suche difference ye maye see, betwene S. Iames Masse and theyrs, O that Saint Paul were now alyue, & saw the behauoure,
and order of the prieest, at theyr masse. Thinke ye, that he woulde take it & accompt it, for the Lords supper? When he had espied, but one fault in the holy communion, amongst y• Corinthians, streyght waye he rebuked them, and called them backe to Christes institutiō. Thys (sayth he) I receyued of the Lord, and the same, I gaue ouer, vnto you. But if he saw the disorder that we haue seene, woulde he not be moued asmuche against vs now, as he was sumtyme, against the Corinthians? wold he not pull vs backe to the institution of Chryst, as he did them? Would he not say vnto vs, did I euer teache you, to minister the holy Communion, in a straunge laugage? did I euer teache you, to receyue the Com∣munion,
priuately to your selfe a∣lone, and so to disdayn, and to des∣pise your bretherne? Did I euer teache you, to minister the Com munion to the people in one kind? Did I euer teache you, to say Masse, or to receyue the Sacra∣ment for the people? Did I euer teache you, the idle folyes of your cannon? Did I euer teache you, to offer vp the son of God vnto hys Father? Did I euer teach you, an other propitiatorie sacrifice for sin, then that Christe once offered vpō the crosse? Did I euer teach you, to minyster the Lordes supper, wherin the people should nothing els but loke vpon, and beholde your doynges, wythout any kynd of knowledge or conforte? Did I euer teache you, to lyfte the sa∣crament ouer your head? Did I
euer teach the people, to fall down thereunto, and to worshyp they knowe not what? Be these the thynges, that I deliuered you? Be these y• thyngs, that I receiued of the Lord? This would Saint Paule say vnto vs, if he were nowe alyue. Thus would he reproue vs, and call vs to the standarde, and originall of the fyrste appointynge of the holy Sacrament. Oure owne inuentions, and phantasies, wherewyth we had filled the Masse, were so manye, and so grosse, that they quyte co∣uered, and shadowed the death of Christ, and the holye misteryes of our saluation. Therefore we coulde not truly say, these thinges Paule deliue∣red vnto vs, or these things Paule
receyued of the Lorde. Wherefore, good people, and derelye beloued bretherne, for as∣muche as we see, there haue  great and euident abuses, and er∣rours in the Masse, so plaine and so manifest, that no man, that hath reason, and wyll consyder them, can deny it. Let vs folow the coū∣sel of S. Paule, let vs returne to the ordinaunce of Christ, vnto the true standard that cannot fail vs. As it is not in the power of mā, to appoint sacraments: so is it not in the power of man, to alter or chaunge sacramentes. God wyll not be worshipped, after our phā∣tasies, and therfore, so oftentimes, he chargeth vs, in the scriptures: Non facietis quod bonum videtur in oculis vestris. Ye shall not do that thynge, that semeth good to
you in your owne syght: ye shall not tourne, neyther to the left hād, nor to the ryght: But what thing soeuer I bid you do, that only shal ye do. Your thoughts be not my thoughts, neyther be your wayes my wayes. For as farre as hea∣uen is from the earth, or the east from the west, so farre of, be your thoughtes from my thoughtes, & your wayes, from my waies, saith the Lorde. It is a daungerous thyng, for a mortall man, to con∣trolle, or fynd fault, wyth the wis∣dom of the immortall God. Ter∣tullian, an olde father of y• church, sheweth vs, the wilfulnes of mās hart, after it hath once enterpry∣sed, to presume a lytle agaynste Gods truth, and ordinaunce. Prae∣ scripturas faciunt, vt post,  contra scripturas faciunt▪
Fyrste saith he, they attempte sumwhat besyde the scriptures, to thentēt, that afterward, they maye gather courage and boldnes to do contrary to the scriptures. At the end they procead as far, as the Scribes and Pharisies, that for maintenaunce of theyr owne tradicions, despised and brake the commaundementes of God. For redresse therem, there is no better waye, then to folowe S. Paules councel here, and to haue recourse to Goddes holy worde. Saint Ambrose saith. Interro∣gemus Petrum: Interrogemus Pau∣lum, si verum volumus inuenire. If we will fynd out the truth, and be put out of doubt, saith Saint Am∣brose, let vs harken what Peter & Paule will say vnto vs. Saint Cyprian sayth. Hinc schismata oriuntut, quia caput non
quae, & ad fontem non reditur, & caelestis magistri praecepta, non seruātur. Hereof saith Saint Cy∣prian, aryse schismes, & diuisions, for that we seke not to the heade, nor haue recourse to the spryng, nor kepe the commaundementes of the heauenly master. Tertulli saith, Haec ratio contra omnen hae∣resim valet, hoc verū est, quod pri∣mum fuit. This reason saith he, is able, to confound al maner he▪ resies. That thing is true, yr was first appointed. O that our aduersaries, and all they that stand, in the defence of the Masse this day, woulde cō∣tente them selfe, to be tudged by thys rule. O that in all the controuersies, that lye betwen vs and thē, they woulde remyt the iudgemente,
vnto Godes worde. So shoulde we sone agree, & ioyne together: So shoulde we delyuer nothynge vnto the people, but that we haue receyued at Godes hand. And if there be any here, that haue had, or yt hath, any good o∣piniō of the Masse, I beseche you for Godes sake. euen as ye tender youre owne saluation, suffer not your self, wilfully to be led away: tunne not blyndlye to yur owne confusion. Thinke with your self, it was not for nought, that so ma∣ny of your bretherne, rather suffe∣red them selues to dye, & to abyde all maner extremitie, and cruelty, then they woulde be partakers of that thinge that you reken to be so holy. Let their death, let their as∣shes, let theyr bloud, that was so aboundantlye shed before youre
ies, sumwhat preuaile with you, and mout you. Be not ruled by your wilfull affections. Ye haue a good zeale, and mynde towardes God. Haue it, according vnto the knowledge of God. The Iues had a zeale of God, and yet they crucifyed the sonne of God. Searche the scrip∣tures, there shall ye fynde euerla∣styng lyfe. There shall ye learn to iudge your selfe, and your owne doinges, that ye be not iudged, of the Lorde. If euer it happen you, to be present againe, at the masse, thinke but thus with your selfe: what make I here? What profyte haue I of my doinges? I heare nothyng: I vnderstand nothyng: I am taught nothing: I receyue nothynge: Christe bad me, take: I take nothynge. Chryste bad me,
ate: I eate nothing. Christ ad me, drink: I drink nothing. Is this, the institucion of Christ? Is this, the Lordes supper? Is this, the right vse, of y• holy misteryes? Is this it, that Paule deliuered vnto me? Is this it, that Paule receiued of the Lorde? Let vs say but thus, vnto our selfe, and no doubt God of his mercy wil open our heartes, we shall see our er∣rours: and content our selfe, to be orded by the wisdome of God: to do that God will haue vs doo: to beleue that God will haue vs be∣leue, to worship that God wyll haue vs worship. So shall we haue comforte, of the hoy mysteries: So shall we receyue the fruytes of Chrystes death: So shall we be  of Christes bodye and bloud: S
shall Christ truly dwell in vs: and we in him: so shall all errour, be ta∣ken from vs: So shall we ioyne al together, in gods truth: So shal we all be able, with one hart, & one spirite to know, and to glorifie the only, y• true, and the liuing God▪ and hys only begotten sunne Iesus Christ to whom both with the holy ghost be all honour and glory for euer, and euer. Amen.
An Index or table of the most notable thinges and wordes conteined in thys work. A A  of the bread if they be worshipped it is dolatry. 141. they are vn∣nown of the peo . 141. b. Accidentium substā∣tia. 65. b doratiō of yr bread 137. b a new  138. very daunge∣rous. 139 Agnus . 128. b Albertus Pigghius. look Pighius. Altar must be made of ston, whi. 149. Antyquitye boasted in vain. 106 Antiquity of the pa∣pists religiō. 49. b Apostles knoledge in Mōtanus . 109 Apostles churche an infant. 111 Apl rom Pope to counsel forbod 93 argmentes gathe∣red of D. Cols wordsagainst he Pope most effec∣. 92 of the  ∣ble▪ 147 Argumēt of . 47 Argumēt of D. ▪ very , 110. b. of  ▪ touching y• church 111. b. propoded y Satum, vnpos∣sible
to be proued by the papistes. 4. b Asseueraciō trew is sufficient prou in the law. 46 Authorities, papists do forge whē they la. 41 B Baptim abused. 126 b. for the dead, & after yr dead, ibidē Baptim ministered at al times indiffe∣rently 108 Baptizynge for the dead. 92 Basil counsel erred, 91 Bishop of Constan∣tinople attempted the supremacy. 15 Bishop vniuersal. 47 Bishop vniuersall a∣gainst gospell and old canons, 110 Bishop onlye must cōsecrat the church why. 149 Bishop muste were purple sādals why 148. b. Bohemyshe people vnmercifully delt withall. 85 Bold offer of Sarū, 162 Bound not to dis∣pute. 75 Bread remaineth in the sacramēt. 140 Bread wourshiped, 137. b a new deuis 138. Idolatri. 139. b Bread sacramentall must be roūd, why 150 Bread sacramentall diuided in three, why. 156 Buers & Caluins reasons answered by the Papistes
how. 7 Camotenses. 64. b Canon of the masse. 135 Chalice must be of sil uer or gold. 150 Children sing in the church with men & wemen. 69. b Christs body not suf  blest alredi. 136. offred by the priest ibidem. Christ hath nied of our praiers. 136 Christs sacrifice for s euery day. 169. Christ and his?  no infants. 111 Christs flesh honora∣ble. 142. his  is to be  & eatē in hea∣uen. 143 Christ death applied vnto vs, howe 169. be▪ Church may not be halowed but of a bishop . 149 Church is ladi of her own lawes & hand∣maid of christ: 110. b Church an infant in thapostles tyme. 106. b Churche may not be reformed wt hout ge nrall consent. 114 Church can not , wh. 113 Church mai er 115 b Church only rule of our faith, papistes say. 117. b Clok goes trewhow so euer the  goes, 117. b Cole. look D. Cole. Commaūdemēts of God may not be broen. 108. b. Cōmunicatynge for the people by the priest. 168 Communiō refuiers
excommunicated 158. b. 97 Communion vnder one kind howe it began. 114. b Communion vnder one kind, grea a∣buse. 81. b Communion vnder one kynd, by E∣phesus counsel. 41 Communion vnder one kynd why. 112 149. b Communion vnder one kind of no an∣tiquit. 86. b Communion vnder one kind. 14. b vn der both . 600   . 67 b. 135 vnder o kind open . 135 Communion vnder both . 83. vnder  kīd n er allowed  ge nerall counsel. 84 Communion  both kinds. 6. b. Communion vnder both kinds. 85. b Communion geuen to infants. 127. b. to the dead. 128. trem end therof. 129 Communion euery day. 154. b. thrise onday. ibidem. licensed to Priests by the Pope. 97. b Conscientia . 97. 104 b Consecratiō is very difficult. 144 Consent general ne∣cessarye for refor∣mig y church. 114 Constantie of Pa∣pists. 77. b con̄sel  y . 83 91
openlye againste Christ and all the primitiue churche 6. b. Consuetudo. 53 b. Cōtinuans no good ground. 54. b Corporall must be of fyn linnen, why 149. b Corpus Christi day began. 138. b Corrupters of doc∣tors. 63. b. Councel generall of gretter authoritie with the papistes then the vniuersal ordinaūs of christ 84 Coūsel general, non is to be loot for. 80. b Counsell generall a∣boue the Pope in D. Coles opiniō, 91. b. Counsel inferiou to the Pope. 93 Counsell is but a re∣semblaunse of the church. 92. b Coūsel general what maketh. 89 Coūsel general may aswel be deceiued as particular. 92 Coūsels nothing re∣gardid by the pa∣pists for all theyr brags. 96. b Coūsel general haue erred. 87 Counsel of Cōstans against christ, 6. b Cranmer asscited to ome, how. 73. b Croun of a Priest must be shauen, why. 148 Cue of D. Cole. 66. b Cup is no ceremony lefull to be remo∣ued. 109 Cushion. 58 b
Custū refuted. 115. b Custum of scools. 16 Custum. 53. b Custum. 83. b D Darknes most este∣med of sum. 123. b Deaō preacher. 108 Demāds of D. Cole satisfyed. 39. b Demur made by D. Cole. Deuocion increased by vnderstanding the praiers. 71 Deuises of mā. 173. b Devises of mē may be altered▪ 107 papists at not. 13. b. 40 Disorders in ye churh wherbi they oght to be redressed. 121 Disputacion refused 75. 76. b D. Clemēt et book. 59. b D. Cole ashamid of his wryting. 35. b. fumish hastie. 37. a scholden. 38 D. Cole against Pig gius. 88 D. Cole agrieth not with . 84. b D. Cole confesseth papists broght ne∣ther script. doct. nor counsels in . Maries tim. 44. b D. Cole deceyued of the people. 78. b D. Cole forget of au∣thoritie. 41 D. Cole graunteth h s doctryn new and ours old. 106 D. Cole a lerner. 57 D. cole  apes. 100 is nothing  for the people. 101 D. Cole not the gret test papist. 91. b . Cole
both in diuinitie & D. Cole vanquished by hys own con∣fession. 48 D. Cole hath non of y• principal groūds to defēd his religiō 14. D. Coles demandes satisfied. 39. b D. Col lowd lye. 50 D. Coles redines at his cue. 66 b D. Coles substātiall argument. 110. b D. Oglethorps rea∣ding. 62 D. Smithz redig. 61 Doctors alledged bi D. Cole notwtstan∣ding his recog. 105 D. nams empty. 82 b D. old ar a good ba∣lanse of controuer sies▪ 82 Doctryn & reasōs of the Protestantes hyldish. 146. b Doctrin of the prote stāts in doubt how 74 Doctrin of y• papists new & ours old. 106 of y• papists 74. b E Eatīg & wourshipīg of christs bodi, both is in one place. 143 Ecclesiā apostolicam papists brag they are. 79. b Emperour vnder y• Pope. why. 112 Emperour vnder y• Pope as y• moe vnder the sun. 147 Ephesus counsel for∣ged. 41 Ephesusgeneral co selered. 87. that it was generall. 88 Errors of y• churche how they shalbe re formed. 116. 117. 121 Euidēs papisis haue non to shew, tha is . 55. b F
Facere in the words of y• supper signifieth to sacrifice, why. 150 Faith altered vp the papists. 77 Faith   to saluation. 146 Fals light vsed by D. Cole. 35. b Fig leaues. 98 Fifteen hūdred yers 106. Forgers of authori∣ties a y• papists. 41 of sound . . 12. b. 38 Futur tens fayrest shew of D. Coles lernig. 43. G against trā substant. 18 Gelasius mistakē bi Sarum. 62. b.  expounded by pa∣pists. 64. b Gelasius touchyn the cup. 109. b Gospell of Christ a∣bused. 126 Gregory against ∣niuersal . 110▪ Gregorie Bishop of Rome opinion of y• vniuersal . 47 b. 49. 50 Gregori B. of rome opinion of the su∣premacie. 15. Groundes to build soūd doctryn vpon ar iiii. 12 b 38. H. Hand burnt with a torch. 73. b to receiue the sacrament for an other. 169 isit not to re∣ceiue vnder both kinds D. Cole cō∣fesseth. 83. b Heresy horrible. 85 Headvniuersal of the church no wher for y• space of 600. yers after Christ. 50 Holiest things ma be abused. 126 Hol water must the people be sprinkled withall, why. 149
Hossius a maker of heesie, 85. b Host must be round why, 150 I Iames said masse at at Hierusalē 170. b Idolatry if bread re∣main in the sacra∣ment 139. b Iewel subscribed. 77 Ignoranse, hate of light, power of darknes. 71. b Ignoranse cause of trew deuociō. 70. b mother of al errors 70. b Image must be in the churche, why 113 Image inchurch for∣bodden. 97 Indiuiduum agum 165 Ifāt, was y• church in thapostles tim. 106. b. 111. Infant is the primi∣tiue church. 60 Infants receiue the communion 127. b Innouacion papists make none now, because all things ar altered to their hands. 80 Instant what. 51 Intent in consecra∣cion. 145 Innouacion how it oght to be made. 52 Inuencions of man 173. Iudge in a mans ow cause vnlaw∣full. 81 L Lāgage one, to pray in, through all na∣tions, why. 148 Languag straunge must be vsed in the
church, why. 149 Language straunge in the church, why 111. b. 113. b Lāguage vnknown in the churche. 133. Latera counsel au∣thor of the word of transubstant. 436 Latin ūg, sermo I∣talum. 68. b Law only defēce for papistes. 45. b Law vsed bp the pa∣pistes was nether according to diuine tie nor humanitie. 73 Legendes reding a∣gainst the counsell of Carthage. 97. b. is a faulte with D. Cole. 103. b Light hated of sum. 123. b of apes. 100 yon  like ignorant people. 71. b M Manicheus errour. 109 Marcionistes error, on to receyue for an other. 169 Mariage of priests. 81. b Maried man maye be no priest, why 112. b Masse priuat. 67 Masse priuat fit to be vsed, why. 112 Masse priuate was non in the church for y• space of. 600 yeres after Christ 152. in no aunciēt doctors. 155 Masse cā not be pri∣uate. 167, b Masse book against priuate masse. 155 Masses errour con∣fessed
by Pighius 81. b. Masse consisteth of four parts. 130. it is sautie by the pa pists . 131 hath ani abuses. ibidem. Masse nothing cō∣fortable to the hea rers. 134 Masse of a priest y•  a concuyn forbodden to be hard. 97. b Men wemen & chil∣dren syng in the church altogether 69. b fyrst named. when. 170. b Mithridates strata∣gem. 167. Montanus errour. 109 N Name of God abu∣sed. 126, Negatiue holden in this controuersie, by Sarum. 7. b Negatiue rested one by Christ. 46. b Negatiue questiō le∣ful to be rested on. 14. b. holden by Gregory. 15. b Negatiue impossible to be proued. 98 Negatiue, cā no law driue a mā to pro∣ue. 40. b Non uit. 56 Nullum tempus prae∣scribit regi. 54. b O Obstinate parson who. 13. 39. b Ordinaūces of god maye not be alte∣red. 107. deuysed by men maye be chaunged. ibidem Organs must be in
the churche, why. 113. b Originall synne in our ady. 97 P Papistes roght ne∣ther script. doct. nor  in . Maries tyme 44. b Papistes are not . 40. 13. b Papists reasons. 46 Papists arguments . 147 Papists alter theyr faith. 77 Papists vse   policie. 166 Papists dowting  the Pharisies. 74. b Papist doctrin new, and ours old. 106 Papists may not be  against. 72. b Papistes persuade nowe gentle and mercifull dealing 72. b Paralogismus à non causa vt causa. 41. b 42. b Paralogismus à secū∣dum quid ad sim∣pliciter. Pardons authoritie whens. 119 Patriarches iii. t rule y• church. 96. b Peter said masse at ome. 169 b. Pigghius what he was. 131. b Pigghius corrupter of doctors. 63. b Pighius accused by D. Cole. 87. b. de∣fended by 88 Policie of Mithri∣ates. 166 stamping 56. b Pope hath power ouer both swards why. 148. b
Pope hath the soue∣rainty ouer al  why. 148 Pope is aboue the Emperour, why. 112. is head of the church. why. 112. b Pope and emperor compared to y• sun and mone. 147. b Pope aboue the co sel. 93 Pope inferiour to a generall counsell in D. Cols mind. 91. b Pope maye no man iudge, why. 112. b. 113 Pope commits no simony, why. 113 Pope no head of the church 92. b Possession. 52. b Possessores malae fidei. 52. b. 55. b Prescription of a h dred yeres. 52. b Praiers in y• church must be in Hebrue, Griek, or Latin, why▪ 149 Praiers in a straūge tung. 108 Praiers in commun known tung. 68 Praier in the vulgar tung commanded by God. 110 Priest communica∣ting for the people 168 Priests mariage 81. Priest maye be no maried man, why 112. b Priest hath no pry∣uiledge aboue the people to receyue vnder both kinds 86 Priest muste shaue his  why. 148 Priest  sorcerers 170 Prist must  into
the chalice, why. 150. b. must wash his hands kis the altar, giue a sygh, &  his brest. &c. 150. b churche, who foloueth, er∣reth. 106. b Primitiue churches order lefull to be broken 108. b Primitiue church a∣gainst the papists 59. b. an infāt. 60 Priuat masse. 67 Protestants haue no lerning. 41. b prtestants doctrin light and chyldish 146. b Protestants reasōs sound. 150. b Proufssufficient are deduced out of on of the four princi∣pall groūds of re∣ligion. 12. b. 38 Proufs vsed by the papists. 46 Proufs brought by papists in . M. tyme. 44. b Purgatorye is cer∣tenly, why. 148. b R Reading of Sarum. 60. b Reading of scripturs tormenteth y• De∣uel. 71 Reason no defens for papists but onli∣law. 45 b Reasons of the pro∣testants chyldishe. 146. b Reasons of the Pa∣pists. 46 Reasons broght by papists in . Ma. tyme. 44. b Reasons of the Pa∣pists very strong. 111. b Reasons of extremi∣tie
vsed by the pa∣pistes howe then also haue ben an∣swered. 44. b Recgnizans. 60 Recognizans is D. Coles clook. 98. b. orbids him not to dispute. 99. nor to alledge approued doctours. 99. b Rēcognizans no let to D. Cole when he lift. 105 Redres of the errors of the churche. 121 Redres lefull in reli∣gion, what maner 174 Reformacion lefull, of what sort. 174. b. Reformacion leful is only by the scrip∣tures. 116. 117. 121 Reformacion me noon be had with∣out general consent 114 Religion of the Pa∣pistes of such an∣tiquiti, as we may well obiect, à prin cipio non fuit sic. 49. b. Rhetorik ground of Sarums serinos 130. commendable in the old Fathers 103. b Ridetur chorda. &c. 51. b Roabes of the masse from whens. 170 S Sacrament if it may be abusd. 126. 127. Sacrament must   with cō∣dicin, si ille conse∣crauerit. 145. Sacrament wour∣shiping perillous 144 Sacramēt vnder on kind, wh. 112 Sacrament  for an other, is he∣resie. 169
Sacramēts may ne∣ther appointed nor altered by man. 173 Sacrament, look cō∣munion. Sacrifice of Christe dayly. 169. b Sacriledge after e lasius opinion. 86 S. George a hors bak. 66. b Sandals of Purple must a Bishop wer why. 148. b Sarum burdened wt subscripcio. 78 Sarum mistaks e lasius perilously. 62. b Sarūs reading. 60 b Scholers froward & peruers. 58 Scripturs reding. 71 Scripture wresters. 64. b Scripturs ā not e. 115. b Scripture no defens for Papistes bu only law. 45. b Scripturs councels nor Doctors haue the Papistes any. 6 Scripturs onli to be ed in the churche 97 Serpent abused. 126 Seruice of y• churche in comun know tung. 68 Simon can not the Pope commit if he would. why. 113 Sires. 59 Stterer both in diuinitye & also in logi is d. Cole. 42 Sophisticacion a se∣cundū quid ad sim∣pliciter. 11 Sophisticacion à nō causa vt causa. 42. b Stamping of Pōpie 56. b
Statuimus, abroga∣mus. 66 Steuen Gardiners reading. 61. b. cor∣rupting of doctors 64. falsifiyng of Ge lasius. 65 Stratagem of Mi∣thridates. 166 Substantia accidentiū 65. b Substantia, subiectum & accidēs, vnknown of the people. 141 Supremacye attēp∣ted by the Bishop of Constātinople. 15 Supremacye of no necessitie, why. 50 b. of no antiquitie 50. b Supremacye of the Pope. 93 Supremacye resto∣red without scrip. Doct. or counsell. 45. b Sursum corda. 142. b Syllogismus of . Coles makīg. 47 T Talking against pa∣pisto. 72. b Traitors that draw theyr swordes a∣gainst their prince 73 Transubstantiation, how it began and when. 139. b Transubstantiation impugned. 60. b Transubstantiation impugned wyth mor auncient rea∣sons then defen∣ded. 43. when the worde was yrste hard of. 43. b Transubstantiation ouerthrown. 18 Treuth puts custum to sylens. 53. b Treuth refused of sū in all ages. 123. b Treuth vttered at vn
ware by D. Cole and Westō. 44 b Trident counsell. 81 Tung known in the church. 68 Tūg known to pray in, no ceremonye to be chaunge▪ 109. b Tūg vnknown miet to be vsed, why. 111 b. 113. b Tung straūge in the Tchurch. 108 Tung straūge must be vsed, why. 149 Tung vnknown in y• church. 133 Tung one in all na∣tions to praye in, why. 148 V Vats of the papists of theyr doctours. 167 Verò for verè a sore error. 63 Vnderstanding of y• praiers. 70. b Vniuersal bishop. 47 Vniuersall bishop a∣gainst gospel and old canons. 110 Vntreuths by heaps made by D. cole. 75 Vulcanus honored of the Romains. 96 W Wemen baptyz. 108 Wemen sing in the churche together with men. 69. b Wemens wils. 58 b. Weston vttereth treuth vnwares. 44 Wresters of script. 64. b Wourshiping of the sacrament. 137. b. a new deuis. 138. it is daungerous. 139 Z Zeal must be accor∣ding to knoledge▪ 176 Zeal for the people hath D. Cole no 101 FINIS.
¶ Faultes escaped in the printing. FOl. 6. line, 19. rede for father, farther. fol. 7. line. 10. rede we haue red. fol. 21 line. 12. rede content, li. last rede coū∣sell. fol. 29. line 14. rede affectually. fol. 30. line. 13. rede pronounced. fol. 35. line 16. rede by the. fol. 36. syde. ii. line▪ 3. rede yours. fol. 40. line. 13. rede should. fol. 5 line. 2. rede negatiue fol. 53. line. 7. rede graunt. fol. 55. line. 3. rede to be. fol. 56. yde. ii. line. 15.  foot. fol. 64. line. 20. rede dedit. fol. 67. side. ii. li. 22. rede lear∣ned. fol. 71. syde 2. line rede ye may. fol. 76 syde. 2. line rede farther. foiio. 105. line. 3▪ rede to be broken, line. 14. rede so were, fol. 116. line. rede. id esse. fol. 118. line. 15. rede triacle. FINIS.
