14929 99844927 9785
THE HISTORIE OF CALANTHROP AND LVCILLA. CONSPICVOVSLY DE∣monstrating the various mutabilities of Fortune in their loves, with every severall circumstance of ioyes and crosses, fortunate exploites, and hazardous adventures, which either of them sustained be∣fore they could attaine the pros∣perous event of their wished aimes. By IOHN KENNEDIE. Gratis Corycio, mihi nectar Castalis vndae, Mnemosynes natae, nocte dedere novem. EDINBVRGH Printed by Iohn Wreittoun, and are to be sold at his shop a little beneath the Salt-Trone. 1626.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, TRVELIE NOBLE, MAGNANIMOVS, AND worthy Lord, Sir DONALD MACKAYE, of STRA∣NEVER Knight, Lord Colonell, &c. MY LORD, I Have (reposing in your Lordships in∣genuous nature) assumed the audaci∣tie for two respects, to present these my Neophiticall labours vnto your Lord∣ship. The first reason moving me so to doe, is this: Each generous minde re∣putes your Lordship to be well affected towards every act or aime (being vertuous) of whatsoever qualitie. The which report hath much imboldned mee (though meanly acquainted) to offer out of the indigencie of my illiterate skull, this litle mite, assuredly expecting (that since it proceeds of a loving & liberal mind, that your L. will accept thereof (though it be not of such value) even as well as of theirs (who out of the abundant riches of their prudent and learned experiences) doe vsually throw moe talents into the The saurie of your Lordships praeexcellent and admired worth. The second reason in∣citing me, is this, That in regard this my Poeticall Ex∣ordium, is the first perspicuous invention of my stirile braine: and therefore consequently fearing the insuffici∣encie
thereof, I esteemed it my best to make choyce of your Lordship, as my worthy Mecoenas, whose gran∣dour, and great respect, is of sufficient power to palliate all the infirmities of this Pamphlet, yea and to shrowd the very same from the impetuous obloquie, and prepo∣sterous scandall, of the most calumnious carper, or Saty∣ricke Inveigher. Therefore since for your Lordship I did it, and to your Lordship I direct it: then good my Lord vouchsafe to patronize it. By which means I shall prove fortunate in my attempt, & your Lordship (as you are of every worthy one already, much respected) shal al∣so of me be more & more reverenced, & intirely & infi∣nitly affected, as I have special reason, being tyed many wayes thereto by dutie-bound obligation: of the which I esteem this last none of the least, and shall perpetually acknowledge it so to be, wishing your Lordship (in re∣quitall of the same vndeserved benefite) the perfect frui∣tion of each terrestriall happinesse here, and immortall felicitie hence, vowing likewise solemnly (during life) to continue, Your Lordships dutie-bound and obsequious servant, whom your Lordship may absolutey dis∣pose of, Iohn Kennedie.
TO EACH READER OF whatsoever qualitie or condition. IVdicious and Courteous Reader, knowing (by many experiences) that those who are most pru∣dent, learned, or capable, are generally ever most favourable and sparing in their censures. I there∣fore have presumed to commit this Poeme to thy view, in∣treating thee, that though perhaps it doe not give thee every way content, and that in respect it is voyd of ornate or elegant phrase, and not of an Heroicke stile: and therfore not answe∣rable to thy expectation, nor my desire: yet since it is (though not as I would, yet such as I could) allow me this gaines for my paines, that it passe without checke. But after the per∣vsing hereof, if thou bee so benevolently disposed, (though not to commend the worke) yet to approve my aime, I shall for that vndeserved favour, ever esteeme my selfe infinitely bound to thy courtesie. But if thou prove towards mee an invective Critick, I am enforced to tel thee, that Momists are little or nothing respected. And Zoylus, though through car∣ping at Homerus his workes, acquired the name of Homero∣mastix (which is Homers scourge) yet was he laught at for his paines, because he disapproved the worke which hee could neither amend nor paralell. It likewise was reputed a cynical humour in Phocion (though hee was Plato his scholler) to carp at every man that wore shooes, because he himself went alwayes bare-footed. Likewise let me advise thee, if thou be a Poet, that thou doe not, with Theon, satyrickly inveigh at those who are thy betters, because thou thy selfe comest short of their worke, and therefore canst neither merite nor attaine the like commendation. Grudge not therefore because that the Poetical talent is not bestowed vpon every one alike, but rather endevour through study (if thou be so vertuously incli∣ned) to extend the Talent thou hast allowed thee. But if thou be illiterate, and yet aime to censure (if thou hadst vn∣derstanding) this Poeme invectively, I will advise thee for
thy profite (though I have small reason so to doe, in respect of thy malevolentinent) to desist, lest thou give me occasion to say, Ne Sutor vltra crepidam: or, smiling at thy peevish humour, intreat thee to meddle onely with such things as come within the compasse of thy capacitie. Yea, though thou be indifferently well affected, yet if ihou be vnlearned, I dare hardly adventure to come within the circuite of thy censure, lest either through misconstruing the subiect, or maimedly reading the verse, thou value my labour at too low a rate. But vnhappy hee (and worthy to bee esteemed the Prince of fooles) who willingly consents to vnder-goe the censure of those who are both besotted with ignorance, and of a Saty∣rick disposition. Yet expecting the best of every Reader, be∣cause I by those, no otherwayes have deserved, I thus con∣clude, which every one that is capable must allow, as a Di∣lemma, that since love ever aimes at a correspondencie, (not∣withstanding of the inequalitie of persons. For as the old Scottish Adage goeth, Love cannot stand on the one side. So Reader, I whatsoever thou be) according to thy censure of these my labours, rest towards thee affected, even thus, Thine as thou meritest, Iohn Kennedie. Philetaeros.
In Authorem Encomiasticon. NOn Venerem Coam melius puto pinxit Apelles, Praxitilesve prius Gnidiam de marmore duxit Nec mage dulce melos, Siculo cita vela profundo Detinuit, Kenedo fluit hic quam nectar ab ore, Harmonicisque modis castos describit amores, Suavis huic patriis manans de vitibus humor. Ritè Caledoniis numeris includere versus Gestit, & ad patrios modulos benè verba referre, Nec sinit indecores nostras, magis esse Camenas. Scilicet Aonidum chorus, hunc, super arduae vectum, Per iuga Parnassi, gelidique cacumina Pindi, Castalios gustare lacus, vmbrasque subire, Lauriferi nemoris, seeretaque Phocidos antrae Permittit, Comitemque sacri iubet ordinis ire, Inter & illustres nomen meruisse poetas, Quotquot Hyanteos latices hausere Caballi Ergo per hunc, veteri Coaque, Gnidoque relictâ Vecta Caledonias Venus aurea venit ad oras, Barbara nec dici meruit, velut indiga cultus, Lingua Britanna, suo referens sermone libellos. Galterus Bellendinus. Ejusdem aliud. HIc Venerem Venerisque doces Kennede clientes, Ore verecundo verba Britanna loqui, Vlla nec in toto prurit lascivia libro, Non minus est nobis, pagina, vita, proba. Galterus Bellendinus
In Kenedum Authorem. GOrdius a Kenedo laxatur nodus amoris, Nexibus haud ruptis ense, sed arte datis, Pingitur alma Venus non sic pinxisset Apelles, Ced cut Naso, splendet amoris Epos. Nil miri expertum quod cantet amator amorem Cura quûm Musas perpete captus amet. R. Fairlaeus. The Mappe of this Muse. REader I wish thee hencefoorth to refraine, To read the rupturs of madde O vids braine What canst thou find in al these lines of his But flatrings, smilings, or a baudie kisse, Vaine wenching, ieasting, dallieing, iealousies, Fainde sights, deceats, and Venus vainities, But view this pamphlet, and thy witt shall finde Wise precepts and instructions for thy minde. Sweet peace of thought, the secreet ioy of heart, Chaste modest loue, void of all vitious airt, Rare continence, adornde with vertues shame, Still lothing loue that lecherie doth name Loe heere are lynes of passing pleasant grace, Which modest maids may read but blush of face Those are the first fruits of a braue ingyne, Fortelling what his spirit will proue in time. Then goe briefe booke and Momus seed defye, Bee not affraid of Criticks base envie, For to thy fame this boldly I relate. No lines of loue shall liue a longer date. Patrick Mackenzie
THE HISTORY OF CALANTHROP AND LVCILLA. ONE Summers day young Calanthrop sate downe In pleasant grove, hard by a crystall brooke, A Bay by vmbrage, Flora by her gowne Gave such content, that great delight he tooke: For here his smell was pleas'd, so was his sight, His body safe from Phoebus scorching light. Zephyrus motion 'mongst the fruitfull sprigges, Made fall the Cherry, Apple, Prune and Peare: Feath'red confed'rates sate on tender twigges, Ready prepared for to please his eare: These wing'd Musitians strain'd their pretty throates, In divers Ditties warbling forth their notes. In yonder rock sits Niobe immur'd, Here Philomela 'gins for to lament, Poenaean Daphne there growes vp obscur'd, Phaetons sisters likewise doe relent, And with their Amber teares through barke and rine, Their losse and brothers fall seeme to repine. Looke, Adons floure, yet of Vermilion dye, Reteines the staine received by his blood, The silver teares fell from faire Venus eye Vpon the leafe stand yet, as then they stood, For, seeing how the Boare her loue had slaine, Shee weeping kist, and kissing't weeps againe. Narcissus next, presents it to his view With drouping head, as he in fountaine gaz'd, In signe he drencht, yet is it wet with dew, Without a breach, it's head cannot be rais'd, Of colour white, small savour doth possesse, He foolish faire, his death doth well expresse▪
Turning by chance, his eye aside he cast, And there perceiues a fountaine richly fram'd Of Iet-black Marble, snow-white Alabast, Nature nor workman neither to bee blam'd: The worke was portraits, as I shall descrive, Through liquid motion seem'd (though dead) alive. There Mars and Venus might you see insnar'd In Vulcans net, still toyling to getout, Both of them vowing for to bee repair'd, In taking vengeance on the polt-foot lout, Phoebus peepes in, shame sits on Venus cheeke, Iu Scarletroabe, Mars strength is now to seeke. A statue next, Orpheus doth represent, His harpe in hand, Sylvanus doth approach, With Sylvans, Fauns, and Satyrs of intent, To trip and daunce the woodie Nymphes incroach, The tops of trees reverberate the ground, Who, if they rootlesse were, would daunce a Round. Even as the Ivie doth infold the Oke, Right so Pygmalion can his Statue close, Twixt breast and armes, that scarce he leasure tooke To view it well, for kissing't mouth and nose. It seemes on him to smile with comly grace, And still the water makes them move apace. Next, sits Arion on a Dolphins backe, The light-foot Nercids, tripping on the sand: He playes, the Dolphins tumbling, dauncing make, His speciall aime is to attaine the land. Twixt sea and shore, him tosse they to and froe, Though not indeed, by water seeme they so. Then greedie Midas, sencelesse in his sute To Bacchus made, that what he toucht in gold, Should quickly turne, his Asses eares repute, Midst gold halfe starv'd, he heavens implores, behold, The response bids go bathe in Pactol's streame, Thy vertue losse, thy former state redeeme.
See how At'lanta and Hippomenes, By foot-course try most swiftly who can run, Venus gold apples of Hisperides, The Lasse perceives lye glistering gainst the sunne. First one, an other, before the third she catch, The Lad prevailes, and winnes her to his match. As Icar soares with artificiall wings, His father cries, Sonne, keepe a lower gate; Oft-times ambition late repentance brings, His waxen plumes, shake loose through Titans heat. Whilst Dedalus an equall course still craves, The sea his sonne of flight and breath bereaves. Grim-fac'd Medusa, next, with Snakie head, Lookes all imbrewd in Serpents loathsome gore, The vipers seeme, by biting, make her bleed, Such is the water-worke I shew before. Those that beheld her, turned were to stone, So are they here, save Calanthrop, each one. Paris on Ide, three goddesse him beforne, Stands doubting which of them to giue the ball. Pallas bids wit, Iuno gold, nere forlorne, Venus faire Helen height, and gained all. Gold he reiects, Prudence no whit prevail'd, Bewitching beautie so his heart assail'd. Last, Venus sonne stands hood-winkt, from his bow He shafts forth sends at randone through the aire, Without respect both whom he hit or how, If hee doe hit at all, is all his care. None can evite all-conquering Cupids sting The base-borne beggar, nor the royall king. This grove Gargaphiae iustly might be cal'd, Save that a Dian doth it not containe, Nor Cadmus Oye, whose head with hornes impal'd, For timelesse viewing of the chastest traine, Precipitate Acteon of his rutblesse hounds, For Fatall looke, received Fatall wounds.
Whilst Calanthrop thus gaz'd, him thought he heard Musickes sweet sound arrest his hearing sence, Hee turnes and sees approch, a lovely guard Of Damosels, yet knew not their pretence, His anxious thoughts import a tim'rous minde, Himselfe he shrouds an Ivie-bush behinde. By this those Nymphes at fountaine doe arriue, Their instruments they lay apart, and then Who can their Mistres first deroabe, they striue, This takes away her roabes, that comes agen. Thorow the bush, still Calanthrop doth prye, Their trickes he doth with small content espye. One with a key vnlockes the fountaine gates, And now the fairest doth the streame embrace, Shee warmes the spring, the spring her heat abates, Her Iv'rie body doth the fountaine grace. Shee ioyes to bathe, but Calanthrop's afraid, Poore malcontent he to himselfe thus said. Oh heavens (said he) must I an Acteon prove, This cursed Dian then is every where: Infort'nate youth, what fatall chance did move Thee at this time vnto these woods repaire. Remed'lesse grieves, I finde are most obscure, What Fates decree, we humanes must endure. But oh, if one might possibly require, Or cite those Fates to render their account Before great love, what matter then in fire (If once reveng'd) in smallest ash be burnt. But woe (aye me) without controll they still Dispose of us, we must obey their will. Now there Megaera and Alecto come For to coact my metamorphosis, But stay you Furies, sure I will by some Vn-usuall tricke, you disappoint in this. Now with his sword to rob he doth intend Himselfe of life, which should his life defend.
And as the point he presents to his breast, Take courage wofull Calanthrop (said he) This heart of thine where earst did sorrows rest, Now at one thrust shall quickly bee made free, And this braue act shall eternize thy name, Who death preferres before a living shame. Mean while that maid, whom he Megaera thought Taking her fellow by the hand, did say, Cousin, by your advice we here are brought, Lets turne in time lest in these woods we stray: Or shall we goe and make us pleasant posies, For here's good store of Violets and Roses. This their discourse did suddenly denood Him so of sence, that still hee did surmize Hee dream'd: for such an vnexpected good As this, he thought could hardly sympathize With his thrice more then miserable state, Which winds with grones, would through the world regrate By this his bloud begins againe retire, Yet dare he not allow his eyes their due, But still he lookes, and looking doth admire, This happy change he cannot thinke be true, But to confirme what he before hath seene, Even him beside vpon a flourie greene, These wel-fac'd Furies who of late dismaid Him now begin againe to recomfort, So that his furious enterprize he staid, And rests content to see them make such sport. For whilst their Lutes, a Base or Tenour sound, Their voyce in Alts sweet musicke doe abound. Though that a man through melancholy mad Were so ore-gone, that he could not abide No companie, nor musicke for to glad His sp'rits, yet such Musitians would assyde Soone banish grief, & by their heavenly voyce, The saddest heart that ever was reioyce.
Now one of those, belike, of speciall worth, Her selfe advances, and her voyce doth raise, Her brave intent thus prosecutes shee forth, Which was to sing vnto her Mistres praise. The rest applaud in hearing her rehearse This Dittie which herselfe had put in verse. THE DITTIE OF A MAID. MAiestick Iuno iealous was, As Io well did finde, Her Cow-heard Argus sight surpasse All mens, yet was made blinde. Through Morpheus aid, and Syrinx note, Asleepe he fell, his charge forgot. Vulcans faire wife the wanton plaid With moe then Mars, you know, At last the Smith her well repaid For his cornuted blow. The Cent'nell Gallus he neglected, So Mars his master him reiected. Chaste Dian iustly may be taxt Of monstrous crueltie, Who for one looke so angry waxt As could indure to see. A man vsde, vnhappy wife First hornd the man, then tooke his life. Ioves braine-bred daughter, much ador'd Of Troians: made descend From Heavens Palladium, which instor'd them still, and much defend Their Citie: yet for all her wit The w Greeke removed it.
Theres one whose beautie well may bee Compared to Ioves Queene, No envie, nor no iealousie Is, or hath, with her been. All mortals may her praise proclaime, LVCILLA is this Ladies name. Venus was faire, yet had a stain, Faire Helen had the same, Into her face a spot some faine: But such hath not this Dame. Lucilla's faire, without disgrace, No inchast spot is in her face. The Huntresse chaste, might well admit This Lady of her traine, No cruell nor no cholerick fit, Doth in her heart remaine. She in this gift, her sexe exceeds, Chaste are her thoughts, her words, her deeds. If prudent Pallas were on earth, Her equall should she finde For solid wit: as for rare birth, Pallas surpast her kinde. Yet had Lucilla Troy protected, No forraine force had them eiected. Each goddesse for one qualitie, You see are still extold Should then not shee, in whom agree all graces, be inrold In scrolles of fame? since free from fault, Let all the earth her thus exalt. A Iuno lacking iealousie, A Venus stainlesse faire, A Dian without crueltie, For wit a Pallas rare. Luciila's vertues shine as cleare, As Phoebus in his highest spheare.
HER song thus ended, presently one calles, So they retire their Mistres to attend. This maid who cal'd, whereas the Spring devalles Still staid since first Lucilla did descend Into the Bathe, where she hath staid so long, That they'r afraid, her too much bathing wrong At her egresse, the statues seeme to weepe, For woe that faire Lucilla must depart, Which matchlesse treasure they wold gladly keep. Now from their eyes the water drops by art. Likewise the water downe her body trilling, As loath to part: last on her feet stands billing. Till that the Aire, more subtill element, His place doth claime, which yet the water holds, But now that raine, by Aeols force halfe spent, Which yet remaines, one in a cloath infolds, And so leaues Aire, & Water, midst their store, To trye whose interest greatest was before. Quoth Neptune, brother Aeolus, I may You iustly taxe, of breach of brotherhood, Who most enioyes Lucilla night and day, Not so content, with Vesta you collude, Still to prevent her wish'd approach to me, For Brookes and Springs are mine, as is the Sea. Then Aeole thus, with boystrous voyce reply'd, Neptune, Lucilla's not a fish belieue, Nor can with finnes, thy weltring waves divide, Nor is she Sea-Nymph, therefore do not grieue She leaue thy home, by nature cold and wet, By me she liues, though Vesta's part were set. Neptune replies, Lucilla liues by you? You'l make her then a Salmond fish indeed, For th' Aire those fish some say their food allow, And by report they on nought els do feed. But she's no fish, nor fowle, nor bird that sings, For as she gills doth lack, so doth she wings.
My mates (quoth Vesta) may not I as well Some interest claime into this louely lasse, Since her, and such, for to sustaine I feele Vpon my wombe the crooked plow oft passe, And soript vp, reintegrates with gaine To Bacchus wine, and vnto Ceres graine. Now came Acmonides the Cyclop swift, And them commands in Vulcans name, leaue off Such friv'lous talke, els by some suddaine shift, His master would them chastice: him they scoffe, And bad him tell his master, they regard No whit his message, far lesse such reward. For (quoth they) though his region be aboue Ours plac't, yet doth he beare no rule ore us, And no superior saue the mightie Iove, Will we acknowledge, also tell him thus, Choler abounds most in a furious beast, But in Lucilla is his interest least. Yet stay (said Vesta) let vs not despise His pow'r: for, when foolish Phaeton fell, I got a hot memento, to be wise, Which yet my scorched Lybia can tell. For guiltlesse I try'd then, his fierie force, Choler no reason yeelds, nor hath remorse. And Aeole likewise you'l confesse, I hope, You must giue place to Vulcans thundring clap; Neptune likewise for all his boundlesse scope. Is not content such in his bosome wrap, For sure the habite of immod'rate heat Will watry Tethys to repine excite. Now Vulcans selfe into their hearing roares, And terribly midst fierie flames appeares, Thorow the clowds he in his chariot soares, At such a sight, the hearts of humans feares. And now twixt Aeole and the god of flouds, He lights, and leaues his Chariot mongst the clouds,
My friends (quoth Vulcan) will you play me so? Shall I've no part in faire Lucilla here? In rationall, and sensitive you know, And vegitative creatures, still I beare A part with you: why then not so in this? Who count before their Hoast, they count amisse. But yet you may (perhaps) mistake mee much, To dominiere in such, I doe not use, So then I trust, since that my humour's such, Me as copartner you will not refuse. By nature shee participates of all Vs foure: yet t'one must she be most in thrall. Let's therefore trye who hath this rule supreame, Vesta shall bee disburdned of this charge, Melancholie in her is not extreame, Nor yet shall he who rules the rivers large. Beare soveraigne rule: so let him not contest, For flegme, in age, it selfe best manifest. Then Neptune thus spake in a chafing rage, I hope one Venus Vulcan may suffice, Lucilla's wit, her choler doth asswage, Therefore to him doth not belong this prize, To Aire then yeeld her, as we ought in dutie, Since Sanguines onely doe possesse such beautie. Thus then agreed Vulcan for Aetna makes, Aeole doth still 'bove sea or earth abide, For hee, you know, a locall mansion lackes, Neptune returnes, to rule his waters wide: Vesta prepares herselfe to give account, How farre her yearely increase doth amount. BVt now, to faire Lucilla must I turne, Whom maids, in rich apparrell, gladly cloath, Shee homeward tends, whereat the woods doe mourne, Calanthrop likewise, wood and fountaine both Bids now farewell, and in Lucilla's quest He goes, which if attaind, he thinkes him blest.
Ov'r hilles and vales, through meads and dales hee runnes, No steepie mountaine may his passage let: At last hee sees her, and at first two Sunnes, Of which the brightest on the earth is set. Hee thinkes he sees, his obiect him deceives, Againe hee lookes, a womans face perceives. But such a face, the earth yeeldes not another, For matchlesse beautie, and behaviour brave: No Naiad, Driad, no nor Cupids mother, In lovelinesse, compare with her may have. Nature her made in Venus mould to sit, Amending now, what shee did then omit. LVCILLA HER Description. Even such she was: Her haires gold wyre vnwynd Resemble right, which carelesly shee hung In greene silke-lace, with silver wrought, confynd Over her shoulders: but her face no tongue Can giue the due: her brow is Cupids throne, Where hee, vnseene, delights to sit alone. Her eyes like sparkling starres in frostie night, Her nose even such as lovely Leda had, Her partie-coloured cheekes, grac't with delight, Like Lillies mixt, with Rose, in Crymson clad. Her lips sweet Rubie-red, box-like inclose Her pearle-like teeth, till she to smile dispose. Her breasts as white as those two Swannes which draw Venus by coach, to Paphos lovely hold, Her hands like hers, Achilles aeath fore-saw, Yet could not brooke the touch of water cold, For though she dipt the boy the flood beneath, His heele kept dry, which was in end his death.
Her feet like Thetis which none can remarke, The print therof, even where she newly walkt, Her pace like Iuno's, when in Ida parke With Pallas, and the Queene of Loue, she talkt. In fine, her better Nature never wrought, Her shape can hardly be conceiv'd by thought. THis rare admir'd sole quintescence of kinde, With all her maids, were now come to a place, Hard by the sea, where as they vse, they finde Their Bark and Boat-men waiting, but their pace Hath been so swift, that through great heat even there They'r forc'd sit downe, to breathe and take the aire. Now Calanthrop approches to be briefe, For Cupid wounded vnawares his heart, He sees their aime, and sees it to his griefe, He findes their Barke: this aggravates his smart. Yet at the Boat-men doth hee now enquire, If they'l transport him, and receiue his hire. Whereto they answer, Good sir, please you heare, This Barke belongs vnto the loveliest Dame That this day liues: who now belike is neare Vnto this place, and wee her servants came Her to attend: els willingly we would Receiue you sir, if any way we could. My friends (sayd hee) tell me where is your course If so in friendship I intreat you may: For it is like that by a briefe discourse You giue content, and I be pleas'd to stay, In court'sie sir, so much will wee you show, To yonder land lyes opposite we goe. There comes the Lady, so if you acquire Her owne consent, without reproach wee can Yeild you content: so lest the time expire, Put forth your sute: for bee assur'd no man Shall you refuse, to trannsport without wage, For you're but one, and yonder comes a Page.
This Page delivers him two letters sent By some his friends, which doth import great haste, Yet 'tis too late: for now his heart was lent Els-where: for his affections all were plac't In faire Lucilla, who her Barke stands by, And now to enter doth herselfe apply. Whilst Boat-men striue to make their Barke cohere To land: for their faire Ladies greater ease, A maid comes running, with exceeding feare, And to her Lady thus spake, Madame please, I've seene a man, or Incubus belike, And as she spake, her breast with hand did strike. Looke how a maid confynd in narrow way, 'Mongst steepie rockes, finding a Dragon sleep, How tim'rously shee'l stand: yet no delay Her frighted heart can brooke, for now to weepe Doth nought availe: right so with feare now fild, Shee ran away, as though shee thought be kild. But now the Mar'ners to relate begin Vnto Lucilla, how a brave youth sought By them to haue transport her Barke within, Take what they pleas'd for hire, he cared nought, A Gallant braue, a stranger we him thinke, Loe yonder comes he 'longst the river brinke. Now Calanthrop a thousand wayes is vext, Strange cogitations doe him so turmoyle, He cannot stay, to goe he is perplext, Lest through presumption he receiue the foyle. But, goe he must, how ere she him repute, Loue so commands, thus doth he her salute. FAirest on earth, wil't please you to allow Me who's a stranger for to haue transport Into your comp'nie, I solemnly vow, If you be pleas'd to grace me in such sort, In your defence, command so when you list, I'le hazard life, and if I dye, I'me blest.
For know, deare Lady, my adoes are great, Even such wherein consist my blisse or baile, So, if I stay, the Destinies doe threat Me with such death, as makes my heart to quaile, Even such a death, that whilst I liue, I'le dye, And though I death desire, death will me flye. Therefore sweete Nymph, since I haue told you plaine, Beatifie me, by your generous grant, So shall I still your servant true remaine, Whereof with credite I may iustly vaunt, For such a Mistresse hath no mortall wight, Gainst Mars himselfe, I dare maintaine by fight. Lucilla, all this while attentively Remarkt his speech, and felt she knew not what, A more intire respect then vsually She heretofore to any bore, whereat Aggriev'd, her selfe of fondnesse doth reprove, For she as yet ne're felt the force of love. Yet this respect she caries to the youth, I hope, anone, shall purchase him his fraught, Now the sweet Organ of her lovely mouth, Vtters such words, as might haue Merc'rie taught: Which words, from out Loves lethagrie, awake Young Calanthrop: for thus to him she spake. SVch titles sir, I you intreat, reserve As you give me, for some of more desert, For, through selfe-loue, many from honour swerve, As those report in Nature most expert, And if ambition once the heart subdue, Honour, wit, vertue, bid that heart adiew. It may be Sir, that you repute this strange, That vndeserved, many will assume Prerogatives: and badly doe exchange Vertue with vice, such is ambitions fume: Those late repentance, make their plumes decline, Yet they ne're strive their hum ours to refine.
Let this suffice then, now as to your suite Sir, you shall know, that we vse not permit Men in our comp'nie, lest through scand'lous bruit Our spotlesse names in question come, but yet Those Mar'ners you perhaps esteeme as men, Yet are they Eunuchs, though in number ten. But lest your losse through our default accresse, And we prove guiltie of your overthrow, We will for this time, our strict vse represse, And for your weale, our hazard vndergoe, Since you're a stranger, then in charitie, We should you aid, if we may lawfully. For this, Calanthrop renders thousand thankes, And on his knee offers her hand to kisse, Which she refus'd: now each in their own rankes Goe boord the Barke: but ô what ioy by this Doth Calanthrop conceive! & now their saile They hoise, for why, they have a prosperous gale. Now, being imbarkt, Neptune begins to ioy That he hath gaind which he of late was reft, No wrinkling wave vpon his brow t'annoy Them now is seen: no swelling surge is left Vpon the Oceans face, but like to balme The seas appeare now, through a pleasant calme. Lucilla now the stranger plac't hard by Herselfe: and seeing he so silent sate, Smiling, began she to enquire him why He lookt so sad, or what he cogitate. Whilst he so sate into a silent muse, Whereat asham'd, himselfe doth thus excuse. MAdam, by nature I'me melancholy, Yet doe I think by casuall accident, This humour much more is infus'd in me, Which if I could, I gladly would prevent; But so it is, I'me forc't to taste the soure And bittet sap, whilst others smell the floure.
For know deare sweet, the Fates doe so ordaine, Whilst others ioy, that I in woe must waile, The blinde-borne Archers shaft, I entertaine My heart within: this makes me looke so pale, And which is worse, with griefe I pine and mourne, She lovelesse lives, mids Cupids flames I burne. And yet in truth, thus farre I must confesse, I silent grieue, for such I never shew To her directly, neither did adresse My selfe to sute such, for I thought I knew Already, that I labour would in vaine, And poure forth plaints to one would me disdaine, Yet since I see that silence will redound To my great losse, likewise in such a case, It is not requisite, lest I confound My selfe, and so my fortunes all intrace In grizely lab'rynth of pale-looking woe, I'le speake in time, heavens aid me thereinto. The Mar'ners all this time were sleeping neere, And glad to rest, for they out-waked were. Lucilla's maids apply'd themselues to heare The Page discourse, no longer time deferre Would Calanthrop, but since the time so serves▪ Proceedes: yet trembling feare possest his nerves. For he was feard the Mar'ners might awake, Or that the maides might to his speech advert, He likewise feard Lucilla faire might take Exception by his words, and so insert His name and hopes in scrolles of pale reiect, Yet he resolues, this speech to her direct. THrice fairer then the fairest that doth breath, Ortrampe downe Tellus by their harmlesse foote, More worth to me then life, do not in wrath This as presumption vnto me impute, That I, sore loue-sick, must thy pitty crave, For thou it's onely must me kill or save.
Thou, whose Idea in my heart is fixt So firmly, that no death can it remoue, Let thy great beautie be with mercie mixt, Pittie is cal'd the ornament of loue. Pittie those shrowds, disdaine would whip with roddes, It's pittie onely, makes vs like to goddes. Sweet lovely faire, please you remember right, When I of you my transport did obtaine, I told you that my stay would marre my spright, And through transport I should lost ioy regaine: So true it is, for since you shew such grace, You gave me life by looking in your face. For such like matter I ne're thought vpon, As of transport, but glad was to conceale My love, vntill such time as there was none Hard by, to heare what I to you reveale: For since, sweete loue, I saw you in the wood, I still esteem'd you my sole earthly good. Even then when you did richly benefite The colding spring, with touch of your faire hide, The fountaine bathe within, for to repeate What ioy the whole spectators were beside Did then conceive, would scarcely purchase trust, But as for me, appeare no way I durst. For whilst I on the fountaine statues gaz'd, You marcht so swift with all your lovely bond, That I, by such great beauties much amaz'd, Into a bush, hard by, my selfe abscond, And all the while you did the bathe inure, I silent sate with small content I'me sure. Cause I Diana absolute esteem'd You: for such beautie humanes not possesse, As you enioy: so wisht I be exeem'd From such like comp'nie: lest that such distresse Might me befall, as him who wore Harts horne First on his head, then by his dogges was torne.
But when I saw that dangers all were past, And that you were a humane creature, When you were gone, I follow'd after fast, Loves fierie faggots so my heart combure, Such bait gave Cupid on a guilded hooke, I could not stay till I you over-tooke. So now, sweet heart, since opportunitie Hath made me fort'nate, granting me such time, My loue t'impart to your selfe privatly Grant me your favour, that amidst the prime Of my yong yeares, I may more ioy conceive, Then Nestor old in all his life did have. In thy sweet selfe my spotlesse loue's ingraft, In thee is plac't my ioyes, and whole content, Let not disdaine by his fastidious craft, Frustrate my hopes, nor yet my ioyes prevent. For Nat'ralists this maxime oft observes, A lovely face grace in the heart conserves. That Oracle which Delphos did containe, Sometime, I hope, was held in such respect, That many did through great expence and paine, Obtaine response, whereon they did erect All their attempts: so Calanthrop now prayes, Her answer might gree with his hopes alwayes. Looke how a man for capitall offence, Being arraign'd, a Iurie doth sustaine, How pale-fac'd feare his heart holds in suspence, Till from the Iudge his sentence hee attaine Of death or life: even so doth hee expect Her answer, which will worke the like effect. But now Lucilla for to solve the doubt, Which at this time yong Calanthrop surpriz'd, Lifting her eyes, and looking all about, She lookt on him, which looke might have intys'de The coldest minded Saturnist had breath, To loue: and thus her answer did bequeath.
GOod Sir, I marvell you should so advance Fond loue so farre, since wise men him deride Whose power's onely foolish hearts t'intrance: Must they not stray, who haue a blinded guide. Where Cupid reignes, the sence hee deludes soone, Making them see strange visions in the moone. Some do report the Gods did once conveene, A Parliament touching prerogatives, Then of Ambition Envie hatcht hath beene, Cupid and Folly at debate, shee drives Him back, scratcht out his eyes hee might not see, Therefore appointed was his guide to be. Since so it is, good Sir, let me intreate You to renounce such guides as be those two, For though the heart with ioy bee full repleate At first by them, yet in the end comes woe, A prudent minde in vertue exercysde Within Loves limits seldome is comprysde. And as for me, fond Venus and her boy I scorne, and doe 'their Deitie still detest, To talk of loue, I think it but a toy, Lymphatick hearts he onely may molest, Let such adore him, and admire his power, The higher is their flight, their fal's the lower. So now shee calls her maids, and bids them goe Awake the Mar'ners, for she sees the shore Is neere hand by them, likewise there is moe Billowes appeare, nor was seene heretofore. The mar'ners rise, they tackle, veere and tye, They gaine the land, so Neptune they defye. Her coach is waiting her approach: so now She and her maids incoach themselves with speed, They bid farewell to Calanthrop, and bow Themselues in coach: his griefe doth now exceed All mens on earth: yea, it may haue compare To those who in the Stygian shades repaire.
Not Sysiphus, who roules the restlesse stone, Nor Ixion, who turnes the toylsome wheele, Such griefe possesse as he: since she is gone, Whose beauteous presence was his safties seale, Nor Beliles, who midst infernall fire, To fill still emptying buckets, doe desire. No nor Prometheus, for his heaven-fire stealth, By vultures torne alive, midst fierie flame, Nor Midas King, whose cov'tous heart such wealth Requir'd, as thereby lost both sence and frame, No greater griefe doth any of those trye, Disdaine yeelds heate his harmlesse heart doth frye. Still starving Tantalus, to quench his thirst, Standing in water, water craves to drinke, To pull the flying fruite, he doth insist, The fruit eschew, the waters from him shrinke, His babling tongue iustly his paine procur'd, But Calanthrop is guiltlesly iniur'd. While Calanthrop with grief was thus or'e-swaid His Page suggesteth, that it were the best To give the Mar'ners coine, who as yet staid, Belike, expecting some: the which request He soone fulfild, bidding him giue a crowne To each of them, wherat the Page did frowne. Yet ne'rethelesse he must this charge obay, Therefore he went and cald them for to row Their ships boat, which they did without delay, On each of ten a crowne he did bestow. They yeeld him thanks, requesting him in end, Their service to his master recommend. He said he would, then to a wood hard by Directs his course, which way his master went, When he had walkt a while, he saw him lye Mongst loftie Pynes, famous for high ascent, Calanthrop bids him with what hast he might Some where about provide their Innes that night.
As he directs, the Page away doth passe, Yet knew not where this Innes hee should provide At last by chance hee meetes a countrey Lasse, Who shew him that the way longst the wood side Was best for him: for by yond flowrie spring, Hee'l finde a way to citie will him bring. Even this same time doth Calanthrop bewaile His hard mishaps the Destenies decree, Even thus I see such Fortune's favours fraile, What gain'd by month, doth in a moment flee. (O happy I) if I had never prov'd The sad effects, affection hath mov'd. So you sweet Cedars, and you high-rear'd Pines, I you intreat subvmbrate me by shade, From mortall eyes, lest spitefull worldlings mindes In ioy triumph, to see my successe bad. No, let the earth alive my corpes interre, Rather then Fortune, thus my ioyes deferre. Whilst Calanthrop through griefe bereft of sense, Thus tumbles, tosses, welters here and there, He sees a man, now for his best defence He seekes his sword, yet found he it no where. The man salutes him in this courteous forme, Which wrought in him a calm after this storm. GOod gentleman, please you, came there this way Of late some Huntsmen, chasing of a Deere? Or did you heare the shrill-mouth'd hounds, at bay With fearlesse Boare, or with the crushing Beare? For from a thicket distant scarce a mile, Wee rouz'd a Beare, whom we try to exile. This hurtfull Beare doth much vnlookt for harme, In killing men and women, children weake, His bad embracement rais'd a sad alarme Into a neighb'ring Castle, by a Lake. Lowring he lies mongst brambles, briers and bushes, Waiting his prey: which got, he teares and crushes.
Misfortune great, a youth some twelue yeares old, A Cousin to Lucilla (beauteous creature) This proper youth (aye me) lesse wise then bold, Belov'd of all, and of a comely feature, One day would needs himselfe, by times solace, With horse & hounds to keep the Beare in chase. But he a little from his comp'nie singled, The Div'lish beast perceiving him alone, Despaire with chol'rick furie intermingled Begot in him revenge, so that anone, Running amaine, he puld the youth at vnder, Then (vnresisted) tore his ioynts asunder. And ever since the Duke with many knights, Try by all meanes, this cruell beast to kill, Or else expell, but hee almost affrights All his pursuers: for his lookes doe fill Their hearts with fear, that they encounter dare No way, but glad to view the chase a farre. But yet the Duke appointed hath a day, And letters sent to all his bordering mates, Them in his aid, requesting to assay Their valorous force, so men of all estates, Are lookt for here, gainst Tuesday next at morn, To chase the Beare with horse, with hound, with horne. This present day, some gallants brave to try, Which was the place of his foule residence, Came to this forrest, and of late went by To yonder grove, disturb'd his patience. Rousd the foule monster from his loathsome cave, Like Martialists, to rob his life they crave. And since that I am in those woods acquaint, For long time I thereof haue keeper been, They my advice requir'd e're they attaint This enterprise: but now I have not seene Nor heard of them this houre agoe and more, And this makes me inquisitiue therefore.
In truth good friend (quoth Calanthrop) be sure If I had seen such, I would likewise goe And trye the sport: for it should much allure The hearts of yong men, to be baited so, Therefore let me intreat you to repose Your selfe beside me, and that tale disclose. Touching the Duke, and that same youth was kild, The faire Lucilla likewise would I know, And where she lives, that so the earth hath fild. With strange reports, for oft-times many moe Then you, haue told me of this Ladies favour, But still I thought their speech did amply savour I cannot think her such as they report, Or that her beautie can so farre excell All other womens: so I you exhort, Let your relation beare a trustfull smell, For truth to heavens with sacred wings doth flye, While heaven and earth abhorre still those who lye. Beleeve me Sir, I'me glad that yee haue told Me such good tale, for now I well perceive You doe desire that I the truth vnfold, The which discourse most truely you shall haue: For I shall you acquaint with all the state, So now give eare whilst I the same relate. THE FORRESTER HIS RELATION. LOng after that the val'rous Greeks had leveld with the ground The stately walles of Ilium, & Priams race consound, For rapt of Menelaus wife, even then of happy Greece, The Diadem was rightly swayd, the scepter ruld in peace, By Princes of its Provinces, who all as in one minde Most vertuously for publick weale, aptly themselves combynd.
This time Thessalia's peacefull reigne, made pleasant Tempe smile: Two-topt Pernasse and Helicon, the Muses haunt this while. The spring was wrought by Pegasus the winged horse his hove, Those thrice three sisters sacred selves were knowne about to move The Nymphs with fair disheveld haire, then tript the flowrie meads, The harmles flocks through vales & dales, & mountains safly feeds. The skipping Satyrs midst the groves, longst silver brooks did play, The countrey maids in rurall games to gaine the praise essay. Even then did prudent Philagath over Thessalia reigne, A man whom Fates and Fortune both, more favourd than a king. For by his birth he honoured was, through royall right discent, Of many Kings of Thessaly, as histories comment. His grandour purchast great respect, his iustice made men feare, His clemenciemade him belov'd, of all his name did heare. And Nature in succession would him also happy make, In giving him a sonne which should (when as he pleasd forsake) The Scepter, rule in fathers stead, his countries all defend From forraine force, if any to invade the same intend. A comely girle he also had, who as shee grew in yeares, Her beautie then not paraleld, more lovely still appeares. Her beautie great, fame blaz'd abroad, in regions round about, Yea, it I thinke, was published, almost the world throughout. So from all countries suiters did, to Thessaly resort, Where they themselvee might recreate in each desired sport. But all their aimes was to attaine, the Ladies wisht consent, Yet all in vaine, for still they did returne most malcontent. Yet at the last, as Fortune would not haue her dye a maide, The Duke of rich Calabria himselfe there soone convayde, And in short time such successe had, as he acquir'd her loue In honest forme, and so they match, which afterwards did prove To both their goods and hearts content, for in a twelvemonths space She bore to him a gallant girle, which had an Angels face. This girle was nam'd Lucilla faire, as iustly she may bee, The fairest Lady, now aliue, inricht most plenteouslie With rarest gifts, and graces good, that mortals doe enioy, The Gods likewise in one assent, still shield her from annoy. But now the Duke her father did, conceive so great delight, In his new match, and laughter faire, he ev'rie day or night, Esteem'd a yeare till he reurnd with this his beauteous prize, Towards his countrey, for all Greece, his successe did despise.
So hee tooke leave of Philagath, the King of Thessaly, Then homewards hasted with his wife, and all his companie: At home he led a ioyfull life, sequestrate from all care, Till envious Fortune griev'd thereat, inraged through despaire, Would make him taste the bitter gall, of her satyrick frowne, And make him know the sun-shine of her favours, were ore-blowne. Not fully liv'd he sixe yeares space, with his beloved wife, When Philagath through sicknes great, was thought should loose his life. Those newes, I thinke, bad musick sound, into the Dutchesse eare, Now were her senses all apal'd, by sudaine pale-fac't feare. Yet she resolves to visite him, as she in dutie should, The Duke doth strive her to disswade, but yet no way hee could. Away she goes for Thessaly, with all her lovely traine Of gallant Knights, and Ladies faire, she hastes ore hill & plain. Through diligence she doth attaine, her wished iourneyes end, Even as some wearie Pilgrime doth, who feeble foot-steps spend In superstitious pilgrimage, before some kinsmans death: Right so she hastes, as though shee could, preserue her fathers breath. But so it is, death doth prevent, too oft what we desire, And our moist nature doth combure, with flames of fatall fire. For ere the Dutchesse could attaine, her loving fathers sight, Remorselesse Death (vnwelcome guest) forc't him forgoe his sp'right. Then with great shonts she pierced oft the azur'd welkin faire, And clouds with eechoes did resound, her plaints throgh emptie aire Yet forc't she must haue patience, mournings doe nought availe, For Death with equall pace, both Prince, & poore-man doth assailc. So she, with griefe, her last leaue takes, of Thessaly with teares, And her owne brothers eldest sonne, along with her she beares. Home to her owne Calabria shee & her comp'nie goe, From their sad harts the speach-like groanes still seem'd to vtter woe Thorow Epyrus lay their way, where they one night did rest. But, on the morrow, Phoebus beames them scorchingly opprest. So that vnto a wood they seek, to taste some cooling shade, A forrest faire they found hardby, wherof they all were glad. With speedie pace they thither went, but better they had staid For they had not long soiourn'd there, when they were all afraid. The Savages those woods did haunt, them furiously assault, The knights again, wth murdring swords, sharply correct that fault. In little space those wild men were, forc't to a sad retreat, Some kild, some fled, some howlingly, bad successes repeat.
The Dutchesse glad of victory, intends now to depart, Yet e're she goe, she must endure, inevitable smart. For as the Knights the Dutchesse sought, vnto her coach to bring, A monstrous Scorpion lurkt hard by, her pittiously did sting, Then to the hold returnes againe, a foot-groome it prevent, And with a Sable it divides, so frustrates its intent, The Dutchesse Surgeon by his balme, and vnguents tryes his skill, His Teriack nor his Mithridate, cannot the venome kill, His antipoysons have no force, no nor his vipers oyle, Doe what he can, the venome strong, the Lady's like to spoyle. Her grievous pain doth stil increase, her wound grows worse & worse No cordiall nor no cataplasme, against the sting have force, With sad and wofull hearts her guard, doe carie her along, Gainst Fates & Fortune they exclaime for this opprobrious wrong, If poysnous heat made her a thirst, or did the heavens ordaine, Her present ayd, no man can tell, but she could not sustaine Such thirst: therefore she cald a groome, and bids him goe and finde Some colding spring, that she might ease her hart, with heat was pynd He goes and findes a purling brooke, then quickly turnes againe, Thereof she drinkes, and still she thinkes, the lesser growes her paine. Now from her coach she doth dismount, (ô admirable thing) The paine and poyson both decrease, by drinking of the spring. Her knights and guard goe both apart, her Ladies bathe her wound, Throgh bathing with the helthful spring the Dutches is made sound. With humble & with thankfull hearts they praise the gods therfore, Who did so soone mirac'lously, their Ladies health restore. Then to a village bording neere, she and her comp'nie went, But e're they could the same approach, the day was nere hand spent. For midst the way they find a man, whose cloathes were old & worn, He seem'd to be of poore estate, & yet by countrey-borne, The Dutchesse askd him, how they cald this countrey, & the wood, And how they cald the happy spring, that yeelded her such good. This countrey is Epyrus cald (quoth hee) where we are plac't, Hazardfull forrests of Epyre be those, you lately trac't, The brook is cald the healthfull spring, through Grecia flies its fame, Of each of those (faire Ladie know) this is the proper name. Those forrests be cald hazardfull, cause many one of old And likewise now, strange accidents in them sinde manifold. The brooke is cald the healthfull spring, as well it may indeed, Gainst poyson, venom-cakring , a soveraigne try'd remeede.
The man takes leave, they forward went, vnto the village right, Next morning on their iourney goe, how soone the day was light. Then in few dayes to this her home, the Dutchesse quickly came, This countrey her Calabria, it is the very same. What then it was, so is it now, not subiect to decay, No forraine force, nor homebred iarres, its indwellers dismay. When that the Dutchesse liv'd here home, a while with easeful mind And former sorrowes all were past, as loath to prove vnkinde. She caused skild Artificers, erect (to her great charge) Of marble black, & Alabast, a fountaine high & large. Like to a stately Pyramis, the healthfull spring above, Lest any of ingratitude, her iustly might reprove. In memorie of benefite she once did there receive, Expert Mechanicks shee causd search, could rightly cut and grave. Through dext'rous cunning these adorn'd the happy healthful fount, With Emblemes fram'd of Alabast, and marble of the mount. Of yeares, two lusters scarce were spent, after this work was done, When she citations had from death, so had her brothers sonne. The Dutchesse did the gods implore, that they the youth would spare And pittie him of tender yeares, and expectation rare. Thessalia's hope, his mothers ioy, sole comfort of his Syre, For doubtlesly if now he dy'd, their lives would then expyre. As for her selfe she was resolv'd, Deaths message to obey, And that ne' re-yet remitted debt, she's willing to repay. It seem'd the gods did grant her suite, the boy did convalesse, But she (sweet Lady) found deaths force, her vitall spirites distresse. Then cald she for her love, & Lord, whose groanes proclaim'd his grieves And for her lasse Lucilla fair, in whom true beauty lives. Deare Lord & loue (quoth she) I finde that we must parted bee, The loyall love I to thee beare, doth make me loath to dye. Heavens, Fates, & Death, doe all decree, my glasse of life bee runne, And Atropos now cuts the threed which Lachesis once spun. So hence I must (ô deare sweete love) I pray thee doe not weepe, For sure my sp'rite midst highest heavens, the sacred gods will keepe. Lucilla deare, thy mothers ioy, come to thy dying Dame, As Heavens & Nature thee inricht with beauties bravest frame, Heavens grant that thou doe vse it well, to thy immortall praise, Live chastly, yet selfe-loue abhorre, pride breeds contempt alwayes. This one thing doe I thee intreate, in memorie of me, Goe thrice a yeare & view the spring thy mother did supplie.
When physicke, nor no simples could, the venome strong expell, The water of the healthfull spring, in power did precell. Therefore three times a yeare doe view, that spring by consuetude, And mother-like (what beasts detests) abhorre ingratitude. Thus said, her happy sp'rite she yeelds, which to eternall ioy Numberles numbers powers divine, invisibly convoy. Her funerals once solemntz'd, then doth Lucilla faire, In sable robes of mourning black, with maids so clad, prepare To goe and view the healthfull spring, and there bewaile her losse, And mothers death, whose memories, giues her continuall crosse. Since she is thus determined, her father likewise send Shadowes of men (Eunuches I meane) as guardians her t'attend. Those likewise serve as mariners, to rule her bark by sea, Accompanied by those, and mayds, she doth continually Thrice yearly goe and view that spring, a day or two they mourne, Their regrates being finished, againe they here returne. Her father, though he haue no sonne, for to succeed his place, Loves her so well, hee will not wed againe in any case. Yet though he loue her, he ore-lookes her with a prying eye, Loue hatcheth care, which care begets respectiue Iealousie. The iealous Syre of daughters good, doth make her liue retyrd, For which himselfe of strangers is, ridic'lously admyrd. Lucilla, since her mother dy'd, is forc't to liue apart From company of anyman, which sure must grieve her heart. For saue those Eunuchs, & those maids, who serue her night & day, And her own Syre, the aged Duke, none else approach her may. Many a Prince, and gallant Knight, doe her in mariage crave, But through her fathers perswasiues, she none at all will haue. And for to try to speake herselfe, it's folly, there's no meane She is so warelie lookt vnto, none can such good attaine. This aged Duke, and his faire Lasse, dwell neere within sixe mile, Where they in divers sports delight, to posting time beguile. A castle situate by a lake, in it doe they abide, From thence they see both woods & meads, & ships at anchor ride. Even from this Castle of the Dukes, about a fourthnight since, In companie of other knights, went the Thessalian Prince, Retimes they rise, and winde their hotnes, not fearing any foe, Through desart woods, & vnknowne paths, they all a hunting goe. But whilst the rest their horses mount, the Prince his horse refuses, Him to receive, yet would the youth, admit no such excuses.
Twice more then thrice the horse would not, permit the Prince him back, Prodigious presage which foreshews the riders speedy wrack. Hard by the lake there haunts a Beare, a monster for a beast, Who by the space of thirtie yeares, those woods did haunt at least. This beast mongst brakes & pricklie thornes, all day still lurking lay, And when dark night black mantle spred, then went to seek his pray. The night preceeding he had straid, abroad to seek his food, His late trac't steps (though not by sent) might well bee knowne by blood. There did the hounds, by fatall chance, finde out the recent sent. With librall mouths against the clouds, their voice they largely spent This quick approach soon rousde the Beare from out his lothed hold, The hounds give chalenge, he againe, gives them encounter bold. Now huntsmen came, where at the hounds with courage fresh begin A new pursute, yet none so bold, as once to tooth his skin. The knights with darts the Beare so wound, that void of all remorse This desp'rate beast (afflicted thus) the yong Prince did vnhorse. Their darts are spent, no shot they have, so all their helpe is vaine, Maugre them all, before their eyes, Thessalia's Prince is slaine. A steepie rock conteines a cave, the Beare long vsd before, Thither went he (with dogges convoy) of him they saw no more. Huntsmen with sad and sorie hearts, their cloathes they all to rent, Home with the corps they sadly move, this hunting they repent. But when the Duke this obiect saw (a wofull one indeed) He and Lucilla all the rest, in sorrow did exceed, Helplesse is their excessive griefe, though nat'rall bee their mone, Nature to life can nere restore, whom death hath once vndone. But yet the Duke makes narrow search to guerdon the offender, And still the Beare for this his paines, bad thanks again doth render. For whom the beast conveens withall, may hee prevaile with rage, Them makes he smart, without respect, of person, sexe, or age. So this abuse hath causd the Duke, stil hoping for amends, Him to assist to kill the Beare, intreat his neighbouring friends. And as I shew you we expect them next ensuing weeke. So this is all concerning this, I know, or yet can speake. Yet this I'me sure, some gallants will fearlesly try their strength, And for their loues couragiously abbreviate the length Of their strong launce, into the Beare, if they may him conveene, Not caring for his crush, or bite, his choler, rage, or spleene. But now me thinks I heare a horne, therefore must I bee gone, So, pray you sir, apardon me, for leaving you alone.
Farewell my friend, quoth Calanthrop, good successe still enioy, I shall not stay here long alone, for yonder comes my boy, This rare Discourse of yours, hath me affoorded such content, That if hereafter we conveene, you's thinke this time well spent. THE Forrester thus gone, now comes the Lad, And tells his master that he had prepar'd An Inne: but (quoth he) I good fortune had, Else mongst those woods I doubtlesse had been snar'd, A wench I found, which did direct mee right, The gainest way vnto the Cities sight. A stately Citie it appeares to me, A goodly Inne, where you may be well easd, The merriest man that ever I did see, Is that your Hoast, Sir if you so be pleasd. Wel grounded walls, high, large, & passing strong The Citie guard from iniurie or wrong, Many braue Knights perambulate the streete, Who come to hunt, as Citizens report, Some rav'nous beast, who badly doth intreat The countrey people: so that to be short, Each man provides him horse, and hounds, and lance, Against the hunts, his honour to advance. By this discourse now Calanthrop did finde That all was true the Forrester disclosd, Still doth the Page, according to his minde, Solve all demands his master him proposd. Now came they to the Cities Easterne wall, Found patent gates, such fortune did befall. Then went they to their Inne the ready way, They supt, and then betooke them to their rest, Next morning early, by the breake of day, Calanthrop cald his Page, to him exprest Some part his mind, gives crowns, & bids him goe Buy horse and lance, apparrell black also.
The Page did shortly his desire fulfill, Returnd and shew him all that he had done, Each thing contented him so to his will, Next morning he intends for to be gone, And view the hunts, the Duke and Knights condigne, For hunting sport that day did all assigne. When day appear'd, each man to palace sought, The Duke t'attend, yet Calanthrop abode Still with his hoast, till all were gone, then thought He best to goe: so to the wood he rode, His courteous hoast did him such favour yeild, As to conduct him to the hunting field. But e're they came, the game was well begun So they retyr'd, expecting the event, Vnto a shade, bright Phoebus beames to shun, Now doth the Beare boldly himselfe present, He (fearlesse beast) 'ginnes such encounter give, His tuskes and pawes both hounds and huntsmen grieve. At this the Knights seeme all to be asham'd, To kill the Beare they all at once conspire, But this designe is worthy to be blam'd, He who intends true honour to acquyre, His foe with equall number should assaile, Then merits praise, if he doe so prevaile. Yet notwithstanding of their multitude, The Beare perswades them to a sham'd retreite, Many brave Knight he of their armes denude, Which sight did val'rous Calanthrop incite, For seeing how each Knight did court'sie straine Who first should try himselfe, the Beare againe. Heroick hee, impatient of delay, On his black Courser, from the thicket rushes, The beast inrag'd, him meetes in middle way, In his thick hide the lance in peeces frushes, Yet for all that, meane while the Knight dismounts, The Beare a trick him taught next time he hunts.
For ere the Knight could well vnsheath his sword, The Beare him wounds a little on the arme, But now the gallant quickly him affoord Due recompence for his intended harme, Florisht his sword aloft, then with a thrust, He mindes to punish crueltie vniust. The beast perceives his aime, in this hard case, By shift of body doth the thrust avoyd, And for this kindnesse offers him t'imbrace, The Knight could not such demonstrations bide: But sensibly he made the Beare to know Come was the time, he must his life forgoe. With ore-thwart stroke bravely the Knight divides The Beares left legge, largely two yards and more Full from the other: Intrals through his sides Fall out amaine: now in his bloody goare The beast lies kild by Calanthrops brave hand, Whereat amaz'd the whole spectators stand. Calanthrop quickly now remounts his Steed, Hastes to the place where he had left his hoast, The Duke and Knights admire this noble deed, Though none of them thereof may iustly boast, Therefore the Duke sends to request the Knight To come receive the honour of the fight. But Calanthrop not willing bee cognost, Himselfe before the message came, absented, Such loue-sick thoughts his minde so ever crost, That smothred groanes his hearthad almost rented. Yet forc't content he beares most patientlie, To Citie went his Hoast, his Page, and hee. Where we must leaue them for a little space, To shew you what content the Duke conceiv'd By this dayes sport: but yet the great disgrace His Knights had got: iustly no pardon crav'd, Sham'd to confesse, yet reason them constraind An vnknowne Knight, not they, the honour gain'd.
Most glad in heart, the Duke hastes to his home, With many Knights, discoursing on this sport, They all yeeld praise to one, they know not whom, The Beare his death did each of them comfort, Yet envious sp'rites still secret malice ludge, At stout mens successe base mindes oft doe grudge. For the good Duke to glad his guests withall, When he came home, causd his faire lasse be brought To sup with them: to minde he then doth call, The val'rous act one knight that day had wrought, Then to Lucilla told in pleasant words, In audience of Knights, Princes, Earles and Lords. How that an vnknowne Knight the Beare did kill, For after (quoth he) we had rouz'd the beast, The tim'rous hounds at bay did keepe him still, Many were hurt, glad to retire, at least They seem'd vnwilling any more to try, Wherein the Beares defence and strength did lye. But while as yet each knight with other strove, Who first should dare him to encounter new, There came a knight from an adiacent grove, His horse, lance, clothes, were of a pale-black hew, The Beare in mid-way meets him on the plaines, As loath to put a stranger to great paines. With an vnformall welcome doth him greet, Yet on his breast the lance doth split asunder, But e're the knight on ground could fixe his feet, The Beare got vp, though he was once at vnder, Then e're the knight could halfe his sword vnsheath, He runnes to him belike, to begge his death. Which suit the knight seem'd willing to obey, For at one stroke he did the Beare so wound, The griefe thereof his body did o're-sway, Foure-feet thereafter set he ne're on ground, One of his legges the knight quite off did cut, Then in the sheath his noble sword he put.
Then on his horse he quickly did returne To that same grove, from which of late he came, Thither where we thought he did then soiourne, I sent three Lords for to enquire his name, Desiring him to come where we expected, Him who so had our countries weale protected. But he was gone before they could attaine The very grove which we had seene him enter, Not willing to be knowne, he did preveene, Their comming: yet his life for vs did venter. Then since they could not finde him any where, We all thought best home to this place repaire. Thus, daughter, haue you heard the very truth Of our dayes sport, directly as it was Acted, by that brave magnanimick youth, Chastiz'd the monster for his vile trespasse: He, for our safetie, and our publick good, Life hazard, honour gaind, yet spent his blood. Sir (quoth Lucilla) give me leave to speake, This act, me thinkes, precels the labours twell Of that brave worthy martiall minded Greeke, Who drag'd three-headed Cerberus, from hell, He that kild Hector midst the campe of Greece, Or hee who gaind Ile Colchis golden fleece. When Hercules to fetch his wife did goe, Infernal Phasma's made his courage droupe, Achilles at advantage strooke his foe, Whilst hee to rob dead Patroclus did stoupe, Medea's magick gain'd the fleece of gold, For Iasons love she fathers thesaure sold. Likewise the Argonauts both last and first Did aid Duke Aesons sonne in his pursute, Oeta's foes did bravely him assist, Orithia's sonnes to aid them prosecute, Wing'd Calais, and Zethes thither flew, In their returne the Harpyes they subdue.
Desire of gaine did Iason most intyse, Necessitie, the other two did move, For Herc'les must forgoe his enterpryse, Else fight the dogge, Achilles too must prove Himselfe a Coward, if hee misse the stroke, But no such matter did this knight provoke. No greed of gaine, nor yet necessitie Did move this gallant enterprise this deed, True honour did his minde most qualifie, He likewise saw this countrey stood in need Of speedie ayd, so for our publick weale, Vnarmd alone, he did the Beare appeale. And, praise to Iove, hee happy victor prov'd, Deare father therefore whatsoe're he be, Of yong and old he ever should be lov'd, Of rich and poore, of each sexe and degree, To him erect then, stately Trophies rare, Who for our safeties would his life not spare. Though all the min'rals earth containes, were swords, And all tooke life were men to vse them well, If Calanthrop, I thinke, had heard her words, (Being so set on top of Fortunes wheele) Hee would gain-stand them all in open plaine, Though Hydra-like they two-fold liv'd againe. But while Lucilla did Calanthrop praise, One Philotomp much to her speech adverts, His name, his naughtie humour still bewrayes, This knight in heart the Ladies words inserts: For fretting Envie, humour monstrous strange, Mov'd him, was no way wrong'd, to seeke revenge. For Philotomp, that proud ostentive man, Made search to know where the knight did remaine, Fully resolv'd to kill him if hee can, Naughtie designes are bred in basest braine, So in dark night he went vnto the Citie, With heart bent to revenge, and void of pittie.
Some say that Philotomp right much affected The faire Lucilla, and this was the cause, He hates the knight, doubting to bee reiected, His rivall humour could admit no pause, Lucilla's speech he though had savour kinde, Towards the knight, which did molest his minde. Now in the Citie, at the time of rest, Some knave convayd him to the knight his Inne, So he and sixe well arm'd with him, addrest Them to the house: now doth the fight beginne, Calanthrop and his boy did well asswage Philotomps choler, and his vniust rage. Yea Calanthrop alone so farre prevaild, His martiall page defending still his backe, That in short time those seven who him assaild, Through his brave hand were brought to sudaine wracke, Foure of them kild he, two like Cowards fled, Philotomp captive made, his bloud not shed. The Burgers hearing the vp-rore, conveene, And both the parties doe incarcerate, But yet in Iayle not willing to detaine Such persons long, lest they extenuate, Their libertie: therefore they now intend, Vnto the Duke, to know his will, to send. Their Messenger doth to the Duke dilate The very forme of this bad accident, And how the vnknowne knight his hard estate Was much bewaild, when he to iayle was sent. For what he did, was in his owne defence, But no man knew knight Philotomps pretence. How soone the Duke had heard him to an end, To horse he went, with many gallant Lord, Each one to heare, their itching eares did lend, What the event should be of this discord, Wishing the Duke might expiate his ire, Each Lord and knight him humbly did desire.
But now the Maior and the Burgers meet The Duke: then to their iustice hall convoy Him, with great pompe, alongst their Cities street, Each one was glad his presence to enioy, In each adoe, though iustice he preferd, The tryall he to witnesses referd. In this adoe there was no need of such, For Philotomp became so penitent, That he (vnto his shame) confest thus much, (Requesting them to haste his punishment) Against all reason, I sought to confound This knight, which now hath to my shame redound. Well (quoth the Duke) since thou vniustly sought To kill this knight, who never did thee wrong, As he best likes, thou shalt to death bee brought And suffer torment short, or painfull long. Calanthrop thankt the Duke right humblie, For this his iust and absolute decree. But here's the tryall of a generous minde, Who having powerfully to dispose Of one who sought to kill him, yet could finde In heart, most freely to remit such foes, Brave martiall mindes ingenuously forgiue The penitent, Cowards to death them drive. So now it prov'd, for Calanthrop remits All the trespasse which Philotomp had done, Likewise intreates the Duke, who Iustice sits, To liberate th'offender to be gone, Yet Philotomp was sworne, that sword nor knife, He should not beare, during his loathed life. Thus then asham'd, he hastes vnto a Barke, Commits his body to the sea some space, Bids friends farewell, and then when night grew darke, He went where Tryton rules with forked mace. Thus was he gone, but no man e're could tell, What fortune afterward to him befell.
And now the Duke intreats the vnknowne knight To take the paines to goe with him along Vnto his house, and bee his guest that night, The which request, more sweet then Syrens song Calanthrop thought: yet seemd hee not doe so, Most willing hee, vnwilling seemd to goe. Now well he knew, he should be once more blist By happy view of faire Lucilla's face, And so perhaps, might find time to insist Opport'nately in some convenient place, Renue his suite, and make his love more knowne, So ripe affections seed where he had sowne. Most sure Loves seed is recompence in love, And each one aimes for to acquyre the same, Each loyall Lover must this aime approve, Lustfull desires are ever worthy blame. Calanthrops vertuous thoughts doe still aspire Not subiect to libidinous desire. But now they came whereas the Duke then dwelt, Then were conducted to the Presence hall, Lethargick love this time Calanthrop felt, Yet wisely he his sences did recall. The Duke well kmowing that this was the knight, Who had so stoutly kild the Beare in fight. Intends all honour possibly to give Vnto his worth, as tributarie pay, Loves lawlesse passions doe the knight much grieve, Though he for to restraine the same assay, So since the Duke perceives him malcontent, Hee tries all meanes this humour to prevent. Therefore he sends for his faire Lasse in haste, And all the while he keepes the knight in speech, For he alone was by the Dukes selfe plac'tt Now comes Lucilla, (top of beauties reach) The love-sicke knight offers to kisse her hand, Yet (courteous shee) his offer doth gain-stand.
The Duke sayd, Daughter, this same knight is hee That kild the cruell Beare before my face, Defending vs from beastly tyrannie, Though Philotomp sought time him to disgrace, Yet he most freely his trespasse forgave And pardon'd him who should no pardon have. But now Lucilla (smiling) 'gan to speake, Beleeve me Sir, if this knight merit praise, In reason I this claime may also seeke, That I as partner honour'd bee alwayes, For, last time I the healthfull spring did see, In my returne I brought this knight with me. And is it so, then daughter I request Each time thou goes to view the spring againe, To fetch'thy father ever such a guest, As is this knight which now doth here remaine, But now the Duke intreates the knight to show If this tale his Lasse tels bee true, or no. Beleeve me Sir (quoth Calanthrop) I came From Epyre last, amongst a lovely traine Of Ladies, whereof I beleeve this Dame Was chiefest: I desir'd their help to gaine The other shore, a stranger since I was, They me permitted in their Barke to passe. And ever since I lay at yonder Towne, Where the malicious knight sought mee to kill, Sometimes I viewd the countrey vp and downe, Which pleasant progresse did content mee still, And now I love to my owne countrey goe, Therefore good Sir, I pray you let bee so. Now went they all to dinner, afterward The Duke, Calanthrop, and Lucilla went Vnto a chamber, others were debard Where they the after-noone discoursing spent, They both intreat the knight his name reveale, Protesting firmly they should it conceale.
Likewise the Duke requests Calanthrop stay, Whereto Calanthrop forg'd some bare excuse, Saying, Good Sir, I needes must goe away, And so the Duke was forc't to brooke refuse: Then bids the Duke his Lasse, her credit trye, Perhaps the knight will not her suit deny. So went the faire Lucilla to solist One whom himselfe more happie did esteeme, Then those who in Elysium everblist, Obtaine ingresse, late traild through Stygian streame, Fortunes inconstant change, men may perceive, Who made Lucilla suiterto her slave. Thus she began, Sir knight, may I intreate You stay with vs, during a month, or two, For why, my father thinkes you a compleate Brave Gentleman: and if that you be so, I hope you'l then obey a Ladies sute, Lest I should iustly you ingrate repute. At your request I caused once transport You and your Page both of you, through the sea, Therefore you should concede in such like sort, To this my suite, for in the like degree It should have place, likewise you swore, in right Me to defend, and to become my knight. Which I accept before my father here, If you be constant in your first desire, How now (quoth she) sweet father, pray you beare A part, that we our sute may once acquire? If you'l become my knight Sir, take this ring, You of your promise it will mindfull bring. Madame (sayd he) I will the same receive, For I'me perswaded you will not impose To me, more then in reason you may crave, Therefore I will my service seale inclose Within the limits of your gracious will, Vowing while breath doth last, it to fulfill.
Well then (quoth she) the first thing I command, Is, that you stay at court where wee abide, Therefore now servant, strive not to withstand My iust decree, excuses lay aside. Then next I doe demand your proper name, Whereof I hope, you need not to thinke shame. As to my stay (quoth he) I am content, And therefore willingly I will obey, Likewise (Madam) since it is your intent To know my name, I must it not gainsay, Men call me Tristius, of Cimerian vale, For darke disdaine mee ever doth assaile. Now comes a knight and tells the supper's drest, Therfore the Duke seeing his Lords attend, Both to his daughter and her knight exprest, How that the Lords to supper for them send, Yet did the Duke and his faire Lasse conceive, Great ioy, that they had gaind what they would have. But I beleeve Calanthrop did enioy As much content as any man aliue, For now he doth his best wits all imploy To speake his mistres, yet doth wisely strive To hide the same, till time and place doe serve, Though he meane while in love was like to sterve. To supper went they, after that, to rest, Lucilla by her maids was then conveyd To chamber: but Calanthrop now supprest His passions great, expecting fort'nate aid, When Duke, and Lords, and Knights were all asleepe, Sick-thoughts Calanthrop did best comp'nie keepe. Thus then perplext, hee went out at the gate, Seeking to finde some solitarie place, Where he might well, vnheard or seene, regrate His hard mishaps, and wofull black disgrace, In coverd walke, ne're to the river side, Haid by the garden, him sweet Cedars hide.
Ov'rcharg'd with griefe, hee 'gins for to impart His love-sick passions, to each sencelesse thing, Deepegrounded sighes opprest his loyall heart, Which mov'd him to his Lute this Dittie sing, The subiect was, how Fortune crost each man In their loves suite: thus Calanthrop began. CALANTHROP HIS THRENODIE. THE silent night summonds each thing to rest, The schrieking Owle (nights Herald) notes her houres, In sable robes, when crystall welkin loures, Each fowle an little bird flie to the their nest, The Hamadriads haste to shadie bowres, Each beast opprest with labour, travell, paine, House, hold, or cave, to rest them in remaine. Now dew discends vnseene in silver shoures, Refreshing scorched plants, flours, grasse & grain, Each thing that lives, this season somway please, The wearie Phlegon in the night findes ease, Coolding in Tethys bowre his fierie waine, Yet I tormented by a deepe disease, In night find neither rest, nor yet reliefe, Pale-fac't disdaine is cause of all my griefe, My frowning Fate I no way can appease, Fortune (aye me) hath made me, to be briefe, A gazing-stock of discontented woe, And still decrees I shall continue so, Till death exhale my breath by lawlesse reife. You whistling windes that ev'rywhere doe blow, Tell all the world how I am forc't to prove The worst of Fortune, in the best of love. Smooth glyding streames that to the Ocean goe, Shew raging Neptune limited above My restlesse passions, and heart-killing feares Move me each houre (as tribute) pay him teares. blessed Powers above the starres who move,
And when you list to vs below appeares, I you implore to abrogate my smart, Else lend Lucilla her coequall part, For she as yet what love may be, admires, Therfore doe wound by sweet remorse, her heart, O Cupid, if I durst, I would demaund Why thou permits her thus thy lawes gain-stand, I wish thou wouldst but touch her with thy dart, Then should she be subiect to thy command, And pittie me who daily for her feele Griefe, paine, and passions, signes of sorrows seale And thou faire ring oft kist her fairer hand, (Now drouping sits, and heares what I reveale) Thou by that meane didst much more honor have Then I thy master, who like blisse did crave, Old doting Morpheus is most glad to steale The guerdon which in right I should receive, Possessing her faire body, he doth smile At wenching Iove, who strives him to beguile. Why doth not death me soone of breath bereave, Since black disdaine affection doth exyle, Satyrs & Faunes which haunt those woods among, And dauncing Driads witnes this my wrong. See how the windes keepe silence all this while, To heare the sad rehearsal of my tongue, Sea-guyding Cynthia shames to come in sight, And twinkling stars in clouds obscure their light, Sweet smelling Cedars straight & passing long, Thrice happy I, were this my finall night. No, no, I yet must try a wearie day, For, to my griefe, the Fates my death delay, Lest I by death might ease this wofull spright. O heavens what have I done, that you assay In my loves quest, each way to give me crosse, Though I much fear to call heavens errors grosse. Yet this abuse my sences so dismay, I'me sensible of nothing but my losse, Looke how Aurora at my woe doth weepe, Cleare dewie teares from her gray eyes downe leep On Flora's coat, where gentle windes them tosse.
The pleasant brookes a grudging murmure keepe, Faire Phoebus now beginnes to guild the fields, And though his beames to all things comfort yeelds, Yet since he sees me wrapt in sorrowes deepe, Musing a mayd can see a man so pyne, Sham'd of my wrong, he now withdrawes his shine. CAlanthrop having sung this Threnodie, Sighes strive with teares, and both prevent each word, Teares wet his cheekes, sighes dry them suddenly, His matchlesse griefe, deepe grounded groanes record, Such wofull passions oft suggest despaire, Whose on-wayters be sorrowe, shame, and care. Yet Iove defend, such like should him befall, Superiour powers think it now high time, That Fortune should in prosp'rous ioyes install Him whom till now she punisht without crime. So, lest perchance hee offer might offence Vnto himselfe, by desp'rate violence. Heavens mov'd Lucilla his complaint to heare, For such like passions made her to awake With loving heart, and with a listning eare, Loves kingly power made her pittie take, For by the consequent one may surmise Her selfe was subiect to the same disease. And yet she did most cunningly proceed, How skild bee women in their coying Art? She well perceiv'd Calanthrop stood in need Of her sweet aid, to ease his love-sicke heart, And though she was most willing to extend Reliefe to him, yet doth the same suspend. Now ov'r the walke where Calanthrop then lay, Therestood a gallerie on the garden wall, To this same gallerie was a privie way From her bed-chamber: here she vs'd to call Her maids by one dilating there her will, To those shee pleasd, whilst all the rest stood still.
Vnto this gallerie went she all alone, For all that night she had receiv'd bad rest, Hearing her knight relate with many groane, The various wayes his vrgent grieves increast. And when Calanthrop had left off to sing, He slept: which time shee dropt on him a ring. The happy ring this posie did conteine, (Thy chiefe desire shortly shalt thou acquyre) E're he awoke, she went away vnseene, Then to a secret walke did she retire, Repenting her that e're this ring she threw Vnto her knight, whereof he nothing knew. Now being alone, she 'ginnes her selfe to blame, That should give place to such an idle thought As love: even thus, Lucilla now thy shame Apparent is, which thou regardest nought. What (fond Lucilla) wilt thou midst the yeares Of tender age, subiect thy selfe to feares? For Love's a field of feares, of cares, of paine, Of trouble, sorrow, griefe, and ghostly woe, Since so it is, in time it's best restraine Such fruitlesse folly, and such like forgoe, Lest Venus boy thy gentle heart intrap Making therof no conquest, but a rapt. And what is hee that thou dost thus affect? A stranger, and perchance of such base minde, That having got thy love, will then reiect Thee, though at first he seeme to be most kinde, Neither know's thou his revenewes, nor state: Therefore in time rue rather then too late. But now Loves king once toucht her heart againe, So that she now reputes herselfe ingrate, Who could permit her lover to remaine So long in griefe, and might the same abate. For which in heart she vowes to make amends, And ere she loose her loue, shee'l loose her friends.
For why shees sure, a knight of so good parts As is her knight, must loyall bee in love, Deceit ne're dwels in noble martiall hearts, This maxime skildest Phylosophs approve, His birth likewise is sure equivalent, Els her to suite could ne're be his intent. Yet she remembers beggar Irus sought The constant love of chaste Penelope, Which he mongst Peeres of Ithaca deare bought, Endymion lov'd the Huntresse Hecate, Thus love both Prince and poore man doth controll, The gayners ioy, the loosers still condole. But what though love a beggar did provoke Or yet a shepheard enterprise such aime, And rich and poore bee subiect to loves stroke, And Cupid with one dart both heale and maime, Like to Achilles lance, whom it did wound, It selfe againe, nought else, must make them sound. What then Lucilla? can there be such thing, As ever love such operation had? To make a base-borne slave, looke like a King, Though love hath power to make one glad or sad, Love in transformes will not prove so vnright, To make a Heard, or Beggar seeme a Knight. Admetus flocks nine winters Cynthius kept, And love made Iove in golden showre descend In Danaes lap, whilst she (faire Lady) slept, The heat of love those gods made such intend, Love likewise hath made Kings themselves abase, Yet Indigence still stops Preferments place. Since so it is, what then should make thee feare? Yet try if that his love to thee be such That he esteems no love as thine so deare, If it be so, thou oughts reward him much, Thus then resolv'd she cald her chiefest maid, Sophona nam'd: and to her thus she sayd.
MY sweet Sophona, greatly need I ayde, And none save thou, I thinke, can serve the turne, For, wit and truth with secresie conveyde, Must onely helpe me to leave off to mourne. Her love-sicke heart now secretly doth bleed, Whereat she pausd, as one sham'd to proceed. Which passion wisely Sophona thought good To stop in time, before it should accresse To greater height: for now her mistresse blood From face to inward parts had swift regresse. Whereby it seem'd, that love should be the cause Of her stupiditie, and shame-fac't pause. Thus therefore spake she to Lucilla sweet, How now Madam, belike you mee mistrust, Else sure you would not spare for to repeate To me your griefes: if I prove false, heavens thrust Me from their blisse: so Madam doe notspare To shew to me the cause of all your care. Praise to the heavens, I likewise can shut vp A secret in the cabine of my heart, Neither can Cresus worth my minde corrupt, For to reveale the same in any part, Speake what you will, to heavens I here protest Till time you please, it shall not bee exprest. But give me leave Madam, what if I gesse Your cause of griefe? for I did well remarke While as you spake, some passion to suppresse, You greatly strove: I doubt it is loves sparke, For why, a tim'rous pause your speech made faile, Rose-red first waxt your face, then ashy-pale. And if Madam, love doe your heart possesse, Give Cupid place, his deitie is supreame, Rather then vrge an helplesse businesse, It's folly great to strive against the streame, Then be content, and prove not times abuse, But freely shew how I may serve your vse.
My deare Sophona (quoth Lucilla thou Knowst well that hitherto I ever lov'd Thee more then all my maids, and shall, I vow, For why to me, as yet, thou ever prov'd Most faithfull, constant, kinde, discreete, and wise, Thee secrets to divulge, none can entyse. Therefore to thee I'le tell the simple truth, A tale that scarce my heart dare well commit The pretious secret therof to my mouth, Indeed Sophona, thou the mark hast hit, I loue (aye me) I loue, what shall I doe? The paines of loue my heart will rent in two. Yet let mee tell thee, hee's a worthy one, And this last night, I secretly ov'r-heard His plaint, which might have mov'd a heart of stone To pittie him, then went I afterward Alongst the garden gallerie: he below Lay fast asleepe, so nought at all did know. In this meane time I took from off my hand A pretty ring, and dropt it on his cloake, The posie whereof, if hee vnderstand, Of black despaire will quench both fire and smoake, But though his plaint at first made me relent, Yet that I threw the ring, I did repent. For why, I thought, I knew not well his worth, And to my friends hee likewise was a stranger, Yet loue me told, valour (though hid) breakes forth, For mee and mine, hee put his life in danger, In open field, vnarm'd, and without feare, Couragiously alone he kild the Beare. Disdaine sayes, Honour pusht him thereunto, And what he did, was not for my respect, Loue sayes againe, what had he here adoe, But for my sake? should I him then reiect? Reason suggesteth, once he told mee plaine, I was his earthly ioy, and chiefest gaine.
For kinde Sophona, this same is the knight, That came from Epire in our companie, And when we landed here, took his good night, Beleeve me woman (faith) the same is hee That came with vs last time we view'd the Spring, This knight I meane, on whom I dropt the ring. And now Sophona I intreate thee trye, If that his love to me be so entire As it appeares: likewise if thou canst spye Him all alone: I pray thee strive to heare His words, remark his gesture, and his lookes, By these thou'le know, if he contentment brookes. Sophona kinde, worke war'ly I exhort, For long will I looke for thy wisht returne, 'Cause sure I am, thou wilt the truth report, And helpe to quench the flames my heart doth burne, Madam (quoth she) let me and that alone, No more, farewell Madam, I will begone. SInce she is gone, it were no misse to show What cogitations companied the knight: For when Lucilla him the ring did throw, You know he sleeping was, for why his spright, Whilst he awoke was vext with griefe extreame, For which in sleepe he had a golden dreame. Hee dream'd he was into a lovely wood, Where prettie birds melodiously did sing, Hard by a river, where they also stood, Trees, hearbes, and flowers, which pleasantly did spring, All sorts of beasts here walkt most fearlesly, Each thing strove here to satiate the eye, In this meane time came Venus and her boy, As he surmysd, betwixt them was a Lasse, Whom they conduct without guide, or convoy, Thus, swiftly marcht they where Calanthrop was, Venus then cald alowd, brave knight awake, And turning to Cupido thus she spake.
Sonne, long time hath this knight our servant beene, And he as yet ne're had of vs reward, Therefore it's time that he should now attaine The wished aime which hee doth most regard. Say sonne, shall it be so? Yes mother, yes, He shall anone enioy his earthly blisse. (Quoth Cupid) knight, since thou ador'st our shrine, Richer then Paris shall thy guerdon bee, This spotlesse virgine shall be thy propine, Thrice fairer farre then Helen was, is shee, In signe that what I speake shall be most true, Receive this ring from her: so now adiew. Calanthrop through this extasie awakes, Then blames he Morpheus 'cause he himdeceiv'd, Rouzing himselfe, hee drowsie sleepe forsakes, And looking round, he quickly now perceiv'd, The very ring, which he thought whilst hee dream'd, He had receiv'd from her he most esteem'd. Dreames are of sundry natures, some reports, Their reasons divers, divers their effect, Yet those best knowne, consist but of three sorts, Of which this first is held in least respect, It's nam'd a dreame of office by the wise, When folk in night, dreame of dayes exercise. The second dreame is called naturall, 'Cause it proceeds of ones complection, As phlegmatikes in sleep will dreame they fall In rivers deepe: Sanguines suggestion Is oft of bloud: Choler'ans of the fire, Melancholickes of Divels, which none desire. The dreame of Revelation is the last, Which still foreshewes a good or bad successe, This taught men divination in times past, Thus knowne, of ioy or griefe it leaves excesse Into the heart, which will not soone remove, This dreame is not of nature, but above.
Belike Calanthrop did this dreame enioy, When he awoke he was the merriest man, I think, that liv'd: his heart voyd of annoy, Doubting was't he, he to the river ran, To view his shadow in the water cleare, But whilst he stoupt, Dirce vnseen drew neare. The posie of his ring he oft ov'r-read, Kissing it, sate he on the rivers brinke, Whilst thus he toy'd, Dirce steales vp her head, Reft him the ring, then vnder flood did shrinke, And now amaz'd Calanthrop on the land, Like those beheld Medusa did hee stand. Yet cry'd he Dirce, ô sweet Dirce, heare, Now longst the river runnes, now doth he stay, Still crying, gentle Dirce, once appeare, For thou wast once a woman, Poets say, Then pittie me, a humane wretch distrest, Once vp she popt, yet to the sea her drest. His regrates onely serve to shew his harme, She serpent-like hardned her deafned eare, As when inchanters strive them for to charme, So carelesse shee, to sea hastes without feare, No whit regarding Calanthrops offence, She loves to dive in Neptunes confluence. Sometimes she sporting would approch the shore, Then would Calanthrop strive her to invade, Now would she swim neere hand the flood some more, Then sought he by intreates her to perswade, But all in vaine, for let him doe his best, She kept the ring hee held in most request. Now since hee saw, hee no way could prevaile, He vowes that he anone shall fisher turne, And emptie all the seas of fish and Whale, Els Phaeton-like he seas and earth shall burne, But that's impossible: so now therefore He Neptune, Nereus, Proteus doth implore.
Humbly intreates he that they'l him befriend, In causing Dirce him againe restore, Or they'l be pleasd, the little ring to send With some such like, he vowes hee'l then adore Their liquid Deitie, large and limitlesse, Belike those Sea-gods pittied his distresse. For now anone appeares a monster great, Holding the robber firmly by the back, His looks with death the whole spectators threat, He towards land the neerest way doth take, But since he sees Calanthrop, he directs Dirce to goe and mend her past defects. Trembling she went, and doth the ring produce, Craving him pardon whom she had offended, Protesting ne're to doe the like abuse, She likewise told him that shee once intended To give that ring vnto a kinsman neare, Which Neptune causd her to its owner beare. Well (quoth Calanthrop) now I see it's sure, Ambition made thee loose thy humane shape, Thy strife 'gainst Pallas iustly did procure This thy mishape, and though thou death didst scape, Be sure, abides thee yet some greater paine, If thou hereafter vse such trickes againe. So now farewell, for freely I forgive Thee all my wrong, Neptune still thankes shall have, Who did thee of thy libertie deprive, Vntill such time as thou was forc't to crave Pardon for thy offence against thy will, Else thy deform'd attendant would thee kill. Dirce to sea, Calanthrop homewards went, 'Cause that the Duke might chance for him enquire, And finding him that time to be absent, Thereof to know the reason should desire, For this cause did he to his chamber goe, So secretly none save his page did know.
He bids his page there leave him for a space, If any did enquire for him that day Say he was sick, and see in any case, That none approacht him, but he should them stay, For now the passions of loves fierie fume, His loyall heart was likely to consume. Likewise his dreame reputes he meere deceit And blames himselfe that e're did such beleeve, Yet when hee thinkes vpon the rings receit, Those sorrows vanish, which do most him grieve. 'Cause he admires what blist sp'rite did bestow So rare a gift to stop his over-throw. With weeping eyes hee doth the posie view, His pale-hewd lips the ring doe often kisse, Sighing he said (O heavens) may this be true, That faire Lucilla will forthink her misse, And pittie wretcht Calanthrop his estate, Would sell his life for her at easie rate? No, no, fond man, be sure it cannot be, For she hath told thy selfe already, that She much distasted Cupids deitie, And thought those fooles that ever did inact Their liberties, within his lawlesse booke, Or in loves mirrour sought themselves to looke. Therefore there was small hope of his reliefe, Yet willd his Genius him renew his suite, It might be heavens would some way ease his griefe, Seldome brave mindes succumbe in loves pursute. And though he dy'd, his ghost should have content, Since for her love death did his breath prevent. Vnknowne to him, Sophona was hard by, And heard the maner of his whole regrate, You know Lucilla sent her there to trye His passions which were tedious to relate, His plaints, Sophona did to stay allure, For shevnseene lookt through a doore obscure.
Thereafter went she to his Page, and told, She much desir'd to speake with Tristius His master: therefore wild shee him vnfold So much vnto him: likewise shew him thus, (Though for the present he be somewhat sicke) Lucilla's mayd Sophona would him speake. His Page acquaints him that there did attend A Lady faire, Sophona was her name, To speake with him she gladly did intend, Since you are sick Sir, she doth favour claime To visite you: some physick for your ease, Perhaps she brings, will banish your disease. Chiefe Dame of honour to Lucilla faire Is this Sophona, els am I deceiv'd, Goe fetch her quickly, she perchance my care May ease, which of her mistresse I receiv'd, Heavens grant it so: yet what way can I chuse To give her presence, I can not refuse. Now doth Calanthrop Sophona embrace, Their salutations beeing finished, Vnto a window they remov'd a space, Sighes show his griefe is not diminished, Faire Lady (quoth he) to a loyall heart, You may your pleasure now at length impart. Sir Tristius (quoth Sophona) I intreate You be not wroth, I come to visite you, Nor for my words repute me indiscreet, For to my knowledge I most firmly vow, I will not speake the thing may you offend, Proceed (quoth he) faire Lady, heavens defend. I should be wroth at any Ladies words, And namely those who faire Lucilla serve, Since I'me her knight, with reason it accords, I should such dutie towards her observe As strive to doe her meanest servants good, In dangers la b'rinth though I me intrude.
Well then (quoth she) ever since you came here I have perceiv'd you wonderfully sad, The reason hereof I doe much admire, Your face declares your heart's in sorrow clad, To see so brave a knight it grieves me much As you, so subiect vnto sorrowes touch. Therefore I here the gods supreame obtest To witnesse this my true and kinde intent, That since I see your minde is so opprest, If you'le shew mee the cause, I shall consent To ayd you in each loyall endevour, With secresie, and diligence in store. O blest Sophona, wilt thou say me so? Shall I beleeve thy Nectar-tasted speech? 'Fore heavens (quoth she) what ever you me show I shall keepe secret, and I you beseech If that my paines can stand you in good stead, Shew me your minde, and fearlesly proceed. Indeed faire Lady, I will then declare Thee all my griefe: Love doth my heart molest, Disdaine oft drives me very neare despaire, Lucilla so bereaves my minde of rest, Her love, her love, oft makes my hart to quaile, For why I see no meanes for to prevaile. Nor can I finde a time to shew my minde Vnto her selfe: so Lady if you doe Be pleasd to show me such a favour kinde, As finde a mean how I may speake her to, Of me you shall have such reward allowd, As you shall thinke your travell well bestowd. Sir (quoth Sophona) you shall vnderstand No gifts can move Sophona to deceive Her loving mistresse: but since your demand Is so discreet, and sorrowes which you have Are passing great, then bee you rul'd by me, I'le shew you when you may convenientlie
Speake with my Lady, this advice receive, This very night some Lords will act a maske, In the great hall, so when you speech would have, When they begin, see you for me doe aske, Hard by Lucilla you shall have a place, And when you please I shall remove apace. O sweete Sophona, wise is thy advice, Have here this Iewell for thy kinde assent, As thou hast said, so shall I enterprise, Heavens grant that Fortune thereto give consent, Now to the end I may avoid rebuke, I will be gone for to attend the Duke. Sophona now I thinke, with merrie cheare, Went to her mistresse, who did then expect Her wisht returne, yet not without some feare, Although the message she did much affect, And when Sophona came into her sight, Twixt hope and feare vext was Lucilla's spright. Hope tels her all is well, be not afraid, Take courage for thy comfort quickly comes, Feare sayes it is not so, which tale dismaid Her so, that griefe her sences all benummes, And ill advisd to try Lucilla's thought, At first Sophona seem'd bad newes t'have brought. How soone she went to try Calanthrops minde, Lucilla to a chamber did retire, And there herselfe most secretly confin'd, Whereat her maides did very much admire. For she in vse had ne're such formes of old, Yet to enquire the reason none so bold. Sophona findes her tumbling on a bed, And making to herselfe a secret moane, But at Sophona's sight her passions fled, Yet every word's prevented by a groane. Now vp she rose, then said with sighing breath, Sophona sweete what newes? Is't life or death?
Madam (quoth she) I went at your command, To trye your knight, his vertue or his vice, My voyage was like theirs who plow the sand, Or those who search for fire beneath the yce. At which Lucilla shrunk right where she stood, Like to a snow-ball cast into some flood. Which Sophona perceiving, gript her fast, Cursing the time that e're she so did iest, Through her complaints Lucilla woke at last, Then faintly said, how sweete is death his taste? And still Sophona pittifully cries, Pardon Madam, for what I said is lies. Whereat she faintly heaveth vp her head, Saying, O heavens, sweet heavens, where am I now? In heaven, or earth, or am I'mongst the dead, She strives to stand, her feeble sinewes bow, Weakned through feare, but yet she at the length, Pac't vp and downe, and so regain'd some strength. Sophona now craves pardon for the wrong, Which she had done her through her misreport, Lucilla said, Sophona thou art strong Enough, to glad me by a wisht support, But here before the gods I thee adiure, That thou thy mistresse of the truth assure. By heavens Madam this is the veritie, This day I'me sure you have the worthiest knight That lives, or loves, void of infirmitie, I heard his plaints, yet kept me out of sight, Not so content, I went and spoke him faire, Whereby I tryd him to a very haire. Blest gods, what doe I heare, what, what, words, what? Sophona sweet, I pray, doe but remaine, And once repeate that Nectar-speech, even that, Of force sufficient fetch a ghost againe From darkest region of infernall shade, To Limbus patrum, where all ghosts be glad.
In truth Madam, I pittied his complaint, When in his waylings hee most plainly shew Loves passion made his loyall heart to faint, And when I did his countenance review, The figure of disdaine, and black disgrace, Pale discontent had portrait in his face. Lucilla faire, Lucilla did hee call, Pittie deare sweet, pittie thy love-sick slave, For thee who would to death his life inthrall, A truer love, shall never woman have, Aye me, aye me, wilt thou not pittie him, That for thy love the Stygian lake would swim. When thus I heard him, truth I must confesse I could not chuse but sigh: Madam, how now? I think you strive vs t'imitate, vnlesse You spare those groanes, I will the same avow, No Madam, no, beleeve me if you please, You are the authour of his great vnease. Now Madam harke mee, hee did mee intreate That I would move you for to give him eare, In some convenient place, for to repeate His plaints, whereby his passions might appeare, Therefore Madam, pray be not discontent, At maske this night I wild him be present. Where he shall have a time convenient, Whilst all the rest are exercysd in daunce, To tell his griefe, as is expedient, To you who may his fortunes best advance. Say Madam, say deare Madam, shalt be so? Sophona mine, I cannot say thee no. It shall indeed, I cannot still refuse To grant my worthy knight some audience, Else iustly may he think I him abuse, And that I light esteeme his good pretence. But this is worst, small time can wee acquyre, There to discourse, which both of vs desire.
Madame (quoth shee) can you not then appoynt Both time and place where you and he may meete? His loyall love with ioy you may annoynt, And be your selfe copartiner repleate. This is the best, so Madam thus conclude, If ev'r you minde to taste contentments food. My sweete Sophona, thou art passing wise, In each thing therefore Il'e be ruld by thee, Vnhappy she such counsell would despise As comes of love, seald with wise secresie, The time drawes neare, therefore let vs addresse Our selves, and put each thing in readinesse. Each houre a day, each moment seemes an houre, Vnto these lovers, till this day be spent, Delay, of taste, to lovers proves most soure, The time seemes tedious which precurres content, Yet, day oncespent, then the great hall within, The trumpets sound before the Maske beginne. The Duke with Lords and Knights went to the Hall, Next doe the Actors of the Maske provide, Then came Lucilla, with her Ladies all, Sophona still kept by her mistresse side, Calanthrop doth salute the Ladies there, Past by as though he sought a place elsewhere. Sophona sees him, therefore doth forsake Her place, went to him as of courtesie, Saying, Come here Sir Knight, though I should lacke A place, since you're a stranger, I'le supply, You at this time: he thankes her, she conducted Him to the place as she before instructed. Thus shee Calanthrop, by Lucilla set, The rest their roomes were distant a good way, When they began to speake, lest shee should let A good occasion: she without delay Remov'd herselfe a little from them two, To her Lucilla sayd, where doe you goe?
Madam (quoth she) no way, I'le stay right here, I doe attend the comming of a friend, And to our speech, lest you perhaps give eare, I doe remove this happy time to spend, Your knight Madam, I causd to you repaire, He in my absence will of you take care. Indeed Sophona I did think no lesse, For I admir'd you were become so kinde, As give your place with such a willingnesse, Except you had some other plot in minde, Now there's a iest (quoth shee) my life to pledge, Servant, that Sophona attends your Page. Sweet Madam (quoth Calanthrop) glad am I, If I or he can any way her please, Or any of your servants, because why I am your knight, who never shall surcease Both you and yours to serve to my lives end, My servants therefore should the like intend. For my deare love, when first I saw thy face, I vowd my service absolute to thee, Whose exc'lent beautie, and sweet lovely grace, Can ne're be darkned by obscuritie, O wert thou pittifull, as thou art faire, Then wouldst thou ease those sorrows I declare! Sweet, cruell, faire, is it not now high time To pittie me thy captive wretch forlorne? By thee disdaind, made captive without crime, Disdain still moves thee, laugh my love to scorne, Pittie deare love, aye me, how long? how long? Wilt thou persist in this thy wilfull wrong? Oh if thou hadst but onely one poore touch, Of that loves passion, and tormenting paine, Then sure thou wouldst be mov'd to pittie much Him, who for thee doth hourely such sustaine, The hope whereof, seale in my heart by this, Lend me of thy faire hand, one sweet sweet kisse.
Beleeve me servant, that's a poore request, Faith servant, I much pittie thy estate, For thou appear'st to be by love opprest, Therefore in heart I doe thy state regrate, Wishing that thou that humour couldst forbeare, Which throbbling sighes demonstrate to my eare. But trust me servant, I thought long agoe, Thou shouldst forget this idle humour love, Yet I perceive belike it is not so, Loves wound, some say, doth no way soone remove. With credit therefore may I doe thee good, I sweare I shall thee from those grieves seclude. Servant perswade thy selfe of my good will, In any thing with credit I may doe, And if thou love me, thou my honour still Must aye regard, this favour I'le thee show. In signe whereof I give thee here my hand, Thou shalt enioy my presence at demand. So when you doe desire to speake with mee, Send you your Page vnto my trustie maid Sophona: she shall show him secretly When you to me may fittest be convaid. The Maske's at end, for this time must we part, Yet take this secret kisse to ease thy smart. Madam (quoth he) I never can repay This favour, past the value of the earth, Though I could dye for you ten times a day, And (with Deucalions stones) live without birth, Or Hydra-like revive when I were slaine, My blood could never counterpoyse my gaine. Now comes Sophona, tels them of a match, Betwixt her and the Page, the morne at night, How they had plotted to deceive the watch, Steale forth at gates, by helpe of Phoebe's light, He runnes (quoth she) the water-walke 'gainst me, Madam, you and your knight our Iudges be.
Truth (quoth Lucilla) if I could vnseene, I would most gladly view that prettie sport, What say you servant, will you then conveene? Yes Madam, yes, I will in any sort Be present▪ then (quoth she) take you a care To bring your Page, I'le bring Sophona there. At two a clock in night see you attend, For she and I will come the garden way Thorow the gallerie, and the staires descend, Take heed the watch be vnto you no stay, No Madam, we in time for that shall guard, And never yeeld them thankes for their reward. The Maske now ends, the Duke and Lords them sped Vnto their chambers, for to take some sleepe, Lucilla and her Ladies goe to bed, Though one intent did not them comp'nie keepe, Her maids did minde of nothing but their rest, But she (sweet Lady) was by love opprest. She set an houre-glasse, nights houres to recount, And often cryd Sophona doest thou heare? To what a clock doth now the houres amount? Or pray thee tell me what a night doest make? How tedious is the time that doth prolong Lovers content? whose absence proves too strong. The night wore out, so likewise did the morrow, When it grew late, Calanthrop and his boy Went forth at gates, lest that vnto his sorrow Their stay might turne, for it would much annoy Him to be frustrate of such sweete solace, Therefore before the time hee kept the place. By ten a cloke hee did approach the walke, The time appoynted was the houre of two, Now with his Page hee secretly doth talke, At last he walkt a little way him fro, Where he the sweetest harmonie did heare, That ever was presented to the eare.
From out the garden gallerie came the sound To a basse Lute, the trebble sang some voyce Palinode-like, the subiect seem'd refound Tribute to Cupid, and therein reioyce. It was Lucilla, whom love did constraine. By this her Palinode her minde t'explaine. LVCILLA HER PALINODE. MAny one rashly give, reasonlesse censures towards love, But those as I beleeve, his mightie pow'r did never prove, Why should they speake, were ne're love-sicke Of Cupids power or might, Blind folke should not, iudge colours but Give place to those have sight. The time was once I thought, as those vaine fooles do now surmise And I by all meanes sought, to move each one his power despise. But foolish I, did not espy That Cupid was a God, Though I was wilde, hee made mee milde Like babes who kisse their rod. It's more then madnesse great, to raile against affections King, Be he control'd hee'l threat, the gods themselves to ruine bring. Him powers blist, dare not resist Iove, Neptune, nor Apollo, Should then not wee, who mortals be, Learne their example follow. Though Danae was kept close, and strictly watcht by matrons guard, Her father life must losse, by her first borne for his reward, He knowing that, incarcerate Her, to pevent the same, Iove did surmise, gold blindes the wise, And time make Dian tame.
Such sure is Venus boy, deare bought experience makes me know, None can on earth finde ioy, vnlesse themselves his servants show. Let yong and old, let base and bold Let rich and poore obey, For who gainstand, Cupids command, He workes their wrack alway. Long since, I must confesse, I Venus deitie did detest, And thought it foolishnesse, in those their hopes so fondly plac't, I cald Love blinde, and now I finde He wounds without respect, Yea, all alike, his darts doe strike, With love or pale reiect. But where as I before, transgrest' gainst Venus and her sonne, I vow now to adore, their sacred will till life be done. No bad pretence, but ignorance, Made me their lawes forsake, So Iewels rare, some fooles will spare, And yet a feather take. Love all things overcomes, to Love Lucilla doth give place, Their sences he benummes, who strive his deitie to disgrace. Or seek his foyle, or honours spoyle, Therefore I thus resolve, In life or death, whilst I doe breathe, My love shall ne're dissolve. CAlanthrop in this song tooke such delight, He now remaind the gladdest man that liv'd, Her happy words he registrate in spright Whose force from death to life could have reviv'd The saddest malcontent that liv'd, or lov'd, To see how Princely love disdaine remov'd, The time appointed came, Lucilla faire, And wise Sophona, though the night was darke, Came both so softly downe the gallerie staire, None of her guard them absent did remarke, They shut the privie gate themselues behinde, Thereafter shortly whom they sought, they finde.
Madam (quoth Sophona) to this advert, Remember when you speake your knight, this clame, For men in love are cunningly expert, As yet you know not Tristius proper name, Is't possible (quoth she?) Madam, it's true, Then (quoth Lucilla) I'le that sute renue. Now see they other through a lowring light, For envious Cynthia gave vnwilling shine, 'Cause why she knew that Cupids day was night, Lovers convents move chastitie repine. Yet told Lucilla Phoebe to her face, Endymion saw her smile with better grace. Thus doe they meet, Calanthrop by the arme Tooke faire Lucilla, paicing so along, The night was dark, yet was the season warme, He calles to minde Lucilla's sugred song, Whereby love told him plainly to conclude, Lovers late meetings aimes at further good. Therefore he was most loath for to neglect Such good occasion: And so he desir'd Her, whom on earth his sp'rite did most affect, Vnto a parle: she againe requir'd Sophona and his Page to try their game, Of foot-course, which to view she thither came The which they did, the match Sophona gaind, For, midst the course the Page through fiercenesse fell, So they him looser merrily ordain'd, But yet the Boy their censures did repell, Alledging, that since Fortune gave the crosse, They could not iustly say his was the losse. Thus merrily discourst they on the sport, Calanthrop took Lucilla faire apart, Sophona did the Page be pleas'd exhort, Who seem'd to take his losse in evill heart. Whereat he smiling, rounded in her eare, To make them sport he did so sad appeare.
Sophona and the Page were quickly gone, Towards the vtmost end of this same walke, Calanthrop since he found himselfe alone With his sweet love, he thus began to talke, First craving pardon if he should offend, This speech to her sweet eares he did commend O Bravest frame that ever Nature wrought, Rare quintescence of beauties honoured frame, Fairer then she to Troy whom Paris brought, Thou who art staine to Cupids smiling Dame, Poore lowring Cynthia shames her shine to showe. Because she sees thy fairer face below. Each gazing eye doe homage to thy beautie, The fairest Nymphs as hand-maids wil thee serve Each heart adores thee, in all soveraigne dutie. Yet Phoebus faire midst envy's like to sterve, For why, black clouds eclipse his light divine, Thy fairer rayes not subiect to decline. The sparkling starres much imitate thy eyes, When chilling frost doth cleare the azur'd skye, In thee alone true vertue lives and dies, My life and love on thy sweet selfe relye, Look how the Lizard feeds on humane sight, Right so thy face both yeelds me life & light. The Salamander lives amidst the fire, Not burnt thereby, nor choked by the fume, So doe I live 'midst flames of hot desire, Thy lookes my heart doe fire, yet not consume. Likewise thy words inchant my listning eare, Like Syrens songs, when shippes their rockes drew neare. Since thou bewitches, deare sweet vse me so, As Circe did of Ithaca the king, When he by sea late-sacked Troy came froe, By magick spelles him to her Ile did bring, Yet through loves force, when she her conquest viewd, She yeelds herselfe to him she late subdu'd.
But if thou wilt not imitate a witch, Let vertuous Dido thy example bee, Who though she was most infinitely rich, Sea-tost Aeneas kept she companie, And though you iustly may to me obiect. That he was false: I'me free of that defect. Therefore sweet love, while as the season fits, Once make me fort'nate in my loves attempt, Are they not wise their secretes most commits To sencelesse things, from feare they're sure exempt, Windes, rivers, trees, hearbes, floures, nor grasse can tell What we coact, so let our ioyes excell. No hindrance have we, if thy selfe be willing, Come deare sweet love, come seale it with a kisse, Then shall we looke like prettie Doves a billing, If thou with-draw thy head, thou robst my blisse. O let me suck the Nectar from thy lippe, Where loves Idaea still delights to skippe. Midst fervent passion, he doth softly crush Her whiter hand then snow that's lately blowne, He pulls, she holds, this mov'd a modest blush Possesse her face, yet second by a frowne, Which so him frighted, that he could not speake, Whereat (she smiling said) and clapt his cheeke. SErvant, you men have a deceiving wit, When you your mistres favour would acquire, No sugred sentence doe you then omit, Some lying sp'rite doth so your hearts inspire. For when you seek to foyle poore womens fame, Vnder a loves pretext, serve you not blame? It's sayd that women when they list can weepe, And men in love can when they please looke pale, What passions, plaints, griefe, groanes, and sighes you keepe In store for to obscure a fained tale, Likewise you'le mourne like Crocodils with teares For ayd, while as your false intent appeares.
With sweetest songs like Marmaids, you'le inchaunt The chastest eare when nothing else can doe it, Blest are those women who in time dis-haunt Such smooth-tongu'd Sycophants who move them to it, When plaints, sighes, groanes, tears, songs, cannot prevaile, By truthlesse praises you our sexe assaile. One sweares his Nymph is more than Venus faire, When one would thinke her Aethyopian borne, Ioves Queene to her most sure hath no compare, Squint, drouping lookes, her gesture so adorne. How meek she is, most lovely is her grace, When fye on her, she hath Alectoes face. Now Dian must not be so chast as shee, Though Lais-like shee have a loving heart, Pallas I gesse, no way so wise may bee, For she can skill of Mopsa's hood-winkt art. Penelope so constant none did finde, As she whose Thain-like thoughts move with each wind And hee'l maintaine, she secretes can conceale, Though scarce so well as babes, who late got vse Of blabbing tongue, 'who all they heare, reveale, Yet in one thing she merit may excuse, Proud is she not, perhaps against her will, Cause to attaine the same, she lacketh skill. Her golden haires (though crow-black) will he guild, Her starre-like eyes, looke sleepie, yet must glance, Her snow-white cheekes, an Amber colour yeeld, Her proper nose, huge great, and crook't perchance, Her Rubie-lips, remaine of purple dye, Her pearle-like teeth, like Currall men espy. Her Ivorie hands are wrinkled like a frogge, Her comely breasts are such as babes forsake, Her heavenly voyce sounds like a barking dogge, Her breath perfum'd, would make a whole head ake. In end, his mistres pardon he exhorts, Cause of her worth he sparingly reperts.
And if we will not trust you, then you'le sweare, The cursed'st oathes that ever mortal heard, By this meane doe you banish all our feare, Which to our losse oft turneth afterward, That this is true, servant be you assur'd, Yet heavens defend that each man were periur'd. But come, sweet servant, pray you tell me this, Can there be love where that the truth's conceald? Some speciall reason may excuse that misse, Madam (quoth he) though love by truth be seald Yet if a man can yeeld no reason good. Their mistresse iustly may their sute exclude. But Madam, I intreate, if that you can, Shew me the woman that such wrong hath got, Or what's the name of that disloyall man, That hath his honour staind with such a blot. Servant (quoth she) my selfe the woman be, And you the man that did the wrong to me. Did I (Madam) did I? yes servant, you, Yet shall it ne're be publish to your shame, O grieve not servant, till I tell you how, Is not my knight cald Tristius to his name? Wherat he blusht, what (quoth she) is't not so? I'le make you then speake true before you goe. So if thou love me, presently declare, Thy proper name, and what reason thou had, For to conceale the same, and so to spare The truth: for truth with honour's ever clad. Madam, my life I weigh not to your love, Therefore this is the truth by heavens above. When first to you I did present my suite, (Heavens know my minde to you was ever true) Yet you, a foole or mad man me repute, For why, as then of love you nothing knew. So nought regarding me, you took good night, And left me (God knowes) with a grieved spright.
Since for your love I had my countrey left, My parents, friends, and all my royall state, Your heavenly beautie so of sence bereft Me, that asham'd I curst my cruell Fate. Likewise I curst those contrarie aspects, In birth beare rule, in life work bad effects. Sham'd to returne to my owne native soyle, Because that I was ty'd eternally Vnto your beautie, and had given the spoyle, To you of all my former libertie, For this cause in these woods and vnknowne wayes, I Hermit-like resolv'd to spend my dayes. Thus then resolv'd, I to the forrest went, A little after I came from your barke, My Page to seek some Innes for me I sent, When he was gone, a grove I did remarke, There lay I downe, and there bewaild my griefe To sencelesse things, which could yeeld no reliefe. Incontinent a man I did perceive, To me he came, and asked if that way There came some huntsmen, I againe did crave In any sort he would be pleasd to stay, And show me how they cal'd this countrey where I now remaind: at my request even there He told me all that I desir'd to know, Thereafter went in truth I know not whither, Most glad in heart of that he did mee show, I rousd my selfe, and then my Page came thither, And told me that my Inne he did provide Into a towne where many knights abide. Expecting on the hunting of a Beare, Who had the countrey people much abusd, Then for thy sake, my love, and dearest deare, I thought I merit blame if I refusd To hazard life, and that if I were slaine, My worth vnknowne perpetuall might remaine,
For this cause I my proper name forsooke, That likewise if I perisht through disdaine, Vnder the name of Tristius I might brookes Oblivion, which in death was all my gaine. This was the reason which did most me move Obscure my name, lest I succumb'd in love. But since thou hast commanded me to tell My proper name, I shall the same impart. Deare love, thou knowst the countrey where the well Once easd thy mother of a poysnous smart, Of rich Epirus, and that healthfull Spring, Thy knight and servant Calanthrop is King. Thou therefore who hast long my love inthrald, Since time so serves (deare sweet love) be not coy, With Epires crowne thy head shall be impald, Each earthly pleasure shalt thou there enioy. I care not for thy father, nor thy friends, So I have thee, let them goe crave amends. I'mesure it grieves thee much to bee confin'd Continually in chamber: doth it not? (Aye me) dearesoule, that thou shouldst bee so pin'd And captive made by him who thee begot. Kisse me (sweet love) and I shall make thee free, My Epire ships through sea shall carrie thee. My Calanthrop (quoth she) couldst thou acquire My fathers grant, it would my minde much ease, Then blamelesse might I grant thee thy desire. Children should strive their parents wrath t'appease, Yet I'me afraid, if thou propone such thing, It thy designe to hindrance great doe bring. High walles are scald when Canons cannot wrong, Import'nate suites in end are often past Continuall battrie, though the fort bee strong, Will force the keepers render at the last, The stone by water's penetrate at length, By often falling rather then by strength.
Lucilla so no longer could resist His strong assaults, nor yet could she reiect His loyalllove, prescrive then as he list She will obey: for why she doth affect Him so, that both her honour, state and fame He may dispose at pleasure of the same. YET though (quoth she) thou now hast gaind the field, I le tell thee one thing (pray thee set thee downe) To Tristius, not to Calanthrop, I yeeld, Lest thou should thinke the guerdon of a crowne Had wrought the match: no, faith I'le this expreeme, Thy selfe I doe more then thy state esteeme. By heavens (quoth he) I never other thought, Therfore I here accept thee for my wife, In signe whereof, this ring which nere was wrought, By mortall hands, which I esteeme as life, I'le give to thee, Dian to Arcas dame It gave, and this way to my hand it came. When as Calisto, one of Dians traine Admitted was, the chaste Queene much did feare The wanton Lasse long chaste should scarce remaine, Therefore she gave her this ring you have here, Whose vertue will preserve ones chastitie So long as she that beares it doth aggree. The chaste ring it is cald, you may behold Its name is written on its inmost side, The greatest leacher, furious, strong or bold, That ever liv'd, though by a maid he bide, Have she this ring, he can doe no offence Against her will, to her through violence. Yet wylie love did court Diana's maid, Who from her mistresse got it for this vse, And when love had enioyd her, as was sayd, She lost this ring by sloth, or by abuse Into a forrest of faire Arcadie, When as the god enioyd her companie.
Where, out of question, it lay many yeares, Yet heavens would not have such a iewell lost, Vnto an Epirot one night appeares It, who was shipwrackt on the Morean coast, Like to a glow-worme he perceives it shine, Like Fairies candle, or some light divine. The passenger, because the night was darke, Was much afraid: for still hee did admire What it might be: at last he did remarke, That neither bush, nor grasse, burnt had this fire, Then took he courage, swore he should it see, Found it a ring, and brought the ring to mee. When I had got the same, I causd demand, Apollo's Oracle what it portended, The response told, that to the fairest hand The world did yeeld, this ring should be extended, And that its owner should the virgine wed, And have her home to his right royall bed. Likewise deare love, it told me whose it was, With all the circumstances of the state, And how that it was lost by yond same Lasse, The vertue thereof thus it did dilate. Now this is all, of it I know no more, But that it's better plac't then of before. In truth (quoth shee) this is a strange report, That you have told me here, about this ring, Yet may it purchase truth in every sort, But now me thinkes the Larke beginnes to sing, Yet sweet heart, see thy Page, how he doth fleepe, And good Sophona must him comp'nie keepe Let vs awake them, for we must remove, Cleare day compels vs for to bid fare-well Black clouds, which hid the welkins face above, Bright Phosphorus makes now, for shame to steale Close out of sight, Aurora's dewie head, Hathdrops disperst ov'r hill, vale, wood and meade.
So each thing tells vs that it's time to part, Lest Phoebus selfe vs absent doe proclaime, Those things composd by Nature, not by Art, Bid vs beware of Envies scandalous blame, A vertuous name is much to bee esteemd, But if once lost, hardly againe redeemd. Deare heart (quoth Calanthrop) we shal not stay, Doe onely show me when you'le ready bee, For presently my Page without delay. Shall from Epirus bring a shippe for thee. My Calanthrop (quoth she) when e're you will, I'le goe with you, and your desire fulfill. For though one man might absolutely dispose Of all the earth, and were in suite of me, In my affection thou mightst safe repose, As heavens me blesse, such is my love to thee, Though love would suite me with the gods convoy, Calanthrop shall Lucilla sure enioy. O sentence blest, more blessed yet that tongue Which mov'd the speech: come, let vs them awake Vp boy, get vp, for thou hast slept too long, Yet first Sophona to her mistressespake, Sweet Madam doe you think it time to goe? Yes, yes, Sophona, doe not you thinke so? Now servant (quoth Lucilla) stay you here, My maid and I will goe a secret way, Towards my chamber, for I greatly feare, Some of my guard vs absent finde to day. Which heavens defend, I rather chuse to dye, Then any should our secret meeting spye. Heavens know (quoth he) Madam that I much more Respect your honour, then my life or blood, So may you well perswaded be therefore, Your smallest griefe will me of ioy denude. Much more the scandall of your honour'd name In my default, would make me still exclaime.
Therefore farewell, but ô what did I speake, Ambitious tongue, darst vtter such a word, The thought of farewell makes my heart so sicke, That twentie tongues its griefe cannot record, Yet thy departure necessare I finde, Then go in peace, though much against my minde. When she was gone, Calanthrop presently Went to his Page, and summar'ly directed Him towards Epyre to goe instantlv, And see that he the fairest ship elected, And brought with him vnto that selfe same land, Where now they were: the boy went at command Vnto Epyre, and there he did prepare Into the Citie of Nicopolis, A stately ship, strong, swift, and passing faire, And likewise lookt that nothing was amisse, Skild marriners he got, who would take paine To rule the ship, then hastes he back againe. This time Calanthrop better did attend The Duke then ever he before had vsd, Since his intent was ne'rea wished end No kinde of paines, nor travell he refusd, Could yeeld the Duke in any sort delight, Yet mindes to serve him with a short good night. Lucilla was not idlie exercysde For how soone she had shewd her loving Maid Who her knight was, together they devysd Time to eschew, yet women are so fraid In such attempts, that though desire abound, Each weake designe their weaker wits confound. For now they think, what if the guard awake When they are gone, and follow after fast, And finding them, with shame should bring them backe, The thought hereof makes their fraid hearts agast, And now anone love courage them affoords, To strampe their foes, though all their foes had swords.
Thus long time were they much perplext with thought, Of their escape, Calanthrop being alone, His Page return'd, and shew him he had brought The ship to shore, and all that he had done, Into a port, Tarento's gulph beside, Your ship (quoth he) and mariners abide. Sweet boy (quoth Calanthrop) thou hast done well To helpe thy master out of this distresse, Goe to Sophona, and to her reveale Thy diligence in this our businesse. Likewise do aske her, when she thinkes it meete, That I her mistresse to be gone intreate. By chance Sophona now stood by the gate, The Page salutes her, tels to her comfort, He brought a ship, then willd he her dilate What time his master fittest might resort To take them hence, and lib'rate them of thrall, Stay then (quoth she) and quickly that I shall. She swiftly went, return'd againe and told Him, that the time was best the second night, And willd him to his master such vnfold, That Luna's change would then prevent her light, Therefore it's best when that the night is darke, That we (quoth she) our selves with speed imbarke. Shortly the Page did to his master show The second night Lucilla had requir'd Him to attend the garden wall below By twelve a clock, for then have they conspir'd To come away, so Sir, take you choyce horses, Then need wee not to feare pursuers forces. Calanthrop at the time appointed came Vnto the place, where soone hee got a view Of his sweet love Lucilla, beauteous Dame, Accomp'nied onely by Sophona true, Iesting (quoth he) faire Ladies you're too blame, To walke abroad so late, doe you not shame?
Friend (quoth Lucilla) what doe you expect? For robbrie sure, and for no other thing, Indeed I should have been more circumspect, For why you little trunke my maid doth bring, If rightly searcht, more worth it will be found Then of good English coyne twelve thousand pound. But you to prove a kingly robber now, Belike intend, who take our selves and all, No, stay my friend, what mind you? how now? how? Is't so indeed? you'l force me then to call For ayd: yet rather I'le conceale my state, Then folk should know I were abroad so late. Thus merrily they talkt, to horse they went, Then to their ship the ready way they tooke, Ere they attain'd the shore the night was spent, The Page by chance did or'e his shoulder looke, And there he saw a sight he did not please, Yea it his master likewise did vnease. The Dukes whole guard and knights came ov'r a plaine, On horse and foot where then Lucilla lay, But ere they came, Calanthrop though with pain. Imbarkt the Ladies, yet was forc't to stay Himselfe on land his Lady to defend, Against all those who her returne intend. One railing knight cryes, Yeeld, you villaine, you, And render those faire Ladies you have stolne, Else by the sacred gods above I vow, I shall cut off thy head: with rage so swolne Calanthrop was, he could not speak a word, But yet with courage he vnsheathes his sword. The knight confronts him, reaching him a blow, Then to his guard returnes for his defence, The wound was not so great as was the show, Yet Calanthrop did yeeld him recompence, Telling him first that he must now forgoe His life, the which immediatly prov'd so.
The knight thus kild, the rest beset him round, His noble sword now stood him in good stead, Lucilla ever shrunke when he got wound, Each blow he got her tender heart made bleed, Yet mongst his foes, he strokes so strong did lend, That each were glad their wages to suspend. Lucilla seeing Calanthrop had kild Great numbers of her native countrey men, Her heart with pittie towards them was fild, Their cryes and dying groanes so griev'd her when Their life expir'd, that she was forc't to crye Thus to Calanthrop when she saw them dye. Stay, stay thy murdring sword, sweete heart (quoth she) And suffer some of those my people live, Not for themselves, yet doe for love of mee, Their lookes and wretched state my heart doth grieve, Spare them, deare love, for they my people be, They doe repent that they offended thee. Her gracious words did penetrate his eare, That now his heart with pittie did relent, He spares his blowes, and doth himselfe retire, His wearie armes, to rest give their consent, Till that he saw some boates goe to assaile Those in the ship where they might soone prevaile. But then he quickly in a boat did leap, Where that three ships-boyes, and two knights abode, The knights he kild, the boyes for feare did weepe. Yet to his ship where shee lay in the roade, He made them row, though much against their will, Through feare or force he mov'd them to it still. First sight he saw when that hee went aboard, A mariner before his face lay slaine, To him that kild him he did thankes affoord, That he thereafter never tasted paine. But when his foes his valour well did note, He was most happy that could gaine a boate.
For like a mad man went he vp and downe, Making great numbers welter in their blood, Others for to eschew his sword did drowne Themselves for feare into the raging flood, In end the ship he emptied of the rest, Then to Lucilla he himselfe adrest, She and her maid Sophona her beside, Sate vndere ore-lap in a quyet place, Calanthrops Page his masters wounds most wide Bath'd and bound vp, then with a pleasant grace, To hoise their sailes, hee Mar'ners did intreate, Thereafter went hee to Lucilla sweete. Madam (quoth he) what thought you of this sport We had to day? was't not a goodly game? Sweet love (quoth she) it nothing did comfort Me for to see you exercise the same. For though my father, or my lover gaine The victorie, I looser must remaine. But since that one of you must victor prove, I love my father well I must confesse, Yet neither him, nor life, to thee my love I doe respect, this much I must expresse, But ah, my countrey people are forlorne This day for me, they to their graves are borne. But yet there's one thing that doth grieve mee more, As (God knowes) I most speciall reason had, To sit and see thy blood diffusd in store, In my default: what marvell I be sad? But come (quoth she) thy wounds I will vntye, For I some Balsam thereto must apply. He telles her there's no need, yet still shee vrg'd Him to vntye them, for (quoth she) I'me sure, It's best your wounds be mundify'd and purg'd, Though you will not admit no other cure. His Page vnties them, Sophona betwixt Them stept, and faind as she some vnguents mixt.
Goe hence (quoth she) Sophona let me see Those wounds, els nothing can remove my feares, She viewes them well, yet with a weeping eye: For she infusd in stead of Balsam teares. Madam (quoth he) I very much admire, This Balsam which you vse should be so cleare. I'me glad (quoth she) sweet heart to see thee so, Thy ioyfull humour will my teares restraine, This liquid vnguent did proceed of woe, She oynts his wounds, and binds them vp againe, Now came a boy, and told them that right neare The Ile of Sason did to them appeare. And that the Pilot sent him to enquire If they intended for to view the Ile, For this day you can no way gaine Epyre, And little Sason is within a mile. Likewise it's best that wee a harbour finde In time, for now it blowes a mightie winde. Then (quoth Calanthrop) to the Iland goe, If that you feare the tempest will increase, For now I trust we need not feare no foe, If seas and windes desist vs to oppresse. The boy acquaints the Pilot that he should, Saile towards Sason with what haste he could. Hard by the Iland in an harbour brave When Sunne was set, they made their anchors fall, To land Lucilla would Calanthrop have, Where they erect Pavillions large and tall, Amidst a wood, and there that night they staid, For why, the storme the Ladies much dismaid. But on the morne the storme was so decreast, That it was turned to a new extreame For such a calme both Seas and Aire possest Their Ship could no where saile, and they esteeme The Ile so pleasant, that they now resolve Themselves some further in the wood t'involve
So for their disport, after they had dyn'd, Calanthrop and Lucilla walkt along From all the rest, vnto a place refyn'd, Where pretty birds by their melodious song Gave such content, that on a little mount They laid them downe, hard by a pleasant fount. This hill with Cypresse trees was all inclosde, With Mirtle, Bay-tree, and such sort of wood, On blooming boughes the birds their eares reioyc'd, Sweet smelling Cypresse did their braines much good, Each various obiect by their sev'rall dyes, As trees, hearbes, floures, delighted much their eyes. The pleasant murmure of the crystall spring, Suggests Lucilla that she should desire, Calanthrop to be pleasd some dittie sing, The which she did, and doth her suite acquire, For to a Mandore shee brought from her tent, He sung this Poeme, wishing her content. CALANTHROP HIS PANEGYRICKE. ABove the skies where gods doe move, Each sevrall deitie honours Love, And entertaine the same. Likewise the powers of fire and aire, In concord keep their motions rare, Despising hatreds name. The liquid powers of groundlesse sea A sympathie affect, And earthly powers nat'rally Sweet amitie affect. Day bright Sunne, night shine Moone, And starres which twinkling shine, Planets tell, and signes twell Loues Deitie is divine.
The airie Fowles, and Birds which sing, Through love are mov'd to welcome spring at his desir'd returne. Apollo and the Muses nine, On Parnasse still without repine, In mutuall love soiourne. The fish and monsters of the flood, Through love, their kinde supplie, Beasts wilde and tame finde love so good, They love to multiplie. The three Fates rule the states Without iarre of our life, Graces three, doe agree Vnitely without strife. The Faunes and Satyrs of the woods, The Sylvans, Dryads, each concludes To reverence Venus Boy. Vallonia and the Nymphes of plaines, Limoniads which in meads remaines A kinde of love enioy. The Oreads which the mountaines haunt, love towards other have, The Nymphs which of their beauty vaunt They Venus aid doe crave, The Furies and Fairies, Which trip each pleasant green, With Naiads and Nereids, Doe all adore Loves Queene. Trees which in thickest woods doe grow, And deepes which neither ebbe nor flow, to love their kinde appeare. The flowres which beautifie the fields, And vertuous hearbs which physick yeelds, Doe fructifie each yeare. Nature makes plants through Sympathie, Affect their mother Earth, And Earth she makes in like degree yearely renue their birth.
And floods when you see then By confluence they meete Voyd of harmes, each in armes, Imbrace, and other greet. Since sacred gods doe Love adore, And each immortall power, therefore Let humanes him obey. Since the Calestiall Firmament And everie sev'rall element Love, reverence night and day, Since Sunne and Moone, who yeeld vs light and starres transparent cleare, Since the twelve signes, and planets bright, at name of Cupid feare, Fowles and fish, Muses wish Monsters of sea and land, Fates and Graces, with sweet faces, And beasts, Loves Deitie stand. Since Gods & Nymphs of woods & meads, Of hilles and vales, and those exceedes All other Nymphes in beautie. Since Nymphes of Seas and Rivers too, And Furies, Fairies likewise doe To Love confesse a dutie, Since trees, brooks, rivers, hearb & flowre, And all which serve mans vse, Since all which live, or move, each houre May man to love induce, Should not wee, then who bee Most subiect vnto reason, Condiscend, to extend Loves power in the season▪ But oh, what reason then have I Whom Gods and men doe both envie For my Lucilla faire, To honour Cupid and his dame, And evermore their praise proclaime
Where ever I repaire, Who have so richly me possest of the most beateous creature, That eye hath seene, or tongue exprest, and of most comely feature. In each art, I'le impart Her beautie, Natures praise, For her sake, I shall make Homage to Love alwayes. THus having sung, he renders to his deare The litle Mandore she of late him lent Intreating if his song dislik't her eare, To pardon him, for such a bad intent He swore ne're harbour'd in his loyall brest, The which to witnesse, Venus he attest. Sweet servant (quoth she) you doe still preveene Me by your court'sie, which I much admire, In right I must, if any wrong had beene, Remit it freely, for I did require You for to sing, which since at my request You did: To yeeld you thankes it is the least. Now waxt it late, Phoebus was gone to rest, And Heards their flockes drave to their wonted fold, The singing birds went chirping to their nest, The Owle sate skrieking in an Hollyne old Therefore those lovers now forsooke their place, And to their tent they walkt a comely pace. When they had new refresht themselves with food, And each one minded for to goe to bed, One came and told the winde was marv'lous good, And therefore willd them ev'rie thing expede. So loath to let such good occasion slip, Each one went presently aboord the ship.
They weigh their ankers, and they hoyse their saile, And now they lanch forth quickly in the deepe, A west north-west yeelds them a prosperous gale, The ship vpon the tops of waves did leape. But on the morrow by the breake of day, They saw a saile make towards them right way. Yet they (sweet folk) their course kept without feare, Still towards Epire, as they had intended, Little knew they this was a man of warre, And though they had, they could not have defended, He gain'd the wind-ward, emptied all their sheetes, Then with a brasse-peece rudely he them greetes. They by no meane were able to resist, Againe he shootes, yet never speakes a word, Force must they yeeld, thinke of it as they list, His ship then theirs was taller by a boord. In end he offers peace if they will render, Which they accept, for each their life did tender. The Pyrat boords them, took what he thoughtfit, At last by chance hee lookes, and doth espye The Paragon of beautie weeping sit, And kinde Sophona doing so, her by, Seeing them weepe, he neerer doth resort, With good intent the Ladies to comfort. Calanthrop all this while was keeped fast, For he had kild two when they first did enter, Downe in the roume the Souldiers had him cast, Sixe did attend him, for they durst not venter To leave him, fearing hee himselfe would kill, Therefore they stayd to know their Captaines will. But whilst the captaine by the Ladies stood, Earnestly viewing faire Lucilla's face, Her beautie wounds him so, that to conclude, He at his captive'gins to suite for grace, Which she (wise Lady) would not flat refuse, Lest that he might the prisoners abuse.
Now came a Sergeant, willd the Captaine show What was his will concerning him they kept, For he hath kild your best commanders two, As for the rest, you them to grace accept. Since (quoth Lucilla) of no bad pretence That man those kild, but in his owne defence, In this respect (good Captaine) I intreat You him to pardon, whatsoe're he be. The Captaine, since her sute was so discreete, Sayd to his Sergeant, bring him here to mee. And Lady (quoth hee) for thy sake hee shall Not die I sweare, though he had kild them all. Calanthrop to their Captaine they present, He pardons him, his love did so abound Towards Lucilla: likewise gave assent That all the rest of captives there were found, Went to their shippe, all such as pleasd to goe, For, save the Ladies, hee would keepe no moe. The Captaines shippe was by some blind-rocke brusde, To land they must, before the breach they mend, This voyage all the robbers much confusde, Yet since to land they must, they all intend Towards Zacyntus Pyrats harbour sure, Whose wooddie toppes, their toppe-masts will obscure. There they amended all their shippes defect, But yet the greatest fault they have not seene, The fault was this, the ship did not eiect Those miscreant robbers which shee did conteine. But theeves as well as marchants saile the flood Even as the Sunne doth shine on bad and good. Calanthrop here dismist his Epirots, And faind as though with robbers hee tooke part, Yet he a secret time to them denotes, When they should see him, which reioyc't their heart. They towards Epire, Pyrates to the sea, Were quickly gone, glad of their late supplea.
And now the Captaine'gins againe to suite The faire Lucilla, who did still reiect His kindest offers, then by golden fruite Hee thinkes to move her, him for to affect. But since he saw that nothing could allure Her for to love, or his content procure. By force hee mindesto give himselfe content, So he desir'd to speak with her alone. But now the chastering frustrate his intent, And his assaults the vertue of its stone When he applyd his strength, did make him quaile, And still he marveld why his strength should faile. Now he esteemes Lucilla for a witch For why no perswasives allure her could, Nor yet could gifts, which might her much inrich, Nor could he gaine by force the thing he would. Therfore by threats he seeks her to perswade, For this his last repulse had made him mad. Sometimes hee had remarkt her kindly looke Towards Calanthrop: this incenc't his ire, Fornever Rivall yet could other brooke, Though onely lust had set their hearts on fire. Therefore if shee will not his suite allow, To kill her hee doth execrably vow. And lest (quoth he) thou thinke I doe dissemble, I'le first cause kill the knight that's with you here, (Oh how her heart at this sad tale did tremble) That by his death (quoth hee) thou death mayst feare, Thus sent he Sergeants waiting on him there, To bid the knight for death himselfe prepare. No, stay (quoth she) for by the heavens I sweare, If you doe harme him, you shall nere acquyre My love: therefore it's best in time forbeare Such curst intent, if ever you aspire To gaine my favour: therefore doe not grieve Me so; for I behinde him will not live.
And is it so (quoth he?) Im'e for you then, Faith all the earth now shall not save his life, Yea though the world could yeeld no other men Then now are here, for sure you are his wife. So whilst he lives, my will I'le nere effect, But being dead, I may some good expect. By heavens (quoth she) my husband is hee not, Yet since you'le kill him, pray you kill me first, That he (sweet soule) by me may be forgot, Shortly dispatch, since for our blood you thirst. No (quoth the Captaine) it is my desire, His breath that lets my ioy, doe first expire. But whilst his wretch't intent hee prosecuted, The gods (belike) would no way have it so, For by a thundring noyse they him refuted, And suddaine storme, that each were glad to goe, Prepare themselves for death as well as hee, The captaine feardest of the companie. The storme increast, Boreas (it seem'd) had sworne To pull vp Neptune from his watry Cell, The raging seas on wings of windes were borne, Minding Vulcanus from his reigne t'expell, The swelling Surges of the seas profound, Our gallant Captaines courage did confound. For on those seas he Pyrate did remaine Twelve yeares before, yet never saw such storme In all his life, nor never shall againe, Iust heavens revenge, when men will not reforme. Many nights past, yet came this worser day, Which made the Pyrats (not in vse) to pray. But vrg'd devotion doth not oft prevaile, So prov'd it here, for still a Northerne winde Them to the coast of Africa doth haile, And which was worst, no harbour could they find. In end Neptunus bore them on his backe, Vnto the greater Syrtis, where they wracke.
There dy'd the Captaine and his cursed mates, And Calanthrops kinde Page there also dy'd, If they had time they would revile the Fates, Calanthrop got a boord, but now he spy'd Lucilla by him, fleeting on a wave, So from his boord he went, her life to save. A little he could swimme, not very well, At last he caught her, set her on his boord, Now though he dy'd, he thought he would not feele No paine, since that the heavens did him affoord Such happinesse, as to preserve her breath, Whose beauteous presence had astonisht death. Through fort'nate chance they did acquire the land, Hard by the high and woodie Cephalas, Which Promontorie doth directly stand Where Syrtis doth beginne: but or they passe Any where furder, they Calanthrops Page Dead doe perceive, for now the storme did swage. On sands he lay, (oh how his face lookt pale) Lucilla could not choose, but now shee wept His master doth his timelesse death bewaile, Yet when he mindes himselfe had almost slept In Nereus mansion, hee left off to mourne, And to Lucilla did againe returne. Now since hee's dead, they doe themselves apply To finde Sophona, dead, or els aliue, And as they seeke amongst the rockes to trye For her, they see her ready to arrive, The Fates with happy fortune so her blest, She came to land vpon her mistresse chest. They welcom'd her, then altogether went And with sad hearts inter'd Calanthrops boy, When they had done, they all with one consent, Each other toward Cephalas convoy Where they in silence spent that wearie night, Longing to see faire Phoebus come in sight.
When day appeard, and that the night was past They went to finde some village, or some towne, For, 'gainst their will they kept a two-dayes fast, The wearie Ladies by the way sate downe To rest themselves: Calanthrop found a boy Who said hee would to Tapra them convoy. Riding hee was, a spare horse in his hand He held, whereof Calanthrop was most glad, Yet at the boy hee humbly did demand For money leave to ride: to which the Lad Gave good attendance, telling him for pay He should them horse to Tapra all the way. Calanthrop gives him coyne, the boy alights, And told him likewise that hee had some bread, If they were hungry, to refresh their sprights. Likewise some wine, if they thereof had need. The bread and wine Calanthrop from him takes, Thereof for Ladies (noble banquet) makes. When they had done, Calanthrop much admir'd A barbarous boy to them was so discreete, To know his name therefore hee much desir'd, The which the boy did willingly recite, My name (quoth hee) Sir is Philodespot, Likewise by birth I am an Epirot. I'me glad (quoth Calanthrop) for so am I, (At this Lucilla could not chuse but smile) But (quoth Calanthrop) pray thee tell me why Thou in Barbaria loves to stay this while? Sir (quoth the boy) our ship was run a-ground By this late storme, where my sweet master drownd. And now since I a master lacke, I goe To Tapra, for to try if I can finde Some shippe, going for Greece, that I may so Transported be, which much will ease my minde. Please thee (quoth Calanthrop) I'le give thee wage, If thou wilt stay with me, and be my page.
I am content (quoth he) Sir, if you please, Yet much I long my native soyle to see, But yet it will my minde most greatly ease, To serve or be in honest companie. So horse those Ladies, I shall be their guide, Behinde you one, the other me shall ride. Forwards they iourney'd towards Tapra Citie, But by the way (misfort'nate accident) The vilest tyrant, lecherous, lacking pittie, That breath'd, or mov'd beneath the firmament, They met with all, Anxifer was his name, Of Cyrenaica king: yet lacking shame. This shamelesse tyrant, when that hee perceiv'd Such matchlesse beautie have so slender guard, He and his comp'nie bea stlily behav'd Themselves, not caring what came afterward. For many wounds they to Calanthrop gave, Thereafter of his Ladies him berave. Two great misfortunes Calanthrop did prove, For first the Ladies were bereft him there, Next, was so wounded, that he scarce could move, But yet the losse of his Lucilla faire, More then his wounds did aggravate his griefe Though his kinde Page did yeeld him great reliefe. For hee on horse set him, when they were gone, So, through great labour, they the Citie gain'd. But oh! to heare what wofull wailing mone The Ladies made, when as they were constrain'd To part with Calanthrop, and hee so wound, That sight the gladdest heart might have confounded. Calanthrop through his wounds was forc't to stay In Tapra Citie for a weeke or two, Then towards Epire he without delay And his kinde Page, addrest themselves to goe, Minding a navie shortly for to bring Towards Corena, and besiege the King.
For in Corena did this king abide, This Anxifer, who did Calanthrop wrong, In Cyrenaica hard by the sea side, Corena stands, a Citie matchlesse strong, The tyrant to this towne the Ladies brought, Where many times he villanies had wrought. Now must we leave Calanthrop in Epire, Levying his forces with what haste he can, And speak of those faire Ladies who were here Kept in Corena by this div'lish man. This Anxifer, that monster for a King, Who sought the Ladies to dishonour bring. For when he was (as pittie were) returnd Vnto Corena, he made shut each gate, Toward Lucilla he in lust so burn'd, That he waxt carelesse of his owne estate, Save onely that he lov'd to be secure, Till time he might his vile content procure. Therefore hee to a chamber quickly went, Taking Lucilla with him all alone, Minding for to effectuate his intent, Which he (I thinke) might easily have done, Had not the vertue of the Ladies ring Him disappointed of his curst designe. But when he saw that strength could not prevaile, Nor that he could not purchase her owne grant, Another way he mindes her to assaile, And that was this: Some Sorcerers did hant Much in that palace, for those hath he sent, And bids them make that Lady be content To bed with him: or else show him a cause Why hee could not doe what hee did intend, Or else he sweares that without any pause, Their wretched soules to Pluto he shall send, They him request some space them to allow. To morrow this time (quoth he) else I vow
You all shall hang: thus Anxifer dismist Those gracelesse Sorc'rers, who in one accord Their master invocate, and so insist Continually, till he sent them this word, Lucilla faire, she keepes Calisto's ring On her left hand, whose vertue lets your King Vnto the King the morrow went they all, And told him that a ring was all his stay, On her left hand shee keepes it, they it call Calistos ring, (quoth they) therefore assay If you can any way that ring acquire, Then are you sure t'accomplish your desire. Of this the King was glad, gave them reward, Charging them that to none they should impart What they had told him, then without regard Of honour, went he with a merrie heart Vnto Lucilla's chamber, whose estate No heart so hard, but must the same regrate. She and Sophona bitterly did weepe, Yet nothing did the tyrants heart relent, Why doe you thus (quoth he) a mourning keepe? Faire Ladies doe not so: O be content, For thou whose beautie gave my heart its wound, Vpon thy head (quoth he) I'le set my crowne, Which if thou wilt not willingly receive, Then shall you both be vylie prostitute To each base villaine, and each filthy slave, Then to the death I shal you persecute. Yet e're you dye the hangman shall abuse You both, if thou to be my wife refuse. Sir (quoth Sophona) pray let vs advise Some little space, which choyce of those to take, For who so doth a marriage enterprise, Should well advise before the match they make. So Sir remove, and doe appease your wrath, For be you sure, each flesh abhorreth death.
The King went to his Sorcerers, and told How that by threats he hoped to attaine The Ladies love: and to them doth vnfold That for their magick they should still remaine With him, and honour'd bee as men of worth, If their advice good successe now brought forth But now Sophona to her mistresse sayd, Madame (quoth she) bewailes doe nought availe You see with tyrants, and I am afraid That he with beastly furie vs assaile, If that hee see his hopes are each way spent, Therefore it's best you seeme to bee content For I am sure before the time bee long, Calanthrop will see his Lucilla faire, And then most sure hee will revengeour wrong, Our losses all hee likewise will repaire, To wed the tyrant therefore condiscend, For sure your ring your honour will defend. Lucilla likewise thought this course the best, Their present shame and danger to prevent, By this the tyrant came, and did request Them now to show him what was their intent, Lucilla told him, much against her minde, She would become his wife, if hee were kinde. Whereto he swore, that hee should so her love, That after-ages should admire the same, And each one should his loyaltie approve, And for the wrong he penitent became, Which he had done her: then he causd conveene His barbarous nobles for to see his Queene. The very morne must be the wedding day, He longs so much his faire Queene to enioy, The heat of lust can hardly brooke delay, His barbarous Lords to morrow him convoy Vnto a Church, where he his Queen did wed, Would see him hang'd, e're shee with him would bed.
In divers sports they spent the afternoone, Ne're was bridgrome more ioyfull or more glad, Vnto their chamber are they quickly gone, Never was Bride more sorrowful or sad, Yet in her ring she specially reposd, Not knowing that its vertue was disclosd Vnto the tyrant, by a div'lish art, Else all the world could not have mov'd her goe To keepe this tyrant companie apart, No feare of death could her have frighted so, As to involve her honour in such danger, To bee alone with such a barb'rous stranger Now being alone, the King his Queene intreates To come to bed. which suite she doth deny. How so (quoth hee) then summarly recites He all her promises, and askes her why Shee doth refuse, since that shee is his wife, To bed with him, as she should all her life? Then lifting her left hand, hee faines to kisse The same, and she no other did expect But treach'rously hee did her more amisse At vnawares: for hee without respect Of teares, or cries, pulld from her fairer hand The chaste ring, which she no way could gainstand, So on the bed hee faire Lucilla threw, Fully resolv'd his pleasure to fulfill, He findes that once the Sorc'rers have prov'd true, And yet he must be frustrate of his will. For why Lucilla did the heavens implore To save her honour though she dy'd therfore. The gods (it seem'd) did grant the Ladies suite, For such a shaking did the King possesse, That his designe hee could not prosecute, Iust heavens doe still such villanie represse, When earthly meanes the vertuous minded faile, Then sacred Powers by their strength prevaile.
For though Lucilla could no way resist This tyrant king, heavens pittied her estate, And so those heavenly powers ever blist, In time gave aid, whilst shee her griefe relate, For now the tyrant vile began to bleed, And soone thereafter on the floore fell dead. This sight amaz'd Lucilla's tender spright, So that she cald the guard for to appeare Then vp they came, for they had watcht all night, But when they saw the King was dead, such feare Possest them, that they scarce could well take hold Of faire Lucilla, who the truth them told. Yet ever thinking she the king had kild, Their wrath and furie did so farre abound, That both the Lords and Citizens have wild The guard to putin prison most profound The Lady that this murther did coact, Vntill such time as she confest the fact. Her maid beg'd leave to keepe her companie, And then the guard to Iayle did them commit, Lucilla fully is resolv'd to dye What death they please, e're she thus prison'd sit. But now (sweet Lady) voyd of all comfort, She to Sophona spake in this same sort, How now Sophona, had it not been good That in Calabria we as yet had staid? Then had our friends not spent for vs their blood, Nor we thus prison'd, been for death affraid, Iust are the heavens who though into their ire, They punish me with flames of sacred fire. Even me who have my fathers will represt, Despising counsell (Natures kinde respect) By which I brought griefe to his aged breast, Who me (vile wretch) intirely did affect. Sweet heavens (quoth shee) to dye for my offence I'm glad, so death my misse can recompence.
But yet, (aye me) Calanthrop my sweete knight. Could I refuse to goe away with thee? Since in thy selfe is plac't my whole delight, Likewise thy ioyes I'me sure are fixt in mee, Therefore I vow, that death, or greatest paine I can for thee endure, shall be my gaine. Sweete Madam (quoth Sophona) well resolv'd, Though spitefull Fortune at this time vs crosse, And vs in woe hath guiltlesly involv'd, Yet if with patience wee can brooke our losse, We pay her home: for none can more iniure Fortune, then patiently their crosse indure. And for your knight, though you great griefe sustaine, Most sure the like him likewise doth annoy, For, till hee see Lucilla faire againe, I'me sure his heart will never peace enioy, Our griefe's at height, then Madam be content, For, vehemencies are not permanent. Whilst thus they spake, the Iaylor did them call, Told them that presently they must compeare Before the Iudges in the Iustice hall, So with him went the Ladies, (void of feare) Lucilla to the Iudges did dilate The simple truth of all the present state. Yet for all that, she was adiudg'd to dye, And so to Iayle the Ladies did returne, But oh! iust heavens, have a disposing eye, Which oft relieve the wofull hearts that mourne, For, now they sent the Ladies aid from sea, Who can & shall their wretched state supplea. The morne, alive midst fire, to yeeld their breath Were they condemn'd: this was their punishment The one as accessarie to his death, The other as the actor eminent, But yet, Calanthrop lately came ashore, E're they doe so, I trust will aske wherefore.
For now hee sent Philodespot to towne, To trye if he could with the Ladies meete, The Page knew all the countrey vp and downe, Therefore his maister doth him now intreate, To try what newes hee heard, or where the strength Of all the towne lay: so the boy at length Went and return'd: then to his maister shew The towne was all in armes, and much agast, So, of the Ladies he could get no view, For they into a Dungeon deepe were cast, The King was dead, and ev'rie one reports Two Ladies had him kild who were consorts. At this report inrag'd Calanthrop sweares, He will besiege the towne: that's not the best (Quoth divers of his Lords) for it appeares Since they're in armes, for warre they are addrest, Therefore let vs some stratagem invent, Them to ov'r-throw, & frustrate their intent. Sir (quoth a Captaine old) I pray you heare, Your Page tells that the execution place Is distant from the towne a mile right neare, To morrow when they come, in any case, Let vs obscure our selves by the sea side Till they come forth: our forces then divide. Your forces are some eighteen thousand strong, Of beaten Souldiers, well expert in warre, Who vow to dye, or else revenge your wrong, To morrow then when Citizens appeare, See you attend the place where as they minde To kill the Ladies: some shall stay behinde, And goe betwixt them and their Citie-gates, By this meane shall we stop them to retire, Then let them raile on Fortune and the Fates, And when they cry for mercie, stop your care Till time they yeeld their Citie and their lives To you: likewise their children, goods and wives.
It's well advisde (quoth Calanthrop) therefore I doe applaud: our shippes are out of sight, It seemes the gods doe ayd vs more and more, Blest be those pow'rs who favour still the right, The morne the Burgers came, who did intend To kill the Ladies, whom the heavens defend. Calanthrop and his forces with great rage, Ov'r-threw the Burgers, who were full of feare, Still was he guided by his loving Page, Each in his Armie crying still Epire. Now fled the Burgers for to seeke refuge, Vnto their Citie, where they must not Iudge. For why, Calanthrops forces were betwixt Them and the towne, so forc't them back againe, No where about could one their eyes have fixt, But they should see numbers of Burgers slaine, Heavens (quoth Lucilla) what moves all this sturre? To kill vs two, you need small force concurre. At last Sophona gave attentive eare, For why, she marveld what should move them stay, Then presently, shee heares men cry Epire, Madam (quoth she) we will not dye to day. With that Calanthrop cryes, vntye, vntye Those Ladies, else by heavens you all shall dye. The which they did, not daring to gain-stand, Calanthrop doth Lucilla faire embrace, And then Sophona: now he gives command All who had captives, to remove a space, Yet see that no man did a Burger kill Till time they knew what was their Princes will. Anone the captives they to him present, He graciously to mercie them receav'd, The captives then their Cities keyes have sent Vnto Calanthrop, seeing hee behav'd Himselfe so meekly, sparing all their bloods, To him they rendred Citie, lands, and goods.
Then to the Citie went hee, where his forces Receiv'd him and Lucilla ioyfully, On foot they stood in armes, for now their horses Were put a part, yet lookt to carefully, So Calanthrop and faire Lucilla went Vnto the Palace with no meane content. There hee directs his Souldiers all in armes To keepe their centries carefully each night, So should they still be ready for alarmes, But see how soone that ere the day grew light, Others, in stead of those should cent'nel keep, That those who watcht already, might goe sleepe. When they had supt, and it was time to rest, The Ladies to their chamber he convoyd, Thereafter Morpheus so his eyes possest, That hee in bed, till day, one sleepe enioyd. Then hee arose, and willd his Page goe see If that the Ladies lov'd have companie. Or if the Ladies sleeping were, or not, Or if they counted all their sorrowes past, And if their by-past griefe was all forgot, For he with them intended break his fast. The Page went and awake Sophona found, But sweet Lucilla, yet was sleeping sound. Sophona to the Page most softly spake, Asking what rest that night his master got, Yet through their speech Lucilla did awake, And seeing that it was Philodespot, She cald him to her, askt him for his Lord. Hee told her hee was well, and every word Even as before his Lord did him direct. Tell him (quoth she) he banisht hath my sorrow, And that I doe his presence here expect Whilst thus she spake, Calanthrop gives good morrow, To her, and to Sophona, for no way His page so stayd, hee could endure to stay.
Cousin (quoth she) pray who hath sent for you To come into my chamber you're too bold. Madam (quoth he) I cannot helpe that now If I returne not: then in armes he fold His sweet Lucilla, who forgave his misse, And in her bed disdaind not him to kisse. As thus they sport, a Lord to him was sent, By all the Princes of the Royall blood, Intreating humbly he would bee content To cause interre their king, for it was good, Since he was dead, that he were had to grave, And so his last honour of them receave. The Sepulchre without the Cities wall Was built most richly all of Marble stone, Like to an Obeliske: thither went all The Lords, and Burgers, yet with no great moane, The corpes they carrie, buriall to enioy, Calanthrop likewise did the corpes convoy. But by the way huge feare all those possest, Who bore the corpes, the Coffin did so shake, A thundring noyse, midst lightning, then exprest Heavens wrath, which made the stoutest heart to quake. So each remov'd, expecting the event, In end, before their eyes, the Coffin rent. Out of the which there came a fearfull beast, Like a Chimera was this monster wrought, Fram'd like a Lyon, was it's head and breast, The body thereof like a Goate was thought, And like a Dragon, was it's filthie taile, This beast the whole spectators did assaile. And so ran raging whersoere hee lists Amongst those frighted people to and froe, Till that brave val'rous Calanthrop resists Him, giving him vpon the back a blow, Which mov'd the beast, finding it selfe to bleed, Vnto the Lybian forrests run with speed.
The beast thus gone, Calanthrop and the rest, (Whose hearts in admiration did abound) Now to interre the corpes they thought it best, But when they came, no corpes was to be found, A scroll they found, the which they did vnfold And found those following verses writ in gold. THis metamorphose heavens doe right impose On wretched Anxifer, who it deserv'd, This scroll you read, is sent for to disclose That cause this tyrant still from honour swerv'd, Who was a king, and so bare rule above Others: yet cherisht vice, ne're would reprove. For this cause to Chimera is he turnd, Whose Lyons crest resembles crueltie, And cause in lust (not love) he ever burnd, His Goat-like bodie imports lecherie, His Dragons tayle doth evidently show Vnlawfull actions oft in end bring woe. Therefore let his example teach each one In Rulers places, who conspicuous sit, Beware of tyranny: for still the mone Of poore oppressed people, heavens admit, And iustly, when oppressors least expect Poure forth their wrath on those who wrong effect. If much before, each one now more admir'd, For why they finde Lucilla had not kild The king, as they supposd: so they rety'rd Vnto the Citie, where the Princes willd Calanthrop to accept the noble Crowne Of Cyrenaica, which should much redowne Vnto his honour, yet hee did refuse, Telling them that he never did such merit, Yet will they not admit of his excuse, For why, they swore, none else should it inherit. In end, into a place most eminent, They crown'd Calanthrop with his owne consent.
Thereafter was Lucilla crowned Queene, To recompence the wrong she had receiv'd, Fortunes inconstancie may well bee seene, In this: for why, those folkes who lately crav'd To take her life, now as their Queen most fit, In one accord Lucilla they admit. Thus liv'd Calanthrop and his Ladies here Into Corena for a prettie space, At last Lucilla long'd to see Epire, Yet er'e Calanthrop mov'd from that same place, In favours of the nearest of the blood Royall, did of the crowne himselfe denude. So did Lucilla to her endlesse praise, But yet they ever tendred this respect, That Cyrenaican kings of them alwayes Should hold their crowne: and likewise should elect (If that the royall race were dead or gone) Ever their kings, by their advice alone. Those Articles the Princes all have sworne, Likewise they vow, their dearest bloods to spend In his behalfe, as if he had been borne Their native king, they vow him to defend. Thus they convoy Calanthrop to the sea, Giving rich gifts to all his companie. Now from the coast of Africa they goe Towards Epire, with great celeritie, Smoothly their ships divide the Ocean so The way they went, cannot discerned bee, Sweet Southerne windes affoord them so good way, Comarus hav'n they gained without stay. Then in Nicopolis a day or two They stayd, then went they to Vallonia, Calanthrop now not fearing any foe, Embassdours sent vnto Calabria, Intreating that the Duke without delay Would come to Epire 'gainst his wedding day
Where many Princes of no meane degree, Earles, Lords, and knights, would likewise there expect, And give their presence, each as well as hee, Hon'ring the nuptials with a great respect. The Duke tells them, his presence hee should give, They thanke him humbly, then they take their leave. So to their King Calanthrop they returne, Told him their answer, whereof hee was glad, Now in Vallonia did the King soiourne, Where'gainst his Nuptials hee provided had Each in his court, horse, clothes, and armour brave, And each thing requisite their hearts could crave. Amongst those Courtiers was one gallant knight, Hee to Calanthrop Cousin-german was, (Likewise the King in him tooke great delight,) This knight did love Sophona that sweete Lasse, Sophona likewise did the knight affect, For why, no wench his carriage could reiect. Sophona Aunt was to Lucilla faire, In birth his equall, and such like in love, Therefore the King, the Queene, and all were there, Applaud this match, and willingly approve Their equall choyce, so king and Queene consent They wedded be with them, to their content. O what inestimable ioy and pleasure These lovers by this promise did conceive! I thinke they brookt it in the greatest measure Imag'narie that mortall creatures have. Thus they, swift sliding time in pleasure spend, Yetlongingly the nuptiall day attend. Now when this day that every one desir'd So much, was come, and Princes, Earles and Lords Were present, each one whom the King requir'd, Vnto them all Calanthrop spake these words, Yet to Calabria's Prince he did direct His speech in speciall, vnto this effect.
MY Princely brethren (quoth hee) I intreate You think not hardly I in Armes am clad, Nor that my Queen stands maskt: for I'le repeate The reason hereof, which yet makes her sad, Till she bee wedded, sheel'e not show her face, Nor I vnarme my selfe in any case. This is the cause: Of late in Africa By chance I was (O fort'nate adventure) When as the King of Cyrenaica A tyrant vile, did many one iniure, Heavens struck this tyrant with a lethargie, So that no physick could his griefe supplie, This Lady you see here, was then his Queene, Yet wedded to him much against her will, Hee wasfound dead vpon the wedding ev'n, So each one thought the Queen the king did kill. Therfore the Queen and this her waiting maid Who likewise must be maskt, as I have sayd, Vntill she wedded be, imprisond were, Thereafter were they both adiudg'd to die Before the counsell would their king interre, This time a boy acquaints me privilie, That two the fairest Ladies that did breath, For no offence this day must suffer death. I hearing that, having an Armie strong Hard by Corena, for a speciall vse, 'Cause that dead king before had done me wrong I long'd for to revenge that old abuse. So I, in spite of his, releiv'd at length, Those Ladies two, by stratagems & strength. Thereafter homeward I my iourney tooke, Those Ladies needes would beare me companie, Since for my sake they Africa forsook, It had in me been great discourtesie, Their kindnesse to reiect in any sort, Wherein I tooke thereafter great comfort.
For when I had with admiration gaz'd Vpon this Ladies beautie stands me next, Her lovely face my spirits so amaz'd, That ever since my ioyes in her are fixt, Likewise, because shee thinkes I sav'd her life, She is content now to become my wife. Now you the reason may perhaps admire, Why she is pleasd be wedded vnder vaile, It is their countrey fashion (though not here) Those that be widowes, ever to bewaile Their husbands death, with maids in like attire Till they do wed, their husbands then require Them vsually, for to leave off to mourne, Likewise for to cast off their mourning weed, The which they doe, and so againe returne To love the quick, and to forget the dead, This is the cause why those their face obscure, My Princely brethren hereof be you sure. But now you may in reason likewise aske, Why I thus arm'd desire to wed my Bride, I else have showne you why the Ladies maske Their face: so likewise know, I arm'd abide, Because the martiallkings of Epirus Who wan theirwives by Armes, were wedded thus. This other forme'they ever likewise vsd, Some forraine Prince their Queene must to them give, Which ancient custome none have yet abusd, Nor shall by me: for why, it would me grieve To abrogate such worthy fashions old, Ordain'd by my ancestors stout and bold. For this cause I most humbly doe request You, noble Prince of rich Calabria, Doe me the honour before all the rest Of Kings and Lords of famous Grecia, 'Cause you're a forraine Prince, as to bestow This Queene on me, which all the rest allow.
Sir (quoth the Duke) if that can can do you good, Your Queene I shall deliver vnto you, Therefore it's best you presently conclude To goe to Church: for to the gods I vow, I'le honour you in any thing I can, For why, I love each martiall-minded man. The king did yeeld him thankes, and so they went To Church, whereas the parties all were wed, The Duke knew nothing of the Kings intent, When to the armed king his Lasse hee led, For this same Duke had vowd, during his life, With his consent, his Lasse should nere be wife The Palace Royall stood amidst the towne, When there they came, Calanthrop went apart, And on Lucilla's head he set hiscrowne, Disarm'd himselfe, then with a ioyfull heart The King, the Queene, Sophona and her Lord Vnmaskt, or arm'd, returnd with one accord. Before the Princes in the dyning hall, The King, the Queene, and Sophona there crav'd Pardon on knees for their offencesall, Of the Calabrian Duke. When heperceav'd His daughter and her maid, likewise her knight Was king of Epire, he with great delight In armes embrac't and kist Lucilla faire, Next her the king, and last her maid likewise, Then he intreates Calanthrop to declare, The pret'rite fortunes of his enterprise, With ev'rie sev'rall successe good or bad, And ioyes and crosses which in love he had. For (quoth he) I remit all your trespasse, And ev'rie wrong you towards mee have done, Since thus you haveacquir'd my lovely Lasse, I likewise must account you as my sonne, Therefore be pleasd the truth for to relate Most punctually, of all your former state.
At his request Calanthrop did expresse His passedlife, even as the Duke desir'd, With all the circumstances, more and lesse, That heretofore he had through love acquir'd. To his discourse, exult they in assent, And much approve his resolute intent. The nuptialls celebrated were with ioy, Which did continue for a five-weekes space, In end Lucilla of a goodly Boy Was brought to bed, the wedding more to grace, Which mov'd her father stay til she amended, Then home he went, as hee before intended. So did each Grecian Prince: when all were gone, Calanthrop cald Sophona, that sweet maid, She and her husband, by the king alone, After this fort the king vnto her sayd, Lady (quoth he) as yet no recompence Of thy deserts, through my benevolence To thee hath been extended: wherefore now I here to thee and to thy husband give The province of Thesprotia, likewise you May in the Citie of Pandosia live, Which lands with you and yours shall still remaine, And not returne vnto the crowne againe. This now Sophona shall be thy reward 'Cause in my love thou ever didst mee ayde, Thee and thy husband likewise I'le regard Next to my Queen, thus shall thy love bee payd, Since thou with vs wast partaker in woe, In prosp'rous state good reason thou bee so. They on their knees doe thanke him rev'rently, He them embraced, then a Herald cald, Before his Queene he causes presently Them in The sprotia's province bee instald, Well (quoth the Queene) who serve (I doe perceave) A loving maister, need their wage not crave.
In great content thus liv'd they many yeares, Till that there came a messenger and told The Duke was sicke, and (quoth hee) it appeares He shall not live, for he is very old, Therefore it's good you to Calabria goe, If you intend to see him die, or no. The King, the Queene, and the yong Prince their sonne Towards Calabria doe their iourney take, Sophona likewise would with them bee gone, Likewise her husband went, for comp'nies sake, They to Brundusium saile the ready way, For neare that towne the Duke diseased lay. When they were come, the Duke was marv'lous sicke, For now his latter end drew very neare, Yet seeing them, hee straind himselfe to speake, The which they all desir'd him to forbeare, Onely they lov'd to know his finall will, Which all of them were ready to fulfill. Hee finding that his dayes were neare an end, The little Prince hee tooke into his arme, My child (quoth hee) the sacred gods defend Thee still, and save thee ev'ry way from harme, My feeble hands shall crowne thee, my sweete boy, That ere I dye, my seed my crowne enioy. For it will give my dying sp'rite content To see my off-spring in my place succed, Whilst I yet live: therefore to this intent, I set Calabria's crowne vpon thy head, And with my crowne receive my blessing here Before thy father and thy mother deare. The Prince thus crown'd, the dying Duke commends His people vnto Calanthrop the King, Then for his whole Nobilitie he sends Delivering them to him: but now the sting Of death, even then did penetrate his heart, Which forc't him say, Farewell, and so depart.
Now since the Duke was dead, Calanthrop stayd Onely to see the funerall welldone, Which being ended, he no time delayd But to Epirus with his comp'nies gone, Yetdoth his wofull Queene with teares lament Her fathers death, which many moe repent. Thus was the Crowne of Calabrie annext Vnto Epire, which many yeares indur'd, Till long time after they Epirots vext Through their revolt, and many times iniur'd Their Messengers, when they their tribute sought, Which twixt the kingdomes great warres after wrought. For, since they saw Calabrians refusd To pay their tribute as they ought to doe Vnto the Epirots, and still abusd Each messenger that came Epirus froe, They then resolv'd to make them know by force Their dutie, and thereafter vse them worse. To this effect the Epirots did raise An Armie great Calabria to invade, Each Prince in Greece to their immortall praise, Did them assist, and likewise did perswade Them for to prosecute what they resolv'd, Lest they, through stay, themselves in shame involv'd. Therefore they went with all their Armie great, And so rebellious Calabrie assaild, Which frighted folke, with death their Armie threat, In end, those Grecian forces so prevaild, That they a Province wonne, and brookt in peace Long after that, which yet is cald Great Greece. Now, lest I from my historie digresse, I will acquaint you with Calanthrops death, And his faire Queenes, whose lives in happinesse Both in one day expir'd, through lacke of breath. During Calanthrops dayes, brave martial man, Nor yet his sonnes, rebells revolt began.
And when Sophona heard of this report, Calanthrop and Lucilla both were dead, Griefe on her tender heart seasd in such sort, No physick earthly could yeeld her remead, She folds her armes, and then with fixed eyes Vpon her husband, she (sweet Lady) dyes. Calanthrops sonne, Epirus Annals tell, Was first, and father of the Castriots, Whose val'rous race still lineally befell For to governe the martiall Epirots. George Castriot, Scandarbeg, last king remain'd, After whose death, the Turkes, Epirus gaind. FINIS.
