15042 99842397 7047
LECTVRES of John Knewstub, vpon the twentith Chap∣ter of Exodus, and cer∣teine other places of Scripture. ¶ Seene and allowed accor∣ding to the Queenes ma∣iesties Iniunctions. IMPRINTED BY Lucas Harrison. ANNO. 1577.
¶ To the right Honorable and vertuous Ladie, the Ladie Anne, Countesse of Warwick I. K. wisheth increase of that grace, that hath promises, bothe of this life, and of the life to come. WHen once I had yeelded (right honorable) to the often and earneste request of sundry men, for the publish∣ing of certeine Lectures which (as they said) not without some fruite they had heard me reade, I was soone resolued within my selfe of one, to whome I might present the first fruites of this my labour. For the well accep∣ting of that which first I did speake before your honour, put me in assured hope to finde an indifferent eare for this, whiche with more deliberation I should commit to writing and the manifolde benefites which I haue receiued, constreined me to lay holde of any opportunitie offered, whereby I might lee some remembraunce of my thankefulnesse and dutie toward a∣ny of that honourable house of Warwick, to the which I am (in the Lord) so many wayes indebted. Wherof I haue in few wordes to say thus much, that I thinke there is great occasion offered of thankefulnesse vnto the Lord, who would that so many benefites and so much comforte should come to me from thence, that he hath offered me also this opportunitie, to leaue behinde me a thankefull memorie thereof, that there might be some remembraunce continued of that thing, that hath in it greate deseruing why it shuld not be soone forgotten. And to the Christian reader whosoeuer I say, that I am not ignorant into what danger I haue offered my selfe, attempting to write of that matter wherein so many and godly men with so greate fruite and commendation haue trauayled before me for to add any thing vnto them, or to differ any whit from them, will bee charged of some with noueltie, or secret reprehension of their trauayles, and to tread in the same steps with others that haue
gone before, shal not be able to auoide the blame of needlesse la∣bour, and trauel to no purpose. I am therefore to require of all men that iudgement may not proceede against me, before I shal be admitted to speake for my selfe, and that with indifferencie it may be heard what can be said, why no suche sentence ought by any right to passe against me or any other in the like attēpt. And for the former charge (of adding any thing to the labours of so godly men) if those who haue gone before vs hauing so litle helpe from their predecessours, haue notwithstanding left great light vnto vs, so that being be trusted, but (as it were) with one talent, by their diligent trauel and occupying they haue made it fiue, I do not see, but that it may wel stand with the modes∣tie of a Christian of our time, being so richly left, and entering vpon so great a stocke, to trauel at the reckoning to be found at the lest to haue gayned something: nay, I do not see how we shal auoide the iust reproche of vnfaithful stewardes, if so many ta∣lents increase nothing vnder our handes: so farre am I from imagining that the blame of noueltie or any suche thing, hathe in it iust cause to stay our trauell, or hinder our labour in that behalfe. And for the other charge (of treading in the same steppes with them that haue gone before vs) if that course should be taken, there is much that might be saide for it. For the same meate which beeing prepared by one, doth please the taste and stomach: beeing dressed by another, we haue no suche sauour in it: and surely the affections of men stande no lesse diuersly affected towardes the varietie of Gods giftes in deliuering one and the same matter, then doth the stomache toward the diuersitie of dressing of one and the same kinde of meate, so that in so great diuersitie a man may with modestie hope to be directed vnto some, who shall finde themselues hol∣pen by his handeling of the matter, albeit no other thing be brought beside that which hath beene heard of before: For as
the Lord will alway haue this aduantage againste the wicked for the cleareing of his iustice, that it may truely be said vnto them, in respect of the varietie of Gods giftes graunted them: We haue piped vnto you, but ye haue not daunsed:Luke▪ 7.31. we haue mourned vnto you, and ye haue not wept: so wil he magnifie his mercie towardes those that be his, in graunting them suche varietie of giftes, as no man shalbe so affected, but that he shall finde a helpe prepared, whereby he may be benefi∣ted. We see then, that either of these courses hathe not onely sufficient defence to cleare it, but also muche to be saide in the cōmendation of the same. The Christian Reader shal perceiue in perusing this treatise of the lawe, that my trauel hath beene to let him see, that Christ is a Sauiour in deede vnto him, that he might perceiue the length, bredth, and depth of his mercies, and so be brought to imbrace them accordingly. And because the greatnesse of our corruption discouereth the riches of his grace, which is by so much the richer, as the pouertie is greater which it doth relieue: I haue laboured therefore to lay out our pouertie & want in euerie particular commandement, & how our affection standeth naturally not indifferent, but an vtter enimie to the obedience required in the same: that in the sight of so muche rebellion and sinne, bleeding (as it were) in euerie part of vs of some deadly wound, we might slacke no time in see∣king vnto Christ Iesus the only Physician of our soule: and con∣sidering the number and daunger of those wounds that he doth cure and couer in vs, we might neuer forget or smally account of, but alwayes worthily magnifie the greatnesse of his grace and mercie towards vs. Which manner of proceeding (if it be indifferently exami∣ned) shall be found to haue great fruite and profite in it: For to make vs carefull in seeking after Physick, this is not sufficient, that we knowe our selues to be diseased and sick, but to know a number of diseases to be growing vppon vs, & those of that
quantitie that euery of them threatneth present death, haue∣ing infected the principall partes of our life: that is it which maketh a man with all speede to take him to the remedie ap∣pointed for the same. Many there are, who will not denye themselues to be sinners and sicke of sinne: but because they neither knowe how many partes are infected, nor yet howe daungerous their infection is, their care to be releeued is the smaller, and their labour the lesse to bee ridd of it. Where∣vppon also it followeth, that he is so much the lesse regarded who is to worke that cure vppon them: so that we see this ge∣nerall lapping vp of sinne, when it is not vnfolden to our con∣sciences and layd out in the seuerall braunches thereof, is not only hurtful vnto vs, but also iniurious vnto the due estima∣tion of the death of Christe. I cannot more fitlie compare those men (who will most willingly confesse them selues in generall words to be sinners, and yet are very loath to be troubled with any particular knowledge thereof) then vnto some notori∣ous offenders against the lawes and peace of their prince, who can willingly heare these generall wordes, that they bee offen∣ders, and haue not kept the seuerall statutes and lawes of their prince, so that they will proceede no further with them: but to be brought foorth and charged with their seuerall fel∣lonies, murthers, or treasons that they haue committed, and to haue their wickednesse particularly layd out in number of dedes, & manner of doing, that may best set out the heynous∣nesse thereof, that, in no ease, may be abidden: and yet notwith∣standing before that time, neither is their owne estate greatly feared, nor yet the lawe so much as thought vppon how to bee satisfied. It is this particular sight of sinne that sendeth vs forthwith vnto Christ, and maketh him appeare both glorious in the multitude of his so greate mercies, and moste necessarie in the consideration of our so many daungerous infirmities. If it please the Reader in the examining of him selfe in any commaundement, foorthwith to ioyne to the same that which is written here of the properties of loue, and that other nexte
Lecture of the vse of the lawe: he shall finde (I hope) some helpe in them, the sooner to departe from him selfe, and the more carefully to imbrace Christe. And that he may be acquainted the better with my meaning, and purpose in this matter, I will giue him in fewe wordes the reason of the same. I see in the lawe of God that we are not only forbidden the workes of our owne deuotion and intent, & bound to that choise of workes that God hath appointed in his word: but also that we are strictly charged to doe the same, all and euerie one of them in loue, which is an affection that carrieth a man so in delight after the thinges which he loueth, that he oftentimes forget∣teth himselfe in respect thereof, according as it is reported by the holy Ghost (as a propertie to know it by) that loue seketh not her owne thinges. This is the cause why after the commande∣mentes I haue set downe the notes and properties to discerne loue by, that when we haue seene what workes they be that we are bound to doe, we may also see with what affection we are charged to do thē: that we may be as careful to bring the right manner of doing vnto the Lord, as the verie deede that he ap∣proueth. For we are as well to perfourme duetie in the manner of doing, as in the deed it selfe: It is one and the same God who hath inioyned both vnto vs, and therefore may not be denyed in either of them. The vse of the lawe which is in the Lecture following, wil declare with what conditions we haue wages pro∣mised for our worke, and whether the couenant be so fauoura∣ble as that we neede not to doubt, but that we shall be able to perfourme it, and therefore to liue in it: or otherwise so harde, (as the trueth is in verie deede) that he remayneth vnder the curse of God, who continueth not in all thinges that are written in the booke of the lawe to do them. Let vs then set these together. First, the number of deeds: then, the manner of doing, whiche must haue in it those properties that be in loue: and last of al, the hard condition, which is, not to haue our good doeings to blotte out and put off our euil, but to remaine vnder the curse, if we shall not continue in euerie thing that is writ∣ten
in the booke of the lawe to doe it: and then we shalbe for∣ced to giue ouer this strong holde, euen this confidence in our selues, and betake vs wholy to the mercie of our God, and mag∣nifie the same accordingly. And least we should imagine the matter of letting go the opinion of our selues and our worthi∣nesse to be nothing so hard as is supposed, and therefore no such nede to haue so often before vs in meditation and earnest con∣sideration thereof the multitude of deedes to be doone, the louing manner of doing, and the hard condition if they shall not be doone: Let vs aduisedly consider, how that singular in∣strument of God S. Paule confesseth, that he himselfe was so subiect vnto this ouer great opinion of him self, that the messenger of sathan was sent vnto him to buffet him,2. Cor. 12.7 leaste hee should be puffed vp with the measure of graces, whiche were giuen vnto him. The daunger is greater therefore then we are aware of, when so rare an instrument and chosen seruaunt of GOD as was Paule, so hardely and with so much a doe, is brought to haue an humble opinion of him selfe and his wor∣thinesse. The Romish religion likewise (fighting so stoutely for the deserte of man) may teach vs, that this doctrine of true hum∣bling and submitting of our selues vnto our God, wil not so ea∣silie enter into fleash and bloud, as at the first we would ima∣gine: but that we haue neede often to set before vs this looke∣ing glasse of the lawe, in manner as hath beene declared, to humble vs withall: and all shall bee founde little inoughe to bring vs truely from our selues, and to sende vs, not in parte, but wholy, vnto the mercies of our GOD, whiche are de∣clared vnto vs at large in the next Lecture after the vse of the lawe. When we shall haue profited in drawing nere vnto Christ, and making much of his mercie, by an often and true sight of our selues in the lawe, there is yet remayning an other vse and fruite to be taken by it, of no lesse profite then the former: whiche is, that when wee shall haue taken comforte in
the mercies of Christ, and decreed to walke in the obedience of his will, to declare our thankefulnesse thereby: the lawe will stand vs in good stead to quicken vs therevnto, while wee learne by it, bothe the number of things that are to be done, and also the backwardnesse of our naturall disposition and in∣clination therevnto: which we could not once (without this admonition from the lawe) haue suspected to haue beene so greate, and therefore our care to suppresse it, would haue bene so much the lesse. But hauing determined once to walke in the wayes of his commaundements, and then hauing warning from the lawe, that there is bothe in our witt and will enimi∣tie therevnto, altogether bent to resist it: it can not but in∣crease our care, and add vnto our paines and trauaile, for the atteining vnto that end of obedience which we haue propoun∣ded vnto vs. For the man who hath a desire vnto any thinge, vnderstanding once of any let in the way, is thereby more pro∣uoked and stirred vp to bestowe cares and paines vppon the same: knowing very well, that the thing which he desireth can not otherwise be compassed. And where is that man then, that seeing what duties are to be perfourmed bothe to the Lord, and to his brethren, and in what manner of affection and loue, (for it is the end of Christe his death, and the purchase of his passion to haue a number not only giuen, but zelously giuen vnto good workes) remembring withall, what an enimie he hath at home of his owne nature, if there be any feare of God in him, that shall not be occasioned hereby more plentifully to practise the meanes of his saluation: especially knowing, that those who are ingraf∣ted into the body of Christe, must dye vnto sinne and rise vp in to these fruites of righteousnes? Moreouer the knowledge and meditation of the lawe and commaundements, doe helpe vs forward vnto true and sincere Christianitie. For a great num∣ber deceiue them selues in a generall good meaning whiche they haue to serue the Lord, taking that to be the true seruice of him: and in the meane time are nothing carefull to keepe a
good conscience in the seuerall dueties of the lawe, nor any thing traueyling to traine vp their affections to delight ther∣in: as if in Christianitie we were to roue vncerteinely aboute good motions and good meanings, and had no certeine marks of seuerall dueties set before vs to shoote at, that we might so iudge of our selues, as we see vs come shorte or wide of them: whereas the true Christian, in very deede profiteth in drawing neerer and neerer vnto the Lord, in making his life and con∣uersation more conformable vnto the seuerall duties set downe in the commaundementes, beeing likewise carefull to approue his doings by the lawes & statutes made for the same, as in ciuil dealings and traffique, a man wil feare to offende against the lawes and statutes prouided in that behalfe. And as a wise man that hath much dealing in the worlde, wil haue some abstract of the statutes, that (as occasion requireth) he may turne to them, and so deale without danger of lawe: so it standeth well with the policie of a Christian, to be skilfull in the statutes of his God, that when he hath to deale with the name of his brother, lookeing in this abstract, he may see the cautions to be obserued in the same, that he offend not against the lawes and statutes of the Highest: & when soeuer he hath to deale with his goodes, he may turne in like maner to that statute that hath prouided for wel dealing therin, & so auoide the dangers that otherwise he should fall into. The like is to be done, when there are dealings immediately betwene vs & the Lord, that we should often loke into this briefe abstract of the statutes of our God, to see alwayes what is the prouiso that is made for his glorie, and the suppressing of our owne corrupti∣on. Our corrupte nature doeth aske all this of vs, and the man that feareth God giueth no lesse vnto it. For the blessed man is saide to meditate in the lawe of his God day and night. Nay, we see that the only wise God (who knoweth better then we our selues what nede we haue) hath appointed vs yet more meanes, and therfore we must thinke that there is more vnto∣wardnes in vs, then we could of our selues suspect. For he hath
left it a perpetuall order for the education of his children, that there should be men of special giftes, both for learning and apt∣nesse to teach, & also for good life: who by teaching, exhorting, and reprouing, should (as it were) whet the word to make it en∣ter. It must of necessitie bee an hard matter, that requireth such instruments, & such workemen, for both the instrument and the workmen are from aboue: The wisedome of the world could not perfourme this, and therefore the Gospell (which is the arme and power of God vnto saluation) was sent from the bosome of the father: and for the workemen, we are not at our choyse to take where it seemeth good vnto vs, but they are ap∣pointed to our hād by the holy Ghost, who hath set downe such notes of good learning & good life to discerne them by, who are of his sending, and fit for so weightie a worke, as that they giue forth a plaine testimonie vnto vs, that they come from Hea∣uen, framed and prepared of the Lord him self vnto this work. As the goodnesse of our God could not deny vs any thing necessarie, so his wisedome would not that we should be loaden with any thing superfluous and vnnecessarie, which must force vs to conclude against our selues, that we are not knowen vn∣to our selues, vnlesse we see matter within vs, necessarily re∣quiring to be pricked forward with the liuely preaching and sounding ministerie of the word: and that we tempt the Lord, if we content our selues with our priuate readings and medi∣tations, and despise the preaching of the worde: which the Lord hath seene to be so necessarie, that hee hath appointed it not for one sorte of men, but vnto all, of what condition soeuer: neither vnto age alone, but perpetuall for all ages and times. The labours therefore of them that doe write, are not taken in hand, that men standing vpon them, should contemne or lesse frequent the publique ministerie of the Church: but to bring them into greater loue and liking with the same, that recei∣uing some fruite that way, they might looke for a greate deale more by that which is appoynted by the Lorde,Col. 1.21 to present vs perfect in Christe Iesus.
Concerning these Lectures, I am to craue generally of all men to whose handes they shall come, that in what point so euer they shall thinke their admonition may doe mee good, they woulde not denie mee that Christian and Brotherly helpe: and likewise if they shall in any thing finde them∣selues holpen by my trauell, that as they are to returne the whole praise vnto GOD (to whome onely it is due) so they woulde not denie the comfort of their prayers vnto him, whom the Lord in mercie hath vouchsafed to make an instru∣ment (though most vnworthie) of some goodnesse vnto them. And of your honour (my verie good Ladie) I am most humblie to require, that this dutie (how slenderly soeuer performed) may according to your accustomed clemencie be well accepted of: that what want soeuer be in the work, either of that you desire, or that I were in duetie to perfourme, may finde a supplie here∣in, for that it proceedeth from a minde moste willing to answer your desire, and moste vnwilling (if abilitie did serue) to be be∣hinde with the leaste parte of that, that duetie may in any respect demaunde. And as al good Christians should rather be desirous to lerne howe to go forwarde, then to heare what good beginnings they haue made, so I doubt not (Madame) but a fewe wordes vt∣tered to that ende (especially from me that haue great cause to be thankeful vnto God, for that he hath already wrought in you) shall finde better interteinement with your honour, then much speeche directed to an other purpose, howe good and iust soeuer the cause be that might prouoke me thervnto. It was a saying sometime of Asia, that it was no prayse neuer to haue seene it, but to haue liued temperately in Asia, was praise wor∣thie: so many were the allurements, & so great was the intem∣perancie thereof. I thinke we may nowe (altering the words) reteine the trueth of the matter, if we should say: it were no great matter, neuer to haue seene the Courtes of Princes, but to haue liued Christianly in those Courtes, were a special work of Christ in his. And therefore (Madame) as sometimes I
spake in the hearing of your honour, so nowe I say againe, that where the assault of the aduersarie lyeth sorest against any, there wisedome would, that the instruments to beare off and to beate backe the same, should be more in number, and stronger in effect. And for this cause we do reade, that in the Courte of Israel the Prince himselfe, who for the number and weight of affaires was (as may be thought) by some iust title to be pri∣uileged aboue the rest, might not be exempted from keeping this diligent watch and warde in his owne person, (by reading all the dayes of his life in the lawes of his God) against the dangers that by reason of that place he was in great danger of: diuers wherof, after they are recited in Deuteronomie, imme∣diately the holy Ghost giueth the medicine for them, whiche is, to be occupied in the lawes of his God, all the dayes of his life. If any by daily meditation in the lawe of God,Pro. 4.8. shall thus exalt wisdome (that is the word of God) by making it the chief delighte of their heart, beside the auoyding of these daungers and suche like, there is a promise passed from the Lord, that wisedome shall exalt them. If they shall sett her in place and estimation aboue all other things, she will requite it againe, by aduauncing their honour and estate aboue the condition of others: but if they shall make no more of her, but as a common thing, she wil answer them in like measure againe, to leaue thē in place & estimation with the common & worst sort of men. The honour therfore of aduauncement (which all men are giuen to haue so great lyking of) commeth neither from the East nor frō the West, but from the Lord him self: & this true honour wayteth vpon all of them, whom imploy them selues, their countenance and their credite, to honour and aduaunce this wisedome, which is the worde of God. Which thing that it may abound in you (Madame) daily more and more, and in his honour to whome the Lorde hath ioyned you, and that by the meanes thereof, you may so continue your life, as that you shall not feare to dye, as in dutie I am for ma∣ny
benefites receiued moste bounden: so I doe moste humbly craue it of our mercifull GOD, to whose fatherly proui∣dence (ceassing to adde any thing further, and re∣mayning to perfourme all duties, from time to time that I shall bee enabled vnto) I do most humbly com∣mittee your Honour. (¿?¿) Your honors moste humble to commaund in the Lorde. Iohn Knewstub.
❧THE LECTVRES of Iohn Knewstub vpon the twentith chapter of Exodus, and certeine other places of Scripture. The first Lecture vpon the firste and seconde verse of the same Chapter. THEN God spake al these words, saying: I am the Lord thy God, 2 Which haue brought thee out of the lande of Aegypt, out of the house of bondage. IT hath alwayes beene and now is a frutefull trauaile of men, to drawe arts and sciences plenti∣fully laide out into briefe heads, and some few general rules and principles, not onely for memo∣rie, (whiche in many, and long discourses, becom∣meth so intangled as it can hardly with any fruit get out:) but also for practise, whiche of necessitie muste be so much the later, as it shall be longer be∣fore we learne the matters to be practised: and the slower we are in perusing matters to be done, the slacker must we be in the performance therof. But yet all this notwithstanding, aswell reason, as the
practise of the learned, might easily be auoided, bi∣cause all is but the reason and practise of man: if the onely wise God had not leafte vnto vs, the whole doctrine of Christianitie comprehended in verie fewe words,Exod 20. Deut. 5. Matt. 22.37. Heb. 6.1. examples whereof we haue di∣uerse, bothe in the olde, and newe Testamente, whiche may be a sufficient warrant for enterpri∣sing thus briefly to comprehend Christianitie. If any shall take exception against the preaching and opening of the lawe in this cleare lighte of the gospell, calling it (as it is called in the seconde E∣pistle to the Corinthes) the ministerie of death,2. Cor. 3. & the killing letter: let him vnderstand that the holie ghost in the same place speaketh of the lawe with∣out Christe, what it worketh in our infirmitie: whereas otherwise of the law (being considered in the couenant, that is, in Christ) it is truely saide by the Prophet in the Psalme, The lawe of the Lorde is perfect,Psalm 19.7 conuerting the soule, the statues of the Lorde reioyce the heart, &c. At the publishing of this lawe of God, there was great terrour & feare on euery side. For (as ap∣peareth in this former chapter) the mount Synai was all on smoke, and the Lorde came downe vp∣on it in fier, and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a fornace, and all the mount trem∣bled excedingly. The people hearing the thunders and lightnings, and the sounde of the trumpet, see∣ing the mounteine smoking, and feeling such ter∣rible trembling and shaking of the earth, fled, and stoode a farre off: making earnest suite vnto Moses
that he would speake vnto them, and that they might not heare the Lorde least they died, so great was their feare, and so woonderfully were they a∣mased at the matter. It was very requisite and ne∣cessarie, that this maiestie of the lord should come in with the entrance of his worde. For we are gi∣uen to make small reckoning of it, & lightly to re∣iect the authoritie thereof. For, doe not thousands imagine that they sufficiently reuerence the maie∣stie of the Lord, when notwithstanding, they liue without all awe, feare, and reuerence of his word? Nedeful therefore was it, nay most necessary, that the maiestie of the Lord should visibly come forth after a glorious maner at the deliuery of the word: that men might vnderstand that the neglect of the worde, is the contempt of the maiestie and honor of the Lorde. For the Lorde hath coupled his honor, and glorie to his word, so that they can not neglect the one, but that they must in so doing cō∣temne and despise the other.Heb. 1. Those plentifull te∣stimonies, that are recited to the Hebrues to ad∣uaunce the dignitie of Christe, prouing his diuini∣tie, and giuing him superioritie aboue the Angels: are in the seconde chapter applied by way of ex∣hortation, to the reuerencing of his worde: telling them, that if the worde spoken by angels was rati∣fied, and that euery disobedience receiued a iust re∣compence of rewarde, how could they think once to escape, neglecting so great saluation, which at the first, begoon to be preached by the Lorde, and afterward was cōfirmed by them that heard him
God bringing testimony and authoritie thervnto, both with signes and woonders, and diuers myra∣cles, and giftes of the holie Ghost. Well did the Lorde vnderstand, that words are but winde with men, and therefore it was the good pleasure of his will, that neither his law, nor Gospel should come naked and bare into the world, but with the credit of his owne glorie, and countenaunce of his owne maiestie. For, the gospell as now we haue heard, was not only preached by the Lorde Iesus, but al∣so confirmed by the ministerie of those that heard him, with signes, woonders, and myracles: so that to neglect the gouernemēt of the word, is, to tread vnder feete the maiestie of the Lorde. Hauing made this entrance I doe proceede vnto the texte, where I am enforced to speake a little of the na∣ture of the wordes, because they bring great light to the true vnderstanding, and meaning of the cō∣maundement. The word IEHOVAH which is here englished Lorde, is a name of God, giuing vnto him his true nature and essence, which is, so to haue his begin∣ning, and being, of him selfe, as in him, & by him, all thinges that are, haue their beeing: and therfore it is vsually set before the promises and couenants of the Lorde in the scripture, that we shoulde not doubt of the perfourmance thereof, seeing it is the couenant & promise of that God that hath his be∣ginning and beeing of him self, and procureth the beeing and perfourmance of all things vnto them: in so much that the Lorde denieth in Exodus that
he was knowne to Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, by his name Iehouah,Exo. 3.9. bicause he had not perfourmed in their time the promises made for their deliue∣rance out of Egypt, and for their possession of the lande of Canaan. The verbe is not vsually ex∣pressed of the Hebrues in the like phrases, where the sense is apparant, and therefore of some is sette downe before the word, Lorde, and read thus. I am the Lorde thy GOD: of other some nexte after the word, Lorde, and then it is read thus: I the Lorde am thy GOD, wherin, although in sense there be no difference, but that both affirme one and the selfe same thinge, yet bicause there is more cleare vnderstanding of that one and the same thinge, by placing the verbe next after the worde, Lorde, I see no cause why the practise of some should be pre∣iudiciall in this matter, but that it may be said. I the Lorde am thy GOD. In affirming that he is their God, he assureth them of all mercy and happinesse, from him selfe a∣lone, both in this life and in the life to come, ma∣king a league with thē, to make himselfe knowne to be their God, by the mercies he had to bestowe vpon them, and that he would haue the care and charge of their welfare, reserued to himselfe alone. It remaineth to be proued by the scripture, that this manner of speaking (to be their God) contey∣neth promisses in it, for this life and for the life to come. In the psalme,Psal. 144.15 the Prophete hauing made mention of sundry outward blessings in children, in increase of corne and cattel, peace and freedome
from enimies, concludeth thus, Blessed are the people that bee so, blessed are the people whose GOD is the Lorde, making these outwarde blessinges, to bee conteyned vnder the benefite of hauing the Lord to be their god.Exod. 6.7. In Exodus, promising their deliue∣raunce from Aegypt, he saith that he wil be their God, conteyning that outward deliueraunce, with∣in this mercie of being their God. And as for the spirituall and inward blessings, as writing his lawe in our harts, pardoning our sinnes, and not remem¦bring them anie more, that they are conteyned within this couenant of beeing our God, may ap∣peare in the Epistle to the Hebrues.He. 8.10.12. After those dayes (sayth the Lord) I wil put my lawes in their minds, and in their hartes I will write them, and I will bee their God, and they shall be my people. For I will be mercifull vn∣to their vnrighteousnesse, & their sinnes & their iniquities I wil remember no more. And in Ezechiel we may cleer∣ly see,Ezech. 38.28 that the renuing of our stonie hartes, the re∣ceiuing vs to mercie after we haue transgressed, the causing vs to walke in his statutes and lawes, are streames that flowe from this free founteine of grace that the Lorde is become our GOD. A newe hart (saith the Lorde by his Prophet) will I giue you, and a newe spirite will I put within you, and I will take away the stonie harte out of your body, and will giue you a heart of flesh: and I will put my spirite within you, and cause you to walke in my statutes, and yee shall keepe my iudge∣mentes, and doe them, and yee shall dwell in the lande that I gaue to your Fathers, and you shall be my people, and I will bee your GOD: Where, these benefites recei∣ued,
are made the fruites that followe of hauing him to be their God, whiche is all done freely, and vndeseruedly, as the Lorde plainely professeth in the same chapiter in these wordes:Vers. 32. Bee it knowen vnto you, that I doe not these thinges for your sake (sayth the Lorde) therefore O ye house of Israel, he ashamed and confounded for your owne wayes. Neither doeth this mercy of hauing the Lorde to bee our God, con∣teyne it selfe within the compasse of this life, but reacheth vnto the blessinges of the life to come, as appeareth in the Gospell after Saincte Luke,Luke. 20.37.38. where our Sauiour Christe proueth that it must needes be well with Abraham, and that hee muste rise againe, bycause it is written, The Lorde is the God of Abraham, for he is not the GOD of the dead, (say∣eth our Sauiour Christe) but of them that liue. In the Epistle to the Hebrues, Abraham,Heb. 11.10. and others the children of God, are reported to haue bene straungers in the land of promise, and not to haue sene the promises fulfilled in their time: whi∣che might seeme to make againste this that I haue sayd, concerning the blessing of them to whom the Lord is become God: but it is answered there, that he was not ashamed to bee called their God, for he had prepared for them a citie: as if that whi∣che seemed to be wanting in this life, were so suffi∣ciently recompēced in that ioye that did abide for them, as yt the Lord neded not to be ashamed to be called their God, so rich was his mercie towardes them. By this we learne, that the first commaun∣dement conteyneth in it the promises of the Gos∣pel
(as it is well noted by M.Peter mar∣tyr vppon Rom. 7. Peeter Martyr) con∣trarie to this damnable opinion of certeine, who holde, that the fathers of the olde Testament, had no promises, sauing of the lande of Canaan, and temporall thinges. We see that the Lorde made promise to be their God, which (as we haue heard) hath promises bothe of this life, and of the life to come. And (as it appeareth in Genesis) all the mer∣cies that Abraham receiued,Gene. 17.7. were conteined vn∣der these wordes (which are the wordes of the co∣uenaunt) I will be God to thee and to thy seede after thee. The benifite (that here is set downe) of bring∣ing thē out of the land of Egypt, & from the house of bondage, is an experience whiche they had of this goodnesse of God, wherin he did apparauntly declare him selfe to be their God, and so likewise it is in other places brought in as a confirmation of the couenaunt:Deut. 7.8.9. Because the Lorde loued you (sayth the holy ghost) and because he would keep the othe which he had sworn to your fathers, the Lord hath brought you out by a mightie hand, and deliuered you out of the house of bon∣dage, from the hand of Pharao king of Egypt, that thou may∣est knowe, that the Lorde thy God hee is GOD, the faith∣full God, whiche keepeth couenaunt and mercie vnto them that loue him, and keepe his commaundements. This expe∣rience of God his goodnesse towardes them, and the triall that hee is become their GOD, maketh much to bring an obedience, and therefore is pla∣ced with the couenaunt. For when we haue tryall in deed, that ye Lord hath speciall good wil towards vs, it hath greate force in it, to bring vs willingly
vnder his obedience. Therefore we are taught by this, alwayes to haue in memorie those benefits of God, that haue in them the note and marke of spe∣ciall good will and lyking, such as he beareth vn∣to his Children. For the remembraunce of those, will draw dueties from vs, that shall proceed from a frank and free hart. Let vs therefore haue a regi∣ster of his greatest benefites done vnto vs: Let vs call to minde what a speciall benefite this is, if we had none other, that when we were (as is the dis∣position of all Adams children) following the lusts and affections of our owne hart, in that brode way that leadeth vnto death, which so many followe, it hath pleased him to pick vs out of so many, to giue vs mysliking of that course of life, whiche by na∣ture we are so addict and inclyned vnto, & the ear∣nest hungring and thirsting after that righteousnes that is approued by his worde: His benefites may not be ouer passed without consideration, they ca∣ry with them strong persuasion vnto obedience, the faithful doe vse this helpe to further obedience vnto God. In the last chapter of Iosua,Iosua. 24. there is mention made of the seuerall benefites of God be∣stowed vpon his people, and all for this end, to re∣clayme them from sinne, and to stirre them to free and willing seruice of the Lord. And the people (in the same Chapter) alledge his benefites recei∣ued, as a reason, why they neither may nor wil re∣fuse obedience vnto him. God forbid (say the peo∣ple) that we should forsake the Lord to serue other Goddes. For the Lorde brought vs and our fathers out of the land of
Aegypt, from the house of bondage, and he did those greate myracles in our sight, and preserued vs in all the way that we went, and among all the people, through whome we came, and the Lord did cast out all the people, euen the Amorites which dwelt in the land, therfore will we serue the Lord, for hee is our GOD. They gather by these benefites that he is their God, and conclude therfore that they wil serue the Lord because he is their God, and hath beene so singulerly good & beneficiall vnto them. And in very deede this persuasion that hee is our God, and so tenderly affected towardes vs, is the mother of all true obedience, the founteine from whence floweth all true worship and seruice of God, the note that discerneth betweene the workes of a true Christian, and the deedes of an Infidel or heathen man. The Christian worketh his obedience, hauing this persuasion, that God is already his GOD: The Infidel and vnbeleeuer hath no suche persuasion, and therefore his do∣inges come not franckly and freely from him to honour the Lorde, but slauishly and seruilely to serue himselfe, and after that manner, as it were, to get within the Lorde, and to earne his saluation of him selfe, It is this faith which made the diffe∣rence betweene the sacryfice of Abell, and the sa∣crifice of Cayne, as the Scripture doeth declare. It is this faith, that maketh the difference betwene the continencie that we haue reade to haue beene in Infidelles and Paganes, and that whiche is in Christians: betweene the mercie and almes that procedeth oftentimes from ciuil men, and that
merciful reliefe that commeth from Christians: It is this persuasion of his goodnesse that iustifieth the one, whereas ye other wanting this is odious & hateful in his sight. It is this persuasion, yt God is so rich in goodnesse as to accept of vs, which sendeth vs to the true seruice of him. The Lord is not only contented to say, that he is their GOD, but also to bring good euidence for the same, in putting thē in mind of that singular benefite of their deliuerance from Egypt, which he had bestowed vpon them. Wee learne then in this Commaundemente (which chargeth vs that we take the Lorde for our God) that he hath taken vpon him selfe the proui∣sion, to stoare vs with graces and blessings, bothe for this life, and for the life to come: and will haue the honour and glorie of it him self alone, because he will declare the riches of his graces towards his faithfull people, and by his dealing with them, bee knowen to be their God. Therefore, he bindeth vs to seeke for all good things at his hands alone: and in like manner, when we haue receiued any thing by humble thanksgiuing to returne ye whole praise therof vnto him again. Now that we know ye mea¦ning of this cōmaundemēt, it behoueth vs to apply it to our profit: wherein we must first vnderstand, that by ye meanes of sin (which is in euery man by nature) man his wit & vnderstanding hath receiued such a blindnesse, as it cannot conceiue the trueth of this cōmaundement, & also his wil & affection is so poysoned, as it cannot take any ioy or lyking in it: the tryall wherof, may be had in this manner:
when the man that is not borne againe and recei∣ued into mercie (whome the scripture calleth the naturall man because all are such by nature) whē he (I say) is in any streight or necessitie, either because he wanteth necessary foode for this life, or for that he is in dāger to loose welth, credit, or life, & seeth not the ordinarie meanes, by which it is likely hee should escape ye danger: Let it thē be tolde him, that God is his God, & hath a loue towards him, and a care ouer him, & wil in his time by lawful meanes prouide for him: yet notwithstanding his wit nei∣ther cōceueth this persuation, nor his wil & affecti∣on is any thing made ioyful or comforted therby, as one that desirously enclyneth after the hope thereof: which is declared by this, that some fall to stealinge, or seeking vnto witches, wisemen, or wisewomen (as they call them) to haue their gri∣efes remedied, and their wantes supplied: others not vsing the same, yet by one vnlawfull meanes or other, winde them selues out of daunger, not wayting by faith vpon the Lord, vntill by lawfull meanes he procure their deliuerance. This corruption also of the naturall man, is no lesse euident, when he is out of danger and hath or∣dinary meanes to maintaine him by. For when a naturall man hath credit, wealthe, or freendes to compasse matters by, either not at all doth he seek to God by prayer to prosper those meanes whiche he vseth: either else if hee pray vnto him, it is so coldely, as that euery man may perceiue, but espe∣cially his owne conscience may tell him, that his
hope ariseth, rather from the meanes he hath, then from the goodnes of God, without whose blessing all helps are nothing: & yet for all that, he findeth no fault with him selfe for want of faith, but will protest, that he taketh God to be his God, and loo∣keth for all things from him, beleeuing as assured∣ly in him, as the best of them all. It is not greatly to bee merueyled at, if the naturall man giue so much vnto the meanes, for it cōmeth often times to passe, that the Lorde is constrayned in dealinge with his Children, to withdrawe something from the number or stength, euen of his lawfull and or∣dinary meanes, that the glorie may be wholy his. A notable example wherof we haue in the booke of the Iudges,Iudg. 7.1. where the Lorde caused Gedeon to send away the greatest parte of his men when hee shuld go to battail, giuing the reason of his doing in these words. The people that are with thee, are to ma∣ny for me to giue the Madianites into their handes, lest Is∣rael make their vaunt against me, and say, My handes haue saued me. Thus corrupte is the estate that all men are borne in, and in this estate doe all men conty∣nue, finding no faulte, nor mislyking of the same, saue that little flock of Christes, that by the bene∣fite of his death are exempted from it, whome when it pleaseth God to call vnto the hope of e∣uerlasting life, by the meanes of his word, he clea∣reth their wit and vnderstanding to conceiue the goodnes of this God to them warde, hee purgeth their wil and affection to take comforte in it: And therefore when meanes want, they are not (as the
wicked) altogether without hope, running after vnlawfull meanes, but waite better vppon their God: and when they haue the ordinarie meanes whereby God vsually bringeth matters to passe, they are careful in crauing ye successe of it, yea with inwarde persuasion of heart, to finde no fruite but by his blessing. The man that will truely examine himselfe in this commaundement, muste well consider with himselfe, what euil and vnlawfull shiftes he hath made throughout this life, in his distresse and ne∣cessitie, or what doubtes and feares of not beeing well, and in due time prouided for, haue arisen at a∣ny such in time his hart, & how tickle his nature is thervnto. Likewise when hee hath had the vsuall meanes of Gods mercies, he muste consider well, how sparing and how colde he hath been in pray∣er to God for ye successe of them, which declareth, that his trust was rather in them, then in God the giuer of them. Thus may he easily perceiue in what a miserable condition he should haue beene, had not the mediatour and redeemer Christ Iesus aunswered the matter for him. It is therefore re∣quired, that after this māner he throughly examine his infirmitie and disobedience, vntill he be truely humbled and brought to Christe, to see the bene∣fite of his death and passion, how greate it is, and how needful for him, when by due examining of himselfe he doeth well vnderstand, that he is who∣ly beholden vnto God for the benefite of his salua∣tion, because by the lawe they are accurssed that
continue not in all things which are written in the booke of the law to doe them:2. Cor. 5. then is he forced to acknowledge that it is good right and reason that his life should be ordered after the pleasure and wil of him, that by his death hath brought deliuerance vnto him from euerlasting death and destruction, and the hope also of a blessed estate to continue for euer. Whervpon, he proceedeth not only to ye mi∣sliking of this corrupt nature of his, but also to the suppressing of it, that it deale not as it was accusto∣med, neither when it wanteth meanes, nor yet whē it enioyeth thē, calling earnestly vnto God by prai∣er that he may so increase in faith, yt he may glori∣fie him in the obedience of this commaundement. His profiting in this obedience (how great soeuer) is alwayes ioyned with true humilitie, because hee wel vnderstandeth (by the sight that he hath of him self) yt he standeth by the mercies of God in Christ alone, because also he plainly perceiueth that his o∣bedience is not without frailtie and manifolde in∣firmities cleauing vnto it: as his obedience is not with out humility, so his falles & infirmities ar not without grief & vexatiō of hart, whilst he seeth in them the dishonour and obedience of that God, of whose free goodnes he holdeth al yt he hath or ho∣peth for. A great number persuade thē selues that their faith is perfect inough, & no want in it at all, whē notwithstāding in their necessities & distres∣ses they are all ready to doubt & distrust of cōfort, as if they had neuer heard of the Gospell, nor lear∣ned any thing of the promises made vnto ye faith∣full:
Nay, which more is, they shall no sooner be in any distresse, but they are as farre from hope in God, and as redy to helpe them selues by one euill shift or other, as those ciuil men which haue no re∣ligion in them at all: And all this notwithstāing, they cannot see, nor be brought to acknowledge a∣ny want in their faith. Let a man bee broughte something behinde hand (as we say) either by losse that he hath had in his sheepe or cattle, or by mea∣nes of euill creditors with whome hee hath hadd dealinges, and by and by he wil be ready to ima∣gine, that he shall not be able to liue, vnlesse he vt∣ter his commodyties at a greater price then before he hath done, when notwithstanding, hee hath gone as farre before, as conscyence coulde in any respect giue him leaue. Hee thinketh that his for∣mer decay, doth priuiledge and make lawfull this kinde of dealing: and vnderstand by the way, that in all this purpose & practise, he receiueth not any suspition, that there should be any wante of faithe or weakenesse in that behalf, when as in very deed: then is there true tryall of our faith, if in our nece∣ssitie, wee shall thereby stay vs from euill meanes, in hope to haue vs prouided for according to his promise, albeit we see not any likelyhood therof, so far as our reason can reache. For in faith there is hope beyonde hope. Rom. 4.The Children of God by the eyes of faith, see a secret blessing promised, which they apprehend by hope, when as the common sorte wanting this eye, cast away all hope, vnlesse by a sensible
manner they perceiue and presently may groape the goodnes and help of God. The man that will take no knowledge that there is wante of faithe in him, but doth professe (as the most wil do) that he trusteth in God with all his heart, and that there is no mistrust of God in any parte or corner thereof, is to be sent back to his doeings and thoughts that are and haue beene in him in the time of his trou∣bles, dangers, pouertie or decay: to consider if there haue beene thē in his hart, no more doubting, fea∣ring or suspecting to bee prouided for, from the Lorde, then hath beene in other times: by this meanes (if there bee any sense or iudgement in him) he shall be constrained to confesse the weak∣nesse of his faith, & so seeke his comfort in Christ, beeing conuict within him selfe, of suche mistrust and vnbeliefe, as the lawe doeth accurse and con∣demne. For if a man wil not willingly be wise in the beguyling of him selfe, he may soone see and perceiue a greate diuersitie in him selfe at those times: that where so longe as hee had helpes and and holdes to go by, he was comfortable, bolde & confident, those beeing taken away, hee is become without all courage, comforte or hope. If there were no want of faith, how could there bee any lack of comforte or hope? If his confidence were not in the meanes, how could he be as a man with out all hart or hope, so soone as the meanes are ei∣ther vtterly taken away or else diminished: espe∣cially seeing the goodnesse of the Lord, whiche is the ground of faith indureth for euer?
And that the man, whiche will take no know∣ledge of the want of his faith, may bee brought to the sighte of himselfe, let him well consider with himselfe, what shoulde bee the cause, that when he hath aboundance, and wanteth no necessarie help, he is so exceeding sparing and carelesse, in his man∣ner of seruing and seeking of the Lorde: in respect of the feare, and care that he is in, so soone as he shall be any way distressed, and the paynes also that then he taketh in his manner of seruing the Lorde, if his faith be at both times one, why shuld his care; whiche doth bewray his feare, be almoste none at one time, and so plentifull at another: but onely that there was want of faith before, albeit he coulde not espie it, the meanes standing as a myst or a cloude betweene him, and the light that would teache him truly to discerne. The man therefore yt boasteth of the perfection of his faith, not feeling any want therin: denying that he trusteth in his riches, friend∣ship, authoritie, or wealth, muste bee willed to sette them a while aside in his thoughts and considerati∣ons, imagining seriously and in good earnest, that he had them not: then let him aske his conscience, & truly serch out his spirits, whither he could be as confident, comfortable, and hopefull in his heart, in the wanting, as in the hauing thereof, his heart will then tell him the contrarie, if he search truely and throughly, and his deedes will declare no lesse. For we shall se such as couragious, and as confident as may be in their wealth, credit, and health: and when they are taken away, as faint and feeble, as men that
neither haue hart nor hope. Thus must a man be sif∣ted both in abundance and want, that in ye true sight of his pouertie, he may be forced carefully & thank∣fully to lay hould vpon the mercies brought by Ie∣sus Christ. As for vs that professe we know Christ, & are led to magnifie his mercies, by the experiēce of sinne that we haue within our selues: Let vs re∣member that it is our parte, to declare that we are his, and in him, by dying vnto sinne, and liuing vn∣to righteousnesse. Let vs therefore bee ashamed to beare the name of Christ, & to carrie ye coūtenance of them that loue his gospell, and yet in our ncces∣sities to bee as mistrustfull, and as readie to helpe it by one vnlawfull shift or other, as euer we were: or as they are, that neither professe nor knowe the gospell. Let vs be ashamed to professe the gospell, and in the meane time to be at no more mislyking, nor warre with our mistrustfull thoughtes, then wee haue beene, when wee had no knowledge of the same. Hath not the Lord therefore died,Rom. 6. that by his power we might die vnto sinne? hath he not ap∣peared to weaken the power and strength of sinne in those that be his, that although they cānot driue sinne from being at all in the flesh, yet they might driue it from reigning and rulinge in them, a∣beating the power and force thereof? How can men thinke then, that there is any trueth of Chri∣stianitie begunne in them, beeing in the same man∣ner affected towarde their mistrustfull thoughtes and euil shiftes, that proceede thereof, as they were from the beginning ere euer they knewe the word
and Gospel of their GOD: hauing no more ha∣tred of them, nor greater war and strife with them? It is true, that the Lord in mercie for Christ coue∣reth the sinnes of his, but it is as true, that the Lorde cureth the sinnes of his. It cannot be denyed, but that for Christe, he doeth pardon the sinnes of his seruantes, neither may we deny, but that in Christ he doeth also purge the sinnes of his seruants. Let vs therefore (brethren) resorte vnto God by faithful prayer, that as he hath taken away the condemna∣tion of sinne, so he would more and more abo∣lish the rule and kingdome thereof. Our hope is great, for our promises are many: our capteine is stronge, our enemie hath often beene foyled, euen in fraile flesh as feeble as we bee: but the conque∣rors haue euer beene careful, much giuen to vse the meanes of the word and prayer, often in the fielde with their owne affections, hauing vpon them the compleate harnesse of a Christian. Now let vs pray vnto our heauenly father, that wee may so see our wante of faithe, that wee may truely magnifie the grace and mercie of GOD in Christe, whiche couereth the imperfection thereof: and also that we may haue such strength from the power of his death, that by the meanes thereof we may more and more preuaile bothe ouer our mistrustful nature in want, and al∣so ouer our carelesse and secure estate in plentie and abundance.
¶The second Lecture vpon the thirde, fourth, fifte and sixte verses. 3 Thou shalt haue none other Gods before me. 4 Thou shalt make thee no grauen image, neither a∣ny similitude of things that are in heauen aboue, nei∣ther that are in the Earth beneath, nor that are in the waters vnder the earth. 5 Thou shalt not bow downe to them, neither serue them, for I am the Lorde thy GOD, a ielous God, visiting the iniquitie of the fathers, vppon the chil∣dren vpon the third generation, and vpon the fourth of them that hate me. 6 And shewing mercie vnto thousandes, to them that loue me and keepe my commaundements. ALbeit the time would nor per∣mit me to speake the laste day of the third verse, but forced me to reserue it vnto this day, and to ioyne it with this matter that now you haue heard (of not ma∣king to our selues any grauen image) yet that whi∣che time hath nowe knitte together, is by the iudgement of diuerse godlie and learned men, not to be sundered at all. For they take that (of hauing the Lord our God) which hath already beene de∣clared, to be the firste commaundement, and this Scripture that now I haue read, conteyned in these
foure verses, to be the seconde. Of this iudgement was that learned Father Peter Martyr,Rom. 7. whose wor∣des are these in his Commentarie vppon the Ro∣manes. I suppose the firste commaundement to be that which is sett before the reste in steade of a proheme, I am the Lorde thy GOD whiche haue brought thee out of the lande of Aegypt. For in these wordes are we commaunded to accompt him for the true God, and that we shoulde not thinke that he is to bee worshipped together with other Gods, straight way is added the second precepte, where∣in wee are prohibited to worship straunge Gods, and grauen thinges and images, and if a man will more narrowly consider the thing, he shall see that together with this first comaundemente is offered vnto vs the Gospell, for in it GOD promiseth that he will be our God. These are the wordes of Peter Martyr. Of this iudgement in like manner was that lear∣ned and godlie man M. Bucer, as appeareth in his exposition vpon 24. Psalme, where hee hath these wordes. The first thing of all in the matter of our saluation, is to beleeue in one Lorde our GOD, from whome as the fathers had their deliuerance from Aegypt and all other blessinges beside, so wee all receiue the good things that we haue, whiche is taught in the firste of the ten commaundementes, that is to say, in this, I the Lord am thy GOD whiche brought thee out of the land of Aegypt. The seconde cōmaundement is to ioyne no feigned God with the true GOD, which mans madnesse is alwayes
accustomed to do: neither were these men alone of this iudgement, but followed in it the opinion of some of the best learned among the interpreters of the Hebrue, who doe thus diuide these two com∣maundements, taking yt of making grauen images to be a braunch of ye second cōmaundement, which forbiddeth vs either to ioyne any false God to the only true Lord, or to worship ye true God with any false worship deuised of our selues, & not cōman∣ded frō him. For as it followeth in that place whi∣che now I cited out of M. Bucer, the blindenes of man is accustomed to giue so much to his own de∣uises, in ioyning some in worship with God, or to that which he hath deuised for the worship of god, that he wil not depend vpon the mere goodnes of God alone. And for the moste parte (saith he) they seke by such ceremonies to pacifie the lord, whom they do perceiue to be offended with their wicked life, which thing hath greater blasphemie in it then we can conceiue of. It is most sure that when once man dare aduenture, to put others in the honour of worship with the Lorde (whiche thing he hath forbidē) he wil not be afraid to bring vpon him an other worship then he hath commaunded: these bothe come from one corrupte beginning, as shall (God willing) heereafter more plentifully appeere. We are in this commaundement forbidden to worship any together with him, or to admitt any worship of him, besides his owne whiche he hath lefte vs in his worde, the Lorde therefore woulde haue vs to seeke al good things at his hands alone,
and cannot abide that we should haue other Gods before his face, or vppon his face, for this interpre∣tation will bothe the wordes and the meaning beare very well: as if he should say, In as muche as I haue taken vpon me to care for you, and to honour my selfe by shewing foorth the treasures of my grace vpon you, it shall not be lawfull for to darken the light of my goodnesse, by seking to ob∣teine that at the hands of any other, the gift wher∣of I haue reserued to my selfe alone, for the glorie and praise of the riches of my grace. For I doe you to vnderstand, that when soeuer you seeke to any other then me, for any parte of your welfare, you doe as it were drawe a corteine ouer my face, that I cannot be seene in the full shewe of my mercie, howe I am affected towardes you, while they by stepping betweene, conuey some praise of the gifte and mercie to them selues. Heere we see all passa∣ges to the virgine Marie, Angels or Saintes what∣soeuer, to be stopped vpp, and the way to GOD opened vnto all, in their necessities to run thyther, with an assured hope of comforte, by reason of the promise. When Sathan would haue obteyned of our sauiour Christe, a parte in the honour of worship, he telleth him it was written:Matt. 4.10. Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God & him alone shalt thou serue, the answere of our sauiour Christ being according to ye questi∣on and demaund, telleth vs that Sathan would not haue refused to haue had the Lord worshipped, so that he might haue obteyned to haue beene parta∣ker
with him in it. It declareth also that not only the Lord refuseth to haue Sathan, but also any o∣ther whosoeuer, to be worshipped with him. for it is written, Him alone shalt thou serue. Inuocation therefore and prayer, beeing a wor∣ship that the Lord preferreth aboue sacryfice, may not be giuen to any Sainct or Virgin, but muste be reserued vnto the Lord alone, who will not haue his grace darckened, or his glorie parted with any. Neither can he suffer that the virgin Marie, or any saint or angel should cōe into any opinion of mer∣cy, either aboue him, or equall with him: whiche must be graūted, if this be cōfessed, that it is lawful to call vpon thē. For why should we come in pray∣er vnto them, if he who is of greater power to per∣fourme our request, be also of more mercie to in∣cline fauourably to our demaunds? This resorting therefore vnto them by prayer, hath in it a plaine profession, that they are more redily inclined vn∣to compassion, then the Lord: which in deed deni∣eth him to be God. For he is not the true God, if any do exceede him in mercie and compassion. It cannot be that the Lord should be God, if any be found his superiour or match in mercie, wherein consisteth his chiefe glorie. But of this (God wil∣ling) more shall be spoken when I come to speake of prayer:Rom. 5. And yet it may not be forgotten that in dying for vs when we were enimyes vnto him, he lefte that patterne of mercie behinde him, the like whereof hath not beene hearde or seene in any: which cannot but leade vs in beliefe to hope for
more mercy from him, then from any other. If a∣ny thinke that prayer is not suche worship of God wherewith he is so delighted, but that he can bee content that others, as Sainctes or Angels, should also haue that honour: let them peruse the 50. Psalme, and they shall finde that the Lorde pre∣ferreth this seruice of his (to bee called vppon in necessitie) aboue all sacrifice and outwarde wor∣ship. The Churche of Rome will not giue out licence to offer sacrifice vnto Saintes that bee de∣parted from this life, and yet the Lord setteth pra∣yer in dignitie aboue sacrifice, making it a seruice that doth more honour him, then doth that other. For what greater honour can he haue, then to bee magnified in this greatnesse of his mercie, that hee shoulde bee the onely sanctuarie for the distressed in their calamitie. The Angels them∣selues haue refused to bee worshipped of men, knowing that the Lorde wil not haue his glorie parted vnto others.Reue. 22.8. In the Reuelatiō, Iohn profes∣seth that he fell down to worshipp before the feete of the Angel, and that the Angel saide vnto him, Se thou do it not, for I am thy fellow seruant, and the fellow seruaunt of thy brethren the prophets, and of them which keepe the words of this book: Worship God. The Angel refuseth worshippe, placeth himselfe as a seruaunt among them that serue the Lord after his worde, and chargeth him to worship God. Let vs learne to bridle this affec∣tion, that seeketh to be approued vnder the title of a good intent: for it is a strong persuasion to the
fleashe, that the Lorde cannot refuse, but well like of whatsoeuer worshipp wee offer, so it bee to no other, thē those that are beloued of him, of whom he hath declared his likeing by graces and gyftes graunted vnto them in greater measure, then vnto the common sort of his seruauntes. We may well suspect our infirmitie, when the Euangelist Iohn was almost carried away with his weaknesse in this parte. For the infirmitie of the flesh reasoneth thus. Can it be any offence to honour & aduance them whome God himselfe hath honoured? Hath not God himself declared by his graces giuen vnto them, what reckoning he maketh of them? Can we make too much of them, whome God so tenderly loueth? These are the pathes of good intents wan∣dering without the worde: Nay, they proceede further. If wee shall be approued of the Lorde, wee must creepe into fauour with those that are deere vnto him: and the next way to haue fauour with him, is to growe into the fauour of those that are neere aboute him, according as the practise is to get the good lykings of men, that are of greate calling heere in earth, by growing into the lyking of those their seruantes, that can doe moste of all with them. But we are taught of the Lord him∣selfe, that his wayes differ from oures as farre as Heauen differeth from the earth, and that the Hea∣uens are not so farre in height aboue the Earth, as are his thoughts aboue oures. So that wee offer exceeding wronge vnto his maiestie, while we thinke to bring him vnder the condition of mans
infirmitie, whose good countenance cannot be ob∣teyned, vnlesse in the persons of those whome hee especially lyketh of (by brybing or flattering of them) he him selfe may seeme to be honoured, and the holde of his fauour craftily vndermined. The word of the Lord shaketh off all such fol∣lies, telling vs, that it is the hearing of his worde & keeping of the same yt getteth credite with him that maketh vs allied vnto him: euen to become truely the mother, sister, or brother of him: as wee read in the gospell after S. Luke,Luke. 8.21. in the which place he doeth so commend this kinred (as I may call it) of his worde, that he maketh no reckoning of any other, but in respect of that. Wherein hee doeth notably reproue the foolishe fancie of fleashe and bloud which imagine that they can offer nothing vnto the virgin Marie, wherin they shall not binde him vnto them: the Lord therefore is constrained to signifie, that those naturall respects preuaile not with him, as with weake men, but that the hea∣ring of his worde and doeing of the same, is all in all with him, and the onely worship that plea∣seth him, which when it is wāting, he accepteth of no seruice, haue it neuer so greate shewe of mans reason for it. As wee may not take vpon vs to worship any besides the Lorde, no more is it lawfull for vs to giue any worship to the Lord, but onely that whi∣che is allowed in his word: and therefore hath he forbidden vs to make any grauen image, imagi∣ning that way to please him, and to doe a worke
that is acceptable vnto him. For those that bow vn∣to grauen Images, thincke and say that the Lorde is serued therein, and that they doe it not vnto the Image, but vnto the Lorde represented vnto them in the Image: but the Lorde in this commaun∣dement forbiddeth as well the false worship of the true GOD, as the giuinge of any parte of his true worship vnto a false God, I meane vnto any besides the onely true God. It commeth all from one founteine, to dare be bolde to giue vnto him any worship beside that which he hath cōmanded, and to worship any other besides himselfe: which thinge he hath in many places plainely forbidden, & therefore in this cōmaundemente he represseth this intollerable boldnesse of man, that in his owne deuotion will presume to please the Lorde, either in the worshipping of others, or in any other ma∣ner of worshipping him, than he himselfe hath o∣pened in his worde. In this seconde parte (concer∣ninge grauen Images) there are certeine wordes, which beeing layde open, will make the better en∣trance to the true sense and meaning of the whole: in consideration whereof, it shall not be vnprofita∣ble, briefely and in a worde to touch them. It is saide here that he is A ielous God: which signifieth, that he can not suffer vs to ioyne any with him, in the cause & care of our welfare. A kinde of speach borrowed from husbandes: who can not abide to see the mindes & affectiōs of their wiues entang∣led with any other men, but require to haue them kepte pure and chaste to them selues alone. The
pursuing of his displeasure (whiche is heere reci∣ted) towarde the thirde and fourth generation of them that hate him, seeming to maintaine vnrigh∣teousnes in the Lord, is to be vnderstoode of such children, as treade in the same stepps of iniquitie with their fathers. For otherwise that of the Pro∣phet Ezechiel is true,Eze. 18.20. The godly sonne shall not beare the iniquitie of his vngodly father. These thinges beeing now made plaine vnto vs, let vs goe forwarde with the matter that wee haue in hand. The Lorde God in forbidding the worshipping of images, and so vnder that, all other kinde of worship inuented by man, addeth this reason to disuade vs from it, because hee is be∣come our God, who is iealous ouer vs, and cannot abide that wee go after any other: this reason to disuade vs from idolatrie, maintaining suche ten∣der affection of God towardes his as cannot suffer them to looke aside after any other, because hee woulde haue them, as they are in deed, so to take them selues wholy beholden to him, argueth that Idolaters and false worshippers of God, are so ca∣ryed away with the loue and affection that they beare vnto those whome they worship with the LORDE, and with the opinion of that their deuised worshippe of him, that they depende not wholy vppon his goodnesse, takinge him alone to bee their whole happinesse, the onely au∣thor and worker thereof, but are parted and diui∣ded in their affection, imagining and persuading
them selues that they are beholden, and that not a little, (for the benefites they haue what soeuer) vn∣to those whome they worship, and vnto this their deuised seruice of the Lorde. This thinge is notably declared by the Pro∣phet Hosea:Hosea. 2.5 where the Idolatrie of the Israelites is resembled in the adulteresse and whorish wo∣man, that sayeth plainely shee will goe after her louers which gaue her breade, wooll & flaxe. Their mother (sayth the Lorde by his Prophet) hath pla∣yed the harlot, shee that conceiued them hath doone shame∣fully, for she saide I will go after my louers that gaue me my bread and my water, my wooll & my flaxe, mine oyle and my drinke. It is the persuasion of the Idolaters, that the blessinges whiche they haue are the giftes and re∣wardes of those whome they worshippe, and of that their deuised worshippe. It is yet a common thinge in the mouthes of many, that the worlde was good when men worshipped Sainctes and Images: there was plentie of all thinges, so that euen now we may descry the whore by her won∣ted speeche, I will goe after my louers that gaue me my wooll and my flaxe, mine oyle and my drink. In the 8. verse of this Chapter the Lorde sayeth plainly by his Prophet, That this whore did not knowe that it was he that gaue her corne, and wine, and oyle, and multiplied her siluer and goulde, which was bestowed vppon Baal. It doeth plainely appeere by this, that the I∣dolaters are drawen in their hart and affection vn∣to those whome they worship, nourishing a secret
persuasion that they haue their benefites from thence: whereby it commeth to passe, that their hearts departe by little and little from the Lord. We haue a plain profe of this in Poperie, not only by their speache that say, while they worshipped Sainctes they had store and plentie of all thinges, but also by their practise, who had assigned vnto seuerall Sainctes the honor of help and aide in se∣uerall causes of distresse. To some they assigned the charge for agues, to others for the frutes of rhe earth, and to seuerall kingdomes & countries they assigne seuerall Sainctes for patrones. To these they did resorte in distresses, these they called vp∣pon, when any help came, they receiued it as the benefite of that Sainct to whom they had allotted that charge. Thus hauing distributed Gods office vnto others, and hauing put ouer the distribution of seuerall benefites vnto seuerall Sainctes, and (as men that tendred the trouble of the Lorde) set al∣moste ouer all dealings vnto other vnder him, be∣ing any way releeued, the honour therof if it were not altogether giuen away from the Lorde, at least it must be parted: so that it cannot be but ye talke of the whore, That she will go after her louers, that haue gi∣uen her her oyle and drinke, her woll and flaxe. For to what ende should she so resorte vnto them, if ha∣uing helpe that way, she meant not to returne the honor vppon them. The trueth is so, that worship∣ping any besides the Lorde, as also in giuing him any worship of their owne deuising not confir∣med in his worde, they are caryed so away with
the opinion and worthinesse thereof, that they do not wholy depend vpon the goodnes of the Lord, therefore we shall finde it often in the scriptures where the Lord laboreth to ouerthrowe Idolatrie and worshipping of Images: in the same place he magnifieth his owne goodnes and his alone good¦nes towards them, a notable confirmation where∣of we haue in the prophet Esay speaking of them that set vp the woods of their Idol:Esai. 45.21. Immediatly vppon it he hath these words, There is none other God besides me, A iust God, and a Sauiour: there is none beside mee. Looke vnto mee, and yee shall bee saued: all the endes of the earth shall be saued, for I am God, and there is none o∣ther. I haue sworne by my selfe: the worde is gone out of my mouth in righteousnes, and shall not returne, that euerie knee shall bow vnto me, and euery tongue shall sweare by me. Sure∣ly he shall say, In the Lorde haue I righteousnes and strength, he shall come vnto him, and all that prouoke him, shall bee a∣shamed. The whole seede of Israel shall be iustified and glorie in the Lord. It is worthy the diligent consideration, that in depressing of idolatrie and false worshipp, he ariseth to mainteine our iustification, strength and glorie to be in the Lorde alone, and vs so to professe it, that vve glorie for that we haue righte∣ousnes and strength in the Lorde: which proueth plainely, that Idolaters are not so persuaded, but that in the opinion of these their doinges,Esai. 44.21. their affection abateth towardes the goodnes of the Lorde. The like confirmation we haue in an other place of the same prophet, where disuading thē from idolatrie, he setteth forth the greatnes of
his goodnesse towardes them. Remember these (Oh Iacob and Israel) for thou art my seruaunt: I haue fourmed thee, Thou art my seruant: O Israel forget me not: I haue put away thy transgressions like a cloude, and thy sinnes as a myste: turne vnto mee for I haue redeemed thee. Where∣as before the greate and vndeserued goodnesse of the Lord is brought in as the best medicine to cure idolatrie. True it is therefore, whatsoeuer they do say, yt they so trust vnto these vntoward deuised thinges which they doe vnto God, that they de∣pende not wholy vppon his meere and alone goodnesse, as they who take their happinesse one∣ly to arise from thence: and that is the cause, why in dealing with them, he vpholdeth the great¦nesse of his goodnesse, and of his alone goodnesse towardes them, whiche carrieth in it a secrete sentence against them, that they stande not persua∣ded & resolued therof. Idolatrie is most fitly com∣pared in the scripture vnto adulterie, and the Ido∣laters called whoores, because as whoores admitte vnto their loue others than their owne husbandes, so Idolaters, and the false worshippers of God, re∣serue not their faith and confidence vnto the Lord alone, but permit others to be fellowes with him at the same. Wherefore to declare the great hatred that he hath of such dealing he taketh vnto him the quarell of ielousie threatening that he will prose∣quute this iniurie of prostituting and laying open that faith vnto others which is due vnto him, euen vnto the third and fourth generation of them that shalbe founde transgressours herein calling them
haters of him, who are not by faith (the very knot of this spirituall wedlocke) surely knit vnto him a∣lone. He can no more abide to heare of any that should be fellowes with him at our faith, than the honest man can abide to heare, that another besides himselfe, should haue the enterteinment of an hus∣band with his wife. It is diligently to be obserued that he calleth thē haters of him who shal thus di∣uide their affection from him. The most that they can say, for this their worshippe is, that it commeth from a good meaning & intent, & this persuadeth the moste of them well of it: For God (say they) cannot of his mercie refuse that which is wel ment & intended towarde him: The Lord therfore vt∣terly ouerthroweth this defence, saying in expresse wordes, that they be haters of him, & so ledd with the liking of their worship, from the Lord and his true seruice, yt when occasion serueth, they bewray extreame hatred therevnto, prosequuting it with fire & fagot in the true professours thereof. This sin of idolatrie and false worship of God, is diligently to be considered of, that we may see the danger of it, and keepe vs from transgressing therein. The daunger of this sinne, & the greatnesse therof, we can not better discerne, than by the punishment executed against it from the iust Lorde: who be∣cause he is iust and Iustice it selfe, cannot appointe punishment, but according to the nature and qua∣litie of the offence, he threateneth that the fire of his ielousie shal burne vpon the posteritie of those that offende therein, vnto the thirde and fourth
generation. Greate muste that sinne bee, the flame of whose punishment casteth out smoke so long. The greatnes of the punishment may lead vs to se the heynousnesse of that offence of Idolatrie and seruing of God by good intentes. The fire of Gods wrath beeing kindled by this sinne, as wee see, can∣not be quenched many generations after the death of them that haue beene the firste transgressours in ye same. The lord declareth ye reason by his prophet Hosea why he will thus punishe the posteritie of the idolaters,Hosea. 2.4. I wil haue no pitie vpon her children (saith the Lord by the prophet) because they be the childrē of fornication, declaring yt hee may lawfully disinherit them, because they are none of his, but children be∣gotten in fornication. The state of the children of Israel in the captiuitie of Babylon euen vntill the comming of Christe may fitly shadowe out vn∣to vs the truth of this punishment threatened here for idolatrie. For albeit there was a returne frō Ba∣bylon, yet we knowe that the number was small that returned, and subiect vnto greate misery euen vntil the comming of Christ, beside their punish∣ment, in the want of temporall benefites. The lord thretned by his prophet Hosea according as he did perfourme in deede,Hosea. 2.11. that he would no more suffer them to inioye the vse of his worshippe, I will cause (saith the Lord) al her mirth to cease, her feast days, her new Moones and her Sabbaoths, and al her solemne feasts. And in the thirde chapter, the Lorde in like manner de∣clareth,Hosea. 3.4. that the children of Israel shal remain ma∣ny daies without a king, & also without an offring
Long before their captiuitie, they had nothing beside the outwarde shew and ceremonies of the worship of God, which also vtterly ceassed when they were led into banishment: yet the comforte came which was promised in the latter time vnto their posteritie, according as it was fore-told them by the Prophete: but greate was that sinne that procured so long lasting punishmente vppon their posteritie, and so greate a punishment, that they should be diuorced from the Lord. For he affir∣meth this by his Prophet, that he wil marrie them vnto him for euer, declaring thereby that they had bene diuorced before. But we need not take exam∣ples of God his punishment of Idolatrie from the people of Israel, (wanting, beside other benefites, the true worshippe of God so long time:) Poperie in these last times may be a true spectacle thereof, where ye declining from true religiō hath brought so miserable blindenesse, continuing so many ge∣nerations. The Papistes now in the latter dayes of the Gospel, after this as it were solemnizing of the marriage againe betweene the Lord and his Church, require to knowe where the Church was before this time of the Gospel: as if some of the Is∣raelites, after that the Lorde had returned vnto them in mercie and betrothed them a newe vnto himselfe againe, should haue required where the Church had beene in their captiuitie, when they wanted the sacrifice and offeringes, ye Sabbaothes, new moones, and all ye true outwarde worship of God: calling into question the trueth of that true
worship and seruice of God, because they had been so long without it before. Those times of Poperie were the times of idolatrie and punishment of the Lord for idolatrie: they were (as I may call it) the widowhoode or rather the diuorced estate of the churche, when (notwithstanding the Lorde did beare loue and secrete liking vnto those that were his) yet was their outward estate the condition of a widowe, or rather of a diuorced woman, hauing in it the badge of displeasure and punishment from ye Lord. To require therfore yt this our time should bee confourmed in worshippe vnto that, is to like of diuorcement better then marriage, & to craue yt the vnlawful libertie of the one may be a paterne & warrant to dissolue the godly and lawful bonde of the other. The Lord affirmeth likewise that he Wil shewe mercie vnto thousandes of them whiche loue him, and keepe his commandementes: wherein he noteth vn∣to vs two properties in ye true worship of God, the first is the loue of him, the seconde the keeping of his commandementes: wherof the first, (that is the loue of him) openeth vnto vs what beginning true worshippe hath: and the seconde (which is the do∣ing of things pleasaunt in his sight) telleth vs by what rule that worshippe doth proceede, euen by his word, which truely discouereth what thinges are pleasing or displeasing vnto him. That loue towardes him beginneth all true seruice and worship of God, hereby it is manifest, because the Apostle declareth yt the children of God are sealed
vp with the spirite of adoption, whereby they crie Abba Father, whiche beareth witnesse vnto their spirite, that they are the children of God.Rom. 8.1.16. Whiche inward tes∣timonie of adoption cannot be without the loue of him that hath adopted them. And in the Epis∣tle to the Galathians, the Apostle hath these wor∣des, In Iesus Christe neither circumcision nor vncircumci∣sion auaileth any thing, but faith that worketh by loue.Gal. 5.6. And in the same Epistle he affirmeth, The life whiche he nowe liueth, to be in this faithe, that the Sonne of God hathe loued him, and giuen him selfe for him. This loue there∣fore that ariseth of the goodnes of his God,Gal. 2.20. whom he perceiueth so entirely to imbrace him, and to reckon of him as righteous, is that which sendeth a true christian to good workes, and is here noted as the founteine from whence good woorkes doe flowe, and the first marke of a true worshipper of God. For before this persuasion of his fauour to∣wardes vs, the workes that are done by vs (not∣withstanding suche they are as be commanded of God) are done rather to make our selues righteous thereby, then for any loue and liking of him, and therefore defiled with selfe loue, & our owne pro∣fite, not directed as they ought, by the alone loue of God. This loue proceedeth to the doeing of those thinges that are acceptable in the sighte of God: for it is the second note of the true worship∣pers of God to keep his commandements, & to go to the seruice of God, not at aduenture directed by the line of our owne deuotion, but by the leuell of
his word and commaundement, wherein also false worshippers are greately deceiued: for as their be∣ginning is euil, because it floweth not from loue to God, so their proceeding is as daungerous, in that they followe not the rule of his worde. For not∣withstanding, the LORD might iustlie reiecte what soeuer deedes of ours though commaunded of him, if they should not proceede from loue to∣wardes him, yet herein more appeareth the greate blindenesse of Idolaters and false worshippers, who in their deuising to serue God happen alwaies on those works that least like him. And therefore the seruing of God by Images, as it hath often in the Scripture, the goodnesse of God set against it, for the redresse thereof, (in that the not restinge therin hath begotten it) so hath it also the word of God often times in the Scripture to correct it as not proceeding by the right rule. Therefore in Deuterono.Deu. 4.12. when the Lord was about to prescribe the manner of his worship, it is said thus: You heard a voice, but saw no similitude: Take therefore good heed vn∣to your selues, for you sawe no Image in the day that the Lord spake vnto you in Horeb, where the holie Ghoste ma∣keth the practise and example of Almightie God, in opening himselfe by his worde, and not by any similitude, a sufficient declaration that his wil was we should be directed by his worde, and not by I∣mages in the seruice of him. Exo. 20.22.23.In Exodus in like manner, the holie Ghoste maketh the teaching by the worde of God a rea∣son why they shuld haue no images: You haue seene
(sayth he) that I haue talked with you from Heauen, you shall not therefore make with me Gods of siluer, nor Gods of goulde, you shall make you none.Esai 30.21.22. And in Esay it is decla∣red, that when the worde of GOD shall take place with his, they shall abhorre Images as a menst∣ruous cloath. Thine eares (saith the prophet) shall heare a worde behinde thee saying: This is the way, walk in it, when thou turnest to the right hand, and when thou turnest to the left, and ye shall pollute the couering of the Images of siluer, and the rich ornamentes of the Images of goulde, and caste them away as a menstruous cloath, and thou shalt say vnto it, get thee hence. Neither is the worde of GOD set downe heere to keepe vs from Images alone, but also to restraine vs from seruing of GOD by any deuotion of our owne or good intent whatsoeuer, whereof we haue no warrant from the word. For in his worde we receiue his owne testimonie for good & euil, and he hath plainely tolde vs, yt if we followe our owne heart and our eyes, in discer∣ning good and bad, wee shall departe and goe a whoreing from him: as it is written in the booke of Numbers, where they are cōmaunded to haue the lawe continually before their eyes, that they should not seeke after their hearte, and after their owne eyes,Nume. 15.39. after the which (faith the holie Ghoste vnto them in the same place) you go a whooring. In the Gospell after S. Iohn,Ioh. 14.23. our Sauiour Christ sayth, If any man loue me he will keep my word. The ex∣perience is plaine, that if any man doe loue ano∣ther, he will obserue what things hee is delighted withall, that in doeing thereof hee may satisfie his
affection, and wil not be so negligent as whē with a little paines he may learne his dispositiō, rashly to aduenture ye doing of that which (for any thing he knoweth to ye contrarie) may possibly procure his heauie displeasure. This is not humilitie, but pride & dangerous securitie, restrayning the Lord to our lyking, & not conforming our selues to the good pleasure of his wil. Out of this cōman dement we may learne a notable differēce betwene the church of God, & the synagogue of sathan. The church of God loueth God, and keepeth his cōmandements, she is that chaste wife, that admitteth none beside the Lord into the felowship of her faith: she bring∣eth vp her young ones vnto the lyking of him, fee∣ding them with the sound milke of the word. The church of Antichriste keepeth not her selfe to her husband alone, but admitteth others to the vse of her faith, and therefore in the scripture is she fitly resembled vnto an harlot: neither doeth she nurce vp her yong ones after the lyking of her husband, with the wholesome doctrine of the olde and new Testament, (which Augustine doth call very fitly, the two pappes of the Churche:) but with the pes∣tilente poyson of good intentes, teaching them from their infancie to followe her foote-steppes in going a whooreing after their owne eyes, and after their owne heart, whiche are the very steppes of an harlot, as was euen now proued vnto vs out of the Booke of Numbers. Our nature is corrupt in this commaundement, as in all the reste, and greatly pleaseth it selfe in thinges that it doeth of a
good meaning and intent vnto the Lorde, not re∣garding whether they stand approued by his word or no, holding this as a true principle, that the thing can neuer be euill taken of the Lord, whiche is well ment of man. The man that will truely ex∣amine him selfe in this commaundement, muste throughly consider of the former time of his life, when hee hath occupyed him selfe in outwarde things, not warranted by the worde, and yet repu∣ted of him as the speciall pleasing of God: nay vn∣der the defence and shadowe of those thinges, hath beene the more carelesse to seeke out and practise the duties of the worde: remembring that suche seruice of GOD, deserueth to haue a cursse con∣tinuing vppon his posteritie vnto many generati∣ons. Thus shall he easily perceiue what is ye bene∣fite that he hath by the mediatour Christ Iesus: for the law driueth him therevnto by opening his cor∣ruption in this manner, and letting him see yt there is no helpe but in the alone redeemer Christ Iesus: when in him selfe he doeth truely vnderstand that he is only beholden vnto the Lord for his saluati∣on, he must begin to warr with his affections that would shake of obediēce vnder ye shadowe of good intent & deuotiō, occupying it selfe in trifling out∣warde thinges, and neuer drawing neere vnto the Lord in ye dueties laide vpon him by the word, he must labour diligently to finde out the wil of God in his word, for no other end but that hee may be a doer and follower of the same, his profiting, how greate so euer it bee, is not without infirmitie,
and therefore hee is not without humilitie in his best doings: his offending at any time cannot bee without griefe, for hee seeth in it the dishonour of his merciful father, whose free mercie is his stay. Let vs learne (brethren) to take heed in seruing the Lord in a deuotiō that agreeth not with his word. What will it auayle to say, We do it of loue and good meaning towards him, when the Lord hath said, yt all such are haters of him? Shall our mening, condemne the trueth of his saying? Or shall that be good meaning when we come to true reckoning which the Lorde hath pronounced to be hateing? Let man be afraid to beare hatred against ye Lord, and therefore let him feare to serue him with good intents besides his worde. If man should bee so obstinate in euill, that he feareth no punishment in respect of himselfe, imagining his life to make an end of all his affliction: yet let him fear the punish∣mente of this sinne, that will not leaue him in the graue, but set the marke of his iniquitie vppon his children and posteritie vnto many generations. I neede not greatly to speake vnto the moste that be heere, that they should leaue those foolish works of deuotion and good meaning, as going on Pil∣grimage, setting vp of shrynes, and such like things receiued amongst the Papistes. His name be pray∣sed, that madnesse is descryed, and a great number of them selues begin now to blush at it: but the out∣warde ceremonies of Religion, as resorting to common prayer, hearing of Sermons, or suche o∣ther, these haue obteyned now the title of the true
seruice of GOD, and shut out the obedience vnto the dueties commaunded by the word. These hold men now from care of dueties appointed by the word, as deuised deuotion kept them in Poperie, from true religion. These are the good intentes of Gospellers at this day, and as the Lorde spake of his sacrifices commaunded in his worde, when mē were holden in those without any care of good life. He that killeth a Bullock, is as if he slue a man,Esa. 66.34. they haue chosen out their owne wayes, therefore wil I choose out their delusions, and bring their feare vpon them. So may it truely be said of a greate number, that the Lorde hateth their resorting to prayer and sermons, they are now become their owne wayes whiche they haue chosen, because they are sundred from Chri∣stian conuersation and amendment of life, for the which they were ordayned. The meanes to auoid the dangers of our deuises in the seruice of GOD, and to haue disclosed vnto vs the subtilties and snares thereof,Pro. 2.10. is to delight in the wisdome of the worde, to be much exercised therein, according as it is declared in the booke of Prouerbes, That when wisdome entreth into the hearte, and knowledge delighteth the soule, then shall it deliuer vs from the euill way, and from the straunge woman, whiche forsaketh the guide of her youth. Now let vs pray vnto our heauenly father, that we may so see our vntowardnesse vnto his true worshippe, that we may magnifie his mercies that hath pardoned our transgressions, and that wee may receiue strength from the power of his death
to shake off all those shadowes of seruing the Lorde,Iohn. 4. beeing truely humbled to serue him in spirite and truethe, according to the direction of his worde. ¶The thirde Lecture vpon the seuenthe verse 7 Thou shalt not take the name of the Lorde thy God in vaine: for the Lord wil not holde him guilt∣lesse that taketh his name in vaine. IT is manifeste in the Scriptures, that by the name of GOD, is ment the lawe and commaun∣dement of God. For the Lorde wil be honoured and get a name among his people, by transfor∣ming their affections and deedes, into the obedi∣ence of his lawe. In Leuiticus it is thus writ∣ten:Leuit. 22.31. Yee shall keepe my commaundementes, and doe them: for I am the Lorde. Neither shall ye pollute my holie name: declaring that his name is prophaned, taken in vaine, and polluted, when his commaundementes are not regarded. 1. Tim. 6.1.It is also to bee seene in the Epistle to Timo∣thie, that the name of GOD is taken for the doc∣trine and woorde of God. Let Seruants (sayth the
Apostle) account their maisters worthy of all honour, that the name of God and his doctrine be not euill spoken of: ioy∣ning the name and doctrine of God together, as wordes that importe all one matter. For the name of GOD cannot but be dishonoured and euil spoken of through vs, when suche lawes (as all men knowe he hath appointed for vs to walke in) are without regarde neglected and contem∣ned of vs. If it bee required, why the Lorde speaking of his lawe giueth it the title of his name, wee must vnderstand the reason of his so doeing, to be very good & forceable to procure obedience. For what can be more deare vnto vs, than the name and glo∣rie of our GOD? Or what can binde our obe∣dience vnto more dutifulnesse, than when we vn∣derstand he hath committed his owne name and honour into our handes: beeing content to abide without all name and glorie heere in earth, if hee may not haue it of his, by their obedience to his lawe? And therefore as the loue of GOD muste cause vs to begin all dueties, so the end wee looke at in all of them, must bee by the doeing thereof to get honour and glorie to our God. For it is written to the Corinthes:1. Cor. 10.31 Whether yee eate or drinke, or what soeuer ye doe, doe all to the glorie of GOD. Heerevppon it commeth, that workes commaunded are reiected of the Lorde, when they are done to be seene of men for the prayse of our selues, and not with a carefull heart to glori∣fie the Lorde, and procure his prayse thereby.
Take heede (saith our Sauiour Christ) that ye giue not your almes before men to be seene of them, or else yee shall haue no rewarde of your father whiche is in heauen. The Lorde him selfe often vseth the credite and glo∣rie of his name not onely in commaunding, but also in forbidding things to be done:Leuit. 19. as in Leuiti∣cus 19. almost through the whole chapter, when he forbiddeth any thing, he addeth these wordes im∣mediatly, I am the Lord thy God: because the contempt and breach of his commaundement, doth reach to the stayning & polluting of his name. For he hath entred couenant with vs to be our God, in causing vs to walke in his wayes, that he thereby may be magnified and aduanced: as it is written in Deu∣teronomie,Deut. 26.17. Thou haste set vp the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walke in his wayes, and to keepe his ordinaunces, his commaundements, and his lawes, and to harken vnto his voyce: as if the obseruing of ye law were the placing of him in his seate of glorie. Now that we haue learned what is ment by this worde Name, it re∣maineth to vnderstand, what it is to take his name in vaine. This name is saide to be taken in vaine, when there is not diligent care, watchfull obseruing, and greate regarde had to the commaundementes of GOD to doe them. It is written in Deuterono∣mie,Deut. 28.58 If thou shalt not obserue to doe (for so is the trueth of the Hebrue text) all the wordes of the law, that is, If thou wilt not diligently marke this law for to doe it, and feare this glorious and fearefull name, the Lorde thy GOD, then the Lord wil make thy plagues woon∣derfull,
&c. Carelesse securitie, when men haue no carefull minde of the worde of God to liue there∣after, is that which is forbidden by this taking of his name in vaine or vainely. For in this place the holie ghost expoundeth the obseruing and taking heede to doe al the commandementes of the lawe, to be the fearing of this glorious name, The Lorde thy God: whiche feare of his name is contrarie to the taking of it in vaine, and esteeming of it as a vaine thing. In saying He wil not holde them guiltlesse: he doth assure them of punishment, that are carelesse in ke∣ping of his commaundementes: wherevppon his name and honour hangeth: as it is written in Le∣uiticus, If ye shall despise mine ordinaunces,Leuit. 26.15. either if your soule abhorre my lawes, so that yee will not doe all my com∣maundementes, but breake my couenaunte, then will I ap∣point ouer you fearefulnesse, a Consumption, &c, threate∣ning (as appeareth in that Chapter) to proceed in punishment, vntill their vncircumcised heart bee humbled to the carefull keeping of his commaun∣dements. For those who minde his commaunde∣mentes to doe them, are they to whome onelie his mercies are promised in the 103, Psalme,Psalm. 103.17.18. The louing kindenesse of the Lorde indureth for euer, vppon them that feare him, and think vppon his commandements to do them. The punishmente of these that haue no care∣full regard of the worde to doe it, is threatened in the 28. of Deuteronomie, beginning at the 15. verse,Deut. 28.15. in the which verse it is to be noted that there is the same phrase of speeche in the Hebrue whiche I
spake of before (that is, not obseruing to doe all the commaundements) which importeth this want of care in doing, pointing out by that speache, secure men that take no greate care of the worde for to doe it. The same wordes (Obserue to do) are vsed in the first verse of the same Chapter, and therefore not lightlie to be regarded of vs, beeing so often noted by the holie ghoste. If wee peruse the iudge∣mentes of God throughout the whole Bible, wee shal easily perceiue, that when the people ceassed to be carefull how to please God, then was some one punishmente or other let in vppon them, to a∣wake them out of that daungerous sleepe of se∣curitie. Send away this care, by good life to honour God, and then assure thy selfe, punishment will not be long absent, if thou be not a bastarde, ouer whome he hath no fatherly regarde. And no meruaile: for in very deed God hath no seruice in trueth, where this godly care is wanting: it is no prayer that is not a careful prayer: he neuer obteyneth, that hath no desire to obteine. When workes (of them sel∣ues good) are done without any great care to haue them doone, the same may haue prayse for doe∣ing, but the heart can claime nothing for any care∣full purposing. The scripture therefore is plentiful in teaching vs that a Christians life muste bee a carefull life, comparing Christianitie to a trade or occupati∣on
that muste be applyed thoroughly,2. Tim. 2. vers. 5.6. or else there is no good to bee doone in it. If any man striue for a maisterie, (saith the holie Ghoste) hee is not crowned except he striue as he ought to do. The husbandman must la∣boure, before he receiueth the fruite: sending vs to learne at husbandry, the care and trauail of Christianitie. Euery man that proueth maisteries (sayth Saincte Paule) absteyneth from all things:1. Cor. 9.25. and they doe it to ob∣teyne a corruptible crowne: but we for an vncorruptible. This commaundement therefore, excludeth all feigned, carelesse, and hypocriticall walking in the wayes of the Lord: and telleth vs that the Lorde looketh vnto them (as he sayth by the Prophete) that doe tremble at his worde.Esai. 66.2. It is not lightlie to be passed ouer, that requi∣ring this care to be had of Gods glorie, he ioyneth to the name of the Lorde those two wordes, Thy GOD: whiche signifieth, that loue to him, be∣cause he is our God, must bring foorth the care of his glorie, and this obseruing of his commaunde∣mentes to doe them. For heerein is the care and feare of a seruaunt distinguished and discerned from the care and feare of a Sonne, that the sonnes care and feare he hath of his Father is ioyned with loue, and ary∣seth thereof, and proceedeth thereby to please him: The Seruauntes care and feare aryseth in re∣specte of punishment if hee displease his maister, or else from the hope of wages if happily hee may please him in his seruice. So that euen the true feare and care of GOD is min∣gled
with the loue of him, because he is our God. And is not that which wrestleth with the consci∣ence and proceedeth to doing onely for this cause, to get ease thereof, not hauing any respect to glo∣rifie his good God: not, but that the Lorde hath such beginning euen of his best children, but that it is not right, before it be seasoned with the loue of his mercie. For the feare of GOD is neuer true in vs, till wee be drawen vnto him by his good∣nesse, where through he allureth vs: as it is writ∣ten in the Psalme,Psal. 130.4 Mercie is with thee that thou maist be feared. In the Booke of Kinges, Solomon prayeth that the straunger (who is not one of the people of Israel,1. Reg. 8. c. 41.42.43 but commeth to the house of GOD) hearing of his woonderfull workes, may haue his prayers graunted, that al people may feare GOD, as doeth the people of Israel: acknowledging his true feare to spring of his goodnesse. The feare of GOD because it ariseth of his goodnesse, draweth vs alwayes vnto God: and in the Scrip∣ture therfore argumentes and reasons are drawen from his feare to bringe vs toward him, in some one or other duetie: as in the Psalme, Yee that feare the Lorde,Psalm. 22. verse. 23. prayse him: and the reason is taken from his goodnesse, in the next verse following: For he hath not despised the affliction of the poore, but when he called vnto him he hearde. Also in the 115. Psalme, Ye that feare the Lorde,Psalm. 115.11. trust in the Lord, for he is their hel∣per and their sheelde, &c, prosecuting his goodnesse as before. In the next verse following it is saide,
The Lord hath bene mindeful of vs, he will blesse vs, he wil blesse the house of Israel. &c. Wee do plainely se then by these testimonies, that they doe not truely feare him, that are not drawen by his goodnesse to the carefull louing and honouring of him. This commaundement then toucheth al those that passe ouer their time carelessly without a lawe & feare of the Lord, as if there were nothing lesse belonging vnto them then by obseruing his wil to get honour to their God: or as if their vngodlie and secure life, shoulde neuer a whit impeache the glorie of his name. By this commaundement we learne, that not onely Atheists and godles persons haue to feare the iudgementes of God, but also all those that are not touched with care and great de∣sire by their good life to glorifie God. For he will not hold thē guiltlesse that take his name in vaine, not regarding his honour by careful attending vp∣pon his pleasure. Hereby also we are taught to ceasse to meruaile at the afflictions of those men, in whose liues we haue espied no great outwarde offence. For here we see the want of care to his glorie, though it bee coupled with no outward euil, hath matter in it su∣fficient to prouoke the iudgements of God against vs. Doeth not that maister who at his comming home findeth the worke he had inioyned his ser∣uant carelesslie loked vnto, thinke there is occasion sufficient offered him to proceede to the correction of his seruant, notwithstanding hee hath no other matter to charge him withall?
In this cōmaundement also is forbidden all swea∣ring vainely or falsely: all swearing by those things that are not God, as particular thinges against his word, and therfore against the glorie of his name. For if the commaundement forbid the neglect of his lawe generally, it must needes forbid seuerally and particularly that which is against some seue∣rall & particular cōmaundement. We haue lear∣ned that carelesse contemning of his worde is re∣proued in this commaundement: and the reason is, because the Lord doth communicate his name and his honour therevnto, whiche we may not take in vaine or without reuerence.Heb. 6. The same thing is to be saide for the vse of his name, whiche he hath graunted vnto vs to decide controuersies & doub∣tes of great importance withall: that because there is in it the marke and print of his glorie, wee must haue the vse of it in those matters with reuerence accordingly. We deale not with the Lord in any communicating with his essence and euerlasting beeing, that a man should imagine yt hee can offer him no wrong vnlesse he rush against the heauens, and violently run vpon his person: he dealeth with vs by his worde, and by his name: if there be any villany, wickednesse, nay want of reuerence yt way it toucheth his glorie & pearceth the honour of the highest. Blasphemous mouthes therefore that can∣not be stirred in their affections, but they wil by & by be reuenged of the Lorde, & cast vp their choler in othes and blasphemie against his maiestie, haue heere wel to looke aboute them, and to remember
that in such outrage, they fight against ye honour of the liuing Lord, yt wil aduance ye same in the disho∣nour & vtter confusion of them. Is it not horrible blasphemie, that a miserable man should seek to re∣deeme himselfe from contēpt by bringing ye Lord vnder his foote, and treading his honoure in the dust? I doe not meane that periured persons, who haue put vpon the Lord the person of Sathan, in making him a protector of lyes, be only these blas∣phemous mouthes, that haue enterprised the defa∣cing and dishonouring of the Almightie, but those common swearers also, in whose mouth the name of the Lord runneth so vsually & so vnreuerently in common speeche. The Lord hath lent vs the vse of his name to determine our doutes, & decide our controuersies that be of great importance, and can∣not otherwise come to light: and that with such re∣uerence as vnto his honour apperteyneth. He hath not left it to wait vpon our vaine words & talke of no importāce, to serue where our humor wil place it: so that men are alwayes guiltie of high treson a∣gainst his glorie in ye vse of his name, vnles both ye weightines of the mater they haue in hand & their reuerēce in ye manner of dealing therin, shall excuse them. A man can no way be vnreuerēt toward his name, but he shal in so doing be guiltie of his disho∣nour: for those things wherin he hath left ye marks of his glory, as his name, his word, and sacramēts, by the vse or abuse of them, do truely witnes of the heart, how it standeth affected towardes the ho∣nouring of him.
There was neuer man founde truely honouring God in his heart, whose tongue was defiled with vsuall swearing, and often vnreuerent vsing of his name. Neither was there euer founde man truelie fearing the Lord, that walked without all awe and reuerence of his worde. The excuse therefore is vaine and vtterly vntrue, that swearing is but a cu∣stome of the tongue, and that their heart standeth reuerently affected towarde his name and glorie. For it is the want of reuerence in the heart to God, that fometh out such filthynesse at the mouth: and the longe continuaunce of that impudencie in the heart, hath brought the fruit thereof into ye mouth: which witnesseth sufficiently the corruption that is settled inwardly in the heart. Let the common swearer then ceasse to seeke excuse, by saying, It is but a folish custome: For that long custome of dis∣honouring the Lord in his mouth, will proue that he hath had a custome to dishonour him in his heart of no lesse continuaunce. Our communicati∣on must be yea, yea, nay, nay: that which is more commeth of euil. But it is commonly said, Some∣thing must be added or els men shall not be belee∣ued. It is a pitiful thing that the credit of a Christi∣an should be so little, that to borrow beliefe for his common talke, he must leaue no lesse pawne and pleadge behinde him, then is his faithe and trueth, the greatest treasures and iewels that he hath recei∣ued from the Lorde. If men would seeke credit by their wel dealing, they need not to bring foorth so great assurance for it in their speaking.
It is likewise vnlawfull to sweare by creatures: in asmuche as an othe giueth superioritie vnto that whereby they sweare: and acknowledgeth it as a Iudge and discerner of secret & hid things, a bring∣er also of them vnto iudgement, condemning the wicked in bringing his way vppon his heade, and iustifying the righteous in giuing him according to his righteousnesse. The giuing of this vnto cre∣atures entreth vppon the right of the Almightie, & intituleth creatures vnto the honour of the creator who hath declared plainely,Esa. 42.8. that hee will not giue his glorie to another. And therefore it is in ye high∣est degree of reproching, or rather blaspheming the Lorde, in laying his chiefe honour open to the spoyle of a creature, bringing a contemptible cre∣ature, as it were to pray vppon the almightie crea∣tor. And if there be acknowledgement of superio∣ritie ouer vs to the thing that we shal sweare by (as is witnessed by the holie Ghoste,) then,Heb. 2.16. as we may not sweare by Heauen, Earthe, or any other crea∣ture, muche lesse may wee, by Masse, Mattens, Roode, or such like, we will put the honour of the Almightie vpon them, and take them as our God, who onelie hath superioritie ouer vs,1. Re. 8.31.32 to iustifie righteousnesse, and to bring the wickednesse of the wicked vpon his head: whiche thing in our othe we do acknowledge to belong vnto him by whōe we sweare.Hos. 2.17. When Almightie God promiseth by his Prophet Hosea, to receiue the Israelites to fa∣uour again after their affliction, he saith that he wil take away the names of their Idols out of their
mouth, & thei shuld be no more remēbred by their names. These things may suffice to teach vs, yt the Lord cannot beare the dishonour of his name, but will haue that vpholden in honour and reuerence, without suffering it either to lie open vnto the cō∣tempt of godlesse persons, or vnto the spoyle of I∣dolaters, who breaking it vpon his glorie, do beau∣tifie and set out his creatures with the ornamentes thereof. This commaundement likewise rea∣cheth particularly to all of them, whiche neglecte any of those meanes, that God hath commaunded vs to vse, either for the welfare of our soule, or bo∣die. For the wordes and workes of his wisedome may not be refused as vaine & needelesse, but must with all humilitie be imbraced, that in our so doe∣ing his wisdome may be honoured, who hath ap∣pointed those to be the meanes, whereby he will conueye his mercie towards vs: the neglect where∣of, chargeth the Lord with want of wisedome in ordeyning them. Here falleth to the grounde the wicked and blasphemous opinions of the Anabap∣tistes, Libertines, and the feigned Familie of loue, who are growen to suche a magnifying of grace, brought as they say by the reuelation of the spirit, as the wisdome of God in his worde is of small or no account with them in deede: but as if it were a needeles matter or had no certeintie in it, it is who∣ly transformed into their spirite, & made to speake accordingly. The nature of man is in this cōman∣dement corrupted, as in the rest: doing the thinges which he doeth to God without all awe and feare
of his word. It behoueth the man therfore that wil truely trie him selfe, to searche into his life, and wel to consider what manifest contempte there hathe beene in him of the name and honour of God, in stubbernely standing againste the authoritie of his word, while he hath willingly neglected to be ad∣monished and aduised thereby: what contempt of his honour he hath giuen forth in common swea∣ring and vsual oathes, that either directly or indi∣rectly reach to the glorie of God, euen to ye woun∣ding of him in ye same. Moreouer it behoueth him to consider what carelesnesse there hath beene and what little regard in his best doings, to haue them so soundly & throughly done, as vnto the honour of God doth apperteine: where the diligent paines, carefull and through dealing in matters that touch his owne name, shalbe a sufficient light to disclose his halting with the Lord. For the corruption of mans heart is so great and so hidden, yt all meanes almost are to few to vtter it: therfore it is requisite, that we vse al the meanes we may in that behalfe. Let a man in this examination wel consider, whe∣ther there hath beene any suche feare or care to a∣uoide things forbidden, and to do things comman∣ded him by the word, (wherein consisteth the glo∣rie of God) as there hath ben while his own honor is in hand, and his owne name called to question at any time: whether he hath delt in dueties appoin∣ted him by God with feare and care, lest the Lorde through his infirmitie shuld be foyled, & his name dishonoured, whiche coulde not haue beene wan∣ting, if his owne estimation had beene in hazarde,
that he may be brought to the sight of his Sonne. For when it pleaseth God to cal any to the hope of his kingdome, hee letteth them see their corrup∣tion to be so great in these and suche other kindes of dishonor that they haue done vnto him, as that their harte is forced to appeale vnto the mercie of God, fastening themselues to it, & vtterly giuing ouer their owne obedience. Whiche mercie of God they so stay vppon, and are so comfortable in, that it prouoketh them no longer to neglect the name and glorie of their God, but with all reue∣rence to submit themselues to the gouernement of his word, alwayes endeuouring to better their obe∣dience towardes his lawe, because it tendeth to the glorie of his name, wherein howe greate so euer their profiting be, yet this corruption whiche clea∣ueth so fast vnto them, cānot but continue in them stil an humbled and lowly harte, euen in all their blessings, while they clearely perceiue them (by the sight of their corruption) to be the vndeserued graces and gyftes of their God. Their offending also whatsoeuer, cannot be without the great grief of their hart, because they see it to be with the dis∣honour of him, who hath abased himselfe to the deathe of the Crosse, to worke the honour and ad∣uauncement of them. We are therefore (brethren) diligently to learne to waxe wearie of those wayes that would depart from the reuerence and honou∣ring of the Lord, in not fearing to offend againste his word:Po. 3. vers. 13. because it is written, He that despiseth the worde, he shalbe destroyed, but he that feareth the comman∣dement,
shalbe rewarded. Let vs learne to become careful in the duties which are appointed vs by the worde, for the Lorde will not holde them guilt∣lesse that are secure therein. We can not beare good heart vnto the Lord, if we let his honour fall to the ground among vs: it is his mercie that doth vouchsafe vs this fauour, to be trusted with his ho∣nour. Can it want then iust reproche, if we shalbe tried to be senselesse in this point? It drewe teares from Dauid, that the wicked kept not his lawe: & can we see our owne liues, and the liues of those committed vnto vs, wandring from the wayes of life, and hungerly (in the contempt of the worde) pursuing after death, and yet for all that neuer to be touched with it, especially seeing the dishonour of our God dependeth vpon it? It should vexe vs, that the gospell hathe beene so long time with so litle fruite among vs: that the instruments of his grace, that haue gayned so many in former times vnto God, shuld not only not preuail in many, but euen receiue discredite and dishonour among men: and that the litle fruite appearing in our liues, shoulde call into question the veritie of Gods gospel, being in fruite and effect so vnlike in many, vnto that it hathe beene in former times. A Christian should go to the dueties laide vpon him by the word with the like minde, that a good souldiour goeth to the defence of that holde whiche being taken by the enimies, he is assured to receiue continuall shame and dishonour. The Lord will be honored, by hauing his word
obeyed: if we doe not conspire to mainteine his honour that way, we are guiltie of treason against his glorie: when we suffer sathan to batter downe obedience in vs to God and man, we are as well accessarie to the betraying of his glorie, as those souldiers, that are quiet within the castle, while their enimies sacke the same without. Let vs ther∣fore goe carefully aboute these matters of his ho∣nour, let our care and sounde dealing be a recorde vnto our hartes, that we are not conspired with his enimies. There can be no better argument, that men do willingly consent with sathan, then to see them carelesse of his assaultes: then neuer to see them stande vpon their watche, especially dealing with the enimie, who hath professed that hee will neuer be at truce with them. And because the Lord giueth so glorious a title to christianitie, as to call it his glorie, making so neere a bonde betweene our saluation & his honour: let vs not sleepe in so ear∣nest matters, neither bring a slender and bare af∣fection, where there is the assured hope of a double commoditie. Nowe let vs pray vnto our heauenly Father, that we may more be humbled, that wee haue so long liued to so litle honour of his name, not only that we may thereby truly acknowledge the mercy of Iesus Christe, that hathe put vppe so great dishonour at our handes, washing it away no otherwise than with his bloud, but also that in the remembraunce of so long time, wherein we haue dishonoured him, we may bee whetted to bestirre vs this time, that we haue to liue, bothe
to pull downe our affections, that would disho∣nour him in the plaine contempte, or carelesse re∣gard of obedience, & also to bring forth that fruite of newe life, that may open the mouthes of many to speake of his praise for it, whose work∣manship it is. The fourth Lecture vpon the eighth verse. 8 Remember the Sabbaoth day, to keepe it holie. 9 Sixe dayes shalt thou labour, and doe all thy worke. 10 But the seuenth day is the Sabbaoth of the Lord thy God: in it thou shalt not doe any worke, thou, nor thy sonne, nor thy daughter, thy man seruaunt, nor thy maide, nor thy beast, nor thy straunger that is within thy gates. 11 For in sixe dayes the Lord made the heauen and the earthe, the sea, and al that in them is, and rested the seuenth day: therefore the Lord blessed the Sabbaoth day, and halowed it. THe rest from bodily laboures that was commaunded vpon the Sab∣baoth day, had in it this significa∣tion: that Christianitie did con∣sist in ceassing from sinne. So doe the Prophets (who are the true ex∣positors of ye law) interpret it:Isai. 56.. For thus we do read in the Prophet Esay, Blessed is the man that doeth this, and the Sonne of man that taketh holde on it, he that keepeth
the Sabbaoth and polluteth it not, and keepeth his hand from dooeing any euill. The Prophete doeth declare, what it is to keepe the Sabbaoth, by these wor∣des following, And keepeth his hand from doeing any euil. The euill that by this sabbaoth we are com∣maunded to rest and ceasse from, is not a matter straunge and disagreeing from our disposition, but rooted in our nature: as nowe we haue it from A∣dam. And therefore the same Prophet that here af∣firmeth the keeping of the Sabbaoth to consist in ceassing and resting from euill,Esai. 58.13. in an other place af∣firmeth it to be the ceassing from our owne wayes and workes: declaring thereby this euill and ini∣quitie (that we are commaunded to ceasse from) to be no forrener or straunger, but to keepe his house and home in our owne nature. In that the Scrip∣ture termeth euil to be our own wayes and works, according as it is written by the Prophete Isaie, If thou consecrate the Sabbaoth as glorious vnto the Lorde, and shalt honour him,Esai. 58.13. not doing thine owne wayes, nor seeking thine owne will, &c. expounding the Not doing our owne ways, nor seeking our owne will, to be the consecrating of a glorious Sabbaoth vnto the Lord. The Sabbaoth then consisteth in keeping vs from doing euil, so that necessarily we must conclude this euil to be in our owne wills and wayes. This inwarde cor∣ruption, wherewith bothe our wit and wil is poy∣soned, was very fitly resembled in the outward ob∣seruing of the Sabbaoth. For vppon the Sabbaoth day, the people were called from all their accusto∣med workes, that they had beene occupied in the
sixe dayes before. So that a man comparing their doinges that day, with those they were exercised in the other sixe dayes, must of necessitie say they were cleane altered and chaunged in their doinges, from that, that vsually before they had beene, and so diuerse, as if they had not beene the same, but o∣ther men. A resemblance verie fitte and sitting to our spirituall Sabbaoth, whiche consisteth in be∣comming newe men concerning our dooinges, from that wee haue beene, before wee knewe the Gospell. The outward rest from bodily laboures, whiche did shadowe out our true rest from sinne, (whiche is our accustomed way and worke) was so strictely obserued among the Iewes, that the neglect thereof in the least thinges, (as gathering sticks vpon the Sabbaoth day) was punished with death: as we do reade in the 15. of Numbers, to de∣clare some signification of greater thinges in it,Num. 15. ac∣cording as the Prophetes haue interpreted it. The Sabbaoth then doth verie well point out the cor∣ruption that we haue receiued of Adam, which ru∣leth and reigneth in the ways and wils of al them, that are not borne againe and chaunged bothe in will and deede, by the power of that his grace, which only he bestoweth vppon his elect.Ephe. .3. For thus it is written to the Ephesians: Among whome (speaking of the children of disobedience) We also had our conuersation in time past, in the lustes of our flesh, in fulfilling the will of the fleshe, and of the minde, and were by nature the children of wrath as wel as others. We haue to marke here that speaking of his sinne, he descri∣beth
it to haue beene done by following the wil of the minde, (whiche is the reasonable part:) as well as in following the will of the flesh, (which is the affection & vnreasonable part.) And lest we shuld ascribe this only to his custome in sinne, (as if hee had not beene borne with this disease, nor by na∣ture inclined therevnto,) he putteth himselfe and others vnder the wrathe of God by nature, saying: We are by nature the children of wrath as well as others: making it the common case of all men, as naturally to be inclined to euill, as they are to eate and drinke in their hunger or thirst. It is worth the noting yt he putteth himselfe in the number, for he saith of him selfe to the Philippians,Philip. 3.6. yt his life was not outwardly to be reproued, no not before his calling. And therefore we may learne, that this is the estate, euen of those ciuil men, that are not to be touched with any notorious offence or outward euill. This Sabbaoth, teaching vs our inward corrup∣tion, stayeth not there, neither is that the end of it, but leadeth vs to vnderstand, that our iustification, sanctification, and true holinesse of life, are the free works of God within vs: which we are compelled to graūt, in yt we confesse our own ways to be cor∣rupted, & yt the ceassing frō sinn, is the ceassing frō our own ways & works. For if (as the truth is) our owne wayes be al corrupted & defiled with sinne, if any good be in vs, it must haue a beginning and spring other where then from our selues. That
the Sabdaoth did signifie our newe birth in Christ to be the workmanship of God within vs, may ap∣peare in Exodus. Keepe ye my Sabbaoth,Exod. 31.13. for it is a signe betweene me and you in your generations, that you may know that I the Lord do sanctifie you. For the deniall of their owne wayes, must needes witnesse theire woorkes of sanctification to proceede from the Lorde, and not of them selues. The same is witnessed in Eze∣chiel, and in the Actes of the Apostles.Ezech 20.12 Actes. 3.26. The coue∣naunt made with Abraham for blessing all nations in his seede, is saide to be perfourmed in Christ, in turning euerie one of his from their iniquitie. Vnto you (saith the holy ghost in that place) hath God rai∣sed vp his sonne Iesus. And him hath he sent to blesse you, in turning euerie one of you from your iniquities. There is mention made in this commandement, of the Lords creation of the worlde in sixe dayes: as if the Sabbaoth should only direct vs to the con∣sideration of that worke of our creation, not requi∣ring any thing beside: especially, seeing there fol∣loweth that note of inferring: Therefore the Lorde blessed the seuenth day & halowed it:Deuter. 5.15 as ifelse there were no other consideration to be had. In the fifte of Deute. where the lawe is repeated, this comman∣dement hathe annexed to it, the memorie of their deliuerāce out of Aegypt: Remember (saith the holy Ghost in that place) thou wast a seruaunt in the land of Aegypt, and that the Lord thy God brought thee out thence by a mightie hande and stretched-out arme: Therefore the Lorde thy GOD commaunded thee to obserue the Sabbaoth day. In this diuersitie of benefites to bee
considered in the Sabbaoth, we may learne, the Lord meant rather to induce vs to the freenesse of his goodnesse in Christe in euerie benefite: then to binde vs to any one particular fruit and effect ther∣of, the clearest testimonie of this free goodnesse we haue in our newe birthe: And yet the scrip∣ture affirmeth the excellencie of our creation to be in Christ, as may appeare by conferring the eighth Psalme with the 2. chapter to the Hebrues verse 7.8. and 9:Psal. 8.5. Heb. 2.7.8. &. 9. where the excellencie of man aboue o∣ther creatures, is put ouer to be cōsidered in Christ being crowned with glorie and honour. The Pro∣phet noteth the founteine of all our goodnesse to be in Christ, & the greatest fruite therof to be our new byrth: notwithstanding all other benefites are receiued of his children, as fruites and effects there∣of. And they bound therefore, as in sanctification, so in creation and deliuerance from Aegypt, to ac∣knowlege the alone & free worke of Gods good∣nesse: and this is the cause why ye holy Ghost doth not strictly bind them vnto one benefite in the ob∣seruing of the Sabbaoth. This commandement teacheth vs mortification: for to that ende are wee taught, that our nature is corrupt, yt we may learne to subdue the same, & to renounce it. The Iewes had this special ceremonie of rest, to exercise them in the doctrine & practise of mortification: the truth of which ceremonie is fulfilled in Christe.Rom. . For by the power of his death it is brought to passe, that sinne dyeth in his. It was necessarie they should be acquainted
with this doctrine, for the Lord hath no seruice of vs that he will accept of, if we learne not to re∣nounce and denie our affections: neither can we goe truely to the obedience of him, but in the de∣niall of our selues. Our affections are as vntamed coltes that refuse to draw in the yoke of the Lord: and therefore must be tamed if we meane to in∣terreine obedience. For we can not drawe nere vnto the Lorde, except we shall remoue farre, from our selues: keeping vnder our wisedome and affections, that they make no insurrection a∣gainst the Lorde in the gouernement of his word. If a man might reteine his owne affections and desires together with the worshippe of the Lorde, it woulde be receiued of many: but because they can not stand together, but he who is ruled by the one must depart from the other, the number of them is small, that truely serue the Lord. For notwithstanding there be many that obserue out∣warde thinges that apperteine to the profession of religion and outward deedes which they may do, and yet not greatly straine their affections, yet because suche men, whensoeuer the matter of re∣ligion and duetie directly warreth with their af∣fections, then do vsually take part with themselues in their affections againste the Lorde, their kinde of seruice of the Lord, is but in deede a seruing of them selues. For they haue not learned this spe∣ciall point, without the whiche all the rest is no∣thing. It is a small matter for a man to busie him selfe aboute sundrie thinges, so that he be surely
determined of this, that his affections shall no soo∣ner be pressed, but he will forthwith set them at li∣bertie, and let them goe free. If we shal haue taken part with the wisedome of God, to the suppres∣sing and abandoning of our owne witt, if with his pleasure, we haue stoode against our owne, then may we say in trueth, that there hath beene some religion and seruice of God vsed and practised of vs, when it hath preuailed to the displacing of our owne lustes and desires. Free will.By this commandement falleth to the grounde all free will of man to doe good: all workes of preparing vs to receiue Gods grace. For what franke and free will vnto God can there be in that nature that is dead in sinne? Or how can he boast of the freedome or good inclination of his nature, whose glorie and sanctification consisteth in res∣ting and ceassing from the affections and motions of his nature, in such a victorie ouer them as he be no longer led nor ruled by them? This commaundement teacheth vs to giue all glorie vnto God, in the true abasing of our owne corrupt nature: for the Lord is not truely honou∣red and glorified of vs, vnlesse he be found true, & we liars, he iust & we vniust. He will not haue vs stande together with him. No iustice, but his, must be vpholden in the fall of ours, he aduaunced in our humilitie. Many may be brought with the Phariseie,Lu. 18. vers. 10.11.12.1. &. 14. to confesse Gods goodnesse in the bene∣fites they haue receiued of him, but fewe with the
Publicane to humble themselues truely and from the sense of their heart in the nature that they haue rebelling against him. It is neither great aduaun∣cing of God, nor any great abasing of our selues, to professe him to haue done vs good, when there is no deseruing of ours to ye contrarie confessed or acknowleged. For euen ciuil men haue this good∣nes in them, to do wel to them yt haue deserued no∣thing to ye contrarie. But then is he truly honoured in his goodnesse, when it is giuen to vnworthie & vndeseruing persons: when the loue is so great to∣warde his enimies. Then are we truely hum∣bled, when in hart we acknowledge it not only to be vndeserued, but also euen contrarie to our de∣seruing. What then? Shal we sinne that God may be glorified in our humilitie? God forbidde. For when we haue taken as good care ouer our wayes as fleshe and bloud possiblie can perfourme, there will be matter enoughe of throwing downe our selues in all humilitie, before the throne of his mercie. By this cōmandement are Papistes, Anabaptists, and that wicked & damnable sect of the familie of loue, vpholding free wil, & their fulfilling of ye law found all traitours to Gods glorie, which standeth not whole and sound, vnles euerie mouth be stop∣ped, & al the world found culpable & faulty before GOD: as it is written to the Romanes.Rom. 3.19. This commaundement as farre foorth as it is ceremo∣nial, nowe is ceased bycause Christe is nowe come, by whose death we die to sinne, & rest from
our owne wayes. And therefore in that it did ad∣monishe vs of him to come, nowe, in that he is come, it serueth no longer to that ende: In as∣muche also as the dispensation of those times were (as the Apostle saith to the Galathians) The minoritie and wardshippe of the Churche,Gala. 4.1.2. during whiche time, the heire (though Lord of all) differeth not from a seruaunt, but is vnder gouernours. These times that nowe fol∣lowe Christe, must needes bee more free from the bondage of these outward thinges, and from that strict obseruing of the outwarde rest, that in those times they were in bondage vnto. Yet all this notwithstāding, in as much as this seuēth day is appointed by ye Church for the assembling of ye faithfull, and for their ioyning together in prayer, Sacramentes, and hearing of the worde, thereby to gette power to ceasse from sinne, (that is our owne wayes and workes,) it cannot without great wic∣kednesse and sinne against God, be neglected. Wherein the wickednesse of this exceedeth, in that men commonly no day in the weeke, followe so muche their owne wayes, and the delightes of their owne hart, as on that day, which is appointed to learne them howe to ceasse from their owne wayes, workes, and delightes. For a great num∣ber, (& those not ye worst of all,) take that day to be ordeined only for the ease of their bodie, & to be a day of recreation after their trauels & labours that haue beene the sixe dayes before, and vse it ac∣cordingly: whereas the Lorde hathe appointed it
to the exercise of the word and prayer, that beeing vnburdened of their worldly affaires, they mighte with free harts and mindes attend vpon the word, prayer, and meditation of the mercies & benefites of God, and so profit therein, that the other dayes of labour might feele the benefite and commoditie therof, they being better armed to stand against the occasions of euil, which men who haue daily dea∣lings in the world, and so tickle a disposition vnto sin, without great grace shal neuer be able to auoyd but must altogether bee ouerwhelmed therewith. And likewise it was ordeyned that men by con∣sideration of his mercies, should so be ledd to loue him, and by faith to waite for the mercies and hap∣pynes laide vp for his, that they might become the more willing to ceasse from their owne wayes & wills, and to moderate their inordinate desire after worldly thinges. But is this regarded of the moste, I cannot say so: for common experience would confute mee. One sorte (as was declared before) making the case of the body to be the end thereof: An other, (a great deale worse then they) vsing it onely to make good cheere, play and sporte themselues on that day. Thus the right vse and end of the Sabba∣othe is cleane altered, and not that only, but chaun∣ged into a practise moste contrarie to the instituti∣on thereof. For beeing appointed to bee (as I may call it) the market day of the soule, to make proui∣sion for the dayes following: they are not onely no better holped that way, but as if Sathan might
boldely open his shoppe windowes then, whiche could not bee permitted him before, they doe so fasten vppon his wares and stoare them of that prouision, that not onely that weeke, but many weekes are serued of the abundance thereof. In a third sorte we shall see it, that if a man haue any matter to deale in, that is of smaller importāce then yt his ordinarie busines may giue place there∣vnto, those are cast vpon the Lords day, and then muste hee and also oftentimes some of his, be sent vpon those messages or other matters whatsoeuer to dispatch them. These kinde of men vse the Sab∣baoth day commonly to make an end of recko∣nings, or other kind of like matters not finished the former weeke, and to set matters and busines in a redynes for ye week following: so that their heads are as ful fraught with the world that day as vpon any other, and therfore far from the right vse ther∣of, which is to be emptied of all suche thinges, that better may haue the place. These foure commaundements, instruct vs per∣fectly concerning the glorie of God wherin it doth consist. First,  in acknowledging him alone, the au∣thor of all our welfare both in body and soule. Se∣condly,  in taking such comfortes therein, that wee be allured by his mercyes to doe the things that are pleasant in his sighte, making it the beginning of our seruice. Thirdly,  in hauing no other end, then by our carefull doeing of his will to get glorie and praise vnto him. Fourthly,  in all these doings, euen the best, to humble our selues in true acknowe∣ledging
from the heart, the corruptiō of our owne heart, wayes and workes, & earnestly trauelling to subdue the same; therby aduancing the free mercie and vndeserued goodnes of our God, both in iusti∣fying and also sanctifying of vs. In the examination of our selues concerning this cōmaundement, we haue to learne that we are by nature corrupted in this commaundement as in ye rest, & that there is nothing so hard, as with true humilitie of hart to be humbled in acknowledging and mortifying the corruptions, wickednes & re∣belliōs of our nature against Gods cōmandemēts: in somuch that oftentimes he suffereth his children to fall into grosse infirmities, that all ye world may see it, before they can truly be humbled in the sight of their infirmitie, and so cast downe as they giue the whole glorie to his mercie, earnestly seting vp∣on their affections for the subduing of them. But when it pleaseth God to pull any out of their cor∣ruption, and to begin Christianitie in them, hee doeth let them see with assurance of his mercie to∣warde them: but so, as notwithstanding he bring∣eth them not onely to the sight and bewailing of that rebellion which they feele in their affections against his wil, but also to the mortifying and sub∣duing thereof. The man therefore, that will truely examine him selfe, hath to consider what resisting of his af∣fections hath beene in his life, so shall hee soone perceiue, what neede he hath to betake him selfe vnto the mediatour CHRISTE IESVS, while
his conscience shall wittnesse either of no profi∣ting at all herein, or at the least so little, as shall suf∣ficiently conuict him, and force him to lay holde vpon the righteousnesse of Christe, as his only re∣fuge: yet so, as his care to suppresse his affections be no lesse, because hee vnderstandeth what mercie is in Christe, but so much the more increased, as he perceiueth that trauaile to please the Lord, euen as the best thankfulnesse that wee can performe, for the great benefite of our redemption. Now let vs pray that we may beare such an e∣nimies heart against our owne corrupt affections, as may not spare to treade vppon them, when so∣euer they shall ryse vp against the Lord. ¶The fifte Lecture vpon the twelfth vearse. 12 Honour thy Father and thy mother, that thy dayes may be prolonged vpon the land which the Lord thy GOD giueth thee. THe former commaundementes, doe perfectly instructe vs in all the dueties that apperteine di∣rectly to God. These following, doe giue vs rules and preceptes for the dueties that wee doe owe vnto men. The Lord our God being perfect in all
happinesse by him selfe alone, hath no neede of our seruice: yet will he haue tryall of the loue that wee beare vnto him, not onely by deedes done immediatly vnto him selfe, but also by deedes done for his cause vnto men. He therefore (mea∣ning to make a tryall of our loue towardes him) hath commaunded vs that we should not be alto∣gether our owne men, closed vp within our owne profites and pleasures, onely regarding and procu∣ring them, and wholy taken vp of them, but that we should go out of our selues at his commaun∣dement, to the good of our brethren: witnessing our thankfulnesse vnto God, in giuing for his sake this seruice vnto men. The dueties vnto GOD (going in order be∣fore these vnto men:) do admonish vs of this doc∣trine, that all our doeings towardes men are no∣thing, where Gods glorie doth not go before, as it is written in the Epistle of Sainct Iohn:1. Iohn. 5.2. In this wee knowe that wee loue the children of GOD, when wee loue God and keepe his commaundementes. And like as our dealing with men is nothing, when the true ser∣uice of God is either not knowen or not regar∣ded, so that seruice that is giuen vnto GOD is not accepted, when our brethren are neglected of vs.Matth. 5.23. &. 24 Therefore doeth our Sauiour Christ in Matthew charge vs that when our neighbour hath any thing against vs, wee should not presume to offer any gift vnto God, before we be reconciled, so greatly doeth the Lorde esteeme of this louing conuersa∣tion with men, that the holie Ghoste maketh it
the proofe of our blessed estate, as it is written in Iohn,1. Ioh. 3.14. Wee knowe that we are translated from death to life, because we loue the brethren. Concerning that which we do owe vnto men: the honourtng of father and mother, hath the firste place. By Father and mother are all those vnder∣stoode, who are the instruments of GOD in a∣ny of his speciall goodnesse towardes vs: whome because hee hath vouchsafed to be his meanes in the conueying of that grace that we doe inioy by them, he cannot abide that they should be with∣out honour at our handes. By honour (whiche is required to be giuen vnto them) wee are taught so to behaue our selues towardes them in all our dealinge, as may wittnesse that in heart wee doe honour them, and therefore this honour doeth not so much exact any one seuerall thing, as it putteth a qualitie and condition vppon all our behauiour towards them, that it should be such, as it may be a wittnesse of our hearte howe highlie it doeth re∣uerence and regarde them. If it be demaunded, why the Lorde by Father and mother, should vnderstand all the instrumen∣tes of his goodnesse towards vs, whereas hee ma∣keth mention but of one sorte, it may be required of them againe, why the Lorde forbidding all kinde of violence, should make mention onely of murther: For as by murther beeing the chiefe, he comprehendeth all of that kinde, so by one instru∣ment of his speciall goodnesse, hee leadeth vs to
the consideration of all the like. Moreouer, we must reuerence the wisedome of the onely wise GOD heerein, who by the moste grosse euils, laboureth to worke the loath-thing of all the like, and by benefites and good thinges in them selues moste amiable, to further the cause of all the rest, setting the ouglyest shape he possiblie can vppon euils to terrifie vs withall, and giuing to good thinges the countenaunce that may best commend them. Our trauaile there∣fore muste bee to searche into these good thinges which wee receiue by others: that when we shall haue founde them, wee may (as by dutie apper∣teyneth) honour the owners of them. Nature may preuaile with them that bee of any consi∣deration, for the conceiuing of those benefites whiche they inioye by meanes of theire Pa∣rentes: so that the trauaile neede not to be muche heerein. Reason may persuade, euen the moste simple, that if wee haue any good thinge in this life, or any blessing following it, they who haue brought vs into life, may iustely clayme a parte therein. The matter of Magistrates is not so plaine, what good wee receiue by them, therefore it cra∣ueth more time to be giuē vnto it. The Magistrate is the instrument of GOD to preserue that life whiche the Lorde in mercie hath giuen vnto vs. For by the administration of iustice and executi∣on of good lawes, the outrage of the wicked (with
whome the worlde is alwayes pestered) is restrai∣ned from laying violent handes vppon the good, which otherwise would at all times burst foorth, because the occasion (which is the good workes of the one, and the euill of the other) can neuer bee se∣parate from their liues. And that this is the occasi∣on,1. Ioh. 3.12. may be proued out of the Epistle of S. Iohn, where, after inquirie had what it was that moued Caine to slay Abel, he answeareth, Because his owne workes were euill and his brothers good. And least wee should note some extraordinarie thing in Caine, hee putteth all the wicked in the ranke with him, making it the common disposition of them all: and therefore saying, We may not bee as Caine which was of the wicked and slew his brother. It is therefore no small blessinge and benefite of God, that keepeth the sword of the vngodly from our throte, whiche is euery houre drawen out and shakē at vs, with whom we can neuer be at league, vnlesse we will be at one with euill. Moreouer, the bloud which is spilt in any land, and the wicked∣nesse that is committed therein, cryeth to the Lord for vengeaunce against that land and people wher∣in it is committed, and is sure to drawe out the sworde of the Lord against that people, if the Ma∣gistrate (who is the Lords Lieutenaunt) shall not before drawe vppon it, by executing deserued pu∣nishment against it. Which thinge to be so, the very Infidels haue perceiued: and therefore in their greate afflictions haue proceeded by casting of lottes, to knowe the
malefactour, that by his punishmente, the euill might be remoued from them: as wee reade the mariners dealte wih Ionas when the tempeste was moste vehement against them.Ionas. 1.7. Therefore often times in the Scriptures after charge giuen to execute punishment against sinne,Deut. 13.5. these or such like wordes are added: So shalt thou take euill away, forth of the middest of thee. And these also:Deut. 13.17. That the Lord may turne from the fiercenesse of his wrath, and shewe thee mercie and haue compassion on thee. Solo∣mon charging Benaia (as it appeereth in the booke of kinges) to slay Ioab, addeth these wordes:1. Reg. 2.31. That thou mayest take away the bloud which Ioab shed causelesse, from me and from the house of my Father. The Magistrate therefore as hee keepeth the bloudie hand of the vngodly from vs: so is he our sanctuarie from their sinne that pursueth vs & our land to destroy vs, while he executeth iustice vp∣pon it. Miserable therefore are the Anabapistes and suche kinde of men, who in denying Magi∣stracie, denie thereby those greate comfortes and blesinges, whiche GOD by them hath graun∣ted vnto his people. The Magistrate also bin∣deth the benefite and helpe of all degrees of men and trades of life vnto vs, so that in denying vs their lawfull ayde, wee haue remedie of lawe a∣gainst them, whereby they stand bounde to em∣ploy them selues without deceipt or fraude to our good: whether it bee in place of Iustice vnder the Prince & chiefe Magistrate, or in any trade or oc∣cupation for the maintenance of them selues: while
we haue so many lawes to correct the abuses in them, that thereby they may bee vsed without guile or deceipt to our most profite. But the chie∣fest benefite of all other is, when they are ye instru∣ments of Gods glorie, in bringing the Gospell to vs, and maynteining it amongst vs, whē they open the eyes of the seers and Prophets, that they be no more shut, cause the heart of the foolish to vnder∣stand knowledge, and make the tongue of the stut∣ter readie to speake distinctlie:Isay. 3.3.4.5. &. . as it is spoken of all godlie magistrates vnder the person of Eze∣chias. By which meanes of the Gospell, euil is disclo∣sed, yt it can no more lurk vnder the name of that it is not, but appearing in his moste filthie face, may the better be auoyded, and good thinges are brought to their beautie and increase, that they may be stronger to allure vnto them the heartes of all those that haue any loue of good things with∣in them: whiche are in the place aboue named re∣cited as fruites that followe the receiuing of the Gospell. By this wee haue some taste of those blessings of God, whiche we doe receiue by mea∣nes of magistrates, how many they bee in number, and how worthie in deseruing. From this sight, muste arise the true honou∣ring of them: for so doeth the Apostle teache vs to the Romanes: who▪ when firste hee hath taught that the magistrate is appointed for the ter∣rour of the euill and prayse of the good,Rom. 13.3. he conclu∣deth, that therefore wee must be subiect vnto ma∣gistrates:
not onely for feare of their punishment, but also for conscience of the good that they doe vnto vs, least (as sayeth Chrysostome vppon those wordes) thou shouldest bee vnthankfull to∣warde a benefactour. It were too longe to stand vpon the benefites that other inferiours receiue from those whome the Lorde hath set aboue them: onelie this doe I require of all inferiours, to enter into some diligent consideration thereof: in so doeing, I am sure that they shall finde them farre to exceede the opinion that before they had of them. It is therefore verye meete and requisite that our dutie towardes them in all thinges should bee such, as may well bee called a true honouring of them, and a right regarde of so greate benefites as we doe receiue by them. The opinion of those men who restraine honour onely to some ciuil outwarde gesture of the body is so friuolous and vaine, as it doth scarce deserue the honour of an aunswere. That honour is not onely seene in ci∣uil gestures of the bodie, but also in outwarde dedes to be done:1. Tim. 5.17. as may appere in the first Epistle to Timothie, where the holie Ghoste (speaking of the mainteynaunce of them that labour in the worde) calleth it Honour: affirming that such doe deserue double honour. And in the same Cha∣piter he admonisheth Timothie to honour wi∣dowes that haue no kinred to prouide for them, meaning that he should se so good prouision to be made for suche, as they mighte take them selues
honoured therein. Matth. 15.And our Sauiour Christe reproued the Phari∣seies as contemners of the commaundement of God, (commaunding parentes to be honoured) when they gaue counsell to their children to of∣fer vp those thinges in the Temple, whiche ought to haue beene bestowed towardes the reliefe of their poore parentes. By these testimonies wee may cleerely see, that such things as doe wittnesse our greate regarde, and louing affections towards others, are iustly called by the name of honour, and they truely honoured therein▪ There is a promise annexed to this commaun∣dement, that it shall go well with suche as honour their superiours, and that their dayes shall be pro∣longed here vpon earth. The promise, in equi∣tie is very well aunswearing to the thing it selfe: that those who are thankful to the instrumentes of GOD, wherby he hath either begunne, continu∣ed, or any way blessed their life, should haue the blessing of manye good dayes: and that they who are vnthankfull to those his instrumentes of life, should in iustice be depriued of the benefite of liuing, beeing so vnthankful and vnduetiful to the instruments thereof. The transgression against this commaunde∣mente, threateneth the shortening of life vnto the rebellious and disobedient: whiche punishment (if it be not executed against his person) will not faile to finde out his seede and posteritie, in whom he is said after a manner to liue.
Contrarywise, obedience to our Parentes, con∣tinueth vs & our posteritie, according as it is writ∣ten in Ieremie: Because yee haue obeyed the commande∣ment of Ionadab your father,Iere. 35.18. &. 19. therefore thus sayth the Lord of hostes the GOD of Israel. Ionadab the sonne of Rechab, shall not want a man to stand before me for euer. A greate blessing of God to haue a heyre male of our owne seed wherein our name may be cōtinued vnto ma∣ny generations. The Verbe that heere is tran∣slated of a Verbe Passiue, hath vsually in the Scripture the signification of a Verbe Transitiue: and therefore thus it may very well be translated: That they (meaning thy Parents) may prolong thy dayes, making the continuaunce of our life, as it were the gifte of Parentes, approuing the honour that their Children giue vnto them: and so it is here attributed vnto Ionadab as his blessing and benefite, that he shall not want a man to stand before GOD for euer, notwithstanding the obe∣dience were in his Children. Whereby wee are taught so to walke duetifully and thankfully to∣wardes our superiours, as they may be compelled to approue it, and so to blesse it with many good dayes. For the Lorde to get this honoure of inferiours to their superiours, hath (as it were) put this benefite of longe dayes into their handes, and maketh it to followe their approuing of that thankfulnesse, whiche they receiue from their in∣feriours. This threatening of the Lord, may not onely
bring a terrour vnto rebellious subiectes, and dis∣obedient children, whiche liue in the displeasure of their superiours, iustly conceiued against them: but also vnto those (who notwithstanding they haue committed nothing that iustly may displease them) yet haue not done any thing that may iustly chalenge approbation and lyking from them. This curse (of cutting off the length of their liues, either in their owne person, or in their posteritie) moste iustly falleth vpon such, as greatly regarde not the consent of their parentes in that weightie matter of marriage. Parentes haue heere to learne the bring∣ing vp of their children in all obedience and re∣uerence towards them selues, lest by their too much lenitie, they bring such an infection into their chil∣dren, as will not departe from them, before it hath broughte them all vnto the graue, that there bee not one man of their seede lefte to continue their name. This blessing (of many good dayes promised to obedient inferiours) is so farr foorth perfourmed, as it may be a blessing vnto them. For sometime God in mercie taketh away obedient children in their young yeeres, that they should not taste of the afflictions that he meaneth to bring vpon the land: or lest the iniquities of those dayes should peruert them.Deut. 5.16. In Deuteronomie vnto the promise of long life are added these wordes, That it may be well with thee, promising them benefite of longe life no longer, then it shall be for their weale to in∣ioy it.
So likewise it may come to passe, that a diso∣bedient childe may liue long, to taste of the griefe of disobedience in his owne Children, to suffer exile and banishment, or some one greate punish∣ment or other: or else that his wickednesse may growe yet riper to reuengement, so that it be no longer a blessing to inioy such dayes. Wee must remember that all this which hath beene spoken of obedience, and the blessing thereof, must be limit∣ted so, as in obeying them we do not disobey God, and go contrarie vnto his word. This commaundemente also bindeth superi∣ours vnto their inferiours. For those gifes of God that come with speciall direction to be employed vnto certein persons, (as do the gifts of inferiours) cannot in equitie, but haue some speciall conside∣ration from them againe, vppon whome they are thus especially employed. Heerevpon aryseth the particular callings that bee, when by reason of par∣ticular benefites and blessinges whiche wee re∣ceiue of particular persons, wee become indebted vnto them againe for seuerall dueties, more and aboue those generall dueties which we owe vnto all men. This commaundement comprehendeth all parti∣cular callings of what cōdition soeuer they shalbe. For the lawe beeing a perfecte rule of righteous∣nesse, cannot content it selfe with generall duties alone. When this duetie from superiours is not giuen to them that be vnder them, it commeth of∣ten to passe by the iust iudgement of God (and yet
with the inferiours their great sinne & heynous of∣fence,) that they become vnthankeful, vndutiful & rebellious againste those that be set ouer them, ar∣med by the iust iudgement of God to denie duetie vnto them, from whom they haue receiued none. Maisters complaine of the vnfaithfulnesse of ser∣uants, and yet was there neuer any time when ser∣uaunts had iuster cause to complaine of vndutifull maisters. For where are those masters to be found that haue any iust regard of the swette of their ser∣uants, (which is their bloud) bestowed in their ser∣uice? How slenderly are they recompenced, when they haue spent their young yeares, (the flower of their life) vpon them? yet euen reason would, that seeing the Lorde hathe laide the maintenance of their life vpon their labour and trauell which their maisters haue eaten vp, they should not be so cru∣elly vnkinde, as after their long seruice to sende them away with an emptie hand. I omit to speake how litle ye care is of bringing them vp in the feare of God. The number of those parentes which care∣fully perfourme this dutie towards their children, to make them learned in the lawe of their God is as small. And where shall we finde any number of suche Magistrates, as employ them selues to terri∣fie wickednesse and wicked men, and to incourage the good in their goodnesse? These thinges are as wel due from them, as the other duties before reci∣ted belong vnto them. There is also generally required of all superiors, yt louing dealing and behauiour towardes their infe∣riours
which may witnes yt they are not vnthank∣full for those special benefits which they do receiue from them. For if loue (whiche hathe in it speciall good will and liking) be commanded towardes all men in generall, there must of necessitie be a grea∣ter measure of it betwene those, that are more par∣ticularly employed the one vpon the other. This louing regard of them outwardly declared in deed and behauiour, must come in as a supplie to helpe to beare and susteine the weight of labour & sub∣iection, whiche the nature of man otherwise can hardly digest, as in a mans bodie more labour or cost is bestowed about those parts that haue the lest beautie and forme in themselues, in so muche that those parts, which (as they are of themselues) dare least abide the eye, are set forth with more beautie to the eye, thereby (after a manner) hauing recom∣pence of their want in the bodie, so in the bodie of the common wealth, and in the societie of man, tender regarde of superiours and amiable affection towards those that be vnder them, should beare vp a part of that heauie burthen of subiection and ser∣uice. The gyftes and graces of God in others craue also honour from vs. For being fellowe-members of one bodie, we haue our benefite, and fare the better for the seuerall gyftes of others. For the Lorde hathe made suche a diuision of his gyftes, as that he hath laide a necessarie part of the welfare of euerie man out of himselfe in some other: the lack wherof, maketh him maymed in him selfe, & ther∣fore
forceth him to seeke vnto others, for his per∣fecte forme & iust proportion. These gyfts of God wee are not only bound to see and behold, but al∣so to subiect our selues in modestie vnto them, e∣uen he that hath more vnto him that hath lesse, as it is written to the Philippians: In meekenesse of minde let euerie man esteeme another better then himselfe.Philip 2.3. And to the Romanes, In giuing of honour, let one go before another.Rom. 10.12 There is as great a cause why the aged shuld be honoured in his knowledge long time experi∣enced in good thinges, as the young man for the ripenesse of his witte: and therefore men must mu∣tually reuerence the gyfts of their fellow brethren, if loue and liking shall be any longe time mutual∣lie vpholden. That is the cause, why in the same verse when the Apostle had persuaded vs to bro∣therly loue, immediately hath these wordes: In gi∣uing of honour, go one before another: as if the one would not long continue, where there were not the other. There is no one thing that our nature can lesse like of, then to be vnder contempt, and that nothing should be espied in vs for the whiche men woulde regarde vs: wherefore it standeth all vpon, to tra∣uell so in finding out the goodnesse of the gyftes and graces of GOD in other, as their hartes may in vnfeignednesse yelde reuerence therevnto: and also thereby to make a defence against infirmities whiche wilbe in flesh and bloud, that there may be bearing and forbearing one of another, by loue & reuerent regarde had to the gyftes of Gods grace in
them. Our nature is no better inclined in dueties towardes men, then it is (as before we haue lear∣ned) in dueties towardes God. For we are giuen to seeke to haue our selues honoured in our calling or gyft whatsoeuer, but litle to regard, nay euen to enuie the honour of others: whiche we shall then discerne, when any shalbe compared with vs, and made either superiours, or else equals vnto vs. And therefore when it pleaseth God to call any of his vnto the hope of his kingdome, he letteth them see their corruption euen in this commandement, so as they are forced by the sense and feeling thereof to giue ouer the claime of saluation in the title of their workes, whiche haue no promise if they doe not perfourme the whole lawe and euerie worke thereof throughout the whole course of their life. For it is written in Deuteronomie,Deut. 27.16. Cursed is hee that confirmeth not all the wordes of this lawe to do them. And I would willingly learne what man there is yt can truely say, that he hath neither done nor yet left vndone any thing, either to his superi∣our or inferiour to men of greater gyfts or lesse thē him selfe, which did bewray want of honouring of them from his hart. The lord also causeth those whom he calleth, both carefully to stand in watch against their infirmitie, lest it should burste forthe to the dishonour of God, & likewise more hartily to require a readie and willing affection to procure the honour of his name, by walking duetifully in this commandement.
And if the outward work of this commaundemēt should be attended vpon of any neuer so diligent∣ly, & yet Gods glorie not sought therein, it would profite vs nothing. For if we giue men their due, and in the meane time deny the Lorde his, what auayleth it vs? Therefore those former foure pointes (wherein his glorie consisteth) conteyned in the former commaundements, must of necessi∣tie be ioyned with all duties vnto men, which are: First yt we acknowledging all our welfare to come from the Lorde alone, doe depend wholy and on∣ly vpon him. Secondly, that in loue of him for his mercyes wee begin to obey him after his word. Thirdly that his glorie beeing the marke we shoot at, make vs carefull in all our works, so to do them as he may haue honour by them. Fourthly, and last of all, that in true acknowledging and trauaile in subduing of our owne corruptions (whiche will not altogether bee sundred from our wayes and workes) we humble our selues in our best obedi∣ence, that the Lord may alwayes reteine the praise of the free and vndeserued working of his grace. Now let vs pray vnto our heauenly father, that we may truely see and bewaile the little reuerence and regarde that we haue had bothe to superiours and inferiours, becomming thereby not onely vn∣thankfull vnto them, but also vnto the Lord, who hath placed such graces for our benefite in them: and let vs craue of him, that we may not onely ob∣teine more power to suppresse the same, but also may be inabled from him to send abroade suche
fruites of true reuerence and honour, as may come to the sight & hearing of many, to the great praise of his name. The sixte Lecture vpon the thirteenth verse. 13 Thou shal not kill. THe former commandement hath giuen forth instruction for par∣ticular callinges, from whiche (by reason of more particular im∣ploying of benefites mutualy one vpon another) there ariseth more particular duetie of the one vnto the other, then that which euerie common man may claime vnto himselfe. Nowe we are to be instructed in those dueties that generally we doe owe vnto all men: amongst whiche, this cōmandement of not killing hath the first place, wherein we are forbidden to do any violence, iniurie or wrong to the bodie & life of our neighbour: and commanded to defend, mainteine, and cherish the same. It is to be obser∣ued, that the Lorde bidding vs shewe foorth loue vnto our neighbours, hath not left it vnto vs to de∣uise wherein to pleasure them, but hath set downe what things are most deare vnto them: that by our helpe giuen for the preseruation of those thinges
safe vnto them, and in benefiting them therin they may haue true triall of the loue and affection that we beare vnto them. Our neighbour therefore in this consideration is not shut vp in the alone fleshe & bloud of the man, but the duties of neighbour∣hode reache vnto the life and bodie, wife, goodes, and good name of the man. Neither is loue the not hating or not hurting of a man, but the hel∣ping and furthering of him to receiue more com∣fort in those thinges aboue recited: ouer the whi∣che euerie man is so tender, that beeing in any of those annoyed, he can no longer account him selfe as a man loued or regarded of the authours therof: For he himselfe is vpholden in life and liking by the comfort of them. The Lorde (in forbidding murder) forbiddith also all violence, crueltie, and wrath towardes our neighbour: labouring in the detestation of this greatest euill, to worke in vs a hatred towardes all that be of any affinitie with it: and therefore not letting vs see them, but in that fourme which may most feare vs from them, put∣ting vpon them al that feareful fourme of murder. The punishment of the offences against this com∣mandement, wil help vs to iudge ye greatnes of the same. Touching the murderer, it is said in Leuiti∣cus,Leui. 24.17. He that killeth any man he shalbe put to death. Vio∣lence bursting foorth into extremities of dealing, in the olde lawe was punished with the like of that that was done what kinde soeuer it was, according as it is written in Leuiticus, If a man cause any blemish in his neighbour,Leui. 24.19. as he hathe done so shal it be done to him,
breache for breache, eye for eye, toothe for toothe, suche a blemishe as he hath made in any, such shal∣be repaid to him, wherby the offender was drawn to the better consideration of that griefe whiche he had brought vpon another, in feeling the displea∣sure thereof within him selfe, and also feared the more from offending, being wel assured before, that he could offer no great wrong vnto his neighbour, whiche selfe same in so doing he should not bring vpon his owne head. This punishment doth not only declare the vnlawfulnesse of violence whiche here is forbiden, but also by that punishment whi∣che the iust Lord did appoint for it, we see howe great the offence is which hath had suche a punish∣ment appointed for it from the iustice of God, that more account may be made of suche iniuries, then commonly there is in any place. In this comman∣dement is forbidden all crueltie: and therfore in the punishment of certeine offences, there was a num∣ber of stripes appointed, whiche in punishing they might not passe: as we reade in Deut.Deut. 25.2.3 So doeth the Lorde abhorre crueltie, that he would not haue it couered, no not vnder the cloake of iustice & zeale against sinne, whiche vnder that pretence might be shadowed, if in any respect at al it were to be main∣teyned. This lawe was so religiously obserued a¦mongest the Iewes, that they would alwayes giue one stripe lesse vnto the offendour whosoeuer. And therefore fourtie beeing the number of stry∣pes whiche they might not passe, the vsuall pu∣nishment was to giue fourtie saue one, whiche number they did not exceede, no not in punishing
of Paule towardes whom they beare so deadly ha∣tred:1. Cor. 11.24 as he testifieth of himselfe to the Corinthes, Of the Iewes (saith he in that place) fiue times receiued I fourtie stripes saue one. Thus woulde the Iewes giue out some signification howe they did abhorre cru∣eltie, being verie vnwilling to be publiquely noted of that crime, how bloudie soeuer their harts were, no not at that time, when as they might haue had some shadowe, in pretending the zeale of iustice for their facte. But Christians must abhorre that in deede, whiche these in shewe would be thought to be farre from.Leui. 19.14. Crueltie was restrained, in that whiche we read of in the nineteenth of Leuiticus, (of not putting a stumbling blocke before the blinde, nor reuiling the deafe:) for suche wantes gette compassion amongest all those in whome there is any humanitie or pitifull inclination. Those therefore must of necessitie be cruel and sa∣uage, that are so farre from any touch therwith, as that they can abide to increase it, by insulting vp∣pon them and adding more torment vnto them. To represse cruel dealing, it was forbidden them to withholde the hyre of the poore and needie hyred seruant,Deut. 24.15. as it is written in Deuteronomie, Thou shalt giue him his hyre for his day, neither shall the sunne goe downe vpon it: for he is poore and therewith susteineth his life, least he crie against thee vnto the Lorde, and it bee sinne vnto thee.Exod. 22.21 To the same ende was the comman∣dement giuen in Exodus (for not vexing nor op∣pressing the straungers, widowes, and fatherlesse children) with this threat, If thou vexe or trouble suche and
so he call and crie vnto me, I will surely heare his crie. Then shal my wrath be kindled, and I wil kil you with the swoorde, and your wiues shalbe widowes, and your children fatherlesse.Exod 22.26 For the same cause, in the same chapter they are cōmanded to restore the garment taken to pledge before the sunne go downe, This is his garment for his skinne (saith the Lord:) Wherein shal he sleepe? therefore when he crieth vnto me I will heare him: for I am merciful.Leui. 25.35. The commandement that was giuen in Leuiticus (concerning those that were impouerished & fal∣len into decay) to relieue them, but in no case to take vsurie or aduantage of them, had in it ye same purpose and ende to meete with crueltie and vn∣mercifulnesse. For euerie suche condition hath in it matter to moue vs to pitie & compassion: which occasion is taken of the good, as offered them from the Lord to declare whose children they are by be∣ing mercifull euen as their heauenly father is mer∣cifull.Matth. 7 But when men are so farre from compassi∣on and mercie, as beeing prouoked by present and visible occasion offered, they doe not onely shut vppe the bowels of compassion against them, but euen make a pray & spoile of them, most cru∣elly increasing their miserie, it is a plaine proofe that there is no droppe of humanitie, and muche lesse of Christianitie within them. To conclude this speeche of crueltie, that whiche is written in DeuteronomieDeut. 25. (of the mouseling the mouthe of the Oxe that treadeth out the corne) and is applied by Saint Paule to the Corinthes,1. Cor. 9.9.10. to proue that the labourer may not bee denied his hyre and wages
for his paines, maketh plainely against crueltie, & battereth downe all the walles of vnmercifulnesse, that are so strongly vpholden by the general prac∣tise of so many now a-dayes. For what man al∣most is there of any worshippe or wealth, who thinketh not that he may lawfully vse his tenaunt, or poore neighbour without any wages? yet the prophet Ieremie pronounceth woe againste this kinde of crueltie in these wordes:Iere. 22.13. Woe vnto him that buildeth his house by vnrighteousnesse, and his cham∣bers without equitie: he vseth his neighbour without wages, and giueth him not for his worke. It is nothing so cruell a facte to robbe a straunger, whome thou knowest not, as to sucke out (by his labour) the bloude of thy friende and neighbour, and after to sende him away without wages. If suche buildinges stande vpon vnrighteousnesse, (as sayth the prophete,) it is to be feared that many a faire house in this land hathe suche a ruinous foundation, as threateneth the destruction of the owner. This kinde of cru∣eltie howe heynous it was in the sight of God, and what plague it might bring in iustice vppon the things that were in suche vnrighteousnesse accom∣plished, did Iob verie well vnderstande, and there∣fore saith. Iob. 31.39.If I haue eaten the fruites of my lande without siluer, or haue grieued the soules of the maisters thereof, let thistles growe in steede of wheate, and cockle in steed of bar∣ley.Prou. 12.10. A righteous man (saith the holy Ghost) regardeth the life of his beast, but the mercies of the wicked are cruell.
If hee neglecte not his beastes but giueth them foode in due time, muche lesse will he neglecte his familie or seruantes, in defrauding them of that, ei∣ther in meate, or wages, that is conuenient. These examples that nowe I haue alledged, as they spring from an vnmercifull heart, and tende to the vniust griefe and molestation of the bodie and life of our brother, so are they directly againste this commandement. Notwithstanding, as they bring damage vnto him by deteyning that whiche is his due, they are against this commandement al∣so, Thou shalt not steale: so that it is not vnpossible for one kinde of action, to be guiltie both of mur∣der and theft. The negligence of man, whereby his neighbour receiueth either losse of life, or hurt of bodie, is for∣bidden in this commandement. The reason is ve∣rie good. For if the Lord hathe lawfully and in e∣quitie laide vpon vs the care of our neighbour his life, by good right may he require at our handes the wilfull neglecte thereof. The punishment of suche wilfull negligence towardes the life or bodie of their brethren, was moste sharpe and seuere in the olde lawe, as we may see in Exodus,Exod. 21.28 where the mans owne life must answere for the life of his brother who perished by his negligence: ac∣cording as the example is sett downe there, of a man not keeping vppe his oxe whiche he knewe was woonte to pushe. If the oxe were woont to pushe in times past (sayeth the holy Ghost) and
it hathe beene tolde his Maister and hee hathe not kepte him, and after, he killeth a man or woman, the Oxe shalbe stoned, and the owner shall die also. In this offence of negligence are all those trans∣gressours against this commaundement, who by. delaying to take vppe matters in controuersie or suites of lawe with all possible speede that may be, doe by their negligence giue occasion to the fraile nature of man to committe murder or some other mischiefe, against him with whome he is in con∣trouersie. And if carelesse negligence be thus daun∣gerous, howe harde a matter will it be to reckon with the Lorde for deliberate purpose to kepe men at variance and debate, that their gaine may grow thereby? It wilbe a harde matter to answere be∣fore the Almightie, if wee haue giuen occasion whereby our neighbour hathe receiued losse of life. Dauids carefulnesse herein is woorthily commended to all posteritie, who when his men (breaking through the hoast of the Philistins with the daunger of their liues) had brought him water to drinke whiche he so greatly thirsted after and wished for, immediately powred it out for an oblation vnto the Lorde, and saide, Let not my God suffer me to doe this:1. Chron. 11.17.18.19. shoulde I drinke the bloud of these mens liues, for they haue brought it with the ieopardie of their liues: therefore he would not drinke it. A notable ex∣ample to feare vs for being occasiō to any (though seruant or inferiour) rashly to hazard his life either
for our profite or pleasure. In this commandement the Lorde is not onely careful to haue obedience from our handes, but al∣so from our hearts and tongues: so that bothe thoughtes and wordes must come vnder subiecti∣on vnto him, that neither of them be infected with malice whiche the Lorde so hateth and abhor∣reth. For we must interpret the Lawe, according to the nature of the Lord who is the lawe-giuer. Man, by reason that he onely seeth the deede and cannot discerne of the heart, maketh lawes for the outward doeings, and punisheth them alone,Ierem. 1 with∣out proceeding further: but the Lorde, who sear∣cheth the heart and reines, maketh lawes for it, and punisheth euen the consent of the heart goeing a∣gainst his lawe: in asmuch as the Lord hateth the euil it selfe, he cannot but abhorre it wheresoeuer he shall finde it, whether in heart, hand, or tongue. It is written in the Epistle of S. Iohn,1. Iohn. 3.15 That whosoeuer hateth his brother is a manslear. We see then that not onely grosse euils come into reckoning before the Lord, but euen hatred settled in the heart, although the hand hath neuer beene stretched foorth to ex∣ecute the same, neither commeth it before him as some trifling thing whiche doeth not greatly dis∣please him, but appeareth monstrous, hauing none other shape vpon it, nor other accounte made of it then of murder. Thus must we thinke of hatred consented vnto in the heart, that it hath a bloudie face in the sight of the Lorde, and therefore is to be abhorred and loathed as the crueltie of murder.
This was ye cause why ye Lord forbidding hatefull & malicious thoughts in this cōmandemēt would giue it none other name thē murder, teaching vs yt howsoeuer we nurish such thoughts & make smal account of them, yet his iudgment is plaine yt they be no better then murder, when ye hart is settled in them.Matth. 5.22. In the Gospel after S. Matth. we see how the Lorde hateth words proceeding from malice and anger. Whosoeuer shall say Foole vnto his brother (saith our sauiour Christ) shalbe worthie to be pu∣nished in hell fire. Hatred towardes our brethren is so grieuous in his sight, that it staineth and defi∣leth whatsoeuer it toucheth, be it word, or thoght: and maketh it so heauie that the Lord can no lon∣ger beare it. And bycause wordes bewray yt which lurketh in the heart, and bringeth it to light that o∣therwise would not so easily be espied, we must keepe some good watche ouer them, that from thence we may be ledde to the priuie chamber of the heart, to see how al thinges go there: for of the aboundance of the heart the mouthe speaketh, so that there is no outward thing, that can bring vs sooner to the sight and speeche of the heart, then can the tongue it selfe: whiche if it bee infected with hatred or disdaine, sure it is that all thinges are not well at home in the heart: and therefore all men must obserue the inclination of the heart by the vsage of the tongue, that when it commeth a∣broade casting forth hatred, wrath, and debate, we may with speede returne to the founteine, that is the heart, to purge and cleanse the same: because we are sure, that from thence the tongue receiueth all
poyson. If we shall preuaile muche in suppressing hatred both in our heart, tongue, and hand, yet is not that all whiche is here commanded. For the Lorde in forbidding murder, meant not to stay there, but in remouing hatred, his purpose was to make way & passage for merciful dealing towards the life of others. And necessarie it was yt he should giue vs warning of that stumbling blocke whiche lieth in the way, lest we suspecting no such matter, should haue imagined that there would haue bene true care for ye life of our brother, where there was no victorie before ouer our own dispositiō which is altogether otherwise giuen & inclined. The true profe wherof we shal then haue, when our affecti∣ons shalbe stired vp by any dealing which shal mis∣like vs. For then we shal well perceiue wrath to be mightily working in vs, which before (because it had peraduenture no great matter to worke vpon) we thought that we had bene altogether voide of, or at ye lest not greatly infected therwith. But now in this manner of speaking vsed by the holy Ghost (who battereth downe hatred, when his purpose is to builde vp loue) we see yt there will be no passage to any louing dealing in trueth, but by treading down of our contrarie affections, which are noted to bee in vs by the fourme of speaking. For to what ende should the holy Ghoste will vs to doe no murder, if there were no disposition in vs thervnto? This is the cause why ye holy Ghost dea∣leth so plainely with vs, in telling vs what we are, that our care may be great to reforme it. And when we shal haue profited any thing herein, it may be
acknowledged from whence we had that, whiche we are assured was not to be founde in our nature. The holy Ghost therefore in this place detecteth our nature of want of loue, nay, of hatred & cruel∣tie, whiche otherwise we should not haue marked no nor suspected our selues of it, if we had not had warning from the almightie that our nature is poysoned therewithall. For if a man (not fearing God, yet otherwise of good vnderstanding to cō∣ceiue the trueth of things) be demaunded what his opinion is of himself, whether he be prone & bent to hatred, & whether he findeth his nature greatly inclining thereto or no, he will with great protes∣tation constantly affirme, that in him (he thanketh God) there is no suche matter: abiuring it, with ad∣miration and woondring how any man should be brought to think so of him: & thus in ye not vnder∣standing his owne corruption, he seeth not what neede he hath of a sauiour & redeemer, and there∣fore whatsoeuer hee sayeth, is in deede and trueth vnthanckfull for that benefite, while in finding no great thing amisse in himselfe, he cannot see what way he should so greatly be beholding to a sauiour that would answer for his transgressions, which in his owne opinion is no greate matter to doe, they being either fewe, and so borne out in the number of those good thinges which he hathe done, or else none at all. Moreouer, if wee shall haue done something, or diuerse thinges that may be thought louing and friendly, yet if the inclina∣tion to wrath (which is by nature in vs) be either
not knowen, or being knowen, the strength there∣of shall not bee subdued, and the sting pulled out that it reigne no more within vs, we shall neuer be prouoked by any euill dealing of others, but that foorthwith (letting the reyne go to our heart) we shall dishonour his name in following the rage of our minde contrarie to the lawe of our God. So might it come to passe that a man (hauing some good opinion of him selfe, for some outwarde things, but neuer tryed with iniurious dealing of another) might take it to go well with him, when notwithstanding this corrupt nature of his stan∣deth whole in her full force and strength, beeing neuer a whit subdued vnto the spirite, as hee well perceiueth when that any great occasion shal be of∣fered to try him with all. We see then how iust cause there is, that the Lord should admonish vs of this corruption of hatred which is within vs: not onely that we should see the benefite of our Saui∣our and mediatour, but also that subduing it and treading downe the strength of it, we might finde free passage, to doe and not to be remoued from doeing the workes of mercie and loue whiche are heere cōmaunded, euen the contrarie of those that (as we haue heard) were forbidden vs. We are commaunded to haue care of the body and life of our brother, to mainteine it as his necessitie shal re∣quire, and our abilitie can perfourme, remembring that the Lord hath commited that care vnto vs. The Iewes were commanded to make places of refuge and defence,Deut. 4. where the guiltlesse persons
might haue protection against the rage of them who pursued them vnto death: that (as it is writ∣ten in Deuter.Deut. 19.10) innocent bloud be not shedd with∣in their land, and least bloud should be vpon them: (for these are the very wordes of the texte in that place) signifying that the not regarding and proui∣ding for the safetie of their life were matter suffi∣cient inough to make them & their land guiltie of their bloud, that thereby they might well vnder∣stand that the care of their brethrens life was com∣mended vnto them, not without greate danger, if there were to be found any negligence therein. Mercifull dealing is heere commaunded to∣wardes all, but especially towards inferiours, wi∣dowes, fatherlesse children, and those that be in a∣ny greate extremitie. A notable practise we haue of this in the person of Iob suffering his seruauntes to pleade their right,Iob. 31.13. and to maynteine their good cause before him: not vsing his authoritie to op∣presse them, and crueltie to execute his rage, with∣out regarding the equitie of their cause, only stan∣ding vpon his owne authoritie ouer them: If I did contemne the iudgement of my seruaunt, and of my maide, (sayeth Iob) when they did contend with me, what then shall I doe when GOD standeth vp? and when hee shall visite me, what shall I answere? he that hath made me in the wombe hath he not made him? Here is ye true tryall of a mercifull man: for it is no commendation, not to offer wrong vnto those who are our equals and a∣ble to match vs, but then haue we true tryall of our affections that there is some mercie in trueth with∣in
vs, when we shall shewe pittie and compassion towardes, those whome (for our authoritie or place that we bee in) wee might easily oppresse: when we shalbe kept from fleshing our affections vpon those that lay open vnto vs, hauing no fence of power or credite, that is sufficiently able to holde vs. His example of compassion is no lesse commendable towardes all of them that were in any greate want or extremitie, as the holie Ghoste (vnder his person) witnesseth in these wordes:Iob. 29.12. I deliuered the poore that cryed, and the fatherlesse: and him that had none to help him. The blessing of him that was rea∣dy to perish came vpon me, and I caused the widowes heart to reioyce. The Iewes were bound to declare their compassion towardes their brethren, by that lawe which commaunded them to lend their brother that was needie amongst them, sufficient for his neede: taking for assurance, a pledge whiche hee might forbeare, as appeareth in Deuteronomie:Deut. 15.8. where they haue a streight charge, that when the yeere of Iubilie should approche (at what time all men were charged to relese their debts) they should not at that time shut vp their compassiō from him that would borrowe for his nede, but frankly giue vnto him notwithstanding ye yeere when all debts must be released be euen at hand. There is a pro∣mise added to incourage them, that for so doeing the Lord would blesse them in all that they should put their hand vnto. They were charged also to relieue their brother or the straunger that dwelte with them, who
was fallen into decay, forbidding them in expresse wordes to take any vsurie or increase of suche, ei∣ther of money or meate,Leuit. 25.35.36. as appeareth in Leuiticus: vsing their goodes to suche comforte of their bre∣thren, as might wel witnesse the loue that they had vnto them. The lawe and commaundement that was giuen to this people at the time when they had made an end of the tything of their increase, doth declare that they had in charge frō the Lord, to relieue with their goodes, the Leuite, straunger, fatherlesse and widowe.Deu. 26.13. For in Deuter. before the people should craue of God that hee would blesse their land, they must protest in set words that they had giuen vnto the Leuites, straunger, fatherlesse, and widowe, accordingly as he had commaunded them, and so proceede after declaration of this their obedience to his will, to craue his blessing for the people and the lande: thus vsing their goods to the commoditie of their brethren, in lending and giuing according to Gods appointment, they did giue apparaunt tokens of loue towardes their neighbours. The Apostle Paule will not acquite him that hath stolne if he shall steale no more, but chargeth him that he shall labour that he may haue some thing to giue to him that needeth, that way to practise loue and the workes thereof vppon his needy brethren. It is not onely therefore the dutie of rich-men to giue something towarde the reliefe of the needy, but euen the poore must spare some∣what of their pouertie to the comfort of Christ in his needie members: which be it neuer so litle that
they offered of their pouertie (if there go a willing and a faithfull minde withall) is much more accep∣table to God, then great summes giuen from some wealthie men of their superfluitie onely, without like faith or loue vnto the Lord: as wee are taught in the parable of the widowe casting in her two mites into the treasurie, which are iustified by our sauiour Christe to be more then all that the riche had cast in, because theirs was of their superfluitie,Mat. 12.43. but hers of her pouertie. If any ought to be dispen∣sed withall from declaring their loue in this parte, it is very reasonable that he (who by reason of his long loitering in acquaintāce with stealing & idle∣nes was become through custome whiche is an o∣ther nature, vnapt for labour) should be discharged vpon the maintenance of him selfe by some ho∣nest trade: yet notwithstanding, euen hee standeth charged from the Lorde, to reserue some thing for the prouision of his needie members. To encourage vs to duetie in this part of merci∣full dealing and giuing to the needie, the Lorde doeth promise that it shall bee paide vs againe in our greatest need. For thus saith the Prophet Isay, If thou refresh the hungry and troubled soule,Isay. 58.10. then shall thy light spring out in darknesse. The Lord shall satisfie thy soule in drought, and make fat thy bones, and thou shalt be like a spring of water whose waters fayle not. A great blessing of God to be prouided for in drought, a godly for∣caste to lay vp in prosperitie that whiche we may be assured will not only come againe, but also will be sure to watch that time, when for our neede it
shall be moste welcome vnto vs. Who would not be content to giue, if he might be sure to haue it againe at his moste neede? And beholde we haue letters patents from the Lorde, vnder the broade seale of his bloude, for the finde∣ing of that wee haue laide out for him, euen in our greatest neede. How can we then be slack in ye libe∣rall laying out of some thing for an euil day? ac∣cording to the counsell of the holie Ghoste in Ec∣clesiastes:Eccle. 11.2. Giue a portion (sayth he) to seuen and to eight, for thou knowest not what euill shall be vpon the earth. Moreouer, the sentence of that great day procee∣deth against the damned persons in this fourme. Departe from me ye cursed into euerlasting fire whiche is prepared for the diuel and his angels: for I was an hungred, and ye gaue me no meate:Matt. 25.41 I thirsted, and ye gaue me no drink: I was a straunger and ye lodged me not: I was naked, and yee cloathed me not: sick and in prison, and ye visited me not. Ve∣rilie, I say vnto you, in as much as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me. And if ye promise cānot drawe vs, the forme of sentence must necessarily prouoke vs to obedience heerein. We learned be∣fore, that negligent delaying, whereby our neigh∣boure is indaungered in his body or life, was for∣bidden in this commaundement: and then is spee∣dy helpe and diligent vsing of the present occasion that is offered to doe our neighbour good giuen vs heere in commaundement. Wee haue a singular example of this in the fourthe of Hester,Heste. 4.14. where Mardocai telleth the Queene, that if she should let slip that present occasion then offered her to doe good vnto the Iewes, shee and her fathers house
shoulde perish, and yet deliuerance would appeare vnto the Iewes from some other place. In like manner Iob professeth that hee had not caused the eyes of the widowe to faile in longe looking and wayting before their request were graunted,Iob. 31.1 but had with all spede satisfied her desire: acknowledg∣ing it for a greate offence, if hee had bene but slack therein, euen such as if he should haue bene guiltie therof, might iustly haue brought a curse vpō him. Our naturall inclination goeth wholy amisse in this commaundement as in the rest: which not∣withstanding it lye hid in some more cloasely then in other, for all ye it is not so cunningly couered in a ny, but that it is disclosed and discerned when oc∣casion is offered. The man that is borne again vnto ye hope of euerlasting life, doth so cleerely perceiue his infectiō heerin, that both in hart & word he ac∣knowledgeth the great necessitie & benefite of a sa∣uiour & redemer: being priuy vnto himself not on∣ly of many euil fruts ye haue appeared in his life cō∣trarie to this commaundement, but also of a dispo∣sition within, that is naturally prone & inclined to offend heerein. The hope that he hath in his medi∣atour and sauiour Christ Iesus, doth not make him secure and carelesse in his sinne, following the in∣clination of his owne heart, but leadeth him to a continuall strife and debate with it, because it is a∣gainst ye honour of his God and sauiour, to whom he well perceiueth yt he is onely beholding for his saluation, and quickeneth him to all louing dealing which is so often commended and commaunded of his good and mercifull father.
The naturall man seeth not any such inclination in him selfe to wrath, or dulnesse vnto louing dea∣ling with his neighbours, as through the grief ther∣with driueth him to make much of the alone Sa∣uiour and redeemer Christe, but when he is char∣ged with his offences that burst foorth contrary to this commaundement, hee maketh light of them, and putteth them vp in a common bagge, saying, all men haue infirmities: neuer so touched with it, as hee can bee compelled to magnifie the grace brought by the alone mediatour Christ, and much lesse is he driuen to any earnest warre with it, or great care to profite in the works of loue, that are contrarie to it. To conclude, this commaundement if wee shall doe some outwarde thinges commaunded heere whiche shall obteine greate commendation of many men, and for all that the Lorde want his glorie, which consisteth in the foure points which were spoken of in the former commaundement, it shall auayle vs nothing. Those things that ap∣perteine vnto God, must of necessitie go with those dueties vnto men that shall be accepted. Neither in deede can we holde out in these, except we haue life and incouragement from the other. For the loue that GOD is our God, tenderly fauouring and plentifully rewarding vs that bee his, muste make vs to perseuere in those dueties which other∣wise would not abide the reproches and iniuries of men, but would burst foorth to requite them: and muche lesse would wee laboure to ouercome
them and their euill, with our good doone vnto them. But this persuasion of his good fauour to∣wardes his, and plentifull mercie whiche is to bee shewed vpon them, maketh men willingly to for∣beare the insuing and satisfying of their owne cor∣rupt affections, not enuying the wicked their tran∣sitorie delights, but prosecuting their course in his obedience, through all their reproches, while they doe well perceiue what a plentifull recompence of rewarde abideth for them by the free gifte of their GOD. The man that cannot be persuaded but that hee loueth his neighbour as himselfe, perfourming all that is required of him in that behalfe, must be sent to examine him selfe, if there haue at no time ap∣peared in him any cruell dealing, towarde his in∣feriours, any neglect or delay in helping and re∣leeuing the distressed, if compassion hath alwayes, as occasion serued, drawen him to speedie relee∣uing, by lending or giuing, so shall he easily see in∣to the errour of his opinion. Now let vs pray vnto our heauenlie Father, that we may so see into our cruell and carelesse dis∣position, that we may magnifie the free mercies of our GOD in the forgiuenesse thereof: and also haue power more and more to subdue it, that wee abounding in all mercifull dealing, may glo∣rifie him in this life, and be glorified of him in the life to come. H.I.
¶The seuenth Lecture vppon the 14. verse. 14 Thou shalt not commit adulterie. WE haue learned alreadie, that the loue whiche we owe to our neighboure stayeth not in his owne person alone, but procee∣deth vnto other things that bee precious and deere vnto him: in the which if he shall by vs be annoyed, foorth with in so doeing we shalbe conuict to be voide of loue and charitie towardes him. For the excuse is vaine and childish to say we loue the man, when we stick not there to vexe him, where we knowe it cannot be but that some greate griefe of heart will come vnto him. He that loueth a man in deede, dealeth ten∣derly with all those thinges that are especially li∣ked of that man: fearing moste of all there to of∣fend, where he vnderstandeth that he may the soo∣nest displease. And because nexte to a man him selfe, his wife ought to be most deere vnto him, the wrong that is done to any therein, cannot but haue the next place vnto the sinne of murder. The greatnesse of this sinne of whordome shall then better be discerned, when wee shall bring our
minde from that account which is made of it with man, vnto that iudgement whiche the moste iuste GOD hath set downe of it in his worde. It hath beene obserued in all times, and is to be seene at large in the olde Testament, that the sinne of adulterie and vncleannesse hath then abounded moste, when for their idolatrie the people hath beene vnder the greatest displeasure of the Lorde.Rom. 1.24.26.27. And if to be giuen vp to this & such like kindes of vncleanesse hath bene the punishment of that most greeuous sinne of idolatrie, we may soone coniec∣ture in what account it standeth before the Lorde. For it cannot be holden for a small offence before him, which he in iustice taketh to be a due punish∣ment for the greatest sinne. The holie Ghoste maketh the crime of theft, a small matter in respect of the offence of adulterie: affirming theft to be subiect neither to the like in∣famie and reproche with men, neither yet to the like greeuousnesse of punishment from the Lord. And therfore when he hath spoken of the punish∣ment that is due for theft, amplifying the other crime aboue it, hee vseth these wordes: But hee that committeth adulterie with a woman,Pro. 6.32. hee is destitute of vnderstanding: hee that doeth it, destroyeth his owne soule, hee shall finde a wounde and dishonour, and his reproche shall neuer bee put away. Thus the adulterer in his wickednesse doth both vndermine his owne life, and also bringeth suche a blot of infamie and reproche vnto his name, as
neuer shall be wiped out. It is not to be meruailed at, if the holie Ghoste make adulterie a more heynous facte then theft: For therein men rob not others of their goods & substāce alone, but of their honestie & honor. Nei∣ther rob they only those yt are borne, but also those that are yet vnfashioned in their mothers womb: from whom as they take all honour & estimation, so they procure vnto them a perpetuall blot of in∣famie, more and besides that that by their byrthe they become illegitimate, and cut off from the ti∣tle and claime of many temporall benefites, which they are moste cruelly depriued off, before that euer it was graunted them to see into the benefite and commoditie thereof: muche lesse to take any comforte by the vse and inioying of them. What the stayne was of infamie and dishonour that bastards were vnder in the olde lawe, may ap∣peare in Deuteronomie,Deu. 23.2. where it is plainely for∣bidden them, euen to their tenth generation, to beare any office among the people of God. A cruel & heynous offēce to rob so many generatiōs of all estimation, all place of office & honour among the people of God: yet so much more heynous is the crime, because it is done by falsifying of the coue∣nant of marriage, & cancelling of ye bond that was made by the Lord himselfe, for the perfourmance of certeine dueties betweene partie and partie, bee∣ing sealed and deliuered in the presence of God, his Angels, and many other wittnesses assembled for that purpose.
Moreouer, the adulterer as much as lyeth in him maketh a stewes in his owne house, becommeth a bawde to his owne wife, directeth the eyes and heartes of adulterers towardes her, in as muche as it is a punishment iustely befalling him from ye ius∣tice of the Lord, if he shall haue his owne wife abā∣doned to ye wickednesse, that he hath brought vpon another. Whiche punishment, Dauid him selfe (though otherwise deare vnto the Lorde,2. Sam. 16.22. & Sam. 12.11. & .12. and lea∣ding his life in vprightnesse, sauing in that faulte with the wife of Vrias) was not free from, accor∣ding as we reade in Samuel.Iob. 31.9.10. Iob also (acknow∣ledgeing the iustice of that punishment) offereth him selfe to suffer the shame thereof, if euer hee sought to abuse any mans wife. But if it shall so fall out, that a wicked man in this kinde of sinne shall haue a godly wife, whome the Lord shall preserue from this euill to yeeld vn∣to the wickednesse of others, yet is his faulte ne∣uer a deale the lesse heerein, then if he should haue fallen into that extremitie of sinne, because his de∣seruing hath called for that punishment from the Lorde, which the Lorde in mercie towardes her hath withholden. And in asmuch as the adul∣terer depriueth a man of the true comforte of his true and naturall seede and posteritie, can we ima∣gine otherwise of the Lorde, but that hee will drawe one swoorde or other vppon some of his children, that shall neuer ceasse to pursue them, be∣fore it hath driuen them in at the dores of death? Iob (speaking of this sinne of adulterie) sayeth,
that it is a fire that deuoureth all to destruction.Iob. 31.12. So that by this testimonie, the house of the whoore∣monger must be consumed, and there is a secret fi∣er flaming there, that threateneth to deuoure be∣fore it hath done and made a finall end: which men might easily se by sundrie experiences in ye world, if there were no word of God to leade vs therevn∣to. The hope to hide this sinne (which bewitcheth the vngodly, & leadeth them into this fire of God his wrath) must of necessitie be vaine, because the Lorde him selfe hath taken vpon him to be reuen∣ged of those that shall dare to breake that bond of wedlock which he hath made. In ye olde testamēt the Lord did (by a special law made for ye purpose) take vpon him,Heb. 13. not only the knowledge, reuealing and punishing of this sinne, euen when it should be most secretly done without witnes of any other man, yea or certeine knowledge frō the husbād him self, but also ye defence and clearing of the guiltlesse woman, oppressed & vexed with the vniust ielou∣sie of her husbād: who might presēt his wife (whe∣ther she were guiltie in deed, or onely in his ielous minde was thought to be so, before the priest, vnto that tryall which God had appointed & established for ye end. After which matter solemnized with all the circumstances therof, as it was appointed in the boke of Num. if the woman were defiled in deed, then should her belly swel and her thighe rot:Num. 5.12. if she were not defiled, then should she not only be free from this punishmēt, but also be blessed with fruit∣fulnesse, as appeareth in ye same place. We see how
greatly the lord doth abhorre adulterie, taking vp∣on him to bewray the closest dealing in ye wicked∣nesse that can be, and also what a care he hath of the vniting of their mindes, who are become one by mariage, in ordeyning a law to cure ielousie, and so taking vppon him also the defence of the innocent partie. That law is now ceased, but that same God doth yet remaine, bearing the same hatred to that sinne that he did before, & hath the like loue to in∣nocencie that before he hath had. So that there is small hope to be had when God is become ye sear∣cher him selfe: when he who knoweth it, is an vt∣ter enimie vnto it, and hath professed the reuealing of it, yea and that more is, the iust and deserued pu∣nishing thereof. It would greatly feare the theefe, if it were noysed that that man would searche him, whome he doeth wel remember to haue passed by and behelde him, while he was hiding of that whi∣che before hee had stolne. Wee doe not reade through the whole testament, the like solemnitie in ye searching out of any sinne, neither yet that in any other sinne the partie suspected was compelled to subscribe vnto certeine words of execration and calling for euil against himselfe, if he had offended, saue onely in this tryall of adulterie: whiche may both teach vs in what place of sin to set this crime of adulterie, and what measure of punishment to looke for, after trespasse and transgression made in this parte. The punishment, whiche in the olde Testament was appointed to be executed a∣gainste it by the ciuil Magistrate, was death:
according as it is written in Leuiticus,Leu. 20.10. The man that committeth adulterie with another mans wife, because hoe hath committed adulterie with his neighbours wife, the ad∣ulterer and adulteresse shall dye the death. In this commaundement is not onely adulte∣ry forbidden, which is, when one of the offenders is ioyned or betrouthed to another in marriage, but also fornication when bothe the offenders are sin∣gle persons. We haue learned before, that it is v∣suall in the commaundements, vnder one kinde of euill to forbid all that bee of affinitie with it, and like in wickednesse vnto the same. Fornication is forbidden in expresse wordes in Deutero.Deu. 23.17. There shall be no whoore of the daughters of Israel, neither shall there be any whoorekeeper of the sonnes of Israel. The pu∣nishment of this sinne of fornication whiche was so fearefull among the people of Israel, is brought in of the Apostle Paule, to bring all men to suche feare of God as may restraine them from it:1. Cor. 10.8. Nei∣ther let vs commit fornication (sayeth the Apostle) as some of them cōmitted fornication, and sell in one day twen∣tie three thousand. The life of man beeing so preci∣ous vnto our mercifull father, as it is, it can be no small sinne that prouoketh the Lord to procede in iudgemēt euen to the death of twentie three thou∣sand. And therefore is this notable punishment (notwithout great reason) ioyned to fornication, which was the cause thereof. For commonly, this sinne is made as nothing, hauing naturall infirmi∣tie set beside it, in the vsuall speech of men to hide it withall.
But the holy Ghoste doeth not so matche it in his speeche, he doeth not set it before our eyes in a cloake of natural infirmitie, whereby we should the lesse feare it, but putteth vppon it the garment that in deede belongeth vnto it, euen a cloake ba∣thed with the bloud of xxiii. thousand men. There is great diuersitie betweene these two cloakes: the one is farre vnlike the other: in the eyes of the holy Ghoste, this sinne is fearefully stayned with much bloud: in the sight of fornicatours, there is nothing in it whiche is not naturall and kindely: so diuerse are their iudgements, and so great is their disagree∣ment of their opinions.1. Cor. 6.16. The Apostle Paule reaso∣neth against fornicatours by the worthines of our bodies, whiche are the members of Christ: howe great is that abasing and howe miserable, to be di∣uorced from Christ, and coupled to an harlot? Dee ye not knowe, (sayeth the Apostle) that hee whiche cou∣pleth himselfe with an harlot is one bodie, for two (saith he) shalbe one fleshe. Moste certeine it is, that the bodie of an harlot can be no member of Iesus Christe. And the fornicatour, by the testimonie of the apostle, is become one bodie with her, hauing the same con∣iunction with her in wickednes, that the husbande hathe with his lawful wife in holinesse, and by the appointment of the Lorde. There is great cause therefore why the holy Ghost shoulde so earnest∣ly persuade vs to flie fornication, making ye sinne aboue all other to offend againste his owne bodie whiche doth committe it. Neither are these two especiall braunches of
filthinesse forbidden alone in this commandement, but also all other vncleannesse and losenesse of life in this kinde and degree. The meanes also whiche bring them on, and do begett them, or being begotten doe cherrish and mainteine them, are here forbidden in this com∣mandement: as, the want of temperaunce and so∣brietie in apparell, meate, and drinke, idlenesse, euil companie, euil speche, and filthie communication: in the which, whiles we doe cherrishe our selues, not bridling our affections, we do tempt the Lord, and running vppon the rockes that he hath forbid∣den, doe hazarde our chaste behauiour. For we haue no warrant of his safe conducting of vs vn∣der those sayles of vncleannesse, but threatening, that in so dooing we shall make shipwracke of all honest and chast behauiour. For to walke in such wayes, hathe no promise of protection from him: they are not ye wayes which he hath promised to prosper. It doth become a christiā which loketh for mercie from Christ, to humble himselfe vnto all suche conuersation as he is well assured that the Lorde imbraceth: that hee may stande vnder certeyne hope of fauour and mercie from his han∣des. For these thinges before recited and suche like, are we forewarned of in the Scriptures to be∣ware of, as those thinges that lie in waite to de∣ceiue vs, and lay siege vnto our good conuersation to giue it an ouerthrowe. Neither is the assault so weake (as we suppose commonly) that it neede not to be feared, but so strong as beeing continued,
it preuaileth and corrupteth our good conuersati∣on, according as it is written to the Corinthes: Be not deceiued,1. Cor. 15.33. (saith the Apostle) euill speeche corrup∣teth good maners. By this one example of euil speech, we may learne howe to iudge of all the rest. It is not lightly to be passed ouer, that he willeth vs not to be deceiued herein. For this watche-woorde signifieth that our nature conceiueth not so hardly of the matter, and therefore is the sooner to be de∣ceiued by it. This forespeeche (I say) pointeth out the tickle∣nesse of our corrupte nature, and is vsed of the A∣postle elsewhere, after he hathe giuen admonition to the faithful, for auoyding of the like matters, as filthinesse, foolishe talking and iesting, conclu∣ding with these wordes:Ephes. 5.6. Let no man deceiue you with vaine words, for, for such things commeth the wrath of God vpon the children of disobedience. We suspect no dan∣ger in these thinges: but the onely wise God bid∣deth vs take heede that we be not deceiued. Can we nowe continue without feare of these enimies, when the holy Ghost hath descried the daunger of them, with so many blastes of his owne trumpet? or dare we say there will followe no harme, when the holy Ghost saith in plaine words, that it doeth corrupt good manners, and that for suche thinges, the wrath of God commeth vppon the children of disobedience? And euen in this commaunde∣ment we see, that the holy Ghoste doth vouche∣safe them none other name, then the name of ad∣ulterie.
For sure it is, that vnder this word they are forbid∣den by the testimonie of all the learned: therefore it is well to be considered howe the holy Ghoste doth terme it, and his reason whie he will haue it knowne by that name. Sure it is, that he is well ac∣quainted with our nature, which is accustomed to make small accompt of great euils, and therefore to giue them names accordingly, he is constrained to name the childe himselfe, and cal it adulterie: wil∣ling vs so to take it, and to thinke no better of it, whensoeuer we shall let the reyne goe to our affec∣tions, not restraining them in these and suche like thinges. The Prophet Ezechiel saieth in expresse wordes,Eze. 16.49. that pride, fulnesse of bread, and aboun∣dance of idlenesse were the sinnes of Sodome, that brought downe fire & brimstone frō heauen vpon them. Thus the holy Ghost writeth the meanes of vncleannes and filthinesse, & blameth them for al that punishment, that followed their abhominable vncleannesse, and filthinesse, not to be named: tea∣ching vs thereby, that we may not mainteine this excessiue eating and drinking, proude and wanton attyreing of our selues, and surfetting, vnder the name of good fellowshippe, ciuil behauiour, and suche like titles, but that we knowe them by the names whiche the holy Ghoste hathe giuen vnto them, who knoweth better then we what they are, and therefore hathe giuen them their names accor∣dingly. Our nature (if wee knewe it as the trueth
is) needeth not to be made tame vnto sathan by a∣ny such meanes. We are of our selues inclined too much to imbrace him, and nothing so wylde that way as were to be wished. Being therefore so ouertractable of our selues, what madnesse is it to offer him those blockes of aduauntage, wherby his temptations with more spede & ease may mount vpon vs, and thus willingly to holde the stirrup to our owne destruction? The heart of man (beeing the founteine from whence commeth good or badde) may not be suffered to goe at libertie after vnchaste thoughtes, but must be kept in, with the feare of God. For out of the heart of man (as sayth our sauiour Christ,) proceede euil thoughtes,Marke. 7.21 adulteries, fornication, vncleannesse, a wicked eye. All these euils come from within, and defile a man. They are not therfore to be cherrished and followed after, but to be repressed and beaten backe, of so many as feare ye Lorde. The daunger is not only of the soule in time to come, but as experience telleth vs, in cherrishing of vncleane thoughtes, there is perill towardes the reason and witte of man. For howe often falleth it out, that men by giuing themselues ouer vnto these thoughtes, become madde, voyde of witte, & reason, not able to gouerne them selues like other men? And therefore hathe that vertue whiche re∣presseth these affections, a name with the Graecians which carrieth with it ye signification of that fruite and effecte whiche doeth followe it: whiche is, the preseruation and safetie of the minde. For mo∣deration
and temperance in this part, is the health and soundenesse of the minde and witte of man: which (while it is wanting) is either vtterly ouer∣throwen, or else so feeble and weake, as euerie one may descrie it, for the dulnesse and feeblenesse that is in it. Adulterie being forbidden, the godly & chaste life of married folkes must needes be commaun∣ded: which that it may be perfourmed, Almightie God requireth of his children, yt they do match thē selues with such as feare him and serue him after his worde: suche hathe he promised to blesse. As for those that marrie for riches, beautie, and suche outward thinges, when there is not the feare and true worshippe of God ioyned withal, they haue alwayes tasted of most grieuous plagues from the hand of the Lorde. This vnequall matching of the godly and godlesse (for so I call all of them that are not humbled to serue God after his word) was the cause of that vniuersal floude whiche did ouer∣flowe the worlde in the dayes of Noe, according as it is written in Genesis:Gene. 6.2.3. Then the sonnes of God sawe the daughters of men that they were faire, & they toke them wiues of all that they liked. Therefore the Lord said, My spi∣rite shal not alwayes striue with man, because he is but fleshe, &c. Here vppon we see the euill beginning, and the iust punishment of suche as pollute marriage, whiche shoulde be kept in all obedience and holi∣nesse. For marriage is the nourcerie of Christiani∣tie. Nowe if the nource be a drie nource, not ha∣uing
any true feare and seruice of God, shal she not be guiltie of those that sterue vnder her hand? Or shal their cruel carelesnesse be vnpunished that dare commit heires of so great an inheritance vnto such nources destitute altogether of any nourishment fitte and conuenient for them. The learned giue this reason (why in the books of kinges there is so continuall mention made of their mothers who were Kings) that the children are by nature giuen to followe muche the inclina∣tion of their mothers, and that education whiche they receiue from them: and therefore that dili∣gent care should be had to make suche choice, as were likely to bring the benefite of Christian edu∣cation to their children and posteritie. This is the first thing whiche is required to make a godly and chaste life in marriage, Euen to marrie in the Lorde.1. Cor. 7. As this choice is the beginning of a godly and chaste life, so loue and heartie good affection is the thing that doth continue it. For the increasing where∣of it was prouided in the olde Testament,Deut. 24.5. that the newe married man should not go on warfare, nei∣ther be charged with any publique businesse, but be free at home one yeare & reioyce with the wife whiche he had taken, to the ende there might be suche vniting of mindes, as afterwardes were not easily to be fundered. This also had the Lorde respect vnto in that lawe,Num. 5.12. which (as we haue heard before) was made to cure the iealous affection of the man.
This loue shall then be surely continued when either partie shall perfourme that which the Lord hath laide vpon them, humbling themselues vnder ye burden of obedience which he hath charged thē withal:Peter. 3.7. which is: for ye man, (as we are taught by ye Apostle Peter) that he giue honour vnto the wo∣man as the weaker vessel, making a supplie of her weakenesse, and that want whiche by nature shee hathe of many gyftes graunted vnto man, by his loue and hartie good affection declared vnto her, euen as in the bodie of man, the stronger members giue diligent care and support vnto the weaker: al∣wayes taking heede that he suffer no contempte to abide in his heart (much lesse in his dede) towards her, who is fellowe heire with him of the grace of life (as the Apostle witnesseth in the same place) & therfore may not haue her life made (by contempt or outragious dealing) so bitter and grieuous as it may rather be called a curse, then a grace and mer∣cifull gyft of God. But the chiefe cause whiche shoulde moue a christian moste, is, left their prayers and seruice of God be reiected: whiche cannot be acceptable vn∣to him while there abideth wrathe and displea∣sure in the hart towards any, but especially if there be iarring and dissention with those with whome we should be moste at one. For prayer is the lifting vppe of pure handes without wrathe (as the Apostle testifieth to Timothie.1. Tim. 2.8.) The man be∣hauing himselfe thus according to the commande∣ment
of God, shall do the duetie which to him be∣longeth,1. Pet. 3.4. to continue a chast and godly life. For ye wife, it is required by the apostle in the same place, that she be of a meeke, gentle, and quiet spirit, whi∣che the holy ghost requireth her to be apparelled withall, setting it in the place of all outward vaine attyring of them selues, as that which is precious before God, and most able to allure the heartes of good men: affirming this to haue beene the attire of holy womē in times past which trusted in god: who for that they trusted in him, committed them felues to the ornamentes prescribed by him: not fearing contempt, but assuredly beleeuing that in that his way, he both coulde and woulde giue fa∣uour vnto them in the eyes of their husbandes. It is worthy the noting, that hee maketh it the attyre of them that trusted in God: for therein he plaine∣ly giueth foorth, that the outwarde vaine setting out of them selues, sauoureth of mistrust and feare of contempt, whatsoeuer be pretended: and that (if they trust in God) they shall not neede to feare that their meeknesse and quietnesse can bring any con∣tempt with it, but that it shall be rewarded with li∣king from the Lord. It is also required that they be reuerently subiect vnto their husbandes in all things as was Sarai, who vsed such speach of reue∣rence, (calling him syr,) as did witnesse of the heart that it did honour him: which if it be refused, nei∣ther is that benefite graunted vnto their weaknesse (of a head and guide) acknowledged, (whiche is great vnthankfulnesse both vnto God and to their
husbande) neither yet that gouernement obeyed, which the Lord hath put them vnder, which is in∣tollerable disobedience. The place therefore that they are in, must be acknowledged with all humi∣litie: and the duties laide vpon them by the Lorde perfourmed, that there may bee continuance of their godly and chaste loue. Thus no occasion must be giuen vnto sathan by either of them (tho∣rough alienation of minde and breach of loue in not perfourming their seuerall dueties) to make a∣ny way or passage to the vngodly and vnchast li∣king or vsing of any other. Yong men shall then giue them selues to the dueties of this commaun∣dement, when they shall haue learned sobrietie & temperaunce, a gifte that brideleth their affections in pleasures (as eating, drinking, and vaine setting forth of them selues in apparel,) not suffering them to haue all that they require herein, but cutting thē short of that they wold, yea, of some part and of yt also which honestly they might haue: alwayes be∣ing short, rather than in any respect beyond that ye is conuenient for men of their degree, so that they neede not to feare the iudgement of any indiffe∣rent men, being alwayes a good deale within the compasse of their state and calling, but neuer with∣out: giuing foorth testimonie by that meanes to al men, of their modest, temperate, and sober minde, which the holy Ghoste calleth the ornament of young men. And the Apostle Paule warneth Ti∣tus to exhorte them vnto this gifte and grace of young yeares,Tit. 2.6. a verie profitable meane to driue a∣way
vnchast conuersation. Women also are ex∣horted vnto this temperance, and sobrietie, and vn∣to modestie, and shamefastnesse which is the roote and beginning of it, by the Apostle Paule to Ti∣mothie: who willeth in that place,1. Tim. 2.9 that their ap∣parell may speake and declare the shamefastnesse of their minde, which dare not put foorth it selfe vn∣to all that dignitie and degree of countenaunce in their apparell, that most lawfully they might o∣therwise clayme. For therefore it is called tempe∣raunce, bycause it restraineth a man of his libertie. But in this our age, when almost all goe as farre as they may, and the most part both of men and wo∣men a great deale beyond their compasse, where is this temperance and sobrietie, which is so high∣ly commended in the Scriptures, the verie walles of pure life, and barres of chast conuersation? This may be bewayled of all men, but the disease is so vniuersall, as it is impossible to be cured, if the lord shall not put to his mightie hand from heauen. It will be sayde that it is hard to measure these indif∣ferent things: but the trueth is otherwise, for the holy Ghost hath sent vs a measure and meteyard, euen sham efastnesse and temperance: so that when there is no moderation or temperance, but that by euerie indifferent iudgement, they bee as farre as their estate can giue them leaue, when there is no shamefastnesse, but that they dare bee bolde to goe without blushing as farre as their place or abilitie can leade them, maye wee not bolde∣ly say, that they haue left the Lorde his measure?
and therefore their attire and behauiour must of necessitie be deformed in his eyes, how wel soeuer it be pleasing vnto them selues. This temperaunce is to be taught the yonger sort not onely from the mouth of the elder, but frō their life and conuersation: that they may be kept in those means which do vphold chast behauiour: and therefore the Apostle Paule chargeth Titus that he stirre vp the elder both men and women,Titus. 2.2 to season yong yeares therewith. Although this be the dutie generally of all elder people, yet is it the speciall dutie of parentes to their children, by their teaching and example of life, thus to instruct thē. And therefore in Deuteronomie it appeareth, that the woman that had offended in her fathers house,Deu. 22.21 (the matter not beeing knowne before marriage) must be stoned to death at the doore of her fathers house. But and if her husband should wrongfully charge her, that he found her not a mayde, after tri∣all made to the contrarie, he must pay an hundred sickles of siluer to the father of the mayde. The re∣ward of her innocencie, as well as the punishment of her wickednesse, reaching vnto the father, (for she must be stoned at his doore) telleth vs what du∣tie belongeth vnto the parents, in as muche as they had their parr, as well in the dishonour as honour that followed the good education of their childrē. The Lorde in forbidding vs adulterie, telleth vs that our nature is inclined therevnto. For what neede wee to be forewarned of that, which we are in no daunger of.
It is required that we peruse diligētly the course of our life, with due consideration how our intem∣perancie hath vttered it selfe in any of those things which we haue nowe learned to be forbidden vs, and also in diligent consideration, howe prone and tickle our affections be therevnto, that we may in truth come from the opinion of our selues, to be∣take vs wholy to that perfect obedience of Iesus Christ, to rest in it as that onely, which can abide the iustice of the righteous God: & then in thank∣ful regard of those his mercies, manfully to set vp∣on our in temperat desires for the mortifying ther∣of, that the Lord may haue the honour of our mo∣derate and chast conuersation. Which that it may so come to passe, let vs call vppon our heauenly fa∣ther, saying. The eighth Lecture vpon the fifteenth verse. Thou shalt not steale. IT hath bene shewed before that our neighbour is not to be con∣sidered in his person alone, but in what so euer thing is deare vnto him: as goods, good name, and suche like: and therefore that the loue which we must beare towards him, may not be towardes his body alone, but also towardes his goods: that our dealing with them may be so vp∣right, as may declare in deede that we doe loue the
man. For if any thing of his, passing through out handes, shall not finde fidelitie and faythfull dea∣ling, but deceitfull conueyaunce of it or some parte thereof to oure selues, can it bee truely sayde, wee loue the man? there is no man that can so iudge of it: that can I say persuade him selfe that hee is be∣loued of those men, when nothing of his goodes commeth to their handes, but it is sure to be flee∣ced, and to pay toll before it shall depart. The Lord therefore (commaunding safe passage and louing dealing towardes our neighboures goodes, when so euer (according to the manifold necessities of e∣uerie man, to deale and communicate with an o∣ther in buying and selling, or otherwise) they haue occasion to passe through our handes) hath forbid∣den stealing, and all vnfaithfulnesse in their goods: condemning it of want of charitie and loue to∣wardes them selues, whose goods are diminished by vs, when so euer we shal haue dealing with thē. And bicause we goe so closely to work, and are so cunning to deceiue our selues, imagining that wee loue our neighbours, when in deede there is no such affection in vs, the holy Ghoste is compelled as it were to trace vs, and by such vnfaithful foote∣steps as these be, to descrie vs. For when we are so often taken with vntrustie dealing, and vnfayth∣fulnesse, in our neighbours goods, good name, and such like: is there not iust cause to arest vs for not discharging this duetie of loue, which is so due vn∣to them?
This vnfaythfull dealing with the goodes of our neighbour, howe greatly it did displease the Lorde, and with what lawes he did restraine his people of Israel from the same, the statutes and or∣ders of that gouernement can best declare: from whence it shall not be amisse to take some helpe in the interpretation of this commaundement. In Exodus we doe reade,Exo. 22. verse. 1.4. that if any man should steale a sheepe, and kill it, or sell it, he should restore for that one sheepe, foure: but if any man should steale an oxe, and after kill it, or sell it, hee should restore fiue oxen for that oxe. The reason why he must pay more for the oxe then for the sheepe, was, for that his neighbours losse was greater in the want of the one then of the other, as bringing more pro∣fite to the owner thereof. But if they were found with the theefe aliue, not solde nor killed, then must hee restore but the double of the oxe, asse, or shepe, for that his obstinacie in this euil did not ap∣peare so greate, as when hee should make sale of them, and turne them into gaine. For it might be, while they were aliue, that he being touched with repentaunce, woulde restore them againe: but when they were solde or killed, the theefe gaue greater token of his impudencie, and confirmed obstinacie, and the owner also was one degree further from any likelyhoode to come by them againe. If the theefe be nothing worth, and so not able to make restitution, then as it is there declared, he must be solde.
Thus did the iust God in the olde Testament, by lawes made for that purpose, and punishments appointed accordingly, declare his hatred of the e∣uill, and in what reckoning it commeth before his iudgement seate: that we might take light at his iudgement, howe to discerne of theft, and how to iudge of this kynde of hatred towardes our neigh∣bour, that bewrayeth it selfe in so vniust dealing with his goods. The loue that wee muste shewe foorth to∣wardes our neighbour by dealing well with his goods, may not only be seene in this law (so sharp∣ly punishing the thefe for his want of loue euident¦ly appearing in his theft and iniurie cōmitted) but also in the lawe made for him, that should borrow any of his neighbours goods. Which lawe did very well prouide for faithfull dealing with it, in punishing the contrarie so sharply, as his vnfayth∣fulnesse (howe great so euer) should gaine him no∣thing at all. For thus it is written in Exodus: If a man borrowe ought of his neighbour,Exo. 22.14 and it be hurt, or else dye, (the owner thereof not being by) hee shall surely make it good. If it be an hyred thing, he shall not make it good, it came for his hyre. It appeareth here plain∣ly, that the owner must haue his losse made good of the borrower, vnlesse his owne eyes could testi∣fie, that the hurt or losse thereof came not through any default of the borrower. But he that shall lend for hyre, must stand to the aduenture of the prin∣cipall if it decay. The reason is rendred, bicause it came for hyre, and not of loue alone, as did the
thing borrowed. And therefore the reason is good, why hee should not be charged in this case, as the borrower, to make good that which he hath hired being hurt or dead. Marke well I pray you this lawe of God for lending and hyring: that the bor∣rower must make good things borrowed, if they decay, but not the hyrer. Marke it well I say, for this is the ground of many thinges that are to be spoken of hereafter. The equitie of this lawe, bringeth great light to discerne of the vsuries that are so common at these dayes. In things borrowed (it appeareth by this lawe) that only the hurt or death of the goods was prouided for. Here is then no helpe for mony that is borrowed or lent, which perisheth not with vse, but is still of the same value and worth that it was at the first deliuerie of the same. Besides that, if it were worsse for the vse, there is no more requi∣red but to make the decay of it good. Howe then can those who lend their monie to vsurie (whiche decayeth not with vse) clayme any thing aboue that which was deliuered? By this lawe of lend∣ing, their recompence was commaunded onely in this title, that the thing by lending was certeinly knowne to be impayred. Howe dare then the v∣surers claime a right of recompence, vnder none o∣ther title, but that it was likely with ye vse thereof, yt they might in that time, thus and so greatly haue gained? It is ye equitie of God, to require no recō∣pence for the vse of things that are the worsse with vsing, so long as there appeareth no casuall hurt (as
we call it) of the whole. What equitie then must it be, that for thinges not worsse with vse, con∣tenteth not it selfe, no, not with the whole? Here, in this law of God good wil is no better re∣compenced, but that it be no looser: Shall a co∣uetous desire then so richly be requited, as that it shall bee sure alwayes to come home a gayner? By this equitie of God, when it is certeinly kno∣wen, that by the vse of the thing borrowed, the borrower hath good gaine, yet doth the almigh∣tie allowe no returne of commoditie to the len∣der for that gayne. By what equitie then can the vsurer clayme gaine for the vse, yea oftentimes when it is certeine there is no gaine gotten at all? By this lawe of GOD, the lender could neuer gayne: for there is no other prouiso made but for his principall: by ouer practise, he is euer assu∣red of gayne. By that lawe, the borrower was assu∣red of the gaine that was to returne to him: by this practise, the lender is oftentimes the whole gayner. If it be graunted, that this lawe of God in borrowing and lending haue in it any equitie, this practise in borrowing and lending of monie, must bee condemned of playne wrong and iniu∣rie, as directly standing against the same. If this dealing, shall feare the strict iustice of borrowing and lending, and seeke couert vnder the libertie of thinges let out to hyre, it is also shut out there, and findeth worsse interteynment. For hyred thinges, bycause they goe for hyre, haue not the ordinarie allowaunce of the princi∣pall,
if they shall decay, which borrowed thinges iustly claime, bicause they come freely and with∣out hire: therfore the law yt we had of hyred thin∣ges, handleth the vsurer more hardly, thā that law of borrowing & lending. For here, bycause of his hyre, he hath no holde of the principal if it decay. Thus if it should be graunted that monie may be hyred, which I thinke neuer can be proued: yet must it bee with hazard of the principall, ac∣cording to the equitie of this lawe. That by the equitie of this lawe, (which is the equitie of God) it can haue no better allowance (if it shall bee pro∣ued lawfull to let it out for hyre,) then to stande to the daunger and decaye of the principall, these reasons will plainely proue: The goods whiche naturally yeald commodities in the vse of them to him that possesseth them, as sheepe, and suche other, muste stand to the aduenture of decay, if they be hyred: therefore muche more must they doe so, which naturally and of them selues yeald no commodities. The goodes that in yealding their commo∣dities doe spend and we are away them selues, are contented with their hyre, and lay no clayme to haue the whole repayred. By what iustice then may goodes that are neuer a whit the worsse for wearing, besides their hyre, binde a man to vphold the whole? If it bee equitie, that those goodes which naturally of them selues yeald by vse a cer∣teine gayne, should not be charged with the daun∣ger of decay, it is against all equitie, yt those things
which neyther of them selues, nor yet with like certentie yeald the commoditie, should beside their hire, haue the whole vpholden. To conclude, if those goods which (by all mens iudgement) may most lawfully haue consideration for their vse, be not better considered, it seemeth to me good rea∣son, why those goods (which the most thinke are not at all to haue hyre for their vse, and all men thinke, they may not so iustly require it as the o∣ther) should hold them selues well contented, whē their allowance is as good as theirs is, whiche best do deserue it. If any man shall replie, and say that some of great deseruing in the Church of God, men of sin∣gular learning and iudgement, haue thought and taught otherwise: Let them vnderstand, that there is no vsurie that is nowe in vse with vs that can be vpholden by their doctrine. For proofe whereof, I referre my selfe vnto that, whiche is written by that worthie instrument of God Maister Cal∣uine vpon this matter in his Commentaries vpon Ezechiel Chapter eighteene:Eze. 18. a man that hathe sayde the most for the allowance of vsurie in some speciall cases, his wordes are these: Nunc videndum est, quando, & a quibus, accipere foenus liceat. Hîc autem valere debet sententia illa, ne{que} passim, ne{que} om∣nia, ne{que} ab omnibus. Hoc quidem dictum fuit de muneribus: & lex illa imposita fuit praesidibus prouinciarum: sed optimè quadrat huic causae. Non omnia igitur accipere conuenit: quia si modum excedat quaestus, (quia id pugnat cū charita∣te) etiā repudiandus est. Diximus quo{que} morē & vsum cōti∣nuū, vitio nō carere. Iā ne{que} passim, quia foenerator (vt dixi)
locum habere non debet neque ferri in Ecclesia Dei. Dein∣de nō ab omnibus, quia a paupere semper foenus accipere ne∣fas erit. Nowe wee must consider when, and of whome, we may take vsurie. And here that com∣mon saying taketh place, not euerie where, not al∣wayes, not al things, not of all men. This was spo∣ken of giftes: and this lawe was made for the ru∣lers of prouinces: but it agreeth verie fitly vnto this cause. A man may not therefore take all gaine, for if it exceede measure (bycause that is againste charitie) it is to be refused: and we haue sayde al∣ready, that often to vse it, and to make a common and vsuall practise of it, can not be without fault. Neither is it to be allowed euerie where: bycause the vsurer (as I haue sayde) ought to haue no place, nor once to be suffered in the Church of God. Moreouer, it is not to be taken of all men, by∣cause it shall alwayes bee extreme wickednesse to take vsurie of a poore man. This is the opinion of that man, who of all other giueth moste liber∣tie, and is thought to bee moste fauourable in this cause. As for him that liueth vpon vsurie, as the husbandman doth vppon his husbandrie, his iudgement is that he ought to be thrust out of the societie of men. Thus muche for his iudgement, whome some vsurers in this matter pretende to build vppon. We see in this commaundement, what hedges and fences the Lorde hath made for the safetie of our goods, to reserue the proprietie and benefite thereof vnto our selues: and to keepe vs also from witnessing any want of loue, by brea∣king
in vpon any other mens goods, vnlawfully. This want of loue, witnessed by euill dealing with oure neighbours goodes, was likewise prouided for by lawes made for their faithfull dealing, that had any thing giuen them to keepe. We reade in Exodus,Exo. 22.7. that if a man deliuer his neighbour mo∣nie or stuffe to keepe, and it bee stolne out of his house, if the theefe be found, he shall pay the debt: if the theefe be not founde, then the maister of the house must be brought vnto the Iudges to sweare, whether hee haue put his hand vnto his neighbors goods to defraud him of it or no: not beeing ac∣quitted of that suspicion, before he had purged him selfe by an othe. But if a man shall deliuer vnto his neighbour to keepe, asse, oxe, or sheepe, or a∣ny beast, and it die, or be hurt, or taken away by e∣nimies, and no man see it, the owner (hearing him testifie by an othe that there was no deceit of his part in the matter) must holde him selfe contented therewith. If it were stolne from him to whom it was giuen to keepe, hee must make restitution to the owner thereof, bycause therein appeared his negligence. If it were torne in peeces (which might bee, notwithstanding his diligence were neuer so good) he must bring some part of it, and shew that it was deuoured, and in so doing, hee is not bound to make it good,Exo. 22.11 12.13. as appeareth in Exodus. These te∣stimonies are here brought in, to testifie how care∣full the Lorde is of faythfull and louing dealing with our neighbours in their goods, and to let vs see and vnderstand, that wee are not so free from
duties in that behalfe, as commonly we are wont to esteeme our selues to bee: but that wee stande bound before the Lord, to leaue recordes behinde vs of our louing affection towards them, when so euer by any occasion wee shall haue to deale with their goods. What naturall man canne bee persuaded, that there is any conscience binding to restore goodes that were put in trust vnto him, if they should be stolne? What naturall man would not fret and fume at this, that when his neighbour ma∣keth request vnto him to keepe it, hee should not∣withstanding bee bound to aunswere it if it were stolne, or be troubled for his goodwill, to purge him selfe before a magistrate by an othe, that there was no vnfaithful dealing on his parte with those goodes? Would not flesh and bloud storme at this, as an vnlawfull and vniust thing? But the iust Lorde, by these lawes letteth vs see that wee stand more bound vnto louing dealing with our neigh∣bours in their goodes, than our corrupt nature woulde willingly yealde vnto. And those lawes are good glasses for vs thus farre to looke into them, that wee may learne that wee are bounde to shewe more fidelitie and loue towardes oure neighbours in their goodes, then our corrupt na∣ture can bee brought with any goodwill to ac∣knowledge. The negligence, whereby an other man suffe∣red losse or damage in his goodes, was accounted as a kynde of deceite and iniurie before the Lord:
& he was bound to make it good, through whose negligence it did perish, according as it is written in Exodus:Exo. 21.33. When a man shall open a well, or dig a pit, and couer it not, and an oxe or an asse fal ther∣in, the owner of the pit shal make it good, and giue monie to the owners thereof, but ye dead beast shal be his. What shall we then think of thē that of de∣liberate purpose, wittingly and willingly shal bring damage or losse to their neighbours? when care∣lesse negligence (not being ioyned with any pur∣pose to hurt or impouerish) is boūd to make good the hurte and damage of his negligence, and yet nothing is so common nowe a dayes (euen among christians and gospellers) as vpon the least grefe or displeasure conceiued, to force a man to spend his monie and goods in suite of lawe. These men are farre from fearing the punishment of negligence, while their deliberate purpose without any law∣full cause to impaire his wealth, is accounted as no fault with them, no not halfe the price of their dis∣pleasure, be it neuer so vniustly or without cause conceiued. We haue heard how carefull the Lorde is to make safe passage for our goodes, whether they come within the coast of the borrower, receyuer, or carelesse passinger. The same care hath he also of them, when they must passe by the buyer or sel∣ler. For euen the buyers and sellers haue charge to deale well with them, that there appeare not lacke of loue towardes the owners, by the their doings and dealings with their goods. And therefore our
owne greedie affections must not make the mar∣ket, nor set the price vppon the thinges that are to be solde, but the worthinesse of the thing it selfe that is to be bought or solde, & the benefite that it is likely to yeelde to him that shall inioy it, muste strike the stroke. A lawe was giuen vnto the people of Israel for fidelitie and faithfull dealing in buying & selling, as appeareth in Leuiticus:Leuit. 25.14.15.16.17. When thou sellest any thing to thy neighbour, or buyest at thy neighbours hand, ye shal not deceiue one another, but according to the nūber of yeres af∣ter the Iubilie, thou shalt buy of thy neighbour: also accor∣ding to the number of the yeeres of the reuenewes hee shall sell vnto thee: according to the multitude of yeeres thou shalt increase the price thereof, and according to the fewnesse of yeeres thou shalt abate the price of it: for the number of fruites doeth he sel vnto thee. Oppresse not yee therefore any man his neighboure, but thou shalt feare thy GOD, for I am the Lorde your GOD. These are the verye wordes of the texte. At the yeere of Iubilie euerie manne returned againe to his landes and pos∣sessions that he had solde and made away: there∣fore as that yeere was further off or neerer, so they bought and solde thinges deare or better cheape. And the reason and equitie of this lawe is added: for (sayeth the holie Ghoste) the number of frui∣tes doeth hee sell vnto thee, and those canst thou not haue after the yeere of Iubilie, and therefore if he shoulde sell otherwise then after that rate, hee should take in some money of thee, not giuing a∣ny
thing out for it: for the number of fruites doeth he sell vnto thee. As if he should say, he hath not righte to take, but in regarde of that fruite and commoditie that doeth come vnto thee, by that which he doeth sell thee. For he maketh this the reason (why he must abate according to the neere approching of Iubilie,) because the other after that time, could receiue no benefite of that whiche hee bought: as if it were an vndoubted trueth, that there must be some equalitie of mutual benefite betwene the buyer and the seller, that a man may not take money for nothing of his neighbour, but must giue him a penie worth for his penie. The yeere of Iubilie is gone, with other the like lawes made for the gouernement of that people: but the reason and equitie of this lawe standeth, and bindeth vs to haue conscience in our buying and selling, & not to let our couetous affection set the price vpon that we haue to sell. Out of the equitie of this lawe, which yet re∣maineth, (beeing the equitie of that GOD which cannot be contrarie to himselfe,) it appeareth, that the seller must in selling looke what commoditie and benefite it is likely that the buyer shall inioy by that which he selleth vnto him, making con∣iecture thereof according vnto the vsuall rate of those wares as they go at that time, and to increase or abate the price of his wares, or that hee hath to sel whatsoeuer accordingly. For they must buy and sell according as the yeere of Iubilie (whiche
beeing once come they might no longer inioy it) was sooner or later, increasing the price, if it were longer to that yeere, because the buyers commo∣ditie should increase: and abating the price, if the time were shorter, because the buyers commodi∣tie must be so much the lesse. By the equitie and reason of this lawe, we may lerne two rules, which wil teach vs to discerne wel of true buying & selling, & learne vs to buy and sel in the feare of God & with a good conscience. The firste is, that our couetous affection muste not sett the price of that we vtter. For here we see he must haue an eye to that time, when the others com∣moditie must ceasse, and take his rule from thence: so that hee is sent from him selfe in making of the price, and must looke at an other. This is the firste rule giuen vs to buy and sell by, and is drawen from the equitie of this lawe, whiche is the equitie of our GOD. A meruaylous good rule, sauouring of loue to our neighbour, and brideling selfe-loue, whiche without regarde of others, loketh to it selfe alone. If this rule were obserued, then should these spee∣ches ceasse in Christian mouthes, and not bee hearde, I may and will sell thus, because I haue had losses heeretofore: or I will sell as I can get for my wares how soeuer, because I may haue losses hereafter, and this must helpe to beare when that commeth: As if wee had commission from the Lord, to take vp vpon ye buyer, our shipwracks, or the recompence of our losses what so euer:
or as if we had authoritie, to lay those strokes vp∣pon his shoulders, that should firste deale with vs, whiche wee haue iustly borne from the hande of the Lorde. It were very requisite, if any doe so, that his commission were seene why hee should so doe: for sure it is, the Lord giueth not out any suche large commission, as by vertue whereof any may challenge a recompence in another mans goods, when soeuer the Lord for iust causes hath thought it good to diminish his. The second rule is, that in buying and selling, wee driue the commodities giuen and receiued as neere equalitie as possibly we can: that so farre foorth as wee can gather (by the present value, rate, and account that is made of those things exchaunged) there be equall commo∣dities comming to bothe the parties by that ex∣chaunge, & that neither partie be a deceiuer, or op∣pressour of his brother: for suche hath the Lorde threatened that he will be reuenged of. There∣fore this reason is giuen (why hee must take lesse if the time be neerer, when the buyer shall forgoe his commoditie:) for (sayth the texte) thou sellest him the fruites, and the fruites he can no longer in∣ioy: and if he should say, hee can no more haue commoditie of that which he bought of thee, and therefore must thy price bee abated accordingly, that there may be mutuall benefite, & neither parte be found oppressing an other. For thou art not li∣censed to take any penie from thy brother for nothing.
Thou must (as nigh as thou canst discerne) giue him as good as thou takest: thou art bounde to giue him a penie worth for his penie, and a pe∣nie for his penie worth. Thou maist not doe that to him, which thou wouldst be loth that he should doe to thee. Thou wouldest not that hee should take any commoditie from thee, vnlesse hee gaue thee the worth of it againe. I perceiue the time passeth, and I haue muche yet to speake of this matter: I will therefore heere make an ende, reseruing the reste vntill the nexte day. Now let vs call vppon our heauenly father in the name of his sonne, that wee may wittnesse the loue whiche wee beare vnto our brethren, by all faithfull and louing dealing with their goods. &c. ¶The ix. Lecture continued vppon the 15. verse. WE learned the laste day, that a man might not take any com∣moditie from another, vnlesse he gaue the worthe of it againe. This rule saith sore to the vsuall buyings, & sellings of these daies when commonly all men regarde them selues a∣lone, to make the moste they can of their commo∣dities, without any regarde had what his commo∣ditie is like to be that dealeth with them, by that which he receiueth from them. Yet it is no other
rule, but that cōmon one which we haue receiued by the light of nature, that wee may not doe that vnto another, we woulde not haue done vnto our selues. And who (I pray you) would haue the worse at an other mans hand? Who would haue willingly lesse giuen him then hee had deliuered vnto an other? Or who could beare, that another man should haue no regard how well or ill he had dealte with him? Then may wee not doe so vn∣to others. Wee must therefore thinck, that when wee come to buying and selling, we come to wittnesse our loue towardes our neighboure by our good dealing with him in his goods, and to leaue some testimonie of the feare of God, and a good consci∣ence behinde vs: we come to make tryall of our faith to God, while we depend vppon his blessing for our prouision to liue well and happily, in fol∣lowing the rule of loue and vpright dealing, whi∣che he hath left vs, and not the desire of our owne rauinous affection. But in verye deede, if a man should looke to the dealinges that now are com∣mon in the worlde in all buyinges, sellinges, and exchaūges, he must be forced to confesse that men come to buying and selling as it were to the razing and spoiling of some enimies citie or holde, where euery man catcheth, snatcheth, and carrieth away, whatsoeuer he can come by: & he is thought ye best that carrieth away the moste: his botie is taken to be the warmest, that hath made the moste naked in
the streetes: he commeth home the merriest, that hath caused the moste weeping and wayling, sighing and sobbing, to vtter the heauinesse of the heart. Yet in all this oppression, euery such offen∣der persuadeth him selfe that he is not out of cha∣ritie with his neighbour, but that hee loueth him entirely and sheweth it well enough: for he giueth him good wordes in buying and selling, and hee intendeth no hurt vnto his person. But the ho∣lie Ghoste will bringe vs to another tryall of our loue, he will not be bound to that alone: and ther∣fore doeth send vs to see how louing wee are, by our dealing with him in his goods. Therefore doeth the Apostle say very well to the Romanes, that this commandement,Rom. 13.9. Thou shalt not steale, is as the rest fulfilled no otherwise then by loue. These oppressions therefore, these fraudes and deceiptes to pul another mans goods into our hands that are so rife euery where, doe no lesse de∣clare our want of loue (by the testimonie of the Apostle) then doe murthers, slaughters, and bloud∣shed. Now to come to the matter more particular∣ly, by this rule is condemned all vttering of naugh∣tie and conterfaite coyne or ware. For how can there be equalitie of commodities, where the one is not commodious or profitable at all? Secondly, here is condemned all that vttering of money or wares (though good in thē selues) whi∣che haue some thinges closely ioyned with them,
to vtter them with all and to increase the price aboue that which they are worth, and without those additions, doe vsually go for: which thinges are no commodities nor merchandize at all of them selues, neither will they alwayes abide with the vse of the thinges, and departing, they cannot but bring losse vnto him that must haue the vse of them, and leaue him (as we say) in the lashe. In this number are all those, that sell their com∣modities what soeuer, dearer then otherwise they are solde for in those times, because they giue day with them, and longer time before they bee payed, taking money for time, and making it to increase, and add to the value of their commo∣dities. First vnderstand, that time is no merchaun∣dize: for who dare bee so bolde as to say that hee hath brought time into the market to sel? or who hath giuen thee leaue to sell dayes and monethes? There must also bee equalitie of cōmodities: the man hath giuen out for time, but when he com∣meth to the vsing or wearing of that thinge, hee findeth no benefite by reason of that time, which he hath paide for. In deede if a coate or cloake-cloathe solde dearer for time, would bee longer time in wearing then another coate of the same or like peece solde for present money, there were some reason in it, because the buyer should haue the same commoditie of time in the vsing of it, that the other had in the sale of it.
Or if the corne solde dearer for time, woulde feede a mans familie longer then so muche bought for readie money, there were something to be said for it. And if it be answered, that he who receiueth it of vs maketh a commoditie of time as we doe, for he selleth it thereafter, the matter is not yet answe∣red, vnlesse it be firste proued that thou maist law∣fully take money for yt, whiche though peraduen∣ture one do not lose by, (through his as vniust dea∣ling as thine owne) yet thou art sure another can∣not but smart of it: for it commeth so muche the dearer to him that must vse it, who reapeth no cō∣moditie for time, but rather losse and hinderance, notwithstanding it hath increased thy gaine. And who hath giuen thee leaue to take some thing the more for thy commoditie, in consideration of that, whiche wilbe gone, when thy commodities shall come to be taken commoditie of, and to be put to the vse, for the which they were bought and solde, that is, to occupie, spende or vse them as their na∣ture doth require? There is no equalitie in that ex∣change, when a man must giue out something for that, whiche he is neuer a whit the more, but rather so much the lesse, benefited by, whensoeuer it shal∣be put vnto that vse for the whiche it was made, & in respect whereof we do take money for it, but in respecte of that commoditie which it will yeelde, when it shalbe put to that vse and ende, whiche the nature of the thing requireth. Moreouer, if there be any thing of good reporte,Phil 4.8. we Christians must seeke after it: and surely it can purchase no com∣mendation
of brotherly dealing and good speeche that way, when our dealinges shalbe harder, then the vsuall dealing of those times are, euen among those men that haue no other thing to gett their li∣uing by, beside the commoditie and profit that cō∣meth vnto them by that their trade. Herevnto may be added, that it is often preiudicial to the rea∣sonable sale of that man, who must sell his wares for present money, his necessitie so constrayning him. The like is to be said of other things, which (notwithstanding they be good and sufficient for the moste parte therof, yet) haue something min∣gled among to increase the quantitie, and so the price of the other: whiche in the vse thereof, brin∣geth no benefite, but hurt, hinderance, and deceipte vnto him that occupieth the same. One example may be this: Whē cloathes are stretched fiue, sixe, or seuen yardes in a cloathe aboue that whiche the cloath doth of necessitie require, it is well knowne vnto the seller who taketh money for the same, that all of them will shrinke in againe, so soone as euer they shalbe wet, and that the wearer shall haue no good by thē. And how then can these men take money for nothing? They can not be priuileged to take in some part of money for that, which hath no peece of commoditie in it, when it shall come to the triall and vse that should be of it. There is no equalitie, to take a commoditie for that, which in his handes or house if it lie by him, wil vanishe into nothing. It is no otherwise, then if some iuggler had closed in our fist, (as we thought)
some peece of coyne, but when we open our hand, there is no suche thing to be found there. As for their desire to haue it so whiche doe buy it of vs, that cannot mainteyne any thing in vs, not lawfull of it selfe. For no mannes appetite can warrant our wrong dealing in deceiptfull wares. If the commoditie whiche we do vtter be neither altoge∣ther, nor yet in part deceiptfull, but wholy good and sufficient, yet if we shall ouer-sell it, we tres∣passe against this rule of equitie and reason, which forbiddeth the commoditie of one, to arise of the losse of another, and laboureth for equall commo∣ditie in exchaunge, as nighe as may be. Neither can we bee truely intituled vnto any other their commoditie, but by departing from some other thing of ours vnto them againe, as commodious as that is, and the same, either in weight, measure, or value. Those men therefore that in buying and selling doe alwayes lay in wayte for them, who for some one necessitie or other, must necessarily vtter their cōmoditie, thinking to make a pray of their necessitie, & to make ye price after their owne lust & desire, are not simple theeues: (for it skilleth not to make it theft, whether it be muche or litle yt we take frō another which we haue no right vnto, nether yet whether it be done vnder some color, or without any shewe of right,) but also this kinde of dealing hath in it a spice and smacke of crueltie & murther: because it is toward those most cōmonly whose necessitie (if there were any Christiā bow∣els in vs) were rather to be pittied as it alreadie
is, then further to be increased by vs: as if their af∣fliction were not yet enoughe to bee vnder our feete, vnlesse we trampled vpon them, and did our good will that they might neuer arise againe. It is no more lawfull, to leaue testimonie that there is wante of loue towardes our neighbour by our dealing with his goods in buying and selling, then it is in our borrowing, keeping, or lending, as was before declared. For the Lorde hathe forbidden vs to shewe a∣ny lacke of loue towardes our neighbour: and for triall of our obedience herein, he followeth our footing to the gate of his goodes, as well as to the doore of his person: to espie, whether we returne from thence bothe mercifull and helpefull, or cru∣ell and hurtefull. For thus doth he trace vs and trie out our heart towarde our brethren, leading vs to see the secretes of it, by the out-goinges that it hathe to the thinges that be especially necessarie and commodious for them, and also best beloued and most deare vnto them. As the Lorde hathe bounde the borrower, len∣der, keeper, buyer, or seller, to good abearing to∣ward our goodes, so hathe he graunted the peace for him, that shall finde any thing of oures. (No exception admitted to the contrarie, no not in the finding of the goods of his enimie.) For the man that shal find his enimies oxe or asse going astray, is charged to bring to him againe. And if he shall see his enimies oxe or asse lying vnder his burthen, he must helpe him vppe with it, according as it is
written in Exodus.Exo. 23.4.5. Hee is also charged with all the lost thinges of his brothers that he shall finde, to restore them againe in Deuteronomie:Deut. 22.3 and if he knowe not whose oxe, or sheepe they be that he findeth going astray, they must remaine with him at his house, vntil his brother seeke after them, Deuteronomie.Deut. 22.2. If any man should deale deceipt∣fully (and therefore vncharitably) with his neigh∣bours goodes, then were they bounde to restore yt whatsoeuer it were, whiche their conscience did charge them with all, adding the fifte parte more thervnto, & giuing it vnto him yt was so wronged, iniuried, or deceiued by thē, the same day which they should offer for yt their trespasse to ye Lord: so that the Lord would not be appeased, vntil their brethren were satisfied. Thus must they do, when their conscience should pricke them in any thing, according as it is written in Leuit.Leuit. 6.. The wronges that are there sett downe to be restored againe, are, to denie his neighbour that which was taken him to keepe, or that whiche was put to him of trust: oppression, either by fraude or violence: finding that whiche was lost, and denying it: and what∣soeuer one hath hindered his neighbour in, by a false othe. These thinges are expressely set downe in that place, to be restored in the whole and the fifte parte thereof added therevnto, at the summon of their conscience whensoeuer. It appeareth in the booke of Numbers,Num. 5.8. that the offenders in this parte, must pay this damage vnto his next kinse∣man, if he were dead whom thus they had wron∣ged:
neither was he so acquited, if he had no kins∣man, but must giue it to the Lord, for the priestes vse. If so be it shal please the Lorde to call any man, and let him see an vniuersall oppression and harde dealing in all his doeing, not grieuing him with the alone remembrance of one, or some fewe, then the counsell of Daniel is to be followed:Dan. 4.24. to breake off their sinnes by righteousnes, and their iniquities by mercie toward the poore, that plentie of mercifull dealing may followe there, where there hath gone before great store & plentie of the contrarie.Isaie. 58.6.7 Is not this the fasting, (sayth the Prophete Isaie) that I haue chosen, to loose the bandes of wicked∣nesse, to take off the heauie burdens, and to let the oppressed goe free, and that ye breake euerie yoke? Is it not to deale thy bread to the hungrie, & that thou bring the poore that wander vnto thine house? When thou seest the naked, that thou couer him? &c. Thus must he not onely leaue oppressing, but also take vp mercifull dealing with the needie. We see howe by this whiche hitherto hathe beene said, the Lorde hath fenced our neigh∣bour his goods, and howe contrarie it is to the loue of our neighbour, to hurte or hinder him any way in them, and how agreeable to the wil of the Lord, that we should be meanes that he might inioye the commodities thereof. Therefore was there a lawe among the children of Israel made to shewe their loue towardes their neighbour, who had planted a vineyard, but not tasted of the fruite therof: wherin it was prouided, that the officer should make pro∣clamation at their going to warfare against their e∣nimies, that if there were any who had not eaten,
of ye fruite of their labours, they shuld returne home and take comfort and vse of their owne. This lawe of loue, might not be dispensed withall, no not in the heate and vrgent necessitie of warres. A no∣table testimonie to shewe howe well it liketh the Lord, that men should take comfort of their own. As doth that Lawe also,Deut. 19.14 which was giuen in Deu∣teronomie of not remouing the lande-marke, which they of olde time haue set. And therefore we are commanded to shewe them this kindenesse and loue, to reserue vnto them the comfort of their commodities, without impayring of them when∣soeuer we shal either borrowe, keepe, or finde any thing of theirs: or in buying and selling exchange with them. For we please God & shew loue vnto them, whensoeuer we shall deale truely with their goodes: according as we heard before, that God maketh trial of our hart toward our neighbour, by our handes, as they are wont to deale with them in their commodities. It is an vndoubted truth there∣fore, that God is greatly pleased, when for obedi∣ence vnto him, we deale thus faithfully & louing∣ly with thē in that which is theirs: it is a true fruite of loue, and a faithful obedience vnto this cōman∣dement. And because of that, whēsoeuer it is done for obedience sake vnto God, who doth comaund it, and of good wil vnto them who receiue ye fruite of it, euen this fidelitie in his goodes that we bor∣rowe, finde, or be trusted withal, either else receiue by way of exchange, in buying & selling, is a good worke in deede, and an humble obedience to the charge of God giuen vs in this commaundement.
There are two thinges, without the whiche wee shall neuer be able to perfourme any acceptable o∣bedience to God in this commandement. The first is an assured faith in Gods promises, that he will prouide for vs, in the thinges necessa∣rie as well for the bodie as the soule: and that he hathe charged himselfe, as well with the care and prouision for the one, as for the other. This faith (if it were true) woulde consume many feares, and cares of our minde for worldly matters and works that followe the same. So might we employ our selues vppon the care of better thinges. This did the holie Ghoste knowe verie well, and therefore meaning to cure couetousnes, he maketh the plas∣ter of faithe, saying: Let your conuersation be without couetousnesse,Heb. 13.5. for he hath saide, I wil not leaue thee, nor for∣sake thee. When our hearts shalbe fully persuaded, that the Lorde will not leaue vs, nor forsake vs, we cannot be so greatly tormented with the care to liue and obteine necessarie thinges for vs, ha∣uing so strong assuraunce for it as his promise, who hathe made all thinges of nothing with his worde. And therefore in the former place, exhor∣ting them to conscience in buying and selling: he sendeth them to the couenant, saying: I am thy God: which wordes (as we haue learned in the first com∣mandement) conteine promises for al things nede∣full for this present life. If this be stedfastly belee∣ued, that the Lord wil not leaue vs, nor forsake vs, there wilbe no doubt of our euill dealinges with the goodes of our neighbour: whether we buy or
sell, borrowe, or keepe the thinges that be his. The seconde thing is, to finde a contented minde, with that which we haue alreadie, and therefore to stay in it, as in a riche portion, with great thankfulnesse of heart to our God for it, bea∣ring our port and countenance in all our doinges accordingly, without any exceeding whatsoeuer. For if once our affections shall ouerflowe ye bankes of our owne condition, so that in minde we burne with the desire of a better, our dooinges can neuer be persuaded, that they must so nerely be loked at, but that they may borrowe a litle of conscience & equitie, to make the prouision according as the de∣sire directeth. This doth the Apostle confirme in plaine speeche to Timothe:Timo. 6.9. where after persua∣sion to be content with that we haue, (because the gayne of godlinesse is great,) he telleth vs plainly, that they who wilbe riche, fall into many tentati∣ons, snares, and many noysome lustes: this is the danger of them, that are fallen so farre into friend∣shippe and loue with a better estate, that they wilbe rich. This being once set downe and determined, not onely conscience is constrained to depart, but also thankefulnesse to God for our present estate doeth in like manner forsake vs. Let vs learne by this commaundemente to knowe our corrupt inclination toward the goodes of our neighbours, and so to viewe our deceiptes that haue beene in vs at any time, either in buying or selling, borrowing or keeping any thing of his, together with our corrupte inclination therevnto,
that the remedie, of redemption (broughte vs by Iesus Christe) may truely be taken holde of: and that wee being made comfortable in his mer∣cie, may with courage goe about the obedience of his will in this commaundement so that still we may be more and more freed of all manner of de∣ceipte, and more and more inabled to glorifie him, in all louing and faithful dealing with the goodes of others. Whiche that it may be perfourmed, let vs call vppon our heauenly Father in the name of his Sonne, that it would please him in the multitude of his mercie, to holde vs vp by the hope of his promises, that we standing assured of his help, may not be drawen by any necessitie, to do contrarie to his blessed will; and also that we hauing a content∣ted minde, may not be tormented with the hungrie desire of a better estate, which being once entred, vniust dear∣ling cannot long be kept out. The tenth Lecture vpon the 16. verse. Thoy shalt not beare false Witnesese, &c.
THis commandement taketh care for the good pame credite, ho∣nour, and estimation of our bre∣thren, that we should not bring a∣ny blotte or blemishe unto that, but by loue mainteine and vphold it. For herein the Lord will haue tryall of our loue towards them, as wel as in their bodie and goodes: and therefore chargeth vs no lesse herein with duetie, then before he hathe done in other thinges that are deare and precious vnto them. Neither is there any late cause why we should stande charged towards his crate & good name, then towardes his goodes. For as the ho∣ly Ghoste witnesseth in the Prouerbes:Prou. 22.1. good name is better then great richesse and the louing fauour of men whiche doeth followe it, is aboue siluer and aboue golde. This must cause vs to be∣come carefull, lest we should annoy him, in so great a benefite and treasure of his, as credits and good name is, by good right accounted of by the holy Ghoste. The togue therfore is here inioyned not to caste foorth, by want of loue, any suche speech as might leave behinde it the stayne and soyle of infamie & reproche vpon his neighbour. That the hurt and annoyance of the tongue may rightly be considered vpon, it shalbe good to proceede to the danger and damage of it particularly. The first is, when in open place of iustice & iudgement, any man shal of malice and will will, testifie or depose yt whiche is vntrue against his neighbour. Which
howe heynous a thing it is before God, may ap∣peare by the punishment, that the Lord did appoint for the transgressours herein: whiche was to haue the same punishment, that he should haue had whō they did falsely accuse, if the accusation had beene proued true. As it is writen in Deuteronomie: And the Iudges shal make diligent inquisition:Deu. 19.18.19. and if the wit∣nesse be found false, &c, then shall ye doe vnto him as hee had thought to do vnto his brother: so thou shalt take euill away froth of the middlest of thee: and the rest shall heare this and feare, and shall from henceforth commit no more an such wickednesse among you. Therefore thine eye shall haue no compassion, but life for life, eye for eye, toothe for toothe, hande for hande, foote for foote. The false wit∣nesse therfore in the judgement of God is as great an offender, as if he had done that in deed himself, whiche vntruly he doth charge another withal: & therefore must he reckon with the Lord, for com∣mitting that sinne himselfe (howe heynous soeuer it shalbe) that by his testimonie and speeche, an o∣ther is wrongfully blamed for. As for example: if he shall wrongfully accuse a man of murder, he is in the same fault before God, as if he should haue cutte any mans throate: for false witnesse maketh them doers of that, which vntruly by wordes they put upon others. And because of the daunger that might grow herein, ye Iudges were charged not to receiue testimonie of one alone against his negh∣bour: but at ye lest two should testifie in euerie mat∣ter, before any judgment should go against ye man. For when the testimonie of two or three is tho∣roughly
examined, the falsehode (if there be any) may soone be found out, whiche might ham bet∣ter, couert vnder one mans testimonie alone. This may teache vs, howe carefull the Lorde is to preserue the credite Of man, from the malice, ha∣tred, and venome of a false witnesse. The Lorde also hathe charged the judge moste strictly, that he hurt not the right and cause of any man with his tongue and sentence: so carefull is the Lorde to keepe vs harmelesse from this mem∣ber, that is so tickle vnto euil. Therefore Iudges, and those that be in place of iustice, are charged in Exodus not to ouerthrowe the right of the poore in his suite:Exo. 23.6.7. but to keepe them farre from a false matter, either to pronounce it, or to admitte of it, because (as it is there saide) the Lord wil not fie a wicked man. They are forbid there to receiue giftes, because those wil blinde the eyes of ye wise. These are the charges that be giuē vnto them that sitte in place of iustice. For the Lord meaning to make an harborowe againste all the winde wea∣ther of an euill tongue, woulde neuer leaue ye parte vncouered, where the weather were likes to bring the greatest daunger. And if the Lorde so mislike false witnesse, that he would haue no place to be a sanctuarie for it, he can neuer abide that wrong to be offered vnto him, that his owne sacred seate of iustice should become the throne thereof. It is no small matter before the Lorde, to dare defile his seate with a false sentence. And notwithstanding it seeme no one matter to pronounce a false sen∣tence,
and to beare out an euill man or euill matter, yet is it amongest the euils of the tongue the grea∣test to ouerthrowe the right of the righteous, and to iustifie the wicked: and so muche the more, be∣cause that throne of the Lord & place of iustice & execution for the wicked, is by that meanes made a denne of theeues and wickednesse. Can there be a more monstruous sinne then this of the tongue, to adiudge him the garland and crowne of a cleare and iust man, who hath deserued the hyre and pu∣nishment of reproche euen from the seate of the Lord? And whiche more is, to make the Lorde to put the crowne vpon the head of the wicked, and the halter about the necke of a iust man, whyle sitting in his place and seate, as it were in his name, and for him they doe it, iustifying by their sentence, a wicked man or wicked mat∣ter, whome the Lorde abhorreth: and condem∣ning the iust, whom he approueth? The Lorde doth threaten them, that sitting in place of iustice and iudgement, do bolster euill men and euill mat∣ters, with those punishments (and that in this life,) that of all others they doe moste mislike: euen to be in contempt, reproche, and inwarde misliking of the people, according as we are taught by the holy Ghoste in the Prouerbes:Prou. 24.23 It is not good to haue respect of any person in iudgement. He that saith to the wicked, thou art righteous, him shal the people curse, and the multitude shal abhorre him, but to them that rebuke him shalbe fauour: and vppon them shal come the blessing of goodnesse. It is feared lest if men should set them
selues in yt place against euil men & causes, it were the way to make them subiecte to displeasure and losse of fauour with many, without any gaine of good report: but the holy ghost saith in that place, yt the blessing of good liking shalbe vpō such, wher as the other labouring (by vpholding euil matters) either to keepe friendship, or otherwise to make all stand in awe of their displeasure, & so to speake of their greate authoritie with admiration of it, shall finde the contrarie: euen the secret misliking of al, howsoeuer for a time feare may keepe it in, yt out∣wardly there be no exclamation & outcrie against it. In the word of God, not onely those are char∣ged with this sinne of false witnesse, that first sett on foote and erecte a false tale to the discredite of their neighbour, but those also, that by their ap∣prouing of it, and eares willingly opened vnto it, do vphold the same. For notwithstanding it were set vp, yet must it of necessitie fall downe againe, if it should finde none that would by the receyuing and approuing there of, vnderproppe it, and as it were lende their shoulders vnto it. Therefore it is saide by the holy Ghost in Exodus,Exod. 23.1. Thou shalt not receiue a false tale, neither put thy hand with the wicked, to be a false witnesse. It shal not excuse vs that wee were not the first authours of it, neither yet yt many as wel as we did beleue it, but we are taught to take heede how we giue credit to report, euē strength∣ned with ye approbatiō of many, (wherof notwith∣stāding we our selues haue no certeine knowlege,) yt we be not so hastie to giue sentence in our heart,
and much lesse in place of iustice vse our testimo∣nie against any, vpon no sufficient ground, moued onely by the speeche and reportes that runne a∣broade. We are taught neither to ioyne nor goe with the mightie to witnesse a false matter for fa∣uour or feare: neither yet vpon a kinde of foolishe pitie to honor the poore, & to ioyne with them in their vniust cause: so precious woulde the Lorde that the regarde of his trueth should bee. It is not lawfull for vs to agree with any againste God. And as for that easie eare that so soone receiueth the slaunderers report, the holy Ghoste giueth the medicine for it, in the Prouerbes: As the Northe winde driueth away the raine,Prou. 25.23. so doth an angrie coūtenance the slaundering tongue. It is the ouer good enterteine∣ment, that the slaunderous tongue findeth, that cherrisheth it: for the heauie countenaunce dri∣ueth suche guests cleane away. The scripture spea∣keth of those people, that they be as pedlers that go from house to house to vtter their wares, euen slaū∣derous speeche: the receiuer therefore must be as euill, as the first brocher: for if we had no recei∣uers we should haue no theeues. Those men there∣fore that with friendely lookes and eares do enter∣teine them that are euer bringing newes and re∣portes of others, are partakers with them of that euil, and of all the fruites and effectes thereof. We are to consider that whiche oftentimes hath bene spoken before: yt vnder one sinne (as this bearing of false witnesse) it is vsuall with the ho∣lie
scripture to conteine all that be of any affinitie with it: so that all the fruites and venome of an hateful and vnlouing tongue are heere forbidden. Those men that blaze abrode the infirmities and offences of their brethren, through want of loue, offend against this commaundement: which pro∣uideth for all louing dealing with our brethren in their name and estimation. It is no excuse to say, the matter is true we vtter of them, when the truth shall conuict vs, that we haue not proceeded there∣in by the rules of loue, which chargeth vs to couer them, and by louing couering of them to cure them in deede, and to take out the blott and ble∣mish of them bothe before God and man. For the word of God chargeth vs with a duetie of lo∣uing dealing euen towardes such as shall slip into sinnes and offences: as is saide, that loue couereth all trespasses: and that it is hatred that stirreth vpp contention. And likewise we reade,Pro. 10, 12. that he who couereth a transgression, seeketh loue:Pro. 17.9. but hee that shall publish suche a matter, separateth his chiefe freend. For it commeth so heauily vnto our heart, when that we shall heare men that they haue no re∣garde of vs in our infirmities, not spareing by the inlargeing of ye report to increase our miserie & in∣famie, yt notwithstanding we haue bene most ten∣derly louing to suche men aforehand, yet shall we now no longer kepe yt lyking & good opinion of them, while we doe not see them, as it were bear∣ing a parte of our griefe and sorrowe with vs, but rather increasing the same by their vnlouing dea∣ling,
in the publishing of it. We haue good admo∣nition to this purpose in the Prouerbes, where it is said: That the discretion of a man differreth his anger: and his glorie is to passe by an offence.Pro. 19.11. This passing by, is an vsuall speech, when wee stand not vppon a thing to the vttermost, as those that meane to beare with nothing, nor vse any friendship in the mat∣ter, but with extremitie to stand vppon all things. This couering of offences may seeme a very pleasant doctrine vnto the flesh: for we are natural∣ly bent one to sooth vp an other in sinne, and no man to espie any fault, specially in his friend & ac∣quayntance: at the least if we shall see it, yet we wil not see it. But the holie Ghoste is far from the vp∣holding of any such kinde of passing by sinnes and offences: for he meaneth, that couering of them by louing admonition and priuate exhortation, whi∣che in causing a man to be ashamed of them, and to leaue them, blotteth out the memorie of them bothe before God and man. So doeth the Apo∣stle Iames expound this couering of sinnes: Bre∣thren if any of you haue erred from the trueth,Iam. 5.19. &. 20. and some man hath conuerted him, let him knowe that hee whiche hath conuerted the sinner frō going astray out of his way, shall saue a soule from death, and shall hide a multitude of sinnes. To this doeth our Sauiour Christe exhorte vs in Matthew,Matt 18.15. affirming that if he which hath offen¦ded shall heare our admonition, and be ordered by it, we haue wonne our brother: that place is worth the diligent noting. For after that he hath spoken
of his care, for the lost sheep that leaueth ninetie & nine, to seeke that one whiche was lost, declaring also the ioy that he conceiueth after the finding of this one, foorthwith he maketh mention of see∣king vp those of our brethren who haue fallen in∣to sinne or iniquitie, and therefore offended vs: chargeing vs with the seeking vp of them by bro∣therly admonition, according as it is there plainly set foorth, as also in Leuiticus.Leui. 19.17. By these testimo∣nies is apparant, that louing and freendly admoni∣tion is the way to hide sinne, and that dissembling it, and not admonishing our brethren, is the hatred of them & the procuring of the blazing abroade of it, because we knowe that the Lord will not suffer him vnpunished, but by punishing it, wil vtter and declare it. We therefore in dissembling it, while that we shall not admonish them to leaue it, and so to haue it hid in the mercies of God, may truely be said to hate them, and also to be in the same of∣fence and fault of publishers and blazers abroade of their sinne, in as muche as through our negli∣gence, the Lord is forced to bring it to light, that so it may be cured. So that we must be farr from this hatred towarde them, nay, wee must so loue their credit, lest they should be put to some open punish∣ment and shame for their sinnes,Matth. 1. as that the very good affection that we beare vnto them, and griefe to haue them made a publique example of re∣proch, moue vs by way of exhortation to preuent the publishing of it by some blaste of sore punish∣ment from the Lorde.
Wherin as we are to deale plainly, so must we al∣so deale in the spirit of meekenesse and mildenesse, according as wee are willed in the Epistle to the Galathians.Gal. 6.1. Brethren, if any man be fallen by occasion into any fault, ye which are spirituall, restore suche one with the spirite of meekenesse, considering thy selfe least thou also bee tempted, As the faintnesse and want of loue which lea∣ueth a man in his sinne, is iustly reproued: so that blustering heate that of a medicine in like manner maketh a poyson, is no lesse to bee reproued of want of loue towarde the good name and estima∣tion of our brother. For there is no man yt can ea∣sily growe into any good lykinge of those men, in whom he perceiueth there is no affection towards him: neither yet can well digest sharpe medicines, though otherwise neuer so wholesōe, if there shall be no suger to make it sweete withall. We must therefore take heede lest the medicine become vn∣profitable by our vnskilfull handling it, and so we become no couerers of sinne, but rather by dea∣ling so rudely make him cast off all care of good∣nes, letting the raynes go to all libertie of life with the vngodlie, while he seeth him selfe so hardly dealt with, & the godly to haue cast off all hope & care of him. This is the cause why the Apostle in the Epistle to the Thessalo.2. Thess. 3.15 willeth them to admo∣nish those as brethren, who for their euill conuer∣sation did iustly stande excommunicate: Haue no familiar companie with him (sayth the Apostle) that hee may be ashamed, yet account him not as an enimie, but ad∣monish
him as a brother. The nature of man is easily carried to offend in this parte, euen to seeme to come into some opinion of holinesse, by coun∣ting all others as prophane, and reprouing them in such a blustering māner, as carrieth with it no sig∣nification at all of louing affection towards them. We are therefore diligently to obserue, that our heartes wittnesse vnto our selues, the care we haue by our admonition, to haue them reclaimed from those sinnes: and then that we consider, what man∣ner of dealing they are moste like to profite by, that notwithstanding wee may deale with some more roundly then with others, yet euē those may see them selues not despised of vs, nor yet altoge∣ther despaired of, that they should be in a manner caused to fall into the acquaintance and fellowship of the vngodly: and lest that they should onely see our affections eased vpon thē, without further care of their good. If there be good affection towarde thē in deed, we shal easily auoyd both ye extremes, that neither we ceasse to admonish them at al, nei∣ther yet in admonishing be ouer bitter towardes them. It is sure yt loue wil moderate both: hauing no other end in reprouing & opening the euill, but to keepe him from persisting in it. In the handling also of the matter, this louing affection wil direct him, to consult what manner of dealing is likely to doe most good, (for al men are not able to beare alike) that after consultation had, he may procede accordingly: alwayes remēbring, that what sharp∣nesse soeuer, either the thing it selfe or the disposi∣tion
of the man shall require, yet it may appeare, that we seeke not to haue the man defamed, but the sinne cured. If in this behalfe the matter shall be cleere, bothe in our conscience and the iudge∣mēt of those who are accustomed to weigh things by the wisdome of ye word, it skilleth not though those men holde them not contented, who would haue sinne touched, in whose opinion the mildest proceeding against sinne that can be, is too boy∣sterous. To conclude this parte, let vs be well aduised that wee speake not of the infirmities of our bre∣thren, but with this affection and meaning, that ei∣ther they may be reclaymed, or others feared from offending in the like, while they shall learne the great daunger thereof: and that there be no want of loue in vs towarde our brethren, that shall sett our tonges a worke that way, without meaning of any good either towarde him or them that heare vs. There is an other vice and mischiefe of the tongue reproued in this commaundement: when the wordes or deedes of our neighbours are by the want of this loue wroūg either into a sense plaine diuerse from their meaning, or else not so well in∣terpreted as they might be taken, if they had found any indifferent iudge. It is an euil practise & mis∣chiefous, (notwithstanding it be common at this day) to bring a mans owne wordes against him, chaūged into an other sense, purpose and meaning, then euer the man had in vttering of them: which
is not onely vsuall in wordes taken from the mouth of the speaker, but also in speeches penned as plainly as may be. For what is more vsual with many, then to stand so vppon some one or fewe bare wordes of a statute, bond, or obligation, that the meaning of the same shall be cleane altered, and the true intent and purpose of the lawe-maker, no longer sought for? But as it did not acquire the Iewes of false wittnesse-bearing against the Lord Iesus, notwithstanding they vsed some of his wordes, because they had altered his meaning, (wringing his wordes to the building vpp of the temple at Hierusalem within three dayes,Matt. 26.6 62. whiche he ment of the Temple of his bodie) no more shall it be able before GOD to discharge any man that he hath stood vpon some words of a statute, or obligation, when his conscience shal accuse him that he hath swarued from the meaning and pur∣pose thereof. As for the dealings of those men who are accustomed to expounde those thinges into ye worst parte, which might haue a good mea∣ning if they were indifferētly weighed, or for some infirmitie ioyned with a good action doe disgrace and discredite the whole, this commaundement must necessarily reproue them, when it condem∣neth (as we haue heard before) the carelesse blazing abroade of thinges altogether euil in them selues, charging vs with the couering of them by friend∣lie and priuate admonition. If things altogether euil, must be cured with a god¦ly
and friendly couert of priuate admonition had for that purpose, those thē which if they were wel weighed might be well taken, must finde more friendship at our hand, then to haue open outcryes made against them. Neither can it be lawfull for a Christian, where some infirmitie or wante hath bene found with a good deed vnder pretēce of ha∣tred had therevnto, to worke the discredite of the whole, and in so doeing to vndermine the work∣manship of God, plainely appearing therein. It is wonderful to see our corrupte nature, what poy∣son it vttereth in such matters as these be. We shal see some men that are litle moued or touched with infirmities and faultes of their owne (whiche are not in parte, but wholy euil,) and yet for all that so boyling at these little, and as I may tearme them halfe euils of others, (for so they are in respect of their owne,) that a man would iudge them to be great zealous men, when as in deede they nourish monsters at home, and can well inough awaye with them: yea whiche more is, play and dallie with them. It were good in such causes to practise firste vpon a man him selfe, before he take libertie to go abroade: first to vse some sharpe dealing with his owne affections, to see how that wil work, before he shall minister so bitter medicines vnto others. For it is an intollerable thinge, that greate euils should liue quietly at home, when little ones are so sharpely reuenged abroade. It is straunge that any manne shoulde play with some that is
growne to bee a monster, and not to bee able to looke vpon it in the childhoode thereof, when it is nothing so deformed nor euill fauoured. Suche quarelling with euils not halfe formed in others, especially when there is quietnesse with many that be alreadie perfectly shapen at home, can not proceede of any sound meaning or hatred against sinne. We must remember the end why the Lord hath giuen vs a toung: which is, that wee should mainteine loue and friendlinesse, in communica∣ting the good things that lie hid in our harts & af∣fections, by our speach and talke one with an o∣ther. Wherefore wee must carefully consider, that we vtter no poyson nor venome that lurketh in our corrupt nature▪ and is deepely rooted there∣in, by our toung and talke one with an other. The holy ghost being priuie to our great infirmitie this way, hath in many wordes forewarned vs of the slipperinesse of the toung, that wee should haue it vnder sure and safe custodie, telling vs in playne wordes, that hee, who shall let his lippes goe at li∣bertie without restraint, shall surely come to de∣struction, according as we are taught in the Pro∣uerbs: He that keepeth his mouth, keepeth his life:Pro. 13.3. but he that letteth loose his lippes, destruction shal be vnto him. And further: the good man is described to be mu∣sing and meditating what to speake, and the folish and euil mā without any moderation of that mē∣ber, to be babbling out whatsoeuer first commeth into his head.Pro. 15.28. The heart of the righteous studieth to an∣swere: but the wicked mans mouth babbleth euill things.
In this place we see that the holy Ghost ascribeth only a mouth vnto the foolish man, and not a hart to ponder and consider his wordes before, which hart he giueth vnto the wise man, occupying it self in musing and considering how to speake.Pro. 15.2 In the same chapter there is yet a clearer and playner dif∣ference betwene the wicked and the godly, drawn from their vsage in speach, yt the good man hauing wisdome, and therfore good matter to vtter, doth notwithstanding beautifie & adorne it in entering the cōsideration how to make it good, & get grace & fauour vnto it, by obseruing the circumstances of fit time, place, and manner of vttering, whiche most may commend it: whereas the wicked and foolish man hath neither care of the matter whiche he is to vtter, neyther yet of the maner how to vt∣ter it. This vse and end of the toung, to communi∣cate the good thinges of our heart one with an o∣ther, to the increase of loue and friendship among men, doth reproue those who are wont to presse vpon others with wordes of wrath and contempt. It shall not excuse him that hath layde reproch or contempt vpon his neighbour in his speach, to say that his wordes were no wordes of malice, but of pleasure and myrth: for euen that pleasant speache that nippeth and taunteth oure neighbour, and bringeth reproch, contempt, or griefe of heart vn∣to him, can neuer be so cloaked with the outward shewe of iesting speache, but that the Lorde shall clearely see the bitter griefe of contempt or dis∣daine that lyeth close within it, and howe farre
that toung is from the maintenaunce of that loue and amitie, which increaseth the estimation and credite of his neighbour. Moreouer, if the vse of the toung bee to com∣municate the good thinges of the heart, not onely these infamous speaches shall be brought to iudge∣ment, but also fruitlesse and vnsauourie words, yt haue not the fruite and profite of wholsome in∣struction in them. As we are taught by the apostle.Ephe. 4.29 Ephesians: that we should let no vnsauourie com∣munication proceede out of our mouth, but that which may bring grace vnto the hearers. For (as we haue heard) the tong serueth to communicate together the good things of our heart, not the wic∣kednesse or vanitie that lurketh therin: and wher∣of there is so great daunger, that we are counselled in the scripture to separate our selues from foolish men,Pro. 14.7 when wee perceiue not in them the lippes of knowledge. It is apparant by this that hath beene spoken, what are the dueties and good works of this com∣maundement, euen the contrarie of these aforena∣med. It shall be therefore sufficient in a worde to touch them here, bycause they are clearely percey∣ued in their contraries, whiche nowe wee haue heard reproued and forbidden in this commande∣ment. The general charge of this cōmandemēt is, by loue to mainteine and vpholde the credite, esti∣mation, and good name of our brother. For our loue must be declared as well by louing and entire deling with his credit, honor, & good report, as by
louing behauiour towardes his goods and person. It behooueth therefore that the loue which wee beare towarde our brethren should bee fruitfull in the good workes of this commandement, bicause this way the inward affection of the hart hath her outgoing, and is conuict either of loue or hatred, no lesse than in his person and goods. As false witnesse, standing against the life and bloud of our neighbour, was the thing whiche in the first place (as we haue heard) was forbidden, so the good worke contrarie to this, is to vse the cre∣dite of our testimonie for the defence of him. The goodnesse of such a worke is declared in the Pro∣uerbes in these wordes: A faithfull witnesse deliuereth soules.Pro. 14.25 What worke can be of greater account then to come iustly into this commendation, to haue deliuered the liues of men? The good workes of them that by their sentence execute iustice, is (ac∣cording as it is declared in the person of Iob) to de∣liuer the poore that cryeth,Iob. 29.12 the fatherlesse and him that hath none to helpe, diligently to seeke out the trueth and goodnesse of their cause, to plucke the praye out of the vnrighteous mans teeth. This bringeth the blessing of him that was readie to pe∣rish vpon them. It was forbidden as a sinne againste this com∣maundement, to blaze abroade the infirmities of our brethren. The good worke that answereth it, is to admonishe one an other, and so to hide sinne and iniquitie, as it is written. 1. Thessalonians. Wee desire you,Thes. 5.14 Brethren, admonishe them that are vnruly:
comfort the feeble mynded: beare with the weake: be pa∣tient toward all men. It was forbidden vs to expound things that might bee well taken, into the worse parte: and for some little blemishe to deface the whole.Mat. 7.3.4 It is commaunded vs to shewe foorth our zeale against sinnes that bee alreadie ripe in oure selues, and to turne it that way to be reuenged vp∣on them, when it would be so gladly occupied in suspecting and surmising euill in others, which ei∣ther is not so at all, or at the least not so cleare as in our selues. So that alwayes this bee our rule, from the sight of our owne sinnes, to proceede to the re∣prouing of others. In consideration of the end and vse of the toung, which is to giue foorth the good things of the heart, we are sent from speach, either bitter or nipping, or vainely or without profite de∣lighting, vnto the wholesome wordes of edifying and instructing one an other vnto good, as it is written in the Prouerbes: The heart of the wise,Pro. 16.23 & 24. ma∣keth his mouth wise, and addeth doctrine vnto his lippes. His sweete words, are as an honie combe, sweetnesse to the soule, and health to the bones. The lippes of the iust man are reported to feede many:Pro. 10.21. and that they knowe what is acceptable to God and man, and la∣bour to get grace and fauour to that which they do speake.Pro. 11.30. It is sayd that the fruit of a righteous man is as a tree of life, and that he, bycause he winneth soules, is wise: and that he shal be filled with good things, for the fruit of his mouth:Pro. 12.14. that it is yt good vnderstanding and wisedome, that getteth grace and fauour with men,Pro. 13.15. with other infinite testi∣monies
out of that booke, directing vs to the right vse of the toung. Wee haue to learne so to exa∣mine our dealings with our neighbours credite and good name, according to these dueties here prescribed vs, that wee learne truely to humble vs vnder the free mercies of Iesus Christe, and truely to honour him, by shewing forth our loue towards our neighbour in all good dealing with his name, and subduing those affections, that rise vp against it: that we may giue forth testimonie vnto others, that we are in Christe, by cause we are dying vnto sinne, and liuing vnto righteousnesse. Nowe let vs pray vnto our heauenly father, that wee may wit∣nesse our loue vnto men, by all faithfull and lo∣uing dealing with their name. The xj. Lecture vpon the seuenteenth verse. Thou shalt not couet thy neighbours house, neyther shalt thou couet thy neighbours wife, nor his man seruant, nor his mayde, nor his oxe, nor his asse, neyther any thing that is thy neighbours. THis last commaundement pear∣ceth deeper then the former. Be∣fore, the deede was condemned that was hurtfull to our neigh∣bours, and the setled wil also and resolued determination: these were forbidden in the other commandements: but nowe, the holy Ghoste reproueth the desire and
lust towardes any thing of our neighbours, not∣withstanding there be no full resolution nor setled consent giuen therevnto. I call it a setled consent, when in our mynd we are fully resolued, and haue set it downe, that we will embrace and follow that (as occasion shall be giuen) wherevnto our desire, lust, and appetite doth leade vs. Desire and long∣ing after the thinges of our neighbours, as house, wife, goods, or lande, (which yet are cut off before we sit down with the deliberate persuasion to take our pleasure of them) are here brought vnto iudg∣ment, and restrayned by this commaundement. In deede the Lorde doth pardon and forgiue vnto his childrē the desires and longings of their minde, that are repulsed and beaten backe before they ob∣teine full consent. But it is one thing to dispute, what desire vnto euill is in the desart of it selfe, and an other howe it is pardoned in the merites of Christe. For in the merites of Christe, not onely the desires, but also the euill doings of his seruants lye hidden and couered. We are then to consider, what reckoning is to be made of the lusting & co∣ueting desires, yt solace themselues some good time with their neighbours benefite, when yet they shal be scared frō that feast, before their affectiō shal be filled & wholy satisfied. In ye gospel after S. Luke,Luk. 10.2 we are charged to loue the Lord with all our hart, with al our strēgth, & with al our thoghts. While thē our thoughts are carried hither & thither, now after his goodes, to desire this house, or this parcell of land of his: or ye estate & condition yt now is his,
although we would not wishe it before his death: being a long time holden in these thoughtes, and vanishing in these desires, although nothing be ful¦ly concluded to say deliberately in our heartes, These pleasures will we followe, are we not iustly blamed for not louing him with all our thoughts? Were it not a plaine mockerie of GOD, if a man should giue libertie to his thoughts to pursue plea∣sures whole dayes and weekes, so that they take heede of setting it downe, and concluding fully to wallowe in any? Our thoughts should be wholy taken vp to the Lords vse, and therefore may they not be let loose after goods or benefites of our bre∣thren, with the alone charge to take heede howe they fully settle them selues in them, but so they be sure of that, otherwise to take no great care, this is not by loue to take vp our thoughts and direct them to his seruice, but by carnall libertie to giue them the head. And surely we may discerne a fault in this, euen by the light almost of reason: that our thoughts should rather delight to spend themselues vpon euill or vaine thinges, then vpon those that haue the greatest pleasure and chiefest goodnesse in them. Behold then it is a faultie thing that our thoughts run rouing after vaine things, that they folow the delights of their neighbours pleasure or profites, though not greatly setled in them, but wantonly wandring by them. Why should they not bee fastened with delight and whole consent vnto good things? Hath not the Lord payde the price for body and soule and al that is in vs? Why
then should not all bee kept vnder his obedience, without rouing after our owne desire? Either else why should wee excuse any thought straying and wandring from him with this answere, that it had returned before it was gone so farre as possible it might? This is no reasonable excuse nor plaine dealing before our God: this is not to loue him with all the thought. It were a verie vngodly thing and would be cryed out against euen amongst mē, if any should permit his sonne not to spare dali∣ance and delight with young women, so that hee made this alwayes sure, that they should gette no holde of him by giuing full consent to ioyne in marriage with them. This were an intollerable thing among men. And can we thinke when we shall haue delighted oure selues a long time in the pleasure of vnlawfull thoughtes, that this wil wipe out all, bicause we are not fully purposed to dwell in them? Our thoughts are married already vnto the Lorde: they are not at libertie to matche them selues where it shall best like them, neyther yet to acquaint them with any straunge loue. She is no longer holden as a chaste wife, that spareth not to sport and pleasure her selfe with others besides her husband.1. Cor. 13. It is written to the Corinthians that loue thinketh not euill against him whome it loueth, nor reioyceth not in iniquitie done against him whom it tendreth. If then we shall loue our neigh∣bours, our thoughts must bee kept vp from think∣ing any euill, or by thought intending any wrong against them. For the thoughts of a man that truly
loueth an other, imagineth nothing that hee kno∣weth may hurt him, and therefore he is further frō reioycing and delighting in it. No man can denie, but that we doe owe loue vnto our neighbours: therfore may not our thoughts haue libertie by de∣uise and desire, to hurt, harme, or hinder them: in wishing their delightes and comforts from them, or wishing our vse of them, which can not be but with the vexing or annoying of them. Whē such things aboūd, it shal be proued that loue is not true in vs: for loue thinketh not euill, neyther reioy∣ceth it in iniquitie: behold how we are sent for tri∣all of our loue towards our neighbours, euē to our thoughts. It is a common saying, that thoughtes are free, that they pay no tribute any where: and it is true among men, they answere not in any court. But the Lorde God requireth tribute of them, ar∣rayneth them, maketh thē hold vp their hand at ye barre, kepeth a court for them, and setteth fines and amerceaments vpon the heads of them: wherin, his court hath the prerogatiue and preeminence aboue all other. For bare thoughts feare not earthly ma∣gistrates: but the heauēly iudge, who searcheth the hart which can not be sounded by man, bindeth e∣uen the thoughtes vnto obedience, and exacteth dutifull obedience from them, whiche they ney∣ther may nor can, by any shewe of righte with∣hold him. This matter requireth some plainer spech to cō∣ceiue the cleare sight of it. Sometime our thoughts
shal be wandering this way and that way, and yet the desire not styrred to hearken after them, or to be set aflote with them: euen then is mater offered, to humble our selues. For why shuld not our tho∣ughts keepe them stayedly vpon good things, and stand vnto their dutifull seruice? And though the Lord be content to beare with vs when there is no desire or longing appetite, why should not wee bee grieued, that any thing in vs should make so ma∣ny escapes from the Lorde, and so many attempts to giue him the slip? This hath in it matter of mis∣liking, that there should be any such vntowardnes in vs, and that our thoughts shuld be so vnruly, as euer and anon they are to bee called home to giue their attendance. This surely ought to humble vs euen in this respect. Moreouer, these thoughtes are not only out∣straying them selues, but also soliciting and allu∣ring our desires and affections to rebel with them: This also can not but make vs humble, careful, and watchfull. Remember then, where no desire doth ioyne with the thoughts of our mynd, yet is there occasion why such thoughts shuld be misliked of, and we euen to be wearied with thē, and vexed at them: desiring after a godly and patient manner to haue this tickle and vnstable estate chaunged with that, which shall abide free frō these pricking pro∣uocations vnto euils: according to the example of the apostle, who notwithstanding he had maruel∣lously profited in al obediēce, & maruellously pre∣uayled in keeping his consent from euil, so that he
did the euill which he would not, yet in this estate and in the consideration of the rebellion which he did see in him notwithstanding hee gaue no con∣sent therevnto,Rom. 7.24 he cryeth out and saith, Wretched man that I am, who shall deliuer me from this bo∣die of sinne? Miserable therefore is that religion of Rome, that telleth a man there is no care to bee had of thoughts, so that our desire doe not with ful and setled affection followe after them and bathe her selfe in them. Sometimes our concupiscence and coueting thoughts, get the desire and affection of our will to hearken vnto them for sometime, and to conferre with them: which desire and affec∣tion of our will (after some better aduisement ta∣ken) letteth them goe, and yealdeth not any con∣sent to ioyne wholy with them: this is a degree worsse then the other, and therefore more to bee misliked: yet notwithstanding the consent is not setled, without the which the Papistes and that re∣ligion of Rome say that the matter is a matter of nothing, nothing to bee weyghed or esteemed of. In this kynde, sometimes wee beate backe suche tentations verie soone, when our desire hath bene but a little while with them, hauing had verie litle liking of them or conference with them. Some∣times againe, after some long time of conference had, standing in a mammering what to do, (some∣times liking well to go with them, and reasoning for them, and anon conceiuing something to the contrarie,) at the last with muche wrastling and much adoe, we wring our selues out of the handes
of them: here is not yet their full consent. But what thē, is not the occasion doubled, why we shuld be∣waile our weaknesse and lament our pouertie, that stand in so great daunger, to become euen slaues vnto sinne, and to ioyne wholy with it? Is there not cause though it be pardoned, that yet it should be acknowledged faultie as it is? and his mercy ex∣ceeding great in working our riddance from such a dangerous snare, wherein we had intangled our selues with so great peril as that was? and also our owne too easie inclination thervnto is to be pitied, bewailed, and confessed of vs, yea, and with feruent prayer so much the more to be holpen. For in such lusts there needed but one blast more, and we had ben wholy carried with it, and the conception had ben perfect, so that we could not haue auoyded af∣ter this conceiuing, but haue nourished that mon∣ster whatsoeuer, vntill it had bene brought forth: for concupiscence after conception bringeth forth sinne.Iames. 1.15 The daunger then is great for our desire to haue any familiaritie, yea, but a time with those thoughts. For if it goe hand in hand with them, there is daunger of suche aioyning with them, as it shall conceiue thereof, and nourishe that mon∣strous seede, vntil it come forth a mightie & huge monster. This is the cause why the Apostle war∣neth vs to take heede, least suche desires make any abode with vs, and be suffered any time to rest vp∣on vs, least we conceiue by them, and so afterward willingly and wittingly nourish them, vntill they come to light. In the same consideration wee
are warned in the Epistle to the Ephesians,Ephe. 4.26 that the sunne should not go downe vpon our wrath: that we should not sleepe with those passions, and suf∣fer our selues to continue in them any time vnre∣pelled and not driuen backe, least vnhappily wee should conceiue of the comming and continuing together, that mischief, which being once concei∣ued, it shall not grieue vs to nourish, be it neuer so ougly and monstrous in the eyes of others. What shall we say then to those teachers, that say there is no daunger nor feare, saue when con∣ception is perfected, and the will hath wholy relē∣ted, and is with delight set downe in it? Can there be any conference about the begetting of suche monsters, that shall not haue great blame iustly layde vnto it? Can thoughts that are married vn∣to the Lord, euer approch vnto the bed of such de∣sires, and not bee conuict of faith and fidelitie bro∣ken with the Lord him selfe? Can she any longer be accounted chaste, that admitteth conference of long continuaunce, about the enterteinment of o∣thers besides her lawfull husband? Yet would the Papistes haue such blamelesse: howe often soeuer they haue such vnchaste and vngodly meeting, if by cōceiuing and fully consenting they bring not foorth sinne.Psal. 4.5. The counsel that is giuen vs by the Prophete Dauid is farre otherwise, whervnto no doubt the apostle did allude in the place before al∣ledged out of the epistle to the Ephesians, for there we are charged, that we should shake at such thin∣ges, and not perseuere in them, but deale earnestly
with our heart against them in our chamber, and not suffer such continuance in meeting, nor conti∣nuall meeting, whereby this monstrous byrth and conception might iustly be feared. There is then occasion offered to stand vpon our watche, and to strengthen our affections against suche co∣ueting desires, whensoeuer they arise, least this cō∣cupiscence by long dallying with our affections, at length get within them, and so ouerthrowe them. The infection of sinne is so vniuersally disper∣sed ouer our nature, that there is no part free from it: for it hath entred and infected the thoughts thē selues, and they are poysoned with it, so that there is deadly daunger in following and persuing after the will of our owne thoughts. The Apostle Paule when he setteth foorth the fearefull estate that hee was in before his conuersion, & which all men are in by nature, (for he putteth him selfe in the ranke with others) speaketh no otherwise of it but thus, That he followed the will of his owne flesh and of his owne thoughts.Ephe. 2.3. No other guide had hee but run after the direction of his owne thoughts, euen then whē his estate was most dānable. We must therfore learne to suspect our thoghts, if we wil be aduised by the Apostle, and not to imagine with the doctours of Rome that our estate is good, so long as the will (when it shall haue wrastled) at length getteth out, not hauing wholy yealded nor flatly falne downe. Thoughts therfore rūning this way after any thing of our neighbors, in so doing, make manifest declaration of their poyson & cor∣ruptiō: which if they shal haue no resistāce, do carie
vs headlong through the broad way, into destru∣ction. If by grace they shall be stopped and resi∣sted, in that grace, God is to be magnified: yet we in that our corruption notwithstanding iustly are to be blamed and admonished, therby to seeke for more ayde in that part of our thoughtes, least if ye tentation should lye sore vpon vs, sathan shoulde that way get entrance into the heart. It seemeth a hard doctrine, that thoughts, wishes, and desires should be condemned, that lawes should bee made for them, and men charged with the ordering of them: and no maruel if it appeare so vnto vs, for it appeareth that the apostle Paule wold neuer haue suspected any danger in concupiscence, lustes, and desires, if the lawe had not sayde, Thou shalt not lust or desire.Rom. 7.7. Nay, it appeareth plainely in that place, that hee thought maruellous well of him selfe, before he came to this commandement. He tooke him self before to be liuing and in good liking to∣wards God and godlinesse: but (as he confesseth) after he had looked vpon this cōmandement, and beheld him selfe a while in this part of ye glasse, he sawe him selfe plainly to be no body, a dead man, sold vnto sinne. Howe necessarie then is it to sift our selues, & to examine vs in this commandemēt throughly, yt we may be humbled vnder the grace of God as apperteineth? For if he so singular a man was not throughly cast down before he had wrast∣led with ye iustice of god in this cōmandemēt, how requisite is it yt we shuld truly trie vs here, least yt in supposing yt to be in vs which we want, we becom
carelesse in seeking the mercie of Christ, without the which there is no hope. In this commaundement therefore aboue all the rest, it is required that wee be diligent and true tryers of our selues. For those who haue no misli∣king of them selues, for the lusting and coueting after the thinges of their neighbours, whiche they doe perceiue to be in their thoughts, haue no Chri∣stianitie in them to be accounted of. Euill beeing misliked in trueth, will be misliked wheresoeuer it shall be, whether in worde, thought or deede. Euil being truly resisted, wil be resisted euē in thought: and therfore certein it is, yt he who neuer hath stro∣uē with euil in his thoughts, hath neuer truly stro∣uen with sinne. It was meete yt the law should vtter all our euil, and hide nothing of our vnrighteous∣nesse from vs, that the manifolde corruption ther∣of might force vs to seke the mediatour and peace∣maker Christ: that we beeing so many wayes con∣uicted of corruption in our selues, might wholy giue ouer the opinion of our owne workes and meriting, and so make much of the mercie offered by Iesus Christe: which is so muche the more made of, by how much we doe more cleerely see our vtter vndoeing without it. If onely the acte of murther, adulterie, thefte, and false wittnesse-bearing, or the deliberate and setled consent vnto any of those, should alone come in question in the cause and matter of sinne against our neighbour, many an euil man would hope to make good shifte: but when thoughts and
desires vnto any of those, are called for and exami∣ned, it will cause any man to cast downe his cou∣rage, and to fall a pleading of his pardon. As before, we were endaungered by the doc∣trine of Rome, to conceiue sinne, when they not∣withstanding bad vs liue without any feare (in that respect) of sinne, so long as we keepe our con∣sent cleare in the matter: So here (if we shall hear∣ken to their doctrine) we come in daunger neuer to magnifie rightly the mercyes brought vs by Christ Iesus: while we see not halfe the neede that we haue of him, nor ye halfe parte of ye miserie that we are in without him. For a mā may make good shifts, if onely deedes and full consents be asked af∣ter, and so in his owne iudgement no great bene∣fite is obteyned by him that shall supply that whi∣che is lacking in his behalfe, and therefore he ma∣keth no greate haste to seeke after him. But when thoughts & desires are sifted, he must of necessitie acknowledge him selfe greately befriended, if so great want of his shal by an other be found answe∣red. We must looke in this glasse of the comman∣dements, and into this infinite nature of lust, de∣sire, and concupiscence, that we may be confoun∣ded in our selues vtterly, that our deliuerie may be from the gates of death, that we may knowe how that our saluation consisteth in his meere grace: for we can hardly be brought to begge abrode, till all reliefe be spent at home. There is no daunger in the feeling and acknow∣ledgeing of our pouertie: for the Lord hath pro∣mised,
that if those that be heauie loaden with sin shall come vnto him, they shall be refreshed:Matth. 11. neither was there euer found any that despayred, who be∣fore had not thought too well of him selfe. All the daunger is on the other side, least wee not taking those to be no sinnes which are sinnes in deed, & so thinking better of our selues then there is cause, should in iustice be iudged of the Lord,1. Cor. 11. because we would not proceede by a right rule to iudge our selues. By this that wee haue heard, it is plaine, that a Christian must walke in feare and care, not onely to consent to euil towards his neighbour, but also to be stirred and pricked with any, bee it neuer so little or small a delight therevnto: and that our thoughts are poysoned, and therefore the daunger great in ye not bridling of thē. The thing then com∣maunded, is, to bring our desires, thoughts, and de∣lights vnto the good and benefite of our brethren, in matters wherein they are to be benefited: that we bring not only hands to do wel to our neighbours, but also heartes, thoughts, desires, lusting, longing, and delighting therein,Rom. 7.22. according as the apostle te∣stifieth of him selfe, that he was delighted with the law of God according to the inner man: whervnto accordeth the holie Ghost in the Prouerbs in these wordes: It is ioy to the iust to doe iudgement.Pro. 21.15. Many haue bene brought to do outward things in them selues good, which neuer had any ioyfull desire in them to glorifie God with them: but ye holie ghost worketh in his, not onely a chaunge of workes,
but also an alteration of thoughtes, desires and de∣lights, that their desires may be holden within that whiche is good. Wherin it behoueth a Christian to be carefull, euen thus to transforme his delights: not taking it sufficient, if hee shall haue brought them at any time from that which was euill, vntill he haue ioyned them to that which is good. Let our care be increased this way, to haue suche de∣sire and delight vnto that whiche is good, as may reteine our thoughts and kepe them diligently oc∣cupied in suche seruices. Be it far from vs to think that the grace of GOD onely reacheth vnto the deede and ful consent, letting desires and thoughts take their libertie in their corruption. We muste confesse (as the trueth is) that his grace not onely bridleth thoughts frō rushing into yt which is euil, but also giueth them a sweete taste in that which is good, and holdeth them greatly therevnto. There is no man will denie, but that we ought to delight in that which is good: and surely if the delight be once taken in doing good vnto our neighbour, it will gather the thoughtes together, and assemble them to that ioy & delight. If when the delight is wicked, the thoughtes are spent therevppon, sure∣ly if the desire bee chaunged, the thoughts also wil resorte greately thither. Let vs therefore seeke after the grace of GOD, not onely to season our deeds, but also our thoughts & delights therewith, yt our studie and thoughts may be occupied in that which is acceptable to him. For if some deeds shal at starts be done of vs, but the heart neuerthelesse
vnchaunged in desires & delights, it shall not profit vs. The vnderstanding that Christians haue of their estate, how it fareth betwene God and them, is better taken, and hath surer profe and more cer∣teyne testimonie from their desires and inwarde affections vnto the lawe of GOD, then from their outwarde doeing of things commaunded by the lawe. Euil things may be left vndone for feare of punishment, for desire of commendation, or a∣uoyding of euill speech, or for that wee are not tempted with them, when notwithstanding the heart shall not in any respect mislike of them. Good things also may bee done for praise of man, for hope of merites with God, when yet the affection shall nothing bee moued that way. And this is nothing before God, to auoyde euill from thy hand, but to embrace it neuerthelesse in thy heart, or to doe good with thy hand without any desire of the heart. So that bothe in euill deedes left vndone, and also in good deedes done, we may be deceiued. But if the inwarde affection of the heart stand desireously affected after that which GOD hath commaunded vs to doe vnto men, and hateful∣ly affected towardes that which God hath forbid∣den, this chaunge cannot be wrought there, but by the spirite of GOD alone. As for the praise or dispraise of the people, it reacheth nothing so farr. Let vs then embrace this desire vnto the dueties commaunded vs, not giueing any rest vnto the Lorde in our prayers before we shall obteine this
inwarde testimonie whiche is aboue all excep∣tion to be taken against it:Esaie. 62. and without the which outwarde doeinges are of no account before the Lord, who looketh into the affections of man, and embraceth a cherefull and delightfull giuer. Heere are those men confuted that would driue affections out of the fleashe, and kil nature, attemp∣ting such things as vtterly tend to destroy it: as if the nature of man shuld by regeneration becōe al∣tered into ye nature of Angels: wheras regeneration killeth not nature, but restoreth and repayreth it: destroyeth not the affections, but transfourmeth them from that euill which naturally they are in∣clined vnto, into that which is good & commaun∣ded of GOD. The angrie man may not thinke his conuersi∣on and regeneration to be good, if hee shall bende him selfe neuer to be moued with any thing at all: but if that heate which sometimes hee felte vnto euill, be now as feruent vnto that whiche is good, then is his conuersion approued before GOD. The couetous man is not then conuerted, when he shall haue driuen all desire & thirst after world∣ly commodities out of his minde, vnlesse that de∣sire be repaired in him, to bestowe and vse those commodities as GOD hath commaunded. Nei∣ther is that man gone straight way out of the worlde, that hath betaken him selfe to a wilder∣nes and cloyster to haue no dealings in the world, but he that in dealings of the world hath kept him
selfe vnspotted of the world,Iam. 3. 1. Cor. 7. vsing the things ther∣of as if hee vsed them not, hee may truely say he hath left the worlde, In all these dueties towarde our neighbours, we may neuer forget this which hath partely bene touched before: that if it were possible for vs to perfourme all dueties vnto men, and yet not doe them in obedience vnto God, according vnto the rules which before we haue learned, it were vtter∣ly to be abhorred. For what auaileth it to deale wel with men, and in the meane time to defraude the Lord of his glorie? Let vs learne throughly to examine our thou∣ghtes, not onely blaming those that fully consent, but euen warring with those that any whit de∣light them selues in coueting and desiring that whiche apperteyneth vnto others: so shall wee see whether it bee an easie matter to loue our neighboure as our selfe, or otherwise: so shall we also clearely giue ouer the title of righteousnesse in regarde of our owne doinges, and wholy de∣pend vpon the free merites of God in Christ, pro∣ceeding in the confidence thereof, with good cou∣rage to purifie our thoughts, that we may not on∣ly do good with the hand, but euen with the long∣ing desire of our thoughts. For the accom∣plishment whereof, let vs call vpon God in the name of his Sonne, saying as hee hath taught vs. O our Father which art in Heauen. &c.
¶The twelfth Lecture vppon the first to the Corinthians. ¶Chapter .xiii. 4 Loue suffereth long: it is bountifull: loue enuieth not: loue doeth not boast it selfe: it is not puffed vpp: 5 It disdayneth not: it seeketh not her owne things: it is not prouoked to anger: it thinketh not euill: 6 It reioyceth not in iniquitie, but reioyceth in the trueth: 7 It suffereth all things: it beleeueth all things: it ho∣peth all things: it endureth all things. WE haue learned out of the lawe, what seuerall dueties they bee, that we owe vnto God, and al∣so vnto man: but in the lawe we are not only charged to do those dueties there appointed to bee done, and to forbeare the contrarie, but also of loue to doe them, and of loue to keepe vs from the o∣ther. Therefore it shall bee expedient to examine what properties be in loue necessarily adioyning vnto the same: whereby we must iudge of our sel∣ues, how it fareth with vs: whether that affection (without the which all doing of good, or ceassing to do euil is to no purpose) ruleth in vs both in our doings, and also when we shall absteine from do∣ing.
The properties & fruits of loue, are in no place better set foorth then in the former Epistle to the Corinthes:1. Cor. 13.4. from whence I meane to giue you some light, thereby the better to see into loue, the nature of it, and howe great thinges are conteyned in it. Where the first note giuen to knowe it by, is that it suffereth long, or is patient: a propertie that moderateth the heate and hastinesse of a mans minde, that he followe it not, in the boyling ap∣petite and desire thereof. This patience and mode∣ration of our affections, hathe great commenda∣tions in the scripture: especially the booke of the Prouerbes painteth foorth the excellencie thereof in so many places, and with so great titles, as I can not but giue you a taste of some of them. In the foureteenth Chapter of that booke, it is thus writ∣ten: He that is stowe to wrath is of great wisedome,Prou. 14.29 but he that is of an hastie minde, (or to giue it you as it is there word for word, he that is of a short spirite,) exalteth follie. In this place we see this slowenesse vnto wrath is not barely ioyned with wisedome, but with the excellencie of wisedome. For so it is said, He is of great wisedome that is slowe vnto wrathe. It is a degree and profiting in wisdome, whi∣che not all men, no, not all wisemen haue atteyned vnto, to moderate the headie and hastie affection of an angrie and passionate minde. Likewise in the same booke thus speaketh the holy Ghost: The discretion of a man differreth his anger: and his glorie is to passe by an offence. A merueilous commendati∣on,
that it should be the glorie of a man to put vppe offences: that he should haue no manhode in him, or matter to boast of any thing worthie of a man, that hath not learned to passe by offences, and to qualifie his affections, euen towardes transgressi∣ons and iniuries. Nature teacheth vs a cleane con∣trarie lesson: that it is the glorie and zeale of a man to persue the infirmities of others, and reuenge our affections the heate and displeasure of them therevpon: and yt he is a beast & no man, that wil let go wronges, transgressions, and iniuries vnre∣uenged, especially, if they shall haue touched him∣selfe. But the spirite of God teacheth vs, that it is loue that findeth a waye to cure a transgression, & yet notwithstanding to couer it, and to reserue a place to couer it, vntil it shalbe cured, as it is writ∣ten in this booke. Pro. 10.12. Prou. 21.24Moreouer we reade in the Prouerbes, that hee shalbe taken for proude, arrogant, and scornefull, that doeth his woorkes in the wrathe of pride. A good testimonie to tell vs, not onely what begin∣neth this wrath, (whiche is pride in deede, & there∣fore fitly ioyned with it in this place in calling it the wrath of pride,) but also what, is ioyned with it alwayes: that suche a one as he is, so shall he beare the name and reproch of an arrogant, hau∣tie, and scornefull man. Pro. 29.28.In a nother place of this booke, the holy Ghost compareth that man that can not restraine his af∣fection, vnto a citie broken downe, and without walles: but I must conteine my selfe within these
fewe testimonies for that purpose: for it were a verie great labour to seeke out all that is spoken hereof, if I should goe no further then vnto this booke. This patience and long suffering, being as we haue heard so excellent, euen ye glorie of a man, may iustly clame the first place among the proper∣ties of loue. For what can be more fitte to vpholde loue, then to be of a patient spirite, when matter is offered & occasion, to breake loue and heartie good affection? He doth iustly deserue wel of loue, & to haue his praise in all the fruits that followe it, who shal by patience vnderprop it, whē it shalbe assaul∣ted and shaken by hatred or euill dealing howsoe∣uer. As for that man, who then letteth loue fall downe, whensoeuer any burthen of displeasure, of∣fence, or vnkinde dealing shalbe laide vppon him from the man whome he pretended to loue, he de∣clareth plainely, that he neuer tasted of true loue, and heartie affection, the first and principall note whereof is to be patient and suffer long. Let him ceasse therefore to make any account of his loue, who hath not made reckoning to vpholde it in iniuries and displeasures. And let him also ceasse to bragge of any loue that he hathe borne vnto a∣ny, who neuer was tried to haue mainteined it, throughe the vncourteous dealing of that man in one respect or other. For who is he (if he be not a monster of men) that cannot liue peaceably with them who neuer shal displease him? But then is it thankesworthie, when our loue by patience shal o∣uercome the vnkindenesse of others.
This note of loue is clearely seene in that loue, whiche mothers beare to their children: howe muche frowardnesse and causelesse crying doe the mothers not onely patiently beare at the hande of the childe by loue, but also appease, not other∣wise then by giuing of them something to quiet them withall, by loue rewarding rather then reuenging their frowardnesse. There is loue, and therefore the chiefe propertie thereof can not bee wanting, whiche is to be patient and long suffe∣ring. The litle bearing and forbearing one of an o∣ther bothe publiquely and priuately, doeth plaine∣ly speake, that loue is not to be found in the nature of man, but is an especiall gift of God. For so sicke are we of selfe-loue, and so voide of the loue of o∣thers, that not onely we cannot passe by the trans∣gression of our brother, and by a louing hyding of the same cure it, but also we can hardly abide, that any should in any thing (thoughe not euill) either in opinion or affection be diuided from vs. Nay, whiche more is, oftentimes we woulde haue all our friendes beare an heauie countenaunce towards him, whom we for priuate causes haue begone to mislike. But true loue is patient and suffereth long, forgiuing others, euen as God for Christe his sake hathe forgiuen vs.Ephe. 4.32. Neither is there any thing in vs worthie of praise in this worke of loue, if this pa∣tience and long suffering be absent. For asmuche therefore as bothe there hath bene & shalbe also vnto ye end of the world in ye children
of God weakenesse and wantes bothe in iudgment and in affection, it is moste necessarie for him that shall haue dealing with any whatsoeuer, to craue earnestly at the handes of God for this excellent stay of loue, which is called patience or long suffe∣ring, without the which it wilbe impossible to liue Christianly in any societie howe small so euer: especially is this gifte necessarie in these latter dayes, where all places and persons almoste are full of offence. It is to be obserued, that this propertie of loue is not onely at variance with hastinesse that is so soone displeased and so easily offended, but also with that other extremitie, when a man is so ouer∣whelmed with displeasure conceiued, as that not∣withstanding hee burst not out into heate, yet he suffereth his affection towardes the man alto∣gether to quenche in him, ceassing any more to shewe forth the fruites of a louing heart. Therfore in fewe wordes to comprehend the nature of this propertie of loue, it is that good affection whiche passeth through vnkindenesse to vtter it selfe, and breaketh through displeasures to make it self kno∣wen by louing deeds, being in verie deed the pow∣er and work of God, and therfore able so strongly against suche strong lets, to preuaile.The second propertie of loue. It is also said of this loue, that it is Bountifull, a second note or ef∣fecte to discerne it by. The worde signifieth him that is courteous, gentle, and readie to pleasure an other, whiche is rather the cause of bountifulnesse, then bountifullnesse it selfe. For when the heart
standeth so sweetely affected, it cannot easily be let∣ted from plentifull witnessing of the same, as occa∣sion and abilitie will permitte. That this is a pro∣pertie that cannot be sundered from loue, it doeth appeare in the loue and affection whiche parentes beare vnto their children. How gentle are they to them, howe readie to seeke the pleasuring of them, howe plentifull and liberall therein? Which com∣meth wholy of a tender affection towards them. This fruite of loue is fitly ioyned vnto the other: for when a man can not onely beare the displea∣sures & vnkindnesse of men, but also is of a gentle & franke dispositiō, readie to deserue wel of men, howe can there be any thing more required? For his patient spirite wil not easily take offence at the euil dealinges of others, and his mylde affection will as hardely vse euill dealing towardes ano∣ther. Therefore peace is soone purchased and long continued, where there is plentie and store of suche affections. Euerie man may see how hard a thing it is to finde either of these fruites of loue. For where is that man almoste to bee found, that will beare any vnkindenesse at the handes of ano∣ther? Or where is that gentle disposition, that hath a grace and facilitie in readinesse to doe well vnto another? If any shal haue obteined the one, he thin∣keth it therefore almoste an vnlawfull thing to re∣quest the other at his handes. For if he be a man that can beare somewhat with the vntowardnesse of others, he taketh the
desert thereof to be so great, as that it were not law∣full to looke for any courteous dealing from him, but to holde them selues well satisfied with that o∣ther: so as euen that were to be vnthankfull for it, if they did but seeme to require any thing to be ad∣ded more vnto it. Likewise, if any be founde of a gentle and readie affection to pleasure others, he thinketh his so doing, to carrie with it a dispensa∣tion and priuilege for his not bearing of vnkinde∣nesse at the handes of others: so harde a thing is it to match these two together. But how hard soeuer it be to find these two coupled together in any one, yet this is an assured trueth, yt wheresoeuer loue is, there are apparant tokens of them bothe. There is bothe patience towardes infirmities, and readinesse to deserue wel of those howe many soeuer we shal loue. It is lamentable to consider, howe farre the dealings of men swarue from these properties. E∣uerie man saith, he is in loue and charitie with al men: yet if he shall neuer so litle be offended, he cannot be kept either from plaine reuenging, or at the least from letting go al good liking of the man. And as he cānot be kept from reuenging, no more can he be dragged and haled to well deseruing of any: yet for al this persuadeth he himselfe, that al ye loue and charitie that is required in a man, doeth dwel plentifully in him: so vnskilfully & vnchari∣tably do we iudge of loue and charitie, as if he lo∣ued a man, who were not prouoked by any affecti∣on boiling in him to hate, or at lest to mislike him:
whereas in verie deede loue is a tender liking con∣ceiued of a man, and so greatly delighting & affec∣ting of him, that it maketh him bothe merueilous apt and easie to doe whatsoeuer may pleasure him, and also verie harde by any griefe or displeasure to let goe the good liking that once he hathe concei∣ued of him. The worlde knoweth not this affecti∣on, for it is the speciall worke of Gods grace. It needeth no long speeche to declare that the world is not acquainted with it: for euerie man almoste is carelesse in offending other, so farre is he from this affection that is so readie to pleasure: and eue∣rie man also is impatient of the lest displeasure that may be offered from any other. This that hath ben spoken of the rarenesse of this affection which we cal loue, may not beget in vs a despaire to come by it, but a care earnestly to seeke it where it may bee had, and wilbe had of so many as in the carefull desire therof shal multiplie their petitions & pray∣ers to God for it: which must be so much ye more feruent and often, as this age hathe moste neede of it, and is farthest from acquaintance with it. This is also a note of loue to discerne it by, that it is not Enuious. Loue (saith the Apostle) enuieth not. This tender affection of loue that knitteth the hart of one vnto another, is so farre from enuying the graces or giftes of God whatsoeuer in any other whome he loueth, that he wisheth from his heart, that they were more and better then they are. For tryall of the trueth herein, let vs consider of the
affection of parents towards their children: where wee are sure that nature hathe planted loue, and therefore this note of not enuying which alwayes accompanieth it, cannot be wanting there. What parentes were euer found (except it were some one rare monster in nature) that did enuie their chil∣dren, because there were suche plentie or store of giftes in them? Nay, we see the plaine contrarie, that they are greatly delighted to heare them prai∣sed of others for their giftes, and muche giuen to speake of their praise themselues: sometime think∣ing and affirming those giftes which they haue, to be more and greater, then in deede they are: nay, sometime imagining that to be in them in great measure, whereof in deede they neuer had any portion, no not the least parte: so farre are they from any enuying of them: for by loue they are so as it were made one, that the praises of their chil∣dren they take to be a part of their owne commen∣dation, whiche willingly they would not loose. This loue doeth so ioyne together and vnite them, that there can nothing be taken from the one, but the other taketh him selfe to be maymed thereby: as if he had lost some limme or ioynt of his owne. For this affection maketh them to growe both into one: and who hathe euer enui∣ed the good or benefite that he receiued by some member of his owne bodie? The Scripture teacheth vs that we are all mem∣bers of one bodie, and that wee haue our parte
of the profit that commeth by the giftes of others, through the meruelous working of God. What maddenesse therefore were it to enuie our owne commoditie? There can be no greater token of an hatefull man, then is enuie: neither any playner profe that we are diuers from the bodie of Christ, then to enuie the giftes of the members thereof. There is great diuersitie betweene loue and enuie, for he that loueth taketh himselfe to be benefited in the benefite of him whome he loueth: him selfe to be praised, in the praises of that man whome he liketh. The enuious man on the contrarie parte, thin∣keth that another man is not praised, but in the self same he is dispraised: yt another cannot be profi¦ted, but yt in ye same he is hindered: & therfore stor∣meth when any thing is attributed to another, as if in that deede somthing had bene taken frō himself. Thus in all thinges the enuious man dealeth as if he were a stranger from the other, the louing man as if he were not diuerse, but one with the other, & a verie part and member of the same. Let vs there∣fore keepe our selues farre from this enuie, the tru∣est token that can be of the absence of charitie, & all true feare of God or fellowship with his mem∣bers. For the driuing away of enuie, we haue first to deale with our heartes, to persuade them, (as the trueth is in deede) that we haue our benefite and profite in their giftes, no lesse then the eye hathe benefite from the foote, or the foote from the eye:
which is brought to passe, by the secrete and won∣derfull working of God. Secondarily, that we are of one bodie, and that therfore we are intituled after a maner to the pray∣ses, commodities, or benefits that doe redound vn∣to them. Thirdly, that the Lorde is the authour of this diuersitie in giftes, and that therefore the enuying of others for their giftes giuen vnto them, is in deede to picke a quarell with the Lorde who hath giuen it them, and to vtter our mislyking of his di∣stribution and disposing of matters among men. And howe daungerous a thing it is to controll the lord, I leaue to them to consider of at their leysure. Last of al, to feede our affection herein, is to bring a continuall torment vpon vs. For when wil there ceasse to be diuersitie of giftes in men? And if we be grieued when others haue that which we haue not, when shal we ceasse to be vexed? Shall there not be this diuersitie vnto the ende? Shal there be any time when all the bodie shalbe but one member? Let vs not imagine yt when we shal giue our harts leaue to enuie some one, that this affection will die when he is taken away, or when we shal haue pre∣uailed against him: nay, it is made by yt meanes so much ye more stronger: and as for ye occasion, it ne∣uer dieth. For there shalbe alwayes some that shall de∣serue, and iustly haue true prayse and estimati∣on for some thing, whiche we haue not, and therefore cannot come to haue the praise of it for
our selues. In deede the nexte way to haue the glorie of it, is by loue to be one: as one with the true owner thereof. To incourage vs to this loue that driueth away enuie, let vs remember that in driuing it away we ioyne with the Lord, who hathe thus appointed it. We approue his doinges as good: we acknow∣ledge by thankefulnesse the commoditie that we haue of them: we ridde our selues of an infinite and endelesse torment. To conclude this proper∣tie of loue: it is requisite that we often consider, howe vnworthie we are of those benefites that we doe inioy, to learne, bothe to be contented with them, and to be thankfull to God for them, and to keepe vs in suche thankefull remembraunce there∣of, as may make vs studious to walke worthie of them, to so great goodnesse of God towardes vs therein, as may keepe vs occupied in care, how by dueties we may aunswere them: alwayes taking heede, least we should become vnthankfull, euen for the good whiche God did meane towardes vs in those giftes, the possession wherof he hath giuen vnto others. As loue is voide of enuie, so is it reported here by the holy Ghoste that it is voide of dealing inso∣lently, frowardly, or stubbernely, (for so soundeth the worde,) and that it is not puffed vp with pride againste him whome he loueth. Moreouer, that it doeth no vncomely thing againste him, without hauing due regarde of the dignitie of the man, his degree, estate, or condition whatsoeuer.
These thinges are expressed in three wordes in the text, and may be expressed in these three wor∣des thus: that loue dealeth not frowardly, proud∣ly, nor vncomely. These thinges doe I ioyne together in speaking of them, because they are of such affinitie one with another. Where true loue is, there the man who loueth is so persuaded of the excellencie of the other whome he loueth, and so rauished with the admiration of some one or o∣ther thing in him, that in his iudgemente there is nothing, no not in himselfe like vnto it, or worthy of it: with the whiche hee is so delighted, and in loue withall, that often times he thinketh himselfe happie, if the submitting of himselfe to any seruice or paynes for him, may be accepted of and taken in good worth at his handes. For the thing whi∣che he is in loue withal, appeareth so glorious in his eyes, that it darkeneth not only some litle thing in himself, but euen yt which is the best in him, and that whiche before he made moste reckoning of, nowe being sett by this whiche he is so inamou∣red with, appeareth scarse sufficiently worthie to serue it. A true proofe of this nature, that it is in loue, may be taken frō that prouerbe which is receiued among vs, whiche is: That loue and lordship can broke no fellowship. For loue magnifieth yt which it loueth so greatly, that it can suffer none to be fe∣lowes with it at that worthinesse whiche it con∣ceyueth thereof, but will haue all other with all submission to giue place therevnto. It was no
doubt long tried experience that brought this in∣to a common speeche, and we haue the triall of it in the loue that we beare towardes our selues. For our nature cannot like of suche a praise, wherein others are thought as good as we, hauing equall commendation with vs. We esteeme it nothing if we be not magnified, as all others be put vnder vs in that degree and measure of commendation. We see it true also in that loue that the wicked man beareth vnto the harlot and wicked woman: when once loue is kindeled in his heart, he abaseth himselfe to al kinde of slauerie, forgetting euen the dignitie of a man in his subiection or rather slaue∣rie vnto her: and all this commeth, bycause there is loue kindeled in his heart, the nature whereof is to holde a man in a wonderment at the dignitie & worthinesse thereof, euen so greatly, that all things in himselfe acknowledge subiection therevnto. Therefore to applie this vnto the matter whiche we haue in hande: where loue is, there can be no froward and peeuish dealing, no swelling and set∣ting vppe of himselfe and his owne giftes againste him whome he loueth, no vncomely or vnreue∣rent behauiour in speeche, countenance, or deede, towardes him, other then the place, woorthinesse, or condition of the man requireth. For loue thin∣keth not that the thing loued is sufficiently ad∣uaunced, vnlesse all other become therein abased. For as was saide before, Loue and Lordshippe will abide no fellowshippe.
It is profitable to obserue the diuersitie of these thinges that loue driueth away. Sometimes a man for want of loue towardes another, dealeth fro∣wardly and stubbernely with him: other some∣times a man shal discerne no insolent and crooked dealing, albeit there be inward swelling, & setting vppe of him selfe againste him in his heart and se∣crete thoughtes. It may be also that both those be lacking, and yet for all yt, no loue reigning in him: whiche is perceiued herein, that he doth not with reuerent estimation thereof, humblie acknowledge the graces and giftes of God in him, and himselfe also duetifully indebted therevnto: or else that he entereth not into suche a consideration of that es∣tate that he is in, whereby he is moued to deale so, as vnto that condition, (whether it be prosperous or miserable) or vnto that man, (whether hee be strong or weake) by good right apperteineth. Which declareth plainely that he wanteth loue, whose propertie is to deale comely, either so hum∣blie as besemeth those gifts & great graces of God, or else so tenderly, as his afflicted condition doeth require. The croked and crosse dealinges, the hautie hearts declared by highe lookes do plainely speake, that loue is a pilgrime among vs. But if the not reuerent submiting of our selues vnto ye graces of God in another, & not tendering of those that be in necessitie and want be added vnto these, in whome shall we not finde one of these three reign∣ing & bearing rule? so rare a gyft of God is loue, & so muche lieth hidde therein.
The opinion that commonly is receiued of loue, what it is, commeth no nearer vnto loue in deede, then doeth blacke vnto white, or light vnto darke∣nesse: whiche thing to bee true we shall easily dis∣cerne, if either we looke vnto selfe-loue, or into the naturall loue that parentes do beare vnto their chil∣dren. For concerning this last point of not dea∣ling vncomely, but obseruing with all reuerence the dignitie of the man: how plainely may we ob∣serue this in selfe loue? that taketh it selfe then rightly regarded, when with reuerence and lowly submission it is honoured: and when a man so aduaunceth him, that he doeth with all lowlinesse put himselfe vnder him. For loue findeth suche worthinesse and dignitie, as may, by good right, (in the iudgement of him that loueth) clayme reue∣rence and submission therevnto. The reasons to persuade vs to this humble re∣uerencing of the giftes of God in men by loue, and to forbeare froward dealinges with them, pride and swelling against them, or vndutifull regard of them are many, and those weyghtie. For first of all they are the gifts of God, & therefore he may not want his honour in them. Secondly our gifts how good soeuer, are appointed to serue thē, & ye more wee haue, the greater seruice is required at our handes: neither may their neglect of duetie to∣wards vs, be our discharge for want of duetie vnto them. Besides this, they haue giftes whiche wee want. Moreouer, we doe not see their gifts so de∣faced and stayned with infirmities, as we doe well
knowe that ours are, (if wee knowe our selues:) which cannot but persuade vs more highly and reuerently to esteeme of them, then of our selues. For be it that we doe knowe greate infirmities in them, yet is it sure, that if we do knowe our owne selues truely and throughly, we shall vnderstande that there is more lacke in our selues then wee can charge them with all. For what we want in mea∣sure, we are sure to haue it in number. If they shal be infected with some one or fewe notorious of∣fences, whiche we are free of, wee are priuie to so greate a number within our selues (howsoeuer we be short in the weight and measure of some sinne which they are infected withall) as will match the heynousnes of their offences. This that hath bene said, that our giftes are by the Lorde appointed to the seruice of our brethren, in consideration wher∣of they are our betters: that their giftes are not knowen vnto vs to be so defaced with sin, as we are sure ours are: is spoken to this end, yt we should by those & such like considerations be drawen to ho∣nour the grace of God in thē. For we must se some great thing in them, before we shall in trueth be∣haue our selues reuerently, and not carelesly, or vnseemely towards them. He that loueth, hath in him reuerence towards him whome he loueth, and is voyde of this vncomelinesse, that knoweth not dignities, degrees, callinges, giftes, or conditions of life: whiche reuerence muste partely arise of that whiche wee conceiue to bee in them, whi∣che wee must searche out, (rightly examining the
worthines thereof) that we may be forced to haue that loue, lyking, and estimation of him, whiche may driue vs from all stubberne, proud, and pre∣sumptuous dealing: yea from all vncomely & vn∣reuerent dealing toward him, making his excellē∣cie to humble vs euen in yt wherein we did moste glorie. Thus must wee trauel with our heartes to find out some great thing in him: for we can hard∣ly bow vnto nothing, or by loue reuerence, but where we shall haue found some worthinesse and cause thereof, yet if there be no greate thing in the man, the Lords authoritie must step in, to obteine this loue towardes him, who hath appointed our giftes to serue those that haue nede of them. Loue see∣keth not his owne.Loue is also perceiued by this propertie that It seeketh not her owne things: this is set downe also in this place, as a token and sure marke of it: the mea∣ning wherof is not that loue letteth go all care and regarde of it selfe, but that it is so carefull of that whiche it liketh, that in regarde thereof it is often negligent about it selfe, not inioying all the liber∣tie, pleasure, or cōmoditie, that lawfully it might haue. A proofe of this may bee had in parentes, whome nature hath taught to loue their children: they seeke not with how little charges they might be discharged of them, in putting them off their hands to be apprentises of some occupatiō, which may be done with small charges, and is very law∣ful for them to doe, whereby also they them selues may be the better able to liue, as beeing with so lit∣tle coste vnburdened of them. They inquire not
thus with how little charges they may be bestow∣ed, but will straine them selues oftentimes aboue their abilitie, liuing very spareingly and hardly at home, to mainteine them at learning, or at some o∣ther thing likely to procure their preferment, This is loue which seeketh not her owne things: whiche teacheth them to forgoe that pleasure or profite which lawfully they might inioy, to plea∣sure and profite their children whome they loue. This propertie of loue did Paule plainely declare,1. Cor. 9. when that he did not burthen the congregation as lawfully he might. By this propertie of loue it cōmeth to passe, yt men hauing once learned what is lawful, begin to inquire then, whether that same be expedient to be done or otherwise, because not∣withstanding that it be lawfull:1. Cor 5. yet loue will not doe it, vnlesse it be also expedient. By this it com∣meth to passe, that those which be strong, will not alwayes proceede in the strength of their persua∣sion to doe accordingly,Rom. 15.1. but forbeare their right to winne the weake withall. This propertie of loue is lacking euery where. For almost all mē wil haue all their pleasures and all their profits; not for∣going any parte thereof, although the Gospell and them selues do heare much euil for it euery where. If we may once say it is lawful, I may do it by law or it is not forbidden, but permitted by the word, we neuer inquire further. This proueth manifestly that loue is not in vs, which seketh not after all that it may, but is contented to departe from her owne right, oftentimes, therby to declare her affection to
them whome she loueth: especially when the hol∣ding of her to her owne, is like to bring discredite vnto that whiche she loueth. In preseruing our cōmodities or our pleasures, we alwayes followe them, to the vttermoste of that which is lawfull: we driue our commodities as far alwayes, as by a∣ny meanes may be accounted lawfull: and if at a∣ny time wee bee accused of hard dealinge, wee aunswere, it is a couenaunt: a plaine bargaine: true buying and selling: it is lawfull: as if loue vnto the Gospell (if it were in vs) would not make vs sometimes to giue in, and relent of that we might demaund, to get credit therevnto, and to stop the mouthes of the euil speaker and slaunderer, when we see that wee cannot holde that, but wee must procure euil speeche to our profession. Likewise, when we are charged with excessiue vsing of recre∣ations, or apparell: forthwith we answere, recrea∣tions are lawfull: apparell is lawfull: wee may vse it. But loue seeketh not all that it may. When our profession is euil spoken of, the Gospel blamed to be a doctrine of libertie, should not the loue there∣vnto make vs ceasse to seeke all that wee may, and beginne to inquire what is most conueniēt to pur∣chase glorie to God withall? When those which striue for maysteries are desireous to get the gar∣land,1 Cor. 9. and haue a loue therevnto, they doe not sit downe to reckon how many kindes of meates they may lawfully feede vppon, and yet be able to run with some speede, but they consult how many they had neede to absteine from, that they may be
likely to preuaile and get commendation by run∣ning. Thus hath loue taught them to defraude them selues of many sweete morsels which, law∣fully they might take, to inioy but some corrupti∣ble thing. For loue seeketh not all it may, but for∣goeth much of her right, for their pleasure whom she so greatly liketh. Miserable therfore are these times, wherein so many go further in pleasures and commodities, then by any lawful meanes they may doe: and the better sort stand at ye staues end with God, not yeel∣ding one iote of those profites or pleasures that by any colour of lawfulnes they can lay claime vnto, notwithstanding his name (that is so euill spoken of for this obstinate vse of their libertie) doth euen begge it at their hands, that they should relente of their right, and something giue in vnto their God. Where are they to be founde whome the care of their brethren doeth so occupie, that it taketh them vp from some of their lawfull commodities, plea∣sures, and cares, to bee occupyed the more where their loue resteth? Loue is full of paines, where it loueth:1. Thes. 1. therefore doeth the Apostle giue laboure and labouriousnesse vnto it, as the proper note to discerne it: wherevnto accordeth that which is set downe heere, that it is so much occupied where it loueth, that oftentimes it neglecteth it selfe. This propertie of loue, notably descrieth idle and care∣lesse pastors and preachers of the word: whiche so much seeke thēselues, that they neglect their flock and charges: wheras if there were loue in deed to∣wards
them, it would beget in them the care there∣of, euen with the neglect of them selues, in respect of the care and paines taken with them. This pro∣pertie must euery man try him selfe by, in his cal∣ling whatsoeuer. For if the Lord shall accepte of our dealings therein, it is mete & requisite that they be done in loue which is ful of seruice & paine to∣wards that which it loueth. To relent of our right vnto God for his glorie, is no work of supererogatiō which we are not boūd vnto (as the church of Rome hath taught) but due debte.) For we doe owe loue vnto God from the ground of our heart, and loue seeketh not all her owne, but oftentimes frankly and freely giueth of her right vnto God. Herein also we may discerne, that loue hath great things in it, yt it mightily car∣rieth the affections to that which it loueth, & kee∣peth them occupied there, euen oftentimes to the neglect of it self. The rarenes of it and ye great me∣sure that we shall see our selues come short thereof, must force vs to often & earnest prayer to God for it: wherin it shall be profitable to remember, yt this not seeking of our selues but the good of others, is in trueth the next way to benefit our selues. For as the hād which is occupied alwaies in giuing forth help to the mouth, or other partes of the body, doth in so doing prouide for it selfe & hath his nourish∣ment, help, and health, of that whiche it hath giuen vnto the mouth, so by ye especiall working of God it commeth to passe, that our benefite is inclosed in that which we bestowe vpon another, and he be∣cōmeth
the best husband for him selfe, that is most employed according to his calling vppon other. This is a speciall work we may see of Gods grace: for our nature is wholy giuen to attend vpon her selfe, little regarding (so matters go wel there) how it fareth with others abroade. Loue in like māner is knowen thus, that it is not prouoked vnto anger: it is not easily incensed, though wrong be offered vnto it. For the heart is so knit by loue, that it can well beare many wrōgs. This note, wherby loue is dis∣cerned, differeth not much frō that propertie which was spoken of in the first place, saue that to speake properly, that is a meekenesse ioyned with doings, & this with suffring. This hardnes to be prouoked vnto anger, is procured by the help of yt which fo∣loweth, being another token of loue, yt it thinketh not euill, or imputeth not euill. For in as much as it standeth not vpō the matter, examining ye euil dea∣ling yt is in it, but by loue either altogether pas∣seth ouer it, or else twiteth and blameth some o∣ther thinge for it, as a cause that moued the doer therevnto, and so remoueth it from him: therefore it cannot be incensed therewith or prouoked vn∣to anger. Parents in dealing with their children do plainely proue that loue wanteth this diligent considering, thinking vppon, or through exami∣ning of the euil of their children. For how many of their froward doings do they passe ouer, & not examine at all? In how many thinges which they se to be offences in thē, doe they notwithstanding
put ouer the whole blame thereof, to some one thing or other? as that their frowardnesse com∣meth for lack of sleepe, or want of meate, &c. For loue cannot ryfle into the euill, to be musing and thinking much vpon it, diligently examining the wickednes how great it is that doeth appeare in it: loue cannot stand vpon it, to gather together the coniectures that may be had of great euill to be in it. Hereby it appeareth that loue is far from suspi∣cion of euil, where there is no apparant tokē there∣of, seeing it passeth with such speede, and turneth the thoughts so soone from musing vpon, and exa∣mining seene and knowen euils, in those whome it loueth. It is also incident vnto loue as a true marke to discerne it by, not to reioyce in iniquitie, but to reioyce in the trueth. So doth ye holie ghost report of it in this place. The trueth, wherein he that loueth is said to reioyce, signifieth true and sincere dealing, accor∣ding to the vsuall speech of ye scripture: which may also be vnderstode, in that it is set heere against ini∣quitie or vnrighteousnesse, as being contrarie ther∣vnto. This propertie of not reioycing in iniquitie, is ve∣ry fitly ioyned vnto the former. For in that it was said not to thinke euill, but friendly not to im∣pute it, it might bee thought that loue had a de∣light in the euill dealing of him whome shee lo∣ueth: therfore is this added, that it reioyceth not in his euill dealing & vnrighteousnes. For these may wel stand together: not to search into euill thinges
to withdrawe his affection from the offender therein, and yet for all that to bee grieued that the thing is done. For he well vnderstandeth, that that whiche is done vnrighteously, can not but turne to his discredite and reproch, which he wold bee loath should happen vnto him whome hee so tenderly loueth. The most wicked man that li∣ueth, would bee loath that the man whome he lo∣ueth should doe any thing, whiche (in his iudge∣ment) coulde not but bring harme or hurte vnto him: and when any such thing escapeth him, hee is grieued and vexed at it. If it be sayd against the trueth of this, that when one wicked man loueth an other, yet he will reioyce at many things done wickedly and vniustly by him whome he loueth: To this it may be answered, that hee (according to the blindnesse and hardnesse of his heart) think∣eth not that his suche dealing will any waye turne to his hurte or discredite: but thinketh rather that it will woorke his credite, amonge those men that hee vseth to make account of: as for feare of punishment from GOD against him, that is farr out of sight. Herevpon it is plaine, that perfect loue is not to bee found but among the godly: for all other through blindnesse and hardnesse of heart, reioyce at many thinges done by those whome they loue, which are not sincere and righteous: and therefore must turne to their hurte, from the handes of the Lorde: which yet they do not so much as once surmise, bicause their iudgement of things is not according to the word
of God. Heere falleth downe that great piller of Poperie which cryeth with open mouth for loue and vnitie, and yet smothereth trueth, righteous∣nesse, and sinceritie, reioycing and triumphing in that, which the trueth and righteousnesse of God set downe in his woorde, vtterly condemneth. Here also is condemned that damnable sect whi∣che termeth it self the Familie of loue, who vphol∣ding their loue like vnto the Papistes, are cleane gone from the trueth and righteousnesse of God approued by his woord, vnto a righteousnesse ap∣proued by the reuelation of their owne spirit, ma∣king the woorde of GOD the playnesong whiche their spirite may descant vppon, as see∣meth good vnto it selfe: but alwayes so, that there be no melodie but from their owne mouth. For they will haue the woorde to haue no soundnesse nor certeintie in it selfe. Heereby is all the friendshippe of the wicked condemned, who will haue no long liking of any, but suche as will ioy with them in their wicked∣nesse: for they will not holde friendshippe with them, that will not lend them the credite of their countenaunce, and if neede bee of their othe also, to helpe out euill causes withall. Heere also are all these detected of want of loue, who publishe abroade the infirmities of their brethren to those, to whome in no consideration it is behouefull to be knowne. Loue reioyceth not in iniquitie, nor in vnrigh∣teous or not sincere dealing of him whome he lo∣ueth,
not in the vnrighteous or not sincere dealing of others towardes him. For the loue which hee beareth towardes him, forceth him to mislike of all annoyance and wrong, that happeneth vnto him. And bycause of this, hee can not but with griefe heare of any wrong or hard measure offered vnto him: so farre is hee him selfe from dealing euill or hardly with him. Loue reioyceth not in iniquitie, but it reioyceth or ioyeth together with him at the truth, or sinceritie, and vprightnesse of his dealing: bycause that wil turne to his good, and haue approbation and allowance euen from men. Loue so laceth it selfe in the commendable do∣ings of him whome it loueth, and the man that loueth, taketh pleasure in the well doing of him whome hee loueth. Therefore, if there bee true loue in vs, wee must not onely not enuie the good doings of our brethren, but wee must acquainte our heartes to ioy with them in their good doing, and good report for the same. It is a good degree of profiting to haue driuen away enuie: but wee must proceede further, to ioye with him in his well doing, and deserued commendation for the same. For men deale well with him, when they shall iustifie his sinceritie by their talke and speach: which if our heart repyne at, nay if it doe not ioy at it, that plainly bewrayeth want of loue to be in vs towards them. When wee shall come once to this, to ioy in heart at their vprighte dealing, that their good dealing shall bee the comforte of our hearte,
wee shall not be able to denie them any helpe that is in vs of counsel or admonition, that may eyther encourage them to good, or withdrawe thē from that which is euill, nay, we shall bee readie to offer it vnasked for: especially, when wee shall perceiue some neede thereof. These things which are in the last place attri∣buted vnto loue, as that it suffereth all things: it belee∣ueth all things: hopeth all things: endureth all things: do declare, yt a louing man is of a verie patient spirite towarde his brother, euen in his infirmities, and that he layeth his handes softly vpon the soares of him whome hee loueth, and desireth to haue them healed, hauing a great burthen of griefe vpon him self for thē, which notwithstanding loue teacheth him to goe vnder and to abide, and not deintily or impatiently and roughly with speede to cast it off. Likewise it is declared heere, that loue is of a good and easie disposition, to beleue and hope wel of him whome he loueth. Wee may not thinke when it is sayde that loue beleeueth all thinges, and endureth all things, that loue wanteth all iudgement to discerne: but the meaning of the holy Ghoste is by that vniuersall note, to declare how much they are inclined that way, and easily induced there∣vnto, when there is any good matter to moue them therein. As for that lightnesse in beleeuing, that commeth for want of wit and iudgement, it is easily discerned from that which proceedeth of charitie and loue.
When we shal haue tryed truely our dealings to∣warde God, our dealings toward our neighbours, and our dealings in our seuerall callings, by these affections which are reported by the holy Ghoste to be in loue, it will appeare, that to be a Christian is a rare matter, a mightie, rare, and especial worke of God. Nowe let vs pray, &c. The xiij. Lecture vpon the third Chapter to the Galathi∣ans, and third verse. For as many as are of the workes of the lawe, are vn∣der the cursse: for it is written, Curssed is euerie man that continueth not in all things, which are written in the booke of the lawe, to doe them. HAuing learned what thinges are to bee done of vs, and in what maner they are to be done, it re∣mayneth to consider, whether any man can doe all these good deedes that are commanded by the lawe of God, in that fourme and maner that he hath commaunded: that is, from the ground of a louing heart, which must be discerned to haue that tender affection of loue in it, by these properties which neuer are wāting where loue is to be foūd,
according as of late it was proued vnto vs. The Scripture is playne in this matter, that no man can fulfill the lawe. In the Epistle to the Galathians, the Apostle affirmeth all those to bee curssed that clayme righteousnesse for the workes of the lawe which they haue done: and hee vseth this reason, to proue that all such are vnder the cursse: For it is written,Gal. 3.10. (sayth he) Curssed is euerie man that continu∣eth not in all things which are written in the booke of the lawe, to doe them: taking it for an vndoubted truth, that no man continueth in doing all those things. This reason is no reason, if the Churche of Rome may be beleeued. It is no reason with them, to say euerie man is curssed that hopeth for saluati∣on from the woorkes of the lawe doone by him, bycause the lawe cursseth him that continueth not in all duties of the lawe to doe them. For they say, that a man may continue in all thinges that are commaunded him in the lawe, to doe them, in that they say a man maye fulfill the lawe. And if a man maye continue in doing all thinges that are commaunded, then is hee free from the cursse of the lawe: bycause the lawe cur∣seth none, but suche as continue not in the fulfil∣ling of all thinges in it. But the holie Ghoste taketh that, as graunted of all men, that there is no man that continueth in all thinges that are written in the booke of the lawe to doe them: and therefore thinketh, that hee hath sufficiently proued, that which hee affir∣med,
that all men, who lay clayme to righteous∣nesse by the woorkes of the lawe are accurssed. The Apostle affirmeth euerie man to bee ac∣curssed that seeketh for righteousnesse from the lawe: bycause the lawe dealeth so strictly and hardly with man, that it cursseth euerie man who continueth not in doing all the thinges com∣maunded in it: whiche the Apostle taketh to bee impossible, and therevppon is bolde to affirme all men to lye vnder the cursse of the lawe, for not hauing continued in all the dueties there∣of. But the Churche of Rome acquiteth them of that cursse, affirming plainely, that a man maye keepe the lawe, and continue in all the dueties thereof, for want whereof and for no other cause the Apostle did lay the cursse vppon euerie man. It may not bee omitted, that there is suche con∣trarietie of iudgement betweene the doctrine of the Apostle, and the doctrine of the Churche of Rome, that the Apostle should take this as graun∣ted, that no man can continue in all things com∣maunded in the lawe, and therefore all men to bee accurssed: and they of the Churche to holde it as a receyued doctrine and approued of them all, that a man may continue in all the woorkes of the lawe, and fulfill and keepe the lawe: in so muche as they are not ashamed to pronounce him to be accurssed, who shall holde, that the lawe doth lay any impossible thing vpon vs.
The Apostle doth take it to bee so plaine, that no man can kepe the lawe, that he will not bestow any paines in the proofe thereof. The Churche of Rome taketh it to bee so playne, that a man may keepe the lawe, that they do accursse him, whoso∣euer shall holde the contrarie. But it behoueth vs to rest in the doctrine of the holie Ghoste, which therefore holdeth all men accurssed that sticke vn∣to the righteousnesse of woorkes, bycause no man can do all those workes to the which righteousnes and life is promised. And righteousnesse is promi∣sed, not vnto him that shall doe some fewe works, but vnto him that shal haue done all that are writ∣ten in the booke of the law. Neyther yet vnto him that for a great time shall haue done all, but vnto him that shall haue continued from the beginning, vnto the ende of his life, in doing all the workes that are commaunded in the lawe. Whereby it appeareth, that that man who shall offend but in one thing forbidden in the lawe, is in so doing shut out from all hold and hope of righteousnesse ther∣by. For he is holden accurssed by the lawe, that cō∣tinueth not in all thinges that are written in the booke of the lawe to doe them. For the lawe doth offer vs wages for our worke, but so, that it refu∣seth to pay any penie, but vnto him that shall bring all his worke finished and done: bycause the coue∣naunt was so: and the lawe dealeth by Indenture and couenaunt and not otherwise. Hee shall not want hyre for his labour, that shall haue done his whole taske, and all that was set & appointed him
for to do. For the Lorde did couenant with vs for accomplishment of those works, that were agreed vpon and set downe in the lawe, that when wee should haue perfourmed that obedience, it might be lawfull for vs, to clayme our wages: which is, that he that doth them, shall liue in them.Gal. 3.12. But if wee should come with our worke halfe done and halfe vndone, or any (euen the least) part vndone, the lawe sendeth vs away without wages: letting vs see the condition of the obligation, whiche is, that he standeth accurssed, without all hope of hire from the lawe, that shall not continue to doe all things that are commaunded. For the law wil not goe one iote from couenaunt. In deede it will keepe couenaunt with vs, if we keepe couenaunt with it, and bring our whole worke accomplished according to the Indenture. If a man shoulde for tenne, twentie, or fourtie yeare, or if it were possi∣ble that from his infancie vnto his dying day, hee should haue bene a painefull workman to the law, doing all the workes thereof truely and without blame, and yet slippe in one thing, if but in one thought, euen vpon his dying day, he doth therein forfeit his obligation, wherein he standeth bound for continuing in al the works of the law vnto the end. Curssed is he (sayth the lawe) that continueth not.Gal. 3.10. And as was sayd before, the lawe dealeth not but by Indenture, and therefore looketh for and will haue the benefite of the obligation and the forfei∣ture of the bond at our hands. If it shall bee sayde that the good workes that we haue done shall dis∣charge
vs of the euill that we haue done, that aun∣swere will not bee taken: there is no reason in it, nor lawe for it. For when we are bound to doe those woorkes (which we say will discharge vs from the euill woorkes that wee haue done) and more then they be, (for wee are bound to doe all, and it is due debt of our part,) howe commeth it to passe, by what right or reason, that parte of pay∣ment of one summe whiche is due debt from vs, shoulde not onely discharge that whole debt, (it beeing but a parte thereof) but also shoulde dis∣charge vs of an other bond, wherein wee stande bounde for the payment of an other summe of monie? Wee stande bound not onely to doe well, but also to absteine from doing euill. The discharge of one bonde (if it were fully discharged) coulde doe no more, but free vs from the daunger of that: it can not acquite vs of the other bond, wherein wee stande other wayes charged. To apply it to our purpose, the bond wherein wee stand charged for doing well, being in some part aunswered, can not cancel the other obligation wherein we stand bound to absteine from euill. There is no man that hath an other bound vnto him in two seuerall obligations for two seuerall summes of monie, that will by and by after that one is discharged, take the other by that payment to bee as good as cancelled: there is in it neyther lawe, right, nor reason. Much lesse will any man be so foolish, as when
but some parte of the one shall bee payde, to ima∣gine that then hee must giue ouer, not onely the clayme of the other parte yet behinde, but also the whole debt of the other bond, which in no parte hath bene discharged. These things being considered, we shall be for∣ced to say with the Apostle, So many as sticke vn∣to the woorkes of the lawe, are vnder the cursse. For it is written, Curssed is euerie man that continu∣eth not in all thinges which are written in the booke of the lawe to doe them. If any man shall thinke with him selfe that this reason is not sufficient to proue all accurssed, bycause euerie one that dothe not continue is accurssed, imagining that a man may continue in all thinges: let him examine him selfe by eue∣rie commaundement in euerie seuerall dutie there∣of: adding therevnto the properties of loue, and considering whether his affection may be proued by those effectes, to beare loue vnto the lawe and the dueties of the lawe, or otherwise: ioyning with all his continuaunce in euerie thing, euen in the thoughtes of his heart: and then, no doubt, it will bee manifest vnto him selfe, that hee is farre from that righteousnesse whiche the lawe requi∣reth, and hee by it is bound to perfourme it. Hee shall then see, that hee him selfe is farre shorte of that number of workes which haue promise of life made vnto the workers therof, when they shall haue accōplished those workes in that number of deeds, & that louing maner of doing, which ye lord
requireth: especially if that prouiso be remembred, that there must be continuance without interrup∣tion, both in the deedes and manner of doing, euen vnto the end. Moreouer, the punishments in this world whi∣che the godlyest that euer liued haue not beene al∣together free from, declare that no man kepeth the lawe. For the lawe doth not onely promise free∣dome from punishments, but also plentie of al ma∣ner of blessings in the frut of our body, in the fruit of our ground, in the increase of our kyne, cattle, flockes of sheepe, in our comming in, in our going out, in all that we take in hand, in causing all that rise vp against vs to fal before our face. &c. But ye godliest man that euer liued, was neuer free from all those punishments that there are appointed for the transgressours of the lawe, nor yet blessed with all those blessings in all thinges which are promi∣sed to them that keepe the lawe:Deut. 28. and therevppon we may safely conclude, that the godliest man that euer liued, did neuer fulfill the lawe. For then surely the Lorde woulde haue stoode stedfast to his promise, both to haue procured all these bles∣sings promised vnto him, and also to haue kept euerie part of those punishments from him, whi∣che are appoynted for the transgressours of the commaundements of God. Rom. 1.18In this manner dothe the Apostle proue that righteousnesse commeth by the mercies of GOD taken holde on by faythe, bycause the wrath of GOD is reuealed from heauen, againste all vn∣righteousnesse
and vngodlinesse of men, with∣holding the truth in vnrighteousnesse: proceeding to the punishment of the Gentiles▪ to declare what did befall them, declaring also as concerning the Iewes, that the name of GOD was euill spoken of for them, that calamitie was in their wayes, and that they had not knowne the way of peace, ta∣king his ground from the punishments that light vpon them, to proue that they did holde the truth in vnrighteousnesse, that their obedience did not aunswere vnto their knowledge whiche they had of GOD, that they coulde clayme nothing in res∣pect of their deedes, whiche the Lorde from heauen had reproued, by punishmentes brought in vppon them. And therefore hee doth strengthen his former affirmation, that the iust man shall liue by faythe, which was his purpose to proue vnto them, and vnto the whiche ende he directeth all his speache in those foure chapters. In like manner,Rom. 5.12 14. the Apostle proueth to the Romanes, that all men had sinne, (euen children that did neuer committe any actuall offence,) by∣cause death (which is the punishment of sinne) did take holde vpon all. This one punishment therefore, if there were no other, may suffice to proue, that no man euer did keepe the lawe, bycause death whiche is a pu∣nishment for transgressing the lawe dothe seaze vpon all men, of what estate, degree, or yeares so euer.
It is the reason of the Apostle in that place, that bycause all had sinned, therefore death came vp∣on all: prouiding by the dealing of GOD against man in punishing of him, that man had dealt a∣gainst GOD, in transgressing of his lawe and commaundements: nay, prouiding (which is yet more,) that bicause GOD punished al men, there∣fore euerie man hathe offended against him in transgressing his lawes and commaundementes: so that there is no man that can say hee hath or doth fulfill the lawe. For if it might in trueth be vttered of any man, that hee were able to fulfill the lawe, it might in like manner as truely bee affirmed and hoped for, that the same man should neuer dye or chaunge this corruptible estate. Wherefore then serueth the lawe? May it stande with the righteousnesse of GOD to com∣maund any thing that we can not doe? Or to make promises of lyfe, for the keeping and ob∣seruing of that, which hee knewe assuredly wee coulde not perfourme? Firste, that the Lorde might righteouslye require that kynde of obedience at our handes, though it were not possible for vs to perfourme it, may bee proued heereby: bycause we should haue had power to haue perfourmed it, if wee had continued in that estate that he had lefte vs in.
Oure sinne therefore and weakenesse by the meane of sinne whiche is our owne offence, can not nowe make that vnrighteous in GOD whi∣che before was righteous. Our vnrighteousnesse and sinne can not make vs lesse indebted vnto GOD then before we were. Is it not blasphemie to say, that bycause we had offended more, therefore the iustice of GOD should bee lesse then before it had beene? Wee confesse it was iust before the fall of man to re∣quire all these duties at our hands, bycause he had giuē vs power and abilitie, to be able to performe them. And can our sinne so pull in the iustice of GOD, that nowe it shall no longer bee lawfull for him to keepe the same rule of equitie which he did obserue before? Moreouer, who can lett the Lorde who is in∣debted vnto no man, to promise eternally lyfe vn∣der what deedes or couenauntes so euer seeme good vnto him? Shall it be vnlawfull for a man who hath some portion of lande to sell, to saye vnto a poore man, (who is not able to gyue halfe so muche as hee dothe offer to sell it for, and as it is woorth in deede,) Thus muche I meane to haue for it of him who so euer shall in∣ioy it? Is it vnlawfull thus to price it, bycause the pore man is not woorth so muche as will purchase it? Dothe his pouertie make the lande of lesse value,
eyther else make it vnlawfull for him to require any thing like as the goodnesse of the ground doth deserue? No man will thinke this to haue any equitie or right in it. No more surely hath this other: that our pouertie and want shoulde make it vn∣lawfull for the Lorde, to esteeme the treasures of his kingdome aboue all the obedience that wee can perfourme, and to set them at a greater price then this pouertie and want that wee are in, shall euer bee able to reach vnto. If it bee further demaunded what meaning the Lorde had in promising lyfe vnto vs, for do∣ing of that which hee knewe wee neuer coulde perfourme and bring to passe, it is to bee aun∣swered: that the Lorde did it, to let vs (who are so well persuaded by the nature of our owne a∣bilitie) see clearely into our pouertie and wante, howe great it is: that wee might haue true triall within our selues, howe greatly wee are beholden vnto the free mercies of GOD in Iesus Christe. When wee shall haue seene plainely by the lawe, howe vnable wee are to perfourme, that there is required to bee done of so many as hope for wages by reason of their woorke, and that if wee will lay clayme to the mercyes of GOD for our woorkes, wee remaine accurssed for euerie sinne and offence against the law committed by vs: bycause it is the written sentence of the lawe, that Hee is curssed that continueth not in all thinges
that are written in the booke of the law to do them. Then not from the bare speeche of our mouth, but from the true tryall of our heart, wee are sente to the mercies of GOD alone, to stick wholy vnto them, acknowledging all our goodnesse to pro∣ceede from thence alone, and are compelled by the sense and feeling of our owne wantes made kno∣wen vnto vs by the law, to let passe all that opini∣on of our owne workes which we before were so well persuaded of. As if some impotent and lame childe, that were in deede able to doe nothing to∣wardes the earning of his liueing, (beeing charge∣able to his father, not onely for him selfe, but also for one that should giue attendaunce vnto him:) should in the foolish persuasion of some trifleing worke that he doeth, persuade him selfe that hee is so farre from chargeing his father, that hee is be∣come very helpfull vnto him, bringing in a greate portion of that whereby the whole familie is mainteined: wherevppon the father setteth him to some worke, promising to giue him wages for it, as he doeth vnto day-labouring-men, that the ouerplus of his charges maye redounde to his owne profite alone. When the foolishe impotent childe seeth by good experience, that hee is not a∣ble to doe any thing to the maintenaunce of his liueing, then hee is forced to acknowledge his fa∣thers liberalitie, and to confesse his vndeserued goodnesse towards him, whiche before hee made no reckoning of, pleasing him selfe in the foolishe
persuasion of his owne earning, vntill by good tryall it hath beene proued vnto him to bee no∣thing. In like manner the Lorde our GOD, wil∣ling that wee should take our selues as wee are in deede beholden to his mercie, and onely cleaue to that, is constrayned to bring vs from this fo∣lishe persuasion of our deseruings and earninges by our owne workes, (the persuasion whereof keepeth vs from magnifying of his mercies as wee are bounde:) and to set vs to worke for wa∣ges, appoynting vs hyre for laboure, and wages for a certeine number of workes: wherein when wee shall haue taken tryall of our owne insuffi∣ciencie to mainteine our selues, we shall be forced to lay holde of his alone mercies, and in true hu∣militie acknowledge the benefite thereof, whiche was a principall end that the LORD did looke at, in loading vs with that so greate laboure of the lawe, and exactinge a continuaunce in euery woorke thereof, so streightly at our han∣des. For the promise to bee receiued to mercie in the merites of Christe alone, was made foure hundreth yeeres and more before the lawe, whi∣che came in to driue vs by due experience of our selues, to sticke wholy vnto the bountie of that his mercie: whiche thing to be so, he Apo∣stle
proueth by the nature of the lawe that was gi∣uen. For suche a lawe was giuen as (by meanes of our weakenesse) coulde not giue life. And therefore sure it is, that the LORD ment not that wee should looke for happinesse from the lawe and the obedience thereof, but wholy from the mercies of God in Christe. If there had beene a lawe giuen (sayeth the A∣postle) whiche coulde haue giuen life, surely righte∣ousnesse should haue beene by the lawe:Gal. 3.21. But the Scrip∣ture hath concluded all vnder sinne, that the promise by the faith of IESVS CHRISTE should be giuen to them that beleeue. Wherefore the lawe was our Schoole-maister to bring vs to CHRISTE, that we might bee made righteous by faith. The Apostle sayeth, that if there had beene gi∣uen suche a lawe as coulde haue giuen life, righ∣teousnesse should haue come by the lawe. Sure it is, that the want which was in the lawe to giue life, was not in it selfe: for it did pro∣mise life vnto them that kepte it, whiche pro∣mise made by the LORD to the keepers of the Lawe, it were blasphemie once to ima∣gine that hee woulde not, or coulde not, per∣fourme. Therfore the want that was in ye law to giue life
commeth wholy of our infirmitie: by reason of the weakenesse that is in fleashe and bloud, as it is written to the Romanes:Rom. .3. That that which was im∣possible to the lawe, in as muche as it was weake, because of the fleash, GOD sending his owne sonne in the simili∣tude of sinfull fleash, and for sinne condemned sinne in the fleash. Greate is the opinion that fleashe and bloud hath of it selfe, when the Lorde is constrained to bring a looking-glasse of his lawe for vs, before we can bee brought to iudge rightly of our selues. Great is the credit of our owne deseruing and earning by our well doeing, when the Lorde to pull vs from it, is forced to putt vs to the try∣all of an impossible work. Hardly are we brought from the opinion of our owne wealthie estate, when the Lorde cannot be beleeued of vs: tel∣ling vs the contrarie, before hee hath layde before vs in his accounting booke, our seuerall parcels of debte. A Christian therefore is taughte by the ende that GOD had in giuing of this lawe, to learne how harde a thinge it is to lay downe all lyking of him selfe, and opinion of wel deseruing for his deedes, in as much as the Lord is driuen to reckon with vs particularly, & proue vnto vs by plaine e∣uidence yt we are worse then nothing, before wee can be made to let go the opinion yt we haue once cōceiued of our owne good estate. Therfore who∣soeuer
meaneth to depend truely vpon God, must by the often sight of him selfe in the lawe, be wey∣ned from the opinion of his owne doeings, while that in seeing his deformities so muche in euery parte (by meanes of the sundrie and seuerall due∣ties that are commaunded,) hee be compelled by good tryall to acknowledge the benefite of his bloud, whereby they are wyped away. For it is the true tryall of our selues, that maketh Christe to be of any reckoning with vs. It is the true mis∣liking of our selues that causeth vs to like of him. How necessarie then is it for vs, not onely to ac∣knowledge a kinde of debte, but to see the seuerall parcels thereof in euery commaundement grow∣ing to such a greate summe, as should offer iuste occasion to thinke highely of him, who hath brought vs a free discharge, for these so many and sundrie billes of debte. Let vs learne then often to go vnto ye counting booke of our God: to see in euerie commaunde∣ment the great debt that we are drawen into, that wee may haue occasion knowen to our selues to be very greate, why we should wholy beetake vs to the mercyes of our God. It falleth out often∣times, that a manne who is deepely in debte, for want of earnest consideration had of the seuerall sūmes & parcels of the same, may take it to be no greate benefite to be discharged thereof: but when the particulars be summoned and brought in, and in the whole thereof appeareth to be a great mat∣ter
to discharge, hee beginneth to chaunge his minde, and to take him for a speciall friend that would offer to aunswere it: euen so it commeth to passe with vs, while in generall words of course we confesse our selues to bee sinners, and therefore indebted vnto GOD, but yet neuer truely con∣sider by true tryall of our selues in euery com∣maundement, what the particulars are whereof the generall ariseth so great. Wee make no greate account of the mer∣cies brought by Christe for the discharge there∣of, because the greatenesse of the debt and daun∣ger, for wante of summing the particulars, is not truely knowen nor rightly considered of: which is the thing that maketh a right reckoning bothe of our owne wante, and also of his worthi∣nesse, in releasing vs from so greate daunger and debte, By this we may clearely perceiue, that so ma∣ny as shall not often looke to their liues by the lawe, doe neither knowe what wretchednesse is in them selues, nor yet what mercie is in Christe. For beeing ignoraunt of the seuerall parcels, they doe iudge amisse of the whole, and therefore of the greatnesse of that benefite that hath dis∣charged all. Those men that are not acquainted with the often sighte of their seuerall sinnes by the lawe and commaundementes, may fitly bee compared to a man that hath some sore in his bo∣dy
which he discerneth by some little hole appea∣ring in the skinne, yet so as he maketh nothing of it, neither thinketh to be any greate benefite to be cured thereof: for it appeareth to him to bee verye little, by reason of the small quantitie of skinne that is broken: but after yt it beeing searched and lanced, there is knowen to be so muche dead fleashe about it, as (beeing taken out) maketh the hole tenne times greater then before: then hee beginneth to thinke what daunger hee is in for the decay of his whole bodie, if that parte bee not well healed, and therefore taketh it for a greate and singular benefite to be cured thereof, whiche before he did nothing at all esteeme, No lesse necessarie is it for vs by searching into our seuerall corruptions, by euery com∣maundemente, to cutt away the dead fleashe of carelessenesse and good lyking of our estate, or at the leaste of findeing no greate lacke in it, whiche hindereth the true enterteyning of the free mer∣cies of Christe. For it is the burthen that wee feele of sinne by the lawe, whiche maketh grace sweete and ac∣ceptable vnto vs: and they that be loaden with the weight of sinne, bee those whome the Lorde hath promised to ease, as it is written in Matthew: Come vnto mee all yee that are wearie and loaden,Matt. 11.2 and I will ease you. For what are they that doe not well perceiue
in what a miserable condition they should bee without him, can neuer rightly esteeme of him. One contrarie maketh an other better know∣en. Libertie is neuer so swete, as when it commeth immediately after bondage. One day of libertie is more made of while the burthen of bondage is fresh in memorie, then two dayes are after, when there is no remembrance lefte of the former con∣dition. It is miserie that maketh a right account of mercie. It is miserie that maketh mercie to be mercie. The lawe must let vs see our miserie, that we may haue right regarde of mercie. If it were so expedient for Paule to haue the messin∣ger of Sathan to buffet him, lest he should be ex∣alted out of measure for the abundaunce of Gods giftes, that praying often that it might departe from him, he could not be heard to haue it taken cleane away,2. Cor. 12.7.8. as appeareth to the Corinth. how ne∣cessarie is it for vs, that are in much more daun∣ger then he, to bee exalted with the liking of our selues, to be kept humble with the continuall sight of our infirmities in the lawe, that we exalte not our selues against the free grace of our God? Iob. 33.16.17.In the booke of Iob it appeareth, that the Lord, to hyde the pride of man, vsually bringeth them into some one great affliction or other, and that sundrie times.Iob. 33.29. For there it is saide, that GOD will worke thus twise or thrise with a man, that he may turne back his soule from the pit. For these are the wordes of the text in that place.
This doctrine vtterly ouerthroweth them, that rest in their workes: looking for righteousnes and iustification, from their owne deseruings & good deedes, because they haue kept the lawe of God in their owne opinion, and therefore may iustly lay clayme to eternall life for those their good deedes. This doctrine also condemneth all secure men, that haue no sense of sinne: For the lawe should so lay open vnto vs the soares of our sinnes, that the verie sight thereof might sende vs to Christe. For the ende of it is so to charge vs with our owne woful estate, that we may be driuen to giue ouer ye strongest holde that we haue, whiche is the opini∣on of our selues, and fortifie our selues in Christ & in his mercies alone. It is the greatest worke of the Lorde to win this hold at our hands: yet if we remaine in it, we are but dead men and caste away euerie one of vs. The Lord therefore meaning to hyde vs in his mercies, and there to make a sure & safe harboroughe for vs, doeth shoote off this war∣ning peece of the lawe, so to shake this ruinous holde of our owne good deedes, that we seeing in deede the weakenesse thereof, may take vs to his mercies alone: a holde that will holde in deede. The practise of sathan by the Lawe, is in extre∣mities: for either he woulde driue vs to despaire thereby, or else touch vs not at all therewith. But we are learned out of the worde of God, that the office of the lawe is to ioyne vs to Christe: and to keepe vs from bothe these rockes of securitie and
despaire whiche are two daungerous rockes, and therefore needefull for all men to take heede of, in this voyage of Christianitie. For either of them bothe, doeth threat to make shipwracke of our saluation. Let vs therefore require of the Lawe to do that which vnto it apperteineth: that it would so let vs see our selues, that we be no longer carelesse of our estate: which must needes be, vntill that warning peece haue awakened vs and scared vs out of our selues. But if it shal presume to deal further with vs to driue vs to despaire, remēber yt that is more then it hath in cōmission: for ye law is charged with no more saue this: so to humble vs, that Christ may receiue vs. For as an euill bodie must be prepared, before the physicke that shal do good must be mi∣nistred, so must the lawe by true humbling of vs, and purging these hautie humours that we be full of, make way for the medicine of his mercie to worke well vpon vs. This doctrine giueth God his true mercie: for to giue vnto them that be vn∣worthie, is a thing worthie and beseeming God, Dare indignis, res magè digna Deo. It giueth vnto him true iustice: for it ascribeth vnto him suche iustice and righteousnesse, as no righteousnesse that is found in man is able to stande with all, but muste yelde and giue ouer. But the doctrine of the Churche of Rome, offendeth bothe against his mercie, and iustice: ascribing neither perfect mer∣cie, nor righteousnesse vnto God.
For it is no mercie to helpe him that hathe de∣serte in him selfe to be holpen, that is iustice. Nei∣ther is that iustice perfect and beseeming GOD, that mans can matche withall, and stande with∣out checke before it. That lifteth man too high, & abaseth God too lowe. The law then teacheth vs true humilitie, & letteth vs see that it was the free and vndeserued goodnesse of God, that hath be∣gone whatsoeuer holinesse and righteousnesse of life is in vs. Moreouer, when we shalbe assured that we haue verie well profited in Christiani∣tie, it is also necessarie for vs to beholde our selues often in the lawe and commandements of God, thereby to see what infirmities are still in vs: that the Lord may haue the praise of his vndeser∣ued mercie, as wel for continuing his graces vnde∣seruedly, as for beginning thē without any our de∣sert. For when we shal perceiue by true tryal in our selues, what iust occasion the lord hath offered him on our part, to stay, or rather vtterly to giue ouer his merciful dealing towards vs, we must acknow¦ledge euen from our heart, yt the Lord hath taken the occasion to continue his graces towardes vs, as well as to beginne them in vs, from his free mer∣cies alone: and so from an humbled heart yeelde vnto him no lesse prayses for continuing, then for beginning true holinesse in our heartes: that he may haue (whiche by good right doeth apper∣teine vnto him,) the whole glorie of our newe birth and regeneration.
What horrible wickednesse were it with the Chuche of Rome to part the praise of our Christi∣an conuersation, betweene God and vs, whiche is wholy due vnto his vndeserued grace? according as it is written in the Epistle to the Philippians: It is God that worketh in you, bothe the will, and deede: euen of his good pleasure. This is spo∣ken vnto them that had begone and continued al∣so some good time in Christianitie, yt they should continue in feare and humilitie: because God wrought in them euen of his owne good pleasure, and not at the deserte of their obedience: whiche may soone be perceiued to be true, if we shall exa∣mine our selues by the Lawe and commaunde∣mentes of our God, whiche thundereth out cur∣ses against him, that shall not continue in all man∣ner of obedience vnto the ende. The lawe beeing looked truely vppon, will let vs see muche requi∣red and commaunded, and yet vnperfourmed of vs: muche forbidden, yet for all that done of vs: and therfore many curses due vnto vs, by our own deseruinges: so that we shal be forced to confesse the greatnesse of his kindenesse, that continueth through so great vnkindenesse of oures. We may conclude then, that in those who haue begone in simplicitie and singlenesse of heart to serue the Lorde, the lawe hathe great vse: and the often sight of themselues therein, is verie ne∣cessarie, not onely to be humbled vnder the free∣nesse and vndeseruednesse of his grace, but also vnder the greatnesse of his goodnesse: whiche
is so muche knowen to be the more, as our deserte is knowne and perceiued in our selues to be the lesse: so muche the more tried to be mightie, as it is well perceiued not to haue beene beaten backe by so great force of our sinne, as we are well pri∣uie vnto (by tryall had of our selues in the lawe) to haue stoode in the way against it. Therefore, to conclude this part: the lawe and commandements of God truely beholden and considered, do teache vs to giue vnto God, the honour that is due vnto him, as well for the free & vndeserued beginning, as for the free and vndeserued continuing of his mercies towardes vs: that he that will glorie, may glorie in the Lorde. Moreouer, this vse we haue of the lawe of God, that by it we are truely directed into the way of life, which of our selues we could neuer haue lear∣ned: and so, forewarned of these by-wayes of our owne deuising and deuotion, whiche leade vnto destruction. For it can neuer be lawfull, that the rule to serue and please a maister by, should come from his seruaunt, who is to please, and not from the maister himselfe who is to be pleased. And therefore miserable should our estate haue beene, if we should haue imagined, that the rule for vs to serue and please God by, were to be taken from our good intent and well meaning: and not from ye Lord our maister his good pleasure and liking. If a maister should not haue prescribed his seruant what to doe, or to leaue vndone, there were more
to be saide for his good meaning, although it did goe from the good liking of his maister, whiche was not vttered vnto him: but when the maister shal make knowen his will and pleasure by his woorde, there is no excuse lefte vnto good intent or good meaning, when his pleasure made kno∣wen and declared vnto the seruaunte from his owne mouthe, shalbe neglected and not accom∣plished by him. The lawe therefore (being the will of our mais∣ster vttered from his owne mouthe) teacheth vs, truely and safely to serue him: and stop∣peth vppe that daungerous pitte of our good in∣tente, deuotion, and good meaning: a daunge∣rous pitte to fall into at any time, but nowe moste daungerous when we haue learned what is good deuotion and good meaning, euen from the Lords owne mouthe. There is also an other singular benefite whiche we haue by the lawe, and seueral commandements of God, which doeth remedie a mischiefe that is ouer rife in these dayes. Many not of the worste sort of men, content themselues generally to haue a liking of the word of God, and a general good meaning towarde his commaundementes, but ne∣uer trauell to approue their heartes before GOD by profiting and goeing forwarde in the seuerall dueties of euerie seuerall commaundement whi∣che is well prouided for in the lawe, where wee are charged with seuerall dueties vnto GOD,
and also vnto man: so as the neglecte of any due∣tie sett foorth by the lawe, redoundeth to the con∣tempt of the Lord who is the lawgiuer. The often perusing therfore of the seueral commandements, doe bring vs from christianitie pretended in gene∣rall profession and meaning vnto Christianitie approued in particular practise of seuerall dueties: drawing that vaine generall profession and liking vnto particular and seuerall well doeing. It were a lewde practise of a seruaunt, to pretend good li∣king of any thing that his maister should com∣maunde, yet neuer to put his hande painefully to the executing of his seuerall charge. There is nothing so common among many professours of the worde, as to vpholde the credite of professing the Gospel, and fauouring it, not with careful fol∣lowing after the thinges giuen by name, and parti∣cularly in charge vnto them, but onely with their general liking or rather their not misliking therof: as if this were good seruice, to giue our maister leaue to commaunde as seemed good vnto him, so wee might be at libertie to practise and doe as muche as like vs. It is a Christians profession to vpholde Gods honour, in what thing soeuer it is assaulted: & there specially where it is most assaul∣ted in any, & he most weak to resist: which kind of warfare as it is the best, so is it well mainteyned by this light of ye law. For there we se by often & true examination, which of ye walls of Gods glorie are moste battered in vs, & beat vpon by ye aduersaries
power: whereby if there shalbe any care in vs, we shalbe prouoked to bring all the helpe that we haue or can come by, to that parte, to strengthen it withall. For to what purpose were it, for vs (the eni∣mies entring in at one parte of the house vppon vs,) to let goe the care of that, and there to keepe watche and warde, where there is no assault made against vs? As if sathan should sore assault vs with couetousnesse, and labour to enter there, breakinge downe the walles of sobrietie and temperaunce in these earthly profites, (whiche we should vse so soberly and temperantly as if we vsed them not: and wee doubting no harme from thence, should conuert all our munition and defence, to vpholde the walles of gentlenesse, loue, and meekenesse, when as in deede we are not assaulted with wrathe or displeasure. Were not this a wofull kinde of warre, to lay open where we are assaulted: and to bee fenced on those partes where we are not once attempted? Were not that a slender vic∣torie, for that man to bragge, that he hath not one wound vpon his legges, whose heade and shoul∣ders haue borne off all? It cannot be denied, but many that goe for Christians, boast themselues greatly of such kinde of victorie: that their legges are safe, because some grosse euils, as reuengement or plaine oppression hathe not preuailed against them, when notwith∣standing their head is yet bleeding with ye strokes
of ignorance in GODS worde, or carelesnesse of his glorie, and their shoulders full of the scarres of couetousnesse, or suche other like grieuous woundes. This mischiefe is redressed by the lawe, by the light whereof we clearely perceiue, where the force of the aduersarie lieth soarest vpon vs: that we may turne our prayers and all spirituall armour to that part especially: So shall our prayers not bee cast off without care at aduenture and by custome, but beeing bothe warned of great daunger, (which without the alarme of the law we would not haue feared) and also hauing warning to what place the aduersarie directeth his power, our prayers may carefully and directly stande against it. Nowe let vs praye vnto our Heauenlie Father, that we may learne by the Lawe bothe to bee humbled vnder his mercies, and also to be directed vnto his owne good pleasure & will to the praise of his name, and our owne euerlasting com∣fort, &c.
The fourteenth Lecture vpon the thirde Chapter of S. Iohn verse 16. So God loued the worlde, that he hath giuen his onely begotten sonne, that whosoeuer beleeueth in him should not perishe but haue euerlasting life. AFter the knowledge of the Lawe and the vse thereof, it is necessa∣rie to speake of Christe (who is the ende of the lawe) howe by faith he is receiued bothe to iusti∣fie vs from the curse and rigour of the lawe: and also to sanctifie our hearts to such a liking of those duties yt there are appointed to be done, as bringeth with it the careful attending vp∣pon the doing thereof. This doctrine hath bene somewhat touched in the lawe: but a more plen∣tifull discourse thereof is yet required, where the mater may be laide open more at large then hither∣to we haue heard of. For the perfourmance wher∣of, this portion of Scripture that now I haue read vnto you promiseth verie muche. Wherein we may vnderstande, that the firste spring and founteine of our saluation is the loue of God. That is the first cause, the principal ground,
and chiefe beginning of all our happinesse, and therfore it is set down here as the cause why Christ was giuen for our sinnes. So God loued the worlde, sayth the texte, that he gaue his onely beegotten sonne. The tender affection and loue of God towards vs, is placed before that great gift to commend the goodnesse of it. For not so muche the gifte, as the minde of the giuer is wont to be considered. This is noted by the holy Ghost, with a speciall note of cōmendation in these wordes.1. Iohn. 4.10 Herein is that loue, not that we loued God, but that he loued vs, and sent his sonne to bee a reconciliation for our sinnes: Like∣wise in the Epistle to the Romanes.Rom. 5.15. There is set against the single transgression of Adam as an ouer matche, the grace of God, and the gifte in grace, or by grace. The benefite and medicine of Christe his obedience, was sufficient for the wounde of Adam his transgression, to make it whole withall: then remaineth as an aduantage or ouerplus, the grace and goodwill of the Father, wherin this me∣dicine was lapped and closed vp, which is the cause why he maketh a special note of the grace of God, and of the gifte in grace, or by grace. These thinges are diligently to be obserued: for they are the groundes of muche good doctrine that is esta∣blished strongly hereby. When we consider what that was yt first turned ye fauour of God towards vs, we may not begin at ourselues, (as if it had come of our works preparing ourselues for him, & addressing ourselues towards
his obedience) we may not beginne at our merites: nay, we may not beginne at the worke of our re∣demption, and the merite of Christe, to make that the first thing that euer turned his heart towardes vs. For here it is affirmed by the holie Ghost that he loued vs, and therefore gaue his onely begotten sonne for vs. When we come to the meriting of Christe, we must not looke vpon the vertue of it without the good will and fauour of God, where∣in it was founded, and from whence it hathe the worthinesse and merite that it hath. So farre off then are our owne works, from bringing their de∣serte with them, and opening by themselues the gates of his goodnesse: that the good will of God the father prepareth the way euen for the merite of Christe his passion. Our owne woorkes come shorte of beeing the first that hath commended vs vnto God, when bothe the good will of God the Father, and the merite also of Iesus Christe haue beene there before them in our behalfe. Let men therefore ceasse to say or imagine that their owne woorkes were the firste that euer spake one good worde for them, when it is so assured by the word of God that they haue had friendes in that courte that haue done for them when al the credit of their owne doeings was vtterly reiected and coulde not be heard. Whensoeuer therefore we seeke out the chiefe cause and the first spring of our blessed∣nesse, let vs come to the loue of God. For it is saide, that God so loued the worlde that he
gaue his onely begotten sonne, &c. Let vs take heede of beginning at our selues, and our owne doinges. For (as hath beene saide) it was the loue of God that did begin all our blessednesse: yea, and that e∣uen then, when we were enimies vnto him: and therefore farre from deseruing any good thing at his hands: which thing cōmendeth his loue, aboue all the loue and affection that is to be found in the worlde. For who hath euer beene knowen (the Sonne of God excepted) to giue his life for his e∣nimies? Therefore doth the holy Ghoste vppon iust cause affirme, that the loue of God towards vs, is herein sette out and commended aboue all loue and affection that we haue heard of: because while we were yet sinners and enimies vnto him,Rom. 5.8. Christ died for vs. The scripture beareth recorde that Christe di∣ed for the vngodly: but (as it is there affirmed) hee is scarce to bee founde that will die for a good man. What good man hathe euer beene found that would haue suche compassion, as to offer him∣selfe to die for a godlesse person? The Sonne of God giueth his life for vngodly men. Meruell not at these wordes, neither thinke there is any thing too muche spoken in this matter. For in that Chapter it is saide plainely, that Christe died for the vngodly, for sinners, for his enimies, and al to commend the greatnesse of his loue. It will be graunted of all men, that in deede before the death and passion of Christ, we were godlesse, vngodly, enimies to God, without any hope of a better life:
But all men are not persuaded, that we doe nowe come suche men into the worlde and continue so: vntil by the special grace of God working with his worde we be reclaymed and refourmed, whiche (for that chaunge) is called regeneration or newe birthe. All men are not persuaded, that when Christe beginneth Christianitie in any, he doeth beginne with his enimie. Yet doeth the Apostle S. Paule affirme that he, as others, was by nature the childe of wrath,Eph. 2.4.5. yt before his calling he, as other men, was dead in trespasses and sinnes: walking af∣ter the course of this worlde, after the spirite that woorketh in the children of disobedience: but GOD (sayth he) whiche is riche in mer∣cie, throughe his great loue wherewith hee lo∣ued vs, euen when we were dead by sinnes, hathe quickened vs. There is no doubt of it, but that he who liueth the moste blamelesse life of all men in the worlde, is an enimie vnto God, and without all hope of any better life before this especiall woorking and calling of GOD. I doe call Christianitie a speciall woorke of God, because it is not to bee founde in the nature of any man, how great good thing soeuer it seeme to haue in it: but is a pecu∣liar worke of GOD. This is a matter neede∣full to stande vppon, because it giueth vnto God the commendation of that loue whiche is not to be matched in the worlde. And in denying this greatest kinde of louing dealing, we darken and
diminishe the glorie of his mercie, appearing so clearely and so aboundantly herein: we deale vn∣thankefully with GOD, not giuing vnto him all the praise that of duetie belongeth vnto him. If two seruauntes had receiued equall commodities and benefites of one maister, the one hauing beene a verie profitable seruaunt to his maister, the other a verie vnthrifte, and not onely not profitable, but also a waster of his goods: should the vnthrift suffi∣ciently acknowledge the liberalitie of his maister, if he should confesse that he had receiued as muche of him as his fellowe-seruaunt, making no menti∣on in the meane time of his vnworthinesse in re∣spect of his fellowe? Euerie man seeth the good will of the maister, to appeare more in the one then in the other, and therefore he should iustly bee accounted vnthank∣full, if hee woulde not bothe thinke and con∣fesse, that he were more beholding to his maister then the other. For true thankefulnesse cau∣seth the benefite receiued after a certeine manner to remaine still in the benefactour, by thankefull remembraunce not onely of the gifte, but also of the maner and qualitie of the gifte: especially when it addeth any thing to the worthinesse and deserte of the giuer. The cause therefore is great, and a parte of our thankfulnesse vnto God is in it, to withstand with the Churche of Rome herein, that not onely wee haue had these benefites that we haue from God,
but also that wee haue had them contrarie to our deseruing: which vtterly ouerthroweth those wor∣kes of preparation, and setting our selues in a to∣wardnesse for the Lorde, and maketh the benefite to remaine in God, by his iust praise, not only for the deede dooing, but also for tne mercifull maner of dealing with vnworthie men: wherin his loue is tryed to haue more in it, then any affectiō yt hath beene hearde of amongest men, that we may truly say with the holy Ghoste, not only that God hath loued the worlde, but as it is saide in this place, So God loued the world, noting in that word (So) no com∣mon affection, but the highest and greatest degree of loue. By this that hathe beene saide before wee doe learne, that God did beare tender affection towards his, not onely before any deseruing hadde gone before to procure the same: but also when as yet they were enimies vnto him, and therefore the Apostle in the Epistle to the Ephesians,Eph. 1.3.4.7 bringeth the benefites of GOD to be considered in his free good purpose, and gratious good will towardes vs, beeing the head and spring thereof: whiche addeth greatly euen to the greatest of his benefites. And if the consideration thereof be o∣mitted, the whole deseruing of the benefactour is not acknowledged, nor deserued praise rendered therevnto. When the Apostle had giuen praises vnto God the father of our Lorde Iesus Christe, for that he
had blessed vs with all spirituall blessinges in hea∣uenly things in Christe: immediatly in the verse following (which is ye 4. in number) he hath these wordes: As he hath chosen vs in him before the founda∣tion of the worlde, &c. As if his loue towards vs had not begonne then first, when those benefites were bestowed vpon vs, but that his good will (whereof those were testimonies and fruites) was bent to∣wardes vs, before the beginning of the worlde: whiche is the cause why he letteth vs to see those fruites not barely in them selues alone, but in that good will which so long before was inclined to∣wards vs. And good will the longer it hath conti∣nued, the more it is to be esteemed: and the bene∣fites of an olde friend, and welwiller of long time, haue iust occasion in thē to be the more accounted of. It is not to be merueyled then, why with ye gift he bringeth in also the good will of the giuer. For the gifte is made thereby the greater, bothe for that the good will hath beene of long time continued, and also for that it is his goodwill onely, and not any thinge either had allready, or else hoped for from vs, that hath brought all these benefites vnto vs: as it followeth in the nexte verse in expresse wordes: That he hath predestinate vs to bee adopted through Iesus Christe, according to the good pleasure of his will, by whome (as it is there in like manner affirmed) we haue redemption through his bloud, euen the forgiuenesse of sinnes, according to his riche grace. In all these places we are let to vnderstand, that all our benefites, euen the forgiuenesse of sinnes
came from the good pleasure of his will, and the riches of his grace, and not (as hath beene saide be∣fore) from any thing of ours, either had already, or else hoped for. Let vs learne therefore to set his loue before all his benefites, as the only cause and spring therof. For if we shall beginne at our selues, to say that either that which already wee had, as a towardenes and preparation to goodnesse: or that whiche God did forsee would bee in vs, was the cause why the Lorde hath appointed euerlasting life for vs, and giuen vs the graces that apperteine there vnto: we darken and diminish the greatnesse and goodnesse of the gifte. Whiche cannot be so commendable, if it come for the deserte of bene∣fites, either had already, or else hoped for: as if it had beene sent from the frank and free good will of the giuer, without any such respect of any thing that should proceede from vs. This is the reason why the loue of God is heere set before the gifte of the mediatour and redeemer Iesus Christe: and also why the benefite of election and all other, in ye first cap. to the Ephesians are alwayes coupled to the good will of God. For we are giuen to ima∣gine that the good things which are supposed to be in vs, doe turne his heart, & purchase his fauour towards vs: when in very deede his good wil to∣wardes vs, brought all those graces, & all the good∣nes that we haue vnto vs. In somuch that both our election and redemption are recited to the Ephe.Ephe. 1. to haue proceeded from the free good wil of God, and are made not as matters purchasing it: but as mat∣ters
purchased of it. Whē this free goodwil of God is not acknowledged to be the beginning of all his giftes, his giftes must of all men yt are so persuaded be lesse esteemed. For it is the minde and goodwil of the giuer that doth commend the gift, and ma∣keth it to be alwayes the better accepted. Men are wont not to esteme the gift so much, as ye minde of the giuer. Therefore the doctrine of the churche of Rome hath and doth meruelously pull away from the benefites of God and the deseruings therof: be∣cause it doth not esteme of them as fruites of a well willing minde towardes vs, and of suche a one as-already liketh well of vs: because that doctrine professeth that those giftes of his in vs, by our vse thereof do first turne his fauourable countenaunce to vs-ward. Moreouer, because that loue was bent towards vs, when we were bent as enimies against him: which maketh his loue so great yt it may iust∣ly be said of it, So God loued the world, as being a rare kinde of loue, ye like whereof we haue not know∣en. Therfore that doctrin of the church of Rome yt giueth vnto man workes of preparation, and ma∣king of him selfe fit to meete God & to ioine with him in the purchase of his happinesse, darckeneth greatly this great degree of his loue that was shew∣ed vnto vs, when we were so farre from preparing our selues to mete with him for our saluation, that we were vtter enimies both vnto him and vnto it. Which is so cōfortable vnto those that are truely turned vnto him, that it is the groūd of their  (in their affliction & distresse) that their end
happie, because that if when they were enimies they were reconciled by his bloud,Rom 3. much more be∣ing now made friends, they shall by his life be sa∣ued from wrath. It hath beene declared at large, why the greate loue of GOD is set before the benefite of our re∣demption, and the greate gifte of Iesus Christe giuen vnto vs? Now it remaineth after the sight had of his good will, to see into the gifte, what it is that commeth from so greate good will. The texte saieth, that this gifte is his onely begotten sonne: For So God loued the world, that he gaue his only begot∣ten sonne. Now we knowe the gifte, it is his onely begottē sonne, which at the first sight doth witnesse greate good will, the gifte beeing so greate as to pleasure vs with his onely begotten sonne. But yet it is needeful that we vnfolde this gifte, that wee may vnderstand of euery commoditie that lyeth hid within it.. Cor. 1.30. It is written to the Corinthes that Christ of GOD the father is made vnto vs wise∣dome, righteousnesse, sanctification, & redemptiō. Behold the seuerall commodities that come with this gifte of Iesus Christ, giuen vnto vs from God the fa∣ther, which euery one of them is of that dignitie and worthinesse, that I cannot ioyne them all to∣gether, and in few wordes dispatch them: but am inforced seuerally (and yet as briefely as I can) to stand vpon euery one of them. First it is said heere that he is made of God vnto vs wisdome. Christe is be∣come the wisedome of his seruants, he teacheth his chosen children true wisedome, hee is appointed
of his father to be their scholemaister, as it is writ∣ten in the Gospel after S. Matthew:Matt. 17.5. This is that my beloued sonne in whom I am well pleased, heare him. And to the Colossians it is written,Coloss. 2.3. That all the treasures of wisdome and knowledge are hidden in Christ. If it shall be demaunded, how it cōmeth to passe, that so ma∣ny men in the gouerning of their liues & dealings, doe followe their owne wisedoms & their owne witt, going no further, but holding them selues well content with that, neuer suspecting any want in it: and yet another sorte shall so suspecte their owne wisedome and the deuises of their owne head, and see such want in it, that letting it alone they betake them to the wisdome of God reuealed in his word, become paineful traueilers therin, and careful framers of their liues accordingly: the aun∣swer is redy, that Christe (who is made of God the father wisdome vnto his) hath laid claime vnto the one sorte and taken possession of them as vppon his owne, but not vpon the other. This is the cause of this diuersitie, and none other thing. And there∣fore the Apostle proueth that the testimonie of Ie∣sus Christe was confirmed amongst the Corinthi∣ans because they abounded in all knowledge.1. Cor. 1.5.6 And here by ye way, it is manifest that ignorance is not mother, but stepmother vnto deuotion and true Christianitie. For Christ is made vnto Chri∣stians of God the father wisedome, teaching them the knowledge of his word and wil. In like man∣ner, if it should be demanded why in their religi∣on and seruing of God, some followe the inuenti∣on
of man (which hath in it great shew of holines,Col. .2. in humblenesse of mind, not sparing the body, but laying much affliction vppon it: in doeing many thinges vnto God voluntarily, not beeing bound vnto it by him, but frankly and freely of their own accorde.) And another sorte (contenting them sel∣ues with the bare and naked simplicitie of Gods worde, in the worshipping and seruing of him) do condemne and vtterly reiect all those inuentions of men and shewes of holinesse and humblenes of minde, which standeth so strongly vpon the wise∣dome and reason of man: the matter is plaine and the aunswere soone made, Christe is made of GOD the father wisedome vnto his. This is the cause why his seruantes finde no wisedome but in him. This is the reason why it seemeth madnes and extreme follie vnto his ser∣uants whatsoeuer is not approued by his worde, haue it neuer so strong reasons of mans wit to vp∣holde it withall. It is not their wisdome: they can see no witt in it. For Christe is become wisedome vnto them, and they haue learned no suche thinge of him in his word. Therefore it is their wisedome to reiect such wisedome. It is a merueylous thinge, that any man who hath wit and reason, should mislike that religion which hath nothing else in it but force of witt, and strength of reason. But let vs ceasse to meruaile, and beginne to magnifie the goodnes of that God, who vouchsafeth to become wisedome vnto his, teaching them in his worde another manner of
wisedome, then that whiche is taught them of ther owne wit and reason. Here ye see then the first benefite that commeth with Christe vnto his, euen wisdome in his word. Doe we meane to approue it before God & man, that we are called vnto the fellowshippe of Christ, and become Christians in deede? Let vs then be∣come wise after his worde. Let vs giue ouer our owne witt and reason in the gouerneing of our liues either towarde God or man, and betake vs to his worde, who is become our wisedome. Let the worde of God dwel richely in vs in all wisedome, teaching & admonishing ourselues as we are com∣manded by the Apostle.Col. 3.1. For if in our dealing with God or man, we like well inough of the counsell had from our owne witt, in vaine is this boaste made that Christe is become wisedome vnto vs. For he pulleth his from the deuises of their owne witt in the ordering of their conuersation, vnto the gouernment of his word: letting them vnder∣stand and feele the want & wretchednesse of the one, and the sufficiencie and blessednesse of the o∣ther. Christe (as you see) at his first comming chaun∣geth our wisedome: this is his worke. Where is then our frank and free will vnto that whiche is good? when it is manifest wee cannot see what is good, before Christe lighten vs, who is be∣come our wisedome. Wee haue no will vn∣to any thing but that whiche our witt approueth, and our iudgemente doeth embrace and good
things can we not in iudgement imbrace and like: before Christe (who is our wisedome) shall haue chaunged our iudgements. If Christe must open our heartes and chaunge our mindes, before wee can haue true wisdome and vnderstanding of good things (which we must approue in iudgement be∣fore we haue a desire and wil vnto them in our af∣fection:) it followeth necessarily yt not from our selues, but from Christe, commeth all the free will which we haue vnto that which is in deede good. For we haue no will vnto any thing but that whi∣che wee approue and like in our iudgement. We can approue and like in our iudgement no good thinge, before our iudgement be good. Good iudgement & wisdome we haue not of our selues but are taught it of Christe, and haue it with him who is made our wisedome: therefore the de∣sire and will vnto good things, wee haue not from our selues but from Christe, amongst whose giftes the very formoste is that he giueth him selfe vnto vs, when he giueth vs the knowledge of him selfe in his worde, Christe our righteous∣nesse.The second benefite that we receiue from God the father by Christe, is Righteousnes. For it is writ∣ten (as wee haue heard before) that hee is made wisedome vnto vs and righteousnesse, &c. This righteousnes consisteth in two points. The first is in discharging vs of our sinnes. The second is in presenting vs blamelesse before his father, in suche perfect obedience as the lawe cannot reproue, nor iustely charge with any want.
This is perfourmed to vs in Christe, who hath sa∣tisfied in his suffering for our sinnes, and wrought our full discharge: and also perfectly kept the whole lawe and euerie commaundement thereof in the behalfe of vs that be his. For he being God, (and therefore aboue the lawe as Lorde and giuer therof,) needed not to haue become a subiect ther∣vnto for him selfe. Whereby it appeareth plain∣ly, that he went vnder that obedience in our name and for vs, and that the same obedience of his is a∣uaylable for vs that be his: according as it is writ∣ten to the Romanes in these wordes.Rom. 5.19 As by one man his disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedi∣ence of one shall many also be made righteous. The tree must be good, before the fruite be good, and there∣fore wee our selues must bee righteous, before any good fruite of righteousnesse proceede and come from vs. The gift is neuer welcome when we can not abide the giuer: neyther will the Lorde haue good liking of any thing that is oures, before hee shall thinke well of vs. Wee are therefore first to be setled by fayth as righteous in Christe: before the Lorde will take in good parte any thing that shall proceede from vs. Our roote was rotten in Adam, and therefore brought foorth fruite accor∣dingly. We must therfore be grafted into Christ, and then drawe power from him to bring foorth fruite that shall be pleasing vnto him, and accepta∣ble in his sight: according as our Sauiour Christe sayth in Iohn. As the braunch can not beare fruit of it selfe except it abide in the vine,Iohn. 15.4. no more can
ye, except ye abide in me. His seruants finde want of righteousnesse in them selues, and therefore flee vnto him for righteousnesse. They see so much in thē selues, yt they wel vnderstand that they cannot be accepted for thē selues, and therfore sticke vnto ye righteousnes of an other, which is Christ. Whē ye question is then whervpon ariseth this diuersitie of iudgementes in men, that one persuadeth him selfe that the cause why hee is acceptable to God, first springeth of him selfe, and an other number denyeth all that is in him selfe, to haue beene any cause to make him accepted vnto God, and dothe attribute ye whole cause why he is acceptable vnto God vnto the righteousnes of Iesus Christ, which is become theirs by fayth? from hence wee haue an aunswere that may satisfie vs, whiche is, that Christe is made righteousnesse vnto his. It is the worke of Christ in them, to assure them to bee ac∣cepted for the righteousnesse of an other, and to giue ouer all the holde that they haue, by the rea∣son of any thing that they shall haue doone them selues. Our naturall wit and reason can not allow of that. It is apparant therefore, that wee haue an other scholemaister that doth teache vs this doc∣trine. Can one man for his good workes that he hath done, stand so strongly assured in his opiniō of saluation, and to bee accepted for them, that hee shall offer his ouerplus to helpe other withall: and an other man (that is not inferiour vnto this other, neyther in wit, reason, nor good deedes) so giue o∣uer all the hope of them, that in flat deniall and vt∣ter renouncing thereof, he should lay clayme only
to the righteousnesse that an other hath done, and boast of that none otherwise, then if he shuld haue done it in his owne person? Can this I say be tho∣ught reasonable vnto any, that hath not had an o∣ther scholmaister then wit and reason to persuade him therein? Can the naturall man bee persuaded that he must first be righteous, and then do righte∣ous things: and not rather that in doing of many righteous deedes, at length hee becommeth to bee accepted for righteous him selfe thereby? Or can a naturall man bee persuaded, that his fauour with God commeth wholy in respect of an other his doings, who hath done him all this good: and not rather that his owne doings haue done the moste for him, and he that is especially beholding vn∣to them? This commeth from an other teacher then any that wee haue at home: it sauoureth not of the earth, it is from aboue. Ceasse therefore to maruell at suche diuersitie of doctrine, when the scholemaisters that teach are so farre differing one from an other, as heauen is from earth. The ser∣uauntes of God giue ouer their owne righteous∣nesse, they finde nothing in it: they doe clearely see it will not goe for payment, and therefore doe betake themselues to the merites of an other. Nei∣ther doe they onely say, that they bee vnrighteous in them selues, but with griefe doe finde and feele it to be so within them selues. But howsoeuer they stand rotten in their own root, they are notwithstāding strongly stayd in Ie∣sus Christ: whose obediēce they do make so great
an account of, as if it were their owne perfourmed by them selues. Christ our sanctifica¦tion,The thirde thing that wee doe receiue with Christe is Sanctification, or holinesse of life. This sanctification followeth immediately after righ∣teousnesse, in the place which before I haue alled∣ged. For it is not onely requisite, that wee should remaine righteous by the obedience of one man once perfourmed: but that our whole life should continue consecrated vnto the seruice of him, in bringing foorth such fruit as hee hath appointed. That righteousnesse which before we haue heard of is as the tree, and this holinesse is the fruit ther∣of. The nature of our Sauiour Christe was free from all infection, not hauing in it any remnaunt or relique of sinne, and therefore he was sanctifica∣tion it selfe, and perfectly sanctified. When wee beginne to separate our selues from the common corruption of the worlde, and bend our selues to purenesse of life approued before God, this is the worke of Christe, sanctifying and working true holinesse in vs. For of our selues we are prophane and vnholy, voyde of these fruites of righteous∣nesse whiche are wrought in vs by Christe. The cause why a number do mislike such deedes and conuersation, both in them selues and also in others, which an other sort of men doe approue & delight in, following after them, with all greedi∣nesse of desire: is, for that Christ is become sancti∣fication vnto the one sort of people, and not vnto the other, who continue in their prophane and cor¦rupt
wayes, not finding any want therein: when the other sort are vexed & grieued to see such do∣ings abound in others, and tormented in them sel∣ues if at any time they shall of infirmitie slip into the like, not ceasing to apply the meanes whereby they may get victorie ouer them. Here ariseth a question necessarie to be discussed, whether righ∣teousnesse be in the children of God before sanc∣tification and holinesse of life, or good works and holy life do goe before, iustification being in his, before they be acceptable vnto God. Wherein notwithstanding that which hath beene sayde al∣readie, may be thought sufficient vnto any indif∣ferent man, yet it shall not be amisse to adde some more force and strength vnto it. It is proued that righteousnesse goeth before good workes.Rom. 4.6 Rom. 4.6. where the testimonie of Dauid is alledged, pronouncing him blessed and happie, to whome the Lorde imputeth righteousnesse without wor∣kes. And leaste any man should thinke this to bee ment of the ceremoniall workes, the verie wordes of the Prophete are cited in the next verse folow∣ing, affirming blessednesse to be in the remitting of sinns vnto vs, and not in the admitting of good workes for vs. If the Apostle doe ioyne with the Prophete in this, that God imputeth righteous∣nesse without woorkes, then must I demaund of the aduersaries, whether this righteousnesse impu∣ted without woorkes, doth exclude all woorkes, or but some woorkes? If it be aunswered that all
kynd of working is not seuered frō this iustifica∣tion and righteousnesse, the question is againe, whether those workes that stand with iustificati∣on and righteousnesse, goe before it, or spring of it, and so come after it. Heere their aunswere is, we are iustified with∣oute woorkes going before, but not withoute workes folowing it, making this iustification that is saide to be without woorkes, to shut out onely those woorkes that are before a man be iustified, but not the other. For their opinion is, that wee are iustified by them, wherevpon it followeth ne∣cessarily, that righteousnesse goeth before holi∣nesse of life, that good workes do followe from a man iustified alreadie: and are not sent before to iustifie him therewith, that was not accepted of God as righteous, vntill those were perfourmed. The Apostle is plaine in this matter to the Ephesi∣ans.Ephe. 24.5 God which is riche in mercie, euen when wee were dead in sinnes hath quickened vs. &c. There were no woorkes then that went before to quicken vs, see∣ing it is sayde, that when we were deade in sinnes, not onely sinners, but also deade in sinnes, God hath quickened vs. This proueth plainely, that our good workes and holinesse of life, did not procure righteous∣nesse vnto vs, when the matter is cleare that wee were dead in sinnes, when he in mercie quickened vs.Rom. 6.22 In like manner the Apostle proueth, that ho∣linesse of life is a fruite of them that bee alreadie the seruants of God: but now (sayth the Apostle)
beeing freed from sinne, and made seruaunts vnto God, you haue your fruit in holinesse and the end euerlasting life. There is no woorke acceptable vnto God, without fayth and persuasion of his good will towardes vs, whether it be done at the desire of vaine glory, or at the motion and instinct of nature, iudging that woorke to bee lawfull and honest. For it is fayth that doth purifie the heart, and the ende of the commaundement is loue,1. Tim. 1.5. but so that it bee of a fayth vnfeined. The tree must be good, before the fruite can be good.Mat. 7.17.18. For an euil tree can not bring foorth good fruite. Against this it will be excepted, that Abraham in offering of his sonne Isaac vppon the altar (as sayth the Apostle Iames) was iustified,Iam. 2.2 and therefore that the works of men eyther vnrighteous before, or else but in parte acceptable, doe iustifie them and make them rightly to be accepted of God. It appeareth in Genesis,Gen. 15.6 that Abraham was iu∣stified before Isaac was borne, for the offering of whome vppon the altar, the Apostle Iames sayth that Abraham was iustified. For in that Chapter it is written, that the word of the Lord came vnto Abraham in a vision, saying: Feare not Abraham, I am thine exceeding great reward. And Abraham said, Oh Lorde God, what wilt thou giue me, seeing I goe child∣lesse, Beholde, to me thou hast giuen no seede, wherefore a seruaunt of myne house shall be myne heire. Then the worde of the Lorde came vnto him saying, One that shall come out of thine owne bowells, hee shall be thine heire.
Moreouer, he brought him foorth, and sayde: Looke vp nowe vnto heauen, and tell the starres, So shall thy seede be. And Abraham beleeued the Lord, and he ac∣counted that to him for righteousnesse. By this testimo∣nie we see that Abraham was accoūted righteous, & not in part righteous, or half righteous, but with out any addition it was sayde of him, that he was righteous (before he had any sonne, and therefore before he could offer vp his sonne in sacrifice, euen then, when he made complaint vnto God for that he had no sonne, and therefore a seruaunt must bee his heire) beleuing the promise that thē was made vnto him for a seede and posteritie that shoulde come out of his owne loynes, that fayth was rec∣koned vnto him for righteousnesse, and hee him selfe accepted of, as righteous before the Lorde. Iames sayth, that hee was iustified when his owne sonne Isaac was offered vppon the altar, and that this deede of his, in not refusing to kill his onely sonne for a sacrifice at the commaundement of God, did so please the Lorde, that he was iustified for it. In the other place alledged, the holy Ghost affirmeth, that hee was iustified before his sonne Isaac was borne, euen at that time when the pro∣mise was giuen forth that he should haue a sonne, and that the beleeuing of this good will of God towardes him herein did so please the Lorde, that he accounted of him as righteous for it. Howe then? Doth the holy Ghost differ from him selfe? God forbid. But the Apostle Sainte Iames attri∣buteth that to the effect for being ioyned with his
cause, which the holy ghost in that other place gi∣ueth vnto the true and originall cause alone. As if one man wold iustifie a workman, and commend him aboue others for workes that hee hath seene him do, and an other would in like manner iusti∣fie the same, but for the inward skill, knowledge, and conceiuing that he hath of the rules and prin∣ciples of that trade or occupation what so euer: which skill he may discerne by his speache, albeit he neuer sawe him worke. And albeit a man may say that he is a good workman, bicause his worke is good, yet if a man wil speake properly, he must say he is a good workeman, bycause his skill is good. For his good skill in that trade, is the cause of his good workmanshippe, and the goodnesse thereof commeth from thence as from the proper founteine and cause. Nowe euerie man knoweth that when any man is commended for his worke, it is bycause of the skill and knowledge that appeareth therein, and is ioyned therewith, as the onely cause and oc∣casion thereof: Euen so, bycause our fayth appea∣reth in our good woorkes, as our skilfull know∣ledge dothe in our skilfull workmanship: that is giuen to good woorkes, which is peculiar vnto fayth, as the proper cause thereof, and a man shall bee called a skilfull woorkman for his skilfull workmanship, when notwithstanding it is most assured, that his skilfull knowledge is before his skilfull woorke, as also the cause thereof: and hee iustly may be called skilfull for it, notwithstand∣ing
he should bee kept from vttering that his skill in worke many yeres after the perfect knowledge thereof. The holie Ghost therefore in Genesis, iustifi∣eth Abraham as skilfull for his skill alone: and in that epistle of Iames he iustifieth him, as skilful of that worke wherein so much skil appeared. For it may be lawfull vnto me for the better vnderstan∣ding hereof, to resemble fayth by skill, and good deedes by skilfull workmanshippe, bycause as good workmanship hath all the commendation for the good skill that appeareth in it: so haue good woorkes all their praise from the fayth that hath begotten them, and is necessarily ioyned with them. This is also to be added, that bycause there is not in our workes that perfection that is required, we are constreyned to stand to the mercie of God, and to seeke refuge there by a true fayth: and this is the cause why we magnifie faith, (which other∣wise is imperfect as be all things that are in vs) bi∣cause it applieth the mercy of God vnto vs, wher∣by our sinnes are pardoned, and the want that is in our worke not imputed. And for proofe that the Apostle Sainte Iames giueth not that title vnto woorkes to iustifie, but bycause of the fayth whiche hath begotte those workes, and which is ioyned with them, and co∣uereth the imperfections that is in them: in the same place where he ascribeth righteousnesse vnto Abraham for offering vp his sonne, hee sayth that
this scripture was fulfilled: Abraham beleeued, and it was reckoned vnto him for righteousnesse, and he was called the friende of God: So that all the commendation of this woorke is included in faith, and giuen vnto it for the fayth of the doer. For other wise hee should haue sayde: Abraham wrought, and that was receiued bycause it was righteous, seeing hee had stoode vppon the com∣mendation of his workes so muche immediately before, and was euē yet in the same matter. But he sayth, Abraham beleeued, and that was reckoned vnto him for righteousnesse. They would match workes with faith in iusti∣fication, and the Apostle when hee speaketh most of works, doth shrowd them vnder fayth, saying: (after mention of his best woorke) that this Scrip∣ture was fulfilled in it: Abraham beleeued, and that was imputed to him for righteousnesse, and not receiued in the righteousnesse and deseruing of it selfe, and he was called the friend of God. And in the eleuenth Chapter to the Hebrues,Hebr. 11. all the woorkes of the godly fathers are ascribed vnto fayth, and by name in the seuenteenth verse of that Chapter, this deede of Abraham is fathered vpon his faith. For workes are so farre from iusti∣fying vs, that the cause why they them selues are iustified, is in fayth.Hebr. 11.6 For without fayth it is impossible to please God. And in this chiefe worke of Abra∣ham that nowe wee haue heard of, that Scripture of imputing righteousnesse vnto him, was fulfil∣led.
Therefore the worke did not stande in any ac∣count for the worthinesse thereof, but onely by∣cause the Lorde did impute it vnto him for righ∣teousnesse: which thing also it did not attaine vnto of it selfe, but bycause of fayth whiche was ioyned with it. It is to be noted, that the Apostle Sainte Iames speaketh here but of one woorke (as the offering vp of his sonne) and that woorke also not done, but onely purposed to be done. If there∣fore his meaning had beene to debate the worthi∣nesse of woorkes, and what place they haue in the purchase of our saluation, hee would haue taken woorkes not onely purposed, but also practised: not some one worke alone, but many works long continued. Neyther would he haue sayde of that or those works, that they were imputed vnto him for righ∣teousnesse, but that they wrought his righteous∣nesse, eyther wholy or at the least in part. But the purpose of the apostle is to signifie, that a true faith is fruitfull in good works, and is witnessed by thē, and that it is impossible that a true fayth should not be rich in good workes, or that righteousnesse should be without holinesse of life. For it is im∣possible that we receiuing comfort in his mercies by fayth, should not witnesse the same by a life framed to the liking of him of whome wee haue those comforts. The last of these benefites that we receiue by Christe is Redemption, that is, the deliuerie from all daunger, affliction, and corruption.
It is the fruite of his resurrection to raise vs out of all extremities euen from death and the graue, and to place vs with his Saintes in that glory that hee hath purchased for vs.Rom. 8.23 Ephe. 1.14. Thus is redemption taken for our fredome and deliuerie from our wretched∣nesse. For we hold not with the aduersaries of god his grace, that our good deeds do redeeme vs from the daunger of our euill doings: neyther yet that by prayers or satisfaction whatsoeuer, we can de∣liuer eyther our selues or other from the daunger in this life, and much lesse in the life to come. We confesse, that howsoeuer we humble our selues by repentance, prayers, and fruits of good liuing, whē his rod of correction is vppon vs, that it is onely the free benefite of Christe, to deliuer from the daunger thereof, and to put an happie end vnto it. Wee doe not thanke our deedes for it when wee come foorth of trouble, albeit that we haue plenti∣fully brought foorth the fruites of good life. We acknowledge it to be onely the worke of Christ, who is made of God the father vnto vs redemption, to deliuer vs from sinne, and all those punishments yt come vnto man for it. In this benefite of Christ there appeareth a great difference betweene ye chil∣drē of God and the children of this world. For the children of God glory in trouble, knowing that it will bring vpon them experience, and tryal of god his goodnesse in the ende, as the Apostle teacheth vs.Rom. 5.4 For Christ is made vnto them redemption frō sinne and all the punishments thereof: whereas the vngodly (howe so euer in prosperitie they fleshly
bragge of their hope in God. Yet when affliction commeth, they are without all heart, comforte, or courage. For why, in truth they knowe not that Christ is made redemption vnto them, to deliuer them from all that danger that commeth for sinne as well as from sinne it selfe. This persuasion cau∣seth the godly in all their afflictions and necessi∣ties whatsoeuer, to stay them selues in godly con∣uersation, both towarde God and man, with pati∣ence and assured hope of an happie ende: when as the vngodly eyther murmur against God, eyther else fall into some one euill dealing or other, ther∣by to purchase their deliueraunce, which is an assu∣red testimonie that they doe not looke to haue it from the Lord. Nowe wee haue heard what seuerall benefites do come with Christ, and that we do not receyue him naked and alone, but according as he is giuen vnto vs from God the father, clothed with wise∣dome, righteousnesse, holinesse, and redemption. Thus is he giuen vnto the beleeuers, and thus is he receiued of the beleeuers. And heereby wee may clearely vnderstand what faith is, euen that which findeth all want in it selfe, and al plentie in Christ: that is poore at home, and rich abroad: that in her necessitie boasteth, and is comfortable in an other mans plentie: that neuer resteth in her selfe nor a∣ny thing of her own, (haue she neuer so great plen∣tie in respect of others) and yet is ioyfull, comfor∣table, and well payde and satisfied with Christe in her greatest want. For faith is not so highly com∣mended
as it is a worke of ours, for so it is imper∣fect as all others be that come from vs: but bicause it giueth all glorie from vs vnto God. Therfore hath it so iust commendation in the woorde of God, wee giue the most vnto it, bicause it giueth nothing vnto vs, that God may haue all glorie, and yt he that will glorie, may glorie in the Lord. We doe not exalt it aboue other thinges that proceede from vs, bycause it doth exalte vs, but bycause it doth abase vs, that Christ may be exalted, therefore do we magnifie it. For faith findeth perfection in God, and imperfection in vs. Fayth findeth true wisedome to be in Christ, charging all the worlde with follie in their wit, (bee they neuer so wise in the opinion of men) before they be lightened with the vnderstanding of his wisedome set foorth in his worde. Fayth findeth true righteousnesse in Christ alone, and chargeth all men with vnrighte∣ousnesse in them selues, as withered braunches proceeding out of the rotten stocke of Adam their first father, vntil we be grafted into Christ the root of all righteousnesse. Faith findeth true sanctification and holinesse of life in Christ, and chargeth all men howe ciuily and honestly so euer they liue in the iudgement of men, to bee of a prophane and vnholy nature and disposition, except they haue it refourmed by spe∣ciall grace from Christ. Faith findeth deliuerance from all daunger in Christ, and chargeth the deeds of all men, with want of abilitie in that behalfe. Thus we learne, that fayth doth finde all those
things in Christ, and the want of euerie one of thē in the nature of man: nay, which worsse is, a coun∣terfet of euerie one of them deepely imprinted in vs: a counterfet wisedome of man his wit and in∣uention, for the true wisdome of his word: coun∣terfet righteousnesse of our corrupt works, for the true righteousnesse brought and wrought by Christ alone: a feined deuotion grounded by our owne good intent, for holinesse, and sanctification of life and well doing, guided and directed by his worde: a false persuasion to auoyde daungers by our owne satisfactions, in stead of an assured stan∣ding to his redemption, and deliuerie in all our ne∣cessitie and wantes. These are the withered bran∣ches of that rotten roote our olde Adam: and the nature and disposition of all men goeth this way, except they be reclaymed by Christ, as all those be (in his appointed time) that shal inherite with him in his kingdome. In as much as we do clearely vn∣derstand what is in vs, before that Christ shall call vs: it shall be profitable to consider whether (after that Christ hath layde clayme vnto his, and giuen them that in truth which before they had in shew) fayth doth yet finde any such want and lacke, that (notwithstanding such a chaunge) it resteth onely in Christ, and refuseth to stand to any desart whi∣che this newe obedience can clayme. The Scrip∣ture is plaine, that fayth findeth lacke and want in man, notwithstanding that hee be chaunged and renued by Christe, from that he was before, and come to that perfection that euer any man hath at∣tained
vnto. This wil appeare most plainely in the consideration of those seuerall cōmodities whiche (as we lerned before) ar brought with Christ. We that be Christs, do receiue wisdome from Christ, yet is there want of wisedome in ye childe of God that hath receiued the greatest portion thereof,1. Cor. 13.12 ac∣cording as it is written to the Corinthes. Now we se in a glasse darckly, but then shall we see face to face. Now I knowe in parte, but then shall I knowe euen as I am kno∣wen. We that be Christes do receiue righteousnes from him by faith, but we haue such wantes in our faith while we be here, that this is the prayer of the Church and euery member therof, so long as they liue: Lord increase our faith: I beleeue, Lorde helpe mine vnbeliefe. We receiue sanctification and holinesse of life from Christe, but in that measure: that it is the continuall prayer of the church vnto the ende, Forgiue vs our trespasses, as we do forgiue them that tres∣passe against vs. The faithful that haue bene deliuered from ma∣ny dangers already by Christe, who is their redēp∣tion, haue yet for all that many dangers & troubles abiding for them: insomuch that it is thus written of the estate of them:Rom. 8.36. For thy sake are we killed all the day long, we are accoūted as sheepe for the slaughter. And if they should escape all other, yet death will sure∣ly haue to doe with them al at the last, and wil not resigne her right vnto any. These are plain proofes that the faithfull neuer stande satisfied with any thing in them selues, as beeing perfect in it, but al∣wayes returne vnto their mediatour and redeemer
Christe, where is the perfection of that whiche in small measure abideth in them selues: who hath these thinges so perfect in him selfe, not for him selfe, but for vs: and therefore the holy Ghost doth not say (which notwithstāding in truth he might) that Christ hath made vs wise, righteous, and ho∣lie, but he sayth that Christ is made vnto vs wise∣dome, righteousnes and holines, adding the cause thereof in these wordes folowing: That he that will glorie, may glorie in the Lorde. For faithe refuseth to glorie of any thing in it selfe, finding wante in all things: that it may glorie in the Lord alone. For it is no praise worthie of him, if hee be but fellowe with vs in the worke, but when we are truely ta∣ken (as we are in deede) for nothing, and that that commeth from vs as no sufficient payment, then receiueth the Lord the whole right of his glorie, which otherwise is cleane darckened, when it is made to patch vp that which we had begunne. Let vs therefore neuer forget this, that we doe mag∣nifie faith aboue all that which doth come from vs, not simply, because it fasteneth harde vppon Christe: but because it so taketh holde vpon him, that it letteth go all the holde that it hath of any thing in it selfe. We may not therefore onely consider whether we haue any stay in Christ: but whether we haue such a stay, that acknowledgeth vs vnstayed in our selues, and therefore to be vp∣holden by him alone. For faith ioyneth riches to pouertie, & bringeth plentie vnto the emptie man. Nowe let vs pray vnto our heauenlie father, that his true faith may be increased in vs. &c. Amen.
¶The xv. Lecture vppon the Gospel of S. Matthew, the 6. Chap∣ter, the 9. and 10. verses. Our father which art in heauen, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdome come. &c. WE haue learned already what faith is, and therfore order doth require to speake somewhat of prayer, beeing suche a fruite and effect therof, as cannot be parted from it. For as faith is weake or strong, so are prayers colde or carefull, sparing or plentifull, because true prayer receiueth life from faith, which without it is dead & nothing worth. And because faith quickneth prayers, we may tru∣ly iudge of faith by our praiers, cold prayers, colde faith, few prayers, little faith, they increase and de∣cay together, they arise and spring vp both at one time. In this treatise of prayer, before I shall ex∣pound the petitions, that is, what things are to bee asked, it shalbe very profitable to speake somwhat before, necessarie for the preparing of vs thervnto. Heerein the firste thing to bee considered is, the vse and end of prayer, whiche is to bring vs to suche tryall and experience of Gods good∣nesse towardes vs: as may force vs in trueth to honour and praise him. For we cannot hartily honour & praise him, of whose goodnesse toward vs we haue no certeine knowledge. And how shall we haue certeine knowledge and true tryall of his
goodnesse towardes vs, but by receiuing and taste∣ing thereof: and how can we stand better assured what we haue receiued, then by finding that giuen vs, which we knowe and well remember that we haue asked and begged before at his hands in pray∣er? So that prayer leadeth vs to this certeine and as∣sured knowledge of God his good meaning to∣wards vs, which is the founteine of all true seruice and praise of God: while prayer goeth in euery necessitie to trie for it selfe the goodnesse of God promised in his word, and bringeth with it a true certificate and good experience thereof, in that his sute is graunted and he in his prayer is comfor∣ted. And this assurāce of God his particular regard and fauour towards vs, bringeth with it a seruing and honouring of God in trueth. And therefore Solomon rendereth this reason why he wold haue the Lord to graunt the petition yt his seruants shuld pray for:1. Kin. 8.40 That (saith he) they may feare thee as long as they liue. It is his reason also why he would haue ye straunger (which was not of the people of Israel) heard in all that he called for: that all the people of ye earth might know his name, & serue him as did his people Israel. For it is this assured knowledge of a speciall good will of God towards vs, yt incli∣neth our hartes to ye true worshipping of him. All men knowe that God is good, but all men knowe not that he is good vnto them. All beleeue that he is good, but all beleeue not that hee is good vnto them, yet is that the true faithe, and therefore is prayer a true fruit of faith yt confirmeth vs therin:
according as the Prophet Dauid testifieth of him selfe,Psal. 116.1. that he loued the Lord because he had heard his prayers. Our faithe hath neede of all the helpes that can bee, to strengthen it withall in temptations, and therefore this tryall of it, (when wee receiue comforte of our prayers, hauing his good will brought home vnto vs, and therefore by so good experience assured vs, that we can shew good eui∣dence for it) is not to be neglected but highlie to be accounted of. If God haue made vs many promi∣ses to help vs in our necessities, and wee shall not once haue sent our prayer to make tryall thereof: can we haue any greate hope at our neede of his helpe, hauing no holde but by his bare promises, which long time before were made vnto vs, but neuer tryed by vs to haue any truethe in them? Let vs not tempte the Lord, in differring this strēgthening of our faith, which hath need of al the vpholding that may be had: and all wil be tryed in tryall to be little inough. It behoueth vs to looke vp our euidence, for we deale with that aduersarie that neither wanteth skill to espye his aduauntage, nor wil to holde it to the vttermoste: and prayer is ye which bringeth tryall of God his good wil to vs particularly, in that by prayer wee are comforted and releeued whensoeuer we shal open our griefes and wants vnto our God. For albeit the Lorde might giue it vs without asking, yet it is his will that we should aske, that we may knowe wee haue beene heard: and by that meanes receiue assurance
of his goodwil towards vs. It hath bene said before that it is one thinge to be persuaded that God is good: and another to be persuaded that he is good to vs, it is one thing to be persuaded yt God giueth all things, and an other that he giueth them to vs as a pledge of his speciall goodwill and meaning to∣wards vs. The faith of God his childrē persuadeth them of goodwil from the Lord, ment particular∣ly to thē: and in their prayers they receiue in out∣warde benefites no otherwise: but as speciall to∣kens of his fauour, who now is atone with them & tenderly doth imbrace them. And ye Lord hath ap∣pointed prayer to be a helpe vnto our faith in this parte, that a man obteining by asking, might know that he were of some reckoning with the Lorde: and might bring out this proofe against those tēp∣tations that should shake his faith, in calling it into question whether he were regarded of the Lord or otherwise. We see that Dauid strengtheneth his faith in the hope to be heard for his presēt suite,Psal. 4.1. be∣cause the Lord had confirmed his good-will to∣ward him in hearing his prayers before. Sure it is that if the Lord wil giue vs things vnasked, muche more wil he giue vs yt which we haue intreted him for. And if we get no cōforte that way, our hope is small. This help of our mistrustful dispositiō, that we should come by benefites through intreatie and prayer (where wee may plainely see that we are greatly regarded & not without reckoning before him, in yt he vouchsafeth to answere vs in our mo∣tions made vnto him for our welfare) is a singular vse and end of prayer, which merueilously addeth
to the force of faith. This singular vse & special end of prayer are they depriued of that vse to pray vnto God in an vnknowen tong. For if any particular benefit be giuen them, they knowe not whether it hath come at their intreatie or no, because they knowe not what they haue prayed for: & so receiue they no sure & cer∣teine testimonie of ye Lords help. It is a singular bles∣sing, to haue his goodnesse towards vs particularly in assured experiēce. It wil be answered for them yt pray in an vnknowen tong, that it skilleth not though they them selues know not what they pray, in asmuch as God knoweth all things: and therfore vnderstandeth it. This answere were to some purpose, if the institu∣tiō of prayer were in regarde of God alone without consideratiō of vs, but prayer is appointed (as we haue already heard) yt our weakenes of faith might haue as it were sensible hold therby, & such as would suffer no exception to the contrarie, in that wee haue felt him help vs there wherein we haue requested his helpe by name & speciall request: so yt there hath bene friendly cōmunicating together, we asking, and he giuing that which we haue asked: we requiring, and he subscri∣bing vnto yt request. As for those yt pray in a tong vn∣knowen, how can they assuredly know that he fauou∣reth thē, in graūting that which they haue required? when they knowe not what it is yt they asked, and therfore their faith doth receiue no strength by their prayer yt can stand in any triall. This vse also of pray∣er which consisteth in bringing helpe to our faith, re∣proueth those that pray onely in some vniuersall speeche, and doe neuer particularly and by name offer to God the redres of any thing that doth vexe them.
The example may be this: some onely in generall words vse to pray yt God would blesse them, or yt God would make them his seruants, or yt he would kepe euil frō them. But they are not accustomed to pray for his blessing in any speciall causes whiche they are destitute of: neither come they to God, to craue his grace to serue him in this or that particu∣lar obedience, wherevnto they are bounde, and yet knowe themselues to be wanting therein, & there∣fore can they see no speciall fruite of their prayers to helpe their faithe with all. We doe see then apparantly, that this fruite and effecte of prayer, to strengthen our faith in the persuasion of God his good will towardes vs: is a meruelous profitable meane to incourage vs to prayer, beeing so strong a fortresse of our faith. The seconde thing that is to be required of him that shall pray in trueth, is, to beare a good affecti∣on, and heartie loue and good will to the worde of God, to see the Lord honoured thereby, either in dueties commaunded of him, and perfourmed: or else in promises made by him, and fulfilled, The Lorde reigneth by his word, and his honour is acknowledged when that is reuerenced, hee is magnified when it is obeyed, he is iustified and honoured when thinges fall out according to the trueth of his word. For by his word hath he made himselfe knowen alwayes,2. Peter. and by that as he made the worlde, so hathe he appointed to gouerne and iudge ye world, making himself glorious in perfor∣ming ye trueth therof. And therfore we seeking his
glorie and honour in our prayers, as we must do, (if we shall pray to any purpose,) muste ioyne with his worde in them, either praying to haue some grace giuen vs, to walke in some duetie that he hath commaunded, that in that duetie he may be honoured: or else in our affliction to finde some comfort: (according as he hathe promised,) that he in the trueth of his promise may be glo∣rified. And because the prayer that is approued must proceede from the desire of the heart, longing and lusting after that which in prayer he desireth: ther∣fore is there in the hearts of them that pray aright, a loue, liking, and heartie affection, that longeth hungerly after the righteousnesse and trueth of the worde to see it established and vpholden: & name∣ly after that dutie or promise, that in his prayer he desireth to haue perfourmed. As there is loue to∣warde the lawe where true prayer is, so is there griefe and mysliking for the transgressing of the lawe to be found in like manner within his heart, that prayeth in trueth vnto the Lorde. For if the keeping of the lawe be vnto any his delighte, the transgressing of the lawe in like manner must bee his griefe. It is plaine then, that true prayer must not onely be directed by the lawe and commande∣ment of God, but also must ioyne in desire and af∣fection with the same. The glorie of God is coupled to his word, and therfore must praiers (being the desire of the heart) goe in desire after the same, according as we haue
the example and practise of the Prophet Dauid at large in the Psalmes,Psalme. 119. where it is apparanr that hee placeth all the honour of God in his word, some∣times praying to haue his petitions graunted that he might keepe his commandementes, some times taking comfort, & assuring himselfe that he should he heard, because he had a loue vnto his law: plain∣ly affirming (as appeareth in that Psalme) that sal∣uation is far from the vngodly because they seeke not his statutes,Vers. 155. wherein his glorie consisteth: as we may learne if we goe no further for profe ther∣of, then vnto the Lords prayer it selfe. For after mention made of hallowing of his name, & com∣ming of his kingdome: there followeth the request of doing his will here in earthe: because his ho∣nour, glorie, and dominion is seene in the obedi∣ence to his will reuealed in his worde. Herein we may clearely see sentence giuen a∣gainst all such prayers, as (proceeding from a heart ignorant of the word of God) go after their owne good deuotion whiche is the honouring of them selues: and not after his good will reuealed in his word, which they are vtterly ignorant of. Where we may clearely see what account is to be made of Popishe prayers, where the woorde of God is not knowen of the moste, and not regarded of the rest: holding it for a sure principle that ignorance is the mother of deuotion. To all suche prayers the Lorde doth answere, (according as it is written in the Prouerbes:Prou. 1.28.) They
shal call vpon me, but I will not answer: they shal seeke me early, but they shal not finde me: because they hated know∣ledge, and did not choose the feare of the Lord. A iust recōpence of reward, not to be heard when they in their distresse shal by prayer speake vnto the Lord, because they refused to heare the Lorde speaking to them in his word. Here also are the prayers of all suche reproued (notwithstanding they haue knowlege of ye word, and followe not their good intents in praying vn∣to the Lorde) as haue no affection, ioye, delite, nor good liking to see the lawe and the dueties there∣of perfourmed in their life: nor yet any vexation or griefe in themselues for transgressing the same. For prayer is a desire of the minde, and therefore most desirously affected after that which it seketh, whiche is the lawe and commaundement of the Lorde. Whereby it appeareth also how fruitelesse those prayers are that come but from the lippes alone, the heart being altogether holden with other mat∣ters, and occupied wholy about other delightes. The thirde thing that is required to prayer, is, that it proceede from an emptie heart, whiche findeth want in it selfe of those thinges that it beg∣geth. For if a man feele no want of that which he asketh, he can neuer be earnest in asking. The daunger heereof is then moste to be feared, when we pray for those thinges, the meanes wher∣of we haue at home: as when a man prayeth for
successe in a matter, hauing either such wisedome in him selfe, such wealth, or such friendes: that it is likely their nede to be no doubt made of the suc∣cesse. It is hard in such like causes to come to God with an emptie heart to begg it as earnestly of him as if we wanted all such helpes. And yet is all our prayers but a dallying with God, when wee shall nourish a secure opinion in our harts, that we haue that helpe within vs, for the which in wordes we are become sutors vnto him in our prayers. Whē a wise man goeth aboute matters that vsually are compassed by wisedome, or a rich-man about that that commonly we see compassed by riches, a lear∣ned man about that which is perfourmed by lear∣ning, and the like is to be thought of all such like matters: cōmonly there are either no prayers at all to God for the accomplishing of suche matters, or if there be any, they are so colde and fainte: as be∣wraieth this secret opinion to be nouseled within, that they shall not do greately amisse, though there come no helpe by their prayers. For surely, if the help at home were in truth doubted not to be suf∣ficient, the sute for relief abroad would be earnest. The importunate sutor is hee that speedeth of his sute as we reade in Luke,Luk. 11.8. and he that is pinched with want wil spare no speech for his relief: but he that feeleth no want, is to learne as yet how to beg. The prayers therefore of such, as seldome or neuer examine themselues by the lawe and commande∣mentes of God, are greatly to be feared: nay, are plainely to be charged with dallying in their pe∣titions
with the Lord. For there is the sight of all our pouertie plaine and euident, and all the sight that we haue of it otherwise, is but a false light had in the shoppe of sathan to vtter counterfet wares withal. The fourth thing required to praier, is, yt we haue an assured hope of helpe from the Lorde: a sure beliefe to obteine that which we doe aske: for therefore is prayer an acceptable worship to God, because it ascribeth vnto him that honor of mercie to be helpful to our miserie, whē he is called vpon: neither tying his mercie to good deseruing, nor yet his power to secōd causes, as if where they had no deseruing, he had no mercy, or where they had no instrumēts of helping, he had no hand or power to helpe. God is not truely honoured of the wicked, where either he is taken to be but a vaine name & dead thing, in whom there is neither mercie nor power to be found in our necessitie (as ye Epicures & bellie-gods think, whatsoeuer they say,) or else suche weakenesse and imperfection in bothe, as cannot goe but by holdes and helpes from vs. Our sinne then may not weaken our faith be it neuer so greate, when there is true repentaunce for it. For that should darken the praise of his mer∣cie: nor yet the want of all those meanes that haue any likelihoode to helpe the matter, must driue vs to despaire: for that were to abridge and diminishe his power. The praier therfore that is ioyned with faith, cannot but be acceptable vnto him, giuing him the honour that is due vnto his name, and be∣cause of that, being an acceptable seruice and sacri∣fice vnto the Lord. But prayer without faith, (de∣spayring
to be heard) dishonoureth the Lorde, and is returned without any comforte or hope of helpe,Iames. 1.6 according as it is saide by the Apostle Iames, that he that doubteth and wauereth is like a waue of the sea tost of the winde & carried away, which shall not receiue any thing of the Lord. Yet here∣in we are to be admonished that we doe not take either that anguish and feare of the fleshe in daun∣ger and trouble, or yet the weakenesse and feeble∣nesse of faithe, to be that wandering, that the Apo∣stle speaketh of. For feare and anguishe in trou∣ble, weakenesse also in faith, are euer to be founde in fleshe, and wil not be vtterly remoued, so long as we abide in this mortal life. That prayer that by faith holdeth out and continueth, (notwithstan∣ding this feare of the fleshe and feeblenesse of faith) to sollicite the Lorde, is sure to speede of her pur∣pose at the last.Rom. 5.1 For patience wil bring experience of his goodnesse, and experience bringeth hope: for by continuing our prayers to the Lorde in the time of trouble, we are sure to finde suche mitiga∣tion thereof, as not onely maketh it so tollerable that it may be borne: but also leadeth vs to a fur∣ther hope, in that experience of mitigation alrea∣die had: whiche thing is better learned with vse, then it can be made plaine by any rule. Onely we haue to take heede, lest we should let goe the expe∣rience of his goodnesse towardes vs: either in ha∣uing taken away trouble at our request, or else in hauing asuaged the rage thereof, for experience strongly vpholdeth hope, and mightily battereth
downe despaire. And nowe to incourage vs to prayer, we haue not onely a commaundement for it,Psal. 50. (whiche maketh our obedience herein better then a sacrifice offered vnto God, & our contempt and neglecte of prayer, sinne and rebellion against God) but also most plentiful and louing promises to allure vs with assured hope of rewarde, as it is written in Matthewe: Aske and it shalbe giuen you.Matth. 7.7. Knocke and it shalbe opened. Seeke and ye shall finde. What man is there among you whiche if his sonne aske him bread would giue him a stone? If ye then which are euil can giue to your children good giftes, howe muche more shall your Father whiche is in heauen giue good things to them that aske him? These promises whiche are grounded in the mercies of God, haue made the godlie con∣ceiue hope to pray vnto him, and not their owne worthinesse: nay they haue turned away their eyes from the feare of their owne sinnes, after the hope of these promises made in mercie vnto his. A no∣table example wherof we haue in Genesis where Iacob after he confessed that he was not worthie the least of those benefites whiche he had alreadie receiued:Gene. 32.10. yet notwithstanding is imboldened to pray for other benefites, because God had promi∣sed. The promises of God are founded in his mer∣cie: and therefore perfourmed, because of his mer∣cie. These promises made al ye godly that euer were in any age bolde to pray. We therefore hauing the same promises, haue also the same hope and holde of his mercies that they had, and the same cōmen∣dation of our cause and suites whatsoeuer.
For all their hope did hang and depend vppon the goodnesse of God promised in his word, therefore let vs not be guiltie of so greate sinne againste our owne soules, as to be disobedient by our neg∣lect of prayer to the lawe and commandement of our God: neither yet so iniurious vnto the Lord, as through infidelitie and mistrust to call into questi∣on the veritie of his worde and trueth of his pro∣mises,2. Cor. 1. which are perfourmed vnto vs in our medi∣atour and redeemer Christ Iesus, in whom all the promises are fulfilled. When the question is then of our vnwoorthi∣nesse, let vs call to minde that there was neuer any man vpon the earth, no Saint or seruaunt of God, howe holie or blessed so euer, that was heard for himselfe: or had the promises perfourmed vnto him in respect of his owne worthinesse, but onely in and for Christe, to whome the promises were made, who is the heire of all things, as it is written to the Hebrues:Hebr. 1.2 and therefore no man hathe true title to any promise of blessednes, but in his name and for him, because he is a part and member of Christ, who is Lord of all, & hath true title there∣vnto. Our hope ariseth in the right of Christe, our clayme is good in his title, our comfort com∣meth by his interest. We beeing therefore mem∣bers & partes of him, haue lawfull title in his name who is the true and lawfull heire of all the inheri∣taunce, notwithstanding that in any title that we can shewe for our selues, (as from our selues,) we remaine without hope of any help or comfort by
suite to recouer any thing at all: a deede of gifte being before made vnto the Lord Iesus, of that in∣heritance and all that belongeth therevnto. Euerie gifte and graunt that is made passeth in his name, and whatsoeuer suite is recouered apperteining to our happie estate it is entred likewise in the title & right of him, and is giuen vnto vs because we are members of him. The firste Chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians maketh plaine proofe hereof,Ephe. 1.3. that we haue no spirituall blessing but in Christe, be∣cause we are his, and in him, whom the father hath appointed the lawful inheritour of all thinges. It is in plaine wordes affirmed by the Apostle to the Corinthes,1. Cor. 1.30. that the faithfull are by the appoint∣ment of God the Father in Iesus Christe, (who is made vnto them, as before wee haue heard, wise∣dome, righteousnes, holinesse, & redemption,) that he who will glorie may glorie in the Lord. Those therefore that enter their suites and peti∣tions to God the Father in the title and right of a∣ny Saint, Angel, or Apostle whatsoeuer: whether they passe in their names alone, or in Christe his name and theirs together, they enter their suite a∣misse, and therefore shall neuer profite by it. They take vpō them to frustrate that graunt made from God the Father to Iesus Christ alone, making an alienation thereof vnto others at their owne will and pleasure, cancelling that deed of gifte and for∣ging a newe, wherein the virgine Marie and o∣thers are made parteners with him, affirming that the suites and petitions must proceede in their
name also as well as his. That blasphemous prayer of theirs is not vnknowen vnto any. Tu per Thomae sanguinem, quem pro te impendit, fac nos Christe scandere, quo Thomas ascendit. Thou Christ for that bloud whiche Thomas for thee did spend, make vs clyme thether, whi∣ther Thomas did ascende. If they woulde qualifie their speeche, their owne practise will condemne them. For they haue prayed to bee accepted in the title, right, and deseruing of the Sainctes, making media∣tours to him, who is for vs alreadie, and our a∣lone mediatour in deede, making him as a straun∣ger or enimie rather, to be appeased by others: when as in verie deede hee is our best and deerest friende, appointed our mediatour, and standing on our part to appease other. Whose affection that it standeth better towardes vs then the affec∣tion of any Sainte or Angel, herein we may be persuaded, if we be not willingly and obstinately blinde:Phil. 2. Rom. 5. for that he hathe tasted of that infamous death of the crosse for vs, when we were enimies to him. The like affection was neuer founde in anie Saincte or Angel towardes vs. Shall wee then make him further off in affection, then the An∣gels and Saintes, and that they shoulde be soo∣ner inclined to pitie towardes vs then hee, and therefore wee shoulde beginne with them in our prayers for the appeasing of him? This is not to make him the peacemaker, but the partie to be ap∣peased.
This is not to make him the man that should make them one who were at variance and debate, but to make him one of the two, that bee∣ing at variaunce, were to be made one. The word of God appointeth him the onely mediatour and peace-maker betweene the righteous God and the vnrighteous man: it is therefore the woorde of man, and no worde of GOD that maketh him the partie that is at variaunce with man, and must be reconciled by an other. Is he who came downe from heauen, leauing so greate glorie, and laying downe his owne life for vs when we were his eni∣mies, nowe become so cruel, that Saintes and An∣gels must be made for vs to stay him? Is the mat∣ter fallen out so farre otherwise then he could dis∣cerne, that comming with the minde and affecti∣on of a mediatour for vs, he cannot nowe with∣out a mediatour be at one with vs? The Leuiti∣cal priesthoode did shadowe out vnto vs the priest∣hoode of Iesus Christe. Their highe prieste was their mediatour and peace-maker, that in offering vppe sacrifice made peace betweene GOD and them, but there was neuer any meanes appointed to appease the priest, nor any mediatour made for the people vnto him, neither yet any ioyned with him.Leuit. 1 It appeareth in Leuiticus that it was vnlaw∣full for any to abide in the Tabernacle of the Con∣gregation, when the prieste went into the holie place to make attonement, vntill he had made an ende. Wherein was plainly signified and established
the trueth of the alone mediatour Christe Iesus in whome the trueth of this shadowe and figure was apparantly seene: For when he was to offer vppe himselfe for our sinnes, had he any helpe from any Saint or Angel? Was there at any time suche infir∣mitie seene, euen in the best of his Disciples, as then when the Lorde went about the worke of our re∣demption, all forsaking him, and some swearing and forswearing that they neuer knewe him? For it behoued him to goe about that worke alone, not beeing ioyned with others, nor hauing helpe or aide from any. It wil be graunted that in the worke of redemption, there is none to be ioyned with Christe, but that he alone is the mediatour of re∣dēption, finishing yt him selfe none otherwise then as the high priest was alone in making attonement for the people: but in ye mediation of prayer & in∣tercession they say yt others are to be ioyned with Christ, and that Saintes and Angels are to be made on our part and for vs vnto him. Let it be shewed then that there was appointed of God, or practised in the Leuiticall priesthoode any mediatour of in∣tercession for the people vnto the high priest, whi∣che must haue beene shadowed out there, if there had beene any suche thing in trueth brought by Christe, and therefore nowe to be vsed of vs. For according as it is written to the Hebrues. The priestes that according to the lawe offer gifts,Heb. 8.4.5. doe serue vnto the patterne and shadowe of Hea∣uenlie thinges.
This whiche hath beene said of faithe in the mer∣cies of God shewed vnto vs in Christ ye alone me∣diatour and redeemer, teacheth vs to be humble in all our prayers, refusing all our owne righteousnes & deseruing, casting off all the opinion therof, ha∣uing al our hope to be heard arising only in respect of the mercies of Christ assured vnto vs by faithe: remembring alwayes that the proude Phariseie boasting of his good deeds in his prayer is refused, when ye poore Publicane is receiued making men∣tion of nothing but his miserie, sinne, & wretched∣nesse, and therefore appealing vnto mercie in ear∣nest suite calling vnto God for that alone. In that prayer which is appointed vs by ye Lord Iesus we do call God, Our Father,Luke. 18.11. to assure vs of his tender fauour towardes vs. For that is (as we haue heard) aboue all things required, neither is it possible without this persuasion of his fatherlie af∣fection to please God. For without faith,Hebr. 11. it is im∣possible to please the Lord. Therfore is it set in the beginning, because without it there is no enterance vnto him nor hope of beeing heard at his handes. Neither must we only be persuaded that the Lord fauoureth vs, and is become a father vnto vs: but also yt in regarding our prayer, & hearkening vnto the petitions that we shal make, he will make kno∣wen this fatherly affection & good will yt he doth beare vs. For when we are about to pray vnto him we are charged to be mindefull of this, that he is our Father, and so to cal him, because in the hearing of our requestes, we shalbe assured so to finde him.
Marke it wel therfore that when we are to pray vnto him, we are taught to call him Father. The Lord cannot truly be said in any respect to be farr from his, yet in praier is he said especially to draw nighe vnto them,Deut 4.7. Psal. 145.18. as appeareth in Deuteronomie, & in the Psalmes. This is the thing that we ought to be resolued fullie of, that it is the wil of our hea∣uenly Father by hearing ye prayers of his to testifie good wil towards them, to giue thē experience & triall of it that way, to the strengthening and in∣creasing of their faith. Being therefore readie to pray, let vs consider a whyle of the promises made vnto them that aske,Matth. 7.7. Knocke and Seeke, that we may be persuaded by them to finde him Fatherly affec∣ted and inclining to our demaunds. For that doth this worde Father in the beginning of our prayers offer to our consideration. His being in heauen, that is immediately spo∣ken of after this naming of our Father, doeth put vs in minde of an heauenly maiestie and power in him, able to goe throughe with the purpose of his good will towardes vs, that in nothing our hope of being heard may be hindered. This helpe that is offered vnto our faith in prayer, doeth tell vs that the heart of man is hardly resolued of this thing in trueth, that the Lord is so present alwayes by good will, power, and effect, at the suite of his seruauntes, that thereby they take true triall of his greate good will towardes them, matched with heauenly power, maiestie, and glorie, for the per∣fourmance
thereof. And that there is great difference betweene this faithe, and those opinions that commonly men are wont to conceiue of God. For the common pray∣er of the greater sorte: notwithstanding they be liberall of words and sparing of no paines therein) yet are they farre from this persuasion required of necessitie vnto true and faithfull prayer.Matth. 6. They receiue hope and are confident by reason of the la∣boriousnesse of their paynes in the multitude of prayers, and other doinges of their owne deuising: they knowe not what the mercie of God meaneth, whiche onely worketh hope in his, and maketh them humble euen in the doinge of those thinges that are commanded of him, because it is the mere mercie and good will of God that hath wrought, them in those that be his, and that doth accept them and take them in good part at their handes. The ende and marke that the seruauntes of God should sette before them in their prayers and petitions, is, to haue the Lorde glorified by perfourming that vnto his whiche he hathe promised, to haue his mercie and power to come vnto the eyes and eares of men, so euidently perfourming the trueth of his word, that they may see and be forced to confesse that he ruleth here in earth. Whē we are readie to pray either for good thin∣ges to be giuen vs, or for euill things to be taken frō vs, the care to haue God his mercies magnified, & his goodnesse promised towards his to be seene & come to light thereby, to the credite, name, and
glorie of the Lord: ought principally to prouoke vs, and to be the chiefe thing that should moue vs to make suite either for any good thing to bee gi∣uen vs, or to be eased of any affliction. And therefore are we taught in this his prayer, (which is a paterne vnto all our prayers) to begin them with the desire that his name may bee hal∣lowed, and his kingdome may come. In the whiche petitions, by the consent of all the godlie learned, we ought to haue our mindes and senses wholy shut vpp within the desire that hee mighte haue a wonderfull name, and be seene and knowen to reigne as a king, in performing the trueth of his word here vpon earth. And notwithstanding our good and benefite bee not diuided from this his glorie, but moste neerely ioyned therevnto: yet must we flie ouer the care of that in our thoughts, and beginne our requestes in the earnest desire to see the tryall of his mercies and power promised vnto his experienced, and made knowen in trueth and in effect. Therefore you shall not looke for at my handes any seuerall declaration, what parti∣cular things are conteined vnder the hallowing of his name, or the comming of his kingdome: for that were infinite, in asmuch as there is no trueth promised in his worde perfourmed, but in that same his name is hallowed, and his kingdome commeth. And I tolde you euen now, that it was the desire of his name, & his glorie, that must send vs to prayer, and go before all our owne priuate commodities and respectes whatsoeuer.
When wee doe pray that his will may bee doone in Earth as it is in Heauen, we are admo∣nished in that petition, that the glorie of his name, and the power of his kingdome, are not fundered from his will and worde. It may not once enter into our thoughts, that the Lord will be glorified in shewing foorth the greatnesse of his power and goodnesse, any otherwise, then as hee hath declared in his word, whiche is the true witt∣nesse of his will. Wherefore whensoeuer wee are truely touched with the glorie of God his name, or the aduauncement of his kingdome, we are de∣sirous to haue some thing perfourmed, whiche in his word he hath approued. In this petition, wee haue warrant to pray vnto the Lord for any thing that in his word he hath promised to bestowe vp∣pon his, & therfore are we taught to inquire at his mouth, I meane euen at his word what his wil and pleasure is. For to presume to aduaunce his glorie otherwise then he hath shewed vs in his worde, is to tempt the Lord: and to imagine to glorifie him, or to purchase praise vnto him, with that which by his word cannot be approued, is not to honour, but to dishonor ye Lord, for he hath coupled the glorie of his name & the honour of his kingdome to the doeing of his wil. It was declared of late, that not∣withstanding the glorie of God and the comming of his kingdome, be not diuided from ye commo∣ditie of his seruants: yet ought his seruantes to cast their eyes vpon his glorie alone in ye recital of those petitions: In like man̄er ought we to iudge of this
petitiō: where we do craue for the doing of his wil that the in requesting of any thing agreable to his wil, we ought not so much to loke vpon any com∣moditie cōming to vs therby, as vnto this, yt ther∣by his wil and pleasure taketh place, and he is sene & plainly perceiued to be iust & true in his word, and so by that meanes his kingdome is truely ac∣knowledged, & his name hallowed. We do con∣fesse that he ruleth according to his word, but whē we see the experience therof, yt whiche before was faintly in the mouth, is now strongly conceiued in the hearte. And who soeuer he be yt hath the greatest porti∣on of faith and most assured persuasiō of the good wil & power of God, that it watcheth alwayes for the perfourmance of his wil reuealed in his word, he hath neede notwithstanding to haue his faith strengththened, by experience and tryall of ye mer∣cies of God, visibly performed in the gouernment of his church. The Sainctes and seruantes of GOD are desirous alwayes to haue his honoure aduaunced and his kingdome acknowledged by the ordering and gouerning of things here in earth according to his word, & therfore after that Solomon had made an end of intreating the Lord to heare the prayer of his seruaunts in their seuerall necessities (ac∣cording as they are recited in the booke of Kings) he rendereth a reason why hee would haue the Lord to graunt their petitions:1. King. 8.43. That (sayth he) all the people of the earth may knowe that the Lord is GOD
and none other. This is the cause why the seruantes of God are desierous to haue their petitions and prayers which they make according to his wil, to be heard and graunted, euen that the glorie of his name may be aduaunced, that it may be seene that hee ruleth and none other, and that experience may iustifie the gouernement of God after his word. Heere we see that blinde and ignoraunt pray∣ers (what deuotion and good meaning so euer be pretended) are no prayers that euer the Lorde will accepte of, and that suche as doe not serue the Lord after his word, are cut off from all hope to haue their prayers heard to any benefite or com∣forte of theirs, because the Lorde hath ioyned his mercie and power wherein hee will bee glorifi∣ed, to the performaunce of his will, for the com∣fort and good of those that doe serue him after his worde. Therefore doeth the Prophet Dauid make his seeking out of the preceptes of God a persuasion that he shall be heard.Psal. 119.94 Saue me (sayth he) for I haue sought thy preceptes. And in the same 173. verse. Let thy hand saue mee, for I haue chosen thy preceptes. Likewise in the last verse of that Psalme hee say∣eth these wordes. I haue gone astray like a loste sheepe, seeke thy seruaunt, for I doe not forget thy commaunde∣mentes. And not in this verse alone, but in ma∣ny other through-out this Psalme, hee concei∣ueth hope of beeing hearde in his Prayer, be∣cause
ye Lord had giuen him a carefull heart to the keping of his word, wherin his glorie doth consist. In asmuch therfore as he was careful of his glo∣rie, he conceiueth hope that the Lorde will not be vnmindefull of him, but is bolde in a godlie hope to say:Psal. 119.153 Beholde mine affliction and deliuer me, for I haue not forgotten thy lawe. And sometimes in this intreating of the Lorde to heare him, he promiseth in time to come that he will keepe the statutes and commandements of the Lord, as it appeareth in the 145. verse of ye Psalme in these wordes. Heare me O Lord and I wil keepe thy statutes. These authorities from the Prophet are vt∣tered to this end, that we shuld not put those things a sunder, which the Lord hath coupled together. For the Lord his glorie is not parted from his wil reuealed in his worde: & whensoeuer we haue in purpose to sanctifie his name to get praise vnto him, and to aduaunce his kingdome here vpon earth: we must proceede no otherwise then ac∣cording to his word, being assured that it hathe al∣lowance and probation from the same: these three petitions do not so much note what seueral things are to be asked, as with what minde those thinges that we aske according to his wil are to be desired: that is euen with a hartie longing & desiring to see his name sanctified, his kingdome established, and that whiche is to his good liking and will accom∣plished here vpon earthe: by bringing something to passe, whereof he hath declared his liking appa∣rantly in his word.
If we shal craue any grace of him whereby to haue our life bettered, and our conuersation amen∣ded: the care of his kingdome, the desire of his name, the longing to see his wil and pleasure take place: ought to bee the thing that should moue vs therevnto. Our petitions also for temporall blessings, or to haue euils remoued from vs, ought in like manner to be made in the care and desire of his kingdome and glory, who hath promised in his worde, that he will be nigh vnto his that call vppon him in in trueth, and that hee will heare the prayers of his that attende vppon his commaundementes: bothe in blessing them with good things, & also in turning euil things from them. Such things there∣fore, we should also desire euen for ye establishing of his name, credit and kingdome here vpon earth, according as the seruants of God haue done, as ap∣peareth in many places of the scripture. Helpe vs oh God of our saluation (saith the Prophet) for the glo∣rie of thy name,Psal. 79.9. deliuer vs and bee mercifull to our sinnes for thy names sake. Wherefore shoulde the heathen say, Where is their God? beeing moste of all carefull least the wicked should triumphe ouer the Lotd, if that he should not stand by his, according as he promi∣sed in his worde: but lay them open to all iniuries and reproches of the wicked, without hope of de∣liuerance from him. Nowe let vs pray vnto our heauenlie father, that we may so be touched with the glorie of his
name, the care of his kingdome, and desire that his wil may take place, as may comforte vs in the assured hope to haue our prayers heard when we call vpon him &c. ¶The xvj. Lecture vppon the 11. verse. Giue vs this day our daily bread. WHen Solomon had made re∣quest vnto the Lord for the peo∣ple of Israel on the dedication of the temple,1. Reg. 8. that hee woulde vouchsafe to hear their prayers, when any of those seuerall occa∣sions whiche there he maketh mention of, should oppresse them: in the end of his prayer, he request∣eth the Lord yt he would defend ye cause of his peo∣ple Israel alwayes as the matter should require, that what soeuer necessitie or extremitie time should bring vpon thē, he would haue a fatherly regarde vnto them in that time of their necessitie & releeue them. This is that which is ment by daily bread, that the Lorde would graunt vs euery day whatsoeuer shalbe the necessitie of that day, giuing alwaies the thinges of ye day in his day. For those be his words in yt place according to ye truth of the Hebrue text. In this petitiō we haue warrāt to call vnto God for temporall benefites that we shall stand in neede of,1. Kin. 8.59. whatsoeuer. The seruāts of God haue gone before vs by their example, in applying the Lorde with
prayer when soeuer ye want of any thing did vexe them. In the booke of Psalmes we shall see that Dauid in all distresses flyeth vnto God by prayer: cureing all his griefes, whether of minde or body, with no other plaster then prayer. That booke of psalmes being well perused, let vs see the manifold vse and wonderful successe of prayer, for somtime the Prophet cureth the griefe and languishing of his heart with prayer: sometime he recouereth the helth of his body by prayer: in other places he put∣teth all his enimies to flight, with no other weapō then this of prayer: to be briefe, he maketh of pray∣er a medicine for all maladies, & speedeth so wel with it in all his necessities, that we may not onely say in bare words that it is a salue for all sores, but euen write vpon the head thereof Probatum est, for it is tryed to haue cured all griefes and vexations of what kinde soeuer.Psa, 107.5.6 In the Psalme the Prophet declareth that hungrie and thirstie soules, wande∣ring in the wildernesse, and calling vnto God by prayer: are satisfied of him and sent away repleni∣shed with good thinges.Verse. 10. In the same Psalme he declareth in like manner, that men beeing in pri∣son bound fast with chaines and yron, without all hope of help, calling vpon the Lord in their pray∣ers are heard of him, their prayers graūted, & they deliuered.Verse. 17. The same psalme maketh mentiō of mē pyning away with sicknes, or heauines of heart, & yet by calling vpon him in prayer to haue ben cu∣red & to haue recouered that dangerous estate. To cōclude, in ye 13. verse of the same psalme the mari∣ners yt call vpon God when ye tempest doth threten
death vnto them, are reported there to haue their prayers heard of the Lorde, to be deliuered from that daunger, and to bee brought to the land that they longed for. What man not well instructed, would once haue conceiued hope to haue these or the like thinges holpen by prayer? What man (not well instructed in the worde of God) would not take it to be a casuall thing that commeth (as it is said) by fortune, when faire wether commeth af∣ter a tempest, or health doeth succeede sicknesse, when deliuerance commeth after imprisonment, or plentie after pouertie? These are so often sene by experience to come one after an other, that not∣withstanding men haue in their distresse prayed for them, yet hardly can they be brought to think that they are blessings graunted to faithful prayer: but rather imagine that they are thinges cast heere and there vpon men at aduenture. And therefore where men are in those or such like distresses, they hardly, or not at all, conceiue any hope to he heard. Seldome doe they make a∣ny sute vnto God in faith, especially if those afflic∣tions lay sore vpon them: but the children of God (knowing that they are promised to haue ye Lorde neere vnto them in all that they shall call vnto him for) and that they shalbe heard for the thing of the day vpon his day: as their occasion requireth, so doe they seeke vnto the Lord, beeing sure in con∣tinuance to finde comforte at his hands, and why they knowe assuredly that the Lord will haue his mercie and power tryed and seene heere vppon
the earth, in hearing the requestes of his in their di∣stresse: that by that meanes hee may bee truely feared and honoured of them, according as it is proued in the booke of Kinges:1. King. 8.43. and also that by his hearing of their petitions in those their distres∣ses, they may be confirmed in the persuasion that GOD fauoureth them, remitteth their sinnes, and beeing at one with them is fauourably incli∣ned vnto them in all their needfull demaunds. Whosoeuer shall diligently consider of the places of Scripture in the olde Testament, applied by the Apostle to ye forgiuenes of sinns, shall easily perceiue, that the godlie haue taken their deliue∣raunce from their distresses, as pledges of the re∣mission of their sinnes, and assuraunces that God for Christe was at one with them. For their temporall blessings were not receiued of them, but as confirmations of his reconciliation with them: whiche proueth that which was said before, that the Lord heareth ye prayer of his in their necessitie, to strengthē their faith in the remission of sinnes, and persuasion that GOD for Christ is beecome fatherly affected towardes them, his promises being visibly confirmed to them. In Deuteronomie there are promises made vnto them that do giue diligent heede vnto the law and commandements of God to obey them,Deut. 28.10 that they shalbe blessed in the fruit of their body, in the fruit of their cattel, in their comming in and going out, in all that they shall put their handes vnto, in cau∣sing their enimies that rise against them to fall be∣fore
their face, and the cause is added in the tenth verse in these wordes. Then all the people of the earth shall see that the name of the Lorde is called vppon ouer thee, and they shall be affrayde of thee. It is therfore moste assured, that the Lord will be seene to bee the GOD of his, and to haue a kingdome heere vppon earth, by graunting them their requestes, when they shall call vppon him in their distresse: by leauing outwarde blessings as plaine confirmations of his inwarde heartie good will that he beareth towardes them. And for this cause doe his people craue those temporall bene∣fites, euen that it may bee seene that he ruleth vp∣pon earth, standing by his as he hath promised. Wherefore, whensoeuer their enimies op∣presse them, or by the want of any his accustomed benefites they seeme not to bee regarded of the Lord, they cōplaine vnto him not so much in the consideration of their necessitie, as in regarde of his glorie: vsing these & such like kind of speeches, Wherfore should the Heathen say, Where is now their GOD? As if their chiefe care were to haue the Lorde his glorie vpholden in the confirmati∣on of his goodnesse promised vnto his: whiche is called into doubt of the vngodlie, while they see those that accounted thēselues for his in affliction and oppression, necessitie and want, as if they were not regarded of him, wherby the vngodly are im∣boldened the more to oppresse the righteous, & by calling into question ye trueth of his promises made
vnto his, confirmed the rather in the continuing of their disobedience. Very fitly therefore is the hal∣lowing of his name, the comming of his king∣dome, and the doeing of his wil, set before the re∣quest of outwarde necessities, because wee should demaund them rather in respect of his glorie, that he might therby haue a name and kingdome here in earth, and his wil perfourmed, rather then wee to haue therein our alone necessitie releeued. The godly in like manner returne the whole praise vnto him, euen whē those things are graun∣ted vnto them that seeme to be moste casuall, and to come at aduenture.Psal. 107. Therfore in that Psalme be∣fore mentioned they are willed to praise ye Lord, and to tel vnto others what he hath done for thē, when those things which seeme to be meere casu∣all, and comming by fortune and chaunce, are ob∣teyned: which clause of praysing the Lord, and tel∣ling vnto others what thinges he hath graunted at the requestes of their prayers, is added in ye psalme vnto the end of euery seuerall benefite, graunted vnto thē. But al men cōceiue not this doctrin, they are his children alone, who in hart are assured that these which cōmonly we cal casual things, are dis∣posed by him at the pleasure of his will, & graūted as pledges of his goodwill, to those that in trueth call vpon him, and therfore in ye last verse of that psalme, it is said: Who is wise that he may obserue these things, because they be onely his children that haue this wisdome to obserue this, to mark it, to knowe
that he disposeth these outwarde things to ye good of his, as pledges of his fatherly goodnes towards them: and therfore they onely call vpon him for them in faith, and in receiuing them doe assured∣ly in their heart reckon them as benefites receiued of him, confirming their faith therby, in the assu∣rance of his especiall goodwill towards them. By this that hath bene said, it doth appeare, that when we are oppressed with anguish of heart, or vexed with any calamitie, either of bodie or minde: wee haue to seke our remedie at the hands of the Lord by prayer, in assured hope to receiue no smal com∣fort thereby, if in faith and hope of his mercies we continue in calling vppon his name. It is a very hard matter, and the worke of faith alone, when a man is sore distressed & seeth no means to escape, then to call vpon God with faith and hope of bee∣ing heard: and if help shall come, it is as hard a mat∣ter to ascribe it vnto the mercies of God as ye fruit of prayer, and an assured token of his goodwil ren∣dering from the ground of our hart the praise that is due vnto him for it, and strengthening our faith therby in the persuasiō of his mercies towards vs. The seruāt of God glorifieth God in these things, acknowledging from his hearte, that God is the giuer and disposer of them, but the vngodly what∣soeuer they say in worde, thinke in heart that they came by fortune and chaunce, and therefore doe not giue him the glorie for them, neither sanctifie them by prayer as things receiued in especiall good will from God.
In the Psalme there is plentifully set foorth vnto vs,Psal. 91. what protection the godly shall finde against all dangers in their distresses, & in the end of that Psalme, it is declared, by what meanes they shall escape those dangers, in these wordes: He shall call vpon me and I will heare him, I will be with him in trou∣ble, I will deliuer him and glorifie him, with long life will I satisfie him and shew him my saluation. If any shall diligently reade that notable book of prayer, the prayer booke of the holy Ghoste, I meane the booke of Psalmes, he shall cleerely see that which before was said, that the prophet is no way distressed, but hee runneth foorthwith vnto God by prayer, and findeth comfort at his hands, knowing (as he testifieth in the Psalme) that the Lorde is neere vnto all that call vpon him,Psal. 145 18 yea to all that call vpon him in trueth, that hee will fulfill the desire of them that feare him, that he will heare their cry and saue them. It hath bene declared, that we in this petition are taught to call vpon God for deliuerance, what∣soeuer our necessitie shalbe, and that with hope in God to be heard, albeit we see no meanes how we shalbe holpen. It hath in like manner bene declared how hardly this is perfourmed of vs, yt we should haue hope when we can see no meanes lightly to helpe: so that it is the faithfull man alone that gi∣ueth this glorie vnto God. We learned out of the Psalme yt the faithful man beeing tossed with the tempest vpon the sea, and seeing no possibilitie to escape, resorteth vnto God by prayer, and findeth
the fruit thereof. This (as was said before) is hard∣lie perfourmed in such extremities, where there appeareth no meanes likely to deliuer vs. It is as hard a thing by reason of our corruption, to seeke at God his hands by true prayer, those outwarde benefites that are procured by our laboure, as by meanes appointed of God to helpe vs therevnto. As for example, whē a man hath an occupation to liue by, it is no easie matter for him to craue as har∣tily at God his hands for his liueing, as that man yt wanteth all ordinarie meanes to mainteine him. We are taught in this petition to beg at ye hands of God by prayer, those outwarde thinges that haue meanes ordeined to bring thē euen then when we haue the vsuall meanes. For the man yt hath friends of great credite, that are able to compasse matters of greater importance then he hath any to trouble them withall, must looke & seke for successe at the Lorde by prayer, as carefully as if he knew of no helpe or friendshippe at all. When men of wise∣dome, credite, or power, go aboute their matters without any calling vpon the name of God, they plainly denie the Lord that honour that is due vn∣to him: for he must be acknowledged, as hee is in deed, the disposer of all outwarde benefites, aswell of those that come by the meanes of our labour, indeuour, or other our meanes whatsoeuer, as those that come so as we can giue no reason of the same, comming by casualtie or fortune, as men commonly vse to speake. And in this petition wee are taught to craue
all outwarde benefites, and the successe and goeing forewarde of all our laboures of the LORDE, who is the onely giuer of them, and without whose especiall blessing all healpes and meanes are to no purpose: according as it is written in the Psalme:Psa. 127.1.2 Except the Lorde builde the house, they labour in vaine that builde it. It is vaine for you to ryse early and lye downe late: decla∣ring heereby, how little helpe there is in all our carefull toyle, to atteyne to wealth and earthlie commodities. And therefore in all our trauailes wee are taught to resorte vnto GOD by earnest and faithfull prayer. It is he that muste blesse our going in, and our comming out,Pal. 121. as wee do reade in the Psalmes. Wherfore the godlie looke for a peculiar blessing of GOD vppon their laboures, and seeke vnto him for it, when as the vngodly ascribe ye honour that is due vnto God, vnto those helps and meanes of counsel, labour, or indeuour, which are but the instrumentes appointed of the Lord therevnto. The daunget of this disease is so greate, and man so easilie drawen to seeke vn∣to the healpes that hee hath without any due res∣pect and regarde of the Lorde: that in expresse wordes he giueth his people warning of this of∣fence in Deuteronomie.Deu. 8.17. Beware leaste thou say in thine hearte, my power and the strength of myne owne hand hath prepared me this aboundaunce: but remember the Lord thy GOD: For it is he whiche giueth the power to get substaunce, Let vs learne to sanctifie all outwarde bles∣sings
by prayer, seeking them vnfeignedly at the Lorde, and acknowledging them in trueth, and from a persuaded heart, to haue beene giuen vs from the hands of our God, what soeuer hath bene store or strength of our meanes to procure thē by. For otherwise they are not pure vnto vs, if we bee not resolued of the giuer thereof, reaching through all meanes into the sight of his goodnesse, who is the Lord and disposer of these temporall thinges. A Christian is taught in this petition not to be tormented before hand, with the feare of an hard estate and euil condition in time to come, because the Lord (who is the disposer of all outward thin∣ges) hath taught his to resort vnto him for the ne∣cessitie of the day, in the day and time of their dis∣tresse: promising to stand by them in their troubles and wants, and to declare himselfe to be their God by the benefites and mercies, that he will graunt at their requests. What a great burthen therfore are we discharged of by the Lord, who in promising to heare vs in the day of our calamitie, hath cut off many cares, griefes, and vexations which long be∣fore they come, torment the vngodly, and when they are vppon them, doe driue them either to des∣paire or to vngodly shiftes. How iust also is the plague and punishment of those, who refusing this benefite of the Lorde, will haue their owne care and feare vsurpe vpon the mercie and goodnesse of GOD: who in singular good will hathe returned vnto vs the benefite of our thoughtes and cares, to haue them
otherwise bestowed for our good in his seruice, willing vs not to be careful before hand for the ne∣cessitie to come, for the care of the day shall suf∣fice for the same.Matth. 6.34. If the Lorde in mercie abate and giue backe this benefite of our care, that we may haue it before the necessitie come free to bestowe vpon his seruice for our owne profite: what mad∣nesse is there in our refusall? nay, what wicked∣nesse and contempt of the grace of God? That man therfore that learneth not to abate the care for out∣ward daungers and necessities to come, can neuer in trueth pray vnto the Lord that he would giue him this day his daily breade. For these wordes of daily bread, and this day, doe cutt off the care and torment of times farre off. By the promise whiche in this petition we doe trust and depende vppon,Hebr. 13.5 the holie Ghost to the Hebrues cureth co∣uetousnesse: willing them to be content with that they haue, & to see yt their conuersation be with∣out couetousnesse, because the Lorde hath saide, I will not leaue thee nor forsake thee. This promise of the Lord, that he will not for∣sake his in the day of their necessitie, is set as a bul∣worke to beate backe their feare of want, and care∣full coueting that ariseth therevpon: that they may hold them wel content and apaide with their pre∣sent state and condition. The holie Ghoste ma∣keth a great diuersitie betwene the godlie and wic∣ked touching these earthly thinges: for they come to the godlie as it were sleeping: for so doeth he tearme their quiet laboure, that wayte assuredly
for ye successe frō the Lord, in respect of the careful toile yt the vngodly are tormented with, as if their liuing lay onely in their trauels. There is a secrete blessing of the Lorde which must be sought for at his handes by faithfull prayes, without the which all care and trauel that can be taken wil not auaile. It is the blessing of the Lord that maketh riche (sayeth the holie Ghost.Prou. 10.22) There is more in that then our fleshly and mistrustfull heart can easily be persua∣ded of. Let vs therefore learne to lessen our mis∣trustfull care, that we may testifie to the worlde ye increase of our faith, in the persuasion of his mer∣cie towardes vs, according as this petition doeth admonishe vs. For in praying vnto him for these outward commodities, we doe acknowledge that they be at his disposing, and that all the labour in the worlde will not fetche them, vnlesse it please him to giue successe. Wherefore we may plainely see, that when we haue trauelled or vsed those out∣ward meanes wherby commonly benefits are pro∣cured, we haue but accomplished one part, and the least part of that that bringeth the benefite in deed. Prayer must also be vsed, and the Lorde he is to be intreated, and this is not the least but the chiefe parte. The godly tempt not the Lord by refusing his meanes, but euen then when they doe vse those meanes, they are muche in prayer for the successe and going forward of them: whether it be labour, counsell, or friendshippe that they they vse to com∣passe their matter by. For the want of this, we see
it fall out in common experience, that the wisest men haue had suche successe with their deuises, as the most foolish man that is, could not haue made a madder matche, then often times falleth out euen there where their care and counsell hath beene the greatest: whiche teacheth vs to giue the Lorde his due, to acknowlege him the Lord and gouernour of those temporall commodities, to begge them at his handes by true and vnfeigned prayer, and by faith to depend vpon him, and not vpon our trauel, no not where it is the greatest and promiseth the moste vnto vs. Worldly men that depend wholy in the per∣suasion of their heart vpon the help of their hands, their wisdome, or their wealth or friendship: do dis∣semble with the Lorde in this request. For they seeke that at him as his gift, whiche their heart tel∣leth them that they haue alreadie at home. Coue∣tous men that wold gather faster then he will giue, how can they in trueth seeke it at his hands: when they are not at any time content with yt measure or portion that he doth giue, neither rest in his distri∣bution, hauing such a hungrie desire as would pre∣scribe the Lord, and not be limited or prescribed by the Lord? The oppresser, hard & cruel dealer, yt pretendeth to beg his bread & temporal cōmodity of the Lord, & in the meane time is the purueyer, and prouider for him selfe, by suche oppressing and vnmercifull meanes as the Lorde abhorreth, doeth dallie with the Lorde, deceiue him selfe, and maketh his praier a curse vnto his owne soule, and
a witnesse in the day of iudgment against his own conscience: in that he hath professed in this prayer that to be the Lords gift, whiche he sought of sa∣than by suche wayes and meanes as he approueth, but the Lord abhorreth them. We pray here for others aswell as for our selues, he therfore that pro∣fesseth to pray for others their good estate concer∣ning temporall thinges, and yet conueyeth that whiche is others, or withholdeth it eyther by vio∣lence or deceipte: with what conscience doeth he offer this petition to the Lord? The children of God haue their faith declaring it selfe by outward thinges, while they doe depende vppon him for them: wherein the vngodly bewray their wante, howsoeuer they boast of their inward persuasion of his goodnesse. For if the Lord speede them not to their contentation, they will not sticke to pro∣uide for themselues, by suche either open or secrete oppression as he hathe plainely forbidden, as if he were onely the God of the soule, and not of the bo∣die also, & whole man, to prouide for both, accor∣ding to the good pleasure of his will: and wee by faith to depende and wayte for a speciall bles∣sing from him, euen in outward thinges which the vngodly cannot see into. For they binde the Lord so vnto the instrumentes whereby hee wor∣keth his will, that in truth they haue the glorie, and he is altogether depriued thereof. They be only his children that in truth acknow∣ledge him the giuer of these outwarde benefites, & therfore wil vse no meanes besides those which
he hathe approued. The other in seeking helpe by meanes forbidden of him, doe plainely speake in those their doings yt they haue no faith nor cōfidēce in him: we may in faith & good hope aske those thinges, because they make for the glorie of God, who doth reigne and rule in earth by giuing vnto his their wantes, euen in these outward and tempo∣ral things, according as we may learne in ye Psalm.Psalm. 146. Where after many words declaring that God ex∣ecuteth iustice for the oppressed, giueth bread to the hungrie, loseth the prisoners, kepeth the stran∣gers, relieueth the fatherlesse, ouerthroweth ye way of the wicked: immediately it followeth, The Lord shal reigne for euer, ô Sion. As if the Lord should not be known to reigne, if he should fayle his seruants calling and depending vpon him in their distresses. For we may not think that he faileth his seruants, when he giueth them better benefites, then those which they doe aske. As if they craue deliuerance out of present daunger, and he by taking them in mercie out of this life, worketh a final riddaunce out of all daunger: shall we say that the Lord hath not heard them? Likewise if their necessitie what∣soeuer, indureth longer then they wishe, or increase vpon them after their suite made for deliueraunce, because ye Lord wil worke a more glorious worke in their deliuerance for the comfort and increase of their faithe, notwithstanding it be some long time after: shall we say the Lorde hathe reiected their prayers, because he hath delayed so long? God for∣bidde. For the Lorde according to the good coun∣sel
of his will, hath not iustified the innocencie and good causes of his sometimes, no not before their death. And as it hath bene said of the time, so like∣wise is it to be thought of the meanes & maner of helping & relieuing vs, if yt hath ben other then we coulde haue prescribed, shall we denie the Lord to haue hearde our suites, because the helpe that we haue had, hath not beene in the same manner that we haue conceiued to be best? This one thing we haue often to call to remembrance, that before the request of these outward necessities, there is the de∣sire of doing his will here in earth: to teach vs that the Lord is thus helpful, in outward necessities op∣pressing them, vnto the prayers of suche, as haue not onely the knowledge of his will, but also the desire to do it. For that goeth before the other in our prayer, & therfore in our desire, in as much as true praier go∣eth not without ye desire of the hart vnto ye request of the tongue. Those therfore, that looke for these outward blessinges when they call vnto the Lord, must learne both to know what his will is reueled in his word, & also to haue a desire to doe ye same. For vnto those that thus worship him, the Lord hath promised to incline his eare, according as it is written in these wordes: We knowe that God heareth not sinners,Iohn. 6.31. but if any man be a worshipper of God, & doth his wil, him heareth he: putting them in hope of bee∣ing heard yt be worshipers of him, & making those the worshippers, not that do vnto him whatsoeuer liketh them, but that are doers of his liking & wil,
which is opened to vs in his word. To the confir∣mation of this may be added that, which is writ∣ten in the first Epistle of S. Iohn in these wordes, whatsoeuer we aske we receiue of him,Iohn. 3.22. because we do those thinges whiche are pleasing in his sight. By this it appea∣reth that witches & sorcerers (whiche wil haue the name of wisemen and wise women) who are thought to do so many things with prayer, can∣not preuaile with the Lorde to obteine these out∣ward thinges of him in fauour and goodwil: for of all people they are the most ignorant of his will, & therefore of his worship. But as euen nowe it was proued, if any man be a worshipper of God and a doer of his will, him heareth he. Those are they to whō the Lord hath made promise yt he wilbe mer∣cifully inclined vnto in their prayers & petitions, he is nighe vnto al that call vpon him in trueth, he wil fulfil the desire of thē yt feare him, he wil heare their crie and will saue them.Psal. 145.19.20. The Lord preserueth all them that loue him, (saith the holy Ghost.) It may so fal out that the prayers of witches & such like may be instrumentes of his iustice, for the punishment of sinne in others: and for the hardening of their own harts: but it is as sure as the lord liueth, yt they neuer obteine any thing by their prayers to their good, in fauour & good liking of ye lord. But as for ye seruants of God, they are in assured hope to haue their prayers heard, whē they shal cal vpon ye Lord in their outward distresses: for they are persuaded, (as ye truth is in deede) yt it standeth vpō ye name & glorie of ye Lord, to stand by his in their necessities
for to succour and help them, as the matter shall re∣quire. Wherefore they require it as a part of his owne glorie, as an argument and assurance that he reigneth here in earth, as a matter that is agreeable to his good pleasure and will, according as they haue learned out of his word, whiche giueth them an assured hope of beeing heard, and maketh them bolde to call vppon him, knowing that his owne glorie, the renoune of his owne kingdome, and a matter that is agreeable to his owne good liking and will, is in hande, while their distresses & wants are brought before the Lord, to be holpen, & relie∣ued by him. A manifest confirmation & proofe of this is to be found in the Psalme: In the whiche place the prophet speaketh much in the beginning of extolling the name of God,Psal. 145. of meditating the beautie of his glorious maiestie, of shewing foorth the glorie of his kingdome, and speaking of his power: after this it followeth, that the Lorde vp∣holdeth all that fall, that he fulfilleth the desire of them that feare him, that he wil heare their crie, and will saue them: as if the glorie of his name, and renoune of his kingdome were seene in this: to lift vp his that fall, to heare their crie and saue them. And no doubt the Lord will haue it know∣en here vpon earth, that he is Lorde ouer all true & faithfull in his word, by the helpe and defence that he will graunt vnto his, whensoeuer in their dis∣tresse they shal by faithful prayer resorte vnto him. His meaning is to leaue manifest and plaine profe that he ruleth herein earth, euē by that mercie that
he hath to bestowe vpon his, who cal and crie vnto him in their necessitie with an assured hope of be∣ing heard. For the glorie of his name, the honour of his kingdome, and the good pleasure of his will go ioyntly together with the hearing & regarding of their cause: according as they are set before this petition, in this fourme of prayer that is prescribed by the Lord. Where, before we make mention of daily bread, there is request made for the halow∣ing of his name, the comming of his kingdome, and dooing his wil, because euen then when he re∣lieueth the necessities of his that call vpon him, his name is hallowed, his kingdome commeth, and that is perfourmed which is agreeable to his will. This cannot but minister hope and comfort vnto vs in all our necessities, that his honour and glorie is after a manner darkened in our distresse, and as it were suffereth in the same, which the lord God cannot but erecte and aduaunce, and therefore fa∣uour our distresse, wherevnto his owne honour is so neerely ioyned. Nowe let vs pray, &c. ¶The xvij. Lecture vppon the 12. and 13. verses. 12 And forgiue vs our debts as we also forgiue our debters, 13 And lead vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs frō euil: for thine is the kingdome, and the power, and the glorie for euer, Amen.
IN this petition we do require the forgiuenesse of our sinnes, where∣in wee are to vnderstande that by this worde sinne, is not onely ment the guiltines that we haue brought in vpon vs by offending, but also ye punishment whatsoeuer that followeth therevpon, as shal hereafter (God willing) moste plainely appeare. We are therefore put in hope by this petition, to haue as well the punishment as the fault of our sinne pardoned, & forgiuen vs, so that when any punishment of God is vppon his, they neede not to despaire: for we are taught and com∣manded by him to make suite for the forgiuenesse of sinnes, which could not be done in faith, if the Lord had not promised vnto vs the pardon & for∣giuenesse thereof. The godlie at all times when a∣ny affliction was vppon them, haue resorted to the Lord for the forgiuenes of their sinnes. And why? Are we not taught so to do in the holy scripture?1. Kinges. 8. Doth not ye praier of Solomon leaue this for a per∣petuall doctrine vnto the Church: that when any punishment is vpon those yt be his, they should cō∣fesse their sinnes in trueth, with an assured hope in so doing to finde fauour at his handes: and ease of their griefe when they shal truely turne vnto him? according as it is written in that Chapter in these words:Verse. 33. When thy people Israel shalbe ouerthrow∣en before the enimie, because they haue sinned a∣gainst thee, and turne againe to thee, and confesse thy name, & pray & make supplication vnto thee,
then heare thou in heauen, and be mercifull vnto the sinne of thy people Israel, & bring them againe vnto the land which thou gauest vnto their fathers. A plaine proofe we haue in this place that the peo∣ple of God may resort boldly vnto God, euen then when his punishment is vpon thē for the forgiue∣nesse of their sinnes: and as plaine is this also yt his mercie toward them, & pardoning of their sinnes, consisteth not only in the remouing of the fault frō them, but also of the punishment that is due for the fault & transgression. For he praieth that when the people shalbe led out of their land by their enimies, because they haue sinned against the Lord, yt if they shall confesse their sinnes and turne vnto the Lord: then he would be merciful and bring them againe vnto the land, which is to remoue the punishment from them, as well as the fault and guiltinesse. This was that punishment to bee captiues and priso∣ners in their enimies land: when they are brought home this punishment is remoued. The like profe we haue of this matter in the same Chapter, in these wordes: When heauen shalbe shut vppe,Verse. 35. & there shalbe no rayne, because they haue sinned againste thee: and shall pray in this place, and turne from their sinne, when thou doest afflicte them, then heare thou in heauen, & pardon the sinne of thy seruants, & giue rayne vpon the land. They that haue sinned are incouraged to pray vnto the Lord, & are assured to be heard, whē they shall in trueth bewayle and confesse their sinne. Marke it also, that as well in this place, as in that former, the pardon of their sinne remoueth the pu∣nishment,
and reacheth vnto that as well as vnto the guilt therof. I do note this because of that doc∣trine of the church of Rome, which doth affirme that God doth pardon the fault of his, and yet re∣teine still the punishment, which they say must bee redeemed by their satisfactiō. A daungerous doc∣trine that God shuld absolue them of the fault, & yet presse them with the punishment whiche doth not apperteine vnto them, but in respecte of their offence, because they are faultie: this doctrine char∣geth the Lord with iniurie. For if he shal remit & forgiue the fault & yet reserue the punishment, he punisheth without a cause. For where the fault is pardoned, the man is as if he had not offēded, he is no longer accounted a trespasser. Can it then stand with the iustice of the Lord, to punish him whom he him selfe hath iustified as no offender, in the free pardoning and forgiuing of his fault? We do see it throughout this chapter, that when they shall con∣fesse their fault and turne vnto the Lorde, they are discharged of the punishmente, and that the holie Ghost is ignorant of this diuorcement betweene ye punishment & ye fault, which the church of Rome hath inuented to vtter their merchādize of satisfac∣tions withall. And lest any should thinke that this prayer for the forgiuenesse of sinnes, did but take place in these special causes in ye remouing of those particular & speciall punishments, the holie Ghost maketh it generall in the seuen and thirtie verse. When there shalbe Famine in the land, when there shalbe Pestilence,Verse. 37. Blasting Mildew, Grashoppers, or
Caterpillers, when their enimies shall besiege them in the cities of their lande, or any plague, or any sicknesse, for these are the verie words of the text: that their prayers shalbe auaileable when they shal confesse their faultes and truly turne vnto ye Lord, for ye remouing of those punishments what so euer they are yt be vpō thē yea euen to make them yt shal haue led them away captiues to haue pitie and cō∣passion on them, as it is declared in yt chap.Verse. 50. This is great comfort vnto a Christian conscience, when he shall learne and vnderstand that there is a medi∣cine that can cure him, euen then when the Lorde shall haue reuealed his sinne by bringing punnish∣ment vpon it. Moreouer, least it should be excep∣ted against this, that in deede Solomon praied that punishments might be remoued when they should confesse and truely bewaile their sinne: but howe can it be proued that the Lorde did euer promise to heare any suche prayers.2. Chro. 7.12.13.14. The matter is ma∣nifest in the booke of Chronicles. And the Lorde appeared to Solomon and saide vnto him, I haue heard thy prayer, if I shutte the heauen that there be no rayne, or if I commaunde the grashhoppors to deuour the lande, or if I sende pestilence among my people, if my people doe hum∣ble themselues, & pray, and turne from their wicked ways, then will I heare in heauen and bee mercifull vnto their sinne and will heale their lande.Psal. 107.10 In the Psalme there is plentifull profe, that the Lorde wilbe intreated to forgiue the sinnes of his seruauntes, and to remitte their punishmentes when they shall in true repen∣taunce, humble them selues before him. They
(sayth the prophet) that dwel in darkenesse beeing fast bound in miserie and yron, because they rebelled againste the word of the Lord, when he humbled their heart with heauinesse they fel downe, & there was no helpe, then they cryed vnto the Lord in their trouble, and hee deliuered them from their distresse: he brought them out of the sha∣dowe of death,Verse. 17. and brake their bandes in sunder. In that Psalme there is likewise proofe of the same matter apparant enoughe in these wordes. Fooles by reason of their transgression, and because of their iniquitie are af∣flicted, their soule abhorreth all meate, & they are brought to deaths doore, then they crie vnto the Lord in their trou∣ble, and he deliuereth them in their distresse: he sendeth his word and healeth them, & deliuereth them from their graues. It were an infinite worke to recite those places in the booke of Psalmes that proue the mer∣cies of God to remoue punishmentes from the of∣fenders, when they shall in true repentaunce turne vnto him. It is a harde matter in great affliction to persuade the man that is sore afflicted for his sinne, that there is mercy with the lord to remoue his pu∣nishment, if he shal truly humble him selfe in repē∣tance for his sinne: yet, we see what plaine proofes there are of the same, to increase our faith in the persuasion to haue our sinnes forgiuen, when we are truely grieued and penitent for the same. This is a doctrine most needefull to be stoode vpon, because the blessing that the Lord hath pro∣mised to bestowe vpon his, by reason of our cor∣ruption are rather deliueraunces from euill, then preseruations in any continuall course of prospe∣ritie.
I say they rather come in after our afflicti∣on, then stande continually with vs to keepe af∣fliction from vs, whiche many mistaking, haue stumbled at the afflicted estate of the children of God: but the worde of the Lord doth guide those that be his, to looke to the end of the vpright man. Marke the vpright man, and beholde the iust, for the end of yt man is peace (saith the Prophet.) And almoste all those requestes that Solomon maketh for the people of God,Psal. 37.37. are to haue blessinges & be∣nefites procured vnto them after their troubles & afflicted estate. We see therefore howe neede∣full it is to holde this doctrine of forgiuenesse of sinnes, that we stumble not at the crosse of Christ, that we do not murmur or despaire in our afflic∣tion: that we should not shake off hope, notwith∣standing our grief whatsoeuer haue had long con∣tinuance and abode with vs: that we nourishe no wrong iudgement of the estate of the Church and children of God, yt we decide not with the vngod∣ly against the seruants & saints of God. A tentati∣on that had almost shaken the faithful seruant and prophet of God Dauid, vntil he went into ye sanc∣tuarie of the Lord, to inquire ye end of those men. This doctrine ouerthroweth ye heresie of the No∣uatians, who do denie the forgiuenes of sinns after baptisme. That which is ioyned with this petition of our forgiuing them yt trespasse against vs, noteth not any deseruing to haue our sins forgiuen, by rea∣sō of our forgiuing of them yt offend against vs, for then we should not pray to haue them forgiuen, se∣ing
we remoue them by deserte: but is added for our instruction, and for our comfort. For our in∣struction, to teache vs that the Lord requireth this at our handes, that we should be mercifull because he is mercifull. For our comforte to tell vs that if we whiche be men can remitte the wronges and iniuries done against vs, much more will our hea∣uenly Father, who is without comparison aboue man in mercie and compassion, forgiue the offen∣ces & sinnes of his seruants, when they shal in true repentaunce seeke vnto him. For the same it is needefull for our infirmitie to receiue persuasion of his mercie, especially when his iudgement shal∣be vppon vs, and punishment which is the assured signe of his displeasure shall presse vs, it is then a harde matter to conceiue hope that the Lorde will forgiue vs. For infidelitie is as deepely rooted in our heartes as any sinne or iniquitie whatsoeuer, therefore the Lord hath left vs (who are taught by his spirite to forgiue vnto others their offences cō∣mitted against vs) an assured hope to finde fauour at his handes: who will neuer be found inferiour vnto man in mercie. Therfore is it thus writ∣ten in Luke,Luke. 11.4. Forgiue vnto vs our sinnes, for euen we forgiue euerie man that is indebted to vs. And as it is necessarie that we should bee vpholden with this hope, so is it requisite that we remember that which is written in Matthew,Matt. 6.15. If ye doe not for∣giue men their trespasses, no more will your father forgiue you your trespasses: to admonish vs that the Lorde will haue his to resemble him, and heare this his
image of mercie before the world. If we be taught to remitt and forgiue offences vnto others, when they shall haue done vs any wrong, we may easily perceiue that the Lord will not haue vs to cherish our selues in the hope of beeing heard, when wee shall offer vnto other iniurie and wrong. For if a Christian be admonished in this petition, so far to profite that hee learne to forgiue iniuries done a∣gainst him: much more would the Lorde haue him to be farre from offending others by iniuries done vnto them. The last petition wherin we craue that the Lord would not leade vs into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill, doeth admonish vs that the almightie vseth to punish sinne with sinne, that when men shall haue long continued in sinne, they shall be∣come so blinde and hardened therein by the iuste iudgemente of GOD, that hardly some∣time after muche affliction, they can bee cured of the same. That the godly are subiecte vnto a kinde of hardnesse of heart, which is a punishment for their former sinnes, laide vpon them from the Lord, as may appeare by that prayer of the church of God, whereof wee reade in the Prophet Isaie, in these wordes:Esay. 63.17. O Lorde why haste thou made vs to erre from thy wayes, and hardened our heartes from thy feare, returne for thy seruaunts sake, and for the tribes of thine inheritaunce. It is not that hardnesse of heart, whiche is peculiar to the reprobate, that is menti∣oned in this place, but to bee so taken with the snares of sinne, and so ledd into temptation and
blinded & intangled therein, as the godlyest that lyueth may bee, and yet afterwarde by afflic∣tion, or some other meanes, deliuered from the same. For when it pleaseth the Lorde to lay afflicti∣on vpon his, no doubt there is in them this erring from his wayes, and hardnesse of hearte from his feare, which the Churche of GOD com∣plaineth of in this place, and whiche the Lorde purposeth to cure. For he is not cruel to punish when there is no cause, but his meaning is to mol∣lifie their harde heartes thereby, that they may be humbled vnder the gouernement of his holie worde. We pray therfore in this petition, that we may not bee hardened through the deceiptfulnesse of sinne, for the auoyding wherof, ye children of God are admonished in the Epistle to the Hebrues to exhorte one another.Heb. 3.13. Exhorte one another (say∣eth the holie Ghoste) while it is called to day, least any of you bee hardened through the deceiptfulnesse of sinne. This petition of not leading vs into temptation, but deliuering vs from euil, doth wel followe that of forgiuenesse of sinnes. For when it pleaseth the Lord to forgiue sin, he deliuereth them from bee∣ing hardened therein: giuing them the sight of the deceipt that is in it, and also power and maisterie ouer the rage thereof. In that prayer of Solomon, whiche we haue so often heard of before, when he
prayeth that the people of God may haue their punishmentes remoued, when they call vppon him: there is alwayes added the condition of tur∣ning from their sinne, either in expresse wordes, or else in wordes that necessarily importe the same. As to take one example for many, in that Chapiter hee hath these wordes: When Heauen shall be shutt vpp, and there shall be no rayne,1. Reg. 8.35. because they haue sinned against thee, and they shall pray in this place, & confesse thy name, and turne from their sinn, when thou doest afflict them, then heare thou in Heauen, and pardon the sinne of thy seruauntes, and of thy people Israel, when thou haste taught them the good way wherein they may walke: so that the turning from sinne is ne∣cessarily required of them that doe looke for the forgiuenesse of sinne. And then especially when the Lorde shall testifie against vs from Heauen, by punishments laide vppon vs: wee haue to call to minde our former sinnes, and ceasse to be care∣lesse and secure therein. For when the Lord for∣giueth sinne, hee also cureth sinne, not suffering vs any longer to sleepe in the same, beeing snared with the baytes and allurementes thereof, but begetteth in vs a new care to shake it off, and a new watchfulnesse ouer it. There is added to ye end of this petition, For thine is the kingdome, the power, & the glorie for euer: which do¦eth admonish vs of sundrie profitable instructiōs, for by it we are taught what shuld be ye end of our petitions, why we would haue thē graunted, euen
that his kingdome, power, & glorie, may be aduā∣ced. For (as we haue learned before) while that the Lord frameth his to ye obedience of his wil, giueth good things vnto thē, remoueth euil thinges from them, his name is halowed, his kingdome cōmeth & his wil is done here in earth: for by dealing thus with his seruaunts, he will be knowen to rule and reigne here vpon earth, & be glorified in the same. This desire therefore to haue him glorified, should bee bothe at the beginning and end of our prayers, whether our suit be for spirituall graces, or for tē∣porall blessings. By this also our faith is strengthe∣ned in the hope to obteine our petitions, because the Lorde cannot neglect the glorie of his name, and the honour of his kingdome, whiche depen∣deth vpon the perfourmaunce of his mercies to∣wardes his seruauntes that call vpon him: & ther∣fore our hope cannot deceiue vs, beeing ioyned so neere vnto the glorie of our God. Moreouer in this we are admonished, that it is not the worthynesse of our selues, nor yet of any other, but the honour of his name, yt commendeth our suites and petitions vnto the Lord. Finally, heerein we are admonished of a speciall worshippe and seruice, which is thanks giuing vnto GOD, when soeuer wee receiue any benefite, of what kinde soeuer. For we acknowledging in our pray∣ers, not onely that hee hath the disposing of these benefites, but also that his kingdome, glorie, & ho∣nour consisteth in the rewarding of his with the same: shall be found traytors to the crowne of his king∣dome,
if after benefites receiued, wee doe not by thanks giuing, confesse and acknoweledge the same. This giuing of thanks is a speciall worshipp and seruice of God, in somuch that the Lorde re∣iecting sacrifice, placeth his honour in thanksgi∣uing. Will I eate the fleash of Bulles,Psal. 50.13. or drinke the bloude of Goates? (sayth ye Lord by his Ptophet.) Offer vn∣to God praise, and pay the vowes vnto the moste high, and call vppon mee in the day of thy trouble, so will I deliuer thee, and thou shalt glorifie me. And in the laste verse of that psalme, it is said that he who offereth praise vnto the Lord, doth glorifie him. Whereby it ap∣peareth that the Lord esteemeth thanksgiuing as a speciall worship and seruice of him, whiche may well bee perceiued in sundrie places of the Scrip∣ture, but especially in the booke of the Psalmes. It is in deede a seruice of God, peculiar and proper vnto the children of God. For the wicked are not acquainted with it, they see not the Lord his arme in their deliuerances, they see not through the in∣struments that God vseth to helpe thē by, into the especiall goodwill and fauour of GOD: from whence the godly take those healpes to come as a plaine profe therof. Therfore doth ye Prophet say, The voice of ioy and deliuerance shalbe in the tabernacles of the righteous, saying,Pal. 118.15. the right hand of the Lorde hath done valiauntly. Hee maketh it the peculiar worke of the righteous, to reioyce in the Lorde, and in heart to prayse him. For, notwithstanding all people taste liberally of his benefits, yet the fee∣ling of his fatherly goodnesse whiche procureth
giuing of thanks in deed, is proper onely vnto the children of God. It is a singular priuiledge, that he doth vouch∣safe his elect alone, when he giueth such a sweete taste vnto his benefites, as driueth their heartes to reioycing and giuing of thankes: not onely in the comfort of the present benefite, but also in that ha∣uing receiued an assured token of his fauour, they peaceably passe ouer the course of their life, assu∣ring them selues that they are had in especiall rec∣koning and account with the Lord. Therefore the Prophete is bolde to haue this speech of them.Psal. 89.15.16. Blessed is the people that reioyce in thee, they shall walke in the light of thy countenaunce. O Lorde, they shall re∣ioyce continually in thy name, and in thy righteousnesse shal they exalt them selues. He maketh it no common matter to reioyce in the Lord, but matter belong∣ing onely to the electe and blessed people of God, how greatly it pleaseth the Lorde. The Apostle wittnesseth in the Epistle to the Corinthes,1. Cor. 1.11. where hee requireth the prayer of the church of God for him in his affliction, that when his deliueraunce is obteyned by the prayers of many: many per∣sons may giue thanks vnto God. Which notably declareth how acceptable a seruice it is, to giue thanks vnto God, when the afflictions of the chil∣dren of God serue therevnto, and are beecome a speciall ende of the same. As wittnesseth in like manner the Prophet:Psal. 102.19 The Lorde hath looked downe from the height of his Sanctuarie, that hee might heare the mourning of the prisoner, and deliuer the children of
death, that they may declare the name of the Lorde in Hierusalem and his praise in Sion. Now if it be demaunded why the sacrifice of thanks giuing is so acceptable a worship and ser∣uice of the Lord? The answere is ready, because it ascribeth the gouernment and distribution of all benefites vnto the Lord: denying them to come by casualtie or chaunce, as doe the vngodly what∣soeuer they say, in that they are neither comfor∣ted truely in them, nor yet thankfull for them. Moreouer it acknowledgeth God not to be a dead thing and bare name, that regardeth not men that serue him in the obedience of his will, but that in trueth hee hath a care of his Church, helpeth in their neede, and regardeth them in perfourming the trueth of his promise towardes them. This acknowledging of the mercies of God by giueing of thanks, helpeth forwarde the faith of other in persuasion of this tender care that hee beareth to∣wardes his. Wherefore the godly were accustomed to open vnto others the children of God, the especi∣all benefites and mercie whiche they had receiued of the Lorde, that they might not onely ioyne with them for the praise of his mercie, but also re∣ceiue increase of faith in the visible experience of his goodnesse. It is wel knowen that the people of God vnder the law had a solemne rite & ceremo∣nie, in perfourming the vowes of thankesgiuing and peace offering, when soeuer they had receiued any notable and singular benefite of the Lorde.
Whiche was a thing so well pleasing the Lorde, that they present this their purpose, to prayse the Lorde, and to tell what he had done for them, as a reason to persuade him to worke their deliuerance when they are distressed, according as wee reade: Saue me from the Lyons mouthe, and aunswere me, in sa∣uing me from the hornes of the Vnicornes:Psal. 22 21. I will declare thy name vnto my brethren: in the middest of the congre∣gation wil I prayse thee, (saying) Praise the Lord ye that feare him, magnifie him all yee seede of Iacob. For he hath not despised nor abhorred the affliction of the poore, but when he calleth vnto him, he heard. My praise shall be of thee in the great congregation, my vowes wil I perfourme before them that feare him. The pore shall eate and be sa∣tisfied: they that seeke after the Lorde shall praise him. This kinde of persuasion haue the seruants of God often vsed, and therefore wee doe reade that the godly in their petitions haue vsed often these words: Shut not vp (ô Lord) the mouthes of them that prayse thee, open not the mouthes of the vn∣godly, that they may praise the power of their i∣dols, and magnifie a fleashly king. They were per∣suaded that the Lord did greatly esteme his owne glorie and honor: that it was a speciall seruice and worship that he delighteth in, as it is in deede. For euen the end of our saluation is the praise of his free mercie and grace, and he hath elected his to the prayse of the riches of his grace: and the end of our temporall deliuerance is to acknowledge and magnifie that grace whiche we haue tryed to bee true, & had good experience of the same. So doth
the godlie king Ezechias confesse, that the Lorde would not haue him swalowed vp of the pit with∣out the taste of his mercie in deliueraunce, because if he had so departed, the Lorde should then haue wanted that seruice of thankes giuing for his deli∣uerance which is so acceptable vnto him. For those that are so ouerwhelmed in their afflictiōs tast not of the mercies of deliuerance, which openeth their mouth, & filleth it with the prayses of the Lord. It was thy pleasure to deliuer my soule (sayth Ezechias) from the pit of corruption,Esay. 38.17. for thou haste cast all my sinnes behinde thy back: for the dead cannot prayse thee, they that go downe into the pitt cannot hope for thy trueth, but the liuing shall confesse thee as I doe this day. The fa∣ther to the children shall declare thy trueth: the Lorde was ready to saue mee, therefore wee will sing my songe all the dayes of our life, in the house of the Lord. That he sayth: The dead cannot prayse him, wee haue to take it as the trueth is, that when those that be his are not deliuered in their distresses, hee wan∣teth that praise here in earth (where his glorie is of∣ten oppressed) whiche their deliueraunce would plentifully spread abroade. And they doe moste thirste after the tryall of his goodnesse heere vppon earth, where there bee so many enimies to his glorie, that seeing ye plaine proofe thereof, they may be plentiful in his praise. Therfore doeth Dauid in like manner require de∣liuerance, that he be not ouerwhelmed in his afflli∣ction, and so the Lord wante the praise of his de∣liueraunce: Returne O Lorde, deliuer my life, saue mee
for thy mercies sake. For in death there is no remembrance of thee, in the graue who shall praise thee? The Scripture is plentifull in such proofes, where the seruants of God haue greatly longed for deliuerance, that they might praise his name, and haue vrged it as a reason to persuade the Lord to heare their petitions, be∣cause then they would offer vnto him that well pleasing sacrifice and seruice of thankesgiuing, a sacrifice that doeth so greatly please the Lorde, and therefore cannot but be well liked of all those that be his. It was declared before, that there was a solemne rite and ceremonie among ye Iewes, in their thanks giuing after sōe greate benefite receiued, where the godlie mett together not only to giue praise, but al∣so to be confirmed and strengthened more & more in their faith, & persuasion of his fatherly care and regarde that he hath towards those that be his. This is made plaine vnto vs in ye Psalme: He hath brought me out of the horrible pit (sayth the Prophet) and hee hath put in my mouth a new song of prayse vnto our God.Psal. 40.2. Many shall see it and feare, and shall trust in the Lorde. It cānot but be a singular worship of God, yt ascribeth this right of gouernement and care of his seruants vnto him, that also hath in it such force to increase faith which is the founteine of all obedience. How greate then is the sinne of vnthankfulnesse, when men passe ouer the benefites of God, and the assu∣red pledges of his fauour, without any thankfull remembraunce or comfortable assuraunce of the good will of GOD?
Surely the neglect of this duetie (I meane of thanks giuing to God, when we receiue any singular bene∣fite, as some notable deliuerance from daungers, or happie out going frō our trouble) denieth the Lord to be the disposer and gouernour of thinges here belowe, & fathereth them vpon fortune or chaunce. How soeuer they denie it in wordes, it denieth in deede any especiall care to be in God ouer his: it maketh God to be nothing beside a bare name, and vaine imagination: it ouerthroweth faith, (whiche persuadeth vs of the speciall care and good will, that God beareth vs in taking his benefites, not as com∣mon thinges, but as pledges of his peculiar fauour,) in that as common matters, and no witnesses of a∣ny especiall good will, by vnthankfulnesse they are passed ouer, and lightly let slippe. Moreouer, the want of this dutie hindereth the profiting of others, in that they denie this helpe of strengthening their faith, which the Lord hath appointed, and the ser∣uauntes of God hath practised, according as it was of late cited out of the Prophet, that many shoulde see what the Lord had done, and be drawne to put their trust in him. Now let vs pray vnto our hea∣uenly Father in the name of his sonne, that we may so pray that we may obteine, & ob∣teyning render from a thankful heart true praise, and thanksgiuing vnto his name. FINIS.
To the Reader. Suche faultes (Christian Reader) as haue escaped in the imprinting of this booke, the greater parte whereof here vnderplaced, and corrected, and the residue (beeing few or none, and of litle weight,) omitted, we desire thee to conferre in reading, & charitably to correct that which, beside these, is else-where to be amended, bothe in the poynting and in the matter. Page 5. for Exo. 3.9. read 6.3. p. 6. For Ezec. 38.28.36.26. ibi. line. 19. for renu∣ing, remouing. p. 8. l. 28. an, on. p. 14. l. 5. it, them. p. 15. l. 24. obediēce, disobediēce. ibi. l. 29. all, as. p. 19. l. 25. abeating, abating. p. 26. l. 2. not, no. ibi. l. 9. out, vs. p. 34. l. 9. vntoward, outward. p. 39. l. 21. put out, they are. 57. l. 22. we, vnlesse we. ib. Heb. 6.16. p. 58. l. 7. it, in. p. 60. l. 1. Sonne, sinne. ibi. in the margine. Prou. 13.13. p. 61. l. 19. gadned, gained. p. 64. l. 16. nature. In, nature, in, &c. p. 67. l. 9. Ezechiel, and, Ezechiel. And. ibi. l. 9. Apostles. The, Apostles, the. 70. l. 26. no iustice but his, no, his iustice. p. 72. l. 20. this, this age. p. 75. l. 21. put out of. p. 83. l. 23. as, it. p. 85. l. 10. of, as. p. 86. l. 29. them, them the. p. 90. in the margine. Rom. 12.10. p. 97. l. 28. of the, of not. p. 105. l. 5. heart, heate. 109. l. 1. offered, offer. 117. l. 20. he, she. 119. l. 11. be had, hyde it. 124. l. 17. writeth, witeth. 130. l. 19. put out (and.) 138. l. 17. ouer, our. 142. l. 8. debt, double. 144. l. 30. by the their, in their. 148. l. 25. and as. 153. l. 26. we do, do we. 156. l. 29. to him, them. 172. in the mar. 2. Thes. 6. & 15 173. l. 17. lest, least of all. p. 174. l. 8. would haue, would not haue. p. 176. l. 31. some sinne. 185. l. 4. hath, had. 194. l. 17. his, this. 195. l. 5. put out, not. p. 199. marg. Iam. 3. Iames. 1.27.212. l. 2. be one: as, be as, 214. l. 7. not, not so. 220. l. 3. preser∣uing, pursuing. 223. l. 20. twiteth, witeth. 231. l. 24. the, that. 238. l. 3. prouiding, prouing. ibi. l. 6. prouiding, prouing. 140. li. 17. put out, the. 244. l. 6. put out, and. 245. l. 29. summoned, summed. ibi. l. 30. put out, in. 247. l. 30. put out, what are. 263. l. 28. withstand, stande. 275. l. 15. He that, that he. 277. l. 10. put the point after the word iustification. 278. l. 14. follow, flowe. ibi. Ephe. 2.4.5.282. l. 6. of, for. 286. l. 28. payde, appaide. 300. l. 8. secure, secrete. 302. l. 10. wandering, wa∣uering. 318. l. 10. on, in. 319. l. 6. let, will let. 325. l. 26. lightly, likely. 330. l. 5. prayes, prayers. 344. l. 7. set the plaine point after same.
