18284 99841194 5757
SVPERIVS. SONGS AND PSALMES composed into 3. 4. and 5. parts, for the vse and delight of all such as either loue or learne MVSICKE: BY JOHN MVNDY Gentleman, bachiler of Musicke, and one of the Organest of hir Maiesties free Chappell of VVINDSOR. Imprinted at London by Thomas Est, (the assigne of William Byrd,) dwelling in Aldersgate street, at the signe of the black Horse. 1594.
TO THE RIGHT HO∣nourable, Robert Devorax, Earle of Essex and Ewe, Vicount of Hereford, Lord Ferrer of Chartley, Borcher, and Lovaine, Master of the Queenes Maiesties Horse, Knight of the noble order of the Garter, and one of hir Maiesties most Honourable privie Councell. RIght Honourable, knowing the tedious∣nesse of time, to bee best beeguiled by the sweetnesse of exercise, I haue exercised the nine sweet Muses, with greedy affection, to delight the tenth. Your Honour, is the same excelent tenth Muse, of more in valewable worth then the other nine. To your de∣light, I consecrate my duties, and offer vp my nights labors for your dayes pleasures, and voutsafe noble Lord, to grace the offering by your kinde acceptacion, & enter∣taine with fauor, the offerers entire deuocion. In your fauorable regard, consisteth my safest gard, and my Muses securitie in your Honours satisfaction. If I satisfie not you, I satisfie not any, al∣though all beesids. If I content you, I hope I shall content all, whom I am to haue regard not to discontent, & therby I gaine, which is the sweetest gaine, the comfort of my labors. I therfore right humbly beeseech your Honour, not presuming vppon the worth of so poore and base a present, but vppon the wor∣thinesse of your owne noble hart, that this may rest secure vn∣der your Honourable patronage, as vnder priuiledge of a religi∣ous Sanctuarij, commended by your redie acceptance, and de∣fended by your fauorable countenance. Your Honours in all dutie to bee commaunded. Iohn Mundy.
To the Reader. YOu that shall reape the pleasure and delight Of all his paine that hath composd these songs, His meaning well, with taking well requit, Giue paines due praise, and skill what there to longs. So graced shall these first fruits of his skill, Make him with stodie, seeke to please you still. Iosepho Lupo, Musico de sua mata: sermá:
I. Of 3. voc. SVPERIVS. PRayse the Lord ô my soule, while I liue will I prayse the Lord: ij. yea, as long as I haue as I haue any beeing, I will sing prayses vn- to my God. Euery day will I giue thanks, euery day will I giue thanks, ij. euery day will I giue thanks to thee and prayse thy name thy name, and prayse thy name thy name, and prayse thy name for euer more.
II. Of 3. voc. SVPERIVS. SAue mee ô God and that with speed, the waters flow ij. the waters flow full fast, ij. so ny my soule doe they proceed, that I am sore a- gast. I stick full deep in filth and clay, ij. in filth and clay, where as I feele no ground: I fall into such fluds, I fal into such fluds I say, such fluds I say, that I am like be dround.
III. Of 3. voc. SVPERIVS. O All ye nations ô all ye nations of the Lord, O all ye nations of the Lord, praise ye the Lord all- wayes: and all the people e- uery where, set forth his noble prayse, his noble prayse. For great his kindnesse is to his, to his, ij. his truth endures for aye: wherefore prayse ye the Lord our God, prayse ye the Lord I say.
IIII. The first part. Of 3. voc. SVPERIVS. BLessed art thou that fearest God, and walkest in his way: for of thy labor thou shalt eate shalt eate, happie art thou happie art thou I say. Like fruitfull Vines on thy house side, so doth thy wyfe spring out: ij. thy wyfe spring out: Thy Children stand lyke Oliue plants, ij. thy table round about about. ij. thy table round about.
V. The second part. Of 3. voc. SVPERIVS. THus art thou blest that fearest God, ij. and he shall let thee see let thee see: the promised Ierusalem, Ierusa- lem, & his fe-lici-ty. Thou shalt thy childrens children see, thy chil- dren see, to thy great ioyes, en- crease: and likewise grace on Isra- ell, pro-spe-ritie and peace.
VI. Of 3. voc. SVPERIVS. HEare my prayer, ô Lord, and consider my desire: consider my de- sire: consi-der my de-sire: hearken vnto mee, vnto mee, ij. ij. and enter not into iudge-ment with thy seruant: for in thy sight, in thy sight, for in thy sight, shall no man lyuing bee iustified. bee iusti- fied.
VII. Of 3. voc. SVPERIVS. YEe people all in one accord, ij. in one ac- cord, clap hands and eke re-ioyce: Bee glad & sing vnto the Lord, with sweet and pleasant voyce. ij. Sing praises to our God, sing praises to our God, sing praise, sing prai-ses to our king, for God is king of all the earth, ij. all thankfull praises sing. ij. all thankfull prai-ses sing.
VIII. Of 3. voc. SVPERIVS. O O Lord turne not away thy face, ij. ij. from him that lies that lies prostrate: lamenting sore his sinful life, sore his sin-full life, bee-fore thy mercy gate, which gate thou openest wide to those, that doe lament their sinne, their sinne, shut not that gate that gate, shut not that gate against mee Lord, but let mee enter in. enter in. ij. ij. ij. let mee enter in.
IX. Of 3. voc. SVPERIVS. O Come let vs lift vp our voyce, let: ij. and sing vnto the Lord: ij. ij. to the Lord: in him our rock of health reioyce, in: ij. let vs with one ac- cord. Yea let vs come beefore his face to giue him thanks and prayse, in singing Psalmes vnto his grace, vnto his grace, ij. vn- to his grace, let vs bee glad alwaies. glad all- waies, let vs be glad alwaies, be glad allwaies.
X. Of 3. voc. SVPERIVS. OF all the birds that I haue heard, that I haue heard, the Nightingale doth beare the bell, ij. whose pretie pretie tunes, pretie tunes, whose: ij. ij. all other byrds excell, all other byrds doth far excell, but if such voyces were not deere, were not deere, I would my Mistris sung so cleere. ij. ii. ij. so cleere so cleere.
XI. Of 3. voc. SVPERIVS. AS I went a walking in the month of May, in the month of May, merily talking, merily talking, I thus began to say, where dwelleth Loue, dwelleth Love, where dwelleth Loue, ij. where dwelleth Loue that liuely Boy, that liuely Boy, how might I see his face, that breedeth paine, and bringeth ioy, that breedeth paine and bringeth ioy, that alterith eue-ry case: then with a sigh I dyd re- fraine, I dyd re- fraine, and to the world let it re- maine. & ij. & ij.
XII. Of 3. voc. SVPERIVS. TVrne about & see mee, & see me, & see me, how lustely, lustely, lusty I spring as ioyfully as may bee, as glad as glad as glad as any thing: If you wil aske the cause & why, I meane to tell you by & by. I: ij. she liues ye I doe honor most, far passing all, far passing all ye rest, a mightie Prince & excelēt, ij. sweet Eglentine the best: sweet Eglentine the best: thē ioy with mee with mee, ij. ij. ioy with mee, ij. both great and small, hir life brings ioy vnto vs all, vnto vs all. hir ij. Heere endeth the songs of three parts.
XIII. Of 4 voc. SVPERIVS. LOrd to thee I make my mone, I make my mone, when dāgers me op- presse: I call, I sigh, I call, I sigh, I sigh, I plaine and grorie, trusting to find release. Heare now ô Lord, ij. ij. my request, for it is due time, it is full due tyme: and let thine eares bee euer prest, euer prest, and: ij. vnto this prayer myne. vn-to this prayer mine. this prayer mine.
XIIII. Of 4 voc. SVPERIVS. O Lord of whome I doe depend, ôi ij. I doe depend, behold my carefull heart: behold be- hold my carefull heart: and when thy will and pleasure is, &: ij. release mee of my smart. ij. thou seest my sorowes what they are, what they are, my griefe is knowne to thee: and there is none that can remoue, or take the same or take the same from mee. or: ij. or take the same from mee.
XV. Of 4 voc. SVPERIVS. SIng yee vnto the Lord our God, sing yee vn- to the Lord the Lord our God, a new re-ioysing song: reioysing song: a ij. and let the praise of him bee heard, his holy saints among. ij. Let Is-ra-ell reioyce in him, that made that made him of nothing: and let the seede of Sion eke, ij. bee ioyfull, bee ioyfull of their king. bee ioyfull of their king. ij. of their king.
XVI. Of 4 voc. SVPERIVS. I Lift my Heart to this, ij. my heart to thee, my God & guide most iust: Now suffer mee to take no shame, to take no shame, for in thee doe I trust Let not my foes reioyce, nor make a scorne of mee: ij. make a scorne of mee: and let them not bee ouerthrowne, ij. ij. that put their trust in thee. ij. that put their trust in thee.
XVII. Of 4 voc. SVPERIVS. MY pryme of youth is but a frost is but a frost of cares, of cares, my feast of ioye, is but a dish of payne my: ij. my crop of corne is but a feeld of tares, but a feeld a fleed of tares, & all my goods is but vaine hope of gaine, the day is past, the day is past, and yet I saw no sunne, and now I liue, and now my life is done. and now I liue, I liue, and now my life is done. my life is done.
XVIII. Of 4 voc. SVPERIVS. IN deep distresse to liue without de-, light, were such a life as few as few I think would craue, in pangs and paines, to languish day and night, in: ij. were to to much for one poore soule to haue, if weale and woe will thus continue strife, if: ij. a gentle death were good to cut of such a life. to cut of such a life. a gentle: ij. a gentle death were good to cut of such a life.
XIX. Of 4 voc. SVPERIVS. THE longer that I liue that I liue, the more of- fence doth flow, the more offence the more of- fence doth flow, ij. the more offence I giue, ij. the more account the more account I owe, I owe, the more account I make, ij. the harder it will bee, harder it will bee, wherefore to liue my heart doth shake, death is a gaine to me. to mee. death is a gaine againe to mee.
XX. The first part. Of 4. voc. SVPERIVS. THe shepheard Strephon, loued, loued faire Do-ri-da, the finest shephardis in all our feeld, whose loyall loue, when shee would not obay, ne by in- treties forced once to yeeld, all on his knees, ij. vnto ye seemely saint, in woefull wise thus gan hee make his playnt.
XXI. The second part. Of 4. voc. SVPERIVS. VVItnesse yee heauens, yee heauens, the pallace of the Gods, the pallace of the Gods, of the Gods, witnesse yee Gods, which hould your seats therin, witnesse hell furies with reueng-full rodds, witnesse fond loue and all that loue can wyn, witnesse the ayre, ij. fire, water, earth & all, how I haue liu'd, ij. a vassaile at thy call. a vassaile at thy call.
XXII. Of 4. voc. SVPERIVS. HAigh ho chill go to plow no more, no more, chill: ij. sit down & take thy rest, ij. of gouldē groats I haue good store, to flaunt it, to: ij. to: ij. in the best, but I loue, & I loue, I loue, and who think you, ij. the finest las that ere you knew, that ere you knew, the finest las that ere you knew, which makes mee sing when I should cry, haigh ho for loue I dye. I dye, ij. haigh ho for loue I dye. haigh ho for loue I dye. Heere endeth the songs of foure parts.
XXIII. Of 5. voc. SVPERIVS. LOrd arise and help thy seruant, Lord arise arise and help thy seruant, which onely trusteth in thee, trusteth in thee, which onely trusteth in thee, for I am in mi-se- rie, ij. ij. for I am in mi-se- rie. ij. ij. in mi-se-rie.
XXIIII. Of 5. voc. SVPERIVS. HAue mercie on mee ô Lord, ij. haue mercie on mee ô Lord, and graunt mee my desire, and graunt mee my de- sire, let truth & righteousnesse, dwell with mee for e-uer, let truth and righteous-nesse dwell with mee for e- uer, so shall I alwaies praise thy name, prayse thy name, and sing to thee ô my God. my God. ij. and sing to thee ô my God. ij. ô my God.
XXV. Of 5. voc. SVPERIVS. VN-to thee lift I vp mine eyes, ij. thou that dwellest in the heauens ij. ij. doe well ô Lord, to those that are true of heart, ij. that are true of hart, that are true of heart, doe well ô Lord, ô Lord, doe well ô Lord ô Lord, to those that are true of heart, for onely in thee doe I trust.
XXVI. Of 5. voc. SVPERIVS. WEre I a king, ij. I might I might commaund content, were I obscure, vnknowne should bee my cares, ij. and were I dead, ij. no thoughts on thoughts should mee torment, nor words, nor words, nor wrongs, nor wrongs, nor loues, nor loues, nor hopes, nor feares, a doubtfull choice of three things one to craue, a kingdome, or a cottage, or a graue, or agraue, a king- dome, or a cottage, or a graue.
XXVII. The first part. Of 5. voc. SVPERIVS. IN midst of woods or pleasant groue, where all sweet byrds doe sing, ij. ij. my thought I heard, I heard so rare a sound, my thought I heard, I heard so rare a sound, which made ye heauens to ring, the heauēs to ring, ij. the charme was good, ij. ij. the noyse full sweet, ij. each byrd dyd play his part, and I admir'd to heare the same, ioy sprong into my heart. ioy sprong in- to my heart.
XXVIII. The second part. Of 5. voc. SVPERIVS. THE black byrd made the sweetest sound, ij. the swee-test sound, whose tunes dyd far ex- cell, full pleasantly and most profound, ij. was all things placed well, placed well, thy pre-tie tunes mine owne sweet byrd, ij. mine owne sweet byrd, done with so good a grace, ij. extolls thy name pre- fers the same, abroad in euery place, thy Musick graue bedecked well, bee- decked well, with sundry poynts of skill, beewraife thy knowledge
excelent, ij. ij. ij. ingrafted ingrafted in thy Will, my tongue shall speake, my pen shall write, in praise in praise of thee to tell, the sweetest byrd that e-uer was, ij. in friendly sort farewell. in friendly sort farewell.
XXIX. Of 5. voc. SVPERIVS. PEnelope, that longed that longed for the sight, the sight of hir Vlisses, wandring all to lōg, all to long, felt neuer ioy, ij. ij. wherin she tooke delight, although she liu'd in greatest ioys amōg, so I poore wretch, ij. ij. ij. possessing that I craue, both liue & lack by wrōg of y• I haue, thē blame me not, although to heauēs I cry, to heauēs I cry, to heauēs I cry, to heauēs I cry, and pray ye gods, the gods, & pray the Gods that shortly I might dye. that shortly I might dye.
XXX. Of 5. voc. SVPERIVS. WHo loues a life deuoid of quiet rest, of qui- et rest, ij. and seeks content in dens of cruell care, cru-ell care, who most triumphs when most he is opprest, & weens him free, weens him free, and weens him free whē fast he is in snare, who in the sweet, ij. in the sweet doth find the sowrest tast, his life is loue, ij. is loue, ij. his food is vain re- past. repast. his food is vain repast. vain repast. ij. is vaine re- past, his food is vaine re- past.
A Table of all the songs con∣tained in these Bookes. Songs of three parts. PRayse the Lord ô my soule, I Saue mee ô God and that with speed. II O all yee nations of the Lord. III Blessed art thou that fearest God. The first part. IIII Thus art thou blest that fearest God. The second part. V Heare my prayer ô Lord. VI Yee people all in one accord. VII O Lord turne not away thy face. VIII O come let vs lift vp our voyce. IX Of all the byrds that I haue heard. X As I went a walking in the month of May. XI Turne, about and see mee. XII Songs of foure parts LOrd to thee I make my mone. XIII O Lord of whome I doe depend. XIIII Sing yee vnto the Lord. XV I lift my heart to thee. XVI My prime of youth. XVII In deep distresse. XVIII The longer I liue. XIX The shepheard Strephon. The first part. XX Witnesse yee heauens. The second part. XXI Haigh ho chill go to plow. XXII Songs of fiue parts. LOrd arise and help. XXIII Haue mercie on mee Lord. XXIIII Vnto thee lift I vp myne eyes. XXV Were I a King. XXVI In midst of woods. The first part. XXVII The black byrd. The second part. XXVIII Penelope. XXIX Who loues a lyfe. XXX FINIS.
CONTRATENOR. SONGS AND PSALMES composed into 3. 4. and 5. parts, for the vse and delight of all such as either loue or learne MVSICKE: BY JOHN MVNDY Gentleman, bachiler of Musicke, and one of the Organest of hir Maiesties free Chappell of VVINDSOR. Imprinted at London by Thomas Est, (the assigne of William Byrd,) dwelling in Aldersgate street, at the signe, of the black Horse. 1594.
TO THE RIGHT HO∣nourable, Robert Devorax, Earle of Essex and Ewe, Vicount of Hereford, Lord Ferrer of Chartley, Borcher, and Lovaine, Master of the Queenes Maiesties Horse, Knight of the noble order of the Garter, and one of hir Maiesties most Honourable privie Councell. RIght Honourable, knowing the tedious∣nesse of time, to bee best beeguiled by the sweetnesse of exercise, I haue exercised the nine sweet Muses, with greedy affection, to delight the tenth. Your Honour, is the same excelent tenth Muse, of more in valewable worth then the other nine. To your de∣light, I consecrate my duties, and offer vp my nights labors for your dayes pleasures, and voutsafe noble Lord, to grace the offering by your kinde acceptacion, & enter∣taine with fauor, the offerers entire deuocion. In your fauorable regard, consisteth my safestgard, and my Muses securitie in your Honours satisfaction. If I satisfie not you, I satisfie not any, al∣though all beesids. If I content you, I hope I shall contentall, whom I am to haue regard not to discontent,& therby I gaine, which is the sweetest gaine, the comfort of my labors. I therfore right humbly beeseech your Honour, not presuming vppon the worth of so poore and base a present, but vppon the wor∣thinesse of your owne noble hart, that this may rest secure vn∣der your Honourable patronage, as vnder priuiledge of a religi∣ous Sanctuarij, commended by your redie acceptance, and de∣fended by your fauorable countenance. Your Honours in all dutie to bee commaunded. Iohn Mundy.
To the Reader. YOu that shall reape the pleasure and delight Of all his paine that hath composd these songs, His meaning well, with taking well requit, Giue paines due praise, and skill what there to longs. So graced shall these first fruits of his skill, Make him with stodie, seeke to please you still. Iosepho Lupo, Musico de sua mata: sermá:
XXIII. Of 5. voc. CONTRATENOR. LOrd a-rise and halp thy seruant, which onely trusteth in thee: in thee: which onely trusteth in thee: for I am in mi-se-rie. in mi-se-rie. for I am in mi-se- rie. for I am in mi-se-rie in mi-se-rie. for I am in mi-se- rie. for I am in mi-se- rie. for I am in mi-se- rie.
XXIIII. Of 5. voc. CONTRATENOR. HAue mercie on mee ô Lord, ij. haue mercie on me ô Lord, haue mercie on mee ô Lord, and graunt mee my de- sire: let truth and righteousnesse dwell with mee for e- uer, let truth and righteousnesse dwell with mee for e- uer for e- uer, so shall I alwaies praise thy name, ij. and sing to thee ô my God. and sing to thee ô my God. ô my God.
XXV. Of 5. voc. CONTRATENOR. VN-to thee lift I vp mine eyes, mine eyes, ij. ij. thou that dwellest in the heauens, ij. doe well ô Lord, ô Lord, doe well ô Lord to those that are true of heart, ij. doe well ô Lord to those to those, doe well ô Lord to those that are true that are true of heart, for in thee doe I trust. for in thee doe I trust.
XXVI. Of 5. voc. CONTRATENOR. WEre I a king, ij. I might I might cōmaund content, were I obscure, ij. vnknowne should bee my cares, vnknowne should bee my cares, and were I dead, ij. no thoughts no thoughts should mee torment, nor words, nor words, nor wrongs, nor wrongs, nor loues, nor loues, nor hopes, nor feares, a dout-full choise, of three things one to craue, a kingdom or a cottage, or a graue. a: ij. a. king-dome a cottage or a graue.
XXVII. The first part. Of 5. voc. CONTRATENOR. IN midst of woods or pleasant groue, wher all sweet birds doe sing, wher all sweet birds doe sing, my thought I heard, I heard so rare a sound, my thought I heard, I heard so rare a sound, which made the heauens to ring, ij. ij. the charme was good, ij. ij. the noise full sweet, ij. each byrd dyd play his part. ij. and I admir'd to heare the same, ioy sprong into my heart, into my heart, ij. ioy sprong in-to my heart.
XXVIII. The second part. Of 5. voc. CONTRATENOR. THE black byrd made the sweetest sound, ij. whose tunes dyd far excell far excell, ij. full pleasantly and most pro-found ij. was all things placed well, thy prety tunes, ij. mine owne sweet byrd, ij. done with so good a grace ij. so good a grace, extolls thy name, prefers the same, abroad in e-uery place, thy Musick graue bedecked well, ij. with sundry poynts of skill, ij. bewraise thy knowledge excelent
excelent, ij. ij. in-grafted in thy Will, my tongue shall speake, my pen shall write in praise, in praise of thee to tell, the sweetest bird that e-uer was, ij. in friendly sort fare- well, in friendly sort fare-well.
XXIX. Of 5. voc. CONTRATENOR. PEnelope, that longed yt longed for ye sight of hir Vlisses, wandring all to long, wandring all to long, ij. felt neuer ioy, neuer ioy, wherin shee tooke delight, shee tooke delight, although shee liu'd, ij. in greatest ioys a-mōg, so I poore wretch, ij poore wretch, possessing that I craue, both liue & lack by wrōg of y• I haue: thē blame me not although to heauēs I cry, all: ij. to heauens I cry, and pray the Gods, ij. ij. the Gods, ij. that shortly I might dye. I might dye.
XXX. Of 5. voc. CONTRATENOR. WHO loues a life deuoide of qui-et rest, ij. ij. ij. and seeks content in dens of cruell care, ij. who most triumphes whē most he is oprest, & weens him free, whē fast he is in snare, whē fast he is in snare, who in y• sweet doth find the sow-rest tast, doth find the sow-rest tast, his life is loue, ij ij. ij. his foode, is vaine re- past. repast, his foode is vaine repast. ij. his foode is vaine re-past.
A Table of all the songs con∣tained in these Bookes. Songs of three parts. PRayse the Lord ô my soule, I Saue mee ô God and that with speed. II O all yee nations of the Lord. III Blessed art thou that fearest God. The first part. IIII Thus art thou blest that fearest God. The second part. V Heare my prayer ô Lord. VI Yee people all in one accord. VII O Lord turne not away thy face. VIII O come let vs lift up our voyce. IX Of all the byrds that I haue heard. X As I went a walking in the month of May. XI Turne about and see mee. XII Songs of foure parts LOrd to thee I make my mone. XIII O Lord of whome I doe depend. XIIII Sing yee vnto the Lord. XV I lift my heart to thee. XVI My prime of youth. XVII In deep distresse. XVIII The longer I liue. XIX The shepheard Strephon. The first part. XX Witnesse yee heauens. The second part. XXI Haigh ho chill go to plow. XXII Songs of fiue parts. LOrd arise and help. XXIII Haue mercie on mee Lord. XXIIII Vnto thee lift I vp myne eyes. XXV Were I a King. XXVI In midst of woods. The first part. XXVII The black byrd. The second part. XXVIII Penelope. XXIX Who loues a lyfe. XXX FINIS.
MEDIVS SONGS AND PSALMES composed into 3. 4. and 5. parts, for the vse and delight of all such as either loue or learne MVSICKE: BY JOHN MVNDY Gentleman, bachiler of Musicke, and one of the Organest of hir Maiesties free Chappell of VVINDSOR. Imprinted at London by Thomas Est, (the assigne of William Byrd,) dwelling in Aldersgate street, at the signe of the black Horse, 1594.
TO THE RIGHT HO∣nourable, Robert Devorax, Earle of Essex and Ewe, Vicount of Hereford, Lord Ferrer of Chartley, Borcher, and Lovaine, Master of the Queenes Maiesties Horse, Knight of the noble order of the Garter, and one of hir Maiesties most Honourable privie Councell. RIght Honourable, knowing the tedious∣nesse of time, to bee best beeguiled by the sweetnesse of exercise, I haue exercised the nine sweet Muses, with greedy affection, to delight the tenth. Your Honour, is the same excelent tenth Muse, of more in valewable worth then the other nine. To your de∣light, I consecrate my duties, and offer vp my nights labors for your dayes pleasures, and voutsafe noble Lord, to grace the offering by your kinde acceptacion, & enter∣taine with fauor, the offerers entire deuocion. In your fauorable regard, consisteth my safestgard, and my Muses securitie in your Honours satisfaction, If I satisfie not you, I satisfie not any, al∣though all beesids. If I content you, I hope I shall contentall, whom I am to haue regard not to discontent, & therby I gaine, which is the sweetest gaine, the comfort of my labors. I therfore right humbly beeseech your Honour, not presuming vppon the worth of so poore and base a present, but vppon the wor∣thinesse of your owne noble hart, that this may rest secure vn∣der your Honourable patronage, as vnder priuiledge of a religi∣ous Sanctuarij, commended by your redie acceptance, and de∣fended by your fauorable countenance. Your Honours in all dutie to bee commaunded. Iohn Mundy.
To the Reader. YOu that shall reape the pleasure and delight Of all his paine that hath composd these songs, His meaning well, with taking well requit, Giue paines due praise, and skill what there to longs. So graced shall these first fruits of his skill, Make him with stodie, seeke to please you still. Iosepho Lupo, Musico de sua mata: sermá:
XIII. Of 4. voc. MEDIVS. LOrd to thee I make my mone, I make my mone, Lord to thee I make my mone, I make my mone, when dangers mee opresse: when dangers mee opresse: I call, I sigh, plaine and grone, plaine and grone, trust-ing to find re- lease. Heare now ô Lord, ô Lord, ij. ô Lord, heare now ô Lord, ô Lord my request for it is full due time, and let thine eares be euer prest, &: ij. &: ij. be euer prest, vnto this prayer myne. ij. vnto this prayer mine.
XIIII. Of 4. voc. MEDIVS. O Lord of whome I doe de- pend, ij. ij. I doe depend, bee- hold my carefull hart: ij. my carefull hart: and when thy will and pleasure is, & plesure is, release mee release mee of my smart. Thou seest my sorowes what they are, my sorowes what they are, my griefe is knowne to thee: is knowne to thee: and ther is none and ther is none that can remoue, that can remoue, or take the same from mee. or take the same or take the same from mee.
XV. Of 4. voc. MEDIVS. SIng yee vnto the Lord our God, the Lord our God, a new reioycing song, reioycing song and let the praise of him bee heard, his holy saints a-mong. ij. Let Is-ra- ell reioyce in him, that made that made thee of no- thing, and let the seede of Si-on eke, of Si-on eke, &: ij. bee ioyfull, ij. in their king. be ioyfull in their king. in their king.
XVI. Of 4. voc. MEDIVS. I Lift my heart to thee. ij. ij. my God and guid most iust: and guide most iust, now suffer mee to take no shame, for in thee doe I trust. ij. Let not my foes reioyce, ij. nor make a scorne a scorne of mee: nor make a scorne of mee: and let them not bee o-uer-throwne, &: ij. &: ij. bee ouerthrowne, that put their trust in thee. that put their trust in thee.
XVII. Of 4. voc. MEDIVS. MY prime of youth is but a frost of cares, but a frost of cares, is but a frost of cares, my feast of ioy is but a dish of paine, my ij. my crop of corne, my crop of corne is but a feeld of teares, & all my goods is but vaine hope of gaine. and ij. The day is past, and yet I saw no Sunne: the ij. and now I liue and now my lyfe is done, and now I liue, and now my life is done. and now my life is done. my lyfe is done.
XVIII. Of 4. voc. MEDIVS. IN deep distresse to liue without delight, ij. were such a life as few I think would craue, as few I think would craue, as few I think would craue, in pangs and paines, to languish day and night, were to to much for one poore soule to haue, one poore soule to haue. If weale and woe will thus continue strife, a gentle death were good to cut of such a life, such a life, a ij. a ij. a gentle death were good to cut of such a life.
XIX. Of 4. voc. MEDIVS. THE longer that I liue, the more offence doth flow, doth flow, the ij. the ij. the ij. the more offence I giue, ij. the more account I owe. ij. ij. the more account I make. ij. the harder it will be, ij. wherefore to liue my heart doth shake, ij. death is a gaine to mee. death is a gaine to mee.
XX. Of 4. voc. MEDIVS. THe Shepheard Strephon:
XXI. The second part. Of 4. voc. MEDIVS. WItnesse yee heauens.
XXII. Of 4. voc. MEDIVS. HAigh ho chill go to plow no more, no more, sit downe and take thy rest, ij. of goulden groats I haue great store, to flaunt it, ij. to flaunt it with the best, but I loue, and I loue, and who think you, and who think you, the fi-nest Las that ere you knew, ij. the finest Las that ere you knew, that ere you knew, which makes mee sing when I should cry, haigh ho for loue I dye. ij. ij. haigh ho for loue I dye. haigh ho for loue I dye. Heere endeth the songs of foure parts.
XXIII. Of 5. voc. MEDIVS. LOrd a rise and healp thy seruant, Lord a rise and healp thy seruant, healp thy ser- uant, which onely trusteth in thee: which onely trusteth in thee: ij. for I am in mi- se-rie. in mi-se-rie, for I am in mi-se- rie. for: ij. for: ij for: ij for: ij. for I am in mi-se-rie.
XXIIII. Of 5. voc. MEDIVS. HAue mercie on mee ô Lord, haue mércie on mee ô Lord, & graūt mee my desire: graūt mee my de- sire: let truth and righ- teousnesse dwell with mee for euer, dwell with mee for euer, let righteousnesse dwell with mee for euer, So shall I alwaies prayse thy name, and sing to thee ô my God. &iij. and sing to thee ô my God. and sing to thee ô my God.
XXV. Of 5. voc. MEDIVS. VN- to thee lift I vp myne eyes, ij. myne eyes, thou that dwellest in the heauens, ij. ij. doe well ô Lord to those that are true of hart ij. ij. doe well ô Lord to those, doe well ô Lord to those that are true of heart, for onely in thee in thee doe I trust.
XXVI. Of 5. voc. MEDIVS. WEre I a king, ij. I might I might comaund con- tent, were I ob- scure, ij. vnknowne should be my cares, my cares, and were I dead, & ij. no thoughts no thoughts should mee tor- ment, nor words, nor words, nor wrongs, nor wrongs, nor Loues, nor Loues, nor hopes, nor feares, a doutfull choise, a doutfull choise, of three things one to craue, a kingdom or a cottage, or a graue, a cottage or a graue. or a graue. a kingdome or a cottage or a graue.
XXVII. The first part. Of 5. voc. MEDIVS. IN mydst of woods or plesant groue, where all sweet byrds doe sing: where: ij. ij. my thought I heard, I heard, so rare a sound, my: ij. which made the heauens to ring. ij the heauens to ring. the charme was good, was good, ij. ij. the noyse full sweet, ij. each byrd did play his part, ij. and I admired to heare the same, the same, ioy sprong in-to my heart. ioy sprong in-to my heart.
XXVIII. The second part. Of 5. voc. MEDIVS. THE black byrd made the sweetest sound, the black byrd made the sweetest sound, the sweetest sound, whose tunes dyd far excell, ij. full pleasantly and most profound, ij. and most profound was al-things placed well, thy prety tunes mine own sweet byrd, mine own sweet bird, thy: ij. don with so good a grace, ij. ij. extolls thy name, prefers the same, abroad in euery place, thy Musick graue bedecked well, bedecked well with sundry poynts of skill,
with: ij. beewraies thy knowledge excelent, ij. ij. ij. in-grafted in thy Will: my tongue shall speake, my pen shall write in praise, in praise of thee to tell, the sweetest bird that euer was, the sweetest byrd that e-uer was, that e-uer was, in friendly sort fare-well. in friendly sort fare-well.
XXIX. Of 5. voc. MEDIVS. PEnelope, that longed that longed for the sight, for the sight of hir Vlisses, wandring all to lōg, wandring all to long, all to long, felt neuer neuer ioy, felt neuer ioy wherin shee tooke delight, wherein shee tooke delight, although she liu'd in greatest ioys amōg, so I poore wretch, poore wretch, so I poore wretch pos- sessing yt I craue, both liue & lack, by wrong of yt I haue: then blame me not, although to heauens I cry, to heauens I cry, to: ij. & pray ye gods, and pray the gods, that short-ly I may die. &: ij.
XXX. Of 5. voc. MEDIVS. WHO loues a life deuoide of quiet rest, de- uoide of quiet rest, ij. deuoide of quiet rest, and seekes content in dens of care, who most triumphes when most hee is oprest, and weenes him free, when fast hee is in snare, ij. who in the sweet doth find the sow-rest tast, the sow-rest tast, his life is loue, ij. loue, his life is loue, ij. his foode is vaine repast, his: ij. is vaine repast. ij. ij. repast. his food is vain re- past.
A Table of all the songs con∣tained in these Bookes. Songs of three parts. PRayse the Lord ô my soule, I Saue mee ô God and that with speed. II O all yee nations of the Lord. III Blessed art thou that fearest God. The first part. IIII Thus art thou blest that fearest God. The second part. V Heare my prayer ô Lord. VI Yee people all in one accord. VII O Lord turne not away thy face. VIII O come let vs lift up our voyce. IX Of all the byrds that I haue heard. X As I went a walking in the month of May. XI Turne about and see mee. XII Songs of foure parts LOrd to thee I make my mone. XIII O Lord of whome I doe depend. XIIII Sing yee vnto the Lord. XV I lift my heart to thee. XVI My prime of youth. XVII In deep distresse. XVIII The longer I liue. XIX The shepheard Strephon. The first part. XX Witnesse yee heauens. The second part. XXI Haigh he chill go to plow. XXII Songs of fiue parts. LOrd arise and help. XXIII Haue mercie on mee Lord. XXIIII Vnto thee lift I vp myne eyes. XXV Were I a King. XXVI In midst of woods. The first part. XXVIII The black byrd The second part. XXVIII Penelope. XXIX Who loues a lyfe. XXX FINIS.
TENOR. SONGS AND PSALMES composed into 3. 4. and 5. parts, for the vse and delight of all such as either loue or learne MVSICKE: BY JOHN MVNDY Gentleman, bachiler of Musicke, and one of the Organest of hir Maiesties free Chappell of VVINDSOR. Imprinted at London by Thomas Est, (the assigne of William Byrd,) dwelling in Aldersgate street, at the signe of the black Horse. 1594.
TO THE RIGHT HO∣nourable Robert Devorax, Earle of Essex and Ewe, Vicount of Hereford, Lord Ferrer of Chartley, Borcher, and Lovaine, Master of the Queenes Maiesties Horse, Knight of the noble order of the Garter, and one of hir Maiesties most Honourable privie Councell. RIght Honourable, knowing the tedious∣nesse of time, to bee best beeguiled by the sweetnesse of exercise, I haue exercised the nine sweet Muses, with greedy affection, to delight the tenth. Your Honour, is the same excelent tenth Muse, of more in valewable worth then the other nine. To your de∣light, I consecrate my duties, and offer vp my nights labors for your dayes pleasures, and voutsafe, noble Lord, to grace the offering by your kinde acceptacion, & enter∣taine with fauor, the offerers entire deuocion. In your fauorable regard, consisteth my safest gard, and my Muses securitie in your Honours satisfaction. If I satisfie not you, I satisfie not any, al∣though all beesids. If I content you, I hope I shall content all, whom I am to haue regard not to discontent, & therby I gaine, which is the sweetest gaine, the comfort of my labors. I therfore right humbly beeseech your Honour, not presuming vppon the worth of so poore and base a present, but vppon the wor∣thinesse of your owne noble hart, that this may rest secure vn∣der your Honourable patronage, as vnder priuiledge of a religi∣ous Sanctuarij, commended by your redie acceptance, and de∣fended by your fauorable countenance. Your Honours in all dutie to bee commaunded. Iohn Mundy.
To the Reader. YOu that shall reape the pleasure and delight Of all his paine that hath composd these songs, His meaning well, with taking well requit, Giue paines due praise, and skill what there to longs. So graced shall these first fruits of his skill, Make him with stodie, seeke to please you still. Iosepho Lupo, Musico de sua mata: sermá:
I. Of 3. voc. TENOR. PRayse the Lord ô my soule, ij. while I liue will I prayse the Lord, ij. yea as long as I haue any beeing, yea as long as I haue a- ny beeing, I will sing prayses to my God. Euery day will I giue thanks, will I giue thanks, euery day will I giue thanks, euery day will I giue thanks to thee, euery day will I giue thanks to thee, and prayse thy name for euer more. and praise thy name, thy name for euer more.
II. Of 3. voc. TENOR. SAue mee O God & that with speed, & that with speed, the waters flow full fast: ij. the waters flow full fast: so ny my soule do they pro- ceed, doe they pro- ceede, that I am sore agast. I stick full deepe in filthy clay, I stick full deepe, ij. full deepe in filth and clay, where as I feele no ground: I fall into such fluds, ij. ij. into such fluds, into such fluds I say, that I am like that I am like bee dround.
III. Of 3. voc. TENOR. O All ye nations ij. ô all ye na- tions of the Lord, prayse ye the Lord all wayes: & all the people euery where, euery where, set forth his noble prayse. ij. ij. ij. For great his kindnesse is to his, great his kindnesse is to his, his truth endures for aye: wherefore prayse ye the Lord our God, prayse ye the Lord I say.
IIII. The first part. Of 3. voc. TENOR. BLessed art thou that fearest God, that fearest God and walkest in his way: for of thy labour thou shalt eate, thou shalt eate, happy art thou, happy art thou I say. ij. Like fruitfull Vines on thy house side, on thy house thy house side, so doth thy wyfe spring out: thy wyfe spring out: ij. thy wyfe spring out, thy Children stand like Oliue plants, ij. like Oliue plants, thy table round about. ij. ij. thy table round about.
V. The second part. Of 3. voc. TENOR. THus art thou blest that fearest God, fearest God, ij. & he shall let thee see, ij. shall let thee see, the promised Ierusalem promised Ie- rusa- lem, and his fe-li- ci- ty. ij. Thou shalt thy childrens children see, children see, to thy great ioyes, ij. to thy great ioyes, great ioyes en-crease, and likewise grace on Isra- ell, on Isra- ell, prosperitie and peace.
VI. Of 3. voc. TENOR. HEare my prayer, ô Lord, and consider my desire: ij. hearken vnto mee, ij. hearken vn-to mee, ij. and enter not in- to iudgement with thy seruant: with thy seruant: for in thy sight, shall no man li-uing bee iustified. bee iustified. for in thy sight shall no man liuing bee iusti-fi- ed.
VII. Of 3. voc. TENOR. YEe people all in one ac- cord, in one ac- cord, clap hands and eke reioyce: ij. bee glad and sing vnto the Lord, vnto the Lord, with sweet and pleasant voyce. pleasant voyce. with sweet and pleasant voyce. Sing praises to our God, sing praise, ij. sing praises to our king: for God is king of all the earth, ij. God is king of all the earth, all skillfull praises sing. ij. skilfull praises sing, all skilfull praises sing.
VIII. Of 3. voc. TENOR. O Lord turne not away thy face, ô Lord turne not a- way thy face, thy face from him that lies prostrate: lamenting sore his sinfull life, his sinfull life, before thy mer-cie gate, which gate thou openest wide to those, ij. that doe lament their sinne, shut not that gate against mee Lord, but let mee en-ter in. ij. let mee enter in. ij. but let mee en-ter in.
IX. Of 3. voc. TENOR. O Come let vs lift vp our voyce, come let vs lift vp our voyce, O: ij. and sing vn- to the Lord: ij. and sing vn- to the Lord: ij. in him our rock of health re- ioyce, in him re- ioice, let vs with one ac- cord. Yea let vs come before his face, be- fore his face, and giue him thanks and praise: in singing Psalmes vnto his grace, ij. vnto his grace, let vs be glad alwayes. al- waies. let vs be glad al- waies.
X. Of 3. voc. TENOR. OF all the birds that I haue heard haue heard, the Nyghtingale doth beare the bel, ij. whose pretie pretie tunes, ij. whose pretie pretie sweet pleasing tunes, all other byrds doth far excell, but if such voices were not deere, I would my Mistris sung so cleere. ij. so cleere. I: ij. so cleere. I: ij.
XI. Of 3. voc. TENOR. AS I went a walking in the month of May, merily talking, meri- ly talking, I thus bee- gan to say, where dwelleth Loue, where dwelleth Loue, ij. ij. where dwelleth Loue that liuely Boy, how might I see his face, see his face, that breedeth paine and bringeth ioy, that breedeth paine, and bringeth ioy, yt alt'rith euery case, then with a sigh I dyd refraine, wt a sigh I dyd re- frain, & to the world let it re- main. re-main. &: ij. let it remain. &: ij.
XII. Of 3. voc. TENOR. TVrne about & see me, & see me, how lu-stely lu-stely. lu-sty I spring, as ioyfuly as may bee, as glad as glad as any thing. If you will aske yt cause & why, I meane to tel you by & by, to tel you by I & by, she liues y• I doe honor most, she. ij. far passing al ye rest. all ye rest. A mighty Prince & excelēt & excelēt, excelēt, sweet Eglen- tine ye best: ye best: thē ioy wt me, ioy wt me, thē ioy with mee, ij. ij. ioy with me both great & small, great & smal, hir life brings Ioy vnto vs all. hir life brings Ioy vn- to vs all. Heere endeth the songs of three parts.
XIII. Of 4. voc. TENOR. LOrd to thee I make my mone, ij. I make my mone, when dangers mee op- presse: when dangers ij. I call I sigh plaine and grone, ij. trusting to find release, to find release. Heare now ô Lord, ij. heare my re- quest, heare my request, for it is full it is ful due time: & let thine eres bee e-uer prest, ij. bee e- uer prest, let thine eares bee e-uer prest, vnto this praier mine. ij. vnto this prai- er∣mine
XIIII. Of 4. voc. TENOR. O Lord of whome I doe depend, ij. O: ij. behold my carefull heart: ij. my carefull hart and when thy will and pleasure is, ij. and pleasure is, release mee of my smart. Thou seest my sorowes what they are, what they are, my griefe is knowne to thee: ij. and there is none that can remoue, or take the same from mee. ij. ij. the same from mee.
XV. Of 4. voc. TENOR. SIng yee vnto the Lord our God, sing yee, vnto the Lord vnto the Lord our God, sing: ij. sing: ij. a new reioycing song: reioycing song: and let the praise and let the praise of him bee heard, his ho- ly saints a- mong. Let Is-ra-ell reioyce in him, that made that made him of nothing, and let the seede of Si- on eke, and let the seede the seede of Si-on eke, bee ioyfull in their king, ij. bee ioyfull in their king.
XVI. Of 4. voc. TENOR. I Lift my heat to thee, ij. my God and guide most iust: ij. Now suffer mee to take no shame, now suffer mee suffer mee to take no shame, for in thee doe I trust. doe I trust. Let not my foes reioyce, ij. nor make a scorne of mee: ij. & let them not bee o- uerthrowne, and let them not be ouer- throwne, ij. that put their trust in thee. ij. that put their trust in thee.
XVII. Of 4. voc. TENOR. MY prime of youth is but a frost of cares, ij. my feast of ioyes, my feast of ioyes is but a dish of paine, my crop of corne is but a feeld of tares, but a feeld of tares, and all my goods is but vaine hope of gaine, is but vaine hope of gaine, the day is past, the day is past & yet I saw no sunne, I saw no sunne, and now I liue, now I liue, and now I liue, and now my life is done. ij. now my life is done.
XVIII. Of 4. voc. TENOR. IN deep distresse to liue without delight, to liue without delight, In deep distresse, to liue without delight were such a life as few I think would craue, as ij. in pangs and paines, to languish day & night, day and night, were to to much for one poore soule to haue, if weale and woe will thus con- tinue strife, continue strife, a gentle death were good to cut to cut of such a life, a ij. to cut of such a life, a gentle death were good to cut of such a life.
XIX. Of 4. voc. TENOR. THE longer that I liue, the more offence doth flow, the ij. the ij. more offence doth flow, the ij. the more offence I giue, ij. the more account I owe, ij. ij. the more account I make, I make, ij. the harder it will bee, wherfore to liue my hart doth shake, death is a gaine to mee. a gaine to mee. death is a gaine to mee.
XX. The first part. Of 4. voc. TENOR. THE shepheard Strephon:
XXI. The second part. Of 4. voc. TENOR. VVItnesse yee heauens:
XXII. Of 4. voc. TENOR. HAigh ho chil go to plow no more, to plow no more, sit down & take thy rest, sit ij. of goulden groats I haue good store to flaunt it ij. to flaūt it with the best, but I loue, &-I loue, & I loue, & who think you, & who think you, the finest Las that ere you knew, the finest Las that ere you knew, ij. that ere you knew, which makes me sing when I should cry, haigh ho for loue I dye. ij. haigh ho for loue for loue I dye. ij. ij. ij. Heere endeth the songs of foure parts.
XXIII. Of 5. voc. TENOR. LOrd arise and help thy seruant, ij. which onely trusteth in thee, which onely trusteth in thee, for I am in mi- se- rie, ij. ij. ij. ij. for I am in mi se -rie. ij.
XXIIII. Of 5. voc. TENOR. HAue mercie on mee ô Lord, ij. ij. and graunt mee my desire, let truth and righteous- nesse, dwell with mee dwell with mee for e- uer, dwell with mee for e- uer, for e- uer, so shall I alwaies praise thy name, and sing to thee ô my God. my God, and sing to thee ô my God.
XXV. Of 5. voc. TENOR. VN to thee lift I vp mine eyes, mine eyes, ij. thou that dwel- lest in the heauens ij. ij. doe well ô Lord, ij. to those that are true of heart, to those that are true of heart, doe well ô Lord ô Lord, doe well ô Lord to those that bee true of heart, for onely in thee in thee doe I trust.
XXVI. Of 5. voc. TENOR. WEre I a king ij. I might I might commaūd content, were I obscure, ij. vnknown should be my cares, and were I dead, ij. no thoughts no thoughts should me torment, nor words, nor words, nor wrongs, nor wrongs, nor loues, nor loues, nor hopes, nor feares, a doubtfull choise of three things one to craue, a kingdome, or a cottage, or a graue. a cottage, or a graue a kingdome, or a cottage, or a graue.
XXVII. The first part. Of 5. voc. TENOR. IN midst of woods or pleasant groue, wher all sweet birds doe sing, ij. my thought I heard, I heard so rare a sound, my thought I heard, I heard so rare a sound, which made ye heauens to ring, ij. the charme was good, was good, ij. ij. the noyse full sweet, ij. each bird did play his part, ij. his part, & I admir'd to heare the same, ioy sprong in-to my hart. ij. ioy sprong in-to my heart.
XXVIII. The second part. Of 5. voc. TENOR. THE black byrd made the sweetest sound, ij. whose tunes did far excell, ij. full pleasantly and most profound, & ij. was all things pla-ced well, thy pretie tunes mine owne sweet byrd, ij. done with so good a grace, ij. with so good a grace, extolls thy name, prefers the same, abroad in euery place, thy Musick graue beedecked well, with sundry poynts of skill, ij. beewraise thy knowledge excellent, ij. ij. ij. in-
grafted in thy Will, my tongue shall speake, my penne shall write, in praise of thee to tell, the sweetest byrd that euer was, in friendly sort farewell. in friendly sort farewell.
XXIX. Of 5. voc. TENOR. PEnelope, that longed for hir V- lisses, yt long- ed for hir Vlisses, wādring, wandring all to long, all to long, felt neuer ioy, felt ne-uer ioy, ij. wherin wherin shee tooke delight although although she liu'd in greatest ioys a- mōg, amōg, so I poore wretch, ij. ij. possessing y• I craue, both liue & lack, by wrōg of yt I haue, thē blame me not although to heauēs I cry, to: ij. al: ij. & pray ye gods, the Gods, ij. the Gods, & pray the Gods that shortly I might dye. that shortly I might dye.
XXX. Of 5. voc. TENOR. WHo loues a life deuoyd of quiet rest, de- uoyd of quiet rest, who: ij. of quiet rest, and seeks contēt in dens of cruel care, of cruel care, in dens of cru-ell care, who most triumphs, when most he is opprest, & weens him free, and weens him free, whē fast he is in snare, whē fast he is in snare, who in ye sweet doth finde the sowrest tast, doth ij. his life is loue, his ij. loue, his life is loue, his food is vain repast, vaine repast, his food is vain re- past. ij. ij. his foode is vain re- past.
A Table of all the songs con∣tained in these Bookes. Songs of three parts. PRayse the Lord ô my soule, I Saue mee ô God and that with speed II O all yee nations of the Lord. III Blessed art thou that fearest God. The first part. IIII Thus art thou blest that fearest God. The second part. V Heare my prayer ô Lord. VI Yee people all in one accord. VII O Lord turne not away thy face. VIII O come let vs lift vp our voyce. IX Of all the byrds that I haue heard. X As I went a walking in the month of May. XI Turne about and see mee. XII Songs of foure parts LOrd to thee I make my mone. XIII O Lord of whome I doe depend. XIIII Sing yee vnto the Lord. XV I lift my heart to thee. XVI My prime of youth. XVII In deep distresse. XVIII The longer I liue. XIX The shepheard Strephon. The first part. XX Witnesse yee heauens. The second part. XXI Haigh ho chill go to plow. XXII Songs of fiue parts. LOrd arise and help. XXIII Haue mercie on mee Lord. XXIIII Vnto thee lift I vp myne eyes. XXV Were I a King. XXVI In midst of woods. The first part. XXVII The black byrd. The second part. XXVIII Penelope. XXIX Who loues a lyfe. XXX FINIS.
BASSVS. SONGS AND PSALMES composed into 3. 4. and 5. parts, for the vse and delight of all such as either loue or learne MVSICKE: BY JOHN MVNDY Gentleman, bachiler of Musicke, and one of the Organest of hir Maiesties free Chappell of VVINDSOR. Imprinted at London by Thomas Est, (the assigne of William Byrd,) dwelling in Aldersgate street, at the signe of the black Horse. 1594.
TO THE RIGHT HO∣nourable, Robert Devorax, Earle of, Essex and Ewe, Vicount of Hereford, Lord Ferrer of Chartley, Borcher, and Lovaine, Master of the Queenes Maiesties Horse, Knight of the noble order of the Garter, and one of hir Maiesties most Honourable privie Councell. RIght Honourable, knowing the tedious∣nesse of time, to bee best beeguiled by the sweetnesse of exercise, I haue exercised the nine sweet Muses, with greedy affection, to delight the tenth. Your Honour, is the same excelent tenth Muse, of more in valewable worth then the other nine. To your de∣light, I consecrate my duties, and offer vp my nights labors for your dayes pleasures, and voutsafe noble Lord, to grace the offering by your kinde acceptacion, & enter∣taine with fauor, the offerers entire deuocion. In your faworable regard, consisteth my safest gard, and my Muses securitie in your Honours satisfaction. If I satisfie not you, I satisfie not any, al- though all beesids. If I content you, I hope I shall content all, whom I am to haue regard not to discontent, & therby I gaine, which is the sweetest gaine, the comfort of my labors. I therfore right humbly beeseech your Honour, not presuming vppon the worth of so poore and base a present, but vppon the wor∣thinesse of your owne noble hart, that this may rest secure vn∣der your Honourable patronage, as vnder priuiledge of a religi- ous Sanctuarij, commended by your redie acceptance, and de∣fended by your fauorable countenance. Your Honours in all dutie to bee commaunded. Iohn Mundy.
To the Reader. YOu that shall reape the pleasure and delight Of all his paine that hath composd these songs, His meaning well, with taking well requit, Giue paines due praise, and skill what there to longs. So graced shall these first fruits of his skill, Make him with stodie, seeke to please you still. Iosepho Lupo, Musico de sua mata: sermá:
I. Of 3. voc. BASSVS. PRayse the Lord the Lord ô my soule, while I liue will I praise the Lord: will I praise the Lord: yea as long as I haue any beeing, I will sing prayses vnto my God. Euery day will I giue thāks, giue thanks, will I giue thanks, euery day will I giue thanks to thee, giue thanks to thee, and prayse thy name for euer-more, and prayse thy name for euer more.
II. Of 3. voc. BASSVS. SAue mee ô God and that with speed, ij. the waters flow full fast: waters flow full fast: ij. ij. sony my soule doe they pro- ceed, that I am sore agast. ij. I stick full deep in clay, I stick full deep, I stick full deep in filth and clay, wher as I feele no ground: I fall into such fluds, ij. I say, fluds I say, y• I am like bee dround.
III. Of 3. voc. BASSVS. O All ye nations of the Lord, prayse ye the Lord alwayes: praise the Lord praise the Lord all-waies: and all ye peo-ple e- uery where, set foorth his noble prayse, ij. ij. ij. for great his kindnesse is to his, his truth endures for aye: where fore prayse ye the Lord our God, prayse ye the Lord, prayse ye the Lord I say.
IIII. The first part. Of 3. voc. BASSVS. BLessed art thou that fearest God & walkest in his way: for of thy labor thou shalt eate; happie art thou ij. are thou I say Like fruitfull Vines on thy house side, ij. so doth thy wyfe spring out: ij. Thy Children stand lyke Oliue plants, thy Children stand like Oliue plants thy table round a- bout ij. round a- bout.
V. The second part. Of 3. voc. BASSVS. THus art thou blest that fearest God, that fearest God, and hee shall let the see: ij. the promised Ie- ru-sa- lem, and his fe- li- ci- ty. Thou shalt thy childrens children see, ij. to thy great ioyes, ij. to thy great ioyes in- crease, and likewise grace on Isra- ell, on Isra- ell, pro- spe-ri-tye, and peace.
VI. Of 3. voc. BASSVS. HEare my prayer, ô Lord, and consider my desire: hearken vnto mee, vn-to mee, hearken vn- to mee, hearken vnto mee, and en-ter not in- to iudgement with thy ser- uant: for in thy fight, shall no man li-uing bee iustified, bee iustified, for in thy sight shall no man li-uing bee iu-sti-fied.
VII. Of 3. voc. BASSVS. YEe people all in on accord, ij. clap hands and eke reioyce: and eke reioyce: bee glad and sing vn- to the Lord, to the Lord, with sweet and ple-sant voyce. Sing praises to our God, sing prayses to our God, sing prai-ses to our king: for God is king of all the earth, God is king, of all the earth, all skilfull praises sing. praises sing. all skilfull pray- ses sing.
VIII. Of 3. voc. BASSVS. O Lord turne not away thy face, Lord turne not away thy face from him that lies prostrate, lamenting sore his sinnfull life, sore his sinn-full life before thy mercie gate, which gate thou openest wide to those, that doe lament their sinne, shut not that gate a- gainst mee Lord, but let mee enter in. ij. let mee enter in. ij. ij. let mee en-ter in.
IX. Of 3. voc. BASSVS. O Come let vs lift vp our voyce, ij. our voyce, and sing vn- to the Lord: ij. ij. in him our rock of health re- ioyce, let vs with one accord, yea let vs come before his face, let: ij. to giue him thanks and praise: in singing Psalmes vnto his grace, in singing Psalmes vn- to his grace, vn-to his grace, let vs bee glad all- wayes. glad all-wayes.
X. Of 3. voc. BASSVS. OF all the byrds that I heard, the Nyghtin- gale doth beare the bell: ij. whose pretie pretie tunes, whose pretie pretie fine sweet pleasing tunes, all other byrds doth far excell ex- cel, but if such voices were not deere, I would my Mistris sung so cleere. ij. so cleere. ij. I would my Mistris sung so cleere.
XI. Of 3. voc. BASSVS. AS I went a walking in the month of May, merily talking, ij I thus began to say, where dwelleth Loue, ij. ij. where dwelleth Loue that liuely Boy, how might I see his face, that breedeth paine, and bringeth ioy, that alt'rith euery case: then with a sigh I dyd re- fraine, I dyd re- fraine, and to the world let it remaine. remaine. ij. and to the world let it re- maine.
XII. Of 3. voc. BASSVS. TVrne about and see mee and see mee and see mee, how lu- stely lu-stely lusty, I spring, as ioyfully as may as may bee, as glad as glad as any thing. If you will aske the cause & why, I meane to tell you by and by, by and by, she liues that I doe honor most, doe honor most, far passing all the rest. A mightie Prince & excelent, excelent, Sweet Eglentine ye best: the best then ioy with  ij ij Ioy, ij. ij. both great and smal, hir life brings Ioy vnto vs al. ij. vn: ij.
XIII. Of 4 voc. BASSVS. LOrd to thee I make my mone, ij. when dangers mee op- presse: ij. I call, I sigh, ij. plaine and grone, trusting to find release, to find release. Heare now ô Lord, ij. heare my re- quest, heare my request, for it is full due time: and let thine eares bee e- uer prest, ij. and let thine eares be e-uer prest, vnto this prayer mine, vnto this prayer mine. this prayer mine.
XIIII. Of 4 voc. BASSVS. O Lord of whome I doe de- pend, I doe de- pend, bee-hold my carefull heart: ij. and when thy will and pleasure is, ij release mee of my smart release mee, re: ij. thou seest my sorowes what they are, ij. my griefe is knowne to thee: is knowne to thee: and there is none that can re- moue, or take the same from mee. or take the same from mee.
XV. Of 4 voc. BASSVS. SIng yee vnto the Lord our God, vnto the Lord our God, ij. A new reioy-sing song: ij. and let the praise of him bee heard, his ho- ly saints among. a- mong. Let Is-ra-ell re- ioyce in him, that made that made him of nothing, and let the seede of Si-on eke, bee ioyfull, bee ioyfull of their king.
XVI. Of 4 voc. BASSVS. I Lift my hart to thee, ij. ij. my God and guide most iust: and guide most iust: Now suffer mee to take no shame, suffer mee to take no shame, for in thee doe I trust. ij. Let not my foes re- ioyce, reioyce, nor make a scorne of mee: a scorne of mee: and let them not bee o-uer throwne, and let them not bee ouer throwne, and let them not bee ouerthrowne that put their trust in thee. in thee. that put their trust in thee.
XVII. Of 4 voc. BASSVS. MY prime of youth is but a frost os cares, my feast of ioye is but a dish of payne, my crop of corne is but a feeld of tares. ij. and all my goods is but vaine hope of gaine, and all my goods is but vaine hope is but vaine hope of gaine, the day is past, the day is past and yet I saw no sunne, and now I liue and now my life is done. ij. and now my life is done.
XVIII. Of 4 voc. BASSVS. IN deep distresse to liue without delight, were such a life as few I think would craue, ij. in pangs and paines, to languish day and night, to languish day and night, day and night, were to to much for one poore soule to haue, if weale and woe will thus continue strife, if: ij. a gentle death were good to cut of fuch a life, a gentle death were good to cut of such a life,
XIX. Of 4 voc. BASSVS. THE longer that I liue, the more offence doth flow, the ij. the ij. the more offence I giue, the more account I owe, ij. the more account I make, ij. the harder it will bee, wherfore to liue my hart doth shake, death is a gaine to mee. ij. death is a gaine to mee.
XX. The first part. Of 4 voc. BASSVS. THE shepheard Strephon:
XXI. The second part. Of 4 voc. BASSVS. WItnesse ye heauens:
XXII. Of 4 voc. BASSVS. HAigh ho chill go to plow no mote, sit downe and take thy rest, of goulden groats I haue great store, to flaunt it, to flaunt it with the best, but I loue & I loue, I loue and who thinke you, &. ij. the finest las yt ere you knew, ij. ij. that ere you knew, which makes mee sing when I should cry, haigh ho for loue I die, haigh ho for loue for loue I dye. haigh ho for loue I dye. ij. haigh ho for loue I dye, Heere endeth the songs of foure parts.
XXIII. Of 5. voc. BASSVS. LOrd arise and help thy seruant, Lord a- rise and help thy seruant, which one-ly trusteth in thee, trusteth in thee, for I am in mi-se- rie. ij. for I am in mi-se-rie, mi-se- rie. for I am in mi-se-rie. in mi-se-rie
XXIIII. Of 5. voc. BASSVS. HAue mercie on mee ô Lord, ô Lord, and graunt mee my desire: & graunt mee my desire: Let truth and righteousnesse dwell with mee for euer, dwel with mee for euer, for e- uer: so shall I alwaies praise thy name, and sing to thee ô my God. ô my God. to thee ô my God. and sing to thee ô my God.
XXV. Of 5. voc. BASSVS. VN-to thee lift I vp mine eyes, ij. thou that dwellest in the heauens, that dwellest in the heauens, thou y• dwellest in the heauens, doe well ô Lord, ô Lord, doe well ô Lord to those that are true of heart, that are true of heart doe well ô Lord, ô Lord, doe well ô Lord to those that are true of heart, for onely in thee doe I trust doe I trust.
XXVI. Of 5. voc. BASSVS. WEre I a king, ij. I might I might commaund content, were I obscure, ij. vnknown should bee my cares, ij. and were I dead, ij. no thoughts no thoughts should me tormēt, nor words, nor words, nor wrongs, nor wrongs, nor loues, nor loues, nor hopes, nor feares, a doubt- full choise of three things one to craue a kingdome or a cottage, or a graue. a kingdome or a cottage or a graue.
XXVII. The first part. Of 5. voc. BASSVS. IN midst of woods or pleasant groue, where all sweet byrds doe sing, my thought I heard, I heard so rare a sound, my thought I heard, I heard so rare a sound, which made the heauens to ring, ij. the charme was good, was good, the charme was good, the noise full sweet, the noise ful sweet, each byrd dyd play his part, dyd play his part, and I admir'd to heare the same, ioy sprong in-to my hart. in-to my hart. ioy sprong in-to my hart.
XXVIII. The second part. Of 5. voc. BASSVS. THE black byrd made the sweetest sound, ij. whose tunes dyd far excell, did ij. full pleasantly and most profound ij. was all things placed well, thy prety tunes, mine owne sweet byrd, ij. done with so good a grace, with ij. extolls thy name, prefers the same, abroad in e-uery place, thy Musick graue bedecked well, with sundry poynts of skill, with sundry poynts with sundry poynts of skill, bewraise thy know- ledge excelent, ij. ij. in-grafted in thy Will, my tongue shal
speake, my pen shall write in praise of thee to tell, the sweetest bird that e-uer was, the sweetest byrd that e-uer was, in friendly sort farewell. in friendly sort fare-well.
XXIX. Of 5. voc. BASSVS. PEnelope, that longed for the sight the sight of hir Vlisses, wandring, wandring all to long to long, wandring all to long, felt neuer ioy, felt neuer ioy, neuer ioy wherein shee tooke delight, although she liued liued in greatest ioyes a- mong, so I poore wretch, so I poore wretch possessing that I craue, both liue & lack, by wrong of that I haue, then blame me not although to heauens I cry, al: ij. to heauens I cry, & pray ye gods ij. ij. & ij. that shortly I might dye. ij.
XXX. Of 5. voc. BASSVS. WHo loues a life deuoyd of quiet rest, ij. deuoyd of quiet rest, & seeks contēt in dens of cruel care of cruel care, who most triumphs, whē most he is opprest, & weens him free, weens him free, & weens him free when fast he is in snare, who in ye sweet ij. doth finde the sowrest tast, his life is loue, ij. is loue, his food is vaine repast. his foode is vaine re- past. ij. is vaine repast. is vaine repast.
A Table of all the songs con∣tained in these Bookes. Songs of three parts. PRayse the Lord ô my soule, I Saue mee ô God and that with speed. II O all yee nations of the Lord. III Blessed art thou that fearest God. The first part. IIII Thus art thou blest that fearest God. The second part. V Heare my prayer ô Lord. VI Yee people all in one accord. VII O Lord turne not away thy face. VIII O come let vs lift vp our voyce. IX Of all the byrds that I haue heard. X As I went a walking in the month of May. XI Turne about and see mee. XII Songs of foure parts LOrd to thee I make my mone. XIII O Lord of whome I doe depend. XIIII Sing yee vnto the Lord. XV I lift my heart to thee. XVI My prime of youth. XVII In deep distresse. XVIII The longer I liue. XIX The shepheard Strephon. The first part. XX Witnesse yee heauens. The second part. XXI Haigh ho chill go to plow. XXII Songs of fiue parts LOrd arise and help. XXIII Haue mercie on mee Lord. XXIIII Vnto thee lift I vp myne eyes. XXV Were I a King. XXVI In midst of woods. The first part. XXVII The black byrd. The second part. XXVIII Penelope. XXIX Who loues a lyfe. XXX FINIS.
