19382 99847193 12216
THE Second part of the Booke of Christian exercise, apper∣tayning to Reso∣lution. OR A Christian directory, guiding all men vnto their sal∣uation. VVritten by the former Au∣thor R. P. Psalme, 27. ver. 4. One thing haue I requested of the Lorde, and that I vvill demaund still, vvhich is, to dvvell in his house all the dayes of my life: to the ende I may knovve and doe his vvill. AT LONDON, Printed by Iohn Charl∣wood for Simon Waterson, in S. Paules Church-yarde, at Cheape-gate. 1592.
To the right Honoura∣rable, Sir Thomas Heneage, Knight, Chauncellour of the Dutchie of Lancaster, vize Chamberlaine to her excellent Maiestie, Treasurer of her royall Chamber, and one of her Highnesse most honorable priuie Coun∣saile. All happinesse in this life, and in the life to come hartily wished. BOth duety, for honoura∣ble fauours receyued, and intire affection, the spurre that pricketh forward the verie harshest conceite: hath im∣boldened mee to present this trea∣tise to your honours viewe, as a te∣stimonie of good will to shunne the infamous title of ingratitude, as al∣so in some measure to expresse my poore yet vnfeyned zeale, the bold∣nesse of the one (I presume) noble nature wil pardon, the slender ha∣bilitie of the other (I hope) the same will accept. I know howe far from your ho∣norable
thoughts, sinister opinions are, that might checke the young springing plants, whose forwardnes promise greater mattters to ensue. I know withall, not onely your ho∣norable care to cherish such ende∣uours, but also your prouident and liberall bountie, in supporting any towardly hope from falling. Ouer faint harted might hee then bee thought, that would dismay when doubt is so worthily remooued. Then boldly (yet as it becōmeth me in duetie) I reuerently deliuer your honour this simple gift: refer∣ring the iudgement both of it and me, to your wonted noble conside∣ration. And as your yeeres, so pray I all blessings of heauen may en∣crease vppon you, to the comfort of such as haue good cause to loue you.
TO THE CHRISTI∣AN READER, Health. CVrteous Reader, not many yeres since a book vvas pub∣lished Of Christian Exercise, appertaining to Resolution: vvritten by a Iesuit beyond the seas, yet an Englishman, named M. Robert Parsons; vvhich Booke M. Edmund unney hauing diligently perused, committed to the publique vievv of all indifferent iudgements: as glad, that so good matter proceeded from such infected people, and that good might arise thereby to the benefit of others. Since the manifestation of that Booke, the first Author thereof, named M. Robert Parsons, hath enlar∣ged the same Booke, vvith a second part and nevv Additions, vvherein hee hath concluded and finished his vvhole intent of the Resolution, and that vpon speciall causes, as himselfe sets dovvn in Preface in this maner. Beeing admonished by the writings of diuers, that since the publishing of my first Booke, it hath been misliked in two principall points. First, that I speake so much of good works & so little of faith. Secōdly, that I talked so largely of Gods
iustice, and so briefly of his mercie. Be∣side, conceiuing by the information of manie, that diuers persons, hauing a de∣sire in themselues to reade the ormer booke, but yet being weake & fearful to be touched so neere in conscience, as they imagined that Book did, durst neuer in∣termedle therwith, being informed there was nothing in the same wherewith to entertaine themselues, but only such ve∣hement matter of perswasion, as would greatly trouble and afflict them. For re∣medy of which inconueniencie, I haue framed this second part of that work, & therein inserted diuers chapters and dis∣courses of matters more plausible, & of themselues more indifferent, wherewith the Reader may solace his minde, at such times as he findeth the same not willing to feele the spur of more earnest motion to perfection. Hereupon grevv the occasion of his framing his second book: vvhich being perused by sundrie lerned men vvho haue thought it as vvorthy to bee seene as the first, s novv (gentle Reader) presented to thy vievv: read it indifferently, and iudge thereof, as thou findest occasion.
OF THE MANIFOLD PERILS THAT ENSVE to the VVorld by In∣consideration. And how necessarie it is for eueri man, to enter into cogitation of his owne estate. CHAP. I. THE Prophets and Saints of GOD,The chari∣table pro∣ceeding of God by his Prophes. vvho from time to time haue beene sent by his mercifull prouidence to ad∣uertise & vvarne sinners of their perilous estate & condition for sin, haue not onely foretold them of their vvickednes & imminent dan∣gers for the same, but also haue re∣uealed the causes thereof, vvhereby they might the easier prouide reme∣die for the inconueniences to come. Such is the charitable proceeding of our most merciful Lord vvith the children of men. And among other causes, none is more generall, or oft∣ner alledged, than the lack of consi∣deration:The danger of Inconsi∣deration. by vvhich, as by a cōmon snare and deceipt of our aduersarie,
most men fall into sin, and are hol∣den also perpetually in the same, to their finall destruction and eternall perdition. So Esay the Prophet, spe∣king of the carelesse Nobilitie and Gentrie of Iurie, that gaue them∣selues to banquetting and disporte, vvithout consideration of their du∣ties tovvards God: repeateth often the threate of woe against them, and then putteth dovvne the cause in these vvords:Esa. 5. The sensual life of the Ievvish gen∣trie. The Lute, and Harpe, and Timbrel, & Shalme, & good wine, aboundeth in your banquets, but the workes of God you respect not, nor haue you consideration of his dooings. And then insueth, Therefore hath hell en∣larged his soule, and opened his mouth without all measure or limitation, and the stout, and high, and glorious of thi people shall descend into it. Here are tvvo causes (as you see) and tvvo effects linked together, of these Ievves damnation, the one de∣pending of the other. For as good cheere and sensualitie, brought these men to inconsideration of GODS vvorks & proceedings tovvards sin∣ners: so inconsideration brought them to the mouth and pits brimme of hell. I say, that inconsideration
of Gods vvorkes tovvards sinners, brought them to this perrill, for that it follovveth in the very same place: And the Lord of hostes shall be exalted in iudgement, and our holy God shall be sanctified in iustice: as if he had saide, that albeit you vvill not consider novv Gods iudgements and iustice, amidst the heate & pleasure of your feasting: yet shall he, by exercising the same vppon you heereafter, bee knovvne exalted and sanctified tho∣roughout the vvorld. The like dis∣course maketh God himselfe by the same prophet, to the daughter of Ba∣bylon,Esa. 47. and by her to euerie sinfull & sensuall soule, figured by that name. Come dovvne (saith he) & sit in the dust thou daughter of Babylon thou hast said,The daugh∣ter of Babi∣lon forget∣teth her end I shalbe a Ladie for euer, & hast not put vpon thy heart ye things that thou shouldst, nor hast thou had remembraunce of thy last ende, &c. Now therfore harken thou delicate (daughter) which dwellest so confi∣dently, there shal come vpon thee an euill, whereof thou shalt not knowe the of-spring, and a calamitie shall rush vppon thee, from which thou shalt not bee able to deliuer thee. A miserie shall ouertake thee vpon the
suddaine, which thou shalt not know, &c. Holy Ieremie, after he had weigh∣ed with himselfe what miseries for sinne the Prophets Esay, Amos, Ho∣sea, Ioel, Abdias, Micheas, Nahum, Sophonias, and himselfe, (all which Prophets liued within the compasse of one hundred yeres) had foretold to be imminent vppon the world: not onely to Samaria and the tenne Trybes of Israel,4. Reg. 15. & 17. which were now alreadie carried into banishment to the furthest parts of the East, but also to the States & Countries that most flourished at that time, (as by name to Babilon, Egypt, Damasco, Tyrus, Sidon, Moab, and finally to Ierusa∣lem and Iudea it selfe,The com∣plaint of Ie∣remie for inconside∣ration. which he fore¦saw should soone after most pitiful∣ly be destroied) when he saw also by long experience, that neyther hys words, nor the words and cries of the other fore-named Prophets, could anie thing mooue the harts of wicked men: he brake forth into this most lamentable complaint, Desola∣tione desolata est omnis terra, quia nul∣lus est qui recogitet corde. The whole earth falleth into extreame ruine & desolation, for that there is no man
which cōsidereth deeply in his hart. This complaint made good Iere∣mie in his dayes for compassion of his people, that ranne miserably to perdition for want of considerati∣on. And the same complaynt with much more reason, may euerie good Christian make at this time, for the infinite soules of such as perish daily by inconsideration. VVhereby, as by a generall and remedilesse enchant∣ment, manie thousande soules are brought a sleepe, & doo finde them∣selues within the gates of hel, before they misdoubt anie such inconueni∣ence, being led thorough the vale of this present life as it were blindfol∣ded, with the veyle of careles negli∣gence, (like beasts to the slaughter∣house) and neuer permitted to see their owne danger, vntill it bee too late to remedie the same.Esay 5. Propterea captiuus ductus est populus mus, quia non habuit scientiam, saith God by the mouth of Esay. Therefore, & for this cause is my people ledde awaye captiue in al bondage and slauerie to perdition, for that they haue no knowledge, no vnderstanding of their owne estate, no fore-sight of the times to come, no consideration
of their danger. Herehence floweth all the miserie of my people, and yet this is a mysterie that al men wil not know. The mistery of Inconsi∣deration. Iob. 4.VVill you see what a mysterie and sealed secrete this is? harken then how one describeth the same, and with what circumstances. Further∣more (saith hee) a certaine hidden word was spoken vnto me, & mine ere (as it were by stealth) receiued the veines of his whispering: it was in the horror of a vision by night, when dead sleepe is wont to possesse men: feare came vpon me & trem∣bling, and all my boanes were ex∣treamely terrified. At length a spirit past by, in my presence, whereat the haires of my flesh stood vp in hor∣rour. There stood before mee one whose face I knewe not. His image was before mine eyes, & I heard his voyce, as the sound of a soft ayre. Hetherto is described in what ma∣ner and order this secrete was reuea∣led; but now what said this vision or spirit (think you) at the last? truely, he mde a short discourse, to proue by the fall of Angels for their sinne, that much more,Iob. 4. Qui habitant domus luteas, & terrenum habent fundamen∣tum,
consumentur velut tinea, et de ma∣ne vsque ad vesperam succidentur:A collecti∣on to bee noted. they who dwell in houses of morter, (as all doo, whose bodies are of flesh) and they which haue their founda∣tion of earth, (as most folke of this world haue, that put their cōfidence in things of this life) they must all consume by little and little, as the cloth doth by the moth, & at length they must vpon the suddaine (with∣in lesse space perhaps than is from morning to night) be cut downe & dispatched, when they thinke least of it. And to shew that herein standeth a poynt of high secrecie (I meane to cōsider & pōder well this discourse) hee maketh his conclusion in these words immediately following Et quia nullus intelligit, in aeternum peri∣bunt; And for that few or none of these men before mentioned, who haue such earthly foundations, doo vnderstande this poynt aright, (I meane of their suddaine death,Lack of cō∣sideration, cause of e∣ternall de∣struction. and cutting off from this world) there∣fore must they perish eternally, and this is a secrete which few men will beleeue.Psalm. 91. Vir isipiens non cognoscet (saith Dauid) & stultus non intelliget
haec: An vnaduised man wyll not learne these things,A point that fooles will not consider. nor wyll a foole vnderstand them. But what things? it insueth in the same place: howe wonderfull the workes of God, and how deep his cogitations are about sinners; who spring vp as grasse (and florish in this world) vt intereant in seculum seculi: to the ende they may perish for euer and euer. The Prophet Daniel had many vi∣sions, & strange reueltions of great and high mysteries: but one among all other (and this is the least) of the most dreadfull iudgements of God, vpō sinners in the end of the world. The Vision was by the great Riuer Tygris:Dan. 10. A most ter∣rible vision of Daniel, wherein he saw Christ. where, as diuers Angells were attending about the bankes, so vpon the water it selfe stood one in the likenes of a man, of exceeding dreadfull maiestie; his apparell bee∣ing onely linnen, through which his bodie shined like precious stone, his eyes like burning lamps, his face like flashing lightning, his armes and legs like brasse enflamed, and his voice as the shoute of a whole multitude of people that should speake together. This was Christ by all interpretati∣on, at whose terrible presence when
Daniel fell downe dead, he was ere∣cted againe by an Angel, and made strong to abide the vision; and so ha∣uing heard and seene the most won∣derful things that in his Book he re∣counteth, he was bold to ask a que∣stion or two, for better vnderstand∣ing thereof: & his first question was,Dan. 12. How long it should be ere these wonder∣full things tooke their end? VVhereun∣to the man vpon the water aunswe∣red, by stretching foorth both his brasen armes to heauen, & swearing strangly by him that lyueth for euer: that it should be A time, and times, and halfe a time. VVhich aunswer, Daniel not vnderstanding, began to question further, but he was cut off with this dispatch:A secrete. Goe thy way Da∣niel, for these speeches are shut vp and sealed, vntyll the time pre-ordayned. And yet for his further instruction, it was added in the same place; Im∣preagent impij nec intelligent:Dan. 12. wicked men will alwayes doe wickedly, and will not vnderstand these mysteries, albeit wee should neuer so much ex∣pound them. VVhereby,VVilfull ig∣norance. as by all the rest that hetherto hath been alleaged, is made apparant, that inconsideration, neg∣ligence,
carelesse ignorance, & lacke of vnderstāding in our own estates, and in Gods iudgements and pro∣ceedings with iniquitie and sin: hath been a bane, and a common perdi∣tion of retchlesse men from time to time. The cause of so much sin at this day.And if wee will turne our eyes to this our age, much more shall we see the same to be true. For, what is the cause (thinke you) why at this day wee haue so many of those people,Iob, 15. whom holy Iob dooth call abhomi∣nable, that drink vp iniquitie, as beastes drinke water? that commit all sinne, all iniustice, all turpitude, without remorse or scurple of conscience? VVhat is the cause of this (I say) but lacke of consideration, lacke of vn∣derstanding, lacke of knowledge? For as Christ sayd to Ierusalem tou∣ching her destruction,Luke, 19. Si cognoisses et tu, &c. If thou also (ô sinful soule) didst knowe what hangeth ouer thy head for this carelesse life of thine: if thou (daughter of Babylon) wouldst remember & ponder in thine heart, what shalbe the end of thy delights, thou wouldest not liue so pleasant∣ly as thou doost:Luke, 19. Nunc autem abscon∣dita sunt ab occulis tuis: But now (sai∣eth
Christ) these thinges are hidden from thine eyes. Not, but that thou mightest haue knowne them if thou wouldest, but for that thou art one of them that say to God,Voluntarie inconside∣ration. scientiam viarum tuarum nolumus, we wil not haue vnderstan∣ding of thy wayes: one of them qui sunt rebelles lumini,Iob. 21. yt are rebellious against the light and illumination of Gods grace:Iob. 23. one of them, qui nolunt intelligere vt bene agent, that will not vnderstand to doe well: and finally, one of them,Prou. 28. qui declinant aures ne au∣diant Legem, that turne away theyr eares to the end they may not heare Gods Law:Prou. 28. quorum oratio est execra∣bilis, whose not onely life, but also prayer is execrable and detetable in the sight of their Maker. Truely, nothing in reason can bee lesse tollerable in the presence of Gods Maiestie, than wheras he hath published a Lawe vnto vs,Deut. 6. and 11. with so great charge to beare it in minde, to ponder in hart,Iosua. 1. to studie & meditate vpon it both day and night,Psal. 118. at home and abroade,Eccle, 6. and 22. at our vprising & our downe lying, to make it our cogita∣tion, our discourse, our talke, our ex∣ercise, our rumination, and our de∣light:
that we should notwithstan∣ding contemne the same, as to make it no pat of our thought, but rather to flee the knowledge thereof, as we see most men of the world doe, for not troubling their consciences. Eccl 17. The first cause why men flee considera∣tion. But the holy Ghost hath laid down the reason hereof long agoe in these words: Cum sit timida nequitia testi∣monium condemnationis: For that wic¦kednes in it selfe is alwaies fearefull, it gyueth witnesse against it selfe of damnation, whensoeuer it thinketh of the Lawe of God, or of honstie. So Foelix the Gouernour of Iurie, when S. Paule began to talke of iu∣stice, chastitie,Acts 24. & Gods iudgements be∣fore him, he was wonderfully afeard and said to Paul, that he should depart for that time, and that he would call for him afterward, when occasion should require. But hee neuer did, and wht was the cause? for that (as Iosephus testifieth) he was a wicked man,Iosep. lib. 20. antiq. cap. 5. and Drusilla his faire Lady that was with him at S. Paules speech, was not hys true wife, but taken by allurement and violence from an other, & ther∣fore it offended them both to heare preaching of chastitie. This then is one principall cause,
why men of this world will not en∣ter into consideration of their owne estate, and of Gods commaunde∣ments, least they should read and see their owne faults, and beare witnes against thēselues of their own con∣demnation.The second cause why men flee cō∣sideration. VVhereunto the holy Scripture annexeth an other cause, not far vnlike to this, which is, that worldly men doe so drowne them∣selues in the cares & cogitations of this life, as they leaue in their minds no place to thinke vppon Gods af∣faires, which are the busines of their owne soules. Thys expresseth Ieremie the Pro∣phet most effectually,Ierem. 7. when hauing made his complaint, that notwith∣standing his preaching and crying in the Temple gate, for long time to∣gether, where al the people passed by him and heard him: yet no man (saith he) would enter into conside∣ration, or say with himselfe,Ierem. 8. what haue I doone? and reason: Omnes enim conuersi sunt ad cursum suum, qua sie∣quus impetu vadens ad praelium. All men are set vppon their owne cour∣ses and wayes, and doe runne in the same with as great vehemencie and fearce obstinaciō, as a furious armed
horse, when he heareth the Trumpet in the beginning of a battayle. By which comparison, the holy Ghost expresseth very liuly, ye irrecouerable state of a setled worldlly man, that followeth greedily his own design∣ments in the negotiation of earth. These are two of the cheife causes of inconsideration, I meane wilfull malice and obstinate corruption in the vanities of this life. And yet mē∣tioneth the Scripture,The third cause of in∣considera∣tion. a third sort al∣so of inconsiderate men, who ney∣ther of direct malyce, nor yet of great occupation in worldly affaires doe neglect consideration, but rather of a certain lightnes and idle negli∣gence, for that they will not trouble theyr heads with any thing but di∣sport and recreation, of whom it is writtē,Wisdom. 15. aestimauerunt lusum esse vitam nostram: They esteeme this life of ours to be but a play-game. And in an other place of the same men:Eccle, 8. Ita securi viuunt quasi iustorum facta ha∣beant. They liue as securely & confi∣dently without care and cogitation, as if they had the good works of iust men to stand for thē. But as the holy Ghost pronounceth in the same place hoc vanissimum: this is vanity
and folly in the highest degree. For as in things of this lyfe,A compa∣rison. hee were but a foolish Merchant, that for quietnes sake would neuer looke into his own account booke, whe∣ther he were behind hand or before and as the ship-master were greatly to be laughed at, that for auoyding of care, would sit downe and make good cheere, & let the ship goe whe∣ther shee would: so, much more in the busines of our soule, it is madnes and folly to fly consideration for es∣chewing of trouble, seeing in the ende thys negligence must needes turne vpon vs more trouble, and ir∣remediable calamitie. For as Ieremie sayth to all such men,Iere. 30.23. in nouissimo die intelligetis ea, in the end of your dayes, you shall not chuse but know, and see, and vnder∣stand these things,In the end euill me shall vnder∣stand, whi∣ther they will or no. which nowe for delecacie you wil not take the pains to thinke of. But when shall this be trow you? he telleth plainely in the same place: When the fury of the Lord shall come foorth as a whirlwind, and shall rush and rest vppon your heads as a tempest: then shall you know and vnderstand these things. It seemeth that the Babylonians
were a people very faultie in thys poynt of consideration,The exam∣ple of the Babyloni∣ans. (as all weal∣thy people are) not onely by that which before hath beene touched of the daughter of Babilon, that would not consider her ending dayes: but also, for that not long before ye most terrible destruction of that great cit∣tie by the Medes and Persians, God cryed vnto her in these words:Esay, 21. My deerely beloued Babylon, put aside the Table, & stand vpon thy watch: ryse vp you Princes from eating and drinking: take your Targets in your hands: goe, and set a watchman vp∣pon the walles, and what soeuer hee seeth, let him tell you. And then was there a watchman set vppon the walles, and a Lyon to denounce with open mouth, what∣soeuer daunger he saw comming to∣wards them. And God taught the Prophet to cry in thys sort to theyr Sentinell or watchman: Custos, quid de nocte? custos, quid de nocte? Thou VVatchman, what seest thou com∣ming towards thee by night? what espyest thou (O Sentinell) drawing on vs in the darkenesse? By all which circumstaunce, what els is insinuated, but that God wold
haue vs stand vppon our watch,VVe must stand vppon our watch. for that his iudgements are to come vp∣pon the world by night, when men least think therof? they are to come as a theefe at midnight, as also in an other place we are admonished, and therfore happie is the man that shall be founde watchfull.Considera∣tion the on∣ly doore to our watch. But nowe the doore and sole entrance into thys watch, wherof the securitie of our e∣eternal life depēdeth, can be nothing els but consideration, for that wher no consideration is, there can be no watch, nor fore-sight, nor knowe∣edge of our state; and consequent∣y no hope of our saluation, as holy S. Bernard holdeth;Bern. lib. 1. de coni. which thing, caused that blessed man to write iue whole bookes of consideration o Eugenius. Consideration is the thing that ringeth vs to knowe God and our elues. And touching God, it layeth efore vs his Maistie, his mercie, his udgments, his commaundements, is threatnings, his promises, his roceeding with other men before s, wherby we may gather, what we lso in time must expect at his hands And for ourselues, consideration s the key that opneth the doore to
the closet of our hart, vvhere all our Bookes of account doe lye:The many commodi∣ties of con∣sideration. it is the looking glasse, or rather the very eye of the soule, vvhereby she taketh the view of herselfe, and looketh into al her whole estate; into her ritches, her debts, her duties, her negligences, her good gifts, her defects, her safety, her daunger, her way she walketh in, her course shee followeth, her pace shee holdeth, and finally, the place & end vvherevnto she draweth. And with∣out this consideration, shee runneth on headlong, into a thousand brakes and bryers, stumbling at euery step, into some inconueniencie or other, and continually in perrill of some great and deadly mischeefe. And vvonderfull (truely) it is, that in all other busines of thys lyfe, men can see and confesse, that nothing may bee begun, prosecuted, or vvell ended, without consideration: and yet in this great affayre, of vvinning heauen, or falling into hell, fevve thinke consideration greatly neces∣sarie to be vsed. Effects of conside∣ration.I might stand here to shew the in∣finite other effects and commodities of consideration, that as it is ye watch or larum bell, that stirreth vp and a∣wakeneth
all the powers of our mind; the match or tinder, that con∣ceiueth & nourisheth the ire of de∣uotion: the bellows that enkindleth & enflmth the same, the spur that pricketh forward to all vertuous, zealous, and hroycll acts; and the thing indeede, that giueth both light lyfe, and motion to our soule. Our faith is onfirmed & increa∣sed by cōsideration of Gods works and myracles; our hope by conside∣ration of his promises,How al vertues are stir∣red vp and quickned by considrati∣on. & of the true performance therof to all them that euer trusted in him: our charitie or loue to God, by consideration of his benefits & innumerable deserts to∣wards vs: our humilitie by conside∣ration of his greatnes, & of our own infirmitie: our courage & fortitude, by contemplation of his assistance in all causes for his honour: our cō∣tempt of the world, by considerati∣on of the ioyes of heauen eternall; and so all other vertues both morral & diuine, doe take their heate, quick∣ning, and vitall spirite from conside∣ration. By the exercise of consideration  meditation, holy Dauid saith,Psal. 38. that he felt a burning fire to flame within
his breast; that is, the fire of zeale, the fire offeruour in Religion, the fire of deuotion, the fire of loue towardes God and his neighbour. And in an other place he saith, that by the same exercise,Psalm. 76. he swept and purged his owne spirit: which is to bee vnderstood, from the dust of thys world, frō the dregs of sin, from the cōtamination and coinquination of humane crea∣tures, for that consideration indeed, is the very fan that seuereth and dri∣ueth a way the chaffe from the corn. For vvhich cause vve shall neuer reade of any holy man from the be∣ginning of the world, neither before Christ nor after,The exer∣cise of holy men tou∣ching con∣sideration. who vsed not much and familiarly this most blessed ex∣ercise of consideration and ponde∣ring. And for the first three Patri∣arches, it shalbe sufficient to remem∣ber the custome of young Isaack re∣corded in Genesis. VVhich vvas to goe foorth towards night into the fielde, ad medit andum, that is, to me∣ditate, consider & ponder,Gen. 24. vpon th vvorkes, iudgments, and commaun∣dements of God.The first three Pa∣triarches. And this hee di beeing but a childe and vnmarried (farre different from the custome o young Gentlemen now adaies, wh
frequent the fieldes to followe theyr vanities,) and as little Isaack coulde not haue that custome but from hys Father Abraham, so (no doubt) but hee taught the same to his sonne Ia∣cob, & Iacob again to his posteritie. And as for Moses & his successor Iosua,Moses and Iosua. it may easily bee imagined howe they vsed this exercise,Deut, 6. and 11. by the most earnest exhortations, vvhich they made thereof to others,Iosua. 1. in their speech & writings. The good Kings of Iuda also, notvvithstanding theyr many great temporall affayres, doe testifie of themselues cōcerning thys exercise; as Dauid almost euery vvhere,K. Dauid. that the commaundements of God vvere his dayly meditation, not onely by day,Psal. 38.62. & 118. & that tota die, all the day, et per singulos dies, euery day, et in matutino, in the morning, et sep∣ties in die, seauen times a day, but al∣so hee insinuateth this custome by night;Psal. 76. meditatus sum nocte cum corde meo, I doe meditate by night in my hart, vpon thy commaundements ô Lord; signyfying heereby, both hys vvatchfulnes by night vvhen other men vvere a sleepe, and the hartie re that hee had of this exercise, which vve esteeme so little.
King Salo∣mon.Salomon also King Dauids son, so long as he lyued in the grace and fa∣uour of God, obserueth this exercise of his Father, and exhorteth other men,Eccle. 6. to haue continuall and daylie co∣gitation in this affaire. Which if him∣selfe had continued still, it is likely he had neuer fallen from God by wo∣men as he did. The good K. Ezechias is reported to haue meditated lyke a Doue,King Eze∣chias. that is, in silence & solitarines with himself alone, which is the true vvay of profitable meditation. Esay testifieth of his owne vvatching by night in this exercise,Esay. 58. and howe hee did the same vvith his spirite alone,Esay. 26. in the very bowels of his hart. The consi∣deratiō that Iob vsed, & the fruites thereof.Holy Iob maketh mention, not onely of his manner of considering, but vvhat also hee considered, and what effect hee found in himselfe by the same. First hee considered (as I said) the wayes, foote-steps, & com∣maundements of God, and then his dreadfull power: to vvit, howe no man vvas able to auert or turn away his cogitation, but that his soule did vvhat it pleased, & by this (saith he) considerans eum timore sollicitor:Iob. 23. I am made sollicitous or vvatchfull vvi feare, vvhen I consider him.
In which words he insinuateh two most excellent effects of considera∣tiō;Tvvo effects of conside∣ration. Esay, 32. First, the feare of God, of which it is vvritten, salutis thesaurus timor Domini, the feare of God is the trea∣sure of saluation; & the second, yt by this feare hee vvas made sollicitous, vvatchfull, & dilligent in Gods ser∣uice, of vvhich the Prophet Michaeas saith thus.Michae. 6. I wil tell thee (O man) what is good, and what the Lord requireth at thy hands: to vvit, to doe iudgement & loue mercie, and to walke sollicitous and watchfull with thy God. But thou ô holy and blessed man Iob,A conside∣ration vpon the doings of Iob. Iob. 9. did this exercise bring foorth in thee, so great terror & feare of God: & so carefull watchfulnes for obser∣uing his cōmaundements? now I see vvell the cause vvhy thou vvritst of thy self, that thou diddest doubt and feare all thy vvorks & actins, vvere they neuer so circumspect. But what shal vve say now adaies (most happy saint) vvho do not doubt so much as our own dissolute, carelesse, and im∣moderate actions, vvho feele no ter∣ror of God at al, nor do vse any one ote of watchfulnes in obseruing his ommaundements? tuly, this pro∣ceedeth of nothing els but of incon∣sideration:
it proceedeth of lacke of knowledge both of God and of our selues. For (doubtlesse) if vve knevve either of these two things aright, (as indeede neither of them can be vvell vnderstoode vvithout the other) it could not bee, but that many of vs vvould change our vvrong courses. O merciful Lord, what sinful man in the vvorld would liue as he doth, if he knevv either thee or himselfe as he should doe? I meane, if he consi∣dered vvhat thou art: & vvhat thou hast beene to other that haue lyued and continued in sinne as he dooth? Not vvithout great cause cryed to often & earnestly to thee, that holy Doctor of thy church,August. in lib. confes. for obtaining of those tvvo points at thine hands: vt cognoscam te, vt cognoscam me: that I may knovve thee, and that I may knovve my selfe, saith hee, that is, that I may consider, and feele the true knovvledge heereof, for many men doe knovve, but vvith little commoditie. Knowledge and beliefe in grosse.VVe knovve and beleeue in grosse the misteries of our faith, that there is a God vvhich revvardeth good & euil, that he is terrible in his counsel vpon the sons of men: that there is a
hell for sinners, a heauen for good lyuers, a most dreadful day of iudge∣ment to come, a streight account to be demaunded, and the like. All this we knowe and beleeue in generall, as merchandise wrapped vp together in a bundle. But for that wee vnfold not these things, nor rest vpon them in particular, for that wee let them not downe into our harts, nor doe ruminate on them with leysure and attention: for that wee chewe them not well in minde by deepe conside∣ration, nor doe digest them in heart, by the heate of meditation, they re∣maine with vs as a sword in his sa∣berd, & doe help vs as little to good life,A simili∣tude. (for which they were reuea∣led,) as a preseruatiue in our pocket neuer applyed, can helpe our health. VVee beare the generall knowledge of these mysteries locked vp in our breastes, as sealed bagges of treasure that be neuer tolde nor opened, and consequently, wee haue neither fee∣ling, sence, nor motion thereby, euen as a man may carry fire about him in a flint stone without heate, and per∣fumes in a Pomander without smel, except the one be beaten, and the o∣ther chafed.
The impor∣tance of cō∣sideration.All standeth then (good Reader) in thys one poynt, for direction of our selues in this life, & for reaping be∣nefit by the misteries of our faith, & Religion; that wee alot our selues time to meditate, ponder, and consi∣der what these things doe teach vs. For as the sicke man that had most excellent remedies & precious poti∣ons set before him, could expect no profit or ease thereby, if he only did looke vpon them, or smelled them, or tooke them in his mouth alone, or should cast them forth of his sto∣macke agayne, before they were set∣led, or had time to worke their ope∣ration: euen so is it in thys case of ours. And therefore with great rea∣son said S. Paul to Timothie,1, Tim. 4. after he had taught him a long lesson, haec me∣ditare, meditate, consider, & ponder vppon these thinges which I haue shewed you, as if in other speeches hee had said: all that hetherto I haue tolde you, or written for your in∣struction, and all that euer you haue heard or learned besides, will auayle you nothing for you saluation, ex∣cept you meditate and ponder vpon the same, and doe sucke out the iuyce thereof by often consideration.
VVherfore to conclude this chap∣ter,The con∣clusion of the Chap∣ter. my deere and vvelbeloued bro∣ther, for that consideration is so pre∣cious and profitable, so needeful and necessary a thing as hath been decla∣red, I thought it conuenient in thys first front & entrance of my booke, to place the mention and dilligent recommendation thereof, as a thing most requisit for all that ensueth. For without consideration, neither thys that I haue saide already, nor any thing els that shall or may bee sayde hereafter, can yeeld thee profit, as by lamentable experience we see dayly in the world,The mise∣ry of the world. where many millions of men passe ouer theyr whole age, without taking profite of so many good Books, so many preachings, so many vertuous examples, so many terrible chstisements of God vpon sinners, which euery where they see before theyr face. But yet for that they will not, or haue not leysure, or dare not, or haue no grace to enter into consideration therof, they passe ouer all, as sick men do pylles, diuer∣ting as much as they may, both their eyes & cogitations, from all such matters as are vngratefull to them. Bu as good Ieremie sayth,Iere. 30. and 2. the
time vvill come vvhen they shall bee enforced to see and know, & consi∣der these things, when perhaps it wil be too late to reape any comfort or consolatiō therby. Wherfore (deere brother) that which perforce thou must doe in time to come, and that perhaps to thy greater damnation, (I mean to enter into consideration of thine owne estate,) doe that nowe willingly to thy comfort & conso∣lation, for preparing the way to thy saluatiō.Ephe. 5. Preuent the day & redeeme the time, according to S. Paules wise counsell; run not headlong with the world to perdition, stay sometime as holy Ieremie admonisheth thee, and say to thy selfe,Iere. 7. what doe I? whe∣ther goe I? what course hold I? what shall be my ende? Take some time from thy pleasures, and frō the com∣pany of thy pleasant friends, to doe thys, althought it bee with losse of some pastime and recreation; for I assure thee, it will recompence it self in the end, & make thee merry when thy laughing friends shall weepe. The effect of all the Chapter. following.The effect of al the considerations that ensue, is, rightly to know God, for by knowing him, we shal knowe our selues, & all things els which are
necessary for vs to know: & without knowing him, all knowledge in the world is vanitie, & meere folly. Haec est vita eterna, (saith our Sauiour Christ to his Father) vt te cognoscant solum Deum verum,Iohn. 17. et quem misisti Iesum Christum. This is life euerla∣sting, that men know thee which art onely true God, and Iesus Christ whom thou hast sent. Gods nature and essence vvee can not know in this life;The way to know God in this lyfe. but the onely meane to knowe God in this world, is, to know his Maiestie, to know his mercy, to know his iustice, to know his iudgements; to know his hatred against sin, his fauour to the good, his benefites, and promises to all: his grace, his threats, his wayes, his com∣maundements, his dealings towards other men before vs: all which things, the considerations follow∣ing doe set before our eyes, & con∣sequētly, they doe teach vs to know GOD aright. Reade then therefore (deere brother) with attention, and remember the wordes that God v∣seth to vs all;Psalm. 45. Vacate et videte quoni∣am ego sum Deus. Take leysure, and consider that I am a God. It must not be doone in haste, nor (as the fa∣shion
is) for curiositie onely, to read three or foure leaues in one place, & so in another? but it must bee doone with such serious intention, as ap∣pertayneth to so great a businesse, which (in truth) is the weightiest that possible vnder heauen may bee taken in hand. It is the busines wher∣of Christ ment especially, when hee said,Luke. 10. vnum est necessarium, one onely thing is necessary. For that all other things in this world, are but trifles to this, and this alone of it selfe, of more importance than they all.
THAT THERE IS A GOD, VVHICH REWAR∣DETH GOOD AND EVILL, against all Atheists of old, and of our time. With the proofes alleadged for the same, by the Iewe and Gentile. CHAP. II. IT is a thing both common and ordinary in Sciences and Artes,A common customes in Sciences to suppose principles. when they are learned or deliue∣red by other, to suppose diuers points & principles, and to passe them ouer without proofe, as either knowne before to the learner, or els so manifest easie, & euident of them∣selues, as they neede none other proofe, but onely declaration. So when wee take in hand to in∣struct a man in Chiualrie,An example in Chiualry. or feats of Armes, we do suppose that he know∣eth before, (were hee neuer so rude) what a man, what a horse, what ar∣mor, what fighting meaneth: as also that warre is lwfull & expedient in diuers causes; the Princes of y• world may wage the same; that Souldiours
haue to liue in order and discipline vnder their regiment, that Kings for this cause doe holde their Generals, Lieuetenants, Coronels, Captaynes, & other like Officers, in their bands, Garisons, Camps, and Armies. In handy crafts.In manuall artes and occupations lykewise, it is euident, that diuers things must bee presupposed to bee foreknown by the learner; as in hus∣bandry or agriculture; in bulding, in paynting, and other such exercises, when a man is to bee taught or in∣structed, it were not conuenient for the Teacher, to stand vppon euerie point or matter that appertaineth to the same, but must leaue and passe o∣uer many thinges, as apparant of themselues, or easie to bee discerned of euery learner by nature, sence, rea∣son, or common experience. In liberall Sciences.But yet in liberall sciences & pro∣fessions of learning, is this more ap∣parant, where not onely such com∣mon & vulgare points are to be pre∣sumed, without proofe or discourse: but also certaine propositions are to bee graunted in the beginning,Grounds to be graunted in Sciences. as grounds whereupon to build all the rest that insueth. So the Logitian (for example) will haue you yeelde ere he
enter with you;In Logick. that contradictorie propositions cannot bee together eyther false or true, neither, that one thing may be affirmed & denyed of an other, in one and the selfe same respect and time. The Morrall Phylosopher,In Morrall phylosophie wyll haue you graunt at the beginning, that there is both good & euill in mens actions: and that the one is to bee fol∣lowed, and the other refused. The naturall Phylosopher,In Naturall philosophie wyll haue you confesse, that all physicall bodies which depend of nature, haue motion in themselues, & are subiect to alterations, and whatsoeuer is moo∣ued, is mooued of another. The Mathematique at his first en∣trance,In the Ma∣thematicks. wil demaund your assent, that euery whole is bigger than his parts: as also, the Metaphisicke or Supernatu∣rall Phylosopher,The Meta∣phisick. that nothing can be, and not be at one time. And so other such like principles and common grounds, in these and all other Sci∣ences are to be demanded, graunted, & agreed vpon at the beginning, for the better pursute and establishment of that which hath to follow, being things in themselues, (as you see) ei∣ther by nature, common sence, or
experience, most cleere & manifest. In Diuini∣tie.And is not this also in Diuinitie (trowe you) and in the affayres that we haue now in hand? yes truely, if wee beleeue S. Paule, who writeth thus to the Hebrues:Heb. 11. Credere oportet accedentem ad Deum, quia est, et inqui∣rentibus se remunerator sit. He that is cōming towards God, must beleeue that there is a God, and that he is a rewarder of such as seeke him. Be∣holde heere two principles,Two prin∣ciples in Di∣uinitie. wherin a man must bee resolued before hee can seeke or drawe vnto God. The one, that there is a God, and the other, that the same God is iust, to reward e∣uery  man according to his deserts. VVhich two principles or general groundes, are so euident indeede of their own natures, & so ingraffed by Gods owne hand, into the mind and vnderstanding of euery particuler man, at his natiuitie, (according to the saying of the Prophet:Psalm. 4. the light of thy countenance is sealed vpon vs (O Lord,) that were not the times wee lyue in, too-too wicked, and the shamelesse induratian of sinners in∣tollerable, wee should not neede to stand vpon ye proofe of these poynts for confirmation of our cause that
we now intreate, of resolution; but rather supposing and assuring our selues, that no resonable creature ly∣uing, could doubt of these princi∣ples; should pursue only the consi∣deration of other things, that might styr vp our wills to the performance of our duetyes towards this GOD that hath created vs, and remayneth to pay our reward at the end. But for so much as iniquitie hath so aduaunced her selfe at this day in the harts of many,The cause of thys Chapter. as not onely to contemne and offend their Maker, but also to denie him, for patronage of their euil life, & for extinguishing the worme of their own afflicted & most miserable consciences; I am enforced before all other things, to discouer this fond and foule errour of theirs, and to remoue also this re∣fuge of desperate iniquitie, by shew∣ing the inuincible veritie of these two principles, the one depending of the other in such sort, as the first beeing prooued, the second hath of necessitie to follow. For if once it be manifest that there is a God,If there be a God, he is a iust re∣warder. which hath care & prouidence of all those: whom he hath created & gouerneth; then must it ensue by force of all
cōsequence, that he is also to reward the same men, according to their good lyuing and deserts of this life. First then to proue this principle, That there is a GOD, I neede vse no other argument or reason in the world, but only to referre each man to his owne See Lac∣tantius at large, in his booke of the work∣manship of the world. The workes of ye world doe declare the work∣man. sence, in beholding the world, wherof euery part & portion is a most cleere glasse, representing God vnto vs, or rather a fayre Ta∣ble, wherin God hath drawn or im∣printed himselfe, in so manifest cha∣racters and legible Letters, as the simpliest man lyuing, may read and vnderstand them. In respect heereof said the VVise∣man so long agoe. That vaine and foolish were all those, who conside∣ring the workes that are seene in the world, could not thereby rise to vn∣derstand the work-man. And he gi∣ueth this reason.Wisd. 3. A magnitudine enim speciei creaturae, cognoscibiliter poterit Creator horum videri. For that by the greatnes of beauty in the creature, may the Creator therof be seene and known.Rom. 1. Which S. Paule confirmeth, when hee saith, that the inuisible thinges of God, may bee seene and knowne by the visible creatures of
the world. VVhich is to bee vnder∣stood in this sense, that as a prisoner in a dungeon, may easily by a little beame that shineth in at a chincke, conceiue ther is a Sun, from whence that beame descendeth: & as a Tra∣uailer in the wildernesse that falleth vpon some channell or brooke, may ascend by the same to the VVell or Fountaine: euen so, hee that behol∣deth & considereth the wonderfull workes of this world, may thereby conceiue also, the wonderfull Arti∣ficer or work-man that made them. If a man should passe by Sea,A simili∣tude. into some forraine, strange, or sauage Countrey, where nothing els but birds and beasts doe appeare: yet if he should espye some exquisite buil∣ding, or other worke of arte & rea∣son in the place, he would presently assure himselfe, that some men dwelt or had beene in that Countrey, for that such things could not be doone by beasts or vnreasonable creatures, euen so in the view and considerati∣on of this world. If we cast our eyes vpon the hea∣uens,The hea∣uens teach GOD. we remain astonished with the myracles that we behold: but who made them? we see the skyes of ex∣ceeding
great highnes, distinguished with collours, and beautie most ad∣mirable; adorned with starres and Plannets innumerable, and these so qualified with their diuers, different, and vnequal motions, as albeit they neuer moue or goe together, yet doe they neuer giue let or hinderaunce the one to the other, nor change their course out of order or season. Ib. 28.Quis enarrabit coelorum rationem, et concentum coeli, quis dormire faciet? VVho is able to declare the reason of these heauens, or who can make cease or sleepe the vniforme course of theyr motions, saith God to Iob? As who would say, that because no man or mortal creature can do this, therefore may we imagine of what power & perfection theyr maker is. VVhich King Dauid had done when he pronounced, Coeli enarrant glori∣am Dei, et opera manuum eius, annun∣ciat firmamentum, the heauens de∣clare the glorie of God, and the fir∣mament dooth preach the workes of his hands. If we pull downe our eyes from heauen to earth,The earth teacheth GOD. we behold the same of an infinite bignesse, distinguished with hils and dales, woods and pa∣stures,
couered with all varietie of grasse, hearbes, flowers, and leaues: moystened with Ryuers, as a body with veynes, inhabited by creatures of innumerable kindes & quallities: enriched with inestimable and end∣lesse treasures, and yet it selfe stan∣ding, or hanging rather vvith all his weight and poyse, in the middest of the ayre, as a little ball without prop or pyller. At which deuise and most wonderfull myracle, God himselfe, as it were glorying, sayde vnto Iob,Iob, 38. Where wert thou, when I layde the foundations of the earth? Tell mee if thou haue vnderstanding, who measu∣red it out, or drewe his line vppon the same? Whereuppon are fastened the pyllers of his foundation, or who layde the first corner stone thereof? If we looke neyther vp nor down,The Sea sheweth GOD. but cast our countenannce onely a∣side, wee espy the Sea on each hande of vs, that enuironeth round about the Land. A vast creature, that con∣tayneth more wonders than mans tongue can expresse. A bottomlesse gulfe, that without running ouer, receyueth all Riuers which perpetu∣ally doe flowe. A restlesse fight and turmoyle of vvaters, that neuer re∣pose
neither day nor night. A dread∣full, raging, and furious element, that swelleth and roareth, and threatneth the Land, as though it woulde de∣uoure it all at once.Arist. lib. de mirabilib. And albeit in si∣tuation it be hier than the earth, as the Phylosopher sheweth, and doe make assaults daily towardes ye same with most terrible cryes, and waues mounted euen to the skye: yet when it draweth neere to the Land, and to his appoynted borders: it stayeth vpon the suddaine, though nothing bee there to let it, and is enforced to recoyle backe againe, murmuring as it were, for that it is not permitted to passe any further. Of which restraint, GOD asketh Iob this question.Iob. 38. Who hath shut vp the Sea with gates, when he breaketh forth in rage as from his mothers womb? VVhereunto no man being able to giue aunswer, God aunswereth him∣selfe, in these words: I haue limitted him with my bounds, and I haue set him both a doore and a barre, and haue saide vnto him, hetherto shalt thou come, and shalt not passe further: heere shalt thou breake thy swelling waues. This in summe, is of things with∣out vs. But if we should leaue these,
and enter to seeke God within our selues,The thinges in man de∣clare God. whether we consider our bo∣dies or our soules, or any one part therof, we shall find so many strange things, or rather so many seas of mi∣racles and wonders, that preach and teach theyr Maker vnto vs, that wee shall not onely perceiue & see God most euidently, but rather (as a cer∣taine old Heathen hath written) we shall feele and handle him in hys workes.Iamblicus de Mist. cap. 1. Which kinde of speech also S. Paule himself doubted not to vse, affirming that God hath giuen space to euery man in this life to seek him, Si forte attractent eum aut inueniant:Acts. 17. if perhaps they woulde handle him, or find him out.VVhich manner of words doe signifie, that by conside∣ration of Gods creatures, and espe∣cially of the wonders in man him∣selfe, we may come to see and per∣ceiue the Creator so cleerely; that in a sort we may be saide to handle and feele him. So ioyntly doe all thinges concurre to the manifestati∣on of theyr Maker: so manifestly & effectually doe they teach, demon∣strate, and paint out God vnto vs; nothing being so little, that decla∣reth not his greatnesse: nothing so
great, which acknowledgeth not his soueraigntie: nothing so lowe, that leadeth vs not vp to behold his Ma∣iestie, nothing so high, that descen∣deth not to teach this verity. It were a labour without end, to goe about in this place to alleadge what might be saide in the proofe of this principle, That there is a GOD, seeing there was neuer yet learned man in the world, eyther Gentile or other, that acknowledged and con∣firmed not the same, beeing driuen thereunto by the manfiest euidence of the trueth it selfe. If you obiect against me Diagoras, Protagoras, Theodorus, Cyrennensis, Bion Borysthines, Epicurus,Olde A∣theists. and some few others, that were open Atheists, and denyed GOD, I aunswer, that some of these were vterly vnlear∣ned,Lartius lib. 2. et 4. de vit. Phylos. and rather sensuall beastes than reasonable men; and consequently might deny any thing, according to the saying of holy Dauid, The foole sayd in his hart there is no God. Others, that had some smack of learning,Psalm. 13. and 52. ra∣ther iested at the falshood of theyr own Panisme Idols, than denye the beeing of one true God. But the most part of these men indeede,
and such others, as in old time were accounted Atheists, denied not God so much in words, as in life & facts;Rom. 1. Phil. 3. such as S. Paule called Athe∣ists in his dayes, that obeyed theyr bellyes, and followed their pleasures in sinne and susualitie not vouch∣safing to thinke of God in this lyfe, (such was the Epicure,Lactant. lib. 3. institut. & many other are at this day of his profession) but yet (as Lactantius wel noteth) when the same men came to be sober, and spake of iudgement (as at their death or other time of distresse & miserie,) they were as ready to confesse God, as any other whatsoeuer. But for learned men, & people of discretion, sobrietie, and iudgement, there was neuer yet any (were hee Iew or Gentile) that doubted in this veritie, but had meanes of probati∣ons to confirme the same, as more particularly in the rest of this Chap∣er shall be declared. Howe the Heathen prooued there was a God. SECT. 2. AMong the Gentiles or Heathen people, those men were alwayes
of most credite and estimation, that professed the loue of wisdome, & for yt respect were termed Philosophers.Phyloso∣phers. VVho beeing deuided into diuers sorts & sects, had four principal Sci∣ences, wherof they made profession, each one of these hauing other low∣er Sciences comprehended vnder it. Foure prin∣cipall Sci∣ences.The first of these foure, is called Naturall Phylosophy: the second, Morrall; the third, Supernaturall, or Metaphisick; the fourth, Mathema∣tick. And for the first three, they haue each one their proper meanes & pe∣culiar proofes, wherby to conuince, that there is a GOD. The fourth, which is the Mathematique,The Mathe∣matick pro∣ueth not GOD. for that it hath no consideration at all, of the efficient or final cause of things, (vn∣der which two respects & conside∣rations only, God may be known & declared vnto men in this world) therefore this Science hath no pro∣per meane peculiar to it selfe, fo proouing this veritie, as the othe Sciences haue, but receyueth th same as borrowed of the former. ¶ The Naturall Phylosopher. THe Naturall Phylosopher amon the Gentiles, had infinite argments,
to prooue by creatures, that there was a God, but all hee reduced to three principall & generall heads, which he tearmed Ex Motu, ex Fine, et ex Causa efficiente. That is, argu∣ments drawne from the Motions, from the Ends, and from the Cause efficiēt of creatures that we behold; which tearmes ye examples follow∣ing shall make cleere and manifest. The argument of Motion,The first ar∣gument in Naturall phylosophy Arist. lib. 7. et 8. phy. standeth vpon this generall ground in phylo∣sophy, that what soeuer is mooued, is mooued of another: Wherin also is ob∣serued, that in the motions of crea∣tures, there is a subordination the one to the other. As for example; These inferiour bodies vpon earth, are mooued and altered by the ayre & other elements: and the elements are mooued by the influence & mo∣tion of the Moone, Sunne, and other heauenly bodyes; these Planets a∣gaine are mooued from the hyghest Orbe or Sphere of all, that is called The first moueable:Primum mobile. aboue which wee an go no further among creatures. Now then asketh the Phylosopher eere, who mooueth this first moue∣ble? for if you say that it moueth it lfe, it is against our former ground,
that nothing is mooued in nature but of another. And if you say that some o∣ther thing mooueth it, then is the question again, who moueth that o∣ther? and so from one to one, vntyll you come to some thing that moo∣ueth, and is not moued of an other, and that must needes be God, which is aboue all nature. Plato lib. 10. de legib.This was the common argument of Plato, and of Aristotle,Arist. lib. 8 pysic. cap. 5. & of al the best philosophers And they thought it a demonstration vnauoydable, & it seemeth they were admonished of this argument by consideration of the Clock,An argu∣ment taken from the Clocke. whose hammer when it striketh, sheweth the next wheele wherby it is moued, and that wheele sheweth to another wheele, and so from one to one, vntill you come to him that was the first cause of mo∣tion to all the wheeles, that is, to the Clock-maker himselfe. Aristotle,Arist. lib. de mundo. to King Alexander, v∣seth this pretie similitude. That as in a Quiar of singers, when the fore∣man hath gyuen the first tune or note, there ensueth presently a sweet harmonie, and consent of all other voyces, both great and small, sharpe & meane: so God in the creation o
this world,A simili∣tude. hauing giuen once the first push or motion to the highest heauen, called Primum mobile, there ensueth vppon the same, all other motions of heauens, planets, ele∣ments and other bodies, in most ad∣mirable order, concord, & congrue∣tie, for conseruation & gouernment of the whole. And thus is God pro∣ued by argument of motion. The other two arguments of the End, and of the Cause efficient of crea∣trues,The second argument of Naturall phylosophy are made euident in a certaine manner, by this that hath beene spo∣ken of motion. For seeing by expe∣rience, that euery thing brought forth in nature, hath a pculiar end appoynted, whereto it is directed by the self same nature, (as we see y• bird is directed to build her neast by na∣ture, the Foxe to make his den, & so so the like in all other creatures,) the Philosopher asketh here, what thing is that that directeth nature herselfe, seeing each thing must haue some∣what to direct it to his end? And no aunswer can be made, but that the Director of Nature, must bee some thing aboue nature, which is GOD himselfe. This argument of the finall End, is most excellently handled, by
Phylo Iudaeus,Phylo lib. de opific. mund. in his learned treatise, Of the workmanship of the world. The third argument of Naturall philosophy.From the Cause efficient, the Phylo∣sopher disputeth thus. It is euident by all reason, in respect of the cor∣ruptions, alterations, and perpetuall motions of all creatures, that thys world had a beginning, & Vide Plu∣tarch de pla∣cetis phylos. all excel∣lent Phylosophers that euer were haue agreed therupon, except Aristo∣tle,Arist. lib. 8. phys. et lib. de Gen. et corrup. Arist. lib. de mund. Et vi∣de Ploti. lib. de mundo. who for a time held a fantasy that the worlde had no beginning, but was from all eternitie; albeit at last in his old age, he confessed ye contrarie, in his Booke to King Alexander. This then being so, that this world had a beginning, it must needes fol∣low also, that it had an efficient Cause. Now thē is the question, who is that efficient Cause that made the world? If you say, that it made it selfe, it is absurde, for how could it haue pow∣er to make it selfe, before it self was, and before it had any being at all? If you say, that something within the world, made the world: that is, that some one part of ye world, made the whole: this is more absurde; for it is, as if a man should say, that the finger (& this before it was a finger, or part of ye body) did make the whole body
Wherefore we must confesse by force of this argument, that a grea∣ter and more excellent thing, than is the whole world put together, or than any part thereof, made the world, and was the Cause eficient of the frame that wee see; and this can be nothing els but God that is aboue the world. So that heereby we see, how many waies the Naturall Phy∣losopher is fraught with arguments, to proue there is a God, and that by reason only, without all light or as∣sistance of fayth. The Mtaphisique and his argument. BVT the Metaphisique, or Super∣naturall Phylosopher among the Gentiles, as he to whom it appertai∣ned most in speciall to handle these high and supernaturall affayres, and many more arguments and demon∣strations, to proue and conuince the being of one God. And first of all he saide,The first ar∣gument in Metaphi∣sicke. that it could not stand with any possibility in his Science, that Ens finitum, a thing finite, or closed within bounds or limits, (as this world, and euery creature therin is) could be, but from
some Maker or Creator. For (saith he) the thing that in it selfe is not in∣finite, hath his bounds & limits, and consequently there must bee some thing, that assigned these bounds & limits. And seeing in this world ther is no creature so great, which hath not bounds and limits, we must of necessitie imagine some infinite su∣preame Creator or Maker that limi∣ted these creatures, euen as we see that the Potter (at his pleasure) gi∣ueth boundes and limits to the pot that he frameth. Thys argument the Metaphisicke confirmeth by a ruled principle in his Science.A Maxime in Meta∣phisicke. That euery thing which is by participation, must be reduced & re∣ferred to some other thing, that is not by participation, but of it selfe.Arist. lib. 8. metapis. capit. 2. And hee calleth a thing by participation, which is not in the fullest or highest degree of perfection in his kind, but may haue addition made vnto it. As for exmple; water, or any thing els that is heated by fire, is hote by partici∣pation, and not of it selfe, for that it may alwaies be hoter, & haue addi∣tion of heate made vnto it; but fire is hote of it selfe, and not by partici∣pation, for that it hath heate in the
highest degree, and in that kinde can receyue no addition, wherefore the heate of all other things, which are hote by participation of fire, are re∣duced (concerning theyr heate) to the heate of fire, as to their originll. Now then (saith the Metaphisick) we see by experience, that all the cre∣atures and parts of thys worlde, are things by participation onely, for that they are infinite in nature,Howe all creatures are by parti∣cipation of GOD. and haue limitatios in all theyr perfections, and may receiue additions to the same, & consequently, they must of necessitie be referred to some higher cause tht is infinite in perfection, & consisteth of it selfe alone, without participation from others: & thys is God, who being absolute, endlesse, and without all limitation of perfec∣tion in himselfe, deriueth from his own incomprehensible infinitnesse, certaine limited natures and perfec∣tions to euery creature: which per∣fections in creatures, are nothing els but little particles, & participations of the bottomlesse sea of perfections in the Creator, whereunto they are to be referred and reduced, as the beame to the Sunne, and the brooke to the Fountaine.
The second argument in Metaphi∣sicke. Multitude. Plato in Parmen.A second argument vseth the Me∣taphisicke, grounded vpon certaine rules of vnitie, wherof one principle is, That euery multitude or distinction of things, proceedeth from some vnitie, as from his Fountaine. This he sheweth by many examples of things in this world. For we see by experience,Primum mobile. that ye diuers motions or mouing of the lower Spheres or bo∣dies celestial, do proceed of the mo∣uing of one highest Sphere, & are to be referred to the same, as to theyr Fountaine. Many Riuers are reduced to one well or of-spring: innumera∣ble beames to one Sunue: & all the boughes of a tree to one stock. MICRO∣COSMOS.In the body of Man, which for his beauty and variety, is called the lit∣tle world: the veynes which are with∣out number, haue all one beginning in the Lyuer, the arters, in the heart, the sinnowes, in the brain. And that which is more, the infinite actions of life,The infinite things that proceede from the soule. sence, and reason in man, as generations, corruptions, nourish∣ments, disgestions, & alteration; fee∣ling, smelling, tasting, seeing, hearing, mouing, speaking, thinking, remem∣bring, discoursing, and ten hundred thousand particular actions, opera∣tions
and motions besides, which are exercised in mans body, vnder these or other such names and ap∣pellations: all these (I say) being in∣finite in number, most admirable in order, & distinct in euery theyr of∣fice and operation, doe receiue not∣withstanding theyr beginning from one most simple vnitie, and indiuisi∣ble substance, called the soule, which produceth, gouerneth, and directeth them al to so innumerable, different and contrarie functions. By this concludeth the Metaphy∣sicke; that as among the creatures, we finde this most excellent order & connexion of things, vvhereby one bringeth forth many, & euery multi∣tude is referred to his vnity so much more in all reason, must the whole frame of creatures contayned in the world, (wherein there are so many millions of multitudes with their v∣nities) be referred to one most sim∣ple & abstract vnity, that gaue begin∣ning to them all, and this is God. A third argument vseth the Meta∣phisick,The third argument in Metaphi∣sick. Subor∣dination. deriued from the subordina∣iō of creatures in this world; which ubordination is such, & so wonder∣ull, as we see no creature by nature
serueth it selfe, but another, and alto∣gether doe conspyre in seruing the common. We see the heauens doe moue about cōtinually without cea∣sing, & this not to serue thēselues, but inferiour creatures, lesse excellent than thēselues. We see ye water moy∣steneth the ground, the ayre cooleth, openeth, & cherisheth the same, the Sunne heateth and quickeneth it, the Moone & Starres poure foorth their influence, the windes refresh it, and all this not for themselues, but for other. The earth againe, that recey∣ueth these seruices, vseth not the same for herselfe, or for her owne cōmoditie, but to bring forth grasse wherewith to feede Cattell, & they feede not for themselues, but to giue nourishment vnto man. A simili∣tude.Now then (sayth the Metaphisick) if a man that stood a farre off vpon  Mountain, shold see in a field vnder him, a great, huge, and maine Armi of Souldiours, most excellent wel appointed, each one in order agree∣ing with the other, deuided int Rankes, Squadrons, Companies, an Offices; subordinate the one to y• other by degrees, & yet all tēding on way, all theyr faces bent vppon on
place, al mouing, marching, and tur∣ning together, all endeuouring with alacritie towards the performance of one common seruice by mutuall assistance, without dissention, dis∣cord, difference, or clamor; he that should see this (sayth the Metaphi∣sicke) as he could not but imagine some Generall high Captaine to be among these Souldiours, whom all obaied, & from whose supreame cō∣maundement & order, this most ex∣cellent subordination, agreement, & vnion proceeded, so much more, vppon consideration of the former coherence, consent, and miraculous subordination of creatures among themselues in their operations, must we inferre, that they haue some ge∣nerall commaunder ouer them all; by whose supreame dispositiō, each creature hath his charge & peculiar taske appointed, which he must per∣forme, for the common and vniuer∣sall seruice of the whole. The fourth reason or argument alledged by the Supernaturall Phy∣losopher,The fourth argument in Meta∣sick. Proui∣dence. is, of the marueilous pro∣uidence arte and wisdome, discoue∣red in ye making of euery least crea∣ture wythin the vvorlde. For seeing
there is nothing so little, nothing so base or contemptible, within the compasse of this heauen that coue∣reth vs, but if you consider it, you finde, both arte, order, proportion, beauty, and excellencie in the same: thys cannot proceed of Fortune, as foolish Lucrecius made diuers bookes a∣gainst the workman∣ship of the world. Lucrecius and some other would haue it, for that Fortune is ca∣sualty without order, rule, or certain tie, & therefore needes it must come from the wisedome and prouidence of some omnipotent Creator. If you take a flye, or a flea, or a leafe from a tree, or any other, the least creature that is extant in the world, and consider the same atten∣tiuely: you shall finde more myra∣cles, than parts therein: you shall finde such proportion of members, such varietie of collours, such di∣stinction of offices, such correspon∣dence of instruments, & those so fit, so well framed, so coherent, and so subordinate: as the more yee con∣template, the more ye shall maruaile, neyther is there any one thing in the worlde more effectuall, to drawe a man to the loue and admiration of his Creator, than to exercise himself often in this contemplation, for if
hys heart be not of stone, this will moue his affection. VVe read of Galen,Galen. lib. 5. de vsu part. a prophane & very irreligious Phisitian, who as himself confesseth in a certain place, taking vpon him to consider of the parts of mans body; & finding much wisdome in the order, vse, and dispo∣sition of the same, sought first to giue the praise & glory therof to na∣ture, or to some other cause than to God. But in processe of time, beeing oppressed (as it were) with the excee∣ding great wisdome, cunning & pro∣uidence, which he discouered in e∣uery least parcell & particle of mans body, wherein nothing was redun∣dant, nothing defectiue, nothing possible to be added, altered, or bet∣ter deuised; he brake forth into these words:Lib. 3. de vsu. par. Compono hic profecto canticum in Creatoris nostri laudem, quod vltra res suas ornare voluit, melius quam vlla arte possent. Heere truely doe I make a song in praise of our Creator, for that of his own accord, it hath plea∣sed him to adorne and beautifie his things better, than by any art possi∣ble it could be imagined. Heereby then doth the Metaphy∣sicke gather and conclude most eui∣dently,
that there is a God, a Crea∣tor, a most wise and powerfull artifi∣cer, that made all things: such a one, as exceedeth all boundes of nature, & of humaine abilitie. For if all the world should ioyne together, they could not make ye least creature that we see in this wold. He concludeth also, that the for-sight & prouidence of this Creator is infinite, for things to come in all eternitie; and finally, that his wisdome & cogitations are iscrutable. And albeit sometime he reueale vnto vs some part therof, yet often againe we erre therein. For which cause,A wonder∣full speech of a Hea∣then. a wise Heathen Plato∣nick concludeth thus, after long search about these affayres. I will praise God (saith he) in those things I vnderstand, and I will admire him in those things which I vnderstand not. For I see that my selfe oftentimes, do things wherin my seruants are blind & conceiue no reason. As also I haue seene little chyldren,Plotin. lib. de proui. cast into the fire Iewels of great price, and their Fa∣thers writings of great learning and wisedome, for that they were not of capacitie to vnderstand the value, & worthines of the thing. One argument more wyll I al∣ledge
of the Metaphisick,The fift ar∣gument in Metaphi∣sicke. Im∣mortalitie of the soule. Plato. lib. 10 de Republ. grounded vpon the immortalitie of mans soul; which immortalitie is proued with one consent of all learned men, (as Plato alledgeth) for that it is a spyrit and immateriall substance, whose nature dependeth not of the state of our mortall body, for so by experi∣ence we see daily, that in old men & withered sickly bodies, the minde & soule is more quick, cleere, pregnant, and liuely then it was in youth, whē the body was most lusty. The same is also prooued by the vnquēchable desire which our mind hath of learning, knowledge, wise∣dome, and other such spirituall and immateriall things, wherin her thirst by nature is so great, as it cannot bee satis-fied in this life, neither can the obiects of sence & bodily pleasures, or any other commodity or delight of this materiall world, content or satiate the restlesse desire of this im∣material reature.VVhen the desire of our soule shall be satisfied. VVhich is an eui∣dent argument to the Phylosolopher, that some other obiect and conten∣tation, is prepared for her in another world: and that of such excellencie and supereminent perfection, as it shll haue in it all wisdome, all lear∣ning,
all knowledg, all beautie, & all other causes of loue, ioy, & conten∣tation, wherin our soule may rest for euer. This being so (sayth the Phyloso∣pher) that the soule & mind of man is immortall, of necessity it must en∣sue, that an immortall Creator sent the same into our bodies, and that to him againe it must returne after her departure from this lyfe heere.Themist. in lib. de ani∣ma. This was the true meaning indeede (how soeuer some latter interpreters haue mis-vnderstood the same) of that ancient doctrine of olde Phyloso∣phers, which Plutarch alledgeth out of Pythagoras & Plato:Plut. de pla∣cit. phylos. affirming, that all particular soules of men, came sent frō one generall & cōmon soule of the whole world, as sparkles from the fire, and beames from the common Sunne: and that after their seperation from theyr bodyes, they shall returne againe to that generall soule, called Anima mundi:The mea∣ning of olde Phyloso∣phers, tou∣ching Ani∣ma mundi. the soule of the world (for that it giueth life & being to the world) & so to remaine with that gnerall soule eternally. This was the doctrine of old Phi∣losophers, which seemed indede to haue beene nothing els, (though de∣liuered
in other speeches) but that which Salomon himselfe affirmeth in playner wordes,Eccle. 12. Et spiritus redibit ad Deum, qui dedit illum: & our soule or spirit shal return to God that gaue it vnto vs.And this may suffice for a taste of that which the Metaphisicke or Supernaturall Phylosopher can say, for proofe that there is a God. The Morrall Phylosopher. THere remayneth yet a third part of humaine wisdome or phylo∣sophie, called Morrall, whose reasons & arguments for proofe of this ve∣ritie, I haue of purpose referred to the last place, for that they bee more plain and easie than the former, and more siensible to the capacitie of e∣uery simple and vnlearned Reader. For first of all,The first ar∣gument of Morral phy∣losophy. hee obserueth in the very natural inclination of man, (be his manners otherwise neuer so euill) that there is a certain propenti∣on and disposition to confesse some GOD or Deitie; as by example he prooueth in all Nations, were they neuer so fierce or Barbarous, yet al∣wayes confessed they some God by
nature, though no man did teach or instruct them therin. The same is cō∣firmed by the cōmon vse of all Hea∣thens, in Tertullian handleth thys poynt excellently in Apolog. lifting vp theyr eyes and hands to heauen, in any suddain di∣stresse that commeth vppon them. Which importeth that nature herself hath ingrafted this feeling, that there is a God. Yea, further he alledgeth, that by experience of all ages, it hath been proued, that Atheists thēselues, that is, such men, as in their health & prosperitie, for more liberty of sin∣full life, would striue against the bee∣ing of any God; when they came to die, or fal into any great misery, they of all other men, would shew them∣selues most fearfull of this God, as Seneca declareth, and as Suetonius sheweth in the example of CaligulaSeneca lib. 1. de ira Suet. in Caligu. VVhich is a token, that theyr con∣science inforced them to beleeue a God-head. Nay, Zeno the Phylosopher vvas wont to say,The saying of Zeno, touching the death of Atheists. that it seemed to hym a substantiall proofe of this veritie, to heare an Atheist at his dying day preach God frō a paire of gallowes or rather such place of misery, (wh he asked God & nature forgiuenes) than to heare all the Philosophers i
the worlde dispute the poynt; for that at this instant of death and my∣serie, it is lyke, that such good fel∣lowes doe speake in earnest and so∣brietie of spirit, who before in their wantonnes, impugned God, yther of vanitie, ambition, sensuallitie, or dissimulation. Now then, when the Morral Phy∣losopher hath proued by this natu∣rall inclination of man, that there is a God, which hath imprinted in vs such a feeling of himselfe, as no con∣science can deny him, when it com∣meth to speak sincerely: thē steppeth he a degree further, and proueth that this God which is acknowledged, can be but one; for that if hee bee a God,The reason why there can be but one God. he must be infinite, and if he be infinite, he can haue no companion, for that two infinite things cannot stand together, without impeach∣ment the one of the others infinitie. Hee prooueth the same by the cu∣tome of the most Gentiles,Lact. lib. 2. diui. instit. cap. 2. who (as Lactantius well noted in his tyme) whē they swore, or cursed, or praied, or wished any thing hartily, (especi∣lly in affliction, that lighteneth the nderstanding,) theyr fashion was o say, God, and not the Gods.Deus et no Dij. And
for the learneder sort of them, how∣soeuer they dissembled, and applyed themselues outwardly to the error of the common people, yet in earnest they neuer spake of more thē of one God, as Plato signifieth of himselfe to Dionisius King of Sicilie, in a cer∣taine Letter, wherein he gaue him a signe when hee spake in earnest, and when in iest.Plato Epist. 13. ad Dyo∣nisi. Hinc discis tu, sribam ego serio, nec ne: cum serio, ordior Epistola ab vno Deo, cum secus, a pluribus. By this signe shall ye knowe whether I write in earnest or not: For when I write in earnest, I beginne my Letter with one God, and when I write not in earnest, I doe begin my Letter in the name of many Gods. Iulian the Apostata, in hys three most scornfull Bookes that he wrot against vs Christians,Cyrillus lib. 2. cont. Iuli. (whom con∣temptuously he called Galilaeans) en∣deuouring by all his meanes to ad∣uance and set foorth the honour o Paganisme,Plotin. En∣nea. 1. lib. 8.1 2. et Eu. 6. lib. 4. capit. 12.3.4. alledgeth this Plato for a chiefe pyller and father thereof, an dareth preferre him with our Mo∣ses: and yet you see what he testifi∣eth of himselfe. And that this wa his perpetuall opinion, three of hi most worthy Schollers, I mean thre
of the most learned that euer profes∣sed the Platonick sect, Plotinus, Por∣phyrius,Porhy. lib. 2. de abst. et lib. de occa. cap. 21. Procl. in theolo. Pla∣ton. et lib. de anima. et Daem. 1.31.42.53. and Proclus, all Heathens thēselues, doe testifie & proue in dy∣uers parts of theyr workes, assuring, that both they and their master Pla∣to, neuer beleeued indeede but onely one God. And as for Socrates that was Platos Master,Socrates. Apuleius, A∣legus, et La∣erti. in vita Socratis. and pronounced by the Oracle of Apollo, to bee the wisest man in all Greece; the world knoweth that hee was put to death foriesting at the multitude of Gods among the Gentiles. Aristotle tht ensued after Plato, began ye sect of Peripateticks,Aristotle & the Peripa∣teticks. & was  man so much giuen to the search of Nature, as in many things he for∣gat the Author of Nature, or at least ise, he treated little & very doubt∣ully therof, yet in his old age, when ee came to write the Booke of the world to K. Alexander (which Book Iustine the Martyr esteemed great∣,Iustin. in Apolo. and called it the Epitome of all ristotles true philosophy) he resol∣eth the matter more cleerely,Arist. lib. de mundo. say∣g thus of God, Hee is the Father of ds & men, he is the maker & conser∣ all things that be in the world. And ee addeth further in the selfe same
place, that the multitude of many Gods,Theo. in me∣taph. Alex. Aphrod. lib. de prouiden. was inuented to expresse the power of this one God, by the mul∣titude of his ministers: so that hee maketh all Gods to be seruants be∣sides onely one. VVhich sentence of theyr Master, Theophrastus and Aphrodiseus, two principal Peripa∣tetickes, doe confirme at large. Zeno & the Stoickes.Zeno the cheefe and ather of the Stoicks was wont to say, (as Aristo∣tle reporteth) that, either one God, or no God.Plut. de ora∣cul. defect. de ranc. de quest. Plat. Seneca de vi∣ta beat. de prouid. in Epist. Which opinion is auerred e∣uery where, by Plutarch and Seneca, two most excellent writers, & great admirers of the Stoick seueritie. And before them, by Epictetus, a man of singuler account in that sect, whose words were esteemed Oracles. Di∣cendum ante omnia, vnum esse Deum omnia regere, omnibus prouidere.Epict. apud Arianum. Befor all things (saith he) we must affirm that there is one God, and that thi God gouerneth all, and hath proui∣dence ouer all. As for the Academiks,The Acade∣mickes. who mad the fourth deuision or sect of Phylosophers, it is sufficient which I hau mencioned before, that Socrate their founder, was caused to dye fo his opinion in this matter; albeit
seem, that such as insued in that sect, whose profession was to dispute and doubt of euery thing, So in this tyme of va∣rietie of Sects. came at length, by their much iangling and disputing, to beleeue and hold no∣thing. Wherof Cicero himselfe may be an example, who in his Bookes De natura Deorum, followeth so farre the Academicall veine of doubtfull disputing to and fro, about the na∣ture of Gods, as hee may seeme (and so did he to dyuers Christians of the Primatiue Church) to be very irre∣solute whether there were any God or no.Arnob. cont. gentes. Albeit in the end he make shew to conclude very plainely and peremtorily with the Stoicks. All the foure sects of Philosophers then,All old Phi∣losophers acknow∣ledged one GOD. who in theyr times bare the credite of learning & wisdom, made profession of one GOD, when they came to speake as they thought. But if we ascend vp hyer, to the daies be∣ore these sects began, that is, to Py∣hagoras, Vide apud Plutarch de placitis phy∣los. Trismeg. in Paemand. et in Asclep. & Archytas Tarentinus, nd before them againe, to Mercuri∣ Trismegistus, that was the first pa∣ent of phylosophie to the Egypti∣ns: we shall finde them so resolute nd playn in this poynt, as no Chri∣tian can be more. VVherfore he that
desireth to see innumerable exam∣ples, as well of these mens sayings, as of other learned Heathens of all a∣ges: lt him read but S. Cyrils first Booke against Iulian the Apostata; or Lactantius his first and second books against the Gentiles, and hee shall re∣maine satisfied. The recol∣lection of the first ar∣gument in Morral phi∣losophy.This thn is the Morrall Phyloso∣phers first argument: the inclination of al people to beleeue a God-head the instinct of nature to confesse it, the force of mans conscience to fear it, the custome of all Nations to a∣dore it. And finally, the consent and agreement of all learned and wyse men, in applying this God head not to many, but to one only, that made this world, and gouerneth the same. Non hominibus, non demonibus, non Dijs ipsis, quos non naturae ratione, sed honoris causa Deos nominamus.Trismeg. in Paeman. cap. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, &c. We do not attribute the appellation of true God (saith Trismegistus) either vnto men,In Asclep. 1.2.6. &c. or vnto deuils, or vnto the mul∣titude of other Gods themselues, for that wee call them Gods, not in re∣spect of theyr natures, but for ho∣nours sake. That is, we call them Gods to honour them for theyr famous acts, and not for that we thin
them in nature true Gods. VVhich Cicero confirmeth in these vvords;Cicero hys opinion of the multi∣tude of Pa∣nyme gods how they were made. The life of man, and common custome hath now receyued, to lift vp to heauen by fame and good will, such men as or theyr benefits are counted excellent. And heere hence it commeth, that Hercules, Castor, Pollux, Aesculapius, and Liber, are nowe become Gods, and heauen al∣most is filled with mankinde. The second argument of Morrall philosophy,The second argument of Morral phi∣losophy. is, De vltimo fine, et sum∣mo hominis bono: that is, concerning the last end of man, and of his high∣est or supreame felicity, wherby the beeing of God is also confirmed. And albeit I haue said somewhat of mans end before: yet that which in this place I am to adde, is more pro∣per and peculiar to Morrall phylo∣sophy. For as other Sciences may, & doe consider the finall ends, of other reatures, which are dyuers, and yet ll concur for the seruice of man: so his Science of Morrall phylosophy, oth properly consider the final end of man himselfe, calling it, summum onum, his greatest and highest hap∣inesse, where-vnto he was created, nd where-vnto he tendeth in thys fe, and wherin he resteth and repo∣seth,
without further motion or ap∣petite, when he hath obtayned it. For better vnderstanding wherof, it is to be cōsidered, that euery thing in this worlde, hath some particuler end, together with an apetite & de∣sire ingrafted by nature to that end,Euery thing in thys world hath a naturall desire to his end. which desire ceaseth when the end is obtayned. As for example, a Stone hath a naturall appetite to go down∣ward into the Centre or middle of the earth, and so resteth in no place (except by violence it be stayed) vn∣till it come thether. On the contra∣ry, fire, reposeth no where, (except it be restrayned) vntill it mount aboue the ayre to his peculier and naturall place of abode, where, of it self it re∣steth. And so in other things that are without sence, there is a certain ap∣petite and desire to theyr end, which end being once obtained, that desire and appetite of it selfe reposeth. In beastes likewise we behold, that they haue a desire to fill their bellies, and to satis-fie theyr other sences, which being satis-fied they remain contented, & desire nothing els, vntill the same appetite of sence vvan his obiect againe.The felicity of beastes. VVherby we perceiue, that sensuality or cōtentatio
of the sences, is the finall end desired of beasts, and theyr very summum bo∣num, or supreame felicitie. But in man, albeit for maintenance of the body, ther be this appetite al∣so to satisfie his sences, according to the lower proportion of hys minde, that is called sensatiue, yet according to the higher part of his mind, whose name is reason, or the reasonable part, (which is the only part indeed, that is peculier to man, and distin∣guisheth him from vnreasonable beastes,) he hath an appetite of some more high and excellent obiect, then is the contentation of these sences: for that by experience wee see and feele, that oftentimes when the sen∣ces be al satisfied, yet is the mind not quyet, which argueth, that sensuali∣tie, or sensuall delectation, is not our smmum bonum, wherein our minde must rest, and enioy her felicitie. Heereupon haue Phylosophers & wise men fallen to dispute in all a∣es, what should be the finall felicity and summum bonum of mankinde? And Cicero saith,Cic. lib. de si∣bonorum & malorum. that this poynt is, do totius phylosophiae, the very hook hynge wherupon all phylosophie geth. For that this beeing once
found out, cleere it is, that all other things and actions are to be referred to the obtayning of this end & hap∣pines. And therfore about this point there hath been maruellous conten∣tion and fight among Phylosophers,The contē∣tion of Phy∣losophers a∣bout the felicity of man. the Stoickes refuting the Epicures, & Peripatetiques refuting againe the Stoicks: and the Platonickes, (who went neerest the trueth) impugning and refuting both the one and the o∣ther: and this dissention went so far foorth, the one part assigning one thing, and the other another, to bee this felicitie or summum bonum, that Marcus Varro, a most learned Ro∣maine, gathered two hundred, four∣score,Aug. lib. 19. de ciuit. cap. 1 and eyght different opinions (as S. Augustine noteth) about thys matter. And finally, when all was said and examined, Plato found, that nothing which might be named or imagined in thys life, could be the felicitie or summum bonum of man, for that it could not satis-fie the desire of ou mind. And therfore he pronounceth this generall sentence.The sentēce of Plato in Phaedon. It is impossibl that men should finde their felicitie  summum bonum, in thys life, see what way they will: but in the next li
without all doubt it must be found. The reason of which sentence and deter∣mination was, for that Plato was a∣ble to refute any thing, that the other Phylosophers did or could name, to bee our felicitie and finll end in this life, were it Riches, Honours, Plea∣sures, morrall vertues, or oher like, which each sect did assigne. As for example,How no∣thing in this life can be our felicity. hee prooued that riches could not be our summum bo∣num or happinesse, for that they are vncertaine, vndurable, vaine, varia∣ble, and things that bring with them more daunger oftentimes & trouble of minde, than pouertie dooth. Ho∣nours hee refelled, for that besides theyr vanitie, they depende of the mouth & minds of other men, who are changeable and inconstant. Plea∣sures of the body, and voluptuous∣nes, for that they are common to vs with beastes, and alwayes haue an∣nexed thy rsting, and discontentati∣on, when they are past. Morrall ver∣tues, for that they consist in a certain perpetual fight & war with our own passions, which neuer giue vs rest or repose in this life. Finally, whether soeuer we turn our selues, or what so euer wee lay our hands vpon in thys
life, to make our felicitie or summum bonum, it fayleth vs (saith Plato) ney∣ther giueth it any durable contenta∣tion to our minde, wherfore this fe∣licitie is to be sought and obtayned in the life to come. Thus farre arriueth Morrall phy∣losophie by reason,How farre Morral phy∣losophy rea∣cheth in de∣termining mans feli∣citie. to proue, that mans felicitie or final end, cannot be in any thing of this life or world. It proueth also by the same reason, (as in part it hath been touched before) that this felicitie of our minde in the life to come, must be a spirituall and immaterial obiect, for that our mind and soule is a spirite: it must bee im∣mortal, for that our soule is immor∣tall. But what? goeth yet humaine phylosophy any further? or can Pla∣to assigne the particuler point wher∣in it standeth? Heare his words and confesse, that not without reason he was called Diuine.Plato in Phaedon. In this it consi∣steth (saith he) Vt coniungamur Deo, qui omnis beatitudinis fastigium, meta, finis, That we be ioyned to GOD, who is the top, the butt, and the end of all blessednes. And can ay Chri∣stian (think you) say more than this? Yet haken what a scholler of hys sayth, for explication of his Masters
sentence:Plotin. Enu. 1. lib. 4. cap. 1 Supremus hominis finis, su∣premum bonum, id est Deus. The finall end of man wherto he tendeth, is a supreame or soueraigne good thing, and this is God himselfe. By which wordes we see, that these Heathens, by the ende of man could finde out God, which was the second argu∣ment propounded in Morrall phy∣losophy. A third argument vseth the Mor∣ral Phylosopher,The third argument in Morral phy∣losophy, touching re∣ward & pu∣nishment. for proofe of God, (which shall be the last I will alledge in this place) deduced from conside∣ration of good and euill, vice & ver∣tue, and especially of the rewarde, which by nature, reason, and equity, is due to the one: as also, of the pu∣nishment belonging to the other. For (saith he) as in all other things, cretures, and actions of this world, that passe from the Creator, wee see proportion, order, iustice, wisedom, and prouidence obserued; so, much more must we assure our selues, that the same is obserued in the same Creators actions & proceedings to∣wards man, that is the cheefe and principall of all other his creatures. Now then we see & beholde, that all other creatures are directed to
theyr ends by nature, and do receiue comfort and contentation so long as they holde that course: and losse, disease, and griefe, as soone as they breake and swarue from the same. Onely man, hath reason giuen him whereby to knowe and iudge of his end; and the holy Scriptures, wher∣by he may eyther direct hys vvay to the same by vertue, or run astray by following of wickednes. Wherupon it ensueth, that in all equitie and iu∣stice, there must remaine reward for such as doe wel, and follow the right path assigned them to theyr end and felicitie, which is by good life: and punishment for the other that aban∣don the same, for pleasure and sensu∣alitie. But we see in this world, (saith the Phylosopher) that most wicked men doe receyue least punishment: and many there be, (as Princes and high Potentates) whose liues & actions, be they neuer so vicious, yet are they aboue the correctiō of mortall men: and many poore men on the contra∣ry part, who for theyr vertue, pai∣ence, & honestie, receiue nothing in this lyfe, but enuie, mlyce, con∣tempt, reproch, despite, and oppres∣sion.
See of this matter So∣crates in A∣polog.VVherfore (saith he) eyther wanteth there prouidence & equitie in the gouernment & disposition of these affaires, which we see not to want in things of lesser moment: or els must there bee a place of punish∣ment & rewarde in the life to come,Plato in Cratil. et in Gorgia. et in Phaed. et in lib. 10. de le∣gibus. Plu∣tarch. de Sera numinis vin∣dicta & o∣thers. vpon the soules of such as part from hence, and a iust and powerful Iudge to make recompence of these ine∣qualities and iniustices permitted in this world. VVhich Iudge can bee none but the Creator himselfe. And so hetherto haue I declared, how euery particuler Science among the Gentiles, had particuler meanes and wayes to demonstrate God by contemplation of his creatures, and by force of reason, which no man could deny. Now remayneth it to shew, howe the Iewe or faithfull Israelite, before Christes appearance in the flsh, was able to confirme thys veritie to a Heathen, which shall be the subiect of the Section following.
How the Iewes were able to prooue God. SECT. 3. The people of Israell Gods par∣tage.THE people of Israell, that for many yeres & ages, were the pe∣culiar people and partage of God, as they dwelt inuironed with Gentiles of each side, that impugned theyr Religion & worship of one God, and had many weak-lings among them∣selues, that were often tempted to doubt of the same Religion, by the example of so many Nations and Countryes about them, that made profession of a contrary Religion, so had the Diuines and learned men of this people diuers forcible proofes, & most reasonable arguments pecu∣lier to themselues, (besides the gyft of faith, or any other demonstration that hetherto hath beene alleadged) to confirme their bretheren in ye be∣leefe of one God, & to conuince all Atheists or Infidels in the world. Diuers thing wher by the Iewes shew God.And albeit these proofes which they vsed were many, as the creation of the world by one God: the deui∣ding of the Hebrue Religion from
the beginning: the conuersation of God with Abraham, of whom the Iewes descended: the myraculous deliuering of that Nation frō Egipt: the Law receyued from Gods owne mouth by Moses: the strange en∣rance of the Iewes into the Land of Promise: the extinguishing of the Gentiles vvhich before inhabited there: the errection of the Iewish Monarchie; and protection thereof against all Nations; the myraculous deedes and sayings of Prophets: and a thousand reasons besides, which confirme most euidently, that the Iewes God, was the only true God: yet for that all these things and say∣ings with an Infidell, had no more credite, than the wrytings or Scrip∣tures wherein they were recorded; hereby it came to passe, that al which a Iewe could say for proofe of God, more than a Gentile, depended only vpon ye authoritie of his Scriptures; and for this cause he referred all hys proofes and arguments to make eui∣dent the trueth & certaintie of these Scriptures, which thing once perfor∣med, the being of one God cannot be called into controuersie: for that these Scriptures are nothing els, but
a narration of the acts & gests of that only God, which the Iewes professe. Comforta∣ble to heare the certain∣ty of Scrip∣tures decla∣red.VVe are now to see then, what the Iew was able to say for proofe of his Scriptures, & consequently, for de∣monstration of God, & of his iudge∣ments declared therin. VVhich dis∣course, as it was profitable in olde time, for stay & confirmation of all such, as were or might bee tempted with infidelitie: so can it not be but very comfortable to vs Christians of these daies, to behold the certain∣tie of these Scriptures layd open be∣fore vs, vpon which the foundation of our whole fayth dependeth. ¶ The first proofe of Scriptures. FIrst therefore, the Iew for proofe of his Scriptures, alledgeth the great & wonderfull antiquitie there∣of.Antiquitie. For as God (sayth he) was before Idols, and trueth before falshood, so was the Scripture, (which is the Sto∣rie of the true God) long before the writings of Panims or Infidls. Nay, Iosephus lib. 10. con. Appion handleth this at large. further he sheweth, that the most part of things recounted in the Bi∣ble, were do one before most of the
Panym gods were extant, and that the very last Writers of the Hebrue Cannon, which are Esdras, Aggaeus, Zacharias, and Malachie, (Eusebius assigneth them 570. in Chron. almost sixe hundred yeeres before the com∣ming of Christ, when the second Monarchie of Persians began) were before most of the Heathen aunci∣ent Historiographers; to wit, before Hellanicus, Herodotus, Pherecides, Thucydides, and Xenophon. And albeit the Gentiles had some Poets before, as Orpheus, Homer, Hesio∣dus, and Lycurgus the Law-maker, that lyued a good whyle after: yet the eldest of these, arryued no higher than the daies of K. Salomon, which was fiue hundred yeeres after Moses, the first writer of the Bible. After whose tyme, the most part of Hea∣then gods were long vnborne, as Ceres,Euphemerus Missen. in Genealo. Deorum. Vulcan, Mercurie, Apollo, Aesculapius, Castor, Pollux, & Her∣cules, as the Gentiles themselues in their Genealogies doe confesse. And as for Abraham, that liued fiue hun∣dred yeres before Moses, he was not only elder than these gods, which I haue named, but also than Iupiter, Neptune, Pluto, & such other, who for dignities sake and antiquitie, are
called by the Gentiles,Ci de natu∣ra Deorum. Dij maiorum Gentium, the gods of great Nations. And yet before Abraham, doe the Scriptures containe the story of two thousand yeeres or there abouts. So that by this it is euident, that the writing of Heathens, and the multi∣tude of theyr gods, are but late Fa∣bles in respect of the olde and vene∣rable antiquitie of Hebrue Scrip∣tures, and consequently the authori∣tie of these Scriptures, must in reason be greater than all other writings in the world besides, seeing they were extant before all others, in those first times of simplicitie & sinceritie, and were in part translated into dyuers languages, before the Monarchie of the Persians, that is, before any story of the Gentiles vvas written,Euseb. lib. 9. de praep. Euang. cap. 2.3.4. as Eu∣sebius out of many Heathen Au∣thors declareth. ¶ The second proofe of Scriptures. Their man∣ner of wry∣ting & con∣seruing.NExt to the reason of antiquitie, is alledged the manner of writing, authorising, and conseruing these Scriptures, which is such, as greatly confirmeth the certainty of thinges
contained therein. For first, what so∣euer is sette downe in these writings, was eyther taken immediatly from the mouth of God, as were the pro∣phecyes and bookes of the Lawe: or els collected from time to time by generall consent, according as mat∣ters & myracles fell out, as were the Bookes of Iudges, the Bookes of Kings and Chronicles, and some o∣ther that containe records and Hy∣stories of times. Which bookes were not gathered by some one pryuate man, vpon heare-say, or his own i∣magination, long after things done, as Heathen Hystories, & other pro∣phane records and monuments are; but, they were vvriten by generall agreement, in the selfe same dayes, when things were in sight & know∣ledge of all men, and so coulde not be feigned. Secondly,How Scrip∣tures were authorised. when books were writ∣ten, they were not admited into the common authoritie of Scriptures, that is, of Gods word or diuine wry∣tings, but vpon great deliberation, & most euident proofe of theyr vn∣doubted verity. For either the whole Congregation or Sinagogue, who had the approouing heereof, (and a∣mong
whom commonly were dy∣uers Prophets) did knowe most cer∣tainly the things and myracles to be true, (as did also the whole people,) that were recorded in these vvri∣tings, cōcerning Histories, or els they saw the same confirmed from God, by signes & wonders, as in the books of the Prophets, and of theyr Law-giuer Moses it fell out. Thirdly, vvhen any thing vvas written and admitted for Scripture, the care of conseruation therof was such,The care of conseruati∣on. & the reuerence of Iewes ther∣vnto so great: as may easily assure vs, that no corruption or alteration could happē vnto it. For first ye thing was coppied out into twelue Auten∣tical copies, for al the twelue Tribes: and then again in euery Trybe there were so many copies made, as were particuler Synagogues within that Trybe. All was doone by speci∣all Notaries, Scribes, Ouer-seers, and Witnesses. The copies after diligent reuiewe taken, were laide vp by the whole congregation, in the Treasure house of the Temple, vnder dyuers locks & keyes, not to be touched, but by men appointed; not to be vsed, but with singuler reuerence To add;
diminish, corrupt, or alter, was pre∣sent death by the Lawes of the Na∣tion. And then howe was it possible (saith the Iewe) that among these writings, eyther falshood shoulde creepe in, or trueth once receiued, could afterward be corrupted? It is not possible (saith he) in rea∣son, and therfore obserueth he ano∣ther thing in thys case, which in truth is of very great consideration, to wit, that no other Nation vnder heauen, dyd euer so much esteeme their own writings,The estima∣tion that the Iewes had of theyr Scriptures, that they would offer to dye for the same, as the Iews were ready to do, for euery sentence & sillable of their Scriptures. Wher∣fore also it did proceede, that in all theyr miseries & afflictions (wherein they were a spectacle to all ye world) in all theyr flights & banishments, to Egypt, Babylon, Persia, Media, and other corners of the earth, in al their spoyles, assaults, and deuastations at home: they euer yet had special care to conserue these writings, more than theyr owne liues, and so haue kept the same wythout mayme or corruption, more ages together, than all Nations in the world haue done any other Monuments.
¶ The third proofe of Scriptures. THE thirde perswasion which is vsed by the Iew for the veritie of these Scriptures,The sinceri∣tie of the VVriters. is, the cōsideration of the particuler men that vvrote them: who were such, as in no rea∣son can be suspected of deceipt or falshood. For as I haue sayd, the sto∣ries of the Bible, were written from time to time by publique authoritie, and by the testimonie of al men that saw and knew the things that are re∣hearsed. The bookes of the prophe∣cies were indited by the Prophets themselues, who were plaine, simple, & sincere men, authorised from God by continual miracles, & yet so scru∣pulus & timorus of their owne spee∣ches, as they durst say nothing, but onely, The Lord sayth thi, the Lord of Hostes commaundeth that &c. And when they preached & read theyr wrytings in the hearing of all the people, they protested, that it was not mans word, but Gods, and that for such they left it in the publique Treasurie of theyr Nation, vntill by tract of time, the euent and fulfil∣ling
of theyr prophecies shold proue them true,The liues & deaths of the Pro∣phets. (as alwayes it did) and theyr owne both liues & deathes de∣clare, that they meant no falshood: subiect to the corruption, pride, va∣nity, or ambition of this life (as o∣ther prophane and Heathen VVry∣ters were) and theyr deathes for the most part offered vp in holy martyr∣dom, for defence of that truth which they had preached and written: as appeareth in See Epi∣phan. de vitis Propheta. Esay, that was sawed in peeces by King Manasses; in Iere∣mie, that was stoned to death by the common people; in Ezechiell, that was slaine by the Captaine of the Iewes at Babilon; in Amos, whose braines were beaten out by Amasias the wicked and Idolatrous priest in Bethell; in Michaeas whose neck was broken by Ioram, sonne to King A∣chab; in Zacharias, that was slayne at the Altar, and the like. And this for the Prophets of the latter times among the Iewes. But now, if we consider the first Prophet of all that wrote among the people,A peculier considera∣tion of Mo∣ses, first wri∣ter in the Bible. I meane Moses, that was not onely a prophet, but also an historiographer, a Law-gyuer, a Captaine, & a Priest, the first that euer reduced that peo∣ple
to a Common-wealth, and the first that put theyr acts and gestes in writing, or rather the acts and gestes of the almighty God towards them: thys man (I say) if we consider him onely? (I meane the circumstances of his person) the Iwe thinketh this a sufficient motiue to make any man of reason beleeue what soeuer he hath left writen in the Bible with∣out further confirmation. And first for hys antiquitie, I haue spoken before, and the Heathens doe confesse:Euseb. lib. 9 et 10. de pre. Euan. Ioseph. lib. 1. de con∣tent. Appio. et li. 2. anti. and for myracles doone by him, the greatest enemies that euer he had in the world; that is, Appion in his fourth booke a∣gainst the Iewes, and Porphyrie in hys fourth booke against Christians doe acknoweledge them; and Por∣phyrie adioyneth more for proofe heereof, that he found the same con∣firmed by the story of one Saconia∣thon a Gentile, who liued (as he af∣firmeth) at the same time wyth Mo∣ses. But what? all those myracles (say they) were doone by Arte-ma∣gick, and not by the power of God, as Moses boasted. But then asketh them the Iewe, where Moses a sheepeheard,Exo. 3.4.8. could
learne so much Magicke, or why could not the Magitians of Pharao, whose study vvas in that profession from theyr infancie, eyther doe the lyke, or at least wise delyuer them∣selues from the plagues of Egypt? why did they cry out,The miracu∣lous works of Moses. Exo. 14. The finger of God is heere? VVhere did you euer heare of such workes doone by Ma∣gick, as Moses did, when he deuided the Red-sea? when he called into his Campe so many Quayles vppon the suddaine,Exo. 16. as sufficed to feede sixe hundred thousand men, besides wo∣men and Children? VVhen he made a Rocke to yeeld forth a Fountaine?Numb. 11. when he caused a dewe to fall from heauen,Iosua 5. that nourished hys whole Campe for forty yeeres together?Psalm. 77. VVhen hee caused the ground to o∣pen, and swallow down aliue,Numb. 16. three of the richest Noble men of all hys Army, together with their Taberna∣cles, and all other bagges & baggage?Ioseph. lib. 4. antiq. cap. 2. & 3. When he caused a fire to come from heauen, and consume fiftie Gentle∣men of the former Rebels and Ad∣rents, without hurting any one that stood about them? These things did Moses, and ma∣y other in the sight of al his Army,
that is, in the sight of manie hundred thousand people, amōg which there were diuers his emulators & sworne enemies, as by the storie and Scrip∣ture it selfe appeareth, Core, Datha, & Abiron, with their faction,Numb. 16. sought in all things to disgrace him,Deut. 11. and to diminish his credite:Psalm. 125. and therefore, if any one point of the miracles had been reproouable, Moses would ne∣uer haue durst to put the same in writing, nor would the people haue stood with him; and much lesse haue receiued his writings for diuine, and for Gods own words, (being solici∣ted against him by so potent means) had not they knowne al things to be most true therein contained, and had seene his strange myracles, and fami∣liaritie with God. The plaine and sincere proceeding of Moses.But he delt plainely and simply in thys behalfe: he wrote the things of his owne doings, which euery man present did know to be true: and of Gods speeches, & communications to himselfe, he wrote so much as hee was commaunded, whereof both God, and his conscience did beare hym witnesse. Hee caused the whole to be read vnto the people, and laide vp in the sacred Arke and Taberna∣cle,
as Gods owne writing & coue∣nant with that Nation. He caused all the whole Armie to sweare and vow the obseruaunce thereof.Num. 20. and 17. And then drawing towards his death,Deut. 31. he made a most exellent Exhortation vnto them, perswading them sincerelie to the seruice of their God; and confes∣sing his owne infirmities, and hovv for his offences he was to die before their entrance into the Land of pro∣mise. Hee concealed not the offence of his brother Aaron,Exod. 32. of his grand∣father Leui,Gen. 49. of his sister Marie,Numb. 12. and other of his kindred,Deut. 14. (as worldlye princes for their honors are wont to doo) neither did hee goe about to bring in gouernment after hys de∣cease, anie one of his owne sonnes, (which is greatly to bee obserued) notwithstanding he left behind him goodly gentlemē fit for the roome,Numb. 27. Deut. 3. and himself of power to place them, f hee had endeuoured: but hee left he gouernment to a Straunger, na∣ed Iosua, as God had commaun∣ded him. Al which things (saith the Iew) do rooue sufficiently, that Moses was o man of ambition, or of worldly pirit, but a true seruant of God, and
consequently, that he wrought not by Magicke or falshood, but by the onely power of his Lord & Master, and that his writings are true, and of the same authoritie, that in his life & death he affirmed them to be, that is, the vndoubted VVord of Almightie God. The fourth proofe of Scriptures THis he confirmeth yet farther by a fourth reason,Consent. which is the con∣sent & approbation of al later VVri∣ters of the Bible, that ensued after Moses. For as among prophane wri∣ters of worldly spirit, it is a common fashion for him that foloweth to re∣prehend the former, and to hunt af∣tr praise by his auncetors disgrace: so in these VVriters of the Bible, it is a most certaine argument, that all wer guided by one Spirit from God, that in continuance of so many A∣ges and thousand yeeres, no one yet euer impugned the other, but alwaies the latter supporting and approuing the former for true, doth buid ther∣upon, as vpon a sure foundation. S the writings of Iosua doo confirm
and approue the writings of Moses: and the records of the Iudges do re∣uerence and allow the Booke of Io∣sa. The storie of the Kings & Chro∣nicles, doth refer it selfe to the storie of Iudges. One Prophet confirmeth another. And finally, Christ appro∣eth them all, by the known diuision of the Law, Psalmes, and Prophets, which is a demonstraion, that all heir spirits agreed in one. And thus hethertoo hath been de∣clared the foure considerations,Foure con∣siderations externall. that re externall or without the Bible, to it; the antiquitie an continuaunce of the Scriptures; the maner of their  writing & preseruing from corrup∣ion;  the sinceritie, vertue, and sim∣licitie  of their VVriters; together  ith their agreement and coherence none spirit. But now further,Considera∣tions inter∣nall. (saith he learned Iew) if you will but open e Booke it selfe, and looke into the ext, and that which therein is con∣ined: you shall see Gods ovvne nd, Gods owne charecters, Gods wne sign and seale, and subscripti∣ to the paper. You shall see Gods mnipotencie, Gods Spirite, Gods rouidence, no lesse in these Letters f his Booke, than you behelde the
same before, in the tables of his cre∣atures. Nay, much more (sayth he) for these letters were deuised for de∣claration of those Tables, to the end that such as for their blindnes could not see him in his creatures, might learn at least to read him in his scrip∣tures. ¶ The fifth prooe of Scriptures. Their argu∣ment, and ende.COnsider then first (saith hee) the subiect or Argument which the Scriptures do handle, together with their scope & ende whereuntoo they doo leuell. You shall find, that th first is nothing els, but the actes and gests of one eternall God, as befor hath been mentioned; & the second nothing els, but the onely glorie an exaltation of the same great God together with the saluation of man∣kinde vpon earth. And shal you fin anie writings in the world besides that haue so worthy an argument, o so high an end? Read all the volumes and monuments of the Pagans, turn ouer all their Authors, of what kind name, or profession soeuer; and see vvhat mention they make of the
two things I meane, of the honour of God, and the saluation of man? Read their Philosophers,Philoso∣phers. & see whe∣ther euer they name or pretend these things. Read their Historiographers,Historio∣graphers. and marke how manie battailes and victories they attribute vnto God? They will describe to you often the particuler commendation of theyr Captaine, they will defraud no one Souldiour of his praise in the victo∣rie, they will attribute much to the wisedome of their Generall, much to his courage, much to his watchful∣nes, much to his fortune. They will attribute to the place, to the winde, to the weather, to the shining of the Sun, to the raising of the dust in the enemies eyes, to the flying of some little bird in the ayre, and to a thou∣sand such pettie obseruations be∣sides; but to God nothing. VVhere∣as contrariwise in the Scriptures, it is in euerie battaile recorded, God deli∣ed them into their enemies handes: Gd ouer-threwe them: God gaue the ctorie. Againe, consider the Lawes & law makers among the Gentiles,Heathen Law-ma∣kers. as Ly∣gus, Solon, Draco, Numa, and the e, and see whether you finde anie
one such Law, or tending to such an end, as this of the Iewes:Deut. 6. Thou shal loue the Lord thy God, with all thy hart, and with all thy soule: and shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe. Prophets & Sooth-say∣ers.Consider in all the Sooth-sayers and Diuines among the Gentiles, whether they vsed to say in their pre∣dictions, as the prophetes of Israell did, Dominus dixit, the Lord hath spoken it; or els, Ego dico, I do speake it. Compare their versifiers and Po∣ets with those of the Scripture,Versifyers & Poets. and see, whether they haue laboured in the praise of men, or of God. And whereas Heathen Poets haue filled vp their Bookes (as also the most part of ours at this day,) with matte of carnall loue: marke where any o them euer brake foorth ino such panges of spiritual chast loue, as ho∣lie Dauid did, when he said: I will loue thee my God,Psalm. 17. my strength, my firmament, my refuge, my deliuerer, my helper, my protector, and th horne of my saluation. And again in another verse.The vehe∣ment loue of Dauid. Psalm. 72. What haue I desi∣red vpon earth besides thee? my fle and hart haue fainted for thee, tho God of my hart, thou God art m part and portion euerlasting?
By all which is euident, that as prophane writings and Wryters, which do treate of men,Prophane writers treat onelie of men. extol men, seeke the grace of men, referre all to the commoditie and good lyking of men, doe proceede of the spyrite of man, and are subiect to those infir∣mities of falshood, errour, and vani∣tie wherewith mn is entangled in thys life: so the Scriptures, which handle matters aboue the compasse of flesh and blood; that referre al to God, and supernaturall ends, could not proceed of nature or of humane spirit. For tht by nature, the Iewes were men as the Gentiles were, and had their infirmities of fleshe and blood as the other had. And there∣fore it must needes be concluded, that these hygh and supernaturall writings among them, proceeded from God, that speciallie directed them, and gaue them light of vnder∣standing, aboue all other Nations and people in the world. ¶The sixt proofe of Scripture. NExt after the argument and ende of the Scriptures, the Iewe wil∣leth vs to consider the peculier styleTheir style.
and phrase which they vse: for that (saith he) it being different from all manner of writings in the world, & vnimitable to man, it doth discouer the finger of God, by which it was framed. For See S. Au∣gustine of this at large. Lib. 12. de ciuit. Dei. wheras humaine wri∣ters do labor much in adorning their style, and in reducing their words to number, weight, measure & sound, with addition of many figures, and other ornaments for allurement of the Reader: the Scripture taketh quite another course, and vseth a most meruailous simplicitie,Simplicitie. therby to accomodate it selfe to the capa∣citie of the weakest; but yet alwaies carrying with it so great profundity,Profunditie as the best learned in the serch ther∣of, shall confesse theyr owne igno∣rance. For examples sake, consider but the very irst words of the Bible,Gene. 1. In the beginning, God created heauen and earth: and the earth was emptie and voide: and darkenesse was vpon the face of the deapth: and the Spirit of God was carried vpon the waters: and God said, let light be made, and light was made &c. What can be more plaine and simple then this narrati∣on, to instruct the most vnlearned about the beginning and creation o
the world? and yet when learned men come to examine euery point thereof, how, and what, and where, and in what maner, & when things were done; it astonisheth them all, to consider the difficulties which they finde, and the depth of so infi∣nite inscrutable misteries. Besides this,The grauity and maiesty of speech in the Scrip∣tures. there goeth in the same simplicitie, a strange maiestie, and grauitie of speech, declaring suf∣ficientlie, from how great & potent a Prince it proceedeth. For as great Monarches in their Edits & procla∣matiōs, are wont to speak vnto their subiects, not in figures or rethorical phases, but plainlie, breefelie, and peremptorilie to shew their autho∣ritie, so the Scriptures, to declare whose Edicts they be, do vse the like manner of phrase and style to all the world, without alluring or flattering any man, & without repect of Mo∣narch, Emperor, King, Prince, or Potentate: Fac hoc & viues:De. 4.16. and 22. do this, and thou shalt liue. Si peccaueris in me, rieris in aeternum: if thou sin against mee, thou shalt die euerlastinglie. And albeit (as I haue saide) the Scriptures do vse this simplicitie of speech, and do not admit that kind
of painted and artificiall stile, which humane writers doe so much couet, yet in perswading, instructing, mo∣uing of affections,The force of the scrip∣tures in mo∣uing of af∣fections. & all other effects which speech or writing can work, there is no comparision, (a thing most wonderfull) betweene any o∣ther writing in the world and these. Wherefore I could alledge many proofes and examples, but that it were too-long. Let any man reade attentiuely, but the first Chapter of the prophecie of Esay, and compare it with any one part or parcell of Tullies or Demosthines Orations. and see whether the difference of wordes, be as great as the difference of motions? Let diuers Himnes and holie Psalmes of the Scriptures, be conferred with the most patheticall Poems, that mans wit hath inuen∣ted, and see whether there bee any comparison in stirring and siering of affections, or no? Flauius Io∣sephus de antiq. Iud.This am I sure, that Iosephus the Iw, who for glory of his eloquence, had his Image of mettall erected by Titus the Emperour in the Market∣place of Rome, wrote the sam story which the Scriptures contane, and bestowed much labour and humane
cunning therein.See S. Ierom lib. de scrip. Eccle. But yet euen in those places, where hee endeuoured most to shew his arte, as in the Sa∣crifice of Isaack by his father, and in the meeting of Iephte with his one∣lie daughter,Gene. 12. Iudg. 11. which by vowe he was constrayned to put to death; the scriptures are able to pierce the hrt, and wring out teares of the Reader, whom Iosephus will not greatlie mooue with hys rethoricall narra∣tion, though otherwise verie learned and artificiallie penned. Aristaeus that learned Gentile,Two Mira∣cles repor∣ted by Ari∣staeus. of whom wee haue made mention be∣fore, who was in speciall fauor with Ptolomie, the second great Monarch of Egipt, (about three hundred yeres before our Sauiour Christ his nati∣uitie) and a chiefe doer in procuring the translation of the Hebrue Bible into the Greeke language,Aristaeus li∣bello de trās∣lat. Bibli, & apud Euseb. lib. 8. de praep. Eang. cap. 1 reported of his owne knowledge o the saide King Ptolomie, two strange acci∣dents which had happened in hys time, and which he had vnderstood o the parties themselues, to whom they had happened. The first was, of Theopompus,Theopom∣pus. an eloquent Histori∣ographer, who hauing translated manie things out of the Bible, & en∣deuouring
to adorne the same with vaine collours of eloquence, could not performe his desire, but was stri∣ken with a suddaine maze and gid∣dinesse in the head, and was warned in his sleepe, not to proceed any fur∣ther in that work after that sort, for that such manner of style was too base for so high matters, as the scrip∣tures contained. The other example, was of one Theodectes a writer of Tragaedies,Theodectes who told Aristaeus, that he once at∣tempted to bring certaine matters out of the Iewes Bible into a Pagan tragaedie, and that thereupon he was presentlie striken blind, wherewith he beeing astonished, and falling to repentance for that he had done, & desisting from the enterprise, (as also Theopompus did) they were both of them restored againe to their for∣mer healthes. And thus much did these three Pagans confesse of the authoritie, diuinitie, and peculier sacred style of our Scriptures. ¶The seuenth proofe of Scriptures, BVT now further it insueth in or∣der, that after the subiect and
phrase, we should consider a little the contents of these Scriptures,The Con∣tents. which will perhaps, more cleerelie direct vs to the viewe of their Au∣thor, then any thing els that hether∣to hath been said. And for our pre∣sent purpose, I will note onelie two speciall things contained in the Bi∣ble. The first shal be certain high and hidden doctrines,High doc∣trines. which are aboue the reach and capacitie of humaine reason, and consequentlie could ne∣uer fall into mans braine to inuent them. As for example; that all this wonderfull frame of the world, was created of nothing, whereas Phylo∣sophy saith, That of nothing, nothing can be made: That Angels being cre∣ated spirits, were damned eternallie for their sinnes; that Adam by dis∣obedience in Paradise, drewe all his posterity into the obligation of that his sinne: and that the womans seed should deliuer vs from the same: That God is one in substance, and three in person; that the second of these persons being God, should be∣come man, and die vpon a crosse for the raunsome of mankind; that after him, the way to all felicitie and ho∣nour, should bee by contempt, suffe∣ring,
and dishonour. These doc∣trines (I say) and many more, con∣tained in the Bible, beeing things a∣boue mans capacitie to deuise, and nothing agreeing with humane rea∣son: most euidentlie do declare, that God was the Authour and enditer of the Scriptures, for that by him onely, and from no other, these high & secret misteries could be reuealed. The pro∣phecies in Scriptures do declare theyr Au∣thour.The second thing contained in the Scriptures, that could not proceede but from GOD alone, are certaine prophecies & fore-tellings of things to come. Wherein God himselfe prouoketh the Idols of the Gentiles, to make experience of their power, in these words:Esay. 42.23. Declare vnto v what shall ensue heereafter, and thereby wee shall know that you are God indeede. Which is to be vnderstood, if they could fore-tell particulerly & plain∣ly, what was to come, in things meerelie contingent or depending of mans will:Howe the Deuils and other crea∣tures may fore-tell things to come. they should thereby declare their power to be diuine. For albeit these Idols of the Gen∣tiles as Apollo, and other that gaue forth Oracles, (which were nothing els indeed, but certaine wicked spi∣rites, that tooke vppon them these
names) did sometimes happen vpon the truth, & fore-tel things to come, as also most Astrologers, Sooth∣saiers, and Magitians doe, either by ore-sight in the starres and other e∣lements, or by the assistance of these wicked spirits and deuils: yet are the things which they pronosticate, ey∣ther natural & not contingent, & so may be foreseene & foretold in their causes; (as raine, heate, colde, winds, and the like) or els, if they be meere accidentall: these predictions of theirs, are onely coniectures, and so most in certain, & subiect to errors. This testifieth Porphirie the great Patron of Paganisme,The opini∣on of a Hea∣then tou∣ching the Prophecies of his gods. in a speciall book of the answers of gods, wher∣in he sweareth, that he hath gathe∣red truely without addition or de∣traction, the Oracles that was most famous before his time, wyth the false and vncertaine euent thereof, in consideration of vvhich euent, he setteth down his iudgement of their power in predictions, after this ma∣ner. The Gods do fore-tell some natu∣rall things to come,Porphiry lib. de resp. et Oraculorum. for that they do ob∣serue the order and coniunction of their naturall causes: but of thinges that are cotingent, or doe depende of mans
will, they haue but coniectures onely, in that by their subtiltie and celeritie, they preuent vs. But yet they oftentimes doe lie, and deceiue vs in both kindes, for that as naturall things are variable, so mans will is much more mutable. Thus farre Porphirie of the pro∣phecies of his Gods, wherunto a∣greeth an other Heathen, o great credite among the Grecians, named Oenomaus,Oenomaus de falsitate ora∣cul. et de ar∣tificibus ma∣leficijs. who for that he had been much delighted with Oracles, and more deceiued wrote a special Booke in the ende, of their falshood and lyes; and yet sheweth, that in many things wherin they deceiued, it was not easie to conuince them of open falshood, for that they would inuolue their aunswers (of purpose) with such obscurities, generalites, equiuocations, and doubtulnsse, as alwaies they woulde leaue them selues a corner wherein to saue their credites, when the euent shoulde prooue false.Deceitfull Oracles. As for example, when Craesus that famous & rich Monarch of Lydia, consuled with the Oracle of Apollo, whether he should make warre against the Persians, & therby obtain theyr Empire, or no? Apollo desirous of bloodshed, (as all wiced
spirits are,) gaue his Oracle in these words, for deceyuing of Craesus.Euseb. Lib. 5. de praep. E∣uan. cap. 10 If Craesus without feare, shall passe ouer Halys, (this was a Riuer that lay be∣tweene him and Persia) he shal bring t confusion a great riche kingdome. Vpon which words, Craesus passed ouer his Armie, in hope to get Per∣sia, but soone after he lost Lydia, by euill vnderstanding of this doubtful prophecie. This then is the imbecilitie of both humane and angelicall power,The circū∣stances of prophecies set down in the Scrip∣tures. in pronosticating things to come, which are meere contingent. In which kinde, notwithstanding, see∣ing that the Scriptures haue manie, and almost infinite prophecies, fore∣told many yeres, (& somtimes ages) before they came to passe, set downe in plaine, particuler, and resolute speech: at such tyme as there ws neyther cause to coniecture them, nor probabilitie that euer they shold be true; deliuered by simple and vn∣learned persons, that could fore-see nothing by skill or arte; and yet that all these by theyr euents, haue proo∣ued most true, and neuer any one iote in the same haue fayled: this (I say) alone, doth conuince most ap∣parently,
(all proofes & reasons, and other argumēts laid aside) that these Scriptues are of God, & of his eter∣nall and infallible Spirit. And there∣fore of these Prophecies, I wil alledg in this place some few examples. ¶The Prophecie to Abraham for his posteritie. ABraham the first Father and spe∣ciall Patriarch of the Iewes, had manie prophecies and predictions made vnto him, as of hys issue, when he had yet none, nor euer like to haue: of his inheriting the Land of Canaan,Gene. 12.13.15.17.18. &c. and the like. But thys which followeth is wonderful, of his posterities discent into Egypt: of their time of seruitude, and manner of deliuerance thence; the same be∣ing fore told, more then foure hun∣dred yeeres before it was fulfilled, & at that time, when no likelyhood thereof in the world appeared. The words are these.Gene. 15. Know thou beoe hande, that thy issue shall be a strange in a forraine Land, and they shall sub∣iect them to seruitude, and shall afflict them for foure hundred yeeres: but ye
I will iudge the Nation vnto whom they haue been slaues, and ater that, they shall depart thence with great riches. This is the Prophecie, and how ex∣actlie it was afterward fulfilled, by the ruine of the Egyptians, and de∣liuerance of the Israelites, euen at that time which is heere appointed: not onely the book of Exodus doth declare,Exod. 12. Gala. 3. where the whole storie is laid downe at large, but also the con∣sent of Porph. lib. 4. contra Christia. Appion lib. 4 cont. Iud. Heathen writers, as before hath been touched. And it is spe∣ciallie to be noted, that this prophe∣cie was so common and wel known among all the Iewes, from Abra∣hams time down vnto Moses, and so deliuered by tradition from fa∣thers vnto their children; as it was the onelie comfort and stay, not onely of all that eople in their ser∣uitude of Egypt, but also of Moses & others, that gouerned the people af∣terwards, for forty yeres together in the desert, and was the onely mean indeede, whereby to pacifi them in their distresses and miseries: and therefore Moses in euery exhorta∣tion almost, maketh mention of this promise and prophecie, as of a thing well known vnto them all, and not
deuised or inuented by himselfe or any other. ¶The Prophecie for the gouern∣ment of Iuda. LOng after this, Iacob that was Abrahams Nephewe, beeing in Egypt, and making his Testament, said of his fourth sonne Iuda.Gene. 49. Iuda, thy brother shall praise thee, and the children of thy Father shall boowe vnto thee, &c. The scepter shall not be taken from Iuda, vntill hee come that is to e sent, and he shall be the expectation of Nations. Which latter part of the prophecie, all Hebrues do expound, that it was meant of the comming of Messias, which was fulfilled al∣most two thousand yeeres after, at the comming of Christ, as shall be shewed in another speciall Chapter. For at that time,Iosep. de an∣tiqu. lib. 14. King Herod a stran∣ger, put out quite the line of Iuda, from the gouernment of Iurie. But for the first part, touching Iudaes scepter, it is wonderfull to consider the circumstances of this prophecie. For first, when it was spoken and vttered by Iacob, there was no pro∣babilitie of any scepter at all, to be
among the Iewes, for that the Israe∣lites, or sonnes of Iacob at that day, were poore, and few in number, and neuer like to be a distinct Nation of themselues, or to depart foorth of Egypt againe. And secondly, if any such thing should come to passe, as they might be a people, and haue a scepter of gouernmēt of their own, yet was it not likelie,Vnlikeli-hoods of this pro∣phecie. that Iuda and his posteritie should possesse ye same, for that he had three elder Brothers, to wit, Ruben, Simeon, and Leui: who in all likeli-hoode were to go before him. And thirdly, when Mo∣ses recorded and put in writing thys prophecie, (which was diuers hun∣dered yeeres after Iacob had spoken it,) it was much lesse likelie, that euer it should be true, for that Moses then present in gouernment, was of the Tribe of Leui,Exod. 2. and Iosua desig∣ned by God for his successor,Iosua. 15. was of the Tribe of Ephraim, and not of Iuda: which maketh greatlie for the certaintie of this recorde. For that it is most apparant, that Moses would neuer haue put such a prophecie in writing, to the disgrace of his owne Tribe, and to the preiudice and offence of Ruben, Simeon, Ephraim,
and other Trybes; neyther would they euer haue suffered such a dero∣gation, but that it vvas euident to them by tradition, that their Grand-sire Iacob had spoken it, albeit then presently there was no great likely∣hood, that euer after it should come to be fulfilled. And this was for the time of Mo∣ses, but yet consider further,1. Regu. 1. and 8. that from Moses to Samuell, (that was last of all the Iudges) there passed foure hundred yeeres more, and yet was there no appearance of fulfil∣ling this prophecie in Israel; for that the Tribe of Iuda was not establi∣shed in that gouernment. At length they came to haue Kings to rule,2. Reg. 9. and then was there chosen one Saul to that place, not of the Tribe of Iuda, but of Beniamin, and he indued with dyues chyldren to succeede him. And who would then haue thought, that this prophecie could euer haue beene fulfilled? but yet for that it was Gods word, it must needes take place, and therefore when no man thought thereof, there was a poore Dauid. Sheepeheard chosen out of the Tribe of Iuda,1. Reg. 16. to bee a King, and the regiment & scepter so established
in his posteritie, that albeit manie of his descendents offended God more greeuously then euer did Saul, who was put out before:3. Reg. 12 2. Chro. 11. And al∣beit ten Trybes at once brake from Iuda, and neuer returned to obedi∣ence againe, but conspired with the Gentiles and other enemies on eue∣rie side, to extinguish the said King∣dome and regiment of Iuda:The won∣derful pro∣uidence of God to∣wards the house of Iuda. yet for the fulfilling of this prophecie, the gouernment of Iuda held out ill, for more then a thousand and two hundred yeeres together, vntill Herods time, (as I haue alreadie said) which is more then any one familie in the world besides,Euseb. in Chron. can shew for hys nobilitie or continu∣ance in gouernment. The Prophecie for the greatnesse of Ephraim aboue Ma∣nasses. THE same Iacob, when he came to blesse his little Nephewes Ma∣nasses and Ephraim, that were Io∣sephs Chyldren: though himselfe were now dimme of sight, & could not well discerne them, yet dyd he
put his right hand vpon the head of the younger, and his left hand vpon the elder, and that of purpose, as it prooued afterwarde. For when Io∣seph their Father misliked the pla∣cing of their Grand-fathers hands, and would haue remoued the right hand from Ephraim, and haue pla∣ced it vpon the heade of Manasses, that was the elder Brother, Iacob would not suffer him, but answered,Gne. 48. I knw my sonne, I know, that Manas∣ses is the elder: and hee shall be multi∣plied in many people, but yet his youn∣ger brother shall bee greater then he. Which afterwarde was fulfilled,Iosua, 16. and 17. for that Ephraim was alwaies the grea∣ter and stronger Tribe, and in fine, became the head of the Kingdome of Israell,Eccle. 47. or of the ten Trybes,Esay, 7.28. whereof there was no suspition or likelihood,Ierem. 31. when Iacob spake this,Ezech. 37. or when Moses recorded it.Hsea, 5. And how then came Iacob to foresee this so many hundred yeeres before?Gene. 49. as also to foresee & foretel the particu∣ler places of his childres habitati∣ons in the land of Promise?Iosua, 14. as Zabu∣lon at the sea side;Exod. 12. Aser in the fertile pastures;Gala. 3. & other the like that fel out by casting lotts,Acts, 13. after foure hundred
yeeres and more. Where-hence had he this (I say) to fore-tell what lots so long after should appoynt, but onely from GOD, who gouerned theyr lots. The fore-sight of Moises. THE like may be asked cōcerning Moises,Numb 34, 35, 36. who before his death in the Deser, deuided out the Land of Canaan to euery Trybe,Iosua, 15.16.17. euen as though he had beene in possession thereof, & as afterward it fel out by ting of lots, as in the booke of Io∣sua appeareth. And coulde any hu∣mane wit or science (think you) fore see, what each Tribe should attaine (ater his death) by drawing of lots? Again, the same Moises fore-saw and fore-told in publique hearing of al the people, how in times to come, long after his death, the Iewes shold forsake GOD,Deu, 31, 32, and for theyr sinnes be cast into many banishments, and finally be forsaken,Deut, 32, verse, 21. and the Gentiles ceiued in their roome, as indeede it came to passe. And whence (trowe you) could he learne thys, but from God alone?
The Prophecie for the perpetuall de∣solation of Iericho. IN the booke of Iosua, there is a curse layde vpon the place where Iericho stood, & vpon what-soeuer person should goe about to rebuild the same, to wit, That in his eldest sonne hee should lay the foundations, and in his youngest Sonne should he build the gates thereof.Iosua, 6. Which is to say, that before the oundations were layd, and the gates builded, he shold be punis with the death of al his chyldren. Which thing was fulfilled almost fiue hundred yeeres after, in one Hiel, who presumed vnder wic∣ked King Achab, to rebuild Iericho againe, and was terrified from the same, by the suddaine death of Abi∣ram and Segul his chyldren, as the booke of Kings reporteth,3, Regu, 16, according to the words of the Lord, which he had spoken in the hand of Iosua the Sonn of Nun. And since that time to this, no man, eyther Iew or Gentile, hath taken vpon him to rayse againe the said Citty, albeit the situation be most pleasant, as by relation of sto∣ries and Geographers appeareth.
The prophecie for the birth and acts of Ioss. THE thyrd booke of Kings ma∣keth mention,3. Reg. 1. that when Iero∣boam had with-drawne ten Trybes from the obedience of Roboam K. of Iuda: to the end they might ne∣uer haue occasion to reunite them∣selues again to Iuda, by theyr going to sacrifice in Ierusalem, (as by the Law they were appointed) he buil∣ded for thē, a goodly gorgious high Altar in Bethel, and there comman∣ded them to doe theyr deuotions. And whē he was one day there pre∣sent himselfe, and offering hys in∣cense vpon the sayd Altar, and al the people looking on: there came a man of God, (saith the scripture) & stood before the Altar, and cried out loude, and spake these wordes;3. Reg. 13. O ltar, Altar, this saith the Lord, be∣ld, a child shall be borne of the house of Dauid, whose name shall be Iosias, and he shall sacrifice vpon thee, these ilatrous Priestes that nowe burne ncumcense vppon thee, and he shall ne the bones of men vpon thee.
Thus spake that man of God in the presence and hearing of all the people, more the three hundred yeeres before Iosias was borne: and it was registred presently, according to the manner of that time (which I haue noted before) & with the same were registred also, ye miracles which happened about that fact: as that the Altar cleft in two vpon the mans words: & Ieroboam extending out his hand to apprehend him, lost pre∣sently the vse and feeling therof, vn∣till it was restored again by the sayd holy mans Prayers: who notwith∣standing, for that he disobeied Gods commaundement in hys return, and eate with a Prophet of Samaria,Disobedi∣ence puni∣shed gree∣uously in Gods dee∣rest. (which was forbidden him,) he was slaine in his way home-warde by a Lyon, and his body was brought back again & buried in Bethel nigh the saide Altar, amongst the Sepul∣chers of those idolatrous Priestes of that place, but yet with a superscrip∣tion vpon hys Tombe, contyning his name, and what had happened. There passed three hundred yere and Iosias was borne,4. Reg. 23. and came to raigne in Iuda, & one day comming to Bethel to ouerthrow the Altar, &
to destroy the Sepulchers of those I∣dolatrous Priests that had been bu∣ried in yt place: when he began to breake theyr Tombes, he found by chaunce, the Sepulcher of the sayd man of God, with the superscripti∣on vpon it. By which superscription and relation of the Cittizens of Be∣thel, when he perceiued that it was the Tombe of him that had fore∣told hys byrth, his name, & his do∣ings, so many hundred yeeres before he was borne: he let the same stand vntouched,Chap, 23, as the fourth booke of Kings doth declare. Nowe consider, whether among any Nation in the worlde, but onely among the Iewes, there were euer a∣ny such prophecie, so certaine, so par∣ticuler, so long fore-told before the tyme, and so exactly fulfilled? But yet the holy scriptures are full of the lyke, and time permitteth me onelie to touch some few of the principall. The prophecie for the destruction of Ierusalem & Babilon. ESay the Prophet is wonderfull in fore-telling the misteries & acts
of the Messias, his natiuitie, his lyfe, and all the particulers that happe∣ned in hys passion. In so much, that S. Ierom sayth, he may seeme rather to write a story of deedes past,Hieron. in prol. Galeat then a Prophecie of euents to come. But yet among other things, it is to be noted, that he lyuing in a peaceable and prosperous time in Iuda, when the Iewes were in amitie and great securitie with the Babilonians, hee fore-saw & fore-told the destructi∣on of Ierusalem by the sayd Babilo∣nians,4, Reg, 20, verse, 17, Esay, 5. and the grieuous captiuity of the Iewes vnder thē; as also the de∣struction of Babilon again by Cyrus King of Persia, whose expresse name and greatnes, he published in wry∣ting almost two hundred yeeres be∣fore he was borne: saying in ye per∣son of God; First, to Ezechias king of Iuda, that reioyced in the friend∣shyp he had with Babilon:4. Reg. 20. Behold, the dayes shall come, when all that thou and thy Fathers haue layde vp, shall be carried away to Babilon, and thy chyldren shal be Eunuches in the King of Babilons Pallace. And next, to Babilon, he sayd:Esay, 13, The destruction of Babylon, which Esay the sonne of Amos saw, &c. Howle and cry, for
that the day of the Lord is at hande. &c. The wonderfull prophecie for Cyrus King of Persia. THirdly vnto Cyrus (not yet born) who was preordained to destroy the same, and to restore the people of Israell from banishment, to re∣build the Temple in Ierusalem, hee sayth thus;Esay, 24. I say to Cyrus, thou art my shepe-heard, and thou shalt ful∣fill all my will. I say to Ierusalem, thou shalt be builded againe. I say to the Temple, thou shalt be founded againe. This sayth the Lord to my annointed Cyrus, I will goe before thee, and will umble the glorious people of the earth in thy presence: I will breake theyr brasen gates,Esay, 25. and crush in peces theyr yron barres, for my seruant Iacobs sake haue I called thee by Name, and haue armed thee, whereas thou Thys he sayth, for that Cyrus was an In∣fidel. knowest not mee. Can any thing be more cleerely or miraculously spoken in the world, then to name a Heathen not yet borne, that shold conquer so strong a Monarchie as Babilon was at thys
time, and should builde againe the Temple of Ierusalem, which others of his owne Religion had destroyed before him? What cause, what rea∣son, wht likeli-hoode could be of thys? Yet Esay speaketh it so confi∣dently, as he sayth,Esay, 13, that he saw it: and he nameth two witnesses there∣of, that is, Vrias, and Zacharias, that were not borne in many yees after, saying:Esy, 8, verse, 2. & I tooke vnto me two faith∣full witnesses, Vrias the Priest, and Zacharias the Sonne of Barachias. Whereof the first was a Prophet in Ieremies time, a hundred yeres after Esay,Ierem, 26, verse, 20, and the second liued fourscore yeeres after that againe, in the dayes of Daris, as by the beginning of his prophecie appeareth:Zach, 1, verse, 1, and yet both (as you see) were dstinctly named by Esay long tyme before. And whereas thys Booke of Esay was pronounced openly to the peo∣ple (as other prophecies wee) and published into manie thousande hands before the captiuity of Baby∣lon fell out,Circum∣stances of certaine truth. and then carried also with the people, and dyspersed in Chaldea, & other parts of the world, there can be no possible suspition of forgery in thys matter, for al that the
world both saw it and read it, many yeres before the thing came to passe: yea, when there was no likeli-hood of any such possibility to come. The Prophecies and dooings of Ieremie, in the siedge of Ierusalem. THE same captiuitie & destruc∣tion of Ierusalem by the Baby∣lonians, was prophecied by Ieremie, a hundred yeeres after Esay, & a lyt∣tle before the matter came to passe: yea, while the Babylonians were a¦bout the walles of Ierusalem, & be∣siedged the same for two yeres toge∣ther, Ieremie was within, and tolde euery man, that it was but in vaine to defend the Cittie, for that GOD had nowe deliuered it. And albeit he were accounted a Traytour for so saying, (especially, when by an Ar∣mie of Egipt, that came to the ayde of Ierusalem from Pharao, the siedge of the Babylonians was raised for a certaine time,) yet Ieremy continu∣ed still in his asseueration, & said to Zedechias the King,Ierem, 37. Thou shalt bee deliuered into the handes of the King
of Babylon.Iere, 38, And to the people, Hae dicit Dominus, tradendo tradetur, haec Ciuitas, &c. Thys sayth the Lorde, thys Citty most certainly shal be de∣liuered into the hands of the Baby∣lonians. And so he continued not∣withstanding he were put in prison and whipt, and threatned daily to be hanged: vntill indeed the Citty was taken, and Zedechias eyes puld out, hys chyldren slaine before his face,Iere, 39, 4, Reg, 24, 25, & al other things performed, which Ieremie had prophecied & fore-told them before. And which was yet more meruai∣lous, Ieremy did not onely fore-tell the particulers of thys captiuitie, but also the determinate time, how long it should endure, saying.Ierem, 25, And all this Land of Iurie shall be into wildernes, and astoniednesse: and all this people shall serue the King of Babylon for three-score and tenne yeeres,The yeeres fore-told of the captiui∣tie of Babi∣lon. & when three-score and tenne yeeres shall be complete, I will visite vppon the King of Babilon, & vpon that Nation saith the Lord, and I will lay the same into eterall desolation.Iere, 24, and 29 But vppon Iud will I cast my pleasant eyes, and will bring them back to this Land again. &c. In which prophecie is contai∣ned,
first the particuler tyme howe long thys captiuitie should endure. Secondly, the destruction of Baby∣lon, and of that Monarchie by the Persians. And thirdly, the returning home of the Iewes againe; which three things to haue been afterward fulfilled,1. Esdr. 1, 2. 2, Esdr. 2. not onely Esdras that liued at that tyme, and was an actor in performance of the last: but all o∣ther Heathen writers besides, doe re∣cord and testifie. And thys prophecie of Ieremie, was so famous, and certainly belie∣ued amongst all the Iewes, in the time of their captiuity: as when the day of expiration drew neere, Dani∣ell writeth thus of himselfe.Dan, 9. In the first yeere of Darius, I Daniell, vnder∣stood in the scriptures, the nūber of the seauentie yeeres whereof God spake to Ieremie, that they should be fulfilled, touching the desolation of Ierusalem: & I turned my face to my Lord God, and besought him in fasting & sack∣cloth. &c. Neyther onely the Iewes vnderstoode and beleeued thys pro∣phecie,Gentiles be∣lieued the scripture. but euen Cyrus himselfe, that was a Gentile, gaue ful credite ther∣vnto, and theeby was induced to restore the Iewes, as appeareth both
by hys own words and Proclamati∣ons,1. Esdras, 1. 3. Esdras. 2 sette downe by Esdras that exe∣cuted the same: and by hys deedes also, in rstoring home the Iewes, & rebuilding theyr Temple at his own great chages, as all Historiographers of the Heathen doe confesse. I might heere alledge infinite o∣ther examples, and make no end, if I woulde followe the multitude of Prophecis which are dysersed tho∣rowe out the whole Scripture? I might shew how Daniell fore-tolde to Baltasar King of Babylon,The Pro∣phecies of Daniell. Dan. 5, in the midst of hys tryumph, as in the hea∣ring of all hys Peeres, the destructi∣on which insued vpon him the ve∣rie same night after. I myght heere alledge, how the same Daniel,Dan. 11. in the first yere of Da∣rius the Median, in the beginning of that second Monarchie of Medians and Persians, fore-told howe manie Beholde, three kings shall yet stand in Persia and the fourh shal be rich aboue all the rest. Dan. 11. Kings should raigne after him in Persia, and how the last (who was the fourth after him, and hys name also Darius) should fight against the Grecians, & be ouercome by a Gre∣cian King, (which was Alexander) and how the Kingdome also of the Grecians, should be deuided and
torne in peeces, after Alexanders death,Iustin. hist. lib. 12. et 13. and not passe to his posteri∣tie, as Iustine & other Heathen wri∣ters doe testifie that it was, by Anti∣gonus, Perdiccas, Sleuchus, Anti∣ochus, Ptolomaeus, and other Cap∣taines of Alexander, that deuided the same among themselues, aboue a hundred yeeres after Darius was dead. I might declare also, how the same Daniell fore-saw and fore-told, the four great Monarchies of the world,The foure Monarchies of Assiri∣ans, Persiās, Grecians, & Romaines. and described the same as distinctly, as if he had lyued in them all, and as by experience we finde since to be true. I myght alledge the particuler description, of the fight betwixt Da∣rius and Alexander,Dan, 2, Dan, 8, sette downe by Daniel vnder the names of the great Ramme,The fore∣telling of great Alex∣ander. & the fierce Gote with one horne, which Goate himselfe inter∣preteth it to be meant of a Grecian King that should conquer the Persi∣ans. And therfore Alexander (as Io∣sephus reporteth) comming to Ieru∣salem about a hundred yeeres after,Iosep lib. de antiq. Iud. cap. 8, and hearing the Prophecie of Dani∣ell interpreted vnto him by Iaddus the high Priest, assured himselfe that he was the man therein signified, &
so after long sacrifice doone to the God of Israel, (of whom he affirmed that he had appeared vnto him in Macedon, and had exhorted him to take thys war in hand,) and after he had bestowed much honor & many benefits vpon the high Priest, & In∣habitants of Ierusalem, he went for∣ward in his war against Darius, with great alacritie, & had yt famous vic∣torie which all the world knoweth. A hundred such prophecies more, which are as plaine, as euident, and as distinct as thys, I might alledge of Elias, Elizeus, Samuel, Dauid, Eze∣chiel, the twelue lesser Prophets, and of other which I haue not named. And in very truth, the whole Scrip∣ture is nothing els, but a diuine kind of body, replenished throughout with the vital spirite of prophecie, & euery day some prophecie or other is fulfilled, (though we marke it not) and shal be vnto the worlds end. What ma∣ner of per∣sons our Prophets were.And the myracle of this matter is yet more increased, if wee consider what manner of people they were for the most part, by whom these Prophecies of hydden thinges wer vttered, to wit, not such men is could gather the fore-sight of things
by Astronomie or Astrologie, that is, by contemplation of the starres, as some fond Gentiles did pretende, (though Ptolomie denie that anie such thing can be fore-told but one∣lie by inspiration from God,Ptolo. in lib. de fructu.) ney∣ther yet were they so sharpe witted, as to attaine to Prophecie by strange imaginations,Moses Nar∣bon in lib. Abubacher et Auam∣pare. as most vainly Auer∣roes and his fellowes hold that some men may; nor finally, were they so delicatly fedde, as by xact dyet and rules of Alchimie, to come to Pro∣phecie as Alchimists dreame that a man may doe, & that Appolonius Thyanaeus dyd,Roger. Baco. lib. de sex scient expe∣rimentalib. who by stillified meates (as they speake) came to be stillified himselfe, and so by helpe of hys Glasse called Alchimusi, to sore∣tel some matters & affaires to come. Our Prophets (I say) knew none of these fantasticall deuises, beeing for the most part poore, simple and vn∣learned men, as in particuler was re∣corded, that Dauid was a sheepe∣heard, & Amos was a keeper of Ox∣en.Amos, 1, Yea, oftentimes they were Wo∣men, as Marie the sister of Aaron,Exod, 15, called in the Scripture by the name of Prophetesse.Iudges, 5, Debora the wife of Lapidoth:1. Reg, 2, Hanna the Mother of
Samuell, Elizabeth the Mother of Iohn Baptist: Anna the Daughter of Panuell: and finally, the most holy and blessed virgine Mary,Luke, 1, et 2, with the daughters of Phillip,Acts, 21. and manie such other, both in the old and new Testamēt, who prophecied strange∣ly, nor could possibly receiue such fore-knowledge of things to come, but onely from the Spirite of the ly∣uing GOD, and by inspiration of the holy Ghost, which is a manifest demonstration, of the excellencie of Holy-writ, and of the certainty con∣tained therein. The eyght proofe of Scriptures. AND nowe, albeit this myght seeme sufficient in the iudgment and conscience of euery reasonable man (as the Iew supposeth) to proue that the Scriptures be only rō God, & consequently by them, that there is a GOD; yet hath he one reason more to confirme theyr sinceriie, which I will alledge in this place, & there-with make an ende. His rea∣son is, that although these holy wri∣tings, (which proceede of Gods spi∣rite)
doe not take theyr testimony or confirmation frō man: yet or more euidence of the truth, God hath so prouided, that al the principall, most strange and wonderfull things, re∣counted in scripure, should be re∣ported also, and confirmed by Infi∣dels, Pagans, Gentiles, and Heathen Writers themselues;Approbati∣on of Hea∣then Wry∣ters. albeit in some poynts they dyffer from the Scrip∣tures, in the manner of theyr narr∣tion, for that they adioyne supersti∣tions thereunto. Which maketh the more for approbation of the things, for that heereby it appeareth, they tooke not theyr stories direcly rom the Bible, but by tradition and most auncient antiquities of theyr owne. The Creation of the world. FIrst thē he sheweth,Gene, 1, et 2, that the cre∣ation of the World, which is the meruaile of all meruailes, with the infusion of mans soule from God, is oth graunted and agreed vpon, by all those Heathen Phylosophers that haue beene cited before, (albeit the particularities be not so sette downe by them, as they are in Scriptures,)
and by all other, that doe see in rea∣son, that of necessitie, there must be yeelded som Creator of these things. The floode of Noe. Gene, 6, 7, 8NExt to thys, the flood of Noe is mencioned by diuers most aun∣cient Heathen Wriers: as by Baero∣sus Chaldaeus,Iosep. li. 1. de antiq. Iud. Ieronimus Egyptius, Nicholaus Damascenus, Abydenus, and others: according as both Iose∣phus and Eusebius doe proue.Euseb lib. 9, de praep. E∣uan cap. 4. And in Bresile, and other Countries dys∣couered in our age, where neuer tea∣chrs were known to be beore, they talke of a certaine drowing of the World, which in tyme past happe∣ned: and doe say, that this was left vnto them by tradition, from tyme out of minde, by the first inhabi∣tants of those places. The long life of the first Fathers. OF the long life of the first Patri∣arches,Gene, 5, 10. and 11. according as the Scrip∣ture reporteth it, not onely the for∣mer Authors, but also Manethus,
that gathered the Historie of the E∣giptians: Molus Hestiaeus, yt wrote the Acts of the Phaenicians, Hesio∣dus, Hecataeus, Abderida, Helani∣cus, Acusilaus, and Ephotus, do te∣stifie, that those first inhabitants of the world, liued commonly a thou∣sand yeeres a piece; and they alledge the reason thereof to be, both for the multiplication of people, and for bringing all Sciences to perfection, especially Astronomie and Astrolo∣gie, which, (as they write) could not be brought to sufficient perfection, by any one man that had lyued lesse then sixe hundred yeeres, in which space, the great yeere (as they call it) runneth about. Of the Tower of Babilon. OF the tower of Babilon,Gene. 11. and of the confusion of tongues at the same, Eusebius citeth the testimonies at large, both of Abydenus that ly∣ued about King Alexanders time,Euseb. lib, 9 de praep. ca. 4 & of Sibylla, as also the words of He∣stiaeus concerning the Land of Sen∣naar, wher it was builded. And these Gentiles doe shew by reason, that if
there had not beene some such my∣racle in the deuision of tongues,Marke thys reason. no doubt but that al tongues being de∣riued of one, (as all men are of one Father,) the same tongues woulde haue retained the selfe same rooes and priciples, as in all dialct or deriation of tongues we see hat it commeth to passe. But now (say they) in many ton∣gues at thys day, we see that there is no likl-hoode or affintie mong them, but all different the oe rom the other, and thereby it apparth, that they were mde diers nd di∣stinct een from the egning. Of Abrham. Gene, 11, 12.13, 14, &cOF Abraham and his ayres, I haue alldged sme Heathen Writers before, as Berosus, Hcat∣us, and Nicholaus Damascenus. But of all other, Alexander Polyhistor alledgeth Eupolemus most at large,Alexan. Po∣lihist. lib. de Iudai. hist. of Abrahams being in Egypt, & of his teaching thē Astronomie tere of his fight and victorie in the be∣halfe of Lot: of his entertainment by K. Melchisedech, of his wife and
sister Sara, and of other his doings, especially of the sacrifice of his sonne Isaack. To whom also agreeth Melo,Melo lib. de fraudib. Iu∣deorum. in hys bookes written against the Iewes, and Artabanus.Arta. in Iu∣deorum hist. Gal de simp. Pausan. in Eliae Solin. in Polih. Taci∣tus lib. vlt. histor. And of the strange Lake wherinto Sodome and Gomorra were turned by theyr de∣struction, called Mare mortuum, the dead Sea, wherin nothing can lyue. Both Galen, Pausanius, Solinus, Tacitus, and Strabo, doe testifie and shew, the particuler wonders therof. Of Isaacke, Iacob, Ioseph, Iob, &c. FRom Abraham down to Moises, writeth very particulerly the fore-named Alexander, albeit he mingle sometimes certaine fables, whereby appeareth, that hee tooke hys storie not out of the Bible wholy.Gen, 15, 16.17, 18, &c, And he alledgeth one Leodemus, who as he sayth, lyued with Moises, and wrote the selfe same things that Moises did, so that these writers agree almost in all things touching Isaacke, Iacob, Ioseph, and all their affaires, euen vnto Moises; & with these do con∣curre also Theodotus a most aunci∣ent
Poet, Artabanus and Phylon, Gentiles. Aristaeus in like manner a∣bout Aristotles time,Aristae. lib. de Iob. wrote a booke of Iob. Of Moises. OF Moises and his acts, not onely the fore-named,Exod, 2, 3, 4, 5, &c. (especially Ar∣tabanus in hys Booke of the Iewes) do make mention at large: but ma∣nie others also, as namely Eupole∣mus, out of whō Polyhistor reciteth very long narrations, of the wonder∣ful and stupendious things done by Moises in Egypt, for which he sayth, that in hys time he was worshipped as a God in that Countrey, and cal∣led by many Mercurius. And that the Ethiopians learned circumcision of hym, which afterwarde alwayes they retained, and so doe vnto thys day. And as for his miracles done in Egipt, hys leading the people thence by the Redde-sea: hys lyuing with them fortie yeeres in the wildernes: the Heathen Wryters agree in all things with the Scriptures, sauing only, that they recount diuers things to the prayse of Moises, which hee
hath not written of himselfe, adding also his description,The descrip∣tion of Mo∣ses person out of Hea∣then Wry∣ters. to wit, that hee was a long tale man, with a yellow beard, and long hayre, wherwith al∣so accordeth Numenius Pythagori∣cus, touching the actes of Moises, whose lyse he sayth that he had read in the auncientest records that were to be had. The storie of Iosua, the Iudges and the Kings. BVT the fore-named Eupolemus goeth yet forward, and pursueth the story of Iosua, of the Iudges, of Saul, Dauid, and of Salomon, euen vnto the building of the Temple,Iosep. lib. 8 de antiq. cap. 2. which he describeth at large, with the particuler Letters written about that matter to the King of Tyrus, which Iosephus sayth were in hys dayes kept in the records of the Ty∣ans. And with Eupolemus, agree Polyhistor, and Hecataeus Abderita, that liued and serued in warre with King Alexander the great,The trea∣sures hiddē in the Se∣pulcher of Dauid. and they make mention among other things, of the inestimable riches of Salo∣mon, and of the treasures which he
had hyd and buried, (according to the fashion of that tyme) in the Se∣pulcher of hys Father Dauid, which to be no fable, (though not menti∣oned by the scripture) Iosephus wel prooueth,Iosep. l. 13. de antiq. ca. 16. for that Hiranus y• high Priest and King of Iurie, beeing be∣siedged in Ierusalem by Antiochus, surnamed Pius, not many yeeres be∣fore our Sauiour Christ his natiity, to redeeme himselfe and the Cittie, and to pay for his peace, The same thing at∣tēpted He∣rode in hys time, as Io∣sephus saith lib. 18, anti. opened the sayd Sepulcher of Dauid, and fecht out of one part thereof, three thousande Talents in ready money, which amount to sixe hūdred thou∣sand pounds English, if we account the Talents but at the least size, of Talentum Hbraicum. The things that ensued after King Salomons dayes. AND as for the things that ensu∣ed after Salomon, as the deuisi∣on of the Tribes among themselues, and theyr diuers warres, aflictions, & transmigrations into other Coun∣tries, many Heathen Writers doe mention & recorde them, & among
other, Herodotus, and Diodorus Si∣ulus. And the fore-said Alexander Polyhistor, talking of the captiuitie of Babilon, sayth, that Ieremie the Prophet, tolde Ioachim hys King,Ierem. 37. what would befall him,4. Reg, 24. & that Na∣buchodonoser hearing thereof, was moued thereby to besiedge Ierusalē. Of the flight of Senacherib from the siedge of Ierusalem,Of Sena∣cherib. and how he was killed at his returne home, by hiw owne sonnes in the Temple, ac∣cording to the Prophecie of Esay,Esay, 31. and 33, and 36. & story of the booke of Kings, for that he had blasphemed the Lord God of Israell,4. Reg, 9 as Herodotus witnesseth: and that after hys death, he had a statue or Image of mettal erected in his memory, with this inscription in Greeke:Hero. lib. 2. Hee that beholdeth me, let him learne to be godlie. Confer Xe∣nophon also in hys seauenth booke De Cyropaedia, and you shal see him agree with Daniell in his narrations of Babylon.Dan. 16 And finally, I wil conclude with Iosephus the learned Iew,Iosep. li. 1, de antiq. Iudai. that wrote immediatly after Christes ascention, & protesteth that the publique wri∣tings of the Syrians, Chaldaeans, Phae∣nicians, and innumerable hystories
of the Graecians, are sufficient to te∣stifie the antiquity, truth, authoritie, and certainty of the holy scriptures, if there were no other proofe in the world besides. The conclusion of this Chapter, with the application. SECT. 4. THus arre haue I treated of the waies and meanes, which haue beene left vnto the worlde from the beginning, therby to know and vn∣derstande theyr Maker. In treating which poynt, I haue stayed my selfe the longer, for that it is the ground and foundation of all that is, or may be said heereafter. It is the first, fi∣nall, and chiefe principle, of our e∣ternall saluation or damnation, and the total weale or woe that must be∣fall vs, and possesse vs for euer. Which grounde and veritie, if it be so certaine and euident, as before hath been shewed, by all reason an prooe, both diuine and humane, & that ye matter be so testified & pro∣claimed vnto vs, by all the creatures of heauen & earth, & by the mouth
and writing of our Creator himself, as no ignoraunce or blindnese can excuse the same,No excuse of ignorāce of GOD. no slothfulnes dis∣semble it, no wickednesse denie it: what remaineth then, but to consi∣der with our selues, what seruice this God requireth at our hands? what gratitude, what dutie, what honor for our creation? to the end, that as we haue proued him a most boun∣tifull Creator, so we may finde him a propitious Iudge, and munificent rewarder. For it is not probable, that his diuine Maiestie, which hath ap∣pointed euery other creature to some action for hys owne gloy, (as hath been declared at large before) shold leaue man-kind onely, which is the worthiest of all the rest, without ob∣ligation to his seruice. In which one point notwithstan∣ding, though neuer so cleere (such is the fondnes of our corrupt nature,The errour of the old Phyloso∣phers. Rom. 1. et 2, without Gods holy grace:) fayled those auncient wisemen of ye world, of whom S. Paul speaketh so much in hys Epistle to the Romaines, ta∣king compassion of theyr case, and calling them fooles, and all theyr great learning & Phylosophy meere fondnes: for that whereas (by the
means before mentioned) they came to know GOD, they did not seeke to glorifie him,Rom, 1. as appertained vnto God, nor yet did render him due thankes: but vanished away in theyr cogitati∣ons. &c. That is, they tooke no pro∣fite by this knowledge of theirs, but applyed their cogitations vppon the vanities of this world, more thē vp∣on the honour and seruice of thys theyr God. For which cause, as Saint Paul adioyneth presently in the same place,Rom, 1. that for so much as they dyd thus, & dyd not shew forth by their lyfe and workes, that they had the knowledge of God indeede: GOD deliuered them ouer to a reprobate sence, and suffered them to fall into horrible sinnes, which S. Paul doth name and detest in al that Chapter, and finally concludeth, that theyr euerlasting perdition ensued princi∣pallie vpon thys one poynt: that wheras,Rom. 1. They knew the iustice of God, (by all the wayes & arguments that before haue been declared,) yet wold they not vnderstand (sayth he) that death was due to all such, which ly∣ued wickedly as they did. And the same Apostle, vpon con∣sideration of these matters, wherein
he standeth long for the importance thereof, pronounceth in fine, thys generall sentence,A generall sentence pronoun∣ced by S. Paule. Rom, 1. with great asseue∣ration and vehemencie of Spyrite: That the wrath of God is reuealed frō heauen, vpon all impietie and iniu∣stice of those men, who hold the know∣ledge of God in vnrighteousnes. That is, who being indued with y• know∣ledge of God, doe liue notwithstan∣ding vnrighteously, or (as he sayde before) doe consume theyr dayes in vanitie, not making account of the seruice which they doe owe to that God, for theyr creation & other be∣nefites.The appli∣cation to our selues. Which thing, if Saint Paule might truly say to those Gentiles be∣fore hys time, who had onely natu∣rall knowledge and vnderstanding of God: that is, so much as by hys creatures was to be gathered: what may, or shall be said vnto vs, who haue not onely that light of nature which they had, but also the wry∣tings & law of God himselfe, com∣municated especially vnto the Iewes, and aboue that also, haue heard the voice of his onely sonne vpon earth, & haue receiued the doctrine of hys most blessed Gospell, and yet doe liue as negligently (manie of vs) as
dyd the verie Hethen, touching good lyfe and vertue. Surely in this case I must denoūce against my sele, that if it be true, (as it cannot be alse) which this blessed Apostle affirmeth here of these Hea∣then Phylosophers, that by that little knowledge they had of GOD, they were made inexcusable,Rom. 1, then by the most iust & certaine rule of Christ, laid downe by S. Luke, cui multum datum est, multum queretur ab eo,Luke, 12. that of euery man which hath recei∣ued much, a gret acount shall be taken for the same; we are forced to inerre, that our account shal be the greater, and our selues much more inexcusable before hys diuine Maie∣stie, then the very Gentiles & Hea∣thens are; if after our knowledge & manifest vnderstanding of his God∣head and iustice, We vanish away in our cogitations, as they did, & as the most part of the worlde at this day are seene to doe, that is, if we apply our cogitations and cares, about the vaine affayres of thys temporl lyfe and transitory commodities, which we should bestow vpon the seruice and honour of thys Lord and Cre∣ator.
OF THE FINAL ENDE AND CAVSE WHY MAN VVAS CREATED BY GOD, and placed in thys world. And of the obligation he hath therby, to attend to the affaire for which he cae hethr. CHAP. III. BY the Chapter precedent, I nothing doubt (gentle Rea∣der) but if thou haue seene & perused the same, thou re∣mainest sufficiently informed of thy Creator.A necessary considera∣tion. Now foloweth it by order of good consequence, that we consider with some attention, (for that is standeth vs much vpon) what intent and purpose God had in cre∣ating vs, & thys world for our sakes, and in placing vs therein as Lordes of the same? By the former consi∣derations we haue learned, that as among other creatures, nothing made it selfe: so nothing was made for it selfe, nor to serue it selfe. The heauens (we see) doe serue the ayre
the ayre serueth the earth, the earth serueth the beastes, the beastes serue man: and then is the question, whō man was made to serue? for in him also holdth the former reason, that seeing he was not made by himselfe, it is not likely that he was made to serue himselfe. If we consult with the scriptures heerein, we finde a generall sentence layd downe without exception:Prou. 16. V∣niuersa propter semetipsum operatus est Dominus, the Lord hath made al things for himselfe.Man made to serue GOD. And if al, then man (no doubt,) who is not ye least of the rest which he hath made. And heerby it commeth to passe, that man cannot be sayd to e free, or at hys owne appointment or dys∣position in thys world, but is obli∣ged to performe that thing, for the which he was sent into this habitati∣on. Which point holy Iob declareth plainly, in a certain inuectiue against such men as were carelesse and neg∣ligent in consideration of thys af∣fayre. A vaine man, (sayth he) is lif∣ted vp in pride,Iob, 11. and thinkth himselfe to be borne as free as the olt of a wild Asse. That is, he thinketh himselfe bounde to nothing, subiect to no∣thing,
accountable for nothing that he doth in thys lyfe: but only borne free, to passe his time in disport and pleasure, as a Colt in the wildernes, that hath no Maister to tame him. Which in other words, the wise∣man vttereth thus;Wisd, 15 He esteemeth this lyfe of ours, to be but a play-game, and therefore careth not how he lyueth, or wherein he spend and passe ouer his time. And this of the man whō the Scripture calleth vaine. But now, for the sober, wise, and discreet, of whom it is written,Prou, 15, The way of life is vppon the learned, to the ende he may decline from the lowest hell: they are farre from so great fol∣lie, as to imagine that no account shal be demaunded of our being in this world: for that they haue read,Eccles. 11, and 12. That God shall bring into iudgement what-soeuer is doone, for euery faulte that is committed. And the Christi∣an man knoweth further, by the mouth and asseueration of hys Sa∣uiour and Redeemer, that hee shall be accountant for euery idle worde that hee mis-vttereth,Math, 12, Account to be gyuen. and finallie, there is no man that is eyther of rea∣son, or conuersant in the wrytings and Testament of his Creator, but
remembreth well, that among al o∣ther irritations, whereby the wicked man is saide to prouoke Gods pati∣ence to indignation, none is more often repeaed, or more grieuouslie taken,Psal, 9, 43. and 141. then, that he said in his hart, God will aske no account. With these men then alone shall be my speech in this present Chap∣ter, who haue a desire to dyscharge well thys account. For attayning whereof (truly) I can giue no better counsaile, instruction, o aduise, then to doe in thys case, as a good Mer∣chant factor is wont to doe, when he arriueth in forraine Countries, or as a Souldiour or Captaine, sent by hys Prince to some great exployt, is accustomed, when he commeth to the place appointed,Profitable demaunds and consi∣derations. that is, to weigh and consider deepely, for what cause he came thether? why he was sent? to what ende? what to attempt? what to prosecute? what to per∣forme? what shall be expected and required at his hands (vppon his re∣turne,) by him that sent him the∣ther? For these cogitations (no doubt) shall styrre him vp to attend to that for which he came, and not to employ hys time in impertinent
affaires. The like would I counsaile a Christian to put in vre, concerning a case proposed, and to demaunde of himselfe, betweene God and hys conscience, why, and wherefore, and to what end, he was created & sent hether into this world? what to do? wherein to bestow his dyes. &c. And then shall he finde, that for no other cause, matter, or end, but onely to serue God in thys lyfe, and by that seruice to enioy heauen, and euerlasting saluation in the lyfe, to come. Thys was the condition of our creation,Gene, 14, as Moises wel expres∣seth: and thys was the considerati∣on of our redeeming, fore-tolde by Zacharie, before we were yet redee∣med:Luke, 2, That we being dliuered from the hands of our enemies, should serue God in holinesse and righteousnes, all the dayes of or lues. Of thys consideration doe ense two conquents to be obserued.The first cō∣sequence, vpon due considera∣tion of our ende. Wheref the first is, that seeing our end and finall cause of being in thys world, is to serue God, & so to work our owne saluation with feare and trembling: what-seuer thing wee doe, or bestowe our time in, which eyther is contrary or impertinent, or
not profitable to thys end, (though it were to gaine kingdoms) it is va∣nitie and lost labour, that wil turne vs in time to griefe and repentance, (if we change not our course) for that it is not the matter for which wee came into thys life, nor whereof we shal be demaunded an account, except it be to receiue iudgement & punishment for the same. The second cōsequence,Secondly, it foloweth of the same consideration, that seeing our onely busines and affaire in thys world, is to serue our Maker, & saue our own soules, and that all other earthly cre∣atures, are put heere to serue our v∣ses to that end onely: we should for our parts be indifferent to all these creatures, as to riches or pouertie, to health or sicknes, to honour or con∣tempt: to little learning, or much learning; and we should desire only so much or little of eyther of them, as were best for vs, to the attainment of our sid end & Butte pretended; that is, to the seruice of God, & the weale of our soules. For whosoeuer desireth, seeketh, loueth, or vseth these creatures, more then for thys, runneth from the end or which he came hether.
By this then may a careful Chri∣stian take some scantling of his own estate with God,How each man may take a scant∣ling of hys own estate. and make a coniec∣ture whether he be in the right way or no For if he attend onely or prin∣cipally to this end, for which he was sent hether; if his cares, cogitations, studies, endeuours, labours, talke, conuersation, and other his actions,A right course. doe runne vpon thys mater, & that hee careth no more for other crea∣tures, as honours, riches, learning, and the lyke, then they are necessarie vnto him for this ende that he pre∣tendeth; if hys dayes & life be spent in thys study of the seruice of God, and procuring his own saluation, in carefulnes, feare, and trembling, as the Apostle aduised him:Phillip, 2, then hee is (doubtles) a most happy man, & shall at length attaine to the King∣dome which he expected. But if he find himselfe in a contrary case and course:A wrong and dange∣rous course that is, not to attend indeed to this matter, for which only he was sent hether, nor to haue in his hart & study this seruice of God, and en∣ioying of heauen, but rather some o∣ther vanitie of the worlde: as pro∣motiō, wealth, pleasure, sumptuous apparel, gorgious buildings, beauty,
fauour of Princes, or any other thing els, that appertaineth not vnto thys end If he spend his time about these trifles, hauing his cars and cogitati∣ons, his tlk & delight more in these thinges then about the other great busines, of possessing Gods eternall kingdom, fr which he was made & plaed in this world: then is hee (I asure him) in a perrilous waie, lea∣ding directly to perdition, exept he alter & change his course. For, mst certin it is, that whosoeuer shal not attnd vnto the serice he came for, shal neur attaine the reward assig∣ned & promised to that seruice. And for that the most part of all thys wold, (not onely of Infidels, but also Christians) doe run amise in thys poynt, and doe not take care of that assayre & busines,The reason why so few are saued. for which alone they were created and placed heere: hence is it, that Christ & hys holy Saints, both before and ater hys apperauce in the flesh, haue spoken so hardly, and seuerely, of the very small number that shall be sa∣ued, (euen among Christians,Math, 7.20. and 22.) and haue vttered certaine speeches which seeme very rigorous to fleshe and blood,Luke, 13, (and to such as are most tou∣ched
therein) scarce credible, albeit they must be fulfilled. As among other thinges,Iames, 4, that a louer of thys worlde cannot be saued;Math, 19, that rich men do enter as hardly into heauen,Marke. 10. as a Camell through a needles eye, and the lyke. The reason of which maner of speeches doe stand in this, that a rich man or worldling, atten∣ding with all his industrie to heape vp rihes (as the fashion is) can not attende, (nor euer doth) to that for which he came into this world, and conseqently, can neuer attaine hea∣ue, except God worke a miracle, & thereby doe cause him to spende out hys riches to the benefit of his soule, (as sometimes he doth) & so do les∣sen the Cammell in such sort, as hee may passe the needles eye. Whereof we haue a very rare example in the Gospell,Luke, 19 of Zacheus, who beeing a very rich man, dyd presently vppon the entering of christ into his house, (but much more as appeareth into hys hart by fayth) resolue himselfe to change his former course touching riches, and at one blow to beginne with-all gaue away halfe of all hee possesed to the poore; and for the rest made proclamation, that who∣soeuer
had receiued any wrong at his handes,A perfit ex∣ample of a good con∣uersion. (as commonly many do by thē that are rich) he shold come and receyue foure times so much a∣mendes. By which almes and resti∣tution, hee was deliuered from the Camels gib or bunch on his backe, that letted his passage through the needles eye. And thys extraordinary fauour and grace he receiued, by the fortunate presence, of his most blessed and bountifull guest, who had signified before in an-other place, that himselfe was able, so to draw the Camel,Math. 19. as he should passe the needles eye, for that the thinges which are vnpossible with man,Marke, 10, are possible with GOD. But to leaue this, and to goe for∣ward in our former purpose, no mer¦uaile it is, if in the world abroade, so few be saued, seeing yt of thousands, scarce one doth account of that bu∣sines, which of all other is the chiefe and principall. Consider you ye mul∣titude of all sorts of people vppon earth, and see what theyr traffique and negotiation is? see whether they treate thys affaire or no? see wherin their care, study, & cogitation con∣sisteth? How many thousand finde
you in Christendome,The wrong course of the world. who spende not one houre of four and twentie, nor one halfe day in forty, in the ser∣uice of GOD, or businesse of theyr oule? How infinite haue you, that breake theyr braines about worldlie commodities, and how few that are troubled with this other cogitation? How many find time to eate, drink, sleepe, disport, deck and trym them∣selues to the view of others, and yet haue no time to bestow in this grea∣test busines of all other businesse? How manie passe ouer whole dayes, weekes, monthes, and yeeres, (and finally their whole life time) in hau∣king, hunting, and other pastimes, without regard of this important af∣faire? How many miserable women haue you in the world, that spende more dyes in one yeere, in pricking vp theyr apparrel, & adorning theyr carkasse, then they doe houres in prayer for the space of all theyr lye? And what (alas) shall becom of this people in the ende? what will they doe or say at the day of account? what excuse will they alledge? what way will they turne them? If the Merchant-factor which I mentioned before, after many yeres
spent in forraine Countries vpon his Maisters expences,A compari∣son expres∣sing the va∣nitie of our occupati∣ons. should returne at length and gyue vp his accounts, of so much tyme and money spent in singing; so much in dauncing, so much in fencing; so much in cour∣ting, and the like; who would not laugh at so fonde a rekoning? but beeing further demaunded by hys Maister, what time he had bestow∣ed vpon the Merchandise & affaires for which hee was sent, if the man should aunswer, that he had no ley∣sure to thinke vpon that thing, for the great occupation which he had in the other: who woulde not e∣steeme him woorthy of all punish∣ment and confusion? And much more shame & confusion, no doubt shal they sustaine at the last dreadful day,Math, 16, in the face and presence of God and all his Angels, who beeing sent into thys worlde, to traffique so rich a Merchandise as is the kingdome of heauen: haue neglected the same, and haue bestowed theyr studies, vpon the most vayne trifles and fl∣lies of thys world, withot cogitati∣on or care of the other. Psalm, 4,O yee children of Adam, saith the Spyrit of GOD,Ierem, 2. why loue ye so va∣nitie,
and seeke after lyes? why leaue you the Fountaine and seeke after Cesterns? If a golden game of ine∣stimable value, should be proposed for such as would runne, and could winne the same;A compa∣rison. & when the course or rse were begun, if some shoulde sep aside and follow flyes or fethers that passed in the ayre, without any regard of the prize and gole propo∣sed, who wold not meruaile & take pitty of their folly? euen so is it with men of the worlde, if we beleeue S. Paule, who affirmeth,1. Cor. 9. that we are all placed together in a course or race, and that the kingdome of heauen is propounded vnto vs for the Game or Prize, but euery man sayth hee, arriueth not thether; and why? for that most men doe steppe aside, and leaue the marke. Most men do run awry, and doe follow fethers vp and downe in the ayre; most men doe pursue vanities, & doe weary them∣selues out in the pursute thereof, vn∣til they can neyther run nor goe, nor mooue theyr lyms any further: and then, for the most part, it is too-lte to amend theyr folly. Will you heere the lamentations of such vnfortunate men? these are
theyr owne words recorded by scrip∣ture. We are wearied out in the way of iniquitie and perdition,Wisd. 5. The com∣plaint of worldlings in the end of their life and the way of God haue we not knowne. What profit haue we receiued of al our pompe and pride, and vaunting riches? what good haue they done vs? They are nowe past away as a shadow, and as a Messenger that ry∣deh in post, and we are consumed in our owne iniquities. Thys is the lamentable complaint of such men, as ranne awry, and fol∣lowed a wrong course in their acti∣ons of thys lyfe. These are they who pursued riches, honour, pompe, and such lyke vanities, and orgate the great and weighty busines for which they were sent These are they, who were esteemed happy men in thys worlde, and thought to run a most fortunate course, in that they heaped much riches together; aduaunced themselues & their families to great dignities: became gorgious, glori∣ous, and dreadful to others: and fi∣nally, obtained what-soeuer theyr lust & concupiscence desired.The fonde iudgement of ye world. Thys made them seeme blessed to world∣ly cogitations, and the way wherein they ran, to be most prosperous and
happy. And I make no doubt, by experience of these our tymes, but they had admirours and enuiours in great aboundaunce, who burned in desire to obtaine ye same course. And yet when I heare their complaint in this place, and theyr owne confessi∣on, wherein they say expreslie:Wisd, 5 We sencelesse men did erre from the way of truth: When I consider also the addition of scripture, Talia dixerunt in inferno: they spake these thinges when they were in hell: I cannot but esteeme theyr course for most miserable, and condemne wholy the iudgement of flesh in thys affaire. Wherefore, my deere brother, if thou be wise, yeeld not to this de∣ceit of worldly lips and tongues, that ve to blesse and sanctifie such,Psalm. 10. as are in most danger and neerest to perdi∣tion. Leane rather to the sincere counsaile of saint Paul, who willeth thee to examine vprightly thine own works and waies,Gala, 6. and so to iudge of thy selfe without deceite. If thou walke the way of Babilon, most cer∣taine it is, that thou shalt neuer ar∣riue at the gates of Ierusalem, except thou change thy course. Oh my brother, what a griefe wil
it be vnto thee,A cōparison expressing our griefe in the end, for running a wrong course. when after long la∣bor and much toyle, thou shalt find thy selfe to haue gone awry? If a man had trauailed but one whole day, and thereby made weary should vnderstande at nyght, that all his la∣bour were lost, and that his whole iourney was out of the way: it wold be a meruailous affliction vn∣to hym (no doubt) albeit no other inconuenience were therein, but on∣ly the losse of yt daies trauaile, which might be recouered and recompen∣ced in the next. But if besides thys, hys busines were great, if it lay vpon his life to be at the place whether he goeth, at a certaine houre: yf the losse of his way were irrecouerable: if the punishment of hys error, must be death and confusion; and hym∣selfe weare so wearie, that he could styrre no one foote further: imagine then what a grieuous message thys would be vnto hym, to heare one say: Syr, you are amisse, your labour is lost, and you haue trauailed who∣lie besides your way. So then will it be vnto thee (my soule) at the day of death,The miserie of a soule that hath gone awry, at the last day. and sepa∣ration from my body, if in thys lyfe thou attend not to thy saluation for
which thou wert created, but shalt passe ouer thy dayes in following of vanites. Thou shalt find thy selfe a∣stray at the end of thy iourney, thou shalt find thy selfe wearie, & enfor∣ced to say with those miserable dam∣ned spirits,Wisd, 5 I haue walked harde and craggy wayes: for that indeede the way of wickednes is full of thornes and stones, though in shew it be co∣uered with fayre grasse, and manie flowers. Thou shat find at that day that thou hast lost thy labour, lost thy time, lost al opportunity of thine owne commodity. Thou shalt then find thy errour to be vnrecouerable, thy danger vnauoidable, thy punish∣ment insupportable, thy repentance vnprofitable, and thy griefe, sorrow, and calamity inconsolable. Oh, hee that could behold and feele the inwarde cogitations of a worldly mans hart at that instant, after all hys honours and pleasures were past; no doubt, but he should find him of another iudgement and opiion in thinges, then he was in the ruffe and heate of his iolitie. He doth wel perceiue then, the sondnes of those tryfles which he followed in this lfe, albeit it were to make him∣selfe
a Monarch. If a man dyd know the cogitations that K. Alexander the great had,Alexanders death. when of poyson hee came to die, after al his victories and incredible prosperitie; if we knewe the thoughts of Iulius Caesar,Iulius Cae∣sars death. at the day of his murther in the Senat-house, after the conquest of all hys enemies, & subiction of the whole world, to hys own onely obedience, we should wel perceiue, that they tooke lyttle pleasure in the wayes they walked; notwithstanding they were esteemed most prosperous and happy men of this world. Iosephus the Iew, recounteth two very rare examples of humane felici∣tie,Two rare examples. in Herod the first, and Agrippa hys Cosine, whereof the one by An∣thony the Triumuir, and the other by Caligula the Emperour,Iosep. lib. 14.15. et 18. d antiq. Iudai. et bello. Iud. lib. 2. (both of them beeing otherwise but priuate Gentlemen, & in great pouertie and misery when they fledde to Rome,) were exalted vppon the suddaine, to vnexpected great fortune, and made rich Monarches and glorious Poten∣tates. They were indued (at seueral times) with the kingdom & crowne of Iurie, & that in such ample sort, as neuer any of that Nation after thē
had the lyke. For which cause they were called in the Hebrue story, (for distinction sake) Herode the great, and Agrippa the great. They ruled and commaunded al in theyr daies, they wanted neither siluer nor gold, neither pleasures nor pastimes, ney∣ther friendes nor flatterers. And be∣sides all these gyfts of Fortune, they abounded also in ornaments and excellencie of body & wit. And all thys was increased & made the more admirable, by reason of theyr For enuie onely of A∣grippa hys fortune, He∣rodias did ruine herselfe and her husband, as Io∣sephus saith. Lib. 18. an∣tiqu. capit. 8, 9, 15, Her husbande was Herode Antipas, that slew Saint Iohn Baptist, and was sonne to Herod the first. Luke, 3. Math, 14. base & low estate before, in re∣spect whereof, theyr present fortune vvas esteemed for a perfect patterne of most ab∣solute felicitie. Thys they enioyed for a certaine space, & to assure themselues of the continuaunce, they bent all theyr cares, cogitations, and studies, to please the humors of the Romaine Emperours, as theyr Gods, and Au∣thors of all theyr prosperitie and fe∣licity vpon earth. In respect of whose fauours, (as Iosephus noteth,) they
cared little to violate their own Reli∣gion of the Iewes, or any thing els that was most sacred. And this for∣sooth, was esteemed of many a most wise, politique, prosperous, and hap∣py course. But what was the end & consumation of thys theyr pleasant rase? First, Herod fell sicke of an incu∣rable and lothsome disease,Herods death. Iosep. lib. 15. antiq. and was tormented in the same with so ma∣ny terrors, Thys He∣rod was cal∣led Ascolo∣nita, & slew the infants in Bethlem. Math, 2. & horrible accusations of his conscience, as he pronounced himselfe to be the most miserable af∣flicted creature that euer liued; and so calling one day for a knife to pare an apple, would needes haue mur∣thered himselfe with the same, if his arme had not beene stayed by them that stood by. And for Agrippa, Io∣sephus reporteth, how that vppon a certaine day which he kept festiuall in Caesaria,The death of Agrippa. for the honour of Clau∣dius the Romaine Emperour, when he was in his most extreame pompe and iolitie,Iosep, li. 19. capit, 7, in the middest of all hys Peeres, Nobles, and Damosels, com∣ming forth at an houre appointed, all glyttering in gold and siluer, to make an Oration vnto the people hys voyce, gesture, countenaunce
and apparrell so pleased, as the peo∣ple beganne to cry, (beeing solicited thereunto by some flatterers) That it was the voyce of God, and not of man, whein Agrippa taking pleasure and delectation, was S. Luke saith he was stroken by Gods An∣gel. Acts, 12. And consi∣der how Io∣sephus a∣greeth with thys narra∣tion. stroken presently from heauen, with a most horrible putrifaction of al hys body, whereof he died, repeating only to his friends these words in the midst of hys tor∣ments; Euse. li. 2. hist. cap. 9, Behold ye me, that do seeme to you a God, how miserably I am en∣forced to depart from you all. Now then would I demaunde of these two fortunate men, who lay∣ing aside all care of God and Reli∣gion, did follow the preferments of thys world so freshly, and obtayned the same so luckily: how they liked of thys theyr course and rase in the ende? Truely, I doubt not, but if they were heere to answer for them∣selues, they would assure vs, that one houre bestowed in ye seruice of God, and of theyr saluation, would more haue comforted them at the last in∣stant, then all theyr labours & tra∣uailes which they tooke in their liues for pleasing of Emperours, and ga∣thering the grace and good lyking of mortall men.
Vse then, ô Christian, vse thys experience to thy commoditie:Sincere and profitable counsaile. vse it to thy instructiō, vse it to thy fore∣warning. That which they are now, thou shalt be shortly, and of all fol∣lies it is the greatest, not to profite or flee from danger by the example of others. The difference betweene a wise∣man and a foole is this, that the one prouideth for a mischiefe while time serueth, and the other would doe, when it is too-late. If thou migh∣test feele now, the state & case wher∣in thy poore hart shall be at the last day, for neglecting the thing, that of all other it shoulde haue studied and thought vpon most, thou woul∣dest take from thy meate, and sleep, and other necessaries, to repaire that is past; Hetherto hast thou time to reforme thy course of lyfe if thou be willing, which is no small benefite, if all were knowne. For in this sence (no doubt) it is most true, which the wise man sayth;Eccle. 4. that better it is to be a liuing dog, then a dead Lyon. For that while the day time of thys life endureth, all things amisse may easilie be amended.Iob. 9. But the dreadful nyght of death will ouer-take thee
shortly, and then shall there be no more space of eformation. Oh that men would be wise, and fore-see things to come, sayth one Prophet.Deut, 32. The greatest wisedome in the world (deere brother) is to looke and attende to our saluation: for as the scripture sayth most truely:Eccle. 37. Hee is a wise man indeede, that is wise to his owne soule. And of this wisdom it is written in the very same Booke, as spoken by herselfe.Eccle. 24. In mee is the grace of all life and truth, and in me is the hope of all lyfe and vertue. In morrall actions and humaine wise∣dome, we see that the first & chie∣fest circumstaunce is, to regard well and consider the end.Great follie and errour. And how then doe we omit the same, in this great affayre of the kingdome of heauen? If our end be heauen, what meane we so much to affect our selues to earth? If our end be God, why seeke we so greedily the worldly fauour of men? If our end be the saluation & eternitie of our soule, why doe wee follow vanities and temporalities of thys lyfe? Why spend yee your money and not in bread, sayth GOD by the mouth of Esay,Esay. 55. Why bestow ye your labour on things that will not yeeld ye
saturitie?Ephe, 1, 1, Thes, 2, 2, Pet, 1, Luke, 15. If our inheritance be that we should raigne as Kings, why put we our selues in such slauery of crea∣tures? If our byrth allow vs to feede of bread in our Fathers house, why delight we to eate huskes prouided for the swyne? But (alas) we may say with the wise man in the Scripture,Wisd, 4, Fascinatio nu∣gacitatis obscurat bona. The bewit∣ching of worldly trifles, doe obscure and hide vs from the things that are good and behoueful for our soules: ô most daungerous enchauntment.Error in our course of lyfe is not pardoned. Osea, 4, But what? shal thys excuse vs? no truely for the same Spyrite of GOD hath left recorded, Populus non intel∣ligens vapulabit: The people that vnderstandeth not, shall be beaten for it. And another Prophet to the same effect pronounceth.Esay, 28, This people is not wise, and therfore he that made them shall not pardon them, neyther shal he that created them, take mercie of them. It is written of fooles, Ven∣tum seminabunt et turbinem metent. They shall sowe and cast their seede vppon the windes, and shall re∣ceiue for theyr haruest, nohing els but a storme or tempest. Whereby is signified, that they shall not one∣lie
cast away and leese theyr labours, but also be punished for the same. Consider then I beseech thee (my deere brother) attentiuely,A profita∣ble fore∣warning. what thou wilt doe or say, when thy Lord shal come at the last day, & aske thee an account of al thy labors, actions, & time spent in thys life: whē he shall require a reckoning of his talents lent vnto thee:Math, 25. when he shal say, as he said to the Farmour or Steward in the Gospel,Luke, 16. Redde rationem villica∣tionis tuae: giue account of thy stew∣ardship and charge committed vnto thee. What wilt thou say when he shal examine, & weigh and try thy doings, as gold is examined & tryed in the fornace, that is, what end they had? wherto they were applyed? to what glory of God? to what profit of thy soule? what measure, weight and substance they beare? Baltasar King of Babilon,A rare chance that happened to Baltasar K. of Babi∣lon. Daniel, 5. sitting at his banquet merry vppon a time, espied suddainly certain fingers with out a hand, that wrote on the wall right ouer-against hys Table, these three Hebrewe wordes, MANE, THEKEL, PHARES. Which words Daniell interpreted in three sentences vnto the King, in thys ma∣ner.
Mane, God hath numbred thee (Baltasar) and thy kingdom: The∣kell, he hath weighed thee in ye Gold∣smithes ballance, and thou art found too-light: Phares, for this cause hath he deuided thee from thy king∣dome, and hath giuen the same to the Medes and Persians. Oh, that these three most golden and most significant words, engra∣uen by the Angell vppon Baltasars wal, were registred vpon euery doore and post in Christendome, or rather imprinted in the hart of each Chri∣stian, especially the two first, that import the numbring and weighing of all our actions, and that in the weights and ballance of the Gold∣smyth, where euery graine is espied that wanteth.If God exa∣mine strait∣ly the acti∣ons of Infi∣dels, much more of Christians if they lyue carelesse. Dan. 5, And if Baltasars acti∣ons, that was a Gentile, were to be examined in so nyse and delicate a payre of Ballance for theyr trial, and if hee had so seuere a sentence pro∣nounced vpon him, that he should be deuided from life & kingdome, (as he was the same night folowing) Quia inuentus est minus habens, for that hee was founde to haue lesse weight in him then he shold haue: what shall we thinke of our selues,
that are Christians, of whom it is written aboue al others;Soph, 1. I will search the sinnes of Ierusalem with a candle. What shal we expect, that haue not onely lesse weight then we shoulde haue, but no weight at all, in the most of our actions? what may such men (I say) expect, but onelie that most terrible threat of diuisiō made to Baltasar,A dreadful diuision. (or rather worse, if worse may be) that is, to be deuided from God and hys Angels: from partici∣pation of God & our Sauior: from communion of Saints: from hope of our inheritance: from our por∣tion celestial & lyfe euerlasting: ac∣cording to the expresse declaration made heereof by Christ himselfe, in these words to the negligent seruant.Math. 24. The Lorde of such a seruant shal come at a day when he hopeth not, & at an houre that he knoweth not, and shall deuide him out, and assigne his part with hypocrites, where shall be wee∣ping and gnashing of teeth. Wherfore (deere brother) to con∣clude this chapter,The con∣clusion. I can say nothing more in this dangerous case, wherin the world so runneth awry, but one∣lie exhort thee (as the Apostle doth) not to conforme thy selfe to the cō∣mon
errour that leadeth to perditi∣on. Fal at length to some reckoning and account with thy selfe, and see where thou standest, and whether thou goest. If hetherto thou haue wandered and gone astray, be sorrie for the tyme lost, but passe no fur∣ther. If hetherto thou haue not con∣sidered ye weightines of thys affayre, serue thy selfe of thys admonition, and remember that it is written, that a Wiseman profiteth by euery occasi∣on.Prou, 6. Esteeme thy resolution in thys one poynt, the chiefest menage that euer shal passe through thy hands in this world, albeit yu wert a Monarche and Ruler of tenne worlds together. And finally, I will end with the ve∣rie same words, wherewith the wise∣man concludeth hys whole Booke. Feare God and obserue his commaun∣dements, for this is euery man.Eccle, 11. That is, in thys dooth all and euery man consist: his end, his beginning, hys lyfe, and cause of beeing: that hee feare God, and direct hys actions to the obseruaunce of hys commaun∣dements; for that without thys, he is no man in effect, seeing that hee looseth al benefit, both of his name, nature, redemption and creation.
THAT THE SERVICE WHICH GOD REQVI∣RETH OF MAN IN THIS present lyfe, is Reli∣gion. With the particuler confirmations of Christian Religion, aboue all other in the world. CHAP. IIII. HAuing prooued in the for∣mer chapters, that there is a GOD, which created man: and that man in re∣spect thereof, and of other benefites receiued, is boūd to honor and serue the same GOD, the que∣stion may be made in thys place, what seruice this is that God requi∣reth, and wherin it dooth consist? Whereunto the aunswer is briefe & easie, that it is Religion;Of Religiō. which is a vertue that containeth properlie the worshyp & seruice that we owe vn∣to GOD; euen as Pietie is a vertue,Pietie. contayning the duety that chyldren doe owe vnto theyr Parents, & Ob∣seruaunce another vertue,Obser∣uaunce, that com∣prehendeth the regard, that schollers
and seruaunts beare vnto their Mai∣sters. In respect of which compari∣son and likenes betweene these ver∣tues, God sayth by a certaine Pro∣phet;Mala. 1. The sonne honoreth his father, and the seruaunt his Maister, if then I be a Father, where is my honour? if I be a Maister, where is my feare? The acts & opperations of Religion.The acts of Religion are diuers, & different; some internall, as deuoti∣on and prayer: some other external, as adoration, worship, sacrifice, ob∣lations, and such lyke, that are decla∣rations, and protestations of the in∣ternall. It extendeth it selfe also to styrre vp and put in re, the acts and operations of other vertues for the seruice of God; in which sence saint Iames nameth it,ames, 1, Pure & vnspotted Religion, is to visite Orphans & wid∣dowes in their tribulation, & to keepe our selues vndefiled from the wicked∣nes of this world. Finally, how soeuer some Heathens doe vse thys worde Religion,August. lib, 10, de ciuit. capit. 1. to some other significati∣ons: yet, (as S. Augustine well no∣teth) the vse therof among the faith∣full, hath alwaies beene,How much it impor∣teth to be religious. to signifie thereby, the worship, honour, and seruice, that is due vnto GOD, so that if in one word you will haue it
declared, what GOD requireth of man in thys life: it may be rightlie sayd, that all standeth in thys, that he be religious. Heereof it proceedeth, that what∣soeuer sort or sect of people in the world, professed reuerence, honor, or worship to GOD, or to gods, or to a∣nie diuine power, essence, or nature what-soeuer: (were they Iewes, Heathens, Gentiles, Christiās, Turks, Moores, Heretiques, or other,) they did alwaies cal theyr said profession, by the name of their Religion. In which sence also, and signification of the worde, I am to treate at thys tyme of Christian Religion; that is, of the substaunce, forme, maner & way, reuealed by Christ and hys A∣postles vnto vs, of performing our duty and true seruice towards God. Which seruice, is the first poynt ne∣cessary to be resolued vpon, by hym that seeketh his saluation, as in the Chapter yt goeth before hath beene declared. And for obtaining this ser∣uice & the true knowledge thereof, no meane vppon earth is left vnto man, but only the light and instruc∣tion of Christian Religion,The neces∣sity of Chri∣stian Reli∣gion. accor∣ding to the protestation of S. Peter
vnto the Gouernours of the Iewes, whē he sayd;Acts 4, There is no other name vnder heauen giuen vnto men where∣by to be saued, but onely this of Christ and of his Religion. If you obiect against me, that in former tymes before Christes nati∣uitie, as vnder the law of Moises for two thousand yeeres together, there vvere many Saints who without Christian Religion serued God vp∣rightly,How men were saued in old tyme without Christian Religion. as the Prophets & other ho∣ly people: and before them againe in the law of Nature, when neyther Iewish nor Christian Religion was yet heard of, for more thē two thou∣sand yeeres: there wanted not dy∣uers that pleased God, & serued him truely, as Enoch, Noe, Iob, Abra∣ham, Iacob, and others. I aunswer, that albeit these men, (especially the former, that liued vnder the Law of nature) had not so particuler & ex∣presse knowledge of Christ & of his misteries, as we haue now: for thys was reserued to the time of grace, (as S. Paul in diuers places at large de∣clareth,Gal, 3, & 4, Ephe, 3, Colos, 1,) that is, albeit they knewe not expresly, how and in what ma∣ner Christ should be borne: whe∣ther of a Virgine or no; or in what
particuler sort he should liue & die: what Sacraments he should leaue,See S. Au∣gust. lib. 19. cont. Faust. capit. 14. what way of publishing his Gospell he shold appoint, & the like, (wher∣of notwithstanding very many par∣ticulers were reuealed to the Iewes from time to time, and the neerer they drewe to the tyme of Christes appearaunce, the more plaine reue∣lation was made of these misteries:) yet I say, all and euery one of these holy Saints, that lyued from Abra∣ham vntil the comming of Christ, had knowledge in generall of Chri∣stian Religion, and did belieue the same;All olde Saints be∣leeued in Christ, and were saued by him. that is, they belieued expresly that there shold come a Sauiour and Redeemer of man-kinde, to deliuer them from the bondage contracted by the sinne of Adam. This was reuealed straight after theyr fall, to our first Parents and Progenitors in Paradise: to wit, that by the Womans seede,Gen 3, v, 15 our redempti∣on should be made. In respect wher∣of, it is sayd in the Reuelations,Apoc. 3, that Christ is the Lambe that hath been slaine rō the beginning of ye world. And Saint Peter, in the first ge∣nerall Counsell holden by the Apo∣stles,Acts, 15. affirmeth, that the old aunci∣ent
Fathers before Christes natiuitie,Rom, 5. were saued by the grace of Christ,Ephe, 8. as we are nowe, which S. Paul confir∣meth in diuers places. And finallie, the matter is so cleere in this behalfe, that the whole Reade S. Aug. l. 18. de ciuit. 1.47. et Epist. 49. & 157. & tract, 45. in Ioh. Cle. A∣lex. lib. 6. Strom. et Ierom in ca. 3. ad Gala. schoole of Diuines accordeth, that Fayth and Religion of the auncient Fathers, before Chri∣stes appearaunce: was the very same in substaunce that ours is now, sa∣uing onely, that it was more gene∣rall, obscure, and confuse then ours is, for that it was of things to come, as ours is now of things past & pre∣sent. For example; they belieued that a Redeemer should come: and we belieue that hee is already come.The diffe∣rence be∣tweene our beliefe and the old Fa∣thers. They sayd, Virgo concipiet, a Vir∣gine shall conceiue: and we say: Virgo concepit, a Virgine hath con∣ceiued. They had sacrifices and ce∣remonies yt prefigured his comming for the time ensuing: we haue sacri∣fice & sacraments that represent hys being for the time present. They cal∣led theyr Redeemer, The expectation of Nations:Esay, 7. and we call him now, The saluation of Nations.Gene, 49. And final∣lie, there was no other difference be∣tweene the olde fayth of good men
from the beginning, and ours: but only in the circumstaunces of time, cleerenes, particularitie, and of the manner of protesting the same, by outward signes and ceremonies. For that in substaunce they belieued the same Redeemer that we doe, and were saued by the same beliefe in his merits as we are. For which cause Eusebius Eusebius handleth this matter at large, lib. 1. dem. E∣uan. cap. 5, well noteth, that as wee are called now Christians, so they were called then Christi, Psalm, 104. that is, annointed in prefiguration of the true Christ in whom they be∣lieued, as the first and head of all o∣ther annointed, and who was the cause and authour of their annoyn∣ting. By thys then it is most manifest, that not onely nowe to vs that are Christins, but at all other times from the beginning of the worlde, and to all other persons and people what-soeuer, that dsired to haue theyr soules saued, it was necessa∣rie to belieue and loue CHRIST, and to professe in hart hys Reli∣gion. For which consideration,The causes of thys Chapter. I thought it not amisse in thys place, after the former groundes layde that there is a GOD, and that man
was created and placed heere for hys seruice: to demonstrate and prooue also this other principle, that the on∣ly seruice of thys God, is by Christi∣an Religion. Wherein, aleit I doe not doubt, but that I shall seeme to many, to take vppon me a superflu∣ous labour, in proouing a verite, which all men in Christendome doe confesse: yet for the causes before alledged in ye second chapter, which mooued me in that place to proue, that there is a GOD; that is to say, first, for the comfort, strength, and confirmation of such, as either from the enemy may receiue temptations, or of themselues may desire to see a reason of theyr belefe: and second-lie, for awaking styrring, or sting∣ing of others, who either of malice, carelesnes, or sensualitie, are fallen a sleepe, and haue lost the feeling and sence of theyr beleefe, (for maie such want not in these our miserable dayes,) it shall not be (perhaps) but to euey good purpose, to lay toge∣ther in thys place, with the greatest breuity yt possibly may be, the most sure groundes and inuincible eui∣dences, which we haue for declarati∣on & confirmation of this matter.
For albeit the Apostle Saint Paule declareth the things which we be∣leeue,Heb, 11, be not such in themselues, as may be made apparant by reason of humane arguments: yet such is the goodnesse, and most sweete procee∣ding of our mercifull GOD to∣wardes vs, as he will not leaue him∣selfe without sufficient testimonie, both inward and outwarde, as the same Apostle in another place doth testifie.Acts, 14, For that inwardly, he testifi∣eth the truth of such thinges as wee belieue, by gyuing vs light and vn∣derstanding, with internall ioy and consolation in belieuing them. And outwardly hee giueth testimony to the same,The diuers testimonies from God, of ye things that we be∣lieue. with so many conuenien∣ces, probabilities, and Arguments of credibilitie, (as Diuines doe cal thē,) that albeit the very point of that which is belieued, remaine stil with some obscuritie: yet are there so many circumstaunces of lykeli∣hoodes, to induce a man to the be∣leefe thereof, as in all reason it may seeme against reason to deny or mis∣trust them. Thys shall easily appeare by the Treatise following of Christ and Christianitie, and of the foundati∣ons
of our Religion, which shal be confirmed by so many pregnant rea∣sons, and most manifest circumstan∣ces of euident probability, as I doubt not, but the zealous Christian shall take exceeding comfort therein, and ésteeme himselfe happy, to haue a lot in that faith & Religion, where he shal see & feele so much reason, proofe, & conueniencie to concurre & shew it selfe, for hys satisfaction. And to thys effect, it shall bee of no meane moment, that I haue pro∣ued before, the certaintie, diuinitie, and infallible truth of ye Iewes scrip∣tures, or olde Testament; which writings we haue receiued from that Nation that dooth (as it were) pro∣fesse enmitie against vs, & the same being written so many ages before the name of Christianity was known in the worlde: it cannot be but of singuler authoritie, whatseuer shal be alledged out of those recordes for our purpose. And therefore as be∣fore, in procuing our first principle, That there is a GOD, we vsed one∣lie the testimonie of such witnesses,The vn∣doubted witnesses to be alled∣ged in thys Chapter. as could not be partiall: so, much more in this confirmation of Chri∣stian Religion, shall we stand one∣lie,
eyther vppon the confession of such as are our enemies, or vpon the records of others, who must needes be indifferent in the cause, for that they lyued before eyther cause or controuersie in Christianitie was knowne or called in question. My whole purpose shall be then, to make manifest in thys Chapter,The dryft of thys Chapter. that IESVS CHRIST vvas the Sauiour and Redeemer of all man∣kinde, fore-promised and expected from the beginning of the worlde; that he was the onely sonne of God, and God himselfe, and consequent∣lie, that what-soeuer he hath left vs in hys doctrine and Religion, is true and sincere, and the onely way of saluation vpon earth. For cleerer proofe, & declaration whereof, I wil reduce what-soeuer I haue to say heerein, vnto three prin∣cipall heads or branches,The princi∣pall heads. according to the order of three distinct tymes wherein they fel out; That is to say, in the first place shal be considered, the things that passed before the na∣tiuitiy or incarnation of Christ. In  the seconde, the thinges doone and verified from that time vnto his as∣cention, which is the space of hys a∣bode
vpon earth. And in the thyrde place, such euents shall be conside∣red, as ensued for confirmation of his Deitie, after his departure. In declaration of which three ge∣nerall poynts, I hope by the assi∣staunce of him whose cause we han∣dle, that so many cleere demonstra∣tions shall be dyscouered: as shall greatly confirme thy fayth (gentle Reader,) and remoue all occasions of temptation to infidelitie. How Christ was fore-told to Iew & Gentile. SECT. 1. FIrst then, for such things as pas∣sed before Christ appeared in the flesh, and doe make for proofe of our Christian Religion, it is to be noted, that they are of two sorts, or at least wise,The Iew & Gentile. they are to bee taken from two kindes of people, that is, partly frō the Iewes, & partly from the Gentiles. For seeing that Christ was appointed from the beginning, yea, before the world was created, Ephe, 1, 1. Tim, 2,(as Saint Paule affirmeth) to worke the redemption both of Iewe and
Gentile,Titus, 1, 1. Peter, 1, and to make them both one people in the seruice of hys Father: heer-hence is it, that he was fore-told and prefigured to both these Nati∣ons,Esa, 2, 11, 19 and diuers fore-warnings were left among them both,Ier, 9, 12.16 for styrring them vp to expect hys comming, as by the considerations folowing shal most euidently appeare. The irst Consideration. AND to begin with the Iewes,The Messi∣as promi∣sed. no man can deny, but that throughout the whole bodie and course of Scriptures, that is, from the very beginning to the last ende of theyr olde Testament, they had pro∣mised vnto them a Messias, which is the very same that we cal Christ, that is to say, a person annointed & sent from God, to be a Sauiour, a Redee∣mer, a Pacifier of Gods wrath, a Mediator between God and man, a Satisfier for the sinnes and offences of the whole worlde, a Restorer of our innocencie lost in Paradise, a Maister, an Instructer, a Law-giuer, a Spirituall and eternall King, that should sitte, and rule and raigne in
our harts, to conquer the power and tyranny of satan, ye enemy of man∣kinde, who ouer-came our first Pa∣rents Adam and Eue, and neuer cea∣seth to assaile vs. The first couenaunt to Adam. THIS is euident by the first coue∣nant of all, that euer GOD dyd make wyth man, when he sayde to Adam our first Father in Paradise,Gene, 2, In what day soeuer thou shalt eate of the Tree that is forbidden, thou shalt die. Which couenaunt beeing after broken, on the part of our sayd Pro∣genitor, he receiued hys iudgement, but yet with a most benigne pro∣mise of redemption for the tyme to come: for thus God said to ye deuill or Serpent that had deceiued hym:Gene, 3. The seede of the Woman shall crushe thy head, and thou shalt lie in waite to hurt his heele. That is, one shall proceede in tyme, of the seede of the Woman, who shall conquer Death and Sinne (that are thy weapons,) and shall not care for thy temptati∣ons, but shall treade them vnder hi
feete, and thys shall be Christ the Messias of the world. Thus did not onely the Rabbi Mo∣ses Benmai∣mon in hun locum. eldest Iewes & Rabbines vnderstand thys place, (what-soeuer the latter haue dreamed, that their Messias should be onely a temporall King,) but al∣so the olde Chaldie Paraphrase, (na∣med Thargum Hierosolimitanum) expoūdeth it plainly in these words, applyed vnto the deuil that had d∣ceiued Adam:Tharg. Hie∣roso. in Gen. cap. 3. They haue a certain and present remedy against thee (O deuill,) for that the time shall come, when they shal tread thee downe with theyr heeles, by the helpe of Messias which shall be theyr King. To Abraham and Isaacke. THE same thing is confirmed by the very same promise seauen times repeated and established vnto Abraham, that liued very neere two thousand yeeres after Adam: and again to Isaack his sonne after him, In semine tuo benedicentur omnes gentes terrae.Gene. 12. & 18. and 22. All Nations of the earth shall be blessed in thy seede. Which had beene indeede, but a very small
benediction to Abraham, or to the Iewes after him, (yt neuer saw theyr Messias actually) if hee had beene onely to be a temporall king: And much lesse blessing had it beene to the Gentiles & all other Nations, if this Messias of the Iewes, must haue been a tēporal & worldly Monarch, to destroy & subdue them to the ser∣uitude of Iurie, as fondly the latter teachers of that Nation do contend. Iacobs prophecie of Christ. THIS yet maketh the Patriarch Iacob more plaine, who prophe∣cying at his death of the cōming o Christ, hath these words:Gen, 49, The scep∣ter (or gouernment) shall not be ta∣ken from the house of Iuda, vntill e∣come that is to be sent, and he shall b the expectation of Nations. Which latter words, the fore-named Chal∣die Paraphrase, as also great Onkelos,Tharg. Hie∣roso t On∣kelos in hunc locum. (both of singuler authoritie among the Iewes,) do interpret thus Donec Christus eu Messias venia &c. Vntil Christ or ye Messias com (which is the hope and expectatio of all Nations, as wel Gentiles, as
vs that are Iewes,) the gouernment shall not cease in the house or Tribe of Iuda. By which sentence of scrip∣ture, and interpretation of the Iewes themselues, we come to learne, (be∣sides the promise of the Messias,) two consequences in this matter, a∣gainst ye Iewes of latter tymes. First, that if their Messias must be ye hope and expectation as well of the Gen∣tiles as of the Iewes:The Messi∣as must be a spirituall & not a tem∣porall king. then can hee not be a temporall King to destroy the Gentiles, (as ye latter Iewes wold haue it,) but a spyrituall King, to raigne ouer them, and to bring in subiection theyr spyrituall enemies for thē, (I mean the flesh, the world and the deuil,) as all true Christians doe beleeue. Secondly, if the tempo∣ral kingdome of the house of Iuda, (whereof Christ must come,) shall cease and be destroyed at the com∣ming of Messias, as the Scripture a∣uoucheth: how then can the Iewes expect yet a temporal King for their Messias, as most fondly they doe? But to leaue this controuersie with the latter Rabbines, and to goe for∣warde in declaration of that which we tooke in hand, that is, to shewe how Christ was fore-tolde and pro∣mised
to the Iewes. It is to be noted, that after the death of Iacob last mentioned, there is little recorded in scripture of the doings of his people, during the space of foure hundred yeres being ye time of their bondage in Egipt;The traditi∣on of the Iewes in Misdrasch Thehilim. but yet ye tradition of that Natiō teacheth, that as soone as they were deliuered out of Egypt, & were in the Desert towards the Land of Promise, the three sonnes of Chore, called Aser, Eleana, and Abiasaphe, (of whom mention is made in the sixt chapter of Exodus, & other pla∣ces) made diuers songs & Psalmes in the praise & expectation of the Mes∣sias to come, and that the holy men of that time, did solace themselues with singing the same: & that king Dauid afterward in the second part of his Psalmes,See the ty∣tles of these Psalmes heere speci∣fied. beginning from the fortie and one, vnto the eyghty and seauen, gathered the most parte of these old songs together, as yet they are to be seene in his Psalter. Moises Prophecie of Christ. BVT Moises, who liued with the people, and gouerned thē in the
wildernesse, had a cleere reuelation from GOD of thys Messias in these words,Deut. 18 I will raise vp a Prophet to this people from amongst theyr bre∣theren, euen as my selfe: and I will put my words in his mouth, & he shall speake vnto them all things which I shall ordaine vnto him: and he that shal refuse to heare the wordes which he shal speake vnto them in my name, I will be reuenged vppon that man. Which words, that they cannot be vnderstoode of any other Prophet that euer lyued after Moises among the Iewes, but onely of CHRIST, it appeareth most manifestly and plainly by the testimony of the ho∣lie Ghost, where he sayth,Deut. 34. And there arose not any other Prophet in Israell like vnto Moises. &c, Dauids Prophecie of Christ. AFter Moises about four hundred yeeres, ensued Dauid, who for that he was a holy man, & the first King of the house of Iuda, out of whose linage ye Messias was to com: the particulers of thys misterie, were more aboundantly and manifestlie
reuealed vnto him, then vnto any o∣ther. And first, for assuraunce that Christ should be borne of his stock and lynage, these are the wordes of GOD vnto hym:Psalm, 88, 2, Reg, 7, 1. Chro, 22. I haue sworne to Dauid my Seruaunt: I will prepare thy seed from eternity, and wil builde vp thy seate to al generations. Which words, albeit the latter Iewes wil ap∣ply it to King Salomon, that was Dauids sonne, (and in some sence they may so be, for that King Salo∣mon was a figure of Christ to come) yet properly these wordes,3, Reg, 5, 1. Chro. 22. And his kingdome shall stand for euer, and for all eternitie, which are so often re∣peated in thys & other places of the Scripture, cannot be verified in Sa∣lomon, whose earthly kingdom was rent and torne in peeces straight af∣ter hys death by Ieroboam,3, Reg. 12, and not long after, as it were extinguished; but they must needes be vnderstood of an eternall King, which should come of Dauids seede: as must also these other wordes of GOD in the Psalmes:Psal, 2, 45, 47, 67, 72. Thou art my sonne, this day haue I begotten thee, I will giue vnto thee the Gentiles for thine inheritāce. Which was neuer fulfilled in Sa∣lomon, nor in any other temporall
King in Iurie after him. And much lesse these words which follow:Psal 71, He shall endure with the sunne, and be∣fore the Moone, from generation to generation. There shall ryse vp in his daies peace, vntill the Moone be taken away: he shal raigne from sea to sea, vnto the ends of the world: all kinges shall adore him, and all Nations shall serue him: for that hee shall deliuer the poore man that had no helper: he shall saue theyr soules, and deliuer them from vsurie, & from iniquitie: all Trybes of the earth shall be blessed in him, and all Nations shall magnifie him. These words of Christes eternall kingdome, of hys enduring to the worlds end: of his vniuersal raigne ouer Iewe and Gentile: of his ado∣ration by all Nations: of his deliue∣rie of soules from bondage of ini∣quitie, and finally, of hys making blessed all trybes of the earth: can∣not possibly be applied to any tem∣porall King that euer was among the Iewes, or euer shall be vnto the worlds end, but onely Christ.
Ieremies Prophecie of Christ. THIS promise made vnto Da∣uid, for Christ to come of hys seede, is repeated after his death, by many Prophets, and confirmed by GOD, as in Ieremie, where God v∣seth these words; Behold, the dayes come on, and I wil rayse vp to Dauid a iust seede,Ierem, 23. and 33. & he shal raigne a king, and shal be wise, and shal doe iudge∣ment and iustice vpon earth. And in his dayes shal Iuda be saued, and Isra∣ell shall dwell confidently, and this is the Name that men shall call him, OVR IVST GOD. All thys was spoken of Dauids seede, aboue four hundred yeeres after Dauid was bu∣ried. Which proueth manifestly, that the former promises and speeches, were not made to King Dauid for Salomon hys sonne, or for anie o∣ther temporal King of Dauids line: but for Christ, who was called so particulerly The son & seede of Da∣uid: for that Dauid was the first King of the Trybe of Iuda, and not onely was Christes Progenitor in the
flesh, but also did beare hys tipe & figure in many other things. Ezechiels prophecie of Christ. FOR which cause likewise in the Prophet Ezechiell (who lyued a∣bout the same tyme yt Ieremie did,) the Messias is called by the name of Dauid himselfe: for thus GOD spake at that time vnto Ezechiel:Ezech. 34. Christ is called Da∣id. I wil saue my flocke, nor shal they be a∣ny longer left to the spoyle, &c. I will rayse ouer them, ONE PASTOR, which shall feede them, my seruaunt DAVID, he shal feede them, & he shall be theyr sheepheard, & Prince, and I will be theyr God, & will make with them a couenaunt of peace. &c. In which words, not onely we that are called Christians, but the latter Iewes also themselues, doe confesse in theyr Thalmud,Thal. tract. Sanch. cap. halec. that their Messias is called by the name of Dauid, for that he shall discend of the seede of Dauid; as by reason also it must of necessity be so, for that King Dauid beeing dead four hundred yeres be∣fore these wordes were spoken, (as hath beene noted) could not nowe
come againe to feede Gods people, or gouerne them himselfe. The Prophecies of Esay, tou∣ching Christ. ESay the Prophet, who lyued a∣bout a hundred yeeres before Ie∣remie and Ezechiel, had meruailous fore-knowledge of the Messias, and hys affayres, and describeth him ve∣ry particulerly, beginning in thys manner.Esay. 2, In the latter daies, the HIL of Gods house shall be prepared vppon the toppe of Mountaines, and all Nati∣ons (or Gentiles) shall flowe vnto him. And many people shall say, come and let vs ascend vnto the HIL of the Lord, and he shall teach vs his waies, and we shall walke in his pathes: hee shall iudge Nations, &c. Which ve∣ry words are also repeated in Michae∣as the Prophet,Mich, 4, and are applyed there (as also heere) vnto the Messias, and can haue no other meaning, by the iudgement of the Iewes & Hebrues themselues. And Esay dooth prose∣cute the same matter afterwardes in dyuers Chapters. As for example, in the fourth, talking of the same Mes∣sias,
which before he called the HIL of Gods house, he addeth these words.Esay, 4, In that day shal the issue of the Lord, be in magnificence and glory, and the fruite of the earth, in sublimitie and exultation, to all such as shal be saued of Israell. In which words he calleth the Messias, both the issue of GOD, and the fruite of the earth, for that he should be both God and man. And in the ninth Chapter he calleth him by these termes,Esay, 9, Admirable: Coun∣seller: God: Strong: Father of the future world: and Prince of peace. In the eleuenth Chapter, hee de∣scribeth him most wonderfully, in these words:Esay, 11, Psal, 71. There shall goe foorth a branch of the stocke of Iesse, (which Iesse was Dauids father,Eccle. 45.) and out of the roote of that branch, there shall mount vp a flower, and the Spirite of the Lord shal rest vpon him: the spi∣rite of wisdome & of vnderstanding, the spirit of counsell and fortitude, the spirite of knowledge & pietie:Wonder∣ful proper∣ties of Christ. he shal not iudge according to the sight of (fleshlie) eyes, nor yet condemne ac∣cording to the hearing of (fleshlie) eares: but hee shall iudge poore men in iustice, and shall dispute in equitie for the milde men of the earth. Hee
shal strike the earth with the rodde of his mouth, and with the spirite of his lyps shal he sley the wicked man. Iu∣stice shall be the girdle of his loynes: and fayth shall bee the bande of hys reynes. &c. Hetherto are the wordes of the Prophet: wherin truely nothing can be more plaine & euident, then that by the rod or branch of Iesse, is meant the Virgine Marie,Math. 1. who directly dis∣cended of the linage of Iesse,Luke. 3. & by the flower ascending frō this branche,Acts. 13. must needes be vnderstoode Christ,Rom, 15. that was borne of her, and had all those excellencies and priuiledges a∣boue other men, which Esay in this place assigneth vnto him. Whose further grces yet, & spe∣ciall diuine properties,Other pro∣perties of Christ. the same Pro∣phet expresseth more particulerly in the Chapters following, where hee sayth;Esay, 25. Hee shal for euer ouer-throwe and destroy death: he shall open the eyes of the blynde, and the eares of the deafe:Esay, 35. Esay, 42. hee shall not cry nor contende, nor shal he accept the person of anie man: but in truth shal he bring forth iudgement. He shal not be sorrowfull nor turbulent. &c. And finally, in the forty & nine
Chapter, he alledgeth the wordes of God ye Father vnto Christ, touching hys commission, in thys sort;Esay, 49, Acts. 13.47. It is too-little that thou be to me a seruant, to rayse vp the trybes of Iacob, and to conuert vnto mee the dregs of Israell.The Com∣mission of Christ. Behold, I haue appointed thee also for a light vnto the Gentiles that thou be my saluation vnto the vttermost parts of the earth. Daniels prophecie of Christ. AND to conclude thys matter, without alledging more Pro∣phecies for the same, (which in truth are infinite throughout the Bible,) Daniell that liued in the end of the captiuity of Babilon, a lyttle before Aggaeus, Zacharias, and Malachias, (who were the last Prophets that e∣uer florished among the Iewes, al∣most fiue hundred yeeres before the natiuity of Christ:) this Daniel (I say) reporteth of hymselfe, that be∣ing in Babilon, and hauing fasted, worne sack-cloth, and prayed long vnto GOD, there came the Angell Gabriell vnto him at the time of the euening sacrifice, & fore-tolde hym,
not onely of the deliueraunce of the people of Israell from the captiuitie of Babilon out of hand, for that the seauentie yeeres of their punishment fore-told by Ieremie, were nowe ex∣pired, but also he tolde him further, that the time of the vniuersall deli∣ueraunce of man-kinde, from the bondage and captiuitie of sin: was now shortned, and that after seuen∣tie Hebdomades, (which as shal be shewed after, make vp iust the time that passed from the rebuilding of the Temple of Ierusalem after theyr deliueraunce from Babilon, vnto the byrth of Christ,) there shoulde be borne the Sauiour of the world, and be put to death for the redemption of man-kind. The Angels wordes are these:Dan, 9. I am come to shew thee, O Daniell, for that thou art a man of good desires. And therefore doe thou marke my speech, and vnderstande this vision. The seauentie Hebdomades are short∣ned vpon thy people, & vpon thy holy Cittie: to the end preuarication may be consumed, and sin receiue an ende, to the ende iniquitie may be blotted out, and eternall iustice brought in her place: and to the end visions and
prophecies may be fulfilled, and the SAINT OF SAINTS annoyn∣ted. Know thou therefore and marke, that from the end of the speech, for re∣building of Ierusalem, vnto Christ the CAPTAINE, there shal be hebdo∣mades seauen, and hebdomades sixtie two, and after sixty two hebdomades, Christ shall be put to death, and the people which shall denie him, shall not be his people. I myght passe on further to other Prophets, and make no ende, if I would alledge what might be sayde in thys behalfe; for that the whole Scripture runneth all to thys one poynt:The Butte of all Scrip∣ture. to fore-tell and manifest Christ, by signes, figures, parables and prophecies: and for thys cause was it principally written. But that which is already spoken, shall bee sufficient for our first consideration, whereby is seene, that among the Iewes from age to age, Christ was prophecied and fore-told, together with the eternitie of his kingdome, that should be spirituall.
The second Consideration. That Christ should be both God and man.NOwe followeth there a seconde consideration of the qualitie of Christes person, of no lesse impor∣tance then the former, and wherein the latter Iewes doe more dyscent from vs: & that is, of the God-head of the Messias promised. I say the latter Iewes or Rabbines, are diffe∣rent herein frō vs, as also they are in many other poynts & articles, wher∣in theyr auncestors (that were no Christians) did fully agree. Euen as all Heretiques are wont to doe,The cu∣stome of Heretiques. that first breake in one poynt, & then in another, from the true Catholique fayth of Christ, to followe mens traditions; and so doe run on from one to one, making themselues in al things as dislike as they can, for ha∣tred of that vnitie, whereunto theyr pride wil not suffer them to return. So is it in the generation of thys re∣probate people, who first agreed with vs in all, or most poynts, tou∣ching Christ to come, and denyed onely the fulfilling or applycation thereof in Iesus our Sauiour, but af∣terward,
their vngracious of-spring, being not able to stand in that issue against vs, deuised a newe plea, and be tooke themselues to a far higher degree of impietie, affirming that we attribute many thinges vnto Ie∣sus, that were not fore-tolde of the Messias to come; & among other, that he should be GOD, and the sonne of God, and the second per∣son in Trinitie. &c. But heerein (no doubt) these ob∣stinate and gracelesse men, do shew themselues both ignoraunt of theyr own scriptures, & disagreeing from the writings of theyr owne fore-fa∣thers. For as for scriptures, it is eui∣dent by all, or most of the Prophets alledged before, that Christ (or the Messias) must be GOD, & the son of God,That Christ must be both God and man. indued with mans nature; that is, both God and man. So in Genesis,Gene. 3. where he is called the seede of the Woman, it is apparent that he shal be man; and in the same place, when he is promised to crush the de∣uil and to breake his head:The first proofe. who can doe thys but onely God? Likewise, when he is called Germen Iehouae,Esay 4, the seede of our Lorde God, hys God-head is signified, as is his man-head,
also, when in the same place hee is named the fruite of the earth.Esay, 9. Who can interprete these speeches;Psalm 71, That, his kingdom shalbe euerlasting. That, he shall endure vntill the Moone be ta∣ken away, and after.Psal. 109. That, God be∣gae him before Lucifer was created.Esay, 53. That,Psal. 96. no man can tell or recount his generation.Hebru, 1. That, all Nations and Angels must adore him.Psal, 110 That, hee must sitte at the right hand of God. And many other such speeches pro∣nounced directly and expresly of the Messias, who (I say) can vnderstand or interprete them, but of God, see∣ing that in man they cannot be veri∣fied? And as for the last of these te∣stimonies, cōcerning Christes sitting at hys Fathers right hand: three of our Euangelists doe report,Math, 2, Luke, 20. that Ie∣sus did blancke diuers of the learne∣dest Pharisies, with alledging onelie these words of Dauid, The Iehoua in Hebrue. Psalm, 110. Lorde said to my Lord, sit at my right hand, vntill I put thine enemies as thy foot∣stoole. For (saide Iesus) if Christ be Dauids sonne,Rab. Ionath. lib, collect. et Misdr. Te∣hillim. in Psal. 2. v. 7, how did Dauid call him hys Lord? signifying heereby, that albeit the Messias was to be Da∣uids sonne, according to his man-head: yet was he to be Dauids Lord
according to his God-head. And so doe both Rabbi Ionathan, and the publique Commentaries of the He∣brues, interprete thys place. Micheas is plaine;The second proofe. Mich . And thou Beth∣leem, out of thee shall proceede a RV∣LER in Israell, and his going foorth is frō the beginning, & from the dayes of eternitie. Thys cannot be vnder∣stood of any mortall man, that euer was or shall be. But yet Esay goeth further, when he sayth:Esay, 9. A litle child is borne vnto vs, & a young sonne is giuen vnto vs, and his principality is vpon his owne shoulder, and his name shall be GOD, the Father of the fu∣ture world (So it is in the Hebrue or of eternitie:) the Prince of peace. &c. In which words we see that Christ is called GOD. But if the Iewe doe cauill heere,An obiecti∣on aunswe∣red. and say, that El or Elo∣him the Hebrue words, which wee interprete God in thys place, may sometime be applyed to a creature, as in Exodus,Exod. 10. once El signifieth an Angel, and Elohim at other tymes is applyed to Iudges: then mark thys discourse of Dauid touching ye Mes∣sias, to whom he sayth:Psalm, 45. Thou art beautifull in forme aboue the children of men: grace is spred in thy lyps, and
therefore hath God blessed thee for e∣uer. &c. Thy seate O God, is for euer and euer: the rod (or Scepter) of thy kingdom, is the rod of direction, thou hast loued iustice and hated iniquity, therefore God, thy God hath annoin∣ted thee with oyle of ioy aboue thy partners. Heere the Messias is called God twice by the same worde Elo∣him, as God his Father is: and ther∣fore as the word signifieth true God in the one, so must it also in the o∣ther. The thyrd proofe.But to remoue all ground of this refuge touching El or Elohim, that are names of GOD, which may be communicated sometimes, and vp∣pon some occasions to creatures: most apparant it is, that the name IEHOVA,Christ is called Iehoua. which is called Teta∣grammaton, & which is so peculier to GOD alone, as neuer it may be communicated to any other, thys name (I say) which is of such reue∣rence among the Iewes, as they dare not pronounce it, but in place there∣of doe reade Adonai, that signifieth Lord, is euery where almost in scrip∣ture, attributed to Christ, See Esay cap. 18. ver. 7. and cap. 28. ver. 5. namelie where the Latine Interpreter hath translated Lord: as for example, in
two diuers places of Ieremie, after the long description of the Messias, which before I haue recited, he con∣cludeth thus;Ierem, 23, Hoc est nomen quod vocabunt eum, Iehoua iustus noster:Iere, 33. thys is the name which they shal cal him, OVR IVST IEHOVA, or as the Hebrue hath word for word, Iehoua our iustice. And so doe the auncient Hebrue expositors confesse vpon thys place of Ieremy, namely, Rabbi Abba,Rab. Abba coment in Thren. v. 16 Misd. Theh. in Psal. 20. ver. 1. who asketh the que∣stion what Messias shall be called? and then he aunswereth out of thys last place, He shall be called the eter∣nal Iehoua. The like doth Misdrasch gather vpon the first verse of the 20. Psalme. And Rabbi Moses Hadar∣san, expounding a place of the Pro∣phet Sophonie, Chapter 3. verse 9. concludeth thus:Rab. Moses Hadars. in Gene. ca. 41 In this place Ieho∣ua signifieth nothing els but the Mes∣sias. Whereby appeareth, that as well in scripture, as also in the opinion of old Hebrue expositors, the Messias was to be true God and man. And I myght alledge many other testi∣monies of auncient Rabbines, if it were not too long: especially, if I would enter among the kind of ex∣positors,
whom they call Cabalists,Two sorts of Hebrue expositers, Cabalists & Thalmu∣dists. (who are more auncient, and lesse brutish then are the other sort, which are termed Thalmudists,) I should finde many cleere and manifest de∣clarations against the Iewes doctrine and errour of latter tymes. And a∣mong other, (for example onelie of Cabalisticall expositions) I refer the Reader to the discourse of Rabbi Hacadosch (which in Hebrue signi∣fieth the holy Rabbine, & liued not long after Christ) vppon the wordes of Ieremie before recited: in which, for that he findeth the Messias to be called Iehoua, which word in the He∣brue is compounded of the three Letters,Ierem. 23. Iod, Vau, and He twyse re∣peated: thys Doctor maketh thys discourse by arte Cabalist, in thys manner. Euen as (saith hee) the Letter He in Iehoua, is compounded of two o∣ther Letters, named Daleth & Vau, (as appeareth by their forme) so shal the Messias,Rab. Haca∣dosch in E∣say. cap. 9. (that is signified by this word Iehoua,) bee made of two na∣tures, the one diuine, and the other humane.A Cabali∣sticall dis∣course. And as in Iehoua, there is twise He, and consequently two Da∣leths, & two Vaus contained there∣in:
so are there two byrthes, filiati∣ons, or chyld-hoods in Messias, the one, whereby he shall be the sonne of GOD, and the other whereby he shal be the sonne of a Virgin, which Esay calleth the Prophetesse.Esay, 8. And as in Iehoua, the Letter He is twise put, and yet both Hes doe make in effect but one Letter: so in Messias there shall be two distinct natures, and yet shall they make but one Christ. Thus playeth this Cabalist vpon the Letters of Iehoua, (according to the manner of theyr diuinitie,) and draweth great misteries (as yee see) from Letters ends. In which kinde of reasoning, albeit we put no groūd of strength at all: yet is it sufficient to shew, that among ye elder Iewes, it was knowne and confessed doc∣trine, that Christ shoulde be both God and man, & haue two natures conioyned distinctly in one person, which is the same that we Christi∣ans doe affirme. Nay, I will adde further,The fourth proofe. (& thys is greatly to be obserued,) that the selfe same auncient Iewes, (as some also of the latter) doe hold, & proue by Scripture, that Christ shal be,Christ cal∣led the Son of GOD. (for alwaies they speake of the Messias to
come) the very sonne of GOD. Et verbum Dei incarnatum, & the word of God incarnate, or made fleshe. And for the first, that shall bee the sonne of God, they proue it out of diuers places alledged by me before: as for example, out of Genesis,Gene, 49. whe the Latine text hath: The scepter of Iuda shall not be taken away, vntill he come that is to be sent.Rab. Dauid Kimhi. in li. radicum. The Hebrue hath, vntill Silo come, which Silo, Rabbi Kimhi proueth by a long dis∣course, to signifie so much as Filius eius, hys sonne, that is, the sonne of GOD. The same they proue by the place of Esay,Esay. 4. where the Messias is called Germen Iehouae, the seede or sonne of Iehoua. Which the Chal∣die Paraphrase termeth,Tharg. in hun locum. the Messias of Iehoua. They proue the same also out of diuers Psalmes, where Christ is called plainly the sonne of GOD, as where it is sayd:Psal, 49. He shal say vnto me, thou art my Father. &c. I will put him, mine eldest sonne, more high∣er then al the Kings of the earth, &c. Iehoua said vnto me, thou art my son, this day haue I begotten thee, &c.Psalm. . Kisse the This is according to the He∣brue text. son ye Kings & Iudges of the earth, and happy are al they they place theyr hope in him. Which last
words can no way be vnderstood of the sonne of any man, for that it is written, Cursed is the man that put∣teth his trust in man.Ierem, 17 Wherefore Rabbi Ionathan, Rabbi Selemoth, Aben Ezar, and others, do conclude by these and other places which they alledge, that the Messias must be the very Sonne of GOD. And for the second poynt,The fist proofe. they goe yet further, affirming this sonne to be Verbum Patris, the worde of God the Father. Which the foresaid Ionathan in his Chaldy Paraphrase, doth expresse in many translations: as for example; where Esay saith, Is∣raell shall be saued in Iehoua with e∣ternall saluation, (which Iehoua sig∣nifieth Christ, as al men do cōfese) Ionathan In the Chaldie Paraphrase. Hosea, 1, turneth it thus: Israell shall be saued by Gods word. So a∣gaine, where God sayth by Hosea, I will saue the house of Iuda by Iehoua theyr God: (which is by Christ,) Io∣nathan translateth it thus: I wyll saue Iuda by the word of theyr God. In lyke manner where Dauid wry∣teth,Psalm. 110. Iehoua sayd to my Lord, sitte at my right hand, &c. Ionathan ex∣presseth it thus: Iehoua sayde vnto his worde, sitte at my right hand. So
Rabbi Isaack Arama,Rab. Isaack. com. in cap. 47. Gen. writing vpon Genesis, expoundeth this verse of the Psalme:Psalm, 106. verse 20. he sent his word and healed them, &c. to be meant of Messias, that shal be Gods word. And Rabbi Simeon the chiefe of all the Caba∣listes, vpon these words of Iob,Rab. Simeon Ben. Iahai. com. in cap. 10, Gene. Iob, 19, I shall see GOD in my flesh: gathereth, that the word of God shal take flesh in a womans wombe. So that thys doctrine was nothing strange a∣mong the auncient Rabbines. For further confirmation where∣of, (seeing the matter is of so great importance) consider what is recor∣ded in a Treatise called Zoar,Rab. Simeon in Zoar. of high authoritie among the Iewes, where Rabbi Simeon that was last before alledged, citeth a place out of olde Rabbi Ibda, vppon these wordes in Deuteronomie,Deut, 6. Iehoua our Lorde is one Iehoua, which words the sayde auncient Rabbi Ibda,The blessed Trinitie, prooued by an auncient Rabbine. interpreteth in thys manner: by the first Iehoua in thys sentence, (being the incōmuni∣ble name of God,) is signified, sayth he, GOD the Father, Prince of all things. By the next words our Lorde is signified GOD the sonne, that i fountaine of all Sciences. And b the second Iehoua, in the same sentence,
is signified GOD the holie Ghost, proceeding of thē both. To all which there is added the worde (One) to signify that these three are inuincible. But this secrete shall not be reuealed vntill the comming of Messias. Hetherto are the words of Rabbi Ibda, reported in Zoar by Rabbi Simeon, where also the said Rabbi Simeon interpreteth these words of Esay, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabaoth, in this manner. Esay by repeating three times holy, sayth he, doth as much, as if he had sayd, Holy Father, holy Son, & holy Spi∣rite: which three Holies, doe make but one only Lord God of Sabaoth. Finally,The sixt proofe. I will conclude thys con∣trouersie betweene the latter Iewes and vs, with the authoritie of lear∣ned Philo, who lyued in the verie same time with Christ, and was sent Embassadour twise to Rome, in the behalfe of his Nation in Alexandria;Phil. li. 2. le∣gat Ruff. lib. 1. hist. 1, 6. Euseb. in Chron. that is, first in the 15. yeere of Tybe∣rius the Emperour, which was three yeeres before Christes passion, and the very same yeere wherein he was baptised by S. Iohn: and the second time about eyght yeres after, to wit, in the first yere of the raigne of Ca∣ligula.
Thys man, that was the lear∣nedest that euer wrote among the Iewes, (after ye writers of holy scrip∣tures ceased) made a speciall Booke of the banishment of hys Countri∣men, where hee hath thys discourse ensuing. Philo. lib. de exulibus.What tyme may be appointed, (saith he) for the returne home of vs banished Iewes, it is hard to deter∣mine. For by tradition we haue, that we must expect the death of an high Priest. But of those some die quick∣lie, and some liue longer. But I am of opinion, that this high Priest shal be the very word of GOD which shall be voyde of all sinne, both vo∣luntarie and inuoluntarie: whose Father shall be GOD, & this word shall be that Fathers wisedome, by which all things in thys world were created. His head shal be annointed with oyle, and hys kingdome shall florish, and shyne for euer. Thys wrote Phylo at that tyme, when he little imagined, yt the same high Priest, whom he so much ex∣pected, and the same word of God, whose kingdome he describeth, was now already come into the worlde. And this shall suffise for our second
consideration, what maner of Mes∣sias the Iewes did expect. The third Consideration. NOw in the third place commeth to be considered, what authori∣tie and power the Messias shoulde haue at hys appearance vpon earth, and whether he should change and abrogate the Law of Moses,Whether christ shold change the Lawe of Moses. or no? Wherein there is no lesse controuer∣sie between vs and the latter Iewes, then in the former point of his diui∣nitie. For we hold with Saint Paule,Gal 3, & 4 that the Lawe of Moses was gyuen vnto the Iewes but for a time,Hebru. 7. to en∣tertaine the people withall, and by the outward signes and ceremonies which it had,1, Cor, 20. (whereof ye most pat, or al, prefigured Christ to come:) to be their Schoole-maister and leader to the tyme of fayth, wherein it should be abrogated, & a far more perfect law sete downe by Christ in place thereof. This we prooue first,The Lawe of Moses imperfect. Hebru. 7. for that the Lawe of Moses was an imperfect Law, bringing nothing to perfecti∣on, as S. Paule well noteth; It was
as S. Peter saith,Acts, 15, a burdensome law, which the Iewes thēselues were not able to beare, for the multitude of ceremonies therein contayned. It was a carnall and seruile Law, con∣sisting most in the external. It was a Law of terror and feare,Gala, 3. more then of loue and liberty of the spirite. It was a Lawe (as I sayd before,) of signes & figures for things to come, & consequently to cease, whē those things which it prefigured shoulde come to be present. It was a Lawe, peculier and proper to the Iewes on∣ly,Deut, 15, without respect of all the rest of the world:Deut, 13, and 14, Leu, 5, 25, Exod, 23, Deut, 27, and the exercise thereof, was allowed onely in the Countrey of Iurie; and that which is more, it was not permitted but in one place onely of that Countrey, that is, in Ierusalem, whether euery man was bound to repayre three times a yere, to wit, at the Pasqua, at the Pente∣coste, & at the feast of Tabernacles: & in that place alone to make theyr sacrifices, and in no other Countrey or place besides. Now then reasoneth the learned Diuine,Good rea∣sons. if thys Lawe of Moses were for the Iewes, and Iurie onely, howe could it serue for ye tyme of the Mes∣sias,
who was to be King as well of the Gentiles as of the Iewes:Psal, 2, 21. and to rule all people in the worlde,Esay, 2, 11, that shoulde belieue in hym vnder one Law. If the exercise of this law were allowable onely, and lawull in Ie∣rusalem: how could it possiblie be fulfilled by Christians, that are dys∣persed ouer all the world? as for ex∣ample, howe could they repayre to Ierusalem thrise euery yeere? howe should euery woman that shoulde dwell in England or India,Leuit, 12, Exod, 13, Num, 8, repayre to Ierusalem for her purification af∣ter euery chyld-byrth, as by the law of Moses she was commaunded? Most euident is it then, which we sayd before, that thys Law was gy∣uen but to endure for a time. And to vse S. Paules owne words, it was but Introductio melioris spei,Hebr. 7, an in∣troduction to a better hope. It was but an entertainement to that peo∣ple, (which by theyr beeing among the Egiptians, were prone to Idola∣trie) vntill Christ should come and ordaine a perfect Lawe.The newe Lawe of Christ, and the perfecti∣ons therof. That is, a Law of spirit & internall affection: a Law of loue and libertie: a Lawe that should be common to al men: serue for al Countries, times, places,
and persons: a Law that should be written in the bowels of our harts: a Law that should be tollerable, ea∣sie, sweet, plaine, light, breefe, and flexible, as wel to the poore as to the rich, a Lawe (to conclude) yt shold consist in charitie. Thys signified Moses, when hee sayde to his people, after he had de∣liuered the former Law vnto them:Deut, 18, The Lorde shall rayse vnto you a Pro∣phet of your owne Nation, and from among your owne bretheren, as my selfe: him shall you heare. As though he had sayd, you shall heare me vn∣till he come, that must be a Law-giuer as my selfe, but yet of a more perfect Law: and therefore more to be heard and obeyed. And then he addeth, whosoeuer shall refuse to hear the words of this Prophet, I my selfe will reuenge it sayth the Lord God. Which words cannot be verified in any other Prophet after Moses vntill Christ: for that of those Prophets the Scripture sayth,Deut 34, There arose no Prophet like vnto Moses in Israell. Which is to be vnderstood, that they had no authoritie to be Law-makers, as Moses had, but were all bound to the obseruation of yt Law
onely which Moses left, vntil Christ came, whom Moses heere calleth A Prophet as himselfe: that is, a Law-maker, and exhorteth all men to heare and obey hym. Thys yet is made more plaine by the Prophecie of Esay, who sayth: Out of Sion shall come a Law, and the word of God out of Ierusalem,Esay, 2, which cannot be vnderstood of Moses law,A new law prophcied. that had been published eight hun∣dred yeeres before thys was spoken, and that from the Mount Sinai, & not from Sion. But Christes Lawe began from Sion and Ierusalem, & from thence was spredde into al the world. Which the same Esay fore∣saw, when talking of the comming of the Messias, he sayth:Esay, 1 In that day there shall be an Altar to God, in the midst of the Land of Egipt. And the title of the Lord at the end therof. &c And God shall be known to the Egipti∣ans at that day, and they shal honour him with sacrifices and oblations. Which words could not be verifi∣ed in the old Law of Moses, for that by that Lawe, the Egiptians coulde haue neyther Altar nor Sacrifice, but at Christes comming it was fulfilled when ye Egiptians were made Chri∣stians,
& enioyed both the Altars & Sacrifices that Christians doe vse. The same thing was fore-told by GOD in Malachie, where he sayth to the Iewes and of the Iewish Sa∣crifices. I haue no pleasure in you, neither wil I receiue oblations at your hands.Mala, 1. For that from the vprising of the sunne, vnto the going down there∣of, my name is great among the Gen∣tiles,The repro∣bation of the old Law with a pro∣mise of a new. and they doe sacrifice vnto me e∣uery where, and doe offer vnto my name a pure oblation, saith the Lorde God of Hostes. In which words wee see first, a reprobation of the Iewish sacrifice, & consequently of the law of Moses, which dependeth princi∣pally of that Sacrifice. Secondly, we see, that among the Gentiles, there should be a pure maner of sacrifice, more gratefull vnto God then the other was, & such, as myght be per∣formed in euery place of the world, and not to be tyed to one place on∣lie, as the Moisaicall Law and sacri∣fice was. And finally, I wil conclude thys whole matter, with the expresse words of God himselfe, concerning the ceremonies and precepts of the old Law;Ezech, 20, Dedi eis praecepta non bo∣na, & iudicia in quibus non viuent.
I gaue vnto them precepts that were not good, and iudgements wherein they shall not lyue. That is, they were not good to continue perpetu∣ally, nor shall they lyue in them for euer, but vntill the tyme by mee ap∣pointed: of which time he determi∣neth more particulerly by Ieremie the Prophet in these words;Ieremie. 3, Behold, the daies shal come, and I will make a newe Couenaunt or Testament with the house of Israell and Iuda:A new Te∣stament promised. not ac∣cording to that Couenaunt which I made with your Fathers, when I brought them forth of the Land of E∣gipt. Where you see, that at the com∣ming of Christ into thys world, (for of hym and hys byrth, he talketh at large in thys chapter) there shall be a newe Testament, contayning a different Law from that of the olde Testament, which was gyuen to the Iewes at theyr going forth of Egipt. Thus much then hetherto hath been shewed, that Christ in all ages was fore-told & promised:The sum of that which hath been said. that he should be God, and that his autho∣ritie should be to change the Lawe of Moses, that was giuen but for a tyme, and to establish a newe Lawe and Couenaunt, and a newe Testa∣ment
of hys owne, that shoulde en∣dure and continue for euer. The fourth Consideration. All particu∣lers foretold of Christ.AND albeit these things be verie wonderfull, and sufficient to e∣stablish any mans beleefe in the worlde, when he shal see them ful∣filled, (which shal be the argument of my second Section,) yet resteth not the Scripture heere, but passeth further, and fore-telleth euery parti∣culer acte, accident and circum∣staunce, that shal fall out of impor∣tance about the Messias at his com∣ming, incarnation, byrth, lyfe, death, and resurrection. As for example, at what particuler time and season he should appeare. Gene, 49. verse, 10, That he shoulde be borne of a Vir∣gine.Math, 1, Esay, 7, ver. 14. That the plce of his birth should be the Towne of BethleemLuke, 2, Michae. 5, verse, 1. That at at hys byrth all the Infants round a∣bout Bethleem should be slaine for his sake.Math, 2, Ierem. 31, verse, 15. That the Kings of the East should come and adore him,Math, 2, & offer Gold and other gyfts vnto him. Psal. 71. ve. 10. That
he should be presented by hys Mo∣ther in the Temple of Ierusalem.Luke, 2, Mala. 3, ver, 1. That he should flee into Egypt, & be recalled thence a∣gaine. Ose. 11, ver, 2, Esay, 19, verse, 1. That Iohn Baptist shold goe before hym, & cry in the Desert. Esay, 40. ver, 3, Mala, 3. ver. 1. After thys, that he should begyn his owne preaching with all humili∣tie, quietnesse, and clemencie of spi∣rite.Math, 5. Esay, 42, verse, 2. That he shold doe strange miracles,Mat, 4. et 8, Marke, 8. and heale all diseases. Esay, 29, verse, 8, and 35. ver. 5. and 61. ver. 1. That he shoulde die for the sinnes of all the worlde. Esay, 53, Dan, 9.Math, 27, That he should be betrayed by his own Disciple. Psal. 40, ver, 10. and 54, ver. 14, and 108, verse, 8.Math, 16, and 27. That he should be sold for thirty peeces of siluer. Zach, 11, ver. 12. That with those thirtie peeces, there should be bought afterward a Field of pot-shardes. Ierem, 30.Mat. 21.7 That he should ride into Ierusalem vpon an Asse before hys passion. Zach, 9, verse, 9.Mat, 26, 67 That the Iewes shold beate and buffet his face, and defile the same with spetting vpon him. Esay, 50. verse, 6. That they should whip, rent and teare his body before they
put hym to death. Esay, 53, ve. 2. Psa. 37. verse, 18.Luke, 22, That they should put him to death among thieues & ma∣lefactors. Esay, 53, ver. 12. That they should giue him vineger to drinke,Math, 27, deuide his apparrel, and cast lots for hys vpper garment. Psal, 68, ver, 22, and 21, verse, 19.Math, 28, That he shoulde rise againe from death the third day. Psalm. 15. verse 19. Ose, 6, ve. 3. That he should ascend to heauen,Luke, 24, and sit at the right hand of God his Father for euer.Acts, 7. Psal, 67, verse, 19, & 109. verse. 1. All these particularities, and a nūber more, were reuealed in scrip∣ture touching the Messias, some four thousand yeres, some two thousand, and some one thousand, & the last of all, aboue foure hundred yeeres before Christ was borne. Which if we lay together, and doe consider withall, how exactly they were ful∣filled afterwarde, in the person of Christ, as in the next Section shall be declared: if we adde also to this, that we haue receiued these Prophe∣cies and predictions from a Nation that most of all other doth hate vs, and that the same are to be seene & read in theyr Bibles, euen worde for
word as they are in ours; if you hold in memorie also, what inuincible proofes are alledged before in the se∣cond chapter, for the infallible truth and certainty of those Hebrue scrip∣tures: you shall find, that hardly a∣ny thing can be imagined for mani∣festation of a truth before it com to passe, which God hath not obser∣ued in fore-shewing the Messias. The fift Consideration. AND all these considerations are touching the Iewes. There re∣mayneth some-what to be sayde of the Gentiles;Manifesta∣tion of Christ to the Gen∣tiles. who albeit they were to receiue their principal knowledge in thys affayre from the Iewish Na∣tion, to whom the Messias was first and principally promised, and from whom the Gentiles had to expect, both theyr Sauiour and hys Apo∣stles, as also the Scriptures for testi∣monie and witnesse of them both, and finally, al theyr certaine know∣ledge and sounde vnderstanding in the misteries of Christ: yet had they also among themselues, some kinde of notice and fore-warning in thys
matter, which beeing ioyned with that which I haue sette down before of the Iewes, and examined at the light of Gods diuine Prophecies be∣fore alledged, it wil make very much for confirmation of our Christian veritie. And therefore thys last con∣sideration, shal be of the foreknow∣ledge of Gentiles in thys behalfe. For better vnderstanding wherof, it is to be noted, yt besides all know∣ledge of ye Messias, that diuers Gen∣tiles might haue by the Hebru scrip∣tures, which (as Chap, 2. I haue shewed be∣fore) were in the Greeke language, diuers ages before Christ was orne, or by the instruction or conuersati∣on of the Iewes, with whom many Pagans dyd lyue familiarlie: there remained three waies peculier to the Gentiles,Three parti∣culer waies wherby the Gentiles might heare of Christ. wherby they receiued some vnderstanding and fore-warning of this great mistery. The first was, by tradition and writing of theyr aun∣cestours. The second by prophecies of theyr owne. The third, by admo∣nishment of their Idoles & Oracles, especially when the time of Chrises appearaunce drew neere. The first way.And for the first way, it is euident, that as the Iewes receiued diuers
things by succession from their fore∣fathers, & they againe from Moses, and Moses from the Patriarches, Ia∣cob, Isaack, & Abraham, (who was the first man frō whom that whole Nation proceeded, and in whom they were distinguished from all o∣ther people in the world:) so had the Gentiles & other Nations,Tradition of learning among Iewes and Gentiles. theyr succession also of doctrine and mo∣numents, euen from the beginning, albeit the lower they went, the more corrupt they were, and more obscu∣red in diuine knowledge, by theyr exercise in Idolatry. So we knowe, that the Romains had their learning from the Graecians: the Graecians from the Egyptians: and the Egyp∣tians from the Chaldaeans, who were the first people that receiued instruc∣tion in diuine matters from Adam, Methusalem, Noe, and others of those first auncient Fathers. Now then it is to be considered,Eusebius in Chron. that by consent of Writers, there were three famous men that lyued together in those auncient times, to wit, Araham,Abraham. (who descending from HEBER, was the Father and beginner of the Iewes or Hebrues,) and with him Iob,Iob. and one Zoroa∣stres,Zoroastres.
that were not of that linage of HEBER, but as we call them for distinctions sake, eyther Heathens or Gentiles, albeit that difference was not then in vre. And of Iob, wee know by ye testimony of his booke, that he was a most holy & vertuous man. Of Zoroastres, we know one∣lie, that he was greatly learned, and left testimonies thereof vnto his po∣steritie. Thys Zoroastres lyuing in Abra∣hams tyme, might (by account of Scripture) see or speake with Noe. For Abraham was borne three-score yeeres before Noe deceassed. And Noe was borne aboue fiue hundred yeeres before Metusalē died, which Methusalem had liued two hundred and fortie yeeres with our first Fa∣ther Adm, and had enioyed con∣uersation both with God & Angels. And thereby (no doubt) could tell many high and secrete misteries, e∣specially touching Christ, in whom all hys hope for redemption of hys posterity did consist. Which miste∣rie and hidden knowledge, it is not vnlike, but that Abraham, Iob, Zo∣roastres & others, who lyued at that time with them, might receiue at the
third hand, by Noe, and his children, I meane The Iewes haue a tra∣dition, that Abraham serued Sem 15. yeeres in chaldaea. Sem, Cham, and Iaphet, who had liued before the flood, and had seene Methusalem, which Me∣thusalem lyued (as I said before,) so many yeeres with Adam. Heere-hence it is, that in the wry∣tings of Zoroastres which are extant See Clem. Alex. lib, 1, strom. et O∣rig lib 6. cō∣tra Celsum. et Procl. lib. 2, et 3, in Par. Plato, or recorded by other Authors in his name, there be found very plaine speeches of the Son of GOD, whom he calleth, Secundam mentem, the second minde. And much more is to be seene in ye writings of Hermes Trismegistus, (who liued after in E∣gipt, and receiued his learning from thys Zoroastres:Trismegi∣stus.) that these fyrst Heathen Philosophers had manifest vnderstanding of this second person in Trinitie, whom Hermes calleth,Mercu. Her. in Paemand. cap, 1, et de incepi. The first begotten Sonne of God: his onely sonne: his deere, eternall, im∣mutable, and incorruptible Sonne: whose sacred Name is ineffable, those are hys words. And after him againe among the Graecians,Graecians. were Orphe∣us, Hesiodus and others, that vttered the like speeches of the son of God: as also the Platonists, whose wordes and sentences were too-long to re∣peate in this place. But he that will
see them gathered together at large, let hym reade eyther Origen against Celsus the Heathen, or els S. Cyrill in his first booke against Iulian the Apostata. And thys shall suffise for thys first way, whereby the Gentiles had vnderstanding of Christ. The pro∣phecies tou∣ching christ among the Gentiles.For the second thing which I mē∣tioned, is to be vnderstoode, that a∣mong the Gentiles there were cer∣tayne Prophetesses, or women Pro∣phets, called Sibyllae, which in the Greek tongue (as Lactantius gathe∣reth) may signifie so much, as either Counselles to God, or Reuealers of Gods councell.Lact. li. 1. di∣ui. inst. ca. 6. And these women, be∣ing indued, (as it seemeth) with a certaine spirit of prophecie, did vtter from tyme to tyme, (though in such termes as most Gentiles vnderstoode them not,) most wonderful particu∣larities of Christ to come, agreeing (as it were) wholy with the Prophets of Israell, or rather setting downe many thinges in more plaine & eui∣dent speech then dyd the other:Of the Si∣byls. the one of them beginning her Greeke meeter in these very words. Knowe thy God, which is the sonne of God. &c.Lact. lib. 4, inst. cap. 6. An other of them maketh a whole discourse of Christ in Greeke
verses called Accrostichi, for that the beginning of euery verse, is by some Letter appointed in order, foorth of some one sentence that runneth tho∣row the whole. As for example, the sentence that passed through the be∣ginning of those verses which nowe we talke of, was this, S. Aug. translateth al the verses lib, 18, de ciuit. Dei. cap, 23. Iesus, Christ, Sonne of God, Sauiour, Crosse. And there were so many verses in ye whole discourse, as there are Letters in this entence. The totall argument be∣ing, of the incarnation, life, death, glory, & iudgement of the sonne of God. And ye last two verses of al the meeter, are thus, He that hath beene heere described, by our Accrostick ver∣ses: is an immortall Sauiour, and a King that must suffer for our sinnes. And for that these Prophecies of the Sibyls are of meruailous impor∣tance to confirme the verity of our Christian Religion,The Greeke verses of the Sibyls, of what im∣portance & authority. and are alledged often for that purpose, by the most graue & learned Fathers of the Pri∣matiue Church: as for example, by Iustinus the Martyr, in his Apologie for Christians; by Origen against Celsus; by Arnobius and his schol∣ler Lactantius against the Gentiles; by S. Cyrill, against Iulian the Apo∣stata;
by S. Augustine in his booke De ciuitate De: by Eusebius, and Constantine the Emperor & other; I wil say some-what in thys place, for the authoritie & credite of these verses, least any man perhaps might imagine, (as some Gentiles in olde time would seeme to doe) that they were deuised and inuented by Chri∣stians. And the most of my proofes shall be out of a learned See this Oration in Euseb. lib. 4, cap, 32, de vita Const. at the end. Oration, written in Latine by the foresayde Emperour, to a Counsel of Prelates in hys dayes: wherein he endeuou∣reth to shew, the vndoubted autho∣ritie of these Sibyl prophecies, which he esteemed so much (after dilligent search made for theyr credite & sin∣cerity) as they seeme to haue beene a great cause of his constant zeale and feruour in Christianity. The first proofe, for credite of the Sibyls verses. Varro lib. de rebus diui. ad C. Caesa∣rem pont. max.FYrst then hee sheweth, that these predictions of the Sibyls, coulde not be deuised or fained by Christi∣ans, or made after the time of Chri∣stes natiuity, for that Marcus Varro,
a most learned Romaine, who liued almost a hundred yeeres before Christ, maketh mention at large of the Sibyls, (who in number he saith were tenne) and of their writings, Countries and ages, as also of the writers & Authors, that before hys time had left memory of them. And both hee and Fenestella,Fenest. cap. de 15, viris. (an other Heathen) doe affirme, that the wry∣tings of these Sibyls, were gathered by the Romaines from all partes of the worlde, (where they myght be heard of,) & layd vp with diligence and great reuerence in the Capitole, vnder the charge and custody of the High Priest and other Officers, in such sorte, as no man might see or reade them, but onely certaine Ma∣gistrates, called the Fiftine, & much lesse might any man come to falsifie or corrupt them. The second proofe. SEcondly he sheweth, that Sibylla Erithraea, who made the former Accrostike verses of Christ, testifieth of herselfe, that she liued about sixe hundred yeeres after the floode of
Noe, & her Countriman Apollido∣rus Erithraeus and Varro doe report, that she liued before ye war of Troy, and prophecied to the Graecians that went to that war, that Troy should be destroied.Lact. lib, 1, inst. cap. 6. Which was more thē a 1000. yeres before Christ was borne. Cicero.Cicero also, that was slaine more forty yeeres before Christes natiuity, translated into Latine, the former Accrostike verses,See Cicero of these Accro∣stike verses of Sibylla, lib. 2. de di∣uinatione. as Constantine af∣firmeth, which translation was to be seene in his workes, when Con∣stantine wrote this Oration: so that by no meanes they could be deuised or brought in by Christians. The thyrd proofe. THirdly he sheweth, that the same Cicero, in diuers places of hys works, besides the mention of these Accrostike verses, insinuateth also an other Prophecie of Sibylla, tou∣ching a King that should ryse ouer all the world, where-with himselfe and the Romans were greatly trou∣bled: and therefore in one place, af∣ter a long inuectiue against hys ene∣mie Anthonie, that would seeme to giue credite to that Prophecie, or ra∣ther
as Cicero dooth vrge against him, would haue had the same ful∣filled in Iulius Caesar, he concludeth thus;Cicero, lib. 2. de diui. paulo post medium. Let vs deale with the Prelates of our Religion, to alledge any one thing rather out of the booke of Sibilla, then a King, whom neither the Gods nor yet men, can suffer hereafter to be in Rome. The like prophecie of Sibylla tou∣ching a King,Cicero, lib. 1. Epist. fam. Epist. 1.2.3.4.5.6. is insinuated by the same Cicero, in his first Booke of Epistles to Lentulus: to wit, that when the See lib. 2. Oracul. Sib. Romaines shoulde re∣store a King in Egypt by force, then shoulde ensue the vniuersall King, that should be Lord ouer Romaines and all other. Which Prophecie bee∣ing much vrged by Cato the Tri∣bune, Epist. 5. against the restoring of Hee was Father to Cleopatra. Ptolomeus Aulates late King of Egypt, that for his euill gouernment was expulsed by his subiects, ye mat∣ter was thought of such weight by all the Romaine Senate,The feare which the Romans had of the vniuersall King pro∣phecied by Sibylla. (I mean the sequel of this Prophecie) that wher∣as otherwise for many respects, they were greatly inclined to haue resto∣red the said Ptolomie: yet in regard of thys Religion, (as they called it,) they changed theyr mindes. But what? could they alter by thys the
determination of God? No truelie, for soone after, King Ptolomie per∣ceiuing the Senators mindes to bee altered, fled secretlie from Rome to one Gabinius, that was Gouernour of Syria,Dion. li. 39. histor. and for fiue Millions of Gold that he promised him, he was by the force of Gabinius restored: and not long after was Christ born, according to the meaning of the Si∣byll Prophecie. ¶The fourth proofe. FOurthly, the said Emperor Con∣stantine prooueth the authoritie of these Sibyls verses, for that Augu∣stus Caesar, before our Sauior Christ was borne, had such regard of them, that he laid them vp in more straigh∣ter order then before, (according as Suetonius a Heathen,Suet. tranq. cap. 3. de vita Aug. in his life re∣porteth) vnder the Alter of Apollo, in the hyll Palatine: where no man might haue the sight of them but by speciall licence; which licence Con∣stantine prooueth that Virgill the Poet had,The Pro∣phecies of Sibylla al∣ledged by Virgill. for that hee was in high fauour with Augustus. And there∣fore in a certaine Eglogue or com∣position of Verses, that he made in
praise of a yong child named Salo∣ninus, newlie borne to Asinius Pol∣lio, Augustus great friend, (or as o∣ther take it) of Marcellus a little boy, that was Nephew to Augustus by his sister Octauia, or rather of them both, for adulation of Augustus, he applieth (I say) to one or both of the young Infants, the whole prophecie, which he had reade in the verses of Sibylla, touching the birth of Christ, and of the peace, grace, and golden world yt shold come with him. Vpon which subiect he beginneth thus. Vltima Cumaei venit iam temporis aetas:Virgil. Eg∣log. 4. Magnus ab integro saeculorum nascitur ordo:Christes preordi∣nation. I am redit & Virgo, rediunt Saturnia regna. That is, now is come the last age prophecied by Sibilla, called Cumaea, now commeth to bee fulfilled the great ordinance and prouidence of GOD, appointed from the begin∣ning of the world, (these were Si∣bylles words,) now commeth the Virgine, and the first golden daies of Saturnus shall returne againe. Thus much translated Virgill out of Sibylla, touching the eternall de∣termination
of God, for Christes comming into this world: as also of his Mother the Virgine: and of the ininite blessings that should ap∣peare with him. Now ensueth in the same Poet, what Sibylla had said for Christes actuall natiuitie. Christes birth.I am noua progenies caelo dimittitur alto: Chara Deum soboles. &c. Now a new progenie or of-spring is sent downe from Heauen: the deerelie beloued issue or child of the Gods. And note heere, that Sibylla saith plainlie, Chara Dei soboles, the deerely beloued Sonne of God, and not of Gods; but that Virgil would follow the style of his tyme. And thirdly, hee setteth downe out of Sibylla, the effect and cause of this sonne of Gods natiuitie, in this sort. Christes cause of comming.Te duce, si qua manent, sceleris vestigia nostri: Irrita perpetuo, soluent formidine terra. That is, thou being our leader or Captaine: the remnant of our sinnes shall be made voide, or taken away, and shall deliuer the world for euer from feare for the same. These are Virgils words translated
(as I said) out of Sibylla. And now consider you in reason, whether these Prophecies might be applied (as Virgill applied them) to those poore children in Rome, or no, who died soone after this flatterie of Vir∣gill, without dooing good, either to themselues, or to others? Albeit (perhaps) in this point, the Poet be to be excused, in that he beeing not able to imagine what the Sibyl shold meane, made his aduantage thereof, in applying the same to the best plea∣sing of Augustus. These then are the proofes, which Constantine vsed for the credite and authoritie of the Sibyll verses. And of Sibylla Erithraea in particuler, that made the Accrostike Verses before mentioned, of Christes death and Passion, hee concludeth in these words;Constantines opinion of the spirit of Si∣bylla Ery∣thraea: orat. ad caetum. Sanct. ca. 18 These are the things that fell from Heauen, into the mind of this Vir∣gine to ore-tell. For which cause I am induced to account her for blessed, whom our Sauiour did vouchsafe to chuse for a Prophet, to denounce vnto the world, his holie prouidence towardes vs. And we may consider in this whole dis∣course of Constantine, for authori∣tie of these verses. First, that he vseth
onely the testimonie of such Wri∣ters, as liued before Christ was born, or Christians once thought vpon.  Secondly, that he vseth these proofes to no meaner audience, then to a Councell and congregation of lear∣ned  men. Thirdly, that he vvas an Emperour which vsed them, that is, one that had meanes to see and exa∣mine the originall Copies in the  Romaine Treasurie. Fourthly, for that he had great learned men about him, who were skilfull, and would be dilligent in the search of such an antiquitie of importance: especially Lactantius,Lactantius. that was Master to hys sonne Crispus, and who most of a∣nie Author, reciteth and confirmeth the said Sibyls verses: and Eusebius Caesariensis, that wrote the Ecclesia∣sticall historie, and See Euseb. lib. 4. cap. 32. de vita Con∣stant. howe this Oration was first written in Latine and translated into Greeke. recorded this Oration of Constantine therin. And finallie, we may consider, that Con∣stantine was the first publique Chri∣stian Emperour, and lyued within three hundred yeeres after Christ, when the recordes of the Romaines were yet whole to be seene. He was a religious, wise, and graue Emperor, and therefore would neuer haue be∣stowed so much labour, to confirme
such a thing, at such a time, to such an audience, had not the matter ben of singuler importance. And thus much of the second point, touching Prophets among the Gentiles. ¶Of the confssion of Oracles, con∣cerning Christes comming. THere remaineth onelie a word or two to be spoken of the thirde: which is, of the confession of deuils and Oracles, concerning the com∣ming of Christ; especiallie when the time of his appearance drew neere, and that they began to fore-tell his power and vertue. Wherein as I might alledge diuers examples, re∣corded by the Gentiles themselues: so for that I haue been some-what long in the former points, and shall haue occasion to say more of thys matter in another place heereafter, I will touch onelie heere two Oracles of Apollo concerning this matter. The one whereof, was to a Priest of his owne, that demaunded hym of true Religion, and of GOD: to whom he aunswered thus in Greek.The first Oracle. O thou vnhappie Priest, why doost thou aske me of GOD, that is the father of
all things: and of this most renowmed Kings deere and onelie sonne, and of the spirit that containeth all. &c. Alas, that spirit will enforce me shortlie, to leaue this habitation and place of Oracles.Suidas in Thulis, et Porphy. et Plut. de ora. The other Oracles was to Augu∣stus Caesar,The second Oracle. euen about the verie time that Christ was readie to appeare in flesh. For wheras the said Emperour now drawing into age, wold needes goe to Delphos,Suidas in vi∣ta August. Niceph. lib. 1 hist. cap. 17. and there learne of Apollo, who shoulde raigne after him, and what should become of things when he was dead, to which demaunde, Apollo for a great space would make no aunswere, notwith∣standing, Augustus had been verie liberall, in making the great Sacri∣fice called Hecatombe. But in the end, when the Emperour began to ite∣rate his Sacrifice againe, and to be instant for an aunswer: Apollo (as it were) inforced, vttered these strange words vnto him. An Hebrue childe, that ruleth ouer the blessed Gods, com∣maundeth me to leaue this habitation, and out of hande to get mee to Hell. But yet doe you depart in silence from our Altars. Thus much was Apollo inforced to vtter of his owne miserie, and of
the comming of the Hebrue boy, that should put him to banishment. But yet the deceitfull spirit, to hold still his credite, would not haue the matter reuealed to many. Where∣vpon, Augustus falling into a great musing with himselfe, what thys aunswer might import: returned to Rome, and builded there an Altar in the Capitole, with this Latine in∣scription (as Nicephorus affirmeth,) Ara primogeniti Dei:Niceph. lib. 1 hist. cap. 17. The Altar of Gods first begotten Sonne. Thus then haue I declared, howe that the comming of Gods son into the worlde,The con∣clusion of this first Section. was fore-tolde both to Iewe and Gentile, by all meanes that possibly in reason might be deuised; that is, by Prophecies, signes, figures, ceremonies, tradition, and by the confession of deuils themselues. Not onelie that his comming was fore-tolde, but also, why, and for what cause he was for to come, that is, to be the onely Sauiour of the worlde: to die for the sinnes of all men: to ordaine a newe Law, and more per∣fect Common-wealth. How also he was to come to wit, in mans flsh, in likenes of sinne, in pouertie, and humilitie. The time likewise of his
appearance was prefigured, together with the manner of his byrth, lyfe, actions, death, resurrection, and as∣cention. And finally, nothing can be more desired for the foreknowledge of any one thing to come, then was deliuered & vttered concerning the Messias, before that euer Christ or Christians vvere talked of in the world.The argu∣ment of the two Secti∣ons follow∣ing. Now then remaineth it to consider and examine, whether these particularities, fore-told so long ago of the Messias to come, do agree in Christ, whom we acknowledge for the true Messias. And this shall be the subiect or argument of all the rest of our speech in this Chapter. ¶How the former predictions were fulfilled in our Sauior Christ, at his beeing vpon earth. SECT. 2. ALbeit in the points before reci∣ted, which are to be fulfilled in the Messias at his comming, we haue some controuersie & disagreement with the Iewe,Our contro∣uersie with Gentiles. as hath been shewed, yet our principall contention in thē all, is with the Gentiles & Heathen,
that beleeue no Scriptures. For that in diuers of the former Articles, the Iew standeth with vs, and for vs, & offereth his life in defence therof, as far forth as if he were a Christian. In so much, as the Gentile oftentimes, is inforced to meruaile, when he see∣eth a people, so extreamely bent one against another, as the Iewes are a∣gainst Christians: and yet doest and so peremptorilie in defence of those verie principles, which are the pro∣per causes of their disagreement. But heereunto the Iewe maketh aunswer,Our contro∣uersie with the Iewes. that his disagreement from vs, is in the application of those principles, For that in no wise he wil allow, that they were, or may be ve∣rified in Iesus. And heerein he stn∣deth against vs, much more obsti∣natly then doth the Gentile. For that the Gentile, as soone as he commeth once to vnderstand and beleeue the Prophecies of Scripture, he maketh no doubt or difficultie in the appli∣cation thereof: for that he seeth the same most euidentlie fulfilled in our Sauiour Christ. Which is the cause, that few or no Gentiles since Chri∣stes appearance, haue come to bee Iewes, but that presentlie also they
passed ouer to be Christians. The obsti∣nacie of the Iewes.But the Iewe by no meanes wil be moued to yeeld, albeit he haue ney∣ther Scripture, nor reason, or proba∣bility for his deence. Which among other things, is a verie great argu∣ment to prooue, that Iesus was the true Messias indeede, seeing that a∣mong the markes of the true Messias set downe by Gods Prophets, that was one: that he should be refused of the Iewish Nation. Heerehence are those wordes of the holie Ghost so long before vttered;Psalm. 118 The stone which the The Iewes are the buil∣ders, who take vpon them to build Gods house. builders refused, is made the head stone of the corner, this is done by God, and it is maruailous in our eyes. Heerehence is that great complaint of Esay, touching the incredulitie and obstinacie of his people, against their Messias, at his comming, which Moses also long before Esay expres∣sed most effectuallyMath. 21. Esay, 6. Deut. 28.It maketh then, not a little for our cause (gentle Reader) that the Iewish Nation is so wilfully bent against vs,The Iewes obstinacie against vs, a great argu∣ment for vs. and that they refused Christ so per∣emptorily at his being among them. For whom soeuer that Nation shold receiue and acknowledge: it were a great argument by Scripture, that he
were not indeede the true Messias. But yet to demonstrate to the world, what little shew of reason they haue in standing thus against their owne saluation, and in refusing Christ, as they doe: I will in as great breuitie as I may, run ouer the chiefe points that passed at his beeing vpon earth, and thereby examine by the testimo∣nies of his greatest enemies, whether the foresaid Prophecies, and all o∣ther signes, which haue beene from the beginning, to fore-tell vnto vs the true Messias, vvere fulfilled in him and his actions, or no. And for that the matters are ma∣nie and diuers, that will come heerin to be handled, I will for order sake, reduce all to fower considerations.The deuisi∣on of thys Section into fower con∣siderations. Whereof the first, shal be, touching the time fore-prophecied of ye com∣ming of the Messias, and whether the same agreed with Christes nati∣uitie or no. The second shall be of dyuers particulers that passed in Christes incarnation, birth, circum∣cision, and other accidents, vntil the time that he began to preach. The third shall be of his life, conuersa∣tion, miracles, and doctrine. The fourth and last, shal be of his passion,
death, resurrection, and ascention. In all which, (as I said before) I will vse no one Authour or testimonie of our owne side,The testi∣monies here vsed. for approuing any thing that is in controuersie bee∣tweene vs: but all shal passe by trial, either of their owne Scriptures, or of manifest force and consequence of reason, or els by expresse recorde of our professed enemies. ¶The first consideration. FOR the first then, concerning the time,The time appointed. which is the principall and heade of all the rest it is to bee noted, that by consent of all Wri∣ters, both Pagan, Iewish, and Chri∣stian, IESVS, (whom we beleeue and confesse to be true CHRIST) was borne the twentie fiue day of December, in the ende of the fortie and one yeere of the raigne of the Emperour Augustus Caesar, vvhich was fifteene yeeres before his raigne ended. Also in the beginning of the thirty-three yeere of Herods raigne in Iurie, which was foure yeeres and more before his death. And from the beginning of the world, as See Euseb. in Chron. some account, foure thousand, one hun∣dred,
and ninetie-nine. And as o∣thers doe account, foure thousand, foure-score and nine: for that in this point, betweene the Hebrues and the Graecians, there is a difference of some little more then an hundred yeeres, concerning their reckoning. The state of the world at Christes natiuitie,The general state of the world at Christes comming. was this. The three Mo∣narchies of the Assirians, Persians, and Graecians were past ouer, and ended: and the Romaines were en∣tered into the fourth, that was grea∣ter then any of the rest, according to the Prophecie of Daniell,Daniel, 2. fiue hun∣dred yeeres before Octauius Caesar, surnamed Augustus,Suet. tran. et Aurel. victo. et alij in vita August. after fiue ciuill warres by himselfe waged, and after infinite broyles & bloodshed in the world, raigned peaceably alone for many yeeres together: and in token of an vniuersall peace ouer all the earth, he caused the Temple gates of Ianus to be shutte, according to the custome of the Romans in such ca∣ses: albeit this had happened but twice before, from the building of Rome vnto that time. And the verie same day that Christ vvas borne in Iurie, Augustus commaunded in Rome (Oros, lib. 6. hist. cap. 22.as afterward was obserued)
that no man should call him Lord, thereby to signifie the free libertie, rest, oy, and securitie, wherein all men were after so long miseries, which by continuall warres the vvorld had sustained. The first proofe.By this we gather first, that thys time of Christes birth, agreed ex∣actlie vvith the Prophecie so long before set downe in Daniell, (who liued in the first Monarchie,The Ro∣maine Mo∣narchie. Daniell, 2.) that after his time there should be three Monarchies more, and the last big∣gest of all: at whose appearing the Messias should come, and builde vp Gods kingdome throughout the whole vvorld. The second proofe.Secondly, wee see that fulfilled, vvhich Esay the Prophet, aboue an hundred yeeres before Daniell, fore∣tolde that at the comming of Christ, people should sit in the beautie in peace.The peace of all the world. Esay, 32. And againe, there should bee no ende of peace. And yet further, hee shall be Prince of peace. And K. Dauid long before him againe:Psalm, 71. In his daies there shall arise iustice and aboundance of peace. Which thing, though especi∣allie it be to be vnderstood, of the internal peace & tranquillitie of our mindes and soules: yet considering
that external peace also was necessa∣rie for a time, for the quiet planting and publishing of Christes Gospell, and seeing that ye same was brought to passe most miraculously vpon the suddain, when in reason men might least expect the same, for the infinite warres wherein the world a little be∣fore had been: and by reason of the Romaine Monarchie so freshly esta∣blished, (which in their beginnings are wont to be troublesome:) thys peace (I say) can not bee but a great argument, that this was the proper time of the Messias his comming. And thus much for the state of the world in generall. And now for the particuler state of Iurie at Iesus natiuity,The third proofe. thus it was, according as Iosephus the Iew (who was borne within fiue yeeres after Christes passion) describeth ye same.The Scepter of Iuda. One Herod a stranger, whose Father called His grand∣father was a Sextane in Apollos tē∣ple, and his father was brought vp among theeues in Idumaea. Antipater, came out of Idu∣maea, was risen to acquaintance and fauour with the Romans, partlie by his said Fathers meanes, who was, (as Iosephus words are) a well moni∣ed man, industrious, and factious, and partlie by hys owne diligence and ambition, beeing of himselfe both
wittie, beautifull, and of excellent rare qualities. By which commenda∣tions,Euseb. lib. 1. cap. 6. ex A∣phricano. Ioseph. lib. 14 antiq. cap. 2. he came at length to marrie the daughter of Hyrcanus King of Iurie, that was descended lineally of the house of Dauid, and Tribe of Iuda. And by this marriage, obtay∣ned of his Father in law to bee Go∣uernour of the Prouince of Galilie vnder him. But Hircanus afterwards falling into the hands of the Par∣thyans, that carried him into Par∣thya: Herod ran away to Rome,The first ry∣sing of He∣rod Ascolo∣nita. and there by the special helpe and fauour of Anthonie, that ruled in company together with Octauius, he obtained to be created King of Iurie, without any title or interest in the world. For that not onely his said Father in law Hyrcanus was yet aliue in Parthya, but also his yonger brother Aristo∣bulus, and three of his sonnes, na∣med Antigonus, Alexander, and Aristobulus, and diuers other of the blood royall in Iurie. Herod then, hauing procured by these meanes to be King of Iurie: procured first to haue in his handes the fore-said King Hyrcanus,Ioseph. lib. 15 anti. ca. 9.11 and so put him to death: he also brought to the same ende, his younger brother
Aristobulus, and his three sons like∣wise. He put to death also his owne wife Mariamnes,The most horrible murders committed by Herod. that was K. Hyrca∣nus daughter, as also Alexandra her Mother: and soone after two of his owne sonnes, which he had by the said Mariamnes, for that they were of the blood royall of Iuda. And a little after that again,Lib. 17. c. 10. he put to death his thirde sonne named Antipater. He caused also to bee slaine at one time, fortie of the cheefest noble men of the Trybe of Iuda.Lib. 15. ca. 1. Phylo lib. de tempore. And as Phylo the Iew writeth (that liued at the same time with him) he put to death all the Sanhedrin, that is, the seauentie and two Senatours of the Trybe of Iuda, that ruled the people. Hee killed the chiefe of the Sect of the Pharisies.Ioseph. lib. 14. cap. 2. He burned the Gene∣alogies of all the Kings and Princes of the house of Iuda: and caused one Nicholaus Damascenus an Histo∣riographer that was his seruant, to drawe out a Petidegree for him and his lyne, as though he had discended from the auncient Kings of Iuda. Hee translated the High priest∣hood,A patterne of an am∣bicious Ti∣rant. and solde it to strangers. And finallie, he so rased, dispersed, and mangled the house of Iuda: as no
one iote of gouernment, dignitie, or principalitie remained therein. And when he had done all this, then was IESVS of the same house and lyne of Iuda, borne in Bethleem, the pro∣per Cittie of Dauid, which Dauid was the founder and first Author of Regalitie in Iuda. The Pro∣phecie of Iacob tou∣ching the Scepter of Iuda. Gene. 49.Now then, consider the prophe∣cie of Iacob, concerning the parti∣culer time of Christes appearance, almost two thousand yeeres before these things fell out. Come hether my chyldren, (said he) that I may tell you the things which are to happen in the latter dayes &c. The Scepter shall not be taken from Iuda, vntill he come who is to be sent: and he shall be the expecta∣tion of Nations. Which prophecie, that it was fulfilled novv at Christes natiuitie, vvhen Herod hd extin∣guished all gouernment in Iuda, no man can denie, that will acknow∣ledge the things set downe before, which are recorded by Writers both of that time, and of the Iewish Na∣tion and Religion themselues. That the Scepter ne∣uer failed in Iuda vntill Herod cameAnd that it neuer vvas fulfilled from Dauids daies, (who began the gouernment of the house of Iuda) vntill this time, appeareth plainly by
all Histories and Recordes both di∣uine and prophane. For that from Dauid,1. Reg. 16. (who was the first King) vn∣to Zedechias that vvas the last, and died in the captiuitie of Babilon,4. Reg. 29. Ierem. 37. the Scripture sheweth how all the Kings descended from the house of Iuda. And during the time of their capti∣uitie in Babilon,Thal. in tra. Sanh. ca. Di∣nei. Manmo∣noth. (which was seauen∣tie yeeres) the Iewes were alwaies permitted to chuse themselues a Go∣uernour of the house of Iuda, whom they called RESCHGALVTA. And after their deliuerie from Ba∣bilon,Rab. Moyses Egip. in prae. Maimonim. Esd. lib. 1. ca. 1.2.3. Zorobabel was their Captain of the same Tribe: and so others af∣ter him, vntill you come to the Mac∣chabees,Mac. lib. 1. cap. 2.3. who were both Captaines and Priestes: for that they were by the Mothers side, of the Tribe of Iuda, and by the Fathers side, of the Tribe of Leui, as Rabbi Kimhi hol∣deth.Rab. Kimhi. com. in Agg. Iosep. lib. 13. & 14 antiq. And from these men down to Hircanus and Aristobulus whom Herod slewe, there continued stil the same lyne, as Iosephus declareth. So that by this Prophecie it is euident, that Iesus was borne at the proper time appointed for the Messias, whē there was neither King nor Cap∣tain, nor High Priest, nor Counseller,
nor any one Gouernour of the house and Trybe of Iuda, left in Iurie. The fourth proofe.An other Prophecie there is, no lesse euident then the former, where∣in it is affirmed, that the Messias shold come before the second Tem∣ple of Ierusalem,The destru∣ction of the seconde Temple. (that was builded by Zorobabel after the Iewes were returned from their captiuity in Ba∣bilon) should be destroyed by the Romaines. For better vnderstanding whereof, it is to be noted, that the Temple of Ierusalem was builded twice;3. Reg. 6. et 7 first by Salomon, which la∣sted about foure hundred and fortie two yeeres,2. Chron. 3. and then it was burned and destroied by Nabuchodonozer King of Babilon.Euseb. in Chron. Clem. lib. 1. strom. Wherefore about seauentie yeeres after, it was builded againe by Zorobabel,4. Reg. 25. who reduced the Iewes from Babilon,1. Esd. 1.3.4. and so it continued, vntil it was destroyed the second time by Tytus, son to Vespa∣sian the Romaine Emperour, about fortie & sixe yeres after our Sauiour Christ his ascention. At what time it had lasted from Zorobabel almost sixe hundred yeeres: and from Salo∣mon, aboue a thousand. And in the time of the seconde building, the people of Israell were
poore, and much afflicted in respect of their late banishment,1. Esdras 5. and 6. (though much assisted to this worke by the liberalitie and munificencie of Da∣rius King of Babilon:) so was the building and workmanship of thys second Temple,The buil∣ding of the seconde Temple lesse gorge∣ous then the first. 1. Esdras, 5. nothing compara∣ble, for excellencie to the first, which was builded by Salomon, when the Iewes were in the flower of their glorie and riches. This testifieth Aggaeus the Prophet, vvho was one of the builders, and he testifieth the same to Zorobabel, and to the rest of those that were with him, by Gods owne appointment, in these words.Aggae. 2. The woord of God was made to Aggaeus the Prophet. Tell Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel Captaine of Iu∣da, and Iesus the sonne of Iosedec high Priest, and the rest of the people. Who is there left of you, that saw this Temple in his first glorie, (before our transmi∣gration,) and what say you to this, which now we see? is it not in our eyes as though it were not at all? That is, is it not as though it were a thing of nothing, in comparison of ye former Temple, which Salomon builded. Thus saith Aggaeus by Gods com∣mission, of the materiall building of
the seconde Temple. And yet to comfort the Iewes with all, he was commaunded presently in the same Chapter to say thus; Comfort thy selfe Zorobabell, and comfort thy selfe Iesu thou sonne of Iosedec high Priest, and comfort your selues all yee people of the earth, saith the Lord God of Hostes:Aggae. 2. do yee the thinges which I couenanted with you, when yee came foorth of the Land of Egipt, and feare not, for that my Spirit shall bee among you. Thus saith the Lord God of HostesThis he said for that the three Monarchies ensued, wherein there was continuall warre and bloodshed. a little time yet remaineth, when I will mooue both heauen and earth, both Sea and Land, with all Countries in the world. And then shall come the DESIRED OF AL NATIONS: And I will fill his house (or Temple) with glorie saith the Lord GOD of Hostes. Siluer is mine, and Gold is myne, sayth the Lord GOD of Hostes: great shall bee the glorie of this last house or Temple, more then of the first, saith the Lord GOD of Hostes. Hetherto are the words of God by Aggaeus, and the often repetition, o the Lord GOD of Hostes, is to signifie the certaintie and great weight of the matter promi∣sed. Now consider then, that wher∣as God had said immediatly before,
that thys seconde Temple was no∣thing in respect of ye first, for pompe and riches of the material building, which the old men in the booke of Esdras doe testifie by their weeping (when they saw this second, and re∣membred the first) yet now GOD sayth,1. Esdras, 3. that Gold & Siluer is his owne, (as though he made no account of the aboundance thereof in the for∣mer Temple, or of the want of the same in thys) and that notwithstan∣ding the pouerty of the second buil∣ding, yet, shall it be filled and reple∣nished with glorie, and that in such sorte, as it shall far passe in glory the former: and that shall be, (as both heere is expressed, and other where most plainly,) by the comming of our Sauiour Thys was fulfilled whē christ was perso∣nally, and taught in the Tem∣ple. Christ into the second Temple,Luk. 1, 2, 19. which shall be a greater dignitie,Math, 21, 26, &c. then any dignitie what so∣euer was found in the first building of Salomons Temple. Concerning which poynt,Preroga∣tiues of the first Tem∣ple. it is to be considered, yt the learned Iewes, besides the materiall dyfference of building before mentioned, doe note fiue things of great importance to haue been wanting in the second Temple,Rab. Samuel tract. Sanh. in Thalm. which were in the first. To
wit, The fire sent from Heauen to burne the Holocaustes;Hieroso. Ra. Aba. in lib. deorum. The glorie of GOD (or Angels) appearing a∣mong  the Images of Cherubines  that stood in the Temple; The ma∣nifest  inspiration of Gods Spirit vp∣pon Prophets, (for that Prophecie  fayled in the second Temple;) The  presence of the Arke; and last of all Vrim and Thumim. All which great wants and differences, notwithstan∣ding, God sayth as you see, that the glory of this second Temple, shall be much greater then the first, by the comming of Christ into the same. Which thing, Malachie that lyued at the same tyme when the seconde Temple was in building, confir∣meth more expresly in these words.Mala, 3, Behold, I send my Thys christ inter∣preted of S. Iohn Bap∣tist. Mat. 11, Angel, & he shall prepare the way before my face. And straight after, shall come to this Tem∣ple, the Lord or Ruler, whom ye seeke & the MESSENGER OF THE TESTAMENT whom you desire. Behold, he commeth sayth the Lord of hostes, and who can imagine the day of hys comming? or who can stande or abide to see him? for he shall be as a purging fire. &c. By all which is made euident, tha
Christ must come & appeare in the second Temple before it be destroy∣ed, (as Iesus did) and therefore hee cannot be now to come, seeing the sayde Temple was destroyed aboue one thousande and fiue hundred yeeres past by the Romaines, as hath beene sayd. Which destruction and finall desolation, was prophecied by Daniell, to ensue soone after the byrth and passion of Christ in these words.Dan, 9. After sixtie and two hebdoma∣des, Christ shall be slaine: and a peo∣ple with their Captaine to come, shall destroy the Cittie,The second Temple to be destroy∣ed presently after Chri∣stes passion. and the Sanctuary, and the ende thereof shall be vastitie or spoyle. And after the warre ended, there shall ensue the appointed desola∣tion. Which prophecy to haue fallen out litterally about 40. yeres after Ie∣sus was put to death, whē Ierusalem was destroied & the Temple ouer∣throwne by Titus,Iosep. de. bel. Iudaico. li. 6. the story of Iose∣phus yt learned Iew, who was Cap∣taine against Tytus in that war, doth maniestly and at large declare. And for that we haue made men∣tion heere of Daniels prophecy con∣cerning the particuler time of Chri∣stes comming,The fift proofe. The 72. Hebdo∣mades. and of his death, which confirmeth the purpose we
treate of so perspicuously, as nothing can be said more euident, it shal not be amisse to examine the same be∣fore we passe any further. For bet∣ter conceiuing whereof, it is to bee vnderstoode, that thys Greeke word Hebdomada, (signifying seuen) doth som-time import a weeke or seauen dayes,Two kindes of weekes. according to our common vse, and then it is called in scripture Hebdomada dierū, a weeke of daies, as in Daniell the tenth chapter, and the second verse; where the Prophet saith of himselfe, that he did mourne three weekes of dayes. But at other times, it signifieth the space of sea∣uen yeeres, and is called in scripture Hebdomada annorum, a weeke of yeeres. As in Leuiticus where it is sayd;Leu. 25. vide etiam ca 23 et ali. passim Thou shalt number vnto thee seauen weekes of yeeres, that is seauen times seauen, which make fortie and nine yeeres. Now then it is certaine, that Da∣niell in the Prophecie before alled∣ged, where hee assigneth sixty-two weekes to ye time of Christes death, could not meane weekes of daies, fo that hee appoynteth onely seauen weekes, to the rebuilding of the Cittie of Ierusalem, of the Temple, an
of the wals about; which were not ended but in forty and nine yeeres after, as my be gathered by the Bookes of Esdrs:Lib. 1. et 2. which forty nine weekes, do make iust seauen weekes of yeeres. And therore it is certaine, that such Hebdomades of yeeres, are meant heere by Daniell in all the prophecie. First then, whē the Angel came to comfort him, and to open vnto him secrets for the time to come, he sayd these words;Dan. 9. Marke my speech, and vnderstand the vision. The seauentie Hebdomades or weekes are shortened, (or hastened) vpon thy people, & vp∣pon thy holy Citty: to the end all pre∣uarication and sinne may take an end, and iniquity be blotted out, & euerla∣sting iustice be brought in place ther∣of: to the end that visions & prophe∣cies may be fulfilled, and the HOLY OF HOLIES may be annointed.Ierem, 25, et 29. In which words, it seemeth that the Angel did allude by naming sauen∣tie,Why the Angel na∣med seuen∣tie and two Hebdoma∣des in thys place vnto the seauentie yeeres of cap∣tiuitie, prophecied by Ieremie, after which ended, the people should be deliuered rom their temporall bon∣dage in Babylon. And therfore Da∣niell nowe being in that place, and
perceiuing the same tyme to be ex∣pired, prayed to God with great in∣stance, to fulfill his promise made by Ieremie. Whereto the Angell aun∣swered, that it should be done. And as after the expiration of 70. yeeres, God was now to deliuer them from the bodily captiuity of Babilon: so was hee also ater seauentie Hebdo∣mades more, to deliuer them from bondage of sinne & prearication, and that by the annointed MES∣SIAS, which is indeed the Holy of all Holes. This (I say) may be the reason of naming seauentie Hebdomades, thereby to allude to the number of the seuentie yeeres of that Babilo∣nicall seruitude. For that immedit∣ly ater, the Angell appoynteth the whole exact nūber to be three-score and nyne Hebdomades, that is, sea∣uen to the building of the City and Temple, and sixtie-two from that to y• death of Christ, in these words.Dan. 9, Know hou and marke, that from the end o this speech, to the time that Ie∣rusalē shal be builded,The exact number of wekes frō the buil∣ding of the second Tē∣ple to the death of Chist. 62. and vnto Christ the Captaine, there shal be Hebdoma∣des seauen, and Hebdomades sixtie-two: and the streetes & wals (of Ie∣rusalem)
shal be builded again, though with much difficultie of the times: & after sixtie and two Hebdomads, Christ shall be slaine. And the people that shall denie him, shall not be his &c. And then vnto consumation and end, shall perseuer desoltion. Now then, if we put these yeees together, which are here mencioned by Danill:The accoūt of Daniels weekes. that is, fist the seauen Hebdomades, whih make fortie and nine yeeres, and then the three∣score and two, from the restaurati∣on of Ierusalem, which make foure hundred, thirty and foure more, we shall finde the whole number to be foure hundred, and eyghtie-three yeeres. Which being begunne from the first yeere of Cyrus, as some wil, (for yt he first determined the Iewes reduction,) or from the second yere of Darius, as others will, (for that hee confirmed and put the same in execution,) or from the twenty yee of the said Darius, for that then, hee made a new Edict in the fauour of Nehemias, and sent him into Iurie, euery way they wil end in the raigne of Herod and Augustus, vnder whō Christ was borne, or in the rigne of Tyberius Caesar, vnder whom he
suffered. And by no interpretation in the world, can it be auoided, but that this time appointed by Daniel, is now out, aboue one thousand and fiue hundred yeeres past, whyle yet the Temple stoode, and was not put to desolation. And therefore of ne∣cessity, Christ must be come about that time, and neuer more heerafter to be looked for. The sixt proofe.The traditions and obseruations of the olde Iewes themselues, doe meruailously confirme thys beleefe of ours, for that they all dyd run to thys one poynt,The tradi∣tions of Rabbines. that about the tyme of Augustus his raigne, (wherein Ie∣sus was borne) the Messias shoulde appeare. It is often repeated in the Thalmud,Thal. tract. Sand cap. elec. et alibi that one Elyas left thys tradition, that the world should en∣dure sixe thousande yeeres; that is, two thousand before the Lawe of Moses, two thousand vnder the same Lawe, and two thousand after that, vnder the Messias. Which last two thousande yeeres, by all computati∣on, could not begin much from the byrth of Iesus. And the Rabbines a great while agone, complained in theyr Thalmud,Thal. in tra. Auodazara. that there seemed to them in those dayes, seauen
hundred and fourteene yeeres past, since Christ by the Scriptures shold haue appeared: and therefore they doe meruaile why God so long de∣ferreth the same. An other obseruation they haue vpon the words of Esay,Esay, 9. An obser∣uation of the Caba∣listes. Paruulus natus est nobis, a little chyld is borne vnto vs. In which wordes, for that they finde the Hebrue Letter Mem, to be shut in the midst of a worde, (which is strange in that tongue, for that Mem is wont to be open in the midst of words, and shut onely in the end,) they gather many secretes.Thal in lib. Sabbat. et in tract. Sanh. And among other, that seeing Mem signifieth sixe hundred yeres, so long it should be after Esay, vntil the time of Christ. Which account of theirs falleth out so iust,Esay, 7, that if you reckon the yeeres from Achaz King of Iu∣da, in whose tyme Esay spake these wordes,Math, 2. vntil the time of King He∣rod vnder whom Christ was borne, you shall perceiue the nūber to fayle in little or nothing. A much lyke obseruation hath Rabbi Moses,The obser∣uation of Rabbi Mo∣ses. the son of Maimon, (whom the Iewes doe holde in ex∣treame great reuerence, calling hym the Doctor of iustice,) in his Epistle
to hys Countrimen of Affrica,Rab. Moses Ben. Mai∣mon. ep. ad Iudeos Afri, con∣cerning the time of Christes appea∣raunce, which hee thinketh to be past according to the Scriptures, a∣boue a thousand yeeres in his daies, (he lyued about the yeere of Christ, one thousand, one hundred & for∣tie,) but that God deferreth his ma∣nifestation for theyr sinnes. Rab. Iosue Ben. Leui, in Thal tract. Sanhed. cap. helec.To which purpose also, appertai∣neth the Narration of one Elias, as Rabbi Iosue reporteth it in ye Thal∣mud, yt the Messias was to be borne indeede, according to the Scripture, before the destruction of the second Temple; for that Esay saith of the Sinagogue,Esay, 66, Before she was with child shee brought foorth: and before the griefe of trauaile came, she was deli∣uered of a man child. That is, sayth hee, before the Sinagogue was af∣flicted and put to desolation by the Romaines, she brought foorth the Messias. But yet (sayth he) this Mes∣sias for our sinnes, dooth hyde him∣selfe for a time in the Sea,Christ hy∣deth him∣selfe in the Sea and o∣ther desert places, vntill we be wor∣thy of his comming. To the lyke ef∣fect is the obseruation of the Thal∣mud it selfe,The obser∣uation of the Thal∣mud. and of diuers Rabbines therin, concerning the wicked man∣ners
of men that should be at Chri∣stes appearance vppon earth, of whō they doe pronounce these wordes:Thal. tract. Sanhed. cap. helec. Rab. Iohanan. Rab. Iuda. Rab. Neho∣ras. &c. The wise men in Israell shall be ex∣tinguished: the learning of our Scribes and Pharisies shall be putrified: the schooles of Diuinitie shal be stewes at that time. Which thing Iosephus that lyued in the same age with our Sauiour Christ,Iosep lib. 20, anti. ca. 6. et 8 et lib. 6, de bel. Iud. 15, et li. 7. cap. 9. affirmeth to be ful∣filled in the tyme of Herode: in so much, that if the Romaines had not destroyed thē, without doubt, sayth he, eyther the earth would haue o∣pened and swallowed them downe, or els fire from heauen would haue consumed them. All then runneth to this end,The seuēth proofe. both by Scripture, tradition, obseruation, and instinct of God himsele:Foreboding. that about Herods time the true Messias should be borne. And heereof came that common and publique fame that is recorded by Tacitus Suetoni∣us, and Iosephus,Tacit. li. 12, Sueton. in vita Vesp. Iosep. de bello Iudai. lib, 7, cap. 12, (which was also written in open sight, vpon the chie∣fest Tower of the Citty of Ierusalē) that out of Iurie should rise A ge∣nerall Lord of the vniuersall worlde. Which Prophecie, as the Romaines eyther contemned, or turned ano∣ther
way, applying the same after∣ward to the Emperour Vespasian, so the Iewes vnderstood it of their Mes∣sis, and Herode feared the matter greatly; and for that was so watch∣full to extinguish the line of Dauid as hath beene already shewed. Heereof also it did proceede, that the Magi,The eyght prooe. or Wise men of the East, attended so diligently about yt time, to expect the starre that Balaam had promised at the comming of thys King. Heere-hence also it was, that the whole people of Iurie,The gene∣ral expecta∣tion of the people. remained so attent at thys time, more then e∣uer beore or since, in expecting the Messias. Whereupon, so soone as e∣uer they hearde of I. Baptist in the Deserte,Iohn, 1, they ran vnto him, asking if he were Christ? As afterward also they flocked to Iesus, demaunding; Art thou he which is to come, or do we expect another? Which wordes im∣port the great expectation wherein that people remained in those dayes. Neither wanted that expectation in the chiefe Gouernors themselues, as may appeare by that spech of theirs to Iesus;Iohn, 10. How long wilt thou kill vs, (with thys expectation?) if thou be Christ, tell vs plainlie.
Of which fame, expectation,Diuers false Christes did rise in Iurie. and greedie desire of the people, diuers deceiuers tooke occasion to cal thē∣selues the Messias in those daies, and the people followed them presently:Acts, 5. which thing had not happened in any age before.Iosep. lib. 17, ca. 8. et li. 18 ca. 1. et 2. et lib. 20. cap. 2, & 6. And among other, there is named one Iudas Gauloni∣tes, or Galilaeus (as S. Luke calleth hym,) and another Iudas the sonne of Ezechias, both of them very wic∣ked and licentious fellowes One al∣so called A tonges, a sheepheard, and two other, named Theudas, & Egip∣tus, most notable deceiuers. And a∣boue all, there was one Barcozbam,Thal. tract. San. ca, helec Rab. Moses, Ben Maim. in Sententijs (who as the Thalmud affirmeth) for thirty yeeres together was receiued for the Messias, by the Rabbines themselues, vntill at last they slewe him, for that he was not able to de∣liuer them from the Romaines. Which facility in the people whē Herod sawe: hee caused Nicholaus Damascenus (as I noted before) to deuise a petidegree for him,Nicol. Da∣mascenus. Iosep. lib. 14. antiq. cap. 2. from the auncientest Kinges of Iuda, and so he, as well as other, tooke vpon him to be the Messias, whom diuers car∣nall Iewes, that expected the Messias to be a magnificent King, as Herod
was, would seeme to beleeue, and di∣vulgate abroade, and thereof in the Gospell, they are thought to haue beene called Herodiani, that is, He∣rodians or followers of Herod,Math, 22, who came to tempt Christ,Mar, 3, 12, with the Scribes and Pharisies. Wherefore to conclude at length, this weighty poynt of the tyme of Christes appearing;The cōclu∣sion of thys fist consi∣deration of the tyme. seeing that a∣bout ye birth of Iesus vnder Herods raigne, there concurred so manie signes and arguments together: as the generall peace of the Romaine Empyre; the defection of the lyne and regiment of Iuda; the open de∣cay of the second Temple; the iust calculation of Daniels Hebdoma∣des; the attestation of Oracles; the obseruation of Rabbines; the pub∣lique fame & expectation of all the Iewes: together with the palpable experience of more then fifeene hundred yeeres past, since Iesus ap∣peared, wherein we see the Iewish people in vaine doe expect another Messias, they being dispersed ouer all the world, without Temple, law, Sacrifice, Prophet, or promise for their redemption, (which neuer hap∣pened vnto thē til after Iesus death,
for that in all other theyr banish∣ments, captiuities, and afflictions, they had some Prophecie, consola∣tion, or promise for theyr deliuerie.) These things all (I say) considered and put together, we may most vn∣doubtedly and assuredly conclude, that Iesus was borne at the iust time appointed, and fore-told by the spi∣rite of GOD; and consequentlie, that he only was the true Messias & Sauior of the world, which yet shall better appeare, by examination of other things that are to follow. The second Consideration. NOw in the second consideration there come to be weighed these poynts following;Christ hys byrth. the lyne & stock of Iesus; his manner of conception; the place of hys byrth; his circumci∣sion & name; hys adoration by the Magi; his presentation in the Tem∣ple; and hys flight to Egypt. For hys line and stock,Iesus lyne. there was neuer man denied or doubted, but hat Iesus was directly of the Trybe of Iuda, and descended linially by hys Mother of the peculier house of Dauid, (3, Reg, 7, Psalm, 80, according as it was fore∣tolde
that the Messias should doe,Esay, 11, Math, 1, Luke, 3,) which is prooued most cleerely by the two Genealogies & petidegrees, sette downe by S. Matthewe and S. Luke, of the blessed Virgins whole discent, from Dauid to Ioseph, that was of the same Tribe and kindred with her. And it is confirmed by theyr repayring to Bethleem, (when Proclamation was made by Creni∣us in Of thys matter wri∣teth Iosep. lib. 18. cap. 1. antiq. Augustus name, that euerie person should repaire to the heade Cittie of theyr Trybe and family, to be cessed for theyr Tribute,) seeing that Bethleem was the proper Cittie onely of them that were of the house and line of Dauid: for that K. Da∣uid was borne therein.1. Regu. 17 2 Reg, 2, And finally, it is euident by that the Scribes and Pharisies, who obiected matters of much lesse importance then thys a∣gainst Iesus,Math, 13. (as that he was a Car∣penters sonne,Luke, 6. therby to debase him for hys pouerty,) yet neuer obiected they against him, that he was not of the house of Dauid, which they would neuer haue omitted, if they might haue doone it with any co∣lour: for that it wold haue weighed more against him then all the rest: and would in one word haue dys∣patched
the whole controuersie Nay I adde further, that it remaineth re∣gistred in the Iewes Thalmud it self,Thal. tract. San. ca. Nig∣mar had. that Iesus of Nazareth Crucified, was of the blood royal from Zorobabel of the hose of Dauid. For the maner of his conception,The maner of his con∣ception. Luke, 1, and of the Message or annunciation made vnto hys Mother by the An∣gel, albeit it depend principally, vp∣pon the relation and credite of the Virgine herselfe, who onely was pri∣uie thereunto: and ppon the testi∣monie of Ioseph, to whom it was re∣ealed by the same Angel afterward; yet, he that shall consider the circū∣stances of the thing it selfe: as first, the simplicity of both the reporters, then, howe that it is not vnlikeli, that Ioseph beeing iust (as he is de∣scribed) woulde haue concealed a thing so much against himselfe,Math, 1, & against the Law, if he had not some way beene assured of the truth. Thirdly,Augus. lib. 4 de Trin. ca. 5 et lib. cont. Iudaeos ca. 5, Chrisost. in cap. 1, Luc. the innocent age of the blessed Virgine, (who was not past fourteene yeeres olde at that tyme, as S. Augustine and other auncient Fathers doe prooue by manifest ar∣guments) All these things I say, do make it improbable, that she would
inuent such a matter of herselfe. And finally, the strange prophecy which she vttered in her Canticle of Mag∣nificat, and which we see nowe ful∣filled, (albeit at that tyme very vn∣likely,) to wit, That all generations should call her blessed. These circum∣stances, he that shal consider them, cannot but see that the matter must needes be true. The maner of Iesus na∣tiuitie.And as for the kind and manner of hys natiuity: most maniest it is by scripture, that the Messias was ap∣pointed to be borne of a Virgine, for so sayth Esay plainlie: Behold, a vir∣gine shal conciue, and bring foorth a Sonne.Esay, 7, And Esay appointeth thys to King Achaz for a wonderfull and strange signe from GOD, which he could not haue doone in reason, if the Hebrue word in yt place, might haue signified a young woman on∣lie, (as some latter Rabbines will af∣firme) for yt it is no signe or strange thing, but very common and ordi∣nary for young women to conceiue and bring forth children. Wherfore the Septugent doe very well trans∣late it in Greeke,Parthenos. by the proper name of Virgine, and so did also the elder Iewes vnderstand it,Rab. Simeon Ben. Iohai. in capit. 2, Gene. as Rabbi Sime∣on
well noteth. And Rabbi Moses Hadarsan, of singuler credite wyth the Iewes, vpon these words of the Psalmes:Rab. Moses Hadar. in Psal, 14, verse. 12. Truth shall bud foorth of the earth, &c. sayth thus: heere Rabbi Ioden noteth, that it is not sayd, Truth shal be ingendered of the earth, but, Truth shall bud foorth, To signifie thereby, that the Messi∣as, (who is meant by the worde Truth) shal not be begotten (as o∣ther men are) in carnall copulation. Thus farre Rabbi Moses: who in another place, that is, vppon the twenty and fiue Chapter of Gene∣sis, alledgeth Rabbi Berachias to be of the same opinion; and to prooue it out of the hūdred & nine Psalme and fourth verse. The same is prooued also, in the plain words of the Prophet Ieremie:Ierem, 31, God hath created a newe thing vppon earth: a woman shal inuiron (or in∣close) a man. That is, she shall in∣close him in her wombe, and bring hym forth after a newe and strange maner, without generation of man. And finally, Rabbi Hacadosch pro∣ueth by Cabala out of many places of Scripture,Ra. Hac. qu. 3. in Ea. c. 9. not onely that the Mo∣ther of the Messias shalbe a Virgine,
but also that her name shall be Ma∣rie.Betu. in lib. de car. Sibyl. All the tenne Sibyls in like man∣ner, (according as Betulius setteth out theyr Prophecies) doe make spe∣ciall mention of the Mother of he Messias, that she should be a most pure and holy Virgine; so that thys matter was reuealed very cleerely, both to Iewe and Gentile before it came to passe. And Clemens Alex∣andrinus writeth,Clem. in recog. that Simon Ma∣gus, to the end he might not seeme inferiour to Iesus in thys poynt, fay∣ned, that he was also borne of a Vir∣gine, as Iesus was. That Bethleem where Christ was borne,The place appointed for ye byrth of the Mes∣sias. was the peculier plae preor∣dained by God for the byrth of the Messias: the Prophet Michaeas fore∣told plainly, when he vttered dyuers ages before Christ was incarate, these wordes;Mich, 5, And thou Bethleem Ephrata, art but a little one (in re∣spect of thousands in Iuda:) and yet shall there come foorth of thee, one that shall be the RVLER of Israell: and his comming forth is from the be∣ginning, and from THE DAIES OF ETERNITIE. By which words is plainly expressed, that albeit Bethleem were but a lyttle poore
Towne, (as indeede it was, in com∣parison of many other in Iuda:) yet therein should be borne temporally that Gouernour of Israel, whose di∣uine byrth, was before the worldes foundation, and from all eternitie. And so doe interprete thys place, both Ionathan Ben vziell the great Author of the Chaldie Paraphrase, (who dyed twenty-eyght yeeres be∣fore our Sauiour Christ was borne,) and also Rab. Selomoth and Haca∣dosch, in theyr Commentaries vpon thys place of Michaeas. The same thing fore-tolde Dauid of Ephrata, or Bethleem, (for both names doe signifie one thing, as ap∣peareth by the former place of Mi∣chaeas and Gene, 35. and 48. 1. Cron, 2. Psalm, 131, others,) when talking of the Messias, & beeing desirous to knowe where he should be borne, sayth; I will not goe into the taberna∣cle of my house, nor into my bed: nor will I giue mine eyes sleepe, or rest to the temples of my head: vntil I finde out the place that is appointed for my Lord: the tabernacle (or house) for the God of Iacob. And then, the my∣sterie beeing reuealed vnto him: he sayth presently; Beholde, wee haue heard of it (nowe) in Ephrata (or
Bethleem) we haue founde it out in the fieldes of This he said for that in Dauids time Beth∣leem stoode nigh vnto woods. Math, 2, woode. And to shewe how he reuerenced ye place for that cause, he addeth immediatly; Wee will adore in the place where his feete haue stoode. Whereby he fore-pro∣phecieth, not onely the adoration vsed after in that place vnto Iesus by the Magi, or three kings of the East, but also of all other adoration vsed in the same place in the memorie of Iesus, by other deuout Christians vntill thys day; for which cause O∣rigen sayth,Orig. cont. Cels. that the place of Bethle∣em, was most famous and renow∣ned in hys dayes. The Angels singing.For the Angels appearing to the Sheepe-heards, in the nyght of the Natiuity, there can be no more said, but the credite, honestie, and simpli∣citie of them that reported it: and likely it is, they woulde neuer fayne a thing, that might haue been refu∣ted by testimony of the sheepheards themselues, if it had been false. Of the Name of IESVS, giuen to hym in hys circumcision:The name of IESVS. it was to be sene sette down in a booke, that how soeuer it were not scripture, yet was it extant in the worlde before Christ was borne I mean the second
Booke of Esdras, which hath these wordes in the person of GOD the Father.2. Esdr, 7, Behold, the time shall come, when the signes shall appeare that I haue tolde, &c. And my son IESVS shal be reuealed, with those who are with him. And after those yeeres my sonne CHRIST shall die: and the earth shall render those that sleepe therein. Rabbi Hacadosh also prooueth by arte Cabalist,Ra. Hac. in Esay, 9, Gene, 49, Psal, 71, and 95. out of many pla∣ces and textes of Scripture, that the Messias name at his comming, shall be IESVS. And among other, hee addeth this reason: that as ye name of him who first brought the Iewes out of bondage into the Lande of Promise,Note thys reason. was Iesus, or Iosue, (which is all one) so must his name be Iesus, that shall the seconde time delyuer them frō the bondage wherein they are, and restore them to theyr olde and auncient possession of Iurie: which is the chiefe benefit they ex∣pect by the Messias. Finally, it is not probable, that the Virgine Mary should fayne thys name of herselfe, for that among the Iewes there were many other names of more honour and estimation at
that time; as Abraham, Isaack, Ia∣cob, Moses, and Dauid. And there∣fore if she wold haue feigned anie: it is like she would haue taken one of them, as soone as this, which had not been the name of any great Pa∣triarch. The com∣ming of the three kings.There followeth the comming of the three Magi or wisemen frō the East: of whom Cypr. ser. de Bapt. et idem Yert. lib. 3. cont. Marcion. in hillar. lib. 4. de Trin. Iosua, 12. Cyprians wordes are these: It is an old tradition of the Church, that the Magi of the East, were Kings, or rather little Lords of particuler places. Which is to be vn∣derstoode, such little Kings as Iosua slew thirty in one battaile. And it is to be noted, that S. Matthew ma∣keth mention of the comming of these Kinges to Ierusalem, as of a knowne & publique matter, where∣of all Ierusalem and Iurie were able to beare him witnesse. For he talketh of theyr often comming to Ierusa∣lem, and of the inquiy for the new borne King: of their speech & con∣ference had with Herod: as also of Herods consultation with ye Scribes and Pharisies about the place of the Messias birth. And finally, he shew∣eth the most pittiful murder that en∣sued, of almost 14. Thou∣sand as saith the Lyturgie of the Ae∣thiopians, et Calend. Grecorum. infinite infants, in
all the circuite of Bethleem for thys matter. Which could not be a thing vnknown to all Iurie, & much lesse fained by the holy Euangelist Saint Mathew; for that he shoulde haue giuen his aduersaries the greatest ad∣uantage in the world; if he had be∣gun his Gospell, with so notorious and open an vntruth, which might haue been refuted by infinite per∣sons that were yet aliue. Epiphanius is of opinion,Epiph. hae∣rit. 51. that the three Kinges arriued in Ierusalem, two yeeres after Christes Natiuitie, for that Herod slewe all the infants of that age.Amō. Alex. in Harm. Niceph. lib. 1, cap. 13. But other holde more probablie, that the starre appeared vnto them, two yeeres before Chri∣stes natiuity, so that they came to Bethleem the thirteenth day after Christes byrth, according as the Church doth celebrate the Epipha∣nie. Saint Basile thinketh that they were learned men,Basil ser. in nati. Dom. and myght by theyr learning and Arte Magicke, (wherein those Countrimen at that tyme were very skilful,) vnderstande and feele, that the power of theyr Heathen Gods, was greatly dimini∣shed and broken. They might also be stirred vp with that cōmon brute,
and generall prophecie, spred ouer all the East in those dayes, as both Sutonius and Iosephus do recorde. That out of Iurie should come an vni∣uersall King ouer all the worlde.Suet. in Ves. cap. 4. Iosep. lib. 7. de bel. c. .12. Num. 24. By these meanes (I say) and by the pro∣phecie of Balaam, lest among them from Moss time, (for he was a Gen∣tile) whereby was signified, that a starre should rise and declare a great and mighty King in Israell; they might be induced at the sight of this starre, to take so long a iourney as they dyd towards Iurie. Prophecies of things that should fall out in Bethleem. Num, 24, Psal, 71.Thys starre (as I haue sayd) was fore-told by Balaam a Heathen pro∣phet, aboue one thousand and fiue hundred yeeres before it appeared. And after Balaam againe, it was pro∣phecied by Dauid, that Kings of A∣rabia, Saba, and other Easterne Countries should come and adore Christ, and offer both golde and o∣ther gyfts vnto him. The murder al∣so of those infants of Bethleem, was presignified by Ieremie, in the wee∣ping of Rachell for the slaughter o her children:Ierem, 31, Gene. 35. which Rachel was bu∣ried in Bethleem, and for that cause those Infants were called her chyldrē, albeit she were dead aboue tw
thousande yeeres before they were slaine, and aboue one thousand and fiue hundred yeeres before Ieremie wrote thys prophecie. Amongst which infants, Herode also for more assuraunce,Philo lib. de temp, slewe an infant of his own. For that (as Phy∣lo noteth) he was discended by hys Mothers side of the lyne of Iuda. Which crueltie comming to Augu∣stus eares, he sayd,Macro. lib. 2 Saturnal. cap. 4. Augustus speech of Herod. (as Macrobius re∣porteth) that he had rather bee He∣rods swine then hys sonne, for that he being a Iewe, was forbidden by his religion to kil his swine, though not ashamed to kill his sonne. The same starre wherof we spake, is mentioned by dyuers Heathen Wryters:Plin. lib. 2. capit. 25. Heathen te∣stimonies for the star which gui∣ded ye Wise∣men. as by Plinie, vnder the name of a Comete, (for so they ter∣med all extraordinary starres) which appeared in the latter end of Augu∣stus dayes, & were far different from all other that euer appeared. And therefore contrary to the nature of those kind of starres, it was adiudged by the whole Colledge of Soothsai∣ers, to pretend vniuersall good vnto the earth; and for that cause had an Image of mettall erected to it in Rome, and (as Plinies wordes are)
Is Cometa vnus, tota orbe colitur, that onely Comete, is worshypped tho∣row out the whole world. Orig. cont. Celsum.Origine also, writeth of one Chae∣remon a Stoike, that was much mo∣ued with the consideration of thys Starre, and for that after the appea∣rance therof, he perceiued the power of hys Gods decayed: tooke a iour∣ney into Iurie, (in companie of o∣ther Astronomers) to informe him∣selfe further of the matter. Wherun∣to Chalcidius a Platonicke doth ad, that the Chaldaean Astronomers did gather by contēplation of this star,Chalcid a∣pud Marsil. Ficin tract. de stella Magi. that some God discended from hea∣uen to the benefit of mankind. And finally, the Sibyls talking of the cō∣ming of Christ, affirmed plainlie: Rutilans eum Sydus monstrabit:Sibyl. Samia apud Betul. a blazing starre shal declare his com∣ming. Which prophecie, Virgil the Poet hauing read in Augustus tyme, and soone hauing seene ye same ful∣filled: applyed it (as I haue shewed before of all the rest.) to the flatte∣ring of Caesar, and therfore he sayth in the place before alledged. Eglog. 4.Ecce Dionaei, processit Caesaris astrum. Behold the star of Caesar, (descen∣ded
of Venus) hath now appeared. Which starre indeede, was the starre of Caesars Lord and Maister. After fortie daies past ouer, Saint Luke reporteth,Luke, 12. how Iesus by hys Mother was presented in the Tem∣ple of Ierusalem:The presen∣tation of Iesus in Ie∣rusalem. and therewithall, recounteth two strange thinges tht hppened at the same time; to wit, that two graue and reuerende per∣sons, Simeon, surnamed Iust, and Anna the Prophetesse: both of sin∣guler sanctitie amongst the Iewes, comming into the Temple at the same time when Iesus was there in hys Mothers armes: tooke notice of hym, and acknowledged him pub∣liquely for the Messias and Sauiour of the world Fore-telling also by the Spyrite of prophecie, dyuers particu∣ler things yt were to ensue, both to Christ and Christians, & especially to hys Mother the blessed Virgine. Which things being published at that time, and confirmed afterwards by the euent, doe well declare, that thys narration of S. Luke could not be forged; as doe also the number of particuler circumstaunces sette downe about the tyme, place, and persons, most notoriously knowne
to all Ierusalem. For, as for Anna,Anna the Prophe∣tesse. she had lyued from her youth vntill four-score yeeres of age in the Tem∣ple, and thereby was knowne to the most part of Iurie. And as for Sime∣on,Simeon. he was the Scholler of the most famous Hillel, & condisciple to Io∣nathan maker of the Chaldie Para∣phrase,Thal. tract. pitkei. A∣outh. of whom I spake before, and the Iewes Thalmud conesseth, that by the death of these two men, (e∣specially of Simeon) fayled the spy∣rite of the great Sinagogue,Thal. tract. Ioma. cap. Tereph. Be∣calp. called Sanhedrin: which after the captiui∣tie of Babilon vntill Herods tyme, supplied (in a sort) the spirit of pro∣phecie, that was expresly in Israell before the sayd captiuitie. Christes flight into Egypt. Luke, 2.Of Christes flight into Egypt for feare of Herod, S. Luke wel noteth, that it was prophecied by Ose long before:Osea, 11, that God would call his sonne out of Egipt. And the Prophet Esay describeth the same very particulerly when he sayth:Esay, 19. Behold, our Lord Ie∣houa shal ascend vp, (or ryde) vppon a lyght cloude: (which was his fesh or humanitie) and shall goe down in∣to Egipt, and all the Idoles of Egipt shall shake at his presence. Which latter poynt, Eusebius
sheweth that it was fulfilled most e∣idently in the sight of al the world,Euseb. lib. 6 dem cap. 20, t lib. 9, cap. 2, 3, 4. for that no Nation came to Christi∣an Religion with so great celeritie or ferour, as dyd the Egiptians, who threw downe theyr Idols before a∣nie other heathen Nations. And as they had beene the first in Idolatre to other Countryes: so were they the first,The bene∣fite that E∣gipt recei∣ued by Christes flight vnto it. by Christes comming vnto them, that afterward gaue example of true returne to theyr Creator. It followeth in Esay: And I wil giue vppe Egipt into the handes of cruell Lordes: and a Potent King shall take dominion ouer them. Which was ful∣filled about the verie time wherein Christ was to come. For that then, after many spoyles and cruelties ex∣ercised vpon Egypt by the Romaine Lords & Princes, as Pompey, Cae∣sar, Anthony and others: in the end Cleopatra theyr Queene, that was the last of all the bloode and lyne of the Polomies, was enforced to sley herselfe: and so Augustus the Em∣perour tooke possession of al Egipt, and subiected it as a Prouince to the Romaine Empire. But consider you, how Esay con∣cludeth ye matter, ater all these tem∣porall
afflictions threatned against Egypt, and confesse, that such ad∣uersitie, is no signe of Gods dys-fa∣uour to thē who receiue it. For thus sayth God after all his cominations, In that day, there shall be an Aultar of Iehoua in the midst of Egypt: they shall cry to God in their tribulation, and he shall send them a Sauiour, &c. Blessing shall be in the midst of that Lande, to whom the Lord GOD of Hostes hath giuen his benediction, say∣ing: Blessed is my people of Egipt. And heere we make an ende of our second Consideration. The third Consideration. The life & actions of IESVS.NOw in the third place there cō∣meth to be considered, (accor∣ding to our former diuision) the life, conuersation, doctrine, & myracles of IESVS. And first, touching things doone by him after hys com∣ming out of Egypt, which might be about the sixt or seauenth yere of hys age, vntill hys baptisme by S. Iohn, which was the thirtith, there is lyt∣tle recorded,Iust. in Trip. Chris. in Ioh. Aug. li. 4, de Trin. cap. 5. eyther in prophane, or Ecclesiasticall wryters. For that as S. Iustine, S. Chrisostome, S Augu∣stine
& others do write, he bestowed that time in the cōmon exercise and labours of mans lyfe: thereby to shewe hymselfe true man, and gyue demonstration how much he hated and detested idlenes. Of S. Iohn Baptist. OF Saint Iohn Baptist, all Hebrue Wryters of that tyme doe make mention, with exceeding praise and admiration of hys holinesse: especi∣ally Iosephus that lyued immediatly after Christes daies, sayth: he was,Iosep. lib. 18, antiq. cap. 7 Vir optimus: Iudaeos excitans ad vir∣tutum studia. A most excellent man, styrring vp the Iewes to the exercise of vertue. He addeth also, that partlie for feare of the great concourse of people which flocked vnto him, and partly by the solicitation of Herodi∣as, concubine and brothers wife to Herode Antipas, the great Herods sonne, for whose cause he had tur∣ned off hys owne wife, daughter to Areta King of the Arabians hee was apprehended and imprysoned in the Castle of Acherun, and ther∣in soone after put to death. Which murder, Iosephus esteemed to be
the cause of all the misery which in∣sued afterward to Herode and hys whole familie. Of thys man it was written by Malachie the Prophet: Beholde, I send my messenger (or Angel) before me,Mala, 3. and he shall prepare the way be∣fore my face: and presently shal come to his Temple, the RVLER whom ye seeke, & the MESSENGER OF THE TESTAMENT whom yee desire. Which prophecie was fulfil∣led most euidently, vppon the prea∣ching of S. Iohn,S. Iohns be∣hauiour to∣wardes Christ when Christ came vnto him, and albeit S. Iohn had ne∣uer seene him before, yet he aknow∣ledged hym for the Messias, in the presence of infinite people, and hys acknowledgement was confirmed by the visible descending of a Doue and voice from heauen,Math, 3, Marke, 1. Luke, 3. in the sight and hearing of all the people pre∣sent, according as three of our E∣uangelists doe report. Which they would neuer haue presumed to do: had not the matter beene most eui∣dent, and without all compasse of deniall or contradiction. And truely, no one thing in all thys story of Iesus lyfe, dooth more establish the certaintie of his beeing
the true Messias: then that S. Iohn Baptist, whose wisedome, learning, vertue and rare sanctitie is confessed and recorded by the writings of all our aduersaries, shold refse the ho∣nor of the Messias offered vnto him selfe, and lay it vpon Iesus: as also, should direct those disciples that de∣pended vpon him, to the onely fol∣lowing & embracing of Iesus doc∣trine. Which is most euidently pro∣ued that he dyd, for that so many followers and Disciples as himselfe had, not one appeared euer after, that was not a Christian. The preaching & doctrine of Iesus. WHen Iesus was baptised, he be∣gan to preache, and hys whole doctrine was directed to the mani∣festation of hys Fathers wyll, and a∣mendement of mans life. It tendeth all to this one ground and principle. Thou shalt loue the Lord thy GOD with al thy soule:Deut, 6. and thy neighbour as thy selfe.Math, 2. It was plaine, easie, per∣spicuous, & euident, though it trea∣ted of most high mysteries.Heathen doctrine It had neither pompe nor pride of rethori∣call wordes, nor flattering of mans
wickednes, as the doctrine of manie Phylosophers had. Neither consisted it, of vnprofitable externall ceremo∣nies,Iewish Ce∣remonies. as the latter obseruations of the Iewish Law did, nor was it fraught with carnalitie and spyrite of thys world, as the Turkish Alcoran,Turkish Alcoran. and other sectaries doctrine is. But al was simplicitie; all was spyrite; all was truth; all was honestie; all was hu∣mility; all was charitie. It tooke away or disanulled no one perfect or spiritual point of Mo∣ses Lawe,The com∣parison of Christes Law with that of Mo∣ses. Math, 5. but rather reuiued, inter∣preted, fulfilled, and made perfect the same. For wheras that comman∣ded externall obseruaunce, thys ad∣deth also internal obedience. Wher∣as that said, loue your friendes, thys adioyneth, loue also your enemies. Whereas that commaunded wee should not kyll, thys further com∣mandeth to speake no angry words. Whereas that prohibited to commit actuall adultery: thys also forbyd∣deth to couet in mind. Wheras that sayde, take no interest or vsury of a Iew that is thy Countriman: thys sayth, take it of no man what soe∣uer Whereas that accounted euerie Iew onely to be thy neighbour, this
teacheth uerie person lyuing to be thy brother. Whereas that taught thee to offer vp a Calfe, a Sheepe, or an Oxe for thy sinnes: thys instruc∣teth thee, to offer vp a contrite hart, by fayth in the bloode of him that dyed for all, with a firme & resolute purpose of amendement of life. And finally,The effect of Christes doctrine. this doctrine tendeth wholy to the true, sincere, and perfect ser∣uice of GOD thy Lorde, that made and redeemed thee, to the exaltation of his holy name, power, goodnesse, & glory: to the depression of mans pryde by dyscouering his misery, to the contempt of this world & vaine pompe thereof; to the mortification and subduing of our sensuall appe∣tite: to the true loue and vnfeyned charitie of our neighbour: to the styrring vp of our spirit to celestiall cogitations; to peace of conscience; tranquility of minde; purity of bo∣die; consolation of our soule. And in one word, to reduce mankinde a∣gaine to a certaine estate of innocen∣cie, simplicitie, & Angelical sancti∣tie vppon earth, wyth hys eye fixed onely in the eternall inheritaunce of Gods kingdome in heauen. Thys was the doctrine deliuered
by Iesus: which is the same that the Prophets of God fore-tolde shoulde be deliuered by the Messias. The life & conuersation of Iesus. AND as for hys life & conuersa∣tion, by ye testimonie of his grea∣test aduersaries, it was more admira∣ble then his doctrine, his lyfe beeing a most liuely Table, wherin the per∣fection of all hys doctrine was ex∣pressed. A man of such grauitie, as neuer in hys lyfe hee was noted to laugh, of such humilitie, as beeing the sonne of GOD, he scarce vsed in thys worlde the dgnity of a ser∣uant, of such sweee and milde be∣hauiour, as all the iniuries of hys e∣nemies, neuer wrested frō him one angry word. Finally, he was such a one, as he was described by Esay, so many ages before he was borne, in these words;Esay, 42, He shal not cry nor con∣tend, nor shal any man heare his voice in the streete: he shal not crush a bro∣ken reede, nor tread out a little laxe that ieth smoking on the ground &c. And another Prophet not long after him, brake foorth into thys speech, vpon cōsideration of the behauiour
that should be in the Messias:Zach, 9. Re∣ioyce thou daughter of Sion: tryumph thou daughter of Ierusalem: for be∣hold thy King shal come vnto thee, thy iust Sauior: he is poore and humble. &c. And as the Prophets did foretel the vertue & sanctitie of the Messi∣as, so the deuils thēselues could not but conesse the same to haue beene fulfilled in the person of Iesus; as is most euident by the testimonie of Porphiry, a professed enemie of the Christian name. Who after conside∣ration of diuers Oracles vttered by hys Idols, touching Iesus, he brea∣keth forth into this cōfession.Porph. lib, de laud. Phylo It is ex∣ceeding wonderful, what testimonie the Gods do giue of the singuler pietie & sanctitie of Iesus: for which they auouch him rewarded with immorta∣litie: but yet these Christians are de∣ceiued in calling him GOD. Thus much writeth Porphirie. And last of all Iosephus the Iew, that was borne immediatly after Iesus, writeth of him thus.Iosep. lib. 18, antiq. cap. 7. There was at this time one Iesus, a wise man, if it be lawfull to call him a man: a worker of most wonderful miracles, & a Maister & teacher of all such men, as willinglie were content to imbrace the truth.
Of Iesus myracles. BY which testimony of Ioephus, we see mention also of Iesus my∣racles, which is the next thing wher∣of we are to consider. And as Iose∣phus in this place, (beeing a Iewe) beareth witnesse that Iesus perfor∣med many strange myracles: so most apparently, and according to the interpretation of Iosephus in this place, were the same miracles fore∣told by the Prophets of GOD, that they should be done by ye true Mes∣sias. So Esay in his thirty-fiue chap∣ter, describeth at large, how the Mes∣sias at hys comming,Predictions of the Mes∣sias myra∣cles. shall declare hys commission, by giuing sight to the blinde, hearing to ye deafe, speech to the dumbe, and agilitie of bodie to the lame and cripple. And that which is more; God reuealed thys poynt very particulerly to the Gen∣tiles by the Sibyls, among whom, one of them wrote thus of Christ to come, as Lactantius recordeth:Lact. lib. 4, diuna. In∣tit. cap. 15 He shall doe al by his onely word, he shall cure all infirmities: he shall raise the dead: he shall make the lame to run and skip: the deafe shall heare: the
blinde shall see: and the dumbe shall speake. In fiue loues & two fishes, fiue thousand persons shall be satisfied, and the fragments shal fill twelue baskets, to the hope of many. He shal cōmaund the windes, and walke vpon the furi∣ous sea, with his feete of peace. And after diuers other Greek ver∣ses to thys purpose, shee concludeth in these words;Thal. tract. Beracoth, et Merma∣thas. Coli. Men shall say, that I am a mad and lying Prophetesse, but when all these thinges shall come to passe, then remember mee: for then shall no man say more, that I was a lyar, but rather the Prophet of the great God. To these predictions of Prophets in Iurie and among the Gentiles, do agree the Doctors of the Iewes thē∣selues, in many places of their Thal∣mud: to wit, that the Messias shall be most wonderful in working my∣racles. And in theyr publique Com∣mentary vpon Ecclesiastes, they haue these words.Misdrach, co¦heleth, ca. 1, All the former miracles of Prophets or Saints shal be nothing to the myracles of the Messias, when he commeth. And thus much of the fore-telling of Christes miracles. But now for the fulfilling thereof in Ie∣us; that is, howe these predictions
were performed in the stupendious workes and actions of our Sauiour Christ, there is no difficultie. For that besides the former testimony of Iosephus, (which were sufficient in thys case) the Iewes themselues doe graunt and record Iesus miracles,The confes∣sion of Ie∣sus myrales by hys ene∣mies. in dyuers places of Treatises of theyr Thalmud; yea, they make mention of many wonderful thinges that Ie∣sus did, which are not written by our Euangelists. The same doth Maho∣met in his Alcoran,Tha. in tract Auodaza∣ra Misdr. Coheleth Alcoran A∣zoar. 14, 11, 13. affirming Ie∣sus the sonne of Mary, to haue beene a great Prophet, & to haue wrought hys myracles, by the onely power & Spyrite of God; and that himselfe was sent to confirme Iesus doctrine, sauing onely in the poynt of hys God-head: wherein he sayth, that Iesus went too-farre, & had a check for the same at Gods hand when he returned to heauen. Thus much do these enemies con∣fesse of Iesus miracles. Which, as it is much, comming from such witnes∣ses: so if they would either deny or dissemble the same, they myght be prooued against them by most eui∣dent reasons: especially in tvvo poynts, wherin there can be no pro∣bability
of any deniall. The first is, the calling and retay∣ning of hys Apostles,The calling of the Apo∣stles. Iosep. lib. 18, antiq. cap 4 and other followers, (whereof Iosephus also in the place before alledged, maketh mention, as of a great miracle) who were of dyuers callings, states, con∣ditions, trades, and occupations in the world. And yet al, vpon the sud∣daine, left both father, mother, wife, children, & other temporal respects, & followed him, who had nothing to giue or promise thē in this world. A man, that neuer spake them faire, or vttered doctrine that was not re∣pugnant to the sensuality of this life, as may appeare by theyr owne wry∣tinges and testimonies of hym. A man, that was accounted by the btter sort, as then it might seeme: that is, by the Wise and learned of that Countrey, and especially disly∣ked by them that were in gouern∣mnt, as a dangerous and trouble∣some man to the state. One that had neyther freendes in the worlde to beare hym out, nor a house to put hys head in.A great mi∣racle. And yet notwithstan∣ding all thys, that worldly men and women, and some such also as were great sinners, & loose lyuers before,
should leaue all their worldly hope, stay, and condition, to follow such a man, with so great inconueniences, losses, dangers & disfauours as they did; and should continue with him in all his afflictions, and be content to die & loose their lyues rather then forsake him, or abandon his seruice; thys (I say) is such a miracle, as neuer in the world fel out the like, & must needes be graunted by the enemie, to be supernaturall. The miraculous facts of Iesus. THE second poynt is, of externall things and facts done by Iesus, aboue all power of humane abili∣tie, in the sight and knowledge of all the Iewes, which facts were pub∣lished by our Euangelists, and espe∣cially by S. Matthew, in the Hebrue tongue, while yet the persons were aliue vpon whō they were wrought, or infinite other that might be wit∣nesses thereof. As for example, the raysing of Lazarus in Bethania, that was a Village but a myle or two di∣stant from Ierusalem:Iohn, 11. at vvhose death and buriall, (beeing a Gen∣tleman) many Scribes and Pharisies
must needes be present, (according to the Iewish custome at that tyme, as is reported by Iosephus) and they saw him both deceased,Iosep. lib. 17. antiq. ca. 11. interred, & the funerall feast obserued for hym, as also raised againe from death by Iesus, after four dayes of his buriall. With whom they did both eate and drink, and conuerse after his returne to lyfe, and euery day might behold him walking vp and downe open∣lie in the streetes of Ierusalem. Thys storie (I say) how could it be feig∣ned. So in like manner,Math, 9. Marke, 5, the raysing of the Archisinagogues Daughter, whose name is affirmed to be Iai∣us, with dyuers other circumstances that doe make the thing most noto∣rious. The raysing of the widdowes sonne,Luke, 7. before the gate of the Cittie Naim, in the presence of all the peo∣ple that bare the sayde corpes, and stoode about it. The healing of the Cripple in Ierusalem,Iohn, 5, that had lyen thirty and eyght yeeres lame, at the Pooles side or Bath called Probati∣a, which miracle was done also in he sight of infinite people. The ca∣ting out of a Legion of deuils,Math, 8. Marke, 5, from  man that for many yeres together
was known to lyue possessed in the Mountaines, which deuils by pecu∣liar lycence, obtained of Iesus to en∣ter into a heard of swyne, & so pre∣sently carried two thousand of them away into the sea, & drowned thē. Whereupon the whole Country a∣bout of the people called Gerasines, beeing striken with extreame feare vpon sight of the fact,Math, 14. besought Ie∣sus most humbly to depart rom their borders.Luke, 9, The feeding & filling of fiue thousand men, besides wo∣men and chyldren, wyth fiue Barley loues and two fishes only. The tur∣ning of water into wine, at a marri∣age at Cana, in the presence of all the Guestes. The healing of him by a word only,Luke, 14, that had an incurable dropsie, and thys at the Table of a principall Pharisie, and in the sight of all that sate at dynner with hym. Thys (I say) & diuers other such myracles, which were doone in the presence and sight of so infinite a number of people, and recorded by our Euangelists, at such times when many desired to discredite the same and might haue done easily by ma∣ny witnesses and authorities, if any one part thereof had beene subiec
to calumniation: cannot in reason or probability be doubted of. And thereore I must conclude,The con∣clusion of thys Consi∣deration. that see∣ing these things are aboue al power of humane nature, and coulde not be done, but by the finger and ver∣tue of the liuing God himselfe, con∣sidering also that it is impossible, that God should assist or gyue testi∣monie vnto any falsehoode, it must needes ensue, that all was true and sincere which Iesus affirmed: and consequently, seeing he affirmed himsele to be the sonne of God, and the true and onely Messias, it must needes folow by these miracles, that he was so indeede; which is the ground of that speech of hys to the faithlesse Pharisies,Iohn, 10. If you will not beleeue my words, beleeue my deedes. And thus much of Iesus lyfe, doc∣trine, conuersation, & miracles. The fourth Consideration. THere remaineth now onely, the fourth and last consideration of thys Section, which is, the passion,The passiō and resur∣rection. resurrection, and ascention of Iesus. And about hys passion there is little or no controuersie: for that all hys
enemies doe agree and graunt, that he was betrayed by hys owne Disci∣ple; apprehended, afflicted, and de∣liuerd vp by the Iewes, and finallie put to death vppon a Crosse by the Gentiles. The testimony of Iosephus may serue for all herein, whose wor∣des are these;Iosep. lib, 18. antiq. cap. 4 That the principall Iewes of his Countrey, hauing accused and deliuered ouer Iesus to Pilate, (that was Gouernour of Iurie for the Romaine Emperor) he adiudged him to the Crosse. The same doe other Iewes and Gentiles record, and in thys they take great offence & scan∣dale, that we should attribute diui∣nitie vnto a man that had suffered death vpon the Crosse. But if we shew that this was the eternall preordination and appoint∣ment of GOD, for sauing of man∣kinde: and that the same was fore∣told both to Iew and Gentile from the beginning: and so vnderstoode also by the Iewish Doctors them∣selues of elder times: then euery rea∣sonable man (I trow) will remaine satisfied, and preferre Gods diuine wisedome before mans follie.
Christes ascending to Ierusalem to receiue his passion. FIrst then consider, that when Christ had ended his preaching, and wrought so many miracles as seemed sufficient to hys eternal wis∣dome, and when the time was come preordained for his passion, (wherof he told publiquely his Disciples be∣fore,) hee went vp to Ierusalem of purpose to receiue hys death: and made a solemne entry into that Cit∣tie vpon an Asse, which was pro∣phecied of him many yeeres before;Math, 21. Reioyce daughter of Sion. Behold thy IVST KING and SAVIOVR,Zach, 9, shall come vnto thee vpon an Asse. And after hys abode some dayes in that place, hee was betrayed and sold by his owne Disciple,Math, 10, and 16. as Dauid before hande in many places had fore-told shold come to passe.Psalm, 40 54, & 108. Then folowed his apprehension, & most seruile abusage by the Iewes, wherof it was fore-prophecied in his person by Esay;Esay, 50. I gaue my body to thē that beate it, and my cheekes to them that buffeted the same. I did not turne my
selfe away from them that reproched me: nor yet from them that dyd spet in my face. The barbarus abusage of Iesus, fore∣tolde by prophecie. AFter thys barbarous intreatie by the Iewes, they deliuered hym o∣uer to Pilate a Gentile, & neuer cea∣sed to solicite and pursue theyr vn∣quenchable hatred against him, vn∣till they saw him on ye Crosse, where also he was vsed in the highest de∣gree of spightfull dealing. Whereof likewise the Prophet Dauid made mention long before, in the person of the Messias, when he sayd;Psalm, 21, They pearsed my hands and feete: they de∣uided among them my apparrell, and vpon my (vpper.) garment they did cast los. And againe of another cru∣elty hee complaineth, saying; They gaue mee gaule to eate, and in my thirst they refreshed me with Vineger. Christes death plainly fore-tolde. AND finally, that Christ should die for the sinnes of mankind, i
a common principle, both prefigu∣red and fore-told throughout all the old Scripture. Prefigured by the Sa∣crifice of Isaack:Gene, 21, 22 by the raysing vp of the brasen Serpent,Numb, 21. and by all o∣ther sacrifices that were in the Law. Fore-tolde, not onely by the Scrip∣tures before alledged, but also most plainly by Daniell,Dan. 9 who was told by an Angell, that ater a certaine tyme by him there appointed: Vngetur Sanctus Sanctorū, the Saint of Saints shal be annointed, et occidetur Chri∣stus, and thys annointed Saint or Christ shal be put to death. Zacha∣rie also about the same tyme, dooth not onely fore-tell his death, but al∣so the kind thereof, and from what people he should receiue the same: for thus hee saith in the person of Christ himselfe.Zach, 12. The inhabitants of Ierusalem at that day, shal looke vpon me, whom they haue crucified. The wonderful predictions of Christes passion, set down by Esay. BVT if yee will reade the whole story of Christes passion, sette down at large sixe hundred yeres be∣fore it fell out, I refer you to a narra∣tion
of Esay, who to signifie the strangenesse of the case, beginneth with the Praeface.Esay, 57, Who wil giue cre∣dite to that we shal report. &c. And thē a little after he goeth on in these words.Christes de∣formity vp∣pon the Crosse. He shall mount vp as a twig frō a dry earth. He hath no forme or beautie vpon him. We beheld him, & there was no countnaunce in him, we saw him the most contemptible & de∣spised man in the world. A man full of paines, and experienced in infirmitie. His countenaunce was obscure & dis∣picable, and we made no account of him.Christ ap∣pointed to die for our sinnes. Truly he tooke vpon himselfe our greefes, and did beare our paines. We accounted him as a Leaper, and as a man striken and punished by GOD. But he was wounded for our iniqui∣ties, and crushed in peeces for our wic∣kednes. The discipline (or correction) of our peace lyeth vpon him: and by his woundes we are made whole. We haue all erred, and gone astray lyke sheep, euery man after his own waies, and God hath layd vpon him the ini∣quity of vs al. He was offered vp for v because he wold so, he shal be led to hi slaughter as a sheepe: & as a Lamb he shal be silent before his shearers. For the sinnes of my people haue
striken him, saith God. He hath doone no iniquitie, neyther was there deceit found in his mouth. Yet would the lord crush him in infirmitie. But if he shall giue his lyfe for sin:The increase of Christes kingdome after his re∣surrection. then shal he see a long seede (or gene∣ration) & the wil of the Lord shal be directed in his hand. And for so much, as his soule hath sustained labour: it shall see and be filled. And this MY IVST SERVANT,That is in making himselfe known, or reuealing the know∣ledge of him selfe to the world. in his know∣ledge shall iutifie many, and beare theyr iniquities. And I will allot vnto him very many people, and hee shall deuide the spoiles of the stoute, for that he hath deliuered his soule vnto death and was accounted among the wic∣ked, & prayed or his trespassours. The particulers of Christes passion, fore-told by Sibylla. THus particulerly (as we see) was the death & Passion of our Sa∣uiour Christ, fore-told by the Pro∣phets of Israel, to that Nation. Now heare ye the Prophecie of Sibylla, if ye please, wherein she fore-shewed the same to the Gentiles; These are her owne words, set downe by Lac∣tantius.
He shall appeare miserable, ignominius and deformed,Lactan, li. 4 diuin. instit, ca. 16, et 18, to the ende he may giue hope vnto the miserable. Afterwarde hee shall come into the handes of most wicked and faithlesse men: they shal buffet him with their sacriligious fistes, and shall spet vppon him, with their vncleane mouthes. He shall yeelde his innocent backe to the whyp, and shal say nothing while hee receiueth the stripes, to the end he may speake to those that are dead. He shall beare a crowne of thornes, and they shal giue him Gaule to eate, & Vine∣ger to drinke. And this shall be the hospitalitie he shall find among them. What thing can be more plainly de∣scribed then thys? The consent of Rabbines. NEyther doe the auncient Rab∣bines and Teachers among the Iewes discent from this.Thal. tract. Sanh. ca. he∣lec. Misdr. Ruth. Rab. Iosep. in lib. Siph Rab. Iacob et R. Hanina in cap. helec. For that in theyr Thalmud, that was gathered aboue one thousand and two hun∣dred yeres agone, the plaine senten∣ces of diuers are sette downe: that theyr Messias at hys comming shall be put to death. And as for Rabbi Ionathan, the Author of the Chal∣die
Paraphrase, who died a little be∣fore our Sauiour Christ was borne, he applyeth the whole narration of the Prophet Esay before recited,Esay, 53. (as needes he must) to the murther of the Messias by the Iewes. Whereup∣pon Rabbi Simeon, that lyued the next age after hym, wryteth these words folowing;Rab, Simeon Ben. ehai. lib. de spe. Woe be to the men of Israell, for that they shall sley the Messias. God shal send his son in mans flesh to wash them, and they shal mur∣der him. Whereto agreeth Rabbi Hadar∣an and others,Rab. Had. in Dan. and doe prooue fur∣ther, out of the fore-alledged Pro∣phecie of Daniell, Chapter 9, verse 27. that after the Messias shall haue preached halfe seauen yeres, he shall be slaine. For that Daniel sayth:Dan. 9. In halfe of seauen yeres, the Hoste and Sacrifice shall cease. Vppon which wordes they comment thus: Three yeeres and a halfe shall the presence of God in flesh, cry and preach vpon the Mount Oliue, and then shall hee be slaine. Which words the Iewes or∣dinary Misdrasch Tehelm. Commentarie vppon the Psalmes, doe interprete to be meant of Christes preaching three yeres & an halfe before his passion. Which
disagreeth very little or nothing frō the account of vs Christians, and of our Euangelists. Of the miracles that fell out in Chri∣stes death and passion. THus see we by all that hetherto hath beene sayde, that the verie particulers of Christes whole death and pssion, were fore-tolde most plainly both to Iew & Gentile, and acknowledged also by the auncient Doctors of the Iewish Nation, be∣fore the effectuation therof came to passe. And Sibylla addeh further two particulr miracles, that should fall out in the sayd Passion of the Messias, to wit;Lact. lib. 4. diuin. Inst. capit. 19, That the veile of the Iewes Temple should breake in two: and that at midday, there should be darknes for three houres ouer all the worlde. Which thing to haue beene fulfilled at the death of Iesus, not onely S. Matthew doth assure vs in hys Gospell:Math, 27. but also Eusebius af∣firmeth that hee had read the same word for worde, recorded in dyuers Heathen Wryters. And amongst o∣ther, he citeth one Phlegon an exact Chronicler, that reporteth the same
in the fourth yeere of the two hun∣dred and two Olimpiad,Eusebius in Chron. An. Domi. 32, Phleg. Tral∣lian. 11.14. Chro. An. 4 Olim. 202. which a∣greeth iust with the eyghteene yeere of Tyberius hys raigne, which was the yeere wherein our Sauior Christ suffered. And he goeth so nigh, as to name the very houres of the day, as our Euangelists doe. See Orig, cont. Cels li. 6. et Suid. in verbo Iesus et Tert. in Apolg. Dioni Are. in Epist. Aesculus an old Astronomer, doth confirme the same, and prooueth moreouer, by the situation & consitution of the Sunne and Moone at that time, that no Eclipse could then be naturallie. Which thing in lyke manner, Dyo∣nisius Areopagita did obserue in the very day of Christes passion, beeing at that time but twenty & fiue yeres olde, and yet well studied in Astro∣nomie, as himselfe testifieth. And finally, Lucianus a learned Priest of Antioche,Lucian praes. apud Euseb. was accustomed to pro∣uoke the Gentiles to theyr owne Commentaries & stories, for recorde and testimonie of those things. Of Iesus Resurrection. THere ensueth now, fr ending & confirmation of all that hath beene sayd and prooued before, to adde a word or two of Iesus Resur∣rection.
Which poynt, as of all o∣ther it is of most importaunce: so was it exactly fore-told both to Iew and Gentile, and promised by Christ himselfe in all his speeches while he was vppon earth. And among the Iewes, it was assured by all the Pro∣phecies before recited, which do pro∣mise so great aboundance of glorie, ioy, & tryumph to Christes Church after his Passion. Which neuer pos∣sibly could be fulfilled, vnlesse hee had risen from death againe. And therefore the sayd Resurrection was prefigured in Ionas,Ionas, 2, together with the time of his abode in the Sepul∣cher. It was also expresly fore-shew∣ed by Dauid, affirming;Psalm, 16. That God would not suffer his holy one to see cor∣ruption. And after him againe, more plainly by the Prophet Oe;Osea, 6. He shall quicken vs againe after two dayes, in the thyrd day he shall rayse vs, & wee shal liue in his sight. And to the Gen∣tiles, Sibylla left written not far frō the same time:Lactan. li. 4 inst. di. c. 19, He shall ende the ne∣cessity of death by three dayes sleepe: and then returning frō death to lyght againe, he shall be the first that shall shew the beginning of Resurrection to his chosen: for that by conquering
death, he shall bring vs lyfe. Thus much was promised by prophets before christes appearance. And Iesus to comfort his disciples & followers,Mat, 12, 16, Marke, 8, 9, Luke, 11, 18. reiterated hys promise a∣gaine of himselfe in many speeches, albeit many times his meaning was not perceiued.Iohn, 2. Which promise of returne from death, if it had beene made for some long time to come, (as Mahomet promised his Sarasins after eyght hundred yeeres to reuisite them again,Maho. in Alcor. Azo∣ar, 17.) albeit the performance were neuer meant: yet might the falshood lurk in the length of tyme. But Iesus assuring all men that hee would rise again within three daies, it cannot be imagined, but that he sincerely purposed to fulfil hys pro∣mise, for that otherwise the fraude must haue beene discouered. Nowe then let vs consider what manner of performance Iesus made heereof. The appearings which Iesus made after his Resurrection. AND first the persons most inter∣essed in the matter, as they whose totall hope, stay, refuge, and felicitie depended heereof, I meane hys ap∣palled
dysmaied, and afflicted Dis∣ciples, do recount twelue sundry ap∣parisions, which Iesus made vnto them in flesh, after his Resurrection. The first was, to Mary Magdalen a∣part,Math, 16, when she with Solome and o∣ther women, went and remained with oyntments about the Sepul∣cher. The second was, to all the wo∣men together, as they returned home-wards,Math, 28, who also were permit∣ted to embrace his feete. The thyrde was to Simon Peter alone.1, Corin. 15, The fourth, to the two Disciples in theyr iourney to Emaus.Luke, 24, The fift was, to all the Apostles, and other Disciples together when the dores were shut.Iohn, 20, The sixt, was to the same companie againe,1, Cor, 15, Iohn, 20, after eight dayes when Tho∣mas was with them, at what tyme also he did both eate & drinke, and suffered his body also to be handled among them. The seauenth was to S. Peter and Saint Iohn,Iohn, 21, with fyue other disciples, when they were a fi∣shing at what time also he vouch∣safed to eate with them. The eyght was to eleuen Disciples at one time,Math, 28, vpon the Mount Thabor in Galiley. The ninth was,1. Corin, 15, to more thē 5. hun∣dred bretheren at one time, as Saint
Paule testifieth. The tenth was to S. Iames,Ibidem. as the same Apostle recor∣deth. The eleuenth was to al his A∣postles disciples & friends together,Acts, 1, vpon the Mount Oliuet by Ierusa∣lem, when in their presence he ascen∣ded vp to heauen. The twelfth and last, was after his ascention,1. Cor. 15. vnto S. Paule, as himselfe beareth witnesse. All these apparitions are recorded in Scripture, as made by Iesus after hys Resurrection, to such as by hys e∣ternall wisedome, were preordained to be witnesses of so glorious a spec∣tacle. To whom (as S. Luke affir∣meth,Acts, 1,) He shewed himselfe aliue by many arguments, for the space of for∣tie dayes together, and reasoned with them of the kingdome of his Father. And why any man should mistrust the testimonie of those men which saw him, conuersed with him, eate with hym, dranke with him, tou∣ched him, and heard him speake, & whose entire estate and welfare, de∣pended wholy of the certainty heer∣of; I see no reason. For what com∣fort had it beene or consolation to these men, to haue deuised of them∣selues these former apparitions? What encouragement might they
haue taken, in those doleful tymes of desolation and affliction, to haue had among them the dead bodie of him,Circūstan∣ces that cō∣firme the true resur∣rection of IESVS. on whose onely lyfe, theyr vni∣uersall hope and confidence depen∣ded? The Scribes and Pharisies, be∣ing astonished with the suddaine newes of hys rysing againe, confir∣med vnto them by their own Soul∣diours that saw it, founde no other way to resist the fame thereof, but onely by saying, (as all their posteri∣tie doe vnto this day) that hys Dis∣ciples came by night, and stole away his body while the souldiours were a sleepe. But what likeli-hoode or possibilitie can there be in thys? for first, it is eident to all the worlde, that his Apostles themselues, (who were the heads of all the rest) were so dismaied, discomforted, and de∣iected at that time, as they durst not once goe out of the doore, for which cause onely those seely women, who for theyr sexe esteemed themselues more free from violence, presumed alone to visite the Sepulcher, which no one man durst doe for feare of the Souldiours: vntill by those wo∣men they were enformed, that the fore-sayd band of Souldiours were
terrified & put to flight by Christes Resurrection. And then how was it likely,Great im∣probabili∣ties. that men so much amazed & ouercome with feare, shold aduenture to steale away a dead body from a Guard of Souldiours that kept it? or if theyr hearts had serued them to aduenture so great a daunger: what hope or probabilitie had there beene of suc∣cesse? especially, considering the said body lay in a newe Sepulcher of stone, shut vp, locked, and fast sea∣led by the Magistrate? Howe was it possible (I say) that hys Disciples should come thether? breake vp the Monument? take ou his body? and carry the same away, neuer after to be seene or founde, without espial of some one amongst so many that attended there? Or if thys were possible, (as in reason it is not) yet what profite, what pleasure, what comfort coulde they receyue heerby? We see that the Apostles & Disciples of his, who were so aban∣doned of life & hart in his passion: after two dayes onely they were so changed, as life and death can be no more contrary. For whereas before they kept
home in all feare, and durst appeare no where, except among theyr own priuate freendes:The great change in Iesus Disci∣ples by hys resurrection nowe they came forth into the streetes and common places, and auouched with al alacri∣tie, and irresistable constancie, euen in the faces & heaing of their grea∣test enemies, that Iesus was risen frō death to lyfe; that they had seene him, and enioyed his presence. And that for testimonie and confirmati∣on heereof, they were most readie to spend their liues. And could all thys (trow you) proceed onely of a dead body, which they had gotten by stealth into theyr possession? wold not rather the presence and sight of such a body, so torne, mangled, and deformed, as Iesus body was, both vpon the Crose and before: haue rather dysmayed them more, then haue gyuen him any comfort? Yes truely And therefore Pilate the Go∣uernour,The exami∣nation of the matter by Pilate. considering these circum∣staunces, and that it was vnlikelie, that eyther the body shold be stolne away without priuity of the Souldi∣ours, or if it had been, that it should yeeld such life, hart, consoltion, and courage to the stelers: beganne to giue eare more diligently to ye mat∣ter;
and calling vnto him the Soul∣diers that kept ye watch, vnderstood by them the whole truth of the ac∣cident, to wit, that in their sight & presence, Iesus was risen out of hys Sepulcher to lyfe, and that at hys ry∣sing, there was so dreadful an earth∣quake, with trembling and opening of Sepulchers rounde about; such skryches, cryes, and commotion of all Elements: as they durst not a∣bide longer, but ranne and tolde the Iewish Magistrates thereof, who be∣ing grealy discontented (as it see∣med) with the aduertisement, gaue them money to say, that whyle they were sleeping, the body was stolne away from them by hys Disciples All thys wrote Pilate presently to hys Lord Tyberius,Pilats Let∣ters to Ty∣berius, and his proee∣ding there∣vppon. who was then Emperour of Rome. And he sent withall, the particuler examinations & confessions of diuers others, that had seene and spoken wyth such as were rysen from death at that tyme, and had appeared to many of their acquaintance in Ierusalem, assuring them also of the Resurrection of Ie∣sus. Which information, when Ty∣berius the Emperor had considered, he was greatly moued therwith, and
proposed to the Senate, that Iesus myght be admitted among the rest of the Romaine Gods: offering hys owne consent, with the priuiledge of hys supreame royall suffrage o that deree. But ye Senate in no wie would agree thereunto. Wherupon, Tyberius beeing offended, gaue ly∣cence to all men to beleeue in esus that would: and forbid vpon paine of death, that any Officer or oher, should molest or trouble such, as bare good affection, zeale or reue∣rence to that name. Thus much te∣stifieth Tertullian against the Gen∣tiles,Tertul. in Apolog. pro Christ. of hys owne knowledge, who lyuing in Rome a learned man, and pleader of causes, dyuers yeeres be∣fore he was a Christian, (which was about one hundred and foure-score yeeres after our Sauiour Chrst hys ascention,) had great ability by rea∣son of the honour of his familie, learning, and place wherein hee ly∣ued, to see and know the Recordes of the Romains. And the same doth affirme also Egisippus,Egesip. lib. 1. hist. Euseb. lib. 4, cap. 21, Ruff. li. 1, cap. 22. another aun∣cient Wyter, of no lesse authoritie then Tertullian, before whom he li∣ued. Neither onely diuers Gentiles had
thys opinion of Iesus Resurrection againe from death,The opini∣on of ye wi∣ser sort of Iewes, tou∣ching Iesu resurrection at that time. but also sundry Iewes of great credite and wisedom, at that tyme were enforced to be∣lieue it: notwithstanding it plea∣sed not God to gyue them so much grace as to become Christians. Thys appeareth plainelie by the learned Iosephus, who wryting his storie not aboue fortie yeeres after Christes passion, tooke occasion to speake of Iesus and of his Disciples. And after he had shewed howe hee was crucified by Pilate, at ye instance of the Iewes, and that for all thys, his Disciples ceased not to loue him stil: he adioyneth forh-with these words;Iosep. lib. 14, antiq. ca. 4, Idirco illis tertio die vita re∣sumpta, denuo apparuit. That is, for thys loue of hys Disciples, he appea∣red vnto them againe the third day, whē he had resumed life vnto him. Which expresse, plaine & resolute words, we may in reason take, no as the confession onely of Iosephus, but as the common iudgement, o∣pinion and sentence, of all the dys∣creete and sober men of that tyme, layde downe and recorded by thys Historiographer. In whose dayes there were yet many Christians a∣liue,
that had seene & spoken with Iesus after his Resurrection; & infi∣nite Iewes, that had heard the same protested by theyr Fathers, brethe∣ren, kins-folkes and freendes, who had beene themselues eye witnesses thereof. Of Iesus ascention. AND thus hauing declared and proued the Resurrection of our Sauiour Iesus, both how it was fore∣shewed, as also fulfilled: there re∣maineth nothing more of necessitie to be sayd in thys Section. For that whosoeuer seeth & acknowledgeth, that Iesus beeing dead, could rayse himselfe againe to lyfe, wil easily be∣leeue also, that he was able likewise to ascend vp to heauen. Whereof notwithstanding,Acts, 1, S. Luke alledgeth one hundred and twenty witnesses at the least, in whose presence he a∣scended from the top of the Mount Oliuet, after forty dayes space, which hee had spent with them from the tyme of hys resurrection. Hee alledgeth also the appearing of two Angels among al the people
for testimonie thereof.Likeli∣hoods of truth. He nameth the day and place, when, and where it happened. He recounteth the very words that Iesus spake at his ascenti∣on. He telleth the manner howe hee ascended, and how a Clowde came downe, and receiued hym into it out of theyr sight. He declareth what the multitude dyd, whether they went, and in what place they remai∣ned after theyr departure thence. And finally, he setteth downe so many particulers, as it had been the easiest matter in the world, for hys enemies to haue refuted his narrati∣on, if all had not beene true. Ney∣ther was there anie to receiue more domage by the falsehoode thereof, then himselfe, and those of his pro∣fession, if the matter had beene feigned. Wherefore to conclude at length thys treatise of the byrth,The con∣clusion of this seconde Section. lyfe, doc∣trine, actions, death, resurrection, and ascention of Iesus: seeing no∣thing hath happened in the same, which was not fore-tolde by ye Pro∣phets of GOD: nor any thing fore∣shewed by the same Prophets con∣cerning the Messias, which was not
fulfilled most exactly, within the compasse and course of Iesus abode vpon earth: we may most certainly assure our selues, that as GOD can neyther fore-tell an vntruth, nor yeeld testimony to the same, so can it not be, but that these things which wee haue shewed to haue beene so manifestly fore-prophecied, and so euidently accōplished, must needes assure vs, ye Iesus was the true Messi∣as. Which thing shal yet more par∣ticulerly appeare, by that which en∣sued by his power and vertue, after his ascention: which shall bee the argument of the next Section which followeth. How Iesus proued his Deitie, after his departure to heauen. SECT. 3. AS by the deedes and actions of IESVS while he was vpon the earth, compared with the predicti∣ons of Gods Prophets from tyme to time:The con∣tents of thys thyrd Secti∣on. he hath beene declared in the former Sections to be the true Mes∣sias and Sauiour of the world; so in thys that now we take in hand, shal
the same be shewed by such thinges as insued after hys ascention and de∣parture from thys world. Wherein his power & Deitie appeared more manifestly, (if it may be so spoken,) then in other hys workes which he wrought in his life. In which kinde, albeit I might treate of many & al∣most infinite branches, yet for order and breuities sake, I meane onely to take in consideration these few that ensue. Wherein not onely the pow∣er of Iesus, but also his loue, his care and prouidence, & most perfect ac∣complishment of all hys promiss, and finally, the iustification of al his speeches, prophecies, and doctrines vpon earth haue declared. And to reduce what is to be sayd heerein to some order and method,The deuisi∣on of the particuler considera∣tions ensu∣ing. it is to be noted, yt in the first place shal be considered the sustentation, protection, increase, and continua∣tion of Christes lyttle Church and kingdome, that himselfe first plan∣ted and left vpon earth. The seconde consideration, shall be of hys Apo∣stles and theyr actions. The thyrd of his Euangelists. The fourth of hys Witnesses and Martyrs throughout the world. The fift shal treate of the
kingdome of infernall powers, bea∣ten downe by hys vertue. The sixt, of the punishment and iust reuenge that lighted vpon his enemies, who most impugned his diuine person in the world. The seauenth and last, shall declare the fulfilling of al such Prophecies and predictions, as pro∣ceeded frō his diuine mouth, while he was conuersant vppon earth. The first Consideration. NOw then for the first, it is to be considered,Christes Church. that as IESVS de∣parture out of thys world from the Mount Oliuet, S. Luke reporteth, that all the multitude of his follow∣ers, which there had beheld hys as∣cention into heauen, returned backe together into the Citty of Ierusalē, and there remained in one house to∣gether, continuing in prayer and ex∣pectation what should become of them, The whole Citty was bent a∣gainst them: themselues were pore and simple people: and dyuers of them women: Lands or reuenewes they had none to maintaine them: nor freendes in Court to gyue them conntenannce against theyr ene∣mies.
The name of Iesus was most odious: and whosouer did fauour him, was counted an enemie to the state. There wanted not (perhaps) among them, who considering the great multitude,The state of christes first Church. woulde imagine with themselues what should be∣come of them: where they shoulde find to maintaine & sustaine them, what should be the end of that ee∣ble Congregation? For abroad they durst not goe, for feare of persecuti∣on; & continue long together they might not, for want of necessaries. Besides that, euery houre they ex∣pected to be molested and drawne forth by Catch-poles and other Of∣ficers. And albeit in these distresses, the fresh memorie of Iesus, and his sweet promises made vnto them at his departure: as also the delectable presence of his blessed Mother, and her often exhortations and encou∣ragements vnto them, dyd comfort them generally as may be supposed: yet, to hym that by humaine reason should ponder and weigh theyr pre∣sent state & condition, it could not chuse but seeme hard, and no waies durable. But beholde vpon the suddaine,
when they had continued nowe ten dayes together, and might by al pro∣bability find themselues in very high degree of temporall distresses, Iesus performed hys promise of sending them a Comforter, which was the holy Ghost.The com∣ming of the holy Ghost, and what comfort he brought with him. Acts, 2. By whose comming, besides the internall ioy and incredi∣ble alacritie & exultation of minde, they receiued also fortitude and au∣dacity, to goe forth into the worlde. They receiued the gyft of tongues, enabling them to concourse & deale with all sorts of people. They recey∣ued wisedome and learning, with most wonderfull illumination in highest misterie, wherby to preach, to teach, & conuince their aduersa∣ries. They receiued the gyft of Pro∣phecie to fore-tell things to come, together with the power of working signes and myracles, whereby the whole world remained astonied. And for a taste or earnest pennie of that which should ensue, concerning the infinite increase of that lit∣tle Congregation: they sawe thre thousand of theyr aduersaries conuerted to them in one day, by a Semon of S. Peter. Which increase went on so fa
for the time that ensued: that with∣in forty yeeres ater, the Gentiles themselues confessed, that the bran∣ches of thys Congregation, were spredde ouer all the world, and be∣gan to put in feare the very Romane Emperors themselues.Suet. in vita Nero. Con. Tait. lib. 5. hist. Whereof not long after, a man that was as learned as euer was any, conuerted from Pa∣ganisme to Christianitie, beareth re∣cord in his deence to an Emperour and his Officers, who according to the nature of persecutors, accounted Christians for Traytors & enemies to his state and dignity. Which vul∣gare obiection, this fore-sayde lear∣ned man refuteth in these words. If we were enemies to your estate,Tertul in a∣pol. ad gen. you myght well seeke newe Citties and Countries whereof to beare go∣uernment; for that you shold haue in your Empire more enemies then Cittizens. We haue filled you Cit∣ties, your Townes, your Prouinces, your Ilands, your Castles, your For∣tresses, your Tents, your Campes, your Courts, your Palaces, your Se∣nats, and your Market places. Onely we haue left your Idolatrous Tem∣ples vnto your selues: all other pla∣es are full of Christians. If we were
enemies, what daungerous warres might we make against you, (albeit our number were farre lesse,) who esteeme so little of our liues, as to of∣fer our selues daily to be slaine at your hands? Thys then is your sa∣fetie in very deed, not your persecu∣ting of vs, but that we are honest, patient, and obedient; and that it is more lawfull in Christian Religion, to be killed, then to kill. By which words of Tertullian, in this first beginning and infancie (as it were) of Christian Religion,The won∣derful quick increase of Christes Church. (for he liued in ye second age after Christ) we see how this little flock & king∣dom of IESVS was increased, not∣withstanding all the resistance and violence of the worlde against it Which appeareth by the same Tertullian, to haue beene such:In Prefa. Apolog. & was euen at that tyme when hee wrote those words (the fourth persecution being then in most furie,) as all the malefactors of the worlde together had not so much rigour shewed against them: as had the most innocent Christian that liued, for confesing onely that name and Religion This then declared most apparenly, that it could not proceede but
some diuine power and supernatu∣rall assistaunce, that in so shorte a space, amidst the contradiction and oppositions of so many aduersaries, among the whyppes, swordes, and tortures, of so great, potent, and vio∣lent persecutions, this poore, simple, and feeble Congregation shoulde pearse through, and augment it selfe so strongly. Especially if we consider the outward meanes of this increse,The increase of Christi∣ans against nature. wherein there was nothing to allure or content mans nature: nothing gorgius, nothing delectable, nothing to please or entertaine sensualitie. We reade of an Emperour, that taking in hand to cōquer the world, made thys Proclamation for win∣ning men vnto hys partie.Plut. in A∣poth. Prisc. regum. The Procla∣mation of Cyrus, Mo∣narch of Media. Who so∣euer wil come and be my seruaunt: if he be a foote-man, I will make hym a horse-man; if he be a horse-man, I will make hym ride wyth Coches; if he be a Farmour, I will make him a Gentleman, if he pos∣sesse a cottage, I wil giue him a Vil∣lage; if he haue a Village, I will gyue him a Citty; if he be a Lord of a Citty, I will make him Prince of a Region or Countrey. And as for gold, I wil poure it forth vnto them
by heapes and weight, and not by number. Thys was the Proclamation and Edict of Cyrus to hys followers, ve∣ry glorious (as we see) in pompe of words and ostentation of style. Let vs now compare the Proclamation of Iesus,Iesus Pro∣clamation. whose enterance and Prae∣face was: Paenitentiā agite, Repent yee. And then it followeth:Math, 3, In hoc mundo pressuram habebitis:Iohn. 16, in thys world you shall receyue affliction. And then after againe; They shall whyp and murder you.Math, 10. And yet fur∣ther: You shal be hatefull in the sight of all men for my sake. Then is there adioyned He that loueth his life, shall lose his soule.Luke, 9. After that ensueth, Hee that will follow mee, must beare his Crosse. And finally, the conclusion is;Luke, 14, He that commeth to me and doth not hate his Father, his Mother, his wife, his chyldren, his bretheren, his sisters and his owne lyfe for my sake, he is not worthy to be my seruaunt. Thys was the entertainment pro∣posed by Iesus, to such as wold come & serue vnder hys Banner; with ex∣presse prostestation, yt hymselfe was sent into the worlde,Math, 5, not to bring peace, rest, & ease to flesh & blood,
but rather to be the cause of sword, fire, trybulation, combate, and en∣mitie. And yet with these colde of∣fers, presented to the world by pore, abiect, and most contemptible Of∣ficers; and by this doctrine, so crosse and opposite to mans nature, incly∣nation, and sensual appetite, he gay∣ned more harts vnto him, within the space of forty yeeres, as hath beene sayde, then euer did Monarch in the world possesse louing Subiects, by what-soeuer temporall allurement they dyd or might propose. Which argueth most euidently, the omni∣potent puissaunce of hym, that con∣trary to mans reason, could bring to passe so miraculous a conquest. The second Consideration. THere followeth in order, the con∣sideration of Christes Aposles:Of Christes Apostles. which in some respect, may be sayde more strange & wonderful then the former, in that they beeing both rude, simple, and vnlearned men, (and for the most part of the baser sort,) should be chosen & assigned to so great a worke, as was the con∣uersion of all Countries & Nations,
and to stande in combate with the power, learning and wisedome of all the world. Neither only had they to contend and fight against they enemies, but also to direct, gouerne, and menage all those, who shoulde be adioyned to theyr Maisters king∣dom To which charge they seemed so vntoward and insufficient, in all that tyme wherein they lyued with him heere vppon earth: as by theyr questions and demaunds made vn∣to him a little before his passion, they might appeare to haue learned very little, in three whole yeeres con∣uesaion & instruction: and in ve∣rie deede, to be incapable of so high mysteries and unctions. Yet notwihstanding, these men, who of themselues were weake and impotent, after strength and confir∣mation receiued by ye descending of Gods holy Spirit into them, became so perfect, able, and most excellent men, as they brought the whole world in admiration of them. Not onely by the most exquisite perfecti∣on of theyr doctrine, (wherein on a suddaine, without study, they excel∣led, and conuinced the greatest Phy∣losophers then lyuing,) but also, and
that especially, by the rare & stupen∣dious myracles which they wrought in the sight of al men. The contem∣placion whereof,Acts, 2, as S. Luke repor∣teth, droue the beholders, not onelie into great meruaile, but also into feare and exceeding terrour. And for example, he recounteth the restoring of a lame man at ye Tem∣ple gate of Ierusalem,The Apo∣stls mira∣cles. which had been a Cripple for the space of forty yeeres and more, and thys myracle was doone and testified in the pre∣sence and knowledge of all the Cit∣tie. He recordeth also the dreadfull death of Annanias and Saphira, by the onely speech and voyce of S. Pe∣ter:Acts. 3, as in lyke manner, the healing of infinite sicke people, by the pre∣sence and shadowe of the same A∣postle. He reporteth also the most wonderful deliueraunce of the sayd Saint Peter,Acts. 5, out of the hands & pry∣son of Herod by the Angel of God. The varietie of languages, which all the Apostles spake. The visible des∣cending of the holy Ghost vppon al such, on whom the sayde Apostles dyd but lay theyr hands.1. Cor, 15, 2, Cor, 12, Acts, 9, 22, and 26, The mira∣culous conuersion of S. Paule, by Christes appearing vnto him in the
way, when he went to persecute. Of which myracle, S. Paul himself pro∣testeth in euery place afterward, and once especially, in an open audience and iudgement, before K. Agrippa, and Festus Gouernour of Iurie. These miracles & many moe are recorded by S. Luke, whereof some part were seene by hymselfe, and the rest most euident to all the worlde, as doone in publique before infinite witnesses. Neyther is it possible they could be ayned,The mira∣cls repor∣ted of the Apostles, could not be fayned. for that (as in the like I haue before noted) it had been most easie to haue refelled them, & thereby to haue discredited ye whole proeedinges of Christian Religion in theyr first beginnings. As for ex∣ample; if the miracle of Saint Pe∣ter, beeing deliuered foorth of the hands & pryson of Herod Agrippa, had any way beene to be touched with falshood, howe many would there haue beene of Herodes Offi∣cers, Courtiers, seruants & friendes, that for defence of their Princes ho∣nour, (so deeply tainted by this nar∣ration of Saint Luke, published not long after the thing was done) how many (I say) woulde haue offered themselues to refute and disgrace the
writer heereof, hauing so pregnant meanes by publique recorde to doe the same; So again, wheras the same S. Luke reporteth of his own know∣ledge, that in a Citty of Macedonie, named Philippi,Act, 6. Saint Paule and Si∣las after many myracles doone, were whypped and put in pryson, with a dilligent guarde in the lowest prison of all: theyr feete loked fast in the stockes of Tymber, & that at myd∣nyght, when Paule and Silas began to pray, the whole pryson was sha∣ken, and all the doores throwne o∣pen, as also the gyues, not onely of those two, but of all the other pry∣soners vpon a suddain burst in sun∣der: and that thereupon, not onely the Iaylor cast hymselfe at the feete of S. Paule, but the Magistrates al∣so, (who the day before had caused them to be whipt,) came and asked them pardon, and humbly intreaed them to depart out of theyr Cittie. This story (I say) if it had been false, there needed no more for confutati∣on therof, but onely to haue exami∣ned ye whole citty of Philippi, which could haue testified the contrary. And yet among so many aduer∣saries, and eager impugners of Chri∣stian
Religion, as Gods enemy styr∣red vp in the Primatiue Church, of all sorts and sects of people: no one euer appeared, that durst attempt to take in hande,None euer durst im∣pugne the miracles of the Apo∣stles, but by calumnia∣tion. the particuler impro∣uing of these or ye like miracles, but rather confessing the facts, sought alwaies to discredite them by other sinister calumniations: namely and commonly, that they were wrought by the deceits and sleightes of Arte-Magick. Thus sayde the Iewes of the myracles of Iesus,Math, 12. and so said Iulian the Apostata, of the wonderfull strange things doone by Saint Peter and S. Paule;Apud Cyril. lib, 1, cont. Iulian. affirming thē to haue beene the most expert in Magicke, of any that euer liued:Augu, lib, de era Relig. and that Christ wrote a speciall booke of that pro∣fession, and dedicated the same to Peter and Paule: whereas notwith∣standing it is most euident, that Paule was a persecutor diuers yeeres after Christes departure. Euseb. lib. cont. Hiero.One Hierocles also wrote a booke, wherein he fayned Appolonius Ty∣anaeus to haue done the lyke myra∣cles by Magick, which Christ & hys Apostles did by diuine power. And finally, it is a generall opinion, that
both Nero and Iulian, gaue them∣selues so extreamely to the studie of that vaine Science, as no men euer did the lyke; vpon emulation onlie of the miracles doone in Rome by Peter and Paule when Nero lyued, and by other Saints and Disciples in the tyme of Iulian. But what was the ende? Plinie that was a Pagan,Plin. lib. 30. Nat. Hist. cap. 1. wryteth thus of Nero; that as no man euer labou∣red more then he in that Science, so no man euer left a more certaine te∣stimonie of the meruailous excee∣ding vanitie thereof. The like in ef∣fect wryteth Zosimus of Iulian,Zosimus in vita Iulian. al∣beit himselfe a malicious Heathen. And if it were not written, yet theyr seuerall extraordinarie calamities, & most miserable deathes, which by al their Magick they could not fore∣see, dooth sufficiently testifie ye same vnto vs; especially the last wordes of Iulian,Niceph. lib. 10. c. 35. hist. Vicisti Galilaee, vicisti. Thou hast wonne (ô Galilaean) thou hast gotten the victory. Acknowledging thereby, as wel the truth of Christes myracles and of hys followers, as al∣so the vanitie, folly, and madnes of his owne endeuours. Thus then went forward Chri∣stes
Apostles,The suc∣cesse of the Apostles. and preached him eue∣rie where throughout the worlde; Domino cooperante & sermonem cō∣firmante, sequentibus signis:Marke, 16, that is, (as S, Marke affirmeth) the Lorde Iesus working with them, and con∣firming their preaching by signes & myracles. In respect of which be∣nigne assistance of Iesus in theyr ac∣tions, S. Luke sayth further:Acts, 14, They dealt most confidently in the Lorde: his worde of grace giuing testimonie vnto their doings, and shewing foorth signes & most prodigious wonders by theyr hands. No persecution, no ter∣rour, no threates of enemies, no dyf∣ficultie, or danger that might occur, could stay them frō their course of setting forth Christes name & glo∣rie. And they were so assured of the truth,The assu∣rance of the Apostles. by the inwarde illuminations which they had, and by this certaine testimony of Gods fauour and assi∣stance in dooing myracles: as one of them wryteth thus;1. Iohn, 1, That which we haue hearde, which we haue seene with our eyes, which we haue behelde, which our hands haue handled of the word of lyfe: that we doe testifie and announce vnto you. And another who had S. Paule. been a grieuous persecu∣tor,
and was conuerted without any conference with any Christian in the world; sayd,Rom, 8, of Iesus that was deade and risen again, that neither tribula∣tion, nor distresse, nor famine, nor beggery, nor danger, nor persecution, nor dint of sword, could daunt hym from the seruice of such a Maister. And in another place he sayth, that he esteemed al things of this world, wherein a man might glory, to be as very dounge and detriments, in respect of the eminent knowledge,Phil. 3. (that is hys word) of hys Lord Iesus Christ. In which very name he tooke so exceeding great delight: as in a fewe Epistles which he left written, he is obserued to haue vsed this sen∣tence, Dominus noster Iesus Christus, aboue two hundred times. Neyther indured thys in these A∣postles for a time onely,The ioyfull ending of the Apo∣stles. but al theyr lyues, which as they spent the same with alacritie in the seruice of Iesus, so in the end they gaue vp the same most cheerefully,2, Tim, 4, 1, Thes, 2, to what-so-euer death presented it selfe, for confir∣mation and sealing of theyr former doctrine; neuer so ful of confidence, courage, and consolation, as at that houre, nor neuer so boldly denoun∣cing
theyr Maister, or talking so ioy∣fully of rewards, Crownes and king∣doms, as at the very last instant and vp-shot of theyr worldly combat. This then declareth most mani∣festly, that the actions of these men, proceeded not of humane spirit, nor could be performed by the power of man, but by the diuine force and su∣pernatural assistance of theyr Lord and God, whom they confessed, The third Consideration. AND thus much in breuitie of Christes Apostles.Of the E∣uangelists. There ensue next hys Euangelistes: that is, such men as haue let vnto vs written, his byrth, life, doctrine, & death. Wher∣in it is to be noted, that Iesus being God, tooke a different way from the custome of man, in deliuering vnto vs his Lawes and precepts. For that men, who haue beene Law-makers vnto the worlde, knewe no surer way of publishing theyr Lawe, and procuring authority to the same, thē to write thē with their own handes, and in theyr life tyme to establishe theyr promulgation. So Lycurgus, Solon, and others among the Grae∣cians,
Numa to the Romaines, Ma∣homet to the Sarasines: and dyuers other in lyke manner. But Iesus to shew hys diuine power in directing the penne and style of his Euange∣lists, wold not leaue any thing writ∣ten by himselfe,Iesus left nothing written by himselfe. but passed frō thys world in simplicity and silence, with out any further shew or ostentation of hys owne doings: meaning not∣withstāding by his eternal wisdome, that the prophecy of Ezechiel shold be fulfilled,Ezech, 1, which fore-signified the beeing of his foure irrefragable wit∣nesses, which day & night without rest, should preach, extoll, and mag∣nifie theyr Lord and Maister to the worlds end. Foure then were fore-prophecied,The diffe∣rent quali∣ties and cir∣cumstances of the foure Euangelists. and foure as we see by Gods proui∣dence, were prouided to fulfill the same prophecie. The first & last are two Apostles, that wrote as they had seene. The two middle are two dis∣ciples, who registred thinges as they had vnderstood by conference wyth the Apostles. The first Gospell was written by an Apostle, to giue lyght & open the way to al the rest. And the last in lyke manner was written by an Apostle, to giue authority and
confirmation to all the former. The first was written in the Hebrewe or Iewish tongue, for that Iesus actions were doone in that countrey, to the end that thereby, eyther the whole Nation might belieue them, or the obstinate impugne them. The other three were wrytten in the publique tongues of all other Nations, that is in the Greeke & Romaine langua∣ges, if it be true (See Ar∣macan. lib. 9 de quest. which dyuers holde) that S. Markes Gospell was first wrytten in Latine. They wrote their stories in diuers countries, each one remaining farre distant from another,Circumstā∣ces of truth in our E∣uangelists. and yet agreed they all (as we see) most exactly, in the very same narration. They wrote in dyuers tymes, the one after the o∣ther, and yet the latter dyd neyther correct nor reprehende any thing in the former. They published they stories, when infinite were aliue that knewe the factes, and many more that desired to impugne them. They sette down in most of their particu∣ler narrations, the tyme, the day, the houre, the place, the Village, the house, the persons, the men, the wo∣men, and other the lyke. Which cir∣cumstaunces, the more they are in
number, the more easie to be refuted if they were not true. Neyther dyd they in Iurie, write of things doone in India, but in the same countrey it selfe, in Townes and Citties that were publiquely knowne, in Betha∣nia and Bethsaida, Villages hard by Ierusalem: in the Suburbes & hyls about the cittie, in such a streete, at such a Gate, in such a porche of the Temple, at such a fish-poole, which al people in Ierusalem did euery day behold. They published theyr writing in theyr owne lyfe tyme,The publi∣shing of our Gos∣pels. and preached in word, so much as in writing they had recorded. They permitted the same to the iudgement and exami∣nation of all Christes church, espe∣cially of the Apostles, who were a∣ble to diserne euery least thing ther∣in contained. So S. Marke set foorth hys Gospell,Hier. in ca∣talog scrip. Eccles. by the instruction and approbation of S. Peter, as also dyd S. Luke by the authority of S. Paul. They altered not theyr writings af∣terward, as other authors are wont in theyr latter editions, nor euer cor∣rected they one iote of that which they had first sette downe. And that which neuer happened in any other
wrytings in the world besides, nor e∣uer Prince or Monarch was able to bring to passe, for cedite of hys E∣dicts or sanctions: they gaue theyr lyues for deence and iustifying of that which they had written. The maner of style in our Euan∣gelists.Theyr manner of wryting, is sin∣cere and simple, without all Arte, amplification, or rethoricall exhor∣tation. They flatter none, no not Ie∣sus hymselfe, whō they most adore, nor in confessing hym to be theyr God and Creator doe they conceale his infirmities of flesh,Math, 21, Marke, 2. in that he was man: as hys hunger and thyrst: his beeing weary:Iohn, 7. howe he wept: hys passions of feare, and the lyke.Luke, 19. So lykewise in the Apostles that were the Gouernours, Superiours, and heads of the rest: do these Euange∣lists dyssemble, hyde, or passe ouer no such things as were deects, and might seeme to worldly eyes to turn to theyr dyscredites. As for example, how Christ rebuked them for theyr dulnes in vndrstanding:Marke, 15. howe af∣ter long instruction,Iohn, 10, 11, and 20, they proposed notwithstanding, very rude and im∣pertinent questions vnto hym; how Thomas would not beleeue the at∣testation of hys fellowes: howe S.
Iohn and S. Iames, the sons of Ze∣bedee, ambiciously solicited to haue the preheminence of sitting neerest to Christ in hys glory: which latter clause, beeing sette downe cleerelie by S. Marke,Marke, 10, whyle yet S. Iohn the Apostle was lyuing, the same was neuer denyed, nor taken ill by the sayd Apostle, neyther was S. Marks Gospel any thing the lesse approued by hym, albeit he lyued longest, and wrote last of al the rest. Nay, which is more, and greatly (no doubt) to be obserued;A speciall poynt to be obserued in our Euan∣gelists. these E∣uangelists were so sincere and religi∣ous in theyr narrations, as they no∣ted especially the imperfections of themselues, & of such other as they principally respected. So S. Mathew nameth hymselfe Mathew the Pub∣lican.Math, 10. And so S. Marke,Marke, 14. beeing Pe∣ters Disciple, recordeth particulerlie how S. Peter thrye denyed his Lord and Maister. S. Luke that was Schol∣ler and dependent of S. Paule,Acts, 15. ma∣keth mention alone of the differen∣ces between Paule & Barnabas, and in the story of S. Stephens death, af∣ter al hys narration ended, he addeth a clause that in humane iudgement might haue beene left out, to wit,
Saulus erat cōsentiens neci eius,Acts, 17, Saule was consenting & culpable of Ste∣phens death. Whereby we may per∣ceiue most perspicuously, that as these men were plaine, sincere, and simple, and farre from presuming to deuise any thing of themselues, so were they religious, and had scruple to passe ouer, or leaue out any thing of the truth in fauor of themselues, or of any other whatsoeuer. These mens wrytings then, were published & receiued for vndoub∣ted truth, by all that lyued in the ve∣ry same age, and were priuie to the particulers therein contained. They were coppyed abroade into infinite mens hands, and so conserued wyth all care and reuerence, as holy & di∣uine Scripture. They were reade in churches throughout all countries and Nations: expounded preached and taught by all Pastours, & com∣mentaries made vpon them by holie Fathers rom time to tyme. So that do doubt can be made,No doubt but that we haue ye true writings of our Euan∣gelists. but that we haue the very same wrytings incor∣rupt as the Authors left them: for that it was impossible for any ene∣mie to corrupt so many copies ouer the world, without dyscouery & re∣sistance.
And the same very text, wordes, and sentences, which from age to age the learned Fathers doe alledge out of these Scriptures, wee find them now, as they had them at that tyme. As for example, S. Iohn that liued longest of all the Apostles and Euangelists, had among other Schollers and Auditors, Papias, Ig∣natius, and Policarpus, all which a∣gree of the foure Gospels and other writings left vnto vs in the new Te∣stament, affirming S. Iohn to haue approued the same. These mē were Maisters againe to Iustinius Martyr, Irenaeus and other, whose wrytings remain vnto vs. And if they dyd not, yet theyr sayinges and iudgements touching the Scriptures, are recorded vnto vs by Eusebius and other Fa∣thers of the next age after,Euseb. lib, 5. hist. cap. 15. & so frō hand to hande vntill our dayes. So that of thys there can be no more doubt, then whether Rome, Con∣stantinople, Ierusalem, and other such renowned citties, knowne to all the world at this day, be the verie same whereof Authors haue treated so much in auncient tymes.
The fourth Consideration. AND thus much of Christes E∣uangelists, for whose more cre∣dite, and for confirmation of things by thē recorded: his diuine proui∣dence preordained, that infinite wit∣nesses (whom we cal MartyrsOf Martyrs.) shold offer vp their blood in the Primatiue Church and after. Whereas for no other doctrine, profession, or Reli∣gion in the world, the lyke was euer heard of; albeit among the Iewes in the tyme of the Machabees,Maca. lib. 1. and 2. and at some other times also, whē that Na∣tion for theyr sinnes were afflicted by Heathen Princes, some few were tyrannized and iniuriously put to death; yet commonly, and for the most part, this was rather of barba∣rous cruelty in the Pagans for theyr resistaunce, then directly for hatred of Iewish Religion. And for the number there is no doubt, but that more Christians were put to death within two monethes for theyr be∣leefe thorow out the worlde, then were of Iewes for two thousande yeres before Christes cōming: which is vndoubtedly a matter very won∣derfull,
considering that the Iewish Religion impugned no lesse the Pa∣gan Idolatry, then doth the doctrine of the Christians. But this came to passe that Christes words might be fulfilled, who sayde; I come no o bring peace, but the sworde. And againe, I send you oorth as sheepe a∣mong wolues. That is to say, to bee torne and harried, and your bloode to be deuoured. In which extreame and most in∣credible sufferings of christiās, three poynts are worthy of great conside∣ration.Poynts o be conside∣red in our Martyrs. The first, what infinite mul∣titudes of al estates, conditions, sexe, qualities, and age, dyd suffer dailie, for testimony of thys truth. The se∣cond, what intollerable and vnaccu∣stomed See the narration of Philas, By∣shop in Af∣frica, touch∣ing thys poynt, alled∣ged by Euse. lib. 8, hist. c. 11, & 12. torments, not hearde of in the world before, were deuised by Tyrants for afflicting thys kinde of people. The thyrd, what inuincible courage and vnspeakeable alacritie, the Christians shewed, in bearing out these afflictions, which the ene∣mies themselues could not attribute, but to some diuine power & super∣naturall assistance. And for thys latter poynt of com∣fort in their sufferings, I wil alledge
onely thys Testimonie of Tertullian against the Gentiles, who obiected, that wicked men suffered also as wel as Christians;he singu∣er alacritie of Christi∣ans in theyr sufferings. whereto this learned Doctor made answer in these words. Trueth it is, yt many men are prone to ill, and doe suffer for the same: but yet dare they not defend their e∣uill to be good,Tertul. in Apol. cap. 1. as Christians doe theyr cause. For that euery euil thing by nature, dooth bring with it ey∣ther feare or shame: and therefore we see, that malefactors, albeit they loue euil, yet wold they not appeare so to the worlde, but desire rather to lye in couert. They tremble when they are taken, and when they are accused, they denie all, & doe scarce often-times confesse theyr dooings vpon torments. And finally, when they are condemned, they lament mone, and doe impute theyr harde fortune, to destiny, or to the Planets But the Christian, what dooth hee lyke to thys? is there any man asha∣med? or doth any man repent him whē he is taken, except it be for that he was not takē rather? if he be no∣ted by the enemy for a Christian, he glorieth in the same; if he be accu∣sed, hee defendeth not himselfe; if
he be asked the question, he confes∣seth it willingly; if hee be condem∣ned, he yeeldeth thanks. What euill is there then in the Christian cause, which lacketh the natural sequell of euill? I meane feare, shame, tergi∣uersation, repentance, sorrowe, and deploration? What euill (I say) can thys be deemed, whose guiltinesse is ioy? whose accusation is desire? whose punishment is happinesse? Hetherto are the words of learned Tertullian, who was an eye witnesse of that he wrote,Iesus assi∣stan to his Martyrs. and had no small part in the cause of those that suf∣fered, being himselfe in yt place and state, as daily he might expect to tast of the same affliction. To which combat, how ready he was may ap∣peare by diuers places of thys hys A∣pologie, wherein he vttereth (besides his zeale and feruour) a most confi∣dent securitie, and certaine assurance of Iesus assistance, by that which he had seene performed to infinite o∣ther, in their greatest distresses, from the same Lord before. So that no∣thing doth more acertaine vs of the diuine power and omnipotencie of IESVS, then the fortitude inuisi∣ble, which aboue all humaine rea∣son,
force, and nature, hee imparted to hys Martyrs. The fift Consideration. AFter which consideration, there commeth to be weighed, the fift poynt before mentioned, which is, of the same power and omnipoten∣cie of Iesus, declared and exercised vppon the Spyrits infernall.The sub∣iection of Spyrits. Which thing, partly may appeare by the O∣racles alledged in the end of the for∣mer Section, (wherein those spyrits fore-tolde, that an Hebrew chylde shold be borne, to the vtter subuer∣sion and ruine of theyr tyrannicall dominion,) & much more at large the same might be declared, by o∣ther answers & Oracles vttered after Christes natiuity, & registred in the Monuments euen of the Heathens themselues. Wherof he that desireth to see more ample mention (especi∣ally out of Porphyrie who then was lyuing,) let hym reade Eusebius sixt Booke, De preparatione Euangelica, where he shal finde store, & name∣ly, that Apollo many tymes exclai∣med Hei mihi, congemiscite: Hei mihi: hei mihi: Oraculorum defecit
me claritas. Woe vnto me, lament ye with me; woe vnto me, woe vnto me, for that the honour of Oracles hath now forsaken me. Which cō∣plaints & lamentations, are nothing els but a plaine confession that Iesus was he, of whom a Prophet sayd di∣uers ages before:Soph, 2, Attenuabit omnes Deos terrae: he shall weare out and bring to beggery, all the Gods or I∣dols of the earth. This confessed al∣so the wicked Spyrits themselues, whē at Christes appearing in Iurie, they came vnto hym dyuers tymes, and besought hym, not to afflict or torment them, nor commaund thē, presently to return vnto hell, but ra∣ther to permit them some little time of entertainement in the Sea, or Mountaines, or among heardes of Swyne, or the lyke. Which confes∣sion they made in the sight of all the world, and declared the same after∣wards by theyr facts and deedes. For presently vpon Iesus death, & vpon the preaching of his name & Gospel throughout the worlde,Of the my∣raculous ceasing of Oracles at Christes ap∣pearing. the Oracles which before were aboun∣dant in euery Prouince and Coun∣trey, were put to silence. Whereof I might alledge the testimony of very
many Gentiles themselues, as that of Iuuenall.Iuuenall. Cessant Oracula Delphis. Saty. 6.All Oracles at Delphos doe now cease, &c. That also of another Poet: Excessere omnes adytis, Lucan.arisque relictis Dij, quibus imperium hoc steterat, &c. That is, the Gods by whom thys Empyre stood, are all departed from theyr Temples, & haue abandoned theyr Altars and place of habitation. Strabo hath also these expresse wor∣des.Strab lib. Geograph. The Oracle of Delphos at this day is to be seene in extreame beggery & mendicitie. Plutar. de defectu Ora∣culo.And finally, Plutarch that lyued within one hundred yeeres after Christ, made a speciall Booke to search out the causes, why the Ora∣cles of the Gods were ceassed in hys tyme. And after much turning and winding many waies, resolued vpon two principall points, or causes ther∣of.Two insuf∣ficient cau∣ses. The first, for that in hys tyme, there was more store of Wise-men then before, whose aunswers might stand in steede of Oracles; and the
other, that peraduenture the spyrites which were accustomed to yeeld O∣racles, were by length of tyme growne olde and dead. Both which reasons, in the verie common sence of all men, must needes be false, and by Plutarch himselfe, cannot stande with probability. For first, in hys Bookes which he wrote of the lyues of auncient famous men, he confes∣seth, that in such kind of wisedome as he most esteemed, they had not their equals among their posteritie. Secondly, in hys Treatise of Phylo∣sophy, he passeth it for a grounde, that spirits not depending of mate∣riall bodies, cannot die, or wexe old, and therefore of necessitie he must conclude, that some other cause is to be yeelded of the ceassing of these Oracles, which cannot be but the presence and commaundement of some higher power, according to the saying of S. Iohn,1. Iohn. 3. To this ende appeared the sonne of God, that hee might dissolue (or ouerthrowe) the workes of the deuill. Neyther dyd Iesus thys alone in hys own persn, but gaue also pow∣er and authority to his Disciples & followers to doe the lyke, according
to their commission in S. Mathewes Gospell:Math, 10 Super omnia Daemonia et spiritus immundos, &c. You shall haue authoritie ouer al deuils & vn∣cleane spyrits. Which commission, how they afterward put it in execu∣tion, the whole worlde yeeldeth suf∣ficent testimonie. And for examples sake onely, I wil alledge in this place an offer or challenge, made for the tryall or proofe thereof, by Tertul∣lian to the Heathen Magistrates and persecutors of hys time, his wordes are these Tert. in A∣pol. ad gen.Let there be brought heere in pre∣sence before your trybunall seates, som person, who is certainly known to b possessed with a wicked spirit, and let that spirit e commaned by a Christian to seak and he shall as truly conesse himselfe to be a de∣il as  other tymes to you,A mot cō¦fidet ofer, made y Terulan. he will falsel say he is a God. Agane, at  let there be broght foorth one of these (your Priestes or Prophets) that will seeme to be pos∣sessed with a diuine spirit, I mean of those that speake gasping, &c. (in whom you imagine your Gods to talke,) and except that spyrite also, (commaunded by vs) doe confesse
himselfe to be a deuill, (being afraid indeede to lye vnto a Christian) doe you shedde the bloode of the Chri∣stians in that very place, &c. None will lye to theyr owne shame, but rather for honour or aduantage, yet those spyrits will not say to vs, that Christ was a Magitian, as you doe, nor that he was of the common cō∣dition of men. They wil not say, he was stolne out of the Sepulcher, but they will confesse, that hee was the vertue, wisedome, & word of God; that he is in heauen, & that he shall come againe to be our Iudge, &c. Neither will these deuils in our pre∣sence, deny thēselues to be vncleane spyrits, and damned for theyr wic∣kednes, & that they expect his most horrible iudgement, professing also, that they doe feare Christ in GOD, and God in CHRIST, and that they are made subiect vnto hys Ser∣uants. Hetherto are the words of Tertul∣lian, contayning (as I haue sayde) a most confident challenge, and that vpon the lyues & blood of al Chri∣stians, to make tryall of theyr power in controling those spirits, which the Romaines & other Gentiles adored
as theyr Gods. Which offer, seeing it was made and exhibited to the per∣secuters themselues, then lyuing in Rome, wel may we be assured, that the enemy would neuer haue omit∣ted so notorious an aduantage, if by former experience he had not beene perswaded, that the ioyning heerein would haue turned and redounded to hys owne confusion. The won∣derful au∣thorite of christians ouer spyrits.And this puissant authority of Ie∣sus imparted to Christians, extended it selfe so farre forth, that not onely theyr words and commandements, but euen their very presence did shut the mouthes and driue into feare the myserable Spyrites. So Lactantius sheweth,Lact. li. 2. di inst. cap. 16, that in hys dayes, among many other examples of thys thing, a seely Seruing-man that was a chri∣stian, following hys Maister into a certaine Temple of Idols, the Gods cryed out, that nothing coulde be well done, as long as that Christian was in presence. The like recordeth Eusebius of Dioclesian the Empe∣rour, who going to Apollo for an Oracle, receiued aunswer, That the iust men were the cause that he could say nothing.Euse. li. 5, de praep. Euan. Which iust men, Apol∣los Priestes interpreted, to be meant
ironically of Christians: and there∣vppon Dyoclesian began hys most fearce and cruell persecution in Eu∣sebius dayes. Sozomenus also wry∣teth,Sozom. lib, 3. hist. cap. 18. that Iulian an Apostata, ende∣uouring with many sacrifices & cō∣iurations, to draw an aunswer from Apollo Daphnaeus, in a famous place called Daphne, in the suburbes of Antioch: vnderstood at last by the Oracle, that the bones of S. Ba∣bylas the Martyr, that lay neere to the place, were the impediment why that God coulde not speake. And thereupon, Iulian caused the same body presently to be remooued. And finally, heereof it proceeded, that in all sacrifices, coniurations, & other mysteries of the Gentiles, there was brought in that phrase recorded by scoffing Lucian,Lucian in Alex. Exeant Christiani, let Christians depart; for that while they were present, nothing could be well accomplished. To conclude, the Pagan Porphy∣rie,Porph. lib. 1. cont. Christ. apud Euseb. li. 5. ca. 1. de praep. Eua that of all other most earnestlie endeuoured to impugne & disgrace vs Christians, and to holde vp the honour of hys enfeebled Idoles, yet discoursing of the great plague that raigned most furiously in the Cittie
of Messina, in Cicilie wher he dwelt, yeeldeth this reason, why Aesculapi∣us the God of Phisicke (much ado∣red in yt place) was not able to helpe them.A meruai∣lous confes∣sion of Por∣phyrie. It is no meruaile (sayth he) if this Citty so many yeeres bee vexed with the plague, seeing that both Aes∣culapius and all other Gods be nowe departed from it, by the comming of Christians. For since that men haue begun to worship this Iesus, wee could neuer obtaine any profit by our Gods. Thus much confessed this Patrone of Paganisme, concerning the maine that hys Gods had receiued by Iesus hoour. Which albeit he spake with a mliious minde, to bring Christi∣ans in hatred and persecution there∣by, yet is the confession notable, and confirmeth that story which Plu∣tarch in his fore-named booke doth report; that in the latter yeres of the raigne of the Emperour Tyberius,A prety sto∣rie of Plu∣tarch. a strange voyce, and exceeding horri∣ble clamor, with hidious cryes, skry∣ches, and howlings, were hearde by many in the Graeian sea, complai∣ning that the great GOD Pan was nowe departed. And thys Plutarch (that was a Gentile) affirmeth to haue beene alledged and approued,Plut. de de∣ectu. oracu.
before the Emperour Tyberius, who meruailed greatly thereat, and could not by all his Diuines and Sooth∣sayers, whom he called to that con∣sultation, gather out any reasonable meaning of this wonderful accidēt. But we Christians, comparing the time wherin it happened, vnto the time of Iesus death and passion, and finding the same fully to agree, may more then probably perswade our selues, that by the death of theyr great God Pan, (which signifieth al) was imported ye vtter ouerthrow of al wicked spirits & Idols vpon earth. The sixt Consideration. AND thus hath the Deitie of Ie∣sus beene declared and approo∣ued by hys omnipotent power, in subduing infernall enemies.The punish∣ment of e∣nemies. Nowe resteth it for vs to make manifest the same, by hys lyke power and diuine iustice, shewed vpon diuers of his e∣nemies heere on earth; whose grea∣test punishment, albeit for the most part, he reserueth for ye life to come, yet sometimes for manifestation of hys omnipotencie, (as especially it was behoueul in those first daies of
hys appearaunce in the worlde) hee chasteneth them also, euen heere on earth in the eye and sight of al men. So wee reade of the most infamous and myserable death of Herode the first,Herod As∣colonita. surnamed Ascolonita, who af∣ter hys persecution of Christ in hys infancie,Iosep. lib 17. antiq. ca. 10. et lib. 1. de bell. Iudai. cap. 21, & the slaughter of the in∣fants in Bethleem for hys sake: was wearied out by a lothsome lyfe, in feare and horrour of hys owne wife and children: whom after he had most cruelly murthered, was enfor∣ced also by desperation, through hys vnspeakeable griefes, vexations, and torments, to offer his owne hande to hys owne destruction, if he had not been staied by his friends that stood about hym. Archelaus.After hym, Archelaus his eldest Sonne, that was a terrour to Iesus at hys returne from Egypt, fell also by Gods iustice into meruailous cala∣mities. For first, beeing left a King by hys Father,Iosep. lib, 17, antiq. ca. 15 lib. 2. de bel. Iuda. cap. 6, Augustus would not allow or ratifie that succession, but of a King made him a Tetrarch, as∣signing vnto hym onely the fourth part of that dominion which his fa∣ther had before. And then againe after nine yeeres space, tooke that a∣way
in lyke manner, with the grea∣test dishonour he could deuise, sea∣zing vpon all hys treasure and riches by the way of confiscation, and con∣demning hys person to perpetuall banishment, wherein hee died most myserably in Vienna in Fraunce. Not long after thys, the seconde sonne of Herod the first, named He∣rod Antipas,Herod An∣tipas. Tetrarch of Galilie, who put S. Iohn Baptist to death, & scorned Iesus before his passion, (whereat both himselfe and Herodi∣as hys Concubine was present,) was deposed also by Caius the Emperor,Iosep. lib. 18. antiq. cap. 9 lib. 2, de bel. cap. 8, (beeing accused by Agrippa his nee∣rest kinseman) and most contume∣liously sent in exile, first to Lyons in Fraunce, and after that, to the most deserte and inhabitable places in Spayne, where hee with Herodias wandred vp and down in extreame calamity so long as they lyued, and finally ended theyr daies abandoned of all men. In which misery also it is recorded, that the dauncing daugh∣ter of Herodias,Herodias daughter. who had in her io∣lity demaunded Iohn Baptists head, beeing on a certaine time enforced to passe ouer a frosen Riuer,Niceph. li. 1 capit, 20. suddain∣ly the Ise brake, and she in her fall,
had her heade cutte off by the same Ise, without hurting the rest of her body, to the great admiration of all the lookers on. The lyke euent had another of Herods family, named Herod Agrip∣pa,Herod A∣grippa. the accuser of the fore-named Herode the Tetrarch; who in hys great glory & tryumph, hauing put to death S. Iames, the brother of S. Iohn Euangelist, and imprisoned S. Peter, was soone after in a publique assembly of Princes and Nobles at Caesaria, striken from heauen with a most horrible disease, whereby hys body putrified,Acts, 12. and was eaten with vermine, as both S. Luke recordeth, and Iosephus affirmeth.Iosep. lib. 19. antiq. cap. 7 And the same Iosephus, with no small mer∣uaile in himselfe, declareth: that at the very same time when hee wrote hys story,Lib. 18, ca. 7 (which was about three∣score and ten yeeres after the death of Herod the first) the whole proge∣nie and of-spring, kindred & fami∣lie of the said Herod, (which he saith was exceeding great,The stock of Herod soone ex∣tinguished. by reason hee had many wiues together, with ma∣ny chyldren, brothers and sisters, be∣sides Nephewes & kins-folke) wre all extinguished in most miserable
sort, and gaue a testimony (sayth Io∣sephus) to the worlde, of the most vaine confidence, that men doe put in humaine felicitie. And as the punishments lighted openly vpon Iesus professed enemies in Iurie:The punish∣mēts of the Romans. so escaped not all the Ro∣maines their chastisement; I meane such, as especially had their hands in persecution of him, or of his follow∣ers after hym For first, of Pontius Pilate that gae sentence of death,Pilate. a∣gainst him, we read, that after great disgrace recied in urie,Eutrop. lib, 7, hist. hee was sent home into Italie, an there by maniest dysfauours shewed vnto hym by the Emerour hys Maister,Euseb. lib 2, cap, 7, hist, fell int sch deseraion as he slew himself with hi wne hnds. A secondly o the very Empe∣rous themseles, wo liued rom Tyis (vder whom esus suffe∣red vnto Constantine the great, vn∣der whom Christian Religion tooke dominion ouer the worlde, (which contayned the space of three hun∣dred yeres) very few or none escaped the manifest scourges of Gods dread¦full iustice, shewed vpon thē at the knitting vp of their daies. For exam∣ples sake, Tyberius, that permitted
Christians to lyue freely,Tertul. in Apolog. and made a Lawe against theyr molestation, (as before hath beene shewed) dyed peaceably in hys bed. But Caligula that followed him,Caligula for his contempt shewed against all diuine power, in making hymselfe a God, was soone after murthered by the consent of his deerest freendes. Nero also, who first of all other began persecution against the chri∣stians,Nero. within fewe Monethes after he had put S. Peter and S. Paule to death in Rome, hauing murthered in lyke manner hys owne Mother, Brother, Wyfe, and Maister, was vpon the suddaine, from hys glori∣ous estate and Maiestie, throwne down into such horrible distresse & confusion in the sight of all men, as beeing condemned by the Senate, to haue ys head thrust into a Pyllary, and there most ignominiously to be whypped to death, was constrayned (for auoyding the execution of that terrible sentence) to massacre hym∣selfe with hys own handes, by the assistance of such as were deerest vn∣to hym. The lyke may be shewed in the tragicall endes of Galba, Otho, Vi∣tellius,
Domitian, Commodus, Per∣tinax,Many Em∣perors that dyed myse∣rably. Iulian, Marcinus, Antoninus, Alexander, Decius, Gallus, Voluti∣anus, Aemilianus, Valerianus, Gali∣enus, Caius, Carinus, Maximianus, Maxentius, Lucinius and others. Whose miserable deathes,Euagr. Sco∣last. lib. 3. hist. cap. 41, a noble man & Counseller, (wel neere one thousand yeeres past) dyd gather a∣gainst Zosimus a Heathen Wryter, to shew thereby the powerful hand of Iesus vppon his enemies: adding furthermore, that since the tyme of Constantine, (whiles Emperors haue been christians) few or no such ex∣amples can be shewed, except it be vpon Iulian the Apostata, Valens the Arian heretique, or some other of lyke detestable & notorious wic∣kednes. And thus much of particu∣ler men chastised by Iesus. But if we desire to haue a ful ex∣ample of hys iustice vppon a whole Nation together,The chas∣tisement of Ierusalem, and of the Iewish peo∣ple. let vs cōsider what befell Ierusalem and the people of Iurie, for theyr barbarous crueltie practised vpon hym, in hys death & passion. And truly, if we belieue Io∣sephus and Phylo the Iewish Histo∣riographers, (who lyued either with Christ, or immediatly after him,) it
can hardly be expressed by ye tongue or penne of man, what insufferable calamities and miseries, were inflic∣ted to that people (presently vppon the ascention of IESVS) by Pylate theyr Gouernour, vnder Tyberius the Emperour; and then againe by Petronius vnder Caligula,Iosep. lib. 19. antiq. lib. 2, et 3, de bell, udai. Philo in Flacco et lib. 2. de leg. Cornel. Tac. lib. 12, and after that, by Cumanus, vnder Claudius, and lastly by Festus and Albinus vn∣der Nero. Through whose cruelties, that Nation was enforced finally to rebell, and take Armes against the Romaine Empyre, which was the cause of theyr vtter ruine and extir∣pation by Tytus and Vespasian. At what tyme besides the ouerthrow of theyr Citty, burning of theyr Tem∣ple, and other infinite dysresses, which Iosephus an eye-witnes pro∣testeth, that no speech or discourse humane can declare. The same Authur lykewise re∣cordth, eleuen hundred thousande persons to haue been slaine, & four∣score and seuen teene thousand ta∣ken alyue, who were eyther put to death afterwarde in publique try∣umphes, or sold openly for bond-aues into all parts of the world. And in thys vniuersall calamitie
of the Iewish Nation,Hw Christ his death was uni∣shed with like circum∣stances vpō the Iewes. bg the most notorious and grieous,  euer happened to peol r Naon before or after he, (for the Romans neuer practised the like vpon others) it is sigularly to be obserued, that in the same time and place, in which they had put Iesus to death before: that is in the feast of the Paschall, whē theyr whole Nation was assem∣bled at Ierusalem, from all partes, Prouinces, and Countries of the earth: they receyued this their most pittifull subuertion, and that by the hands of the Romaine Caesar, to whom by publique cry, they had ap∣pealed from Iesus, but a litle before. Yea, further it is obserued and noted, that as they apprehended Ie∣us, and made the entrance to hys passion vppon the Mount Oliuet,Iosep. lib. 5. de bel ca. 8, so Tytus (as Iosephus wryteth) vppon the same Mount planted hys first siege for their finall destruction. And as they ledde Iesus from Cai∣phas to Pilate, afflicting him in their presence:Capit. 27, so nowe were they them∣selues ledde vp & downe from Iohn o Symon, (two Tyrants that had v∣urped dominion within the Citty,) and were scourged and tormnted
before the trybunal seates. Again, as they had caused Iesus to be scoffed, beaten, and villainously intreated by the Souldiours in Pilats Pallace: so were now theyr own principall Ru∣lers and Noble men, (as Iosephus writeth) most scornfully abused, bea∣ten, and crucified by the same Soul∣diers. Which latter poynt of crucify∣ing, or villainous putting to death vpon the Crosse, was begun to be practised by the Romaines vpon the Iewish Gentrie, immediatly after Christes death, and not before. And nowe atthys tyme of the war, Iose∣phus affirmeth, that in some one day, yue hndred of hys Nation were taken and put to thys oppro∣brius kinde of punishment; in so much, that for the great multitude he sayth:Lib, 5, de bel. capit. 28. Nec locus sufficeret Cruci∣bus, nec Cruces corporibus: that is, neyther the place was sufficient to contayne so many crosses as the Ro∣maines sette vp, nor the crosses suf∣ficient to sustaine so many bodies as they murthered by that torment. Thys dreadfull and vnspeakable misery,A meruai∣lous proui∣dence of God, for de∣liuering the Christians that were in Ierusalem at the time of destruc∣tion. fel vpō the Iewes about for∣tie yeeres after Christes ascention, when they had shewed themselues
most obstinate & obdurate against hys doctrine, deliuered vnto them, not only by himselfe, but also by hys Disciples; of which Disciples they had now slayne S. Stephen & Saint Iames, and had driuen into banish∣ment both S. Peter and S. Paul, and other that had preached vnto them. To which latter two Apostles, (I meane S. Peter & S. Paule) our Sa∣uiour christ appeared a little before theyr martyrdoms in Rome, as Lac∣tantius wryteth, and shewed that within three or foure yeeres after their deathes, he was to take reuenge vpon theyr Nation, by the vtter de∣struction of Ierusalem and of that generation.Lib. 4. diui. instit. ca. 21. Which secrete aduise, the sayd Lactantius affirmeth, that Peter and Paule reuealed to other christians in Iurie;Euseb. lib. 3. hist. cap. 5. Nicep. cap, 3 wherby it came to passe, (as Eusebius also and other Authors doe mention) that all the Christians lyuing in Ierusalem, de∣parted thence, not long before the siedge began, to a certayne Towne named Pella, beyond Iordan, which was assigned them for that purpose by Iesus himselfe, for that it beeing in the dominion of Agrippa, who stood with the Romaines, it remai∣ned
in peace & saty, while all Iurie besides was brought to desolation. Thys then wa the prouidence of God for ye punihment of the Iewes at that tyme.The Iewish miseries af∣ter the de∣struction of Ierusalem. And euer after, theyr estate declined from worse to worse, and theyr miseries daily multiplyed throughout the world. Whereof hee that wil see a very lamentable narra∣tion, let him read but the last booke onely of Iosephus hystory De bello Iudaico, wherein is reported besides other things, that after the war was ended, and all the publique slaugh∣ter ceassed, Tytus sent three-score thousand Iewes, as a present to hys Father to Rome, there to be put to death in dyuers & sundry manners. Others hee applyed to be spectales for pastime to the Romaines yt were present with him; wherof Iosephus sayth, that he sawe with his owne eyes, two thousande and fiue hun∣dred murthered and consumed in one day, by fight & combat among themselues, and with wilde beastes at the Emperours appointment.Isep. lib. 7, de bello cap. 20, et 21. O∣thers were assigned in Antioche & other great Citties, to serue for fa∣gots in theyr famous bond-fires at ymes of tryumph. Others were sold
to be bond-slaues, others condem∣ned to dyg and hewe stones or uer. And thys was the end of tht warre and desolation. Ater thys againe vnder Traiane the Emperour, there was so infinie a number of Iewes slaine,The finall desoltion of the Iew∣ish Nation. and made away by Marcus Turbo in Affrica, and Lucius Quintus in the East, (as all Histories agree) that it is imposi∣ble to expresse the multitude. But yet more wonderfull it is, which the same Historians report: that in the eyghteene yeere of Adrian the Em∣perour,Oros. li. 7 ca. 13. Ariston. pellaeus in hist. Euse. li, 4, capit. 8. Niceph. lib. 3. cap. 24. one Iulius Seuerus beeing sent to extinguish all the remnant of the Iewish generation: destroyed in smal time nine-tie & eyght Townes and Villages within that Countrey, and slew fiue hundred & four-score thousand of that blood and Nation in one day: at which tyme also, he beate downe the Cittie of Ierusalem in such sorte, as he left not one stone standing vpon another of their aun∣cient buildinges: but caused some part thereof to be reedified againe, and inhabited onely by Gentiles. He changed the name of the Citty, and called it The Em∣perours name was Aelius A∣drianus. AELIA, after the Empe∣rours name. He droue all the pro∣genie
and of-spring of the Iewes foorth of all those Countries, with a perpetual Law confirmed by ye Em∣perour, yt they should neuer returne: no, nor so much as looke backe frō any high or eminent place to that Country againe. And thys was done to the Iewish Nation by the Ro∣maine Emperours for accomplish∣ing that demaund, which their prin∣cipal Elders had made not long be∣fore to Pilate the Romaine Magi∣strate, concerning Iesus most iniu∣rious death, crying out with one cō∣sent & voice, to wit, Let his blood be vppon vs and vpon our posteritie.Math, 25. The seauenth Consideration. AND heerein also, I meane in the most wonderful,The fulfil∣ling of Iesus prophecies. and notorious chastisement, or rather reprobation of the Iewish people, which of all the worlde was Gods peculier be∣fore, is sette out vnto vs, as it were in a Glasse, the seauenth and last poynt, which wee mention in the beginning of this Section: to wit, the fulfilling of such speeches and prophecies, as Iesus vttered when he was vppon the earth; as namely at
one tyme, after a long & vehement commination made to the Scribes and Pharisies and principall men of that Nation, (in which he repeateth eyght seuerall tyms that dreadfull threat woe,) he concludeth finally, that all the iust bloode, iniuriously shedde from the first Martyr Abel,Math, 23. should be reuenged very shortly vp∣on that generation. And in the same place, he menaceth the populus Ci∣tie of Ierusalem, that it shoulde be made desert.Luke, 21. And in another place hee assureth them, that one stone should not be left standing thereof vpon another. And yt further hee pronounceth vppon the same Cittie these words;Luke, 1 The dayes shal com vp∣pon thee, and thine enemies shal enui∣ron thee with a wall, and shall besiege thee: they shal straighten thee on e∣uery side, and shall beate thee to the ground, & thy children in thee.Iesus spee∣ches of Ie∣rusalem. And yet more particulerly, he fore-telleth the very signes wherby his Disciples shoulde perceiue when the time in∣deede was come, vsing thys speech vnto them.Luke, 21 When you shall see Ieru∣salem besieged with an Armie: then know ye that her desolation is at hand; for that these are the daies of reuenge,
to the end all may be fulfilled which is written. Great distresse shal fal vpon this earth, and vengeance vppon this people. They shall be slaine by dt of the sword, & shalbe led as slaues into al Countries. And Ierusalē shalbe tro∣den vnder feete by the Gentiles, vntill the time of Nations be accomplished. Thys fore-tolde Iesus of the mise∣rie that was to fall vpon Ierusalem,The circū∣staunce of the tyme, when Iesus spake hys words, and when they were writ∣ten. and vppon that people (by the Ro∣maines and other Gentiles,) when the Iewes seemed to be in most se∣curitie, and greatest amitie with the Romaines, (as also they were when the same things were written,) and consequentlie at yt tyme, they might seeme in al humaine reason, to haue lesse cause then euer before to mys∣doubt such calamities. And yet how certaine & assured fore-knowledge, (& as it were most sensible feeling) Iesus had of these miseries, he decla∣red, not onely by these expresse words, and by their euent: but also by those pittiful teares he shed vpon sight & consideration of Ierusalem,Luke, 19, and by the lamentable speech he v∣sed to the women of yt Cittie, who wept for hym at his passio, perswa∣ding them to weepe rather for them¦selues
and for theyr chyldren,Luke, 23, (in re∣spect of the miseries to follow) then for him. Which words & predicti∣ons of Iesus, together with sundry o∣ther his speeches, fore-shewing so particulerly ye imminent calamities of y• Nation, (& that as I haue sayd, at such tyme, when in humane dys∣course there could be no probabilitie thereof,) when a certaine Heathen Chronicler and Mathematique, na∣med Phlegon,Phle. Thral, lib. annal. about a hūdred yeres after Christes departure, had dilli∣gently considered, hauing seene the same also in hys daies most exactlie fulfilled, (for he was seruaunt to A∣drianus the Emperour, by whose commandement as it hath been said before the finall subuersion of that Iewish Natiō was brought to passe) thys Phlegon (I say) though a Pa∣gan,The testi∣mony of a Heathen, for the ful∣filling of Christes prophecies. yet vpon consideration of these euents, and others that he sawe, (as the extreame persecution of Christi∣ans fore-told by Christ and the like) he pronounced, that neuer any man foretold things so certainly to come, or that so precisely were accomply∣shed, as were the predictions & pro∣phecies of Iesus. And hys testimo∣nie of Phlegon, was alledged and vr∣ged
for Christians, against one Cel∣sus a Heathen Philosopher and Epi∣cure, by the famous learned Origen; euen the very next age after it was written by the Authour:Orig. lib. 2, con. Cels. sub initium. so that of the truth of thys allegation, there can be no doubt or question at all. Other prophecies of Iesus, fulfilled to his Disciples. AND nowe albeit these predicti∣ons and prophecies, concerning the punishment and reprobation of the Iewes, fulfilled so euidently in the sight of all the world, might be a sufficient demonstration, of Iesus fore-knowledge in affaires to come, yet are there many other things be∣sides fore-shewed by him, which fel out as exactly as these dyd, notwith∣standing that by no learning, Ma∣thematicall reason, humane con∣iecture, they were or might be fore∣seene. And as for example, the fore∣telling of hys owne death, the man∣ner, tyme, and place thereof: as also the person that should betray him, together with hys irrepentant ende. The flight, feare, & scandale of hys Disciples, albeit they had promised
and protested the cōtrary. The three seueral denials of Peter. The parti∣culer tyme of his own resurrection, and ascention. The sending of the holy Ghost, & many other the lyke predictions, prophecies and promi∣ses, which to hys Apostles, Disci∣ples and followers that heard them vttered, & left them written before they fell out, and sawe them after∣ward accomplished: and who by the falshood thereof, shoulde haue receiued greatest domage of al other men, if they had not been true; to these men (I say) they were most e∣uident proofes of Iesus diuine pre∣science in matters that should ensue. Prophecies fulfilled in the sight of Gentiles. BVT yet for that an Infidel, (with whom onely I suppose my selfe to deale in thys place) may in these and the like things, finde (perhaps) some matter of cauilation, and say, that these prophecies of Iesus were recorded by our Euangelists, after the particularities therein propheci∣ed were effectuated and not before; and consequently, that they might
be sorged; I will alledge certaine o∣ther euents, both fore-told and regi∣stred before they came to passe, and divulged by publique wrytings in the face of all the world, when there was small semblance that euer the same should take effect. Such were the particuler foretellings of ye kinde and maner of S. Peters death, whiles he lyued. The peculier and different manner of S. Iohn the Euangelists ending, from the rest of the Apo∣stles. The fore-sewing and descri∣bing to hys Disciples, the most ex∣treame and cruell persecutions, that should ensue vnto Christians for his sake (a thing at that tyme not pro∣bable in reason, for that the Romans permitted the exercise of all kinds of Religions;) and that notwithstan∣ding all these pressures and intolle∣rable afflictions, his faithful follow∣ers should not shrinke, but hold out and daily increase in zeale, fortitude, and number, and finally should at∣chiue the victry and conquest o al the world: a thing much more vn∣likely at that day, and so far passing all humaine probability, as no capa∣citie, reason, or conceite of man, might reach or attaine the foresight
thereof. And with thys will we con∣clude our thyrd and last part of the generall diuision sette downe in the beginning, concerning the grounds and proofes of Christian Religion. The Conclusion. SECT. 4. BY al that hetherto hath been said,The sum of the former 3. Sections. we haue declared & made mani∣fest vnto thee (gentle Reader) three things of great importaunce. First, that from the beginning and creati∣on of the worlde, there hath beene promised in all times & ages a Mes∣sias, or Sauiour of man-kinde, in whom, and by whom, all Nations should be blessed; as also, that the particuler tyme, manner, & circum∣staunce of hys comming, together with the qualitie of hys person, pur∣pose, doctrine, lyfe, death, resurrec∣tion, & ascention, were in lyke ma∣ner by the Prophets of GOD, most euidently foreshewed. Secondly, that  the very same particulers & speciall poynts that were dissigned and sette downe by the sayde Prophets, were also fulfilled most exactly with theyr circumstances, in the person & acti∣ons
of Iesus Christ our Lord & Sa∣uiour.  Thirdly, that besides the ac∣complishment of all the fore-sayde prophecies, there were gyuen by Ie∣sus many signes, manifestations, & most infallible arguments of hys deitie & omnipotent puissaunce, af∣ter hys ascention or departure from all humaine and corporall conuer∣sation in thys world. By all which wayes, meanes, argu∣ments and proofes, and by ten thou∣sand more, which to the tongue or penne of man are inexplicable, the christian mind remaineth setled, & most firmely grounded in the vn∣doubted beliefe of his Religion, ha∣uing besides al other things, euiden∣ces, certainties, & internal comorts and assurances which are infinite: these eyght demonstratiue reasons & perswasions which ensue,Eyght rea∣sons. for his more ample and aboundant satis∣faction therein. The Prophecies. FIrst, that it was impossible that so many things should be fore∣tolde so precisely, with so many par∣ticularities, in so many ages, by so
different persons of al sanctity, with so great concorde, consent, and vni∣tie, and that so long before hande, but by the Spyrit of God alone, that onely hath the fore-knowledge of future euents. The fulfilling. SEcondly, that it could not possi∣bly be, that so many thinges, so difficult and strange, with all theyr particularities and circumstaunces, should be so exactly & precisely ul∣filled, but in hym alone, of whom they were truely meant. Gods assistance. THirdly, that it can no wayes bee imagined, that GOD would e∣uer haue concurred with Iesus doo∣ings, or assisted him, aboue al course of nature, with so aboundant my∣racles, as the Gentiles doe confesse that he wrought, if he had beene a seducer, or taken vppon him to sette forth a false doctrine.
Iesus doctrine. FOurthly, if Iesus had intended to deceiue and seduce the world, he would neuer haue proposed a doc∣trine so difficult and repugnant to al sensualitie, but rather would haue taught things pleasant and gratefull to mans voluptuous delight, as Ma∣homet did after him. Neither could the nature of man, haue euer effec∣tuously embraced such asteritie, without the assistance of some di∣uine and supernaturall power. Iesus manner of teaching. FIfly, for that Iesus beeing poore∣ly borne and vnlettered, as by hys aduersaries confession doth appeare, and that in such an age and tyme, when all worldly learning was in most florishing estate: he could ne∣ur possibly, but by diuine power, haue attayned to such exquisite knowledge in al kind of learning as to be able to decide all doubtes and controuersies of Phylosophers before hym, as he dyd, laying downe more plainly, distinctly, & perspicuouslly,
the pyth of all humane and diuine learning, within the compasse of three yeeres teaching, (and that to auditors of so great simplicity) then dyd all the Sages of the worlde vnto that day: insomuch that euen then, the most vnlearned Christian at that time, could say more in certainty of trueth, concerning the knowledge of God, the creation of the worlde, the end of man, the rewarde of ver∣tue, the punishment of vice, the im∣mortalitie and rest of our soules af∣ter thys life, and in other such high poyns and mysteries of true phylo∣sophy, then coulde the most famous and learned of all the Gentiles, that had for so many ages before, beaten theyr braynes in contention about the same. Iesus lyfe and manner of proceeding, SIxtlie, if Iesus had not meant plainly and sincerely in al his do∣ings, according as he professed: he would neuer haue taken so seuere a course of lyfe to himselfe, neyther would he haue refused all temporall dignities and aduancements as he
did: he wold neuer haue chosen to die so opprobriously in the sight of all men, or made election of Apo∣stles and Disciples so poore and con∣temptible in the world: nor if hee had, would euer worldly men haue folowed him in so great multitudes, with so great feruour, zeale, cōstan∣cie, and perseuerance vnto death. The beginners & first publishers of Christian Religion. SEuenthly, we see that the first be∣ginners and founders of Christi∣an religion left by Iesus, were a mul∣titude of simple and vnskilfull per∣sons, vnapt to deceiue or deuise any thing of themselues. They beganne against all probability of mans rea∣son: they went forward against the streame and strength of the world: they continued and increased abou humaine possibilitie: they perseue∣red in torments and afflictions in∣sufferable: they wrought myracles aboue the reach and compasse of mans ability: they ouerthrewe Ido∣latry that then possessed the worlde, and confounded all powers infernal by the onely name & vertue of their
Maister. They saw the prophecies of Iesus fulfilled, & all hys diuine spee∣ches and predictions come to passe. They sawe the punishment of theyr enemies & chiefe impugners, to fall vpon them in their dayes. They saw euery day whole Prouinces, Coun∣tries, and Kingdomes conuerted to their saith. And finally, the whole Romaine Empire & world besides, to subiect it selfe to the lawe, obedi∣ence, and Gospel of theyr Maister. The present state of the Iewes, LAstly, among all other reasons and arguments, this may be one most manifest vnto vs: that wheras by many testimonies and expresse prophecies of the old Testament, it is affirmed, that the people of Isra∣ell should abandon, persecute, and put to death, the true Messias at hys cōming, as before hath beene shew∣ed; and for that fact, should it selfe be abandoned of God, and brought to ruine and dispersion ouer all the world: (wherein according to the words of Ose,Osea, 3. They shall sitte for a long time, without a King, without Prince, without sacrifice, without Al∣tar,
without Ephode, or Images, and after this again, the chyldren of Isra∣ell shall returne, and seeke theyr God, in the last daies.) We see in this age the same particularities fulfilled in that Nation, and so haue continued nowe for these 15. hundred yeeres: that is, we see the Iewish people af∣flicted aboue al Nations of ye world: dispersed in seruility throughout all corners of the earth: without dyg∣nitie or reputation: without King, Prince, or common-wealth of them∣selues, prohibited by all Princes, both Christian and other, to make theyr sacrifice where they inhabite; depriued of all meanes to attaine to good knowledge in good litterature, whereby daily they fall into more grosse ignoraunce, and absurdities against cōmon reason, in theyr lat∣ter doctrine: thē dyd the most bar∣barous Infidels that euer were, ha∣uing lost all sence and feeling in spy∣rituall affayres; all knowledge and vnderstanding in celestiall thinges for the life to come: hauing among them no Prophet, no graue teacher, no man directed by Gods holy Spy∣rite; and finally, as men forlorne & filled wyth all kynd of myserie, doe
both by theyr inwarde and externall calamities, preach, denounce, and testifie to the world, that Iesus whō they crucified, was the onely true Messias and Sauiour of man-kinde, and that hys bloode, (as they them∣selues required) lyeth heauily vppon theyr generation for euer. The conclusion of the Chapter, with an admoishment. WHerfore to conclude this whole dyscourse and treatise of the proofes and euidences of our Chri∣stian Religion: seeing that by so manifold & inuincible demonstra∣tions, it hath beene declared & layd before our eyes, that Iesus is the on∣ly true Sauiour & Redeemer of the world: and consequently, that hys seruice and Religion, is the only way and mean to please Almighty God, and to attaine euerlasting happines: there remayneth now to be conside∣red, that the same Iesus, which by so many Prophets was promised to to be a Sauiour, was also foretold by the selfe same Prophets, yt he should be a Iudge,Iesus shall be also a Iudge. and examiner of all our actions. Which latter poynt, no one
Prophet that hath fore-shewed hys comming, hath omitted seriously to inculcate vnto vs. No not the Sibyls thēselues, who in euery place where they describe the most gracious cō∣ming of the Virgins sonne, doe also annexe thereunto hys dreadfull ap∣pearance at the day of Iudgement, especially, in those famous Acrostick verses, whereof there hath beene so much mention before; the whole discourse vpon ye words Iesus Christ the sonne of God, Sauiour & Crosse,Apud Euse. lib. 4, in vita Const. infi. contayneth nothing els, but a large and ample description of hys most terrible comming in fire and flame, and conflagration of the worlde at that dreadfull day, to take account of all mens words, actions, and co∣gitations. To which description of these Pa∣gan Prophets, is consonant the whole tenor and context of the olde Bible,1, Reg, 2, Psalm, 95, Esay, 2, 13, 26, 27, 30. foreshewing euery where, the dreadful maiestie, terrour, and seue∣ritie of the Messias at that day. The newe Testament also, which ten∣deth to comfort and solace man∣kinde,Ierem, 30, Dan, 7, Soph, 1, Mala, 4. and hath the name o Euan∣gile, in respect of the ioyfull newes which it brought to the worlde, o∣mitteth
not to put vs continually in minde of this poynt.Math, 12.13 16, 14.25, Marke 13. And to y• ende both Christ himselfe, amidst all hys sweet & comfortable speeches wyth hys Disciples,Luke, 17, Rom, 2, 14. dyd admonish them often of thys last day,1, Cor, 15, 2, Cor, 5. and hys Apo∣stles, Euangelists, and Disciples after hym, repeated, itterated,1. Thes. 4, 5 2, Thes, 1, 1, Titus 2, 2, Peter, 3. and vrged thys important consideration, in all theyr words and wrytings. Wherefore, as by the name and cogitation of a Sauior,Hebr, 9. we are great∣ly styrred vp to ioy,Iude, 4. alacritie, confi∣dence and consolation,Reue, 1, so by thys admonishment of Gods Saints, and by the testimony of our Lord & Sa∣uiour Iesus Christ himselfe, that hee is to be our Iudge, and seuere exami∣ner of all the minutes & moments of our lyfe: we are to conceiue iust feare and dreade, of thys hys second comming. An illation vpon the premisses, with an exhortation. AND as by ye whole former trea∣tise, we haue beene instructed, that the onely way to saluation, is by the true profession of Christian Re∣ligion: so by thys account that shal
be demaunded at our handes at the last day, by the Authour and first in∣stitutor of thys Religion; wee are taught, that vnlesse we be true Chri∣stians indeede, & doe performe such duties as this Law and Religion pre∣scribeth vnto vs, so farre off shall we be frō receiuing any benefite by the name, as our iudgement shall bee more greeuous, and our finall cala∣mitie more intollerable. For which cause, I would in sincere charity, ex∣hort euery man that by the former discourse hath receiued any light, & is thorowly confirmed in his iudge∣ment concerning the manifest and vndoubted truth of thys Christian Religion: to employ hys whole stu∣die & indeuours for the attainment of the fruite and benefite thereof, which is by beeing a true and fayth∣full Christin; for that our Sauiour Christ hymselfe fore-signified; that many shoulde take the name wth∣out benefit or commodity of theyr profession. And to the ende each man may the better knowe or coniecture of himselfe, whether he be in the right way or no, & whether he performe indeede the true duety belonging to
a faythful Christian, I haue thought conuenient to adioyne this Chapter next following of tha matter, and therin to declare ye particuler poynts belonging to that profession. Which beeing knowne, and thorowly con∣sidered, it shall be easie for euery one that is not ouer partiall, or wil∣fully bent to deceiue himselfe, to dis∣cerne cleerely of hys own estate, and of the course and way that hee hol∣deth. Thys (I say) is a high poynt of wisedome for all men to doe whyle they haue time; least at the last day, we hauing passed ouer the whole course of our liues in the bare name onely of Christianitie, without the substance and true knowledge ther∣of: doe find our selues in the num∣ber of those most miserable and vn∣forunate people, who shal cry lord, Lorde, and receiue no comfort by that confession.
HOWE A MAN MAY IVDGE OR DISCERNE OF HIMSELFE, WHETHER he be a true Christian or not. With a declaration of the two parts belonging to that profession: which are, beleefe and life. CHAP. V. AS in humaine learning and Sciences of thys worlde, af∣ter declaration made of the vtilitie, possibilitie, certain∣tie, conueniencie, and other quali∣ties, commendations, & properties thereof: the next poynt is, to shewe the meanes & wayes whereby to at∣taine the same: so much more, in thys diuine & heauenly doctrine of Christian Religion, (which concer∣neth our soule & euerlasting salua∣tion,) for that we haue shewed be∣fore, not onely the most vndoubted trueth whereupon it standeth, but also that the knowledge heerof, is so absolutely necessary, as there is no o∣ther name or profession vnder hea∣uen,
whereby mankind may be sa∣ued, but onely thys of Iesus:Acts. 4. it fol∣loweth by order of cōsequence, that we should treate in thys place,The effect of thys Chapter. how a man may attaine the fruie of this doctrine: that is to say, howe hee may come to be a good Christian; or if he already possesse that name, how he may examine or make tryal of himselfe, whether he be so indeed or not. Which examination to speak in briefe, consisteth wholy in consi∣deration of these two poynts.Two points First, whether he doe not onely, beleeue  vnfainedly the totall summe of do∣uments and misteries, left by Iesus and his Disciples to the Catholique Church, but also perswade & assure hymselfe, of the forgiuenes of all hys sinnes, and of the fatherly loue and fauour of GOD towardes hym in Christ Iesus, whereby he is adopted to be the sonne of God, & an heyre of euerlasting life. Secondly, whether  he conforme and frame hys lyfe, ac∣cording to the precepts and doctrine of Christ Iesus. So that in these two poynts we are to bestow our whole speech in thys Chapter.
The first part, concerning beleefe. AND for the first, howe to exa∣mine the trueth of our beliefe, it would be ouer tedious to lay down euery particuler way that might bee assigned for discussion thereof: or that it would bring in the contenti∣on of all tymes, as well auncient as present, about controuersis in chri∣stian Fayth, which hath beene im∣pugned from age to age, by the sedi∣tious instruments of Christes infer∣nall enemie. And therefore, as well in respect of the length, (wherof this place is not capable,) as also for that of purpose I doe auoyde all dealing with matters of controuersie within the compasse of this work, I meane onely at thys tyme, (for the comfort of such as are already in the right way, and for some light vnto others, who perhaps of simplicity may walk awry,) to ette downe with as great breuiy as possibly may be, som few generall notes or obseruations, for theyr better helpe in thys behale. In which great affaire of our sayth and beleefe (wherein consisteth as well the ground and foundation of
our eternall welfare, as also the fruite and entire vtilitie of Christes com∣ming into this world; it is to be cō∣sidered, that GOD could not of his infinite wisedome, (fore-seeing all things and times to come) nor euer would of his vnspeakable goodnes, (desiring our saluation as he dooth) leae vs in this life, without most sure, certaine, and cleere euidence of thys matter; and consequently, we must imagine, that all our errors cō∣mitted heerein, (I meane in matters of fayth & beleefe among Christi∣ans) doe proceede rather of sin,The matters of faith and beleefe easie among Christians. neg∣ligence, wilfulnes, or inconsiderai∣on of our selues, then eyther of dyf∣ficulty or doubtfulnes in the means left vnto vs for discerning of ye same, or of the want of Gods holy assi∣staunce to that effect, if we woulde with humilitie accept thereof. Thys Esay made plaine, when he prophecied of thys perspicuitie, that is, of this most excellent priuiledge in Christian religion, so many hun∣dred yeeres before Christ was borne. For after that in diuers chapters hee had declared the glorious comming of Christ in signes and myracles, as also the multitude of Gentiles that
should embrace hys doctrine, toge∣ther with the ioy and exultation of theyr conuersion: he fore-sheweth presently, the wonderful prouidence of God also, in prouiding for Chri∣stians so manifest a way of direction for theyr fayth and Religion, as the most simple and vnlearned man in the world, should not be able (but of wilfulnes) to goe astray therein. Hys wordes are these, directed to the Gentiles.Esay, 35, Take comfort and feare not. Behold, your God shall come and saue you. Then shall the eyes of the blinde be opened, and the eares of the deafe shall be restored, &c. And there shall be a path & away: which shalbe cal∣led The direct holy way of Christians vnder the Gospel. The holy way: and it shalbe vn∣to you so direct away, as fooles shall not be able to erre therin. By which words we see, that among other rare benefits that Christes people were to receiue by his cōming, thys shold be one, and not the least, that after hys holy doctrine once published & receyued, it shoulde not be easie for the weakest in capacitie or learning that might be, (whom Esay heere noteth y the name of Fooles,) to runne awry in matters of theyr be∣leefe, s plaine, cleere, and euident,
should the way for tryall thereof be made. God hath opened hymselfe vnto vs in ye holy scripturs, the wrytings and doctrine of Moses and the Pro∣phets of Christ, and hys Apostles:Iohn 20, 28 wherin is contayned what soeuer is necessary for our saluation.2, Tim, 3, 14, 15. &c. For al∣though the inuisible things of God,Rom. 1, 20, that is, hys power and God-heade, may be seene by the workmanshyp and creation of the world, wherein, as in a booke written with the hand of GOD, and layd open to the eyes of men,Psal. 19, 1, the glory of God and hys mighty power appeareth; Yet be∣cause,Abac, 2, 2, eyther we read not this booke at all, or if wee doe, we read it care∣lesly, therefore it was necessary that the Lord God should adde another Booke, more plaine and easie to be read, so as he may run that readeth it, and this is, (as hath been said) his holy will, reuealed vnto vs in hys written word. Which S. Augustine therefore very well,August. in exposi. Psal. 96, et Serm, 59, ad Fra∣trem. in E∣remo. calleth ye Letters or Epistle of GOD, sent vnto vs from our heauenly Countrey to teach vs to lyue godly and righteously whilst wee soiourne heere in thys present world.Titus, 2, 12,
Psalm, 119, 105,Thys is that Lanthorne whereby our feete may be directed, and that light wherby our paths may be gui∣ded vnto Christ: it is that most cer∣taine and infallible rule and leuel of all our actions, whereby both our fayth & lyfe are to be squared and framed.Psalm, 19, 7 Yea, it is that holy and vn∣defiled way, and withal, that plaine & easy way denoted by Esay, which euen the very entraunce thereof, gyueth lyght and vnderstanding (as Dauid speaketh) vnto the simple.Psal. 119, 130. And although we must confesse with S. Peter, that there are some things in the Scripture harde to be vnderstoode, yet we may also say with the same Peter,2. Pet, 3, 16, that they are hard to those that are vnlearned and vnstable, which peruert and wrest them to their owne destruction. So that if the Gospell of Christ be yet hyd,1, Cor. 4, 3, 4 it is hid vnto them that perish, whose sences sathan hath closed, that the lyght thereof shoulde not shyne vnto them. And heere-hence it is that the Apostle S. Paule, pro∣nounceth so peremptorily of a con∣tentious and hereticall man,Titus, 3, that hee is damned by the testimony of his own iudgement or conscience, for that hee
hath abandoned thys common, di∣rect, and publique way, which all men might see, & hath deuised par∣ticuler paths and turnings to him∣selfe. And heere-hence is it, that the auncient Fathers of Christes Prima∣tiue Church, dysputing against the same kind of people, defended al∣waies, that theyr errour was of ma∣lice, and wilful blindnes, and not of ignoraunce: applying these wordes of prophecie vnto them;Psal, 31, 11. They that sawe me, ranne out from me. Thus then it appeareth, that the plaine and direct way mentioned by Esay, wherin no simple or ignorant man can erre, is the doctrine taught by the mouth of our Sauiour Christ and hys Apostles, which howsoeuer it seeme to be obscure & darksome to men of peruerse mindes, that are not exercised in it, yet to the godlie and studious readers & hearers, that haue theyr eyes opened, and theyr mindes lightened to see the trueth, it is most plaine & easie to be vnder∣stood.1, Pet, 1.19, And thys is the cause, that those holy and sage Apostles of Christ, for the better peruerting of al bie-waies, crooked pathes, and blinde lanes of
errors that afterwards might arise,1, Corin. 16. (as by reuelation from Iesus they vnder∣stoode there shoulde doe many,Gala, 5.) so earnestly exhorted,2, Thes, 2, 1, Tim, 6, 20 2, Tim, 1, Math, 7, Rom, 16, 2, Tim, 2, 3, Titus, 3, & so vehement∣ly called vppon the people, to stand fast in the documents thē receyued, to hold firmely the faith & doctrine already deliuered, as a Depositum & treasure committed, to be safely kept vntill the last day. And aboue all o∣ther things, they most dilligentlie fore-warned them, to beware of new-fangled Teachers, whom they called Heretiques, who shold breake frō the vnity of that body whereof Christ is the head, & shoulde deuise newe glosses, expositions, and inter∣pretations of Scripture, bring in new senses, doctrines, opinions, and de∣uisions, to the renting of Gods Church and citty now builded, and to the perdition of infinite soules. The Apostle S. Paule, euen whilst he lyued,Gala, 1, 11, found some of hys Schol∣lers to be remooued by new fangled Teachers to another Gospell, & the better to make them see their error, hee appealeth to the Gospell which he had taught them. The gospell he preached, was not after man, ney∣ther receiued he it of man, but by re∣uelation
from Iesus Christ. Hee brought them no fancies, visions, dreames, interpretations of Scrip∣ture hatched in his owne braine, but the pure and sincere doctrine,1. Cor 12, 1 recey∣ued by reuelation from GOD hym∣selfe, and faythfully deliuered vnto them, without hacke or mayme as he receiued it. Therefore S. Ierome vppon that place,Ierom. in E∣pist. ad Gal. considering how all Hereticks haue iugled with the Scriptures frō tyme to tyme, sayth. That Marcion and Basilides, and other Heretiques, (the contagious botches and plague sores of the church,) haue not the Gospell of God, because they haue not the Spyrite of GOD, without which, that which is taught, grow∣eth to be mans Gospell. Thys ma∣keth that learned Father to resolue vpon the matter, that it is a dange∣rous thing peruersly to expound the holy Scriptures, for by thys meanes, that is, by wrong and peruerse inter∣pretation, that which is Gods Gos∣pell, is made mans Gospell, et quod peius est, and that which is worse, (sayth thys holy Father,) it is made the deuils Gospell. For discerning therefore of thys kynde of most per∣nicious
people, and theyr deuilish dealing,Ephe, 4.14, and least we should be car∣ried away with euery winde of doc∣drine by the wilinesse of men, GOD hath ordained in hys Church,1, Corin. 12, Apo∣stles, Doctors, Prophets, Pastors & Interpreters, whom he hath so guy∣ded and gouerned frō time to time with hys holy Spyrit, that they haue beene able by the Scriptures to re∣presse and beate downe whatsoeuer errours and heresies haue been ray∣sed vp by the enemies of Gods truth, contrary to the analogie of fayth & rule of charitie: that is to say, be∣side the true sence and meaning of the Canonicall Scripture. No heresie finally pre∣uailed a∣gainst the scriptures.When there rose vp certaine sedi∣tious fellowes among the Iewes in the Primatiue Church, making som contention about theyr ceremonies, as did Simon Magus, Nichlas Ce∣rinthus, Ebion, and Meandr, that were Heretiques; They were refelled and conuinced out of the scriptures by the Apostles and their Schollers, Martialis. Dyonisius Areopagita, Ig∣natius, Policarpus, and other, who were no doubt directed and guided by the Spyrit of GOD. Afterwarde, when Basilides, Cerdon, Marcion,
Valētinus, Tatianus, Apelles, Mon∣tanus, and diuers other troubled the Church wyth monstrous heresie, they were cōfuted by Iustinus Mar∣tyr, Dionisius Bishop of Corinth, Iraeneus, Clemens, Alexandrinus, Tertullian, & their equales, who in all theyr controuersies had recourse vnto the Scriptures, and beeing in∣structed and ledde by the spyrite of trueth, preuailed mightilie against theyr aduersaries. And so downward frō age to age vnto our dayes, what∣soeuer heresie or different opynion hath sprung vp contrary to the doc∣trine of Christ and hys Apostles, it hath beene checked and controlled by the Watchmen, spiritual Pastors, and Gouernors of the Church, who alledged alway the cōsent of ye scrip∣tures for decyding of al doubts, and were most graciously guided by the Spyrite of GOD in all theyr actions. And heereof it is,Ephe, 6, 17. that the worde of God is called the sword of the spirit: because, as it was giuen by inspirati∣on at the first, so beeing expounded by the direction of the same Spirite, it is most liuely and mighty in ope∣ration:2. Tim. 3, 16 Hebr, 4, 12, sharper then any two edged sword, and entering through euen
to the deuiding a sunder of the soule and the Spyrit, of the ioynts and the marrowe, and it is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the hart. This is that spyriual sword wher∣with our Sauior Christ preuailed a∣gainst sathan the head Lord & mai∣ster of all Heretiques,Math, 4. who notwith∣standing pretended scriptures for his deuillish purposes. And the Apostle Paule,Acts, 9, beeing furnished with thys onely weapon, dysputed against the peruerse and ouer-thwart Iewes, which dwelt at Damascus, and con∣founded them, proouing by confe∣rence of Scriptures, that thys was ve∣rie Christ. Now as it was expedient that the Gospels should be written,Theophi∣lactus. that we learning the truth footh of them, should not be deceyued by the lyes of hersies; so was it necessary that the same gospels shold be preached for the confirmation of fayth.Hironi∣mus. And heereof it is, that the Apostle Saint Paule, Rom. 10,Rom, 10, 17 sayth, that fayth cō∣meth by hearing the word of God, because the word preached, is the or∣dinary meanes to beget and increase faith in vs,1, Pet, 1, 23, Ephe, 5, 26, for the which cause also, it is called the incorruptible seede,
whereby we are borne a newe, and whereby the Church is sanctifyed vnto the Lord. Wherfore to conclude this point, seeing that the holy Scriptures are that most infallible and secure way mentioned by Esay, seeing they are the rule and leuell both of our faith and lyfe, containing in them suffici∣ent matter to confute errour & con∣firme the truth, able to make a man wise vnto saluation, and perfectly instructed vnto euery good worke, this ought to be the duty of ye fayth∣ful, (that I may vse the words of Ba∣sil,2, Tim 3, 15.16, 17. Basil. mora. Regula 80, capit, 21,) to be thorowly perswaded in his mind, that those things are true and effectuall, which are vttered in the Scripture, & to reiect nothing there∣of. For if whatsoeuer is not of fayth be sinne, (as sayth the Apostle) and if fayth commeth by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, with∣out doubt, when any thing is with∣out the holy Scripture, (which can∣not be of fayth,) it must needes bee sinne. And therefore (to speake as S. Augustine speaketh) if any,August. con. litteras petil lib, 3. cap. 6. Gala, 1, 8, I will not say if wee, but (which S. Paule addeth) if an Angel from heauen, shal preach eyther of Christ or of his
church, or of any other thing which pertaineth to faith, or to the leading of our lyfe otherwise, then we haue receiued in the holy scriptures of the Law and the Gospell, let them bee accursed. Now if forsaking al by-pathes of mens inuentions and traditions, we wil search diligently in the scriptures wherein we thinke to haue eternall lyfe,Iohn, 5, 39. we shall see that they testifie of nothing so much, as of the promi∣ses of God in Christ Iesus; who as he is the ende of the law for righte∣ousnes to euery one that beleeueth;Rom, 10, 4, Gala, 3, 24 so doe they send vs directly, and as it were lead vs by the hand like a care∣full Schoole-maister vnto hym, tea∣ching vs to apprehend and lay hold on hym with the hand of fayth, and to apply hym with hys gifts & gra∣ces vnto our selues, and our own sal∣uation. So that fayth is made the meanes, and as it were the Conduit to conuay Christ himselfe, his death, buriall, and resurrection, and all the rest of his benefits vnto vs, which the Apostle witnesseth. Colos. 2.12. Yee are buried (saith he) with hym tho∣row Baptisme, in whom ye are also raised vp together, through the sayth
of GOD, effectually working, who raised hym from the dead. Whereof it ensueth, that all the faythfull doe not only obtaine ye benefit of Chri∣stes death, and buriall by theyr Bap∣tisme, whereby they die vnto sinne, but also doe receiue and enioy, the fruite & effect of his resurrection by a liuely faith, wherby they are quick∣ned and raised vp vnto righteousnes in thys life, and are assertained of re∣surrection to glory in ye life to come, by hys mighty working that is able to subdue all things to hymselfe.Phil, 3, 21, Seeing therefore that the summe and substance of our whole Religi∣on, and of our eternall saluation or damnation, consisteth in the know∣ledge of thys one vertue, it shall be worth the labour, breefely (but yet plainly) to describe the forme, force, and nature of thys faith whereof we speake. Wherin you shall not looke for the diuers significations, which that word receiueth in scripture, nor for any declaration of those vnprofi∣table faythes wherof S. Iames spea∣keth,Iam, 2, 19, which are cōmon to the wic∣ked, and to the deuils themselues, whereby they beleeue that Iesus is that Christ;Mar, 1, 24. but heere my purpose is
to entreate of that liuely and sauing fayth, which is peculier and propper to the elect and chosen chyldren of GOD, whereby thy beleeue, tha Christ is theyr Iesus,Math, 1, 21. by whom they are saued from theyr sinnes, & from the punishment due vnto them for the same, and by whom onely they are restored vnto the fauour of God, and made heyres with Christ of his heauenly kingdome.Rom, 8, 17. In the Epistle to the Hebrues, there is a notable description of that liuely faith,Hebr. 11, 1, where it is said, to be ye ground of things that are hoped for, and the euidence of thinges yt are not seene. Of whih description of ye Apostle, we may make a plaine definition af∣ter thys sort. Fayth is an assured per∣swasion of our saluatiō by ye means of Christ, which is grounded on the promises of God, and sealed in our harts by the holy Ghost. This defini∣tion is drawne from the forme and propertie of true fayth, but the other in the Epistle to the Hebrues, see∣meth rather to be taken frō the sub∣staunce of faith, and speaketh of the obiect matter thereof. But both of thē tende to one & the same thing, namely, to expresse the nature of
true fayth, to consist in the certainty of that eternall lyfe, which is pur∣chased vnto vs by Christ Iesus, which althogh we enioy not presently, yet by faith we are as fully assured of it, as if we had possession and fruition thereof already. And heereof it is,Colos. 2.2, Heb, 10, 22, that ye Apostle calleth it plerophoria, fulnesse or assurance of fayth, when wee are perswaded that wee are so highly in Gods fauour, that nothing is able to separate or remoue vs frō the loue that God beareth vs in his sonne and our Sauiour Christ Iesus. Thys fulnes of faith containeth in it these three things. Fyrst, a notice or knowledge of the mercifull promises of God in Christ Iesus. Secondly, an vndoub∣ted perswasion of the truth of those promises. And thirdly, the applying of the same to the comfort of our soules and consciences, for our sal∣uation. For as it is not enough for a man to haue meate, vnlesse hee also eate it & digest it, so it is not enough for vs to know the promises of God,Hebr, 4.2, vnlesse we beleeue the same to be true, and apply them to our owne selues. And as it is not enough for a wounded man, to haue a soueraigne
salue or Medicine in hys windowe, vnlesse he apply it to hys wound, so is it not sufficient for vs, to knowe that Christ is the Sauiour of the world, vnlesse also we acknowledge hym to be a Sauiour vnto vs, & lay hold on hym by the hand of fayth. Wherefore thys is the propertie and effect of a sauing fayth, euen to apply Christ wyth hys gyfts vnto e∣uery one of the faythful, & to make all cōclusions of Gods promises par∣ticuler, that is, peculier to themselues and their own saluation.Habac. 2. And there∣fore it is that fayth is called the lyfe of the soule,Rom, 1, 17, Heb, 10, 37. because it is the instru∣ment, wherwith Christ the true lyfe & foode of our soule is to be eaten. Yea it is the mouth, the tongue, the teeth, the stomack, and that heate of our harts and soules, whereby Christ the word of GOD, is spiritually ta∣ken, eaten, and digested of vs, wyth which worde, or rather with which Christ,Iohn, 6, 51, our soules doe lyue: name∣ly, with the flesh & blood of Christ which we eate and drink, whilst we embrace & receiue Christ by a lyue∣ly fayth. Wherupon S. Cyprian hath thys sweet saying.Cypr. lib. de Caena Dom. Quod est esca car∣ni, hoc animae est fides. &c. That
which meate is to the fleshe, that is ayth to the soule. That which foode is to the body, that is the worde to the Spyrite. So that fayth is the bond, which doth so straight∣ly vnite and knit vs vnto Christ, no otherwise then the members are v∣nited to the heade, whereby we per∣take his spiritual graces, as the mem∣bers of mans body receiue nutriment from the head; and in a word, what good things soeuer are necessary for our eternall lyfe, doe flowe and are deriued vnto vs from Christ, as from a most plentiful & wholesom foun∣taine, & are cnueied vnto vs by the instrument of fayth, as by a strong and substantiall Conduit-pype. It were too long, and not so perti∣nent to the purpose, to reite all the propeties of this sing faith, wher∣of we speake: it may suffise therore to haue shewed you these few notes, and effects thereof, by the due con∣sideration whereof, it shall be easie for any to examine & try themselues as the Apostle speaketh,2, Cor, 13, 5, whether they be in the faith or no: & conse∣quently, whether they be true Chri∣stians for the first part of yt profes∣sion: namely for matters of beleefe,
which cōsisteth (as hath been shew∣ed,) not onely in beleeuing whatsoe∣uer is propoūded vnto vs in the ho∣ly Scripture, (although that also be a true fayth) but also in the assurance of Gods loue & fauour towards vs, wrought in our harts by the prea∣ching of the Gospel, & sealed by the holy Ghost; whereby we do firme∣ly perswade themselues, that our sins are as vtterly forgiuen vs for Christ his sake, as if he neuer had commit∣ted any, and his righteousnes as per∣fectly imputed vnto vs, as if we had performed the same in our own per∣sons. Wherfore to cōclude thys first part of our present speech,Dial cont. Luciferna∣num. hee that not onely protesteth with S. Ierome that he dooth abhorre all sectes and names of particuler men, as Marci∣onists, Montanists, Valeninians, & the lyke, (which like the builders of Babel) haue built vp Churches,Gene, 11, Sina∣gogues, and Conuenticles to gette themselues a name, that men might be called after them, Marcionists, Montanists, and such others, hee I say, that loatheth & detesteth sects, and as hee was not baptised in the name of Marcion, Montan, or Va∣lentine, but in the Name of Iesus
Christ, so refuseth hee to be called a Marcionist, Montanist, or Valenti∣nian, or by any name of any man vnder heauen: and therewithall re∣ioyceth in the Name of Christ to be called a Christian, & giuing al doc∣trines and Gospels the slyp, pitcheth him vpon the doctrine and Gospell of IESVS, taught by his holy Apo∣stles; he that can captiuate hys vn∣derstanding to the obedience of Christ, to beleeue hūbly such things as Christ by his Apostles proposeth to hym,2. Cor, 10, 5, albeit hys reason or sence should stand against the same. And not onely so, but also perswadeth & assureth hys own hart & soule, that all the mercifull promises that God maketh in his word, doe belong vn∣to hym in especiall, and that he is one of that nūber which God hath elected to saluation, and for whose sinnes Christ Iesus the son of GOD was content to die,Ephe, 3, 17, and to rise again for hys iustification, he that findeth hymselfe to be in this faith, or rather thys fayth to be in hym, and feeleth the fruites & effects thereof, that is, as they are reckoned by the Apostle, Rom. 5. to be at peace wyth God,Rom, 5, 12. to haue an entrance vnto grace, to haue
spirituall ioy, not onely in prosperi∣tie, but euen in tribulation and af∣fliction; to haue hope that maketh not ashamed; and to haue the loue of God shedde abrod in his hart by the working of the holy Ghost, &c. Thys man, (no doubt,) is in a most sure case for matters of his fayth, and cannot possibly walke awry therein, but may thynke hymselfe a good Christian for thys first poynt, which is for matters of beleefe. The second part of this Chapter. THere followeth the second parte of Christian proession, concer∣ning lyfe and manners; which is a matter of so much more difficultie then the former, by how many more waies a man may be ledde from ver∣tuous lyfe then from sincere fayth, wherein there can be no comparison at all, seeing the path of our beleefe is so manifest, (as hath beene shew∣ed,) that no man can erre therin but of inexcusable wilfulnesse. Which wilfulnes of errour, See S. Au. de vtil. cre cap 1. Cyp. Epist. 61. the holy Fa∣thers of Christes Primatiue Church, dyd alwaies referre to two principall and originall causes,The two causes of heresie. that is, to pryde
and ouerweening in our owne con∣ceits, and to malice against our Su∣periours, for not gyuing our selues contentation to the things that wee desire. Of the first doe proceede new opinions,The doings of Precis∣matiques. new glosing, expounding and applying of the Scriptures, pre∣erring our owne iudgement before all other past or present; the con∣tempt and debasing of holy Fathers and Councels, & whatsoeuer proofe standeth not with our owne lyking and approbation. Of the second fountaine are deri∣ued other qualities conformable to that humor, as are the denying of iurisdiction & authority in our Su∣periours, the contempt of Prelates, the exaggeration of the faults & de∣fects of our Gouernours, the impug∣nation of al byshoplike dignities or Ecclesiasticall eminencie, and especi∣ally of that rule wherunto appertai∣neth the correction of such like of∣fenders: and finally, for satis-fying this deuilish and pernicious venime of malice, those wicked eprobates do incite & arme the people against theyr spirituall Pastours, they kindle factions against Gods faithfull Mi∣nisters, they deuise a new Church, a
newe forme of gouernment, a newe kingdome and Ecclesiasticall Hie∣rachie vpon earth, wherby to bring men in doubt or staggering what or whom to beleeue, or whereunto to haue recourse in such difficulties as doe arise. These two maladies I say of pride and malice, haue beene the cause of obstinate errour in all Heretiques from the beginning, as ul well no∣ted that holy and auncient Martyr S. Cyprian, when he sayd so long a∣goe.The obser∣uation of S. Cyprian. These are the beginnings & o∣riginall causes of Heretiques & wic∣ked Scismatiques, first to please and lyke wel of themselues, and then be∣ing puffed vp with the swelling of pryde,Cyp. epist. 65 ad Rogation to contemne their Gouernors and Superiors. Thus doe they aban∣don and forsake the church, thus doe they erect a prophane Altar out of the church against the church. Thus doe they breake the peace and vnitie of Christ, & doe rebel against Gods holy ordination. Nowe then, as these are the cau∣ses eyther onely or principally of er∣ring in our beleefe,Many cau∣ses of euill lyfe. most facile and easie (as we see) to be discerned, so of errour in lyfe and manners, there
are many more occasions, causes, of∣springs, and fountaines to be found. That is to say, so many in number, as we haue euil passions, in ordinate appetites, wicked desires, or vnlafull inclinations within our mind, euery one whereof, is the cause oftentimes of dysordered life, & breach of Gods commaundements. For which re∣spect there is much more set downe in scripture for exhortation to good lyfe, then to fayth, for that the error heerein is more ordinary and easie, and more prouoked by our owne frailtie, as also by the multitude of infinite temptations. Wherefore wee reade that our Sauiour Christ in the verie beginning of hys preaching, strayght after he was baptised, and had chosen vnto him S. Peter and S. Andrew, Iames and Iohn, & some other fewe Disciples, went vp to the Mountaine,The effect of Christes Sermon. & there made his most excellent, famous, and copious Ser∣mon, recited by S. Mathew in three whole chapters,Mat. chap. 5 6. and 7, wherein he talketh of nothing els but of vertuous lyfe, pouertie, meekenes, iustie, purity, sorrow for sinne, patince in suffe∣ring, contempt of ryches forgiuing of iniuries, fasting, prayer, repen∣tance,
entrance by the straight gate, and finally, of perfection, holinesse, and integritie of conuersation, and of the exact fulfilling of euery iote of Gods Law and cōmandements. He assured hys Disciples with great asseeration, that he came not to breake the Lawe, but to fulfill the same: and consequently, who soe∣uer should breake the least of hys Commaundements, and shoulde teach men so to doe, that is, should perseuere therin without repētance, and so by hys example drawe other men to doe the like, should haue no place in the kingdom of heauen. A∣gaine, he exhorted them most ear∣nestly to be lyghts,Math, 5, 20 and to shyne by good works to al the world, & that except theyr iustice dyd exceede the iustice of the Scribes and Pharisies,Math, 6, 24 (which was but ordinary and exter∣nall) they could not be saued. Hee told them plainly, they might not serue two Maisters in thys lyfe, but eyther they must forsake God, or a∣bandon Mammon. He cryed vnto them Attendite,Math, 7, 13 stand attent, and consider wel your state and conditi∣on, and then againe seeke to enter by the straight gate.Math, 7, 20. And lastly he con∣cludeth,
that the only trial of a good tree, is the good fruite which it yeel∣deth, without the which fruite, let the Tree be neuer so faire or pleasant to the eye, yet it is to be cutte down and burned. And that not euery one that shall cry or say vnto him Lord, Lord, at the last day, shal be saued,Mat, 7, 5. or enter into the kingdome of hea∣uen, but onely such as did execute in deedes, the will and commaunde∣ments of hys Father in thys life. For want whereof, he assured them, that many at that day, who had not on∣ly beleeued, but also doone miracles in hys Name, should be denied,Mat, 7, 22, re∣iected, and abandoned by hym. Which long lesson of vertuous lyfe, being the first that euer our Sa∣uiour gaue in publique to his Dis∣ciples then newly gathered togeher, (as S. Matthew noteth,) (hauing treated some-what before of poynts of fayth, and by some miracles and preaching shewed himselfe to be the true Messias) doth sufficiently teach vs, that we must not only belieue in his name & doctrine, but conforme our liues & actions also to the pre∣script rule of his commaundements. For albeit in Christian Religion,
faith be the first & principall foun∣dation,A simili∣tude tou∣ching faith and works. whereupon all the rest is to be staied and grounded. Yet as in o∣ther materiall buildings, after the foundation is layde, there remaineth the greatest labour, time, cost, cun∣ning and diligence, to be bestowed vpō the framing, & furnishing of o∣ther parts yt must ensue: euen so in thys celestiall edifice or building of our soule, hauing laid on the foun∣dation and ground of true beleefe, the rest of all our life, time, labor & studies, is to be imployed in the per∣fecting of our lyfe and actions, and as it were in raysing vp the wals and other parts of our spiritual building by the exercise of all vertues, & dyl∣ligent obseruation of Gods cōman∣dements, without the which it will be to no more purpose for vs to brag of our knowledge in the scriptures, or to say we haue fayth, & looke to be saued as wel as other men, then it wil be to purpose, to haue a foun∣dation without a building vpon it, or a stock or tree yt beareth no fruite. Which thing S. Iames (speaking of that historical and dead fayth, wher∣by the wicked and the very deuils themselues belieue that there is one
GOD,) expresseth most excellent∣ly in thys fit similitude:Iam, 2, 26 As a bodie without a spirit is dead, euen so (saith he) is fayth without workes. Thys poynt of doctrine of vertu∣ous life, & obseruing of Gods com∣mandements, not our sauior Christ alone in hys Sermon, most earnestly vrged, (as hath beene sayde) but hys fore-runner also S. Iohn the Baptist, and his followers the holy Apostles, whereof the one continually called vpō the people to bring forth fruits meete for repentance;Math, 3, 8, the other in all theyr wryting,Rom, 12, 1. & no doubt in all theyr Sermons after matter of doc∣trine and fayth propounded,Ephe, 4, 1, do pro∣ceede to exhortation, & precepts of Christian lyfe. In so much as S. Au∣gustine & other auncient Fathers are of opinion, that the rest of the Apo∣stles, S. Peter, S. Iames, S. Iohn, and S. Iude, perceiuing the loosenes and security of the people in their times, directed theyr writings, eyther onely or principally to thys ende, euen to perswade and enforce the necessitie of good life & conuersation among Christians. Yea and that Saint Paule himselfe,Rom, 3, 28, when he concludeth that a man is iustified by fayth without
the works of the Law, doth not ex∣clude the workes of charitie, as ef∣fects and fruites of fayth, which fol∣lowe hym that is already iustified in the sight of God, but hee excludeth them as causes of saluation, which goe before him that is to be iustifi∣ed. Whereby it appeareth, that saint Paul handling the causes of our iu∣stification in the sight of God, is not repugnant r contrary to S. Iames, speaking o the notes and signes whéreby we are iustified: that is, (as the worde is taken Mat. 12.37. els where) de∣clared or knowne to be iust or righ∣teous before men. The sum is, that although good works are not the causes of our sal∣uation,Colos, 1, 10, yet they are the way (as it were) & the path that leadeth ther∣vnto: because by them, as by cer∣tayne marks, we perceiue our selues to haue entered, and to haue pro∣ceeded in the way of eternal life. Yea they are the fruites and effects,Iam, 2, 18, wher∣by we testifie and declare both vnto our selues and to others, the truth of that fayth which we professe. And therefore our Sauiour Christ willeth vs in ye gospel, to let our light shine before men,Math, 5, 16, that they seeing our good
works, may take occasion therby to glorifie our heauenly Father. And his holy Apostle Saint Iames,Iam, 2, 18, byddeth those carnall and sensuall Christians, that stoode so much vp∣on the onely name of faith, to shew hym theyr fayth by their works, that is, they should declare & testifie vn∣to men (as I haue sayde) the fayth which they professed, by the fruites thereof. To men (I say  cause men which iudge but by  outwarde appearance onely,Mat, 7, 16, cannot know the goodnes of a Tree, but by the good fruite which it yeeldeth; they can∣not discerne the inwarde fayth but by the outward workes. But as for God, that searcheth the secrets of the hart and raynes, it needeth not that we should shewe him our fayth by our works, nor may we looke for iu∣stification at his hands by the best of them,Rom, 4.2, for thē might we haue wher∣of to boast, but there is no boasting with God, & therfore no iustifying by works in hys sight. Yet notwith∣standing, the Lord requireth good works at our hands, to the end that hymselfe myght be 1. Pet. 2.12 glorified, our needie bretheren relieued & 1. Cor. 9.1.23. com∣forted, others gained & wonne by
our example, to the embracing of the same fayth and Religion which we professe: our owne fayth exerci∣sed and strengthened,2, Pet, 1, 10. & our calling & election made sure & confirmed. And it is very requisite yt the chyl∣dren of God, which are bought with so high a price, as with the blood of Iesus,1, Pet, 1, 18. shold glorify god both in soule & body, because they are redeemed both in soule & body, and not lyue vnto thēselues, but vnto him which dyed and rose againe for them.1, Cor, 6, 20. 2, Cor, 5, 15 This is the end of our election be∣fore the foundations of the worlde were layde, as the Apostle testifieth, Ephes, 1, 4,Ephe, 1, 4, euen that we should be holie and blamelesse before hym in loue. Thys is the ende of our creati∣on, as the same Apostle witnesseth, Ephesians, 2, 10.Ephe, 2, 10. Where he saith that we are Gods workmanshyp created in Christ Iesus vnto good workes, wherein he hath ordayned that wee should walke. This is the end of our redemption, as old Zachary prophe∣cied. Luke, 1, 74, 75,Luke, 1, 74. that beeing re∣deemed and deliuered from all our spirituall enemies, and from eternall destruction wherunto we were sub∣iect, we should serue God without
feare, in holines and righteousnesse before hym all the daies of our lyfe. Finally, this is the ende of our voca∣tion. For God hath not called vs to vncleannesse, but vnto holinesse,1, Thes. 4, 7 and as he that hath called vs is holy,1, Pet. 1, 15, so must we be holy in all maner of cō∣uersation. And it cannot be that they which are truely iustified, that is to say, made righteous by a liuely faith in Christ, should not also in some measure be sanctified, that is, made holy by a faithfull lyfe in hym. Let not men therfore deceiue thē∣selues with the onely name & sha∣dow of faith, without the nature and substaunce thereof. Let them not promise vnto themselues euerlasting life, because they knowe ye true God,Iohn, 17, 3. and whō he hath sent Iesus Christ: but let them remember how Christ hys Apostle whom he deerely loued, expoundeth that saying, when hee wryteth. By thys we knowe GOD (truly) if we keepe his commaun∣dements:1, Ioh, 2, 3.4 and whosoeuer sayth that e knoweth hym, and yet keepeth not his commaundements, is a lyar, and the trueth is not in hym. For as it is a true saying,1, Tim, 1, 15 and by all meanes worthy to be receiued, that Christ
Iesus came into the worlde to saue sinners: so is it as true a saying, and no lesse worthy to be affirmed,Titus. 3, 8, that they which haue belieued GOD, shold be careful to shew forth good works. S. Gregory vppon the words of Christ to S. Thomas,Gre. in hom. 29. in Euā. Iohn 20. Blessed are they who haue not seene, & yet haue belieued, hath a notable discourse to thys purpose. If any (sayth he) infer heereof, I beleeue and threfore am blessed, and shall be saued, he sayth truely, if hys life be aunswerable to hys beleefe: for yt a true faith dooth not contradict in maners, the things which he professeth in words. For which cause, S. Paule accuseth cer∣taine false Christians, in whom he founde no vertuous lyfe aunswera∣ble to theyr profession;Titus, 1, 16. that they confessed God in words, but denyed hym in theyr deedes. And S. Iohn auocheth,1. Ioh 2, 4, that who soeuer sayth he knoweth God, and keepeth not his cōmaundements is a lyar. Which beeing so, we must examine the trueth of our fayth by consideration of our lyfe: for then and not other∣wise we are true Christians, if wee fulfill in works, that wherof we haue made promise in words. That is, in
the day of our Baptisme,What we promised in our Bap∣tisme. we promi∣sed to renounce the pompe of thys world, together with all the workes of iniquitie; which promise, if wee performe now after Baptisme, then are we true Christians, and may be ioyful. But contrariwise, if our life be wicked, and contrary to our profes∣sion, it is sayd by the voyce of truth it selfe. Not euery one that shall say to me Lord, Lorde,Math, 7. shall enter into the kingdom of heauen. And again, why doe ye call me Lord, Lord, and doe not performe the things yt I tell you. Here-hence it is, that God com∣playned of his old people the Iewes, saying:Esay. 29.17 This people honoureth mee with their lips, but their harts are far off from me. And the Prophet Da∣uid of the same people.Psalm. 78.36, 37, They loued him with theyr mouth, & with their tongues they lyed vnto him. Where∣fore let no man presume to say hee shal be saued, if fayth and good lyfe be diuorced and put a sunder, which S. Chrisostome noteth, by the woful and heay chaunce and iudgement that happened vnto him, who in the gospel was admitted to the feast of christian fayth and knowledge, but for lack of the ornament or garment
of good lyfe, was most contumeli∣ously depriued of his expectation. Of whom S. Chrisostoms words are these.Chris. hom, 9 in Iohn. He was inuited to the feast, and brought vnto the table, but for that by his foule garment he disho∣noured our Lorde that had inuited him: he was not onely thrust from the Table and banquet, but also bound hand & foote, and cast into vtter darknes, where there is eternall weeping and gnashing of teeth. Wherefore let vs not (deere bre∣theren) let vs not I say deceiue our selues, and imagine that our deade and vnfruitfull fayth wil saue vs at the last day: for except wee ioyne pure lyfe to our beleefe, and in thys heauenly vocation of ours, do appa∣rel our selues with the woorthy gar∣ments of vertuous deedes, whereby we may be admitted at the mariage day in heauen: nothing shall be a∣ble to deliuer vs from the damnati∣on of this miserable man, that wan∣ted hys wedding weede. Which thing S. Pal wel noteth, when hauing said, we haue an euer∣lasting house in heauen,2, Cor. 5, 1, 2 not made with mens hands, he addeth present∣ly thys exception, Si tamen vestiti et
non nudi inueniamur. That is, if we be found at that day well apparrel∣led and not naked. Would God e∣uery Christian desirous of his salua∣tion, woulde ponder well thys dys∣course of S. Chrisostome. And so wyth thys alone to con∣clude our speech in thys Chapter,The con∣clusion of this chapter. without allegation of further mat∣ters or authorities, (which are infi∣nite to this effect) it may appeare by that which hath already beene sette downe, wherein the true profession of a Christian consisteth: & therby each man that is not partial, or blin∣ded in hys owne affection, (as many are) may take a view of his state and condition, and frame vnto himsle a very profitable coniecture, how he is lyke to speede at the last accoun∣ting day. That is, what profit or da∣mage he may expect by his know∣ledge & profession of Christian Re∣ligion. For as to him that beleeueth soundly, and walketh vprightly in hys vocation, performing effectually euery way hys professed duety, there remaine both infinite and inestima∣ble rewards prepared: so to him that strayeth aside, & swerueh from the right path o fayth & life prescribed
vnto hym, there are no lesse paynes and punishments reserued. For which cause, euery Christian that is carefull of his own saluation, ought to fixe hys eyes very seriouslie vpon them both: and as in beleefe to shewe hymselfe constant, firme, humble and obedient: so in life & conuersation, to bee honest, iust, pure, innocent and holy. And for this seconde poynt con∣cerning lyfe and maners, hath beene already hādled in my former booke, (which as I vnderstand is imprinted in England) I shal need to wade the lesse in further discourse heereof. But for I haue been admonished by the wrytings of dyuers, howe my former booke hath been disliked in two spe∣ciall poynts; first, that I speake so much of goods works, & so little of fayth: secondly, that I talk so large∣ly of Gods iustice, and so briefely of hys mercy, whereby the consciences of many haue beene offended: let the last chapter going before of be∣leefe and lyfe aunswere the first, and that which immediatly followeth, serue for the latter obiection, and so I doubt not, but a Christian man may be thorowly resolued.
OF THE ONELY IMPE∣DIMENT THAT IS WONT TO LET SINNERS FROM Resolution. Which is, the mistrust and diffidence in Gods mercie, through the mul∣titude and greeuousnes of their offences. CHAP. VI. AMong all other the most greeuous and perrilous co∣gitations, which in thys world are accustomed to offer themselues to a minde intang∣led and loden with great sinnes,Dispaire, an ordinarie temptation to the grea∣test sinners. this vsually is the first, (through the na∣ture of sinne it selfe and crafty sug∣gestion of our ghostly enemie,) to fal into distrust & dispayre of Gods mercy. Such was the cogitation of most vnhappy Caine,Caine. one of the first inhabitants of the earth, who after the murther of his own onely Bro∣ther, and other sinnes by him com∣mitted, brake into that horrible and desperate speech, so greatly offensiue vnto his Lord & Maker,Gene, 4. Mine ini∣quitie is greater then that I may hope
for pardon. Such was in lyke manner the desperate conceite of wicked Iu∣das,Iudas. one of the first of them that were chosen to the peculier seruice of our Redeemer; who feeling hys conscience oppressed with manifold iniquities, and most of all with the prodition of hys own Lord & Mai∣ster, tooke no other way of amend∣ment or redresse, but to destroy him selfe both in body and soule, adioy∣ning onely these words, ful of myse∣rable distrust & desperation, I haue sinned in betraying the innocent and iust blood.Math, 27, By which words & most wretched end, hee more greeuously offendd and iniured hys most lo∣uing and merciful Sauiour, then by all hys former iniquities committed against hym. Thys then (most louing brother) is the first and greatest Rock, where∣at a sinfull soule ouerburdened with the charge of her own iniquities,The shyp∣wrack of soules ouer∣loden with sinnes. & tossed in the waues of dreadfull co∣gitations, by the blastes & stormes of Gods threates against sinners, doth cōmonly make her shipwrak. That is, that most horrible depth & dungion, wherof the holy scripture saith;Prou, 18, The impious man, when hee is
come into the bottom & profundity of his sinnes, contēneth all. That is y• re∣mediles sore, & incurable wounde, wherwith God himselfe charged Ie∣rusalem,Ierem, 3, when he sayde, Insanabilis fractura tua: thy rupture is irreme∣diable. And the Prophet Michaeas considering the same people, thorow the multitude of their wickednes, to encline nowe to dispaire of Gods goodnes towards them, brake forth into this most pittiful cōplaint;Mich, 1. For this will weepe & lament extreame∣ly, I wil stryp off my clothes & wander naked: I wil rore like vnto Dragons, and sound out my sorow at Struthious in the desert, for that the wounde and malady of my people is desperate. Thys is that great and maine im∣pediment,The misery of despera∣tion. that stoppeth the con∣duits of Gods holy grace, from flow∣ing into the soule of a sinfull man. This is the knyfe that cutteth in sun∣der all those heauenly and blessed cordes, wherewith our sweet Lorde and Sauiour endeuoureth to drawe vnto repentance the harts of sinners, saying by his Prophet,Hosea, 11, I wil pul them vnto me, with the chaines of loue and charitie. For by thys meanes euerie sinful conscience commeth to aun∣swer
almighty God, as did Ierusalē, whē being admonished of her sins, and exhorted by hys Prophet to a∣mendement of lyfe, she sayd, Despe∣raui, nequaquam faciam,Ierem, 2. I am be∣come desperate, I will neuer thinke of any such thing. To which lamen∣table estate when a sinfull man is once arriued, the next step hee ma∣keth, is, (for auoyding al remorse & trouble of cōscience) to engulfe him selfe into the depth of all detestable enormities, & to abandon his soule to the very sinck of al filth & abho∣minations, according as S. Paul said of the Gentiles in lyke case,Ephe, 4. That by dispaire they deliuered thēselues ouer to a dissolute life, thereby to commit all manner of vncleannes. Which wicked resolution of the impious, is the thing, (as I haue noted before) that most of all other offences vpon earth, dooth exasperate the ire of GOD, depriuing his diuine Maie∣stie of that most excellent propertie, wherin he chiefely delighteth & glo∣rieth; which is, hys infinite and vn∣speakable mercy.The thing wherin God most de∣lighteth, is mercie. This might be de∣clared by dyuers and sundry exam∣ples of holy writ, how beit two one∣ly shall suffise for thys present.
The first is of the people of Isra∣el, not long before their banishment into Babilon, who being threatned from God by the Prophet Ieremie, that manifolde punishments were imminent ouer their heads, for their greeuous sinnes committed against his Maiestie, began (in sted of repen∣tance) to fall to desperation, and cō∣sequently, resolued to take that im∣pious course of all dissolute lyfe, al∣ledged before out of S. Paule: for thus they aunswered God exhorting them by his threates to reforme their wicked liues. We are now growne des∣perate, and therefore we will heereaf∣ter follow our own cogitations,A desperate resolution. and e∣uery one fulfill the wickednesse of hys owne conceite. Wherat God stormed infinitely, and brake forth into thys vehement interrogatiō; Interrogate Gentes, quis audiuit talia horribilia?Ierem, 18, Aske and enquire of the very Gen∣tiles, whether euer among thē were heard any such horible blasphemies. And after thys, for the more de∣claration of thys intollerable iniurie heerein offered to hys Maiestie: hee commaunded the Prophet Ieremie to goe forth out of his owne house, and to gette him to a Potters shop
which in ye Village was framing hys vessels vpon the wheele. Which Iere∣mie hauing done, he sawe before his face a pot crushed & broken by the Potter al in peeces vpon the wheele, and thinking thereby that the vessel had been vtterly vnprofitable & to be cast away,A meruai∣lous exam∣ple of Gods clemencie. he sawe the same clay presently framed agaie by the Pot∣ter into a newe vessell, more excel∣lent then before. Wherat he meruai∣ling, God sayd vnto him; Dost not thou think (Ieremy) that I can doe with the house of Israel, as this Pot∣ter hath doone with his Vessell? or is not ye house of Israel in my hands, as the clay in ye hands of this craftes∣man? I wyll denounce vpon a sud∣daine against a Nation & kingdom, that I will roote it vp and destroy it, and if that Nation or Kingdome do repent from theyr wickednes, I also will repent mee of the punishment which I intended to lay vpon them. And thē he proceedeth forward, de∣claring vnto Ieremie the exceding griefe & indignation which he con∣ceiueth, that any sinner whatsoeuer, should dyspaire of mercy and par∣don at hys hands. The second example is, of ye same
people of Israel, during the tyme of their banishmēt in Babilon, at what time, being afflicted with many mi∣series for theyr sinnes, & threatned with many more to come, for that they changed not the course of their former wicked conuersation: they began to dispaire of Gods mercy,An other example of Gods won∣derful mer∣cie. & to say to the Prophet Ezechiell that lyued banished among them, & ex∣horted them to amendement vppon assured hope of Gods fauor towards them;Ezech, 33, Our iniquities and sins doe lye greeuously vpon vs, and we languishe in them: and what hope of life then may we haue? At which cogitation and speech, God being greatly mo∣ued appeared presently to Ezechiel, and sayd vnto hym. Tell this people I doe lyue saith the Lord God of hostes, I wishe not the death of the impious, but rather that he should turne from his wicked waes and lyue. Why will the house of Israel die in their sinnes, rather then turn vnto me. And then he maketh a large & vehement pro∣testation, that how grieuously soe∣uer any person should offend hym, and how great punishments soeuer he shall denounce against hym, yea, if he had giuen expresse sentence of
death & damnation vpon him, yet Si egerit paenitentiam a peccato suo, feceritque iudicium et iusticiam: that is, if he repent himselfe of hys sinnes, & exercise Iudgment & iustice to be vsed in true repen∣tance, that is, iudgmēt vppon our selues, & iu∣stice toward others. iudgement and iustice for the time to come, all his sinnes that he hath committed shal be forgiuen him (sayth almighty God,) for that he hath done iudgement and iustice. And thys nowe might be suffici∣ent, (albeit nothing els were spoken) for remoouing thys first obstacle & impedimēt of true resolution, which is the despaire of Gods infinite good¦nes and mercy. Neuerthelesse, for more euident cleering and demon∣stration of thys matter, and for the greater comfort of such as feele thē∣selues burdened with the heauie weight of their iniquities committed against his diuine Maiestie: I haue thought expedient in thys place, to declare more at large, this aboun∣dant subiect of endlesse mercie, to∣wards al such as wil truely turne vn∣to him; in what tyme, state, condi∣tion, or age soeuer in this lyfe, which shal be shewed and sette downe by these four poynts and parts that doe ensue.Foure parts of thys Chapter.
The first part, touching the loue that God beareth towards man. FIrst of all, by the infinite and in∣comprehensible loue ye almightie God beareth vnto man, which loue is alwaies ye Mother of fauor, grace, and mercy. If you demaund of mee in what sorte I doe prooue that the loue of God is so exceeding great to∣wards man, I answer as the Cosmo∣grapher is wont to doe, who by the greatnes & multitude of ye streames and Riuers, doth frame a coniecture of the Fountaine from which they flowe, The proper Riuers which are deriued and doe run forth of loue, are good turnes and benefits, which seeing they are infinite, endlesse and inestimable, bestowed by God vp∣on man, (as in the place before hath beene declared, and the whole vni∣uersall frame of thys world doth a∣boundantly beare witnes,) it folow∣eth most euidently, that the origine, fountaine, & wel-spring of al these fauours, graces, and good turnes, must needes be infinite, immeasura∣ble, and far surpassing all compasse of mans vnderstanding.
If you require of me the cause & reason, why Almighty God should so wonderfully be affected towardes man, I can directly yeelde ye none at all, but rather meruaile thereat with holy Iob,Iob, 7. why so soueraigne a Maie∣stie should set his hart vpon so base a subiect. Notwithstanding, the holy Scripture seemeth to alledge one principal reason of his loue, when it sayth;Wisd, 11, Nhil odsti orum que fecisti, et parcis omnibus, quia tua sunt De∣mine, qui diligis animas. That is, Thou (ô Lord) which louest soules, canst not hate those thinges which thou hast made, but dost vse mercie towardes all men, for that they are thyne. And the lyke manner of rea∣soning vseth God himselfe, when he sayth by the Prophet Ezechiel:The first cause why God loueth vs, for that he is our Creator, & we are hys own works. Ezech, 18. Be∣hold, all soules are mine, and heere∣vpon he inferreth a little after, Num∣quid voluntatis me est mors impij: Can I haue the wil to damne a wic∣ked man, seeing yt his soule is mine, created & redeemed by me? as who would say, thys were a case against all order and equity. And the reason of this maner of speech & argument is, for that euery man naturallie is inclined to loue the things that be of
his own making. So we see, that if a man haue an Orchard, wherein be great varietie of Trees & plants, yet if there be but one of his own pecu∣lier grafting, that florisheth & pros∣pereth well: he taketh more delight therein, then in any of the rest, for that it is hys owne workmanshyp. So in lyke manner, if a man haue a Vineyard of his owne planting and trimming.Euery man gyuen to loue hys owne. For which respect the ho∣lie Prophet Dauid, finding himselfe and the whole kingdome of Iurie in great affliction & calamity, thought no other meanes so forcible to draw God to compassion and commise∣ration of theyr case, as to cry out to hym in this maner;Psalm, 79. Thou which go∣uernest Israel, looke towards vs & be attent. Thou hast brought foorth a Vineyard out of Egipt, thou hast pur∣ged the same from Gentiles, and hast planted it. Thou O God of all power, turne towards vs, looke vpon vs from heauen, and visite this thy vineyarde which thine owne right hande hath planted. The like maner of perswa∣sion vsed the holy Prophet Esay to moue God, when he said; Looke vp∣pon vs I beseech thee, O Lorde, which are the worke of thine owne hands.
But aboue all other, the blessed man Iob,Iob. 10. standeth as it were, in ar∣gument and dysputation with God about thys matter,The confi∣dēce of Iob, in that God had made him. saying, haue not thy hands made me? haue they not framed me of clay and earth? hast not thou compacted me as cheese is made of mylke? hast not thou knyt my bones and sinewes together, and couered my fleshe with skyn? hast not thou giuen me lyfe, and conser∣ued my Spyrite with thy continuall protection? how soeuer yu seeme to dissemble these matters & hide thē in thy hart, yet I know that thou re∣membrest them all, and art not vn∣mindful of them. By which wordes thys holy man signified, that albeit god suffered him greatly to be temp∣ted and afflicted in thys lyfe, so farre foorth as hee might seeme to haue forgotten him, yet was he well assu∣red that his diuine Maiestie coulde not of his goodnes forsake or despise him, for that he was his creature, & the proper workmanshyppe of hys own hands. In which very name of workmanship, holy Dauid tooke such great comfort, considering that the workman cannot chuse but be lo∣uing and fauourable towardes hys
owne worke, (especially so excellent and bountifull a workman, as is al∣mighty God, towards a work made as man is, to his own shape & like∣nes,) that in all his necessities, yea e∣uen in hys greatest infirmities of fleshe, and most grieuous offences committed against hys Maiestie, he conceiueth most assured hope of mercy and pardon, vpon this consi∣deration, that he was his workman∣ship,The assured hope Dauid had, in that he was gods workman∣shyppe. Psal, 102. and consequently wel knowne to his diuine wisedome, of how bric∣kle & infirme a mettal he was made. For thus at one time among other, he reasoneth of thys matter. Looke how far distant the East is from the West, so far off hath God remoued our iniquities from vs. Euen as a fa∣ther dooth take compassion of hys own chyldren, so doth the lord take mercy vpō vs, for that he wel know∣eth the mould wherof we are made, and doth remember that we are no∣thing els but dust. In which discourse, the holy Pro∣phet maketh mention of two things that did assure hym of Gods mercy, the one, that God was hys Creator, and maker, and therby priuie to the frailty of hys constitution & nature,
the other, that he was hys Father, whose property is to haue compas∣sion on hys chyldren; and thys is a second reason,The second reason of assurance of Gods loue, for that he is our Fa∣ther. more strong & forci∣ble perhaps then the former, why e∣uery man may be most assured of pardon that hartily turneth vnto al∣mighty GOD; considering that it hath pleased his diuine Maiestie, not onely to be vnto man a Creator, (as he is to all other things,) but also a Father, which is the title of the grea∣test loue and coniunction, that na∣ture hath left to things in this world. Wherof a certaine Phylosopher sayd well, that no man coulde conceiue the loue of a Parents hart, but hee only yt had a chyld of hys owne. For which respect, our Sauiour Christ to put vs in minde of this most feruent loue; and thereby as it were, by one fire to enkindle another within our harts, dyd se oftentimes & ordina∣rily, to repeate thys sweete name of Father in his speeches to hys follow∣ersMath, 5.6.7, 8, &c. and thereupon founded dyuers most excellent and comfortable dys∣courses; as at one time when he ex∣horted them from ouer-much car and worldly solicitude: hee addeth thys reason;Math. 6. Your Father in Heaue
knoweth, that you haue neede of these thinges. As who woulde say, hee knowing your wants, & being your Father, you shall not neede to trou∣ble your selues with too great anxie∣ty in these matters, for that a fathers hart cannot but be prouident and carefull for hys chyldren. The lyke deduction maketh hee in the same place, to the same effect, by compa∣rison of the byrdes of the ayre, and other irresonable creatures; for which, if God doe make (sayth he) so aboundant prouision, as all the whole world may witnesse that hee doth: much more carefull wil he b to prouide for men that are his own chyldren, which are more deere vnto hym then any other terrestiall thing created. All which speeches and reasons of our Sauiour, are deriued from the nature and property of a Parent,What a Fa∣ther God is. which cannot but affect & loue his chyldren; especially such a Father, whom Christ calleth celestiall, who in thys perfection of true fatherlie loue, so far exceedeth all earthly Pa∣rents put together, as in power, cle∣mencie & goodnes, almighty God surpasseth the infirmity of hys feeble
creatures. Such a father, as hath not onely gyuen lyfe and beeing vnto hys chyldren, but also (as S. Paule sayth,Gala, 4,) hath poured into theyr harts the diuine spirit of hys onely eternall Sonne, styrring them vp to most as∣sured cōfidence & inuincible hope, in hys fatherly goodnes & protecti∣on. And vppon assurance of thys hope, haue as well sinners as Saints from the beginning, fled vnto hym confidently vnder thys title of pater∣nitie, and neuer were deceiued. So the Prophet Esay, as wel in hys own name, as in the name of the sinfull people of Israel, doubted not to cry,Esay, 63. Thou art our Father, Abraham hath not knowne vs, and Israell is igno∣rant of vs: Thou O Lord, art our Fa∣ther, thou art our Redeemer. And to confirme thys assuraunce vnto vs, Christ sent that most sweet & com∣fortable embassage vnto hys Disci∣ples,Christes cō∣fortable embassage. presently vpon his resurrection:Iohn, 20. Goe and tell my bretheren, that I doe ascend vnto my Father, & vnto your Father: vnto my God, and vnto your God. By which words of Father, and God, the one of loue and the other of power: the one of will, the other of abilitie, hee tooke away al doubt
of not speeding, frō each man that should make recourse to this merci∣ful Lord and Father. God himselfe also, after many threates vsed by the Prophet Ieremie against the people of Israel for theyr sinnes, in the end, least they should dispaire, turneth a∣bout hys talke, & changeth his stile, assuring them of many graces & fa∣uours, if they woulde returne vnto him;How great∣ly ye respect of a Fathe mooueth GOD. telling the house of Israel, that hee had loued her from the begin∣ning and had sought to drawe her vnto hym by threates, to the end he might take mercy vpon her, & that now he intended to builde her vp a∣gaine, to adorne her with ioy & ex∣ultation, to gather her children from all corners of the earth, to refreshe them with the waters and Riuers of lyfe, and all this (saith he) Quia fac∣tus sum Israeli Pater: for that I am become now a father to Israel. And in the same place to wicked Ephra∣im (the head Citty of the rebellious kingdome of Samaria,) he sayth,Ierem. 31. E∣phraim is becom my honorable son my delight, & deerly beloued child, ther∣fore my bowels are mooued with com∣passion vppon him, and in aboundance of mercy will I take pittie of him. So
much attributed God to this respect of beeing a father vnto Israel and E∣phraim, and of theyr being his chil∣dren: that for thys cause onely (not∣withstāding their infinite enormous sinnes) his bowels of endlesse mercy were moued with loue & compas∣sion towards them. And these are those tender & mer∣cifull bowels, which holy Zacharie father to S. Iohn Baptist,Luke. 1. protesteth to be in almighty God towards man kind that had offended hym These are those which were in yt good old father mentioned in the gospel, who being not onely offended but also a∣bandoned by his younger sonne,Luke. 16. yet after he saw him return home again, notwithstanding hee had wasted all hys thrift & substance, & had wea∣ried out hys body with wicked lyfe, he was so far off from disdaining to receiue hym, as hee came foorth to meete with hym, fel vpon his necke & kissed hym for ioy: adorned him with newe apparel and rich Iewels, prouided a solemne banquet for himThe fathers liberall hart to the pro∣digall Son. inuited his friends to be merry with hym, & shewed more exulta∣tion & tryumph for his return, then if he had neuer departed from hym.
By which parable, our Sauiour Christ endeuoured to set orth vnto vs, the incomprehensible mercy of his heauenly father towards sinners, in which respect he is truly called by hys Apostle Pater misericordiarum,2. Cor. 1. the father of mercies. For that (as S. Bernard well noteth) this sea & O∣cean of mercies,Ber. Ser. 5, de natal. doth flow peculiar∣ly from the hart of a Father, which cannot be sayde so properly of the gulfe and depth of his iudgements. For which cause he is called in scrip∣ture the God of iustice & reenge,Psalm. 35, and not the Father. And finally, thys blessed name of father in God,What the name of fa∣ther doth import. doth import vnto vs by Gods owne testi∣mony, al sweetnes, al loue, al friend∣shyp, all comfort, all fatherly pro∣uidence, care & protection; all cer∣tainty of fauour, all assuraunce of grace, all security of mercy, pardon, and remission of our sins, when soe∣uer vnfainedly we turne vnto hym. And in thys poynt hys diuine Ma∣iestie is so forward and vehement, to giue vs assurance, that being not cō∣tent to set foorth hys loue vnto vs by the loue of a fathers hart, hee goeth further, and protesteth vnto vs, that hys hart is more tender towardes vs
in thys behalfe, then the hart of any mother can be to the onely child & infant of her owne wombe. For thus he sayth to Sion, which for her sins began to doubt least he had forsakē her;Esay, 49. Can the Mother forget her owne infant, or can she not be mercifull to the childe of her owne wombe? if shee could, yet can I not forgette or reiect thee: behold, I haue written thee in the flesh of mine owne handes. And thys, for so much as GOD is called our Father. There remaineth yet a third con∣sideration,The thyrd argument of Gods loue, the gi∣uing hys son for vs. which more setteth forth Gods inestimable loue, then any of the other demonstrations before handled. And that is, that he gaue the lyfe and blood of hys onely be∣gotten & eternal sonne, for purcha∣sing & redeeming vs when we were lost; a price so infinite and inexpia∣ble, as (no doubt) hys diuine wise∣dom would neuer haue giuen, but for a thing which he had loued a∣boue all measure. Which our Saui∣our himselfe that was to make the payment, doth plainly signifie, and therefore also seemeth as it were, to wonder at such a bargaine, when he sayth in the Gospel;Iohn, 3, So deerely hath
God (my Father) loued the worlde, that he hath giuen for it his onely be∣gotten sonne. In which words he as∣cribeth this most wonderful dealing of hys Father, vnto the vehemencie and exceding aboundance of loue, as doth also his deerest Disciple and Apostle S. Iohn,1. Iohn, 4, saying: In this ap∣peareth the great loue and charitie of God towardes vs, that he sath sent hys onely begotten Sonne into the world, to purchase life for vs. In this (I say) is made euident his exceeding charitie,Christ was gyuen for loue. that we not louing him, he loued vs first, and gaue his own son to be a raunsome for our sins. Wher vnto also the holy Apostle S. Paul a∣greeth, admiring in like manner the excessiue loue of god in these words; God doth meruailously commende and set forth hys great loue vnto vs,Rom, 5, in that we being yet sinners, he gaue his son to the death for our redemp∣tion. And in another place, framing out, as it were, a measure of Gods mercy by ye aboundance of his loue, sayth thus; God who is rich in mer∣cie,Ephe, 2, through the exceeding loue which he bore vnto vs, wee beeing dead in sin, he reuiued vs in Christ, and raysed vs vp euen vnto heauen,
making vs to sitte downe there with hym, to the end he might declare to all ages & worlds ensuing, the most aboundant riches of hys grace and goodnes towards vs. Thys was the opinion of that no∣ble Apostle S. Paule, and of all hys coequals, Apostles, Euangelists, Dis∣ciples and Saints: that this work of our redemption, proceeded only frō the inflamable fornace of Gods im∣measurable loue. And therefore to make no other conclusion heereof,The con∣clusion of thys poynt made by S. Paule. then that which S. Paule hymselfe doth make, If God haue not spared his owne propper and onely begot∣ten sonne,Titus. 3. but hath giue him vp to death for gayning vs vnto hym, how can it be, that with him he hath not giuen vs al other things. If when we were hys enemies,Rom. 5. and thought not vpon hym, hee sent to seeke vs so di∣ligently, by such a messenger as hee loued so deerely, allowing hym to lay downe a price for vs which he so infinitely esteemed: what shall we thinke that he wil doe vnto vs now, (wee being made hys owne by our redemption,) if we return willingly vnto hym: when our receiuing shal cost hym nothing els, but onely a
mercifull looke vppon vs: which is not so much from the infinite bow∣els of hys bottomlesse mercie, as is one droppe of water from the most huge gulfe of the maine Ocean sea. And thys shall suffise for the fist poynt of Gods loue, declared vnto vs by the three most sweet and com∣fortable names and respects of Cre∣ator, Father, and Redeemer. The second part: how God ex∣presseth his loue towards sinners. NExt after which, we are to consi∣der in what manner God is ac∣customed to expresse & declare thys loue of hys, in his dealings and pro∣ceedings towards sinners. And first of al the wise man (hauing had long experience of thys matter,) begin∣neth to describe and sette oorth in thys sort, saying vnto God hymselfe, Thou (O Lorde) doost dissemble the sinnes of men, to giue vnto them tyme of repentance.Wisd. 11 And then when they will not vse thys benefite of hys for∣bearing, but wil needes enforce him to punish and correct them, he sayth further of thys correction: Such as
wilfully doe runne astray (O Lord) and will not turne vnto thee,Wised 12, thou dost correct them sweetly by little & litle, admonishing and exhorting them to leaue theyr sinnes, and to beleeue in thee. These two poynts then of ex∣ceeding clemencie,Two rare poynts of clemencie in God. by the testimonie of the wiseman, are founde in Al∣mighty God; first, to wincke at the wicked lyfe of men, and to expect theyr conuersion with vnspeakeable patience and longanimitie, accor∣ding as also the Prophet Esay bea∣eth witnesse, adioyning the cause thereof in these words; The Lorde doth attend your conuersion, to the end he may take mercie on you, and there∣by be exalted.Esy, 30. And secondly, for the same respect when he is enforced by reason of his iustice to chastise them, yet doth he the same with such mo∣deration and mildnes, as alwaies in this life hee reserueth place of par∣don. And to these two we may ad∣ioyne yet a third property of his mer∣cie, more admirable (perhaps) then the former which is, (as Tertullian excellēly noteth,Tert, in A∣pol. cap. 2.) that he being the partie offended, yet first and princi∣pally desireth reconsiliation: he ha∣uing receiued the wrong & iniurie,
yet doth he most busily intreate for amiti & attonement.God that is offended, seeketh at∣tonement with vs. And where∣as in all ryght and equitie, he might denie vs pardon, and for hys power take reuenge of vs at hys pleasure, yet doth he not onely offer vs peace of hys owne accorde, but also sueth vnto vs by all meanes possible to ac∣cept thereof, humbling (in a certaine manner) hys diuine Maiestie to our basenes and vilitie: and behauing himselfe in thys respect, as a Prince that were enamoured of hys bond-slaue and abiect seruaunt. Thys might be declared by many of hys own speeches and doings in holy Scripture; but one place out of the Prophet Esay shall serue for all: where Almighty GOD so earnestly wooeth ye conuersion of Ierusalem, as no louer in the world could vtter more signes & testimonies of a hart inflamed & sette on fire with loue,Gods woo∣ing of Ieru∣salem. then he dooth towards that Cittie which so highly had offended hym. For first, after many thrates poured out against her, if she dyd not re∣turn, least she might perhaps fall in∣to despayre,Esay, 25. he maketh this protesta∣tion in the beginning of hys speech, Indignatio non est mihi, &c. Angry
I am not (ô Ierusalem) but whatso∣euer I haue spoken, I haue spoken of good wil and loue. Secondly, hee entreth into this dyspute,Hys prote∣station. and doubt with hymselfe about punishing her for her sinnes, what shal I do? Shall I treade her vnder my feete and put her to the fire? or els will she stay my puissaunt hand,Hys cunc∣tation. and make peace with me, will she (I say) make attonement with me? After which doubt and cunctation, he resolueth himselfe to change hys manner of stile, & to al a lyttle to chyde with her, and then he sayth; Harken O ye deafe inhabi∣tants of Ierusalem, looke about ye, yee blinde folke that will not see:His chiding. who is blind and deafe but my seruaunt, that wil not regarde or listen to the Mes∣sengers which I sende? O thou which hast open eares, wilt thou not heare? And then a lyttle after he beginnth to smooth and speake faire againe, saying;Hys fayre speech. Euer since thou hast beene gracions and glorious in mine eyes, I haue loued thee, and for thy soule wil I giue whole Nations. Feare not, for that I am with thee. Wherwith shee beeing little or nothing mooued, he returneth to a sweet maner of com∣playnt, saying; Thou hast enthralld
me by thy sins, and with thine iniqui∣ties thou hast greatly afflicted mee.Hys com∣playnt. Which beeing sayde, and she some∣what moued thereby to loue him as it seemeth, he turneth vnto her with thys most comfortable and kynde speech;Hys kynde speech. I am he, I am he, which can∣celleth thine iniquities for myne own sake, & wil neuer think any more vp∣on thy sins. All which being done, & they now reconciled, and made fast friends together, his diuine Maiestie beginneth a very louing conference (as it were) and sweet expostulation wyth her, sayiug in these words,Hys confe∣rence. Call thou to memory the thinges that are past, and let vs iudge our selues heere together. Tell mee if thou haue any thing wherby thou maist be iustified. Thy first Parent was a sinner, &c. Wherat she being ashamed, & ha∣uing nothing in the world to aun∣swer for her selfe, almighty God cō∣forteth her, and knitteth vp ye whole matter in thys most kind and amia∣ble sort.Hys sweet cōclusion. Feare not, for I will poure out my spirite vpon thee, and vppon thy seede, and my benediction shall be vppon thyne of-spring; thy chil∣dren shal bud vp and florish as wil∣loes planted by the water side. Thus
sayth the Lorde and king of Israell, the Lord of hostes that is thy redee∣mer; I am the first and the last, and besides me there is no other God. Be mindfull of thys thou house of Ia∣cob, I haue dissolued and dissipated thy sinnes, as a clowde is dissolued in the ayre; be mindful of this, and haue an assured confidence. Thus far continueth the treaty betweene God and hys Citty of Ierusalem. And now tell me (deere christian brother) whether it be possible for a∣ny hart or tongue in the worlde,A conside∣ration vpon the former treatie of God with Ierusalem. to conceiue or expresse more wayes or significations of most vehement good will & burning affection, then of Gods part in this treaty hath been declared? What louer or enamou∣red person vpon earth, what passio∣nate hart could wooe more earnest∣ly, se more diligently, sollicite more artificially, complaine more pittiful∣ly, expostulate more amiably, confer more intrinsically, remitte offences more readily, offer benefites more a∣boundantly, conclude more sweetly, and gyue more pregnant testimo∣nie of vnfained loue, or more assu∣red certaintie of eternall league & a∣mitie, then doth almighty God vn∣to
thys Nation that so greeuouslie had offended him? who wil not cō∣fesse now with the Prophet Dauid,Psalm, 144. that sweet and mercifull is the Lord, and his miserations spred ouer all the rest of his most wonderfull workes. Who will meruaile if the same pro∣phet made a vowe,Psalm, 16. that hys euerla∣sting song shoulde be of the mercies of thys hys Lord and Maker? But yet this thing is made much more apparant,Gods tender loue to Ie∣rusalē when he was to destroy it. by that which hys diuine Maiestie dyd afterwardes to the same people in the dayes of Iere∣mie the Prophet (aboue an hundred yeres after this treatie in the tyme of Esay) at what time God beeing re∣solued to destroy them & their Cit∣tie, for their obduration in their sins, when the howre of execution drewe neere, hys bowels of mercie were so touched with cōmiseration towads them, as he called to Ieremie, & cō∣maunded hym once againe to goe vp to the Temple gate, where all the people did passe in & out, and there with a loude voice to cry as follow∣eth; Heare ye the word of God,Ierem, 7, ô al you of Iuda, that doe passe in and out by these gates: thus sayth the Lord of hostes, the God of Israel, yet
doe you amende your waies, and I wil dwel in this place with you. &c. And when this exhortation, & bles∣sed endeuor of almighty God, could not moue or profit them any thing at all, then hys vnspeakeable good∣nes beganne with sharpe threates in thys maner; My furie and indigna∣tion is gathered together against this Citty,Ierem, 7, & vpon the inhabitants, and vpon the very beastes & Cattel ther∣of, as also vpon the fruite and Trees of thys Region. The carkases of thys people, shall be foode to the byrdes of the ayre, and to the beastes of the field,Ierem. 8. theyr enemies shall come and cast foorth of theyr Sepulchers, the bones of the Kinges and Princes of Iuda; the bones of theyr Priestes, Prophets and inhabitants; and shal dry them at the sunne, & cast them out vnto the dunghil. After al which long and dreadful commination, he altereth his speech presently againe, and sayth with a very lamentable & pittifull voyce. And will not he that is fallen (notwithstanding all this) rise vp againe?A pittifull complaint. Wil not he that is de∣parted from me, returne vnto mee a∣gaine? O, why doth my people runne from me so obstinatly? By which lo∣uing
complaint, and infinite other meanes of mercy that God vsed to that people,The won∣derful pro∣ceeding of God wyth Ierusalem. when no amendement at all could be procured, hys diuine Maiestie was enforced to call Nabu∣chodonoser K. of Babilon before the wals of Ierusalem, to destroy it. But uen now also consider the bowels of hys vnspeakeable mercy. For ho∣ping that by thys terror they might perchance be styrred vp to conuersi∣on, hee sent Ieremie the Prophet to them againe, with thys embassage,Ierem. 35. Tell the inhabitants of Ierusalem, will yee not yet receiue discipline and obey my words? Whereat those gracelesse people were so lyttle moued, as they tooke Ieremy and cast him into pri∣son for his message, and thereby ex∣asperated most grieuously Gods fur∣ther indignation against them. Not∣withstanding all which, his incom∣prehensible clemencie woulde not thus abandon them: but comman∣ded holy Ieremie to write out all his threates and promises in a booke to∣gether,Ierem. 36. and to sende the same vnto them, forth of the pryson where hee lay, by hys seruaunt Baruch, to be read in theyr hearing; & so he dyd. Wherof when Ioacim the king had
vnderstanding; hee commaunded Baruch to be brought into his pre∣sence, and there to reade the Booke by the fire side, (as the scripture no∣teth.) And when hee had heard but three or foure pages thereof, he cut them out with a penknife,The obsti∣nacie of the Iewish Na∣tion. & threw the whole booke into the fire, & so consumed it. At which obstinate & impious dealing, albeit Almighty God were exceedingly offended, yet commaunded he the same booke to be indited & written again, in much more ample manner then before, thereby (if it had beene possible) to haue stirred vp and gayned that peo∣ple vnto hym. But when thys by no means in ye world could be brought to passe: then permitted his diuine Maiestie, the whole Cittie to be de∣stroyed, according to hys former threates, and that rebellious people to be led away captiue in bondage to Babilon. In which place and mi∣serie (notwithstanding theyr deme∣rits) hys infinite mercie could not forsake them, but sent hys Prophet Ezechiell,Ezech. 23. as also Baruch vnto them, with extreame complaint of theyr obduration and yet offering vnto them mercy and pardon euen then,
if they would repent. And what more wonderfull cle∣mencie then thys, can possibly bee imagined deere Christian brother? May in reason any man euer nowe enter into doubt or dispaire of gods mercy,Ezech. 2, Epithetons gyuen by God to the people of God. how great and grieuous so∣euer the burden of his sins be, when he considereth thys proceeding of hys eternal Maiestie with the people of Israell, for so many yeeres & ages together: whom hymselfe calleth notwithstanding, Gentem Aposta∣tricem dura facie & indomabili cor∣de: an apostalicall Nation, of a shamelesse countenance and incor∣rigible dysposition? Can GOD de∣uise any more effectuall and forcible meanes, to erect and animate a sin∣ner confidently to return vnto him, then are these? And yet (gentle rea∣der) for thy further comfort and en∣couragement in thys behalfe, I wyll adioyne one thing more, which doth exceede and passe all reason & reach of humaine imagination, and thys is,A wonder∣full poynt. that GOD promiseth to a sinner that faithfully will return vnto him, not onely to forgette and vtterly ex∣tinguish all memory of hys former iniquities, but also to make more
ioy and tryumph at hys conuersion, and to loue and cherish hym more tenderly at hys returne, then if hee had neuer fallen or departed frō hys seruice. This God himselfe signifieth by the Prophet Esay, when he sayth; Call vnto Ierusalem, speake vnto her hart,Esay. 40. (that is, comfortably,) for that her iniquity is forgiuen, shee hath re∣ceiued double at Gods hands for all her sinnes committed.What ioy there is made at a sinners con∣uersion. Esay. 30. And more plainly in another place by the same Pro∣phet, The lyght of the Moone shall be as the light of the Sun: and the light of the Sun shal be as the lyght of sea∣uen dayes, seauen times put together, when God shall binde vp the wounds of his people, and heale theyr sores. And to thys purpose doe appertaine di∣rectly those most wonderfull Para∣bles of our Sauiour in the Gospell, concerning the extraordinary ioy & feasting that the carefull Woman made,Luke, 15. when she had founde againe her grote that was lost, & the good sheepeheard, when he brought back the sheepe that was astray: and the mercifull Father when hee receiued home hys sonne that before had a∣bandoned hym. And to the same purpose doth it also appertaine, that
in the Prophet Dauid God glorieth especially in the seruice of those peo∣ple,Psalm, 57 yt before had not knowne hym. And thys shall suffise for thys se∣cond poynt, to shew what wonder∣ful meanes almighty God doth vse, in setting forth his mercy, for allure∣ment of sinners vnto repentance. The third part, what assurance God giueth to them that repent. AND so hauing declared what exceeding great loue and mercie God beareth towards man, & how effectually he expresseth the same by his suing vnto sinners for theyr con∣uersion: it followeth that we shold in thys thyrd place, examine some∣what more in particulers, what cer∣taine assuraunce his diuine Maiesti gyueth, of vndoubted pardon & ful remission of theyr sins, to all such as vnfainedly shall resolue themselues to make theyr refuge vnto hym. Which thing, albeit euery man by that which before hath been trea∣ted, may sufficiently conceiue, yet for the importance of the matter, it shall not be amisse in thys place al∣so, to adde a word or two, for more
plaine and euident demonstration thereof. And thys shall be doone by setting downe both the wordes and deedes, that is, both the promises & performance which almighty GOD hath vsed & exercised in this behalf, to all such as haue offended hym whatsoeuer. And for the first, which are hys promises,The promi∣ses of God to sinners that repent. most apparant it is as wel by the thinges which before haue beene discussed, as also by the whole course, body, & dryft of holy scripture, yt the promises of mercy & pardon which hys diuine Maiestie hath made to sinners, and wherun∣to by hys sacred worde, he hath in a certaine manner, obliged hymselfe, are both manifold, vehement, abso∣lute, resolute and vniuersal. Whosoe∣uer shal depart from his wicked waies and turne vnto me,Ezech. 18.33, 34.37. (sayth Almighty God) I will receiue him. Beholde the vniuersalitie of all people & persons, without excluding any. And then further, At what time soeuer an im∣pious man shall returne vnto me from his impietie, his wickednesse shall not hurt him, sayth the Lord GOD of hostes. See the vniuersality of al times and seasons without exception. But yet harkē what God addeth besides.
Leaue off to doe peruersly,Esay. 1. (sayth hee to the Iewes &c.) and then doe you come and find fault with mee if you can. For if your sinnes were as red as skarlet, they shall be made as white as snow. &c. Consider the vniuersa∣lity of al kind of sinnes, be they ne∣uer so grieuous, so horrible, or hey∣nous. And finally, God talking to a soule that hath oftentimes fallen & most infinitely offended him,Ierem, 3. hee sayth thus; It is a common receiued speech, that if a woman depart from her husband, and doe ioyne herselfe to another man, she may not return to her first husband againe, for that shee is defiled and made contami∣nate. And yet where as thou hast de∣parted from mee, and hast commit∣ted fornication with many other lo∣uers, doe thou returne vnto mee a∣gaine, and I will receiue thee, sayth Almighty GOD. By which wordes is expressed the fourth vniuersalitie, contayning all states, qualities, and conditions of men, how many waies, or howe of∣tentimes, or howe contemptuouslie soeuer they haue committed sinnes against hys diuine Maiestie. And what may be added now more vn∣to
thys? was there euer Prince that made so large an offer to hys Sub∣iects? or was there euer Father that gaue so ample & vniuersall promise of pardon vnto his chyldren?Foure vni∣uersalities in Gods pro∣mises to sin∣ners. Who can now mistrust himselfe to be ex∣cluded from this assurance of mercy, wherin all sorts of people, all kinde of sinners, all tymes and seasons, all states & qualities of sinners are cō∣prehended? O most miserable and infortunate man, that excludeth him selfe, whō God excludeth not. What is there in this general and vniuersall promises, whereof any man in the world shold haue pretence, to make any least doubt or question? Of the meaning (perhaps) & intent of him that promiseth, ô deere brother, it is onely loue and charitie; and conse∣quently cannot deceiue vs. Of the trueth and surety of hys promises? It is infallible, and more certaine then heauen and earth put together. Of the power that hee hath to performe his promises? it is infinite, and not restrained by anie bounds or limitation:Poynts of great com∣fort. wherof then may we doubt? or in which of these three poynts may wee not conceiue most singuler consolation? Heare
the comfortable meditation yt bles∣sed S. Bernard made vpō these three particulers which wee haue nowe mentioned.Bern. ser. in ver. Psalm. miseric. Do∣in ter. Can. Tria considero (saith he) in quibus tota spes mea consistt, cha∣ritatem vocationis, veritatem promis∣sionis, potestatem redditionis. &c. That is, I do consider three things (sayth thys holy man) wherin al my hope consisteth, and whereby it is made inuinsible. First, the exceeding loue and charity of him, that calleth me to him by repentance; secondly, the infallible trueth and certainty of his promise which he maketh to me of pardon and mercy; thirdlie, the endlesse power and abilitie hee hath to performe whatsoeuer hee promi∣seth. Thys is that triple or threefold rope and chayne, which holy Scrip∣ture sayth is hardly broken,Eccle. 4, for that by thys rope let downe vnto vs from heauen (which is our Countrey) in∣to this world, that is our prison, we may ascende and mount vp (if we will) euen vnto the sight & posses∣sion of Gods eternal kingdome and heauenly glory. Thus far that blessed Father. But now to the second poyn,Howe God hath perfor∣med hys promises to sinners that haue repen∣ted. if we consider how faithfully almigh∣tie
God hath put in execution those promises of hys from tyme to tyme, & how no one man vpon earth, (so many ages as the world hath conti∣nued) was euer yet frustrate of thys hope, in making his conuersion vn∣to his Maiestie, if he made it frō his hart; we shall find further cause for vs to confide. For so much as it is not probable, or in reason to be i∣magined, that he which neuer failed in times past, wil breake his promise for the time to come; especially see∣ing now in Christianitie, when we haue thys aduantage aboue other former tymes (as S. Iohn doth also note) that he who was and is our Iudge,1, Iohn, 2. is become also our aduocate to pleade our cause. Cast backe thyne eyes then my louing brother, and take a viewe of all ages, times and seasons past and gone. Begin from the first creation of the world, and come downwarde euen vnto thys day:Neuer sin∣ner repen∣ted that was not pardo∣ned. & examine in∣differently whether in all thys wide compasse of tymes, persons, places, and most greeuous offences cōmit∣ted against his diuine Maiestie, there wer euer yet any one sinner vppon earth, that returned vnfainedly and
was not receiued. The sinne of our first Parents was presently forgiuen vnto them,Adam and Eue. vpon theyr first signifi∣cation of greefe and sorrowe for the same. And not onely this, but our Sauiour also Iesus Christ was pro∣mised to be sent,Gene. 3. for restoring them and their posterity to the glory and felicity which by their fall they had lost. After this, vntill the time of A∣braham and of the people of Israel, as some workes of Gods iustice are recorded in holy writ, that were ex∣ercised vppon irrepentant offenders: so are there many more celebrated of his mercy; & only two persons in particuler are mentioned, who not∣withstanding some sorrowe which they seemed to haue of theyr offen∣ces, were yet reiected;The reiecti∣on of Caine and Esau. the first wher∣of was the murtherer Caine, who at the beginning denyed hys wicked∣nes vnto God, and then beeing con∣uicted, dispaired of remission. The second was Esau,Hebr. 12. whom Saint Paule calleth a Prophane fornicator, who found no place of repentance albeit with teares he sought ye same. Wher∣of S. Chrisostome giueth the reason in these words;Chris. hom. 80. de paenit. ad pop. An∣tio. For this cause Esau obtained not pardon, for that hee dyd
not repent as he should haue doone, his teares proceeding rather of anger and temptation, then of true sorrow. When the people of Israell came to be a distinct Nation, & to be go∣uerned at Gods appointment, howe grieuously (trow you) dyd they of∣fend daily, and almost hourely hys diuine Maiestie? And howe graci∣ously dyd his vnspeakeable clemen∣cie remit and pardon their manifold and innumerable sinnes and trespas∣ses done against hym?The infinite sins of the Iewish peo∣ple, & theyr infinite par∣dons recei∣ued from God. The whole scripture (in truth) seemeth nothing els, but a perpetuall narration of Gods incredible patience & infinite mercies towardes them. And if I would speake of particuler persons among them, which hee receiued to his fauour after great and manifold offences committed: there woulde be no end of all that recital. Let Manasses that most impious and wicked king be an example for all: of whose enormous life & most detestable actes, whole pages are re∣plenished,The exam∣ple of Ma∣nasses. both in the bookes of Kinges & Chronicles; and yet af∣terwards notwithstanding,4. Reg, 21, 2, Chro. 33, the same man falling into misery & calamity among ye Babilonians, (a fortunate
schoole oftentimes for Princes, who in theyr prosperity are wont to con∣temne God,) he beganne to be sor∣rowful for his former life & actions, and became repentant (as the scrip∣ture sayth) in the sight of GOD for the same. Whereat his diuine and incōprehensible mercy was so much moued presently, as he receiued hym to fauour, and brought hym backe from hys prison and fetters, to hys kingdom & imperial throne of ma∣iestie. The example also of the Nini∣uites is very notable and singuler in this behalfe,The exam∣ple of the Niniuites. gainst whō almightie God hauing decreed a sentence of death, to be executed within a cer∣taine time; he commaunded Ionas the Prophet to go & denounce that sentence vnto them.Ionas, 1, 2, 3, 4, But Ionas wel knowing the nature and disposition of God towards mercie: foresawe (as afterwards he signifieth) that if he shoulde goe and beare that em∣bassage vnto them, and they there∣vppon make change of theyr lyues, hys Maiestie wold presently pardon them, and so he should be taken for a false and lying Prophet. For auoy∣ding which inconuenience, he chose
rather to flee away by sea to the Cit∣tie of Tharsis, and there to hide him selfe. But Almightie God raised a tempest in that iourney, and dispo∣sed in such sort, as Ionas was cast in∣to the sea, and there receiued & de∣uoured by a Whale: from whose belly hee was commaunded after∣wards to repaire to Niniuie, and to doe hys former message, which he performed. And the tennour of his message was, that within forty daies that huge Citty of Niniuie shoulde be destroyed. Which he hauing de∣nounced vnto them, the sequell fell out as Ionas before had suspected. For the Niniuites belieuing the mes∣sage, and betaking themselues to re∣pentaunce, God forgaue them pre∣sently, wherat Ionas was exceeding∣ly greeued and offended, and com∣plained sweetly to God of his strange dealing heerein, demaunding why hee had enforced him to come and preach destruction vnto thē, know∣ing before hand that he would par∣don them. But his mercifull Lorde aunswered him fully to this poynt, by a certaine accident that fell out, whereto Ionas was not able to reply one word.
For so it chaunced, that Ionas sit∣ting without the walles of the Cit∣ty Niniuie, vnder an Iuie bush, that in one night by Gods appointment was sprung vp to couer him frō the sunne: the same Iuie by Gods ordi∣nance perrished vpon the suddaine, and was consumed by a worme,Consider thys speech of almighty GOD. lea∣uing the poore Prophet destitute of that consolation of shaddow which he receiued by it. Wherwith he bee∣ing not a little disquieted and afflic∣ted, God sayd vnto hym; thou (Io∣nas) art sorrowfll,Ionas. 4. and much gree∣ued for losse of thine Iuie tree, which notwithstanding thou diddest not plant or make to growe, nor ookest any labour at all about it. But the same grew vp in one night, and in one night it perrished againe. And shal not I then be careful to pardon my great Cittie of Niniuie, wherein there be aboue an hundred & twen∣tie thousand innocent people, which cannot distinguish betweene theyr right hand and theyr let? Thys was the aunswere of Almightie GOD to Ionas, for defence of his singuler in∣clinatiō to mercy, in respect that the Niniuites were his owne creatures, hys owne workmanship, and the la∣bours
of hys owne handes, as all o∣ther people also are. Of which kinde of reason and consideration, there haue been diuers things saide & de∣clared In the first part of this booke. before, for manifestations of Gods infinite mercy. And al this that hetherto hath beene spoken, is of things onely done in time of the olde Testament, before the appea∣rance of Christ our Sauiour in the flesh. But now if we looke into the time of grace, when God incarnate came himselfe in person, to shew the riches of hys endlesse mercie vnto mortall men vpon earth: we shall see more examples without compa∣rison,Examples of mercy in the new Testa∣ment. of his exceeding clemencie. For that nowe, our Creator and sheepe∣heard, ouercom (as it were) with ex∣treame compassion, cam down into the vale of our misery, with resoluti∣on, not onely to offer pardon and forgiuenes to all hys sheepe yt were astray and would returne: but also to follow and seeke them out: and beeing founde, to lay them on hys owne shoulders,Lke, 15, & so to beare them back vnto the fold againe, and there to gyue his life and blood for theyr defene against the Wolfe. O sweet Lord, what greater loue
can be imagined then thys?Iohn, 10, 12, what more pregnant signification of in∣flamed charitie, can mans cogitati∣on cōceiue or apprehend? is it mer∣uaile nowe if hee which descended vnto vs with his hart, & with these bowels of burning affection, did set open the gates of all his treasures, fa∣uours and graces vnto vs? Is it mer∣uaile if the Apostle S. Paule doe say of thys time Superabundauit gratia,Rom, 5, that grace did ouer abound; & yet further in another place, that Christ beeing very God, did in a certaine sort impouerish and emptie hym∣selfe,Phil. 2, with the most wonderfull ef∣fusion of mercies and hauocke of heauen, which at thys tyme & euer since he hath made? Heere hence it proceeded, that all hys delight and pleasure vpon earth, was to conuerse with sinners, and to giue them comfort, courage, & con∣fidence in hym.The won∣derful cle∣mencie of Iesus our Sauiour. Which he dyd so manifestly in ye sight of al the world, as he became very scandalous & of∣fensiue therby to the Scribes & Pha∣risies, and other principall Rulers among the Iewish Nation.Math. 9.11, Marke, 2, Luke, 5, Heere∣hence also dyd proceede those hys most meruailous speeches & strange
inuitations of wicked men vnto him as for example at one tyme among other, whē he cried out in publique.Math, 11. Come vnto me all yee that doe labour and be heauie loden, and I wil refresh you. And at another time, going in∣to the Temple of Ierusalem vpon a high festiuall day, when all the peo∣ple were gathered together, he stood vp in the midst of them al, & brake forth into this vehement inuitation, with a loud voyce, as S. Iohn Euan∣gelist recordeth;Iohn, 7. If any man among you be thirstie, let him come vnto mee and he shall drinke. Heereby it came to passe, that his diuine Maiestie was termed commonlyMath, 11. Publicanorum et peccatorum amicus, the friend and familiar of wicked publicans & sin∣ners. And heereof finally it did pro∣ceede, that he receiued al, embraced all, and forgaue all that repaired vn∣to him; were they Scribes, Pharisies, Souldiours, Publicans, Vurers, Har∣lots, Theeues, Persecutors, or what∣soeuer most grieuous offenders be∣sides; (whereof particuler examples in each kinde myght be alledged,) assuring vs furthermore, that after hys resurrection, and blessed ascenti∣n to the right hand of hys Father,
he would be more bountifull yet in thys maner of proceeding, and draw all men vnto him:Iohn. 12. beeing at one tyme both our Iudge & Aduocate, our King and Mediatour, our God and Redeemer, our Father and bro∣ther, our Priest and Sacrifice, and he that both pleadeth and determineth our cause together. What then should not wee hope at thys tym (deere Christian Bro∣ther) at the hands of thys our Lord and Maister,Great and many cau∣ses of assu∣red hope in Christ. which hath left vnto vs such words, such deedes, such assu∣red euidence of his infallible loue & aboūdant mercies towards vs? why should not his dealinges with other men before vs, giue vs hart and cou∣rage to trust assuredly in him, for the tyme present and to come? Why should not his former most infinite mercies, be vnto vs odoriferous allu∣ring sauours & oyntments, to make vs as the spouse did in the Canticles,Cant. 10, follow and runne after him. Heare what deuout S. Bernarde doth meditate vpon thys passage of Christes fragrant oyntments.Ber. Ser. 5, in Cant. O sweet Iesus (sayth he) the freshe and odoriferous smell of thy wonderfull clemencie, dooth allure vs to run af∣ter
thee, whē we heare say, that thou dispisest not beggers, nor abhorrest sinners We know right wel ô lord that thou diddest not reiect ye thiefe that confessed thee, nor the sinfull woman that wept vnto thee, nor the Chananaean that humbled herselfe before thee, nor the wicked adulte∣resse brought vnto thee, nor ye toul∣ler or tribute gatherer that followed thee, nor the publican that repaired vnto thee, nor the disciple that deni∣ed thee, nor Saule that did persecute thee, nor thy tormentors yt did nayle thy sacred bodie to the Crosse. O Lorde, all these are fragrant smelles and sauours of thy most sweet mer∣cie: and at the sent of these thyne oyntments, we doe followe and run after thee. Thus farre S. Bernard. The 4 part: the application of all that hath beene sayde. AND so with thys to come to the fourth & last part of this Chap∣ter, and to apply all that hath beene sayde of Gods mercy to our present purpose; What man is there lyuing in the world, that reading and belie∣uing these things, can doubt or mis∣trust
to receiue pardon for their sins? If God be he that iustifieth,Rom, 8. who is a∣ble to condemne vs, sayth the holy A∣postle S. Paule? If God be minded to deliuer vs, who can take vs out of hys hands?Iohn, 10, If God protest that hee wil pardon vs, why should we make any doubt or question thereof at al? Why shoulde wee not ioyne rather with that confident & faithfull ser∣uant of hys S. Paule, who sayth vn∣to vs, and to al other sinners lyuing, in hys Maisters name;Hebr. 10. S. Paules ex∣hortation to confidence. Let vs repaire vnto him with a true hart in fulnesse of fayth, hauing purged our harts frō an euill conscience: let vs hold fast an immouable cōfession of our hope, seeing he is faithful which hath giuen vnto vs his promises, and let vs consider how one of vs may prouoke another to cha∣rity & good works. By which words, the holy Apostle signifieth, yt what sinner soeuer shal resolue with him∣selfe, to purge his conscience from wickednes for ye time to come, & to employ the rest of hys life in charitie and good works, he may confident∣ly and boldly repaire vnto almighty God, with most certaine assuraunce to receiue pardon and remission. And alas (deere brother) why thē
shoulde any man despaire? Where∣fore should any man cast away hys owne soule, that God so much desi∣reth to saue? what a pittifull & la∣mentable case is it, to behold so ma∣ny Christians in the worlde to goe languishing in theyr sinnes, and to gyue themselues ouer to all kind of carelesse and dissolute sensualitie, (which by god himselfe is called des∣peration) vpon thys conceit & wic∣ked cogitation, that nowe they are gone so farre, and so deepely rooted and habitated in thys kinde of lyfe, as eyther it is impossible or in vaine for them nowe to thinke of change or amendement? O deere brother, let these men harken to this excellent discourse of holy Saint Chrisostom, which ensueth. If thou be a wicked man, (sayth hee) thinke vppon the Publican.An excellent discourse & exhortation of S. Chris. hom. 2. in Psal, 50, If thou be vncleane of lyfe, consider the harlot. If thou be a murtherer, remember the theefe. If thou be a swearer, call to minde the blasphe∣mer. Cast thyne eyes vpon Saul and Paule, first a persecutor, and then a preacher; first a violent robber, af∣terward a good steward and dispen∣ser First chaffe, afterwarde corne:
first a wolfe, afterward a sheepheard first lead, afterward gold: first a Pi∣rat, afterwards a good pilot: first a disperser, afterward a gatherer toge∣ther: first a breaker down of Gods vineyard, afterward a Planter: first a destroyer, afterwarde a builder. Thou hast seene manifolde wicked∣nesse, but nowe behold vnspeakea∣ble mercie. Thou hast hearde the pryde of the seruaunt, consider now the loue and clemencie of the Mai∣ster. I will not thou say to me, I am a blasphemer, I haue beene a perse∣cutor, I haue led an vncleane & ab∣hominable life, & therefore I doubt least I shall not be pardoned; Say not so vnto me, for heere thou hast examples to the contrary, in euery of these and many other sinnes. Thou mayst safely flie to what port thou lyst, and that eyther in the olde or newe Testament. For in the olde, thou hast Dauid, in the newe thou hast Paul. I will not haue thee ther∣fore alledge excuses vnto me, for co∣uering thine owne cowardnesse. Hast thou sinned, repent: hast thou sinned a thousande times, repent a thousand times vnfeynedly. Thys is the onely oyntment that may bee
poured into an afflicted conscience the torment whereof I doe well knowe. For the deuill standeth by, whetting hys sword of desperatian, and saying vnto thee;The speech of the deuil to a soule loden with sinne. Thou hast ly∣ued wickedly all thy youth, and thy former daies thou hast mispent, thou hast haunted playes, and spectacles with thy companions, and followed after loose and lasciuious women; thou hast taken other mens goods from them wrongfully; thou hast beene couetous, dissolute, and effe∣minate: thou hast forsworne thy selfe: thou hast blasphemed, and committed many other heynous & wicked crymes, and therefore what hope canst thou haue of saluation? Truely none at all. Thou art a meer cast-away, and canst not nowe goe backe, and therfore my counsaile is, that nowe thou vse the pleasures & commodities of thys worlde, and passe ouer thy time in mirth of hart, without cogitation of other affaires.These are the words of the deuill (louing brother) these are the coun∣sailes & perswasions of our enemie.S. Chriso∣stoms coū∣saile against the deuils temptation. But mine are contrary. If thou haue fallen, thou maist rise againe. If thou haue beene a lost companion, yet
thou maist be saued. If thou haue committed fornication and adulte∣rie in times past, thou maist be con∣tinent for the time to come. If thou haue haunted plaies & games, thou maist draw backe thy foote from hence-forth. If thou haue delighted in leude and euill company, thou mayst heereafter acquaint thy selfe with good. Thys onely is necessarie, that thou begin thy conuersion out of hand, and that thou repent, and take in hande to reforme thy selfe, though it be at the first but a little.Let thine eyes begin but to shed foorth one teare, enter into thy con∣science, consider thy selfe but indif∣ferently, examine thine actions and what they deserue: lay before thy face the day of iudgement with the torments of hell on the one side, & the ioyes of heauen on ye other. Re∣pent, confesse, amend thy life, seeke a medicine for thy wounde out of hand while thou art in thys life, in what state or condition soeuer thou be. Yea if thou be vppon thy death∣bedde, and ready to breath out thy soule and spirit, feare not to repent,No tyme too late to repent. for that Gods mercy is not restrained by the shortnesse of tyme Which I
speak vnto you (my deere bretheren) not to make you heereby the more negligent, but onely to stirre you vp to the confidence of Gods mercy, & thereby to auoyd the most daunge∣rous gulfe of desperation. Hetherto are the wordes of this holy and lear∣ned Father. In which long & large dyscourse of hys, we are to note, that (together with most excellent encouragement which hee gyueth to all sinners, of what state & condition soeuer they be, in all times and seasons to trust in Gods mercy, and neuer to de∣spaire) he giueth also an wholesome admonishment, that we should not by thys confidence become more negligēt in reforming our liues, but rather doe it out of hande, without all delay or procrastination. Wher∣vnto in like manner the holy Father S. Augustine in like exhortation a∣gainst dispayre,An exhorta∣tion & ad∣monition of S. Augu∣stine, Ser, 58 de temp. dooth endeuour most vehemently to stirre vs vp, in these words. Let no man after a hū∣dred sins nor after a thousand, de∣spaire of Gods mercy, but yet so let hym not despayre, as he seeke pre∣sently without all stay, to reconcile himselfe to God by amendement of
life least perhaps, after that by cu∣stom he hath gotten a habite of sin, hee be not able to delyuer himselfe from the snares of the deuill, albeit he would. And in the very same sermon he discourseth yet further of the same matter, in manner following. Not euery man that hath sinned, but he that perseuereth in sin, is hateful and abhominable in the sight of GOD. For that no man must distrust of Gods mercy towards him that will amend and leaue his sinnes. For that God himselfe as a most sweet com∣forter, hath said by his prophet.Eze 11.33, That the impietie of a wicked man shal not hurt him, at what time soeuer he shall returne from the same. But yet thys great mercy of the Lord, is then on∣ly profitable vnto vs, if we delay not our conuersion, nor doe multiply sins vpon sins. Which I will declare vnto you by the example of wounds & ruptures of our body, by which, the infirmities also of our mind and soule may be conceiued. Thus then we see,A similitude of the body to expresse the misery of the soule by multipli∣ing sinne. if a mans foote, leg, or arme be broken, with howe great paine the same is restored to hys accustomed strength. But if any
member of our body shold be bro∣ken twise or thrise, or more often, in one and the selfe same place: your charitie can imagine, howe hard a thing it were for that part to recouer her perfect health againe. So fareth it (deere bretheren) in the woundes and rupures of our soule. If a man do commit sin once or twise, and do vnfainedly without dissimulation, make his refuge to the medicine of repentance, he doth out of hand ob∣taine health againe, and that some∣times without any skar or blemish of the disease past. But if he begin to adde sins vpon sins in such sort, that the woundes of his soule do rather putrifie within him, by couering & defending thē, then heale by repen∣tance and confession, it is to be fea∣red, least that heauie speech of the Apostle be fulfilled in him, to whō he sayth;Rom, 2, Doost thou not knowe, that the benignitie of God is vsed to bring thee to repentance? but thou by thy obdurate and irrepentant hart, doost heape to thy selfe wrath, in the day of vengeance, and of the reuelation of Gods iust iudgement. Thus farre S. Augustine. But nowe (deere Christian bro∣ther)
what can be spoken more ef∣fectually; eyther to erect vs to hope and confidence in Gods mercie, or to terrifie vs frō presumption in de∣laying our amendement, then heere hath been vttered by these noble pil∣lers and Fathers of Christes church,Good mens wordes ought to mooue vs greatly. Eccle, 12 and most excellent instruments and temples of his holie Spyrit? The di∣uine wisedom of almighty God, in a certaine place, sayth; That ye words of wise men, ought to be spurs vnto vs, and as it were nayles, driuen into the depth of our hearts, meaning therby that we should be stirred vp, and most vehemently moued, when we heare such wise men as the holie Ghost there meaneth (which in deed are only they yt haue the knowledge and true feare of God,) make such exhortations vnto vs, and gyue vs such wholesome admonishments, as these godly Fathers in thys great af∣faire haue done. And how is it then (deere brother) that we are nothing styrred vp thereby, nothing quick∣ned, nothing awaked? Well, I will conclude thys whole Chapter and treatise, with another exhortation & admonishment of S. Augustine, for that besides the graue authoritie
of the man, (which ought to moue vs much,) I thinke nothing can be spoken more excellently, or more a∣greeing to our peculier purpose, Thus then he sayth.A notable discourse of S. Augu∣stine tou∣ching our conuersion. Ser. 181, de temp. Almighty God doth neuer despise the repentance of any man, if it be offered vnto him sincerely and simply; nay, he accep∣teth the same most willingly, embra∣ceth the penitent, and endeuoureth to reduce hym to hys former state wherein he was before he fell. And that which is yet more; if a man be not able to fulfil the whole order of his satisfaction, yet dooth not God refuse the least repentaunce that is, though it be done in neuer so short a space. Neyther doth he suffer the reward to perrish of any little cōuer∣sion. And thys doth the Prophet E∣say seeme to me to signifie,Esay. 58, when he saith in gods person to the people of Israel; I haue contristed thee a little for thy sinnes, I haue striken thee & turned my face from thee, thou hast been sad & hast walked in sorrowe, and I haue comforted thee againe. These examples then of repentance (deere bretheren) we hauing before our eyes, let vs not perseuere in wic∣kednes, nor despaire or reconcilliati∣on,
but rather let vs say with a con∣fident hart, we wil turn home to our Father, and present our selues vnto our God, for truely (my bretheren,) hee will neuer turne away from the man that turneth vnto hym. Him∣selfe hath sayde,Esay, 59, yt he is a God which draweth neere vnto vs, were it not that our sins doe make a seperation betwixt him & vs. Let vs take away then the seperation and obstacle, & so nothing shal let our coniunction with him, which he greatly desireth. For to thys end did he create vs, that he might bestowe vppon vs eternall blisse in the kingdom of heauen. He did not make vs for hel,Hell not made for man. Math, 25, but he made his kingdome for vs, and hell for the deuill. So hee sayth in the Gospell. Come ye blessed of my father, enioy the kingdome prepared for you, from the beginning of the world. And to the damned; Depart from me, ye accur∣sed into euerlasting fire, which is pre∣pared for the deuill and his angels.If then hell fire was prepared for the deuil, and the kingdom of hea∣uen for man, from the beginning of the world, it remaineth onely, that we prouide, not to loose our inheri∣tance by persisting in sin. So long as
we are in thys lyfe,In thys lyfe repentance is auailable, but not af∣ter. howe manie of great soeuer our sinnes may be, it is possible to wash them away by true and vnfained repentance, but when we shall once depart frō this world, albeit then wee doe repent, (as no doubt but we shal from the bottom of our harts,) yet shall it auaile vs nothing. And albeit our teeth doe gnash, our mouth cry out, our eyes gush foorth in teares, and our harts lament with innumerable cōplaints and supplications, yet shall no man heare vs, no man assist vs, nor so much as with the typ of hys finger giue vnto vs a drop of water to coole our tongue amidst her torments, but we shal receiue that lamentable an∣swer which the rich glutton receiued at the mouth of Abraham; There is betweene vs and you a great distance, so that none may passe from vs to you, nor from you to vs. Hetherto lasteth S. Augustines exhortation. And there-withal think I it good to con∣clude thys Treatise. FINIS. The end of the second and last Booke, tending to Re∣solution.
A necessarie Table, guiding the Reader to euerie Chapter in thys Booke, as also to euery particuler argument handled in each Chapter. The first Chapter. Of the manifold perils that ensue to the worlde, by inconsideration: and how necessary it is for eueri man, to enter into cogitation of his owne estate. The seuerall matters handled in this Chapter. THE charitable proceeding of GOD by hys Prophets, in fore-telling men of theyr wic∣kednes, and reuealing the cause thereof. page, 1, The daunger of inconsideration, declared in two speciall causes. eodem. The complaint of the Prophet Ieremie, for in∣consideration. page, 4, The misterie and sealed secrete of inconsidera∣tion. page, 6, Lack of cōsideration, cause of eternal destruc∣tion: a poynt that fooles will not consider. 7.8 Inconsideration the cause of so much sinne at this day. page, 10, Wilful malice, obstinate corruption in the va∣nities of thys lyfe, and idle negligence: three spe∣ciall causes of inconsideration. 12, 13, 14. How we must stand vpon our watch, that con∣sideration
is the only doore to our watch: wyth the many cōmodities & effects thereof, 17, 18, That all vertues are stirred vp & quickned by consideration. page, 19, Howe holy men exercised themselues in consi∣deration: namely the three first Patriarches. Mo∣ses, Iosua, King Dauid, king Salomon, & king Ezechias: as also what fruite holy Iob gathered by consideration: and two principal effects en∣suing thereon. page, 20, 21, 22 The importance of consideration breefely de∣scribed. page, 26 The second Chapter. That there is a God, which rewardeth good & euil, against al the Atheists of old, and of our time. With the proofes alledged for the same, both by Iewe and Gentile. The matters handled in this Chapter, are de∣uided into foure Sections. The first Section. IF there be a God, he is a iust rewarder. 35, The workes of the world declare the work∣man. page, 36 Howe the myracles of heauen teach to know GOD. page, 37, In what manner the earth teacheth vs there is a God. page, 38, Howe the Sea doth wonderfully shewe there is a GOD. 39,
The parts of man in body and soule, do am∣ply declare God. page, 41, The second Section. How the Heathen prooued there was a God, by theyr Phylosophy, 43, The three arguments of the naturall Phyloso∣pher, Ex motu, ex fine, and Ex causa efficiente. 45, 47.48, The foure argumēts of the Metaphisik, or su∣pernatural philosopher. The first, ens finitum. 49, The second, that euery multitude or distiction of things, proceedeth from some vnitie as from hys fountaine. page, 52, The thyrd, subordination of Creatures in thys world. page, 53 The fourth, prouidence in making the verie least creature in the world. 55, The fit, immortalitie of the soule of Man. 59, And the meaning of olde Phylosophers tou∣ching Anima mundi. 60, The three Arguments of the Morrall Phylosopher. 1. How in the naturall inclination of Man, there is a disposition to confesse some GOD or Deitie. 61, The reason why there can be but one God. 63 All olde Phylosophers acknowledged one GOD. 67, Cicero hys opinion of the Painime gods, how they were made. 69 2. The second argumen of Morrall phylosophy,
de vltimo ine, et summo hominis bon. 69 Euery thing in thys world, hath a naturall desire to hys end. page, 70, The contention of Phylosophers about the feli∣citie of man. page, 72, Howe nothing in thys lyfe can be our felicitie. page, 73, 3. The thyrd argument, touching rewarde and punishment. page, 75, The thyrd Section. How the Iewes were able to prooue God. 78, Their first proofe of scripture, is antiquity. 80, The manner of wyting authorising, & con∣seruing of Scriptures: the second proofe. 82, Cōsideration of the particuler men that wrote them, and theyr sincerity: the third proofe. 86, Consent and approbation of all latter Wry∣ters of the Bible, that ensued after Moses: the fouth proofe. page, 92, The subiect handled in the Scriptures, with the end whereto they leuell: the fit proofe. 94 The peculier stile and phrase which they vse: the sit proofe. 97, The contents of the Scriptures: the seauenth proofe. 102, The circumstaunces of prophecies set down in the Scriptures. 107 1. The prophecie to Abraham for hys poste∣ritie. 108. 2. The prophecy for ye gouernmeēt of Iud. 110
3. The prophecie for the greatnesse of E∣phraim aboue Manasses. page. 113 4. The fore-sight of Moses. 115 5. The prophecie for the perpetuall desola∣tion of Iericho. 116, 6. The prophecie for the byrth and actes of King Iosias. 117, 7. The prophecie for the destruction of Ie∣rusalem and Babilon. page, 119. 8. The wonderfull prophcie for Cyrus king of Persia. 121, 9. The prophecies and dooings of Ieremie in the siedge of Ierusalem. 123, Approbation of Heathen Wryters: the eyght proofe. page, 130, 1. The creation of the world. 131, 2. The flood of Noe. 132, 3. The long life of the first Fathers. 132, 4. Of the Tower of Babilon. 133, 5. Of Abraham and hys affaires. 134, 6. Of Isaack, Iacob Ioseph, Iob, &c. 135 7. Of Moses, and his acts. 136, 8. The story of Iosua, the Iudges, and the Kinges. 137 9. The thinges that ensued after King Salo∣mons daies. page, 138 The fourth Section. The conclusion of the Chapter with the ap∣plication. page, 140 No xcuse can auaile of the ignoraunce of
God. page, 141, The application to our selues of the premis∣ses. page, 143, The thyrd Chapter. Of the finall end and cause why man was created by God, and placed in this world. And of the obliga∣tion he hath thereby, to attend to the affaire for which he came hether. The matters handled in this Chapter. How man was made to serue God, and therefore cannot be free, or at his own appointment, 146 Man shall be accountant of euery idle worde hee vttereth. page 146 Profitable demaundes and considerations for a man to thinke vppon. 148, How a man may take a scantling of his owne estate with God: by following the right course for which he was sent, and shunning the wrong and dangerous course. 151, The reason why so fewe are saued, 152 A perfect example of a good conuersion. 154 The complaint of worldlings in the ende of theyr lyfe. 158. A comparison expressing our griefe in the end for running a wrong course. 160. The misery of a soule that hath gone awry, at the last day. pag, 161,
Two rare examples of humane felicitie, in He∣rod the first, and Agrippa, with theyr seuerall strange, and wonderfull endes, 162, 163, 164, Errour in our course of lyfe, is not pardoned, page, 168, A rare chance that happened to Baltazar. 169, If God examine straightly the actions of In∣fidels, much more will he doe of carelesse Chri∣stians. page, 170, The dangerous and most dreadfull deuision from God, our Sauiour, &c. 171, The fourth Chapter. That the seruice which God requireth of man in this present life, is Religion: with the parti∣culer confirmation of Christian Reli∣gion, aboue all other in the world. What speciall poynts are handled in this Chapter, and first for the formost part. An aunswere to the demaunde, what seruice God requireth of vs, &c, 173, The internall and externall acts and operations of Religion. 174 No way left to obtaine this seruice, but the light & instruction of Chrisian Religion. 175, Howe men in olde tyme were saued without Christian Religion. 176 The difference betweene our beleefe and the beleefe of the old Fathers. page, 178, Diuers testimonies from God of the thinges
that we beleeue. 181 The principall heads of thys Chapter, deuided into 3. parts, & handled in foure Sections. 183 1. The thinges that past before the nati∣uitie and incarnation of Christ. 184 2. The things doone and verified from that yme, vntill hys ascention. 184 3. Such euents as happened for confima∣tion of hys Deitie, after hys deparure. page, eadem, The first Section. How Christ was fore-told both to Iewe and Gentile, declared in foure considerations. 184, The first consideration, touching the Messias promised. 185, The first couenaunt to Adam in Paradise, 186, The same promise to Abraham and Isaack. 187 Iacobs prophecie of the comming of Christ, page, 188, Moses prophecie of Christ, lyuing in the wil∣dernesse with the people. 190, Dauids prophecie of Christ, foure hundred yeeres after. page, 191. Ieremies prophecie of Christ, foure hundred yeeres after Dauid. 194, Ezechiels prophecie of Christ, wherein hee is called by the name of Dauid. page, 195, The prophecie of Esay touching Christ. 196, Daniels prophecie of Christ, in the ende of Babilons captiuitie. 199,
The second consideration: that Christ should be both GOD and man, sixe wayes prooued. 202 1. That he should crush the deuill, and breake hys head. page, 202, 2. That he shoulde be a Ruler in Israell, and hys name GOD. 205. 3. That he shoulde be called Iehoua, with the interpretation of the Rabbines. 206, 4. That he should be called the very Sonne of GOD. page, 209. 5. That he should be the worde of the Father, page, 211, 6. Learned Phylo. his discourse for the returne home of the banished Iewes. 214. The thyrde consideration: whether Christ should change the Law of Mo∣ses or no. 215 Moses Lawe was an imperfect Law, bringing nothing to perfection, eodem The newe Law of Christ, and the perfections thereof. page 217, The reprobation of the olde Law, with a pro∣mise of a newe. page, 220 The fourth consideration: wherein all particulers are fore-told of Christ, for hys incarnation, byrth, lyfe, death, and resurrection. page, 222, 223, 224, The fift consideration: touching the maniestation of Christ to the Gentiles. page, 225
Three peculiar waies, whereby the Gentiles might heare of Christ. 226 Prophecies touching Christ among the Gen∣tiles by the Sibyls. page, 230 Of what importance & authoritie, the Greeke verses of the Sibyls were. 231 Foure seuerall proofes for credite of the Sibils verses. page, 233, 234, 236, Of the confession of Oracles, concerning Christes comming. page, 241, The second Section. How the former predictions were fulfilled in our Sauiour Christ, at his being vpon earth, 244, The first consideration: of the appoin∣ted tyme for Christes byrth. 241 1. proofe. The generall state of the worlde at Christes natiuitie. page, 449 2. proofe. The peace of all the worlde at his com∣ming. page, 250 3. proofe. The Scepter of Iuda, and most horrible murders cōmitted by Herod, 251, 253, The prophecie of Iacob touching the Scepter of Iuda. 254 That the Scepter neuer failed in Iuda, vntill Herods tyme. eodem. 4. proofe. The destruction of the second Temple. page. 256 The building of the seconde Temple, lesse gorgious then the first, 257. Fiue speciall prerogatiues of the fyrst Temple. page, 259
The seconde Templ to be destroyed, presently after Christes passion, 261, 5. proofe. The seauentie-two Hebdomades pro∣phecied by Daniell. 261 Why the Angell named seauenty Heb∣dōmades in thys place. 263 The exact number of weekes, from the building of the seconde temple, to the death of Christ, sixtie-two. 264, 6. proofe. The traditions and obseruations of the old Iewes themselues. 266 Christ hideth himselfe in the sea. 268 7. proofe. That out of Iurie shoulde rise a gene∣rall Lord of the vniuersall world. 269 8 proofe. The generall expectation of the people. page, 270 The seconde consideration: concerning the byrth of Christ, &c. 274, Iesus lyne and stocke, directly of the Trybe of Iuda, and lineally by hys Mother, of the peculier house of Dauid. page eodem. The manner of hys conception, and the mes∣sage made by the Angell, &c. page, 275, Iesus natiuitie, and in what manner. page, 276, The place appointed for the birth of the Mes∣sias. page, 278 The singing of the Angels, and of the Name of Iesus. page, 280 The comming of the three Magi, or wise men of the East. 282 Prophecies of thinges that shoulde fall out in
Bethleem. 284, Heathen testimonies for the starre which guy∣ded the Wisemen. page, 285, The presentation of Iesus in Ierusalem. 287, Christes flight into Egipt for feare of Herode. page, 288, The benefite that Egypt receiued, by Christes flyght into it. 289, The thyrd consideration, shewing the life, conuersation, doctrine, and myracles of Iesus. page. 290, Saint Iohn Baptist, the Messenger of the Te∣stament. 291, The order of Iesus preaching and doctrine, 293, The comparison of Christes Lawe, with that of Moses. page, 294, The meaning and effect of Christes doctrine, page, 295, The lyfe and conuersation of Iesus, testified by hys greatest aduersaries. 296 Of Iesus myracles: and of the predictions of the Messias hys myracles. 298, The confession of Iesus myracles by hys verie enemies. page, 300 The calling of hys Apostles and other follow∣ers. page, 301, Externall myracles doone by Iesus, aboue all power of humaine capacitie. 302, The fourth consideration: deliuering the passion, resurrection, and ascention of
Iesus. page, 305. Christes ascending to Ierusalem to receiue hys passion, page, 307, His barbarous abusage foretold by prophecie, as also his death most plainely, 308, The wonderfull predictions of hys passion, set downe by the Prophet Esay. 309 The particulers of hys passion, fore-tolde by Sibylla, page, 311, Of the myracles that fell out in hys death and passion, page, 314, Hys resurrection exactly fore-tolde both to Iew & Gentile, page, 315. The appearings which Iesus made after his Re∣surrection, page, 317, Circumstances confirming the true Resurrec∣tion of Iesus, page, 320, The great change in his Disciples, by hys Re∣surrection, page, 322, The examination of the matter by Pilate, 322, Pylats Letters to Tyberius and hys procee∣ding thereupon, page, 323, The opinion of the wiser sorte of Iewes, tou∣ching Iesus resurrection at that tyme, 325, Likeli-hoodes of truth, concerning Iesus ascen∣tion. page, 326, The third Section. Howe Iesus prooued hys Deitie after his de∣parture to heauen. page, 328, The first consideration: declaring the
sustentation, protection, increase, & con∣tinuation of Christes little Church and kingdome, &c. 330 The state of Christes first Church, &c, 331 The comming of the holy Ghost, and what comforts he brought with him. &c. 332, The wonderfull quicke increase of Christ hys Church. 334, The increase of Christians against nature, 335 The second consideration: concerning the Apostles of Christ 337 The myracles reported of the Apostles coulde not be fained, &c. 339, 340, The successe of the Apostles. 342, The assurance and ioyull ending of the Apo∣stles. 344, The thyrd consideration, treating of the Euangelists. page, 346, The different qualities and circumstaunces of the foure Euangelists. 347, Circumstances of trueth in the Euangelists. page, 348 The publishing of the Gospels, and the man∣ner of stile vsed by the Euangelists. 349, 350, A speciall poynt to be obserued in the Euan∣gelists. page, 351 No doubt but we haue the true writing of the Euangelists. 353 The fourth consideration: of Martyrs, that by theyr bloode shoulde confirme hys doctrine. 354
Three poynts to be considered in our Martyrs, and the singuler alacrity of Christians in theyr sufferings. page, 355, Iesus assistance to his Martyrs. 357, The fift consideration: concerning the subiection of the infernall spirits. 358, Of the myraculous ceasing of Oracles, at Chri∣stes appearing. 359 The wonderfll authoritie of Christians ouer Spyrits. page, 364 The sixt consideration: of the punish∣ment of Christes enemies here on earth. page, 367, Herod Ascolonita: Archelaus: Herod Anti∣pas: Herodias daughter: Herod Agrippa: and the stocke of Herode soone extinguished. page, 368, 369, 370. The punishment of the Romans. 371 The chastisement of Ierusalem, and of the Iewish people. page, 373 With what circumstaunces Christes death was punished vpon the Iewes. page, 375, A meruailous promise of God, for deliuering the Christians that were in Ierusalem. 377 The Iewish misery after the destruction of Ie∣rusalem. page, 378, The finall desoltion of the Iewish Nation. page, 379, The seauenth consideration: the fulfil∣ling of such speeches and prophecies, as Iesus vttered on earth. 380
The circumstaunces of the tyme when Iesus spake hys wordes, and when they were written, page, 382, The testimonie of a Heathen, for the fulfilling of Christes prophecies, page, 383, Other prophecies of Iesus, fulfilled to his Dis∣ciples, page, 384, Prophecies fulfilled in the sight of Gentiles. page, 385, The fourth Section. The summe of the three former Sections, wyth eyght demonstratiue reasons for better satisfaction, page, 387, 388, 389, &c, The conclusion of the Chapter, with an ad∣monishment, page, 395, An illation vpon the premisses, with an exhor∣tation. page, 397, The fift Chapter. How a man may iudge or discerne of himselfe, whe∣ther hee be a true Christian or not: with a decla∣ration of the two parts belonging to that profession: which are, beleefe and lyfe. The matters handled in this Chapter. The first part, concerning our beleefe, howe to examine the trueth thereof. page, 402,
The matters of fayth and beleefe, easie a∣mong Christians. page, 403 The direct holy way of Christians vnder the Gospell, page, 404, No heresie finally preuailed against the Scrip∣tures. page, 410, The spirituall sworde, where-with our Sauior Christ preuailed against sathan, the head Lorde and hiefe maister of all heretiques, 414 What the diligent reading of the Scriptures leadeth vs vnto, forsaking the by pathes of mens inuentions and traditions, page, 414, A discription of the forme, force, and nature of fayth. 415. The fulnesse of fayth containeth in it three especiall things. page, 417. That which is meate to the flesh, that is fayth to the soule. 418, A conclusion of thys first part, according to Saint Ierome. 420, The second part of thys Chapter, con∣cerning lyfe and manners. 422, Two causes of heresie, according to the opinion of the holy Fathers, of Christes primatiue Church. page, 422, The dooings of Precismatiques. 423, The obseruation of S. Cyprian, concerning the originall causes of heretiques, 424. Many causes of euill lyfe. odem The effect of Christes most excellent Sermon on the Mountaine. page, 425,
A similitude touching fayth and workes. 428, The summe of fayth and workes. 429, What we promise in our Baptisme. 435, The sixt Chapter. Of the only impediment which is wont to let sinners frō resolution: which is, the mistrust & diffidence in Gods mercy, through the multitude and grieuousnes of theyr offences. Despayre, an ordinary temptation to the greatest greatest sinners. page 439, The shypwrack of soules ouerloden with sin. 440 The woful mysery of desperation. 441 The thing wherein GOD most delighteth, is mercy. page, 442 A meruailous example of Gods clemencie. 444 An other example of Gods wonderfull mercie. page 445, Iudgement and iustice to be vsed in true repen∣tance. page, 446 The deuision of thys Chapter, into foure espe∣ciall parts. eodem. The first part, touching the loue that God beareth towards man. 447, The first cause why God loueth vs: for that he is our Creator, and we are his own works. 448 Euery man is giuen by nature to loue his own. page 449, The confidence of Iob, in that GOD made hym. page, 450,
The assured hope Dauid had, in that he was Gods workmanshyp. page, 451, The second reason of assurance of Gods loue, for that he is our Father. 452 What a Father GOD is. 453, Christes most comfortable embassage. 454, How greatly the respect of a Father mooueth GOD. page, 455. The Fathers lyberall hart to the prodigal sonne. page, 456 What the name of Father dooth import. 457 The third argument of Gods loue; the giuing of hys sonne for vs. page, 458, The conclusion of thys poynt, made by Saint Paule. page, 460 The second part; how God expresseth hys loue towards sinners. 461, Two rare poynts of clemencie in God. 462, God that is offended, seeketh attonement with vs. page 463, Gods wooing of Ierusalem. page, 464, A consideration vpon the former treatie of God with Ierusalem. 466, Gods tender loue to Ierusalem, when hee was to destroy it. 467, A pittifull complaint vsed by God for the wil∣fulnesse of hys people. 468, The wonderful proceeding of God with Ieru∣salem. page, 469, The obstinacie of the Iewish Nation. 470, Epithetons gyuen by GOD, to the people
of Israell. page, 47 A wonderful poynt included in Gods promise to a sinner. page, ad. What ioy there is made at a sinners conuersi∣on, page, 472, The thyrd part, what assuraunce God gyueth to them that repent. 473, The promises of GOD to sinners that re∣pent, 474, Foure vniuersalities, in Gods promises to sin∣ners. page, 476. Three speciall poynts of great comfor. 476, How God hath performed his promises to sin∣ners that haue repented, 477, Neuer sinner repented that was not pardoned. page, 478, The reiection of Caine and Esau, 479. The infinite sinnes of the Iewish people, and theyr infinite pardons receiued at Gods handes, 479, The examples of Manasses and the Niniuites, 480.481, A speech of God to be heedefully considered, 483, Examples of mercies in the newe Testament. 484. The wonderful clemency of Iesus our Sauiour. page, 485, Great and many causes of assured hope i Christ, 487, The fourth part, being the application
of all that hath beene sayd before. 488, Saint Paules exhortation to confidence, 489, An excellent discourse, and exhortation of S. Chrisostome. 490, The speech of the deuill to a soule loden with sinne, 492 Saint Chrisostomes counsaile, against the de∣uils temptations. 492 No tyme too late to repent, 493. An exhortation and admoniion of Saint Au∣gustine. 494, A similitude of the body, to expresse the mise∣ry of the soule by multiplying sinne, 496, Godly mens words ought to moue vs greatly, page. 497 A notable discourse of S. Augustine, touching our conuersion. 498, Hell was not made for man, but for the de∣uill. 499, In thys lye repentance is auailable, but not after. page, 500, FINIS.
