19850 S114662 99849887 15059
THE Key of Historie. OR, A most methodicall Abridgement of the foure chiefe Monarchies, Babylon, Persia, Greece, and Rome. Being a generall and compendious Chronicle from the Flood. Digested into three bookes. Whereunto is added a marginall Chronologie of euery Roman Emperors Raigne, and of all the most memora∣ble persons and accidents. Together with briefe illustrations vpon the more obscute names, places, and Offices. With a directory tble for the more profitable reading of History. Written by that excellent and most learned man IOHN SLEIDAN. LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for William Sheeres, and are to be sould at his shop neere Grayes Inne at the Signe of the Bucke, 1627.
The Translator to the indifferent Reader. THE praise of History in ge∣nerall, or this Generall Hi∣storie, being but tralatitious, especially both speaking their owne worth, may be my Apolo∣gie for both; either to ex∣cuse me from the vsuall en∣comions in the preface to most Histories, or dismisse mee with Salusts speech concerning Carthage, 'Tis
better to speake nothing, then not to speake home. For the first therefore, Ci∣ceroes fiue most significant, and seuerally volume-wor∣thy Epithetes, shall suffice: History is Times euidence, Antiquities Herald, Truths light, memories life, & lifes Mistresse: And for the o∣ther, (this Chronicall Hi∣story following) besides the Authors own admired and approued knowledge in history: the large Com∣mentaries, & explication of the originall Authors, set forth by the accurate investigation of two re∣uerend Diuines, and a fa∣mous Poet, warrant it. His maine drift, as thou maist easily perceiue, was to bee
succinct & close, but with∣all perspicuous, by which he hath made himselfe the Prince of Epitomists: and, by this transcendent deli∣neation of the foure chiefe Monarchies chiefe Mo∣narch of all Historians in this kind. For he hath at∣tain'd to such a height of perfection, that, as Polybius would haue it, a man may at the first view, behold the whole body of Historie, and euery mēber so pour∣traied to life, that scarce a∣ny man of eminencie, or act of excellency, either in Church or Common-wealth, is omitted: being withall so exactly and me∣thodically coucht toge∣ther, that thy eye may run
in a line, from the begin∣ning to the end. Hee hath made it a common key to euerie doore, and a little Perspicill to cary thy sight all the world ouer: the worke it selfe, being the very marrow and quintes∣sence (pardon the meta∣phors) of all historie. The consideration hereof inui∣ted me (one most vnfit) to aduenture the transplanta∣tion of this pretious exo∣ticke root, into our owne soile. Wherein my care to the Authors meaning was religious, which (as I suppos'd) would bee the chiefest thing aim'd at, e∣specially in an old mans last worke (for hee ended this booke & his life both
in one yeere▪) where wee must not looke for a Pane∣gyricall stile, or lofty words (which I might haue perform'd and per∣haps with more ease) but, as it is a plaine, facile, and methodicall narration best suiting with the tender ca∣pacity of younger Incipi∣ents, for whom the Author intended it, well knowing that oftentimes yong wits dote more vpon frothie words, then solid matter. Plainnesse is my ambition, else needed not these little marginall illustrations on∣ly to satisfie a meere Eng∣lish Reader. In some pla∣ces, (if thou considerest not my reasons) I maseeme to swerue from the Au∣thors
meaning. As in the word Caesar, with the Author vses for Emperor, almost through∣out the booke. But after Nero I call them all Empe∣rors (onely for more plain∣nesse) because the line of the Caesars was extinct in him. France I call Gallia, till about Honorius his time, when (after the French Germans had seated them∣selues there) it fell into their name. I haue taken the same course too, tou∣ching other Countries & Cities, till they chang'd their names: except such, as still (with very little al∣teration of the ancient idi∣em) reteind their names,
as Vesontio now Besanson, Suessions now Soissons, &c. Some may thinke, that Iu∣lius Caesar would haue sounded better then Caius Caesar, (by which name the the Authour calls him in euery place) because that compellatiō is more com∣monly knowne: but que∣stionlesse the Authors meaning therein, was to auoid all doubts; for wee read of more of the Caesars beside him, that had the no∣men Iulius, as Lucius Iulius Caesar, & Sext{us} Iulius Caesar, but neuer any other call'd Caius, that euer I heard of. For my well-meaning presumption, in adding the times of each more memo∣rable accident, and of the
seuerall raignes of all the Emperors; I hope I shall find pardon, sith it may serue for a little Chrono∣logie. Though I cannot be so ambitious to desire a free∣dome from euery open∣mouth'd Ardelio, when the best deseruing men could neuer yet obtaine it; yet I both wish and entreat that euery indifferent eye would make a charitable construction of (if I may so call them) my good en∣deauors, ballancing all ve∣niall errours, with my young experience, and in∣conuenience of study, and to accept of the Diamond though not set in its deser∣ued foile: the one may
encourage, the other can∣not daunt mee, for I haue set vp my resolution, in old Mimnermus his Distich: Oblectes animum, plebs est morosa legendo, Ille benè de te dicet, & ille malè. Farewell.
TO THE MOST Illustrious Prince, Ebe∣rard, Duke of Wittenberg and Leck, Count in Mum∣pelgart; Iohn Sleidan wish∣eth all health, &c. LIterature being the greatest or∣nament of your dignitie, (Princely E∣berard) though it be but in∣different; yet that especially, which comprehends in it the Acts of all ages, suits best to your Condition: And a∣mongst vs that professe the
name of Christ; the holy Scriptures challenge the highest place in this kinde, which both set forth the ori∣ginall of mankinde, shew vs Gods will, & affoord vs ma∣ny examples both of his mer∣cy and wrath. Next to them wee ought to know, what is deliuered to memorie concer∣ning other Nations. For scarce can that accident happen, whereof there is not some patterne extant, and in sormer times practised. In which behalfe, those that gouerne a Common-wealth, haue an exceeding great helpe and furtherance, if they neglect not this kinde of learning. Now that way is most commodious, which diuides the whole course of
this world into foure Mo∣narchies. As concerning the first of them, we want Books necessary, hauing besides the Scripture, almost nothing credit-worthie, or whereup∣on we may relie. That age questionlesse was altogether heroicall & most illustrious, for surpassing and memora∣ble exploits. But what part thereof came to our hands? Semiramis, Babylon, and Sardanapalus are memori∣zed, and almost nothing else. But for that dreadfull, and neuer yet paralleld, terrible, and dire spectacle seene in any one man, which Nabu∣chodonozer relates of him∣selfe, as Daniel hath it; who euer toucht vpon it? that a King of such puissance,
should bee brutified, cast out of his Kingdome, banished from his ancient habitation, thrust out of doores, exclu∣ded from all humane society, haue his nature metamor∣phosed, and feed with other bruit beasts, and be quite de∣generated into a beast. This is there related plainely; but with what astonishment think we, were they strucken, that beheld this lamentable example of Gods Maiestie and furie? Therefore I haue briefly runne ouer the Assy∣rian or Babylonian Monar∣chie, because it must be whol∣ly bounded within the com∣passe of holy Scriptures; but the other three that follow, are very famous by many Authors workes; especially
the Greek and Roman. A∣mongst which writers, those (of the Greeks) challenge the first rank, Herodotus, Thu∣cidides, Zenophon and Polybius: for those other that Cicero mentions, Phe∣recides, Hellanicus, Acu∣filas, Phyllistus, Agatho∣clis, Theopompus, Epho∣rus, Calisthenes, Timaeus, Clitarchus, Silenus, are lost: as also those Latines that wrote the ancient Romane historie, whom the same Ci∣cero nominates, viz. the Pontifies Annals, Fabius Pictor, Marcus Portius Cato, Lucius Piso, Caeli∣us Antipater, Caius Van∣nius, Vennonius, Clodius, Asiso, Accius, Lucius Si∣senna. And those indeed
were the Authors, out of whom, Titus Liuius, who is better halfe dismembred, and before him, Salust, im∣perfect also, collected their workes. Cicero indeed vsed not this kind of writing, but was most studiously verst in it, as his Bookes witnesse, which are euery where be∣sprinkled and inameled with remembrances of all antiqui∣tie: but hee was a most dili∣gent obseruer of the course of times, so as by him, one may attaine to the orderly know∣ledge both of persons, ages, and the times of accidents. For otherwise all writings are obscure: and because hee was wont to say, that the writings of histories (especi∣ally after the Greek fashion)
was very much Oratoricall: therefore Pomponius Atti∣cus counsailed him to this kinde of writing, complai∣ning that historie stood in need of the Latine tongue: and alledging, that hee was able to effect that, which, euen in this kinde of writing also, would make Rome not inferiour to Greece. So hee writ a Commentarie of his Consulship in Greeke, and begunne another in Latine, as he saith himselfe. For hee was very desirous to haue that yeare, wherein hee was Consull, celebrated by other mens pennes: insomuch that he professed, that if they for∣bare him, he would not for∣beare himselfe, but would write concerning himselfe.
Caius Caesar onely, writes of his own exploits, and bor∣rowed nothing from any of those before him. Then also flourisht Diodorus of Sici∣lia, and a little after, Dio∣nysius of Halicarnassus: then Plutarch, Suetonius, Cornelius Tacitus, Appi∣anus, Herodianus, Trogus Pompeius, Aelianus, Quin∣tus Curtius: but many of those are either wholly, or the greater part of them lost. After those, many more fol∣lowed, who (each one conti∣nuing the historie of his time, or of his Country) held on, euen till within our me∣morie. And we must be seene in all those, or at least a good part of them, to furnish our selues with that abilitie
which is required. Some also we must read for the matter it selfe; others, for the mat∣ter, together with the stile and form of speech. In which ranke, Caius Caesar alone, iustly challenges precedency among the Latines: for none are more pure, none more ele∣gant then his: who for a de∣lectable style, farre excelled not only those that came not long after him, but also all of his time. Besides those before mentioned, we must likewise turne ouer such Ecclesiasti∣call Authors, as treat of the conuersion of Religion, the afflictions of the godly, or the lawes and decrees of Councels and Bishops. And because the holy Scriptures foreshew the Papall king∣dome,
wee must search out the beginning, together with the progresse and increase thereof; thereby to inable our selues, to compare it with those marks and signs which the Scripture hath chalkt out. But because this large argument which wee haue propounded, is various, ma∣nifold, and combersome, and this field so exceeding spaci∣ous, not to bee gone ouer in any short time: some nearer way must be taken, by a me∣thodicall course, for the help of yonger Students: as for those of deeper experience, they may well enough by themselues, as they say, swim ouer the whole streame of Writers. And for this end haue I vndertaken this task,
that the Neoterie may haue a tract and path-way leading to their further learning, by which in the meane time they may trace, as by a line, till they bee growne riper schollers, and come to that proficiency, as to bee able to cast away and despise those rudiments. For I haue not writ this, that they should be content with, or confine themselues to these bounds, but to giue them a tast of their future reading: when being inuited by variety of matter, they may bee more spurred on, hereafter to per∣lustrate the Authors and Bookes themselues, from whence these are culled. But this kinde of studie properly appertaining to those, that
are appointed to the gouern∣ment of a people, as I said before, I suppose (most Noble Duke) I shall not misapply, to your age and condition, in offring vp those my small watch works to your High∣nesse: so that by you, and through your hands as I may so say, the residue of yonger Students may receiue some fruit thereof, if any may redound from thence. And albeit, those most wor∣thy men, your Tutors, Iohn Sigismund and Sebastian Cox, vse their best dili∣gence about your instruction and erudition: yet as in the culture of a little garden plot, which we desire to haue exquisite and arraied with all kind of flowers, we scorne
not any little plants & herbs brought vs from another ground; so likewise I hope this small present of mine, sent to the manuring of the seed-plot of your learning, will not be inacceptable, be∣ing but onely offred vp for a time, tilyou your self, hauing gotten strength, as I said be∣fore, be able to walke abroad, and course vp & down these open fields & flowrie meads. For which course, you haue that most renowned Prince, your Fathers vertue, for a resplendent patterne: who by his elegant learning, ad∣ded no small ornament and lustre to his Noble birth; and that which is all in all, hee made right vse of this his facultie: to wit, that the
name of God should bee cele∣brated, Churches & Schools well ordered, godly teachers prouided for, and a compe∣tencie allowed for mainte∣nance of Schollers. For this dutie God chiefly requires at the hands of you Princes; and as he seuerely punisheth the neglect thereof, so also he remunerates, those with most bountiful rewards, that shew themselues faithfull Stewards herein. Those ex∣amples of your illustrious Fathers pietie, constancie, and fortitude, might bee mentioned by name: but you will read them in good time hereafter, imblazoned at large, & shall know the pro∣per ornaments of Nobilitie. For hee that is benigne to
good wits, how can it be, that hee should not at one time or other, be repaied by them, with the descrued fruits of gratitude, and bee celebrated to posteritie? Therefore vnderstanding both the dignitie of his place, and the charge laid vpon him by God; hee made it his chiefe care to haue your minde trained vp to godlinesse and learning, euen from your young and tender yeeres. And that which is the feeling pulse of a Fathers loue, nothing euer ioyd him more, then to see his expecta∣tion bettered by your indu∣strie. And I doubt not of your owne voluntary propension that way (as much as your age can beare) and your Tu∣tors
their diligent vigilan∣cie. Wherefore Illustrious Prince, proceed auspiciously, and as you are borne to the gouernement of a Common∣wealth, so furnish your selfe with such ammunition, as is both perpetuall, and will affoord infallible aid: and not onely extenuate the la∣bour, which you must some∣times vndergoe in gouer∣ning an ancient Prouince, but also make it easie and pleasant. From Strasburg, Anno Dom. 1556.
IOHN SLEIDAN of the foure chiefe Mōnarchies. OR, The key of History. The first Booke. BEfore I treat of the foure chiefe and principall Monarchies of the world, Baby∣lon, Persia, Greece and Rome: I must speake a word or two of the great difference, about computation of yeeres from
the beginning of the world; for the Hebrewes, Eusebius, S. Austin; Alphonsus, and Mi∣randula, doe exceedingly vary amongst themselues. But be∣cause almost all the learned men of our times, doe in this point follow the account of the Hebrewes: I also (seeing the case so stands) will tread in their steppes. And first of all, that I may come to my pur∣pose, I meane the first Monar∣chie, (passing by those occur∣rents which happened in the Gen. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, & 6, chap. first age of all, as also the nar∣ration of the Flood, sit hence all those are contained in holy Scriptures, and cannot be bet∣ter exprest,) Ile take start at that time, when the race of mankinde being reduced to a very small number, begunne (after that the Moles. massie multi∣rude of waters was againe dis∣persed, and the earth made drie) to increase anew. The
time of the Flood is referred to the yeere of the world, 1656. and Gen 5. Mathusalah the seuenth from Adam, died at that very time, being 969. yeeres of age. Gen 7. Noah Mathusalah his Nepos. Grandchild by his sonne Lamech, (being then 600. yeeres of age, and by Gods es∣peciall fauour, preserued toge∣ther with his familie,) now when the number of men be∣gunne to multiplie by little and little, was the first that caused his children and poste∣ritie, by remoouing into seue∣rall Countries, to inhabite the earth, and build themselues cities: and afterwards (about the hundreth yeere after the Flood) allotted to each of them his proper Prouince. At which time, Nimrod Noahs Grand-childes sonne, together with his retinue, in∣habited the land of the Chal∣dees, but at length (the multi∣tude
of men still multiplying,) many were necessarily infor∣ced to remoue and seeke out new seats and Colonies. They before their departure, desi∣rous to leaue their perpetuall memoriall behinde them, did thereupon ( Gen. 11. It is credi∣ble that hereupon the Poets took occa∣sion to make that fiction of the Giants, who bea∣ping moantaine vpon mountain, went about to ouer∣throw the gods. Michael Glycas writes, that there were forty yeers spent about building of this Tower. Nimrod being their Chief-taine) beginne to build a Citie, and within that, a Tower of transcendent height: And forgetting Gods wrath, which had so lately swallowed vp the whole Globe of the earth, & where∣of Noah without all doubt, had very much, very often, and diligently preached to them: intended to extend the fame of their owne names, by vaineglorious and ambitious workes. But God herewith offended, made frustrate these their enterprises, sending a∣mongst them a confusion of tongues: whereas before that time, there was but one and
the same kinde of language all the world ouer. Thus being constrained to surcease their begunne worke, they depar∣ted into seuerall parts of the world. From this confusion of tongues, the citie called Babell, took the name: & frō ye time, I mean frō the 131. yeer after the Flood, or therabouts, the king∣dome of the Chaldees & Babylo∣nians took the beginnings. The first King thereof was Nimrod, before spoken of, who as it is written, ruled 56. yeeres. The Scripture stiles him the Gen. 10. 1 Chron. 5. Mich 5. The land of Babylon is called the land of Nimrod. migh∣tie Hunter, and attributes to him strength and puissance. O∣thers call him Saturne, and re∣port, that in the 45. yeere of his raign, he sent away certaine Princes of Colonies, hither and thither, as Assur, Madas, Magog, and Mosech. Those e∣rected kingdomes after their owne names, as Assyria, Me∣dia, Suidas writes, that the Persians were so called, but Melanctho think them to be the now Turks. Magog, and Mosco, the
two first whereof doe wholly belong to Asia, and the third and last to Asia and Europe. The Scripture makes mention of this Assur. Gen. 10. Belus. Assur, and that Nini∣ue was by him builded. Iupiter Belus succeeded his Father Nimrod, who (as historie speakes) possessed all the Country from the sunne-ser∣ting to Sarmatia in Europe, and afterwards made warre against Sabbatius King of Saga, whom not he, by reason hee was pre∣uented by death, Ninus the first Mo∣narch, a∣bout 1905. of the world. but his sonne Ninus subdued: who exten∣ding his dominions farre and wide, was the first that euer tooke vpon him a Monarchie. Noah died 350. yeeres after the Flood, and about the 18, yeere after his death, Gen. 11. Abra∣ham the tenth from Noah (so commanded by God) left his Country, being then 75 yeers of age, and in Gen. 17. 24 yeere after that, God made a couenant
with him, by ordaining the circumcision. In the Gen. 21. 100 yeere of his age, his sonne I∣saac was borne vnto him: hee liued after that, 75. yeeres, for the tearme of mans life was now much shortened. The manner of his Grand-childe Gen. 37. Iacobs life, and vpon what occasion he went downe into Egypt, and there dyed: how afterwards his posteritie re∣mained in Egypt for some a∣ges, oppressed with most grie∣uous bondage, and by Gods fauour brought out and set at libertie by his seruant Moses, the holy From the 30, ch. of Gen. to the 14. of Exod. Scriptures declare. This departing of the children of Israel out of Egypt, is refer∣red to the yeere of the world, 2454. that is, 430 yeeres after the promise made to Abraham, as Gal. 3. S. Paul hath it. After Mo∣ses, the children of Israel were gouerned by Iudges, till the daies of Saul, whom Dauid,
(another King of the same people) succeeded. Now let vs returne to the Empire of Babylon; Ninus being dead, his wife Semiramis succeeded him in his Empire: Semiramis. who in riches, victories, and triumphs, was inferiour to no mortall Prince. She inlarged the towne of Ba∣bylon; and made it a citie of suf∣ficient greatnesse, adorning it with diuers faire buildings, and inuironing it with a wall. Shee subdued Aethiopia, and made warre also in India. Her sonne Zameis the fifth King, Zameis. performed nothing worthy of memorie; Arius. but Arius, who next succeeded him, conioyned the Bactrians and Caspians to his Empire. It is written, that A∣ralius his successor was renow∣ned for his wit and prowesse, Aralius. but what he atchieued, is not committed to writing. The next to him, Baleus. Baleus, subdued many Nations, extending his
dominions euen vnto Iudea, and was therefore sirnamed Xerxes, that is, a conquerour, and triumpher, or warriour. Armatrites the ninth, Armatrites. was altogether giuen ouer to plea∣sure and idlenesse. There is no∣thing written of Belochus the tenth, Belochus. but that hee applied himselfe to the studie of sooth∣saying and diuining. Baleus the eleuenth, paralleld Semira∣mis, in renown for his prowes, and militarie industrie, and hath the fame, to haue beene highly extolled in sundry lear∣ned mens workes. Altadas. Altadas the twelfth, of him it is recor∣ded, that he followed his ease and tranquilitie of life, ac∣counting it a point of folly, to be wearied with multiplicitie of labours, and fettered with varietie of cares, about inlar∣ging the bounds of his king∣dome, because it tended not to the weale and commoditie
of any men, but rather to their endammagement & seruitude. His successour Mamitus the thirteenth, Mamitus. stirred vp his sub∣iects on fresh againe, to dili∣gence and industry in military affaires, and his puisance gaue cause of suspition to the Syri∣ans and Egyptians. For Man∣caleus the fourteenth, Mancaleus. his acti∣ons afford not argument worth the discourse. Spharus. Sphaerus the fifteenth is commended for his great vertue and wise∣dome. There is no mention in writing of any memorable act performed by Mamelus the sixteenth. Mamelus. Sparetus. In Sparetus the se∣uenteenth his raigne histories report, that wōdrous accidents hapned euery where. Ascatades. Ascata∣des the eighteenth brought all Syria vnder his subiection. And thus farre the suppos'd Berosus, of whose writings al∣most all men make a doubt, & thinke them counterfeit: but
because we haue no other re∣cords extant, they follow this order. See their names at the end of the Booke. Others reckon 20 Kings more together with Sardana∣palus, making him the eight and thirtieth King of the As∣syrians. This King as without all compare the most effemi∣nate of men, continually sit∣ting amongst harlots, spining and carding with them, and so totally plunged in voluptu∣ousnesse, that he would scarce euer shew himselfe in pub∣like. For this cause two of his Rulers, Belochus of Babylon, & Arbaces of the Medes, aliena∣ting their affection from him, after they had emblazon'd his filthinesse and lasciuiousnesse vp and downe amongst the vulgar: made warre against him. Hee with his womanish troopes, hauing scarce ioyn'd battell (such was his bad suc∣cesse) fled to his palace, and here causing a great fire to be
made, threw himselfe and all his goods into it. In this deed only, The Mo∣narchy di∣uided, as a certaine writer saith, shewing himselfe a man. Af∣terwards these two rulers di∣uided the Monarchy betwixt them, Belochus was made King of Babylon, and Arbaces of the Medes. After is had stood 1300 years Thus Sardanapalus was the last king in that course when that Monarchy had stood 1300. yeares, for almost all their Kings liued exceed∣ing long. Belochus the nine & thirti∣eth, Belochus. 2 King. 15. 1 Chron. 5. or if it seeme better, the first King of the Assyrians in the new Monarchy, compelled Manasses King of Israel to pay him Tribute: the Scripture calls him not Belochus but Phul. Phul Assur. 2 King. 15. 2 Chro. 28. Phul Assur, surnamed Tiglath Pileser, succeeded him. He tooke some certaine Cities in Iudea, and caried away the people captiue into Assyria. A∣chas King of Iuda, in whose
time the Prophet Isaias liued, desir'd aid from this Tiglath a∣gainst the King of Syria, Salmanas∣sar. and sent him presents. After Tig∣lath followed Salmanassar, who after three yeares siege, tooke the Citie of Samaria, and cari∣ed away captiue Hosea King of Israel, and his people, and al∣lowed them a dwelling place in his owne Dominions euen amongst the Medes as the Scripture saith, 2 King. 18. whereupon some gather that hee rul'd also ouer the Medes. His succes∣sor Senacherib kept his Court in the City of Niniuie: Senacherib. 2 King. 18. Hee made Ezekiah King of Iuda tri∣butary to him, and soone after besieged Ierusalem with a mighty Army, and by his Am∣bassadors exhorting the peo∣ple to make a reuolt: 2 King. 19. and scof∣fed at their King, who hoped for helpe from his God. But he escaped not vnpunisht, for God by his Angell in one
night slew 185000. of his men, as a little before he had confir∣med it to Ezekias by his Pro∣phet Isaiah. Isa. 37. After his returne home, hee was slaine by his owne sonnes. Tob. 1. Till this time, the Babylonians after Sardanapalus his ouerthrow, were in subiec∣tion to the Assyrians. Senache∣rib, as we said before, hauing receiu'd such a destruction at Ierusalem, and not long after slaine by his owne sons: there folowed a great change in the State of the Kingdome, which was then diuided. For the two brothers Adramalech, and Sa∣razar, who had committed the parricide fled. Notwithstan∣ding they leuied forces, and prepared Armes against their brother Assaradon, Assaradon. 2 King. 19. who after his fathers death had seized vpon the Kingdome: hauing formerly gouern'd the Com∣mon-wealth in his fathers Isa. 37. Merodach. absence. Merodach Gouer∣nour
of Babylon taking hold on this faire occasion, 2 Kings 20. 2 Chro. 32. for his own good successe: reuolted, pro∣claiming warre: and hauing by degrees, partly by fauour, part∣ly by force, drawne in the neighbouring countries round about him, to his party, and o∣uercome Assaradon in the 12. year of his raigne: annexed the whole Empire of the Assyrians, to the Babylonians, and raigned Isai. 39. & 50. Benero∣dach. Nabucho∣donozor, 1. forty yeares after. Many rec∣kon, next after him, Benmero∣dach, and Nabuchodonozor the first of that name: but seeing the holy Scripture discouers nothing hereabouts: nor can we rashly giue credit to others, weele rancke that Nabuchodo∣nozor whom the Scripture makes much mention of, Nabucho∣donozor the Great. next in order after Merodach. Hee therefore within few yeeres after his entrance, made warre with the Kings 24. Ierem. 46. Aegyptians: and tooke from them the whole
Countrey therefrom Euphra∣tes to Suidas cals this Peleusiuns, the Key of Egypt, It is now called Damietta. Peleusium, made tributa∣ry to him 2 Kn. 24. Ioachim King of Iu∣da, and in the eight yeare of his raigne caried away captiue to Babylon his sonne Iechonias, together with his chiefe men, and artificers, not onely of the City of Ierusalem, but also of the whole Countrey. In the eighteenth yeare of his raigne he tooke Kings 15. 2 Chro. 36 Ierusalem, after two yeares siege, & within a while after Ierem. 52 sackt, burnt it, & broke downe the walls, caried away most part of the people, put∣ting out king Zedekias his eies; and killing his sons, and No∣blemen. Ierem. 25. The Prophet Ieremy, had foretold this calamity in the first yeare of Nabuchodono∣zors raigne: and from this time we must reckon the 70. yeares captiuity of Babylon. Nabucho∣donozor, about the foure and twentieth yeare of his raigne hauing ouercome the kings of
the Ier. 46. Ammonites, and Moabites) passed into Aegypt with an ar∣my: where hauing got pos∣session of all that Countrey, af∣terwards begun his Monar∣chy. In the second yeare of his Monarchy, as the learned of our times collect, he saw in his dreame a great Image, whose head was of gold, the brest and armes of siluer, the belly and thighes of brasse, the legges of iron, the feet part of iron, part of clay. When hee awakt, and could not call to mind what he had dreamt, but yet remain'd mightily asto∣nisht, calling together his Ma∣gicians and soothsayers, char∣ged them vnder paine of death to interpret his dreame. Daniel a yong man. Captiue with the rest of his Nation, brought thi∣ther from Ierusalem, signified that he could satisfie the kings desire: being brought forth, first hee shewed what the
dreame was, and afterwards in∣terpreted the meaning therof. The Image said hee, signifies the foure chiefe Monarchies of the world, which are to suc∣ceed in order, and turning his speech to the King himselfe; Thou, said hee, whom God hath inuested with supreame power and glory, to whom he hath giuen rule ouer all men, beasts of the field, fowles of the ayre; Thou I say art the Golden Head of that Image. After thee another kingdome of siluer shall arise, worse then this of thine: afterwards the third kingdome of brasse wch shall beare rule farre and wide: but the fourth kingdome shall be of iron, for as yron breaketh in peeces and subdueth all things, so also shall the fourth and last, breake in peeces all the rest, and bring them in subiection to it. This therefore is the first and formerly neuer
heard of prophesie, of the four Monarchies, which God re∣uealed to vs by his Prophet Daniel. A thing truly worthy to bee committed to memory, because in a few words it com∣prises the historie of all ages, vntill the end of the world: as afterwards I am to speake of. Now it sufficeth how at this time first of all, God hath dis∣couered to vs, the order and successiue course of the Monar∣chies. Dan. 4. That place in Daniel also; manifests more clearly of what great puissance this Na∣buchodonozor was: where the Scripture compares him to a Tree, whose height reached to heauen, which, as it were, o∣ueshaddowed the whole earth: whose leaues were ve∣ry faire, and most abundantly loaden with fruit, whereby all creatures were fed and fatned: in whose brāches & boughes, all manner of fowle dwelt and
made their nests. This therfore is the first Monarchy: wch, as it was exceedingly amplified in this Kings raigne & hoisted vp to the very highest steppe. So also it fell away and in his Nephewes time was quite ex∣tinguished euen as God had denounced by Daniel, and o∣ther of his Prophets. This Na∣buchodonozor raigned three & forty yeares. It would quite the cost if all mortall men, e∣specially Kings and Princes, would read & diligently con∣sider, with how dreadfull a spectacle and example; God (as Daniel sets it downe) reuenged his pride: Dan. 4. and 5. that so they might the more reuerence Gods di∣uine Maiestie, Euilmero∣dach. 2 King. 25. Ierem. 51. and performe that office to the people, wch is committed to them. His son Euilmerodach succeded him, he raigned 30 yeares, Assur. Labassar∣dach. and his successor Assur three yeares. Labassardach, who raigned
Metasthe∣ner and others say but 6. euen yeares, succeeded him. After him Balthasar bore rule ue yeares: Many reckon them after this manner, but the lear∣ned of our time, omitting two of them, Balthazar. put Balthasar next af∣ter his father Euilmerodach, & write that he raign'd 14. y. wch is very necessary to make the perfect number of 70. yeares, during which space the Iewes were in captiuity to the Baby∣lonians: sithence their capti∣uity begun in the nineteenth yeare of Nabuchodonozors raigne. Those who obserue this order and leaue out the two Kings before spoken of follow the Tract of Scripture, and especially the Prophet Ie∣remies testimony, Ierem. 25. who prophe∣sied that the Iewes should serue the King of Babell, his son, and his sons son, but in this point let euery man haue his iudge∣ment free to himselfe. How∣beit Balthazar, as the Scrip∣ture
mentions, was the last King of the Babylonians, Dan. 5. and in this all Writers agree. As for the manner of the taking of Babylon, many Authors de∣scribe it. Dan. 5. Daniel also mentions how God denounced to this King, his imminent and euen present calamitie, and relates how the gouernement of the Monarchie, after that King was slaine, was translated to Darius the Mede, Darius. then 62. yeeres of age. Many Writers call this Darius, Cyarxes, who was the son of Astiages, eight King of the Medes, whom Daniel cals Assuerus, Dan. 9. who ha∣uing no issue male, bestowed his daughter in mariage vpon Cyrus the King of Persia's si∣ster sonne: and being prouokt to enter into a warre with the King of the Assyrians, sent for aid to Cyrus, who leading his forces thither, and being made Generall of the whole armie,
returned conquerour, hauing taken that most powerfull Babylon. Dan. 9. Ci∣tie. It is recorded that Darius liued not aboue a yeere after this victorie. And then, when Darius was yet liuing after the taking of Babylon, and the children of Israel, Ier. 25. and 29. Dan. 9. had by this time, remained captiue in Ba∣bylon, almost 70. yeeres: God reuealed in more ample man∣ner to Daniel, according to his praiers in that behalf, who made knowne the same to the Prophet Ieremie, foreshewer of the captiuitie: Cyrùs founder of the second Monarchy of the Per∣sians, when the first of the Assyri∣ans, had stood a∣bout 1538. yeeres, this was about 3434. and did not onely confirme the nearnes of their freedome, but also shew∣ed what time the Messias should come, who should sa∣tisfie for the sinnes of men. After Darius his death, the sway of gouernment was com∣mitted to his sonne in law Cy∣rus, and this is the beginning of the second Monarchie; for now Cyrus alone held in his
owne hands, Assyria, Media and Persia, euen to the Ionian sea, as Thucidides hath it, ha∣uing before his winning of Babylon, taken Craesus that most puissant King of Lydia. So this Cyrus is first King of the Per∣sians, and founder of the se∣cond Monarchie. This most renowned Prince, hauing van∣quisht the Babylonians, made warre with the Scythians, whether going with his armie, and at length intrapped and inuironed by his enemies, was there slaine. In the beginning of his raigne, after the taking of Babylon, hee permitted the Iewes to returne home againe out of captiuitie, 2 Chro. 16. that they might reedifie the Temple, and the Citie of Ierusalem, and to that purpose bestowed very liberally out of his own Trea∣surie. Isai. 44. and 45. God by his Prophet Isai, had foretold him by name, some ages before he was born.
Xenophon brings him in, dis∣coursing with his sons before his death, about the immorta∣litie of the soule, as Cicero hath it, who interprets that place, as all others, very elegantly. Cyrus reached the 70. yeere of his age, and raigned 30 yeers, being 40. yeeres old at the be∣ginning of his raigne. His sonnes name was Cambyses, Cambyses. whom, when hee went from home to the Scythian warre, he set ouer his Kingdome. He (his Father being absent and in imploiments) tooke Egypt. In warre indeed hee was re∣nowned, but otherwise viti∣ous, and did not represent his Fathers vertues. Among the rest of his filthie and sauage deeds, he commanded his own brother to be slain trecherous∣ly. Plato in his bookes, which he writ of the Lawes, reports how Cyrus was very much to blame, for that he brought vp
his sons effiminately, amongst women: who, when they grew into riper yeeres, being cor∣rupted by flatterers, for the most part abusing their cares; did, after their Fathers de∣cease, Darius the sonne of Histaspis. indanger one anothers life. Darius the sonne of Hystas∣pis succeeded Cambyces, second King of the Persians, who sur∣uiued his Father but a short space. And by reason that ma∣ny of his subiects, & together with the rest, the Babylonians did, (after Cyrus his death, and so great an ouerthrow of his armie) reuolt from the king∣dome of Persia: Hee tooke armes at the first steppe of his raigne, and reunited them to his Empire, hauing after a long siege, taken Babylon also by helpe of He man∣gled him∣selfe, cut∣ting off his cares, nose, and lippes, faigning that Darius had so pu∣isht him, for spea∣king in the Babylonians behalfe, whe eup∣on they re∣ceiued him, and by that po∣licie, hee got the Ci∣tie for Darias. Zopyrus. Within a while after, he made warre a∣gainst the Athenians, who vp∣on a sodaine, mustering vp
their forces, not expecting any aid from the Lacedemonians, did at Marathon, with about 10000. men, Miltiades being their Leader, ouercome his huge It consi∣sted of 600000. men. armie. Darius was a∣minded to renew the warre, but death preuented him, in his very first attempt: whose sonne and successor, Xerxes. Xerxes in the tenth yeer after the bat∣tell at Marathon, as Thucidi∣des relates, came with an Some confine it to 1000000 but Justine extends it to 2000000 and Hero∣dotus to more. in∣numerable armie, with intent to subdue all Greece. Hereup∣on the chiefe managing of these warres, was by common consent committed to the La∣cedemonians, because they bore greatest sway all ouer Greece: but the Athenians followed Themistocles his counsaile, quitting their Citie, leauing their wiues and children in one place or other, betooke themselues to their shippes, and ioyning battell with the
enemie at Salamina, ouercame him. That victorie was very commodious to all Greece in generall, for Xerxes being also expelled their Country, did by an infortunate and a dishonou∣rable flight, In a little Fishers boate. returne home, and the Grecians likewise after his departure. But the Athenians hauing a Nauie of 400. saile, or thereabouts, coasting on fur∣ther, and pursuing their ene∣mies, tooke the towne of Se∣stos vpon Hellespont, which the Persians held: and there win∣tring, afterwards returned home, gathered together their dispersed wiues and children, and repaired the walls of their Citie (which the enemie burnt when hee tooke it) and fortified the Port. This warre of the Persians, or (as Thucidi∣des calls it) of the Medes, hap∣pened, as Cicero writes, al∣most at the very same time, with the Volscian warre, where
the exild Romane Coriolanus was Generall: Xerxes his warre, An. Mund. 3488 and that was in the 266. yeere after the buil∣ding of Rome. Herodotus, be∣fore Thucidides, writ of this Persian warre. Cicero calls him the Father of historie, but re∣ports that his writings are stuft with an infinite compa∣nie of fables, The Lacedemoni∣ans were sore offended at this fortification of the Athenians, but sith they could not tell how to amend themselues, bu∣ried all in murmuring silence: and both they, as also the rest of the Grecians, together with the Athenians, ioyning forces, tooke the Ile of Cyprus, and the Citie Now cal∣led Constan∣tinople. Byzantium, which the Persians held. Among the rest of the Lace∣demonian Captaines in this warre, Pausanias was one, who (being condemned of treason) after he was returned home, and lay besieged in a
certaine Sanctuarie, was fami∣shed to death with hunger. Themistocles also (being in like manner accused) fled. Soone after this, Greece was tossed vp and downe with sundry wars and dissentions, partly for∣raigne and partly domesticall, which Thucidides pithily re∣lates. But at length, in the fif∣tieth yeere after Xerxes depar∣ture out of Greece, as Cicero re∣ports it after Thucidides, that cruell warre sprung out when the whole Country of Now cal∣led Morea. Pelo∣ponnesus, conspired against the Athenians; Pericles, Anaxago∣ras his scholler, being their Leader in that warre; who, as Aristophanes reports, lightned, thundred, and set all Greece on fire with his tongue. For these in times past, were the master∣pieces of prowesse and elo∣quence. On the other part, Archidamus King of the Lace∣demonians had supreame com∣mand.
Thucidides who writ of this warre, was both equall to, and emulous of Pericles. Sopho∣cles the tragicall Poet, was, as Cicero writes, Pericles his col∣legue, in the Generalship. Now let vs returne to Xerxes. He, by reason of such his bad successe, being growne into contempt, was slain by his own subiects. Artaxerxes Long-hand. His sonne Artaxerxes Long-hand succeeded him. To him fled the exiled The∣mistocles, whom we spake of a little before, and there Poysoned himselfe, because he would not goe with Artaxerxes to sight a∣gaist his owne Country. Darius Nothus. ended his life, & was buried at Mag∣nesia. After Long-hand, Darius Nothus raigned, who married his owne sister. In the begin∣ning of this Kings raigne, hap∣pened the aforesaid Peloponne∣sian warre. And the Athenians, though they had remora's e∣nough besides, yet in the fourth yeere of this warre, as Thucidides recites in his third booke, they sent a Nauie into
Sicilie, vnder pretence to aid the Leontinians, against the Sy∣racusans, but their intent was to bring that Iland vnder their subiection, that so they might more conueniently subdue Greece, and afterwards when they were returned, and foste∣red their owne factions, Her∣mocrates of Syracusa, was the first that moued the Sicilians to liue in peace, laying aside all grudges, for the Athenians had laid snares of bondage, to intrappe the libertie of their whole country, & his perswa∣sion tooke effect. This was in the seuenth yeere of this warre. Three yeeres after this, the Athenians and Peloponnesians, concluded a truce for fifty yeeres, but it held not full sea∣uen: for euen then many out∣rages were broached, and though the peace were not quite abolished, and gappes of
offences committed, were euer anon stopt vp againe by truces; yet in the 17 yeere, they burst forth againe into open warre with full forces, & this second warre continued tenne yeeres. Then the Athenians send ouer againe their Nauie, most ex∣quisitely furnished, into Sicilie. The chiefe Commanders, whereof among the rest, were Alcibiades and Nicias. Nicias very earnestly (declaiming cer∣taine Orations to that pur∣pose) disswaded them from this voiage: but Alcibiades perswa∣ded the contrarie. The Pelo∣ponnesians gaue aid to the Sici∣lians: at length, the Athenians incounter with their enemies in the Port of Syracusa: but af∣ter a doubtfull and dangerous battell, were all of them put to flight and slaine. In the meane time, the Lacedemonians and their confederates, conclude a league against the Athenians
with Darius King of Persia. Tissaphernes was Darius his Ambassadour. Next after, Co∣drus, Polydor of Sparta, and A∣ristomenes of Messene: these fol∣lowing are for the most part re∣puted the chiefe and most re∣nowned Captaines of the Greekes: some whereof per∣formed worthy seruice for the whole Country of Greece, and euery one for his owne coun∣try at the least: as, Miltiades, Leonidas, Themistocles, Pericles, Aristides, Pausanias, Xantippus, Leotychidas, Cimon, Conon, E∣paminondas, Leosthenes, Aratus of Sicyon, Philopoemen. Most of these were at length banished their countries. Cicero de∣scribes the Port of Syracusa, and reports how the Athenian Nauie onely, which consisted of 300. ships, did within mans memorie, inuade it, and was vanquished and ouerthrowne within the same, by reason of
the aduantage in the scituati∣on and nature of the place, and port it selfe: and then first of all was the puissance of that Citie borne down, abated and ouerwhelmed, and shipwracke was made of Nobilitie, Go∣uernement and Glory. Thuci∣dides relates, that the circuit of Sicilie is as much as a great ves∣sell can saile round about in eight daies space: and that the Iland is distant from the Con∣tinent, about twenty Two miles and a hae. fur∣longs. Darius had two sonnes Ar∣taxerxes Mnemon, and Cyrus; Artaxerxes Mnemon. the first whereof succeeded his father, and Cyrus gouerned lonia: but not being content with his owne share, made war vpon the King his bro∣ther, & was there ouerthrown and slaine. Marcus Portius Cato, as Cicero hath it, cals this Cyrus the yonger King of Per∣sia, a man of an excellent wit,
and the glory of his King∣dome. He commends him al∣so for his delight in husbādry, as Xenophon writes of him: for this Xenophon was one of his souldiers, and very familiar with him, and for that cause was afterwards driuen into ex∣ile by the Athenians who were in league & amity with Mne∣mon. Ochus. Darius. After Mnemon raigned Ochus, his third and youngest sonne. Darius the last of all succeeded. Against him, A∣lexander King Philip of Ma∣cedon his sonne, made warre: who, after hee had subdued Thebes and pacified Greece, set forward into Asia, & in three battels ouerthrew Darius, ta∣king his mother, wife and daughters, prisoners. Darius offered him very large condi∣tions, & part of his kingdome to the riuer of Euphrates: but he refused both, and ceased not, till hee had ouerthrowne
him: for when Darius saw that hee could not make his peace vpon these conditions, hee re∣newes the war the third time, and comming against him with a most puissant Army was the third time ouer∣throwne, and as he fled, slaine by his owne men: when, to∣gether with him, the Monar∣chy of Persia, which had stood 200. yeares was extinguished. Alexander by these famous victories, brought vnder his subiection almost all the coun∣tries lying Eastward, The third Monarchie of the Greekes founded by Alexan∣der the Great a∣bout 3609. after the Persian Monarchie had stood about 200. yeares. translated the Imperiall feat out of Asia, into Europe, and founded the third Monarchie. After this, he made warres in India, but, such is the weakenesse of mortall men, those blasts of ful-handed and indulgent fortune, could not breath vpon him, but must needes puffe him vp with am∣bition: when hauing plaied many insolent prankes, and in
a manner commanded diuine worship to be giuen him: com∣ming to Babylon there died of a feuer, or (as many write) of poison, being 33 years of age, and hauing raigned 12 yeares. Calanus an Indian, as Cicero re∣lates, foretold him of his death, whom, as he was going to be He cau∣sed him∣selfe to be burnt fol∣lowing the ancient custome of the chiefe∣men of his Nation. burnt, Alexāder asked if he had any thing to say, Oyes, quoth he, I shall see thee re it be long. Within a few dayes after Alexander breathed his last, which was (as it is com∣monly taken) in the hundred & fourteenth Games in honor of Iupiter ce∣lebrated e∣uery fift yeere: they begun An. mund. 3186  Most au∣thors (as Meibomius notes) a∣gree that he dyed in the 429 y. after the building of Rome. Olympian, & in the foure hundred and ninth yeare after the building of the City of Rome, which is 322. yeares before the birth of Christ. He was a very deuout louer of good Arts, & most li∣berall towards learned men: & is therefore highly extold in many of their workes. He de∣lighted much in Homers Po∣ems,
and though we read that hee was neuer without many learned men about him to re∣cord his acts: yet when hee stood before Achilles his tomb in Sigeum. O happy young man, said he, that hast found such an Herald as Homer to proclaime thy vertues. For as hee would (rather then any o∣thers) haue Apelles his Painter. Pictor, and Lysippus his Statuist. Fictor: so would hee haue his worth extold and commended to the memorie of posterity, by such, as in setting forth his glory, could purchase renowne to their owne wits. He imployed his Tutor Aristotle, about de∣scribing the nature of all liuing creatures, and for that purpose procured certaine thousands of men, throughout Greece & Asia: as Grasiers, Huntsmen, Fishermen, Fishmongers, Fow∣lers, & many more such like, to giue him information of each
creature. Its written that hee gaue to the Author himselfe in recompence of his labour, 800 Talents, which amounts as the learned of our times collect to 1480. Crownes. He sent Xenocrates the Philoso∣pher 50 Talents, by his Am∣bassador, which comes to 1030 Crownes, which when hee re∣fused and sent him word back again by his Ambassadors that he hath no need of so much money. What, said he, has he no friend, whō he may benefit by thē? In his tender yeares, when he was Aristotles scholler, hee was, as Cicero writes, endued with a most excellent wit, and exceeding great modesty, but afterwards aduanced with the title of King. He grew proud, cruell and deboist. Historio∣graphers tell wondrous stories of Darius his gorgeous pomp, delicious pastimes, and riotous exesse: For hee kept within
his Tents Cookes of all kinds, Hucksters, crammers of fowle, Artificers, clerks of his kitchin, and Confectioners: lest hee should bee vnprouided of any meanes that might encrease his bodily pleasure. Many writers speake of the Kings of Persia their solemnities and sumptuous prouision in their daily banquets elsewhere. They were wont to keep ma∣ny wiues, as Cicero writes, and to those they gaue certaine ci∣ties, that such a citie should find such a woman with all manner of attire for her head, and such a City with this or that apparell. Such was Darius his end, as I formerly recited, who as he fled from Alexan∣der, drinking foule water pol∣luted with dead corpes: denyed that euer in al his life he drunk a more pleasant draught: for he neuer drunke when hee was a thirst, before that time.
After Alexanders death, his spacious Empire was diuided amongst his Nobles, Ptolomeus, Laomedō, Antigonus, Cassander, Leonatus, Eumenes, Python, Ly∣simachus, Antipater, Meleager, Seleucus, but the chiefe of those was Seleucus, afterwards made King of Syria, as also Ptolomeus of Egypt, Antigonus of the lesser Asia, and Cassander of the Ma∣cedons & Greece, hauing quite cut off all Alexanders alliance. This Lysimachus is he, whom Alexander being on a time an∣gry with, caused to be shut vp wth a Lyon: but whē he heard how hee had killed the beast, highly esteemed of him. Now most grieuous warres, as it is common, arose betwixt those forenamed successors and their sonnes and Nephewes: for the mind once corrupted wth am∣bition can admit no rest, but plots how to augment its own power, by committing iniury
vpon other men. And all these Countries being most misera∣bly afflicted with those wars, by reason they were continu∣all, by little and little grew in∣to subiection to the Romanes, who extending their domini∣ons farre and wide, made vp the fourth and last Monarchy, whereof I am now to speake. But amongst Alexanders suc∣cessours in this Kingdome of Aegypt, Ptolomeus Philodel∣phus was one, a most laudable Prince: For he, as much as in his lay, kept peace with all, stir∣red vp the liberall sciences, ap∣pointing stipends for schollers, erected a most copious Libra∣ry and commanded the books of Moses, and the Prophets, to be translated into the Greeke tongue. The beginning of the city of Rome therefore, was at that time when Salmanassar before mentioned, raigned in Assyria,
that is in the first yeare of the seuenth Olympiad, according to Plutarch, and of the world, 3212. when as, almost 400. yeares before, Rome built 3212. Aeneas had be∣gun his raigne in A part of Italy. Latium, af∣ter the Troian warres, which Homer left to the memory of posterity: of whose Herodotus, Dion: Hali∣carnass. So∣linus, and Gellius (as Meibomius notes) wri∣teth of his time. time, as likewise of his Gellius also writes of his Countrey. country, there is no certainty extant: onely Cicero writes that many years before the building of Rome, and Romulus: there was such a man. Howsoeuer there is no prophane writing of more an∣tiquitie then his Poem: for as Horace saith; Many braue worthies flourisht ere those daies, When Agamemnon shin'd, whose bootlesse praise Hath not the force t'attract one liquid eie: For lasting night with blacke obscuritie,
In ignorance inuelopt hath their names, Wanting no Herald to proclaime their fames. Cicero also signifies as much, who writes that there was not the tract of an Orator to bee seene before Homers time. As for the originall of Rome, it was but meane and in a manner contemptible, but be∣cause God hath so ordained as afterwards it shall be declared: it grew vp to the height of potency. In their first begin∣ning seuen Kings raigned o∣uer them, 244. yeares. And in Seruius Tullus the sixt Kings raigne, Solon and Pisistratus flourisht in Athens, and Pytha∣goras in Italy, as Cicero writes. At what time Tarquinius the proud was expell'd. He writes also that in this Seruius Tullus his raigne, Athens had then stood about 700. yeares. Ha∣uing
expell'd their Kings, the gouernment of their State was translated to two Consuls, whose office was annuall. The first was Lucius Iunius Brutus, one no lesse vehement and di∣ligent about expulsion of the Kings, and setting vp the liber∣ty of his Countrey: then vi∣gilant and valiant in preserua∣tion thereof. For when his owne two sonnes, Titus and Tiberius, amongst other No∣blemens sonnes of Rome, had commun'd together in priuate consultations, about calling in againe of the Tarquins: after the matter was openly disclo∣sed, he put them to open death Hee also abrogated his Col∣legue Tarquinius Collatinus his authority, who was his associ∣ate in expelling of the Kings, as also coadiutor in his Coun∣cells. Cicero defends this fact as iust, and saith it was no lesse profitable then honourable to
his Country, that thereby both the name of the Tar∣quins, and the remembrance of the Kingdome might bee extinguished. But in this vari∣able fortune of the Romans, when all Tuscanie. Hetruria had con∣spired against them, three hun∣dred of the 306. as Liuie, Flo∣rus, Ouid, &c. Fabies marched out of the Citie against the enemie, and were all slaine, sauing a childe which was left at home, and so left aliue: who afterwards raised the house againe: this happened in the thirty three yeere after the ex∣pulsion of the Kings. By rea∣son of the troublesome state of the Common-wealth, Ambas∣sadours were sent into Greece, in the three hundred yeere after the building of the Citie, to fetch from thence, the lawes, which the Citie of Rome should vse. After their returne the forme of gouerne∣ment of the Common-wealth,
was changed, and the Tenne Noblemen appointed to gouerne in stead of Consuls. Decem∣virs were put in authoritie with the gouernement therof, but this order held not full three yeeres: for Appius Clau∣dius, one of the Decemvirs, by his lewdnesse in violently car∣rying away a Virgin, daughter to Lucius Virginius, a Citizen of Rome, to serue his lust: gaue occasion to the people wholly to subuert this order. So the gouernement returned to the Consuls, but those two, held it but a few yeeres: and then two Much like our Knight Marshals at this day. Tribunes of the Soldiers were constituted with Consu∣lar authoritie: but they before their yeere was out, left off their office, and made roome againe for the Consuls: and at this time, which was in the three hundred & fifteenth yeer of Rome built, Lucius Quintus Cincinnatus the Dictator, cau∣sed Caius Seruilius Hala, ma∣ster of the Cauallery, to kill
Spurius Melius, & also pluckt downe his house, because hee indeauoured by his lauish libe∣ralitie of corne in the Citie, to procure the Kingdome. Two yeeres after this, the gouerne∣ment was reduced to the Tri∣bunes of the Soldiers, who af∣terwards were not bipartite, but more were created at one and the same time, as the peo∣ple pleased, and the state of the Common-wealth required. This kinde of gouernment continued almost 70. yeeres, and among the rest in this of∣fice, flourisht, Marcus Furius Camillus, inferiour to none for valour: who, though hee had done worthy seruice for the Common-weale, yet his in∣gratefull country, thrust him out into banishment, after hee had beene Tribune of the Sol∣diers the fourth time: but after hee had recouered the Citio out of the hands of the Inhabi∣ting in and about Sons in Gallia. Galli∣senons,
who had taken it, and vanquisht the enemie, was re∣stored to his former dignity, and within two yeeres after made He had power re∣gall, and was neuer chosen, but when the Common∣wealth was in great danger, and could not hold his place aboue half a yeere. Dictator. A few yeeres after this, Marcus Manlius, he that defended the Capitoll against the Gaules, being sus∣pected of affecting soueraign∣tie, was pitcht headlong from the top of the hill Tarpeium, and a law made, that no man descending from the stocke of any Senatour of the house of the Manlies, should bee called Marcus. After this, Camillus was the seuenth time created Tribune of the Soldi∣ers, and being very old, ended his life in the 389. yeere after the building of Rome: the gouernment being a yeere before his death, againe redu∣ced to the Consuls. The first whereof was a One of the Com∣meueltie. Plebeian. In those times flourisht the most renowned Captaines of warre
in that Citie, such as were, Marcus Valerius Corvinus, Ti∣tus Manlius Torquatus, Caius Martius Rutilius, Publius De∣cius Mus, Papirius Cursor, Pub∣lius Philo, Lucius Volumninus, and others. One of which, namely, Ti∣tus Manlius Torquatus, one of the Consuls, beheaded his owne sonne, for that he (con∣trary to his command, and out of his ranke) had encountred his enemie in a single combat, although hee got the vpper∣hand. Publius Decius Alus the other Consull, in the bat∣tell against the Latines, de∣uow'd and bequeathed him∣selfe to death for the Romano Armie: when violently rushing into the thickest troopes of his enemies, by his death, re-esta∣blished the tottering state of Rome. His sonne, of his owne name, foure times Consull, performed the like against the
Galli-Senones, forty foure yeers after that. At the same before∣mentioned time, in the Most Au∣thors a∣gree of 10. or 12. yeers before, viz. Anno Mundi, 3620. or 22. 420. yeere of Rome built, Alexander the great, founder of the third Monarchie, as we haue aboue declared, flourished and made his warres. Titus Liuius com∣pares Lucius Papyrius Cursor with him, and extending his discourse as well for his owne as his Readers recreation, shews that he was able to haue resisted Alexander, if happily hee had led his forces into Eu∣rope, after his conquest of Asia, and made warre vpon the Ro∣manes. This before-recited Papyrius Cursor, was indued with the very quintessence of valour: for, omitting other his valiant acts, when Titus Ʋeturius Caluinus, and Spuri∣us Posthumius Albinus the two Consuls, together with the whole armie at the Made of speares or iauelings stucke in the ground vnder which the conquered were to passe in dishonour. Forks of Caudium, were compelled by
the Lamnits, to goe ignobly vnder the yoke, and had made a dishonourable peace with the enemie: Hee (being cre∣ated Consull) vanquisht the late conquering enemie, and put him to flight; as also when hee was Dictator, made his owne Master of the Cauallery an example to teach what strict obseruance ought to bee had in militarie discipline. In this age also, and a little vp∣wards, Greece brought forth men of transcendent learning; for then flourished Socrates, and from him, as from a cer∣taine fountaine, Aristippus, Plato, Antisthenes, Speusippus, Aristotle, Diaearchus, Xenocra∣tes, Heraclides, Theophrastus, Polemo, and Strabo; all of them Physiologers, and as Ci∣cero cals them, Speculators and hunters of Nature. Then also flourished most famous Ora∣tours, as Gorgias, Protagoras,
Prodicus, Hippias, Isoerates, Lysias, Demostenes, Hyperides, Aeschines, Phalerius, Deme∣trius. And Historiographers chiefly, Xenophon, whom Cice∣ro cals a Socratist, and Calisthe∣nes, Alexander the great his companion. In this age liued Dionysius the Spracusan Tirant, to whom when Plato came and spoke freely concerning the dutie of a Prince, he put him in great danger of his life, as Cicero re∣lates. This was hee who com∣mitted not the guard of his body, to his allies, but to cer∣taine strangers, and sauage and barbarous people: hee who taught his daughters how to cut their haire, that they should not aduenture their neckes vnder the Barbers hands: who suffered them not to vse any manner of edge∣toole, after they were come to yeeres, but made them cindge
his head and beard with red∣hot Walnut-shels: who resor∣ted to his wiues often times by night, but first made sure to suruey and prie into all pla∣ces: who not daring to shew himselfe in the common Pul∣pits, was wont to speake to the people out of a Tower: who shewed Damocles one of his Parrasites, what manner of fe∣licitie that of his was, which he had boasted of: for as hee sate in the middest of his choisest delicates, with abun∣dance and superfluitie of all manner of pleasures; he caused a glittering sword, hanging by a bristle of a horses vpper lip, to be let downe, that it might hang ouer his necke. About forty two yeeres af∣ter Alexanders death, Pyrrhus King of the Epirotes came into Italie, and made warre with the Romanes. In his second yeeres warre, he solicited the
Senate about concluding of a peace and a league. But Appius Claudius both old and blinde, who, as Cicero writes, had beene twice Consull before that, came into the Court; and disswaded the Senate incli∣ning to peace, from making any league with him; for, euen in that case, wherein he then was, he had so much courage, as not to shrinke from any ei∣ther priuate or publike ser∣uice. The Oration which hee then pronounced concerning Pyrrhus, when hee broke off the peace, was extant in Cice∣roes daies, as hee himselfe wit∣nesseth. At this time, Cains Fabritius Luscinus, performed a worthy piece of seruice for the Common-wealth, who being solicited by Pyrrhus, to reuolt, contemned his most ample gifts, and large proffers: nor onely so, but also sent him backe againe, a certaine cap∣tiued
runne-away, who had certified, that hee could take away the Kings life by poison. Cicero compares him with Aristides the Athenian. Manni∣us Curius Dentatus, gaue Pyr∣rhus an vtter ouerthrow, at his second inuasion of Italie, and triumphed ouer him. This Pyrrhus was the first that euer brought Elephants into Luca∣nia. And till this time, (being almost fiue hundred yeeres continuance) the Romans were in warres with the inhabitants of Italie onely, amongst whom the Latines, Veientes, Aequies, Faliscians, Samnites, Hetruci∣ans, resisted very stoutly, some∣times conquered, sometimes conquering: who being at length subdued, and a peace setled; that most bloody warre against the Carthaginians sprung vp: the Iosephus writes that it was built within 143 yeeres af∣ter Solo∣mons Tem∣ple. The first Punicke or Carthagini∣an warre beganne Anno man∣di 3697. originall of which Citie, is by euident te∣stimonie, prooued to be farre
more Iosephus writes that it was built within 143 yeeres af∣ter Solo∣mons Tem∣ple. The first Punicke or Carthagini∣an warre beganne Anno man∣di 3697. ancient then Rome. This warre begunne in the foure hundred eighty fift yeere of Rome built: In which, that no∣ble act, which hath report of performance by Marcus Atti∣lius Regulus deserues singular commemoration, who, being taken prisoner by the Cartha∣ginians, and sent by them to Rome, to treate of a peace and exchange of prisoners, with condition (except hee preuai∣led) to returne to his bondage: Hee, when hee came thither, perswaded the Senate the quite contrary way, & shewed that it was repugnant to the custom of the Common-wealth: but yet holding it a point of honour, to hold promise with his ene∣mie, returned to Carthage, where hee was put to death with the most cruell kinde of punishment: his eye-lids be∣ing cut away, and so bound fast in an engine, consumed
to death by waking. This warre proceeding, the Romans had their first and fortunate sea-fight in Sicilie, against Hanno, Publius Duillius Con∣sul: Cicero rankes this Duilli∣us, Mannius Curius, and Caius Fabritius; as also Attilius Ca∣latinus, Cneius and Publius, both Scipioes, Aphricanus, Marcellus, and Fabius Maxi∣mus, within the list of the most renowned Consuls of Rome. The yeere following, Lucius Cornelius Scipio, Consull, took the Ilands of Corsiea and Sar∣dinia. The Carthaginian warre, after it had lasted three and twenty yeeres, Held 23. yeeres. was at last ap∣peased, Quintus Luctatius, Ca∣tulus Cercus, and Aulus Man∣lius, Consulls. Two yeeres be∣fore this, was Ennius borne. Hee was elder then Marcus Portius Cato, (who cals him his familiar consort) by fiue yeeres. And Rome was now
againe intrapt with new wars against the Of Tus∣came. Faliscians, Of Tus∣came vpon the Sea∣coast. Ly∣gurians, Sclauoni∣ans. Illyrians, Of Gallia, now France. Galles, Bohemi∣ans. Boies, Of now Lumbardie. The se∣cond warre which the Carthagini∣ans begun, Anno Mun∣di 3751. Insubrians, whom ha∣uing at length ouercome, the second Punicke or Carthagini∣an warre burst forth, in the twenty fourth yeere after the conclusion of peace. Publius Cornelius Scipio, and Titus Sem∣pronius Longus, then Consuls. Hannibal was Captaine Gene∣rall in this warre, who sack't the Citie of Saguntum, and bending his course through Spaine towards Gallia, and from thence to Italie, in three seuerall battels, at Now Pa∣uie. Ticinum, the Riuer Trebia, and the Lake Thrasimine, ouercame the Ro∣manes. But Quintus Fabius Maximus being created Di∣ctator, and marching forth a∣gainst the enemie, by subtle and dilatorie withdrawing from him, weakened and tooke off the edge of his force and furie.
This was that very Fabius, whose fame Ennius celebra∣ting, saith thus of him. One mans delay, our safety hath regained. Cicero accounts him a great Politician, and saies, that hee could conceale, keepe silence, dissemble, insnare, and preuent his enemies in their consulta∣tions. But after this, the Ro∣mans receiued a very great o∣uerthrow at A towne of Apulia in Italie. Canna, which strucke such an horrid feare in the Citie, that many of the abler sort purposed to flie and forsake the Citie, but were re∣animated and withdrawne from their intents, by Publius Cornelius Scipio Publius his sonne, a magnanimous yong Gentleman, and then scarce foure and twenty complete. The fourth yeere following, Claudius Marcellus tooke Sy∣racusa after a long continuing siege. In the sacking of which
Citie, the famous Mathemati∣tian Archimides was slaine: who was drawing certaine Astronomicall figures in dust, not dreaming of the conquest of his country. Marcellus ha∣uing notice hereof, tooke his death wonderfull heauily, and commanded his body to bee buried: not onely suffering the conquered Citie to re∣maine in safetie, as Cicero writes, but also left it so furni∣shed, that it should stand for a Monument of victorie, huma∣nitie, and clemency. Moreo∣uer, as he speakes vpon Verres, the Much like our Lord chiefe Iu∣stices at this day. Praetors arriuall there; in this victory of Marcellus, there were fewer men, then gods slaine: but Liuie reports, that many abhominable examples of wrath, enuy, and auarice, were then and there shewed. Cicero when he was Much like our office of Lord Treasurer. Questor of Sicilia hauing by some de∣scription found out the place
of Archimedes buriall, shewed his tomb to the Senate of Syra∣cusa, 137 y. afterwards, though it was quite worne out of me∣mory, grown ouer with bryars and brambles, and vnknowne to the very Citizens them∣selues. He further reports that this City of Syracusa, was the greatest & most beautifull city in Greece, and that it was com∣pact of foure very great Cities: the Island, where was the foun∣taine of Arethusa, hauing great store of fish: Acradania where the market place Porticus. The pub∣like walk∣ing place for plea∣sure, recre∣ation or exercise. Prado, and Curia. Senatehouse stood: Tyche, where the Temple of Fortune stood: Neapolis built last of all, where the most spacious Thea∣ter was erected. Moreouer, this, of any forraigne Nation, was the first, that entred into amity and allegiance with the Romans, and was their first pro∣uince, as the same Cicero testi∣fies: Annibal, soone after his
victory, compelled all Campa∣nia to bee yeelded vp to him: but his Army wintering at Capua with superfluity of vic∣tualls and riot, became wholy disjoynted and broken. The third yeare after the ouerthow of Syracusa, Capua was surren∣dred into the hands of the Ro∣mans: and it was long and much demurred vpon, whe∣ther or no, they should quite destroy the City: at length they agreed to preserue it, yet lest it should at any time after∣wards, bee able to raise any re∣bellion, their fields were quite taken away, all manner of au∣thority both of Magistrates and Senatours abrogated, as also the Councell of Estate, no image of a Common-wealth left, but was appointed to bee a storehouse for fruit, the plowmens rendezuous, the Countreymens market town, and the common Garner and
Cornhouse for the countrey of Campania. Within two yeares after this, Asdrubal brought o∣uer new Auxiliary Forces into Italy: but was slain at the riuer of Metaurum by Marcus Liui∣us Salinator, & Caius Claudius Nero Consulls. In the meane while Publius Cornesius Scipio had good successe in Spaine, af∣ter his father & his vncle had lost their liues there. He ha∣uing recouered the whole pro∣uince, returnes to Rome, and being made Consull, desired to be authorized ouer Africa, that he might make war there. But Quintus Fabius Maximus, an aged graue Senator with∣stood him very earnestly: and vrged that it was not fit to passe into Africa, but to ioyne battell with Hannibal. Scipio contrariwise, that if warre were made with the Carthagi∣nians within their own Quar∣ters, they must of necessity, be
constrained to call home Han∣nibal out of Italy, in whō they setled their chiefe hopes and helpes. After much dispute the Senate grants Scipio the Prouince of Sicilie, and per∣mits him, if it might be com∣modious to the Common∣wealth, to passe ouer into A∣frica. He therefore at length sets forward out of Sicilie into Africa: where, what hee had foretold the Senate by word, he confirmed by deed. For the Carthiginians hauing receiued some ouerthrowes by him, and being much endammaged, call backe Hannibal. Thus he who for sixteene yeeres toge∣ther, had raged vp and downe Italy, and pickt out a place vn∣der the verie walles of Rome, where to pitch his Tents, was compelled to returne home, though sore against his will and to his great griefe: where at length in his owne country
quarrell, Hannibal vanquished An. mund. 3797. hee was vanquished by Scipio, who soone after, by decree of the Senate, conclu∣ded a peace with the Enemie. Hereupon came his surname of Africanus. But here we must consider, after what manner the Romans creptout of these most intricate straights, for all their fortune now hung by a most slender threed; yet so it was destined, that they should ouersway all force and trouble, and become Lords of the whole earth. Some report that Hannibal foresaw this, when hee heard of his brother Asdrubals ouer∣throw. The words which hee then vs'd, Horace sets them downe, in that Ode, Horace l. 4. Ode 4. wherein he celebrates the fame of Dru∣sus and his house; which being most learned & elegant, wor∣thily, amongst other matters, deserues commemoration by all of the yonger sort. Thus
the Romanes being at peace with the Carthaginians: besides those warres wherein they were employed, in Italy, Istria, and Lusitania: The Ro∣man warre with Phi∣lip King of Macedonia, 3770. made sharpe warre against Philip King of Macedonia, who infested the Countrey of Greece. In this warre Titus Quintus Flamini∣us was Generall, who at length, getting the vpper hand of the Enemy, did by decree of the Senate restore Greece, to its former liberty: and amongst other iniunctions prohibited King Philip from making war in any place, out of his owne Territories, without decree of the Senate. The Ro∣man wars with Anti∣ochus King of Syria, 3777. To this warre a∣nother succeeded, against An∣tiochus King of Syria, who pas∣sing ouer into Europe, was ouerthrowne and expelled Greece, by Mannius Glabrio, Philip King of Macedon aiding the Romanes in that warre. Those before recited Kings of
Asia, Syria, and Macedonia, descended from their posteri∣ty, who, as wee haue aboue re∣lated, diuided the prouinces amongst them after Alexander the Great his death. For Car∣thage being pacified, and all Italy brought vnder subiecti∣on; the Romanes hauing sub∣dued their neighbouring Countries of Europe both by sea and land, were now grown to that height, that Kings and people farre remote implored their patronage. After this manner the Egyp∣tians (whose King Ptolomy E∣piphanes was, a very young Prince, and not of ability by reason of his non-age to go∣uerne them) being brought into imminent danger by An∣tiochus the Great, sent ouer their Ambassadors to Rome, petitioning the Senate to vn∣dertake the tuition of their young King. Hereupon the
Senate enioyned Antiochus to forbeare Egypt: Hee hereat incensed, but more especially when Hannibal who was fled to him and remained his guest very earnestly perswaded him to the warre: strucke ouer with a Nauie into Greece, and there, as wee reported before, was put to flight. Whereupon the Romans setting forth with an Armado, pursue him, and striking ouer into Asia, ouer∣threw in a maine battell, and beat him backe beyond the Mountaine Taurus. Cicero re∣lates, how after this ouerthrow he was wont to say, that the Romans had done him a very good turne, for now (being freed from too exceeding great gouernment) hee would conteine himselfe within the moderate bounds of a King∣dome. Lucius Cornelius Sci∣pio, Publius Scipio Africanus his brother, was Captaine Ge∣nerall
in this warre, thereupon surnamed Asiaticus. After this, Marcus Fuluius Nobilior, vanquished the A certaine people of Greece. Ae∣tolians, and triumphed ouer them. And Publius Scipio A∣fricanus, after his returne home out of Asia, (whither he was sent in Ambassage to his bro∣ther in time of this warre) be∣ing crost by the Officers appointed for protec∣tion of the Commons against the Nobles. Tribunes of the Commons: withdrew himselfe into his village of Liternum, and there, this man of transcendent worth, ended his life: being, as many write, 52. yeares old, of the same age with Marcus Portius Cato. In that Dialogue, Sleidan (as Meibomius notes) mis∣takes Afri∣canus, for Quintus Fabius Cunctator whom Ci∣cero speaks of. which Cicero writ of old age, hee brings in Cato speaking very affectio∣nately and honorably both of his age and studies, but most especially extolling his mag∣nanimity: howbeit Liuie writes, that Cato was his ene∣my, and was wont much to
disquiet himselfe with the odi∣ous enuie, that he bore against him for his fortitude. Cicero commends him for his dexte∣rous celeritie in dispatch of businesse. At this time flourisht those Poets, Ennius, Plautus, and Neuius. After Antiochur his ouer∣throw, Hannibal fled to Prusi∣as King of Bythinia: and (when the Romanes desired to haue him deliuered into their hand) by a draught of poison finished his life. Hannibal poisoneth himselfe. An. 3786. To Antiochus, his sonne An∣tiochus Epiphanes succeeded, who likewise practised by treachery to haue seized vpon the Kingdome of Egypt, for that he was vncle to Ptolomie Philometer King of Egypt, who succeeded after his fathers death; hereupon, professing himselfe to be the yong Kings Tutor, purposed to dispatch
him, and so transferre the sway of gouernement into his own hands, but his plot being dis∣couered, the Romans (whom the Egyptians had againe soli∣cited for aide) sent ouer to him in Ambassage Caius Popilius Laenas, who comming to con∣ference with Antiochus, com∣manded him in the name of the Romans to depart from A∣lexandria, which hee then be∣sieged: who desiring time to deliberate vpon it; Laenas with a little rod drew a circle round about him in the place where hee stood, and in flat termes charged him to giue his an∣swer what he would doe, be∣fore hee stirred out of that Ring. Hee, hereat dismaid, and not being ignorant of the puisance of the Romans, pro∣mised peace. Those passages are onely for this purpose mentioned, that it may appeare how the Romans,
from these small beginnings gathered ground step by step, and climbed vp to the highest branch of gouernment. For now their puissance hauing outstript the bounds of Italy, made an impression into seue∣rall Quarters of the world: but a great part of their labour yet remained towards the keeping in together the ponderous burthen of this their Empire, whose circuit contained the chiefest part of the whole world, as hereafter though briefly, Ile declare in order. Philip King of Macedon, he whom I formerly spoke of, ta∣king it very hainously that the Romanes had put him to such a straight: was aminded to re∣new the warre; but being pre∣uented by death, his sonne and successor Perseus, hauing beene long before that incen∣sed against the Romanes, vn∣dertooke this warre as it were
a part of his inheritage: but Lucius Aemilius Paulus, the se∣cond time Consull, Perseus K. of Macedo∣nia, with his wife, mother & Children led in tri∣umph at Rome, by Aemilius Paulus, 3802. at length ouerthrew him in battell, tooke him, together with his wife, mother, and Children, and led them in triumph, for this cause surnamed Macedo∣nicus: and from that time Macedonia became one of the Prouinces of the Romanes. The yeare next before this, dyed Ennius, aged 70. yeares, as Cicero hath it. Within a few yeares following, Publius Cornelius Nasica, subdued Dal∣matia, and not long after the third Punicke or Carthagini∣an warre begunne. The third Punick or Carthigini∣an warre, 3819. For the Carthaginians being impati∣ent of peace and ease, offer violence and hostility to the rest of their neighbours, but more especially to Massinissa King of Numidia, a confede∣rate and friend of the Romanes. The Romans being requested
for their aid, decreed to make warre in the 604. yeere of Rome built: but herein they differed in their opinions, whether it were better to raze the Citie, or preserue it safe: some were of opinion, that it should not bee destroyed, for that, said they, Carthage being taken away, they should fall into ciuill warres and dissenti∣ons amongst themselues: but Marcus Portius Cato, vrging the contrarie, shewed what danger might hang ouer the Common-wealth of Rome, by reason of that Citie, vnlesse it were quite destroyed, and this his opinion carried it, he him∣selfe departing his life in the time of this deliberation, ha∣uing attained to the eighty fift yeere of his age. Cicero rankes him amongst the anci∣ent Orators, and places him next after Marcus Corne∣lius Cethegus, whom Ennius
(as he reports) extolled. Hee also further relates, that there were a hundred and fifty of Catoes Orations extant, stuft with excellent words and mat∣ter: and reprehends those of his time for their too much nicenesse, in not diligently perusing them. He compares him with Lysias the Athenian Writer. In this third Punicke warre, Publius Scipio Aemilianus, Publius Macedonicus his sonne, and Publius Scipio Aphricanus his nephew by adoption: was at length made Captaine Ge∣nerall. He, in the fourth yeere of his warre, begunne by o∣thers, after a sharpe siege con∣tinuing for certaine daies, tooke the Citie of Carthage, sackt it, burnt it, and laid it le∣uell with the ground, Carthage destroyed, 3822. thereup∣on gaining his sirname, like∣wise stiled Aphricanus, as hee was, that ouerthrew Hannibal,
as aforesaid. And this was the period of this most puissant Citie, which by originall was more ancient then Rome, and for worthinesse of Captaines, scarce inferiour to it, hauing borne rule farre and wide. Ci∣cero writes, that Publius Scipio after hee had taken Carthage, restored to the Sicilians, those Ensignes & ornaments which the Carthaginians had taken from them some yeers before: as also to the Agrigentines, that famous brazen Bull, which is reported to bee Phalaris the Tyrants, wherein hee was wont, for punishment, to in∣close men aliue, and then to set it on fire. This Phalaris lost not his life by trechery, as many other Tyrants did, but the whole multitude of the Agrigentines fell vpon him. Cicero calls Affrica the tower of all Prouinces. Much about this time, the Romans made warre
with the Achaians a certaine people of Greece, for offring iniurie to their Ambassadours. Lucius Mummius Consul, was Captaine Generall in this warre, who getting the vpper∣hand in battell, forced all A∣chaia to be yeelded vp to him, and by decree of the Senate, set fire on Corinth the chiefe Citie, and vtterly subuerted it: lest at any time hereafter, be∣ing repaired, it might arise and lift vp head againe. Mummius hereupon was sirnamed A∣chaicus. About this time also one Viriathus, (who from a Shepheard grew to be a Hun∣ter, from a Hunter, to a High∣way-thiefe, and afterward, leader of a strong Armie) kept the Country of Now Por∣tugal in Spaine. Lusitania in possession; who for some cer∣taine yeeres holding play with the Romans, and very oft put∣ting them to the foile, was at length trecherously slaine: and
soone after, Decius Iunius Bru∣tus, subdued all Lusitania, e∣uen to the Ocean. In the mean time the Romans receiued a great ouerthrow from the Nu∣mantines a people of Spaine: for, refusing to accept of the peace made by Mummius the Con∣sull, in regard it was dishonou∣rable, of a new create Publius Scipio Aemilianus Aphricanus, Consull, contrarie to the ordi∣narie course, and to him com∣mit the charge of the warre: who marching forth with an armie, hauing recalled the sol∣diers, growne more effiminate and impatient of labour, to ob∣seruance of strict militarie dis∣cipline, after hee had besieged the citie of Numantia some certaine daies, Numantia destroied, 3832. tooke and sub∣uerted it, in the fourteenth yeere after the subuersion of Carthage, and of Rome built, sixe hundred and twenty. Ci∣cero cals Carthage and Numan∣tia,
the two terrours of the Roman Empire. At this time there arose an vproare of the bond-slaues in Sicilie: who hauing gathered together great forces, were at length with much adoe re∣pressed by Caius Fuluius the Consull. After this, the Ro∣mans had warre with Aristomi∣us in Asia: for Attalus King of Pergamos, had by his testa∣ment made the Romanes his heires, but Aristomius being allied to him, seized vpon that part of Asia, and defrauded the Romans of the benefit of his Testament. Him, Marcus Peperua, Consull, vanquished, and at length tooke prisoner. The yeere following, which was the 625. yeere of Rome built, Scipio A∣phricanus murthered 3837. Scipio Aphricanus lying at his owne house, was in the night-time murthered by his owne kinsfolkes, as it was sup∣posed. Cicero makes relation
of his most fluent eloquence, his fidelitie and integritie: and writes, that albeit the whole Citie was plunged in depth of sorrow for his death, yet no man opened his mouth about the cause therof. He reports al∣so, that in this yeere, the sunne was twice doubled. Thus this most renowned Commander ended his daies, aged 56. yeers, which, as Cicero in a most sweet fictitious inuention faignes, Aphricanus the elder had forewarned him of. In this age liued Lucilius, Terence, Pa∣cuuius, Accius, Licinius, Caecili∣us, Afranius. Caius Laelius, one most intimate with Aphrica∣nus, calls this Pacuuius his friend, but Terence his familiar consort. After this, Fabius Maximus Consul, in a maine battell, ouerthrew the Of Sauoy. Allo∣broges, About the Riuer Lire. Aruerni, and About Rhodes. Ruteni, people of Gallia. At the same time, Caius Gracebus, Tri∣bune
of the soldiers, an elo∣quent man, and defender of the Agrarian law, was slaine at Rome, his brother Tiberius Gracchus hauing twelue yeers before lost his life for the like cause. Cicero giues both of them commendations for their eloquence: and writes, that Tiberius his Orations were not very beautifully set forth in words, but were acute and full of wisedome: and Caius his brothers, were fittest to be perused by those of the yonger sort, as seruing not onely to whet on, but also to nourish the wit, and hee stiles him the most wittie and most eloquent of all the Romans. Gracchus dream't that he heard his brother Tiberius telling him that hee should die of the same death wherof he did: and as Cicero reports, he told it to many before hee was created Tribune of the Commons.
Their lawes are extant, about prouision of corne, replantati∣on of Colonies, The warre with Ju∣gurth King of Numidia begunne Anno Mundi, 3857. soldiers re∣wards for their seruice, go∣uernement of the Prouince, the peopls suffrages about ele∣ction of Magistrates, and of letting to farme King Attalus his lands, and the country of Asia. After these Tribunician dissentions followed that war, which the Romans had with Iugurtha King of Numidia. It was begunne by Lucius Cal∣phurnius Bestia, Consull; con∣tinued by Quintus Coecilius Metellus: Ended, 3859. and ended by Caius Marius the Consull, who ser∣ued in the warres with Publi∣us Scipio: For Bacchus King of Mauritania, Iugurtha's confe∣derate, not willing any longer to vndergoe the hazard of warre, deliuered vp Iugurtha bound, into Sylla's hands, who was sent ouer to him for that purpose by Marius. And at
this very time, which was in the sixe hundred forty se∣uenth yeere of Rome built, was Marcus Tullius Cicero borne, Cicero borne 38. being eight yeeres after the birth of that most fa∣mous Oratour Quintus Horten∣sius. In the time of this Iugur∣thine warre, the Danes. Cimbrians and Germanes vanqui∣shed by Caius Ma∣rius, 3867. Teutons, pierce some into Italie, some into Gallia; where hauing very much annoied the Romans, and in certaine battels, sometimes ouercom∣ming the Proconsuls, some∣times their Lieutenants, were at length ouerthrowne and put to the sword by Caius Marius, the fourth time Con∣sull: the Teutons at Aix. Aquensis, and the Cimbrians on the mar∣ches of Lombardie Insubria. To this felicitie succeeded a new tumult: for certaine people of Italie, as the Sam¦nites, Pelignians, Marsians, The Sociall war, 3877. Ve∣stinians, Marusinians, Vmbrians,
Picentines, Lucanians, reuolted from the Romans. At diuers battels, at length they were reduced to subiection. In the necke of this, followes ano∣ther mischiefe, and a dange∣rous one to the Common∣wealth: The war with Mi∣thridates, 3880. for Mithridates, King of Pontus, expelied Ariobar∣zanes King of Cappadocia, and Nichomedes King of Bythinia, (both friends and confede∣rates with the Romanes) out of their dominions: and seizing vpon Phrygia a Prouince of the Romanes, broke into Asia. Hereupon the Senate decreed to remedie it by the sword: but iust in the nicke, sprung vp a faction, some requiring Lucius Sylla a man of Noble parentage, others Caius Mari∣us for their Generall. Publius Sulpitius Tribune of the com∣mons, aided Marius his par∣tie, but Sylla hauing command ouer the armie, expelled Ma∣rius
the Citie; who thus ex∣iled, and lurking in the mari∣shes about Minturnae, not without very imminent dan∣ger of his life, in a little Barke, strucke ouer into Affrica. In Sylla's absence, in the warres of Asia, Lucius Cornelius Cin∣na, Consull, begunne to raise an vproare, and practise new seditions: who, after hee was banished by his collegue, Cneius Octauius, and expelled the Citie, makes fresh head a∣gaine, and ioynes with Caius Marius, who vpon that occa∣sion was returned from Affri∣ca. Cinna and Marius be∣siege and take Rome, 3882. Thus hauing contracted their forces, they ioyntly be∣siege the Citie of Rome, on that side where the village of Ianiculum stood: when many of the Citie, shewing them∣selues not so much cowards, as perfidious wretches (no meanes for resistance being left) giuing them entrance,
they made all places flow with blood and destruction, and forthwith reproclaiming thē∣selues Consuls, in that their office, exercise much crueltie: among the rest Lucius Cinna committed that famous orator Marcus Antonius to the sword, and Caius Marius, did the like for Quintus Catulus. Lucius Sylla hearing of those hurly-burlies, hauing in a man∣ner recouered all that he war∣red for, concluding a peace with Mithridates returnes into Italy, but Marius, seuenth time Consull, dyed before his arriuall. Lucius Cinna had for his Collegue Cneius Papirius Carbo on their partie: who although they opposed Sylla with might and maine, were, together with Marius his son put to flight: and Sylla being now sole Com∣mander, pursued his aduersa∣ries very sharpely, hung out a
writ of proscription, sels the proscripts goods, and disina∣bled their children of all pri∣viledge and right of bearing honours in the Common∣wealth: and then making himselfe Dictator, caried all matters according to his owne will, and enfringed the Tri∣bunes authority: and when he sould the Citizens goods, de∣clared in the publike assem∣blies, that he sold nothing but his owne prey. Briefly, it came to that passe, that no man without his consent, could hold either goods, country or life: and with such bitter ha∣tred was he incenst against Ca∣ius Marius, that he caused the reliques of his body to bee scattered and strewed vp and downe the riuer Teueron. Anio: and hee himselfe was the first of any Nobleman of the house of the Cornelioes, that desired to be burnt by fire: it may be fear∣ing
lest the same accident shold befall his owne dead bodie. Cicero relates that Marius was strong and valiant, and con∣stant in his wrath: but hee taxes Sylla of vehemency, and Lucius Cinna of cruelty. Hee further stiles Marius the terror of his Enemies, and the hope and helpe of his Country. Lu∣cius Sylla made foure new lawes, against forgery, parri∣cide, murther and iniuries. In the time of his Dictatorship, Marcus Cicero aged 26 yeeres, came into the Court, and plea∣ded Sextus Rossius his cause in publicke. Before him, these Orators were most famous, Quintus Catulus, Caius Iulius, Marcus Antonius, Lucius Crassus. In which age, saith Cicero, the Latine tongue was growne to full perfection in a manner. This age indeede, wherein Cicero liued, did most of all excell in learning. For
to let passe so many and so worthy Orators, there were famous Lawiers, and amongst the rest Caius Aquilius Gallus, Lucius Lucilius Balbus, Caius Iuventius Sextus Papirius, who were Quintus Mutius Scaeuo∣la the Chiefe Priest a∣bout the sacrifices. Pontifies Auditors, to whom Cicero also in his youth, was a retainer. Publius Serui∣us Sulpitius was well neere Ci∣ceroes equall, hee was Auditor of the aboue named men: and Aulus Ossilius, Publius Alphe∣nus Varus, Caius Titus Decius, the two Aufidioes, Caius At∣teius Pacuvius, Flauius Pris∣cus, Cinna, and Publius Caecilius were his schollers. At the same time, with Sulpitius, flourisht Caius Trebatius whose scholler Antisteus La∣beo was. Cicero extolling the deceased Sulpitius in most am∣ple words, saith, That if all who euer in any age professed the law in this Citie, were ga∣thered
together into one place, they were not to bee compared with Seruius Sulpi∣tius; for he was experienct in point of aequity, as well as strict law. Amongst those who were proscribed Quintus Sertorius was one, a man renown'd both for his couragious valour and experience in military affaires. He begun a most fierce warre in the further parts of Spaine, Sertorius his warre, 3890. where ouerthrowing certaine Roman Generalls, brought ma∣ny Cities into subiection. Hereupon the guidance of this warre, was at length com∣mitted to Cneius Pompeius: when after many battels, with diuersity of fortune on both sides, at length Sertorius was treacherously slaine; and after∣wards Pompey, being almost the tenth yeare after the be∣ginning of the warre, recoue∣red Spaine. About this time
Nichomedes King of Bythinia, departing this life, made the Romanes his heires: But Mi∣thridates King of Pontus, who formerly in that faction be∣twixt Marius and Sylla had strucke a league with Sertori∣us, seizing vpon Bythinia, with maine forces renewes the war. Against him Lucius Lucullus was sent with an Army, who when hee was Confull, had good successe in his battells of horsemen; and afterwards be∣ing Proconful, defeating his forces, and recouering Bythi∣nia, caused him to retire into Pontus: and there to Mithri∣dates receiuing an ouerthrow in a maine battell, fled to Ti∣granes King of Armenia: yet Lucullus still following and pursuing him, in some few bat∣tailes defeated both their for∣ces: but the mutinous dissen∣tions among the souldiers, by some craftily rais'd, hindered
him from fully finishing the warre, and bringing home the wisht successe and honour of his victory. For within a while after Lucullus being cal∣led home, Cneius Pompey was made Captaine Generall in that warre: to which seruice Marcus Cicero also was a mo∣tioner, hauing made a very e∣legant Oration to the people in Pompeyes commendation. Lucullus thus recalled, held his triumph neuerthelesse, and be∣stowed a very sumptuous ban∣quet vpon the Romans: soone after this, leauing his Offices in the Common wealth, hee liued at home privately studi∣ing Philosophie, and erected a most copiously furnisht Li∣brary. In his ordinary table, he was (as at all times els) very sumptuous and magnificent. Cicero makes mention of this Library, and sayes, that he was wont to come thither to cull
forth bookes: Pompey put Mi∣thridates to flight, and pursu'd him very farre. He caus'd King Tigranes to yeeld himselfe ouer into his hands, and see∣ing him abased and forlorne in his campe, aduanced him, as Cicero writes, and placing the Insigne re∣gium. Diadem vpon his head again which he had taken from him, vnder certaine cautions com∣manded him to raigne againe. At length Mithridates being besieged by his owne sonne Pharnaces, slew himselfe. That warre which Pompey made a∣gainst the Pyrates (which was before hee went against Mi∣thridates) wonne him much authority. This warre thus appeased, presently another ciuill broile is broached: for Lucius Cati∣lina with many more, conspi∣red the ruine of the Common wealth, but by Ciceroes singu∣lar industry, (who was then
Consull) his villany was dis∣couered, he expelled the City, and hauing gathered together certaine bands and troopes of abiect fellowes in Hetruria, was in battell by Caius Anto∣nius Consul Ciceroes Collegue ouerthrowne and slaine. Cice∣ro euery where amongst his workes, speakes much of the seruice which he then perfor∣med for the Common wealth, and makes relation not onely of the firebrands then seene in the night time, the flaming of the elements, lightnings and earthquakes: but also ap∣plies those wondrous prodi∣gies, which hapned when Lu∣cius Cotta and Torquatus were Consulls, (being two yeares before his Consulship) to this time: when many Turrets in the Capitoll were strucke downe, the Images of the gods ouerthrowne, the statues of the ancient Heroes beat down,
the brazen tables of the Law melted, as also the statue of Romes builder, Romulus in forme of an Infant, gaping and sucking at the teats of a wolfe, was smitten. Cicero describing Catilines nature and qualities, saies, that there neuer was such another Monster as hee vpon the face of the Earth, composed of such contrary dif∣ferent and mutually antipa∣thizing appetites and disposi∣tions of nature. In the time of Ciceroes Con∣sulship was Caius Octauius borne, Caius Octa∣uius borne. 3906. and Iudaea made Tribu∣tary to the Romanes, after Cne∣lius Pompey had surprized the City of Ierusalem. The fift yeare following, Lucius Piso and Aulus Gabinius Consuls, the Now cal∣led Swit∣zers. Heluetians changed their habitation, and leuying maine forces intended to passe tho∣row the Prouince of Gallia in∣to the further parts thereof,
and there to seat themselues in regard of the fertility of the soile. But Caius Iulius Caesar who was sixe yeares younger then Cicero hauing notice hereof preparing an Armie (the Senate hauing authoriz'd him ouer that Prouince) marcht thither and in pitcht battell vanquished the Enemy, and afterwards going out a∣gainst Arionistus King of the Germanes, who had annoyed the Country of Gallia That part of France betwixt the Riuer of Seine & Garonne. Celti∣ca, but more especially the Now Wal∣loons. Heduies confederates with the Romanes, ouerthrew him at Besanson, a Towne of the burgun∣dians inha∣biting a∣bout the riuer Seine. Sequans, not farre from the Rhyne. Soone after he brought the whole Countrey of Gallia in subiection to the Romanes, and forthwith striking ouer the sea into Brittaine, conque∣red it. Cicero reports that Caesar writ to him out of Brittaine on
the first day of September, and the Letters came to his hands the eight & twentieth day of the same moneth. When Cae∣sar went into Gallia, Cicero being molested by Publius Clodius Tribune of the Com∣mons departed into exile, first making an oration to the Gentry and Commons, wher∣in he commended his children and family to their care: and within a few moneths after being called backe by the Se∣nate, (with exceeding great congratulation of the prople) made another Oration to the Romanes, wherein he rendered thanks to his friends. After∣wards, hee laid the blame on Lucius Piso, and Aulus Gabini∣us Consuls, for his banishment, and shewed that by them hee was betrayed, declaiming cer∣taine Orations against each of them, in one whereof, hee counsail'd the Senate to take
from them the Prouinces of Syria and Macedonia, and not to call backe Caius Caesar, ha∣uing most happy successe in his wares in Gallia, but to con∣tinue his authority, whereby he might fully finish the warre. Meane while Ptolomie Auletes King of Aegypt (for his sloth∣fulnesse and cruelty thrust out of his kingdome) came to Rome, and the Senate, at Cneius Pompeyes entreaty, restor'd him by Aulus Gabinius, expelling Archelaus whom the people had ordained to be their king. At length Gabinus was ad∣iudged to pay into the com∣mon treasury 10000 Talents, or as some of our times suppose 6000000. Euery Ta∣lent a∣mounteth to 176 pound sterling. because hee had re∣ceiued so much from Ptolomie. And Marcus Crassus, (who had in charge the managing of the Parthian warre) hauing past ouer the Riuer of Euphra∣tes, was ouerthrowne, and
soone after slaine at an enter∣view vpon Truce. This was he, who was wont to say, that no man was rich, except hee could maintaine an An Army consisted of 2400 foot, and 20000 horse. Army at his owne charge. About this time was Publius Clodius slaine by Titus Anaio Milo; Cicero defended Milo (Cneius Pompey being then the third time and alone Consull) yet at length he was commanded to go into exile. The warres with the Galles being ended, which was about the eight yeare thereof, that ciuill warre of Caius Caesars, The ciuill warre be∣twixt Caesar and Pompey begunne 3916. with his sonne in law Pompey, burst forth. The occasion whereof was, because Caesar was to be depriu'd of his Con∣sulship, except hee would first dismisse his forces, and surren∣der his Prouince, but hee was aduised that it could no waies stand with his safety, to part from his Army: yet hee con∣descended
descended vpon condition, that Pompey as well as hee, should yeeld vp his forces: but when that was refused, march∣ing out with his forces with incredible celeritie, hee left Gallia and came into Italy, where entring into the Coun∣try of Flaminia, he tooke ma∣ny townes some by force, Now Ro∣mandila. o hersome by dedition. Vpon notice hereof, Pompey and the two Consulls Caius Marcellus, and Lucius Lentulus flye from Rome to Brundusiū, a Sea coast Towne in Puell. Apulia: thither marcht Caesar, but before his arriuall, the Consuls had struck ouer the Seas to Durachium: Durace in Macedonia. and not long after Pompey fol∣lowes them. Now Caesar be∣ing preuented by time, not hauing a Nauie in readinesse could not pursue them, but re∣turnes to Rome, where calling together the Senate, he makes complaint of his iniuries, and
also propounded certaine con∣ditions of peace: but being sleighted off by the Senate, he marches to Marsiles in France. Massilia, where the gates were shut against him: hereupon rigging his Nauie, he besieges it both by sea and land, and there leauing his Deputies, sets forward into Spaine, where at length hee compels Petreius and Africani∣us two of Pompeyes Captaines, together with the whole Ar∣mie, to yeeld. Then he returns to Massilia, which City de∣spairing of all ayde, presently yeelds to his power: and after he was made Dictator in his absence by Marcus Lepidus the Praetor, repaires to Rome, calls an assemblie, and is crea∣ted Consull together with Publius Seruilius Isauricus: soone after hauing setled the affaires of the City, hee strikes ouer into Greece, and at length ouerthrew Pompey in Thessaly
in a maine battell, Pompey ouer∣throwne 3921. and disban∣ded him, though his Army farre exceeded Caesars. Pom∣pey thus put to flight, arriues in Egypt, Ptolomy Dionysius, Ptolomy Auletes son, being then King thereof: which Auletes, (when he was expel∣led his Kingdome) Pompey had restored by Aulus Gabini∣us, as aforesaid. In regard of which benefit, hee expected aid and protection from that Countrey: but the King be∣ing a child, his Nobles (either despising Pompeyes fortune, or else fearing some troubles) treacherously kill him. And slaine. Caesar pursuing Pompey, arriues at Alexandria with 3200 men, and there first of all had notice of Pompeyes death. Cicero pas∣sing his censure vpon both of thē, If in the last war, saith he, Pompey had abated somewhat from his austere grauity, and and Caesar much from his am∣bition,
wee should haue had both a firme peace, and some Common wealth left vs. The King of Aegypt was then in warres with his sister Cleopatra. Hereupon Caesar being at Alexandria, would haue their controuersies ra∣ther decided by course of law before himselfe, then by ciuill warres amongst themselues: because hee was Consull of Rome, and some yeares before there was a cōfederacy agreed vpon with Ptolomy the Kings father by decree and consent of the Senate. But the States tooke this most hainously complaining that their Kings Royall Maiesty was ecclipsed, in calling him to sit in iudge∣ment vpon their controuersies. Thus incensed in minde they prepare to make warre against Caesar, but he after much dan∣ger getting the vpper hand, did not reduce it into the
forme of a Prouince: but tol∣lerated Cleopatra, and her yon∣ger brother (the King being slaine) to hold the Kingdome. From thence marching into Syria, and afterwards into Pontus, hee put to flight King Pharnaces, Mithridates his sonne, and setled peace in Cappadocia, Armenia, Gallo-Greece, Pontus, and Bythinia. Forthwith returning into I ta∣lie, and so to Rome about the middle of Winter, at the Win∣ter Solstitium. Sun-sted, he strikes ouer from A towne and pro∣montory in Sicilie. Lilybeum, into Africa, though warned by a chiefe Soothsayer, not to take his voyage before the end of Winter. Scipio and Cato, Mar∣cus Portius Catoes Nephewes sonnes were fled thither from the battell at Where Pompey was ouer∣hrowne. Pharsalia, and hauing gathered together a great Army, drew King King of aitnia Iuba, into confederacy with them. Cesar marching thither, ouer∣threw
and destroied them all; but Cato, (lest hee should fall into his hands) killed himselfe at Now cal∣led Biserta in Barbarie. Vtica; which fact Cicero defends and saith, that it was better for him (whom nature had indued with incredible grauitie) so to doe, then to be∣hold the face of a Tyrant. This Cato was of the sect of the Stoickes, and would often∣times maintaine strange opini∣ons in the Senate, as though he were versed in Platoes poli∣tickes, as Cicero saith, and not in the refuse off-spring of Ro∣mulus. Afterward Cesar re∣paires to Rome, and hauing triumphed ouer Gallia, Egypt, Pontus, and Affrica, set for∣ward to Spaine, where he war∣red against, and subdued Sex∣tus Pompeius. Thus hauing vanquished all his aduersaries, and setled a peace in many Nations farre and wide: in the fift yeere after the beginning
of his ciuill warres, The fourth Monarchie begun by Caius Cesar, An. 3925. being 300. yeeres and odde after Alexander the Great. he returns to Rome, where after hee had triumphed ouer Hispaine, hee assumed the offred title and authoritie of perpetuall Dicta∣tor, and swaied the Senate ac∣cording to his owne will: hee, in a manner hauing the sole bestowing of all honours, and publike offices, conferring them vpon whom he pleased, thereby incurring many mens ill-will. And now the state of the Common-wealth being alte∣red, and the supreame gouern∣ment thereof reduced to one mans principalitie, those con∣spiracies then in brewing a∣gainst him, were at length, broached: For, in the fift mo∣neth after his returne to Rome, Caius Cesar slaine. hee was slaine in Pompeys Curia. Court-house, on the Ides of March, and by those very men, whom by his late shewed kindnesse, hee had obliged to
him, as also pardoned them for seruing against him in the Pompeian warre. Those were Marcus, and Decius Brutus, Caius Cassius, Cneius, Domiti∣us, Caius Trebonius, Quintus Tullius Cimber, two of the Ser∣nilioes, Casea, Hala, and many more. Marcus Antonius the Consull, Cesars Collegue, in∣dicted Cicero also before the Senate, as guilty of the mur∣ther: for that Marcus Brutus presently after Cesar was slain, (holding vp his dagger on high) shouted aloud, and no∣minated him, congratulating him for recouerie of their li∣bertie. Many report that Caius Ce∣sar spake to Marcus Brutus in Greeke, as hee rushed vpon him, and called him sonne, how they take it, I know not; but it is euident out of Cicero, that Brutus was fifteene yeers yonger then he.
Caius Cesar made diuers lawes, some whereof when he was Consull, and other some when he was Dictator, which after his name were called the Iulian lawes: as, about distri∣bution of lands, concerning violence, Maiestie, extortion, Priest-ships, vsurie. Others lawes there were, which goe vnder his name, but were made by Octauius. All com∣mend him for his clemency, and Cicero giues him praise for his wit, quicknesse, reason, memorie, learning, proui∣dence, diligence: but hee stor∣med grieuously at his authori∣tie, yet secretly and in an Epi∣stle to Atticus, Thou shalt per∣ceiue, saith he, that this king∣dome can scarce hold halfe a yeere together. But in al those proceedings, Cicero carried himselfe very wauering and inconstantly: for during the warre, he followed Pompeyes
partie, and his camp, although hee reprehended his discou∣ragement of minde and cow∣ardise, and in his Epistles to his friends, hee cals Cesar a war-waging Tyrant and mon∣ster. But after Pompey was put to flight, and slaine, and Cesar had pardoned many of his ad∣uersaries, he changes his stile, and in three set Orations ex∣tolled him with praises to the very heauens. Further, when Cesar heard that there was treason plotted against him, and would often say, that hee had liued long enough; he be∣seeches and requests him to reiect that opinion: for al∣though hee was full fraught with glory, and in that regard, for himselfe, had liued long enough, yet hee had not liued long enough for the Com∣mon-wealth, which could not be without his aid and prote∣ction: as concerning any
danger, he need not trouble himselfe. For all of vs, saith he, doe not onely promise to watch about and guard Thee, but also to interpose our owne sides and bodies. But for all this, after Cesars death, hee reioyced won∣derfully, and boasted, that they who had slaine him, had obtained that glory, which could scarce bee contained within the heauens. This therefore is the fourth and last Monarchy: in which place we must note, how this citie which was built by Shep∣heards: from most slender be∣ginnings, by little and little increased to the height of po∣tencie, and grew to bee Em∣presse of the whole world. Now hereafter, I will briefly, as farre as I may, declare, after what manner it fell off by de∣grees from this most high e∣state, vnto ruine. The end of the first Booke.
IOHN SLEID AN of the foure chiefe Monarchies. OR, The key of History. The second Booke. CEsar being slain, Octauius Cesar be∣gun his raigue, An∣no mundi, 3925. and raigned An. 57. his sisters sonne Caius Octauius (hauing drawn about the mili∣tarie bands to his partie) per∣secuted the murtherers most bitterly. And at first, seemed to take armes in defence of the
Commō-wealth against Mar∣cus Antonius: but afterward diuding the Empire with him, and Marcus Ledipus or∣dained a Gouern∣ment by three. Cicero put to death, An. 3926. Triumuirat, in which Marcus Cicero was by Marcus Antonius (whom he had very vehemently opposed) put to death, being sixty three yeers of age, which was eight yeeres after Quintus Hortensius his death, who was so many yeers elder then hee, as abouesaid. Cicero directly ouershot him∣selfe in his owne policies: for when Marcus Antonius mole∣sted the Common-wealth, af∣ter Caius Cesars death, he with exceeding great praises com∣mended to the Senate, Caius Octauius, Cesars kinsman, a yong Gentleman of twenty yeeres of age, and begunne to vrge to haue him created Consull, without any regard had to his age, producing ex∣amples of ancient times, how
it might be done, and refuting such obiections as might seeme dangerous: professing to be bound to the Senate vpon his honour, that he should al∣waies couernue such a Com∣mon-wealths man, as he then was, and such an one, as they ought chiefly, to wish and de∣sire him to be: but afterwards, forsaken by him, hee fell into Marcus Antonius his hands. Marcus Brutus reprehends him sharpely for such his flat∣terie. Then as it is common, cer∣taine grudges arising in emu∣lation of the Empire, when as Marens Lepidus for conspira∣cie against Octauius, was for∣merly remoued out of the Triumuirat, and banished: Octauius made warre against Antonius his other Collegue: and after his victorie at A town in Epirus. Acti∣um, ouerthrew both him and Cleopatra beforementioned, at
Alexandria, forcing them both to kill themselues, and made Egypt a Romane Prouince. Au∣thors report, that in Ptolomie, Auletes raigne the yeerely re∣uenues of Egypt, came to 12500. talents, which summe the learned of our times rec∣kon to 7500000. crownes: but when it came in subiecti∣on to the Romans, they iudged it to be farre more rich, in re∣gard of the traffique with In∣dia and Aethiopia. Antonius thus ouerthrowne and cut off, Octauius alone gouerned the Common-wealth forty foure yeeres, and in 29. yeere of his Empire, and of the world, 3954. Christ born An. mundi, 3954. as most account, was our Sauiour IESVS CHRIST borne. Herod, sirnamed the Great, hauing seuen yeeres be∣fore, most sumptuously re-edi∣fied the demolished Temple of Ierusalem. Marcus Antonius was mar∣ried
to Caius Octauius his si∣ster, but afterward (being in∣tangled with Cleopatra's loue) forsooke his wife, and marri∣ed her, which partly was cause of the warre. Both of them were exceeding riotous, and Authors relate almost incredi∣ble stories of their banquets, delights, and pleasures: but such as I before set downe, was the vp-shot and end of their liues: This Marcus An∣tonius, was that most famous Oratour before-mentioned, Marcus Antonius his Nephew. In Caius Octauius his raign, the Romans had their first war in Germanie, within their own territories. Caius Iulius Cesar indeed ouerthrew the Ger∣manes twice, but it was in Gal∣lia, to wit, Ariouistus in the Country of the Celts, and af∣terwards at the meeting toge∣ther of the Riuer Maze, and the Rhyne. After this victorie,
he built a bridge, and past ouer the Rhyne, but resting there a few daies, brought backe his Armie into Gallia, and broke downe the bridge. Two yeers after, he passed again ouer the Rhyne on his second bridge, a little aboue that place where hee formerly had led ouer his Armie, and then fully intended to haue gone against the Now of Pomerania in Germa∣nie. Sue∣uians, but being certified by his Scouts of all affaires, and fearing much difficultie and scarcitie of prouision, returnes into Gallia, breakes downe some part of the bridge, and in the other part, built a To∣wer and a Castle, and fortified it with Cittadels, that hee might not altogether free his enemies from the feare of his returne. And this was all that Cesar did against the Germans, as he himself writes. But Octa∣uius by the two brothers, Ti∣berius and Drusus, made warre
against the Germanes bordering on the Alpes. Rhaetians and Vandals. Vindelicians, and with People about Co∣len. Vbian forces, (who were confede∣rates with the Romanes) Quin∣tilius Ʋarus being their Cap∣taine Generall, inuaded that part of Germanie, now called Westphalia: howbeit Armini∣us Chiefe-taine of the Germanes neere the riuer Elbe. Che∣ruscans, almost vtterly ouer∣threw him, betwixt the Riuer Ems. Amasia, and Necchar. Horat. lib. 1 Ode 24. Lupia. Horaee in a most elegant Ode, com∣forts Virgil, lamenting his death. Drusus died in Germa∣nie, leauing behinde him two sonnes, Germanicus a most worthy soldier, and Claudius. Horace in another most ele∣gant Ode, as wee said before, Horat. lib. 4 Ode 4. extols him, and deriues his pe∣degree from Caius Claudius Nero, who when hee was the second time Consull, together with Marcus Liuius Saelinator, slew Asdrubal, Annibals bro∣ther, at the Riuer of Metan∣rum,
as he was bringing ouer a supply of forces. Octauius so stiled, in honour, as much as Soueraign at this day. Augustus also subdued the Of Biscay in Spaine. Cantabrians, Of Aqui∣tane in Gal∣lia. Aquitanians, Hungars. Pannonians, Inhabi∣ting Wen∣denland in some parts. Dalmatians, Of Scla∣uonia also or Wenden∣lond. Illyrians, Inhabi∣ting neere Lombardie. Salas∣sians, and inhabitants of the Alpes. It is reported, that he often intended, to lay off the weightie charge of the Em∣pire: but againe considering with himselfe that it would be rashly committed to many mens authority, changes his minde. In the thirty third yeere of his raigne, deceased Herod the Great: whom hee, and Marcus Antonius in the third yeere of their Triumui∣rate, had made King of Iudaea: and in the eight yeere after his death, his sonne and suc∣cessor Archelaus was banished to Vienna a Towne in Gallia. It is written, that Octauius maintained forty foure legions of soldiers in protection of the Prouinces of the Empire. In
Egypt, there were three, as ma∣ny in Hispaine, and eight in Germanie. The yeerly expence (as many in their computati∣on reckon) amounts to 2100000. crownes, so as they may distribute amongst euery legion, 272000. crownes yeerely. A legion as they hold, consists of 6000. footmen, and 500. horsemen. Octauius is very much com∣mended for his loue and libe∣ralitie towards men renow∣ned for their learning. The most famous Poets which then flourished, were Varius, Ʋir∣gil, Plotius, Ʋalgius, Fusous, the two Viscoes, Pollio, Messa∣la, the Bibulies, Seruius, Fur∣nius, and Horace, who desired that his workes might haue approbation frō them, not re∣garding other mens censures of thē. But the most famous wits of Reme, flourisht in a certaine continuall order from Marcus
Portius Cato, and Aphricanus the elder, vntill this time. For this age wherein Augustus li∣ued, was in a manner the last that retained that genuine sense, and pure vigour of the Latine tongue; for afterwards by little and little, it grew more and more corrupt, till it degenerated into meere bar∣barisme, which continued e∣uen till within our memorie. The Poets borne at Citie of Betica in Spaine. Corduba, vsed as Tully saith, a kinde of grosse and vncouth garbe: but what thinke wee, would hee haue iudged of them, who li∣ued after him aboue a hundred yeeres, not onely those who were borne and brought vp at Corduba, but those of Rome also. Now Tiberius Augustus his wiues sonne, Tiberius An. Dom. 16. an. 23. m.  d. 26. as also his sonne in law, and by adoption, did (but vtterly against his will, at leastwise hee pretended so,
being with much adoe at last perswaded to it by the Senates entreaty) take vpon him the Empire, and at his first en∣trance, vndertooke nothing of himselfe alone, but commu∣nicated with the Senate in all matters of importance: not∣withstanding within a little while after quite neglecting the affaires of the common∣wealth wholly gaue ouer him∣selfe to his pleasures. In his raigne the Parthians bereft him of Amenia, and the Da∣cians and Sarmatians of Moe∣sia, the Germanes forraged Gal∣lia: but all those losses nothing at all mooued him. Many writers, (and those, men of great esteeme in point of Diuinity) record that in the fifteenth yeare of his raign our Sauiour IESVS CHRIST was crucified, Christ cru∣cified, An. etatis 34. Luk. cap. 3. but Saint Luke writes, that in that same yeare he was baptiz'd by Iohn Baptist.
At that time flourisht those Lawiers, Marcus Coccius Ner∣na, the father and sonne, and Cassius Longinus. Tiberius Nero who serued in the warre at A∣lexandria with Caius Caesar, was this Tiberius his Father. To him Caius Caesar Caligula succeeded, Caius Cali∣gula, An. om. 38. an. 3. m. 8. d. 8. the most wicked sonne and direct monster of Germanicus his most worthie father. Its recorded that Ti∣berius in those twentie three yeares which he raigned, had gathered together an infinite Masse of gold: which Caligu∣la out of hand in the very first yeare consumed. About the second yeare of his raigne He∣rod Antipa, Herod the Great his Sonne, he who beheaded Iohn the Baptist, was sent in banishment to Lyons in France. Lugdunum: to whom Herod Agrippa suc∣ceeded, who beheaded Iames the Apostle. After Caligula was slaine,
Claudius his vncle was broght in. Claudius, 42. an. 13. m. 8. d. 20. He hearing that Brittaine had reuolted, went thither, and after hee had subdued part of the Iland, retur∣ned home. In his raigne hap∣pened that great generall dearth, which Agabus fore∣told, Acts 11. as the Euangelist Saint Luke mentions. Claudius Nero, Nero 56. An. 13. this Claudius his successor, openly signified, that at some time or other, hee would quite abrogate the or∣der of the Senatours. In his raigne Brittaine gaue him a great ouerthrow, massacring the Roman Citizens and confe∣derates there: the Legions also in Armenia were compelled to goe reprochfully vnder the yoke: with much difficulty Syria was held in: Gallia re∣uolted by the meanes of Iulius Vindex Gouernour of that pro∣uince: as afterwards Spaine, Galba 68. m. 7. d. 7. Sergius Galba being their Lea∣der.
And whilst he was casting about how to recouer those losses, Othom. 4. Vitellius m. 8. and making ready his iourney into Gallia, the rest of his forces which lay dispersed in other prouinces, rebelled. Histories relate what a loath∣some and outragious Monster he was: and thereupon being condemned by the Senate, as an enemy to the Common∣wealth, by the helpe of one of his seruants, he killed himselfe. Besides Seneca these Poets thē florished, Lucan, Persius, and Silius Italicus: the last where∣of was Confull in the last yeare of Neroes raigne. From that time the State of the Common wealth was brought to that passe, that the Creation of the Emperours lay within the po∣wer of the Armies and legions of the Romanes. After this manner was Vespatian made Emperour. Ʋespatian 69. an 9. m. 11. d. 24. For those bands which lay in Masia, Pannonia,
Iudaea, and Syria reuolted from Auls Vitellius, and swore feal∣tie to Vespasian. Hee subdued Achaia, Lycia, Rhodes, Byzan∣tium, Samos, Thracia, Cilicia, and Comagena, making them Roman Prouinces, and vtterly subuerted Ierusalem, Titus. 79. an. 2. m. 2. d. 20. Domitiaen 81. an. 15. which warre his son Titus mannaged. Flauius Domitian, made warre against the Now of the Lantz∣graue of Hessens Countrey. Nerua 96, an. 1. m. 1. Trajane 97 an. 19. m. 6. d. 15. Chatties, Dacians, and Sarmatians, and triumph∣ed ouer them. Then liued those Poets, Statius, Iuuenal, and Martial. Vlpius Trajane (adopted by Cocceus Nerua, and afterwards made Empe∣rour) subdued the Dacians, twice rebelling, bringing them in subiection to the Ro∣mans, and planting Colonies there, marching with an Ar∣my against Armenia, and the Parthians, vpon dedition and fauour brought them into his partie, thereupon gaining his sirname of Parthicus, but al∣most
all those Countries by him subdued at length rebel∣led, especially the Armenians and Mesopotamians, and the Parthians reiected the King whom hee had assigned them, as soon as his backe was turned homewards towards Italy. Aelius Adrianus subdued I∣daea then rebelling: Adrianus 116. an. 19. m. 6. d. 15. the occa∣sion of this warre, was because he had erected a Temple at Ierusalem (which City he suf∣fered to bee inhabited againe) to Iupiter Olympius: which fact the Iewes tooke most hai∣nously. Hee likewise visited the Gallia's, Germany, Brittaine, and the Hispaines, as afterwards Mauritania, the Parthians, Asia and Greece: & returning home through Sicilie, from thence went againe into Africa: and after his returne to Rome, sets forward againe into Greece, and from thence passed into Arabia, and afterward to E∣gypt.
Assembling the Senate, Antoninus Pius, 151. an. 22. m. 7. d. 26. hee commended to them Anto∣ninus Pius, who being made Emperor after him, maintain'd peace, endeauoring to obtaine all mens good will, and by his letters and courteous demea∣nure, kept forreine Kings and people within their obedi∣ence. In his time flourisht those Lawiers, Alburnius Va∣lens, Tuscianus, Vindius, Ʋerus, Ʋlpius, Marcellus, Arrianus, Tertullianus, Saluius, Iulianus, Lucius Volusius, Metianus. To Antonius Pius his sonne Marcus Antoninus surnamed the Philosopher, succeeded: Antoninus the Philo∣sopher 160 an. 19. m. 0. d. 11. He tooke his Carien calls him his brotuer kinsman Lucius Aurelius Verus to be his Asso∣ciate in the Empire. By him hee had happy successe in his warres in Parthia, hee himselfe looking to the affaires of the Common-wealth at home, and in the City: but soone after Verus dying he raigned alone,
and ouercame in his warre a∣gainst the Germaues, ouer∣throwing also the Now Mo∣rauians. Marco∣mannes. Sarmatians, Vandalls, and Inhabi∣tants in and about Sile∣sia. Quadies, who had inua∣ded the Vpper & lower Hun∣garia. Pannonia's. For at this time almost all the nations from Illyricum to Gallia, had conspired against the name of the Romanes. Commodus Antoninus the most lewd sonne of this most laudable Prince, Commodus Anteninus 79. an. 12. m. 8. d. 15. by his Leiute∣nants ouerthrew the Of Mau∣ritania or Morisco in Barbary. Pertinax. m. 3. Didius Iu∣lianus m. 7. Septimius Seuerus 192. ca. 17. m. 8. . 5. Moores and Dacians, quieted the Pan∣noniaes, Germanie and Britanie, which Countries cast off their subiection: He himselfe in the meane while, wallowing in all manner of filthinesse and cru∣eltie. Septimius Seuerus had ciull warres with Niger and Albinus who procured Asia and Gallia to make a reuolt: he had good successe in his warres against the Parthians, vanqushed the
Iewes throughout Syria, subdu∣ed Abagatus King of the Per∣sians, and compelled the Ara∣bians to come to composition. He fortified Brittanie, with a wall crosse ouertwart the I∣land, reaching to the Ocean on both sides: and hauing sub∣dued those people that annoy∣ed the Country dyed at Yorke. His son Antoninus Bassianus Caracalla, Caracalla 210. an. 6. m. 2. d. 5. made warre against the Parthians and Armenians. This was hee that comman∣ded Pupinianus, Prafectū praetorij, Gouernor of the pre∣torian Co∣hort. Captaine of the Guard, to bee put to death, for refusing to defend his For Ca∣racalla slew his brother Geta. fra∣tricide. In his time flourisht many Lawyers, and most of them Pupinianus his Auditors, as Tarruntius, Paternus Macer, Papirius Fronto, Anthius, Max∣imus, Hermogenianus, Africa∣nus, Florentinus, Triphoninus, Iushts, Callistratus, Venuleius Celsus. After Caracalla was slaine,
Macrinus succeeded, Macrinus 216. An. 1. m. 1. d. 28. who, hauing bad successe in his warres against Artabanus King of the Parthians, and percei∣uing the legions encline to Heliogabulus Bassianus his son, Heliogabu∣lus 217. an. 3 m. 9. d. 4. Alexander Senerus 221. an. 13. m. 0. d. 9. concluded a peace. Alexander Seuerus a stout souldier, successor to Helioga∣bulus that most brutish of men: ouerthrew Artaxerxes King of the Persians in maine battle: and recouered Mesopotamia, which was lost by Heliogabu∣lus. Hee made warre by his Lieutenants in Mauritania, Il∣lyricum, and Armenia, and had good successe: but afterwards in his expedition against the Germanes, who had forraged the Countrey of Gallia, was murthered by certaine of his owne souldiers. Ʋlpianus the Lawyer, Pupinianus his schol∣ler was very intimate with him, and in his time liued Pau∣lus Pomponius, and Modestinus.
To this Alexander Maxi∣minus succeeded: Maximinus 234. An. 2. Hee with maine forces marches into Germanie: his Army consisting not onely of Roman souldiers, but also of Moores, Osdronians, and Parthians, who had serued vnder Alexander. He burnt the Dorps in Germany farre and wide, put very many of his enemies to the sword, and tooke many more prisoners, returning with a wealthy Ar∣my: Germany being at peace he marches to Syrmium, and was purposed to haue made warre against the Sarmatians, not onely so, but his further intent was, to haue brought all those Countries which lye northward euen to the Ocean, in subiection to the Roman Empire: but his souldiers not enduring his cruelty, Gordianus 236. m. 1. d. 6. created Gordianus their Captaine Ge∣nerall, which the Senate (bear∣ing no good will neither to∣wards
Maximinus) ratified and proclaimed the other ene∣mie to the Common-wealth. He, going about to reuenge this fact, first made an Oration to the armie, and then set for∣wards towards Rome: the Se∣nate vpon notice hereof pro∣claime Pupienus and Balbinus their Emperours: Pupienus, Balbinus 236. an. 1. some moneths. and to Pupi∣enus was committed the charge of the warre against Maximinus, who, together with his sonne, was at the siege of A Citie in Italie. Aquileia slaine by his owne soldiers as hee lay asleepe in his Tent. After this, Pupienus and Balbinus being both slaine in a mutinie amongst the soldiers in the second yeere of their raigne, the gouernement of the Empire was committed to Gordianus a yong Gentle∣man. Gordianus iunior, 237 Ann. 6. He in the fourth yeere of his raigne, marched through Moesia and Thracia against
the Persians, & in those coun∣tries subdued the enemies of the Romans; from thence, stri∣king through Syria, came to Antiochia, which was then held by the Persians. There he fought diuers battels, in so much as hee compelled the Persians, who were in a man∣ner accounted the terror of Italie, to containe themselues in their own limits. At length, in the sixth yeere of his Em∣pire, hee was slaine, being be∣traied by Philip Captaine of the Gard, Philip, 243. An. 5. who had raised a mutinie amongst the soldiers. And this Philip also, who sent ouer his Lieutenants with an armie against the Scythians that were vp in armes against the confederates of the Ro∣mans and their free-boroughs, came to the He was slaine by his owne soldiers at Verona. Decius, 248. An. 2. like end: Decius succeeded him, who being created Emperour by the Le∣gions of Illyricum, and after∣wards
by cōsent of the Senate; first of all appeased the trou∣bles in Gallia. Afterwards com∣mending the care of the Com∣mon-wealth to the Senate, Hee, together with his sonne, whom hee had made his Collegue in the Empire, sets forwards, (hauing the Se∣nates consent thereunto) on his expedition against the Scythians, who both by sea and land forraged the country of Thracia and other domini∣ons of the Empire: from whence (after some battels, hauing got the vpper-hand, and drawne the enemie into a narrow straight place) he had returned with complete victo∣rie, had not Gallus Hostilianus Gouernour of the furthest parts of Moesia, reuealed his counsell to the enemie; where∣upon it came to passe, vpon ioyning battell, that both hee and his sonne (by trecherie
circumuented) were slaine. After this, Gallus 250. An. 1. m. 6. Gallus made Emperour by one of the Legi∣ons, and the remainder of the furuiuing soldiers, concluded a peace with the Scythians, to the dishonour and ignominie of the Romans, in that he pro∣mised to pay them tribute, ne∣uer heard of before, and alto∣gether vnworthy the Maiesty of so renowned a State. The Scythians hereupon growne more fierce, broke the league, ouer-runne Dardania, Thrace, Thessalie, Macedonia, not re∣sting there, but Asia also o∣uerthrowing and subuerting very many Cities. At length, many other Countries, after the example of the Scythians, turned enemies to the Romans, and many rebelled. The Par∣thians broke into Syria, and seized vpon Armenia, putting their King Tyridates to flight. And such was the insolencie
of the Seythians, that they threatned Italie also, and were likely to haue done much mis∣chiefe, had not Aemilianus Gouernour of Moesia vpon the coast of Sarmatia, encouraging his soldiers with faire promi∣ses, and hope of rewards, giuen them an ouerthrow, and pur∣suing them very farre, Aemilianus, 252. m. 4. tooke from them their owne Terri∣tories: for this cause the soldi∣ers proclaime him Emperour: and Gallus vpon notice hereof, marching forth to resist them, was slaine, together with his sonne Volusianus his Collegue in the Empire. In this age flourished Cypri∣an Bishop of Carthage, certaine of whose Epistles to Lucius Bishop of Rome, whom hee calls his brother and collegue, are amongst diuers others, yet extant: and many more of his to Cornelius, where amongst other matters, hee complaines
of those, who being for their offences condemned by the Bishops of Affrica, and degra∣ded from their Priesthood, had appealed to Rome: for it is fit saith hee, that where the crime is committed, there the cause should bee discussed. Si∣thence euery Pastor hath a cer∣taine portion of a flocke com∣mitted to his charge, whereof he must render an account to the Lord: therefore the con∣cord of Bishops is not to bee abrogated, Valerianus 252. An. 7. nor their decree to be annihilated, who had alrea∣die giuen sentence in the cause, in Affrica. In the meane space, another armie, lying in the Alpes, cre∣ates Valerianus Emperour, a man of Noble parentage, which when it came to the cares of Aemilians soldiers, they, to shake off all danger from themselues, kill their owne Emperour, and flie to
Valerianus his partie. This Ae∣milianus, when hee was made Emperour, sent his letters to the Senate, wherein hee pro∣mised to deliuer Thracia and Mesopotamia from the enemy, to recouer Armenia, and on euery side to repel the enemies of the Roman State. Valerianus making warre against the Persians, was by fault of one of his Captaines, taken prisoner, by Sapor King of Persia, whom the neighbouring Princes, and confederate Nations, counsel∣led (but all in vaine) to haue dismissed. For it was the desti∣nie of the Romans to grow more valiant in resistance, after they were conquered. Valerianus thus taken priso∣ner, Gallienus 295. An. 8. his sonne Gallienus succee∣ded. He wholly gaue himselfe to his pleasures, neglecting the Common-wealth, insomuch as the armies which lay dis∣persed in the Prouinces, ele∣cted
euery one a new Empe∣rour; as in Gallia, Spaine, the Pannonia's, Illyricum, Egypt, Affrica, and the rest: but partly by him, partly by ciuill dissen∣tions amongst themselues, all those were ouerthrown. In his raigne, the Gothes seize vpon Thracia, forrage Macedonia, and besiege Thessalonica: the Scythians inuade Bythinia, Cap∣padocia, and Asia, and striking through the Which parteth Europe and Asia. Euxine sea into A Riuer in Jllyri∣cum, which begins in Germany, and is there cal∣led Danu∣bius or Da∣now. Isther, offer hostilitie against the free-borroughs of the Ro∣mans, but so excessiue was his rechlesnesse, then when these newes of the Prouinces reuolt, and publike calamitie came to his eares, his reply was in deri∣sion and scorne: as though all this could not hinder the sub∣sistance of the Common∣wealth, or the preseruation of the dignitie thereof, or the state thereof bee any whit im∣paired thereby. Thus by this
dishonourable course of life, growne into contempt, as well at home as abroad, hee got himselfe many enemies in the Common-wealth, the Scythi∣ans and Gothes mixt together with other Nations, being a∣bout 320000. strong, were then vp in armes, and had con∣spired the destruction of the Romans: Flauius Claudius 167. An. 1. m. 9. Aurelianus 269. An. 6. but Flauius Claudius (who succeeded after Gallie∣nus was slaine,) with much adoe vanquished all those in Moesia and other places. Hee was a man of great prowesse, and worthie of a longer life. After Claudius, followed Aurelianus, because his worth was eminent, hauing made euident proofe thereof in Claudius his raigne, against the enemie in many places. He made warres in Insubria, and with the Marcomannes: at the beginning indeed with much hazard and ieopardie,
but at length, (after the Si∣bylla's bookes, by his com∣mand, were perused, and the Senate had purged Religion) with happy successe. After his returne from thence to Rome, (where hee inflicted a penaltie vpon those, who in his absence had raised an in∣surrection;) he made warre for recouerie of those Prouin∣ces which lay eastward, and in Syria, which Zenobia held, (a puissant and magnanimous Queene, and her owne chil∣drens Tutrix) being left to her by her husband Odeuatus, who in Gallienus his time, behaued himselfe very couragiously and stoutly in those parts. Wheresoeuer this Empe∣rour set his foot, there he ouer∣threw the enemies of the Ro∣mans, as in Illyricum, Thracia, and the rest: and at length ar∣riuing in the Syria. enemies coun∣try, after no lesse doubtfull
then dangerous battell, ouer∣threw and tooke the Zenobia. Queen; who, relying vpon the Arme∣nian and Persian auxiliars, most valiantly resisted him. The chiefe Citie in that Country, (which he subdued,) was Pal∣myra: the Citizens whereof, vpon the Emperours returne out of Asia into Europe, rebel∣led, killing their Gouernour, and maintaining a Garrison for their defence. But the Em∣perour making another expe∣dition thither, demolished the conquered Citie, put all to the sword, not sparing any age or sexe. After this, he recouered Egypt, which then had reuol∣ted, and of a new reduced the Gallia's into the Roman subie∣ction. Then hee triumphed at Rome, and from thence mar∣ching through Illyricum, pro∣claimed warre against the Per∣sians: but in his iourney, was slaine by his owne familiar
friends. After his death, there was a Jnterreg∣num. vacancie for a For sixe moneths. Tacitus 275 m. 6. space, which had neuer happened before since Romulus his de∣cease. At length, Tacitus suc∣ceeded, who, continuing Em∣perour but a few moneths, at∣chieued no memorable ex∣ploit; him the Senate reque∣sted, that he would not ordain his children his successors af∣ter him in the Empire, Florianus, m. 2. Probus 276 an. 6. m. 4. but some man of approued worth and integritie: which was, Probus, who being confirmed, as well by the Legions as the Senate, recouered Gallia, and in diuers battels ouerthrew the Inhabi∣ting Fran∣conia, now called Franken∣landt. French, a people of Ger∣manie, who had gotten pos∣session thereof. He vanquished the Sarmatians, and other Na∣tions in Illyricum; and coasting through Thracia, with the ve∣ry terrour of the name of the Romans, and the greatnesse of his noble exploits, obliged
the barbarous people to his subiection: In Asia hee setled a peace, and the fame onely of his name, made the Parthi∣an King sue for peace. Hee concluded a peace with the Persians, and from thence re∣turned into Thracia, and transplanted those forraigne nations whom he had subdued into the Roman territories; some whereof, continued in subiection, but others contra∣riwise, notwithstanding after∣wards hee vanquished all or the greatest part of them: and hauing composed the rebelli∣ons in Gallia, Hispaine, and Britaine, in his iourney through Illyricum, towards his intended warre against the Persians, was trecherously slaine, by his owne soldiers. At this time the Common∣wealth flourished, peace being setled in all nations on euery side farre and neere; in so much
as Probus would sometimes say, that the world would come to that passe shortly, that there would be no need of Le∣gions and garrisons: but the souldiers offended at this his speech, thought it best to cut him off. After him, followed Carus: Carus 282. An. 1. and some mo∣neths to∣gether with his sonnes, Corinus & Numeria∣nus. hee subdued the Sarneatians, who now, after Probus his death, were growne more insolent, and menaced euen Italie it selfe: then making an expedition against the Persi∣ans, tooke Mesopotamia, and marching on further, died. His yonger sonne Numerianus serued in the warres with him: his other sonne Carinus hee had set ouer the Gallia's. Nu∣merianus was slaine by his Arius Aper. Diocletian, 284. an. 20. wiues father, and in his place, came Diocletian: with whom Carinus had diuers conflicts about obtaining the Empire, but was ouerthrowne and
slaine. Diocletian in regard of the troubles and seditions in many places kindling, tooke to him for his Collegue, Max∣imianus. He quiered the coun∣try of Gallia then in commo∣tion, as also Affrica; and Dio∣cletian Egypt putting the Au∣thors of these broiles to death. He recouered Britaina also in the tenth yeer after the reuolt: and to the end that the state of the Common-wealth might be more firme, and to auoid new commotions about suc∣cession, hee adopted Galerius, and Maximianus, Constanti∣us Chlorius. Galerius being sent by Diocletian, against Narses King of the Parthians, had ill fortune in that warre, losing the major part of his armie: but afterwards com∣manded to renew the warre, he ouerthrew the enemie in maine battell, and marching on further in those places, then
any other Emperour, except Trajan, tooke Ctesiphon, sub∣dued all Assyria, and recouered the fiue Prouinces, lying be∣yond the riuer Running through Armenia. Tigris, which had reuolted in Trajan the Emperours time. Diocletian hauing setled the affaires of Asia, returned into Europe, where the Scythians, Sarmatians, Almaines, lying be∣twixt the Alpes and Ments, as Carion sup∣poses. Alans, People of Sarmatia. Bastar∣nans, welling about the Riuer Car∣pis in Scy∣thia. Constantius Galerius, 304. an. 2 m 3. an. 7. m. 5. Carpies, Chatties, and Quadies, were then all in peace. Afterwards both hee, as also Maximianus resigning their Soueraigntie, inuest their Collegues before mentioned, with the title of Emperours: Constantius of the Gallia's, Bri∣taine, the Hispaines, Italie, and Affrica; and Galerius, of Illyri∣cum, Greece, and Asia: Marcel∣lus was then Bishop of Rome, whose decree is extant, prohi∣biting Bishops from calling a Synode, without the authori∣ty of the Sea of Rome, as also
to condemne any Bishop who should appeale to Rome. But Maxentius the Emperour per∣secuting him, his estate as o∣thers before him, was both meane and miserable. Where∣upon it may easily bee conie∣ctured, whether or no, he (in those perplexities and lurking corners) could take so much vpon him, as to establish such manner of decrees. At length Constantius dying at Yorke, Galerius adopted Se∣verus and Maximianus. In the meane space, the Preterian souldiers at Rome, elect Max∣entius their Emperour. After Seuerus was slaine, Maximia∣nus made choice of Licinius for his Collegue in the Em∣pire. Among those arose great troubles: whereupon the No∣bles of Rome call home Con∣stantine, Constantius his sonne, then imploied in the Gallia's, to rescue their Citie from the
tyranny of Maxentius. Constantine the Great, 306. an. 30. m. 9. d. 27. Hee marching forward into Italie, with part of his armie, in pitcht field, got the victorie, and afterwards quite defeated Maxentius his forces at the Citie of Rome. After this, hee fought against Licinius, who being ouerthrowne in battell, and almost growne into ha∣tred with all men, was at length slaine by his own soul∣diers. Many write that the cause of this warre was, for that Licinius did bitterly per∣secute the professors of Chri∣stianitie, although he had been very often intreated and ad∣monished to the contrary by Constantine. For from the time of the resurrection of Christ, vntill this age, (almost three hundred yeeres) the professors of Christ were diuersly puni∣shed; omitting those whereof the Scripture makes mention, as of Acts 7. Stephen, Acts 11. Iames the bro∣ther
of Iohn, Acts 9. Peters imprison∣ment and inlargement by the Angel; passing ouer in silence Paul likewise, who grieuously persecuted the Church of God, but after his conuersion, escaped no kinde of punish∣ment for Christs cause: the Roman Emperours also, as Ne∣ro, Domitian, Trajan, Septi∣mius Seuerus, Decius, Valerian, Aurelian, Diocletian, and Maximian, committed most horrible and outragious mas∣facres. But Constantine com∣ming to the Empire, and im∣bracing the true Religion, affoorded harbour and refuge to the Christians. Then first of all beganne the Bishops of Rome to liue in safeie; for till then, almost all of them, (who from Peter, whom they will haue to be their first, are recko∣ned to thirty three) were tor∣mented with persecutions. Their decrees are inserted in
the bookes of the Councels, but the greatest part of them are so sleight, triuiall, & quite different from the sacred Scriptures, as makes it credi∣ble that they were a long time after forged by some others. But if they bee true, and pro∣ceeded from them, then in∣deed that which Paul by pro∣phesie foretold, 2 Thes. 2. seemes most rightly to bee applied to this place, that then that sonne of perdition and man of sinne beganne to worke the myste∣rie of iniquity. That decree yet extant goes vnder Anacletus his name, the fourth from Pe∣ter, as they reckon; wherein he ordaineth the Church of Rome to be (by Christs com∣mand and institution) the head of other Churches. To Alexander the next af∣ter him, is that decree attribu∣ted, where he commands, that the water should be consecra∣ted
with salt, to purge the peo∣ple, and to auoid the snares of the Deuill. But iudge I pray you how far those differ from that Maiestie of the Apostles, how farre from the writings of S. S. Ierom writes that he dyed in the 68 yere after the passion. Suidas says that he liued 120 yeares. Iohn the Euangelist who almost liued till this very time. I haue onely set downe these two decrees, that by them wee may iudge of the rest, for they are almost of the same molde, and cary open colour of ambi∣tion, and not onely the speech wants the grace, but also the matter it selfe hath no salt in it, Colos. 4. both which Paul requires in the Ministers of the Church. And to this place also apper∣taines, that decree of Constan∣tine the Emperor, which they haue inserted into their books, for the foundation and bul∣warke of their power. For the cause and occasion of his exces∣siue In con∣ferring (as they ima∣gine) the City of Rome the Empire of the West &c. vpon he Popes. liberality, which is there set downe, may out of history,
be disproued and conuicted of falshood. Further, bee it gran∣ted that the Emperor was thus most exceedingly profuse; per∣haps for himselfe onely, hee might herein abate of his own right, but could not doe it, for his successors, authorized with coequal power, and Protectors of the Common-wealth. For hee who damnifies the free∣dome and liberties of his Em∣pire, ought not to haue the ti∣tle of Father of his Countrey, nor can he ordaine another to share with him in equality of authority or preiudice the same. By Constantine the Emperors appointment, The first Councell of Nice held in An. 325. con∣tinued 3. yeares. a most populous Counsell was called and as∣sembled at Nice a City in By∣thinia, wherein the heresie of Arrius, denying Christ to be coequall in substance with his father, was condemned. Its recorded that many Bishops,
not onely out of Europe and Asia, but also out of Egypt and Lybia, met together there. Amongst other, one decree was, that through Egypt, Lybia and Pontapolis; the ancient cu∣stome should be maintained, that is, all the Bishops there, should remaine vnder superio∣rity of the Bishop of Alexan∣dria, notwithstanding the v∣surpation and withholding therof by the Bishop of Rome: as also that the Church of An∣tioch and other Prouinces and Churches should each one en∣tirely retaine their peculiar priuiledges. After this Coun∣cell, certaine Iewd opinions were vented, (one Eustathius being Author) about shunning of mariage, In mona∣sticall man∣ner, and some wo∣men arti∣red in mens ha∣bite. about a new and vnusuall kind of habit, about forbearance to eate flesh, and forsaking propriety of posses∣sions. And hereupon (many husbands procuring a diuorce,
and seruants leauing their ma∣sters, betaking themselues to this new and religious habite, as they call it; women likewise taking the same course, forsa∣king their husbands: and those who fed vpon flesh, as also the Ministers of the Church that were maried being publikely contemned, as persons impure and vnacceptable to God;) a Counsell was assembled at Gangra a town in Paphlagonia, wherein those were condem∣ned, who either taught or held that opinion. Constantine (for reestablish∣ing a peace in the Common-wealth) being with most ge∣nerall acclamation, confumed both by the Senate and people of Rome, turned himselfe who∣ly to forraine warres, and after many battels ouerthrew the Gthes and Sarmatians, then forraging the Countrey of Thracia; afterwards being
strucken in yeares, he proclai∣med warre against the Persi∣ans, who wasted the Country of Mesopotamia: and in Asia, where he was arriued with his Army, (after receipt of a medi∣cine for recouery of his health) breathed his last, not without suspition of poison. This is he by surname, stiled the Great: who named By∣zantium a City of Thrace after his owne His desire was to haue it called New Rome, but vse pre∣uailed and altered it to Constan∣tinople. name, and thither translated the Imperiall Seat. He began his At Rome, but hee raigned 6. yeares be∣fore in Brittaine and else∣where. raigne about the three hundred and twelfth yeare after the birth of Christ. It is written that Comets of wonderfull greatnesse, were seene before his death. Hee left three sonnes, Constantine, Constantius, and Constans, a∣mongst those was the body of the Empire diuided, to Con∣stantine part of the Alpes, Gal∣lia, Hispaine, Brittaine The Iland of Orkney lying neer and belon∣ging to Scotland. the Or∣cades, Ireland, and Now cal∣led Island lying be∣yond Scot∣land, as some say, others Hitland. Constantine, 337. An. 3. Constantius 337. An. 24 Conslaus 337. An. 1 Thyle, were
allotted: to Constans, Italy, A∣frica, with the Islands, Illyri∣cum, Macedonia, Achaia, Pe∣loponnesus, and Greece: to Con∣stantius, Asia, and Thrace. Constantine not satisfied with this diuision made warre vpon his brother Constans, and at Aquileia (whither he was then come) ioyning battell with Constans his forces: lost both his Army and his life. Constans who in the meane time, was vp in Armes against the The same who were afterwards called Gothes. Carion. Getes and Sarmatians in Dacia, re∣turnes into Italie, and hauing gotten the Alpes, inuaded Gallia, and in two yeares space won all his deceased brothers dominions: but was slaine within a while after by the treachery and crafty dealing of Magnentius. Him, the soul∣diers (before hand allured and inueigled with rewards) elec∣ted Emperour. Constantius the onely suruiuing brother of the
three, vpon notice hereof, (deputing Gallus his vncles sonne, and sisters husband, his Vice-gerent ouer Asia) mar∣ches with a strong Army into Italy, and so into Gallia, where in maine battell he ouerthrew the Enemy. But Magnentius es∣caping, sends his Ambassadors to sue for peace. Whose suit the Conqueror rejecting, he on a fresh wages battell again, but with ill successe: there∣upon flying to Lyons, where perceiuing his owne friends to conspire his destruction, and not hauing any corner where to hide himselfe, became his owne executioner. Afterwards Constantius commanded Gallus his Cosin germane, and Vice∣gerent for Asia as abouesaid, (who abused his authority and power) to bee put to death, when he could not o∣therwise remedy it. After this he returnes into Asia, with in∣tent
to prosecute the warre in Persia, which, by reason of Magnentius his faction aboue∣mentioned, he had broken off. And in regard the Germanes about this time, making an in∣road into Gallia, forraged the Countrey there, hee adopted his other Cosin germane Iuli∣anus, Gallus his brother, and to him committed the protection of Gallia. Iulianus, (hauing had prosperous successe in his de∣signes, and in many battels gotten the vpper hand) beat backe the Enemy beyond the Rhyne, tooke many prisoners, and rescued many Roman soul∣diers out of prison, and at Strasburg in Germany Ar∣gentine almost quite cut off the Enemies whole Army. Here∣upon the souldiers proclaime him not onely Caesar, but also Augustus, and set a Diadem vpon his head, but against his will as hee pretended. For in his letters to Constantius he in∣deauoured
to remoue the en∣vie of the fact frō himselfe. But Constantius hereat greiuously offended, ceasing his warre in Persia, and liberally and kind∣ly entreating the neighbour∣ing nations, that they might continue their allegiance, sets forward on his iourney to re∣duce Iulianus to his duty; but on the way whilst hee was yet in Asia, being taken with a feuer, ended his life, first or∣daining Iulianus his successor. During Iulianus his raigne the enemies contained them∣selues within their owne bounds not raising any com∣motion in any place. Julianus 361. an. 1. m. 7. d. 23. He him∣selfe went out against the Per∣sians, and forraging Assyria (ha∣uing put the Enemies forces to flight) marched forwards as farre as Ctesiphon. At length returning home with his for∣ces, the enemy set vpon him in the rere, where, fighting in the
midst of his souldiers in the maine battalia, hee receiued a wound, whereof, within a while after, he died, an enemy to the name of Christ. The souldiers hauing thus lost their Leader, Iouinianus, 363. m. 7. d. 22. being plunged in great distresse, create Iouinianus Emperor: at what time Iulius the first of that name was Bi∣shop of Rome: certaine of whose Epistles to the Bishops of the East, are yet extant, in which he often presses it, that to Him alone, as Bishop, saith he, of the chiefe See, by a cer∣taine singular priuiledge and diuine ordinance, belongeth the right of conuocating Ge∣nerall Councells. But it may seeme wonderfull, with what face hee could write thus, or they so boast of it, when as be∣fore him, Constantin had cal'd the Councell of Nice; and af∣ter him, a hundred yeares full, Martianus the Emperor called
the Councell of Chalcedon. To Him also alone, as Primate of that City, saith hee, apper∣taines the cognizance of Epis∣copall causes, and other matters of that kinde of more weighty importance. This his arrogan∣cy the Bishops could not en∣dure. But assembling at An∣tiech, boldly reply: That it was not fit, that the sentence by them passed should bee re∣pealed by him, for that they were possessed of the same de∣gree of dignity, whereof hee was, and the doctrine of Christ, came from their Coun∣tries to Rome Tandem. at the second hand, by the paines and mini∣stery of the Apostles. Where∣fore in case he should proceed, and make new decrees, they would not obey them, neither haue communion with him, but would take such a course as the matter it selfe should re∣quire. And in another Coun∣cell
in the same City (of grea∣ter concourse then the former) amongst other decrees, They limit the office of a Bishop, as also of a Metropolitane, about discussing matters of more weighty importance. For they decreed, that in case the Bi∣shops concurre not, the Metro∣palitane of the next adioyning prouince, shall delegate cer∣taine Iudges to determine the cause. But if any Bishop bee condemned for an offence by common decree of the rest of the Bishops, they ordaine that their sentence shall stand firme, and not bee repealed by ano∣ther. They further establish that the Bishop, shall faithfully dispence the Bona sa∣cra. goods of the Church, and distribute them to the vse of the poore, and that hee himselfe if need re∣quire, may take from thence as much as shall bee necessary for naturall sustentation. For St.
Paul saith, 1 Tim. 6.8. We ought to bee con∣tent with food and raiment. Which goods if the Bishop say they, shall perchance con∣uert into his owne or his friends priuate commodity, or commit the administration thereof to his kindred, he is to be restrained by a Councell. At length Ioninianus (the enemy being at his backe) concluded a dishonourable peace, redeliuering those fiue Prouinces beyond Tigris, (wonne by Galerius, as aboue mentioned) as also part of Me∣sopotamia: and afterwards co∣uenanted that the Romanes should lend no ayde, to the King of Armenia their friend and confederate. Marching forth with his Army, as hee was returning home dyed vp∣on the borders of Bythinia. The soldiers forthwith create Valentinianus Emperour, who soone after his comming to
Constantinople, Valentinia∣nus 364. An. 11. m. 8. d. 32. toge∣ther with his brother Valens tooke his bro∣ther Valens to be his Collegue in the Empire, and commen∣ding those Of the East. Countries to his care, marched into Germa∣nie, where hee subdued the Saxons bordering vpon the Ocean, and soone after he had beene in Gallia, In Panno∣nia falling into a fe∣uer by an excessiue straining of his voice in an angry reply a∣gainst some of∣fenders. dyed as it is written vpon a vehement pas∣sion of anger. By this time his brother Valens was arriued in Asia, to represse the Parthians forraging the Country of Ar∣menia, and the King of Persia, who breaking the league, was falne into open hostility: But after the Hunnes or Tartars, and Scythians had ouer-runne Pannonia, Epirus, and Thessaly, he returnes into Europe, where in pitcht battell being ouer∣throwne, and as he fled woun∣ded and carried into a little cottage, which the Enemy set∣ting on fire, hee there dyed. That Edict of Valentinianus the
Emperor, and of Valens, is yet extant, wherein it is prouided, That those who betake them∣selues to a monasticall life and solitarinesse, and in that re∣gard escape warfare and pub∣like impositions, shall bee drawne out of their cells, and either serue for their Country, or else forfeit all those benefits, afterwards conferred vpon them, that vndergoe both paines and perill for the Com∣mon-wealth. The Enemies not long after (appeased by the Emperours gift and mony) departed from Constantinople which they then besiged. Saxony being at peace, Ʋalentinian the Emperour chose his sonne Gratianus for his Collegue: Gratian 375. an. 7. m. 9. d 9. With his son Valen∣itan the I. who, after his father and vncle Valens their decease, succeeded them both, both. But he (the Common-wealth being tossed with di∣uers billowes of troubles) as∣sumed
Theodosius a worthy Commander in warre, and sent him into the Easterne Countries. There at Constan∣tinople, he vāquished the Huns, and Gothes, and chased them out of the Coasts of Thrace. After this, Gratianus was trea∣cherously slaine in Gallia, by Maximus one of his Coronels who affected the Empire. Au∣sonius of Burdeaux (certaine of whose Poems are yetextāt, was his Tutor for literature, whom afterwards he aduanced to the dignity of a Consull. His son Valentinianus also died in man∣ner of the same death, by the treachery of his familiar friend Arbogastus. But the mur∣therers escapt not scot-free, for both of them were slaine by Theodosius the Emperour. Maximus was taken and put to death at Aquileia, and the o∣ther acted that part himselfe. Those Tyrants thus cut
off, Theodosius 378. an. 16. d. 12. Theodosius possest of the Empire, ordaines his two sons Honorius and Arcadius his Collegues: to whom by rea∣son of their nonage hee ap∣pointed Protectors, or as it were Gouernors: to Arcadius he assigned Ruffinus, and to Honorius, Siilico; sand not long after departed hi life. The se∣cond Councell of Constan∣tinople, An. 381. By his command a Councell was held at Constantinople, wherein the heresie of Macedonius, who derogated from the Diuinity of the holy Ghost, was con∣demned. The Fathers there assembled, being as it is recor∣ded, 150 in number, ordained Bishops, both there as also at Antiochia, which they stile the elder and truely Catholike Church, & at Ierusalem which they call the Mother of all Churches. They transmitted those their proceedings to Darsasus Bishop of Rome, who endeauoured to call them
to Rome. Saint Hierom when he was yong, was familiar with this Damasus. Hee was the Author of that memorable saying. Wheresoeuer the Bi∣shop is, be it at Rome, Engubiū, Constantinople, Rhegium, or A∣lexandria, he is of the same de∣merit and Priesthood. The∣odosius hath the fame for a ve∣ry godly Prince, who being reprehended by St. Ambrose Bishop of Millane, and prohi∣bited entrance into the church tooke it patiently. Arcadius gouerned in the East at Constantinople, Arcad us 395 a. 13. m. 3 d. 15. Together with Hono∣rius, who raigned a∣bout 15. yeares af∣ter the death of Arcadius. and Ho∣norius at Rome. But Ruffinus with intent to translate the Empire to himself, vnderhand incited the King of the Gothes to make warre against Arca∣dius: whose treachery being disclosed, he was slaine by the souldiers. Innocent the first of that name excommunicated Arca∣dius
the Emperor, for that hee gaue consent to haue Saint Iohn Chrysostome expelled out of his Church, as it is related in the Papall Law. At this time flourisht Saint Augustine also, Bishop of Hippo, who was present at the third and fourth Counsell of Carthage, where amongst others, those decrees passed, That the Bishop should haue a little mansion house neere to his Church. That his housholdstuffe should be meane, his table and prouision poore, and by his vprightnesse and integrity of life, should get himselfe autho∣rity. That he should vse the vtensils of the Church, as things committed to his charge, and not as his owne. This Innocent the first writ also to Saint Austine, and to Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, where exhorting them to mu∣tuall prayers, he cals them bro∣thers,
and fellow-priests. After Innocent followed Zozimus, who commending the decrees of the Fathers, and of antiqui∣ty, saith that it is not lawfull, no not for the See of Rome, as they call it, to make any altera∣tion therein, or any contradic∣tory decree. Hee also repre∣hends & corrects the custome of his time, that many men of no learning, aspired to the or∣der of Priesthood. Boniface the first succeeded Zozimus, in whose time the sixt Councell of Carthage was assembled, whereto there was great con∣course, wherein Saint Austine also was present. Boniface sen∣ding his Legates thither, de∣clared that the Councell of Nice had granted such priui∣ledge to the See of Rome, that all Prouinces euery where, should appeale thither: and therfore requested the Fathers there assembled, to establish
and confirme the same. Their answer was, that as far as they knew, there was not any such decree at Nice, but, that the certaine truth might be sifted out and knowne, they were agreed to send for a true copy of the Councell, from the Churches of Alexandria and Constantinople; which being at length produced, the decree was found quite contrary: to wit, each Prouince should haue the cognizance of their owne causes, and that an ap∣peale should lye from the Bi∣shops to the Councells of the Prouince, or else to the Oecu∣menicall Councell, as they call it. St. Cyril was then Bishop of Alexandria. Boniface died before the copy came, and his successor Celestinus vrging the same, had his answer accor∣ding to the tenor of that de∣cree. Arcadius dying, his sonne
Theodosius the II. succeeded, Theodos. II. 408. an. 42. m. 2. d. 28. in whose raigne, and by whose command, a Councel was held at Ephesus, in which Nestorius was condemned, who denyed that Christ was borne God of the Virgin Mary, and at this time dyed St. Augustine. On the other side Stilico Honorius his Protector dealt no lesse perfidiously then Ruffinus: For hee not onely gaue the Gothes leaue to inhabite and seat themselues in Gallia, but also instigated them to march into Italy, with their Leader Alaricus, and took the City of Rome, which happened in the yeare of Rome built 1162, and of our Lord 412. The Gothes keeping their Rendezuous at Rome for a while, and harrazing the Countrey till they came to A seacoast towne in Italy, now called Reg∣gio, oppo∣site to Sicilie. Rhegium, from thence sayld ouer into Sicily, where they suffered shipwracke, and lost
their King. But Stilico still continuing his villainous and treacherous practices, with in∣tent to translate the sway of gouernment into his owne sonne Eucherius his hands: was (vpon discouery of his plot) taken, and by Honorius his command put to death. King Alaricus thus dispatcht, the Gothes elected his kinsman Adolphus their King, and vn∣der his leading marcht backe againe to Rome, where, what remained, they spoile. He be∣ing slaine, Gensericus raigned, after whose death followed Wallis, with whem Constantine Honorius. his sisters husband and Leiutenant for the Gallia's, as afterwards Collegue in the Empire: entered into amitie and league, granting them Aquitania a part of Gallia to inhabite. At the same time the Scots and Picts. infested Brittaine,
but were put to flight by the auxiliary forces sent from Ho∣norius the Emperour, likewise the Vandals and Alans, with their chiefetaine, Gense ricus pillaged vp and downe His∣paine. After Honorius his decease at Rome, his sisters sonne Ʋa∣lentinianus succeeded him in the West and at Rome. Theo∣dosius Arcadius his sonne, as aboue recited, in the meane space gouerned the other part of the world at Constantinople. About this time the Van∣dalls and Alans (prouoked by the dissentions and factions of the Roman Captaines in Afri∣ca) breake forth out of the Hispaines into Africa, and wasted the country wth fire & sword. After with destruction, a certaine part of Africa was giuen them to inhabite. The Gothes (who by Hono∣rius his permission and consent
as a little abouementioned, inhabited Aquitane in Gallia) not satisfied with their owne bounds, offred violence and injury to their neighbours: and wearied Narbon with their siege. But Litorius being dispatcht thither with forces, raised the siege, set the Town at liberty, brought in prouisi∣on, and giuing them battell, at the first sped well, but after∣wards was taken with the losse almost of his whole Army: so great was this ouerthrow that the Romans were forced to sue for peace. In like manner Gen∣sericus King of the Vandalls, breaking the league made with the Romans in Africa, as before mentioned, on a sudden sur∣prizes Carthage, where he ex∣ercised much cruelty: which City had then continued in subiection to the Romans, for 585. yeares. Thus hauing got possession of Carthage, hee
strikes ouer into Sicilia, which hee made flow with blood. Hereupon Theodosius the Em∣perour rigging a Nauie, pre∣pares for warre against the Vandals, but by reason the Hunnes forraged Thrace and Illyricum, the Armie was recal∣led out of Sicilie, to defend those parts. The Scots & Picts then againe make an irruption into Britaine, and the inhabi∣tants despairing of aid from the Romans, desire helpe from the English, The Sax∣ons inuade Britaine, about 448. a people of Saxo∣nie: who being allured with the beautifulnesse of the coun∣try, by little and little conuey∣ing ouer more forces (oppres∣sing the Britaines) brought the greatest part of the Iland into their subiection. Not long after this, Theodosius the second, died at Constentinople; in whose raigne, as it is writ∣ten, the Sunne was doubled, and a comet appeared almost
from the Ides of Iuly, till the moneth of September. Martianus succeeded Theo∣dosius in the East. Martianus 450. an. 6. m. 6. Wee haue a∣boue mentioned Gensericus, with whom Valentinianus con∣cluded a peace, diuiding Af∣frica betwixt them. About this time, Athila King of the Huns, hauing got Ducia and Panno∣nia, most cruelly harrazed the neighbouring Countries, Macedonia, Mysia, Thracia, intending to conquer the Easterne part of the Romane Empire. But perceiuing that the warre would be extreame difficult, in regard the Gothes, (who then were in league with the Romans, and inhabi∣ted part of Gallia, as aboue∣said) aided the Romans, there∣fore by his Ambassadours, hee requires their amitie and con∣federacie, but Aetius Valenti∣nianus the Emperours Lieute∣nant preuented that; who cor∣roborating
the league with Theodoricus king of the Gothes, wholly bent himselfe to the warre. Athila neuerthelesse proceeds, and in the Downes of Chaalons, (which part of France in regard of the plaines, is Champaigne) was this most dismall battell fought, in which as it is recorded, 180000. men were slaine. And Athila losing the day, deter∣mined to kill himselfe, lest he should fall aliue into the hands of his enemies. Howbeit king Theodoricus his sonne, follow∣ing Aetius the Lieutenants counsaile, returned home with his forces, to succeed his de∣ceased Father: whereby Athi∣la getting time to recollect himselfe, retires into Pannonia, and leaying new forces, mar∣ches, full swoln with reuenge, into Itali: where at length, winning the Citie of Aquil∣leia, (first wearied out with a
long-continuing siege) sackt and burnt it. Then forthwith he takes Concordia, Padua, Vi∣centia, Verona, Brescia, Berga∣mo, Millaine and Pauie: and so pillaging vp and downe Roman∣diola. Flaminia, incamped at the meeting of the Riuer of Men∣cius and Po: where delibera∣ting about his passage to Rome with his Armie, Leo the first of that name, Bishop of Rome, comes to him, and so farre pre∣uailed, that altering his intent, he not onely surceased his ex∣pedition to Rome, but also quite remouing out of Italie, returned into Pannonia, where within a while after he ended his daies. This was that Leo, many of whose Epistles to Theodosius the second, and Martianus the Emperour, are extant, where∣in he partly apologizes for his absence from the Councels by them conuocated, and intreats
them not to bee offended for sending thither of his Legates; and partly also requests, that they would designe some place in Italie, rather then in Asia, for the celebrating of Councels: but he obtained no∣thing. Whilest Athila thus raged vp and downe Italie, the Citie of Venice was builded; Venice be∣gunne to be built, An. 430. when many of the abler sort, leauing the adioyning places, betooke themselues to those sea-sands, little Islelands, and hillockes, as into some harbour. Thus meane and in a manner despe∣rate and miserable, was the be∣ginning of this Citie, which now, as we see, is growne to a wonderfull greatnesse. They reckon 805. Dukes till this time; the first whereof was Some Au∣thors call him Pau∣lutius Ana∣festus, and write of his beginning in Anno Dom. 697. and after their Citie built, 282. Paulus Anazatus, in the yeere of grace, 706. being 252. yeeres after the begin∣ning of the building of their Citie.
Afterwards when Valenti∣nianus was slaine, Gensericus King of the Vandals, sailing ouer with a Nauie from Affri∣ca into Italie, marches with an exceeding great armie (be∣ing aided by the Moores) to∣wards Rome, and takes the Ci∣tie, in a manner left quite de∣solate: but at the earnest re∣quest of Leo the Bishop, who also, as aforesaid, appeased Athila: hee forbore fire and sword: The Citie-sackt, cap∣tiues were transported to Car∣thage in great troopes. The e∣nemies after this, infest Cam∣pania with grieuous outrages, rase Capua, Nola, Naples, and other Cities: those who sur∣uiue the sword, they con∣demne to the irons, and growne rich with the wealth of Italie, returne into Af∣frica. Martianus, Emperour of the East, a Prince of a calme na∣ture,
inioyed peace: hee was wont to say: That it was not sitting for a Prince to take armes, as long as he might liue in peace. In his raigne, The fourth Councell at Chalce∣don in By∣thinia. and by his com∣mand, a very great Councell was assembled at Chalcedon, wherein Eutyches who con∣founded the two natures in Christ, was condemned. There, amongst the rest, it was decreed, that no Clerke, as they call them, should bee admitted to the Churches of two Cities. Pluralitie of li∣uings, as wee tearme it, was not then heard of, which now is growne so ordinarie, as no∣thing is more common. And almost within our memorie, that custome crept in amongst other blemishes of the Church, that the Pope may conferre two Bishoprickes vp∣on one man. If now therefore he would restore the custome in this behalfe, which was
held in the next precedent age; hee should doe his dutie, but seeing that cannot be, can we suppose it euer to be gran∣ted, that matters shall be amen∣ded according to the holy Scriptures, and decrees of the Apostles and primitiue times? No, they toile in vaine, that ballance the deedes of the Popes, with the rules of anci∣ent Religion. Martianus dying in the se∣uenth yeere of his Empire, Leo, 457. an. 17. Leo succeeded him: and Auitus, (when Gensericus after the ta∣king of Rome, was returned in∣to Affrica) succeeded Valenti∣nianus at Rome, and in the West, next to him, Majoranus, then Seuerus, and after him, Anthemius: after those follow∣ed others, but nothing emi∣nent, who perished in their mutuall massacres and treache∣ries, and raigned but a while, insomuch that now the other
part of the Roman Empire in the West, stood in great dan∣ger. Nothing memorable is re∣corded of Leo the Emperour, but that he entred into amitie and league with the Gothes, then wasting Illyricum, and an Epistle or two of Leo the Bi∣shop of Romes to him, Zeno 474. an. 17. m. 2. d. 7. are ex∣tant. Zeno Called Isauricus, because he was borne in Isaurica in Cicilia. Isauricus was his successor. Among stthose also, who ruled in Rome, after Ʋa∣lentinianus his death, Augustu∣lus was one, in whose raigne, Odoacer with a maine armie of Herulians and Syrians, out of Pannonia, inuades Italie, takes Orestes, a Nobleman of Rome, who was fled to Pauie with his forces) puts him to death, sackes and burnes the Citie: and marching on, takes in the whole Country as far as Rome. Augustulus deiected in minde, voluntarily resignes his Em∣pire: Odoacer enters the Citie,
and obtaining the kingdome of Italie, gouerned without resistance fourteene yeeres. But at length, Theodorieus King of the East-Gothes, sent by Zeno the Emperour: march∣ing from Constantinople, ouer∣threw the Part of the Gothes. Gepides and Bul∣garians, opposing him; and so making his way through My∣sia, and Pannonia, arriues in Italie, and incampes himselfe not farre from Aquileta: whi∣ther Odoacer afterwards repai∣ring, a sharpe battell insued. Odoacer losing the day, fled; but recollecting his forces, ioynes battell on fresh, and is againe ouerthrown, most part of his armie lost: some whereof perished in battell, others in A Riuer running through Verona. Athesis. Hee flies amaine to∣wards Rome, where shut out, he spoiles the Country about, and comes to Rauenna: there at length, after three yeeres siege, vpon the Cities yeel∣ding,
she was taken and put to death. Odoacer thus cut off, Theo∣doricus became Lord of Italie, marches to Rome, where hee assembled two Councels of Bishops, whom hee called to∣gether out of sundry Prouin∣ces of Italie, to sit vpon Pope of Rome. Sym∣machus his cause, whom the greatest part refused, as one vnworthy, and falsly created. This Theodoricus was an Ari∣an, as the Papall bookes haue it. His sirname was Because of his vi∣ctory at Verona. Veronen∣sis, and was descended from that Theodoricus abouementi∣oned, who was slaine in the battell against Athila King of the Hunnes. Odoacer was a Of Ruger∣land in Pomerania. Rugian, a people of Germanie, vpon the Danish sea. Theodori∣cus thereby to strengthen him∣selfe, obliged the Kings of the Vandals, Visigothes, and Bur∣gundians to him by affinitie. Whilest the squares went
thus in Italie, great troubles were on foot, throughout Thrace, Affrica, and Britaine, where at length, the Saxons got the vpperhand. Zeno dying at Constantino∣ple, Anastatius, 491. an. 27. m. 3. d. 3. Anastatius succeeds him. Hee fauoured many of those, who allowed of Eutyches his o∣pinion: wherupon a dissention grew betwixt him and Gela∣sius Bishop of Rome: who by tedious letters dehorts him, as their bookes haue it, from vndertaking the protection of them: for there were two things saith he, whereby prin∣cipally this world should bee gouerned; the sacred authori∣tie of Bishops and regall po∣wer: and so much the more charge lies vpon the Priests, for that they, euen for other men, must render an account to the Lord: but he was to go∣uerne for ciuill policie, yet so, as to bee subiect to the Mini∣sters
of God, and to depend vpon their iudgement: and seeing that Priests doe obey the lawes politicall, it is like∣wise iust, that hee himselfe should not refuse those consti∣tutions, which the Steers-men in matters diuine establish: therefore sithence this honour ought to be giuen to all Mini∣sters of the Church, the cause it selfe requires, that to him most especially it should bee attributed, whom God by his owne word, as also the consent of the Church, would haue to rule ouer the whole order of Priests. Let him leaue off ther∣fore, and rather heare him an excuser in this life, then finde him an accuser in the other. After this, his decree concer∣ning the holy Bible is annex∣ed, in which he grants superi∣ority to the Sea of Rome, as they call it, then to Alexan∣dria, & the third place to An∣tiochia.
In Anastatius his raigne, Sicilie was tossed with trou∣bles and hostile insurrections, which were quenched by the Authors death. Then also the Hunnes wasted Armenia, and Cappadocia: the Getes, Mace∣donia, Thessalie, and Epirus: from both which the Empe∣rour was enforced to buy his peace by gifts, and no small losses. Much about this time, which was in the yeere of Grace, 500. Clodoueus King the French, first of all imbraced the Christian Religion, ha∣uing beene very oft and ear∣nestly solicited thereunto, as also to forsake his Idols and superstition: by his wife who was of the house of Burgundie. The Councell of Orleans in his raigne established, which con∣sisted of thirty three French Bishops, is extant: wherein a∣mongst the rest it is decreed,
that if the rauisher of a Virgin shall flie to a Church, though hee haue offered violence to the Virgin, yet hee shall not come within danger of death: but shall either bee as a bond∣slaue, or else redeeme himselfe from her. Anastatius slaine by lighte∣ning, or as the papall law speakes, dying vpon an Sleidan (as. Mei∣bomius notes) here mistakes the Empe∣rour, for Pope Ana∣statius. Iustine, 518 an. 9. d. 24.  erup∣tion of his bowels: Iustinus succeeded, a man of obscure parentage, and from a swine-heard made a souldier, as it is written. He was at dissention with Theodoricus King of the Gothes, Lord of Italie, about diuersitie of Religion, but yet they held off from blowes: Theodoricus dying, Alaricus his Grand-child by his sonne, succeeded, to the great ioy and contentment of the Gothes. Iohn the first of that name, was then Bishop of Rome. He with other more, was sent in Am∣bassage,
by the aforementio∣ned King Theodoricus, to Con∣stantinople; where, as their bookes relate, hee was most honourably entertained, not onely by the people, but also by the Emperour himselfe. For they, say they, were excee∣ding ioyous, that it was their fortune, now at length to see and entertaine the blessed S. Peters Vicar, as they tearme him, in Greece; which had ne∣uer befallen them before since Constantines time the Great, and Syluesters. But it is strange, that they should prae thus of Syluester, who came not into Greece, as it is manifest: For, then when it was most be∣oofefull, as also needfull, I meane at the Councell of Nice, he stirred not, but sent thither his Legates, Victor and Vincent: and afterwards as they relate, he himselfe assembled another Councell at Rome,
wherein he confirmed the de∣crees of the Councell of Nice. There is extant also, a conso∣latorie Epistle of this Iohn the first to the Bishops of Italie, wherein hee exhorts them, that albeit King Theodoricus polluted with Arian heresie, threatned destruction to them, and to all Italie, yet they should not desist from their purpose, but resolutely pro∣ceed. After Iustine, Iustinianus, 527. an. 38. m. 3. d. 13. his sisters son Iustinianus was made Empe∣rour: Hee wholly bent him∣selfe to the restoring of the Common-wealth, and at his first entrance, set ouer the whole charge of gouernment to Belisarius, who by many great battels, ouercame the Persians, transgressing their bounds, and offring violence to the Romane dominions: set free Illyricum, wasted by the Gepidaes and Bulgarians, redu∣ced
the Parthians being vp in armes, to amitie: ouerthrew the Vandals most powerfull forces in Affrica, recouered Carthage; and from thence striking ouer into Sicilie, where hauing notice of the rebellion in Affrica, he returnes thither, and speedes well. Then at length marching into Italie, takes Naples, sackes it, ouer∣throwes the Gothes, whose King Theodatus then was. Af∣ter this, he repaires to Rome, where he was kindly and ho∣nourably entertained by all, remouing from thence, takes in the townes and forts euery where, and amongst the rest, Perousa: after this, he besieges Rauenna, where Vitigis, King of the Gothes giuing him bat∣tell loseth his Armie, is taken prisoner, and carried away by Belisarius to Constantinople. The Gothes renewing their forces in the country beyond
Po, elect Hildebrand their king. To him, two succeeded, and after them, Totilas. He in Be∣lisarius his absence, ouer-run∣ning all Italie, takes Rome, after a siege, sackes and sets fire on it. Belisarius hereupon recal∣led, hauing finished the warre against the Parthians, who a∣gaine forraged Syria, returnes into Italie, and recouers the Citie in a manner left desolate: and then incountring with the enemy, had a happy bat∣tell: but sailing into Sicilie for prouision, is called backe by Iustinianus, which affoorded occasion to Totilas, to renew his forces, & returne to Rome. The Emperour forthwith or∣daines Narses the Eunuch, Generall in the Italian warre: hee expelled the Gothes quite out of Italie, which was so much the easilier effected, they hauing lost their King Totilas, who died of a wound. That
warre with the Gothes, lasted eighteene yeeres. And Iustini∣anus thus recouering Italie, and Affricke, after he had assumed his Grandchild by his daugh∣ter, for his Collegue in the Empire, departed this life. Some write, that hee was a Prince of a dull nature, and ouerswaied by his wife Theo∣dora. Tribonianus the Lawyer was in high esteeme with him: he who (abrogating the wri∣tings and disputations of the Ancients) gathered out of them an hotchpotch of the lawes, and left vs the frag∣ments onely, which now goe vnder the name of the Pan∣dects: But he had certaine hel∣pers in that worke, whose names are mentioned all ouer. He did the like also in the re∣ferences and lawes of the Em∣perours, which being com∣prehended in three bookes, the Gregorian, Hermogenian,
and Theodosian: he contracted into one volume, naming it Iustinians Code, vsing other mens helpes therein, whose names the Emperour reckons vp in the preface to his booke. There are Authors that report, how this Tribonianus was a co∣uetous man, and for gaine, Virgil 6. Aenoad. (as the Poet saith) made and marred lawes. In the Code be∣fore mentioned, there are ma∣ny of Iustinians lawes, which contradict the former. There was added also, a peculiar worke, of new constitutions, which throughout beare the name and title of Iustinian. The Emperour intreated Belisarius, whom I spoke of, (him by whose prowesse hee had obtained so many and so glorious victories) most igno∣miniously: and in his extreame old age, caused his eyes to bee put out. In his raigne, some Councels were assem∣bled
at Constantinople, wherein Menna, Patriarch of that Ci∣tie, sate President: who, as their bookes haue it, is stiled the most holy, most blessed, and oecumenicall. In the be∣ginning of the Code, an Epi∣stle of the Emperour to the Archbishop of the Citie of Rome, is set downe, wherein he calls him, the Head of all Churches, and subiects all to him. Furthermore, although the learned are of opinion, that it was forged, yet grant it be true, it is certaine, that this controuersie continued many yeers after, til at length the Bi∣shops of Rome, amplified with abilities, preuailed: and in the possession of the Church, would erect to themselues a Tower, which, whether rea∣red by the hands of men, or fauour of Princes, now carries the name, as though it were founded by power diuine. We
haue formerly mentioned how the sixth Councell of Carthage was held in S. Au∣stines time, wherein Pope Bo∣niface the first, and Pope Cae∣lestines fallacies were vnmas∣ked, when they alledged how it was decreed at Nice, that all Prouinces should appeale to them. And in Iustinians time, Boniface the second was Bi∣shop of Rome, whose Epistle is extant, wherein he sharpely re∣prehends Aurelius Bishop of Carthage in the before-menti∣oned Councell, and saies, that he with his fellowes, did by the deuils instigation resist the Church of Rome: as also, giues God thankes, that in his time, Eulalius, Aurelius his succes∣sor, was reconciled to the Church of Rome, and after that, rehearses the words of Eulalius, wherein he professes, that hee condemnes both his predecessors and successors
whosoeuer they bee, that goe about to weaken the priuiled∣ges of the holy and Apostoli∣call Church of Rome. Agapetus the next to Boni∣face, remoued Anthemius Pa∣triarch of Constantinople out of his place, for denying the two natures in Christ. Theodora the Empresse, tooke this very hainously, and by Belisarius, admonished Siluirius Agape∣tus his successor, to restore him: and Belisarius (certaine other accusations also being laid to his charge) turnes him out of his place, and sends him into banishment, substituting Vigilius, who likewise called to Constantinople, and refusing to recall Anthemius, was con∣demned to the like punish∣ment: whereby it sufficiently appeares, in what manner the Bishops of Rome were then subiect to the power of the Emperour.
Iustine the II. Iustine II. 565. an. 10. m. 10. d. 20. being Empe∣ror, the Persian war was renu∣ed, which miscarying, Arche∣laus the Emperors Lieutenant, of a new concludes a peace, Narses the Emperors Lieu∣tenant throughout Italy, (after the Gothes were expulst, and Totilas dead) held Italy almost sixteene yeares: afterwards called home by the Emperour from whom receiuing certain vnwelcome letters, and there∣in perceiuing his ingratitude, he not onely stayes still, but surther for reuenge, (sending away his Ambassadours) insti∣gates the Lombards then seated in Pannonia, proffering them very large rewards, to depart from Pannonia and come into Italy, the most pleasant and fruitfull of all Countries. Thereupon they tooke that part of Italy, which till this day, retaines the name from them. This Iustine as
it is written, constituted an Ex∣arch, Gouernour throughout Italy: hee was as it were the Emperors Vicar or Deputy: His chiefe seat was at Rauenna, neglecting Rome, and in each City and towne ordaining some Gouernour. The Itali∣an writers report that this new ordinance, was the bane of Italy, and Rome. Narses soone after dyed at Rome. Tiberius not long before a∣dopted and made Collegue in the Empire, Tiberius II. 576. an. 6. m. 10. d. 8. was Iustines succes∣sor. He got two happie victo∣ries against the Persians: and established a peace with the Lombards, whose Kingdome then reached from the Sam∣nites vnto the Alpes, the City of Rome onely expected, which after they had for a space sharply besieged, at length (constrained by force of tem∣pest and raine) raised their siege. Mauritius 582. an. 19. m. 3. d. 11. Mauritius, Tiberius his
sonne in law, being created Emperor, in some certaine bat∣tels by his Lieutenants, ouer∣threw the Persians, and at length concluded a peace with them: recalling his Army, he expelled the Scythians out of Mysia, repressed the Lombards throughout Italy: chased the Hunnes out of Pannonia: but being hated of the souldiers for his couetousnesse, was en∣forced (vpon a mutinie arisen) to flie to Chalcedon, & there at length was slain, together with his wife, children, Phocas 603. an. 8. m. 4. d. 9. and whole race, by Phocas the Centurion, who afterwards throgh sediti∣on, was proclaimed Emperor. It is written that in Mau∣ritius his raigne, a Comet ap∣peared for sixe moneths space, and then also was Mahomet borne, whom we will speake of hereafter. At that time, Iohn Bishop of Constantinople, stiled himselfe
the vniuersall Patriarch: but Pelagius the second, Bishop of Rome, vehemently resisted him, and pronounced his de∣crees void. His successor Gre∣gory, the first sharply repre∣hends him for this, and indeed confesses, that in the Councell of Chalcedon, this title and ho∣nour was giuen to his prede∣cessors, but none of them vsed it. As also he exhorts Mauri∣tius the Emperour by his Let∣ters, to restraine him, for that also appertained to his autho∣rity, which he (in arrogating such a kinde of power) did much impaire. It is recorded that the next after Gregory, Bo∣niface the III obtained the pri∣macie from Phocas, certaine E∣dicts and charters being pub∣lisht in that behalfe. In Phocas his raigne the Per∣sians very greiuously annoyed the Common-wealth: seizing vpon Mesopotamia, and Assy∣ria,
and marching on euen vn∣to the lesser Asia, such was the negligence of this Prince. Germany also, together with Gallia, and a great part of Ita∣ly reuolted. The Saracens wa∣sted Aegypt: and he himselfe being slaine for his cruelty and neglect of the Common∣wealth, Heraclius succeeded. Then againe the Persians mar∣ching on very farre through Aegypt, inuade Africa, which they bring vnder their sub∣iection. The Scythians diuersly dismember Europe. Heraclius at length marching into Asia, when hee could not make his peace, though propounding certaine conditions, little ten∣ding to the honour of the Ro∣manes, almost by meere con∣straint encountred with the Persians, (who now also forra∣ged Iudaea) and in a battell or two discomfited them. Then marching on beyond the Ri∣uer
Tigris, and ransaking Per∣sia farre and wide (entring at length into amity with Siro∣chus the Cosroes. King of Persia's son, who hauing slaine his father, set vpon the Kingdome) reco∣uered Africa, and Aegypt, and whatsoeuer else the Persians had taken, and it was coue∣nanted that the Riuer Tigris should deuide the Persian and Roman dominions. At this time also the Saracens seruing in the warres vnder Heraclius, being defrauded of their pay, reuolt in huge troopes, and pillaging vp and downe Syria, (Mahomet being their Chief∣taine) took Damascus, forraged Aegypt, subdued Arabia, and gaue the Persians some ouer∣throwes. This Mahomet was by parentage obscure, but sub∣tle and aduenturous, as also afterwards enriched by mari∣age: and by reason of his prompt wit carying great
sway he propounds a new kind of doctrine (to reason indeed very delectable, but for the most part ridiculous and foo∣lish) whereby hee might more and more oblige the mindes of men, and more firmly possesse himselfe with soueraigntie. And though this flame might at first haue easily beene quen∣ched, yet being neglected, in short space grew to a maine height: and so from that time the Maiestie and Empire of the Romans in the East, decay∣ed more and more, Nations re∣uolting one after another. In Heraclius his raigne, the fourth Councell of Toledo was celebrated, where, because most part of the Priests throughout Spaine, did not e∣uery day (but onely vpon that day which wee call Sunday) vse that prayer which Christ himselfe taught vs: amongst other matters, a reformation
therein was decreed, as also that the Apocalyps of S. Iohn, as they say should bee read in the Church from Easter to Whitsontide. The Gothes then raigned in Hispain, when as the Spaniards (growne weary, as it is com∣mon, of forraign gouernment) attempting an innovation, this Councell vnder a seuere penalty prohibited the practi∣zing of any conspiracy against their King or the Gothish Na∣tion: and that after the Kings decease, the States and Clergie of the whole Nation, Constantine the III. raigned 2. moneths, and Hera∣clian two yeares. should by common consent appoint the successor. The same decree was also renued in some other of their assemblies. The sing∣ing of the Hebrew Allelujah in the Church, in time of Lent was likewise forbidden, Constans the II. 642. an. 27. m. 8. d. 10. for that it was a time of sorrow and not of reioycing. To He∣raclius, Constans succeeded,
who was his grandchild by his sonne Constantine. He had an infortunate sea-fight with the Saracens, who getting the victory, tooke Rhodes, and without doubt had proceeded further, had not the factions kindled amongst them pro∣cured a two yeares truce with the Romanes. The Emperour hauing this time to pause, marches with an Army into Italy, thereby, as he boasted, to rescue it out of the Enemies hands: and arriuing at Taren∣to, besieged Luceria, and other places of Apulia belonging to the Lombards: but in his iour∣ney towards Naples, his rere∣guard was cut off by the Lom∣bards. Entring Rome peacea∣bly, at length hee disrobes the City of all its ornaments, and there staying a few dayes strucke ouer into Sicily, where afterwards he was murthered in a Bath: and some dissension
arising after his death about succession, the Sarazens (lay∣ing hold on this opportunity) with a great Nauy inuaded Sicilie, commit a horrible mas∣sacre of the Islanders, take Sy∣racuse and carry away with them all Constans his spoiles taken from Rome. Constantine the IIII, or Bearded, 669. an. 16. d. 7. To Con∣stans, Constantine the IIII. suc∣ceeded, commonly called the Bearded. He for certain yeeres encountring with the Sara∣zens, at length vanquisht them insomuch as they sued for peace, and for a thirty yeares Truce: as also condescended to pay a yearely Tribute: and the Romanes Enemies in the East herewith shaken implore a peace. But the Bulgars, trans∣passing their bounds wast Thrace, with them a peace was at length concluded, and both the Now Bursia in Asia. Mysia's yeelded vp to them: but afterwards (when they perceiued the Romanes
negligence) breaking the league, flye out againe, and ex∣tenuate the forces of the Em∣pire. This Emperour as it is re∣corded, was the first, that or∣dained, that whom the Clergy and people of Rome together with the souldiers, had created Bishop of that City, hee should obtaine full power: for till this time the dignity of Bishop of Rome depended vpon the con∣firmation either of the Empe∣rour, or of his Deputy for Italy. There is a long Epistle extant of Pope Leo the II, to Constan∣tine, wherein hee condemnes all manner of heretiques, and highly extolls him for his loue to, and protection of Religion, as also for his liberality and munificence: adding, that the Church hauing gotten such a Defender, most ioyfully tri∣umphed. The sixth Councel at Constanti∣nople, 680. The sixth Counsell at Con∣stantinople was held in his raign
which consisted of 150. Bi∣shops. Wherein, about the end thereof, mention is made (but in obscure words) of those Canons stiled the Apo∣stles. But Gratianus reckons vp the contrary opinions, for he auerres, that there be those that can affirme, that they were compiled by heretiques, reiec∣ted by the Primitiue Church, and accounted among the A∣pocrypha's. Yet it is written that Zepherinus B. of Rome, in order the sixteenth appro∣ued them: as also, after him, this Councell before mentio∣ned, which (as they report) was ended in Iustine the II. his time, Constantine the IIII. his sonne. In briefe, all flotes vpon incertaine grounds, nei∣ther doe they agree in the number of the Canons, for some hold 50. others 60. o∣thers 84. in which number in∣deed they are extant. Where∣by
it may easily be coniectured that more were added by de∣grees, and afterwards (though proceeding from many) com∣prehended vnder one title. It is written that then also the Archbishop of Rauenna, sub∣iected himselfe to the Bishop of Rome, who before that (but most especially after the tran∣slation thither of the Exarchy) would yeeld nothing at all to him. To Constantine, Iustinian, II 686. an. 10. Iustinianus his son succeeded; he by reason of his nonage and inexperi∣ence, misgouerned the Com∣mon-wealth, and breaking the league which his father had made with the Sarazens and Bulgars, was brought to that pinch, as he himselfe was con∣strained to sue for peace to both of them. At length, be∣ing thrust out for his crueltie, an banisht with his nose cut off, Leontius succeeded, Leontius, 696 an 3. hauing
beene prisoner two yeares vp∣on suspition of affecting the Empire. In the time of those broiles, the Sarazens inuade Africa, but were within two yeares after chased out thence by force of armes. The Roman souldiers forsaking the garri∣son in Africa, sith the Empe∣rour sleighted ouer all affaires with negligence and carelesse∣nesse, and fearing lest they should againe bee expelled by the Sarazens, Tiberius Apsimarus 699. an 7. who were then exceeding strong: create one Tiberius Emperour. He mar∣ches with his forces to Con∣stantinople, where winning the City, takes Leontius, cuts off his nose, cast him into prison, and constitutes a new Exarch in Italy. And whilst all matters were caried after this boiste∣rous manner, the Sarazens lay∣ing hold on this fit opportuni∣ty, march out of Egypt, with an huge Army: and againe sur∣prise
Africa, and Lybia, and welnigh all Hispaine. Iustinianus (hee whom I a∣boue spoke of, Iustinian the II. a∣gaine, 706. An. 6. expeld and ban∣nisht by Leontius,) by helpe of Tribellius King of Bulgaria, at length takes Constantinople, and therein Leontius, and Ti∣berius, whom hee put to death: First cau∣sing them to be cari∣ed vp and downe the city bound in cords, then tram∣pling vpon their necks and lastly beheading them. Philippius Bardanes, 712. an. 2. m. 9. d. 7. after which hee raigned sixe yeares cruelly, prouing also in∣gratefull to King Tribellius, and at length ioyning battle with Philippicus Bardanes, to whom the souldiers had re∣uolted, both he and his sonne Tiberius were there slaine. Pope Constantine pronounced this Philippicus (for difference in Religion) a Schismatick, whose eyes being afterwards pluckt out by his owne ser∣uants, Anastatius the II. was his successor. Anastatius the II. 715. an. 1. m. 3. Hee sent a strong Nauie to the Rhodes to make warre with the Sarazens, constitu∣ting
an ecclesiasticall person Generall thereof: whom the souldiers refusing to obey, a mutinie arose and one Theodo∣sius of obscure parentage was created Emperour, Theodosius Adramitte∣nus, 716. m. 7. d. 16. who chan∣ging the voyage, marches to Constantinople, takes the City, and confines Anastasius (whō he ouerthrew in battaile) to a Monastery: but not long after being expulst by Leo Lieute∣nant of his forces, Leo Conon, 717. an. 24. m. 2. d. 25. hee also be∣takes himselfe to a Monasticall life. About this time which was in the yeare of Grace 717. the Moores with their whole powers breake into Spaine, and subdue it, Rodericke being then King of the Hispaines, whom the Gothes had elected. The Sarazens in Leo's raigne, hauing ouerrunne Thrace, be∣siege Constantinople both by sea and land for three yeares space; but at length (being well nigh destroyed by the
plague) were constrained to retire home. This Leo was a mortall aduersary to Gregory the II. Bishop of Rome: and charged his Vicar or Exarch in Italy, by all meanes to cut him off: but the Lombards de∣fended the Pope, not for any loue they bare him, but to the end, that by these dissensions, they might enlarge their owne Territories. For vpon this occasion they surprised many townes belonging to the Exarchie-Certaine of this Gre∣gories Epistles to the Clergy and Laity of Thuringia, A part of Saxony, where the City Er∣ford stands. are ex∣tant, whereby he admonishes them more and more to en∣crease in the knowledge of God: as also to the Saxons sharply deterring them from worshipping of Idolls, in which employment hee vsed one An Eng∣lishman borne in Deuonshire. Boniface his helpe, whom he had sent into Germany. The Emperour Leo throwes
all statues & Images of Saints, out of Churches, and enioynes the Pope also to doe the like: but hee not onely disobeyes, but also denounces sharpe pu∣nishment against him perseue∣ring in his purpose. Constantine the V. 741. an. 35. m. 1. d. 27. To Leo, his son Constantine of that name the V. succeeded, surnamed Copronymos, of the same Reli∣gion with his father. He, set∣ting forth with a great Nauie against the Sarazens, for reco∣uery of Alexandria in Egypt. vnderstanding by a messenger of the insurrections hatched at home, and of Artabastus the new elected Emperour retires to Constantinople, takes the Ci∣ty by force, and puts out Ar∣tabastus his eies. He also, as his father Leo, liued in vehe∣ment discord with Gregory the III. Bishop of Rome, who forthwith sending his Nun∣tio's, excommunicates him: and they being cast in prison,
hee made a decree in the Councell thereupon assem∣bled: That, whosoeuer should hereafter demolish the Images of Saints, or contumeliously abuse them, should be vtterly excluded from the Communi∣on of the Church: after this, with all diligence and endea∣uour he erected Images in di∣uers Churches, and as farre as he could, sumptuously adorned them. After Gregory the III. Za∣charias succeeded. An Epistle of his is extant to one Boniface a Bishop in Germany; the same man, as it appeares, whose helpe Gregory the II. vsed, as a little aboue mentioned. Za∣charias satisfied his requests and permitted Bishopricks at Merburgh, Bamberg, and Er∣phord; and also gaue him leaue to goe to Charlemaine, Charles Martel his sonne, who was de∣sirous to haue a Councell held
in some City of the French Kingdome: and that he might diligently reforme the abuses of the Church, but most espe∣cially remoue adulterers, and those that had many wiues from the order of Priesthood: for sithence after the vnderta∣king of the holy Ministery, they ought not to haue or touch so much as one wife, much lesse at one and the same time, they should haue more, for Pauls words, that a Bi∣shop should bee the husband of one wife, is to bee vnder∣stood not of the time present, but past, to wit, that hee who desires to be admitted into the ministeriall function, should haue no more wiues then one. To this Epistle Charlemaines Edict (who stiles himselfe Duke of the French) is an∣nexed: wherein hee ordaines that a Councell should be held euery yeare in his presence:
and commands that adulte∣rous Priests, and whoremon∣gers should be remoued out of their places: and likewise pro∣hibits them from hunting and hawking, and charges them not to maintaine any whore at home: but concerning wiues not a word. From this time Aistulphus King of the Lombards requi∣red a tribute from the Romans, sharply menacing them in case of non-payment. Stephen the II. of that name, then Bishop of Rome, seeing hee could not stop his mouth neither with flatteries nor rewards sues to Constantine the Emperour for ayde, but no helpe comming from him, hee sollicites Pipin, lately (as we below shall men∣tion) made king of the French; to lend him his hand. He mar∣ching with an Army into Italy besieges Pauie, and compells Aistulphus to come to compo∣sition,
but the Enemy, after Pipins returne home, growne more kene, againe takes armes: whereupon Pipin, againe soli∣cited, marches into Italy; then at length Aistulphus surrenders the Exarchie to Pipin, in which Country those Cities are of chiefe account, Rauenna, Fa∣uentia, Caesena, Forli, Forlimpo∣poli, Bologna, Reggio, Parma, and Placentia. It is written that Pipin deli∣uered all this Countrey into the Popes hands, though the Emperor first required him to restore them to him, as belong∣ing to the Empire, not to the Church of Rome. To Constantine, o the IIII 775. an. 4. m. 11. d. 26. his son Leo the IIII. succeeded: He vn∣dertooke one only expedition into Against the Sara∣zeni. Syria, where discomfited, he retires home, and not long after dyed, of the same religion with his father, leauing be∣hind him his son Constantine
the VI. who by reason of his nonage, not of ability to raigne, his mother Irene gouer∣ned the Common-wealth, but he, waxen warmer in 20 yeares of age. yeares, deposing his mother, tooke the Empire vpon himselfe, with no lesse insolency then cruelty: whereupon certaine conspiracies being practized against him: he set a mulct, a∣mongst others, vpon his vncle Nicephorus, and put out his eyes. And at length he him∣selfe by the meanes of his mo∣ther, was serued with the same sauce, within a while after dy∣ing of griefe; and thereupon the sway of gouernment retur∣ned into her hands. Irene the Empresse 797. an. 4. Who afterwards in the fourth yeere of her Empire was deposed and sent into exile, Nicephorus whom we before mentioned, was her successor. In the meane time whilest matters were thus tumultuous∣ly
caryed at Constantinople, the name of Charles King of the French, grew famous. For he hauing finished the warre in Aquitania, at the request of Adrian Bishop of Rome, mar∣ches into Italy, and as his Fa∣ther Pipin repressed Aistulphus King of the Lombards, as a∣bouesaid: so he, after a long siege tooke Desiderius, Aistul∣phus his successor, a heauy foe to Italy, and Adrian the I. As also excluded his sonne Adalgisius out of the Kingdome, and cha∣sed him quite out of Italy. For the Emperours of Rome, by reason of their farre remote absence (I meane at Constan∣tinople) euer since Constantine the Great, and being likewise hindered, not onely with for∣raigne wars, but also with ci∣uill & domesticall dissensions, in a manner neglected Italy, or at leastwise could not con∣ueniently protect it, especially
the Lombards raigning there: Furthermore, most of them also, being at deadly dissenti∣on with the Bishops of Rome, as we haue formerly specified, out of their hatred towards them, were not moued at this prosperous estate of the Lom∣bards. For this cause the Popes prouided forraigne defence, and because no house was in those times, of more renowne and puissance, then that of the French Kings, in regard of the greatnesse of their noble ex∣ploits, to them they flie, as to a harbour in time of trouble. And after this manner, Adrian dying, Leo the third, who suc∣ceeded him, hauing many ad∣uersaries at Rome, Charles the Great, 801. an. 13. m. 1. d 4. sued to Charles, Pipins son: who, at his fourth accession to the Citie, was by the Pope and all the people proclaimed Emperour, which happened at the same time, when nought but facti∣ons
swarmed at Constantinople, insomuch as the very time it selfe, and state of the Com∣mon-wealth, seemed to admi∣nister the cause and occasion of this change. Thus therefore the Empire of the West, came to the Ger∣manes: for without all doubt, Pipin and Charles were Ger∣manes. This was in the eight hundred and first yeere after Christs birth. Now, Nicepho∣rus was o∣uercome and slaine∣by the Bul∣gars, and his scull made a drinking bowle by Crumnus King of the Bulgars. after Nicephorus, the Emperours of the East were tossed with continuall warres; for at first, the Bulgars often incountred them, then the Sa∣razens issuing out of Affrica, tooke the Ile of Candie, as af∣terwards Sicilie, and made ha∣uocke in Asia farre and wide: and last of all the Turks, a peo∣ple of Scythia. The Emperours of Greece, from Nicephorus to Constantine Palaeologus the last, are recko∣ned
to 50, some whereof were women: but most of those were sloathfull. And in Con∣stātine Monomachus his raign, the Turkes from a base origi∣nall, by degrees getting ground more and more, began to wast Asia, and daily increa∣sing their power, at length made vp a Monarchie, but no new or fifth one, but sprouted out of that part of the Romane Empire, lying in the East. Ottoman first Mo∣narch of the Turkes, an. 1300. Of which Monarchie, Ottoman was the head, about the yeere of Christ, 1300. Afterwards, Ma hom et of that name the second, great Grandfather to Solyman, who now swaies the Empire, taking Constantinople, & putting Con∣stantine Palaeologus the Empe∣rour before mentioned, toge∣ther with his whole family, to the sword, vtterly extin∣guisht the nme, and successi∣on of Emperours of our Reli∣gion,
in those parts. And the Turkes to this day hold Asia, Syria, Egypt, Mesopotamia, Iudea, the Rhodes, all Greece, Thracia, Bulgaria, Macedonia, Illyricum, both the Mysia's, and of late, almost the other part of Hungary, and some part of Affrica. In former times, the Chur∣ches of Ierusalem, Antioch, Constantinople, and Rome, con∣tended amongst themselues for primacie, but especially the two last, as wee formerly shewed: but the Turke ended that controuersie, and set such a confusion in those Hierus, Antioch, Constanti∣nople. three places, that there is not a tract remaining of a Church or Christian Congregation: and the matter it selfe shewes, of what colour the face, and what the state is of that Rome. Church now remaining, which now (those Aemulis. riuals or eye-sores be∣ing remoued) alone triumphs.
Therefore hauing shewne after what manner the other part of the Roman Empires bo∣dy, lying in the East, vtterly decaied and fell into the hands of strangers: it remaines that we should also briefly vnfold, how that part in the west, quite perished, and found new Lords. But here by the way, let vs consider, after what a wonderfull kinde of mockerie of fortune, that maiesticall glo∣ry and sublimitie of the Em∣pire, was from those Romans and ancient families, brought into the hands of strangers, and some of them of base de∣grees: some being Spaniards, others originally of Pannonia, Dacia, Dardania, Dalmatia, Gallia, Thrace, Cappadocia. But chiefly it is worth ob∣seruance, how doubtfull and miserable the estate of these Emperours was: for their dig∣nitie and safetie consisted not
in the power of the Senate, or people, but of the Legions and souldiers: so that it may stand for a great wonder, that any would vndertake this charge so dangerous and ob∣uious to iniuries: For from Caius Caesar, (who was mur∣thered in the face of the Se∣nate) till Charles the Great, a∣bout thirty of them were slaine, foure whereof killed themselues: alwaies some∣thing was wanting in them, which the souldiers desired, who could abide the good no more then the wicked: but vpon the least occasion, raising a tumult, cut off those, whom sometimes they had drawne vp to that height of honour a∣gainst their wills, as for ex∣ample, it was Aelius Pertinax his case. The Senate stood in feare of the Emperour, but the Emperour himselfe was swaied by the will, and in a manner,
the becke of the rascall soul∣diers. And this presumption they tooke vpon them after Caius Caesars death, especially those veterane bands, which he had imploied in Gallia, His∣paine, and Affrica. Hereupon Cicero deploring this: Couragious they are in∣deed, saith hee, but in regard of the memory of those ex∣ploits, which they atchieued for the liberty of the Romans, and the dignitie of the Com∣mon-wealth too fierce, and recall all our Councell to their violence. The end of the second Booke.
IOHN SLEIDAN of the foure chiefe Monarchies. OR, The key of History. The third Booke. BEfore wee speake of Charles the Great, (to whō I told you the Empire of the West was befallen) some thing must be vnfolded concerning the Germanes, from whom hee deriues his originall. And first
of all it is manifest, beyond all doubt, that the Germanes very oft passed ouer the Rhyne, and entred the Gallia's, there to seat themselues in regard of the goodnesse of the soile. For the Teuthons broke into the Prouince of Gallia, and were put to flight by Caius Mari∣us the Consull. Afterwards the Aruernes and Heduies quarrelling about principali∣ty, the Germanes (hired with pay from the Aruernes and Sequans) marched thither at first indeed but with indiffe∣rent forces, but increasing by degrees, in Arcouistus their Kings raigne, possessed a good part of the country: but them Caius Caesar ouerthrew it bat∣tell: and some yeeres after, when he made warre against the Inhabi∣ting Lke beond Brabant. Eburons, a people of Gal∣lia Belgica, the Germanes a∣gaine march ouer the Rhyne, with intent to beat backe the
Roman Armie, but were by him discomfied, at the mee∣ting of the Rier Maze and the Rhyne. Many yeers follow∣ing, they contained them∣selues within their owne bounds, because the Roman Emperours held them in play by warres: yet as oft as they could lay hold on fitting op∣portunity, slackt not their owne commoditie, but conti∣nually wasted Gallia. After this manner, Gallienus being Emperour, one no lesse care∣lesse then voluptuous, they made an inroade, and by little and little, sprung vp to that potencie, that the Empe∣rour Probus had much adoe to repell them. Iulianus also, Constantius his Lieutenant, made warre against them. Af∣terwards, when Honorius was Emperour, the Gothes broke into Gallia, to whom the Em∣perour (detained by sundry
warres) granted the Country of Aquitania to inhabite. On the other side, the Of Fran∣kenlandt, then Fran∣conia in Germany. French-Germanes, making their way through Holland. Belgia, vanquishing the In and a∣bout Triers Treuires, Of Iuliers or Gulicke. Menapians, Eburons, Part in Flanders, part in Picardie. Morines, Of Tur∣nay. Neruians, of Picardy. The begin∣ning of the French Kingdome in Gallia, about 421. Amtians, of Picardy. The begin∣ning of the French Kingdome in Gallia, about 421. Bellouacans, of Picardy. The begin∣ning of the French Kingdome in Gallia, about 421. So∣issons, seated themselues in that part of Gallia, which re∣taines their name, and is called France, in which Country, Paris is the chiefe Citie, and not farre from thence stands San-Denis, after∣wards consecrated for the Se∣pulture of the Kings of France to this day. After this manner inlarged, hauing formerly pos∣session of a good part of Ger∣many, euen all the Country betwixt the Riuer Maine, and the Rhyne: they easily repelled not onely offred hostilitie, but also made warre vpon others. Besides, the Roman Empire in Asia and Affrica, daily more
and more sliding away, and the Lombards wasting Italy, they almost extended their dominions quite through Gallia: and after many of their Kings had raigned there in successiue course, at length the Crowne came to Pipin also, and to his sonne Charles. Charles Martel Pipins Father, who was not king himselfe, but onely one of the Nobles and Gouernour of the Pal∣lace, or as they are commonly called, Majors of the house: vanquished the Bauarians, and Sueuians. For as the writers of the French Annals deliuer it, the Kings there, for some yeers together, had nothing at all besides their title, the princi∣palitie of gouernement belon∣ging to the Gouernour of the Kings house. For those Kings degenerated from the worth of their Predecessors, and gaue themselues ouer to pleasure,
reiecting the care of the Com∣mon-wealth: whereupon the Gouernour of the Pallace bore all sway, and by how much greater the kings negligence was, so much more hee aug∣mented his authoritie. At length vpon this occasion, Pipin who was Gouernour in Childrickes raigne, (when the cause, as they say, came to can∣uasing before Pope Zacharie) got the Kingdome. Hereof is mention made in that decree which they name Gratians, to wit, that it is lawfull for the Pope to depriue Kings of their principalitie: but the title and inscription of that place is false, seeing there were two Anastatio' Emperours, and it cannot be referred to either of them; for the former raigned about 200. and the other, 37. yeeres, before this happened: as also there was no Pope Gela∣sius in the later Emperors time.
I thought good to adde this for the Readers aduertize∣ment, that they may wisely and warily peruse the Papall records: for it is not one place alone which discouers this to be their prime practice, so to fasten an opinion of antiquitie vpon their lawes, that they may carry the more weight and authority. Pipin, (besides his repressi∣on of the Lombards in Italie, at the Popes request, as before mentioned) commenced war also against the Saxons, and af∣terwards against the Aqui∣tanians, whose Chieferaine he tooke and put to death: not long after, departing his life, they forthwith rebelled, and King Charles his sonne with much difficultie and infinite toile, at length made an end of that double warre. For he was in armes against the Saxons, full thirty three yeeres; during
which warre, hee made other also: Bauaria likewise with their Chiefetaine Tassilo, hee brought vnder his subiection, and in two expeditions against the Lombards, marching into Campania, subdued all Italie, and setled it with lawes; and reduced into subiection those Cities of Gallia, lying vpon the Ocean, which Caius Caesar cals Armorica, but now goe vnder the name of little Brit∣taine, which refused any lon∣ger to pay yeerely tribute to the Kings of France. In His∣paine also whither hee made an expedition with an Armie against the Saracens, victorie attended him: but in his re∣turne vpon the Pyrene Moun∣taines, by a stratagem receiued a fore ouerthrow from the Of Gas∣coigne. Vascones, a people of Aqui∣tane; notwithstanding at last, after eight yeeres warre, hee ouerthrew the Hunnes, then
in possession of Pannonia, and likewise by his Lieutenants composed Bohemia. And his last warre was against the Danes or For the Normans originally inhabited Norway. Normans, then with a great Nauie forraging the maritime coasts of Germanie and France. By the atchieue∣ment of those so famous ex∣ploits, he gained his sirname, the Great. For, whereas before him, the French Kings onely held that part of Germanie, ly∣ing betwixt Saxonie, and the Riuer Danow, and betwixt the Rhyne, and the Riuer Sala: to this he added Sueuia, and Ba∣arta; all Saxonie, afterwards both the Pannonia's, Dacia, Istria, Ireland, and the mid∣land Country of Dalmatia: whereas also the French Kings had onely that part of Gallia, lying betwixt the Rhyne and the Riuer Loire, betwixt the Ocean and the Against the Ilands o Maior∣qe and Minuerque. Balearique Sea: hee added all Aquitania,
all the top of the Pyrene moun∣taines, to the Riuer Iber, and (which should haue beene na∣med first) all Italie from the Alpes to the furthest part of Calabria. And this done, hee sets forward to Rome the fourth time, where hee was proclaimed Emperour Augu∣stus, by Leo the Third, and all the people: after he had raign∣ed thirty three yeeres. Thus the Romane Empire in the West, rent almost into peece-meales, especially from that time when the Emperours made choice of Constantinople for their Court and seat (as appeares out of that which we haue before mentioned:) was by the Emperour Charles re∣dintigrated, and as it were a new bodie, re-assumed beau∣tie and feature, after so many and so great Prouinces were reduced into one mans princi∣palitie.
Nicephorus the other Em∣perour in the East, was much displeased hereat, but Charles by his humanitie and kinde∣nesse, appeased him, and in∣terchanging presents, both of them liued in amitie: and the certaine bounds of each Em∣pire were set out. Besides other assemblies, he had a Councell at Rhemes, wherin amongst many others, one decree was, that Bishops should diligently peruse the holy Scriptures, and Preach the Word of God. There was a Councell also held at Mentz the yeere before his death: and others, some yeeres before, at Tours, Chaalons, and Arles, about reformation of the Church, as they deliuer it, that liued in those times. Then constituting his sonne Lewis, heire of his kingdome and of the Empire, died at Aix, a towne in Gallia Belgica, aged,
seuenty yeeres, in the yeere after Christs birth, eight hun∣dred and fourteene, after hee had beene Emperour almost fourteene yeeres, the first of any Germane aduanced to that dignitie. In his time, there were onely one and twenty Metropolitane Cities, as they call them, throughout Italie, Germanie, and France: as Rome, Rauenna, Millaine, Friuly, Gra∣do, Cullen, Mentz, Saltzburgh, Triers, Roane, Sens, Besanson, Lyons, Rhemes, Orleans, Vienna, Monstier, Iuerdun, Burdeaux, Tours, and Burges in Berry. Pipin his Father commit∣ted the Exarchat, taken from the Lombards, into the Bi∣shops of Romes hands, as a∣boue said, which indeed is so deliuered to memorie, and it is reported that hee directly gaue it to them, but that very many call into question. Eginardus one very familiar
with Charles. him, and his sworne Scribe, writes, that hee more dearely esteemed of that Church, which they call S. Peters in Rome, then any other, and that a great masse of gold, siluer, and iewels, was trans∣ported thither, and very many gifts sent from him to the Popes: for herein he vsed ex∣traordinary diligence, that by his meanes and procurement, the Citie of Rome might inioy her ancient authoritie, and S. Peters Church might not one∣ly remaine safe and secured vnder his patronage, but also flourish in wealth aboue other Churches: Thus much onely he writes, but of the donation of so many and such potent Cities, within the bounds of the Empire, not a word: nay, it is written, that after his fourth comming into Italie, when hee was created Empe∣rour, he ordered not onely the
publike affaires, but also both ecclesiasticall and priuate, con∣cerning the Pope, the Citie of Rome, and all Italie. For when he was not yet Emperour, but onely King of France, hauing vanquished Desiderius King of the Lombards, as aboue faid: he came to Rome, and had a Councell, in which (as their bookes relate) Adrian the first together with the whole Councell, granted him the right and power of electing the Pope, as also disposing of the sea Apostolique, as they tearme it, and confirming Bi∣shops. Eginardus attributes to this Charles, many vertues worthie of a Prince, as, temperance, modestie, frugalitie, loue to religion, learning, eloquence, and knowledge, not onely of the Latine, but also of the Greeke tongue: withall, his exceeding care and diligence
in educating and nurturing vp his children to the same course. He also, as it is written, founded the Academie of Pa∣ris, as well of his owne accord, as also by the instigation of Com∣monly cal∣led Alcoi∣nus, an English man, so Bede and others. Albinus his Tutor for lear∣ning of the arts, as Eginardus reports. He also gaue Germane names to the twelue moneths, and to the windes, which they now vse, whereas before that time, as the same writer relates, the French vsed partly Latine, partly barbarous names. And thus farre in Preface∣wise touching the Germanes, and the Emperour Charles: henceforward ile briefly run ouer and shew, after what manner this part of the Ro∣mane Empire in the West, hard and sharpe restored and recol∣lected by Charles: againe de∣caied, which being diuided, fell into many mens domini∣ons,
who held the same, as their proper right, not ac∣knowledging the fountaine from whence they flowed: In∣somuch, as that Maiesticall and so much renowned subli∣mitie of the Romane Empire, is nothing else at this day, then a certaine slender shadow of a great bodie, after it was shrunk from such an huge masse, to Germanie one onely particle of Europe. Last of all, ile briefly explaine, how Daniel foretold this interchangeable course of Monarchies, and fall of the Romane Empire. Now Lewis, Charles his son, Lewis l. 814 an. 26. m. 14. d. 24. another Germane Emperour, renewed amitie with Leo Ar∣menius, Emperour of Greece: and Pope Leo dying in the third yeere of his raigne, his successor Stephen the IIII. comming into France, conse∣crated Empe∣rour. him at Rhemes To this Pope, Paschalis succeeded,
who, (by reason the Emperour interposed not his authoritie) diligently and earnestly excu∣sing the fact, alledged, that the Papacie was obtruded vp∣on him, altogether against his will. The Papall bookes haue it, that this Lewis the Empe∣rour, confirmed to this Pascha∣lis, and to the rest after him, both the possession of goods, and also permitted a free ele∣ction, that whomsoeuer all the Romans should iudge fit for that dignitie, he should be ac∣counted Pope. But I see not what credence can be giuen to such kinde of writings as these: for they so iarre amongst themselues, and are so patcht together without all method, that it cannot bee vnderstood what should follow. Lewis had three sonnes, Lotharius whom hee elected Collegue in the Empire and his Kingdome: Charles (who
succeded his deceased brother In France Pipin) he set ouer Aquitania: and Lewis ouer Bauaria. Vpon a rebellion raised, The Empe∣rour Lewis deposed by his owne sonnes. an. 833. hee being taken by his sonnes, and depo∣sed from his Kingdome, was confined to a Monasticall life at Compeigne a towne of the Sissons. The French Annall writers report, that the ecclesi∣asticall Prelates (whose hau∣tinesse and riot hee desired to restraine) conuocating some assemblies at Aix, stirred vp those broyles against him, and prouokt his sonnes to put in practice this so impious a fact. Restored the sixt moneth following. But being set at liberty the sixt moneth following, to the great contentment of the peo∣ple, hee recouered his King∣dome and all more. Because the place serues, let vs by the way, take a view of the many Nationall Synods held in France; for next after that beforementioned at Aix▪
there was another at Troy in Champaigne: after that at Rhemes, Tours, Digion, Paris, Lyons, Vienna, Auinion, Ʋier∣ron, Orleans, and many more in the same places, for when the affaires of the Common∣wealth so required, the Kings themselues conuocated aswell the States Ecclesiasticall as o∣thers, for reforming of pub∣like enormities. In like man∣ner Lewis the twelth, at bitter enmity wih Iulius the second; assembled a Councell of his owne people at Tours and Ly∣ons, in the yeare of Grace, 1510. and 1511. Now to the purpose, Lotharius 840. an. 15. m. 3. d. 10. Lewis dying was buried at Metz and Lotharius (then vp in Armes against his brothers) succeeded; which warre at length quenched, and a new diuision made, Germanie fell to Lewis, and part of France, from the Riuer Maze to the Rhyne:
to Charles, France, from the Brittish Ocean, and Pyrene Mountaines to Maze: Lotha∣rius (besides that he was Em∣perour) held Italy, and the Prouince of Narbon. To him his sonne Lewis the II. succeeded, Lewis II. 855. an. 19. m. 10. who repressed the Sarazens breaking into Italy. In his raigne amongst others, Adrian the II. was Pope, created (as their bookes haue it) contrary to the Empe∣rours assent, by the Romane Nobility, Citizens and Clergy as they call them. For al∣though the Emperours Depu∣ties were in the City, yet were they not called to the Electi∣on: who taking it in ill and discontented part, receiued their answer, that it was not done in any contempt against the Emperour: but in caution for future times, lest that cu∣stome of expecting the Empe∣rours Deputies at the Popes
Creation, should grow vp as necessary. They report that with this answer, they were not onely well pleased, but al∣so in reuerēce humbly saluted the Pope. Now here we may see a certaine wonderfull vari∣etie and inconstancy in their writings: for if Lewis the I. granted them a free election, as they boast, and as it is men∣tioned a little about, why did Lewis the II. his grand-child take this for an iniury offered him? But howsoeuer the case stands, the title of that de∣cree which is in Gratians Cen∣tons, is euidently false, for it is attributed to Gregory the IIII. whereas hee departed his life, twenty and two yeares before Adrian the II. was made Pope. Did he write a history when hee was dead of those things which happened after∣wards? Nicholas the I. was the next
before Adrian. A very long Epistle of his to Michael Em∣perour of Greece, concerning his power ouer all Churches: is extant. For Ignatius was remoued from his Bishopricke at Constantinople, and Photius placed, without the Bishop of Romes consent: as also the Images were throwne downe. He therefore with all the vehemency hee could ex∣claimes against this. Many of his decrees also are extant full of Papall Maiestie. Charles King of France, as abouesaid (notwithstanding his other elder brother Lewis the King of Germanies resi∣stance) marches in all hast into Italy, and is consecrated by Iohn the eight Pope of Rome. In his second expedition into Italy at the Popes request, Charles the Bald, 875. an, 2. m. 2. for repression of the Sarazens who had againe inuaded Campania: he dyed at Poisoned by Zede∣chias a Iew. Mantua. His son
Lewis surnamed the Stamme∣rer was his successour, Lewis the Stammerer, 877. an. 2. m. 6. d. 5. Charles the Grosse, 879. an. 8. m. 7. but he raigned onely two yeares. After him the gouernment of the Empire came to Charles the Grosse, son of Lewis King of Germany, who (his two brothers being dead) held all Germany, Italy, and France, and chased out the Sarazens, who infested Italy: The Nor∣mans first comming into Nor∣mandy in France. for a while also making war against the Nor∣mans, a people of Lower Ger∣manie, then annoying Belgia: at length granted them that part of France, which to this day retaines their name. Next after him Arnulphus his bro∣thers sonne was Emperour, Arnulphus 887. an. 12. m. 1. d. 19. a worthy Prince. He marching into Italy to set Pope Formosus at liberty from his aduersaries: takes Rome, and tooke reuenge vpon the Authors of that sedi∣tion. In the time of his raigne, the Hunnes being chased out of
Scythia, breake into Pannonia, and marching into Germanie, (Lewis the III. Arnolphus his son being then Emperour) got a notable victory not far from the Riuer Laech: and then ouer∣ran Bauaria, Sueuia, In Ger∣many be∣twixt Sue∣uia and Hassia. Fran∣cia, and Saxony, with blood∣shed, robberies and fire. Arnolplus Emperor, a Coun∣cell of two and twenty Ger∣mane Bishops, was held at Tri∣buria sometimes a towne vpon the banke of the Riuer Maine, where amongst many other, one decree was, That no man should sell a burying place for the dead, and that no Layman, as they call them, should bee buried within the Church. About this time a mighty vproare, burst-forth through∣out Italy: For Berengarius and certaine other Nobles of Italy, loaden with multiplicity of fauours from Charles the Bald, conspired against France, at
what time Charles the Grosse raigned: but their attempts there, prouing frustrate, they bend their minds for Italy, which (by long and mutuall conflict, as it is common) they harraze with mercilesse out∣rages. At length the victorie falling to Berengarius, hee got the Kingdome of Italie, where after hee had taken Lewis the Emperour he put out his eyes, as histories relate. About this time also (that no parcell of ca∣lamity might be wanting) the Sarazens, Africans, and Hun∣gars, most outragiously ouer∣runne Italy. Thus whilst the state of most beautifull Religion, vnder the Berengarians, Hugo, Rudolphus, Lotharius, Albertus, and cer∣taine others, was so dolefull and miserable, and Lewis the Emperor dying in the time of those broiles; the Germanes, but more especially the Sax∣ons,
and Francons, proclaime Otho Prince of the Saxons, and Thuringes Emperour, but hee, strucken in yeares, perswades them to take Conradus Duke of Franconia, Conrade I. 911. an. 7. m. 6. who being crea∣ted Emperour, ordered all af∣faires according to Othoes di∣rection: and soone after O∣thoes death, when he himselfe was very dangerously sicke, calling together his prime Nobility, requested them to acknowledge Othoes son Hen∣ry then absent, for Emperour. This was that Henry vulgar∣ly called Henry the Because of his great delight in hawing. Falconer. Henry the Falconer, 919. an. 17. Thus, wee see after what man∣ner the Imperiall splendor and dignity, fell from the French, and Charles the Great his lineage, to the house of Saxony. These two Emperours, Con∣radus and Henry, were not con∣secrated, as they call it, by the Bishop of Rome, and for that
cause are left out by many: moreouer it is written, that this Henry neglected the Popes offered ceremony of consecra∣tion, and that hee should say, that hee was content with the acceptance and suffrages of good men. Within a while after this, Arnolphus the Euill Duke of Bauaria, intended to bring a∣bout the sway of gouernment into his owne hands: where∣upon forces being mustered vp on both parts, when both the Armies stood in battell ray at Ratisbon, the Emperour calls him out to priuate parley, put∣ting him in mind how he was created Emperour by the most part of the people of Germany, and dehorting him from ieo∣parding the liues of so many thousand men, most whereof were innocent and ignorant of the cause of the warre: changed his intention, and so
broke off the battell. In like manner Burchardas Duke of Suenia, rebelled, but (shaken with the Emperours puissance) came to composi∣tion. The Hungars againe spoile Saxony: but after their chief∣taine was taken, make a nine yeares truce. The Emperour after this, trayning vp his sub∣iects in feats of Armes, van∣quishes the Dalmenincians, takes the City of Prague, to∣gether with Wenceslaus Duke of Bohemia, making that coun∣trey tributary to him. In maine battell he ouerthrew the Hun∣gars then againe (after the truce ended) breaking into Saxony: and distributed the tribute which the Saxons paid them, amongst the poore. He intended to haue gone to Rome, Otho the Great, 936. an 36. m. 10 d. 6. but hindered by sick∣nesse, constitutes his elder son Otho heire of the Empire. He
commenced wars many yeares together against the Bohemi∣ans, then in rebellion: as also vanguisht and put to flight the Hungars, who then also stri∣king ouer the Rhyne in the Vangions Countrey, Of Worbs. had made an inroad into Franconia, with intent to march on from thēce and pillage in Saxony. Hee brought Burgundy vnder his subiection, and afterward mar∣ching with a great Army into Italy, and vanquishing the Be∣rengarians: there maried his second wife Aditheida. Lui∣tholdus his sonne hereat dis∣pleased, practises treacherie against him, hauing Coadiu∣tors euery where in readinesse to serue his plots, and amongst the rest Conradus Duke of Sue∣uia his sisters husband. But his father besieging him at Ratisbon, he (first brought into distresse) humbly craues and obtaines pardon.
After this the Hungars, ha∣uing forraged France, breake into Germany in greater multi∣tudes then at any time before, and encampe themselues neere Auspurgh, on that place, which takes name from the Riuer Lych. The Emperor marching thither with the Saxons, Franks, Sueuians, Bauarians, and Bohemians; after a doubt∣full and long battle put almost all the enemies forces to the sword, and caused some of their Chieftaines to bee han∣ged. Then returning into Saxony, after he had setled the affaires there, makes a new ex∣pedition into Italy: but be∣fore his iourney constituted his sonne Otho Collegue in the Empire. At length arriuing at Rome, he assembles a Councel, where hee sate President, and deposed Pope Iohn the XII. for his offences, in whose place he appointed Leo, of that name the VIII. A decree of his
is extant incerted in the Papall Law, where he sayes, that hee conferres to Otho the Emperor and to his successors for euer, the authority of choosing Popes, disposing of the See Apostolike, and confirming of Bishops: as also pronounces a most seuere punishment against those, who (not expecting the Emperors approbation) conse∣crate Bishops. See here ano∣ther Decree, contrary to some other before. After this there is the forme of an oath added, by which (as they report) the Emperor Otho bound himselfe to Pope Iohn, but its not added who this Pope Iohn was, nor of what numbr n name either this Iohn or Otho were. And surely it is wonderfull that matters of such importance and moment, should be so neg∣ligently put into writing. Now if Otho the I. tooke this oath, then this obiection may hold against him. That
whereas in this forme before∣mentioned, amongst other things, he sweares not to pro∣cure any danger to the Popes life, nor to abrogate his honor and dignity: but how can this appeare, when as he, as we said before, remoued Iohn out of his place, and ordained ano∣ther? Let him that can recon∣cile this. Otho, by reason of the new broiles, marches againe into Italy, where hauing setled the affaires, and returning home dyed about the beginning of May, and was buried at Mai∣denburg, in the yeare of Grace, 974. In regard of his noble exploits, and surpassing pro∣wesse, Hee's stil'd the Great. Henry D. of Bauaria, rebel∣led against Otho the II. Otho II, 973. an. 10. m 7. d. 2. but the sword reduc'd him to his duty. Lotharius was then King of France, whose brother Charles was by the Emperour created
Duke of Lorraine, vnder con∣dition that hee should bee a Beaesicia∣rius. Leige-man of the Empire. Henry the Emperour (as the Annals report) got this Pro∣uince from Charles the Simple King of France, and entailed it to his successours in order. But Lotharius displeased here∣at, on a sudden leauying an Army, speedily meets him at Aix, and had almost discom∣fited the Emperour before hee was aware. The Emperour to reuenge this affront, musters vp forces, & marching on as far as Paris, at length (not without great blood-shed on both sides) concludes a peace, Re∣turning home, and from thēce making an expedition to Rome, hee commenced warre against the Greekes, who held Calabria and Apulia: where, after his Army was defeated, he was intercepted by Pyrats, as he fled by sea, but not being
knowne who he was, they dis∣mist him vpon a summe of money paid in hand: and so returning to Rome, besieges Beneuento with the remainder of his forces, takes and sets fire on it. And not long after, wounded with a dart in a bat∣tle against the Greekes and Sa∣razens, departed his life, and was buried at Rome. To him his sonne Otho suc∣ceeded by consent of the No∣bility, Otho II. 983. an. 17. m. 1. d. 21. and was consecrated at Aix. He created one Bruno a Germane Pope, afterwards called Gregory the fift. But Crescentius a Consull of Rome, set vp Iohn Bishop of Placentia in opposition to him. The Emperour therefore comming to Rome inflicts a heauy and ignominious punishment vp∣on Crescentius and his Com∣plices, and caused Iohn of that name the XVII. his eyes to be put out.
The Emperour in regard of the perpetuall dissensions a∣bout succession in the Empire, ordained with the Popes help: That certaine of the prime Nobility in Germanie should bee authorised with right and power of electing the Empe∣rours: lest that any man here∣after should set vpon that dig∣nity as hereditary. The Elec∣torall Princes of Germany, constituted  the yo of Christ 1000. This De∣cree was made about a thou∣sand yeares after Christs birth. Robert then raigned in France, a Prince that loued peace and learning. The An∣nalls exoll him for building many Churches and amply endowing them, as also going in pilgrimage to Rome. This Emperor Otho granted to Bleslaus Duke of Polonia, regall dignity and immunity, The be∣ginning of the king∣dome of Polonia, 9 . as their Annalls haue it. This therefore is the beginning of that Kingdome. Otho, after this, returning out of Italy
He was poisoned by a paire of gloues giuen him by Cresenti∣us (afore∣said) his widow. Henry II. or the Lome, 1001 an. 23. m. 5. d. 16. dyed. The next Emperour after him, was Henry, of that name the II. Duke of Bauaria, kinsman to Otho the great D. of Saxony, and Emperour. He, hauing setled a peace in Ger∣many, and drawne on some of his aduersaries into amity by his extraordinary kindnesse, and subdued other some: marched into Italy, there resto∣ring Apulia to the Empire, which the Sarazens had taken. Then, after his consecration by Benedict the VII. sending away his Army into Germany, He himselfe, taking his iour∣ney through the Sequans Countrey, came to an enter∣ueiw with Robert the French King, where a confirmation of amity was established on both sides. This Emperour was greatly loued of the Cler∣gie, for hee was very liberall towards them. After Henries decease, when
the Electorall Princes could not agree, there was an inter∣reigne or vacancy a For two yeares. Conradus to 24. an. 14. m. 10. d. 12. while. At length Conradus Duke of Franconia succeeded. He en∣forced Stephen King of Hun∣gary to conditions of peace. And hauing setled the affaires of Germany, makes speed into Italy, which was almost all ready to rebell; And at first he laies siege to Millaine, then going to Rome, where conse∣crated by Iohn the XVIII. hee's proclaimed Augustus, with the peoples acclamation. Then impoing a mulct vpon those that attempted the in∣nouation, he composed Italy, and returned into Germany. But new troubles againe kind∣ling in Italy, hee marches thi∣ther and punishes the Authors of that Conspiracy, the Arch∣bishop of Millaine being one amongst the rest, neither de∣sisted hee till hee had brought
it all vnder his subiection. Hauing dispatcht there, hee returnes home, and dyed at Vtrecht, a Towne vpon the frontiers of Holland. Batauia. His son Henry of that name the III. succeeded him, by consent of the Electorall Princes. Hee supprest the Bohemians then rebelling, and made them tri∣butary: re-inthronized Peter King of Hungary, once or twice deposed by his owne subiects: and quieted the whole Countrey, though not without great losse of his own men. At this time hapned an ex∣ceeding great vpr ae at Rome, for Three contended for the Papacy, and what they attemp∣ted was all by sinister practices: those were, Benedict the IX. Siluester the III. and Gregory the VI. The Emperour hereupon marching thither, hauing after
a siege, taken the City, he calls a Synod, and constitutes Suit∣gerus Bishop of Bamberg Pope: who changing his name, was called Clement the II. from whom, soone after the Pope receiued consecration. Then againe the Citizens tooke oath not any wayes to meddle with the Popes Crea∣tion, without the Emperours assent. Italy, thus set at peace againe, soone after the Empe∣rours returne into Germany, Pope Clement dyed, and was buryed at Bambergh. The Em∣peror vpon notice hereof cre∣ates Boppo Bishop of Frisingen, Pope. This was Damasus the II. who holding the place but 23 dayes, Leo the IX. Bishop of Tull, supplied the deceaseds place. A certaine parcell of an Epistle of his is extant, wherin he saies, it is not lawfull for a Bishop, Priest or Deacon, to
forsake his wife for Religion sake, but it is fit they should find her with such necessaries as belong to naturall sustenta∣tion: notwithstanding, in case she vse carnall copulation, it is not lawfull: sithence Paul saies, He had power aswell as the other Apostles, to lead about a wife; 1 Cor. 9. which place he thus interprets. That the Apostles had their wiues alwayes with them for this intent, that they should be maintained, together with them, by those, whom their husbands instructed, in the Christian Religion and faith: and not that they should exer∣cise the office of wedlocke, or lye together: therefore Saint Paul thought fit to vse the word lead about, and not lye with. In the yeare 1050, Leo go∣ing from Rome, assembled a Councell of 42. Bishops, at Mentz, wherein the Emperor
sare President. He dying with∣in three yeares after, Gebehar∣dus Bishop of Aisten, by the Emperours assent, succeeded him: this was Victor the II. The Emperour marching into Italy, after hee had setled the affaires there, returnes into Germanie comes to treaty with Henry, the first of that name, King of France, dyes in Saxo∣nie, and was buried at Spire, the Pope and many other No∣bles being present at his death. He had a sonne called Henry, very Seuen yeares old. Henry IIII 1056. An. 49. m. 10. d. 3. yong, but was constituted Emperour a little before: notwithstanding, his Mother and the Bishop of Au∣spurge gouerned the Empire. Within a while after Pope Victor the II. dyes, after hee had held the Papacy little a∣boue two yeares. To him, Fredericke of the house of Lor∣raine, called Stephen the IX. succeeded. Hee also within
few moneths after dying at Florence: One Benedict, of that name the X. by helpe of his friends, and without the Em∣perours assent, sets vpon the Papacie. The Romans liked not well of this prancke, who, to acquit themselues, dispatch∣ing their Ambassadour to the Emperour, proffer the same fi∣delitie to him, which they had performed to his Father, and intreat him to constitute a law∣full Pope; Benedict hereupon depriued, the Emperour gaue them Gerhardus Bishop of Flo∣rence, this was Nicholas the II. The Princes of Germanie grudged much, that the Com∣mon-wealth should be gouer∣ned by a woman, the Empe∣rous mother, as aboue said: vpon which occasion, a meane was inuented to draw away her sonne from her: whereup∣on the Archbishop of Mentz and Cullen had the prime ma∣naging
of all affaires: to them the Archbishop of Bremen, one in exceeding great fauour with the young Prince, was now and then conioyned, who alone ouer-ruling him, disposes of Ecclesiasticall pro∣motions to himselfe and his friends, especially Abbeies: and to keepe the flame of enuy lower, perswades the Empe∣rour to conferre them likewise vpon other Princes. In the meane space, Nicholas the II. dies, in whose place the Em∣perour constitutes the Bishop of Parma: but hauing not at all acquainted the Senate of Rome herewith, and in that regard some troubles likely to insue: Alexander the II. Bi∣shop of Luca was elected. Be∣twixt those two, a sharpe con∣trouersie followed, but Alex∣ander hauing the longer sword, carried it. The Archbishop of Bremen
onely bearing all sway with the Emperour, incensed his fellow Bishops against him, by whom at length he was depri∣ued: and though shortly after restored to his place, yet hee long suruiued it not. And the Emperour, (necessity constrai∣ning him) sith all in a manner complained of the state of the Common-wealth: requested Anno Archbishop of Cullen, to vndertake the Gouerne∣ment. But he, seeing insolen∣cie and iniquitie, bore great sway, excusing his age and sick∣linesse, afterwards resignes vp his office to him. This young Emperour now grown to two and twenty, being by nature prone to vice, beganne to in∣crease his lasciuiousnesse, and despising his wife Bertha, kept many Concubines. Then rai∣sing Castles all ouer Saxony, intended to bring them into seruitude, and restrained not
his officers, who vsed much excesse and insolencie. Hereupon the Saxons, as well the Nobilitie as Clergie, knitting a league, betooke themselues to Armes, in vindi∣cation of their libertie: which, after much adoe, and long intercession, they lay downe againe, he first satisfying their demands, and making a nar∣row escape by flight in the night time. Alexander the II. dying, the Romane Nobilitie, without the Emperours assent, set vp Hildebrand, called Gre∣gory, of that name the VII. The Emperour vpon no∣tice hereof, expostulates with them by his Ambassadours, and withall admonishes the Pope to giue him satisfaction herein. Hee makes answer, that hee was drawne to it a∣gainst his will, and when hee neuer dreamt of it, and that he would not haue beene inau∣gurated
before Hee, and the rest of the Princes of Germany had approued of his election. Thus hee appeased the Empe∣rour, and was afterward by his consent, confirmed. Then dispatching his Legates into Germanie to certaine Bishops, willed them to assemble in Councell: but they refused it, alledging, that it was contrary to the custome and priuiledge of their Nation. This designe miscarying, He in some certaine Councels held in Italy, decrees, That Massing Priests shall haue no wiues but shall dismisse them, or else leaue their places; sen∣ding this his decree to the Bi∣shops in Germanie, vrges ear∣nestly, vnder a penalty de∣nounced, to haue it establish∣ed: but the Clergy, as they call them, and whole streame of Massing-Priests, stiffely re∣claime calling him an heritike,
that propounds such doctrine; sithence Christs words are, That all should not receiue this word. Mat. 20. And Paul saith, They that cannot containe let them marrie: 1 Cor. 7. But this Pope not re∣garding Christs word, and contemning Pauls authority, would constraine men, to re∣iect the vse of mariage, which is lawfull and ordained by God: and to burne in most filthy flames of lust, and rush into manifest lewdnesse, but they would rather leaue their Ministery then matrimony. He neuerthelesse, as before, sending his agents, pressing it on, and standing stiffely vp∣on it, the Archbishop of Mentz began to hearken to him; who at first gently admo∣nishes those in his inrisdicti∣on, and afterwards assem∣bling a Councell at Erphord, would flatly inioyne them, but an vproare arising, he esca∣ped
death very narrowly. The Emperour in the mean time, to reuenge the ignomi∣nie, receied the precedent yeare, when, besieged by the Saxons, hee wrought out his safety by flight in the night time: makes readie for warre, and violating the league, which he had made the yeere before, musters vp all the for∣ces hee could possibly make, and in the moneth of Iuly, set∣ting vpon the Saxons (who by their frequent Ambassadours had, but in vaine, solicited him for peace) discomfits them in many battels, not without great lsse of his owne men, no small number of the prime Nobilitie being then slaine. Pursuing his victorie, hee har∣razes their country faire and wide, and by his Ambassadors, exhorts them to yeeld: willing them to hope for all fauour from his benignitie: but that
failed, though a certaine few obeied. Bucco Bishop of Hal∣berstadt, and Otho Duke of Ba∣uaria, banished by the Em∣perour, had the chiefe manna∣ging of this warre. The Archbishop of Mentz againe solicited by Gregory the VII. assembles another Coun∣cell, and makes a new propo∣sall about the Clergies not marrying: but was entertained in like manner as before, and stood in great hazard of his life, whereupon he thought it his best course, vtterly to lay off this designe. The Saxons thus put to flight, the Emperour dismis∣ses his forces, and the auxilia∣rie Princes: but vpon conditi∣on, that they should againe present themselues in armes before him, on the two and twentieth day of October fol∣lowing. When that day came, a great many appeared, and a∣mongst
them, many Bishops, but not so many in number as before. There againe the Sax∣ons send their Ambassadours for peace, in camping them∣selues at Northausen. The Em∣perour sends them answer, that one way to peace, was to yeeld themselues: so they, though seeming rather to doe any thing then this, yet certaine Princes (which were sent as Intercessors and Ambassadors from the Emperour) promi∣sing them very largely, that they should not thereby in∣curre any indammagement either of liberty or goods: at length assented, and the Bi∣shop of Maidenburgh, and Halberstadt, Otho Duke of Ba∣uaria, Magnus Duke of Saxo∣ny, and Fredericke Count Pa∣latine, yeelded themselues in∣to his hands: and likewise, soone after, many of the rest of the Nobilitie.
The Emperour at first com∣mits them to custodie, not without fauour: but after∣wards flying from his promise, caused them to be carried in∣to seuerall places, how bee it, not long after, hee set Duke Otho not onely at liberty, but also intreated him very famili∣arly, but for the rest, both kept them prisoners, and gaue their goods for a prey to others. Then raising new Castles and Forts, wholly bends himselfe against the safetie and libertie of the Saxons, and in his ab∣sence committed the whole charge of gouernement to O∣tho Duke of Bauaria, by pa∣rentage descended from the Saxons. After this, hee confti∣tuted a Bishop at Bambergh, as also at Cullen, and an Abbot at Fulden. Now a little before this, hee was accused to the Pope, and most especially for selling Ecclesiasticall promoti∣ons.
Whereupon the Pope, by his Legate, cites him to make his appearance at Rome, with∣in a certaine time, and to giue his answer in the cause. But he cals a Synod of Bishops and Abbots at Wormbs: there it is decreed, that the Pope, for that he came to the Papacie by sinister meanes, should bee depriued of his place, & forth∣with publishes this at Rome, by his Ambassadors. Henry the IIII. ex∣communi∣cated by Gregory the VII. alias Hildebrand an. 1076. But the Pope not a whit moued hereat, both excommunicates him, and al∣so more especially, the Bishops of Mentz, Vtrecht, and Bam∣bergh, hauing formerly excom∣municated certaine of his fa∣miliar friends, by whose coun∣sell hee supposed him to haue beene drawne on to this pra∣ctise. Furthermore, the Prin∣ces of Germany decpely offen∣ded at the Emperours demea∣nour and disposition: especial∣ly for that, contrary to his
promise, hee persecuted the Saxons with so obstinate ha∣tred, conspire against him, and so much the rather, because he was interdicted the Church. Whereupon they dismisse the surrendred prisoners, (the cu∣stodie whereof was commit∣ted to them by the Emperour) iudging them not to bee tied to him in any bond of allegi∣ance. At the same time certaine Nobles in Saxonie, stirring vp, and drawing on others into their partie, surprise those Ca∣stles euery where raised, some by force and command, other some by dedition; and dis∣misse the Garisons in safetie, first binding them by oath, neuer after to beare Armes a∣gainst Saxonie. The Emperour vpon no∣tice hereof, in subtle policie, sets at libertie the rest of the imprisoned Princes, to the
end that they, returning into Saxonie, might doe him faith∣full seruice in punishing the Rebels: for hee saw there was no other meanes to bring a∣bout his wished successe, with more facilitie, then by kindling factions amongst them, and renting one from another, but the euent was not correspondent: for they, after their returne home, well acquainted with his qualities, with ioynt mindes & might resolued to fight for the com∣mon liehrtie; and Duke Otho also, forsaking him, did the like: yet the Emperour was full fraught with good hope, hauing broken through Bohe∣mia, into the Country of Cam∣pania aided with Bohemian forces: but when he was cer∣tified of the Saxons coniuncti∣on, and their Armie in readi∣nesse, despairing victory, re∣tires.
Then at length the Princes of Germanie, appointing the day, met together in great a∣bundance: thither also repaires the Popes Legate, who vnfol∣ding the causes of the Empe∣rours excommunication, ex∣horted them to create another, which otherwise they were a∣bout to doe of their owne ac∣cord: for, making a rehearsall of his life, euen from his ten∣der yeeres, they pronounced him to be the blemish, disho∣nour, and reproach of the Em∣pire; and decreed, that (in re∣gard he had afflicted the Com∣mon-wealth with most grie∣uous calamities) hee should bee depriued of his gouerne∣ment. He, brought into these straights, beganne to depre∣cate and intreat by his Ambas∣sadours, when after much a∣doe this condition was propo∣sed. That he should stand to iudgement, and subiect him∣selfe
to the Popes cognizance, whom they would send for to Auspurge against the first day of February. That hee should procure his absolution within a yeere after the date of the excommunication, wherein if he failed, the whole cause should fall: dismisse his forces: In the mean time liue at Spire, as a priuate man, with a small traine: not meddle in any pub∣like affaires, nor assume the Bundles of rods vsed in an∣tient time to be carri∣ed before the Roman Consuls. fasces, or Imperiall Orna∣ments, till the controuersie were lawfully decided. Hee accepts the conditions, and whilest he liued at Spire, be∣thought himselfe of going downe into Italie, to worke his mature peace with the Pope. Taking his iourney to∣gether with his wife and little sonne, through Burgundie and Sauoy, in a most sharpe winter, not without extreame difficul∣tie and danger of life: at length
arriues in Italie, where he was kindely enterained, by the Nobles and Bishops of that Country, they thinking that he came thither, incenst with anger against the Pope. The Pope in the interim, at the re∣quest of the Germane Princes, began his iourney, comming on some part, till hee vnder∣stood of the Emperours arri∣uall. Whereupon hee staies to acquaint himselfe with the state of the cause. The Empe∣rour forthwith sending a sumptuous Embassie, wherein were some gallant Ladies, a∣mongst which, one was ac∣counted somewhat too obse∣quious to the Pope: makes suite to the Pope for his abso∣lution: at first he seemed very loath, and said hee could doe nothing therein, except the accusers were present: but af∣ter much adoe, ouercommed at length with intreaties, hee
refused not. Howbeit the Em∣perour before hee came into the Popes presence, staied full three daies in the lower roomes, court yard, and with∣out the gates, where the Pope then was: being clad in meane and simple apparrell, without any regall ornaments, bare foot, and fasting from morne to night. The fourth day ha∣uing admittance, the Pope propounds to him these con∣ditions: that hee should stand to his iudgement, answer the Princes their accusation, and if conuicted, leaue his Empire, and neuer afterwards attempt any reuenge: in the meane time liue as a priuate man, and not meddle in any publike affaires, release his subiects from their loyaltie and oath: remoue from him his Coun∣cellors and familiars: in case hee shall doe any thing to the contrary, that benefit now
granted him to become void, and the Princes to haue free li∣bertie, presently thereupon to choose them another. When the Emperour had approoued of these conditions, the Pope saies Masse, and to purge him∣selfe from all pretended crime, takes the vnleauened bread, which they call the Lords Bo∣dy, inuocating fearefull exe∣crations vpon his owne head and estate, if all these troubles were not wrought by his ad∣uersaries: and then he exhorts the Emperour (if he thought the crimes obiected against him by the Princes, were false, or any iniury offered him) to doe the like, and take the other part of the consecra∣ted bread: but hee excused himselfe, shewing that hee could not conueniently doe it, and the Pope vrged him no further, but entertained him with a banquet, and so cour∣teously
dismist him. The No∣bles of Italie vnderstanding of those proceedings, were vehe∣mently vext, that hee should submit himselfe so basely and ignobly to him, who by most lewd practices had set vpō the Papacie, who had polluted all places with bloodshed and adultery. In him (being the Patron of Iustice, the Altar and Bulwarke of lawes) they had grounded all their hopes, and had not onely contemned the excommunication, but also for his sake affronted the Pope in bitter enmitie: and now, for him, by this, directly the most dishonourable of examples, to brand the Empire to all poste∣rity, with this so deepe and indelible infamie, and come in fauour againe with him, the publike enemie both to Church & Common-wealth. Thus, and much more after this manner they chafed, and
were minded to elect the Em∣perours little sonne, carry him to Rome, and depose the Pope. The Emperour herewith acquainted, saw no meanes likelier to pacifie them, then by fleeing from the league, and ioyning with them; which fact quite confounded the Popes plots, insomuch as hee was inforced to breake off his intended iourney into Germa∣nie. And which was next to be done, by his Legates, signifies to the Princes of Germanie; how matters stood, and withal exhorts them to haue a care of the Common-wealth. This was in the yeere, 1077. They therefore create Ru∣dolphus, Duke of Sueuia, Em∣perour, whom the Archbishop of Mentz consecrates. But Henry returning into Germa∣nie, musters vp forces: Rudol∣phus doth the like, who chiefly
relied vpon and from the Sax∣ons; but in the third conflict receiuing a deadly His right hand was strucke off in battell, and being brought to him, lying vpon his death bed, he cried out, saying; This is the hand wher∣with J con∣firmed my promised loyaltie to the Empe∣rour, &c. wound, departed his life. Presently after this victory, the Emperour cals a Diet at Brescia: there a decree passed by the Bishops then present, as well Italians as Germanes, that Gregory was not lawful Bishop of Rome: whereupon Victor the II. Archbishop of Rauenna, was appointed in his place: vpon this decree the Empe∣rour hastens to Rome, besieges Gregory, who at length escapes by flight: and then confirmes Victor the II. by whom he is consecrated. Gregory the next Pope after him, dying, Vrbane the II. at Gergoie, a towne of the Aruer∣nes, vulgarly called Claremont, where there was a meeting of many Princes: perswades Phi∣lip, of that name the first, then King of France, to the Sarazen
warre: of which, afterwards, Godfrey. Duke of Bulloigne, went Leader, who had much happy successe, and recouered Ierusalem. Paschal the II. Vr∣bans successor, was trouble∣some also to the Emperour, who for that cause intending to goe downe into Italie, first assignes his sonne for his suc∣cessor. But he, prickt forward by others, and forgetting that dutie ingrafted in vs by na∣ture, droue his Father into ex∣treame distresse; hauing the Pope and very many Princes of Germanie, his Complices, both in councell and in the fact. And hereupon hee was created Emperour, of that name the V. his Father after∣wards dying miserably at Leige. Henry the V. 1106. an. 18. m. 8. d. 16. Some few yeeres after, hee marches into Italie with a great Armie, to make an end of the controuersie, betwixt
the Common-wealth of the Empire and the Papacie, and hewing out his way with his sword, at length, arriues at Rome. Now from Constantines time, the Emperours had the colla∣tion of Ecclesiasticall honours and dignities: but the Popes growne more wealthie, at length greatly repined hereat, as a thing vnmeet; and from this fountaine issued almost all the iarres betwixt them. Now this Emperour standing vpon his owne right and power, a great tumult arose at Rome, in so much as the Emperour rai∣sed vp in the night, was con∣strained to aide his owne men, who fell by the sword, all the Citie ouer. But these factious persons once supprest, he takes Paschal the II. and dismist him not, till he had giuen him satisfaction by entring into a league: but after the Emperour
was returned into Germanie, the Pope flies off from the league, Henry the V. excom∣municated by Paschal the II. 1115. whereto he had sworn in most sacred words, and ex∣communicates the Emperour, which stirred vp many of the Germane Princes to rebellion, and amongst the rest, more especially the Archbishop of Mentz. The Emperour mar∣ching downe into Italie, sends his Ambassadours to the Pope, about a peace. But whilest the matter was in hand, the Pope dies: To him, Gelasius the II. succeedes. The Emperour, for that he was not called to the election, marches to Rome, and sets vp another. Gelasius thus deposed, excommunicates both him, as also the Pope by him constituted: and the Em∣perour in regard the Popes Legates solicited the Germanes to reuolt, was constrained to retire home. But Gelasius dy∣ing in the interim, the Romans
choose Calixtus the II. Hee thrust him out of his place, whom the Emperor in hatred to Gelasius, had created, and after much interession, com∣pounds with the Emperour. To Henry the V. Lotharius, Lotharus II. 1125. an. 13. d. 18. of the house of Saxony, of that name the II. succeeded. Him Conradus Duke of Sueuia op∣posed, storming that the sway of gouernment, was falne againe into the Saxons hands: who marching into Italy, to settle himselfe in that King∣dome, (whilst Lotharius in the interim held Germany fast) de∣stitute of aide, returned home, and made his peace with the Emperour. Innocent the II. was then Pope of Rome. Him Anacletus resisted: to whom, because he was descended from noble pa∣rentage, Innocent was forced to yeeld, but imploring the Em∣perors ayde, was restored.
The Emperour returnes in∣to Germany, where hauing se∣led the affaires, hee marches downe againe into Italy with a mighty Army, subdues some Cities then in rebellion, and amongst the rest Ancona and Spoleti, chased Roger King of Sicilie out of Apulia and Cam∣pania, and (as fame speakes of him) scarce any Emperor since Charles the Great, archieued more worthy exploits throughout Italy. It is written that then also, the ciuill law which as we mentioned, was collected by Iustinian the Em∣perors command, hauing been borne downe by stormes of warre, was brought to light againe. Conradus D. of Suenia, succee∣ded him: Conradus III. 1139. an 12. m. 10. d. 15. at what time Henry sirnamed the Proud, was Duke of Bauaria, and by mariage with the Emperour Lotharius his daughter, Duke of Saxony
also: who affecting the Em∣pire, and plotting much mis∣chiefe against the Emperour, was proscribed and his lands giuen to others. But Duke Henry, hauing recouered Saxo∣ny; as hee was marching into Bavaria, dyed, leauing behind him his sonne: in fauour of whom, the Saxons rose vp in rebellion against the Empe∣rour, and not so onely, but Welpho also, brother to the de∣ceased Duke Henry; by force of Arms challenged Bauaria, ex∣cluding Ludolphus, vpō whom the Emperour had conferred that Prouince. A little aboue wee mentioned how the Em∣perour expelled Roger King of Sicilie: but whilst Germanie was thus turmoiled, King Ro∣ger laying hold on the oppor∣tunity, inuades Sicilie, and cha∣ses out the Emperours Depu∣tie: and then spurres on Wel∣pho with large promises to pro∣ceed
and hold the Emperour in play: The King of Hunga∣rie too, tooke the same course, who also stood in feare of the Emperour. At length the Emperour marching out against the Sara∣zens, lost his army, and returnes home: from whence inten∣ding to goe downe into Italy, hauing all in readinesse, dyed at Bamberg. Com∣monly cal∣led Barba∣rossa. Frederick Barbarossa 1152. an. 38. m. 3. d. 7 Frederick Aeno∣barb or Red-beard, Duke of Sueiua, of that name the first, succeeded him, a man of he∣roicke spirit. He in the begin∣ning of his raigne, made a peace among the Princes of Germanie, and ended the con∣trouersie about Saxony and Ba∣uaria, afterwards with a maine Army, marches downe into Italy: sets a mulct vpon the Veronesses, who had contem∣ned him: and for example sake hangs some of the chiefe vpon gallowes. He comman∣ded
a Court of Guard to bee kept about him neare Placen∣tia, by all the Leige-Princes of the Empire: besieges Millaine, rases Asta, and layes Deitona leuell with the ground. Going to Rome is consecrated by A∣drian the IIII. suppresses the rebellious Citizens, sub∣uerts Spoleti, and made a great slaughter: subdues the Lom∣bards, and hauing broken the snares laid for him by the Ve∣ronesses, returnes into Germany, inflict an ignominious mulct vpon the Prince Palatine, who in his abscence had raised some commotions: The be∣ginning of the King∣dome of Bohemia. about 100. and after that he made the Duke of Bo∣hemia King. In the meane space the Mil∣lanois, practised many insolent outrages against their neigh∣bours, and againe reared vp Deitona, demollshed by the Emperour: whereupon hee, returning with a strong army,
sacks Millaine, by the ayde of the Cremonesses, Pauians and Nouarians. The City thus taken, the multitude, at the Princes of Germanie their in∣tercession (to whom they had petitioned) was spared. All Lombardy was reduced into his subiection: from hence (hauing setled the City with Lawes) hee remoues to other people thereabouts. After his returne they rebell, contemne the Lawes by him established, and demolish the Forts by him raised: whereupon againe marching thither; he harrazes the whole Country, and rases all places within their Domi∣nions. In the meane space, mortall conspiracies were in hatching against him all Italy ouer: in which Pope Adrian before∣mentioned, was one: who, as soone as hee had absolutely re∣solued to excommunicate him Drinking of water wherein a flie were drowned. dyed.
The Emperour marching into Italy the third time vtter∣ly euerts Millaine, puts the Author of the rebellion to death, and compells the rest of the multitude to goe into ex∣ile: then besieging the City of Rome, lost a great part of his Army by contagious sicknes. For that cause raising his siege, and placing garisons through∣out Hetruria: setting ouer at Spoleti, Ancona, and Rauenna, such as hee pleased should go∣uerne the Common-wealth, he returnes into Germany. Pope Adrian dying, two contend for the Papacy, Victor and Alexander the III. the Emperour being absent, who indeed enclined more to Vic∣tor: but Alexander first ex∣communicates his Competi∣tour, and afterwards (the dis∣sention increasing) the After∣wards whē the Empe∣rour came to him to Venice for his absolu∣tion, the Pope trode vpon his necke, and caused that place in the Psal∣mist to bee sung; Thou shalt tread vpon the Aspe and Basilisk, &c. The Em∣perour ex∣claiming that he did not this honour to him but to S. Peter, the Pope re∣plied, To me and to Peter too. Empe∣rour also. The Millanois perceiuing
this occasion breake into re∣bellion, and in many places in Italy expell the Emperous De∣puties, hanging some of them vpon gallowes. The Empe∣rour hereupon returning into Italy fought a hazardous battle with them. The Pope was Copartner in the warre, who fled to Ʋenice. At length when peace was concluded by truce, he makes an expedition into Asia, against the Enemies of the Christian Religion, where going into a Riuer to wash himselfe, was by force of the streame ouerwhelmed and drowned. His sonne Henry, Henry VI. 1190. an. 8. m. 2. d. 22. of that name the VI. was his successor. He (after William the sonne of Roger King of Sicilies death) hauing beene twice in Italy, conquered Apulia, and Cala∣bria, and taken Naples, sub∣dues Sicily, placing strong gar∣risons there, in regard of the
inconstant disposition of that Nation. Then hee constitutes certaine Nobles ouer Rauenna, and Ancona, and throughout Apulia and Hetruria: soone after, hauing assigned his son Fredericke, as then an Infant, for his successour in the Em∣pire: hee went into Sicily by consent of the Princes of Ger∣many, and there ended his Falling into a bur∣ning feuer by a poy∣soned poti∣on, giuen him (as it was suppo∣sed) by his wife. life. Fredericke his son, being as aforesaid, in respect of his age, but a Childe, all men in a manner deemed it fitter to take his vncle Philip: but In∣nocent the III. Pope of Rome, most vehemently withstood that. Howbeit the Princes disagreeing in their choice, when some would create Phi∣lip, others Otho Duke of Saxo∣ny, a great vproare thereupon ensued, especially about the coast of the Rhyne: But Phi∣lip partly by force of Armes, partly by his exceeding huma∣nity,
drew on his aduersaries into subiection, and forth∣with made his peace with the Pope whom by experience he had found a bitter Enemy. Not long after, Otho IIII. 1208. an. 4. he was murthe∣red in his Chamber, and Otho Duke of Saxony beforementi∣oned was his successour: who incurred the Popes displea∣sure, (being formerly his most entire friend) and was at length excommunicated by him: whereupon a Diet as∣sembled, the Electorall Princes solicited by the Pope to create another, call home out of Sici∣lie, Frederick the King thereof, Henry the VI. his sonne, to whom, (as a little aboue it is mentioned) they had giuen allegiance, being then an In∣fant. Him the Emperour Otho meets with an Army at the Rhyne to stop his passage, but was discomfited, and returning into Saxony, dyed, as it was
supposed, of griefe. Fredericke the II. 1212. an. 11 And thus was Frederick made Emperour of that name the II. Grand∣child to Frederick Aenobarb or Red-Beard, by his sonne. Innocent the III. before spo∣ken of, had a Councell at Rome, called the Laterane, there amongst others, those decrees passed. That the Chrisme and Eu∣charist, which they call the Hoast, should bee kept vnder Locke and Key. That a priuate confession of sinnes should bee made once euery yeare. That an election made by the ciuill Magistrate, in spiri∣tuall promotions, should be of no force. That those of Ecclesiasticall Order should not, without cause, promise fealtie to those that are called Lay-men. That the Lawes made by Princes should not preiudice Churches.
That Ecclesiasticall persons should bee exempted from all contribution. That Tribute should not be paid before Tenths. That the Reliques of Saints, should not be showne forth of a Casket. About these Decrees there followed a great dissention, be∣twixt the Greekes and Latines. for the Greekes would not touch those Altars whereon the Latines had offered vp the Hoast, till they had washed and expiated them, as also of a new baptized those whom the La∣tines had baptized. Hereupon it was decreed that they shold returne to their mother Church of Rome, whereby there might be one Fold, and one Shepheard: in case they obeyed not, to bee (after ex∣communication) degraded from their Order. The Emperor goes to Rome,
and is consecrated by Honorius the third. Hee subdued those Rebells, which were spred all ouer Italy, and proscribes some of them. Many whereof fled to Rome, and implored the Popes ayde. This gaue occa∣on of great discord, for the Emperour tooke it most hai∣nously that his aduersaries should haue their harbour and habitation there. The rancor raging hotter, Hee by consent of the Princes, assignes his sonne Henry his successour in the Empire; and summons the Princes to a Diet at Cre∣mona: but being hindered en∣trance there, by the Pope, and the Lombards factions, returnes into Apulia: and within a while after the Pope dyes, to whom Gregory the IX. Frederick the II. ex∣communi∣cated by Gregory the IX. three times. suc∣ceeds, who excōmunicates the Emperour for not perfor∣ming his expedition against the Turkes, whereto he had
bound himselfe by vow. The Emperour deprecating this offence and purging him∣selfe; when nothing could pre∣uaile, hee marches to Rome, deposes the Pope and inflicts a heauy mulct vpon his Com∣plices: then calling another Diet at Rauenna; is hindered by the fugitiue Pope, who had stirred vp enemies against him in euery place. At length the Emperour, after his wife was dead, that he might performe his promise, and prouide for the Common-wealth, sets for∣ward on his expedition into Asia: But the Pope whilst he was absent, makes warre, and seizes vpon Apulia. The Emperour hauing good suc∣cesse, recouering many places, and amongst the rest Hierusa∣lem: being certified of the state of Italy, concluding a ten yeares truce with the enemy, returnes with his Army, and
recouers his owne Countries. The Pope fortifies himselfe by a new league, with these No∣bles of Italy, on whō the Em∣perour had set a mulct, and then againe excommunicates him for entering into truce with the enemy. The Em∣perour louing quietnesse, by his Ambassadours treats for peace, which with much a doe he obtained, and so hee retur∣ned into Germany. But the Pope not able to leaue his old guise, dismantling Viterbo, a∣gaine excommunicates the Emperour, who hereat incen∣sed beyond measure, posts into Italy, in raging and wrathfull manner, and punishes all the Rebels throughout Hetruria, Vmbria, Lombardy, and the Countrey bordering vpon Po: whereupon the Pope in∣geminates his excommunicati∣on, and conioynes in league with the Ʋenetians. The Em∣perour
coasting through Italy, hauing in a manner reduced it all into his subiection, layes siege to Rome, and not long af∣ter, Pope Gregory dyes, hauing first summoned a Councell of his owne adherents, at Rauen∣na, whither notwithstanding they could not haue accesse, all passages being blockt vp by the Emperour, insomuch as certaine of them were taken. This was the Pope that patcht together the Decretall Epistles, as they call them, which are a great part of the Pontificiall Law, loaden with multiplicity of Commenta∣ries: wherein it may seeme wonderfull, that such men there should bee that will take so much paines as to adhere to those, not onely inconuenient, triuiall, foolish, but also ridicu∣lous workes, as fast as if they were a kinde of Oracle: and spend all their labour and time
in interpreting, explaining and garnishing them: as though they were hired to that end, to defend other mens folly and error, with their best vigilancy and industry, and to lose the reputation of their owne modestie, in other mens impudency. That decree, which goes vnder Gratians name, in diuers places, a∣mongst other passages, hath these: The Rule of the Church of Rome, which is the blessed A∣postle S. Peters seat: must bee followed. It is not lawfull to hold a Councell without permission of the Bishop of Rome. The Lawes of the Church Rome, are to bee obserued, as pronounced by Peters owne mouth. What yoke the Church of Rome imposes, though it be not tolerable, it must be endured.
The Ministers of the Church ought to vow chastity, that is, they should not mary. It is lawfull for him, that hath not a wife, to haue a Con∣cubine. If the Pope bee negligent and remisse in his office, hee may hurt indeed, aswell him∣selfe as others: notwithstan∣ding he cannot bee iudged by any man, because he himselfe is to iudge all men. The Emperour ought to be ruled by, and not rule ouer the Pope. All mortall men besides, may be iudged by men, but the Pope, Peters successour by God alone. It is lawfull for the Pope to release subiects, from their loy∣alty and oath, whereby they are bound to their Prince. In Gregories Decretall Epi∣stles, and in Boniface his sixt booke of Decretalls, the Cle∣mentines,
and Extrauagants as they call them: it is set down there amongst other things; That the Popes authority is not subiect to the Decrees of Councells. It belongs to the Pope to ap∣proue of the elected Emperor, or to reiect him, if hee bee not fit. There are two great lights which gouerne the world, the Sunne and the Moone: The Pope is in stead of the Sunne, and the Emperour, of the Moone. Bishops may deale more mildly with those, that haue offended by adulterie, and other such crimes, as being of lower nature. The Pope onely, hath cog∣nizance concerning the priui∣ledges of the Church of Rome. The bones of excommuni∣cate persons already buried, ought to bee digged vp and throwne away.
The Pope may depose the Emperour from his place and Magistracy. The Emperour is bound to performe allegiance and fealty to the Pope, by oath. It is iust, that Ecclesiasticall persons, should be exempt and free from all cost, molestation and charge. A man may bee declared an Heretique after his death, and his goods be confiscated. The sonnes of heretiques ought not to bee admitted to any place of gouernment ei∣ther ciuill or ecclesiasticall. It is necessary to saluation, that all men bee subiect to the Pope of Rome. Those few places onely are drawne out of an immense heape: and what kind of stuffe they are, theres no man that is well in his wits, but may per∣ceiue. The Law is, that men of
deepest learning should define the same. Soueraigne reason is grafted in Nature, which commands those things that are to bee done, and forbids those that are contrary. And all lawes ought to haue refe∣rence to the common good. And the Law-maker ought to haue the like affection to∣wards the people and Com∣mon-wealth, that the father hath towards his owne Chil∣dren: but what likelihood hereof is there in any the be∣forementioned places? but for them, not onely to excuse those fopperies, but also to garnish, adorne, and illustrate them, with new Commenta∣ries, and rather to babble out any thing, then suffer their dignity to bee impeached, I pray you what grosse impu∣dencie is this? but esting no deeper. If pride, auarice, ambition
of bearing rule, and ignorance of learning drew them on, to make such decrees: if they themselues vary in opinions, nor will one bee tyed to ano∣thers lawes, because endued with equality of power: pray thee, why doest thou macerate thy selfe in straightning those crooked and contrarizing de∣crees? I omit that Ocean, or rather sincke, I meane that part of the Papall law, contai∣ning the sale of benefices as they cal them, and consecrated goods: for who is able to rec∣kon vp their deceipts and collusions? no not they them∣selues, that haue beene factors many yeares together in this kind of trafficke, do sufficiently vnderstand and know all the trickes: when new ones are daily inuented. But this ar∣gument requires both another time, and a booke of purpose: now therefore let vs returne to our purpose.
As Frederick the Emperour, so also Lewis the IX. King of France inuaded Syria and Ae∣gypt with an Army, who after∣wards Of the plague. dyed at the siege of In Africa, where for∣merly (as some say) Carthage stood. Tunis City, in the yeare of Grace, 1270. In his raigne, William Bishop of Paris raised a question a∣bout Ecclesiasticall Benefices: which cause being publikely discust, his opinion tooke place, that it was not lawfull for any man to hold more then one; but it is sufficient to haue spoken onely, and writ down such decrees as those. To Gregory, Innocent the IIII succeeded, vpon whom, as it were by hereditary succession, the Emperours displeasure fell. Wherupon calling a Councel at Lyons, he summons the Em∣perour, excommunicates him for not appearing, depriues him of his dignity, exhorting the Princes of Germany, to
choose another, and this his decree (which amongst o∣thers is in priuate) as also cer∣taine of the Emperours Epi∣stles, to seuerall Kings are ex∣tant, wherein he demonstrates at large, the Popes iniquitie, and his owne innocencie. The Emperour was minded to goe to Lyons, and trie his fortunes: but a new rebellion breaking forth throughout Italie, turnes all his forces that way: where, good successe failing him, he returning into Puel, began to languish, and at length died. Some say hee was poisoned, others, stran∣gled by his bastard sonne Manfred, who afterwards in∣uaded Italie. At that time liued the fa∣mous Lawier, Azo, after whom, the whole streame of Writers followed; who viola∣ting that sharpe and seuere edict of the Emperour Com∣manding his Code onely (into which as abouesaid the whole law was contra∣cied) to be bserued. Iusti∣nian,
filled the world with an innumerable companie of Books; from whence we must now seeke those points, which those Ancients handled most copiously and learnedly. For one man compiles anothers workes, so that there is no end or measure of writing: and all ouerflowes in contrary opi∣nions, in so much as the old mans saying may properly take place here; who hauing asked three Lawyers their ad∣uise; you haue done brauely, saith he; I am a great deale further to seeke then before. I omit the quiddities which are daily de∣uised in abundance; for the Comedians saying falls right here; that craft starts one mis∣chiefe in the necke of ano∣ther. Cicero complaines, that many worthy ordinances were setled by lawes, but those for the most part were corrupted and depraued by Lawyers in∣uentions.
What if hee were now liuing, and saw those Py∣ramides of bookes, and our mo∣derne practice, and that sacred repositorie of the lawes, thus filthily polluted, & miserably contaminated? Howbeit, as God indeed hath within our memorie, brought all other Arts to light againe, so hath he raised vp many men, who being furnished with the help of good learning thinke those paines taken in this behalfe, not to be repented of, being to restore this subiect most beautifull, and altogether ne∣cessary for the societie of man∣kinde; yea, this gift, euen hea∣uenly, drawne out and conuai∣ed from the mid-fountaines of Philosophie, to it's former splendor and equitie; which their indeauours merit not onely publike commendati∣on, but also remuneration. After his death, there was a
vacancie for almost 22. yeeres: A vacancie in the Em∣pire for the space of 22. yeers after Frede∣ricke the II. his de∣cease. first one, then another being elected, who notwithstan∣ding, held not the sway of go∣uernement in those trouble∣some times. In the meane time the Kingdome of Naples fell from the Emperour Frede∣rickes house into the hands of the French, and afterwards Si∣cilie also. For the Popes relied vpon the French power, though soone after most cruell warres insued about those Kingdomes betwixt the house of Arragon, and the house of Angiers in France, but that appertaines not to this place. When the Common∣wealth had floated in this state, as aforesaid, for so many yeers together, Rudolphus Habspurgh, 1273. an. 17. m. 9. d. 16. Rudolphus Habs∣purgh is created Emperour. He in the beginning of his raign, appeased those commotions spread throughout Germanie. And after some Diets ended,
marches out against Ottacar King of Bohemia, then in re∣bellion, whom he inforced to conditions of peace, which he notwithstanding (by his wiues instigation) not long after, breakes, and marching the second time into Austria, is slaine in battell. Ladislaus Cunus King of Hungary, aided the Emperour Rudolphus. At length a peace being concluded with the Bohemians by Iutta the Emperous daughter was mar∣ried to Wencislaus King of Bohemia, Ottacars sonne. marriage, the Emperour gaue Austria, which the King of Bohemia had held ma∣ny yeeres together, to Alber∣tus his sonne: and being hin∣dred by diuers businesses in Germany, went not downe in∣to Italie, neither was he incli∣ned much that way howsoe∣uer: for it is reported of him, that hee would sometimes merrily tell a tale of the Foxe that would not visit the Lyon, lying counterfeitly sicke in a
certaine denne, because hee was affrighted with the foot∣steps of other beasts, of which none had returned: notwith∣standing he deputed a Gouer∣nour in Italie, in manner of Vice-Emperour; and as it is written, confirmed the often mentioned Countrey of Fla∣miniae, and the Exarchie to the Church of Rome; when hee saw very small commoditie re∣turne to him from those parts: For the Emperours wearied with perpetuall dissention and variance with the Popes, be∣came more remisse: neither would the Popes euer bee at quiet, till they had remoued them forth of the Coasts of Italie: and therefore in a man∣ner shelrring themselues vn∣der the wings of the French Kings, and fostering their fa∣ctions by the Bishops of Ger∣many, at length effected their owne wished desires.
But here by the way let vs call to minde the interchange∣able course of estates, when as they (who were secure, had their being, and held their place and dignitie by fauour of the Emperours) were inri∣ched by their goods and libe∣ralities, both arrogated domi∣nion ouer them, and also de∣frauded them of their patrimo∣ny. For they keepe to them∣selues, not onely a good part of Italie, but haue also strictly obliged the Kings of Sicilie and Naples, to their partie: which two kings, both pay thē yeerely tribute, and also are forbidden to vndertake the imperiall dignitie without their permission: and when they receiue possession from them, amongst other clauses, that is one part of their oath. That memorable massacre of the French, through out Sicilie, happened in Rudolphus
the Emperours time. For they being in possession of that Country, where, after soldiers fashion, playing many insolent and outragious prankes, were by secret conspiracie, after a signe giuen, all put to the sword, when the Bell rung to euening prayers. This Massa∣cre is cōmonly called the Sici∣lian Vespers: The Sicili∣an Vespers, 1281. which was com∣mitted vpon Easter day, in the yeere 1281. Rudolphus vpon a summe of money paid, infran∣chised and set charge-free ma∣ny Cities in Italie belonging to the Empire, as the Bononi∣ans, Florentines, Genowaies, Lu∣cans, and others. After this, assembling the Princes at Franckeford, he de∣sired, but in vaine, to haue his sonne Albert assigned his suc∣cessor. Rudolphus dying, Adolphus of Nassaw, 1292. an. 6. m 5. d. 7. A∣dolphus, of the house of Nas∣saw succeeded, who not long after, beganne to picke quar∣rels
with Albertus Arch-duke of Austria: and moreouer of∣fending the Princes of Germa∣nie by his demeanour, as also the Archbishop of Mentz, by whose helpe hee was made Emperour, is deposed, and Albertus Arch-duke of Au∣stria, Rudolphus his sonne, is e∣lected: who, vniting his for∣ces, hauing the Princes aid, makes forward toward Adol∣phus, when giuing him battell in the Bishopricke of Spire, Adolphus being grieuously wounded by Albertus, was soone after slaine by the rest of the souldiers. After this victorie, Albertus, 1298 an. 9. m 9. d. 5. Albertus to confirme his owne title, lest any might report that his for∣mer election was vniust, desi∣red to bee solemnly created Emperour; which done, Pope Boniface the VIII. reclaimed; denying to ratifie what the rest of the Princes had done:
but within a while after, when Philip the Faire, King of France, and hee fell into bitter dissention: hee approoued of Albertus, and spoke much in praise of his progenitours. At length, Albertus was slaine by his owne kinsmen, as hee was marching into Bohemia, ha∣uing all in readinesse, to in∣trude his sonne Fredericke in∣to that kingdome. This Pope Boniface added a sixth Booke, to Gregory the IX. his decretall Epistles, which are contained in fiue Bookes. Amongst the rest, he made a decree, that it might be lawfull for the Pope to dispossesse himselfe of the Papacie; for is written, that he himselfe by sinister meanes, perswaded Caelestine the V. thereunto, whom hee succe∣ded. After Albertus, Henry, Henry the VII. 1308. an. 4. m. 9. of that name the VII. of the house of Luxemburgh, is crea∣ted
Emperour. He, hauing by marriage made his sonne King of Bohemia, goe downe into Italie; the estate whereof was at that time most miserable. For euer since Fredericke the II. his decease, about 57. yeers, the Emperour neglected Italie, which caused the sundry dila∣cerations therof from them, by the greater Nobles, especially by the Two No∣ble fami∣lies in Sue∣uia, which afterwards remoued into Italie. Guelphs and Gibelines, which two factions haue ma∣ny retainers in those parts. He therefore first of all con∣stitutes Gouernours ouer the Cities, and free burroughs throughout Lombardie, and swore the inhabitants to his subiection: then resting a while at Millaine, indeauou∣ring, but all in vaine, to recon∣cile the before-mentioned fa∣ctions: where when Turianus, Gouernour of the Citie, had complotted to assaile him vna∣wares: after discouerie of the
conspiracie, and suppression of his aduersaries; hee commits the gouernement of the Citie to a Vicount. All the Cities in that Country yeelded into his power and protection, onely Brescia rebelled, the walles whereof (hauing after a long siege taken it) hee demolisht. Then marching through Ge∣nua, and so striking ouer to Pi∣sa, arriued at Rome: and was crowned by some of the Car∣dinals, because Pope Clement the V. hauing left the Citie, was remoued into France, and kept his Court at Auinion. When the Cardinals requi∣red the oath of him, which they said was to bee giuen to the Pope: hee refused it, and would not haue any such kind of oath, to be thereby bound to the Pope: vpon notice here∣of, the Pope, to inlarge his owne power, expounded that generall forme of the oath at
large, and annexed it to the rest of his decrees now extant. For he himselfe also preferred many lawes, which retaine their name from him, and are called the Clementines. The knights of the Tem∣ple sup∣prest about 1308. Now also those Knights cal∣led the Templars, being very puissant, were by the same vi∣olence put to death, and made away in diuers places. Philip the Faire, King of France, by the Popes permission, seized vpon a great part of their Re∣uenues. Soone after, the name and memorie of them was condemned: and by the French nationall Synod, at Vi∣enna, their lands were giuen to those, called the Knights of the Rhodes. At this time also the Vniuersitie of Orleans was founded by King Philip, and Pope Clements authoritie. Af∣ter the Emperour Henries He was poisoned by a Monk with a cup of Wine in the Com∣munion. de∣cease and buriall at Pisa, be∣ing poisoned as it was strongly
suspected: there followed most bitter contentions about the election: for Fredericke Arch∣duke of Austria the Emperour Alberts sonne, Lewis 1314 an. 32. m. 11. d. 24. Fredericke of Austria opposeth him, and is elected Emperour also. and Lewis Duke of Bauaria, were compe∣titors for the Empire. The Archbishop of Mentz crow∣ned Lewis at Aix: and the Archbishop of Cullen, Frede∣ricke at Bena: and Pope Iohn the XXIII. proclaimed them both Emperours, but of the two was more inclined to Fre∣dericke, which proclamation increased the flame of discord. Forces being mustered vpon both sides, a sharpe battell was fought at Esling a towne in Sueuia, but in a manner with equall fortune: and soone af∣ter another in Bauaria with stronger forces, Fredericke the other Emperour taken pri∣soner. 1323. in which the Archduke Fredericke was ta∣ken prisoner, losing a good part of his Armie, afterwards he was see at libertie, and re∣turning
home, died within a few yeeres after. Lewis the Emperour hauing thus compast the Empire, mar∣ches downe into Italie, in de∣spight of the Pope, constitutes Gouernors ouer al the Cities & free-burroughes, and is crow∣ned at Millaine by the Arch∣bishop there, from whence (hauing sent his Ambassa∣dours to the Pope at Auinion, againe and againe, about his solemne inauguration, and there failing) he goes to Rome, after he had setled the affaires of Millaine. At Rome hee was entertained with exceeding great ioy, and crowned by one or two of the Cardinals: but the Pope ingeminating his ex∣communication, he, by the ad∣uise of his Nobles, creates an∣other Pope, and after this fa∣shion continued these most deadly flames of hatred be∣twixt them, not without most
scandalous criminations cast forth on both sides. The French Annall-writers report that Charles the Faire, King Philips sonne, was the first that granted Pope Iohn Tenths of Ecclesiasticall goods in France, and shared the prey betwixt themselues, but the Popes chiefe aime in procuring this, was to furnish himselfe with money against the Emperour. After the Emperour was returned into Germany, the Pope dies, and his successor Benedict the XII. both excom∣municated and depriued him of his dignitie. Whereupon the Emperour conuening the Princes at Franckeford in a so∣lemne speech, complaines of the Popes iniuries, explaines the reasons of his allegiance, produces and declares the an∣cient lawes of the Empire: withall shewing, that the
Bishop of Rome had nothing to doe with the Common∣wealth of the Empire: For he, who is elected by the Princes consent, is truely Emperour, without any assent, consent or consecration from the Pope, all that being but a ceremonie, which by little and little crept vp, and now is growne too high, to the great dishonour and indammagement of the Empire. After this, Pope Benedict dying, Clement the VI. succee∣ded, one farre more violent then any before him: who in vehement manner propoun∣ded certaine ignominious conditions, vpon refusall whereof, hee grew a great deale more furious, sharpely admonishing the Princes to choose another Emperour, within a certaine time by him limited, which if they would not dae, hee would take care
that the Church should not want a Patrone and Aduocate any longer. Whilest the Com∣mon-wealth was thus tossed, the Emperour Lewis departed this life, and Charles King Iohn his sonne, Henry the VII. his Nephew was elected King of Bohemia. A little before this, began the occasion of that cruell war betwixt the French and Eng∣lish, When Charles the Faire, King of France, dying with∣out issue male, which was in the yeere, 1327. Edward king of England, of that name the III. being sonne to Isabel, King Charles his sister, chal∣lenged the Kingdome as due to him; but the Estates of France, which are called the Peeres, set the crowne vpon Philip of Valeis, cozen germane to the deceased King Charles: excluding not onely King Ed∣ward the sisters sonne, but also
King Charles his posthume daughter; alledging, that the inheritance of that kingdom did in no wise appertaine to daughters: hereupon insued that bloody warre scarce yet quenched. The beginning of the Em∣perour Charles the IIII. Charles the IIII. 1346. an. 32. m. 7. d. 14. his raigne was troublesome, and the Imperiall dignitie was of∣fred to Edward the third King of England: but hee, as it was reported, refused it, being hin∣dered by the French wars. After the quenching of sun∣dry combustions in Germany, the Emperour Charles goes downe into Italie, and by con∣sent of Pope Innocent the VI. then being in France, is crow∣ned at Rome by some Cardi∣nals, vpon condition not to stay any longer, either at Rome, or in Italie. Hee returnes to Millaine, and granted the of∣fice of perpetuall Vice-Empe∣rour
for Lombardie, to the house of the Viscounts, who then bore great sway in Mil∣laine; in respect of which ho∣nour, they gaue him an huge masse of money, and not they onely, but others also vpon whom hee had bestowed any thing: which act much exte∣nuated the Emperours autho∣rity in that Country. After his returne out of Ita∣lie, he summoned a Diet of the Princes, and there preferred that decree of the Empire, cal∣led the Contai∣ning the lawes and rites to be obserued in the ele∣ction of the Emp: as also the dignitie and office of each E∣lector, and other Prin∣ces and Nobles. Golden bull: lastly, he assignes his sonne Wenceslaus his successor in the Empire; which, as it is writen, he pro∣cured with great difficultie, though with large rewards: and not long after died. In his raigne, Iohn King of France Philip of Valois his sonne, together with his yon∣gest sonne Philip, afterwards Duke of Burgundie, sirnamed
the Stout, or the Bold; was, in pitcht field, neere Poictiers, taken prisoner by the English, who were then in possession of a good part of Aquitaine, and the Citie of Burdeaux. Many of the prime Nobilitie were slaine in that battell. The Annall-Writers record, that the English were not aboue 7000. when the French made against them with many for∣ces, about 60000 strong. This was in the yeere, 1356. the XII. of the Kalends of October. The King was carried prisoner into England, and died the fe∣uenth yeere after. Wencestaus being (as histo∣rie speakes of him) both by nature and course of life, Wenceslaus, 1379 an. 2. m. 5. d. 28. very vicious, quite neglected the Common-wealth. Hee for a summe of money, created Iohn Galeas, of the house of the Vis∣counts, (a man both couetous and cruell) Duke of Millaine
and Lombardie. In his raigne, Iagello Duke of Lithuania or Luten, was, af∣ter King Lewis his death, cre∣ated King of Polonia, by con∣sent of the Nobles: This King was great Grandfather to Si∣gismund, the moderne King there, and was the first that receiued Baptisme, changing his name to Vladislaus. Sigismund King of Hunga∣rie was ouerthrowne in battell at Nieopolis by Baiazet Empe∣rour of the Turkes, the third of the kalends of October. Charls the VI. K. of France, sent a goodly troope of horse for aid into Hungarie, vnder con∣duct of Iohn, sonne of Philip the bold Duke of Burgundie, which Iohn was taken in that battell, and carried prisoner to the Turke, where he stood at the next doore to death, but yet escaped, which (as the French Writers relate) happe∣ned
thus: There was a certaine Physiognomer (one of that packe that professe to know the dispositions and natures of men, by their body, eyes, countenance and face) famili∣ar with Baiazet; who viewing the prisoner, willed and per∣swaded the Emperour to dis∣misse him in safetie. For hee should bee the man, that after his returne home, should kin∣dle a most violent combustion, which should set a good part, either of Europe, or of the Christian world, on fire. Vpon this perswasion, the Turke dis∣misses him, and the rest of the Nobilitie, that were prisoners, after they had paid 20000. crownes for their ransome. After his returne into France, hee began to quarrell with Lewis Duke of Orleans, the Kings brother. For he by rea∣son of the Kings sicknesse, which was in a manner despe∣rate,
desired to gouerne the Common-wealth, being nea∣rest of kindred to the king. But the Duke of Burgundie, for that he was cousin-germane to the King, and elder then the other, challenged the gouern∣ment (his Father Philip being dead) rather to belong to him. This sore euery day more and more festering, at length the Duke of Orleans was murthe∣red in Paris in the night time, as hee was going home from supper. The murtherers were sent priuily by the Duke of Burgundie, who was so farre from denying the fact, that he maintained it. This was in the yeere 1407. the ninth of the kalends of December The XII. yeare following, the Duke of Burgundy com∣ming to a place appointed, a∣bout a pacification in this cause, was entrapped by trea∣chery and murthered by cer∣taine
of the Duke of Orleans his friends that had sworne his death: Charles the Dol∣phin, the Kings sonne, who was iudge in that controuersie being present at the fact. This is the head-spring of the warre betwixt those two houses, which hath so often broke forth euer since that time, till within our memory. Wenceslaus, by reason of his negligence growne into con∣tempt: Robert 140. an. 9 m 8. d. 22. the Princes depriue him of the gouernment, and e∣lect Robert Duke of Bauaria, Count Palatine. He presently applied himselfe about refor∣mation of Wenceslaus his mis∣gouernment: and would not ratifie the grant made by him to Iohn Galeas, but contriued a new, how to reduce Lombar∣dy into the Imperiall domini∣ons: for which, and other such like causes, marching downe into Italy, the said Galeas hin∣dered
and repelled him. The State of Italy, was in those times very troublesome, cheif∣ly by the Emperour Charles and Wenceslaus their default, being too indulgent ouer that Nation: For ouer and besides Galeas lately made Duke of Millaine: The Venetians, Flo∣rentines, & Genowaies, made war vpon their neighbours: and all right was swayed by the sword and violence. Further∣more by reason of the Popes continuall absence, nothing but factions, and those dange∣rous ones, swarmed at Rome. Then also Galeas D. of Mil∣laine made warre vpon the Florentines, who to worke their owne reuenge solicite the Emperor by large proffers, to march downe againe into Italy: but when the Emperor was come to Padua, Hee (at request of the Venetians, who likewise hated Gala, and
withall perceiuing that their prouision was not answerable to their great promises) retires into Germanie, casting off all care of Italy, whose estate after∣wards grew more weake, by its owne ciuill broyles. To the Emperour Robert, Sigismund 14. an. 26. m. 8. Sigismund the Emperour Wen∣cestus his brother King of Hungary succeeds. At this time there were three Popes, Iohn the XXXIII. Gregory the XII. and Benedict the XIII. insomuch as by their factions, almost all the Prouinces of Eu∣rope, were at oddes. For there was not one publike Councel, at any time since Innocent the III. as their bookes testifie, being 200. yeares, and the state of the Clergie was most corrupt, a kinde of bottomlesse sincke of vices and maladies hauing made an inundation, which in a manner scorned to be stopped. For Boniface the
VIII. was Pope in the inte∣rim, who tooke vpon him both the Papall and Imperiall authority. Then the next af∣ter him, Clement the V. of Burdeaux, at Philip the Faire the French Kings request (forsaking Rome) remoued his Court into France: and after his death the Cardinalls fal∣ling into sharpe dissentions amongst themselues, made a vacancie for some yeares: but at length Iohn the XXII. of A∣quitaine, was created Pope at Lyons. The fifth Pope after him, which was Gregory the XI. (when the Popes had kept their Court in France then for 71. yeares together) returnes to Rome; but after his death Vrbane the VI. a Neapolitan, and Clement the VI. a Sauoysin, contended for the Papacy. The first whereof vpheld himselfe by the Italian partie, and liued at Rome, the
other by the French, and liued at Auinion. After those two were dead, the other there be∣fore mentioned, were by seue∣rall factions chosen in their places, the Papall Monster ha∣uing then three heads. At what time many worthy men both Italians and French, deplored the State of the Church, inueighing bitterly enough against the corrupti∣ons and vices of those times, as farre as they could see in those dayes of darknesse. Amongst the rest, Petrarch was one, who when the Popes and Cardinals lay at Auinion, called that City the whore of Babylon. Whereupon to determine that Controuersie, a Councell was assembled at Constance in Germanie, by order whereof those Three were deposed, and Martin the V. elected. At this Councell Iohn H and Hierome of Prague were burnt
for heresie, though they came thither vnder safe conduct from the Emperour Sigismund: the Emperour is much com∣mended, for that He, to bene∣fit the Common-wealth went almost to all the Kings in Christendome, to exhort them to haue a care of the common good. After the affaires were setled in Germany, hee goes downe into Italy, at what time the Ve∣netians and Florentines were vp in Armes both by sea & land, against Philip Maria, Iohn Ga∣leas his son, Duke of Millaine, and so forward to Rome, being there consecrated by Eugenius the IIII. and returned by Ba∣sil, where then there was ano∣ther Councell held. Albertus Archduke of Au∣stria, Albertus II. 1437. an. 1. m. 9. d. 27. King of Hungary and Bohemia, was his successour: whom the ciuill warres at home, and forraigne abroad
held backe from Italy. About this time, those wits were rouzed vp againe, which beganne to polish the liberall sciences, language, and good letters, the Italians indeed gaue the onset, who were furthered by helpe of the Graecians, and then after followed the Ger∣manes, French, and other Nati∣ons: and further, when the inuention of Printing ws inuen∣ted in Ger∣many in the yeare 1440 So Pollydor Virgill, and others af∣firme. Printing came to light, so immense was the profit thereof, that it is incre∣dible what a happy and ioyfull progresse ensued. For now, this course of studie hauing beene constantly continued euer since that time; It is ad∣uanced so high, that this our age may enter into compari∣son, with the most learned ages in time past, and in this regard is blessed aboue all the rest, in that it hath pleased God to il∣luminate this knowledge of the best Arts and languages
with the true knowledge of Him: Whereas those Anci∣ents, furnished onely with the helpe of learning, though men most eloquent, yet they were plunged in depth of darknes, and searcht in vaine, after that quintessence of goodnesse, whereof they writ so much. To Albertus, Frederick III. 1440. an. 53. m. 7. d. 19. Fredericke the III. Archduke of Austria, suc∣ceeded, hee passed quietly to Rome, and receiued consecrati∣on from Pope Nicholas the V. so returning home without drawing a sword in Italy. In the fourth yeare of his raigne Vladislaus, Vladislaus his sonne King of Polonia and Hungary, hauing by Pope Eugenius the III. his instigation, broke the Truce, was ouerthrowne in battell, and slaine at Varna, or Dionysiopolis, the XI. of No∣uember, by Amurath the II. Emperour of the Turkes. The IX. yeare after this, Mahomet
Amuraths sonne, Constanti∣nople taken by Amu∣rath the II. 1453. The Turkish Army at the siege thereof consisted of 400000. men. tooke the City of Constantinople by force of Armes, which his successors haue now held this From 1453. when it was ta∣ken, till 1556. when Sleidan writ this booke. Maximilian 1493. an. 25 m. 4. d. 25. The Moors chased cut of Granado in Spaine, 1487. Charles the V. 1519. an. 38. m. 6. d. 27. 103. yeares, keeping their Imperiall Court there. Casimi, Vladislaus his brother succeeded him in the Kingdome of Polonia: and Ladislaus, the Emperor Albert the II. his posthume sonne, in Hungary. To Fredericke the Emperor his son Maximilian succeeded. A little before the death of this Emperour Fredericke, Fer∣dinando King of Spaine, chasing out the Moores, annexed Beti∣ca, commonly called the King∣dome of Granado, to his owne Crowne. Maximilian (as he did ma∣ny more) made warre also vp∣on the Venetians. Him the most puissant Emperor Charles (be∣ing his grandchild by his son Archd. of Austria. Philip) succeeded, who now swayes the Scepter.
Thus out of that which we haue mentioned, it clearly ap∣peares, after what manner the Romane Empire, then which, none euer was or will be, more potent: is now in a manner crusht in peeces. For through∣out Asia we haue not so much as a foot, or a nailes breadth, as the prouerbe is. The Turkes, Scythians, and other Enemies of our Religon, hold all there. Wee haue lost all Africa, but what hath beene recouered of late yeares, by Charles the V. when hee wonne Tunis from Aenobarbe the Turkish Lieu∣tenant, archieuing a glorious victory, and made the King there tributary to him: as also the fifteenth yeare following, besieged and tooke the Town of Aphricke. Portugal, Spaine, France, Britaine, Denmarke, Sarmatia, Pannonia, Illyricum, all Greece, with the adiacent Countries
are torne away: as also the I∣lands of Sicilie, Sardinia, Cor∣sica, Maiorique and Minorique, and Sauoy, which Prouin∣ces haue their peculiar Lords, who hold full power in all matters, and are not at a penny charge about any affaires of the Empire. Now let vs looke vpon Italy, the old, ancient, and first pa∣trimony of the Romane Em∣pire: but wherein doth it par∣ticipate with vs? The Kings of Spaine, by ancient successi∣on hold Calabria, Apulia, Campania, and Naples. The Popes keepe in their hands the City of Rome, formerly the Emperours Palace and Court Imperill, together with Mar∣ca de Ancona, Romandiola, and part of Tuscane, who are so farre from acknowledging subiection to the Emperour, that they hold the Emperours and their Deputies to bee
bound to them. Those Cities there of any strength, either haue their pro∣per Lords, or else are swayed by factions, and hauing no∣thing at all to doe with vs. Now for the Venetians what a company hold they, not onely of goodly Cities, and freebur∣rowes, but also Prouinces: they themselues in the inte∣rim, being an absolute free∣state, and quite separated from the Romane Empire. As for Insubria, commonly called Lombardy, that indeed belongs somewhat nearer to vs: but it totters too, neither receiue wee any certaine profit from thence. For after that our Emperours had, as abouesaid, first constituted Viscounts there, as they call them, and afterwards Dukes, how mise∣rably was it rent to peeces, and euer since that time how little did it benefit vs? For our
Emperours neglecting it in time of the warres there, the house of the Sfortia's dispos∣sessing the Vicounts, seized vpon it, whom afterwards Lewis the XII. and Francis the I. Kings of France, excluded; the latter whereof held it for sixe yeeres, till the Emperour Charles the V. recouered it. Thus you see, no reuenues come from any part of Italie, for they neither repaire to our Diets, nor contribute any thing at all to any publike vse or necessitie, but what they doe voluntarily, or in fauour to the Emperour: onely Ger∣manie remaines, which alwaies repugned the Romane Empire, scarce euer free from rebellion, as before appears, till at length it was gathered together by the Emperour Charles the Great, and reduced into one body: after which time, when the power of electing the Em∣perours,
was committed to the seuen Electors, as we haue for∣merly shewed, it became the Emperours Court and Mansi∣on place. And here too wee must consider, with what dif∣ficultie this little diminitiue body of the Empire, congea∣led in Germanie, could incor∣porate it self: for when were we euer free from iarres and ciuill broiles? So now whatsoeuer goes vnder the name of the Empire, is incuded within the bounds of Germany, for all for∣raigne places, and those with∣out the compasse thereof, are fallen away. Howbeit we see there are many, euen within those small compast limits, that flie backe, and as much as they can, withdraw themselues and their countries forth of the iu∣risdiction of the Empire. I passe ouer in silence those neighbouring Kings and o∣ther Princes, that day by day
catch & snatch away, as much as they can from this feeble and saplesse little body, which scarce cleaues to the bones: striuing to bring that into their owne dominions, which belonged to the Common∣wealth. But to come to an end in some time, let vs lend our at∣tention to Daniels prophecie, concerning all that is spoken. We haue treated of the Image that Nabuchodonozar saw in his dreame, whereto wee will returne againe; but in the inte∣rim, take a view of some other places. In his VII. Chap. he de∣scribes the foure beasts, which in a dream he saw cōming out of the Sea: A Lyon, a Beare, a Leopard, and the fourth and last, he saies, was terrible and dreadfull to behold. The Ly∣on signifies the kingdome of Assyria, the two wings which he had, are as it were the two
members of that Empire, Baby∣lon and Assyria. By the Beare is vnderstood the kingdome of Persia, by which Babylon was conquered: the three ribs which hee saies were in his mouth betwixt his teeth, are the three chiefe Kings of that Monarchie, Cyrus, Darius and Artaxerxes, who were more famous then the rest, and eate much flesh as he speakes, that is, brought many nations in∣to their subiection. The Leopard is Alexander the Great, or the Greeke Em∣pire; his foure wings & heads, are the foure kingdomes which rise out of that Monar∣chy, after Alexanders death. The fourth and last Beast is the Romane Empire: the tenne hornes are his members or Prouinces, such as were Syria, Aegypt, Asia, Greece, Affricke, Spaine, Gallia, Italie, Germa∣nie, Brittaine: for all those
they held. Now a certaine little horne, grew vp and shot forth a∣mongst the tenne hornes, which pluckt away three hornes from those ten. This notifies the kingdome of Ma∣homet or the Turke, which from a small beginning, bud∣ding forth of the Romane Mo∣narchy, seized vpon three of the chiefest parts thereof, E∣gypt, Asia, and Greece. Further this little horne hath eyes, and was reproachfull against God: For Mahomet vented a new kinde of doctrine, which was well liked of by his followers, as carrying some shew of wise∣dome in it. Those are the eyes, but indeed hee blasphemes God. For hee abolishes the Bookes of the Prophets and Apostles, and acknowledges no benefit by Christ, but re∣proachfully railes against all doctrine concerning Christ.
Further, that little horne, saith he, shall make warre with the Saints, and sore afflict them, till the Ancient of daies shall come to iudgement, who hath neither beginning nor end: whereby it clearely appeares, that within the time of this Empire, the tearme of this world shall haue an end, and shall neuer be againe: but af∣ter the dissolution of all earth∣ly Principalities, then shall fol∣low that perpetual kingdome, whereof Christ shall be Prince and Head. In his eight chapter, the Prophet Daniel describes the Ramme and the Goat, which the Angell afterwards plaine∣ly interprets, saying, the Ram with two hornes, betokens the Kings of the Medes and Persi∣ans: and the Goat, the Greeke Empire, and the great horne in his forehead, the first king of that Empire: and that foure
hornes succeeded after that horne was broken; it signifies, saith he, that foure kingdomes shall rise out of that Empire, but not to bee compared to that first King for strength and puissance. Here we may see how pro∣perly and infallibly the Pro∣phet Daniel portraies Alexan∣der the Great, two hundred yeeres and more before his raigne. For it shall so fall out, saith hee, that the Goat shall not touch the earth; that is, he should runne ouer his warres with exceeding celeritie, and no man should be able to deli∣uer the Ramme out of his hand: for Alexander raigned onely twelue yeeres, in which little inch of time, hee almost subdued all Asia, as wee haue aboue shewed. And though the Medes and Persians were of incredible strength, yet in three set battels, Darius was
ouerthrowne, and lost his life and his Empire both at once. Many write, that when Alexander came to Ierusalem, the High-Priest read that place of Daniel to him, which exceedingly reioyced him. Againe, that another horne should rise from amongst those foure hornes, at first but small, but afterwards very po∣werfull, which should grie∣uously oppresse the Sanctuary: herely saith hee, hee foretells those most bitter persecutions which the Iewes should suffer vnder Alexander the Great his successors, the Kings of Egypt and Syria, betwixt whom the Country of Iudea lies: For the Iewes haue felt that horne which rose out of the foure hornes, in Antiochus Epipha∣nes King of Syria, that most cruell destroier. Hither also, we must apply the eleuenth chapter, where∣in
he speakes againe of Alex∣ander the Great, and so copi∣ously and properly, that it may rather seeme an Historie, then a Prophecie. But now again let vs return to Nabuchodonozors Image, whereof, vpon occasion, wee spoke in our first booke; as for the interpretation thereof, concerning the three first Mo∣narchies, I will not repeat it, because it is both per∣spicuous, as also made good by the times themselues, onely we will speake something of the fourth, because it both properly appertaines vnto vs, who liue in it, and is more ex∣actly described by Daniel: It shall be of iron, saith he, which shall breake in pieces, and bring all the rest of the Monarchies in subiection to it: there needs not many words in explanation hereof; for the matter it selfe speakes, and it manifestly ap∣peares
out of the historie of those Monarchs which wee haue reckoned vp. But the Images feet, and the toes of the feet, are part of iron, part of potters clay. As the foot of a mans body is di∣uided into toes, so the Romane Empire, after it hath for a while continued strong, being supported by iron legges, and incircled the whole world in its circumference; shall fall into toes, and that massie body shall be dissolued. This also is plainely effected, and needs no explication: for at this day, what is more diuided then the body of that most spacious Empire? And though the case thus stand, yet because the sole of the foot is of iron, the foundation shall remaine, and shall neuer bee extinguished, but the reliques, title, and dig∣nitie thereof shall endere till Christ at his comming shall set
a period to all humane things, but it is cleare as noone day, and beyond all doubt, that it is now at the lowest ebbe. That goodly tree is fallen, but the root stickes fast, and remaines yet, not hauing any sappe, and therefore vnable to grow vp, and increase againe: but quite dead and withered, yet no force of man shall bee able vtterly to extirpate this roote, and foot-soale of iron nature, but it shall sticke fast grounded in the earth, till the whole world shall be destroi∣ed. Hereof also wee haue had experience, for many haue of∣ten attempted the subuersion of this small and slender parcel of the Empire, as the Popes of Rome, and lastly the Turkes: who though they haue done great matters, and it may bee promise greater to themselues; yet they shall not make vp such a massie bodie, as may
hold comparison with the pu∣issance of the Romanes: nether shall they subuert this seed∣plot of the Empire which re∣maines, though it be both drie and withered: nor can any fift Monarchie be raised. Though Germanie onely hath the title and possession of the Empire, yet if it would ioyne hearts and hands, it might easily expell all forraign force, as may be prooued by many arguments. The Turkes of late yeeres haue runne in very farre vpon vs, and after the winning of The streight wherupon Constanti∣nople stands in that part diuiding Europe and Asia, being not aboue 7. miles oad. Bosphoros, or Bogazin in Thrace, raged vp and downe farre and wide in Europe, whose terroies are now di∣rectly bordering vpon Germa∣nie, which seemes exposed to the greatest danger, as also Italie, by reason of the neere∣nesse. But if wee looke a little nearer into Daniel, it is to bee
hoped, that their power and greatnesse is now at its full height. For Daniel giues them onely three hornes, as wee haue before recited, which they now haue, being first of all made Lords of all Asia, then of Greece and Egypt. Vnder the name of Greece, may be com∣prehended all those Countries almost as farre as Sclauonia or Wendenland. And though at this present they are in posses∣sion of a good part of Hunga∣rie, and be it granted, that so it may fall out; as they may in∣fest Germanie, or other adia∣cent Countries: yet because their dominions must be con∣fined to certaine bounds, and must not extend to compari∣son with the Romane potencie, as we haue formerly shewed: it is credible that those Pro∣uinces shall not fall into their subiection, as those three are at this day, Greece, Egypt,
and Asia. They shall make warre with the Saints, and rage with extre∣mitie of crueltie, against the Pro∣fessors of the name of Christ, and this their furie shall endure till the end of the world as Daniel clear∣ly testifies. And this is the maine cause of his Prophecie, that wee being hereby admo∣nished and ascertained of the calamities and miseries of the last daies, should not bee deie∣cted in minde, but looke for a freedome by the comming of Christ our Sauiour: who will presently, as hee himselfe speakes, take off these afflicti∣ons, and transport his seruants into a fime and peaceable sta∣tion, and wipe all teares from their eies. Certaine places in Daniel, Dan 9. doe properly appertaine to the Iewes, wherein their deliue∣rance from captiuitie is fore∣told, and likewise the certaine
time (which is there set down and expressed) of the comming of the Messias promised to the Fathers. The rest of his Pro∣phecies belong to the worlds last age of all, and to those that shall then liue: when also that little horne, Ma∣homets posteritie, shall make warre with the Saints: and when that man of sinne and wickednesse shall bee reuealed and disclosed; who sits in the Temple of God, vaunting himselfe as though he were God: for Daniel also presignified his tyrannies, 2 Thes. 2. as Paul in his Epi∣stles expresly interprets. Sathan, whom Christ him∣selfe cals the Prince of this world, who at all times else, but especially in the last age of this fading world, shall rage most of all, letting loose the raines of all his wrath and fu∣rie, and shall stirre vp enemies against Christ; who shall not
onely tyrannize by force of Armes, but also by false do∣ctrine seduce men into de∣ceit and errour, insomuch that the very elect shall scarce es∣cape their snares, Mat. 24. Surely this is the very time which Daniel in his twelfth chapter points at: being so full fraught with affliction and ca∣lamitie, as neuer was before, or euer shall be hereafter. For he promises vs no ioy, but de∣nounces most cruell persecuti∣ons, when he saies, that those calamities which hee speakes of, Dan. 12.7. shall indure till the scattering of the power of the holy people bee accomplished. Therefore Gods seruants shall bee persecuted all the world ouer, and the godly shall be afflicted in diuers pla∣ces, till the end of the world: which testimony of the Pro∣phet, or rather of the Angell, bereaues vs of all hope of re∣conciliation
and aggregation. For he speakes of a perpetuall scattering and dissipation; and after that dissentions haue arisen about doctrine and Re∣ligion, then at length he men∣tions the end, when CHRIST himselfe shall appeare. But to comfort, chear vp, and sustaine those, that shall then liue, presently after those mi∣series, he places the resurrec∣tion of the dead, which that we may finde to our ioy and comfort, wee ought with seruent prayers to beseech God. And Christ himselfe warrants vs for the credence wee ought to giue to Daniel, who in his sermon rehearses a place taken out from thence, Mat. 24. Mar. 13. and commends it to his Audi∣tors. Thus therefore, these our times, being the most misera∣ble, we ought considerately to ponderate and diligently look
into this Prophet, who prea∣ches to vs now acting the last scene vpon this worlds stage: that we may fortifie our selues, both in time of these present afflictions, as also against all imminent stormes and tem∣pests, with true and assured consolation, as with a certaine rampire and bulwarke.
The Names of those Kings of Assyria from Ascatades to Sardanapalus, which Sleidan mentions in the beginning of his first Booke, but names them not. Amyntas. Belochus. Bellopares. Lamprides. Sozares. Lampares. Pannias. Sosarmus. Mitreus.
Tautannes. Teuteus. Timaeus. Dercilus. Eupales. Laosthenes. Pirithidias. Ofrateus. Ofragineus. Ascrazapes. FINIS.
