20086 99854418 19839
A TREATISE OF AMANDVS PO∣LANVS, CONCERNING GODS ETERNALL PREDESTINATION. Wherein both this excellent doctrine is briefly and syncerely deliue∣red, and many hard places of Scripture are opened and maintained a∣gainst the corrupt expositions of BELLARMINE and other Adversaries. S.P.O.. PRINTED BY IOHN LEGAT, Printer to the Vniversitie of Cambridge. 1599.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR EDVVARD Ratcliffe knight, high Sheriffe for her Ma∣iestie in Bedfordshire, and the vertuous and good Ladie his wife, in∣crease of honour and grace and all spirituall blessings. IT is recorded of a certē merry fellow (right W.) who passing by Zeno the Philos. his schoole at such time as the olde man was reading le∣cture to his schollers a∣bout the definition of vertue, merrily asked one in the company, how long he thought it would be, ere the Philoso∣pher would vse vertue, that at these yeres had not learned what it was. This apothegme though vttered in iest (according to a pro∣uerb we haue, Ridentem dicere verum quis vetat: a man in merriment may meane good earnest) may both serue my turne for a iust a∣pologie, and also meete with the braine-sicke humour of this scribling age (whereof I may vse the Poets words (Tenet insatiable mul∣tos
Scribendi cacoethes, Men are madde vp∣on booke-making) that doth nothing els but write, & nothing lesse thē vse aright, the things already extant. For albeit the great respect of your honourable descēt, selfe worthines, & de∣serts to me: besides the affinitie of both out houses by my Fathers matching with the ver∣tuous gentlewoman your sister, or the cōside∣ration of mine own place & calling (thus farre furthered by your VVorships care and kind∣nes) might iustly exact somthing of mine own invention; yet partely the vnnecessarines of sē∣ding newe bookes abroad, without caring of profiting by the olde, and partlie the disabili∣tie of my owne witte that way, altogither in∣sufficient to produce any thing, that is able to passe the censure of mine owne quill, much les the iudgement of anothers coale, hath indu∣ced me rather to carrie other mens books, thē exhibite any of mine owne, giue the spurres to another then stirre my selfe, and commend to my friends such as I finde sappe and sound∣nesse in rather then fill the world with newe or newefangled stuffe my selfe. Let such as the Lord hath imparted a greater measure of his grace vnto that way, imploy their talēts; I, who am the least of all my masters seruants, thinke it sufficient with Ahimaaz, 2. Sam. 18.19. to be sent second, seeing he thinketh me vnworthie to carrie the first tidinges with Cushi, kno∣wing the Lord may so blesse my indeauoure that I may ouertake if not outstrip the firs
messenger, that is, doe as much good by tran∣slating, as some doe by first inventing. But to the point. The blindenesse of former ages hath beene so grosse and palpable, that they would straine at gnattes and make such bones at a greeke worde, that they would balke it with a Graecum est, non potest legi, its greeke, I can∣not skill of it, but in points of deeper learning especially diuinity, and especially the point of Predestination, it was esteemed the highest braunch of all impietie, and praesumption sur∣moūting that of the Bethshemites, 1. Sā. 6.19. that would peere into the arke, to diue neuer so little into that doctrine. Contrariwise our daies haue hatched such pregnant wits, that learning seemes to goe a begging, so that both children and chapmen, martiall and mechani∣call, that neuer set foote within the schoole gates can as roundly talke of Predestination and vniversall grace, as any point in their own trade. But as I must needes mislike the neevish nicenesse of the one, that would tie our faith to the ring of the Church doore; and with the good collier to beleeue as the church beleeues and the Church to beleeue as he beleeues, by an intricate and implicite saith, so cannot I ap∣prooue of their rotten ripenesse and overripe rottennesse, that vnreverently do handle holy thinges, and lay profane handes on Gods arke. There is a modest wisdome taught in Sion, to be wise, but with sobrietie, and the language of C must be learned, but with this memen∣to,
that it is a holy language. VVhether so deepe matters be to be dealt in, I doe not now dispute, mine author shall decide that contro∣versie. To returne therefore vnto your VVor∣ships, for your owne and others instructions in this no lesse dangerous then deepe a point, I haue done into English this treatise of ano∣ther mans, that you whome God hath advan∣ced to great place in your countrey, may both haue your selfe what to hold, and also counte∣nance the Orthodoxalliud gements of the lear∣ned about you, as occasion may serue: your VVorships owne lone to religion, and the for∣wardnesse of the excelēt lady your wife haue imboldened me thus farte. It remaineth that I craue of your VVorships, that as I haue presu∣med to publish this abroad vnder your prote∣ction, so my endeavoures might be accepted by you both, that, whome for your vertuous dispositiō the world doth agnize for a blossome of true nobilitie & for the excellent ornamēts of all gentilitie, that you are beutified with, all men admire for a mirrour of men, I among other may also haue cause to admire for vouch∣safing me regarde the least of all men. And thus resting in your fauour I commit you both to the grace of the almightie, which as it hath hitherto bin your direction so he grant it may still be your VVor. load-starre to euerlasting happines. Camb. this 24. of Ian. 1598. You Worships vnworthy seruant and Ortr Roger Gostwyke.
OF GODS E∣TERNALL PREDESTI∣NATION. VVhether this doctrin may be taught.BEing to intreat of Gods e∣uerlasting predestinat. with the helpe of Christ, I haue thought good first of all to handle this question: whe∣ther we may publiquelie propound this doctrine to the people in the Church of God or no? I am of opinion I may doe it, and that for these rea∣sons. 1. Because God hath deliuered and cō∣mended the same by his Prophets, Christ him∣selfe and his Apostles vnto the Church, as shall appeare more plainely by the testimonies I shall afterward alleadge. Nowe to say we may not teach that in the Church which God him∣selfe hath deliuered, is sacrilegious impietie & wicked folly. 2. Because the doctrine of Predestination is the foundation and princi∣pall part of the Gospel. For the Gospel teach∣e, that God so loued the world that he gaue his onely begotten sonne, that whosoeuer beleeued in him should not perish but haue euerlasting life.What gods loue is. Phil. 3.16. This doctrine of the Gospel will not be foūd,
vnles it be shewed, what manner of loue that is, wherewith God loued the world. Now the doctrine of Predestination sheweth that it is the fatherly good will that God beareth vnto vs, that it is the free loue wherewith he loueth those whome he hath chosen, not that haue chosen him. Malac. 1.2. that it is that euerla∣sting and vnchaungeable loue, which he bea∣reth to his elect vnchaungeablie from eterni∣tie to all eternitie. The doctrine of the Go∣spel will not be sound, if it be not vnderstood that God hath giuen his onely begotten sōne vnto vs, as who was foreknowne before the foundations of the world, 1. Pet. 1.20. as the elect of God the father, as is plaine by the te∣stimonies I will afterward deliuer. The do∣ctrine of faith will not stand, vnles we bring it from the true fountaine thereof, namely gods free election: wherevpon it is called the faith of Gods elect, Tit. 1.1. and againe that they belee∣u, as many as were or dained to eternall life, Act. 13.48. In breefe the doctrine of iustification regeneration, and eternall life, will not stand vnles the ground worke thereof be sought for and she we in the free election. Againe, is it not a parte of the gospell and glad some ti∣dings of eternall saluation, which Christ saith Luk. 19.20. reioyce rather that your names are r it  heauen, the same that is Mark. 13.20. vnlesse the Lord had shortened those dates, no flesh should be saued: but for the elects sake whome he hath chosen, he hath shortened those daies, according to
that he saies, Mat. 24.24. that it is not possible that the elect should be seduced by the false Christs and false Prophets. Consonant againe to Mark. 3.26. Then they shall see the senne of Man comming in the cloudes, vvith much power and glory, and he shall send his angels, and gather together his elect from the 4. windes, from the ende of the earth to the ende of the heauen. And Paul Rom. 8.30. VVhome he hath predestinated, those also he hath called, and whome he hath called, them he hath iustified, & whom he hath iustified, those also he hath glorified: and v. 33. ƲƲho shall late any thing to the charge of gods elect? and againe, Rom. 9.23. to declare the ri∣ches of his glory toward the vessells of mercie, prepa∣red to glorie. And Rom. 11.7. The elect haue obtai∣ned namely, righteousnesse by faith, and v. 5.6. a reseruation is made according to his free election: if by grace, not now of workes, els grace is not grace: if by works, then not of grace, otherwise worke is no worke, and 1. Cor. 1.27. and aboue all in that excel∣lent gospel-thanksgiuing. Eph. 1.3.5.6. Blessed be God and the father of our Lord Iesus Christ, who hath blessed vvith all spirituall blessing in heauen, in Christ, as he hath chosen vs in himselfe before the foundation of the world, that we might be holy and vnblameable before him with loue, who hath prede∣stinated vs, whome he hath adopted into his sonnes by Iesus Christ in himselfe according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace, &c. and verse 11. In him also vve are cho∣sen, when vve vvere predestinate according to the purpose of him, which worketh all things after the
counsell of his owne will. and Iam. 2.5. And in a word Gods promise that he will keepe his e∣lect from worshipping the beast, which all the inhabitants of the earth shall worship, whose names are not vvritten in the booke of life of that lambe which was slaine before the foundation of the world was laid. Apoc. 13.8. Therefore he that denies the doctrine of predestination is a part of the Gospel, renoun∣ceth God and Christ & the Gospel. And what is the doctrine of reprobation els, but an illustra∣tion of the greatnes of the grace of election. For contraries laide one by another, are more per∣spicuous. We neuer perceiue the sweetnes of the grace of election truly indeede, till such time as we see that it is not giuen to all men, but is a gift peculiar to such, as he especially loueth from euerlasting. 3 The third reason is, for that this doctrine of predestination hath many vses, which they defraud the Church of God of, that would haue this doctrine smothered from the people, or onely to be canuased in the schooles among the learned. 1. As first it maketh to the con∣firmation of our affiance concerning the cer∣tentie of our saluation in Christ against all di∣strust and despaire,The vses of this do∣ctrine. as is plaine by these places of Scripture. Luk. 10.20. Luk. 12.32. Ioh. 6.37. Ioh. 10.28. and 17.12. 2. Secondly, it helpeth to fortifie vs against pride and carnal securitie, that we may ascribe all the glorie of our saluation, not to our selues but to God a∣lone
that hath chosen vs to saluation, as ap∣peares by these places. Rom. 11.5, 6. Math. 11.25. and 13.11. Ioh. 15.16. 2. Cor. 10.17. 1. Cor. 1.31. and 4.7. Eph. 1.3, 4. 3. Thirdly it proo∣ueth the deitie and godhead of Christ. For see∣ing Christ hath elected vs to eternall life, Ioh. 13.18. and 15.19. Mark. 3.27. we gather there∣upon, that he is true eternall God. 4. Fourthly it makes to the confutation of the heresies of the Pelagian, Papists, and other enimies of the grace, power, and righteousnes of God. 5. Fiftly it stirreth vp in vs a liuely sense of the eternall loue of God toward vs, and kindleth again in vs a loue toward him. For who would not require him with loue againe, that loueth him so entirely? Mal. 1.2. Rom. 9.13. 6. It en∣gendreth loue towards our neighbours, and the other elect, 2. Thess. 2.13. 7. It whetteth in s a longing to doe good workes. Eph. 1.4. and 2.10. 1. Thess. 1.4. 2. Pet. 1.10. Lastly it breedeth patience in vs against the crosse and all calamities. Rom. 8.28, 29. And thus hauing briefly handled this question, now I will pro∣ceede by the helpe of Christ to the matter it selfe. What is Predestina∣tion.The eternall Predestination of God (to speak generally) is Gods holy, wise, iust, and immu∣table decree, whereby he hath preordained all things from euerlasting with himselfe, to such endes as whereby he may be glorified. In greeke . Whereas Predestination euery where is ta∣ken
onely for the predestination of men to certaine ends, we are to know that is done by a synecdoche: for proorismus pertaines as well to other things, as is euident by places of scrip∣ture, which I shall after be occasioned to quote. 1 Predestination is twofold: of matters; of men. Predestination of things or matters is Gods decree, whereby he hath ordained vni∣versally all things from euerlasting to their proper ende, that should be made or done. As, the things that Herod and Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles and people of Israel did, the hand and coun∣sell of God decreed all should be done, thas is to say, did predestinate or appoint beforehand to be done. Act. 4.27. So saith Paul, 1. Cor. 2.7. that God did () that is, predestinate or decree the wis∣dome which is hid in a mysterie, before the world to our glorie. 2 Predestination of men or persons is Gods decree, whereby they are ordained from eter∣nall to certaine endes. And it is twofold, Ele∣ction and Reprobation.Election. Election is predestina∣ting to a gratious and blessed ende: and it is 1. of Christ. 2. such as are vnited vnto Christ. 1 The election of Christ is his predestination, whereby God hath designed from all eterni∣tie his onely begotten sonne,Christs E∣lection. to be the head of Angels and men, and mediatour betweene God and men. Concerning this election God hath given testimonie by the Prophets and Apostles. Esa. 42.1. he saith, Behold my seruant
whome I vphold, mine elect in whome my soule de∣lighteth. Math. 12.18. Behold that seruant of mine whome I haue chosen, my beloued in whome my soule doth rest. Likewise 1. Pet. 1.20. it is saide, we were redeemed by the pretious bloode of that blameles and vnspotted lambe, that is, Christ. Foreknowne, that is, foreordained according to the knowledge of his gra∣tious pleasure, before the foundations of the world were laid. Hereupon 1. Pet. 2.9. Christ is tear∣med a liuing stone, refused of men, but chosen and pretious with God. In the head that election doth shine and shew, by which we are adopted into the hope of eternall life. The sonne of God is by the eternall decree elected to be in respect of his humane nature the sonne of god, and head of men and angels. Whereupon 1. it followeth, that men and angels must not re∣fuse him,The vse. because that were ignominious and sacrilegious against God. 2. That we may safely and confidently relie vpon Christ, seeing he was ordained by Gods eternall counsell for our saluation, and therefore that our sal∣uation both is and alwaies was in him. This point is very necessarie to be knowne For be∣sides the suspition which nouelties carrie with them, what assurance could we haue of our faith, if we should beleeue, that after some mil∣lions of yeares, this remedie came suddenly in Gods head to succour men by? But some may aske this question, seeing Adam fell not be∣fore the creation, how was Christ ordained a redeemer? for the remedie must be after the
euill for which it serueth. To this I answer, that this hath reference to Gods foreknowledge. For doubtles God before he made man, fore∣saw that he would not stand long in his inno∣cencie: therefore in his great wisdome and goodnes, he ordained his onely sonne the Re∣deemer, to deliuer from destruction mankind that should be lost. For in this doth the infinite goodnes of God more fully appeare, in pre∣uenting our wretchednes with his grace, and ordaining a restoring againe to life before the first man had falne into death. The Election of Christ is meerely of free gift, as Austin prooueth, Tom. 7. lib. 1. de prae∣dest. Sanct. cap. 15. The Sauiour himselfe is a very excellent proofe of predestination and grace, I say the mediatour betweene God and man, the man Iesus Christ, who to be so, by what foregoing merits of faith or workes, did the humane nature that was in him procure? J pray you answer me, that he, that man that was taken into the vnitie of person with the word which was coeternall to the father, should be the onely begotten sonne of God, how did he deserue that? what good qualitie of his of any sort went before it? what did he, what beleeued he, what asked he be∣fore, to obtaine this vnspeakable excellencie? did not that very man, by the words procurement and taking him vp, from the time that he began to be the sonne of God, begin to be the onely begotten? did not that woman that was filled with grace conceiue that onely begotten sonne of God? was not the onely sonne of God borne of the holy Ghost and virgin Marie, not tho∣rough
the lust of the flesh, but by the singular gift of God? was there any feare left in processe of time that man should sinne by free will? or therefore was there no free will in sinne, or was it not so much the more, by how much the lesse he could serue him? surely all these things which are particularly admirable, and o∣ther, which may truly be said were proper in his humane nature, that is, ours, did particularly receiue in him, without any deserts at all before going. 2 Election of those that are vnited vnto Christ is that predestination whereby all they are ordained to saluation, that the father had ap∣pointed to vnite vnto Christ, as the head. For there ought to be giuen a head to such as were to be predestinate to saluation, in whose order, perfection, and vertue the predestinate were to stand. And it is either of the blessed Angels, or of men that were to be saued. Election of Angels.The Election of the blessed angels is that pre∣destination, by which God from eternall or∣dained, to stablish some angels by grace in the good wherein they were created, to the enioy∣ing of eternall blisse. Hereupon Paul cals them elect Angels, 1. Tim. 5.21. J beseech ye in the sight of God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and his elect An∣gels, to keepe these things. The blessednes of good angels is twofold: first, enioying of God: se∣condly, their certen knowledge,Their bles∣sednes. whereby they are secure of their owne euerlasting stan∣ding, and neuer to fall any more. Angust. E∣chirid. ad Laurent. cap. 29. Now the angels were elect before their creation by God, and that
not for any merits of theirs, but of the sole mercie and grace of God. And therefore their constancie and perseuerance in good, was grounded vpon the good pleasure of God. The schoolemen speake much of the an∣gels merits absurdly, vpon misconstruing of S. Austin, as also out of a curious and subtile dispute of Anselmus, in his dialogue of the fal of the deuills. The Elect are in Christ as in their head. Hereupon Christ himselfe for the primacie he hath among the angels as their head, is called an Angel, Mal. 3.1. and hence it is that the an∣gels are subiect to Christ. If any other obiect, The angels sinned not, and therefore neede no mediatour; I graunt indeeded they needed no redeemer, but they needed a head, by whose holde they might cleaue fast and firme vnto their God. They did not neede any restorer, but they did a pre∣seruer in good, without whome they had not remained sure in their innocencie. Bernard in his 22. sermon vpon the Canticles. How can you say, saith he, that our Lord Jesus Christ was the good angels redeemer? he that lifted vp man when he was downe, gaue this gift to the angel that stood, that he should not fall. By the same meanes drawing him out of captiuitie, by the which he defended this from cap∣tiuitie. And in this regard, he was redemption to both of them alike. Deliuering that man, preseruing this angel. Therefore it is plaine that the Lord Christ was redemption to the holy angels, as he was right∣ousnes,
wisdome, sanctification. Thus much saith Bernard. And this opinion some other doe gather out of Col. 1.20. and 2.10. but the faith∣full seruant of Christ Theod. Beza extracts a truer sense of those places. And thus much of the election of the bles∣sed angels, now followes of the election of such men as are to be saued. Election of men.The election of men to be saued is Gods predesti∣nation, whereby he hath decreed with him∣selfe from euerlasting what mē he would one daie take out from the rest, & exempting them from the common distruction, adopt to salva∣tion. Signe of the worde.The name of election is ambiguous: for one while it signifies the taking of one into some office, 1 as Saul was elected to the kingdome, and Iudas Iscariot to be an Apostle. 2. Ano∣ther while it signifies Gods eternall decree of separating and taking some from the rest. 3. of mankind and adopting them to eternall life: againe, sometime that execution of his e∣ternall decree, done in time. 4. And lastly som∣time by a metonymie, the elect themselues, as Rom. 11.7. the election hath obtained, that is, the elect. Heere it is taken in the second significa∣tion. It shal not be amisse to consider, the cau∣ses, effects, subiects, adiuncts, disperats, compa∣rats, coniugats, and examples thereof. The effici∣ent case of election.The proper cause or the principall efficient is onely God the father, the sonne, and the holy ghost: according to these proofes. Eph. 1.
3.4. Blessed be God and the father of our Lord Iesus Christ, who hath blessed vs with all spirituall blessing in heauen, in Christ, as he hath chosen vs in him be∣fore the foundation of the vvorld vvas laid, to be ho∣ly and vnblameable before him with loue. Ioh. 13.18. I speake not of you all, I knowe whome I haue chosen. and Iohn 15.16. you chose not me but I you. And of the holy ghost we read he said Act. 13.12. Separate me Paul and Barnabas to the work vvherevnto I haue called them. Now this calling of the holie Apostles, was with eternall ele∣ction, as Paul declareth saying, Gal. 1.15. that he vvas separated to the Apostleship from the wōbe. Therefore election is made no les, by the sōne and by the holy ghost then by the father, but it is cheifly ascribed to the father, because he is as the fountaine of the Godhead, so the be∣ginning of euerie action in the deitie. Hence we ather 1. that none of vs chose himselfe, none ordained himselfe to eternall life: so that damnable is the leger demaine of a certaine Apostat corrupting that place, Act. 13.48. And they beleeued, so many as were ordained to eternall life:, and construing it thus, that or∣dained and disposed themselues to imbrace eternall life. 2. that the father sonne & holy ghost are one God in essence. Concerning the cause that mooued God to choose vs, or for which he made choice of vs, there is hard hold and great controuersie both a great while since in Saint Austins time exercising & at this day troubling the church.
For the plaine teaching whereof, it shall bee good to shew, which is not the cause for which God chose vs, then which is. Nowe of all this disputation let this be the ground or position. The cause wherby god was mooued to choose vs or for which election was made,Of false cau¦ses. is not mans will, nor faith forseene, nor merits of men fore∣knowne, nor nobilitie of birth, nor any other prerogatiues, nor yet the merit of Christ, nor lastly the ende it selfe of election, but onely that good pleasure of God founded and groū∣ded vpon his free loue. This position consisteth of two parts: 1. the remoouing of the false causes. 2. the asser∣tion of the true one. There are 6. false causes remooued away, mans will, saith foreseene, mens merits, dignitie or prerogatiue of stocke, Christs merite, and the end of election. Wher∣vpon we say the decree of election is absolute, for that the efficient cause, for which it was made, was not the condition of mans will, faith foreseene, foreknowne merits, worthines any way &c. Therefore for the first, Election was not made for the free will of man, or because man did will, and that forthese reasons. 1. The A∣postle doth flatlie denie it, Rom. 9.16. Electi∣on is neither of him that willeth nor of him that runneth, but his that hath mercie namely God. Not because man would and man would not but because by our owne strength we are not able to will. Here he calleth our will, the
thought, desire, and labouring of our minde, this will doth the Apostle plainely exclude from election, ascribing it wholly to Gods mercie, which taketh vs vnto him, neither wil∣ling, nor desiring, no nor yet so much as once thinking on it of our owne accord. They that goe about to prooue out of these places that any strength is attributed to our will, but indeede of it selfe can doe nothing, without the helpe of Gods mercie, are wide: for the Apostle doth not shewe what is in vs, but excludeth whatsoeuer doth seeme to be in vs. 2. Because mans will is not eternall, & therefore cannot be the cause of eternall ele∣ction. The efficient cause must of force be ei∣ther in time or at least in nature before his ef∣fect. But mans will is not first so much as in nature, much lesse in time before the decree of election: therefore it is not the efficient cause thereof. 3. If we were elected for our will, many inconveniances would growe therevpon. 1. Gods grace should be subiected to mens wills, as Prosper speakes, which is as much to say, as that the grace of election were vnder mans will, as the effect is inferiour to the cause, the excellencie of mans will should exceede the grace of God electing. 2. This were to deriue the beginning of saluation frō him that is saued, not from him that doth saue, as the same Prosper saith. 3. It were in mans power if he would to be either elect or repro∣bate. 4. All assurance of saluation should be
cleane taken away, seeing mans will is vnsure and vnstable, and we should bring in the po∣pish suspence or doubting of saluation. 5. Election should be by hap hazard, as depen∣ding vpon the changeable will of man, and so we should make god fortunes idol, as Luther doth well note: he should elect if men would, and he should not choose if men would not: nay the same man should sometime be elect and sometime not be elect. So then mans will is not the efficient cause of election. 2 Neither faith foreseene is the efficient cause of election: for the right vnderstanding of this, we must put off one slander that the adversaries hang vpon our backes. They say we teach, that without any respect at all of faith in Christ Jesus, a litle small number is elected, by a cer∣taine absolute decree. First there is ambiguitie in those wordes: without ny spect at all of faith in Christ: for it may ca doble meaning, either that faith is not the  cause, for which God ele∣cted vs, or that he had no respect at all vnto faith in election, not so much as the effect of election. In the first sense it is truely spoken, that we were elected without any respect at al of faith, that is, we were not elected for faiths sake, or that faith was not the efficiēt cause, for which election was made, and this we truely maintaine. The contrarie assertion is plaine Pelagianisme. In the latter sense we neither saie it, neither can it be truely said: for faith is the
effect of election. Secondly, the decree of election is tearmed absolute, not that it doth not any way looke to faith, but it doth not respect it as the efficiēt cause, otherwise it doth as an effect. This is it then that we say, That faith foreseene is not the efficient cause for which election is made, as ap∣peareth bythese proofes. 1. It is not saide any where in the Scripture that election was made for faith, or is of faith. 2. Mens faith is not from eternall, but the efficient cause of eternall election must be e∣ternall. 3. Faith is the gift of God. 4. The grace of election goes before faith, Ioh. 15.16. You chose not me, but I you. 5. Our faith is the effect of election, Act. 13.48. So many beleeued as were ordained to eternall life. 6. We obtained mercie not because we were faithfull, but be∣cause we should become faithfull: as Paul professeth of himselfe, 1. Cor. 7.25. 7. Faith is not the cause of second grace or of calling, by which faith is giuen, nor of the nearer meanes, namely of the word and sacraments, much lesse then is it the cause of the farther remote or first grace, namely of election. 8. If this were graunted, many absurdities would ensue. 1. Election should not be grace. 2. This were the next way to giue man the first part, and God the second. 3. The grace of e∣lection should depend on man, and not on God. 4. There should haue bin no elect: be∣cause none of his owne nature beleeues, but
should haue bin hurled headlong into misera∣ble perdition, out of which none could reco∣uer himselfe, if God did not helpe him out: we are nothing, we beleeue nothing but so farre forth as he worketh faith in vs, as he saith with∣out me ye can doe nothing, therefore not beleeue; and Paul, Phil. 1.29. it is freely giuen you, not onely to beleeue in him, but also to fuffer for him. By all which arguments it is cleere, that faith foreseene is not the efficient cause of election, which opinion the Pelagians of our time doe gainesay and controll,The adver∣saries proofes. affirming that faith is the cause of election, which they goe about to prooue, both by some places of scripture, and by arguments. Nowe they abuse 6. places of scripture to doe this. 1 2. Thes. 2.13. Paul saith, That God did choose the Thessalonians from the beginning to saluation by the sanctification of the spirit, and faith giuen to the truth: and faith foreseene is the efficient cause of election. Ans. First there is a fallacie of compositi∣on, in ioyning together things that should not be ioyned, for with that word (he chose) there are ioyned these words (by faith) which should not be: but to the word (saluation) the instru∣mentall cause whereof is faith, for from those wordes (to saluation) an ellipsis of the greeke article  cōming between haue those words that followe their dependancie, to wit, (by sanctification, and beleefe of the truth.) 2. If Pauls meaning were, that we were e∣lected
elected for faith foreseene, it should followe also that sanctification of the spirit were the ef∣ficient cause of saluation, for the Apostle sets them both together: but sanctification of the spirit is not the efficient cause of election, be∣cause it followeth after election, for not whom he hath sanctified, those he hath chosen, but whome he hath chosen, those he hath both called and iustifi∣ed and sanctified. Seeing sanctification is a part of glorification. Againe that sanctification comes after election is plaine by Eph. 1.4. He chose vs in him, before the foundation of the worlde was laid, to be holy and blamelesse in his sight vvith loue: and faith is not the efficient cause of ele∣ction. 3. I will shewe the true meaning of ele∣ction. Apostles speech. Paul teacheth that God from the beginning or before the foundation of the world chose the Thessalonians to salvati∣on, which salvation they obtaine through san∣ctification of the spirit, and faith giuen to the truth: therefore he teacheth that sanctificati∣on, the spirit and beleese giuen to the trueth, are not the efficient causes of election, but of saluation, beeing but effects of election. Ther∣fore they are set downe by Paul as tokens and markes of election, shewing that in it selfe it is not to be comprehended of vs. Therefore to knowe that we are elect of God, we neede not seeke and diue into the secret counsell of god: for this is the bottomles pit of wicked despe∣ration. But we shall finde a sufficient proofe of election in our selues, if so be that God hath
sanctified vs by his spirit, and lightened vs to beleeue his gospel. Act. 13.48. And they beleeued so many as were ordained to life. Ergo faith foreseene is the effici∣ent cause of election. Ans. 1. The testimonie is falsely cited, for they should prooue that faith is the efficient cause of election: and this that is alleadged shewes no more but who did beleeue. 2. This speech doth quite ouerthrowe the Adversaries opi∣nion; for it prooueth, that ordination to eter∣nall life is the cause of faith, not that faith is the cause of ordination to life; otherwise it should haue bin said, And they were ordained to eternall life so many as beleeued. 3. They offend by misinterpretation, expounding the place of Luke actiuely of our disposition, whē as the verb passiue is vsed in the text,  as many as were ordained: therefore they were ordained by another, namely of God: ergo Luke saith not, that so many as disposed themselues in minde to beleeue, beleeued; but so many as were ordained to eternal life: now none doth ordaine or dispose but God, who doth predestinate his to the inheritance of e∣ternal life. 4. This place doth prooue, that faith doth depend vpon Gods election, that faith is grounded on Gods eternall counsell, and that wee are assertained of election by faith. 3 Rom. 8.29. it is saide, whome he hath fore∣knowne, he hath also predestinate: therefore fore∣knowne
beleefe is the cause of election. Ans. 1. They dallie with vs with an homo∣nymie in the word [foreknowne,] making vs beleeue the Apostle vsed that worde here for [foresaw:] but Paul vseth it in this place for [he acknowledged for his owne, approoued, loued,] for he speakes of his foreknowledge, not of his bare knowing, but ioyned with his gracious will, wherewith God appointed with himselfe in his secret and eternall counsell to loue those that should be borne and called in their due time, as it is said, that he loued Iacob and hated. E∣sau, Mat. 1.2. For God is said to know such as he vouchsafeth his loue, and to be ignorant of other, Exod. 33.17. Psal. 1.6. 2. Tim. 2.19. ergo the foreknowledge, that Paul speaks of in this place, is not his bare prescience, but the diffe∣rence which he alwaies put betweene his chil∣dren and reprobates. 2 This testimonie is also impertinent. Fo the Apostle doth not say, whose faith he foreknew those also he hath predestinate. Neither doth h speake of the faith but of the persons. 4 Hebr. 11.6. It is impossible without faiths please God. ergo faith is the cause of election. Ans. 1. Neither is this any thing to the pur∣pose, because the Apostle doth not say, it is im∣possible that without faith any man should be electe from euerlasting. 2 There is an elench of a false subiect. Fo the Apostles speech touching reconciliatio with God and iustification, is inconsiderate
wrested to election. We are elected, without foresight of our faith comming betweene, as of the cause, but we cannot be acquit from the guilt of sinne and please God, that is, be re∣conciled without it. 3 I will shew you an impossibilitie: if our adversaries question were true, it should follow that none were elected; seeing we had nothing that could please God, and we are nothing nor beleeue nothing, but in asmuch as he wor∣keth it in vs, both to will and to worke. Therefore it is wrōgfully imputed to faith foreseen, which should rather be ascribed to grace & Christ, in whome we are loued and elect. 5 Paul saies, Rom. 11.20. Thou standest by faith: ergo faith is the efficient cause of electi∣on. Ans. 1. It is beside the matter: for he saith not, Thou art elected to eternall life for thy faiths sake. 2 There is another elench of the false sub∣iect, detorting that foolishly to election that is spoken of the perseuerance of the Saints. Thou standest through faith, that is, thou dost perse∣uere in the people of God, in the communion of the Church. 6 Rom. 11.23. And they also if they remaine not in vnbeleefe, shalbe grafted in, ergo faith is the cause of elion. I answer,  s is as little to the purpose, both for the words and sense. For the wordes, he saith not, they shall be elected to eternall life. For
the sense: the election to life is not to be any more, but it is past, before the world beganne. Now Paul speakes of a matter that shalbe, they shalbe ingrafted. 2 It faileth in the subiect: the place doth handle their calling to the Church, not electi∣on. 3 To be ingrafted in this place, is to be made a member of the mysticall bodie, which is the Church, and that through outward cal∣ling. As the oliue is the Church or people of God. Thus hauing cleared sixe places of Scripture corrupted by the aduersaries, let vs now exa∣mine some of their arguments which they bring for foreseene faith. 1. Arg. Election among men is of such as seeme to haue some excellencie aboue other. Such therefore is Gods election, of them as by faith were to be better then vnbeleeuers. Ans. Here is a sophisme of an equalitie, in making an equalitie between hods electiō & mans, beeing most vnlike. For 1. mans electi∣on, makes choice of nothing but such as seems to haue some excellencie aboue other: but Gods election because it is free, doth not find but maketh them that are to be elected. Ioh. 15.16. You chose not me, but I you. 1. Ioh. 4.10. In this is loue, not that we loued God, but that he loued vs. Therefore wel saith S. Austin against Iulian, God made choice of none that was worthie, but by his choice made them worthie. 2. Mans election is
with a long or at least sufficient delibetation before hand, so is not Gods: for all the workes of God are knowne to him from euerlasting, Act. 15.3. Mans choice may faile, so doth not Gods: therfore repentance often followeth that, but this is without repentance. 2. Arg. If God be better excused by say∣ing he chose them, whome he foresaw would be worthie, and beleeue, and reiected them, whome he foreknew would be vnworthie & vnbeleeuers, thē it follows that faith foreseene is the cause of election. But he is: ergo Ans. It is a false supposition that God needs to be excused, for choosing some & reiecting other: and againe that one excuse is better then an other. For God stands not in neede of any excuse, not the best that can be. For what shall the most omnipotent Creator neede to purge himselfe to his most base & weake crea∣ture? though he had cast off all men, and cho∣sen none at all, who should accuse him, and before what iudge? 2. The assumption is false, because it taketh away the glorie of saluation from God, and giues it vnto man. 3. Arg. Looke how God doth saue vs in time, by the same he did choose vs from eter∣nall: but he saues vs by faith: ergo he chose vs for faith. Ans. 1. I denie the consequence, because there is more in the conclusion then was in the premisses. It is one thing, by faith: an other, for faith. As we are iustified by faith, not for faiths
sake. 2. There is a fallacie in the consequence of the proposition: for the consequence in like∣lihood is cōuerted with the antecedent. Thus it should be, By what meanes God saueth vs in time, by the same he decreed from eternall to saue vs. But now the decree of election doth not stretch so farre: for God in time saueth vs by the preaching of the gospel: did he therefore choose vs by the preaching of the gospel? he saueth vs by the ministers of the word, did he choose vs therefore by them? 4. Arg. If God foreknew who should beleeue, then he chose by faith foreseene: but the first is true: as appeares by Augustine, tract. 42. vpon Iohn, vpon those wordes, Ioh. 8. He that is of God, heareth the words of God: where S. Austin saith, God knew who should beleeue: ergo the latter is true also. Ans. I denie the consequence of the con∣nex: otherwise many absurdities would follow as well as, if God foreknew that Saul should be of a tall stature, therefore for his talnesse he decreed to make him king. Againe, if God foreknew who would doe good workes, then he chose them for good workes: for the bare prescience is not the cause of things. 2. Austins testimonie doth the aduersaries litle pleasure, but rather ouerthrowes their assertion. He doth not, saith Austin, put a difference in their merit, or findeth any thing in men, but Christ foreknew who should beleeue. According to this predestination the Lord spake, not for that he found any, that were al∣readie
of God. 5. Arg. All that are elect are elect in Christ: but without consideration of faith, none is in Christ: therefore without consideration of faith none is elect. Ans. 1. The conclusion is doubtfull: be∣cause it may haue a double force; 1. that wee are elected into faith, and so it were true, be∣cause we are elected both to the ende, and to the meanes leading to the ende. 2. That we are elected for faiths sake, as our aduersaries meane it, but so it is false. 2. This syllogisme hath foure tearmes: 1. all the elect. 2. to be elect in Christ. 3. with∣out respect of faith. 4. to be in Christ. 3. Though we should graunt this proposi∣tion, [They are elect in Christ,] yet for all that there were foure tearmes, because of the ho∣monymie of the word [Elect.] For in the propo∣sition it is a nowne substantiue; in the conclusi∣on, a participle of the passiue voice. Now eue∣ry one knowes that hath the least smacke of logicke that substantia and passio, substance and suffering, are two diuers things. 6. Arg. Austin makes faith foreseene the cause of election, in his booke depraedest. Sanct. cap. 3. J brought my reason to this point (saith he) to say, God therefore in his foreknowledge chose no mans workes, which he himselfe would giue: but in his prescience he chose faith, so that whome he fore∣knew would beleeue in him, him he chose. Ans. They offend by citing a testimonie
that is not authentike. 1. Because Austin re∣tracted this very thing, yea and that in the ve∣ry same booke, and that selfe same place. For he presently crosseth it, saying, J had not yet sought diligently, nor found, what manner of matter Election of grace is, neither would I haue said it, if J had knowne that faith is found among the gifts of God. For it is said, I obtained mercie, that I might be faithfull, not because I was faithfull. The same opi∣nion of faith foreseene, as it were the ragges and reliques of Pelagianisme, he plainely con∣fesseth. Retract. lib. 1. cap. 23. 2 This opinion of foreseene faith, Austin himselfe hath notably confuted. de praed. Sanct. lib. 1. cap. 17, 19. Therefore yet it standeth that we are not elected for faith foreseene. Neither is faith the instrumentall cause of Election. 1 Because faith it selfe is altogether the ef∣fect of election. Act. 13.48. And they beleeued as many as were ordained to life euerlasting. Now an effect can neither be efficient nor instrumen∣tall cause of its owne cause. 2 Faith is not from eternall, but the cause of eternall election must be from eternall: for it is not likely in any reason, that the efficient cause of a thing that was from all eternitie, should be a thing that beganne to be but in time. 3 Faith commeth after election in hir due time, as Paul speaketh of himselfe, 1. Cor. 7.25. I haue obtained mercie at Gods hand, that I
might be faithfull. So saith Iustin Martyr in his dialogue with Trypho the Iew. pag. 202. Here now if J shouldrecken vp all other things that Moses ordained, I could prooue they were figures and notes and denouncements of such things as were to befall vnto Christ, and them that were foreknowne that they should beleeue in him. And Augustine, tom. 7. lib. 1. de praedest. Sanct. cap. 17. Let vs vnder∣stand the calling whereby the elect were made, not that were elected because they did beleeue, but who are chosen to beleeue. 4 There is not the same reason of election and iustification. For they that are to be saued are actually and in deede elected, euen before they beleeue, as Paul, as Dionysius Areopagi∣ta, Damatis, and other that beeing at mans e∣state learned Christ. But no man is actually iu∣stified, but he that beleeues alreadie. 3 Neither are merits of good workes the effi∣cient cause of election.Workes. 1 So Paul auoucheth, Rom. 9. 11, 12. When the children were not yet borne, and had done neither good nor ill, that the purpose of God, which is accor∣ding to election should remaine firme, not of workes but of him that calleth. and Moses, Deut. 9.4, 5, 6. 2 Election is not of him that runnes, Rom. 9.16. that is, must not be imputed to mans in∣dustrie, studie, or labour. 3 Election is of grace by Pauls recorde, Rom. 11.5, 6. Therefore now there is a reseruation made according to free election. If by grace, then not
of workes, otherwise grace were not grace. 4 The merits of good workes are not from euerlasting, and future matters cannot be the efficient of election that was made from euer∣lasting. 2. Tim. 1.9. Who hath kept vs and called vs with a holy calling, not of our works, but of his ovvne purpose and grace, which was giuen vnto vs in Christ Iesu before the world. 5. God foreknewe and prepared good workes also before hand, in which the elect should walke, Eph. 2.10. VVe are his wormanship made in Christ Iesu to good workes, which God hath prepared that we should walke in them. 6 Good workes are the effect of election Eph. 1.4. as be chose him before the foundation of the world was laid, that we should be holy and vn∣blameable before him with loue. 7. No man can met it at all at Gods hand, by Pauls witnesse. Rom. 11.35. VVho gaue vnto him first, and it shall be restored vnto him. 8. If merits should be made the efficient cause of election, these inconveniences would ensue. 1. Election should not be grace, as Paul collecteth Rom. 11.6. if of workes, then not grace, els worke now: were not worke. 2. we had matter to boast of. 3. God should be made subiect to men. 4. Election and salvation should be vncertaine. 9. The Iesuits themselues denie that we are elected for works foreseene, as Bellarm. tom. 3.3. generall controversie, lib. 2. de gratia & lib. arbit. cap. 9. and so forth.
Therefore the opinion of Ambrose Cathe∣rinus and other Papists is false, that holde that merits of good workes foreseene are the ef∣ficient cause of election. Now they vphold their opinions with some places of the scripture. 1 Rom. 8.29. Whom he foreknew,The Papists proofes. those he hath predestinated to be conformable to the image of his sonne, Out of which place they reason thus. If God hath predestinated those whōe he fore∣knew should be conformable in the merits of works to the image of his sonne, then he did predestinate them for their merits of works: but he did, as is alleadged. Ergo Ans. 1. The assumtīo is false. 2. to prooue that they wrest that testimonie to a wrong s̄ese. For Paul doth not teach that they are prede∣stinate of God, whome he knewe would be conformable in merits of workes to the image of the sonne of god, but that God did prede∣stinate those whome he foreknew, that is, ap∣pointed to hold for his sonnes, to this that they should be conformable to the image of his fonne: but wherein? in bearing the crosse, wherevnto they were apointed. Therefore the conformitie to the image of the sonne of God, is the ende of Predestination, no efficient me∣ritorious cause. Bellarmine doth thus & right∣ly expound this saying of Paul, whome he fore∣knewe by his knowledge of approbation, whome he lo∣ued, whom he would, those also be predestinated to be conformable, that is, that they should be conformable
to the image of his sonne: for to knowe and foreknowe in the scripture is often taken for his knowledge of approbation. As Rom. 11. God hath not shaken of his people whome he foreknew, 2. Tim. 2. The Lord knoweth who are his. Math. 5. I knowe you not. Psal. 1. The Lord knowes the way of the iust. Ioh. 10. I am a good shephard and I knowe my sheepe. Here they make an exception: Paul doth not say he predestinated thē that they should be like, but he predestinated them beeing like. (to be, or that they should be, are not in.) Ans. I graunt indeed, the wordes (that they should be) are not expressed, but they must ne∣cessarily be vnderstood, for the verb substātiue is vsually left out in Paul. 2. much lesse doth the Apostle put in those wordes which they doe, namely, that they are predestinated that should be made like the image of the sonne of God. 3. The Apo∣stles wordes depraued, in placing the confor∣mity to the image of the sonne of God among merits, which the Apostle placeth in bearing the crosse, as is cleere by the place where the Apostle sheweth from the very order of electi∣on, that all the afflictions of the faithfull are nothing els but the way wherby they are made like to Christ. Therefore we should not grieue at it, nor thinke much to be afflicted, vnlesse we will thinke much at the Lordes election, wher∣by we are predestinate to life: or take it ill to shewe forth the image of the sonne of God in vs, which is the preparatiue to heauenly glorie. The summe of all is this, that his free adopti∣on
wherein our saluation doth consist, cannot be seuered from this other decree, by which he ordained vs to the crosse, because none can inherit heauen, that is not first made like the onely begotten of God. 2. 2. Tim. 2.20. In a great house there are not onely vessels of gold and siluer, but also of woode and stone, some to honour, other to dishonour. Therefore if any purge himselfe from these things, he shall be a vessel of honour, sanctified and fit for gods vses, and fitte for euerie good worke. From hence they di∣spute thus, If any man shall purge himselfe frō these, he shall be a vessell to honour &c. Ther∣fore predestination is for good works sake, the first is true by the Apostles owne wordes, ther∣fore the latter also. Ans. In the proposition there is a fallacie of the false cause, for the purging of ones selfe from the drosse of false doctrine, such as was that of Hymeneus and Philestus, and other corruptions of the wicked, is falsely alleadged to be the efficiēt cause of election. Paul in this present place onely shewes, howe we may knowe who be vessels of honour, that is, elect, namely by true doctrine and pure life, accor∣ding to Christs rule, by their fruits you shall know them. For this purging consists of 2. thinges, a separation from heretikes, erring from the truth & subverting some mens faith, the words of which heretikes eates like a canker, and 2. amendement from the naturall staine. In a word, Paul heere doth not teach what is the
efficient cause of election, but onely what is the signe and token thereof. Obiect. They vrge Pauls wordes he shall be a vessell to honour. Ergo predestination dependeth vpon workes foreseene. Ans. I answere we must beware of the double signification of the word (shall be) which doth not signifie any thing els, but he shall declare that he is, or he shall be knowne to be. Bellarmine answereth very wel to this, saue for two things. 1. he saies men are made vessels to honour by their owne acti∣ons. 2. that God doth iustifie vs, but so as that our free will doth concurre, and worke together with his grace. 3. Apoc. 3.11. hold that thou hast that none may take awaie thy crowne. From hence they rea∣son thus. If the crown may be lost by ill works, God hath predestinated none to a crowne, but by foresight of good workes. Ans. 1. The defendants of prescience of works are ouershot in the signification of the word (crowne) For Christ in the named place speakes of the crowne of the Ecclesiasticall ministerie, not of the crowne of eternall glory. For he exhorts the bishop of the Church of Phi∣ladelphia to be constant in his ministerie, lest if he faint and faile in his dutie, another be put into his roome. 2. The assumption is true but onely of the crowne of the Ecclesiasticall office, and not of the heauēly glory: many may loose the crown of their bishopricke, without any chaunge of
Gods election to eternall life: but the crowne of glorie none can loose. 3. There is no connection in the proposi∣tion, for it doth not follow: for what? if ill workes are the cause that the crowne of ones bishopricke may be lost, shall good workes be the cause of election to the crowne of glorie? so this obiection failes in argument. Bellarmin doth not answere here currantly. For he saies out of Thomas Aquinas 1. p. quaest. 23. art. 6. ad 1. That the crowne of glorie may be due in 2. respects, of predestination, and of merit; and though in the first regard it cannot simplie be lost, yet in the latter it may. But the crowne of glorie is due to none, but is bestowed by gods free gift to whome soeuer it is giuen, and ergo due debt by notitle. 4. Mat. 25.15. The Lord dealeth his talēts to eue∣ry one according to their own vertue, and this they doe also auerre. If that be so, then by foresight of merits, or disposing of nature: but it is. Ergo. Ans. They corrupt the place, with a false tran∣slation: for whereas indeede the vulgar hath it so, the greeke text is according to euery ones abi∣litie: for so the greeke word . 1. power puts the matter out of all question. 2. The proposition doth not follow:False causes of Election. for what conse∣quence is this, If God doth distribute his talēts to euerie man according to his power, there∣fore he chooseth vnto life for foreseen merits. For deuiding his talents and election to eter∣nall life is not all one, but it is a bestowing of
gifts, which God giues to euerie man, accor∣ding to their calling for the enlarging of Ie∣sus Christ his kingdome, such as the reprobates haue also. For that seruant that had but one talent is the patterne of a reprobate, for he shal be cast into vtter darknesse, that is, he shall be shut out of the kingdome of God, which is a king∣dome of light. 3. Whereas it is further said according to his owne power, therein is not noted the efficient cause of the bestowing the gifts, but the measure, as if he had meant thus, he gaue to euery one a greater or smaller measure of gifts, according as he had bestowed ability vpon eue∣ry one. That is, knowledge, wisdome, and dex∣teritie in following his calling. For God as he inabled euerie man with power and cun∣ning to deale, so he inioyneth him a bigger or lesse worke: to one he gaue 5. talents, to ano∣ther 2. the other one, that is, he bestowed more gifts vpon some, and fewer on other, thereafter as he inabled him with gifts to vse them well and lay them out to best advantage. Therefore that power also is not the dispositi∣on which euerie man hath of nature, but grace giuen to euerie one of God, to vse the talent well that is committed vnto him. 4. This place cuts the throat of the adver∣saries opinion. For if God doth not distribute his gifts for deserts, as is cleere by that which is alreadie said, then much lesse doth he choose vs to eternall saluation for our deserts. Math. 28.8. Call the labourers and giue their
hire. Whence they argue thus, if eternall life be a reward, then they that are elected there∣vnto are elected for their merits: the reason is, by course reward is giuen for merits. Ans. 1. There is an homonymie in the propo∣sitiō in the word (reward.) Properly a reward is the due requitall of desert.Reward. But eternall life in this sēse is not called a reward, but a busiuely, beeing in truth a meere gift, as Paul declareth Rom. 6.23: and it is not the wages of seruants but the inheritāce of sonnes, for the sonne of the bond maide shall not be heire, but the sonne of the free wo∣man. Gal. 4.30. Wherevpon it followeth, that there is no coherence in the proposition. 2. This place quite & cleane ouerthrowes merits. For lest we should thinke the reward which the Lord promiseth vs, comes in way of merite, he propounded a parable, wherein he resembled himselfe to the master of a house that sendes all he could light vpon, to worke in his vineyard, some at the first houre of the daie, other at the second, some at the third, & some at the eleventh. Nowe at night he giues them their hire euerie man alike, not because any deserued so, but because he would needs do so. This hath Ambrose verie well declared de vocat. sect. lib. 1. cap. 3. In this rule, saith he, of comparison the Lord hath taught the diuersity of di∣uerse kindes of callings, belonging all to one grace, vvhere out of doubt, they that vvere sent into the vineyard at 11. of the clocke, and made equall to thē that had laboured all the daie long, resemble the e∣state
of such as for the commendation of the excel∣lencie of grace, at the ende of the day and last cast of their life, Gods mercie did reward: not paying the price of their worke, but powring vpon them whome he elected without workes, the riches of his bountie, and that they who had toiled and moiled, and yet had no more then the last, might know they receiued the gift of grace, not the wages of workes. 6. Matth. 25.34. Possesse ye the kingdome that was prepared for you before the foundation of the world was laide. For I was an hungred, and ye gaue me to eate, &c. hence they make this collection. If the kingdome of God be possessed for good workes, Election was for good works: but the first is true: ergo the second. Ans. 1. The assumption is false. 2. In the proofe they offend by alleadging a place no∣thing to the purpose. For Christ doth not say, Possesse the kingdome for your workes sake: neither can this meaning be drawne out of his words for then Christs speech could not hang toge∣ther. For if the kingdome of God be giuen for merits sake, then not to the blessed of his fa∣ther. But Christ calling them the blessed of his father, puts them in minde that their saluation doth proceede from the meere mercie of God▪ So then the faithfull are saued, because God the father did blesse them, that is, bestowed his free fauour and loue vpon them. Againe, if it be giuen for their merits, it is no inheritāce but the words of our Lord are plaine, , that is, by right of inheritance goe and take
possession, if so it betides because we are the sonnes of God not by nature or merits, but by free adoption. Obiect. 1. Nay, say they, but Christ reckens vp the workes, which he recompenseth with the reward of heauenly glorie. Ans. They deceiue vs with a false cause. He rehearseth vp works, not as the cause of e∣lection or saluation, but as markes and true testimonies of the true heires of heauen. For Christ perswades to the studie of a good life, and promiseth eternall life to such as doe good workes, but not for their good workes. Obiect. 2. Nay but Christ in this recitall of good works, vseth the causal particle [{potestas}, for:] ergo he teacheth that works are the cause of in∣heriting of heauen. Ans. That causal preposition [,{potestas}for,] doth not alwaies note the cause, but generally the consequence or argument, which is not al∣waies taken from the cause but other heads also. As, Rom. 3.22. The righteousnesse of God is made manifest by the faith of Christ Iesus, towardes all and vpon all that beleeue: for there is no difference for all haue sinned and are depriued of the glorie of God. I am sure sinne is not the cause of the righteousnes of faith, but a forerunning ad∣iunct onely inherent in all men. So, this is the mother of the infant, because she will not haue it cut in two. This refusall of the childes par∣ting in twaine is not the efficient cause of the
mother, but onely the true and infallible to∣ken which is the true mother in deede. 7 Act. 10, 34, 35. Peter opening his mouth saide, Of a truth I doe finde that God hath no respect of persons, but in euery nation each man is accep∣ted of him that feareth him, and worketh righteous∣nesse. From this they frame such an argument. If God doth not respect the person, then he chooseth for good workes: because he is no respecter of persons, but giues to euery man according to his desert, reward or punishment. And this is againe confirmed by Paul, Ro∣man. 2.11. There is no respect of persons with God. ergo: Ans. 1. The connex holds not. 2. It proo∣ueth nothing. For 1. the words [accepter of per∣sons] is doubtfull: for it is taken in one sense when we talke of men, and an other when we speake of God. For some iudge may be saide not to regard mens persons, that in hearing of a case shewes no more fauour to the rich and his kinsman, then to the poore and a stranger, and such as will giue sentence according vnto law, giuing euery man as he deserues, and as the law requires, good or ill. But God is here called of Peter no regarder of mens persons in another sense, not for giuing reward to one that deserues it: for no man doth deserue any reward at Gods hand at all, neither is he tied to any law, as men are; but because in louing and accepting of men he hath no respect of nation: and the meaning is, that incircumci∣sion
doth not a whit hinder God from rewar∣ding and approouing righteousnes in a Gen∣tile. Rom. 2.11. in the other place God is cal∣led [no accepter of persons,] because he punish∣eth all vnrepentant sinners, whither Iewes or Gentiles, making no difference betweene na∣tion and nation. 2. There is a fallacie of that that is not the cause, as if it were. For it doth not follow, because he is no regarder of per∣sons, therefore that election is for good works; but rather election is free, because God did not foresee any good workes in man, because there should neuer be any. 3. They take a great deale of needlesse paines to prooue the assumption, which no man doth denie. Ob. But they vrge farther out of the fore∣said place; that the words that follow in Peter doe prooue that election was for good works. But in euery nation he is accepted of him that fea∣reth him and worketh righteousnes. Whence they make this collection: Therefore the studie of godlinesse and vprightnesse is the cause of e∣lection. Ans. The proposition doth not follow, by reason of the doubtfulnes of one word: mans acception in Gods sight is double: 1. when he adopteth vs by his meere mercie called of no∣thing, there being nothing in our nature that he can approoue. 2. When, after he hath rege∣nerated vs, he inricheth vs with his gifts, and prosecuteth with his fauour that image of his sonne which he recognizeth to be in vs. In the
first part of the proposition and saying of Pe∣ter, this second acception of the word is: but here the question betweene vs is of the second. Therfore it stands vnappeachable, that good works foreseene are not the efficient cause of election.4 false cause of election. And so hauing remooued the third false cause, I come to the fourth. Neither worthines of birth, or of any other prerogatiue is the moouing cause why God chooseth vs,Birth. &c. as shall appeare by these reasons following. 1. Arg. If the scripture doth not teach in any place, that our worthines is the efficient cause of election, nor can be drawne by any good consequence out of the same, then it is not: but the first is true: therefore the second. 2. Arg. The cause of election must be frō euerlasting, seeing election is so; but mans worthines is not: therefore it is not the cause of election. 3. Arg. If there be no naturall worthines in man, then that is not the cause: but there is not: for all haue sinned and are depriued of the glorie of God, saith Paul, Rom. 2.23. the same he con∣fesseth of himselfe and other Iewes, Eph. 2.3. we were by nature the children of wrath, as well as o∣thers▪ therefore naturall worthinesse is no cause. 4. Arg. If neither Abraham nor his poste∣ritie were elected, for any dignitie or worthinesse before other people, then that is
no cause: but they were not: for Abraham was an idolater when God called him, and Moses saies to his offspring, Deuteron. 7.7. not because ye were more then other people, the Lord ad a liking to you and chose you, for you were the fewest of all people: ergo worthines no cause. 5. Arg. If election be not hereditarie, nor propagated by generation from parents to children, then worthines of stocke or birth∣right is not the efficient cause of election: the first part of the connex is sure: for not all that came of the father Israel, nor that are the scede of Abraham are Israel, or sonns, as the Apostle speaketh, Rom. 9.6, 7. therefore the conse∣quence is true. 6. Arg. If God hath made vs meete to be partakers of the lot of Saints in light, then our owne worthines is not the cause of election: but that is plaine out of the Apostle, Coloss. 1.12. ergo this. If we will make our owne wor∣thines the cause of election, we must needes make it naturall: but naturall it is not, for it is the gift of God. For God did not finde any worthie whom he might choose, but by choo∣sing made them worthie, whome he might ransome out of the power of darknes, and tran∣slate them into the kingdome of his beloued sonne: ergo no meritorious cause of election. 7. Arg. If none euer was or is chosen of God to the ministerie in the Church for his worthinesse, surely much lesse to eternall life: the antecedent is infallibly true, the Apostle
confessing it of himselfe, 1. Corinth. 15.9. For. J am the least of the Apostles, and am not worthie to be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God, but by the grace of God I am that I am. Now I may conclude from the lesse to the greater: therefore much lesse is any man, for any dig∣nitie whatsoeuer elected of God to eternall life. 8. Arg. If God of set purpose had no re∣spect, no not of the birthright, in the right whereof one excelled another, then for the dignitie of eldership he chose none: but the first is true. For he was not delighted with Cain, but accepted Abels sacrifice, refused Ismael, cast his minde on Isaac: reiected Esau, accepted Iaacob: and in a word, gaue to the younger that which he denied the elder bro∣ther. Therefore the latter is true. 9. Arg. If any be chosen for worthinesse of stocke or any other matter, he had cause to vaunt of the flesh before God: but that can no man doe: therefore I conclude, that worthines of birth, nor of any other prerogatiue befide, is the efficient cause of election. Obiect. But one place of Scripture seemes to make against it, and that is Apoc. 3.4. Yet thou hast some heads at Sardis which haue not defiled their garments, therefore they shall goe with me all in white, for they are worthie. Whence they argue thus: If some shall walke all in white with Christ, because they are worthie, then they are chosen for their worthinesse: but the first
is true: ergo. Ans. There is a fallacie in the double signifi∣cation of the word [worthie,] for they are tear∣med worthie in that place, that are made fit by Christs grace, beeing iustified by Christ, which they haue effectual proofe of. For he is righte∣ous that doth righteousnes; but so as the tree beareth fruit. But in the proposition they are named [worthie] that haue natiue worthinesse, such as wherby god was induced to choose thē. 2 Neither doth the proposition follow. For the antecedent speakes of worthines or fitnes to participate the white robe, that is to say, pu∣ritie from all spot, and glittering glorie, or full glorification and regeneration. And the con∣sequent, of the cause of electing. Now glorifi∣cation or regeneration is one thing, and ele∣ction to eternall life an other. The dignitie or cause of getting the white garment, that is, the accomplishment of sanctification, is iustifica∣tion: for whome God hath iustified, those he hath glorified. 3 They conclude more then was in the pre∣misses. For the antecedēt is indefinite, [because they are worthie,] without defining whether they are worthie from him, or of their owne nature. Now the elect are worthie, not by na∣ture, for so they are the children of wrath: but by grace: ergo that worthines is an effect of e∣lection, and not the cause. Neither is the merit of Christ the efficiēt cause of electiō.5. false cause of election. And least any mā should misconster
my meaning, they must know, that we speake not here of the meritorious cause of our salua∣tion,Christs me∣rits. which from my soule I confesse to be the merit of Christ, and that onely, but the que∣stion is, of the cause of eternall election, which eternall election is not saluation it selfe, but the precedent cause of the same. Hauing gi∣uen this caneat in the beginning, we saie that Christs merit is not the efficient cause of eter∣nall election, which I prooue thus. 1. The cause of eternall election must be e∣ternall, this is not. Ergo 2. If Christ himselfe as he was mediatour, was elected from eternitie, then his merit is not the cause of election: but that is true, 1. Pet. 1.19.20. which was ordained &c. Ergo 3. It is the effect thereof and ergo not the cause. For God did not therefore choose vs, because Christ was to die for vs, but therefore Christ died for vs because God had chose vs in him. Nowe against this doctrine, the adversaries make these obiections. Obiect. 1. We are elected in Christ, therfore for his merit. The proofe of that is, Ephesians 1.4. Ans. The connex is faultie by misinterpre∣tation of the place, for there (in Christ) is not the same that for Christs merit, but he hath chosen vs in Christ, as members in the head. Then here Paul doth not shewe the cause for which we are elected, but the meane or subiect
in whom. Christ indeed is the meane in whōe we are elected, in whome we are ioyned and vnited with God that chose vs: he is the head in whome the election of the members is sure and so the order of election is laid out, 1. the head is chose, 2. the members in the head. Be∣cause the heauenly Father found no worth in all the seede of Adam, he cast his eies vpon Christ, to choose members as it were out of his bodie, whome he would take vp into the participation of life. Therefore we are elect in Christ, because we were no way capable of such excellencie in our selues. Ob. 2. As we are iustified in time, so were we elected before the world was made. But we are iustified in time by the merite of Christ. Ergo Ans. The proposition is false: for not the decree of election, but the decree of iustificati∣on is an swerable to iustification: therefore if they would make this argument prooue any thing, they should frame it thus: as we are iu∣stified in time, so God before the world de∣creed to iustifie vs, but we are iustified for Christs merit, therefore so God decreed to do it. And this I graunt with all my hart: but this is not the question in controuersie. Obiect. 3. In whome we haue redemption and remission of sinnes, and in whome we are taken into the company of the Saints, in him we are elected. But by Christ apprehended by faith, we haue redemption &c. therefore for
him we are elected. Ans. 1. I denie the conclusion, they put one thing in the proposition and conclude another: for thus it should followe, ergo we are elected in Christ, which in the sense aboue shewed we confesse. For Paul teacheth the same to the Ephesians. 1. there are 4. termini. 1. in whome we haue redemption &c. 2. to be elected in Christ. 3. to haue redemption for Christ. 4. to be elected for Christ. Obiect. 4. If election be done without re∣spect of Christ laid hold on by faith, then also without respect of those benefits which pro∣ceed from Christ, as redemption and remissiō of sinnes. But not without these: for then we should be saued without these, which is as blaspemous as impossible. Therefore not with∣out respect to Christ. Ans. 1. I graunt the conclusion of the prin∣cipall syllogisme, if it be rightly vnderstood, for if election be made in Christ as Paul speaks then not without Christ. But if their meaning is this, that electiō is not made but for Christs merit, I vtterlie denie it. 2. There is a double signification in that phrase (without respect of Christ) for there may be many and diuerse respects of one & the same thing, according to the manifold and diuerse argumentes and mutuall affections in the same. 3. There is a straunge kind of speech in that phrase (if election be made without respect or
looking vnto of Christ apprehended by faith.) For first it maie note, that God when he made election laid hold on Christ by faith, which is most fond to saie. 2. or if it be meant of men, it should followe that before they were chosen they laid hold on Christ by faith, which is ab∣surd. This they should say if electiō is made for Christ, whōe mē should after apprehēd by faith 4. Againe there is a double meaning in the consequent of the proposition. (Ergo also with∣out beholding or respect of those benefits that pro∣ceed from Christ.) 1. that we are not elected to be made pertakers of redemption and remissi∣on of sinnes. 2. or that we are not elected for redemption &c. If it be takē in the first sense, the consequent will not followe of the antece∣dent; in the second it doth, if the antecedent be taken in this sence, if election be made for Christs merit. But both waies is sophistical for their double meaning. 5. The same amphibolie is in the assūption, for it may be vnderstood 2. waies, either that e∣lection is made to that end, that we should be partakers of his benefits, or that election is for those benefits, as the moouing cause, which none will grant that is wel in his witts I trowe. 6. In the probatiō of the assūptiō, the cōnnex proposition is false. There beeing a manifest confusion of Gods decrees, making the decrees of election and redemption all one. But who sees not they are seuerall. Therefore seeing there is no soundnesse either in the principall syllogisme, nor yet in the prosyllogisme it
it is a cleere case, that the Adversaries opinion is verie false. And so is the fift false cause refu∣ted. Lastly, neither is the ende of election, the efficient cause of election. Because God ac∣cording to his owne good pleasure, would haue the ende first and principally: and then the meanes for the endes sake. And thus we haue remooued the false im∣pellent causes of election. Now let vs come to the true. The true efficiēt cause then for which God elected vs is his onely good pleasure groun∣ded vpon his meere loue & mercie, according to these authorities. Luk. 12.32. Feare not little flocke, it pleaseth the father to giue thee a kingdome. Rom. 11.5. therefore at this time there is a reser∣vation made according to his free election. Eph. 1.11. When we were predestinate according to his pur∣pose, that hath wrought all things according to the consent of his owne will. and verse 5. who hath pre∣destinate vs whome he hath adopted into his sonnes, through Iesus Christ himselfe, after the good plea∣sure of his will. Deut. 7.7.8. Not because ye vvere more then any other people, did the Lord affect and choose you, for you were the smallest of all people, but because God had a loue vnto you. and 10.15. so greatly did the Lord loue your forefathers and like them, that he hath indeede chosen his seede after them. But beside these testimonies of scripture, there are verie strong reasons for it.
Reason. 1. If Christ himselfe as he was man did not deserue to be made the sonne of god, the head of the Angels, and mediator between God and man, but had that honour freely be∣stowed vpon him, then also is our election of free gift. But that is so. Ergo. Psal. 2.9. it is said, , he gaue him franke and free, a name that is aboue all names, that is, as he was God and man. Againe Saint Austin prooueth the same, tom. 7. lib. de praedest. Sanct. cap. 15. Looke how great soeuer he is, saith he, he is it by grace. why is grace diuerse, where nature is common? surely there is no accepting of persons with God: what man, that is a Christian if he be well in his wits would say this. Therefore the very fountaine of grace appeareth vn∣to vs in our head, from whence he powreth vpon all his members according to euery ones measure. By that grace is euery one made a Christian, so soone as euer he beleeues, by which grace that man from his first beginning was made Christ. Man is regenerate of the same sparit, that he was generated, by the same spirit is made remission of sinnes in vs, by which it came to passe that he had no sinne: these thinges God foreknew that he would doe. Therefore this is the predestination of the Saints, which was chiefly to be seene in the holie of holies: which none can denie that vnderstand the sayings of truth aright. And a little after: therefore this so great and glo∣rious aduancement of his humane nature was predestinated, so high that it could goe no higher, as the divinitie also was abased so low that it could go no lower (for our sake) then it
went by meanes of the humane nature with the infirmitie of the flesh euen to the death of the crosse: therefore as that one was predesti∣nate to be our head, so are manie of vs prede∣stinate to be his members: as for mens merits let them be silent, which perished in Adam, & let grace beare the sway, which doth raigne by Iesus Christ the Lord, and onely sonne of god. VVhosoeuer hath seene the foregoing merits of his singular generatiō, let him looke for the forenamed merits of manifold regeneration, in vs his members. For that generation of Christs was not rendred to him, but giuen, to be borne of the spirit and the virgine without all guilt of sinne, so to vs it was not giuen for any merit of ours, but francke and free, to be regenerate of water and the spirit. And if faith hath brought vs to the washing of the newe birth, we must not presently thinke, that we gaue him first, to be recompensed againe with regeneration of saluation. For he caused vs to beleeue in Christ, that made Christ for vs in whome we doe beleeue. He maketh in men the beginning of faith and perfection in Iesus, that made Iesus man, the author and finisher of faith, as he is called in the Epistle to the He∣brewes. Thus farre S. Austin. 2 If God hath chosen vs, then of Grace. For all the gifts of God are free, wherein I referre me to Pauls iudgement.True cau∣ses of ele∣ction. Rom. 11.35. Who hath giuen him first, and it shall be giuen vnto him a∣gaine.
3 Jf God hath chosen vs in himselfe, Eph. 1.5. which is asmuch to say, as he considered no∣thing without himselfe to regard in choosing, whereby he should be mooued to elect vs, it followes, that his election is of free will: but that is true: ergo this. 4 God chose not all, but onely such as it pleased him, which inequall parting of grace, prooues it to be meerely of free will. 5 He hath chosen vs to the praise of his owne glorious grace, Eph. 1.6. therefore of his owne free will: otherwise the meere grace of God should not be spoken of. 6 He chose vs in Christ: therefore of free good will. 7 From eternall: therefore of grace. 8 That we should be holy, therefore freely: or els these two would be contrarie, that the godly haue it from election to be holy, and to come to it by meanes of workes. 9 The Patriarke Iacob was elect through grace: therefore election is of grace. For, Rom. 9.11. before the children were borne, when they had done neither good nor ill, that the purpose of God, which is according to his election, not of workes, but of him that calleth, might stand firme, it is saide vnto him, The elder shall serue the younger. 10 The elect are vessels of mercie: therfore election is of grace. Against this the Aduersaries alleadge: Obiect. 1. If the decree of election be ac∣cording to his absolute pleasure, then is it not
accor∣ding to his foreknowledge: but it is. The proofe of this proposition is this. If in his ab∣solute will there is nothing before or after, but in prescience there is, then if election be according to his absolute will, it is not accor∣ding to his prescience: but that is so: therefore this. This assumption is confirmed by Pauls and Peters words, Rom. 8.29. whom he foreknew them he predestinated: and 1. Pet. 1.2. to those that are elect according to his foreknowledge. Ans. 1. To auoide the fallacie of the ho∣monymie, wee must knowe that his pleasure is saide to be absolute, not because it hath no cause at all, so much as in himselfe; but for that the cause thereof, is not the condition of faith, or workes, or merits, or any other thing in the men that are to be chosen: and so we call this absolute, not in the first but in the latter sense. 2 The connex of the principall syllogisme is faultie for the ignorance of the elench, set∣ting his absolute will and his prescience in opposition one against another, not beeing contraries. For the knowledge according to which we are chosen, by an excellencie, signi∣fies nothing els, then that speciall knowledge which is spoken of, 2. Tim. 2.19. the Lord know∣eth who are his. that approbation loue, and fa∣therly fauour which God extendeth to them that shall be saued. For those he loueth, he is saide to know, and not to know and be igno∣rant of other, Exod. 33.17. Psal. 1.6. Matth. 7.27.
therefore this foreknowledge is the cause of his will or good pleasure. Therefore doth not disprooue its owne effect. 3 Where it is said in the connex of the pro∣syllogisme, that graunting prescience, prioritie and posterioritie is graunted; it is true in mans foreknowledge, but false in Gods. For when we ascribe prescience to God, our meaning is, that all things euerlastingly were, and conti∣nually shall be vnder his eies, so that in respect of his knowledge, nothing was or shall be, but all things are actually present, and in such sort present, that he doth not imagine by the bare idees, as wee doe when wee remember any thing, but truly discerne and see, as if they were laid before him. Obiect. 2. If the onely will of God be the cause of election, then is their acception of persons with God: but the Scripture saies he is accepter of no mans person. Ans. They goe about to insnare vs with an ambiguous word, taking [acception of per∣sons] in an other sense then the Scripture doth, speaking of God. For the Scripture saying, God was no accepter of persons, by the word [person] meanes not man, in which sense the aduersaries take it; but those thinges that in man lying open to sight vse to procure them fauour, grace, and worshippe, or else hatred, contempt, and shame. Such as are riches, wealth, power, nobilitie, office, countrie, perso∣nable shape, and so forth: or pouertie, weak∣nes,
basenes, deformitie, contempt, and the like. So doth Peter, Act. 10.34. and Paul, Rom. 2.10. Gal. 3.28. shew that the Lord doth ac∣cept of no mans person, because he puts no difference betweene Iew and Grecian, so that onely in regard of countrie, he should take the one and refuse the other. The same doth Iam. 2.5. affirming that God in iudging stands not vpon riches: and Paul, Eph. 6.9. and Coloss. 3.25. saies, there is no respect of persons with God, because he regards not in iudging bodily free∣dome or seruitude. 2 The connex doth not follow. For then God is an accepter of persons, if in one of the two whose meries are all alike, in one I say which is receiued, there were any thing to draw Gods liking to him: but if there be nothing at all, it follows that God lookes on no man, but hath his reason from his owne good will, why he maketh him his sonne. Whereas then the one is taken, and the other not, it proceedes not from any respect of man, but from the sole mercie of God. Obiect. 1. Here they replie thus: If God kept the same course in his predestination to∣ward all men, then indeede he were not an accepter of persons: as for example; if finding all faultie she should punish all alike, or else if innocent, he should forbeare all: but that he doth not: ergo. I answer, the connex is not simplie but in some sort, If God should beare the same hand
oward all men, that is, if he had pleased to mitigate the rigour of his instice with mixture of mercie. But they handle God, as if they would forbid him to vse mercie, or when he would vse clemencie, would constraine him totally to renounce iudgement. 2 Wee ac∣knowledge all are guiltie, but we say and say it with ioy of heart, that Gods mercie doth succour some. Obiect. 2. Againe they vrge. Then let him haue mercie on all. I answer, 1. God is in debt to no man, because no man gaue vnto him first, that he might challenge his owne. 2. It is equitie, that euen in punishing he should shew himselfe an equal iudge: which while the aduersaries will not suffer him to doe, what els doe they but goe a∣bout to robbe God of his mercie, or els at least with this condition to yeeld it him, that he quite relinquish iudgement. Therefore let this remaine immooueable, that the cause for which we are elected, is the free mercie of God onely. And thus much of the efficient cause of election of such men that shall be saued, nowe see wee the other cau∣ses. The matter of eternall election, is the de∣cree, appointment, purpose,2. The ma∣terial cause of election. or counsell of God, that is to say, the iudgement as it were of the heauenly minde of those that shall be saued. Some say, the matter of election, are the elect: but they take the word matter in an
other sense, namely, the matter about which, or the obiect. We by that name, meane the cause. And some againe, that the matter re∣mote of election is Christ as he is Mediatour, and they also vse the word abusiuely for the subiect in which, or the matter wherein. A∣gaine they say, the next matter of our election is the death and obedience of Christ, which in∣deede is not the matter but the effect of electi∣on. For to this ende did Christ die for vs, and was obedient to his father, because we were eternally elected. 3. The for∣mall cause of election.The forme of eternall election, is the putting a difference between certain men that should be taken to saluation, from other that should perish: or, the ordaining out of the generall number, of some certaine men, who beeing de∣liuered out of the generall destruction should be taken to saluation. Againe other say, the remooued forme of election is the adoption into the sonnes of God, the nearer, our vnion with Christ. But these are nothing but effects of election, and not formall causes. 4. The final cause of e∣lection.The ende of eternall election is double: 1. the glorie of God, that is, the manifestation and celebration of the grace and mercie of God in his Church. For God did choose some to make knowne the riches of his glorie, towards the vessells of mercie, which he hath prepared vnto glory. Rom. 9.23. And he hath predestinate vs, whom he hath adopted into himselfe to be sonnes through Iesus Christ, according to the good pleasure of his
will to the praise of his glorious grace, Ephes. 1.5, 6. 2 An other ende of election, is the glorie of the elect, Rom. 9.23. he saith, the elect are pre∣pared vnto glorie. Nowe this glorie of the elect, containes both saluation, and the meanes lea∣ding thereunto. Therefore the elect are said to be elected to eternall life, Act. 13.48. Elect to this to be holy and vnblameable before God with loue, Eph. 1.4. made in Christ Iesus to good works, which God hath prepared that they should walke in them, Eph. 2.10. Election then is not Gods simple will with∣out any end. For to imagine such a will in God as hath no purposed ende, is impious. For if nature doth nothing in vaine, how much lesse God? Thus much of the causes of election: now follow the effects. The effects of election are these. The media∣tion of Christ, adoption, effectuall vocation, sauing faith, iustification, and glorification. And these effects are the meanes and degrees by which God doth bring his elect vnto salua∣tion: the ladder of saluation, or the meanes of bringing our election to the ende thereof. Therfore eternal predestination is the groūd∣worke and fountaine of all Gods sauing be∣nefits. 1 Christs mediation is the first effect of ele∣ction. For the cause why Christ is our media∣tour, is our election.
Effects of Election.2 Adoption, is our receiuing into the num∣ber of the sonnes of God: which Paul testifies is an effect of election, Eph. 1.5. saying, that God hath predestinated vs, whome he hath adopted into his sonnes by Christ into him. 3 Of effectuall vocation, which is wrought by the preaching of the word of God, in our heart by the holy spirit, as Paul speaketh, saying, Rō. 8.30. whom he hath predestinated, those also hath he called: & our Lord himselfe, Ioh. 6.37. what soe∣uer my father giueth me shall come vnto me. There∣fore it is by the arbitreinent of eternall electi∣on, that the gospel of life is preached to some, & findeth place with them, & is not preached to other, or beeing preached is not receiued. 4 Sauing faith doth inseparably accompa∣nie effectuall calling: therefore it flowes and pro∣ceedes from predestination or election who shall be∣leene, saith Luther, in his dutch preface vpō the epistle to the Romanes. Hence is that which Paul deliuereth. Rom. 9. why all the Iewes did not beleeue in Iesus Christ? because all were not elect to life euerlasting. For he saith the sonnes of Abraham are of two sorts: some ac∣cording to the flesh, and other according to the promise: they beleeued so many as were ordai∣ned to life eternall, saith Luke, Act. 14.48. therfore faith is said to be theirs that are elect of God, Tit. 1. 5 Iustification & glorification doe issue from election, Paul saies, Rom. 8.30. whome he hath: predestinated, those also hath he called, and whome be hath called (namely, effectually) those also hath
iustified, and those whome he hath iustified, those also hath be glorified. Now this glorificatiō contains 2. Things in it: 1. Regeneratiō, or sanctificatiō. 1 Regeneration hath in it continuall or per∣petuall repentance, loue, vprightnes, & hate of sinne, studie of good works inuocation of God: true humilitie of the sonnes of God (for if saluation comes frō no other thing vnto vs but the meere grace of election, we haue no∣thing in our selues to boast of: true humilitie is our glorie:) and farther, the prop of a sure affi∣ance by Christs owne words, (who to free vs frō all feare & put vs out of all daunger of so many casualties, snares, & deadly broiles, pro∣miseth that whatsoeuer he hath receiued to keepe of his father, shalbe safe:) againe, a lon∣ging desire of the bright appearance of Christ: also the gift of perseuerance in spirituall com∣bats, that is, constancie to the very last gaspe in the true faith. Heb. 10.28. Mat. 24.13. and Rom. 11.5. so therefore also at this time is there  reseruation made according to his free election: that is, forasmuch as in that vniuersal falling away well neare, some remamed steadfast in the co∣uenant, it came to passe by vertue of the eter∣nall election. Therefore perseuerance also de∣pendeth vpon free election, Ier. 32.40. 2 Glorification comprehends the accom∣plishment of glorie in the other life, 2. Tim. 4.8. And thus out of election ariseth the Catho∣like inuisible Church,Catholike Church. which is nothing els but the companie of such as are predestinate to life e∣uerlasting,
as the holy martyr Iohn Hus did truly maintain in the Councell of Constance. For so did God answer Elias when he complained he was left all alone: I haue reserued to my selfe 7000. men that haue not bowed their knee to the image of Baal, Rom. 11.14. For they were not e∣lect, because they had not bin idolaters, but therefore they were no idolaters: ergo they were the Church, because they were elect. Hence it also appeares, that whosoeuer are predestinate to saluation, they are all predesti∣nate also to the meanes of obtaining saluati∣on. And therefore as the elect doe necessarily come in the ende to saluation, for the firme∣nes of election; so also they must of necessitie be lead and walke by the meanes ordained to saluation, for the same firmenes sake. These are the effects of election. Now fol∣low the subiects. The subiect in whome we are elect is Christ, not as he is God,The sub∣iects of ele∣ction. or the Word, for in this re∣gard he chose vs, Ioh. 13.18. I know whome I haue chosen nor yet as he is man, for being no more but man, he was no meete subiect for vs to be chose in: but as he is God and man, our head and euerlasting mediatour, who for that cause as Saint Austin doth relate, was prede∣stinated mediatour, and the glasse of predesti∣nation. Now this is the cause why we are elected in him, 1. because in our selues wee were not capable of such excellencie: 2. because he
alone is a fit meane for vs to be chosen in, see∣ing in election our vnion and coniunctiō with God that chose vs, was made. 2. The occupying subiect or obiect of e∣lection are all the elect, vpon whome God doth bestowe the inheritance of eternall sal∣vation, who to say truth are a great many in themselues, as by Christs obedience many are made righteous. Rom. 5.19. Yet in comparison of the great number of reprobars, are but few according to Christes owne wordes saying, many are called namely, by the outwarde preaching of the word, but few are chosen. Therefore election belonges but to a fewe, and not generally to all mē. Neither is it more absurd to say that but a fewe are elected, then that which our Lord himselfe speaketh. Math. 7.14. they are but fewe that finde life, and Esaie crieth out vpon Israel, Esay 10.21. & Paul Ro. 9.27. repeates it, though the number of the childrē of Israel were as the sand of the sea,The subiect of election. but a remnant shall be saued. Against this doctrine the aduersaties do ob∣iect thus. Obiect. 1 Those whom God will haue saued shall be saued. But God will haue all men saued as Paul affirmeth. 1. Tim. 2.4. therefore all men are elected to life. Ans. There is an homonymie in the worde (will) which in the propositiō signifies his ab∣solute will, but in the assumption or allegati∣on out of Paul, his conditionall will. For God
will not by his decree and working, but by his invitation and commandement haue all men saued. But if he will haue all saued by his ab∣solute will, either all men without exception are saued (which is not so) or els mens nilling or refusing is more powerfull and strong thē gods willing. As Austin bringes the Pelagians to this absurditie. lib. 1. contra. Inlianum. 1. There is another homonymie in the as∣sumption or Paules wordes in the adiectiue all, by which are not meant all and euerie one, but the men of all estates and conditions, as Austine doth expound it, de correp. & gratia, cap. 14. and in his Enchiridion to Laurentius, cap. 103. 2. For whome Christ died they are ele∣cted to eternall life. But Christ died for all. Ergo. Ans. The assumption is starke false. For Christ Ioh. 10.15. saith, I lay downe my life for my sheepe. & Paul Eph. 5.25. Christ loued his church and gaue vp himselfe for it. Heb. 5.9. Christ was made a perfect author of eternall saluation, to all that harken vnto him. Apoc. 14.3.4. They song as it were a newe song before the throne and before those 4. beasts and the elders, and none could learne that song, but those 14400, which were brought from the earth. These are they that were not defiled with wo∣men, these followe the lambe whither soeuer he goeth, these were redeemed from men, the first fruits conse∣crate to god and to the lambe. 3. Those whome Christ calleth vnto him,
are elected to eternall life, but he calleth all Ergo Math. 11.28. Come unto me &c. Ans. The proposition is not generally tru, but onely of such as obey his inuiting and come at his calling. 2. the assumption is false, for he calleth none but such as heare, but howe many millians of men never hard of Christ, nor doe yet at this daie. 4. They that are called to Christ by the preaching of the gospell, are elected vnto life. But all are. Ergo Ans. The proposition is onely true of them that are effectualy called according to the pur∣pose of his election. 2. the assumption is false, beeing slatte contrary to Christs owne wordes saying, many are called but few are chosen. Againe experience doth confute it. For howe many thousand men neuer had the gospell preached vnto them. For before Christs incarnation, he was not preached to the gentiles, and after he was exhibited in the flesh it was not to many, nor yet is. As in the kingdōe of the Sinars, in al the countries of Tartarie, and other heathen people, to say nothing of the newe worlde, of late yeres found out by nauigation mexico, Pe∣row, magellana, where there was neuer word, yet of Christ nor of the gospell. Therfore it is not true that all and euerie seuerall man either were in time past called to Christ by the prea∣ching of the gospell, or yet are. 5. They to whome the promise of eternall saluation doth belong, are elected to eternall
life: but the promise pertaines to all. ergo. Ans. The proposition is onely true of such as to whome the promise of saluation doth be∣long, not onely by preaching or declaring it, but also by effectuall applying the same. 2 The assumption is false. The promise of saluation is not made generally to all, no not by preaching or declaration, but onely to those to whome the preaching or declaring of the promise is from euerlasting predestinate, and therefore to such as indeede it is preached and declared. Nowe because both the Pro∣phets in olde time did not shew forth the grace of God to all the men in the world, nor the A∣postles were permitted to teach euerie where, as in Bithynia, and yet to this daie the promis of grace neither hath bin published, nor is to many nations, by the euent and selfe experi∣ence it is plaine, that the promise of eternall salvation doth not belong to all and euerie one. 3. To whome the promise of grace doth belong by the preaching, to those but not to all notwithstanding, it doth belong by effe∣ctuall application. Because that effectuall ap∣plication is ordained but onely for the e∣lect. 6. The regenerate are elect, but al that are baptized are regenerate, therefore all that are baptized are elect. Ans. 1. There is an homony mie in the par∣ticle (regenerate) form the proposition it sig∣nifies
those, that are inwardly renued and fra∣med to the image of god by the spirit of adop∣tion. But in the assumption by a metonymie such as are out wardly washed in baptisme. For it is vsuall to call the baptizing of water rege∣neration, and those that are baptized with water to say they are regenerated, as Iustine Martyr speaketh in his second apologie for the christians to Antonius Pius. Whosoeuer shalbee persuaded and beleeue stedfastly, that the things are true which we teach and deliuer, and shall take vpon them to liue thereafter, we instruct them with fasting to pray and aske those things at the hands of God, & the remission of their former sinnes, with whome we also do fast and pray: then wee carrie them to the wa∣ter, and there they are regenerated vvith the same kinde of regeneration that we are: for they are then washed in water in the name of the father our Lord and creator of all things, and of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, and of the holie ghost. And a little after that he saith, that washing is called enlightening, for that their mindes are enlightened, that learne these mat∣ters. Therefore the baptisme of water is called rege∣neration, and illumination, not properly, but by a me∣tonymie, because it is a sacrament of the powring out of the holy ghost, vvho doth properly regenerate vs. Therefore the proposition is onely true of such, as not onely are regenerate with the outward sacrament, but inwardly in their hearts by the spirit of adoption: but the assumption is true of all, so farre forth as they are regenerated but with the sacrament; but if you take it simplie it
is not true. For many want the inner regenera∣tion of the spirit, that had the outward, as Iu∣das Iscariot, Simon Magus &c. 2. Though we should grant that al that are baptized with water, are also inwardly renued yet it should not follow that all men were ele∣cted to saluation, seing all are not so much as baptized. Therefore it is still true, that all shall not be saued. 7. They that are sanctified by the blood of Christ, they are elected to life: but all men vni∣versally are sanctified by the blood of Christ. Ergo. the proofe of the minor or assumption. Heb. 10.29. Of how much more sharp punishment shall he bee thought vvorthie (thinke you) that shall tread vnder his feet the sonne of God, and count the blood of the couenant by which he was sanctified, an vnholie thing and reproach the spirit of grace? Ans. 1. There is an honomynie in the par∣ticiple (sanctified.) For in the propositiō it signi∣fies those that are truely invisiblie cleansed in∣wardly from their sinnes; but in the place to the Hebrues it signifies them that are baptized, or initiated by baptisme, and are saide to bee sanctified by the blood of the couenant, because they haue taken the water of baptisme, which is a signe of the blood and sanctification: in which sense also Heb. 9.13. The blood of bulls and goats, and the ashes of a heyfer, being sprinckled vpon them that are defiled, is said to sanctifie to the puritie of the flsh, that is, purifie, purge, cleanse from sinne, but sacramentallie. Like wise Augustine spea∣keth
tom. 4. lib. 3. of questions vpon the olde testament, quest. 84. With visible Sacraments man is visibly sanctified. And a little after: We may ga∣ther, that some had invisible sanctification and to their profit, without visible sacrament, which altered according to the diver sitie of times, as some were then, but now are not. And that a man may haue, but without any profit, visible sanctification, which is by the visible sacraments, without this inuisible. And yet mast we not contemne the visible sacrament, for whosoeuer contemens it, cannot possibly be sanctified inuisibly. And least one should thinke, that Au∣stin speakes of the typicall sanctification onely of the old law, he presently inferres of Christi∣an baptisme. Hereupon it is that Cornelius and they that were with him, though they appeared al∣readie inuisibly sanctified, by hauing the holy Ghost powred downe vpon them, were baptized for all that; neither was the visible sanctification thought super∣stitious, though they had the inuisible before. Cypri∣an epist. 72. in the Gulartian edition. Then may men be fully sanctified and the sonnes of God, when they are borne of both sacraments: and in many o∣ther places he saies the same, but all that haue the externall baptisme as well as other, haue not the vertue of baptisme. de poenit. distinct. 4. Theresore Paul meanes [to be sanctified by the bloode of the couenant] to be initiated and consecrated by the water of baptisme, which is the sacrament of the blood of the testament. And that this is his meaning, is euident by his drift, because he threatens very grieuous punishment to the re∣nolters
or backsliders from Christiaitie. And least any man should thinke it were but a tri∣fle to goe back, he doth exaggerate this sinne, shewing that the contempt of baptisme, by which they were initiated, was the contempt of Christ, and to account the blood of the testament an vnholy thing is said in the same sense that 1. Cor. 11.29 [not to discerne the bodie of the Lord] is saide. For the reproach of the signes re∣doundes to the things that are thereby signi∣fied. 2 The assumption is false: for many thou∣sands God wot were neuer baptized. 3 The authority that is alledged to prooue it by, is nothing to the purpose, saying nothing of the vniuersalitie of sanctification. 8 Those that Christ hath redeemed, they are elected to eternall life: but Christ hath re∣deemed all men: ergo. the assumption is proo∣ued out of Peter, 2. Pet. 2.1. the false teachers de∣nie euen the Lord that hath bought them, bringing downe vpon themselues swift damnation. Ans. 1. The assumption is false. 2. It is not to the point, the testimonie that is brought: because it saies nothing of the vniuersalitie of the redemption of all and singular persons, wherof the assumption speaketh. Ob. But they vrge, thus: if the Lord hath purchased thē also that denie him, &c. then he hath not purchased the elect onely, but the very reprobate also, and therefore all and singular persons: but the first is true by this place: ergo.
Ans. 1. It is a point of sophistrie, to vnder∣stand that simply, which is spoken but respe∣ctiuely. Peter saies those false reachers denie the Lord that bought them, that is, in their owne opinion and as they boasted. As if he had said: Indeede they giue out and vaunt, that they are redeemed by Christ, and name him their redeemer, and yet for all that they denie him. And this doth the assumption af∣firme simply, as if indeede they were redee∣med by him: which is flat contrarie to other places of the scripture, Apoc. 14.3, 4. Matth. 7.23. Matth. 25.12. Ioh. 17.9. Matth. 20.28. Iustin Martyr in his dialogue with Try∣pho, saith that Christ suffered for those men, whose hearts are clensed from all iniqui∣tie. Thus much of the subiect of election: now I will shew the adiuncts thereof. Election was from euerlasting,The adiun∣cts of electi∣on. or before the foundation of the world was laid, Eph. 1.4. not onely before we beleeued, but before we were. So saies the Apostle of Iacob, Rom. 9.11. when the children were yet vnborne,1. Eternieie. and had done neither good nor ill, that the purpose of God which is according to his election, not of works but of him that calleth, might stand steadfast, it was saide vnto hir, the elder shall serue the younger. Austin in his booke of predestination and grace, chap. 5. Before he made vs, he foreknew vs: and foreknowing vs, when he had not yet made vs, he ele∣cted vs: and againe, we were made since the world,
but elected before the world. Election is free,2. Libertie. not bound to any conditi∣ons of mans iudgement, nor indebted to any; the Lord is at libertie in his free choice, and not tied to that necessitie, to deale his grace to all alike: but he passeth ouer whome he will, and where he will he liketh, Rom. 9.18. He ta∣keth mercie on whome he will, and whome he will he hardneth: and v. 21. Hath not the potter power ouer the clay, of the same piece to make one vessell to ho∣nour, and an other to dishonour? the same is cleare by Eph. 1.11. We are predestinate according to the purpose of him that doth all things by the counsell of his owne will. 3 It is also vnchangeable,3. Immuta∣bilitie. inviolable, firme, certen, sure, and steadfast, it neuer faulters, it neuer failes, or becomes void. Which vnchan∣geablenes and certentie doth not consist in our perseuerance, but in the immutable decree of God. Neither doth it depend on men, but on the meere mercie and good pleasure of God, 2. Tim. 2.19. The foundation of God standeth steadfast, hauing this seale, The Lord knoweth who are his. By a metaphor he calleth Election a foundation, nothing thereby the firmenes and constancie of the same. Hauing this seale, that is, the election is closed vp from vs, we know not certenly whether this man or that be ele∣cted. but the Lord knoweth who are his. For it is a thing proper vnto God, to knowe his owne. Therefore it doth not depend vpon vs but on the most constant and vnchangeable
will of God, who hath mercie vpon vs in his e∣uerlasting mercie, wherof it neuer doth repent him. Nowe they that make it mutable and vn∣certaine, let them consider this; is it a small matter to them to wearie men and pricke thornes into the elect to doubt of saluation, but they must wearie God, making hun chan∣geable in his counsels? Obiect. 1. The tokens of election are not al∣waies apparent: therefore election is change∣able. Ans. The connex that is wanting is false, for though the signes of election are not eui∣dent at all times, yet that remaines inuiolable as the exile of the Iewes in Babylon, and the long shaking them off as it were, might seeme an interruptiō of election, but was not. Ther∣fore God in Es. cap. 41.9. saying thus, I haue chose thee and haue not cast thee off, commendeth the continuall course of his great bounty and fatherlie good will, and expresseth the constā∣cie of election, as if he said, I neuer gaue thee ouer nor forsooke thee, since the first time I e∣lected thee, although thou hast giuē me cause inough to doe it for indeed the people of the Iewes shewed so great ingratitude, that God might iustlie haue cast them off. And that which is said of the Iewes may as well be said of vs. Ob. 2. That which may be made void is chan∣geable: but election may. Ef. 14.1. God shall
haue mercie of Iacob, & choose the Israelites againe. He vseth the future tence, as if the first electi∣on had beene voide. Therefore election is mu∣table. Ans. There is an homonymie by a cata∣cresis in the word of the future tence shall choose, as if he had said, he shall take as it were againe vnto him, as if the election were newe to be∣ginne againe, the nation that in shewe was cast of and giuen ouer into another mans iu∣risdiction: this is spoken after the manner of men. When the Lord chasteneth those that are his, this carrieth a shewe of casting off, as we ga∣ther by many of the Saints complainings. Lord why hast thou for saken vs? For we conceiue of Gods reiection or election according to our owne weaknesse, and iudge the effect thereof by the worke. The meaning then is this, though God handled his people so severe∣ly, as if he had cast them off, yet in the ende he will shewe in trueth and prooue his adopting of them, at what time he will giue a sufficient testimony of his election, and will haue mer∣cy on them for euer. Ob. 3. If the crowne of heauenly glory where vnto a man is elected may be lost, then is not election sure, but it may. Apoc. 3.11. hold that thou hast, least another take thy crowne. There∣fore. Ans. 1. This proofe is not to the purpose. 2. There is an homonymie in the word (crown) for the assumption talks of the crown of glory,
but Christ speakes of the crowne of the eccle∣siasticall ministerie. Looke before in the refu∣tation of foreseene good workes. 4 Ob. He that standeth must take heede least he fall, 1. Cor. 10.12. ergo election is mutable. Ans. It follows not. For the admonition is not a threatning that he shall fall, but onely to stirre vp to more carefulnes. 5 Ob. Zac. 1.17. & 2.16. God chooseth Ierusa∣lem againe. Therefore the first was voide. Ans. There is an homonymie in the worde [choose,] the Prophet vseth it metonymically: for this he shall shew by euident tokens and outward effects that he hath chosen Ierusa∣lem, and really declare that he holdeth certen Ierusalems election. For so the Scripture doth often speake, to say something is done, when it is but ratisied or declared to be done. Psal. 2.7. This day haue I begotten thee. Another adiunct is,4. Sealing. that it is sealed with that holy spirit of promise, as it were a sure pledge. Againe, it is declared by earthly notes; as by the translation of the birthright to Iacob,5. Notes. was his election witnessed. Ratified and confirmed by deliuerance and other corporall benefits:6. Plighting. ergo the word choose is vsed, Esa. 14.2. Euery one of the faithful must make it sure,7. Assurāce. that is, approoue it to other, and confirme it to himselfe by the fruits of faith. Wherefore, bre∣thren, labour to make your vocation sure, 2. Pet. 1.
The signes of our free election,8 Signes. that is, whereby we may certenly know that we are elect, are these: 1. a liuely sense of vocation and bringing vnto Christ, Rom. 8.30. 2. the ar∣dencie and ioy of sauing faith, Act. 13.48. Tit. 1.1. 3. a quiet conscience proceeding frō the blessing of iustification, Rom. 5.1.4. an earnest and constant desire of a new life, such as becommeth those that are rewarded by the holy Ghost, Rom. 8.14. 2. Tim. 2.10. 5. the witnes of our owne spirit, 1. Ioh. 5.6. 6. & last∣ly the inward testimonie of the holy Ghost, sealing election, and all these things bearing witnes together with our spirit, that we are the sonnes of God, Rom. 8.6. whosoeuer findes and knowes these tokens truly and certenly in him∣selfe, he may wel, and ought to reioyce that his game is written in heauen. Thus hauing shewed some of the adiuncts of election, there followes the disperates. Election differeth from vocation,The dispa∣rates of ele∣ction. iustifica∣tion, and sanctification, and ergo may not be confounded with them. And also from adop∣tion. Besides from the promise of saluation. And lastly from saluation it selfe, which is caused of election. Election is cōpared 1. to a foundation that standeth steadfast,The com∣parats of e∣lection. by reason of the immutable firmenes therof. 2. Tim. 2.19. 2. to writing in a booke or a paire of tables, Exod. 32.32. Moses saith to God; Blot me now out of the booke which thou hast written. but God said to Moses, I should blot him out of my books who hath sinned against me.
And Psal. 69.29. Dauid in a figure of Christ, prayeth against his enemies. Let them be blotted out of the booke of the liuing and not be written amōg the righteous. Ap. 13.8. it is said, they whose names are not written in the booke of the lambe, shall worship the beasts. And 17.8. the inhabitants of the earth shall wonder, whose names are not written in the book of life from the beginning of the world. So our Saui∣our Luc. 10.28. Do not reioyce that spirits are sub∣iects vnto you, but, that your names are written in heauen. And Dan. 12.1. Thy people shalbe deliuered, whosoeuer shalbe found written in that booke. For looke as they that are enfranchised into some cōmon wealth, are written into the pub∣like register or notarie of the cittie, so they that are receiued into the number of them that shal be saued, are said to be written into the booke of life: that is, in the prescience of gods minde: such is in a more sure plight then the heauens themselues. The grace of election is greater thē the grace of creation. The Con∣iugate.Of the grace of election the godly are cal∣led elect. Of whome marke these ensuing axi∣omes. 1. the elect are knowne to none but to God. 2. Tim. 2.19. 2. they onely beleeue with a liuely and sauing faith. Ioh. 6.37. Act. 13.48. Tit. 1.1. 3. they onely obtaine saluatiō. Rom. 11.7. the election hath obtained it, that is, the elect: the rest haue bin hardened. 4. they were the fa∣thers, before that euer he gaue them to his onely begotten sonne. Ioh. 6.37. whatsoeuer my father giues me, comes vnto me: if he giues it, then
it was his first. 5. they are blessed and deare to God. Psal. 33.12. Blessed is that nation vvhose God the Lord is, the people that he hath chosen for a possession for himselfe. And Psal. 65.5. Ro. 11.28. 6. they alone are liuely mēbers of the church, alone members of the catholike invisible church: therefore they are saide to dwell in the courts of the Lord. Psal. 65.5. 7. the redemption of Christ is proper to them. Apoc. 5.9. 8. there number is certaine and can be neither increa∣sed nor diminished. 2. Tim. 2.19. the foundation of God standeth immoueable &c, the Lord knowes who are his. To this Austin subscribeth de correp. & gr. c. 13. saying, this I speake of such as are prede∣stinate into the kingdome of God, whose number is so certaine, that none can be taken either in or out. Et retract. 4.26. the almightie God wanted no counsell to fill vp the number of cittizens of his cittie, which was predestinate in his wisedome euen of the damned crew of mankinde. 9. they are seuered from the reprobate, not by meritts, but by Gods prede∣stination, not by the qualitie of their owne vertue, but by the heauenly decree, not by na∣ture but by especiall grace. 10. they are free from perill of reprobation: for the elect cannot be reprobate. Against this doctrine may be obiected. Obiect. 1. They that may bee blotted out of the booke of life, may be reprobate: the elect may be blotted out of the booke of life. Ex. 32:32. Moses saith, blot me out, &c. Ans. 1. The assumption is false. 2. the alle∣gation
doth not prooue the point: for he doth not say he can be blotted out. Ob. but he praies that he may: therefore he could. Ans. the an∣tecedent must be vnderstood but in respect, namely with two conditions. 1. if it be possible, such for all the world as was in Christs praier, Father if it be possible, let this cup passe from me: as if Moses had saide rather adiudge me to the paines of eternall death for the peoples sinne, then destroy thy people, and so haue thy name blasphemed of the gentiles, & yet not except it may be done. 2. If God doth allow & like of this request: which God did not, for he re∣buked him thus. He that sinneth against me I should blott out of my book. Cyprian in his 2. book de lap∣sis saieth thus. He was Gods friend, he talked face to face with God, he could not haue his petition, neither did he appease Gods wrath with his prayer. So then out of this petition of Moses, being conditionall and not liked nei∣ther, we cannot inferr that Moses could, or that the elect can be scraped out of the booke of life. Obiect. 1. They vrge further: at the least we may gather it out of Gods answer vnto Moses, saying, hee vvill blott him out that sinneth against him. To this I say: this is not so, because the commination is conditionall. Thus, if any doe sinne against me, him I will &c. 2. there is an homonymie in the word (sinneth) which is not ment here of any sinne, but of that which is committed of set malice, and continued with∣out
repentance: which Iohn calls the sinne vnto death, and neuer falls vnto the elect. 1. Ioh. 3.9. Againe they vrge. Psal. 69.26. Let them be blot∣ted out of the booke of the liuing: therefore the elect may &c. Ans. This doth not proue the point for two causes. 1. because he doth not speak of the elect, but of the stubborne and stiffnec∣ked enemies of Christ. 2. there is a double mea∣ning in the phrase (let them be blotted out of the booke): wherby is ment, not that they that were written indeed should be scratched out, but they that were so written in their owne opini∣on and other mens, might indeed be declared not to be written. For such remaining in the vi∣sible church, and hauing an externall professi∣on of faith, both thinke themselues they are & so do othermen take them so, when to say truely it is nothing so. And so doth S. Austin vnder∣stand those wordes in his enarration of this psalme. tom. 8. pag. 509 &c. saying, brethren wee must not so take this, as if God wrote any man into his booke, and scratched him out againe: if a man said, that that I haue written, I haue writ∣ten, of the title wherein it was written the king of the Iewes, shall God put any into his booke & take him out againe? And a little after: this was said according to their hope, because they thought they were written in it: what is let thē be blotted out? this: let it appeare vnto thēselues that they are not there. For the verse that fol∣lowes expounds that, and let them not be written with the iust: for this I saide let them be blotted
out, according to their owne hope, but accor∣ding to thy iustice what say I? let them not bee written in: thus much for S. Austin. 3 Yet further they alleadge. Apoc. 3.5. He that ouercomes shalbe cloathed in white garments, & I will neuer put out his name out of the booke of life: therefore God doth put them out that doe not ouercome, but suffer themselues to bee ouer∣come of the deuill and other spiritual enemies, and sinne against God. To this I say. 1. the cō∣sequence is doubtfull. For if they meane, that god wil shew that they that do not ouercome are not written in the booke of life, we graunt it, but if they vnderstand it thus, that God will ranch them out that are once writtē, it is false: for they that do not overcome, but suffer thē∣selues to be overcome of the deuill and sinne against God, they are neuer written, as the Lord speaketh Ezech. 13.9. They shall not be in the count of my people, and shall not be written in the catalogue of the house of Jsrael, neither shall they come into the house of Israel: that is, neither shall be, in the booke of life, nor shall obtaine the deliuerance, but remaine estraunged from the church, and the visible signes of the same, and God and all. 2. Here is an elench of simili∣tude; for he that over commeth, & he that doth not overcome are not like in that whereon this consequence doth depend. For both are not written in the booke of life: which if both were, it would follow of the contrary sense, he that overcomes shall not be blotted, ergo he
that doth not, shall. Obiect. 2. They that may be anathema from Christ, the same may be reprobates: that may the elect be. ergo. Paule wisheth Rom. 9.3. for his brethren the Iewes. Ans. 1. The assumption is false. 2. the place of Paule doth not proue it, for he doth not say he can be, but wisheth he might: that is, by an earnest and enflamed zeale desires his owne destruction, that he might (though it were with his owne losse) aduance the glorie and king∣dome of God in preseruing of Israel. Yea but he wisheth he were, and therefore might be. He doth it not simplie but with condition, as if he had said, I wish my selfe alone were rather depriued of that euerlasting felicitie which I shall haue with Christ, if it were possible, then that so many of my brethren the Israelites should be shutt from grace, and so the name of Christ and the glorie of God should be cal∣led into question: for this is a true testimonie of true loue indeed when a man makes no ac∣count of his owne saluation, in respect of Christs honor and glorie and the saluation of other men. Obiect. 3. 1. Cor. 9.29. J beat downe my bodie (saith Paule) and keepe it in subiection, least by anie meanes, vvhen J haue preached vnto other I should be a reprobate my selfe. Ergo. the elect may be re∣probates. Ans. 1. The authoritie is nothing to the purpose: for he saith not he can be a reprobate.
2. there is an homonymie in the word (repro∣bate) for in the questiō it signifies such an one as is passed ouer by God, and is opposed to one that is elected vnto saluation, but in Pauls speech it standes for him, as by experience is prooued not to be the man he should be, es∣pecially he himselfe setting downe the rule of holy life vnto other, that is, obserues not that himselfe that he prescribes other: and there∣fore as a badde teacher is vnworthie to bee made of, but is such as very worthily deserues to be reiected of all men. And so the worde , reprobate, is contrary to , ap∣prooued, that doth doe that himselfe that he teacheth other. So Ier. 6.30. the siluer is called reprobate, that is not so good as it should bee, and therefore worthie to be cast away. And the earth reprobate. Heb. 6.8. that is, badde & not worth the tilling and sowing, sith it brings forth nothing but thornes and thistles. The meaning then is this, I prescribe other men a square to liue after, therefore I labour to car∣ry my selfe in such sort, that my dealings shall be answerable to my doctrine, and that I may not seeme to neglect that my selfe which I re∣quire of other men, to mine owne reproach & other mens offence. 3. Though I should grant that the Apostle speaketh of reprobation to eternal death, yet he sheweth not here what is done, but what is not done concerning himselfe, as he saieth, 2. Cor. 13.6. but I hope ye shall knowe that we are
not reprobates. and Rom. 8.28. he speakes more plainely. Therefore the consequence is too weake. Paul laboured that he should not be a reprobate, therefore he might be one. For this care of his doth not fight against the certentie of election, but rather is thereby confirmed. For as God would haue perseuerance to be stable, so would he haue it cherished and con∣firmed by this godly care and indeauour, 2. Pet. 1.10. Labour to make your election sure. Obiect. 4. Iudas Iscariot became a reprobate: but Iudas Iscariot was an elect: ergo: the proof of the assumption is this, Haue not I chosen you twelue? Ans. In the assumption and the proofe thereof [Elect] signifieth admitted to the of∣fice of an Apostle, but in the conclusion, one that is ordained to eternall life. All this hath bin but the defence of the 10. axiome, now followes the eleuenth. II. Axiome. The elect cannot loose the faith and righteousnes that they haue recei∣ued of God. Against which Bellarmine, tom. 3. lib. 3. de iu∣stificatione, cap. 14. brings ten testimonies, 2. ex∣amples out of the Scripture, 3. a definitiue sentence of the Church, 4. a reason. 1. Testimonie, Ezech. 18.26. VVhen the iust man shall turne away from his iustice, and worke iniquitie, he shall die therein. A very cleare case. How I pray you is a righteous man turned frō his righteousnes, if he be iustified by faith a∣lone,
and faith once receiued cannot be lost? Bellarmines syllogisme I reciact into this forme: if faith by which alone the elect are iustified, once had, may not be lost, then a righteous man doth not turne himselfe from his righte∣ousnes: but the Prophet saith, he doth: ergo. Ans. 1. The argument is ambiguous. For in the proposition, the word righteous, signifies him that is truly righteous, that is, freely iusti∣fied before God for Christs sake: and righte∣ousnes stands for that blessing of free remission of sinnes, obtained at the hands of God for Christs sake. But in the assumption and place out of the Prophet, the first signifies him that is iust onely in his owne opinion, as hypocri∣tes, and those that beleeue for a time, and after∣ward slide backe. For he that is righteous in∣deede, is like a tree planted by the riuers of waters, whose leaues shall neuer fall away. Psal. 1.3. he shall he had in euerlasting remembrance, Psal. 1.12.6. his righteousnesse remaineth for euer, v. 3. and he shall not die. But of him that is such but in shew, thus the Lord speaketh in Ezekiel, his righteousnesse which he hath done shall not be remembred: againe, he shall die. Therefore he speaketh of such who in their owne conceit and other mens are iust. Of whome Christ saith, I came not to call the iust but sinners to repentance: and not of them that are such indeede. Againe, iustice in the assump∣tion and the Prophets wordes, is not free re∣mission of sinnes, but works in shew righteous, such as hypocrites doe.
2 Though I should graunt that there is meant true righteous and righteousnes, yet he could hence conclude nothing. For Conditio∣nals put nothing, as the Logicians say. Test. 2. Luk. 8.13. out of this place he rea∣soneth thus: They that receiue the seede of the word of God with ioy, and beleeue, but doe not continue, may loose faith: but so doe the elect: ergo. Ans. 1. The argument here againe is doubtfull. For in the proposition the word [beleeue] signifies no more then to consent, but in the assumption to be certenly and vn∣doubtedly perswaded of Gods mercie toward him, and the remission of his sinnes. 2. The second part of the assumption is falfe, for the elect continue for euer. 3 The place alleadged doth not prooue the assumption, which speaketh of the elect, where∣as Christs words are of hypocrites onely, and therefore of reprobates: who beleeue for a time, and in tentation fall away, but the elect keepe the word they haue heard in a good and vpright heart, and bring forth fruit by long continuance. 4. They falsifie the text, which hath these wordes, beleeue [for a time,] which they leaue out. Obiect. To prooue that Christ there spea∣keth of the elect, they goe this way to worke: They that receiue the seede of the word with ioy,o leeue. and beleeue, are elect: these doe so: ergo.
Ans. 1. There is an homony mie in the word [beleeue,] which doth not meane in this place to be certenly perswaded by the holy Ghost of Gods mercie and the obtaining pardon for sinnes, but to giue bare assent, and historically to receiue the Gospel as true. 2 Though that were as it should be, the pro∣position is faultie, for making that a true pro∣prietie of elect (which is peculiar to other as well as to them) to receiue the word with ioy and yeelde historicall assent thereunto. For, Heb. 6.4, 5. it is attributed to some reprobates, that they were inlightened, and had receiued that he enly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost, and had tasted the good word of God, and the vertues of the world to come. and 2. Pet. 2.20. that they had flien the corruptions of the world tho∣rough the knowledge of the Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, and that they that had knowne the way of righteousnes. 3 Againe in the assumption Christs words are depraued in quoting, quite gelding out the wordes [for a time,] whereby it is very mani∣fest that he spake not of sauing but of histo∣ricall faith. Test. 3. If some of the elect are taken from Christ, then they may loose their righteousnes and faith: but they may, Ioh. 15.2. euery branch that beareth not fruit in me shall he take away: ergo. Ans. 1 The assumption is false. 2. the place doth not prooue it. Obiect. All the branches that doe not bring
forth fruit shall be taken from Christ: but some elect are branches bearing no fruit: er∣go. Ans. There is a fallacie in the word [branch] by which name all such are called, as are exter∣nally called to Christ and make, profession. But they are not branches. For the Lord makes an expresse difference of branches. Some fruit∣full and other not. Of these he saith they are cast forth of the vineyard, wither, are gathered together, cast into the fire and burnt. Such are meant in the proposition. 2. The assumpti∣on is false, because all the elect are fruitfull branches, which the father doth daily purge more and more to bring forth more fruit, so farre are they from beeing plucked vp. Obiect. They prooue the assumption thus. They that are regenerate in Christ aliue, are e∣lect: but vnfruitfull branches were regenerate in Christ aliue: ergo vnfruitfull branches were elect. Bellarmines proofe is this. Because it cannot be a branch, that did not sometime liue in the vine. For branches are not grafted in from any other where, but spring out of the vine, and spring out aliue and not dead. So then are the faithfull regenerate in Christ, and when they are borne anew they are not dead but aliue: and yet if after their regeneration they will bring forth no fruit of good workes, they wither, are cut away, and die. Ans. There are many faults in this proba∣tion. 1. False application of the similitude that Christ vseth. For Christ doth not compare
those that are called vnto him vnto branches, because they are not grifted in from other∣where, but are borne aliue out of him. For all his branches are grifted in; for they spring out of Adams stocke, but by grace are set into Christ. 2. It is falsely supposed that all bran∣ches are borne againe and liue in Christ: for none but the fruitfull doe so. 3. It is more false that the regenerate will not, or refuse to bring forth the fruit of good workes. 4. But most of all false that the regenerate doe wi∣ther, are cut off, and die. Obiect. They vige againe that the Lord doth not onely say that the branch that doth wither shall be separated from the vine, but moreo∣uer they shall gather it, cast it into the fire, and it shall burne. And therefore he that hath once bin a branch in the vine, that is, a member in the bodie of Christ by a liuely faith, may be cast into the fire and their burne for euer. Ans. To which I say, 1. it followes not; for the ente∣cedent speakes of an vnfruitfull branch, the consequent of a fruitfull; that shall indeede be cast into the fire, so shall not this. 2. A branch in the vine is defined to be a member in the bodie of Christ by a liuely faith, which defini∣tion is not large ynough, containing onely one kinde, namely the fruitfull onely: but ge∣nerally all such are called braunches that are externally called to Christ by the preaching, ioyned to the visible Church, and professing faith in Christ: whome the Lord himselfe doth
distinguish into fruitfull and vnfruitfull. And so may dead members also be ingrafted into the visible Church. Test. 4. Matth. 24.12. And because iniquitie shall abound the charitie of many shall waxe cold: but he that indureth vnto the ende shall be saued: whēce he reasoneth thus. If some of the elect doe not perseuere vnto the ende, then the elect may loose their faith: but some doe not: ergo. Ans. 1. The assumption is false. For all the elect doe perseuere as the Lord doth promise, Ier. 32.40. I will put my feare into their hearts, that they may not depart away from me. and Ioh. 6.37. whatsoeuer my father giueth me, shall come vnto me, and him that comes vnto me, I will not cast out. 2 They alleadge Christs testimonie falsely. For whereas the assumption saith, that some of the elect doe not persist vnto the ende, Christ saith not so, but to those that do, he promiseth life. Obiect. If he that doth perseuere shall be sa∣ued: then some doe not: but the first is true: ergo. Ans. I graunt all, if the consequent be right∣ly vnderstood: some, that is, such as are not e∣lect, hypocrites and reprobates doe not persist: but all the elect doe. Obiect. If many mens charitie shall waxe cold, and quite and cleane die, then they doe not perseuere: but it shall: ergo. Ans. 1. The assumption is starke false. 2. Christs speech doth not prooue it, because he speakes
not of the elect, who shal perseuere to the end. For howbeit in the elect by reason of many mens ingratitude, treacherie, and villanie, li∣beralitie sometime is much abated, yet it shall neuer finally be put out. Test. 5. If the elect may become reprobates, they may loose their faith: but Paul saies they may, 1. Cor. 9.29. I doe chasten my bodie, and bring it into bondage, least when I haue preached to other, my selfe be a reprobate. Ans. 1. The assumption is false. 2. The proofe is nothing to the purpose. See the explication of the third Axiome. Test. 6. They that can be made voide from Christ and fall from grace, the same may also loose their faith: but that may the elect doe: witnes Pauls owne mouth, Gal. 5.4. You that are iustified by the law are made voide from Christ, and falne from grace: ergo. Ans. 1. There is ambiguitie in the phrase [to be abolished from Christ, and to fall from grace.] For in the syllogisme they signifie to be separated from that coniunction with Christ, which in truth they had, and to fall from grace wherein a man truly was. But in Paul they signifie that Christ is made vnprofitable vnto them, to be excluded from Christs communion,Grace. not to be partaker of him, and to haue no societie with him. And to fall from grace, is to fall from the Gospel, which they had before time receiued (for grace here is the doctrine of the Gospel, set against the law) to haue refused the grace offe∣red
in the Gospel. 2. The assumption is false. 3 Paul speakes of the reprobate, not of the e∣lect. Obiect. Yes of the elect: for they that are truly in Christ and in grace, are elect: these were such: ergo. for they fell from it: therefore they had bin truly in it. Ans. 1. The assumption is false againe. 2 The proofe that is brought doth not prooue it: because it is borrowed out of Pauls testimonie not rightly translated. For Ierome doth flatly reprooue the vulgar translation, turning it, you haue ceased from the worke of Christ, not so well, but yet so, as that hereby we may perceiue he is not the author of the common translation: 2. because of the amphibolie or doubtfull taking of the phrase, as I saide euen now. Obiect. But they fell from it: therefore they were in it. Ans. They are said to fall from it, because they had entered into the way to get it, which the reprobate may doe, seeing there are some degrees to true saith. Test. 7.8.9. They that make ship wracke of faith, revolt from faith, erre from the faith, may loose faith: the Elect make shipwracke of faith, 1. Tim. 1.19. reuolt from the faith, 1. Tim. 4.1. erre from the faith, 1. Tim. 6.10. therefore the elect may loose their faith. Ans. There is an homonymie in the word [faith,] for in the first part of the proposition it signifies the true and wholesome doctrine of
God: but in the second, the certen persuasion of Gods election and mercie. 2. The assump∣tion is false. 3. The places doe not prooue it: for they speake not of the elect, nor yet of this perswasion of the heart of Gods mercie: but by a metonymie, wholesome doctrine. Test. 10. They that fall may loose faith: the elect may fall, Hebr. 6.4, 5, 6. It can not be that they that once haue bin inlightened, and haue tasted of that heauenly gift, and haue bin partakers of the holy spirit, and haue tasted the good vvord of God and the vertues of the world to come, if they fall, should be renewed againe to repentance. ergo Ans. 1. The proposition is false: for they that fal, neuer had that sauing faith: therefore can not loose it. 2 So is the assumption: for it is impossible the elect should fall, that is, finallie fall for euer from the Gospel. 3. The testimo∣nie alleadged will not prooue it, the question beeing of the Elect and this beeing spoken of Apostates and temporarie men: and therfore of the reprobate. Obiect. But here they take exception that Paule speaketh of the elect. They that are true∣ly iustified, enlightened, haue tasted the heauēly gift and are partakers of the holy ghost, are e∣lect: but these of whome Paule speakes are such: ergo Ans. The argument consistes of very di∣uers and differing points. For to be truely iusti∣fied is the propertie of the elect, and therefore as many as are truely iustified are elect, as that
golden chaine of our saluation doth shew, Ro. 8.30. those whome he hath predestinated, he hath al∣socalled: (namely according to the purpose of eternal predestination,) and whome he hath cal∣led those he hath iustified, and whome he hath iustifi∣ed, he hath also glorified. Now the other argumēts, are either ambiguous or obscure. For to be en∣lightened in this place signifies either to know the doctrine of the gospell, or els it signifies by a metonymie to be baptized, as the Syrian in∣terpreter doth expound it: because of the ef∣fect of the baptisme of persons of age that were catechized,  or to enlighten is taken for to baptize: and enlightening baptisme, and the set day for baptisme of the catachumeni: lights of the auncient greeke diuines, as appeares by Iustine Martyrs second apologie for the christi∣ans to Mar. Antonius the Emperour. To tast the heauenlie gift signifies to haue some tast of the life to come. To be made partaker of the holie ghost is here to haue light and vnderstanding of the doctrine of the gospel, and receaue some ioye thereby, which the spirit doth communicate in a generall kinde of manner. 2. These things be common to the elect & reprobate: and so hauing distinguished & laid open the arguments, it is an easie matter to answer the premises seuerally. The proposition is partly true and partly false. This is true, they that are truely iustified are elect: but all the rest is false, they that are enlightened and are elect: for both sorts haue these alike, but the elect
rest not here but proceed further: so likewise is the assumption in part true and in part false: it is true, that these of whome the Apostle spea∣keth are enlightened & the rest, but false that they are truely iustified: for no syllable here soundes to that. 3. Bellarmine doth wrong here to Paules wordes saying impossible, is as much as most hard & rare, which is farre from the signification of that word. Obiect. They for whome Christ was crucifi∣ed, are elect, but Christ was crucified for these: ergo. because Paule saies, they crucifie againe to themselues the sonne of God. Ans. The assumption is false. Againe there is a double amphibolie in this: one from the fallacie of composition and diuision. For in that assumption that word (againe) is not to be construed with that (to themselues) but with the verb (crucifie) being in the greeke (recrucifying,) the second is of the phrase, crucifie againe to thē∣selues; wherein is not ment that Christ was cru∣cified for the apostates, as to redeeme them, as it is impiouslie expounded in the conclusion, but that the backsliders, contemne, make a mock, and (as it is presently found in the text for illustration sake) cause to bee reproached. So saith Paule, Gal. 6.14. that the world was cru∣cified to him and he to the world, that is, as he was despised of the world, so he againe despised the world: as the Iewes cared not for Christ whome they crucified. Obiect. 2. They argue: the words are plaine,
they crucifie again, therefore Christ was once be∣fore truely crucified for them. Ans. 1. It followes not, 2. rather the flatt contrarie, that Christ did not die for them. For they are said to crucifie Christ to themselues, who of a malicious hate make a mocke of Christ crucified, which the wicked Iewes did once before; & the apostates do again. If Christ had beene once alreadie crucifie him to themselues, that is, make light account of him, but loue & honor him very much. Testimonie 11. They that sinne willingly af∣ter they haue receaued the knowledge of the trueth, loose faith: the elect do so. Heb. 10.26. To vs that sinne willingly after we haue receaued the knowledge of the trueth, there is no sacrifice left for sinne, but a fearefull expectation of iudgement &c. Ergo. Ans. 1. The argument is ambiguous, to sinne vvillingly after knovvledge, may bee taken two waies, either to commit same particular sinne, as theft, adultery, māslaughter &c, with know∣ledge and yet of infirmitie, or vtterlie to reuoit from Christ and his gospell, with a hie hand, of malicious wickednes. 2. Which way soeuer you take it the pro∣position is false: First of them that commit par∣ticular sinnes, or els wo be to Dauid and Pe∣ter: nay euery man liuing were in hazard of e∣ternall death. 2. of such as shew by open apo∣stasie that they haue no part in Christ, because
they neuer had that sauing faith: and therefore could not loose it. 3. If the assumption bee vnderstood of sinne committed with knowledge, and con∣sent of will but yet of infirmitie by the elect, then it is true; but neither the proposition nor Paules words speake of that. But if it meanes of generall backsliding, it is most false: neither doth Paule prooue that, speaking of none but apostates, that leaue the Lords assemblie as it is ver. 25, that is vtterlie forsake the church, as Arius, Iulian the apostate and other did. Obiect. To prooue that he speakes of the e∣lect they saye, they that haue receaued the knowledge of the trueth are elect: but so did these. Ergo. Ans. The proposition is not generally true; for onely some that haue receaued that knowledge are elect: other haue it for a wit∣nes against themselues: therefore the conclusi∣on is false. Testimonie 12. They that after the acknow∣ledgement of the way of righteousnes go back from the holy commaundement deliuered vnto them, returne againe to their vomit, after cleansing of their stomacks by vomiting, and beeing come out of the mire and thorowly wrenched, returne to wallow in the same a∣gaine, loose their faith: but the elect doe so. 1. Pet. 2.21. Ans. 1. The proposition is false: for such men neuer had sauing faith, & ergo could not loose it.
2. Peters words doth not proue it, for he speaks of hypocrits and temporarie men, and therefore of the reprobate; that suffer thēselues to be seduced by false prophets, and returne to their old byas. Obiect. Nay but euen of the elect: for they that had truely left those that are in errors, & the corruptions of the world by the knowledg of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, are elect and of those doth Peter speake. To this I say in the proposition there is a false propertie ap∣propriated to the elect, which the reprobate haue aswell as they: some of whome haue wel left hereticks, & heathenish idolaters, & men∣ded their outward manners in good sort. Obiect. Yea but they were once freed and at libertie. Ans. I graunt all, free from their former heresies and euill conditions for a time, but whosoeuer do so, are not presently elect. Obiect. They to whome true faith is ascri∣bed, are elect. Peter ascribed true faith to thē, namely knowledge of Christ and the way of righteousnes, and his holy commandement. Ergo. Ans. 1. The assumption is false. 2. there is an vnsounde definition in the assumption: For true and sauing faith is not the bare know∣ledge of Christ, for the deuil exceeds euen mē in this point. Ergo. Thus farre we haue answered those places of scripture that Bellarmine doth bring: now
followes his 8. examples. Argu. 2. Bellarmines second argument is examples of such as by the witnes of the holy ghost, haue lost faith and charitie: and to be∣gin somewhat hie. First the euill angells, who as the scripture recordeth, sinned, and of an∣gels deserued to be made deuils: they before there sinning were iust, as some of the fathers haue collected out of Esay. cap. 14. and Ezech. cap. 28. Ans. 1. Here are to many interrogatories, for the iustifying faith which cannot bee lost is one question, and the loue of God either as a creator, or as a redeemer is another. The loue of God as a creator may be lost, as the euil an∣gels haue lost it, but the loue of God as a re∣deemer cannot, being a necessary and insepa∣rable effect of iustifying faith. 2. The example of the euill angels is be∣side the matter: for the question is whether men elected may loose their iustifying faith, but euill angells are neither men nor elect: nether euer had they or could haue iustifying faith, seing the promise was not made to them to giue them righteousnes by Christ, nor yet are iustified for or by him. Obiect. But yet they were iust before they fell, as some haue gathered out of those pla∣ces, and therefore lost that righteousnes by sinne. Ans. 1. They seeke to enueigle vs with an homonymie in the word iustice: for the anie∣cedent
talks of inherent righteousnes, and that qualitie that they had at their first creation, the consequent not of inherent righteousnes, but such as is imputed for Christ. 2. we graunt the assumption, but they offend with their double diligence, in prouing that which no man doth denie. 3. the places alleadged will not proue it. For whereas Esay cap. 14.12. saith hovv didst thou fall from heauen o Lucifer, thou sonne of the morning. The Prophet doth not speake of Satan, but of the king of Babel, whome he calleth by those names by a metaphor, for his magnifi∣cence and glorie, wherein he exceeded other kings: he saieth he fell from heauen, to note his fall from that heauenly light and dignitie of his: and ergo they that expound this place of Satan, are faire wide of the Prophets meaning: but that passes for absurditie, to think that Lu∣cifer is the king of the deuills, and that the pro∣phet should so terme him. The place in Ezechi∣el is cap. 28.13. &c. Thou hast him in Eden, the gar∣den of God, &c. the text is cleare, he speaks of the kinge of Tyre and not of Satan. Exam. 2. Our first parents, made after the i∣mage and similitude of God, were adorned with faith and grace, euen in the iudgement of our aduersaries, and yet they cannot denie but that they fel most grieuously. If &c. Ans. 1. Here is an homonymie in the word faith, in the proposition. notwithstanding for that persuasiō of remission of sinnes for Christs sake, which our first parents before there fall
could not haue: so in the consequent. 2. The example is not to the purpose: for the question is of the elect, that haue iustifying faith by the grace of regeneration, which they had not before the fall being still in the estate of their naturall integritie. Exam. 3. Saul the king of Israel lost iusti∣fying faith: but he was elected to eternall life. Ans. The premisses are both false; he nei∣ther lost that heneuer had, nor was an elect. Obiect. To prooue the maior: if he were a good man, so that none was better then he of the children of Israel, then surely he had iusti∣fying faith, but he was. 1. Sam. 9.2. Ans. 1. These is an homonymie rising of the hebrew idome, where the word Ton, signi∣fies, good, and proper of personage as here, as Rab. Dauid Kimchi expounds it, and the he∣brews for the most part. Whereupon the Tar∣gum of Jonathan, the Chaldie paraphrase hath (goodlie to looke vpon:) ergo the word here is re∣ferred to the bodie not to the soule. 2. Though it did signifie here goodnes of the minde, yet it were not to the point, be∣cause we speake of the iustice of the gospell, imputed to vs by Christ, not of the law which is an inherent qualitie. Obiect. Against the minor of the principall sillogisme he was elect. 1. Sam. 9.2. ergo to life eternall. Ans. The translation is false, it should bee
he was yong. For oachur indeed doth signifie e∣lect: that is chosen, or fit for any thing, or work, for warre, &c. more then an old man as Kimchi faies. Obiect. They vrge 1. Sam. 10.24. See you whome the Lord hath chosen: ergo elected to eter∣nall life. of Saul. Aus. There is an homonymie in Samuels words, his meaning being of his aduauncing to the regall dignitie. Exam. 4. Dauid lost his faith, but he was an elect: Ergo, some elect may loose their faith. Ans. The proposition is false: for which they proue the assumption thus: they that com∣mit any great sinne loose euen their iustifying faith as he did. Psal. 6. but this proposition is false againe. For Christ is stronger then that the deuill is able to take any sheep of his out of his hand by his instrumēts, sinnes, tentations, per∣secutions or seducers: but Christ will not per∣mit Satan to carrie any of the elect so farre as to be quite cast from his estate of saluation: for he is the stronger of the two. Ergo: Sathan cannot pluck Christs members away by his entisements. Besides they offend with their ouerbusying themselues, needleslie proouing the assumption which no body denies. Obiect. Yea but if the elect doe not loose their iustifying faith, whē they sinne grieuously, they may sinne freely: they shal be saued though they wallow neuer so in their sinnes, al which
is very absurd to thinke: ergo. Ans. The proposition doth not follow, but thus rather, let the elect that haue fallen into sinne neuer despaire with Cain and Saul, but repent, and turning vnto God, beleeue that their sinnes though neuer so grieuous, are par∣doned for Christs sake, & comfort themselues with this, that there is no cōdēnation for those that are in Christ Iesus. 2. I giue an instance: for if that consequence be good, this will also: if they which sinne, haue an aduocate with the father Iesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sinnes, then we may law∣fully sinne, and wallow therein &c. Exam. 5. Salomon lost his iustifying faith, but hee was elect to eternall life: ergo: the as∣sumption he proues by two places, and a rea∣son. Ans. But 1. hee takes superfluous paines in proouing that none denies. 2. there is an homonymie in his reason, saying he was the sonne of a holie man Dauid, therefore accor∣ding to Caluin and Peter Martyrs doctrine himselfe was holie. For one is called holie, either for inherent righteousnes, as our first parents were before the fall, or for the im∣putation of Christs holines and beginning of inherent holines, sanctified by Christ Iesus, or els for pertaining to a holie-people, with whome God made his couenant, alwaies to conuert some of them and giue them true and inward holines. In which last sense Caluin and Peter Martyr say that a holie offspring comes
of holy parents, by Paules owne witnes Rom. 11.26. If the roote bee holie, the boughes are so also. And 1. Cor. 7.14. An vnbeleeuing husband is sanctified in his vvife &c. othervvise your children should be vncleane: but novve they are holie. 2. The proposition is false, he prooues it thus: the scripture records that in his old iust daies he fell from grace and righteousnes, and how hee worshipped all his concubines idols. Cyprian also lib. 1. Ep. 5. & Aust. 22. contra Fau∣stum lib. 22. cap. 88. affirmes that he was a casta∣way and damned. Ans. 1. The scripture testifies no such mat∣ter as Bellarmine speaks of: as that he fel from grace and righteousnes. 2. his argument is to weake, because he worshipped idols. For God did not vtterly take away his mercie from him as he promised by Nathan. 2. Sam. 7.14. Ergo Salomon did repent, as the booke Ecclesia∣stes which he afterward compiled doth well declare. Obiect. Yea but that promise by Nathan must be vnderstood of his temporal kingdom. Ans. That is begging of the question. 1. proofe gainesaies it. for the greatest part of the kingdome was taken away from his succes∣sors, and in proces of time the whole king∣dome: and so the euent were not answerable to the promise. 2. the same is apparent by the applying of the promise to all the elect. Psal. 89.31. 3. as for the testimonies of Cy∣prian
and Austin are not authentical in diuini∣tie disputations. Exam. 6. Peter lost his iustifying faith, and was elect. Ans. The proposition is false: for Christ praied for him that his faith might not faile, and he proues it thus. He sinned greatly by denying Christ and binding it with periu∣rie, Ans. the antecedent is true but in part, hee sinned, but not with his whole heart and full consent, as appears by his repen∣tance. Confession faild in his mouth, but not faith in his heart. Exam. 7. Simon Magus lost his iustifying faith, and was elect. Ans. they are both false: the maior he proues Act. 8.13. Simon Magus beleeued also. Ans. it is ment of historicall faith. Bellarmine pinnes a slander on Caluins back, saying he auoucheth that he did not truly be∣leeue, but dissemblingly, whereas Caluin mis∣likes that, as appears by his commentaries vp∣pon the Acts, Exam. 8. Iudas the betrayer lost his faith & was elect: ergo: Ans. both false: he proues the minor: whosoeuer is giuē to Christ, is an elect: but so was Iudas. Ioh. 17.12. Those thou gauest me &c. I ans. 1. the phrase is doubtfull to bee giuen to Christ Iesus: for some are giuen him as to a mediatour and redeemer, that he should giue them euerlasting life Ioh. 17.2. so was not he, either as to a Lord and king, as all things in heauen and earth are giuen to Christ, that is, are subiected vnder his rule and gouernment.
1. Cor. 15. Heb. 2. Againe some are giuen him to bestow life vpon, other to bestow an Apostle∣ship vpon. 2. The proposition is ment of such as are gi∣uen to Christ as to a mediator: the assumption of such as are giuē him as a Lord, and to com∣mit the Apostleship vnto. Ergo: the meaning of Christ words is this, those thou hast giuen me to make Apostles, I haue kept from being infected with the leuen of the Pharises and priests, and swaruing from thy trueth which I haue taught them. 3. although I should graūt that Christ Iesus speaketh there of those that are elect to eternall life, yet nothing can be picked out thereof but this, that Iudas onely perished: for so Christ Iesus speaketh exclu∣siuely, none of them perished beside that sonne of perdition: but the aduersaries very grosly af∣firme the same of other the elect, because Iudas perished alone, ergo: other may perish also: but the cleane contrary collection should bee made: ergo: other of the elect cannot pe∣rish. Obiect. They replie to the answer of the ma∣ior he that is iust hath iustifying faith. Iudas was sometime iust: ergo had iustifying faith. Ans. The minor is false, which he proues by Christs words Ioh. 17.12. which I haue already answered. Obiect. He that is in Christs flock hath iusti∣fying faith, but so was Iudas. Ans. they that are so in Christs flock that they are also of it, it
is true of them, but so was not Iudas: for if he had beene of him, he would haue staied with him. And thus farre for his examples. Arg. 3. Because the church hath so defined and iudged it, condemning this selfe same er∣ror long agoe in Iouinian. as Hierom relates lib. 2. contra Iouin, and Austin haeresi. 82. 1. He alleadgeth a witnes that is vnsuffici∣ent in ecclesiasticall controuersies. 2. He would cosen vs with a false testimo∣nie, saying, the church condemned this opini∣on in Iouinian, that the elect cannot loose their sauing faith, which was not cōdemned in him: neither can that bee shewed out of Hierom or Austin, because these fathers condemned in him, that man could not sinne after baptisme: which is another case. 3. If Iouinian taught this simplie, he was in an error, and not in that sense that Iohn doth 1. Ioh. 3.9. that one regenerate cannot sinne, that is, giue himselfe wholy vnto sinne, and not labour for sanctification, because he is borne of God: which if he did, I see not why he should be condemned, vnlesse they condemne Iohn also. Therefore we set more by the truth of Gods word, then by the authoritie of coun∣cels. Hierome because he was at deadly hate & fewde with marriage, most sharply reproues them that defend the holines of wedlock, and Iouinian, and Vigilantius, whome he wrong∣full chargeth with sundrie heresies. And so
much to the definitiue sentence of the church. Argu. 4. Hee bringeth 5. reasons. 1. Any habit may be lost: iustifying faith is a habit: Ergo. Ans. 1. The philosopher will hardly graunt the proposition, because a habit is a firmed setling of the minde and as it were another nature. 2. It is not vniuersally true, such habits may bee lost as are gott by our owne industrie and is not confirmed in mans minde by God: but faith is not gott by our labour, but infu∣sed, and it is confirmed in whomsoeuer hath it, by God, that it may perseuere. For those that God doeth iustifie, hee doeth also sanctifie. Rom. 8 30. Obiect. Hee that committeth one acte of infidelitie looseth the habit of faith: but hee that hath the habit of faith may com∣mit an act of infidelitie: Ergo: maye loose faith. Ars. Hee saies the maior is true by the scripture, and the aduersaries doctrine, which is, that iustifying faith is shaken out, and the holie ghost poured forth of the heart by eue∣rie sinne. The minor he proues thus, a habit doth not necessarily hinder the contrary act, as is euident by the reason and nature of al other habitts, which incline to their act but doe not force it. Ans. The maior is false, for the habit doth
not depend vppon the action, as I. Scaliger doeth verie learnedly dispute Exercit. 71. and ergo is not ouerthrowne by one or two actions. As Dauid did not presently put off all clemencie, when he caused Vrias to bee slaine: nor cast away all faith in God, when hee fledd for feare of Saul to the Philistines. In the proofe of the maior, he appeals very impudent∣ly to the testimonie of the scripture, which hee hath none: and to the aduersaries on whome he fathers a lie, ascribing that doctrine to vs which we renounce. 2. The minor is also false, and foolish the proofe: for a habit is a qualitie imprin∣ted in our mindes, and such an affection as bringeth not onely propension and alacri∣tie of minde to doe the same thing alwaies, but also a setled resolution & grounded, and desire of our will, and doeth not admit the reasons and motions of the contrary affecti∣on, so Bellarmine leaues vs to skanne, whether hee is a worse diuine or a more sottish philosopher. 3. There are foure termes, for to doe an act of infidelitie, and to bee able to doe it are diuers. After this obiection hee faines, that wee take exception where wee doe not: name∣lie that God doeth not permit men that are truely iustified to fall into sinne, accor∣ding to his promise: and then askes where is that promise, and disputes against it, figh∣ting as it were with his owne shaddow, most
foolishly reasoning thus: When the righteous turneth him away from his righteousnes, &c. Ezek. 18. if we denie him, he will denie vs, 2. Tim. 2. ergo. he suffers them to fall. Ans. These proofes are impertinent, and ergo prooue nothing: they deale not of those that are truly iustified. 2. We neuer denie but that truly iustified men may sinne: and there∣fore let him fight no more without an enemie like the Andabate. 2 Many that are baptized in their infancie, when they come to age sinne grossely and are damned: but all that are baptized in their in∣fancie, are predestinated vnto life, are truly iu∣stified by baptisme and receiue faith: ergo ma∣ny that are predestinated vnto life, &c. sinne and are condemned: the minor he appeales to the Lutheran for proofe for. Ans. 1. He alters the state of the question, and fathers that on vs which is not ours. For we doe not teach, that infants are iustified by baptisme, nor yet we denie not but they may sinne grossely that are elected and iustified. 2. He goes in hand to deceiue vs with ioyning many questions together, that are distinct; as whether the elect may sinne grieuously, and whether they may be condemned. 3. The as∣sumption is starke false. 4. For the probati∣on let the Lutherans looke what they graunt to the Papists, and how they will keepe them∣selues from the errour of pu operatum in the sacrament.
1 Obiect. Nay euen without baptisme by the opinion of Calvin, Peter Martyr, and Bu∣cer, the children of the faithfull are borne ho∣ly. Ans. The instance is beside the matter, be∣cause wee speake now of those that are bapti∣zed. 2. Paul saies the same that these holy men doe, Rom. 11.16. Jf the roote be holy, the boughes also. 1. Cor. 7.14. the vnfaithfull husband is sanctified in his wife, &c. otherwise your children were vnholy, but they are holy. Whereby it is evi∣dent, that the children of the faithfull are ho∣ly by force and vertue of the couenant; euen before baptisme also: afterwardes baptisme serues for a signe of that holines. 2 Obiect. That all the children of the faith∣full, or at least all that are baptized when they are young, are predestinate and can not sinne, Calvin saith: or cannot be condemned Bucer and Martyr saie. This is a forgerie and slaun∣der. They neuer taught it, and therefore Bel∣larmines reason is friuolous he brings after. If these mens paradox were true, then all Papists that are baptized in their infancie, are prede∣stinate to life and cannot perish, which not∣withstanding these men count infidels and members of Antichrist. Well, that paradox is none of theirs. If the Lutherans hold any such thing, let them looke to it, we will not put our selues into other mens quarrels. 3 If the elect cannot loose iustifying faith, surely there will be no heretickes in the world: but that is forergo.
Ans. It follows not: but this rather, that they that are elected vnto eternall life cannot be∣come heretikes, that is, such as will stiffely hold such errours, as ouerthrow the ground of sal∣uation. They prooue the maior: because this is the difference between Pagans and heretikes, that Pagans had neuer any faith, heretiks haue had it and lost it. There shall rise some out of your selues that shall speaks peruerse things, Act. 20. and, 2. Tim. 2. Hymeneus and Philetus fell from the truth. and Tit. 3. Ans. This is impertinent, vnlesse we pre∣suppose that onely they that are elected vnto eternall life become heretikes: which we will neuer graunt 2. If they meane by faith, know∣ledge of the doctrine of the Gospel, this diffe∣rence betweene Pagans and heretikes is not alwaies true. For Lucian that had professed Christian religion, afterward fell to heathe∣nisme: so did Iulian the Apostata. For vnder the name of Pagans, we vnderstand the Gen∣tiles or Ethnicks, with Augustine and other of the fathers. But if they meane that firme perswasion of remission of sinnes graunted for Christ, the second part of the difference is false: for they neuer had iustifying faith. The places doe no way prooue it that are brought. 4 If the iust cannot sinne, the Apostles ad∣monitions are in vaine to feare, to beware, to be carefull: it is to no purpose God taught vs to pray, forgiue vs our trespasses, &c. it is superflu∣ous
to maintaine repentance, absolution, and reconciliation of those that fall, against the Novatians: but all these are absurd: ergo. Ans. 1. He changeth the state of the questi∣on: for this is not the controuersie betweene vs, whether the iust may sinne or no; but whe∣ther they that are elected to eternall life may loose iustifying faith or no? 2: there is a dou∣ble ambiguitie in the question, whether they may sinne, or no: 1. in the subiect in the word iust. For it may be taken either after the law, as A∣dam was before sinne, or after the Gospel, as they that beleeue in Christ are said to be iust: and this we meane here. 2. In the word sinne: either of humane infirmity, or of sinne to death. In the first sense wee denie not but they may sinne, 1. Ioh. 1.8, 9. If we say we haue no sinne, we de∣ceiue our selues, and the truth is not in vs, &c. ther∣fore those absurdities touch not vs any way. In the latter sense they that are iustified by the obedience of Christ and renewed of God, can not sinne, 1. Ioh. 3.9. He that is borne of God, giues not himselfe to sinne, because his seed is in him. 5 That opinion that brings in desperation, is not true: to say that the elect cannot loose iu∣stifying grace, brings in despaire: ergo not true. Ans. Both the premisses are false. Bellarmine goes about to prooue the assumption, but leaues the point, & shakes hands with the que∣stion, saying, He that can promise himselfe no∣thing of future euents but rashly, cannot certē∣ly hope that himselfe is iust: but none that is
well in his wittes can promise himselfe any thing but rashly. ergo. Ans. Surely this man needes somewhat to purge his head, for his braines crow. For both his speech and his reason are ill at ease, that for vsing the worde hope, of present affaires: for hope is for future: we feele or trust in present. But his reason is skared out of his wittes. For where be should prooue, that the opinion of the infallible certentie and firmenes of iustify∣ing faith, brings in desperation, he concludes, that none that is in his right minde, can certenly hope that he is truly iust: ô wit whether wolt? then he prooues the assumption of the pro∣syllogisme with testimonies which none de∣nies. Thus then hauing refuted all that Bellar∣mine can oppose against this doctrine, it stan∣deth steadfast, that they that are elect vnto eter∣nall life can not loose iustifying faith. And thus much of the 11. axiome, now followes the 12. Ax. 12. The Elect can not perish: which Austin also deliuered in his booke de side ad Pe∣trum, cap. 35. Hold this steadfast and no way doubt, saith he, that all whome God by his free goodnes hath made vessels of mercie, before the beginning of the world, are predestinated of God into the adoption of the children of God, and that none of them can pe∣rish whome God hath predestinated to the kingdome of heauen, and that none of them whome he hath not predestinated vnto life can by any meanes obtaine the same. And before him Ambrose de vocat.
Gentium, lib. 2. cap. 10. All that shalbe called at any time into the kingdome of God, are sealed in this a∣doption, which was made before the world. And as none of the vnfaithfull are reckened in this number, so are none of the godly left out. For the prescience of God which cannot be deceiued, looseth nothing of the full number of the members of Christs bodie, neither can any casually deminish the summe that was fore∣knowne and elected in Christ euerlastingly. 13 They cannot be taken out of Christs and his fathers hands, Ioh. 10.28, 29. 14 They are not elected conditionally, as the aduersaries say of Paul, if he fulfill the course he began vnto the very ende. 15 They shall not be forsaken of God, as Samuel cheereth vs, 1. Sam. 12.24. The Lord will not forsake his people for his owne great names sake, because it pleased the Lord to make you a people to himselfe. 16 They are like to pure wheat, Matth. 3.12. 17 They are not proud in themselues, or with the contempt of other. They insult not ouer other, that haue not obtained the like grace, Rom. 11.10. 18 It is their part to put on the bowels of mercie, with patience, gentlenes, modestie, rendernes of minde, to indure other, to par∣don other, to be in loue with all, Coloss. 3.12. 19 For their sakes the ministers of the Church especially must suffer all things, 2. Ti∣moth.
2.10. 20 For their sakes the daies of the cruell enemies of the Church are shortened, that they should not without ende make hauocke: as God hastened the last ende of the perfidi∣ous nation of the Iewes, which otherwise would not haue left any iust man aliue, they so hungered after the vtter suppressing of all Christs disciples. Mar. 13.20. 21 The elect are counted fooles, base, vile, nothing in the world, but are beloued of God, that we may perceiue that Gods fauour is not bound to any persons. 1. Cor. 1.27. 22 They shall be gathered and knitte vnto Christ at the last day by the angels, &c. Math. 24.31. 23 God heareth and reuengeth them dai∣ly suffering iniurie and calling vpon him, though he seeme to be slow in reuenging their grieuances. uk. 18.7. 24 Nothing can be laid to their charge at Gods iudgement seat, he iustifying them. Ro∣man. 8.33. 25 They are with the lambe and fight a∣gainst Antichrist. Apoc. 17.14. 26 We must thanke the Lord for them, by Pauls, Syluanus, and Timotheus example, who gaue thankes for the Thessalonians, as know∣ing they were elected. 1. Thess. 1.2, 3, 4. 27 Euery one of the elect may be and in∣deede is, certenly perswaded of his election to eternall life: 1. by the internall witnes of the
holy Ghost, Rom. 8.16. for the spirit of God bea∣reth witnes with our spirit that we are the sonnes of God. 2. of the gospel calling all those elect that beleeue in Christ. 3. of the effects of ele∣ction, which God worketh in the elect alone, and by the feeling wherof as of certen seales, election is signed vnto vs. 28 Euery one ought to trust of his brethren in Christ, that they are elect vnto life, and not to be out of hope of other. The examples of such as were elected to e∣ternall life,Examples. are as many as there haue bin such as by a true & liuely faith beleeuing in Christ haue bin and yet are saued: as Adam, Eve, A∣bel, Seth, Enoch, Noah, Abrahā, Isaac, Iocob, &c. but of king Salomon there is some doubt made, whether we should recken him for an elect, seeing he fell so fowlly and worshipped idols: now albeit I take not vpon me this iudgement, beeing the Lords onely, (who knoweth full well who are his,) yet to shewe my hope of other mens saluation, seeing I haue very good arguments for it, may stand with charitie. I say thē that we must recken Salomon among the elect, & that for these 4. reasons. Salomonan elect.1 The promise was made vnto him by Na∣than, & to Dauid of him, that the mercies of God should not be vtterly taken from him. 2. Sam. 7.14. When he shall doe wickedly I will correct him with the rodde of men, &c. but my louing kindnes shall not quite be taken away from him, as I tooke it from Saul. Nowe that this promise was not of his
temporall kingdome is manifest by the apply∣ing of it to all the elect, Psal. 89.31. If his sonnes forsake my law and walke not in my iudgements, if they breake my statutes and keepe not my comman∣dements, I will visit their sinne with the rodde and their iniquitie with scourges, but I will not make void my kindnes from him, nor lie against my faith. Cyprian also applieth it to all the elect, Epist. 52. & in his booke to the hereticke Novatian. 2 He was a great and princely figure of Christ. 3 He witnessed his repentance in the book Ecclesiastes, which he afterward composed. 4 He was a profitable and immediat mini∣ster of the holy Ghost, in setting downe do∣ctrine of faith and manners to the Church: the penman of Canonicall Scripture. And thus much of the first part of Predesti∣nation, that is, Election: now follows the se∣cond of Reprobation. REprobation, is that predesti∣nation whereby God doth reiect from the kingdome of heauen such as are ordained to euerlasting destruction. And it is meant in the name of hate, Mal. 1.3. Roman. 9. 13. Some are afraid to name reprobation, as if the word were vnluckie and vnfortunate, and vtterly to be banished out of Christian do∣ctrine:
but they should not be so must afraide of it, because the holy Scripture it selfe doth vse it. For Ier. 6.30. it is saide, they are called re∣fuse siluer, because the Lord hath reprobated them: where the Prophet vseth the word maas, which is cōtrarie to bachar, which is to choose, as appeares, Esa. 7.15. The Greeke translation hath , the Lord refused them. And the Scripture sates they are , reprobates. There are two parts of reprobation: first, a deputation to reproach, that is, both to vses vn∣honest, or to those works which the reprobates doe commit afterward, and also to eternal de∣struction: secondly, Reiection from the grace of election, and the effects of the same grace, and so from the ende eternall life. Destination to shame, is before reiection from the grace of election. For that which is last in execution, is first in intention, that is, in counsell and cogitation. See Zanch. de natura Dei. p. 506.6. Bellarmine in his third tome of disputations, lib. 2. de grat. & lib. arbitr. cap. 16. saith, Repro∣bation compriseth two acts in it: one nega∣tiue, the other positiue. For first he saith God had no will to saue them: 2. had a will to con∣demne them. All which we would haue liked well, but that he inuerted the order of the a∣ctions, for that which he sets first, indeede is last. Againe, we like not his making of electi∣on double, one negatiue, the other affirmatiue,
calling that privatiue, this positiue. But other call that passiue, this actiue. For euery thing that consisteth of two parts, is not two-fold. There is but one eternall reprobation, not two, and that hath but one obiect and no more. Eternall reprobation is 1. of the deuill: 2. those that are vnited to the deuill. Reprobation of the deuill, is that whereby God from euerlasting hath reiected the deuill that should become the prince and head of falling from God, and hath adiudged him to euerlasting punishment. Reprobation of them that are vnited to the deuill, is of such as are ioyned to the deuill as their prince and head: and it is either of the e∣uill angels, or damned men. Mat. 25.41. Gen. 3.15. Ioh. 8.14. The eternall reprobation of euill angels is predestination, whereby God from euerla∣sting decreed to forsake some angels ordai∣ned to eternall destruction, not to confirme them in good, to suffer them to fall through pride, and casting them from heauen to ex∣clude them from eternall happines. Math. 25.41. Apoc. 12.9. That there is a reprobation of some of the angels is euident by this, because some angels are elected, by Pauls witnes: now election can not stand without reprobation. Concerning the cause thereof, Bellarmine is of this iudgement, that the negatiue repro∣bation
of the angels, doth not depend on the foresight of sinne. For God foresaw that the angels which perish should most vndoubtedly perish, if indeede he should giue them but that grace onely which he did giue them, therfore giuing them no more grace, he would withall not predestinate them to glorie, but suffer thē to fal from saluation. For if he would absolute∣ly haue saued them, his wisdome would haue found a meanes to doe it. Therefore there can be no reason giuen, why God would giue some angels grace, by which hee sawe they should most certenly be saued, and to other whereby hee sawe most certenly they should not, but onely because he would saue these and not them. But the cause why he would positiuely damne the euill angels was out of doubt their sinne foreseene. For the punish∣ment of condemnation is not iustly inflicted, but where sinne went before. Nowe in this we like it well, that he acknowledgeth no o∣ther cause why some angels were not elected to saluation, but onely the meere will of God. But we very much mislike, first that he makes two kindes of reprobation in stead of the two parts of one and the slfe same thing: se∣condly, that he makes foresight of sinne the cause of his will in condemning the euill an∣gels, seeing it is impossible that the efficient cause should in time be after the effect. And it is very grosse that the sinne should be the efficient cause of the eternall will of God,
that is, of Gods very essence, willing. The ar∣gument he brings is beside the point, because the punishment of damnation is one thing, and the eternall decree of inflicting the puni∣shment of damnation is an other. Indeede God decreed to lay the punishment on the de∣uills for sinne, but sinne is not therefore the cause of the decree. Sinne is the cause of puni∣shment, but not of the decree of punishing. The eternall predestination of men to be condemned, is that predestination whereby God hath determined frō euerlasting to passe by those that are left in the common destructi∣on, into which all men should plunge them∣selues by sinne. 1 There are two parts of this definition, the genus, and the difference: or, the matter and the forme. The genus or matter is Predestination, which is common to election & reprobation: as Austin teacheth, l. 15. de Civ. dei, c. 1. We deuide (saith he) mankinde into two kinds or branches, one of those that liue according to man, the other that lie according to God. Which mystically we call two cities, that is, two societies of men, the one whereof is predestinated to raigne for euer with God, the o∣ther to vndergoe euerlasting torment with the de∣uill. And againe in his Enchirid. to Laurentius, cap. 100. God should bring to passe that which he would, vsing well euen the euill, as chiefly good to their condemnation, whome he iust∣ly predestinated to punishmēt, & to the others saluation, whome in mercie he predestinated
to grace. And the author of the booke of the calling of the Gentiles, calls the reprobate predestinate. So doth Fulgentius ad Moni∣mum, lib. 1. cap. 27. Therefore sinners, saith he, are not predestinated to the first death of the soule, that is, sinne; but to the second, the state of fire and brimstone. And in the second booke to the same man; Gods predestination is nothing else, but the preparation of his workes which in his euerlasting disposition he foreknew he would doe either mercifully or iustly. And Anselmus in his booke of the a∣greement of prescience and free will, saith, Predestination is not onely of the good, but of the badde also. So doe the schoolemen vn∣der the same name of predestination, deliuer as well the reprobation of the wicked, as the election of Saints. Therefore we doe not so ill, in vsing the word predestination for repro∣bation to destruction: nor yet doe we foist in∣to the Church any new opinions of the eter∣nall predestination of the reprobate to con∣demnation, as the aduersaries charge vs: vn∣lesse they will likewise accuse Augustine, Ful∣gentius, and the other fathers for the same fault. Againe, whereas some would haue the reprobate called [foreknovvne] rather, indeede they know not what they say, for that Christ and the Elect are called foreknovvne both in Scripture and by Iustin Martyr, lib. 2. Apolog. and in his dialogue with Trypho the Iewe; so are not the reprobate once in all the Scripture,
that I can remember. 2 The forme or difference to distinguish reprobation of men condemned, from eter∣nall election, is, that God determined and appointed to reiect and exclude those men whome he prepared to euerlasting destructi∣on, from the communion of eternall saluati∣on. So then there are two parts of reprobation of men to be damned, 1. deputing them to ig∣nominie, and so to euerlasting destruction: 2. excluding them from grace of election, and the effects thereof. Of the first part it is said, Rom. 9.21. Hath not the potter power ouer his clay, to make of the same masse one vessed to honour, and an other to di∣shonour? and vers. 22. they are called vessells of wrath made to destruction. 2. Tim. 2.20. In a great house there are not onely vessells of siluer and gold, but also of wood and stone, some to houour, o∣ther to dishonour. and 1. Pet. 2.7. The disobedient are set for this, namely to stumble at the word. Iude, v. 4. Certaine are crept in, long ago ordained to this condemnation, wicked men, that trne the grace of our God into lust. Of the second part Christ speaketh, Ioh. 13.18. I speake not of you all, I know whome I haue cho∣sen. Mat. 20.16. Many are called, but few are cho∣sen. Math. 15.13. There are plants which the hea∣uenly father hath not planted. Apoc. 13.8. All the inhabitants of the earth shall worshippe the beast, vvhose names are not vvritten in the booke of life
of the lambe. And Apoc. 17.8. The inhabitants of the world wondred whose names were not written in the booke of life, before the foundation of the vvorld. Therefore reprobats are shutt from the grace of election. Mat. 11.25. I glorifie thee O father, Lord of heauen and of earth, for hiding these things from the vvise and learned. Ioh. 17.9. I praye not for the vvorld, but for those vvhich thou hast giuen mee, because they are thine. Matt. 7.23. J neuer knevve you. Therefore reprobates are also excluded from the effectes of free electi∣on. That there is reprobation, both the scripture doth affirme and other arguments proue: the places of scripture are these. Ier. 6.30. They shall be called reprobate siluer, because the Lord hath re∣probated them. Obiect. That is spoken of tem∣porall reiection. Ans. If wee should graunt that, they could not denie reprobation, nay that necessarily prooues it. For whomesoeuer God hath reiected in time, hee decreed from euerlasting to reiect: both because God knows all his works from euerlasting. Iam. 15.18. As also because God worketh all thinges accor∣ding vnto the counsell of his ovvne vvill. Eph. 5.11. Test. 2. Ro. 9.22. The reprobats are called vessels of wrathand of destruction. To which they answer, that is not to be ment of reprobation, because vessels of wrath are made of the deuill, to destruction, that is, the deuill doth frame and fitt them, to bee more and more prepared
to euerlasting dishonor. But they are deceiued two waies. 1. in the efficient cause of this fit∣ting, 2. in the exposition of the word. For they saye the efficient cause thereof is the de∣uill; then they construe the word, to induce ha∣bilitie and fitnes vpon the vessels of wrath, that they may bee more and more prepared to e∣uerlasting dishonor. Er. 1. But 1. it is blasphemie to say they are prepared of the deuill to destruction: for by this meanes the work of distinction of mākind, and the iust iudgement which is proper vnto God, is made the deuils. Much better doth S. Austin speake lib. 2. contra 2. Epi. Pelagii. He hath mercie on whome he will, and whome he vvill he har∣dens, that makes one vessell to honor, and another to dishonor; and yet more clearly Epis. 105. to Sixtus the priest: God maketh vessels of wrath to destruction, to shew his wrath and declare his power: And lib. 1. ad Simplicianum. Whereas of the number of the wic∣ked vvhome he doth not iustifie, he maketh vessels to dishonor, he doth not hate this in them which he ma∣keth. And againe, see he hateth Esau, vvhich vessel he made himselfe to dishonor. Obiect. 1. The aduersaries prooue their as∣sertion thus. 1. Paul saies not that the vessels of wrath are made of God to destruction: ergo God made them not. Ans. The like collecti∣on may we make, Paul saieth not, that they are not made of the deuill: ergo: the deuill made them not. Obiect. 2. God is delighted with them that
that he maketh: he is not delighted with the vessels of wrath: ergo: he made them not. Ans. The proposition speaks of their substance, the assumption of their accident, sinne. For God is delighted withal he made, in respect of their substance and the good things created there∣in: but hee is not pleased with the vessels of wrath, as they are defiled with sinns, by which they prouoke Gods wrath vppon their owne heads: therfore it followes not, that god made not the vessels of wrath: that is, made not the reprobate against the euill day, raised not thē vp to shew examples of his wrath: for the ves∣sels are called vessels of wrath, because God made them to shewe in them examples of his wrath for the declaration of his power. Obiect. 3. Those which hee doeth endure, he made not: but hee endures and beares with the vessels of wrath: ergo: he made them not. Ans. If the proposition be generall, it is false. For the Lord made all things for himselfe, the vvic∣ked also against the day of euill. Pr. 16. And doth he not beare long with such? yes, he bestowes ma∣ny good things vpon them: suffers his sunne to shine vppon them, he feeds them, &c: so much for their first error. Er. 2. They expound the worde ill: it doth not signifie to induce an habilitie and fitnes &c. for seing it is the iust worke of God, it is not the induction of any such fitnes: that is, of sinne, by which the reprobates are made fitt to condemnation, as they speake, though im∣properly:
for God is not the author of sinne. Test. 3. Iude v. 4. There are crept in certen mē, appointed long since to this condemnation. Against this they obiect, the meaning of the worde  is this, described before, of whome now lōg ago, it is writtē & foretold in the pro∣pheticall scripture, that at their due time, they should inuade and disturb the church of god, & so in the ende perish euerlastingly: but this ex∣position is not true, being repugnant vnto the Apostles words, which saith flatly, men long a∣goe described before, and not of whome it is written long since in the scripture. Thus farre authoritie of scripture: now fol∣low other arguments. Arg. 1. If there are not many written in the booke of life, then there is reprobation: but many are, not Apo. 13.8. and 17.8. ergo. 2. If but few are elected, thē the rest are re∣iected: for we cānot conceiue of electiō, with∣out reprobation, one necessarily establishing the other: but the first is true. Mat. 20.16. ergo. Obiect. There is an homony my in the word Elect: Christ Iesus there calleth elect, sincere, the true and liuely members of the church, as choise gold, that is pure, and tried. Ans. Though they take elect in that sense: yet it cannot a∣gree but to those that are predestinated to eternall life, for they are onely true and sin∣cere: nay if we stand strictly vpon this signifi∣catiō, there is no mā liuing that shalbee elect, because so long as they liue in this body, none
is without greatstore of drosse and refuse. 3. If God hath not mercie vppon all, then there is a reprobation: but he hath not. Ex. 33.19. I will be gracious to whome J will be gracious, and haue mercie on whom I will haue mercie. This place doth the Apostle bring in the misterie of pre∣destination. Rom. 9.15. What shall we say then? is there any vnrighteousnes vvith God? God forbid, for he saith to Moses, I vvill haue mercie on whome I will haue mercie &c, Ergo: there is a reprobatiō. Ob. 1. Ro. 11.32. God hath concluded all vnder contumacie, that he might haue mercie on all. Ans. Paul doth not gainesay vs. For this ge∣nerall particle is vnderstood one way in my ar∣gument, and another way in him: we meane al & euery one, none excepted, but Paul means al that beleeue, or that are to be saued, not only of the gentiles, but also of the Iewes: that they obtaine saluatiō no way but only by the mercy of God: that there is nothing in man, for which he should be saued, the gentiles haue no priui∣ledge ouer the Iewes; for looke how many so e∣uer are saued, are saued by the meere mercie of god. Therfore they shew their ignorance that stretch the vniuersall particle to another mea∣ning then Paul doth: but yet they will confesse themselues, that God hath not mercy on all actually. Ob. 2. The Lords words to Moses do not proue▪ the opinion of absolute decree, but to cōfue the wicked grudging of the Iewes, who falsly iudged, Gods iustice was called into question
if he denied the reward of eternall blessednes to their labour and trauell. Ans. 1. They cauill in the word (absolute de∣cree) for they imagine, that we call absolute de∣cree, an inordinate decree: wherein the whole order of election, is distracted from election it selfe, and the order of saluation is not inclu∣ded in election, but is vnder the same onely in the executiō. But we call it an absolute decree, because the efficient cause thereof is not the condition of faith foreseene, or of merits fore∣knowne, but the onely will and pleasure of God. 2. They begg the question, saying those words do not belong to the secret of predesti∣nation: the text doth prooue the contrary: for Paul taught a little before, that al are not Isra∣elites that descend of the father Israel, not all sonnes that are the seede of Abraham: that is, that all are not elect that are borne of the holy seed: this he prooued 1. by the example of the sonnes of Abraham, of whome none but Isaac was chosen, Israel being reiected. . of Isaacs sonnes, of whome Iacob alone was chosen. For when the children were yet vnborne, before they had done either good or ill, that the purpose of God that is according to election, not of workes but of him that calleth should stand fast, t was saide to Rebecca their mother, the elder shall serue the yonger, as it is vv∣tten, Iacob haue I loued, and Esau haue J hated: that is, that Esau was reiected from euerlasting, and the signe of this reprobation was, that hee
should serue his yonger brother. Nowe against this doctrine carnall reason obiects this. If god respected neither good nor ill deeds in electi∣on or reprobation, then there is vnrighteous∣nes with him. This consequence Paul denies saying: God forbidd. And he sets downe the rea∣son of this negation, taken from the ende: be∣cause whomsoeuer God hath chosen, he chose for the declaration of his mercie in them, and whomesoeuer hee reiected, it was to declare his power in them. 4. If he hardens whome he will, there is a reprobation: but he doth Rom. 9.18. 5. If most men take the broad waye to de∣struction, they are reprobated: but they doe. Mat. 7.13. 6. If at the last day many shall not bee ta∣ken but be left, then they are reprobated: but that is true. Mat. 24.40. But why shall this bee so, because euerlasting predestination hath so appointed it. Act. 15.18. Gods works are knowne vnto him from euerlasting. Eph. 1.11. Hee worketh all things by the councell of his owne will. 7. If some be called to Christ by the prea∣ching of the gospell, and other not, then there is reprobation: but some are and for experi∣ence shewes it, Christians are called, but many thousands of Turks, Tartars, and other heathen people neuer heard of Christ. 8.  christians some repēt & are saued, o∣ther remaine & die in their sinnes, then &c. ergo.
9. Some waxe hard Rom. 11.7. The elect ob∣tained it, but the rest are growne hard: ergo: there is reprobation. 10. None shall enter into the heauenly church, that commit any abominable thing or speake lies, and Apoc. 21.17. Ergo: it is certaine there is an eternal reprobation. 11. Euerie plant vvhich the heauenlie father hath not planted shalbee rooted out. Mat. 15.13. Ergo. And thus wee haue sufficiently prooued that there is an eternall reprobation: now to aun∣swer the false arguments, which the aduersaries bring against it. We are all by nature the children of wrath: ergo:Adv. 1. arg. there are no vessels prepared to destructi∣on. Ans. 1. The consequent is blasphemous, flatt contrary to the holy ghost. Rom. 9.22. say∣ing there are. 2. it doth not follow, but rather the contrary (viz.) therefore all by nature are prepared to destruction, and that is true: but whereas some are elected to be deliuered frō the generall destruction, it is the grace of God that electeth. 2. The waye to remoue the enuie of others destruction from God, is to make no reproba∣tion. Ans. 1. Although wee make a reprobation, yet shall not the enuie of the others destructi∣on rest in God, seeing whosoeuer perish, they may thank thēselues. For saluation is Gods. Ps. 3.
vlt. 2. Paul labours not greatly, to excuse God with a lie, but onely giues warning that it is not lawfull for the clay to choppe lo∣gicke with the potter, nor the creature with the Creator. 3 VVhome God doth in great gentlenes indure, he hath not reprobated: but he doth tolerate the vessells of wrath: ergo. Ans. The proposition is true of the repentant onely. The assumption speaks of those that are not repen∣tant. Besides they gold Pauls words; for he addes, vessells of wrath that are made to destruction. Lastly, Paul doth not ascribe that patience to God, whereby he looketh for their conuersion; whō he saies are made to destruction. For well saith August. l. 5. c. 5. against Iulian, expounding this place: where power of suffering is set downe, that God doth not let, but moderate with his might. 4 They that are not prepared of God to destruction, are not reprobate: but the vessells of wrath are not, Rom. 9.23. Of the vessells of mercie indeede Paul saies, God hath prepared them to glorie, but of the vessels of wrath, it is not said that God prepared them, but onely that they are prepared, namely of themselues, to destruction. Ans. The assumption is not denied. 2. The place quoted doth not pertaine to the matter: seeing Paul denies not that God prepares them, nor saies they prepare thēselues. 3. How grosse is it that any bodie should make himself to destruction, as if any made thēselues. 4. The
comparing the members togither shewes that both are the workes of God: the place in the Acts puts it out of controuersie, Act. 13.48. where it is passiuely spoken of the elect that they were ordained to eternall life. and Prov. 16.4. God made all men for himselfe, euen the wicked also for the euill day: ergo Reprobation stands, their obiections notwithstanding. The effici∣ent cause of Reprobati∣The efficient principall cause of eternall re∣probation is God, for he refuseth all that are not elect. Ier. 6.30. the Lord reiected them. A∣gainst which they oppose. Obiect. 1. The beginning of so great a mis∣chiefe is not from God. God is not the author of euill. but this is euill. Ans. 1. The proposition is not generally true, but onely of the euill of sinne. 2. The as∣sumption is false. Obiect. 2. God is not delighted with the destruction of a sinner, Ezek. 18.23. and 32. Psal. 5.5. Wisd. 1.13. ergo he is not the author of eternall reprobation. Ans. 1. The proposition that is wanting is false for the elench of the wrōg cause: because it supposeth that the delight of the destruction of the wicked is the cause for which God reie∣cted them. 2. The assumption must be taken but in part: for God is not delighted with their destruction as it is destruction, but as it is the execution of his iust iudgement. 3. There is an homonymie in the place alleadged out of Ezekiel: for there God speakes of the wicked
that is conuerted; with his death he is not de∣lighted, nor wills his death. Therefore it is not truly cited of the destruction of the reprobate, who neuer turne, and of whome the holy Ghost pronounceth the cleane contrarie, Pro. 1.24. I will laugh at your destruction, &c. 4. The place out of the Psalme is impertinent: for is eternall reprobation, vanitie, or iniquitie? 5. To the place out of Wisdome, the answer to Ezekiel will serue. The moouing cause for which eternall re∣probation was made, is not sinne: for the bet∣ter vnderstanding whereof, I will explane this position. Whomsoeuer God condemneth and punish∣eth with eternall death, those he decreed to condemne euerlastingly & punish with death, so that the immediat cause of damnation and punishment is sinne. But this is not now the question, but onely what is the cause of the de∣cree, why God when he foresaw that all men would be sinners alike in Adam, and by nature the children of wrath, determined to shew his mercie in the one, & to leaue the other in their sinnes and condemne them for the same? there can be no other cause tendred of it, but Gods pleasure only. Yet more plainly. Why did God choose the one, and refuse the other, that is, de∣creed to cast off them, to leaue them in their sinnes, and for their sinnes to condemne them, when as the Elect should haue bin no lesse the children of wrath by nature then all other? I
answer, because it so pleased him. It can not be answered it was for sinne, because sinne was to be in the elect also. If here any doe obiect, that there is a difference betweene the elect and the reprobate, because the elect were to declare their repentance, and to beleeue firmely and constantly in Christ, and so were not the re∣probate, yet that doth not take away my an∣swer. For still the question remaines, why God gaue vnto the elect the gift of repentance and constant faith, and not to the reprobate? Whereunto no other answer can be made but this, that it pleased God so. As that onely ma∣ster of ours teacheth vs, Math. 11.25. I giue thee glorie O father, Lord of heauen and earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast reuealed them to babes: euen so O Father, be∣cause it was thy good pleasure before thee. Hence we see how vniustly our aduersaries doe slaunder our doctrine, saying, that wee teach, that God by a certaine kinde of abso∣lute decree, hath ordained some to eternall destruction, without any respect of sinne, or regarde of vnbeleefe and vnrepentance. Whereas we teach, that God hath reprobated, that is, decreed to leaue the reprobate in the destruction, whereinto they should volunta∣rily plunge themselues, and to condemne them for sinne, and punish them with euerlasting punishment. He decreed, I say, to condemne and punish for sinne. This did Zanchius plainely teach, lib. 5. de
natura Dei, cap. 2. and lib. 3. of his Miscellan. pag. 53. of the edition set forth 1592. So doe the Palatine Diuines, as the admo∣nition of Neustad witnesseth, pag. 313. de for∣mula Concordia. Their words are these: VVee teach with the Apostle that God in the con∣demning of the reprobates will declare his iustice, and therefore hath not allotted any to condemnation but for sinne, and doth not will damnation, as it is damnation, but as it is a most iust punishment. And punishment hath no place, but where sinne goes before. But in the Elect he would declare his mercie, because when he might very iustly cast away all mankinde, for the sinne whereinto they were falne, (for all of vs were the children of wrath as well as other) of his onely meere mercie, he determined to take some out of the common destruction, that euery mouth might be stopped, and all the glorie be giuen to God. The very same doth Luther, Calvin, Mar∣tyr, Beza, Bucer, and other excellent Diuines teach. Although God decreed to reprobate, and condemne, & punish for sinne those that were reprobated, yet is not sinne the cause of the decree. And that I prooue by these reasons. 1. Arg. If Esaus reprobation was decreed, before he was borne and had done either good or ill, then sinne is not the efficient cause of the decree of reprobation: but the first is
true: ergo. Rom. 9.11. prooues the first. re∣moouing both Iacobs good works and Esaus ill from beeing the efficient cause of reproba∣tion. 1 Obiect. The aduersaries obiect, that this place is not so much to be vnderstood of Iacob and Esau, as of the people that were borne of them, which they prooue because the places of Moses and Malachie that are alleadged talke of the people of Israel and Idumea, or the po∣steritie of Iacob and Esau. Ans. 1. They cauill of set purpose. For they doe not answer the place of Paul, which I brought to confirme mine argument, namely, when the children were yet vnborne, and before they had done either good or ill. Let them say that the Apostle remooues not away both Esaus ill works and Iacobs good ones. Here is the pith of mine argument, let them hamstring this si∣new if they can or dare. 2. They passe by this argument with silence, and obiect against the two testimonies alleadged by Paul, as if the argument of proofe had beene fetched from them, and so gainesay Pauls words, who most certenly speakes of Iacobs and Esaus persons. vers. 10. Neither did he onely (saith he) but Rebec∣ca also, when shee had conceiued by one, namely our father Isaac, had experience of the same. I pray of whome did shee goe then, not of Esau and Iacob? the same is cleare by vers. 11. for before the children were yet borne, or euer they had done ei∣ther good or ill. Of what children doth he speak?
of Esau and Iacob. 3. They refute them∣selues wherein they saide, that Paul speakes not so much of Esau, as of his posteritie, when they say when Esau was a type of the repro∣bate Iewes. If Esau was here brought in as a type of the reiected nation of the Iewes, what neede they in Esaus name, vnderstand Edu∣means or posteritie of Esau? Againe, he that takes the words of the Prophet, Malach. 1.2, 3. to be vnderstood of their posteritie, and not of Esaus and Iacobs owne persons, doe iniurie to the text. 2 Obiect. This place of Paul may not be vn∣derstood of eternall election or reprobation, because else it should necessarily follow, that not onely Iacob was absolutely predestinated to eternall saluation, but also the whole peo∣ple that descended of him. And againe, that not onely Esau was simply reiected from the grace of God, but that all his posteritie every one was simply reprobates. For the testimonies which Paul brings to prooue his purpose, speake of the people that issued from these fa∣thers. But these consequences were absurd, be∣cause all Iacobs posteritie were not saued, nor yet all Esaus condemned. Therefore. Ans. 1. It is false that this place of Pauls is not to be vnderstood of eternall election or reprobation. For he speakes so plainely that none that is well in his wittes can denie it. When the children were yet vnborne, &c. that the
purpose of God which is according to Election, not of workes, but of him that calleth, should stand sure. Now graunting there is Election, we must needes allo graunt Reprobation, because there is no election without reprobation. 2. It doth not follow: for those absurdities doe not ensue by graunting our opinion, be∣cause v. 11. out of which the argument of our reason is fetch, speaks of their persons and not of their posteritie, but they deale not with vs as if we disputed out of Moses, Gen. 25. and Malach. 1. 3. In the application of our authorities, v. 12. & 13. they accuse not vs but Paul, as if he had wrongly drawne it vnto their persons, which the seat it selfe (as they fondly speake) doth shew it should be referred to the people which came of them. As if they were better in∣terpreters of Moses and Malachie then the A∣postle Paul, and that which he applieth to their persons, did not indeede belong to them, but to both postetities. But to the ende that Pauls applying of it may be thoowly vnderstood, we must obserue 3. axiomes very behoouefull for the interpre∣tation of this Scripture. Ax. 1. Corporall and temporatie matters promised vnto the fathers in the old testamēt, were types and sacraments of greater matters, euen of spirituall and eternall. 2 The things that God ioyned wich his pro∣mises, no man may plucke asunder, but he
ioyned spirituall and eternall thinges with corporall and temporall: ergo not to bee seue∣red. 3. Pauls vse is to comprise the question or the sentence to bee confirmed and the confir∣mation thereof both together in the testimo∣nie he alleadgeth, so that omitting the sentēce to be confirmed, he sets downe the testimonie onely, because there in the sentence to be con∣firmed is contained also. Now I will annex the reason of Pauls application; because that the chiefe or greater part of the Iewes being puft vpp with the title of the church set at naught the gospell of Iesus Christ, the faith of many simple men beganne to faint, who among the gentiles had imbraced the gos∣pell: because they thought it not likelie that Iesus Christ and the saluation in him promi∣sed could possiblie bee reiected of the elected people, the holy nation and naturall Israe∣lites. Therefore Paule to arme the weaker sort against this scandall, giues them to witt: that none of the beleeuers ought to bee of∣fended, that all the Israelites did not imbrace the gospell and beleeue in Christ Iesus, be∣cause they were reiected: which reiection on some good reason hee sets downe very ob∣scurely. Romaines 9.1.2.3. then ver. 6. there is an occupation, wherein hee meets with this obiection. Jf the nation of the Jevves bee reiected, then the vvorde of God is fallen to the grounde: that is, his promise that hee made
to Abraham is made voide, whereby he adop∣ted his posteritie into a people to himselfe. Paul denies the cōsequence, and saies the pro∣mise is not annihilated, because all are not Israel that are of the father Israel. that are of the father Israel. We must vnderstand there are two houses of Iacob, one of flesh and blood the other borne of the spirit and faith saith Iustine Martyr in his dialogue with Try∣pho the Iew. Now the promise belongs to the sonnes that were borne of the spirite and faith, and not to the sonnes of the flesh: and this hee proueth by two like examples. 1. The first is of Abrahams children, of whom Isaac was onely counted for his sonne: and lest any man should surmise, that this dif∣ference stretched no further then Isaac and Is∣mael onely, the Apostle sets downe the gene∣rall application. Those are not the children of God that are the children of the flesh, but they that are the children of the promise are accounted in the seede. 2. The second example is of Esau and Ia∣cob: who albeit they were borne of Isaac the sonne of the promise, both of one mother and at one birth, not at diuers as Ismael and Isaac were, yet onely Iacob was chosen and Esau was reiected. The time of the reiection is described in these words: when the children were yet vnborn: that is before shee was deliuered: then their works are denied to bee the efficient cause of Iacobs election and Esaus reprobatiō, in these words when they had done neither good nor ill: ergo:
good works were not the cause of choosing Ia∣cob, norill works the cause of casting of Esau. And thus doth Augustine expound this place tom. 7. in his booke of the predestination of the Saints cap. 16. But we come back to little ones, to twins, to them (if that be two little) that were yet vnborne: who were begot both at one time, and to bee borne both at one instant. The diuers and discrepant iudgement of Gods will appears in them: vvhere the deepnes of the question vvill trouble the sence of men, that argue to proudly of the vvill of God. Exalt thy voice vvith all thy power now thou vniust accuser of the iust, and tell me what harme he did, what good the other: and Paul shall answer thee not I, neither of them had deserued any thing, but the potter hath power ouer the clay, to make of the same lump, one vessel to honor, another to dishonor. Then is set downe the end why their works must not bee accounted the cause of election and reprobation, (viz.) that the purpose of God which is according to election, not of works but of him that calleth, should remaine firme. After that Esaus reiection is hereby proued, for that albeit hee were the elder brother, yet he was giuen to be his brothers seruant, according to the diuine oracle extant Gen. 25.23. But as Pauls stile is concise and briefe, the sentence concerning the difference betweene Iacob and Esau is in∣cluded in the testimonie that he citeth out of Genesis: when they were yet vnborne &c. as if hee should haue said: the elder was reiected & the younger elected, as it was said to Rebecca. The
elder shall serue the younger. Obiect. But this application of this oracle may seeme vnseasonable for two causes. 1. Because that speaks of the whole peo∣ple, whereas Paul deals but of Esau and Iacob onely. 2. That speakes but of corporall seruitude or Lordship, but Paul of their spirituall condi∣tion. Ans. For the first, wee are to learne that the oracle speaks so of two peoples as not excluding their beginners: nay comprehen∣deth-them in their authors. For to speake pro∣perly the two nations themselues were not in Rebeccaes wombe, but onely their authors: therefore that which the oracle spake of the na∣tions, Paul did rightly applye to their begin∣ners: because the triall and truth ought to bee exhibited in the authors and heads of the na∣tions themselues. Therefore Isaac-saies to E∣sau Gen. 27.39. Behold I haue made him thy Lord. Now for the second, the truth is, the ora∣cle soundes of the externall prerogatiue of the birthright and possession of the land of Canaan, translated vnto Iacob and of the cor∣poral seruitude wherein the posteritie of Esau was subiect to the posteritie of Iacob, but it doth not exclude spirituall and internall mat∣ters. For the translation of the birthright and title of possessing the land of Canaan vnto Iacob, and Iacobs dominion ouer Esau, and
Esaus seruitude, was a tipe of a greater thing, namely of Iacobs spirituall election, and E∣saus reprobation: that is, that Iacob was e∣lected, both to bee the heire of eternall life, as also to bee the enlarger of the church, so that his posteritie possessed the name and ti∣tle of the church and enioyed the preroga∣tiue of the couenant of grace. And on the other side that Esau was reiected, both from the inheritance of eternall life, and also from the societie of the church: and therefore that his offspring the Idumeans should bee cut from the body of the church. So doeth Au∣gustine expound this place of election or pre∣destination to honor. lib. de praedest. & gra. cap. 9. saying, that the blessed Apostle, speaking a little aboue of the iudgement of Gods power in mens election, confirmed it with impregna∣ble examples, where hee spake of Rebeccaes child bearing and issue yet within her bellie, referring the whole matter to Gods grace: and he concludes the chapter thus, he saieth not of workes before going, but when hee saide generally not of vvorkes, there he would haue vs vnderstand both past and to come: past which were not at all; to come, which were not yet. Iacob was predestinated a vessell to honor, because not of vvorkes, but of him that calleth i voi saide, the elder shall serue the younger. VVhat could Saint Augustine haue spoke more plainly? for out of the verie ora∣cle
the elder &c. hee concludes, that Iacob was predestinated a vessel vnto honor. The like he doth de praedest. sanct. cap. 16. and again in his booke de correp. & gra. cap. 7. Obiect. If that oracle must bee vnderstood of election and reprobation, then all Iacobs posteritie were elected and all Esaus reiected: but they were out: ergo: Ans. The connex is vntrue, for it followes not, if Iacob be elected vnto life, that al his po∣sterity must needs be so: because election doth not depend vpon the carnall generation of Ia∣cob, but of the freewil of god electing whome he will: likewise againe it is not necessary that al Esaus sonnes should be reprobates, because of the same reason: for that reprobation doth not depend vpon the carnall generation, but of the iust will of God. Obiect. But neither Rebecca not Esau vn∣derstood that oracle (the elder shall serue the yon∣ger) of Esaus eternall reprobatiō, no more must we: and much lesse, that he was by Gods most absolute will and decree neuer more to bee re∣pealed, adiudged to the punishment of hel fire eternally: and this is good for two reasons. 1. because if Isaac and Rebecca, by the illumina∣tion of Gods spirit, had thought the oracle cō∣cerning the children yet vnborne must bee vn∣derstood, how could it possiblie be, that they should not be vtterly swallowed vpp and kild vp with such vnspeakable griefe, if they had
though that there little babie dandled on his mothers lapp, and sucking at her brest had bin by force of the oracle a firebrand of hell, in so much as that all meanes of grace and saluati∣on had beene barred vpp against him most in∣fallibly, and that for no other cause in the worlde, but because God would haue it so? and ergo the mother vnderstood it not thus. 2. Because Isaac, or rather the verie spirit of God, professedly expounding the oracle Gen. 27. did not vnderstand it of eternall reprobati∣on. Ans. 1. They deale sophistically by many captious interrogations as if they were al one: for in this consequent there are two questions put for one. The first of which onely pertaines to the controuersie now in hand: the second is nothing to the purpose & detractory: because by the simple will and vnchangeable decree of God, whereby Esau is adiudged to hell fire, they vnderstand according to their manner, to be ordained to damnation without respect of sinne: but we hold that god hath adiudged none to dam∣nation, but onely for sinne: therefore auaunt with this slaunder. 2. The proposition that is lest out doth not follow, if Rebecca and Isaac did not vnderstād the oracle so, then we must not: for all things were not so plainely deliuered to the faithfull in the old restament, as they are in the new: ergo though Isaac and Rebecca did not fully knowe the meaning of it, yet Paul did, whome we fol∣low,
as a most true interpreter of the old testa∣ment. 3. But Rebecca and Isaac did vnderstand it so, as for the proofes they proue it not. For the first is but a meere and idle florish of rheto∣rike, and an exaggeration of the sorrowe which Isaac and Rebecca should haue taken if they had vnderstood the oracle of eternall re∣probation, and such as would greatly moue pitie in seelie women, that can easily shedd teares very tēderly for any thing, but not such as truely beleeue, and reuerently submit them∣selues vnto the will of God; as Isaac and Re∣becca did, without grudging or resisting gods will. What? did not Abraham vnderstand that Ismael was excluded from the earthly inheri∣tance and therewithall from the inheritance of eternall life? and yet he died not for griefe: Did not Dauid knowe that Absolom was the childe of hel, and yet was neuer swallowed vp with sorrow for the matter? wee must not bee more mercifull then God, but with reuerence approue his good will, though it seeme some∣what hard to flesh & blood. The second proofe beggs the question, as if Isaac when he blessed Iacob, had his minde setled vpon corporal and temporall matters onely, and had not rather his eye vpon spirituall and eternal, as we col∣lect Heb. 11.20. Where the Apostle bringeth the exāple of Isaac, by faith blessing his sonnes of future matters; thereby to proue the nature of sauing faith which is not fixed vpon earthly
but heauenly things. Obiect. Yet Esau in Paul is brought in not for an example of eternall reprobation, but for a type of the reprobate people of the Iewes: arguing thus, he that was a type, &c. is not an example of reprobation. Ans. 1. The proposition is false, and such an other as this; He that was a type of Iudas the betraier as Doeg was, is not an example of betraying. Doeg both was a type and the man himselfe: and so was Esau. 2. They diprooue their assumption themselues, saying the per∣son of Esau is not so much meant in this place, as the people that sprong of him. For if the E∣domices be here meant by Esau, how then is Esau here put for a type of the reiected Israe∣lites? if they say the Edomites are also by him vnderstood, this answer is not worth a rush. For if by Esau all his posteritie be vnderstood that were ingaged to be slaues to Iacob and his posteritie, and reiected from the lande of Canaan, it will follow that all were seruants: which is false. For Esaus posteritie was first of all subdued by Dauid and brought into bon∣dage, 2. Sam. 8.13. whereas beforetime they had bin free, and their kings no others vassals. Neither did they euer serue, because the Edo∣mites shooke off the yoke of bondage and seruitude vnder Ioram the sonne of Iosaphat, 2. King. 8.20. as Isaac prophecied, Gen. 27.40. yea and that which is more then so, Herod the Edumean and his posteritie
ruled and raigned afterward in the lande of Ganaan. 3. If the assumption were true, that is, that Esau was a type of the people of the Iewes that was so to be reiected, then can it not be denied but that Esau himselfe was a re∣probate. They prooue their obiection thus: Ismael also was cast out of his fathers house, and in him there was a type shadowing out that my∣sterie that the people of the Iewes should one day be reiected: but who would hereupon inferre, that Ismael was reiected by euerla∣sting reprobation from saluation? Ans. Marrie that doth Paul, Galat. 4.30. What saies the Scrip∣ture? cast out the bondman and her sonne, for the sonne of the bondwoman shall not be heire with the sonne of the free: but the barring from the earth∣ly inheritance, was a signe & token of barring from the heauenly. 2 Obiect. That by this place of Paul we are not to gather Esaus eternall reprobation, is cleare by the very manner of applying this type of Iacob and Esau to his purpose. For thus hee would say. Euen as the title of the birthright and the promise of possessing the land, did not depend vpon workes, as it did not vpon this carnall priuiledge, that Esau was elder then Iacob, but vpon free election, by which, not of workes (which the children yet vnborne could haue none of, neither good nor badde,) but of him that called it was said, The elder shall serue the younger. So againe in
the type, (the inheritance of eternall life) we must not thinke is theirs, that stand vpon their carnall generation and natiuitie of Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, or seeke saluation in their workes: but the inheritance is theirs, who neither vaunt of their workes, nor bragge of their carnall prerogatiue from Abraham, but put their whole trust and affiance of their righ∣teousnesse and saluation in the free mercie of God. This is Pauls onely drift in this place, and not any other thing contrarie hereun∣to. Ans. This instance is false, foolish, and hangs not together. False, first because Paul doth not in this manner applie those things he spake of Esau and Iacob, to his purpose, but the cleane contrarie way. For this is Pauls proposition in the 6. verse, Not all that are of the father Israel, are Israel: that is, not all that de∣riue their pedigree from Israel, are to be num∣bred among the true Israelites, or all the po∣steritie of the Patriarke Iacob, are in truth the sonnes of Iacob. This the Apostle prooueth by two very like examples: first, because all the sonnes of Abraham, are truly sonnes: se∣condly, not all the sonnes of Isaac and Rebec∣ca, are sonnes in deede. And thus doth the Apostle applie them. As all the sonnes of Isa∣ac and Rebecca are not truly sonnes, so not all that are of the father Israel, are true Israe∣lites, or truly the sonnes of Israel. That all the sonnes of Isaac and Rebecca are truly sonnes
he prooueth by the adiuncts, because one of them, that is, Iacob was elect, the other, to wit, Esau, was reiected. And shewes that the tran∣slating of the birthright vpon Iacob, was the testimonie of his election, as also his Lordship ouer Esau, and the taking away of the birth∣right from Esau, and giuing him to be a bond∣setuant vnto Iacob, was a signe of Esaus reie∣ction. And the cause of Gods disposing mat∣ters after this order, by which meanes Esau was reiected and Iacob elected, he saith was not their workes, either good or ill. 2. It is false for so consitruing the priuiledge of the birth∣right, as if there were nothing else meant thereby, but onely the inriching Iacob with earthly blessings, and depriuing of Esau of temporall commodities, without any respect had vnto the heauenly. And so that Iacobs faith was fixed but onely vpon temporall things, which is very absurd. 2 It cannot stand. For it saies that the pro∣mise of possessing the land did not depend on workes, as neither on this carnall priuiledge that Esau was the elder brother; seeing that promise was made to Iacob, how can the re∣moouing away of Iacobs works & Esaus pre∣rogatiue of the flesh stand both together? ther∣fore they should haue said thus, that the pro∣mise of possessing the land, did not depend on Iacobs good works, nor yet was hindred by Esaus carnall priuiledge, because Esau was the elder. And not that it did not depend theron.
3 It is also friuolous and foolish: making the inheritance of eternall life a type: but of what can they tell? so doltish they are, that they know not what they say or asseuere. They say the inheritance of eternall life is , that is, the very truth of the type say they. But I say  and  are simply taken for the same thing in the Scripture, Heb. 9.24. the ho∣ly things made with hands are called  of the true ones, that is, types. Sometimes, for a new type agreeing with the old in the ende or scope, 1. Pet. 3.21. baptisme is called  of the deluge, that is, a type answering, sig∣nifying, and sealing the same thing: but neuer of the thing it selfe signed, or the truth of the type. So these men are both absurd Diuines and foolish grammarians. If they had but loo∣ked vpon Bezaes larger notes on the new te∣stament, there they might haue learned the exposition of this word: but they are ashamed to learne, and will rather say any thing, be it neuer so false or foolish then yeelde to the truth. And thus farre in defence of the first argu∣ment, shewing that the cause of the decree of reprobation is not sinne. Nowe followe more. 2. Arg. Sinne is not the cause of the eter∣nall will of God: but the decree of reprobati∣on is the eternall will of God: therefore sinne is not the cause of the decree of reprobation. The proofe of the maior is, because the eter∣nall
will of God is the first and highest cause o¦ther wise it were not, but sinne should be be∣fore it: for euery efficient cause is before the effect. August. tom. 1. lib. 1. de genesi contra Ma∣nich. cap. 2. If the will of God hath any cause, some∣thing goes before it: which is grosse to surmise. 2. Because Gods will dependeth on no superiour cause. 3 That which was from euerlasting hath not sinne for the efficient cause, for nothing that began to be in time can be the efficient to that which was from eternal: but the decree of reprobation was from eternall: ergo. 4 Whatsoeuer is after the decree of repro∣bation in time, is not the efficient cause of the decree: sinne is after it in time: ergo. Obiect. Though sinne be after it in time, yet it may be the cause thereof, because with God nothing is past or to come, but all things are present actually. Ans. If this be a good argument, so is that: Because with God there is nothing past or to come, therefore good workes is the efficient cause of election, how soeuer in time it comes after it. 5 If sinne be the cause of the eternal decree of reprobation, it followes that either all men are reprobated to euerlasting death, because all are by nature the children of wrath, for  haue sinned and are depriued of the glorie of God; or else that the elect are not subiect to sinne, or else are better then other in nature, and there
sore for their dignitie and merits are not repro∣bate: both which are absurd and contrarie to the Scripture: therefore. 6 If sinne be the cause of the decree of re∣probation, merits are the cause of the decree of election: but that is not so: ergo. this is Luthers reason, Tom. 6. printed at VVittenberge, fol. 532. pag. 2. 7 If it proceedes originally out of eternall predestination, who shall not beleeue, nor be deliuered from sinne, then surely the efficient cause of that predestination is not vnbeleefe nor any other sinne: but the antecedēt is true: ergo. Luther saith it in his Dutch preface vpon the epistle to the Romans. 8 If God hath decreed reprobation of his meere free will and good pleasure, then surely sinne is not the cause of the decree: but the first is true. For if God decreed to conceale his sauing knowledge from the wise and pru∣dent, for no other cause in the world but his owne free pleasure, then he decreed their re∣probation also, onely of his meere pleasure. For there is no other cause of hiding the grace Euangelicall from worldly men, then there is of reiecting the same. But the first is true, Math. 25.26. Therefore the last also. 9 If sinne were the cause of eternall repro∣bation, many absurdities would thereof insue. 1. Paul had erred, vrging this expressely, whē they had done neither good nor ill. 2. His answers had bin friuolous to the fol∣lowing
obiections, as first: If God reiected Esan because he hated him, he is vniust: secondly, why is yet displeased, for who hath resisted his will? for the readiest answer had bin this, to haue said sinne was the cause of Esaus and Pharaos reprobation. But he is so farre from betaking himselfe to this answer, that by preuention he cut the throat of it, saying, when as yet they had done neither good nor ill, and commanding vs to rest in the sole will of God. Thirdly, God should be curbed, that he should not haue free power to doe with his owne what he wil, and at his owne pleasure to make himselfe a vessell, wherein to shew his wrath and exhibit an example of his power. 10 The orthodoxall fathers, Augustine, Ierome, Prosper, Fulgentius, Bernard, nay and the very schoolemen themselues, Peter Lom∣bard, Thomas Aquinas, Gregorius Arimi∣nensis and Durandus: yea both Luther and some of his owne sectaries (I speake this for the Lutherans sakes) doe prooue that the cause of eternall reprobation is not sinne: for bre∣uities sake I will here alleadge but some of them. Augustine, tom. 4. lib. 1. ad Simplicianum, quast. 2. pag. 447. in Frobens print, saith, If because God foreknew Esaus euill workes, therfore he predestinated him to serue his yoūger brother, for that cause also he predestinated Iacob to haue dominion ouer his elder brother, because he knew his works would be goods. And again
to hate Esau but for merit of iniustice, is vniust: but graunt that once, and we shall haue Iacob begin to be loued for his merit of righteous∣nes: which if it be true, thē is that false, that not of works: And by and by after, why vvas Esau yet vnborne disliked: when he could neither beleeue him that called him, nor yet contemne his cal∣ling, nor worke either good or il, without gods foreknowledge that his will would be euill: which if you graint once, that any could be li∣ked or disliked, for that which yet was not in time, but onely because god knew before hād that it would be, it will follow, that he could be liked for his works also which God foresawe be in him, albe it yet he had done nothing. A∣gain in his Ench. ad Laur. cap. 98. it is in all mens iudgements an vniust matter, that without the merits of good or euill works, god should loue one & hate another: here, if he would haue the ones good works, & the other ill bin mēt, which God foreknew, he would neuer haue said, not of works: but, of future works, and so would haue assoiled that questiō, or rather haue made no question that should neede the assoyling. The like he saith tom. 2. Epist. 105. ad Sixt. pag. 305. It is straūge, whē they are pinched with these straits, into what downfals they cast thēselues: being afraide of the vessels of trueth: for this cause (say the Pelagians) before they were borne he hated the one & loued the other, be∣cause be foresaw their future deeds: who doth
not wonder that the Apostle was so ouershort: for he thought not of this, when as it were the aduersatie popt him in the mouth with this question, hee did not aunswere thus brieflie, plainely, soundlie and easilie. And a little af∣ter. Whatshall we say then? is there iniquitie with God? God forbid: but why God forbid? for the works which he knew both should do∣no, God forbid this too. Therefore it is the heresie of the Pelagi∣ans, that God did elect or reiect men for their workes good or ill foreseene, by Augustines iudgement, whome we are bound to credit more then a companie of vpstarts, of yester∣daies growth as Tertullian calls them contra prax. cap. 2. Peter Lombard lib. 1. dist. 41. cap. 1. Then se∣ing there are no merites of the grace which is laid before a man to iustification, much lesse of predestination it selfe, whereby god eternally elected whom he would, can there be any me∣rits: so nether of reprobation, whereby he fore∣knew from eternall, that some would bee euill and condemned, as he elected Iacob and reie∣cted Esau, which was not for the merits which they then had, because they had none, for they thēselues were not, nor for their future works which he foresaw, either elected he the one or cast of the other. Thomas Aquinas 1. par. quest. 23. art. 5. and pan. 5. quest. 6. art. 2. euidently proues that there is no cause besides his will onely, why he chose
the one or refused the other: and so doth Lu∣ther Tom. 6. in Wittenberg print. fol. 532. pag. 2. And thus farre we haue shewed that sinne is not the cause of reprobation: now we must dismember our aduersaries forces, maintai∣ning the contrary opinion. Hose 13.9. Thy destruction is of thy selfe O I∣srael: ergo sinne is the cause of eternall reproba∣tion. Ans. The place alleadged is wrongly tran∣slated: for in the Heb. it is thus. Shicethca Iisrael chi bi beezreca: that is, it hath destroyed thee (meaning the calfe which they worshipped) O Israel, whē as in me (as) in thy help (thou stoo∣dest or shouldest haue stood firme and fast.) The Chaldie paraphrase of Ionathan expoūds it thus. When you corrupted your owne works you house of Israel the gentiles had dominati∣on ouer you: but you returned vnto the law of my word, I was your help: or thus, Thy king on whome thou didstrelie neglecting me hath vndone thee: or, thy fained comfort, as Aben Ezra giues it the he brew hath neither (thy de∣structiō) noryet (of thy selfe.) Now out of this corrected translation it is cleere, that here is no hold to ground any efficient cause vpon of the decree of reprobation, but teacheth that whether it was the calfe or their imaginrie comfort or (which better a grees with the text) their king in whome they were some what to confident, was the cause of the peoples destru∣ction
whereas contrary wise had they relied vppon the Lord they should haue had experi∣ence of his help. 2. Though the version were sound, yet they would pick out nothing else out of it but this, that the Israelites were the cause of their perdition, but eternall reprobation is neither their destruction nor cause of the same. 2. Arg. That whose be ginning is from mans homebredd naughtines, is caused of sinne: but the beginning of reprobation is such Rom. 11.20. They are broken of by vnbeleefe: ergo. Ans. 1. The assumption is not true: for the beginning of eternall reprobation is from the will of God, that would shew his power vpon man, and his great right and rule. 2. The proofe of the assumption is beside the cushion; for the assumption talks of the e∣ternall cause of reprobation: but the Apostle speaketh of the Iewes temporary barring from the church: for the oliue tree wherfrom the Iewes are brokē, is the church or people of god: now that breaking of, is their reiection from the communion of the church and people of God, made for their vnbeleefe. 3. Argu. The reprobate by repelling the word of god whereon faith ariseth, make them∣selues vnworthie of eternall life. Act. 13.46. Ergo. Ans. 1. Here is an elench of a false cause: for the making themselues vnworthie of e∣ternall
life, is not the cause of the decree of reprobation which is eternall, that in time. 2. They wrest Pauls words to a wrōg sence: for he doeth not their deliuer the cause of the decree of reprobation, but accuseth the Iewes of ingratitude, because being chosen by God out of al people, to whom the gospel of Christ the Sauiour of the world should be preached, maliciously contemned so great a blessing, and therefore iudged themselues to be vnworthie of eternall life: that is gaue sentence of them∣selues that they were not worthie of life eter∣nall. 4. Argu. That whereof the holy ghost was to condemne the world, is the cause of the de∣cree of reprobation: but that was concer∣ning sinne, as Christ Iesus witnesseth. Ioh. 16.9. Ergo. Ans. 1. The proposition is false, for sinne was a thing temporall: the cause of the other, e∣ternall. 2. They take needeles paines about proo∣uing the assumption, which none denies, and let alone the proposition that needs it more. 5. Argu. God is not the author of eter∣nall reprobation because it is euill: Ergo: sinne is. Ans. 1. The antecedent is false: and 2. the proofe thereof: for how can eternall reproba∣tion be cuil, being Gods eternall decree, as
Theodoricus Snepsius in his Theses of prede∣stination discussed at Tubing anno 1583. 6. Argu. God is not one that wills iniquitie Psal. 5.5. therefore sinne is the cause &c. Ans. Here is a rope made of sand: for the heretikes (as faieth Irencus lib. 1. contra hereses cap. 1.) la bour to make ropes of sand: they goe about to prooue their assertions, by applying either the Lords parables, or the sayings of the Prophets or speaches of the Apostles thereun∣to, least their braines childe should want co∣lour: wherein they passe ouer the order and course of the scripture, and as much as in them is, pluck a sunder the members of trueth: for they translate and transforme, and making one thing of another, deceiue a great many, with wisedome ill contriued out of the Lords words, that they pretend to their error: euen so play our aduersaries in this case: for howe hangs Dauids wordes with their cause? howe proue they it, if not thus? That which God wils not, the cause of that is sinne: but the decree of reprobation God wills not: proofe, because it is iniquitie: ergo: the cause of reprobation is sinne. Ans. 1. The proposition is not vniuersallie true: for god wil not manie things whose cause notwithstanding is not sinne, as that Christ should be an earthly king, or that thou shouldst be God, or an angell, or the monarke of the whole world. 2. The assumption is false: for when god did
reiect those he elected not, surely by the coun∣sell of his owne will he reiected them, because he doth all things by the councell of his owne will. Eph. 1.11. 3. The proofe of the assumption is false, that Gods decree is iniquitie: what fend would say this? 7. Arg. They that being inuited refused to come to the feast, the cause of their reprobati∣on is sinne: the reprobate refuse. Luc. 14.24. Ergo. Ans. There is an homonymie in the word Reprobation: for in the maior it signifies the de∣priuing of their partaking of the feast, whereof the maister of the house saith, I say vnto you that none of the men that were called shal tast of my supper, but we meane Gods eternall de∣cree. 2. if they meane so, their maior is falset of that which is done in time as the refusing of the supper cannot cause a thing that is from euerlasting. 3. Their assumption is particu∣lar where it should be generall: otherwise the conclusion must not be generall: for all repro∣bates refuse notto come, as he that came with∣out his wedding garment. 8. Arg. They that are rebellious to god that cals thē, sinne is the cause of their reprobatiō, the reprobate are so. Esay. 65.2. I stretched out my hand all the day long to are bellious people that walke in no good vvay, by following their ovvne ima ginations. Ans. There is a fallacie in the proposition
of a false cause: for rebellion is not the cause of the decree of reprobation, but consequentlie flowes from it. 2. The proposition is halfe crazie, and he confirmes the assumption. 3. The prophets words are impertinent, for the cause of reprobation is not there handled, but the Iewes wickednes: which is not said to be the cause of the decree of reprobation. 9. Argu. The reprobate contemne their calling, despise his councell, and neglect his reproofes. Pr. 1.24. Ergo: sinne is the cause &c. Ans. The proposition that is wāting is false: for those things are not the cause, but the con∣sequent of the decree of reprobation. 2. No man denies the assumption, yet that doth he prooue. 3. The place out of the Prouerbs is nothing to the matter: because Salomon doth not thereuppon in ferre, that sinne is the cause of reprobation: now impertinently to quote a place, is not at all to proue any thing. 10. Argu. The reprobate rest not in good∣nes. Rom. 11.22. Ergo: sinne is the cause of re∣iection. Ans. 1. The proposition is false, that is a∣way. 2. for the reprobate were neuer in good∣nes, but rather in bountifulnes : for so the greeke is. 3. the proofe of the assump∣tion is from the point: for Pauls words are conditionall, which put nothing in esse, ffirme nothing, but the assumption is categoricall or affirmatiue. Againe the assumption speaks of the reprobate, but Paul of the elect.
Obiect. 1. He threatens them with cutting off, and therfore speakes not of the reprobate. Ans. Though it cannot fall out that they should be cut off, yet haue they neede of such round dealing to abate the pride of their flesh: which as it is indeede contrarie to their salua∣tion, so must it be skared with feare of dāna∣tion. As thē we are elect we heare to our assu∣rance [that the gifts of god are without repentance,] but in as much as we carrie flesh about with vs, which is skittish and wanton against the grace of God, we had neede to be schooled with this commination to be humbled and shake off this drowsines of the flesh. 11 Coloss. 1.23. The reprobate are said to be instable in the faith, suffering themselues to be re∣mooued from the hope of the Gospel ergo. Ans. 1. In the proposition is a false cause, of that eternall decree: because it is tempora∣tie. 2 The assumption meant of liuely faith is false, because that hangs not for reprobates mowing; it beeing a thing they neuer had nor could haue, but the elect onely: if they meane the doctrine of faith, I yeelde. 3 The place doth not prooue it, being con∣ditionall, if you persist founded and stead fast in the faith, &c. Lastly, the assumption speakes of the reprobate, Paul of the elect. Obiect. Against the answer to the maior. Al∣though sinne be after it in time, yet is it the efficient cause of the decree of repro∣bation,
because all things are present to God, and nothing is either past or to come in his foreknowledge, or rather knowledge. Ans. The same did Pelagius obiect against the orthodoxall fathers, that maintained that Faith was not the efficient cause of election, which was before the world. Which obiecti∣on of Pelagius I would faine haue our ad∣uersaties to answer. But we will vse no other answer but that the fathers gaue him. To that Austin answers, tom. 7. lib. 1. cap. 17. de praedest. Sanct. denying that Faith foreseene or fore∣knowne was the cause of election. So doe we that sinne is of reprobation. Now if vnder pre∣tence of Gods prescience, the difference of things past, present, and to come shall be ta∣ken away, then we may conclude that all things are from euerlasting, the world, angels, men, the deuill, and sinne; because they were all present vnto God euerlastingly. Therefore now Aristotle may say the world is eternal, be∣cause it was in his prescience: the Arians may say the sonne of God was eternall, not for that he was indeede, but as in Gods prescience. See what Augustine saith, 4. tom. 1. lib. ad Simp. 2. quest. 12 If sinne be not the cause of the decree of reprobation, then God condemneth inno∣cents and those that doe not deserue it vnto death: but that is absurd: ergo. Ans. It follows not: for though sinne be not the cause of that decree, yet doth he not
iudge innocents to death vndeseruedly. For all are subiect to death by nature, and children of wrath, and cut out of a corrupt lumpe: and all that are condemned haue the cause thereof in themselues. Therefore how can they charge God with any iniurie? Therefore it standeth fast, that sinne is not the cause of the decree of reprobation: and thus farre is one false cause remooued, now to the next. Neither is Gods hate toward the reprobate the cause of the decree of reprobation.2. false cause. Obiect. Mal. 1.2. Rom. 9.13. it is saide, Iacob haue I loued, Esau haue I hated: ergo hate is the cause. Ans. The meaning of that saying is, I haue hated Esau, that is, I haue preferred Ia∣cob before him, not vouchsafing him this ho∣nour, to be a vessell to honour; I haue reiected him frō the fauour I haue bestowed on Iacob. Therfore Gods hate in this place doth not sig∣nifie a passion or disease of the mind, moouing him to some thing, which is not incident to God, but to preferre some before him, not to vouchsafe him that honour that an other hath. Luk. 14.16. If any comes to me and hates not his father, &c. that is, makes more account of his father then of me, is not worthie of me. For Christ doth not here disanull the 4. com. honour thy father, &c. In a word, the reprobation it selfe is here meant vnder the word hate; as e∣lection vnder loue. And thus haue I remooued the false moo∣uing
cause for which the decree of reprobati∣on was made, now I come to the true, whereof I say this position. The moouing cause, whereby God was in∣duced to make a decree of reprobation, is his onely , that is, meere pleasure, that is, his good and free will. The expli∣cation.Gods beneplacitum must not be restrained to his workes that concerne the elect onely (vn∣lesse it be by an excellencie sometime) but is also the cause of his workes which belong to the reprobate, Matth. 11.25. Luk. 10.21. I giue thee glorie O father, Lord of heauen and earth, &c. So that out of his good pleasure is not onely the reuealing, but also the concealing of the mysterie of the Gospel. Therefore we must not acknowledge Gods good pleasure by his benefits onely, but also by the declaring his power, right, and authoritie ouer men. What∣soeuor God wills he wills well, and whatsoe∣uer pleaseth him is good, as the very hiding of his mysteries from the wise and prudent, is his good worke. And thus we see, that it is truly saide his pleasure is cause of both de∣crees. The demō∣stration.1 The moouing or impelling cause of Gods will, is nothing but his meere will: but his eter∣nall decree of reprobation is his will: ergo the onely cause thereof is his will. The reason of the proposition is, because there is nothing without God to mooue him to will any thing. For therefore he wills because it pleaseth him.
Neither could there be any thing without him eternally to mooue him to will. 2 If Gods will onely be the cause of the decree of election, then of reprobation also: but it is the first: ergo. the consequence I make good thus, because Paul makes them equall in their cause, Rom. 9.18. of whome he will, he will haue mercie, but whome he will, he hardeneth, that is, hath not mercie: as the opposition requires and Augustine doth expound, tom. 4. lib. 1. ad Simplic. quaest. 2. The assumption hath bin prooued. 3 If Paul makes Gods will the cause of the decree of reprobation, then it is: but he doth: ergo. The antecedent is true, 1. because Paulren∣ders no other reason of Gods will, Rom. 9.18. saying, Whom he will he hardneth. nor any where else. 2. He makes this preuention of Gods will onely, thou will say vnto me, why then is he yet displeased, who hath resisted his will? This praeoc∣cupation had bin nothing worth, if besides Gods will, he had bin of opinion that there had bin any other cause of reprobation, as sup∣pose sinne. For he made the obiection of his owne head, knowing himselfe and vnderstan∣ding himselfe better then any other bodie. 3. Because he graunted the antecedent of that obiection of Gods will, Rom. 9.19, 20. which he would neuer haue done, if it had not bin the cause of the decree of reprobation. 4 If reprobation be for this end that therby
God might shew his power to doe with his owne what he would, and power and authori∣tie ouer all men, then surely the whole will of God is the impulsiue cause of the decree of re∣probation: but it is so: ergo. Roman. 9.17, 21. 5 If the potter for no other cause makes one vessell to honour, and an other to disho∣nour, much more God chose vs for no other cause & reiected other, but because he would: the first is true, Ier. 18.4, 6. Rom. 9.21. ergo. 6 If the will and pleasure of God onely be the cause of hiding the mysterie of the Golpel, thē also of the decree of reprobation, because this is the cause of that: but the antecedent is true, Math. 11.25. Luk. 10.21. ergo. But the aduersaries denie this doctrine, and alleadge these reasons to the contra∣rie. God will not the death of a sinner, Ezek. 33. ergo his will is not the cause, &c. Ans. They are put as contradictories which are not, by an homony mie in the word [will.] for in the Prophet it signifies to take delight: and not to will, signifies not to delight in. But in the question it sigolfies, sirmely and vnchangeably to decree. 2. Though it did stand for that in the Prophet, yet not to will the death of a sinner, and to will the decree of reprobation, were not con∣tradictorie: 1. because the same predicate is not affirmed and denied: for the death of a sin∣ner, and the decree of reprobation are not all
one, neither is the decree of reprobation the cause of the death of a sinner. 2. Because both wills belong not all to one thing, but to two di∣uerse matters. For God wills not the death of a sinner, that repenteth, but he wills the decree of reprobation of such as he doth not giue the gift of grace and of repentance vn∣to. Obiect. The Prophet speakes of all and singular persons, and not of the repentant onely; because all and euery one are sin∣ners. Ans. The first falsitie of this obiection is this proposition, God will not the death of any sin∣ner at all, whether he repent or no: therefore it is cunningly omitted, and that is cleare first by the text. For that which followes, but that we might be turned and liue, shewes the former speech is referred to sinners that doe conuert and repent: so that in those other he onely putteth repentants in good hope, that none might doubt that God is readie to pardon so soone as a sinner doth returne. 2. The vn∣truth thereof is euident by other places. For if be wil not the death of a sinner, why is it gi∣uen to some to know the mysteries of the king∣dome of heauen, and is not to other? why pu∣nished he Sodom and Gomorrah with death? why were Core, Dathan, and Abiram swal∣lowed vp of hell? why are Cain, Saul, Doeg, Abimelec, the rich glutton, and Iudas, thrust
downe into hell torments? 1 Obiect. Yea but God doth earnestly and ardently wish the eternall blessing of all and euery one, as appeares by his protestation most religiously and solemnly swearing and say∣ing, as I liue, &c. Ans. Here is a sophisine of many questi∣ons, chaunging the state of the controuersie. For we denie not but he doth earnestly and ar∣dently wish all mens eternall happines. For wee say, That God offering all men saluation, doth not dissemble, nor enuie saluation to any, but is de∣lighted with all mens repentance and saluation,Admon. Theustad. de form. Concord. pag, 19, & pag, 112, and with no mans blindnes and destruction. And againe, That God wills earnestly all mens saluation and health, in his owne approbation and ioy. For he wills not nor approoues of sinne, but is highly displeased with it, nor is delighted with any mans, no not the very deuills perdition, ment, and destruction, so farre forth as it is destruction of his worke: He doth not dissemble then in bidding all repent, that they might be saued, &c. But we denie that God did decree from eternall, to adiudge no sinner at all to death. 2 Obiect. God preaching the same do∣ctrine, Ezek. 18. addes this moreouer, why should ye die ye house of Israel, because I vvill not the death of him that dies, saith the Lord God. Therefore God absolutely wills not any way the death of those that die or pe∣rish. Ans. Againe he chaungeth the state of the
question: for we deny not that it is truely said, that God doth not absolutely will the death of those that die and perish: but say with the Apostle, that death is the stipend of sinne. Rom. 6.23. and with the Prophet, that soule vvhich sin∣neth shall die. Ezech. 18.4. neither denie we that it is truely said, that God will not the death of him that dieth, that is, that he delighteth not in it, but this we denie, that it is truely said that the will of God is not the cause of the eternall decree of reprobation. Obiect. 3. God speaks not in the foresaid place of the temporall death onely, but of e∣ternall. Ans. Neither doe we vnderstand it of tem∣porall death onely, but of eternall. Obiect. 4. If it be contrary to Gods nature & will for any to die a temporall death, much more it is repugnant incōparably to his boun∣tifull will for one to be tormented with euer∣lasting and endles paines. An. Again the state of the question is alte∣red: for we say not that God in his bountifull will, will haue any punished euerlastingly, but this, that God iustly will that the reprobate be endlesly tormented. For this is the question: whether the vvill of God bee the cause of the eternall decree of reprobation: we say it is. 2. The ante∣codent is doubtful, and may be taken 2 waies, either that God is not delighted so much as with mās tēporal death: or that God wil by no meanes the tēporal death: in the first sense wee
graunt it, but that is no question: in the second we deny it: for if by no means he would it, none should die. Obiect. 4. If an earthly father cannot abide that his sonne should cruelly be whipped and scourged, and it would euen gripe him to the heart to see him put to death? much more tru∣ly may we say it of God, if he doth a straunge work by afflicting men with temporall punish∣mēts as he calleth it Es. 28. much more straūge a work is it to deliuer him vp to be punished in hell euerlastingly. Therefore this opiniō stands fast and firme inough: yet that God by his simple and absolute hate without respect of impenitencie will not by any will, the destru∣ction or damnation of any. Ans. 1. The state of the question is chaun∣ged againe, because this opinion stands sta∣ble and firme to vs also, that God by his sim∣ple and absolute hate without respect of impe∣nitencie wil not by any will the destruction or damnation of any. 2. The first part of the comparison is but particular: for I could giue some instances that should infringe it: for example T. Manlius Tor∣quatus cōmaunded his sonne should be scour∣ged to death. Iunius Brutus sate iudge himselfe to condemne his sonnes going about some treacherie, and when they were beheadded looked on; a memorable example of iustice. Turius a wealthy man banished his sonne and was commended for it through all Rome: as
Seneca records lib. 1. de Clem. cap. 15. Philip king of Spaine that now is, suffred his owne sonne as a sacrifice to beheld captiue for Pius 5. sake bi∣shop of Rome, and after that to bee murthe∣red, as is euident by the kings owne hand to the same Pius, witnes Gitolam Catena pag. 94. 3. The reddition of the comparison is faul∣tie for two causes. 1. ambiguous in calling the inflicting of punishment and sending affli∣ction Gods straunge work: as if it were not gods owne work to be the iudge of the world, and shew examples in the wicked of his iustice. Es. 38.21. That is called Gods straunge work and vncouth, that is rare and vnvsuall, infre∣quent and very admirable: namely when he op∣pressed the Philistines and threatned to do the same to the Iewes ere they wist, without any mans art: therefore it is so called straunge that yet it is said to be Gods. Gods work to come vpon them sodenly from heauen as he serued the Philistines 2. Sam. 5.24. 1. Cr. 14.15. yet a straunge work, because it was rare, strange & admirable. 2. False, because it auoucheth that it is a work farre from Gods nature, to deliuer a man vp euerlastingly to bee tormenred in hell fire: when as God saith. Deut. 32.35. Reuenge and retribution is mine▪ and ver. 41. I will auenge me of mine enemies and repay it those that hate me. And Christ Mat. 10.28. Rather feare him that is able to destroy the soule & body both in hell. Was it straūge
from Gods nature to stirre vpp Pharao to shewe his power in him, or to thrust the dam∣ned into hell torments, that is, to exercise iu∣stice? Rom. 11.32. God hath concluded all vnder vn∣beleefe that he might haue mercie on all: therefore none of those that are shutt vnder vnbeliefe, is absolutely reprobate from the mercie of God, but Gods sauing mercie is offred vnto all indifferently. Ans. 1. The question is altered, for this should haue bin inferred: Ergo: the will of God is not the cause of the decree of reprobation. 2. Againe they deceiue vs by a captious plu∣ralitie of interrogatories, as if they were but one. The first whereof is false, the second true: for wee graunt that Gods sauing is offred in∣differently to all: but wee denie that none of those that are shutt vpp vnder contuma∣cie or disobedience (for so the greeke doth ra∣ther beare) is absolutely reiected, without the condition of their future naughtie works, as impelling causes; for we euicted the con∣trarie before. 3. This false consectarie is but euen ilfauouredly pickt out of Pauls words. For therein the generall particle of the elect both Iewes and Gentiles is to bee vnder∣stood; for of them the Apostle spake, which also the article set before the generall par∣ticle doeth declare : God concluded those: euery one in contumacie, that hee might haue mercie on them euerie one. The mea∣ning
thē is this, all that are saued of the Iewes or Gentiles, are not saued any other way but by the mercie of God, whereas all of them are concluded vnder contumacie and in themselues are guiltie of eternall death. And therefore the Gentiles had no cause to dis∣paire of the Iewes, for whatsoeuer they were nowe they had beene as all other: and if by Gods meere mercie they had escaped out of vnbeliefe and rebellion, they should giue o∣ther men leaue to haue the like fauour. In a word the Apostle shewes that God hath so ordered matters by his owne prouidence, that all should bee guiltie of rebellion and disobedience and vnder the iudgement of God, and that for this purpose, that saluati∣on should proceede from his meere mercie. Therefore they aree freelie saued whosoe∣uer are saued, because all are lost indifferent∣lie. Obiect. If this place is ment of the elect on∣ly, it followes the elect onely are shutt vpp vn∣der disobedience, & not the reprobate: which is absurd. Ans. The connex is deceitfull because doubtfull: for the place is not to bee vnder∣stood of the elect onely, as if they onely were shutt vnder disobedience, but because they of whome God hath mercie to saue them be∣ing none but the elect, are all shutt vpp vn∣der disobedience, as well as the reprobate. This then is the Apostles meaning, that
none of the elect, or such as should bee saued, should attribute their saluatiō vnto their works, but altogether vnto Gods mercie. 1. Tim. 2.4. God vvould that all men should bee saued and come to the knovvledge of the trueth: Ergo: his will is not the cause of the decree of reproba∣tion. Ans. Here is a sophisme, making them op∣posites which are not: for the word vvill in the latter part of the enthymeme, signifies Gods e∣ternall counsell, which he hath propounded with himselfe from euerlasting: but in the first part, of Pauls words, his precept, cōmande∣ment, incitation vnto saluatiō and the know∣ledge of the trueth: as that, Come vnto me all you that are wearie and laden. Mat. 11.28. Looke vnto me and yee shalbe saued all the ends of the earth. Es. 45.22. with feare and trembling vvorke your ovvne saluation. Phil. 2.12. And indeed the whole prea∣ching of the gospell is the inuiting of all men to saluation and the knowledge of the trueth: as Paul speaks Act. 17.30. The time of this igno∣rance God regarded not, but now hee admonisheth all men euerie where to repent. That this is the mea∣ning of the word will in the Apostles speach, the text will manifest: for by what meanes hee would haue men come to the knowledge of the trueth, by the same hee would haue all men sa∣ued: for he compriseth both these vnder the same will. But God would haue all men come to the knowledge of the trueth, by bidding, inuiting, commaunding, and euen praying thē
to come: therefore he would haue them saued by bidding, &c. as is cleare by the testimonies aboue alleadged: whereto we add this. 2. Cor. 5.20. We are Embassadors in Christs name, and as if God did beseech you by vs, vvee praye you in Christs steed be reconciled to God. But it cannot be ment of Gods eternall councell: for if it were his e∣ternall decree that all should be saued, surely all should be saued. For the councell of God consi∣steth for euer, and the thoughts of his heart euery age. Psal. 34.11. The Lord of boasts hath purposed and who shall frustrate him. Es. 14.27. My counsell shall stand and I will work all my pleasure. Es. 46.10. But yet all men are not saued. For the gate is large & the way is large which leadeth to destruction, & ma∣ny are they that enter through it. Saith our Saui∣our Mat. 7.13.2. Arg. 4. Pet. 3.9. God is patient toward vs vn∣willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance: Ergo: Gods will is not the cause of the decree of reprobation. Ans. They are made opposites here that are not, by the same homonymie that was in the former: therefore must haue the same aun∣swer that it had before. Arg. 5. He that hath mercie on all, & loueth all things that are, and hateth nothing of that he hath made, doubtles his will is not the cause &c. but those things are true of God: ergo: Wis. 11.24. &c. Ans. There is an homonymie in the words to haue mercie, to loue, to hate: For in the proposi∣tion
is ment a speciall loue and mercie, by which God as a most free Lord hath mercie on whome he will Rom. 9.18. and an especial loue which peculiarly he extendeth to his elect, in∣riching them with all the benefites thereof, in which sort he loued Iacob Mat. 1.2. Ro. 9.13. and a speciall hate by which God (hauing cho∣sen to saluation whome he would) passed ouer whome he would, such as hee vsed toward E∣sau Mat. 1.3. Rom. 9.13. But in the assumption and place out of the booke of wisedome, gods generall mercie ex∣tended to all creatures that are in any mise∣ries, and therein to al men aswell vniust as iust, wherein he is prone to succour them and doth indeed preseruing and nourishing all things, euen the eury rauens that crie Psal. 147.9. that is that croke. The old translation hath that call on him, but it is not so in the hebrew: that is his owne. So likewise his generall loue &c, so God hates no∣thing of that he hath made so farre forth as he made it, 2. If the words be hardly vrged and vnderstood of the speciall mercie, loue, & hate, it will follow, that no man at all is reiected of God, no not for sinne, which I thinke they will not say. Argu. 6. He that will gather all, his will is not the cause of reprobation: God would ga∣ther all Mat. 23.37. How often vvould J haue ga∣thered thy children &c. ergo. Ans. 1. Vnder the name will, in the subiect
is meant a desire and earnest labour, but in the predicate Gods counsell and purpose. 2. But be it so, that the counsell of God should be meant in the subiect of the proposition, yet there should be still a fallacie of homonymie in the obiection, because in the assumption by will is meant desire and earnest labour. 3. They offend in proouing the assumption, by allega∣tion of an impertinent testimonie; because the assumption speakes of the will of God, but the saying that is brought out of Matthew is spo∣ken of the humane will of Christ. For Christ speakes of himselfe as he is man, namely as he is the minister of circumcision, or a Prophet sent to the people of the Iewes, which Christ by his humane will desired and sought to ga∣ther together euery one that was offered vnto him, into the kingdome of God by the prea∣ching of the word. 1 Here they vrge: 1. if Christs humane will be here meant, then was that contrarie to his will as he was God, which is the cause of the dectee of the reprobation of the Iewes. 2. The diuine will is rather to be vnderstood, by which he would gather the Iewes by the Pro∣phets which he sent vnto them, and that con∣tinually rising earely and sending them as Ie∣temie speaketh, Ier. 7.13: 11.7. and 35.15. Concerning the former part of this their exception, 1. there is an elench of non conse∣quence. For how could Christs humane will be contrarie to the diuine will, seeing it wholly
rested in the eternall good pleasure of God, as appeares by Math. 11.25, 26.2. If the conse∣quent were true, God also might be thought contrarie to himselfe: for he would, that is, he desireth that all men should be saued, and yet he doth indurate whome he will. Now as tou∣ching the second part of this exceptiō, though we should graunt that the diuine will of Christ be meant, yet it followes not thereupon that his will is not the cause of the decree of re∣probation: for the homonymie remaines still. For Christ would so gather together the Iewes, namely by inuiting them to come vn∣to him, that they should repent and beleeue the Gospel, and so would the decree of re∣probation by his eternall counsell and pur∣pose. 2 They vrge againe. If Christ would haue the gathering together of the Iewes, and yet withall willed the decree of reprobation, then was he a dissembler, and had contrarie wills. But this is absurd. Therefore that. Ans. I denie the consequence. For he was no dissembler, for he willed in earnest and not dissemblingly, but they would not: neither had he contradi∣ctorie wills. For in a contradiction the tearmes must be the same in both places, and take all one way. But when it is said, God would the ga∣thering together of the Iewes, and God would the e∣ternall decree of their reprobation, there is no con∣tradiction at all. First, because the same predi∣cate is not in both places: secondly, will is not
all one in both subiects. In the first it signifies to desire, in the latter euerlastingly to decree. Indeede thus it were a contradictorie, God did desire to gather the Iewes. God did not desire to gather the Iewes. Gods counsell is the cause of the decree. Gods counsell is not the cause, &c. They replie and say; yes two wills are ascri∣bed to God, if he will all should repent, and yet wills eternally the reprobation of many, that doe not repent. I answer there is an homo∣nymie in the word will. For God would haue all repent [by his commandement:] but yet would the reprobation of many by his counsel and purpose. Obiect. Then his commaundement crosses his eternall counsell. Ans. No: because in that he declares what he likes and seekes hartily for, in all men, but not what he will doe in e∣uery one: but by this he casts what he will doe in euery one. Therefore God willing and com∣manding repentance, shewes he is pleased in all that repent, but willing the decree of re∣probation, he determines to reiect those that doe not. 7 He that promiseth saluation to all, his will is not the cause of reprobation. God doth promise so: ergo. Ans. He that promiseth saluation to all, (sim∣plie without any condition of faith.) 2. God promiseth saluation, but not simply but with this condition, if they beleeue, if they lay hold
on saluation by faith. For the vniuersall pro∣mise of grace belongs indeede to all, but yet to all that beleeue onely; because promise and faith are relatiues one to an other. Now then he is simple, to vnderstand that simply that is spoken but in respect. 8 He that offers saluation to all, his will is not the cause of the decree of reprobation. God offereth to all. Ans. He that offers it without commandemēt of taking it by faith, but so doth not God. No maruell then if he would haue their reprobation which were not to obey this commaundement of be∣leefe. 9 If there be any absolute reprobation, that is, if Gods will be the sole cause of the decree of reprobation, the reprobates cannot choose but sinne: but that is false: ergo. Ans. 1. The connex is false. For reproba∣tion is not the cause of sinne, nor yet is sinne the end of reprobation. 2. The assumption is false also. For it is not absurd to say that the re∣probates cannot choose but sinne, who lie al∣together in wickednes. Though no man sinnes against his will, as Cyprian saies, lib. de bap. Chri. Yet he sinnes necessarily, because he cannot doe otherwise, as Ieremie speakes, chap. 13.23. Can the Ethiope change his skinne, or the leo∣pard his spottes? then may ye also doe good, that are accustomed to doe euill. and our Sauiour, Matth. 7.18. An euill tree can not beare good fruit. and, Matth. 12.34. Generation of vipers, how can you
speake good things beeing euill. Rom. 8.7. The wisdome of the flesh is enmitie against God. For it is not subiect to the law of God, neither indeede can be. Obiect. If they cannot but sinne, then they deserue to be excused. Ans. Nere a whit. Nay they deserue to be punished so much the more, because by how much the more necessarily they sinne, by so much the more voluntarily they doe it, seeing their will hath brought them this necessitie, and they resist and iniurie God wittingly and willingly. Therefore they cannot excuse themselues by pretending ne∣cessitie. 10 If Gods pleasure onely be the cause of the decree of reprobation, then God is a ty∣rant and vniust iudge, that for no cause is an∣grie with them that neuer offend him: but not so. Ans. The connex is false, because it is pluckt in by head and shoulders of that ante∣cedent. But if Gods pleasure be the sole cause indeede of the decree of reprobation, then it follows onely that God hath highest rule and free power, to doe with his owne what he list. Which right and power whosoeuer depriues God of, denies him, or at least preferres him∣selfe before him. Seeing euery one would di∣spose of his owne how he list, may not a credi∣tour of his meere good will exact his debt of one and pardon another? may not a prince take one into his house to serue him and let passe many other? now should that prince
or creditour be vniust for so doing? no. Then if a man be not vniust for dealing according to his owne minde, shall God whose iudge∣ment is most iust? so then there is great diffe∣rence betweene a tyrant that deales in all things as he list, and God that worketh all things according to the counsell of his owne will. For their list is vniust and ruled by no law, but Gods will is the rule of all iustice, so that whatsoeuer he wills is iust and equall. Neither frame we a God that is law lesse, but he is a law to himselfe. Men neede lawes, that are subiect to lewde desires, but Gods will is not onely pure from all vice, but the chiefest rule of all perfection, and the law of all lawes. 2 The proofe of the connex is false: arising of a false definition of the decree of reproba∣tion, namely to be Gods wrath. But the decree of reprobation, is his eternall will, (not his wrath,) passing ouer some in electing whome he thought not good to take. Gods wrath is stirred vp by sinne, so is not his decree of repro∣bation: other wise God were a tyrant and vn∣iust, beeing angrie for nothing with them that neuer grieued him. 11 If Gods meere will be the cause, then God doth with crueltie abuse his creatures: but that is blasphemous. Ans. It followes not. For God reiecting whome he will, doth not abuse, but vse most holily and iustly the reprobate to declare in them his great power and freedome, so that
euen they also serue Gods glorie. Doth a king cruelly tyrannize ouer his subiects whome he taketh not to honour and offices in his court? then if he be free from this, God much more. Thus farre of the efficient cause of the de∣cree of reprobation: now followes the rest. 2. the mate∣riall.The matter of eternall reprobation, is Gods purpose or decree. 3. the for∣mall.As the forme of election is the taking of some men out of the whole rout, to be deliuered out of the common destruction, and ordained to life euerlasting, so the forme of reprobation is the passing by of some in the generall destru∣ction, whereinto all thorough sinne were falne. I will set certen theses or positions of the endes. 4. the finall.1 The ende of reprobation is not sinne, as it is simply a transgression, that is, no man is pre∣destinated of God to sinne. 1. Because sinne, as it is sinne or transgression, is hatefull and abominable to God. As it is sinne I say: to di∣stinguish betweene the act and defect. For ex∣ample: the crucifying of Christ as it was a grie∣uous sinne committed of the Iewes and Gen∣tiles, God did hate and detest it, but as it was an act or worke to satisfie Gods iustice, it li∣ked and pleased him. 2. Because it is contra∣rie to Gods wisdome and goodnes, for God to ordaine any to that which is ill, as it is ill. 3. Because God could not predestinate a man
to that, which himselfe had decreed both to forbid by expresse commaundement, and in mercie to blotte out and in iustice to punish. Neither can he be the author of sinne, whereof he is a mercifull disposer and a iust reuenger, as saith Fulgent. lib. 1. ad Monimum. Obiect. But Christ was deliuered vp by Iudas the betraier by Gods determinate counsell, Act. 20.23. and, 4.27. Therefore the reprobate are predestinate of God to sinne. Ans. They inferre more then their argu∣ment will permit. For onely this can be con∣cluded, Therefore they were predestinate to doe those actions: but not to sinne, that is, euil∣nes and naughtines concurring by Satans in∣stigation and mens fault with those actions. 2 Neither is the ende of reprobation the destruction of the reprobate. 1. For if sinne be not the ende of reprobation, then nor their de∣struction which is caused by sinne. 2. If it were, God might seeme to be delighted with mens destructions: for he taketh delight in the ende of all his workes. 1 Obiect. Saluation of the elect is the ende of election, therefore destruction of the repro∣bate is the end of reprobation. Ans. It follows not, for there is not the same reason. For sal∣uation is of God, and the destruction as it is destruction is the creatures; not of God but from himselfe. 2. God findeth a man in de∣struction, and doth not cast him into it: but he
findeth none capable of saluation, but choseth them vnto it. 2. Obiect. God createth the wicked to the day of euill. Prov. 16.4. Ergo: destruction is the ende of reprobation. Ans. The meaning of Salomon is this, God creates not wickednes, but the wicked men: for after the fall he maketh man of that lump, that he came vnto by his fall: that is, corrupt, which thing the harmonie doth acknowledge in the point of originall sinne fol. 261. of the e∣dition set out in Germanie 1580. And so God creats the wicked man for the euill day, that is, to declare his owne power by iustly puni∣shing of him. 3. But the end of reprobation is both Gods glory and the saluation of the elect. It serues the glory of God two waies. 1. it maketh to the declaratiō of his free power and absolute right, to do with his owne creatures what he please. For God saith to Pharao, For this very ende haue I stirred thee vp to shew my povver in thee, and to de∣clare my name throughout the whole earth. Rom. 9.17. Therefore willing to shew his wrath and make his power knowne, be beareth vvith great gentlenes the vessels of wrath Rom. 9.22. If earthly princes haue that authoritie, God much more. 2. It maketh to the commendation of his mercie to the elect: that is, God hath reiected some, to make knowne his great loue to vs: for his benefite which hee freelie bestoweth on some would not bee seene, but by passing by
some, and so declaring what he might lawfully haue done to both, but the more that are reie∣cted, the brighter doth his grace shine vnto the elect. This is the highest grace of faith (saieth Lu∣ther) to beleeue that he is mercifull, that saueth so few and condemneth so many. Thus by eternal re∣probation, is his glory aduaunced, which they detract from him that would haue the doctrin of reprobation suppressed and foisted out of the church doores. And this is the first ende of reprobation. 2. The second is the saluation of the elect as Austine tom. 7. lib. de praedest. & gratia cap. 6. saith. Hee vvould haue the destruction of them that perish to be an argument of saluation to them that are predestinated of him vessels of mercie, and hee vseth the death of some to the life of other: for the potter hath power ouer the clay to make of the same lump one vessell to honour, another to dishonor. The faluation of the elect is wrought by o∣thers reprobation two waies. 1. for that the elect are stirred vp with the thought that other are reprobated to feare and reuerence the power of God in them set forth. 2. seing by meditation of the same they growe to more knowledge & feeling of the greatnes of gods grace to them ward, in as much as the elect do know that by nature they are not a whitt bet∣ter then the reprobate, and therefore cannot but discerne and see the excellencie of Gods grace to them ward: which is more euident & sweet vnto vs when wee thinke how it is deni∣ed
vnto some as we make not so much accoūt of a good thing that more haue thē our selues, as we do of that no more pertake. This may be declared by enumeration of Gods benefites that are temporall, both simplie in them selues, as of temporall life, riches, and honor, and in comparison of spirituall gifts, as eternall life, e∣uerlasting riches, heauenly promotion &c. 1. Whereby we are stirred vp to a greater loue of God, for shewing so great loue to vs, in that God hath not reprobated vs as well as other. 2. Againe wee are mooued to abate our pea∣cocks traine and be humble, by knowledge of our vile vnworthines, no better by nature thē the reprobate, to thinke basely of our selues, so that if we will needs boast, wee boast onely in the Lord that hath not reiected vs a swell as o∣ther. Thou art not a reprobate, then bee hum∣ble, be not proude, boast not in thy selfe, as if by thy desert thou deseruedst not to be so: but boast in the Lord, that hath not made thee so as he made Esau, Pharao, Saul, Iudas, Nero &c. then whome thou wert not better, but like. 3. Lastly we are moued to shew all thankfulnes to God for euer, gratefulnes to him for not re∣probating vs, patience in aduersitie thinking it inough that we haue the grace not to bee re∣probated, studie to do good works, confidēce toward God, & hope of euerlasting life: which al they shal surely haue that are not reprobats. Thus the elect doe reap by reprobation great fruite, which they enuie them and defraude
them of, that would haue this doctrine of re∣probation buried or more sparingly handled in the church. Thus much of the causes of reprobation, now follow the effects. The effects.The effect of reprobation is not sinne: and this doth Tho. Aquinas acknowledge 1. part. q. 23. art. 3. and is cleare by these reasons 1. be∣cause reprobation is the holy worke of God & ergo not the cause of sinne. 2. the deuill is the principall cause of sinne. 3. sinne is not gods effect, nor therefore of reprobation. Obiect. If the reprobate cannot but sinne, then their reprobation is the cause of sinne: but it is: ergo. Ans. I denie the consequence, for reproba∣tion is not the cause that they can do no other but sinne, but the corrupt nature of the repro∣bates: who being euil trees cannot beare good fruite. Mat. 7.18. For the verie elect themselues before regeneratiō cānot chose but sinne, but they that are borne of God sinne no more. 1. Ioh. 3.9. Therefore sinne proceeds not frō pre∣destination: & to this doth Iustine Martyr cō∣sent in his dialogue with Trypho saying, God is not in fault that men or angells are predestinated vn∣iust: but euerie one is such by his owne default as hee appears to be. They except, why then doth he bestow the grace of election vpon the elect and not vpon the reprobate. Jans. with Austin in his booke de genesi. ad lit. c. 10. God could conquer the wil of e∣uill
men into good, seing he is omnipotent: he could so, but why doth he it not? because he would not: and why wovld he not? it is his owne power: for we may not bee wiser then we should. 2. The effects of reprobation are 1. a stir∣ring vpp of the reprobate for God to shew his power and iustice in them. 2. a hiding of the misterie of saluation frō them. 3. a breeding a reuerence in the elect of Gods power and iudgements toward the reprobate. Thus much of the effects, now followes of the subiects.The sub∣iects 1. As all that God doth beffow eternall life vpon, are elected vnto eternall life, so contrari∣ly all are reiected and excluded from it, that God will not bestow it vpon. 2. Wee may know how many are repro∣bate by Christs words, few are chosen: for if it be so, then many are reprobate: and it is not more harsh to say, many are reprobated, then to say, many runne the broad way which leadeth to destru∣ction. Mat. 7.13. seing none are reprobate but such as runne to destruction. 3. Therefore more are reprobate thē elect. 1. because more are condemned then saued: as Esay cries ouer Israel and Paul repeats it. Rom. 9.27. Although the number of the children of Israel were as the sand of the sea, but a remnant shalbe saued. 2. More heare the word without profite thē with profite, seing as appears Luc. 8.15. the fourth parte of the hearers onely receiue the
seede of the word with a good and holy hart, and bring forth fruite by patience. 3. More are vnbeleeuers then beleeuers. Esay 53.1. Who hath beleeued our report &c. And the Lord, Luc. 18.8. The sonne of man vvhen he commeth shall he sinde faith in the earth? therefore he calleth the companie of the faithfull a little flock. Luc. 12.32. 4. The causes why God hath reiected more then elected, are, 1. because he would: which will of his none can iustly reprehend. 2. be∣cause so it was the wisest & best course: where∣in euery godly man must rest. 3. The more are reiected, the greater shewes his grace to the elect, as his loue to the Israelites was more apparent in choosing it alone vnto himselfe & refusing all other, then if he had made choise of more. Deut. 7.7.4. the saluation of the e∣lect is more set forward, the more are reiected. For the more they know are reprobated, the greater they know and feele his loue to them: and therefore are mooued to more thankful∣nes to him, and studie to make their election sure. 5. The number of the reprobate is so cer∣taine with God, that it can neither be increa∣sed, nor diminished, nor chaunged: that is nei∣ther more nor lesse can bee reprobated then were from euerlasting. Thus farre of the sub∣iects. The ad∣iuncts.1. There are three necessarie adiuncts that ensue of Reprobation. The depriuing of sa∣uing
grace, sinnes, & the punishmēt of sinners: that is, whosoeuer are reprobated, 1. they are not made partakers of that grace whereby we are saued, namely neither of that fatherlie fauour which he extendeth to the elect, nor yet of the effects of the same, namely vocation ac∣cording to the purpose of his election, faith, iustification, and regeneration. 2. they sinne necessarily: that is, they can doe no other but sinne, when as being destitute of sauing grace they are euill trees that cannot beare good fruite. 3. They are sure to abide both in this life and that to come most iustlie for their sinnes. 2. Concerning the vnchaungeablenes and certainetie of reprobation: which is such: that as the elect cannot become reprobate: so the reprobate cannot become elect. And repro∣bation is immutable both in respect of God reprobating, in as much as he doth not chaūge, make voide, nor repeale, the decree of his will set downe from euerlasting: and in respect of men reprobated, in that hauing not receaued sauing grace they cannot but remaine in eter∣nall death, whereinto they voluntarie plunged themselues: now he doeth not bestow that sa∣uing grace vppon the reprobate, because he is not bound to giue it, but hath mercie on whome be will. That reprobation is immutable, I prooue it thus. 1 Because God is immutable, with whom
there is no alteration nor shadow of turning Ieam. 2.17. The force of the argument stands thus be∣cause reprobation is an internall and eternall action of god, which in truth differeth nothing at all from his verie essence, but onely in rea∣son: els God should be compounded. 2. Because it is his decree, made according to his good pleasure, now all Gods decrees made according to the pleasure of his will are vnchaungeable, or to speake more plainclie, because it is Gods will, and his will is immuta∣ble. 3. Because it is eternall, and whatsoeuer is so is vnalterable and vnchangeable. 4. It onely dependeth on his wil, It cannot be hindred with any thing without God. 5. It is ioyned with his infallible presci∣ence, and therefore vnchaungeable. 6. It is linked with Gods omnipotencie which cannot be impeached. God is omnipo∣tent, able to execute his decree, neither can it be hindred any way. The aduersaries to infringe this vnchaun∣geablenes of reprobation obiect. Obiect. By this meanes, mans free will is cleane taken away, and a meere fatall necessi∣tie is induced, which is absurd. Ans. That doth not follow: for God by his immutable decree, doth not abolish second causes, nor ouerthrow their nature: therefore mans freewill may stand with the vnchaungea∣blenes of predestination. Besides necessitie of
supposition, and (as the schoolemen call it) of infallibilitie, must be distinguished from coa∣ctiue necessitie, as also from fatall and Stoical necessitie. Fate or destinie (which the Greekes call  of , that is, , to deuide or part,) the Stoicks called the vntwineable linking or order of the second causes, where∣of all things are so necessarily and vnresistab∣ly ruled, that God himselfe cannot chaunge the order thereof, nor worke against it. We that are Christians knowe no such foolish fate. Obiect. If it be immutable, God complai∣neth of the reprobate vniustly, and vniustly punisheth them for sinning: but this is blasphe∣mie to say so: ergo. Ans. The consequence were true if repro∣bation were the cause of sinne, as it is not: and therefore his complaining and punishing of them is not vniust, beeing for sinne. Now to refute the contrarie opinion. 1 If eternall reprobation be changeable, Gods purpose is so too: which is false. For if reprobation be the purpose of God, then if reprobation be chaungeable, his purpose is chaungeable: but it is: ergo. 2 If it be mutable▪ it may be frustrated of his owne proper ende. For that which is mutable may be frustrated of his ende: but reproba∣tion cannot possibly be put by the ende: be∣cause it s the purpose of God, which must
needes take effect. 3 If it be mutable, it is because God sees, that either he could haue better deliberated then he hath done, and taken better counsell then he hath, or els that he could not execute his first deuise: but neither of these can agree to God: for he is alwaies both most wise and most omnipotent. Thus farre of the ad∣iuncts. Some things differ from Reprobation as diuers onely from it,The dissen∣tanies. some as contrarie vnto it. They dissent as diuers onely, that may stand with it and be attributed to the reprobate: such as are those that are reckened vp Hebr. 6.4, 5. illumination, a tast of that heauenly gift, parti∣cipation of the holy Ghost: a tast of the good word of God, and the vertues of the world to come. and Heb. 10.26. a receiuing of the knowledge of truth, sanctification by the blood of the couenant. and 2. Pet. 2.20. flying the carruptions of the world, know∣ledge of the Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, know∣ledge of the way of righteousnes. and Luk. 8.12. hearing of Gods word, receiuing it with ioy, tempora∣rie faith. Of which I thinke it not amisse to explane some, least by their ambiguitie they trouble the rude and vnskilfull reader. 1 First Illumination,Illumina∣tion. Hebr. 6.4. is the same that baptisme is: which by a metanymie of the cause, of the baptisme of men of yeares that were instructed, was called illumination, whereupon  is here taken for baptiza∣ri,
to be baptized: as Hebr. 10.32. and so doth the Syriack translatour expound it, who makes to be inlightened in this place the same, that to goe into the water to be baptized. And so doth lustin Martyr expound it, in his second apologie for the Christians to M. Antonius the Emperour. This washing is called illumination, be∣cause their mindes that learne these things are in∣lightened. The Apostles drift shewes this expo∣sition to be true. For he admonished such as had beene baptized, not to become apostates. Whereupon in the verse next before the se∣cond, he flattely nameth the doctrine of bap∣tismes, by which they were inlightened, that before time had their vnderstanding darkned with the cloudes of ignorance. This inligh∣tening of the vnderstanding is in the repro∣bate without the amendement or chaunge of their wills for the better, their vnderstanding is inlightened with knowledge of the truth, but their will remaines vnchanged, neither is it turned vnto God. 2 There is ascribed vnto them, a tast of that heauenly gift, that is to say, of the sweetenes of eternal life. This tast they haue by knowledge onely, and not by any sound fruition. As he that tasteth meate onely, is nor fedde of the same, nor nourished by such tasting: so some reprobates haue indeede a tast of the sweete∣nes of eternall life which God bestoweth vp∣on the elect, through a smackering of know∣ledge,
but enioy not the gift to the full frui∣tion of the thing. Therefore that verye tast is in a short time gone and without fruite. 3. More then these some reprobates haue a participation of the holy Ghost, namely as much as pertaines to his operation that is common to the elect and reprobate. For that knowledge of the doctrine that bringeth sal∣uation, which is great in some of the repro∣bate, and there ioy vpon that knowledge ari∣sing, is wrought by the operation of the ho∣ly Ghost, but without any grace of regene∣ration, which the holy Ghost worketh in none but the elect, by his owne gratious a∣ction. 4 They haue also a tast of the good words of God, and of the vertues of the life to come, that is, their receiuing of the Gospel with ioy, as is saide of the second kinde of auditours, Luk. 8.33. which they are as glad of as if they enioyed the commodities of future blessed∣nes. 5 And some haue sanctification by the blood of the couenant, Hebr. 10.29. which is, no internall clensing of their heart from sinnes such as befalleth the elect onely, and those that haue the gift of sauing faith: but a sequestring of themselues from the prophane without the Church, and a ioyning of them∣selues to the companie of the faithfull, by par∣ticipation
of baptisme, which is the sacra∣ment of the blood of the couenant. And this is the Apostles meaning, as is euident by his scope; because he threatneth the apostates and backsliders from Christianitie after recei∣uing of baptisme. And least any should thinke it a small matter after baptisme to slide backe from Christs Church, he doth exaggerate this sinne so, as he declareth that the Apostates that contemne and make light account of baptisme, by which they were admitted into the Church and number of the faithfull, con∣temne and make light account of the bloode of Christ, whereby the couenant of grace was established. Besides the text shewes to lesse from the two and twentie verse to this pre∣sent place. The like is said, Heb. 9.13. The blood of bulls and goates, and the ashes of a heifer beeing sprinkled vpon the vncleane, is saide to sanctifie them, namely figuratiuely and in a sacra∣ment. To this doth Augustine agree, cal∣ling outward baptisme visible sanctification. The opposites of eternall reprobation,Opposites are either Disparates or Contraries. Those are temporall exclusion from the Church of God for a time; Damnation, Commination of eter∣nall death. 1 Exclusion from the Church for a time, is either of the elect before they become mem∣bers of the Church by calling; or els of such as are excommunicated. For God will haue all the elect be mem∣bers
of the Church so soone as euer they be borne, but many times deferres their calling a long time, as he did Sergius Paulus, Dionysius Areopagita, Damaris, Lydia the seller of pur∣ple, and many other; this their shutting out from the Church for a space, is not that e∣uerlasting reprobation, neither were they that beleeued at Pauls preaching, Act. 13. reprobates before that. For it is saide in flat words, that they were ordained to euerlasting life. Againe,Excommu∣nication. that same excommunication from the Church, caused of some publike scandall giuen, is not that euerlasting reprobation. For it may be that one that is elected from eter∣nall to euerlasting life, may be excommunica∣ted for giuing some offence, and deliuered to Satan, to the destruction of the flesh, that his spirit may be saued in that day of the Lord Jesus, as Paul speakes, 1. Cor. 5.7. 2 Secondly, Damnation is disparate from reprobation. For 1. reprobation is from eter∣nall, damnation in time. 2. sinne is the cause of damnation, so is it not of reprobation. It is necessarie to know this difference betweene them, for feare of confounding vnskilfully dā∣nation and reprobation together, and least that which is said of the one be foolishly refer∣red to the other. 3 Threatning of eternall death, differs also from reprobation.The Con∣tratie. Election is contrarie vnto it. For when some
of mankinde are elect and ordained to salua∣tion, we are necessarily to vnderstand, that o∣ther are refused and reprobate. We can not conceiue the one without the other, much lesse can one be without the other. For con∣traries are by nature together. And thus hauing declared the dissentanie arguments of it, I come to the comparates,Compa∣rates. e∣specially such as belong to the equalitie or in∣equalitie of reprobation and election. Reprobation is equall to election,1 Paritie. 1. in the efficient causes. For God is author of both, Gods good pleasure or freewill is the motiue cause of both. 2 In the matter. For both is the decree of God. 3 In the endes: for both are for the glorie of God and saluation of the elect. 4 In the cōmon subiect, which is mankind, in asmuch as it was to be corrupted & thrown into eternall death by their owne default. As then election is the decree of deliuering such as are giuen to Christ by mercie out of the common destruction: so Reprobation is the decree to leaue such as are not giuen to Christ in that common destruction by iustice. There∣fore as election founde not men worthie but made them so, so reprobation cast none into e∣ternall death, but by iust iudgement leaues them that are plunged into it by their owne sinne and fault in it. For as God decreed not to choose any that was iust alreadie, but the
sinner to be made iust by grace, so likewise he did not decree to reprobate the iust, but the sinner to be iustly condemned for sinne. 5 In the adiuncts both were from eternall: both are firme and immutable: both not to be altered, whether you respect Gods coun∣sell, or the persons themselues elected or re∣probated. So that neither the counsell of God can possibly be made frustrate, nor the elect become reprobates, nor the reprobates e∣lect. The inequalitie or vnlikelines of reprobatiō and election,2 Disparitie appeares in these. 1 In the forme. For as election is a decree of pitying and deliuering out of the vniuersall ruine, and taking into saluation: so reproba∣tion is a decree of not pitying but relinquish∣ing in the common wast, and of not vouchsa∣fing of saluation. 2 In the effects. For inward calling, faith, iustification, glorification, good workes, and eternall saluation, are the effects of election: but debarring from the grace of inward cal∣ling and faith, and iustification, glorification, good works, and the blessing of saluation, and sinnes, and the punishments of the same, are not the effects of reprobation. 3 In the proper subiects. For election is of such as shall be saued, reprobation of them that are to be condemned. 4 In the ensuing adiuncts. For though sinne
bee not the cause of reprobation, yet it is of damnation: for no man is condemned but for sinne: but the good works of the godly, as they are not the cause of election so neither of salua∣tion, but onely the way that God hath prepa∣red for the godly to walk in. Eph. 2.10. We are his workmāship framed in Christ Iesus to good warks, which God hath prepared that vve should vvalke in them: Nowe as the way is not the cause of the mark, so are not good works the cause of sal∣uation. Hauing thus laid forth the Cōparates, now comed to the Coniugate. Of the misterie of Reprobation they that are to be condemned are called reprobats: of whome these positions following must be ob∣serued. 1. The reprobates are reprobated of God according to his good pleasure, and free, ho∣ly, and iust will: because God doth all things of the counsell of his owne will. Eph. 1.11. so saieth a certaine Prophet to Amazia king of Iudah 2. Cr. 25.16. I know god hath entred into a determina∣tion to destroy thee. 2. They giue themselues to do euill, as Elias sares to Achab. 1. King. 21.20. Thou hast giuen thy selfe to work that which is euill in the eies of the Lord. They sinne, or▪ set their minde to sinne as Iohn speaketh. 1. Ih. 3. 3. They are rebellious and stiff necked. Ro. 10.21. Esay. 65.2. 4. They are raised vp for this end that gods
power might bee shewen in them. Rom. 9.17. 5. They are made of God against the euill day. Pr. 16.4. But the question is what the mea∣ning of this place may be. The aduersaries of the trueth auouch, that it cannot be collected out of this place, that the reprobates are created a∣gainst the euill day: and they make the wicked a∣gainst the euill day, to be, to reduce him to be iustly and worthily punished for his former wickednes: if this be not to depraue the sence of the scripture, I know not what is: The he∣brew goes thus. Colpagnal Jehoua lamanguanchu vegam rashang leion raguah: which words cannot possibly be otherwise translated but thus: The Lord hath made or wrought all things for his owne selfe,Aug. tom. 7. lib 2. de nup. &c cncup. c. 17. He doth so create the euill as he feedeth and nourisheth the euill. the wic∣ked man also to the day of euill. In these words Sa∣lomon treateth of the principall end of Crea∣tion, which he affirmeth to be God himselfe, or which is all one, Gods glorie. For (for himselfe) is the same that (for his glorie): therefore God made all things for himselfe: this sentence he doth illustrate, by a particular example, adding (namely he made) the vvicked also to the day of e∣uill: for euery body sees that word must be vn∣derstood indifferently in both places. What peeuishnes is it then to seuer that which the spirit of God hath ioyned, and to foist into the Bible that, that is not there? What audacious∣nes is it to say that to make the wicked to the euill day, is to draw him back to punishment: but the
verb pagnal is spoken of both: of the wicked and all other creatures or works of God: ther∣fore is God made all things, all one, with this, God drew back all his works: well thus stands the case: looke in what sence God is said to haue made all things, in the same he is vnderstood to haue made the wicked man: but he made all things by creating: therefore he made the wicked man by creating. Now he speaketh of the continuance of the creation of man as he is after the fall. God had made the first man, pure, holy, godly, but after the fall such, as he is, of the masse whereof hee made him: that is, corrupt of a corrupt lump, and by nature the child of wrath: for none are borne holy, but al are borne wicked. Now the elect by Gods free bountie are made godly of vngodly, whereas the reprobate remaine vn∣godly. Now then whereas God createth man such, that is, wicked, it is a most iust punishmēt, like as in creating him at first holy it was his gracious bountie: God createth the wicked man but not wickednes. 6. They are set for this to stumble at the preaching of the gospell. 1. Pet. 2.8. 1. These words two sophisters at this day do corrupt and falsifie. One of them saith that the reprobats also are placed, on Christ the corner stone, being so in Luthers germane trā∣slation, but this is farre from Peters words, who speaking of the disobedient, to whome Christ is a stumbling block, writeth that they
are set to this cis ô: he doth not say they are pla∣ced vpon Christ: neither wil the text abide this falsifying: for the article ô is of the neuter gen∣der and to be set after: therfore can not be re∣ferred vnto Christ: beside that, no noune of the neuter gender that is vnderstood of Christ cā goe before: for  is either the masculine or feminine gender. 2. The 2. sophister saith that those words (to which also they were set) are so to be vnderstood, as if it had bin said, They beleeue not the word of the gospel, whereunto notwithstāding they were called in times past by the prophets, and placed for this by the gracious will of god, that that word should first be preached to thē: but this sence is tugd in by the eates, & not colle∣cted out of the words, being repugnant there∣unto, which goe thus. v. 7.8. To you then it is an honour that beleeue: but to the disobedient, the same stone which the builders refused, is made the head of the corner, and astone to stumble at, and a rock of of∣fence: namely to such as stumble at the vvord being disobedient, to which they were also set. These words will not beare that construction for that (to which) cannot bee referred to the word  that goes before, because (ô) is the neuter gen∣der,  the masculine. This caueling com∣panion shall not teach vs a new grammer, that (ô) should be the masculine gender, or haue any reference to : which must of neces∣sitie bee, if his exposition should goe for cur∣rant. But I will declare their true meaning:
which is this. Peter exhorteth those that beleeue, that lea∣ding a holy life, they would be edified more & more, as it were liuing stones in Christ Iesus. Now that the faithfull must be edified in Iesus Christ, he prooueth thus: because he is that stone which God hath laid in Sion in the bot∣tome of the corner, in which stone whosoe∣uer beleeueth shall not be ashamed. Out of this promise made to the beleeuers, Peter drawes this consequence. Therefore to you it is an honor that beleeue: that he doth amplifie by that that is vnlike: But to the disobedient hee is a stumbling block and a rock of offence. How that is, he shewes in the next wordes: saying that they stumble at the worde. Nowe least any might thinke that is by meere chaunce, the A∣postle saith moreouer, that they are set for this purpose, namely to stumble at the word prea∣ched. So then there are three thinges in this speach that may breede any doubt, First to what the disobedient were set, second∣lie by whome, thirdlie what that is, they vvere set. 1. For the first, they were set to this, that they might stūble at the preaching of the gos∣pell of Christ, and that by the iust iudgemēt of God, by this meanes punishing the sinnes of the disobedient with sinnes. This constructi∣on the sintaxe must needs haue to referre the neuter relatiue  to the whole oration next before going, seing there is no word of the
newter gender before to referre it to: if it bee not absurd that Christ is set for a downefall for many, no more is it, that many should be set for this to stumble at the preaching and so fall. They were set for this of god, as a iust iudge, by that meanes reuenging the sinnes of the re∣bellious and stubburne Scribes and Pharises, and punishing them with sinnes. For all sinne is either a proofe and declaration of mans frailty, as was the transgression of our fore-fathers (whome God suffered to fall to manifest and make proofe of the greatnes of mans weaknes, & how litle auailable euen the most innocent man of all other is, vnlesse he be vpheld by Gods especial grace) or els a iust chastisement, as are most of the sinnes of the holy, or els a pu∣nishment of former sinnes, or the merite of greater sinnes and punishments, as are all the sinnes of the reprobats. Therefore they are not placed to this of themselues: and it is not more absurd that the disobedient are placed to this of God, to stum∣ble at the preaching of the gospell, then for Christ to be set of God in Sion a stone to stum∣ble at, a rock of offence, or that the ministers of the gospell should be a good sauour vnto god at the very time that they are a sauour of death vnto death. 3. They were put, is the same that they were ordained, appointed, and by consequence stir∣red vp and framed as Paul speakes Rom. 9.17.
and 22. whereupon this also doth ensue that necessitie to sinne, is laid as a iust iudgement v∣pon the vnregenerate. 7. They are vessels of wrath made to dishonor & framed to destruction. Rom. 9.21.22. Now here ariseth a great doubt, who did make & frame them so. God, or the deuill, or thēselues. Some cauilling sophisters say themselues: some saye the deuill: both these do rake the heresie of the Maniches out of hell. But the orthodoxall writers say, God. August. ton. 4. lib. 1. ad simplie. quaest. 2. Behold he hateth Esau, which vessel himself did make to dishonor. And a little after: In that of the number of the vngodly whome he doth not iustifie, hee maketh ves∣sels to dishonor, he doth not hate this in them that hee maketh, for in as much as they are vvicked they are abominable, but in as much as they are made vessels, they are made for some vse, that by their appointed punishments the vessels that are made to honor might take some profite: therefore God doth not hate them neither so farre forth as they are men: nor yet as they are vessels: that is to say, neither that which hee ma∣keth in them by creation, nor that he maketh in them by ordination: for he hates nothing of that he made. But yet in as much as he maketh them vessels of de∣struction, he maketh them for this vse, to correct o∣ther; for he hateth the wickednes in them, which hee made not: for as a iudge hateth the fact in a man, but doth not hate that he is set to the mines. For that the theefe doth, this the iudge doth; so God in making of the corruption of the wicked vessels of destructiō doth
not hate that hee doth himselfe: that is, the worke of his owne ordination. So againe tom. 7. lib. 2. de nupt. & concup. ad Valer. cap. 3. God is so the maker of them that are borne, that all of one goe into condē∣nation, whose deliuerer he is by regeneration: for he is termed a potter, of the same lump making one vessell to honor according to his mercie, another to disho∣nor according to iudgement: And in the same book cap. 16. God by his owne goodnes made men, the first with∣out sinne, and the rest vnder sinne for the vses of his owne profound counsells: for as be knew not vvhat to doe with the euilnes of the deuill himselfe, & what∣soeuer he doth is iust and good, though he of whome he doth it is on iust and naught, neither refused there∣fore to make him, because hee knew he would be euill; so of the whole stock of mankinde, though no man is borne without the contagion of sinne, he worketh good who i  good, making some as it were vessels of mercie, whom he seuereth from those that are vessels of wrath by grace, other as it were vessels of wrath, to make knowne the riches of his glorie vpon the vessels of mercie. Now let this fellow goe and dispute against the Apostle whose sentence this is, nay against the pot∣ter himselfe, whome the Apostle forbids to aunswer saying; O man who art thou, that makest aunswer to God? doth the clay say to him that made it, vvhy hast thou minde me thus? hath not the potter povver ouer the clay to make of the same lump, one vessel to honor, another to dishonor? doth he then denie that the ves∣sels of wrath are vnder the deuill? or because they are vnder the deuill, doth any other make them but hee,
that makes the vessels of mercy or of any other stuffe, but of the same lump. Againe tom. 2. Epis. 105. ad Sixtum. pag. 302. But if there be vessels of vvrath, which were made to destruction, vvhich is giuen them of due, let them thanke themselues: because they are made of the same lump, which God did iustly & worthely condēne for one mans sinnes sake wherein all had sinned. 8 They are of old ordained to this condemnati∣on. Iud. ver. 4. VVranglers say, this is the mea∣ning of these words, of whome it was long agoe written and fore-told in the bookes of the Prophets, that at their time they should creepe in and molest the church of God, and in the ende come to euerlasting perdition. But it is plaine that they delude the Apostles words. For he saieth not, of vvhome it vvas vvritten, but, vvhich (that is men) vvere before described. For I praye you what manner of speach is this, of certaine men it is forewrit∣ten and prophecied to this destruction. The true and naturall sence of these words is this. Those wicked men are long since ordained, and appointed to this condemnation: of whome are they ordained and appointed? of God: howe? by his eternall counsell and decree. And he whosoeuer he is, that re∣prehends this doctrine, as absurd, reprehends Gods iustice and power as absurd: For in that God reiecteth manie, maketh the wicked man against the daye of euill, sets the re∣probate for this, to stumble at the preaching
of the Gospel, makes them to dishonour, frames them for destruction, it is the iust worke of Gods iudgement, which we must no lesse holily and faithfully maintaine, then the work of his mercie. Againe, we must so maintaine Gods mercie, as that we ouerturne not nor darken his iu∣stice. He that can take it let him take it: he that cannot, let him leaue it to such as can: and ne∣uer let him finde fault with that he hath not learned, nor speake ill of that he doth not vn∣derstand. As all men haue not faith, so haue not all men the knowledge of the mysteries of faith. 9 The mysteries of the kingdome of hea∣uen are hid from them. Math. 11.25. 10 They are hated of God. Mal. 1.3. Ro. 9.13 11 Christ is placed to them for a fall. Luk. 2.34. 12 The preachers of the Gospel are to thē the sauour of death to death. 2. Cor. 2.16. 13 They are hardned of God according to his will. Rom. 9.17. 14 God giueth them the spirit of stumber, eies not to see and eares not to heare, Esa. 29.10. and 6.9. 15 They are cursed for euer. Math. 25.41. 16 They are not of God. Ioh. 6.47. 17 They are not written in the booke of life. Apoc. 17.8. 18 It is not giuen to them to know the my∣steries of the kingdom of heauen. Mat. 13.11.
19 They beleeue not, Ioh. 12.39. because they are not of Christs sheepe. Ioh. 10.26. 20 They cannot beleeue, because god hath blinded their eies. Ioh. 12.39. 21 They are not healed, that is, obtaine not remission of sinnes, Math. 13.15. Mark. 4.12. 22 They obtaine not righteousnes & life, but waxe hard, Rom. 11.7. 23 They are not regenerated, first because they are not made righteous: for denying of the cause makes the effect be denied; they that are not iustified before God are not regene∣rated, because regeneration is the insepara∣ble effect of iustification. Secondly, because God hath giuen them the spirit of slumber, eies that cannot see, eares that cannot heare. Rom. 11.8. 24 They are not conuerted. Math. 13.11. Mark. 4 12. 25 They cannot receiue the spirit of truth, because they neither see nor know it. Ioh. 14. 26 Christ reckeneth them not as his. Mat. 7.23. I know you not. 27 He doth not pray to the father for thē. Ioh. 17.9. Now remaine examples of them,Examples which are so many, as damned persons. For none is condemned, but he is reprobated from euer∣lasting: as, Cain, Esau, Saul, Achitophel. Iudas Iscariot, Simon Magus, Caligula, Nero, Helio∣gabalus, &c. And thus through the assistance of God I
haue brought this doctrine of Predestination to an ende. The Lord graunt by the same assi∣stance of his grace, that it may serue for the setting forth of his glorie, and edifying of his Church. Nowe because Augustine assoyles many doubts which arise in the secret of Predestina∣tion in Tom. 4. lib. 1. ad Simlis. in his answer to the second question, I haue thought good to set downe the whole answer in this place. His words are these: But now I iudge it high time to proceede to the other question, which in these wordes you haue laide downe, of that that is written, Rom. 9.11. Neither he onely felt this, but also Rebecca when shee had conceiued by one, euen by her father Jsack. For ere the children were borne, and when they had done neither good not ill, &c. to the nine and twentie verse, Except the Lord of hostes had left vs a seede, &c. we had beene as the citie of Gomorrah. The whole discourse beeing debated, would be something more intricate. But I shall not be able to explane these things rightly vnto you, as I know you looke for at my handes, vnlesse you become an humble suter to God for me, by whose helpe beeing made something more confi∣dent, I willingly come to the point. And first I meane to betake my selfe to the full intent, and scope of the Apostle, quite through the e∣pistle, which I will chiefly respect. And that intent, I take it to be this; That no man boast
him of his good deedes, as the Israelites did, because they had beene obedient vn∣to the law which was giuen them, thereup∣on challenging wholly vnto themselues the grace of the Gospel of God, as due to them by desert, and denying that it was to be of∣fered to the Gentiles, who were altoge∣ther vnworthie of it, vnlesse they would re∣ceiue the sacraments of the Iewes. The which doubt, is cleared in the Acts of the Apostles. For they vnderstoode not, that euen for this cause, because it is the grace of the Gospel, therefore it is not due to workes. Otherwise this grace should now be no grace at all. And this is in many places testified by faith, preferring grace before workes, not that it might thereby cleane extinguish workes; but that it might shew how workes doe not goe before grace, but rather followe it: and that no man therefore: ought to thinke, that he hath receiued grace, because he hath wrought well; but rather that he could not possibly haue wrought thus wel, vnlesse he had first receiued grace by faith. Now a man be∣ginneth then to receiue grace, when beeing stirred to faith, in or by some earthly admoni∣tion, he beginneth to beleeue in God. But it concerneth vs to know at what time, or cele∣bration of the lacraments, a more full and e∣uident grace is infused into vs. For euen those which haue not beene instructed, doe not beleeue, or else Cnelius did not, when by
his giuing of almes, and making of praiers, he seemed worthie to haue an Angel sent vnto him. But, had he not first beleeued, he would neuer haue wrought such thinges. Neither would he euer haue beleeued, vnlesse he had bin called, either by the secret admonitions of his minde, and spirit; or else by the more ma∣nifest warnings through the senses and parts of his bodie. But some haue onely so much grace of faith, as that they can not attaine vnto the kingdome of heauen thereby; as those which are newly taught, and as Corne∣lius before he was made a member of the Church, by the participatiō of the sacraments. Now contrariwise, this grace of faith is so great in others, that they be euen now repu∣ted members of Christ and of the Church of God. For the temple of the Lord, saith the Apo∣stle, is holy, which you are. And this is the Lords owne saying, Vnlesse a man be borne of water and the holy Ghost, be can not enter into the kingdome of heauen. There are then certaine beginnings of faith, much like vnto conceptions, yet not∣withstanding we most not onely be concei∣ued, but also borne, that we may fully enioy e∣uerlasting life. Neither is any thing of all these, without the grace of the great mercie of God; because if there be any good workes, they follow this grace, as we saide before, and can in no wise be before in. Which thing the Apostle beeing very desirous to perswade vs, because, as he mentioneth in an other place;
it is not from vs, but it is the gift of God, not by reason of our workes, least peraduenture any man should extoll himselfe, he spake of them which were not yet borne. For no man could say that Iacob beeing now vnborne did mooue God by his workes to speake of him: And the elder shall serue the younger. Therefore, saith he, not onely Isaac was pro∣mised, when it was saide, About this time I will come and Sara shall haue a sonne, who by no meanes may be thought to haue deser∣ued at Gods handes by his workes, to be thus promised before his birth, and that the seede of Abraham should be called in Isaac. That is to say, That those should belong to the companie of the Saints, which is in Christ, who knewe them-selues to be the sonnes of pro∣mise, not waxing proude vpon any of their owne deserts, but imputing it wholly to the grace of vocation, that they were made fellow heyres with Christ. For when they were pro∣mised onely, it could not be that they as yet deserue any thing, before they themselues had any beeing. But Rebecca also hauing brought forth after one copulation with our father Isa∣ac, vttereth this saying very circumspectly. Af∣ter one copulation. For shee conceiued a cou∣ple, least peraduenture, it might be attributed to the fathers deserts, if some man should speake on this manner; The sonne is thus, or thus, because at the very same instant that he
was placed into the wombe of the mother, the father was thus, or thus affected: or because the mother was thus affected when she con∣ceiued him. For both Isaac begot them both at one time, and Rebecca at the same time conceiued them both. To commende this thing vnto vs, shee speaketh thus, By one co∣pulation. That shee might neither leaue any place here for the Astrologian, or rather to that kinde of soothsaier, who by the nariuitie is woont to coniecture of the conditions, and fortune of those which are borne. For they haue nothing to alleadge for themselues, why at the same conception, likewise at the same moment, the constitution of the heauens, and planets nothing differing, when euery thing did so ioyntly agree, there was such great diffe∣rence betwixt that couple. And they may easily perceiue, if they please, that those their an∣swers which they sell to poore distressed wret∣ches, proceede not from any art, or skill they haue, but onely from a casual kinde of suspiti∣on. But to leaue all things not pertinent to our matter. These things are rehearsed to break the neck of their pride, who are so vnthankfull for the grace of God, and dare boast of their owne deserts. For when they were yet vn∣borne, and had done neither good nor euill, not for their works, but in regard of him who called them, it was saide vnto him, that the el∣der shal serue the yonger. This grace therfore is
his who calleth, & consequently good works are his who receiueth this grace; yet not so as that they were the bringers forth of grace, but rather themselues were brought forth by grace: euen as the fire doth not heare other things that it selfe may be hotte, but because it selfe is hotte, nor the wheele doth therefore runne smoothly that it may be round, but be∣cause it is round: so no man doth therefore effect good workes, that he may hereafter re∣ceiue grace, but because he hath alreadie re∣ceiued it. For how can he liue righteously who hath not beene iustified, or he holily, who hath not beene sanctified, or he at all liue, who hath not had life ministred vnto him? Now grace doth iustifie, that he which is iustified may liue righteously. Grace therefore is first, and then follow good workes, as he saith in an o∣ther place. But to him which worketh there is a reward ascribed, not according to grace, but according to debt: As that immortalitie after good workes, yet if it be required as due, as the same Apostle saith, I haue fought a good fight, I haue runne my race, and kept my faith, and nowe there remaines a crowne of iustice for me, which the Lord beeing a iust and vpright iudge shall render vnto me in that day. For happily because he saide, he shall render, it is now vpon debt. But when he ascending lead captiuitie cap∣tiue, he did not render, but bestowed gifts vpon men. For whereupon I pray you
should the Apostle presume, that it was resto∣to him as dew, vnlesse he had before receiued grace which was not dew, whereby being iu∣stified, he fought a good fight? For he was a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and a doer of wrong; but he obtained mercie, as himselfe te∣stifieth; beleeuing verely in him, who iustifieth not the godly, but the vngodly, that by iustifi∣ing him he may make him godly: not in regard of their works, saieth he, but in regard of him which calleth, it is said vnto him, that the elder shall serue the younger. Hither tendeth that which he saith, for whē they were yet vnborne, and had done nothing, either good or euill, that it might be said, not for their works, but in regard of him that calleth: whereuppon it commeth to my minde to enquire, wherefore he said, that Gods purpose might remaine, ac∣cording to his election. For how may that be called, not onely a iust election, but so much as a bare election, where there is no difference? For if Iacob, vnborne as yet, & hauing wrought nothing, was not chose for any desert of his, neither could he be chosen at all, there being no difference whereby he might be chosen; A∣gaine if Esau was disliked without any desert, because he was as yet vnborne & had wrought nothing: when it was said, and the elder shall serue the younger: how can his reproofe bee thought iust? with what discretion therfore, or with what proportion of equitie, do we vnder∣stand that which followeth, I haue loued Iacob,
but hated Esau? which thing is set downe in a Prophet, who was long after their birth and in∣terring. But yet that sentence should seeme to haue beene spoken whereby it is said, and the elder shal serue the younger, before they were borne or had yet wrought any thing: Where-hence therefore is this election, or what māner of election may it bee thought to bee, if these two being yet vnborne, and cleane voide of works, there were no quantitie of desert? or wil you say that their natures & essences did some thing differ? who can euer gather this by one father, one mother, one copulation, one ma∣ker? Or did the same maker, as he brought forth diuers kindes of liuing creatures and mates, out of the same earth: so out of the same marri∣age of man and woman raise a diuers issue which he might partly affect, and partly hate? There was no election therefore, before there was that which might be elected. For if Iacob were made good to the intent that hee might please, how did hee so please before hee was, that he might be made good? Therefore he was not chosen that he might be made good, but being now made good he might verie well be chosen. What therefore according to electi∣on, because God foreseeing all things, had also a foresight into Iacobs future faith being yet vnborne? That although euery man do not de∣serue to be iustified by his works, since he is not able to worke: but being iustified, yet because God doth iustifie the nations by faith, and no
man beleeueth but of a freewil, God foreseing the future will to beleeue, chose him before he was borne, vpon the foresight wherby he iusti∣fied him. If thē electiō be through the meanes of this foresight, and God did foresee the faith of Iacob, what proofe cā you bring for it, whē as hee chose him not nowe in regard of his works? But because neither of them was yet borne, nor had done good or euill, hitherto likewise neither of thē had beleeued. But as by reasō of this foreknowledge he had an insight into his future beliefe, so by the same he might assure himselfe of his works which were to en∣sue. That as he is said to be chosen for the after faith, which God was priuie to before hand, so some other bodie may affirme, that he was ra∣ther chosen for those works of his which were to come, whereof notwithstanding God had a certaine foresight. Whereuppon therefore the Apostle sheweth, that it was not spoken by rea∣son of their works, And the elder shall serue the younger; but because they were not yet borne, it was not onely not spoken in regard of their works, but euen without any respect of their faith also, because before their birth, they had no iotte at all of either of them. He would not therefore haue vs vnderstand that by this fore∣knowledge there was choise made of the yoū∣ger, that the elder should serue him; for being desirous to shew that works were not the cause of this election, he did add this vppon set pur∣pose saying, for when they were yet vnborn, &
had done neither good nor euill. Otherwise might it haue bin obiected to him: yea but god did now know whatsoeuer he was to do here∣after. Wherefore, may it be demaunded, where hence did this election spring? because certain∣ly it could in no wise arise from works, which in these yet not borne, were none at al; nor from faith which was euen as little to be seene in thē as the other. Shall we say that there could be no election, so lōg as there appeared no diuer∣sitie either of faith, or works, or any deserts at all in the wombe of the mother? But it is said, that the decree of god might remain according to the election, & we therefore demaund be∣cause it is said, vnlesse peraduenture we must make this distinction vppon the sentence, that we do not vnderstād it to be spoken not in re∣gard of the works, but in regard of him which calleth, whē it is said, And the elder shal serue the younger, that the decree of God might re∣maine according to election; but thus rather, that no election at all being here vnderstood, we should receiue this as an example of those who were neither yet borne, nor had wrought any thing at all. For whilst they were yet vn∣borne, & had done nothing, either good or euil, that the decree of God might remaine accor∣ding to electiō: that is to say, and had done ne∣ther good nor ill, in so much that for the verie, actiō there might be some choise made of him who had done wel▪ Since therfore there was no choise of the wel doer, according to which the
decree of god might remaine, not in regard of works, but of him which calleth: that is to say, of him which by calling the vngodly to faith through grace, doth iustifie him, it is said, & be∣cause the elder shal serue the yoūger. Therefore the decree of god doth not remaine according to electiō, but electiō by the decree: which is in effect as much as one should say, the decree of gods iustificatiō doth not therfore remaine, because God hath foūd any good works in mē which he may choose. but because that doth re∣maine that he may iustifie those which beleeue therefore hath he found out works, which hee may choose for the kingdome of heauen. For were there no election, what elect could there be? or how might it be well said, who stood ac∣cuser against the elect of God? yet election go∣eth not before iustification, but iustification before election. For, what should any be ele∣cted, vnlesse there were some difference be∣tweene him and the reiected person? Wherev∣pon I know not what to make of the saying, because God hath chosen vs before the foun∣dation of the world, vnlesse I should thinke that here is vnderstood foreknowledge. But whereas he saith in this place; It was said vnto him not in regard of workes, but of him who calleth, because the elder shal serue the yōger, he wold haue the place thus interpreted, not by choise of merits, which shew themselues after the iustification of grace, but by the infinitenes of Gods rewards, least some man should boast
himselfe of his works. For we are saued by the grace of God: And this proceedeth not from workes, but it is the benefite of God; not from works least some man peraduenture should be puffed vp. Now there ariseth a doubt by the way, whether faith merit a mans iustification, or it be rather to be thought that the deserts of faith, do not go before the mercie of God, but the faith is rather to bee accounted amongst the gifts of grace. Because euen in this place, when he had said, not by workes: he doth not presently inferre, but by reason of faith it was said vnto him, because the elder shall serue the younger, but this is it which he addeth imme∣diatly, but for his sake which calleth. For no man beleeueth, vnlesse he be called: Nowe the mercifull God calleth, giuing thus much to no merits of faith, because they rather follow vo∣cation then goe before it: for how shall they beleeue him whome they haue not seene? and how shall they heare vnlesse some man telleth them? If therefore in calling, the mercie of god go not before, neither without doubt can a mā beleeue, that hereby he may begin to be iusti∣fied, and receiue power to do well: Grace then is before all desert: For Christ died for the wic∣ked. Wherefore it was giuen to the younger that the elder should serue him, not for any deserts of his owne, but in regard of him who calleth, and that should bee imputed to the calling of God, & not to Iacobs works where it is written, I haue loued Iacob. But what was
the reason that Esau serued his younger bro∣ther, and that it was thus written of him, but E∣sau haue I hated? what euill had he committed whereby he deserued this, being yet vnborne and hauing done neither good nor euill when this was spoken of him, and the elder shall serue the younger? Or will you say, that as that was spoken of Iacob for no good thing done on his part: so this is also said of Esau for no badd deed of his that he was hated? For if be∣cause God foreknew his bad works which he was to performe hereafter, he was therefore predestinated to serue his younger brother, by the same reason was Iacob predestinated also to be serued by his elder brother, because God foresaw his future good works: And then it is verie false which he saith, not by works. If then it bee true, that there was not such force of works, and he proues that after this māner, be∣cause this was spoken of those which were yet vnborne, and had wrought nothing, & likewise if faith be of as little moment, which they were euen as much naked of before their birth, how could Esau deserue to be hated, being as yet vnborne? For without all question God made those things which he loued. And there is ano∣ther place of scripture which will condemne vs of great absurditie, if we say he made those things which he hated, for nether wouldst thou haue ordained any thing that thou batest, nei∣ther hast thou hated any of these things which thou hast ordained. For vpon what desert was
the sunne made to be the sunne, or in what thing had the moone offended that it was made so much inferiour to the sunne, or what had it deserued whie by the creation thereof it should so much exceede the other starres in brightnes? But all these things beeing good were seuerally made in their kinde. For God would not say I haue loued the sunne and ha∣ted the moone, or I haue loued the moone, and hated the other starres, as he saide I haue loued Iacob, but Esau haue I hated. But God loued all those things, notwithstanding their difference in excellencie, because he saw that they were good, when they were ordained at his word: but there was no shew of iustice, that without some merit of iniustice, he should haue hated Esau. VVhich beeing graunted, it wil necessarily follow, that Iacob was also lo∣ued for some merit of righteousnes. And if this be true, that is most false, to say, he was not loued for his works. Or will you say it was for the vprightnes of his faith. I pray you what haue gained by this, since they beeing yet vn∣borne, could not possibly haue any vprightnes of faith? The Apostle very well perceiued therefore, what might arise out of these words to the minde of the hearer and ader, and for this cause immediatly added this which fol∣loweth, VVhat shall we say? Is there any vn∣righteousnes with God? god forbid. And tea∣ching that it cannot be so: For, saith he, he tel∣leth Moses thus: I will take compassion on
him, of whome I will haue compassion, and shew mercie to him, of whome I wil haue mer∣cie. By which words whether hath he released vs of our former doubts thinke you, or rather increased the same? For herein consists the ve∣ry head of all our doubts; If he takes compas∣sion on him, of whome he hath compassion, and shew mercie to him of whome he hath mercie, why did not Esau finde this mercie, that as Iacob, so he might also therby be made good. VVas this the cause why it was said, I will haue compassion on him of whome I will haue com∣passion, and will shew mercie to him of whom I will haue mercie, because whomsoeuer God of his mercie calleth, him also of his mercie he causeth to beleeue: and whome of his mercie he causeth to beleeue, to him also he will shew mercie, that is, he will make him merciful, that thereupon he may worke well? VVhereby we are admonished, that a man ought not to boast and puffe vp himselfe with the bare workes of mercie, as though by them as by his own works he hath woon God vnto him, since he receiued mercie it selfe through his meanes, who will take compassion on him, of whome he will haue compassion. But if any man will bragge that he hath deserued it by beleeuing, let him know that he was the ground of this beleefe, who by the inspiration of faith, taketh com∣passion vpon him of whome he will take com∣passion, that yet he might impart vocation to the vnbeleeuer. For there is now some diffe∣rence
betwixt the faithfull and the wicked. For saith he, what hast thou that thou hast not re∣ceiued? and hauing receiued it, why shouldest thou bragge as if thou hadst not receiued it? Indeede this is well, but why was Esau abrid∣ged of this mercie, that so he might not be cal∣led, and haue faith inspired into him beeing called, and by this faith be made mercifull, that thereby he might doe good workes? or was it because he himselfe refused it? why then if Ia∣cob did therefore beleeue because himselfe would, God bestowed not this faith vpon him, but himselfe by his willingnes gained it to himselfe, and so he had something which he did not receiue. Or doth God worke faith in men by calling them, because no man can be∣leeue vnlesse he be willing, nor any man be wil∣ling except he be called, nor no man by his owne power worke his owne calling? because bowsoeuer a man can not possibly beleeue a∣gainst his will yet without vocation he can in no wise beleeue. For how shall they beleeue him whome they haue not heard? or how shall they heare vnlesse it be preached vnto them? Therefore no man beleeueth but he that is cal∣led, nor doth euery one which is called be∣leeue. For many are called, but few are chosen. As also whosoeuer haue not contemned the caller, but followed him by beleefe, without doubt they haue beleeued willingly. But what followes? Therefore it is the power neither of him that willeth, nor yet of him which oste∣neth,
but of God onely which taketh compas∣sion. Or because vve cannot so much as vvill vnlesse vve be called, and our vvill is of no force to performe vvithout Gods assistance. VVe must therefore both be vvilling and also speedie. For that vvas not spoken in vaine, and in earth the peace of good vvill vnto men, and so runne, that you may take hold of. Yet it is in the povver neither of him that vvilleth, not him that runneth, but onely of God vvho ta∣keth compassion, that we may attain vnto that vvhich vve desire, and come thither vvhither vve vvish to come. Esau therefore refused, and vvould not runne, but although he had both beene vvilling and had also runne, yet it should haue beene the aide of God vvhich should haue brought him vvhither he vvould, vvho al∣so by calling him should cause him both to vvill and runne, vnlesse neglecting his vocati∣on, he vvould become a reprobate. For God doth one vvay cause vs to be vvilling, and an other vvay cause that to haue effect vvhich vve doe will and desire. For it hath pleased him that it should proceede partly from him, and partly from our selues to will any thing. But whatsoeuer it is that we do desire, it procee∣deth wholly from him; that is to say, to be a∣ble to doe well, and to liue blessedly. But Esau being yet vnborne could neither will nor nill. VVhy then was he disliked being in the womb of his mother? For he betakes himselfe againe to those difficulties, which are much more
troublesome, not only in regard of their owne obscurenes, but also of our so often recitall. For why was Esau reiected being yet vnborn, who could neither beleeue him which called, nor contemne the vocation, nor doe either good or euill, without Gods foreknowledge of that future ill disposition of his? why was not Iacob also approoued by Gods foresight into his good disposition which was to come? Now let it be but once granted, that any man was euer either approoued, or reprooued, for that which was neuer hitherto found in him, onely because God did foresee that it would be in him, it may be here hence very easily ga∣thered, that he might also be approoued by those works which God did foresee would be afterward in him, although he had not yet wrought any thing. And that will make very little to our purpose, that they were yet vn∣borne, when it was saide, And the elder shall serue the younger, hereby to shew it was not spoken in regard of workes, because he had not yet wrought any thing. And besides, if you marke those wordes well, Therefore it is nei∣ther in the power of him that runneth, nor of him that willeth, but of God which taketh compassion, you shall see that it is not the A∣postles drift hereby onely to prooue, that we come to that which we desire by the assistance of God, but also to signifie that which he in∣tendeth in another place, when he saith, With feare and trembling worke your owne safetie,
for it is God which worketh in vs both to will and to worke according to his owne good pleasure. VVhere he makes it very plaine, that euen the very will to good is caused, God wor∣king in vs. For if this be the onely ende of that saying, It is neither in the power of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God which taketh compassion, because mans will of it selfe is not sufficiently able to make vs line vprightly and well, without Gods mercie aiding vs, why may not it be said as well after this manner. Therefore it is not in the power of God which taketh compassion, but of man that willeth, because Gods mercie alone is not of force enough, vnlesse the agreeablenes of our will be added thereto? But that is most manifest, that our wil is not worth a rush with∣out Gods mercie. And yet me thinks that I can not tell what to say to the inferring of these words, That God taketh compassion to no ende vnlesse we be willing. For it necessari∣ly followes that we be willing, if God once take compassion. For it belongs to the same mercie, that we be willing. For it is God who according to his owne good pleasure worketh in vs both to will, and to doe. For I should woonder if any man would denie me that our will to good were the gift of God. Novv be∣cause our vvill to good doth not goe before vocation, but vocation before it, therefore it is most iustly attributed to God that vve vvill, but by no meanes to vs, that vve are called.
VVe must not therefore thinke that this is the cause vvhy it is saide, Therefore it is not in the povver either of him vvhich runneth, or him vvhich vvilleth, but of God vvhich taketh cō∣passion, because vve cannot attaine vnto that vvhich vve desire vvithout his helpe, but rather because vve haue no vvill vvithout his vocati∣on. But if this vocation be the cause of a mans vvill to that vvhich is good, in so much that vvhosoeuer is called attaineth to it, hovv then can that be true, Many are called, but fevv are chosen? VVhich if it be so, and he vvhich is cal∣led doe not consequently obey this calling, and moreouer it be in his vvill vvhither he vvill obey it, it may be very vvell said, It is not ther∣fore in the povver of God that taketh compas∣sion, but of man vvhich doth both vvill, and runne: because the mercie of him vvhich calleth is not sufficient, vnlesse there follovv a cer∣taine obedience of him vvhich is called. Or, it may be, that those vvhich beeing thus cal∣led doe not agree, beeing othervvise called, could applie their vvill to faith, vvhereby that might be also true, Many are called, but fevv are chosen. In so much that, notvvithstanding many are alike called, yet because all are not alike affected, they onely doe attaine vnto this vocation vvho are found fitte for the re∣ceiuing thereof: and that is euen as true, Therefore it is neither in the povver of him vvhich vvilleth, nor of him vvhich runneth, but of God vvhich taketh compassion, vvho so
called as he iudged it to be fitte for them vvho attained to this calling. Novv there came al∣so a calling to the lotte of other men, but be∣cause it vvas such a one, as that they could not be mooued thereby, nor vvere fitte to receiue it, they might indeede be tearmed called, but not chosen. And novv it is not likevvise true, Therefore it is not in the povver of God vvhich taketh compassion, but of man vvhich vvilleth; and runneth, because the vvorking of Gods mercie can not be in mans povver, in so much that his mercie should be of no force if man were vnwilling. Because if he would haue mercie vpon men he might so call them, as it was fitte for them, both to be stirred vp to vnderstand, and attaine to the same. It is ther∣fore very true, Many are called, but few are chosen. For those are elected who are congru∣ously called; but they which did not agree vn∣to, nor obey their vocation, howsoeuer they were called, yet are they not chosen, because they attained not vnto this vocation. Againe this is true; It is neither in the power of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God which taketh compassion on, because al∣though he call many, yet amongst those ma∣ny he taketh compassion on them onely whō he so calleth as it is meete for them that they may attain vnto this vocatiō. But contrariwise most false if any man say, therefore it is not in the power of God which taketh compassion: but of mā which willeth and runneth, because
God taketh compassion of no man in vaine, but he so calleth whomesoeuer he taketh pitie on, as he knoweth it to bee meete for him, to withhold him frō refusing him which calleth. But here will some man say, why then was not Esau so called that he had a desire to obey? For we see diuers men to bee moued by the same things sundry wayes shewed and signified, to beleeue, as for example, Simeon beleeued in our Lord Iesus Christ being yet a little infant, acknowledging him by the reuelation of the spirit. Nathanael after one sentence which hee heard from his mouth, before Philip called thee, when thou wert vnder the figge tree I saw thee, aunswered, Maister, thou art the sonne of god, thou art the king of Israel. Which because Peter confessed so long after, he deserued to heare, that he was blessed, and that the keyes of the kingdome of heauen should bee giuen vnto him. After he had done that miracle of turning water into wine, in Canaan a citie of Galilee, which the Euangelist S. Iohn reporteth to be the entrance to his other signes & won∣ders, his disciples presently beleeued in him. He trayned diuers to beleeue by speaking, & many beleeued not although he had raised the dead to life again. His disciples being terrified as concerning his crosse and passion, did stum∣ble; and yet that theefe did then beleeue, not when he saw him so excell in his works, but e∣uen whē he hung on the same crosse with him. And one of his disciples, after he was risen a∣gaine,
beleeued not so much his liuing parts, as the fresh wounds which had beene made in his flesh. Many of them by whom he was cru∣cified, who contemned him when they saw him worke miracles, beleeued his disciples prea∣ching of him afterwards, and working the like things in his name. Since therefore one man is stirred vp to faith one way, and another ano∣ther way, yea and oftentimes the same thing diuersly vttered worketh diuersly also in di∣uers persons, mouing or not moouing, accor∣ding as it is vttered, who dares say that that kinde of calling was wanting, whereby Esau might applie his minde, & ioyne his will to that faith, wherein Iacob was iustified. But if there can be such great stubburnes of the will, that the frowardnes of the minde can harden it self against all meanes of calling: I aske further whether this hardnes bee a punishment infli∣cted by God or not? For when God doth for∣sake vs by not so calling vs, as we may be mo∣ued to faith, who will also say, that the meanes whereby wee might be persuaded to beleeue, was wanting to the almighty? But why should we make any question of this, since the Apo∣stle addeth this immediatly: For the scripture saith to Pharao, because I haue stirred thee vpp hereto, that I might shew my power in thee, & that my name might be reported through the whole earth? Now the Apostle annexed this saying, that he might thereby proue that which he had said before: therefore it is neither in the
power of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God which taketh compassion. For, as if some man should question with him, what ground haue you for this? he aunswers, because the scripture saith to Pharao, because I haue stirred thee vp to this ende, that I might shew my power in thee, & that my name might be made knowne ouer the whole earth. And as he sheweth here that it is neither in the power of him that willeth nor of him that runneth: but of God which taketh compassion, so hee shutteth vp this: therefore he taketh pittie of whome he will and hardeneth whome he will, since both of them were not mentioned be∣fore. For it is not all one to say, it is neither in the power of him which willeth, nor of him which runneth, but of God which taketh compassion, and to inferre it thus: It is not in the power of him which willeth and contem∣neth, but of God which hardeneth. Wherehēce we may vnderstand that as that which in the latter place hee hath set downe both wayes, therefore he hath compassion on whom he wil, and hardeneth whom he will, may thus be ap∣plied to the former meaning, that the harde∣ning of God be thought to be his vnwilling∣nes to mercy, not that any of this be abrogated from man to make him worse, but onely that he arrogate nothing to himselfe to make him better, then indeed he is. But if there be diffe∣rence made of deserts, who hath not cause to burst forth into that cōplaint of the Apostles?
Doest thou then aske of me why he doth yet complaine, since no man resists his will? For God complaines oftentimes of men, as may appeare by many places of the scripture, be∣cause they will not beleeue, and like wel: wher∣vpon the faithfull and those which do the wil of God, are said to be conuersant without cō∣plaint, because the scripture complaineth not of them. But why doth he complaine, saith he, since no man resists his will, he taking compas∣sion on whome he will, and hardning whome he please? But let vs looke into that which wēt before, what thē shall we say? Is there any wic∣kednes with God? God forbidd. Let this there∣fore be rooted in the minde of euerie faithfull and religious man, that there is no wickednes with God; and let this be a chiefe point of our faith, whereunto we may stick close, that this which is spoken of God, that he will take com∣passion vpon whome he will take compassion, & harden whome he will: that is, that of whom it pleaseth him to haue mercie, he will, and of whome it pleaseth him not, he will not, that this I say; is a hidden point of his equitie, and dee∣per then mans shall ownes is able to search into which is to be obserued in al humaine affairs & earthly contracts, wherein vnlesse we should retaine some prints of heauēly iustice, the scope of our weake capacitie would neuer be able to looke vp or prye into the admirable secrecie, holines, and purenes, of spirituall precepts. Blessed are they which hunger and thirst after
righteousnes, because they shal be filled. Ther∣fore vnlesse we were cherished with some smal blasts of righteousnes descending from aboue, whilst we be combred with this mortall life & condition, we should first wither awaye be∣fore we would euer thirst. Wherefore since the fellowship of man is, as it were tied together, with a mutuall kinde of giuing and receiuing, and those things are giuen and receiued mutu∣ally, which are either due, or contrarie, who sees not that no man can bee iustly accused of vniustice, who demaunds that which is due vn∣to him, which is willing to forgiue, that which is due vnto him? But this is not at the pleasure of the debters, but of him to whome the debt belonges. This image, or as I said before, this print is setled in the businesses of men, from the verie heigth of equitie. Men therefore, since, by the testimonie of the Apostle, all doe die in Adam, from whome the very root of oftending God, sprong forth amongst all mankinde, are euen a lump of sinne owing penance to Gods great iustice, which whether God inflict vppon them, or pardon them, he shall by doing neither of the two shew himselfe vniust. But it is a tokē of great insolency in the debters to make them selues iudges to whome this punishment is to be forgiuen, and vpon whome to be inflicted, like as their indignatiō was most senseles who being hired in the vineyard, repined whē they saw others as largely rewarded as themselues. The Apostle doth thus therefore beat back all
impudencie that may arise out of this questiō. O man, who art thou, that doest thus gainesay God? For what doth he else, when that displea∣seth him which god complaines of concerning sinners? As if God do presently constraine a man to sinne, if he doe but only withhold the mercie of his iustification from him whilst he sinneth, and for this cause must be said to har∣den some offenders, not because he inforceth them thereto, but because he taketh not com∣passion on them? Now those they are of whom he taketh no compassion, vpon whome he fin∣deth in that secret iustice of his, to which mans weake sense is in no case able to attaine, that there is no compassiō to be taken: for his iudge∣ments are not to be searched, nor his pathes to be passed. But he iustly complaines of sinners, as of those whō he would by no meanes haue offend; and with all that those of whome hee bath compassion, seeing their god so grieuous∣ly to complaine of sinners, might attaine vnto this vocation, and being gauled euen at their verie heart, returne into his fauour. Most iustly therefore and mercifully doth he complaine. But if this moue vs, for that no man resisteth his pleasure, because whome he so pleaseth he helpeth, and whome he will againe he forsa∣keth; when both he whome he helpeth, and he also whome he forsaketh, come both of the selfe same lump of sinn, & howsoeuer both of them be subiect to punishment, yet one of them hath it pardoned vnto him, & the other
performed vpon him: If then this do moue vs, O man, who art thou, that thou gainsaist God: For I guesse it to bee all one with that where it is said, are you not men, and doe you not walke after the manner of men? for vnder this name are ment both the carnall, and the spirituall, to whome it is said I could not speake to you as to spirituall men, but as to carnall. And againe, for you could not as yet, neither hitherto can you: for ye are yet carnall. And againe, but a carnall man doth not vnderstand the thinges which belong to the spirit of God: To these therefore it is saide, O man, who art thou, that thou gainesaiest God? Doth that which is fra∣med say vnto him which hath framed it, why hast thou thus fashioned me? Or hath not hee which worketh in clay, power, to make out of the same heap, a vessell for honor, and a vessell for reproch? Euen therehence it may happely sufficiently appeare that hee spake to a carnall man, because the verie clay of which man was first framed, signifies as much. And because al, as I shewed ere whilst out of the same Apostle, are dead in Adam, he saith we are all of one & the same stuffe. And although one vessel bee made for honor, and another for disgrace, yet it must needs be that euē that which was made for honor, haue a carnall infancie, and so after∣wards arise vp to a riper kinde of spirituall age; since they were now made for honor, & borne in Christ, but being he speaketh to those which are yet infants, he calleth them carnall, saying,
I could not speake to you as to spirituall, but as to carnall. I gaue you being as yet little ones in Christ, milke to drinke not stronger meate, for neither were you able, neither yet are you: for euen yet ye are carnall. For all therefore he tearme them carnall, yet he addeth further that they are borne in Christ, and little ones in him, and sucklings; and in that he ioyneth to all this, neither yet can you: he insinuateth thus much, that when they haue profited something more hereafter, they will be able, because that now grace is begunne in them, being spiritu∣ally borne a new. Therefore they were now vessels made for honor, and yet so as that it might well be said vnto them, O man, what art thou, that thou shouldst gainesay God? And if it be rightly spoken to such, much more rightly may it be spoken to such as are not yet so rege∣nerate, but are made for disgrace. Let vs still hold this with a stedfast faith, that there is not iniustice with God: and whether he be contēt to pardon man his debt, or to exact it at his hands, neither can he rightly finde fault with his iniustice of whome he exacteth this debt, nor be in any case boast himselfe of his owne deserts to whome he forgiueth it. For both that is debt which the one payeth, and the other receiueth whatsoeuer he hath. But here wee must labour, with the help of God, to see how that may bee true, which is written, thou hast hated nothing which thou createdst. And a∣gaine that, I haue loued Iacob, but Esau haue I
hated. For if he therefore hated Esau, because he was a vessell made for disgrace, and the same potter maketh one vessel for honor another for disgrace, how hast thou hated nothing of that which thou createdst? For see, he hath hated E∣sau, which himself created a vessell for disgrace: which doubt may be thus manifested, that we know God to bee the maker of all creatures; now euerie creature of God is good: and euery man so farre as he is man, is a creature of god▪ but not as he is a sinner. Therefore God is the maker both of the bodie, and of the minde of man, and neither of these is euill, neither doth God hate either of them, for he hateth nothing which himselfe hath created. But the minde is more excellent then the body, and God, then either the bodie or the minde, being the maker and creator of them both, neither doth he hate any thing in man but sinne. Now the sinne of man is a certaine disorder & crookednes; that is to say, a turning backward from his excellēt maker, and a bending to his baser creatures. Therefore God hateth not Esau as he is a man, but as he is a sinner: as it is said of the Lord, He came amongst his owne, and his would not entertaine him: to whom also he saith himselfe, yet therefore haue not heard, because ye are not of God. How were they his? and how were they not of god? vnles because the one be spo∣ken of men, whom the Lord himselfe made, and the other of sinners whom the Lord him∣selfe did condemne. And yet the same are
both men and sinners: men, by their estate, but sinners by their owne proper will. Why then did he loue Iacob? was he not a sinner? But he loued in him not the fault, which he cleane extinguished, but the grace which he bestow∣ed on him. For Christ died for the wicked, yet not that the wicked should remaine dead, but that being iustified they might be conuerted from their wickednes, beleeuing in him which iustifieth the wicked. For God hateth wic∣kednes, therefore in some be punisheth it by condemnation, in others he taketh it away by iustification, as he thinketh best in those his vn∣searchable iudgements. And because he ma∣keth them vessels of disgrace amongst the wic∣ked, whome he doth not iustifie, he hateth not this in them which he maketh; for inasmuch as they are wicked, they are accursed, but in as much as they are made vessels, they are so made for some vse. That through the punishment ordained for them, those vessells which were made for honour might reape some profit. Therefore God hateth them, neither as they are men, nor as they are vessells; that is to say, he hateth not that in thē which by ordinance he made: for he hateth nothing that he hath made. But yet in that he maketh them the ves∣sels of perdition, he maketh them to the ende to correct others. For he hateth in them the wickednes, which himselfe made not. For as the iudge hateth the theft in the man, but not the weapon which he vsed in the attaining of his bootie, the one beeing the trespasse of a
thiefe, the other no more then the iudge him∣selfe doth and may vse: So God when out of the heape of wicked men he maketh vessels of perdition, hateth not that which he maketh, that is, the worke which he ordained, in the punishment due to those which perish, where∣in they of whome he taketh compassion may finde meanes of their owne saluation. So was it saide to Pharao: I stirred thee vp thereto, that I might shew my power in thee, that my name might be made knowne through the whole earth. This manifestatiō of the power of God, and illustration of his name through the whole earth, is good to draw them to feare, and correct their waies, with whom such a cal∣ling agreeth. So consequently he saies, that if God beeing desirous to shew his anger, and make knowne his power, did in great aboun∣dance of patience bring the vessells of anger, which were made for destruction (there must be vnderstood who art thou, that thou shoul∣dest gainesay God? that the sentence taking recourse to the former words, this may be the meaning.) If God beeing desirous to shew his anger, and make knowne his power, brought the vessells of wrath, who art thou that thou shouldest gainsay God? yet not only being de∣sirous to shew his wrath and make known his power, brought in abundance of patience, the vessels of wrath which were made for destru∣ction, but that which followes too; That he might manifest the riches of his glorie vpon the
vessels of mercie. For what profiteth it the ves∣sels made for destruction, that God sustaineth them patiently, that he may destroy the ordai∣ner, and vseth them as an instrument of other mens saluation, whome he taketh compassion on? But it likewise profiteth them for whose safetie he vseth these: That, as it is written, the righteous may wash his hands in the blood of the sinner, that is to say, that he may be clen∣sed from his euill workes through the feare of God, when he seeth the punishment of sinners. It therfore auaileth to cause a profitable feare in other men, and to make knowne the riches of Gods glorie toward the vessells of mercie which he hath prepared to glorie, that God willing to shew his anger, brought the vessels of wrath. For that hardning of wicked men maketh both these plaine: As wel what is to be feared that euery man may be conuerted to God in pietie, as also how great the graces of Gods mercie are, who sheweth how much he pardoneth some, by punishing others. But if that be no iust punishment which he inflicteth vpon some, he pardoneth nothing vnto others, vpon whō he doth not inflict this punishment. But because that is most iust, and there is no in∣iustice with God, who is able worthily to thanke him that remitteth this, which if he would inflict vpon vs, no man could rightly say that he ought not. Whom also he called. Vs, quoth he, not only of the Iewes but also of the Gentiles, that is, the vessells of mercie which
he prepared to glorie. For he called not all the Iewes, but some of them: nor all the Gen∣tiles, but likewise some of them. For there is one lumpe of sinnefull and wicked men pro∣ceeding from Adam, wherein both Iewes and Gentiles, the fauour of God beeing set apart, haue equall share. For if the pot∣ter, as out of the same heape he maketh one vessell for honour, an other for disgrace; now it is manifest that some of the Iewes are made vessels for honour, and some for dis∣grace, as likewise it is with the Gentiles. It followes that all be vnderstoode to belong to the same heape; Then he beginneth to rehearse diuers protestations of the Prophet in euery particular kinde, the order beeing chaunged. For first he spake of those of the Iewes which were conuerted, and afterwards of those of the Gentiles. Now he first alleadgeth testimo∣nie for the Gentiles, and then for the Iewes. For as he saith in Osee, I will call those which are not my people, my people, and those which are not my beloued, my beloued: and where it is said you are not my people, there shall it be said, you are the sonnes of the liuing God. This saying is meant of the Gentiles, because they had not one appointed place of sacrifice, as the Iewes had in Ierusalem. But the Apo∣stles were sent to the Gentiles, that euery one might beleeue, in the place where he was, and might there offer sacrifice of thanksgiuing, wheresoeuer they beleeued, to whom he gaue
power to be made the childrē of God. But E∣sai saith, he crieth out for Israel. That all Isra∣el may not be thought to haue gone again into destruction. And then he sheweth, that there were other besides made for honour, other for disgrace: If, quoth he, the number of the chil∣dren of Israel shall be as the sands of the sea, the remnant shall be safe; the rest of the com∣panie then, were vessels made for destruction. For, saith he, the Lord shall accuse vpon the earth. That is to say, that by the benefit of faith, he may saue those which beleeue through grace, not through the infinite ob∣seruations wherewith that multitude beeing most basely loaden was oppressed. For tho∣rough grace he finished his word for vs vpon the earth, saying my yoke is light, and my bur∣den pleasant: which is here mentioned a little after. The word is almost in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that is, the word of faith which we preach, because if thou confesse in thy mouth, because Iesus is the true Lord, and beleeue in thy heart, because God raised him from the dead, thou shalt be safe. For we beleeue in our heart for righteousnes sake, but confesse with our mouthes for saluation. This is that ac∣complished word which God made vpon the earth, by which accomplishment, the theefe was iustified, who hauing all his other mem∣bers fastened vpon the crosse, and these two onely free, beleeued in his heart for righteous∣nes, and confessed with his mouth for salati∣ons sake, thereupon deseruing to heare this,
To day shalt thou be with me in Paradise. For now his good works should follow, if by the receit of grace, he were to liue longer amongst men. But yet those good works went not be∣fore, that he might deserue the same fauour, beeing after his offence fastened to the crosse, to be transported to Paradise. And as Esaias foretold, saith he, vnlesse the Lord of the Sab∣both had left vs seede, this is in the same place, the remnant should be safe. But the other as vessells of destruction haue perished as they ought. And it was not their desert, that all of them perished not, as at the downefall of So∣dom and Gomorra, but the grace of God left a seede, from whence newe increase might spring throughout the whole world. And this a little after, So therefore, saith he, in this time also the residue was saued by election of grace. And if by grace then not by workes: otherwise grace is no grace. VVhat then? Israel obteined not that which it sought, but the chosen obtained it, the other beeing blinded. The vessels of mercie obtained it, but the ves∣sells of anger were blinded, yet proceeding both out of the same heape, as in the fulnesse of the nations. There is a place in the Scrip∣ture very fitte for the point which we haue in hand, ratifying the same with a woonderfull contestation, in the book, which some tearme, Iesus of Syracke, some Ecclesiasticus, where it is thus written. And all men are of the same mould or earth, from whence Adam was crea∣ted.
In the multitude of discipline, God sepa¦rated them and altered their waies. And some of them he blessed & exalted, sanctifying them and applying them to himselfe, and some he cursed and brought low, and turned them to their disagreement, as the clay of the potter in his hand, to lay it and order it. All his waies are according to his owne disposition, so man is in the hand of him which made him, and shall re∣store vnto him according to his iudgement. Good is contrarie to euill, & life to death: so is the iust also to the wicked. And so looke into al the works of the most high. Two against two, & one against one. Here first the discipline of God is commended. In the multitude of discipline, saith he, he separated them; From whence but onely from the blessednes of Paradise? And al∣tered their waies, that they might now liue as mortal men. Thē was there made one lump of all cōming out of the brāch of sinne, & punish∣ment of mortalitie, howsoeuer God made and created in all things good. For the shape & pro∣portiō of our bodies, is in euery member so well ordered, that the Apostle to winne men to charitie, did there hence draw a certaine likenes to be in all men. Our breath is also full of life, and cherisheth our earthly limmes, and all the nature of mā, by the gouernment of the soule, and seruice of the bodie, and wonderfully tempered condition thereof, but so that the lust of the flesh doth now raigne by reason of the punishment of sinne, had confounded all mankinde, as one and the same heape, the
guiltinesse from the beginning remaining o∣uer all; and yet it follows, some of thē he bles∣sed and exalted, and sanctified them, and ap∣plied them to himselfe, and some of them hee cursed and brought low, & set them at dissen∣tion among thēselues. As if the Apostle should say, Is it not in the potters power to make out of the same heap one vessell for honor, ano∣ther for disgrace? And therefore that which is added, and it is not vnlike that. As the potters clay, saith he, is in his hand to lay and order it: all his wayes are according to his owne dispo∣sition, so is man in the hand of him which made him. But because the Apostle sayes, Is there a∣ny iniustice with God? see also what he ioynes hereto, he shall pay him saieth he according to his iudgement. But since iust punishments are inflicted vppon the damned, yet because it is turned to that vse, that they may reap profite thereby who are taken pittie on; marke what followes. God is contrarie to euil, saith he, and life to death; so also the iust to the wicked: and so looke into all the works of the most high, there are two against two, and one against one. That out of the comparison of the good, bet∣ter may arise, which are better as it were by grace. As if he should say, the residue shalbe sa∣ued: he goes on and speaks in the person of the residue. And I haue very lately watched, some∣thing like one which gathereth grapes after the maister of the vineyard hath done. And how will he make this good, because not for their owne deserts, therefore by the mercie of god?
In the blessing of God, saith he, and I hoped: & like the labourer in the vineyard I filled my presse. For although he watched very lately, yet because, as it is said, the latest were first, he ho∣ping in the blessing of the Lord, glauncing out of the reliques of Israel, filled his presse out of the fertilitie of the vineyard, which proceeded from the whole world. Then I can see no other meaning of the Apostles, and all the iustified, through whome the knowledge of grace was shewed vnto vs, but that hee which boasteth should boast in the Lord. For who can search into the works of God, that out of the same heape, condemneth one, and iustifieth another? The free choice of will, is of great force; verie true: but it little auaileth them which are sold vnder sinne. The flesh saith he, lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, that ye cannot do what you would, we are warned to liue wel: this reward being propounded to vs, that we may get to liue blessedly for euer. But who can liue well, and do that which is good, vnlesse he be iustified by faith? we are warned to beleeue, that through loue receiuing the gift of the holy ghost we may do well. But who can beleeue vnlesse he be touched with some voca∣tion, that is, with some testification of things? In whose power is it to haue his minde tou∣ched with such a vision, as that his will may thereby bestirred vp to faith? And who embra∣ceth that in his minde which delighteth him not? Or who hath that power to meet with that
vvhich may delight him, or if he do meet vvith it, to delight himselfe therein? Since therefore those thinges delight vs by which wee may come to God, this commeth by the grace of God; not at our beck, nor is it gotten by our in∣dustrie or vvorks: because it is his gift that vve haue a will, industrie, and works of charitie. Therefore we are bidden to aske that we may receiue, to seeke that we may finde, to knock that it may be opened vnto vs. Is not one verie prayer sometime so luke warme, or rather so colde, and almost none, nay none at all, that we doe not so much as marke this in our selues with griefe, because when we grieue at it we do euen then pray also: What is therefore else shewed vnto vs, but that he commaunds vs to aske, seek, and knock, who bids vs flie all these things: therefore it is not in the power either of him which willeth or of him which runneth, but of God who taketh compassion on, since vnlesse he stirre vs vp thereto, we can neither will nor runne. But if here were any election, that we should thus vnderstand that which was spoken, The residue were saued, by the electi∣on of grace, not that the electiō of those which are iustified should be to life euerlasting, but that they might be knowne which are iustified, surely this is so secret an election, that it can by no meanes appeare vnto vs out of the same heap: or if it do appeare to some, I am content herein to acknowledge mine owne weakenes. For haue not wherewith to looke into the
choosing of men to sauing grace, if I be drawne by any cogitation to thinke vppon the top of this election, vnlesse I had either more witt or lighter sinnes, or both, or, if you will haue a fourth, vnlesse I had honest and profitable do∣ctrines: whatsoeuer hee bee therefore that is tainted but with the least sinnes, for well I know that there is none free from all sinne, if he be of a quick witt, and haue the liberall sci∣ences at his fingers ends, my thinks he is wor∣thie to be chosen to this grace. But whilst I professe thus, he which choseth the weak of the world that he may confound the strong, and the foolish that he may confound the wise, will come vpon me so, that I being now with ey∣ing him become somewhat shamefast, may thus scoffe at many, which both in regard of some sinners are something pure, and in res∣pect of fishers accounted orators. Haue we not seene many of these our faithful ones walking in the way of God, to bee for witt compared, not onely to no heretike, but not so much as to any base morrise dauncer? Againe do we not see diuers of both sexes liue in all matrimoni∣all chastitie without complaint, and yet either hereticks or pagans, or at least scarce warme in the true church and beliefe, in so much that we wonder seing them surpassed not onely in pa∣tience and temperancy: but also in faith, hope, and charitie, euen of verie bagages and stage∣players, who are but newly conuerted? It ther∣fore remaines that our wills be chosen. But
the bare will vnlesse something meet with it that delighteth and inticeth the minde, cannot by any meanes be moued. Now it is not in mās power that any such thing should meet with it. What was Sauls will, but to rush amongst, draw, binde, and kill the christians? what a raging, furious, and blinde will was his, who notwithstanding was made to dapp to the very ground by one voyce sent from aboue, and a vision appearing with it; which minde of his, & headstrong wilbēt to all crueltie, being wrung and wrethed to beleife; he was in a trise made of a maruelous persecutor of the gospel, a more maruelous preacher of the same. And yet what shall we say? is there any iniustice with God? which punisheth & pardoneth whom it please him, punishing them onely that deserue it, and pardoning y one, not for any thing that the pardoned can alleadge for himselfe? Is ther now any iniustice with God? God forbidd: but wherefore then doth he deale thus with one, and contrariely with another? O man, who art thou? if thou suffer not that which thou deser∣uest, giue God thanks: thou art happie: mar∣rie if thou do suffer it, thou hast no cause to cō∣plain: let vs only beleeue, if we cānot take hold of: because he which made euery creature, both spirituall and corporall, disposeth al things in iust number, weight, & measure: but his iudge∣ments are vnsearchable, & his pathes not to be trodden. Let vs say Alleluia, and sing a song of praise, without questioning, either what is this,
or for what ende was that? For all things were created in their due time. Hitherto were Au∣gustines words pertaining to the setting clear of the second question. And least any should thinke that Austin handled this doctrine which he sent to Simplician cōcerning prede∣stinatiō▪ more thē once heare what he himself, after he had absolued the 2. book of his retra∣ctations, writeth in the 7. tome of the 1. booke de praedest. Sanct. chap. 4. pag. 843. Ye see now what I thought then of faith and workes, al∣though it were my care to commend vnto you the grace of God, in which opinion I see that these brethren are now also, because they had not the like care to profit with me in these bookes, that they had to read them with me. For if they had taken any care, they might haue found this question discussed, according to the truth of the holy Scriptures, in the first of those two bookes which I wrote to Simplician bi∣shop ouer the Church of the Mediolanenses, that man of blessed memorie, in the very be∣ginning of his bishopricke, then succeeding S. Ambrose, vnlesse peraduenture they came not to the knowledge of those bookes; which if it be so, be a meanes. I pray you, that they may know them. Againe out of the same Au∣gustine, tom. 7. lib. de praedest. & grat. cap. 16. pag. 832. But I come to the little ones, I come to the twinnes; that is not enough; I come to those which are yet vnborne; which were be∣gotten at one and the same copulation, and
were to be brought forth at the same instant. The differing & diuers iudgemēt of Gods will appearing to thē, The greatnes of this question troubleth the senses of mē disputing so proud∣ly of the will of God. Now stretch thy winde∣pipe, and baule thou as loude as thy throat wil giue thee leaue, thou vniust accuser of the iust. What ill had he committed, tell me? or what good had the other deserued? and he aunswe∣reth thee, not I, but Paul the Apostle, truely nei∣ther of them had deserued any thing: but it is in the potters power, to make out of the same lump one vessell to honor, and another to dis∣grace: you will aske why? what confused diuer∣sitie is there in this iudgement? Let him againe confute this presumption, and say, O man what art thou that thou thus gainsaiest God? especi∣ally because the intent being againe chaun∣ged, aunswereth to that comparison of mans actions, that the creditor cannot be condem∣ned of iniustice, who meanes thus to dispose of two of his debters, that he will aske of one, & remit to the other, that which he may, if he please, exspect alike from them both. And sure∣ly it is most true, that in all the sleights & con∣tracts of mans conuersation, which are appli∣ed to the desciding of any matter or to the iudging of this iustice whereby we seeme to trie any other, it floweth into our hearts, out of the vnspeakable fullnes of Gods iustice, bles∣sed Iohn affirming that same in his gospell, be∣cause we haue all receiued of the fulnes there∣of:
of: which being so, with what impudencie shal man being as clay in comparison of the pot∣ter, iudge of God? Not onely saying why hast thou fashioned me so? but also with a damnable kinde of curiositie, questioning of others, and asking, why hast thou out of the same lumpe made one thus, and another so? If man, which at the first was made of nothing, were not borne subiect to death and sinne, and yet it would please God to send some of them into vtter destruction, who would say to the omni∣potent creator, why hast thou fashioned me so? For wee cannot denie him to appoint them to what end pleaseth him, who when they were not, gaue thē their being. Neither should some others say, why doth Gods iudgement differ, since all deserts are alike, because it is in the power of the potter, to make out of the same lump one vessell for honour, another for dis∣grace. But now since the damned be iustly pu∣nished, & those which are saued, cannot claime their saluation vpon due, who being forgetfull of mans estate, may so farre looke into the se∣cret of God, as that himselfe being deseruedly punished, he dare aske why another receiued that fauour which was not due vnto him? Mo∣ses therefore when he them taught that fleshly people, shewed that this diuine election, was not due to deserts, but that it was giuen to mē by the sole bountie of God. For thus he spea∣keth to the people most manifestly in Deute∣ronomie, Behold the heauen is the Lord thy
Gods, and the heauen which is aboue the hea∣uens, the earth and all that therein is. But the Lord chose your forefathers to loue them, and their seede, and after them he chose you be∣fore all other nations. And he added, Be ye circumcised therfore from the hardnes of your hearts, and stiffen not your neckes any more. But blessed Steuen, when he called vpon the Iewes, shewed that this hardnes of heart was in them, as I saide before. For he saith in the Acts of the Apostles on this wise. You haue alwaies resisted the holy ghost, with stiffe necks and vncircumcised hearts and eares. VVhere∣hence arose the stiffeneckednes in the people which was chosen from the whole world be∣sides, who by tenne miracles got to be freed from bondage, to whome the law was giuen, for whose safetie the mouthes of all the Pro∣phets did contend, for whome Christ became flesh, and to whome he was sent, but because there was blindnes ouer a great part of Israel, till it beeing adopted, out of the fulnes of the nations, entred into the kingdome, and the Lord shut vp all of them in incredulitie, that all of them might stand in neede of the mercie of the Sauiour. The sacraments of which diuine coūsaile, & mysterie of Gods maiestie, euen he which for persecutions & blasphemies deser∣ued not to be tearmed a vessel of electiō, short∣ly touching (for howsoeuer by the multitude of reuelations he knew them, yet he was faine to yeeld in regard of his humane weaknes) in ad∣miration
crieth out, O the depth of Gods most rich wisdome and knowledge! confessing fur∣thermore, that his paths and counsels were vn∣searchable. Therefore whensoeuer there ari∣seth any question amongst vs concerning such things, let vs wonder, and holding this still for certaine, that there is no iniustice with God, if that whereof there is doubt, be a thing ex∣ceeding our vnderstanding, and our capacitie cannot reach into the depth of it, let vs con∣fesse it to remaine in that fulnes of the iustice, mercie, and foreknowledge of God, without any breach of his iustice. Least disputing of the high secrets of Gods will, otherwise then the pitch of our estate will permit vs, we for∣sake the iustice of God, and coueting to build vp our own, fall downe headlong into the bottom∣lesse gulfe of diso∣bedience. FINIS.
