20287 99846069 11007
A lamentable tragedy mixed ful of pleasant mirth, conteyning the life of CAMBISES king of PERCIA, from the beginning of his kingdome vnto his death, his one good deed of ex∣ecution, after that many wicked deeds and tirannous murders, committed by and through him, and last of all, his odious death by Gods Iustice appoin∣ted. Doon in such order as foloweth. By Thomas Preston. ❧ The diuision of the partes. Councel. For one man. Huf. Praxaspes. Murder. Lob, the 3. Lord. Lord. For one man. Ruf, Commons cry, Cōmōs cōplaint Lord smirdis. Venus. Knight, For one man. Snuf. Small habilitie. Proof. Execution. Attendance. second Lord, Cambises. For one man. Epilogus. Prologue. For one man. Sisamnes. Diligence. Crueltie. Hob. Preparatiō the 1. Lord. Ambidexter For one man. Triall. Meretrix. For one man. Shame. Otian. Mother. Lady. Queene. Yung childe For one man Cupid.
❧ The Prologue Entreth. AGathon he whose counsail wise, to princes wele extēded: by good aduice vnto a Prince iij. things he hath cōmended First, is that he hath gouernment and ruleth ouer men: Secondly, to rule with lawes, eke Iustice (saith he) then. Thirdly, that he must wel conceiue, he may not alwaies reign: Lo, thus the rule vnto a Prince, Agathon squared plaine. Tully the wise whose sapience, in volumes great dooth tel: Who in wisdome, in that time did many men excel. A Prince (saith he) is of him self, a plain and speaking law: The law, a Schoole maister deuine, this by his rule I draw. The sage and witty Seneca, his woords therto did frame: The honest exercise of Kings, men wil insue the same. But contrary wise if that a King, abuse his kingly seat: His ignomy and bitter shame, in fine shalbe more great. ¶ In Percia there reignd a king, who Cirus hight by name: Who did deserue as I doo read, the lasting blast of Fame. But he, when sisters three had wrought, to shere his vitall thred: As heire due to take the crown, Cambices did procéed. He in his youth was trained vp, by trace of vertues lore: Yet (béeing king) did clene forget, his perfect race before. Then cleuing more vnto his wil such vice did immitate: As one of Icarus his kinde, for warning then did hate. Thinking that none could him dismay, ne none his fact? could sée Yet at the last a fall he took, like Icarus to bée. Els as the fish which oft had take, the pleasant bait from hook: In safe did spring & pearce the stremes whē fisher fast did looke. To hoist vp from the watry waues, vnto the dryed land: Then scaept, at last by suttle baight, come to the fishers hand. Ene so this king Cambices héer, when he had wrought his wil: Taking delight the Innocent, his giltlesse blood to spil. Then mightie Ioue would not permit, to procé offence: But what measure ye king did meat, ye same did Ioue cōmence. To bring to end wt shame his race, two yéeres he did not reign: His crueltie we wil dilate, and make the matter plain. Crauing that this may suffise now, your patience to win: I take my way, beholde I see, the players comming in. FINIS.
A Commedy of First enter Cambises the King, Knight and Councellor. Cambises. MY Counsaile graue & sapient with lords of legal train: Attentiue eares towards bend & mark what shalbe sain. So you likewise my valiāt knight whose māly acts doth fly By brute of fame ye sounding trump dooth perse ye azure sky. My sapient woords I say perpend and so your skil delate: You knowe that Mors vanquished hath Cirus that king of state And I by due inheritance possesse that Princely crown: Ruling by swoord of mightie force in place of great renown. You knowe and often haue heard tel my fathers worthy facts. A manly Marsis hart he bare appéering by his acts. And what? shall I to ground let fall my fathers golden praise? No, no, I meane for to attempt, this fame more large to raise, In that that I his sonne succéed his kingly seat as due: Extend your councel vnto me in that I aske of you. I am the king of Persia, a large and fertil soil: The Egiptians against vs repunge, as verlets slaue and vile. Therfore I meane wt Marsis hart, with warres thē to frequent Them to subdue as captiues mine this is my harts intent. So shall I win honors delight, and praise of me shall go: My Councel speak, and Lordings eke, is it not best doo so? Councel. Oh pusant king, your blifful woord{is}, deserues abundant praise That you in this doo go about, your fathers same to raise. Oh blifful day that king so yung, such profit should conceiue: His fathers praise & his to win, from those that would deceiue. Sure my true and souerain king, I fall before you prest: Answere to giue as duty mine, in that your grace request. If that your hart adicted be, the Egiptians to conuince: Through Marsis and the cōquest wun, then déed of happy prince Shall pearce the skyes vnto the throne of the supernall seat: And merit there a iust rewarde, of Iupiter the great. But then your grace must not turn back, from this pretenced wil For to procéed in vertuous life, imploy indeuour stil. Extinguish vice, and in that cup, to drink haue no delight. To martiall feats and kingly sporte, fix all your whole delight.
King. My Councel graue a thousand thanks, with hart I doo you ren∣der That you my case so prosperouse, intierly doo tender. I wil not swarue frō those your steps, wherto you wold me traū But now my Lord & valiāt knight, wt woord{is} giue answer plain Are you content with me to go, the Marsis games to try? Lord, Yea péerlesse Prince to aid your grace, my self wil liue and dye. Knight. And I for my habilitie, for feare wil not turn back: But as the ship against the rocks, sustain and bide the wrack. King. Oh willing harts, a thousand thanks I render vnto you: Strik vp your drummes wt courage great, we wil march foorth euen now. Councel. Permit (O king) few woords to héer, my duty serues no lesse: Therfore giue leaue to councel thine, his minde for to expresse. King. Speake on my Councel what it be, you shall haue sauour mine Councel. Then wil I speake vnto your grace, as duty dooth me binde. Your grace dooth meane for to attempt of war the manly art: Your grace therin may bap receiue with others for your parte. The dent of death in those affaires, all persons are alike: The hart couragious often times, his detryment dooth séek. Its best therfore for to permit, a Ruler of your land: To sit and iudge with equitie, when things of right are scand. King. My grace dooth yéeld to this your talk, tobe thus now it shall: My Knight therfore prepare your self, Sisamnes for to call. A Iudge he is of prudent skil, euen he shall beare the sway: In absence mine, when from the land I doo departe my way. knight. Your Knight befor your grace euē héer, him self hath redy prest: With willing hart for to fulfil as your grace made request. Exit. Councel. Pleaseth your grace I iudge of him to be a man right fit: For he is learned in the Law hauing the gift of wit.
In your graces presinct, I doo not view for it a méeter man: His learning is of good effect. bring proof therof I can. I doo not knowe what is his life, his conscience hid from me: I dout not but the feare of God, before his eyes to be. Lord. Reporte declares, he is a man that to him self is nye: One that faureth much the world, and to much sets therby. But this I say of certaintie, if he your grace succeed: In your absence but for a while, he wil be warnd indéed: No iniustice for to frequent, no partiall Judge to prooue: But rule all things with equitie, to win your graces looue. King. Of that he shall a warning haue, my heasts for to obay: Great punishment for his offence against him wil I lay. Councel. Beholde I sée him now agresse and enter into place: Sisamnes. Oh puisant Prince & mightie king, ye gods preserue your grace. Your graces message came to me, your wil purporting foorth: With grateful minde I it receiued, according to mine othe. Erecting then myself with spéed, before your graces eyes: The tenor of your Princely wil, from you for to agnise. King. Sisamnes, this the whole effect, the which for you I sent: Our minde it is to eleuate, you to great preferment▪ My grace and gratious coūcel eke hath chose you for this cause: In iudgment you doo office beare, which haue the skil in lawes, We think that you accordingly, by Iustice rule wil deale: that for offence none shall haue cause (of wrōg) you to appeale. Sisamnes. Abundant thanks vnto your grace for this benignitie: To you his councel in like case, with Lords of clemency. What so your grace to me permits, if I therin offend: Such erecution then commence, and vse it to this end. That all other (by that my déed) example so may take: To admonish them to flée the same, by fear it may them make. King. Then according to your woords, if you therin offend:
I assure you euen from my brest, correction shall extend, From Persra I meane to go into the Egipt land: Them to conuince by force of armes, and win the vpper hand. While I therfore absent shalbe, I doo you ful permit: As gouernour in this my right, in that estate to sit. For to detect and eke correct, those that abuse my grace: This is the totall of my wil, giue answere in this case. Sisamnes. Vnworthy much (O prince) am I, and for this gift vnfit: But sith that it hath pleasd your grace, that I in it must sit. I doo auouch vnto my death, according to my skil: With equitie for to obserue, your graces minde and wil. And nought from it to swarue indéed, but sincerely to stay: Els let me taste the penaltie, as I before did say. King, Wel then of this authoritie, I giue you you ful possession: Sisamnes. And I wil it fulfil also, as I haue made profession. King. By councel, then let vs departe, a finall stay to make: To Egit land now foorth with spéed, my voiage I wil take. Strike vp your drūmes vs to reioyce, to hear the warlike sound Stay you héer Sisamnes Iudge, and looke wel to your bound. ¶ Exeunt King, Lord and Councel. Sisamnes. Euen now the King hath me extolde, and set me vp aloft. Now may I were the brodered garde and lye in down bed soft. Now may I purchase house and land, and haue all at my wil: Now may I build a princely place, my minde for to fulfil. Now may I abrogate the Law, as I shall think it good: If any one me now offend, I may demaund his blood. According to the Prouerb olde, my mouth I wil vp make: Now it dooth lye all in my hand, to leaue or els to take. To deale with Iustice to my bound, and so to liue in hope: But oftētimes the birds be gone, while one for nest dooth grope. Doo wel or il, I dare auouch, some euil on me wil speake: No truely yet I doo not meane, the kings precepte to breake, To place I meane for to return my duty to fulfil. Exit.
¶ Enter the Vice with an olde Capcase on his hed, an olde pail about his hips for harnes, a Scūmer & a potlid by his side & a rake on his shhulder. ¶ Ambidexter. Stand away, stand away for the passion of God, Harnessed I am prepared to the feeld: I would haue been content at home to haue bod, But I am sent foorth with my speare and shéeld. ⁂ I am appointed to fight against a Snail, And Wilkin Wren the ancient shall beare: I dout not but against him to preuail, To be a man my déeds shall declare. If I ouercome him, then a Butter flye takes his parte, His weapon must be a blew speckled Hen: But you shall sée me ouer throwe him with a fart, So without conquest he shall go home again. If I ouercame him, I must fight with a flye, And a black pudding the flyes weapon must be: At the first blowe on the ground he shall lye, I wil be sure to thrust him through the mouth to the knée. To conquest these fellowes the man I wil play, Ha, ha, ha, now ye wil make me to smile: To sée if I can all men begile. Ha, my name, my name would you so fain knowe? Yea iwis shall ye, and that with all speed: I haue forgot it therfore I cannot showe, A, A, now I haue it, I haue it in déed. My name is Ambidexter I signifie one, {inverted ⁂} That with bothe hands finely can play: Now with king Cambices and by and by gone, Thus doo I run this and that way, For while I meane with a Souldier to be, Then giue I a leape to Sisamnes the Iudge: I dare auouch, ye shall his destruction see, To all kinde of estates I meane for to trudge. Ambidexter, nay he is a fellow if ye knew all: ¶ Enter three Russians, Huf, Ruf and Snuf singing. Huf,
Gogs flesh and his wounds these warres reioyce my hart: By his wounds I hope to doo wel for my parte. By Gods hart the world shall go euil if I doo not shift: At some olde Carles bouget I meane for to lift. Ruf. By his Flesh, nose, Eyes and Eares, I wil venter void of all cares. He is not a Souldier that dooth feare any dout: If that he would bring his purpose about. Snuf. Feare that feare list, it shall not be I: By Gogs wounds I wil make some neck stand awry. If I lose my share, I sweare by Gogs hart: Then let an other take vp my parte. Huf. Yet I hope to come the richest Souldier away: Ruf. If a man aske ye, ye may hap to say nay. Snuf. If a man aske ye, ye may hap to say nay. Snuf. Let all men get what they can, not to léese I hope: Where soeuer I go in eche corner I wil grope. Ambidexter. What & ye run into the Corner of some prety maid? Snuf. To grope there good fellow I wil not be a fraid. Huf. Gogs wounds what art thou that with vs doost mel? Tou séemest to be a Souldier the trueth to tel, Thou séemest to be harnessed. I cannot tel how: I think he ame lately from riding some Cow. Such a deformed slaue did I neuer see: Ruf doost thou knowe him? I pray thée tel mée. Ruf. No by my troth fellow Huf I neuer sée him before. Snuf. As for me I care not if I neuer sée him more. Come let vs run his Arse against the poste:
A ye: slaues, I wil be with you at the ofts. heer let him swinge thē ahout. A ye knaues, I wil teach ye how ye shal me deride, Out of my sight I can ye not abide. Now goodman pouchmouth I am a slaue with you: Now haue at ye a fresh again euen now. Mine Arsse against the poste you wil run: But I wil make ye from that saying to turn. Huf. I beséech ye hartely to be content: Ruf. I insure you by mine honesty no hurt we ment. Beside that again we doo not knowe what ye are: Ye knowe that Souldiers their stoutnes wil declare, Therfore if we haue any thing offended: Pardon our rudenes and it shalbe amended. Ambidexter. Yea Gods pitie, begin ye to intreate me? Haue at ye once again by the masse I wil beat ye. Huf. fight again Gogs hart let vs kil him, suffer no longer: Snuf. Draw their swords. Thou slaue we wil sée if thou be the strongar. Ruf. Strike of his hed at one blowe: we be Souldiers, Gogs hart let him knowe. Ambidexter. O the passion of God, I haue doon by mine honesty: I wil take your parte héeraster verily. All. Then content let vs agree: Ambidexter. Shake hands with me, I shake hands with thée. Ye are ful of curtesye, that is the best: And you take great pain, ye are a mannerly gest. Why maisters doo you not knowe me? the trueth to me tel: All. No trust vs, not very wel.
Ambidexter. Why I am Ambidexter who many souldiers doo loue Huf. Gogs hart to haue thy cōpany néeds we must prooue. We must play with bothe hands with our hostes & host Play with bothe hands and score on the poste. Now and then with our Captain for many a delay? We wil not stick with bothe hands to play. Ambidexter. The honester man ye, ye may me trust. ¶ Enter Meretrix with a staf on her shoulder. Meretrix. What? is there no lads heer that hath a lust: To haue a passing Trul to help at their néed? Huf, Gogs hart she is come indéed. What mistres Meretrix by his woūds welcome to me: Meretrix. What wil ye giue me I pray you let me sée? Ruf. By his hart she lookes for gifts by and by. Meretrix. What maister Ruf, I cry you mercy. The last time I was with you I got a broken hed. And lay in the stréet all night for want of a bed. Snuf. Gogs wounds kisse me my Trul so white: In thee I sweare is all my delight. If thou shouldest haue had a broken bed for my sake: I would haue made his hed to ake. Meretrix. What maister Ambidexter, who looked for you? Ambidexter. Mistres Meretrix I thought not to see you héer now. There is no remedy at meeting I must haue a kisse: Meretrix, What man? I wil not stick for that by gisse. Kisse Ambidexter,
So now gramercy, I pray thée be gone: Meretrix. Nay soft my fréend I meane to haue one. Nay soft I swere, and if ye were my brother: Before I let go I wil haue an other. kisse, kisse, kisse. Ruf. Gogs hart the whore would not kisse me yet: Meretrix. If I be a whore. thou art a knaue then it is quit. Huf, But hearst thou Meretrix, with who this night wilt ye lyee Meretrix. With him that giueth the moste monye. Huf. Gogs hart, I haue no money in pursse, ne yet in clout: Meretrix. Then get thée hence and pack like a Lout. Huf. Adieu like a Whore. Ezit Huf, Meretrix. Farwel like a knaue. Ruf. Gogs Nailes, Mistres Meretrix now he is gone: A match ye shall make straight with me: I wil giue thee sixpence to lye one night with thée. Meretrix. Gogs hart slaue doost thou think I am a six peny Iug: No wis ye Iack I look a little more smug. snuf. I wil giue her xviij. pnce to serue me first: Meretrix Gramercy Snuf, thou art not the wurst. Ruf. By Gogs hart she were better be hanged, to forsake me and take this Snuf. Were she so? that shall we sée. Ruf, By Gogs hart my Dagger into her I wil thrust.
Snuf. A ye boy, ye would doo it and ye durst. Ambidexter, Peace my maisters ye shall not fight: He that drawes first I wil him smite. Ruf. Gogs wounds Maister Snuf are ye so lusty? snuf. Gogs sides maister Ruf are ye so crusty? Ruf. You may happen to sée: Snuf, Doo what thou darest to me. Heere draw and fight. ¶ Heere she must lay on and coyle them bothe, the Vice must run his way for feare, snuf fling down his swoord and buckler, and run his vvay. Meretrix. Gogs sides knaues, séeing to fight ye be so rough Defend your selues for I wil giue ye bothe inough. I wil teach ye how ye shall fall out for me: Yea thou slaue Snuf, no more blowes wilt thou bide? To take thy héeles a time haste thou spied? Thou Villain séeing Snuf is gone away: A little better I meane thée to pay. ¶ He falleth down, she falleth vpon him and beat him and taketh away his weapon, Ruf. Alas good mistres Meretrix no more: My legs, sides, and armes with beating be sore. Meretrix. Thou a Souldier and loose thy weapon? Go hence Sir boy. say a woman hath thée beaten. Ruf. Good Mistres Meretrix my weapon let me haue: Take pitie on me mine honestie to saue. If it be knowen this repulle I sustain:
It wil redound to my ignomy and shame. Meretrix. If thou will be my man and wait vpon mée: This Swoord and Buckler I wil giue thee. Ruf. I wil doo all at your commaundement: As seruant to you I wil be obedient Meretrix. Then let me sée how before me ye can go: When I speake to you ye shall doo so. Of with your cap at place and at boord: Forsooth mistres Meretrix at euery woord. Tut, tut, in the Camp such Souldiers there be: One good woman would beat a way two or thrée. Wel I am sure Customers tary at home: Manerly before and let vs be gone. Exeunt. Enter Ambidex. Ambidexter. O the passion of God, be they héer stil or no? I durst not abide to sée her heat them so. I may say to you I was in such a flight: Body of me I sée the heare of my hed stand vpright. When I saw her so hard vpon them lay on: O ye passiō of God thought I, she wil be with me anon I made no more a doo but auoided the thrust: And to my legges began for to trust. And fel a laughing to my self when I was once gone: It is wisdome (quoth I) by the masse to saue one. Then into this place I intended to trudge: Thinking to meet Sisamnes the Iudge. Beholde where he commeth I wil him méet: And like a gentleman I meane him to gréet Sisamnes. Enter Sisamnes. Since that the Kings graces maiestie in office did me set: What abundance of welth to me might I get. Now & thē sōe vantage I atchiue, much more yet may I take: But that I fear vnto the king, that some, complaint wil make Ambidexter. Iesu maister Sisamnes you are vnwise.
Sisamnes. Why so? I pray ye let me agnise. What maister Ambidexter, is it you? Now welcome to me I make God avow. Ambidexter. Iesu maister Sisamnes with me you are wel acquainted: By me rulers may be trimly painted. Ye are vnwise if ye take not time while ye may: If ye wil not now when ye would ye shall haue nay. What is he that of you dare make exclamation: Of your wrong dealing to make explication? Can you not play with bothe hands and turn with the winde? Sisamnes. Beléeue me your woords draw déep in my minde. In colloure wise vnto this day to bribes I haue inclyned: More the same for to frequent of trueth I am now minded. Beholde euen now vnto me Suters doo procéed. Small habilitie. I beséech you héer good maister iudge, a poor mans cause to téder Condemne me not in wrōgful wise, that neuer was offender. You knowe right wel my right it is, I haue not for to giue: You take away from me my due, that should my corps reléeue. The Commons of you doo complain, from them you deuocate: with anguish great & greeuo{us} words, their harts doo penetrate. The right you sel vnto the wrong, your priuate gain to win: You violate the simple man, and count it for no sin: Sisamnes, Holde thy tung thou pratling knaue, and giue to me reward Els in this wise I tel thée trueth, thy tale wil not be heard. Ambidexter, let vs go hence, and let the knaue alone. Ambidexter Farwel Small habilitis for help now get ye none. Bribes hath corrupt him, good Lawes to pollute: Exeunt. small habillitie. A naughtie man that wil not obay the Kings constitute. with heuy hart I wil return til Ged redresse my pain. Exit. Shame. Enter shame with a trump black From among ye grisly gosts I come, from tirants testy train.
Vnséemly shame of sooth I am procured to make plain, The odious facts & shamelesse dée vs yt Cambises king dooth vse. All pietie and vertuouse life, he dooth it clene refuse. Lechery and drunkennes, he dooth it much frequent: The Tigers kinde to immitate, he hath giuen ful consent. He nought estéemes his councel graue, ne vertuous briging vp But dayly stil receiues the drink, of damned vices cup. He can bide no instruction, he takes so great delight: In working of iniquitie, for to frequent his spight. As Fame dooth sound ye royall trump of worthy men and frim: So shāe dooth blowe we strained blast, ye trump of shame on him. ¶ Enter the king, Lord, Praxaspes, and Sisamnes. (Exit. King, My Iudge since my departure hence, haue you vsed Iudgemēt right? If faithful stuard I ye finde, the same I wil requite. Sisamnes. No dout your grace shall not once hear, that I haue doon a mis. Praxaspes. I much reioyce to heare, so good newes as this. Cōmons cry. Enter cōmons cry running in speak this verse, go out again hastely. Alas, alas, how are ye Cōmons oppressed, By that vile Iudge Sisamnes by name? I doo not knowe how it should be redressed. To amend his life no whit he dooth frame. We are vndoon and thrown out of doore, His damnable dealing dooth vs so torment: At his hand we can finde no reléef nor succoure, God graunt him grace for to repent. Run away crying king. What doleful cryes be these my lord, yt sound doo in mine eare? Intelligence if you can giut, vnto your king declare. To me it séemeth my Commons all, they doo lament & cry: Out of Sisamnes Iudge moste chéef, euen now standing vs by. Praxaspes. Euen so (O king) it séemd to me, as you rehersall made: I dout the Iudge culpable be, in some respect or trade. Sisamnes, Redouted king haue no mistrust, no whit your minde dismay:
There is not one that can me charge or ought against me lay ¶ Enter Commons complain with Proof & Triall. Commons complaint. Commons complaint I represent, with thrall of dolful state: By vrgent cause erected foorth, my gréef for to dilate. Vnto the king I wil prepare, my misery to tell To haue reléef of this my gréef, and fettered feet so fel. Redouted Prince & mightie King, my self I prostrate héer Vouchsafe (O King) with me to beare, for this that I appéer. With humble sute I pardon craue, of moste royall grace To giue me leaue my minde to breke, before you in this place King. Commons cōplaint kéep nothing back, foar not thy tale to tel What ere he be within this land, that hath not vsed thee wel. As Princes mouth shall sentence giue, he shall receiue ye same Vnfolde the secrets of thy brest, for I extinguish blame. Commons complaint. God preserue your royall grace, and send you blisful dayes: That all your déeds might stil accord, to giue the God ye praise. My complaint is (O mightie king) against that Iudge you by: Whose careles déeds, gain to receiue, hath made ye cōmons cry He, by taking bribes and gifts, the poore he dooth oppresse: Taking rebeef from Infants yung, widowes and fatherlesse. King. Vntrustful traitor & corrupt Iudge, how likest yu this cōplaint Forewarning I to thée did giue, of this to make restraint. And hast thou doon this diuelish dée, mine ire for to augment? I sentence giue, thou Iudas iudge, thou shalt thy déed repent. Sisamnes. O pusant Prince it is not so, his complaint I deny: Commons complaint. If it be not so (moste mightie King) in place then let me dye Beholde that I haue brought wine, bothe Proof & I ryall true To stand euen heer and sentence giue, what by him did insue. Proof. I Proof doo him in this appeal, he did the Commons wrong: Vniustly he will them hath delt, his gréedy was so strong. His hart did couet in to get, be cared not which way:
The poor did léese their due and right, because they want to pay Vnto him for bribes indéed, this was his wunted vse: wheras you grace good lawes did make, he did ye same abuse. Tryall. I Tryall héerto verify, what Proof dooth now vnfolde: To stand against him in his wrong, as now I dare be bolde. king. How likest ye this, thou caitiue vile, canst thou the same deny? Sisamnes. O noble king forgiue my fact, I yéeld to thy mercy. king. Complaints and Proof, redresse wil I, all this your misery: Departe wt speed from whence you came, & straight cōmaūd by me The Executiō man to come, before my grace with haste. All. For to fulfil this your request, no time we meane to waste. king. Exeunt they three. My Lord, before my grace go call, Otian this Iudges Sonne: And he shall heare and also sée: what his father hath doon. The Father he shall suffer death, the Sonne his roume succéed And if that he no better prooue, so likewise shall he spéed. Praxaspes. As your grace hath cōmaundment giuen, I meane for to fulfil: King. step aside & fetch him. Accursed Judge couldst thou consent, to doo this cursed il? According vnto thy dentaund, thou shalt for this thy gilt: Receiue thy death before mine eyes, thy blood it shalbe spilt. Praxaspes. Beholde (O King) Sisamnes Sonne, before you dooth appéere. king. Otian this is my minde, therfore to me come néer. Thy father heer for Iudgmēt wrong procured hath his death: And thou his sonne shalt him succéed, whē he hath lost his breth And if that thou doost once offend, as thou séest thy father haue: In likewise thou shalt suffer death, no mercy shall thée saue. Otian. O mightie King, vouchsafe your grace, my father to remit: Forgiue his fault, his pardon I doo aske of your as yet.
Alas although my father hath your Princely hart offended: Amends for misse he wil now make▪ & faults shalbe amended. In sted of his requested life, pleaseth your grace take mine: This offer I as tender Childe, so duty dooth me binde. king. Doo not intreat my grace no more, for he shall dye the death, Where is the Execution man, him to bercaue of breath. Execution. Enter Execution. At hand and if it like your grace, my duty to dispatch: In hope that I when déed is doon, a good rewarde shall catch. King. Dispatch wc swoord this Iudges life, extinguish fear and cares: So doon, draw thou his cursed skin, strait ouer bothe his eares. I wil sée the office doon, and that before mine eyes. Execution To doo the thing my king commaunds, I giue the enterprise. Sisamnes. Otian my sonne the king to death (by law hath me condemned And you in roume and office mine, his graces wil hath placed. Vse Iustice therfore in this case, and yéeld vnto no wrong: Lest thou doo purchase the like death, or euer it be long. Otian. O father déer, these words to hear, that you must dye by force Bedewes my chéeks wc stilled teares, ye King hath no remorce. the gréeud{us} gréef{is} & strained sighes, my hart doth breke in twain And I deplore moste woful childe, that I should sée you slain. O false and fickle frowning Danie, that turneth as the winde: Is this the ioy in fathers age, thou me assignest to finde? O dole ful day, vnhappy houre, that loouing childe should sée: His Father déer before his face, thus put to death should bée. Yet Father giue me blessing thine, and let me once imbrace: Thy comely corps in foulded armes, & kisse thy ancient face. Sisamnes, O childe thou makes mine eyes to run, as riuers doo by streme: My leaue I take of thee my Sonne beware of this my beame. king. Dispatch euen now thou man of death, no longer séeme to stay: Execution. Come M. Sisamnes, came on your way, my office I must pay.
Forgiue therfore my déed. Sisamnes. I doo forgiue it thée my fréend, dispatch therfore with spéed. smite him in the neck with a swoord to signify his death Praxaspes. Beholde (O king) how he dooth bléed, béeing of life bereft: King. In this wise, he shall not yet be left. Pul his skin ouer his eares, to make his death more vile: A wretch he was, a cruel théef my commons to begile. Flea him with a false skin. Otian. What childe is he of natures mould, could bide the same to sée His Father fleaed in this wise? Oh how it gréeueth me. King. Otian, thou séest thy father dead, and thou art in his roume: if thou béest proud as be hath béen, euen therto shalt thou come. Otian. O King, to me this is a glasse, with gréef in it I view: Example that vnto your grace, I doo not prooue vntrue. Praxaspes. Otian, conuay your Father hence, to Tomb where be shall lye Otian. And if it please your Lordship, if shallbe doon by and by. Good Execution man for néed, help me with him away: Execution. I will fulfil, as you to me did say. They take him away King. My Lord now that my grace hath séen, that finisht is this déed, To question mine giue tentiue eare, & answere make wc speed. Haue not I doon a gratious déed, to redresse my commons wo? Praxaspes. Yea truely if it please your grace, ye haue indéed doon so. But now (O King) in fréendly wise, I councel you in this: Certain vices for to leaue, that in you placed is. The vise of drunkennes (Oh king) which dooth you sore infect: With other great abuses, which I wish you to detect. King.
Peace my Lord, what néedeth this? of this I wil not hear, To Pallaice now I wil return, and there to make good chéer. God Baccus he bestowes his gift{is}, we haue good store of wine: And also that the Ladyes be, both passing braue and fine. But stay, I sée a Lord now come, and eke a valiant knight: What newes my Lord? to sée you héer my hart it dooth delight ¶ Enter Lord, and Knight to meet the King. Lord. Nonewes (O king) but of duty come, to wait vpon your grace: King. I thank you my Lord & loouing knight, I pray ye with me trace My Lords and Knight I pray ye tel, I wil not be offended: Am I worthy of any crime once to be reprehended? Praxaspes. The Persians much praise your grace, but one thing discōmēd: In that to Wine subiect you be, wherin you doo offend. Sith that the might of wines effect, dooth oft subdue your brain My councel is to please their harts, from it you would refrain. Lord. No, no, my Lord, it is not so, for this of Prince they tel: For vertuous proof and Princely facts, Cirus he dooth excel. By that his grace by conquest great, the Egiptians did cōuince Of him reporte abrode dooth passe, tobe a worthy Prince. knight. In persō of Cresus I answer make, we may not his grace com∣pare in whole respect for to be like, Cirus the kings father. In so much your grace hath yet no childe, as Cirus left behinde Euen you I meane, Cambises king, in whome I fauour finde. King, Cresus said wel in saying so, but Praxaspes tel me why: That to my mouth in such a sort, thou should auouch a lye. Of drunkennes me thus to charge, but thou with spéed shalt sée Whether that I a sober King, or els a drunkard bée. I knowe thou haste a blisful babe, wherin thou doost delight: Me to reuenge of these thy woords, I wil go wreke this spight. When I the moste haue tasted wine, my Bowe it shalbe bent At hart of him euen then to shoot, is now my whole intent. And if that I his hart can hit, the King no drunkard is:
It hart of his I doo not kil, I yéeld to thée in this. Therfore Praxaspes fetch to me, thy yungest sonne with spéed: There is no way I tel thee plain, but I wil doo this déed. Praxaspes. Redouted Prince spare my sweet Childe, he is mine only ioy: I trust your grace to Infants hart, no such thing wil imploy. If that his mother hear of this, she is so nigh her flight: In clay her corps wil soon be shrinde, to passe frō worlds delight King. No more adoo, go fetch me him, it shalbe as I say: And if that I doo speak the woord, how dare ye once say nay? Praxaspes I wil go fetch him to your grace, but so I trust it shall not be: king. For feare of my displeasure great, go fetch him vnto me. Is he gone? now by the Gods I wil doo as I say: My Lord therfore fil me some wine, I hartely you pray. For I must drink to make my brain somwhat intoxicate: When that the wine is in my hed, oh trimly I can prate. Lord. Héere is the cup with filled wine, therof to take repaste: King. Giue it me to drink it of, and sée no wine be waste. Drink Once again in large this Cup, for I must taste it stil: Drink By the Gods I think of pleasant wine, I cannot take my fil. Now drink is in giue me my bowe, and arrowes frō sir Knight At hart of Childe I meane to shoot, hoping to cleue it right. knight. Beholde (O King) wher he dooth come, his infant yung in hand Praxaspes. O mightie King your grace behest, with sorow I haue scand. And brought my Childe fro mothers knée, before you to appeer: And she therof no whit dooth knowe that he in place is héer. king. Set him vp my mark to be, I wil shoot at his hart: Praxaspes. I beséech your grace not so to doo, set this pretence a parte. Farewel my déer and loouing babe, come kisse thy father déer:
A gréeuous sight to me it is, to sée thée slain euen héer. Is this the gain now from the King for giuing councel good: Before my face with such despight, to spil my sonnes hart blood? O heuy day to me this is, and mother in like case. Yung childe O Father, Father, wipe your face. I sée the teares run from your eye: My mother is at home sowing of a band: Alas déer father, why doo you cry? King, Before me as mark now let him stand, I wil shoot at him my minde to fulfil Yung childe. Alas, alas, Father wil you me kil? Good master king doo not shoot at me, my mother looues me best of all king I haue dispatched him, down he dooth fall, Shoot As right as a line his hart I haue hit: Nay thou shalt sée Praxaspes, straunger newes yet. My Knight with spéed his hart cut out, and giue it vnto me. knight. It shalbe doon (O mightie king) with all seleritie. Lord. My Lord Praxaspes, this had not béen, but your tung must be walking To the King of correction, you must néeds be talking. Praxaspes No correction (my Lord) but councel for the best: knight. Héere is the hart, according to your graces behest. king. Beholde Praxaspes thy Sonnes owne hart, Oh how wel ye same was hit After this wine to doo this déed, I thought it very fit. Estéeme thou maist right wel therby, no drūkard is the king: That in the midst of all his cups, could doo this valiant thing. My Lord and knight on me attend, to Pallaice we wil go: And leaue him héer to take his sonne, whē we are gone him fro. All. With all our harts we giue consent, to wait vpon your grace: Praxaspes
A woful man (O Lord) am I, to see him in this case. My dayes I déem desires their end, this déed wil help me hēce: To haue the blossoms of my féeld, destroyd by violence. Mother. Enter Mother Alas, Alas I doo heare tel, the King hath kild my Sonne: If it be so, wo worth the déed, that euer it was doon. It is euen so, my Lord I see, how by him he dooth wéep What ment I yt from hands of him, this childe I did not kéep? Alas husband and Lord, what did you meane, to fetch this Child away? Praxaspes. O Lady wife I little thought for to háue séen this day. Mother. O blisful babe, O ioy of womb, harts comfort and delight: For Councel giuen vnto the King, is this thy iust requite? O heuy day and doleful time, these mourning tunes to make With blubred eyes into mine armes, frō earth I wil thee take. And wrap thée in mine apron white, but oh my heuy hart: The spightful pangs yt it sustains, wold make it in two to part. The death of this my Sonne to sée, O heuy mother now? That from thy swéet and sugred ioy, to sorow so shouldst bow, What gréef in womb did I retain, before I did thée sée? Yet at ye last when smart was gone, what ioy wert thou to mée How tender was I of thy food, for to preserue thy state? How stilled I thy tender hart, at times earely and late? With veluet Pap{is} I gaue thée suck with issue from my brest: And daunced thée, vpon my knee, to bring thée vnto rest. Is this the ioy of thée I reap (O king) of Tigers brood? Oh tigers whelp hadst thou ye hart, to sée this childes hart blood? Nature inforseth me alas, in this wise to deplore: To wring my hāds O wele away, that I should sée this houre. Thy mother yet wil kisse thy lips, silk soft and pleasant white: With wringing hands, lamenting for to sée thee in this plight. My Lording deer let vs go home, our mourning to augment: Praxaspes. My Lady déer with heuy hart, to it I doo consent. Betwéen vs bothe ye childe to bere vnto our lordly place, Exeūt ¶ Enter Ambidexter. Ambidexter
In déed as ye say I haue béen absent a long space. But is not my cosin Cutpurse, wc you in ye mene time? To it, to it Cosin and doo your office fine. How like you Sisamnes for vsing of me? He plaid with bothe hands, but he sped il fauouredly. The King him self was godly vp trained: He professed vertue, but I think it was fained. He playes with bothe hands good déeds and il: But it was no good déed, Praxaspes sonne for to kil. As he for the good déed, on the Iudge was commended: For all his déeds els he is reprehended. The moste euil disposed person, that euer was: All the state of his life he would not let passe. Some good déeds he wil doo, though they be but few: The like things this tirant Cambices dooth shew. No goodnes from him, to none is exhibited: But stil malediction, abrode is distributed. And yet ye shall sée in the rest of his race: What infamy he wil woork against his owne grace. Whist, no more woords héer comes the kings brother. Enter Lord Smirdis with Attendance & Diligence. Smirdis. The Kings brother by birth am I, issued from Cirus loynes: A gréef to me it is to hear, of this the kings repines. I like not wel of those his déeds, that he dooth stil frequent: I wish to God that other waies, his minde he could content. Yung I am and next to him, no mo of vs there be: I would be glad a quiet Realme in this his reign to sée. Attendance. My Lord your good awilling hart, the Gods wil recompence: In that your made so pensife is, for those his great offence. My Lord, his grace shall haue a time to pair and to amend: Happy is he that can escape, and not his grace offend. Diligence. If that wicked vice he could refrain, from wasting wine forbere A moderate life he would frequent, amending this his square. Ambidexter. My Lord, and if your honor it shall please:
I can informe you what is best for your ease. Let him alone of his déeds doo not talke: Then by his side: ye may quietly walke. After his death you shalbe King: Then may you reforme eche kinde of thing. In the meane time liue quietly, doo not with him deale: So shall it redownd much to your weale. Smirdis. Thou saist true my fréend, that is the best: I knowe not whether he looue me, or doo me detest. Attendance. Leane from his company, all that you may: I faithful Attendance wil your honor obay. If against your honor he take any ire: His grace is as like, to kindle his fire. To your honors destruction, as otherwise: Diligence. Therfore my Lord take good aduise. And I Diligence, your case wil so tender: That to his grace your honor shalbe none offender. Smirdis. I thank you bothe intire fréends, with my honor stil remain: Ambidexter. Beholde where the King dooth come with his train. King. Enter king & 1. Lord O Lording déer and brother mine, I ioy your state to sée: Surmising much what is the cause, you absent thus from mée. Smirdis. Pleaseth your grace no absence I, but redy to fulfil: At all assayes my Prince and king, in that your grace me wil. What I can doo in true defence, to you my Prince aright: In redynes I alwaies am, to offer foorth my might. king. And I the like to you again doo héer auouch the same: All. For this your good agréement héer, now praised be Gods name. Ambidexter. But hear ye noble Prince, hark in you eare.
It is best to doo as I did declare. king. My Lord and brother Smirdis now, this is my minde and wil: That you to Court of mine return, and there to tary stil. Til my return within short space, your honor for to gréet: Smirdis. At your behest so wil I doo, til time again wée méet. My leaue I take from you (O King) euen now I doo departe. King. Exeūt Smirdis, attendance & diligence Farwel Lord and Brother mine, farwel with all my hart. My Lord, my brother Smirdis is, of youth and manly might: And in his swéet and pleasant face, my hart dooth take delight. Lord. Yea noble Prince if that your grace, before his honor dye: He wil succeed a vertuous King, and rule with equitie. King. As you haue said my Lord, he is chéef heire next my grace: And if I dye to morrow next he shall succéed my place. Ambidexter And if it please your grace (O king) I herd him say: For your death vnto the God, day and night he did pray. He would liue so vertuously, and get him such a praise: That Fame by trump his due deserts, his honor should vp raise. He said your grace deserued had, the cursing of all men: That ye should neuer after him, get any praise agen. King. Did he speake thus of my grace, in such dispightful wise? Or els doost thou presume to fil my princely eares with lyes? Lord I connot think it in my hart, that he would report so, King. How sayst thou? speake the trueth, was it soor no? Ambidexter I think so if it please your grace, but I cannot tel: King. Thou plaist with bothe hands, now I perceiue wel: But for to put all doutes aside, and to make him léese his hope: He shall dye by dent of Swoord, or els by choking Rope.
Shall he succéed when I am gone, to haue more praise then I? Were he Father as brother mine, I swere that he shall dye. To pallaice mine I wil therfore, his death for to pursue. Exit. Ambidexter. Are ye gone? straight way I wil followe you. How like ye now my maisters? dooth not this géer cotton? The prouerb olde is verified, soon ripe and soon rotten. He will not be quiet, til his Brother be kild: His delight is wholly to haue his blood spild. Mary Sir I tolde him a notable lye: If it were to doo again man, I durst doo it I. Mary when I had doon, to it I durst not stand: Therby you may perceiue I vse to play with eche hand. But how now Cosin Cutpursse with whome play you? Take héed for his hand is groping euen now. Cosin take héed, if ye doo secretly grope: If ye be taken Cosin, ye must looke through a rope. Exit. Smirdis. Enter Lord Smirdis alone I am wandring alone héer and there to walke, The Court is so vnquiet, in it I take no ioy: Solitary to my self now I may talke, If I could rule I wist what to say. Crueltie. Enter Crueltie and Murder with bloody hands. My coequall partner Murder, come away. From me, long thou maist not stay. Murder. Yes from thée I may stay, but not thou from me: Therfore I haue a prerogatiue abooue thée. Crueltie. But in this case we must togither abide: Come, come, Lord Smirdis I haue spide. Lay hands on him with all festination: That on him we may woork our indignation. Smirdis. How now my freends? what haue you to doo with me? Murder. King Cambises hath sent vs vnto thée. Commaunding vs straightly, with out mercy or fauour:
Upon thée to bestow our behauiour. With Crueltie to murder you, and make you away. Smirdis. strike him in diuers places Yet pardon me I hartely you pray: Consider the King is a tirant tirannious: And all his dooings be damnable and parnitious. Fauour me therfore, I did him neuer offend: Crueltie. A little bladder of Vineger prikt. No fauour at all, your life is at an end. Euen now I strike his body to wound: Beholde now his blood springs out on the ground, Murder. Now he is dead, let vs present him to the King: Crueltie. Lay to your hand, away him to bring. Exeunt Ambidexter. Enter Ambidexter. O the passion of God, yunder is a heuy Court: Some wéeps, some wailes, and some make great sport. Lord Smirdis, by Crueltie and Murder is slain: But Iesus for want of him, how some doo complain. If I should haue had a thousand pound, I could not forbeare wéeping Now Iesus haue his blessed soule in kéeping. Ah, good Lord, to think on him, how it dooth me gréeue: I can not forbeare wéeping, ye may me beléeue. VVeep, O my hart, how my pulses doo beat: With sorowful lamentations, I am in such a heat. Ah my hart, how for him it dooth sorow: Nay I haue doon in faith now, and God giue you good morow. Ha, ha, wéep nay laugh, with both hands to play: The king througe his crueltie, hath made him away, But hath not he wrought, a moste wicked déed: Because king after him he should not procéed. His owne naturall brother and hauing no more: To procure his death by violence sore. In spight because his brother should neuer be King: His hart béeing wicked consented to this thing. Now he hath no more Brothers nor kinred aliue: If the King vse this géer stil, he cannot long thriue.
Hob, Enter Hob and Lob. Gods hat Naibor come away, its time to market to go Lob. Gods Vast Naybor zay ye zo? The Clock hath striken viue ich think by laken: Bum Vay vrom sléep cham not very wel waken. But Naybor Hoh, Naybor Hob, what haue ye to zel? Hob Bum troth Naybor Lob to you I chil tel. Chaue twoo Goslings, and a Chine of good Porke: There is no vatter betwéen this and Yorke. Chaue a pot of Strawberyes and a Calues hed: A zennight zince to morrow it hath béen dead. Lob. Chaue a score of Egges, and of Butter a pound: Yesterday a nest of goodly yung Rabits I bound. Chaue vorty things mo, of more and of lesse: My brain is not very good them to expresse. But Gods Hat Naybor, wotst what? Hob. No not wel Naybor. whats that? Lob. Bum vay Naybor, maister king is a zhrode lad Zo God help me and holidam, I think the vool he mad. Zome zay he deale cruelly his Brother he did kil: And also a goodly yung lads hart blood, he did spil, Hob. Vorbod of God naibor, has he plaied zuch a volish déed? Ambidexter. Goodman Hob and goodman Lob, God be your spéed. As you twoo towards market doo walke: Of the Kings crueltie I did hear you talke. I insure you, he is a King moste vile and parnitious: His dooings and life are odious and vicious. Lob. It were a good déed zome body would breke his hed: Hob. Bum vay Naybor Lob. I chousd he were dead.
Ambidexter. So would I Lob and Hob with all my hart: Now with bothe hands, wil ye sée me play my parte? A ye Whorson traitorly Knaues: Hob and Lob out vpon you slaues. Lob. And thou calst me knaue thou art an other: My name is Lob and Hob my next Naybor. Ambidexter. Hob and Lob, a ye cuntry Patches: A ye fooles ye haue made wrong matches. Ye haue spoken treason against the kings grace: For it I wil accuse ye before his face. Then for the same ye shalbe martered: At the least ye shall be hangd, drawn and quartered: Hob. O gentleman ye shall haue two Peare pyes and tel not of me. Lob. By God a vat Goose chil giue thée. I think no hurt by my Vathers soule I zweare: Hob. Chaue liued wel all my life time my naybors among: And now chould be lothe to come to zuch wrong. To be hanged and quartered the gréef would be great: Lob. A foule euil on thée Hob, who bid thée on it treat? Vor it was thou that first did him name. Hob. Thou lyest like a varlet, and thou zaist the same, It was zuch a voolish Lob as thou: Lob. Speake many woords and by cods nailes I vow: Vpon thy pate my staffe I wil lay. Ambidexter. By the Masse I wil cause them to make a fray. Yea Lob thou sayest true, all came through him. Lob. Bum vay thou Hob. a little would make me ye trim. Giue thée a zawp on thy nose til thy hart ake:
Hob. If thou darest doo it, els man cry creke. I trust before thou hurt me: With my staffe chil make a Lob of thée. ¶ Heer let them fight with their slaues, not come neer an other by three or foure yardes, the Vice set thē on as hard as he can one of their wiues come out and all to beat the Vice, he run avvay ¶ Enter Marian may be good, Hobs wife run∣ning in with a Broome and parte them. Marian. O the body of me husband Hob, what meane you to fight: For the passion of God, no more blowes smite. Neighbours and fréends so long, and now to fall out: What? in your age to seeme so stout? If I had not parted ye, one had kild another: Lob. I had not cared I swere by Gods mother. Marian, Shake hands again at the request of me: As ye haue béen fréends, so fréends stil be. Hob. Bum troth cham content, and zaist woord neigbor Lob: Lob. I am content agréed neighbor Hob. Shake hands and laugh hartely one at an other. Marian. So, get you to market, no longer stay. And with yonder knaue let me make a fray. Hob. Content wife Marian, chil doo as thou doost say: But busse me ich pray thée at going away. Exeūt Hob. Lob. Marian. Thou whorson knaue & prickeard boy, why didst yu let them fight? If one had kild another héer, couldst thou their deaths requite? It beares a signe by this thy déed, a cowardly knaue thou art: Els wouldst thou draw ye weapon thine, like a man them to parte Ambidexter, What Marian may be good, are you come pratling?
Ye may hap get a box on the eare, with your talking. If they had kilde one another, I had not cared a pease: Heer let her swinge him in her brome, she gets him down, & he her down, thus one on the top of an other make pastime Marian. A villain, my self on thée I must ease. Giue me a box on the eare? that wil I try: Who shalbe Maister thou shalt see by and by. Ambidexter. O no more, no more I beseech you hartely: Euen now I yéeld, and giue you the maistery. Run his way out while she is down, Marian A thou knaue, doost thou throw̄ me down and run thy way? If he were heer again, oh how I would him pay. I wil after him, and if I can him méet: With these my nailes, his face I wil gréet. ¶ Enter Venus leading out her sone Cupid blinde, he must haue a bowe and two shafts, one hedded with golde and th'other hedded with lead. Venus. Come foorth my sonne, vnto my woords attentiue eares resigne What I pretend sée you frequent, to force this game of mine. The King a kinswoman hath, adornd with beautie store: And I wish that Dianas gifts, they twain shall kéep no more. But vse my siluer sugred game, their ioyes for to augment: When I doo speake to wound his hart, Cupid my sonne conset. And shoot at him the shaft of looue, that beares the hed of Golde: To wound his hart in loouers wise, his gréef for to vnfolde. Though kin she be vnto his grace, that nature me expel: Against the course therof he may, in my game please me wel. Wherfore my sonne doo not forget, foorthwith pursue the déed: Cupid. Mother I meane for to obay, as you haue whole decréed. But you must tel me mother deer, when I shall arrow draw: Els your request to be attaind, wil not be worth a straw. I am blinde and cannot see, but stil doo shoot by gesse: The Poets wel in places store, of my might doo expresse. Venus.
Cupid my sonne whē time shall serue, ye thou shalt doo this déed, Then warning I to thee wil giue, but sée thou shoot, with speed. Lord. Lord Lady, waiting maid Lady déer to King a kin, foorthwith let vs procéed: To trace abrode the beauty féelds, as erst we had decréed. The blowing buds whose sauery sents our sence wil much The swéet smel of musk white rose, to plese ye appetite. The chirpig birds whose plesant tunes, therin shall hear record delight That our great ioy we shall it finde, in féeld to walke a brode. On Lute and Cittern there to play a heauenly hermony: Our eares shall heare, hart to content, our sports to beautie. Lady. Vnto your woords moste comely Lord, my self submit doo I: To trace with you in féeld so green, I meane not to deny. Maid heer trace vp & down playing And I your waiting maid at hand, with diligence wil be: For to fulfil wt hart and hand, when you shall commaund me. King. Enter king. Lord & knight. Come on my Lord and knight abrode, our mirth let vs imploy Since he is dead this hart of mine, in corps I féel it ioy. Should brother mine haue reigned King, when I had yéelded breth A thousand brothers I rather had, to put them all to death. But oh, beholde where I doo sée, a Lord and Lady fair: For beauty she moste worthy is, to sit in Princes chaire. Venus. Shoot forth my sōne now is the time, ye thou must woūd his hart Cupid Content you Mother I wil doo my parte. Shoot there and go out Venus and Cupid. King. Of trueth my Lord in eye of mine, all Ladyes she dooth excel: Can none reporte what dame she is, and to my grace it tel? Lord. Redouted Prince pleaseth your grace, to you shée is a kin: Cosin Iarmin nigh of birth, by mothers side come in. knight. And that her waiting maiden is attending her vpon: He is a Lord of Princes Court, and wil be there anon.
They sport them selues in pleasant féeld, to former vsed vse: King. My Lord & knight of trueth I speake, my hart it cannot chuse. But with my Lady I must speake and so expresse my minde: My Lord and Ladyes walking there, if you wil fauour finde. Present your selues vnto my grace, & by my side come stand: first Lord. We wil fulfil moste mightie king, as your grace doth cōmaūd. King. Lady déer intelligence, my grace hath got of late: You issued out of mothers stock, and kin vnto my state. According to rule of birth you are, Cosin iarmin mine: Yet doo I wish that farther of, this kinred I could finde. For Cupid he that eyelesse boy, my hart hath so inflamed: With beauty you me to content, the like cannot be named. For since I entred in this place and on you fixt mine eyes: Moste burning fits about my hart in ample wise did rise. The heat of thē such force dooth yéeld, my corps they scorch alas: And burnes ye same with wasting heat, as Titan dooth the grasse And sith this heat is kindled so, and fresh in hart of me: There is no way but of the same, the quencher you must be. My meaning is yt beauty yours, my hart with looue dooth woūd: To giue me looue, minde to content my hart hath you out found. And you are shée must be my wife, els shall I end my dayes: Consent to this and be my Quéen, to were ye crown with praise. Lady. If it please your grace (O mightie king) you shall not this re∣quest It is a thing that natures course, dooth vtterly detest. And high it would the God displease, of all that is the wurst: To graunt your grace to marry so, it is not I that durst. Yet humble thanks I render now vnto you mightie King: That you vouchsafe to great estate, so gladly would me bring. Were it not it were offence, I would it not deny: But such great honor to atchiue, my hart I would apply. Therfore (O king) with humble hart, in this I pardon craue: Mine answere is in this request: your minde ye may not haue. King. May I not? nay then I wil by all the Gods I vow:
And I wil mary thée as wife, this is mine answere now: Who dare say nay what I pretēd, who dare the same wtstand? Shall lose his hed and haue reporte, as traitor through my lād. There is no nay I wil you haue, and you my Quéen shalbe: Lady. Then mightie King I craue your grace, to hear ye words of me Your councel take of Lordings wit, the lawes aright peruse: If I with safe may graunt this déed, I wil it not refuse. King. No, no, what I haue said to you. I meane to haue it so: For counsel theirs I meane not I, in this respect to go. But to my Pallaice let vs go, the mariage to prepare: For to auoid my wil in this, I can it not forbeare. Lady. O God forgiue me if I doo amisse: The king by compultion, inforseth me this. Maid Vnto the Gods for your estate, I wil not cease to pray: That you may be a happy Quéen. and sée moste ioyful day. King. Come on my Lords with gladsome harts, let vs reioice wt glée: Your Musick showe to ioy this déed, at the request of me. Bothe. For to obey your graces woords our honours doo agrée. Exeūt Ambidexter. Enter Ambidexter O the Passion of me, mary as ye say, yonder is a royal court There is triumphing and sport vpon sporte. Such loyall Lords, with such Lordly exercise: Frequenting such pastime as they can deuise. Running at tilt, Iusting, with running at the King: Masking and mumming, with eche kinde of thing, Such dauncing, such singing, with musicall hermony: Beleeue me I was lothe to absent their company. But wil you beleue? Iesu what haste they made til they were maried? Not for a Miliō of poūds one day longer they would haue taried Oh there was a banquet royall and superexelent: Thousands, and thousands at that banquit was spent. I muse of nothing but how they can be maried so soon:
I care not if I be maried before to morow at noone. If mariage be a thing that so may be had: How say you maid? to mary me wil ye be glad? Out of dout I beléeue it is some excellent treasure: Els to the same belongs abundant pleasure. Yet with mine eares I haue heard some say: That euer I was maried, now cursed be the day. Those be they, that with curse wiues be matched: That husband for hankes meat, of thē is vp snatched. Hed broke with a bedstaf, face all to be scratched. Knaue slaue and villain, a coild cote now and than: Whē the wife hath giuē it, she wil say alas good man. Such were better vnmaried my maisters I trowe: Then all their life after to be matched with a shrowe. Preparation. Enter Preparation. With spéed I am sent all things to prepare: My message to doo as the king did declare. His grace dooth meane a banquit to make: Meaning in this place repaste for to take. Wel the cloth shalbe laid and all things in redynes: To court to return when doon is my busines. Ambidexter. A proper man and also a fit. For the Kings estate to prepare a banquit. Preparation. What Ambidexter? thou art not vnknowen: A wischéef on all good faces, so that I curse not mine owne. Now in the knaues name shake hands with me. Ambidexter. Wel said goodman pouchmouth your reuerence I sée. I will teach ye, if your manners no better be. A yée slaue, the king dooth me a gentleman alow: Therfore I look, that to me ye shall how. Fight Preparation. Good Maister Ambidexter, pardon my behauiour: For this your déeds, ye are a knaue for your labour. Ambidexter. Why ye stale counterly vaillain, nothing but Knaue? Fight
Preparation. I am sory your maistership offended I haue. Shake hands that betwéen vs agréement may bée: I was ouer shot with my self, I doo see. Let me haue your help, this furniture to prouide: The King from this place wil not long abide. Ambidexter. set the frute on the bord Content, it is the thing that I would wish: I my self wil go fetch on Dish. ¶ Let the Vice fet a dish of nuts and let them fall in the bringing of them in. Preparation. Clenly maister Ambidexter, for fair on the ground they lye: Ambidexter. I will haue them vp again by and by. Preparation. To sée all in redynes I wil put you in trust: There is no nay to the Court néeds I must. Exit Prepartion Ambidexter. Haue ye no dout but all shalbe wel: Mary Sir as you say, this geer dooth excel. All things is in a redynes, when they come hether: The kings grace and the Quéen bothe togither. I beséech ye my maisters tel me is it not best: That I be so bolde to bid a gest? He is as honest a man as euer spurd Cow: My Cosin cutpurse I meane, I beséech ye iudge you: Beléeue me Cosin if to be the Kings gest, ye could be taken: I trust that offer would not be forsaken. But Cosin because to that office ye are not like to cōe: Frequent your exersises, a horne on your Thumb. A quick eye, a sharp knife, at hand a receiuer: But then take héed Cosin ye be a clenly conuayour. Content your self Cosin, for this banquit you are vnfit: When such as I at the same am not worthy to sit. Enter King. My Quéen and Lords to take repast, let vs attempt the same Héer is the place delay no time, but to our purpose frame.
Queene. With willing harts your whole behest, we minde for to obay: All And we the rest of Princes train, wil doo as you doo say. king Sit at the banquit. Me think mine eares dooth wish the soūd, of musicks hermony: Héer for to play before my grace, in place I would them spy: Ambidexter. Play at the banquet They be at hand Sir with stick and fidle: They can play a new daunce called hey didle didle. King. By Quéen parpend what I pronounce I wil not violate: But one thing which my hart makes glad. I minde to explicate You knowe in Court by trained is, a Lyon very yung: Of on litter two whelps beside, as yet not very strong. I did request one whelp to see, and this yung Lion fight: But Lion did the whelp conuince, by strength of force a might. His brother welp perceiuing that the Lion was to good: And he by force was like to sée, the other whelp his blood. With force to Lyon he did run, his brother for to help: A wunder great it was to sée that fréendship in a whelp. So then the the whelpes betwéen them both ye Lion did cōuince Which thing to see before mine eyes, did glad yt hart of Prince. ¶ At this tale tolde let the Queene vveep. Queene. These woords to hear makes stilling teares, issue from Christal eyes king. What doost thou meane my spouse to wéep, for losse of any prise Queene. No, no (O King) but as you see, fréendship in brothers whelp: When one was like to haue repulse, the other yéelded help. And was this fauour showd in dogs to shame of royall king: Alack I wish these eares of mine, had not once heard this thing Euen so should you (O mightie King) to brother béen a stay: And not without offence to you, in such wise him to slay. In all assayes it was your parte, his cause to haue defended: And who so euer had him misused, to haue them reprehended. But faithful looue was more in Dog, then it was in your grace:
king. O cursed caitiue vicious vile, I hate thée in this place. This banquit it is an end, take all these things away: Before my face thou shalt repent, the woords that thou doost say O wretch moste vile, didst yu the cause of brother mine so tēder: The losse of him should gréeue thy hart, he beeing none offender It did me good his death to haue, so wil it to haue thine: What freendship he had at my hands, ye same euen yt shalt finde I giue consent and make a vow, that thou shalt dye the death: By Cruels swoord & Murder fel, euen thou shalt dye the breth. Ambidexter, see with spéed, to Crueltie ye go: Cause him hether to approch, Murder with him also. Ambidexter. I redy am for to fulfil, if that it be your graces wil. king. Then nought oblight my message giuen, absent thy self away: Ambidexter. Then in this place, I wil no longer stay: If that I durst, I would mourne your case: But alas, I dare not for feare of his grace. king. Exit Ambidexter. Thou cursed Iil, by all the Gods, I take an othe and swete: that flesh of thine these hāds of mine, in péeces small could tere. But thou shalt dye by dent of swoord, there is no fréend ne f ee: Shall finde remorce at Princes hand, to saue the life of thee. Queene. Oh mightle King & husband mine, vouchsafe to héer me speke: And licence giue to spouse of thine, her patient minde to breke. For tender looue vnto your grace, my woords I did so frame: For pure looue dooth hart of king, me violate and blame. And to your grace is this offence, that I should purchase death: Then cursed time that I was Quéen, to shorten this my breth. your grace doth know by mariage true, I am your wife & spouse And one to saue āothers helth (at troth plight) made our vowes Therfore O king let loouing Quéen, at thy hand finde remorse Let pie be a meane to quench, that cruel raging force. And pardon plight from princes mouth, yéeld grace vnto your queen: That amitie wt faithful zeal, may euer be vs betwéen.
king. A caitiue vile to pitie thée, my hart it is not bent: Ne yet to pardon your offence, it is not mine intent. first Lord. Our mightie prince wt humbe sute of your grace this I craue: That this request it may take place, your fauour for to haue. Let mercy yet abundantly the life of Queen preserue: Sith shée in moste obedient wise, your graces wil dooth serue. As yet your grace but while with her, hath had cohabitation: And sure this is no desert why, to yeeld her indiguation. Therfore (O King) her life prolong, to ioy her dayes in blisse: second Lord. Your grace shall win immortall fame, in graunting vnto this. She is a Queene whose goodly hue, excelles the royall Rose: For beautie bright dame nature she, a large gift did dipose. For comelynes who may compare? of all she beares the bet: This should giue cause to mooue your grace, to looue her very wel. Her siluer brest in those your armes, to sing the songs of looue: Fine quallities moste excellent to be in her you prooue. A preciouse pearle of prise to Prince, a Iewel passing all: Therfore (O king to beg remorce on bothe my knées I fall. To graunt her grace to haue her life, with hart I doo desire: King. You villaines twain, with raging force, ye set my hart on fire. If I consent that she shall dye, how dare ye craue her life? You two to aske this at my hand, dooth much inlarge my strife. Were it not for shame you two should dye, that for her life doo sue But fauour mine from you is gone, my Lords Itel you true. I sent for Crueltie of late, if he would come away: I would commit her to his hands, his cruel parte to play. Euen now I see where he dooth come, it dooth my hart delight: ¶ Enter Crueltie and Murder. Crueltie, Come Murder, come, let vs go foorth with might. Once again the Kings commaundement we must fulfil Murder. I am contented to doo it with a good wil. king.
Murder and Crueltie, for bothe of you I sent: With all festination, your offices to frequent. Lay holde on the Quéen, take her to your power: And make her away with in this houre. Spare for no feare I doo you ful permit: So I from this place, doo meane for to flit. Bothe. With couragious harts (O King) we will obey: King. Then come my Lords let vs departe away. Bothe the Lords. With heuy harts we wil doo all, your grace dooth say, Crueltie. Exeunt king, & Lords Come Lady and Quéen now are you in our haudling: In faith with you we wil vse no dandling. Murder. With all expedition, I Murder wil take place: Though thou be a Quéene, ye be vnder my grace. Queene. With patience I wil you bothe obey: Crueltie. No more woords but go with vs away. Queene. Yet before I dye some Psalme to God let me sing: Bothe. We be content to permit you that thing. Queene. Farwel you Ladyes of the Court, with all your masking hew: I doo forsake these brodered gardes, and all the facions new. The Court and all the courtly train, wherin I had delight: I banished am from happy sporte and all by spightful spight. Yet with a ioyful hart to God a Psalme I meane to sing: Forgiuing all & the king, of eche kinde of thing. sing & Exeūt Ambidexter. Enter Ambidexter weping A, A, A. A, I cannot chuse but wéep for the Quéene: Nothing but mourning now at the Court there is séen. Oh, oh, my hart, my hart, Oh my bum wil break: Very gréef so torments me that scarce I can speake.
Who could but wéep for the losse of such a Lady? That can not I doo, I sweare by mine honesty. But Lord so the Ladyes mourn crying a lack: Nothing is worne now but onely black. I beleeue all cloth in walling street, to make gownes would not serue If I make a lye, the Deuil let ye sterue. All Ladyes mourne bothe yung and olde: There is not one that weareth a points worth of Gold There is a sorte for feare, for the King doo pray: That would haue him dead, by the masse I dare say. What a King was he that hath vsed such tiranny? He was a kin to Bishop Bonner, I think verely, For bothe their delights was to shed blood: But neuer intended to doo any good. Cambises put a Iudge to death, that was a good deed: But to kil the yung Childe was worse to procéed. To murder his Brother, and then his owne wife: So help me God and holidom, it is pitie of his life Heare ye? I wil lay twentie thousand pound: That the king him self dooth dye by some wound. He hath shed so much blood that his wil be shed: If it come so to passe infaith then he is sped. ¶ Enter the king vvithout a gown, a swoord thrust vp into his side bleeding. King. Out alas what shall I doo? my life is finished. Wounded I am by sudain chaunce, my blood is mnished. Gogs hart what meanes might I make, my life to preserue? Is there nought to be my help: nor is their nought to serue? Out vpon the Court, and Lords that there remain: To help my gréef in this my case, wil none of them take pain? Who but I in such a wise his deaths wound could haue got: As I on horse back vp did leape, my swoord from scabard shot. And ran me thus into the side, as you right wel may see: A meruels chaunce vnfortunate, that in this wise should bée. I feele my self a dying now, of life bereft am I: And death hath caught me with his dart, for want of blood I spy. Thus gasping héer on ground I lye, for nothing I doo care:
A iust rewad for my misdeeds, my death dooth plain declare. ¶ Heer let him quake and stir, Ambidexter. How now noble King? pluck vp your hart: What wil you dye, and from vs departe? Speake to me, and you be aliue: He cannot speake, but beholde how with death he dooth striue. Alas good King, alas he is gone, The Deuil take me, if for him I make any mone. I did prognosticate of his end by the Masss: Like as I did say so is it come to passe. I wil be gone, if I should be found héer: That I should kil him it would appéer. For feare with is death they doo me charge: Farewel my maisters I wil go take barge. I meane to be packing now is the tide: Farewel my maisters I wil no longer abide. Exit Ambidexter. ¶ Enter three Lords first Lord. Beholde my Lords it is euen so, as he to vs did tel: His grace is dead vpon the ground, by dent of swoord moste fel. second Lord. As he in saddle would haue lept, his sword from sheath did go: Coring him vp into the side, his life was ended so. third Lord. His blood so fast did issue out, that nought could him prolong: Yet before he yéelded vp the ghost, his hart was very strong. first Lord. A iust rewarde for his misdeeds, the God abooue hath wrought: For certainly the life he led, was to be counted nought. second Lord. Yet a rincely buriall he shall haue, according his estate: And more of him heer at this time, we haue not to dilate. third Lord My Lord let vs take him vp, to cary him away. Bothe. Content we are with one accord, to doo as you doo say. Exeūt. All ¶ Epilogus.
RIght gentle Andience, héere haue you perused, The tragicall History of this wicked king: According to our duety we haue not refused, But to our best intent exprest euery thing. We trust none is offended for this our dooing, Our Author craues likewise if he haue squared amisse: By gentle admonicion to knowe where the fault is. ¶ His good wil shall not be neglected to amend the same, Praying all to beare therfore with his simyte déed: Vntil the time serue a tter he may frame, Thus yéelding you to end we decreed. That you so gentlely red vs to proceed, In such patien  as to hear and sée: We can but thank ye therfore, we can doo no more ¶ As duty bindes vs for our noble Quéene let vs pray, And for her honorable Councel the trueth yt they may b To practise Iustice and defend her grace eche day, To maintain Gods woord they may not refuse. To correct all those, that would her grace & graces lawes abuse, Beseeching God ouer vs, she may reign long: To be guided by trueth and defended from wrong. Thomas Preston. Amen. Imprinted at London by Iohn Allde.
