22444 99852547 17872
THE GRATEFVLL SERVANT. A Comedie. As it was lately presented with good applause at the priuate House in Drury-Lane, By her Majesties Servants. Written by IAMES SHIRLEY Gent. ———Vsque ego postera Crescam laude recens. LONDON. Printed by B. A. and T. F. for John Grene, and are to be sold at his shop at Furnivals-Inne gate, 1630.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, FRANCIS Earle of RVTLAND, &c. My most Honoured LORD: WHen the Age declineth from her primi∣tiue vertue, and the Silken witts of the Time, (that I may borrow from our ac∣knowledg'd Master, learned IONSON) disgracing Nature, & harmonious Poë∣ie, are transported with many illiterate and prodigious births, it is not safe to appeare without Pro∣tection. Among all the names of Honour, this Comedie oweth most gratitude to your Lordship, whose cleere testi∣mony was to mee aboue a Theater, and I applaud the dex∣terity of my fate, that hath so well prepared a Dedication, whither my onely ambition would direct it. I am not pale, to thinke it is now expos'd to your more deliberate censure; For 'tis my security, that I haue studied your Lordships
Candor, and know you imitate the Divine nature which is mercifull aboue offence. Goe on great Lord and bee the volume of our English Honour, in whom while others, in∣vited by their birth and quickned with ambitious emula∣tion reade and study their principles, let mee be made happie enough to admire, and devote my selfe, Your Lordships, most humble creature: IAMES SHIRLEY.
To my learned friend Iames Shirley vpon his Gratefull seruant. PResent thy worke vnto the wiser few That can discerne and iudge; tis good tis new Thy stile is modest, sceanes high, and thy verse So smooth, so sweet, Apollo might rehearse, To his owne Lute, be therefore boldly wise And scorne malicious censures, like flies They tickle but not wound, thy well got fame Cannot be soild or canst thou merrit blame Because thou dost not swell with mighty rimes Audacious metaphors, like verse like times Let others barke, keepe thou poeticke lawes Deserue their enuy, and command applause. John Fox. To my knowne friend Mr Shirley vpon his Comedy the Gratefull seruant. VVHo would writ well for the abused stage When only swelling word do please the age And malice is thought wit, to make 't appeare They iudge they mis-interpret what they heare. Rough Poems now vsurpe the name of good And are admired but neuer vnderstood Thee and thy straines I vindicate, whose pen Wisely disdaines t iniuce lines, or men, Thou hast prepared dainties for each tast, And art by all that know thy muse embrc'd Let purblind critticks still endure this curse To see good playes and euer like the worse. Jo. Hall.
Ingeniosissimo amico Ia. Sherleio. MAter Daedala nil poliuit, hujus Matris mima{que} nil dolauit altum: (Sitotum esynodis tulere sacris Et musarum Hierarchia, & sororu Triga, & Castalius latexrigauit) Quod non dilaniant{que}, lancinant{que} Momi insulsatribus, nepouli{que}. Ergo per charites, nouen siles{que} Diuas,  nihil morare Si qui te lacerent{que} verberent{que} Quis Shirleie tuos jocos lepores, Accentus thymeles sonos theatri, Mellitos globulos, facetias{que}, Verborum veneres, Cupidines{que}, Acetum sesamum, sales, piper{que}, Captus non veneratur osculatur Est diuum nii stoicum assecutus. Supra nos homines seueriores, Laudent fulmina; vortices{que} quales Voluit gurgitetauri formis Ister, Vocum monstra{que} pectines{que} solis.
Velint cum Semele modos tonantes Quos quum non capiant, stupent adusti Sed tu macte animo, tibi{que} plaude, Ridefulminis actaflagra bruti, Laurus te tua temporum corona, Intactum dabit: intonent Theones, Tush I will not beleeue, that iudgements light Is fixt but in one spheare, and that dull night, Muffles the rest, the dimmest lampe of Skie Hath some vnborrowed lustre, so may I By which I may discerne thy muse doth towre, 'Boue common flight and make the cloudes her bowre Then in the higher pitch see her anon Reach Ariadnes Crowne and put it on, And there installed rauish with her shine The God of Poets not the God of wine. Thy Helicon is pure and is distild Through as cleere pipes, which runne, when they are fild Briske Nectar. Phebus hardly can deuine Which issues are his owne and which are thine. Cha. Aleyn.
Amicissimo suo Sherleio, FOns occtuditur ille Pegaseius Et Parnnssia transilice septa Iucundos vetat optimos{que} vates Custos Tartariae triformis Aula: Te Crux postulet Hercules, ferat{que}, Quemraptum puto Cerberum Charonti Musarum statuisse lanitorem: Tu Sherleie Potes, fauente Musa Letrantem triplici canem boatu Tutus spernere: Terreat minores: Olim Pyrithoum peremit ille, Seruum non perimet tuum, fidelem Gratum, Pycithoo{que} chariorem Dulcis fabula, dulcior{que} seruus Et tu dulcior omnnibut Poeta Quales, quas e put as uter{que} fundit? Istis delicias parare fas est Crudas mormoreas{que} saweas{que} Et que molliculos (amice) dentes Gaudent frangereducioce morsu: Quiferrum chalybem{que} struthiones Et nil pretecia coqulant maligni: Tam forti stomacho placere noli Nec Sherleie places: Dapes ministras Iucundas, faciles{que}, milleas{que} Conditas sale, gratia, lepore. I laurum pete, quam merere totam. Nec te trreat iste qui Poctis Iam Minos Rhadamanthus Aeacusq est Et si quis numeratur inde quartus
Qua  dubia tremendus vrn: Sphinx Parnassia quem timemur omnes Te viso velut oedipo tremisat. Sic tu solne Gryphos, vt illa Nectit. Tho. Randolph. I Cannot fulminate or tonitruate words To puzz'le intellects my ninth lasse affords No sycophronian buskins, nor can straine Garagantuan lines to Gigantize thy veine, Nor make a iusiurand, that thy great playes Are terra del fo'gos or incognitaes Thy Pegasus in his admird carreere Curuets on Capreolls of nonsence here. WOnder not friend that I do entertaine Such language that both thinke and speake so plaine Know I aplaud thy smooth and euen straines That will informe and not confound our braines Thy Helicon like a smooth streame doth flow While others with disturbed channels goe And headlong like Nile Cataracts do fall With a huge noise, and yet not heard at all. When thy intelligence on the Cockpit stage Giues it a soule from the immortall rage I heare the muses birds with full delight Sing where the birds of mars were wont to fight Nor flatter I, thou knowest I do abhorre it Let others praise thy play, ile loue thee for it, That he that knowes my friend shall say he has A friend as gratefull as his seruant was Tho. Randolph.
To my friend Mr Shirley vpon his Comedy. LEt others that before thy booke take place Write in thy praises, I will not disgrace The time so much, our Critticks shall not say But I will find some errours in thy play; Thou art too little iealous of thy muse, Her beauties seene to free, she doth not vse To weare a maske or veile, which now a dayes Is growne a fashion, for in many playes Apollo scarce can to himselfe giue light To view the muse, or read the meaning right, Thy fancies, are to pleasing Cupid feares To loose his tribute paid in sighes and teares Whilst louers make their peace with thy conceit; 'Tis haynous, and thy language is too neate, Which euen to me, that am thy friend, affords Leaue to report there's witchcraft in thy words, Though to the stage it would be thought blest harme Might it be still bewitch'd which such a charme. Ro. Stapylton.
To my Judicious and learned friend the Author vpon his ingenious poem the Gratefull seruant. THough I well know, that my obscurer name Listed which theirs, who heere aduance thy fame Cannot adde to it, giue me leaue to be Among the rest a modest votarie At the altar of thy muse, I dare not raise Giant Hyperboles vnto thy praise, Or hope it can find credit in this age Though I should sweare in each triumphant page Of this thy worke, thers no line but of weight And poesie it selfe shewne at the height Such common places friend will not agree With thy owne vote and my integrity Ile steere a midde way, haue cleare truth my guide And vrge a praise which cannot be denyde Here are no forc'd expressious, no rack'd phraze No Babeil compositions to amaze The tortur'd reader, no beleeu'd defence To strengthen the bold at heists insolence, No obscene sillable, that may compell A blush from a chast maide, but all so well Exprest and orderd, as wise men must say It is a gratefull Poem a good play And such as read, ingenuously shall find, Few haue out strip'd thee, many halt behind. Philip Massenger.
To his deseruing friend Mr Ia. Shirley vpon his Gratefull seruant. I Do not praise thy straines, in hope to see My verses read before thy Comedy But for it selfe, that cunning I remit To the new tribe, and mountibankes of wit That martire ingenuity, I must Be to my conscience and thy poem iust, Which grac'd with comely action, did appeare The full delight of euery eye and eare, And had that stage no other play, it might Haue made the critticke blush at cockpit flight Who not discouering what pitch it flies His wit came downe in pitty to his eyes And lent him a discourse of cocke and bull To make his other comendations full, But let such Momi passe and giue applause Among the brood of actors, in whose cause As champion he hath sweat let their stale pride Find some excuse in being magnified, Thy muse will liue and no adulterate pen shall wound her through the sides of common men Let'em vnkennell malice, yet thy praise Shall mount secure, hell cannot blast thy bayes. Tho. Craford.
To my friend the author. MY name is free, and my rich clothes commend No deformd bounty of alooser friend, Nor am I warme i'th Sunshine of great men By guiding their darke sinnes, truth guides my pen, Bright iustice therefore bold by me, doth say Mans vnderstanding feeles no such decay But it may iudge, and while the soule of wit Liues bodied in the stage, spectator sit: Old nature's euer young, and 'twere a crime Gainst reason, to auerre our aged time Is sicke with dotage: which doth still impart To 'th betterd world new miracles of art. I must applaude thy scenes, and hope thy Stile Will make Arabia enuious of our Ile Confesse vs happy since th'ast giuen a name To the English Phenix, which by thy great flame Will liue, in spight of mallice to delight Our Nation, doing art and nature right, Go forward still, and when his muse expires Whose English, staines the geeke and latine lires Diuinest Ionson, liue to make vs see. The glory of the stage reuiu'd in thee. William Habington.
The author to the Reader. THe reason Why my Play commeth forth vsherd by so many lines, was the free vote of my friends whom I could not with ciuility refuse. I dare not owne their character of my selfe, or play, but I must ioyne with them that haue written, to do the Comedians iustice, among whom, some are held comparable With the best that are, and haue beene in the world, and the most of them deseruing a name in the file of those that are eminent for gracefull and vnaffect∣ed action. Thus much Reader I thought meet to declare in this place, and if thou beest ingenuous, thou wilt accuse with me, their bold seuerity, who for the offence of being mod est and not iustling others for the wall haue most iniuriously thrust so many actors into the Kennell—now—
Persons. Duke of Sauoy, louer of Leonora, and in her supposed losse of Cleona. Lodowicke, his brother wild and lasciuious Foscari, a noble count, and louer of Cleona. Grimundo, a Lord, and once gouernor to Lodowicke. noble men of Sauoy. Sorauzo Gioto, Fabrichio, Piero, Compa ion of Lodow. Iacomo, a foolish ambitious steward to Cleona. Valentio, a relligious man, Abbot, Gent. Seruants. Satyres. Leonora the princesse of Millan but disguisd as a page to Foscari and cald Dulcino. Astella a vertuous lady, wife to Lodow: but neglected Belinda wife to Grimundo Cleona Foscaries Mistresse, Ladies. Nimphes- The scene Sauoy.
THE GRATEFVLL SERVANT. ACTVS, 1. SCAENA, 1. Enter Soranzo, Giotto. Giotto. THe Duke is mou'd. Sor. The newes displeas'd him much. Giot. And yet I see no reason, why he should Engage so great affection to th▪ Daughter Of Millan, he nere saw her. Sor. Fame doth paint Great beauties, and her picture (by which Princes Court one another) may beget a flame In him to raise this passion. Giot. Trust a pencill, I like not that State▪ woing, see his Brother Enter Lodwicke. Has left him, pray my Lord how is it with His Highnesse? Lodw. Somewhat calmer, Loue I thinke Will kill neither of vs, although I bee No Stoicke, yt I thank my tarres I haue
A power o're my afection, if hee'le not Tame his, let it melt him into Sonnets Hee will prooue the more louing Prince to you, Get in againe; and make wise speeches to him, There is Aristotles Ghost still with him, My Phylosophicall Gouernour that was, He wants but you two, and a paire of Spectacles, To see what folly 'tis, to loue a woman With that wicked resolution to marry her, Though he be my elder Brother, and a Duke, I ha more wit, when there's a dearth of women I may turne foole, and place one of their Sexe Nerer my heart, farewell, commend me to My Brother, and the Councell-Table. Exit. Sor. Still the same wild Prince, there needs no character Where he is, to  him. Giot. Hee said truth, I doubt there is no roome for one, whom hee Should place in's heart, and honour. Sor. His owne Lady All pitty her misfortune, both were too Vnripe for Hymen, 'twas the old Dukes act, And in such marriages, hearts seldome meet When they grow older. Giot. Wherefore would the Duke Marry his young Sonne first? Sor. The walke of Princes, To make prouision beties for thm: They can bequeath small legacie, knowing th'heyre Carries both state and fortune for himselfe, His fate before him, here comes Grimundo Enter Grimundo. Grim, The Duke is recollected, where's the Prince? Sor. Gone. I would he were return'd once to himselfe. Giot. He has to soone forgot your precepts.
Sor. Your example might still be a Lecture, Grim. I did not deceiue the old Dukes trust While I had power to manage him, Hee's now past my tuition, but to th'Duke— Is it not strange my Lord, that the Young Lady Of Millan, should b forc'd to marry now, with Her Vncle? Giot. They're vnequall, Sor. 'Tis vnlawfull. Grim. 'Tis a trifle, reasons of State they vrg Against vs, leat their Dnkedome by this match, e subiect vnto Sauoy, for the scrupl O Religion, they are in hope, that A Dispensation may bee procur'd To quit exceptions, and by this meanes, They shall preserue their Principality, I'th name and blood, so reports Fabrichio Whom the Duke imployed for Treaty, how now? Enter Gentleman. Gent. The Duke cals for you my Lords. Giot. We attend, Ha? he is comming forth. Enter Duke, and Fabrichio▪ Sor, His lookes are cheerefull. Duke, Fabrichio? Fabr, My Lord, Duke Wee will to Tennis. Fabr. What your Grace please. Duke, Grimundo? Because you take no pleasure in such pasties, Your contemplation may busie it selfe, with that booke. Grim. Booke my Lord, it is— Duke. Leonora's picture a fair Table-booke. You may without offence to your yonng Wife▪ Looke on a Picture. I   it, let  se't o mre,
Millan and we are parted, our breast weares Againe his naturall Temper, allow me pray The excuse of common frailty, to be moued At strangenesse of this newes. Giot. Your Highnesse said, You would to Tennis. Duke, And'tis time enough, Wee haue the day before vs: some Prince Grimundo In such a cause as this would haue beene angry, Angrie indeed, throw'ne of cold language, and Call'd it a high, and loud affront, whose stirring Imagination would haue wakened Death, And by a miserable warre, haue taught Repentance, to a paire of flourishing States, Such things there haue beene? Sor. But your Grace is wise— Duke. Nay doe not flatter now, I do not Court Your praise so much, I speake but what our stories Mention, if they abuse not soft posteritie: I was not come to tell you, what my thoughts, With a strong murmure prompt me too. Grim. We hope— Duke, Ye feare, and do not know me yet, my actions Shall cleare your jealousie, I'me reconcil'd At home, and while I cherisht a peace here, Abroad I must continue it, there are More Ladiesi'the world? Fabr. Most true my Lord. Duke, And as attractiue, great, and glorious women Are there not, ha? Sor. Plenty my Lord i'the world. Duke, Ithe world, within the confines of our Duke∣dome In Sauoy, are there not? Grim. In Sauoy too. Many choice beauties, but your birth my Lord▪ Duke, Was but an honour purchas'd by another,
It might haue beene thy chance. Grim: My Father was No Duke. Duke, 'Twas not thy fault, nor ist my vertue, That I was borne when the fresh Sunne was rising, So came with greater shadow into life, Then thou, or hee. Grim: But royall Sir be pleas'd— Duke, No more, wee are not ignorant, you may Take away this distinction, and alledge In your graue wisedomes, spacious arguments, For our alliance with some forraigne Prince, But we haue weighed their promising circumstance, And find it onely a deuice, that may Serue time, and some darke ends, a mere state-tricke, To disguise hatred, and is emptie of Those benefits, it seemes to bring along: Giue me a Ladie borne in my obedience, Whose disposition, will not engage A search into the nature of her Climate, Or make a serutinie into the Starres: Whose language is mine owne, and will not need A smooth Interpreter, whose vertue is Aboue all titles, though her birth or fortune, B a Degree beneath vs, such a Wife Were worth a thousand farre fetch'd Brides, that haue More state, and lesse Deuotion. Fabr. If your Highnesse— Duke, Come you shall know our purpose, in the last We obey'd your directions, not without Our free and firme allowance of the Ladie Whom wee'l forget, it will become your duties, Follow vs now, wee haue not beene vnthrifty In our affections, and that Millan may Know Sauoy can neglect a Millanoise, And that we need not borrow a delight,
Heere we are fixt to marry, Grim. We are Subiects, And shall solicite Heauen, you may find one Worthy your great acceptance. Duke: Wee are confident, And to put off the cloud wee walke in, know Wee are resolu'd to place all Loue and Honour Vpon Cleona Nor ist a nw affection, wee but cherish Some seedes, which heretofore, her vertue had Scattered vpon our heart. Grim. We cannot be Ambitious of a Lady, in your owne Dominion, to whom we shall more willingly Prostrate our duties. Soren. She's a Lady of A flowing sweetnesse, and the liuing vertue Of many noble Ancestors. Giot. In whom Their fortunes meet, as their Propheticke Soules Had taught them thrifty prouidence, for this Great honour, you intend her. Duke, Wee are pleas'd, And thanke your generall vote, You then shall straight prepare our visit, beare our Princely respects, and say wee shall take pleasure To bee her Guest to day, nay loose no time, Wee shall the sooner quit the memorie Of Leonoraes Image. Enter Lodwicke. Soren: The Prince your Brother Sir? Duke: Withdraw, but be not at too much distance, Lodwicke Y'are welcome. Lodw. I shall know that by my successe, I want A thousand Crownes, a thousand Crownes. Duke. For what vse?
Lodw. Why will these foolish questions ne're be left, Is't not sufficient I would borrow em, But you must still capitulate with me? I would put 'em to that vse they were ordain'd for, You might as well haue ask'd me, when I meant To pay you againe. Duke, That to some other men, Might ha beene necessarie. Lodw, And you wo'not Doe that, I haue another easie Suite to you. Duke, What is't? Lodw. A thing of nothing, I wo'd entreat you To part with this same transitorie honour, This trifle cal'd a Dukedome, and retire, Like a good Christian Brother, into some Religious house, it would be a great ease to you, And comfort to your friends, especially To mee, that would not trouble you, with the noyse Of money thus, and I could helpe it. Du. Tis a kind, and honest motion, out of Charity, Meere Charity, so I must needs accept it— Ile onely marry, and get a Boy, or two, To gouerne this poore trifle for I'me bound In duty, to prouide for my Succession. Lodw. What doe you make of me, cannot I serue? Duke. You, that propound a benefit for my Soule, Wo not neglect your owne I know, we'le both Turne Fryers together? Lodw. And bee low sie? Duke, Any thing. Lodw. I shall not haue a thousand Crownes? Duke, Thou shalt. Lodw. Then be a Duke still, come lets loue, and bee Fine Princes, and thou hadst but two or three Of my conditions, by this hand I wod not Care and thou were immortall, so I might
Liue with thee, and enioy this worlds felicity. Duke, Thast put me in tune, how shall's bee very merry Now in the instant? Lodw. Merry? Duke: Yes. Lodw. Merry indeed? Duke. Yes. Lodw. Follow me, Ile bring you to a Lady? Duke, To a Whore? Lodw. That is a little the courser name. Duke, And can you play the Pander for me? Lodw. A toy, a toy. What can a man doe lesse for any Brother, Th'ordinary complement now a dayes, with great ones, Wee prostitute our Sisters with lesse scruple Then eating flesh on vigils, 'tis out of fashion To trust a Seruant with our priuate sinnes, The greater tye of blood, the greater faith, And therefore Parents haue beene held of late, The safest wheeles, on which the childrens lust, Hath hurried into act, with supple greatnesse, Nature doth weare a vertuous charme, and will Doe more in soft compassion to the sinne, Then gold or swelling promises. Duke. O Lodwicke! These things doe carry Horror, he is lost I feare, no I ha thought a something else, You shall with me to a Lady? Lodw. With all my heart. Duke. Vnto my Mistresse. Lodw. Your Mistresse, who's that? Duke, The faire Cleona. Lodw. She is honest. Du. Yes, were she otherwise, she were not worthy my visit, Not to loose circumstance I loue her.
Lodw. How? Duke, Honestly. Lodw. You doe not meane to marry her? Duke, It sha'not be my fault if she refuse, To bee a Dutchesse. Lodw. A'my Conscience, You are in earnest. Duke, As I hope to thriue in my desires, come You shall beare me company, and witnesse How I woe her. Lodw. I commend Your nimble resolution, then a Wife Must bee had somewhere, wo'd y'ad mine, to ceole Your appetite, take your owne course, I can But pray for you; the thousand Crownes— Duke. Vpon Condition, you'l not refuse, to Accompany. Lodw, Your Caroach quickly—stay— Now I thinke better on't, my Wife liues with her, They are Companions, I had forgot that? Duke, Shee'l take it kindly. Lodw. It were enough to put her Into conceipt, I come in loue to her, My Constitution will not beare it, Duke, What? Not see her? Lodw. Yet a thousand Crownes—God buy Condemne me to my wife. Exit▪ Duke, Yee heare Gentlemen? Grim: With griefe my Lord, and wonder at your sufferance. Duke, He is our Brother, we are confident Though he be wild he loues vs, twill become Vs t'pray and leaue him to a myracle But to our owne affaire. Loue and thy golden arrow, we shall try, How youle decide our second Destiny. Exeunt.
Eer Foscary with a Letter. Fosc: A kisse, and then tis scaled, this she should know Better then the impression, which I made, With the rude signet, tis the same she left Vpon my lip▪ when I departed from her, And I haue kept it warme still, with my breath, That in my prayers hath mentioned her. Enter Dulcino. Dulc. My Lord? Fosc: Dulcino welcome. thou art soone return'd, How dost thou like the Citie? Dulc: Tis a heape of handsome building. Fosc: And how the people? Dulc: My conuersation hath not age enough To speake of them, more then they promise well, In their aspect, but I haue argument Enough in you my Lord, to fortifie Opinion, they are kind, and hospitable To strangers. Fosc: Thy indulgence to my wound, Which owes a cure vnto thy pretty Surgery, Hath made thee, too much Prisoner to my Chamber▪ But wee shall walke abroad. Dulc: It was my duty? Since you receiu'd it in my cause, and could My blood haue wrought it sooner, it had beene Your balmy Fountaine▪ Fosc: Noble youth, I thanke thee. Enter Ser∣vant. How now, didst speake with him? Ser. I had the happinesse my Lord to meete him VVaiting vpon the Duke abroad, hee bad mee, Make hast with the remembrance of his Seruice, Heele bring his owne ioyes with him, instantly, To welcome your returne. Fosc. Didst thou request
His secresie? Ser: I did, he promis'd silence. Fosc. So, Ile expect him, thou art sad Dulcino, I prophesie thou shalt haue cause, to blesse The minute, that first brought vs to acquaintance. Dulc. Doe not suspect my Lord, I am so wicked, Not to doe that already, you haue saued My life, and therefore haue deseru'd that duty. Fosc: Name it no more, I meane another way. Dulc. It is not in your power, to make me richer, With any benefit, shall succeed it, though I should liue euer with you. Fosc: I require, Not so much gratitude. Dulc, There is no way Left for my hope, to doe you any seruice, Neere my preseruing, but by adding one New fauour, to a suit, which I would name, Fosc. To me, I prethee speake, It must be something I can deny thee. Dulc, Tis an humble suite, You license my departure. Fosc. Whither? Dulc. Any whether. Fosc. Doe you call this a way to doe me seruice? Dulc. It is the readiest I can study Sir. To tarry were but to increase my debt, And wast your fauours, in my absence, I May publish, how much vertue, I haue found In Sauoy, and make good vnto your fame, What I doe owe you here, this shall suruine you, For I will speake the story with that truth, And strength of passion, it shall doe you honour, And dwell vpon your name sweeter then mythe, When wee are both dead? Fosc▪ Thou hast art, to moue
In all things, but in this, change thy desire, And Ile deny thee nothing, doe not vrge Thy vnkind departure, thou hast met perhaps, With some that haue deceiu'd thee with a promise, Wonne with thy pretty lookes and presence, but Trust not a great man, most of them dissemble, Pride, and Court cunning hath betrayed their faith, To a secure Idolatry, their soule, Is lighter then a complement, take heede, They'l flatter thy to young ambition, Feed thee with names, and then like subtle Chimists Hauing extracted, drawne thy Spirit vp, Laugh, they haue made thee miserable. Dulc: Let No jealousie my Lord, render me so Vnhappy, that preferment, or the flatteries Of any great man, hath seduc'd my will To leaue you, by my life, and your owne honour, No man hath tempted me, not haue I chang'd A syllable with any. Fose: Any man? Still I suspect thy safetie? And thou mayst thus deceiue me, it may be, Some wanton Lady hath beheld thy face, And from her eyes, shot Cupids into thine, To abuse that fight, or wrought vpon thy frailty, With their smooth language to vndoe thy selfe, Trust not the innocenc of thy Soule too farre, For though their bosomes carry whitenesse, thinke, It is not snow, they dwell in a hot Clymate, The Court, where men are but deceitfull shadowes, The womn, walking flames; what if this Lady Bestow a wealthy Carkanet vpon thee, Another giue thee Wardrobes, a third promise A chaine of Diamonds, to decke thy youth, ▪Tis but to buy thy vertue from thee, and when
Thy outide thriue, vpon their treacherous bountie Th'out starue at heart, and lust will leaue ty body, Many vnpittyed ruines, th ouart young— Dulc. There is no feare my Lord, that I shall take Such wicked courses, and I hope you see not, Any propension in my youth, to sinne For Pride, or wantonnesse. Fose: Indeed, I doe not, But being my boy so young, and beautifull, Thou art apt to bee sedue'd. Dulc. Beleeue me Sir, I will not serue the greatest Prince on earth, When I leaue you. Fosc. Thou shalt not serue mee, I Will make thee my companion. Dulc: No reward, Though iust, should buy the freedome I was borne with Much lesse base ends, i I but meet agen That good man, who in reuerence to his habit, The theeues let goe before your happy valour Came to my rescue. Fosc: Hee that was your Conduct? From Millan, for so—if I remember You named a Father, what could he aduantage? Your fortune, were he present, more, then with Religious Councell? Dule: I did trust him Sir, As being the sasest treasurer, with that, Would make mee welcome in Sauoy, and I know he will be faithfull, when we meete, For his sake, let me beg you would discharge, A worthlesse Seruant, that inquest of him— Fosc. No more to cut of all vnwelcome motiues, I charge thee by thy Loue, thy Gratitude, Thy life preseru'd, which but to stay thee heere, I would not name agen, vrge no consent
From me, to thy departure, I haue now Ve of thy faith, thou wo't not runne away I haue imployment for thee, such a one As shall not onely pay my seruices, But leaue m in arrerage to thy loue, Receiue this letter. Enter Grimund. Let me embrace thee, with a spreading arme, Grim: I haue dispens'd with my attendance, on The Duke, to bid you welcome Sir, from death, Fame so, had coz'ned our beliefe, but thus, She has made you the more prcious. Fosc. Then I prospered, If I may call it so, for I procur'd That rumour to be spread, excuse a minte, He tell thee all my Counsls, I neede not, Wast any instructions on thee, Dulcino, For the conyauce of this Paper, let me Commend it to thy care, tis to my Mistresse, Conceale my lodgings, and doe this for him Will studie noble recompence, Dulc. You command me. Exit. Grim. What pretty youth is that? sure I haue seene That face before, Fosc. Neuer, I brought him first To Savy, hauing brought him from the Bandetti, in my passage, ore the Confines, Is't not a sweet fa'd thing? there are some Ladies, Might change their beauties with him. Grim. And gaine by it. Fosc. Ny, o his shape he has as fine a Soule, Which  that perfection. Grim: You ha not Ben long acquainted with him. Fosc. I haue skill :  my Character, full xcellent excellent sweetnesse. Grim: You expresse him
Passionately. Fosc. Hs vertue will deserue More praise, he suffers Sir for loue, in that He is a Gentleman, for neuer could Narrow, and earthly mindes, be capable Of Loues impession, or the iniury— He willingly forsooke his friends, and Country, Because vnkindly for vnworthy ends, They would haue forc'd him marry against his heart. He told me so himselfe, and it were sinne, Not to belieue him, but omitting these, How fares the best of Ladies my Cleona? Grim. Your Cleon? Fosc. Mine, she is in affection, She is not married. Grim: No? Fosc. She is in health? Grim, Yes. Fosc. There is something in thy lookes, I cannot Reade by thy own glosse, and make me know, That doubtfull text, to whom hath she giuen vp, The hope of my feliciie, her heart, Since my too fatall absence? Git. Vnto none, Within the circle of my knowledge, Fosc. Then I am renew'd agen, may thy tongue neuer Know sorrowes . Grim. Will you pesently Visit her? Fosc. I haue sent a letter, to Certifie, I am still her liuing Seruant. Grim. No matter, weele be there, before the boy, There is necessity, if you knew all, Come lets away. Fosc. Agen thou dost aflict My Soule with iealousie, if she haue still
The  possssion of her heart— Grim: But you are Dead Sir, remember that. Fosc: I shall be liuing, And soone enough present my selfe her fresh, And actiue Lower. Grim: If the Duke bee not Before you▪ Fosc: How? Grim: The Duke, 'tis so resolu'd, Your riuall, if you till affect Cleona, Within this houre, he means his first solicite And personall seige, loose not your selfe with wonder, If you neglect this opportunity, She hauing firme opinion of your death, It will not be a myracle, if the Title Of Dutchesse be a strong temptation, To a weake woman. Fosc: I must thanke your loue, And Counsell, but for this time, disingage Your further stay with me, th Duke may misse you, Prserue his fauour, and forget me in Your conference, I would be still conceal'd, Let me cnsider on my fate, agen I thanke you, and dismisse you, Grim: Quiet thoughts, Dwell in your breast, in all things I obey you, You know you haue my heart. Fose: She's but a womn. Yet how shall I be able to accuse her, With any Iustice, when she thinks me dead, The Duke, I must doe something, I am full Of discord, and my thoughts are fighting in me, From our owne armie must arise ur feare, When loue it selfe is turn'd a Mutinre. Exit.
ACTVS, 2. SCAENA, 1. Enter Iacomo the Steward, and Servants. Jac. So, so, yet more perfume, y'are sweet Seruing∣men, make eury corner of the house smoake, bestirre your selues, uery man know his Pruince, and bee officious to ple my ady, according to his Talent, haue you furnish out the bnquet? Serv. Most Mthodically? Jac. Tis well, here should haue beene a fresh suite of Arras, but no matter, these  the ag well, let'em hang. Serv. And there were a Maske to entertaine his Highnesse? Iac. Hang Maskes, let euery conceit shew his owne face, my Lady would not diguise her entertainement, and now I talke of disguising, wheres the Butler? Btl. Here Sir. Iac: Where Sir? tis my Ladies pleasure, that you be drunk to day, you will deale her wine abroad, the more liberally among he Dukes Seruants, you two are tall fellowes, make good the credit of the Buttery, and when you are drunke, I will send others to releee you, goe to your stations, if his Grace cme hither a Suter to my Lady, as wee haue some cause to suspect, and after mar∣ry her, I may be a great man, and ride vpon a reuerend Move by Patent, tere is no end of my preferment, I did once teach my Ladie to dance, she must then helpe me to rise; for indeed, it is iust▪ that only those, who ger their liuing by their legs, should rid vpon a Foot∣cloth. Serv. Here's a young Gentleman: desires to speake
with my Lady. Jac, More young Gentlemen? tell him I am busie. Sr. With my Ladie— Jac. Busie with my Ladie Sir? Serv. Would speake with my Ladie Sir? Jacom, I ha not done with my Ladie my selfe yet, hee shall stay, tis for my Ladies ste, no time to inter∣rupt my Lady, but now, Ile know his businesse, and taste it for my Lady, if I like it, shee shall heare more, but bid him come to mee, mee thinkes I talke, like a peremptorie States man already, I shall quickly learne to forget my selfe, when I am in great office, I will oppresse the Subiect, flatter the Prince, take bribes a both sides, doe right to neyther, serue Heauen as farre as my profit will giue mee laue, and tremble, on∣ly at the Summons of a Parliament. Enter Dulci. Hum? a Page, a very Page, one that would wriggle and preferre himselfe to be a Wag, tis so, haue you any Letter of commendations? Dulc, I haue a Letter Sir. Jacom, Let me see the complexon of the face, has it a handsome Title Page, is it Stilo . Dulc. I haue command Sir, to deliuer it, To none, but to my Lady. Iacomo: A forward youth, I like him, hee is not modest, I will assist his preferment, to engage him to my faction, a speciall Court policie, see my Lady. Enter Cleona, Astella, Belinda. Cleon. Yet ay Belinda— Bel. I beseech you Madam Allow excuse to my abrupt departure, There is a businesse of much consequence, And which you will not mourne to see effected, Besides the duty that I owe my Lord,
Compels me to it Madam. Cleona. Well, but that Wee are acquainted with your vertue, this Would moue suspition you were not in Charitie with the Duke. Belind: You are pleasant Madam, Cleo. You are seuere, to bind your selfe too strictly, From Court and entertainements, sure your Lord Should chide you for it. Astel. If it please you stay Your Ladiship and i'le conuerse together, My vnkind fate hath indisposed me, To these state ceremonies too. Bel. You will oblige me by your pardon? Cle. Vse your pleasure. Ast. Nay you shall giue me leaue a little further. Here I am vselee. Exeunt Astella, Belinda. Iac. May it please you Madam, This pretty Gentleman, has a suite to you, And I in his behalfe, he will be seruiceable, And actiue in his place, a friend of mine. Dulc. Your Steward Madam, is too full of zeale, To doe me a preferment, but I haue No other ambition, then to commend This paper to your white hands, Jac. Neuer doubt, Tis done, be bold and call me fellow. Cleon. Be You circumspect I pray, that all things haue Their perfect shape and order, to receiue The Dke, you know our pleasure, not to spare Or ost, or studie, to delight his Highnesse. Iac. I hope I haue not beene your Seward so long, But I know how to put your Ladiship To cost enough without study. She reades. Cleon. Shall I credit
So great a blisse? the date is fresh, Foscari Whom I thought dead? giue him fiue hundred Crowns Iac. We will deuide em. Cleo. Stay. Iac. You need not bid, I vse to make 'em stay, and long enough, Ere they receiue such bounties. Cleon. Treasure is Too cheape a paiment for so rich a message. Iac, This is the right Court largesse. Cleon, I must call thee, My better Genius, haue you knowne this youth? Iac. If your Ladiship like him, I haue known him long If otherwise, I nere saw him in my life. Cl. The day breaks glorious to my darkned thoughts, He liues, he liues yet, cease yee amorous feares, More to perplexe me, prethee speake sweet youth, How fars my Lord? vpon my Virgin heart, Ile bui'd a flaming Altar, to offer vp A thank▪ full Sacrifice for his returne, To life▪ and me, speake and increase my comforts, Is he in perfect health? Dulc. Not perfect Madam, vntill you blesse him with The knowledge of your constancie. Cleon. O get thee wings and flye then, Tell him my loue doth burne like Vestall fire, Which with his memory, richer then all spices, Dispersed odours round about my Soule, And did refre itsh when twas dull, and sad, With thinking of his absence. Iac. This is strange, My Lady is in Loue with him. Cleon. Yet stay Thou goest too soone away, where is he speake? Dulc. He gaue me no Commission for that Lady▪ He will soone saue that question, by his presence.
Cle: Time h'as no feathers, he walkes now on crut∣ches, Relate his gesture when he gaue thee this, What other words, did myrth smile on his brow, I would not for the wealth of this great world, He should suspect my faith, what said he prethee, Dulc. He said, what a warme louer, when desire Makes elequent could speake, he said you were Both starre and Pilote. Cleon. Not to fast, my ioyes Will be too mighty for me. Iac: I haue found it, That boy comes from the Duke, that letter loue, 'Twill be a match, and please your Ladiship— Cleo. Forbeare your Ceremonies, what needs all this Preparation, if the Duke vouchsafe His person for my guest, duty will teach me, To entertaine him without halfe this trouble, Ile haue noryot for his Highnesse. Iac. Hum? How's this. Cleona, Be lesse officious, you forget— Sweet youth, goe forward with thy story. Iac. Hum? This is a Favrie, and the Diuell sent him To make my Lady mad, twere well to try Whether he be flesh and blood, ha, Ile pinch him first. Cleon: How now? He pinches Dulcino. Iac. My care shall see nothing be wanting, for Your honour, and the Dukes. Cleon. Your place I see, Is better then your manners, goe too, be Lesse troublesome, his Highnesse brings intents Of grace, not burden to vs, know your duty. Iac. So, I were best keepe my selfe warme with my owne office, while I may, the Tide is turn'd I see with∣in two Minutes, heere was nothing but looke to the
Gallery, perfume the Chambers, what Muficke for the Duke, a Banquet for the Duke, now, be lesse officious, Wee'l haue noryot for his Highnesse, tis this Vrchin h'as vndone all our preferment. Cl. The Suns lou'd flower, that shuts his yellow cur∣taine, When he declineth, opens it againe At his faire rising, with my parting Lord, I clos'd all my delights, till his approach, It shall not spread it selfe. Enter Gentleman. Gent. Madam the Duke? Cleon. Already. Enter Astella and Ladies. Ast. Hee is entred. Cleon. Do not leaue me, I shall remember more. Enter Duke, Fabrichio, Soranzo Giotto. Duke. Excellent Cleona, Cleon. The humble duty of a Subiect to your High∣nesse. Duke, Rise high in out thoughts, and thus Confirme we are welcome, to these eyes, our heart, Shall pay a lower duty, then obedience Hath taught your knee. Cleon, Your Grace much honours me, Till this white houre, these walles were neuer proud, T'inclose a guest, the genius of our house, Is by so great a presence wak'd, and glories, Te entertaine you. Duke. Euery accent falls Like a fresh lewell, to encrease her valew, Wee can but thanke Cleena. Cleon. Royall Sir— Duke, Let me reuoke that hasty syllable, But thanke thee, yes, wee can doe more, and will, Wee haue a heart to do't, our much greeu'd sister I know you doe not weare this sadnesse, for Our presence. Ast▪ If I'ue any skill in mine owne eyes,
Since they beheld you, they haue looked More cheerefully, then they are wont. Duke, And yet I see a teare is ready to breake prison, Ast. It is of ioy to see you sit in health, I hope the Prince is well? Duke, He will bee so Astella, when he leaues to be vnkind To thee, but let's forget him, Dulc. Fame ha's not Iniur'd him, in the Character of his person, And his shape promiseth a richer Soule, I feele a new, and fierie spirit dance, Vpon my amorous heart-strings. Duke, We are come My faire Cleona. Cleon. With your Highnesse pardon, That name was neuer so attended, it Becomes your bountie, but not me to weare That Title. Duke, What? Cleon, Of, faire my Lord? Duke, I said you were my faire Cleona— Cleona. Sir? Duke, I did apply, I hope't does not offend to call you so, Y'are yet my Subiect. Cleon. When I leaue that name, may Heauen— Duke, Be pleas'd to change it for a better▪ Cleona, It cannot. Duke. Doe not sinne, tis in our power With your consent, to worke that wonder Lady. Cleona▪ I want my vnderstanding. Duke, Ile explaine, Cleona, Doe not beleeue it youth, by all the faith Of Virgins▪ Ile not change my seruice, to Thy Master for his Dukedome. Dulc, Y'are too noble.
Duke, What boy is that? Ha Giotto? Dulc. Madam, the Duke obserues vs. Dulc. I ha seene him, It is no common face. Soran. My Lord we know not, Duke, Where is Grimundo? Giot. Not yet come my Lord. Duk. Send for him streight, and bid him bring the picture We gaue into his keeping, yet, forbeare, It is in vaine. Sor. My Lord, Cleona waites Your farther Courtship. Duke, Whither am I carried? Cleon I hope dread Sir, my house affords no obiect, To interrup your quiet. Duke, None but Heauenly, this roofe be capable of ill, onely presence Lady would conuert it. rtuous Magick in your eye, For where soere it calls a beame, it does Create a goodnesse, y'aue a handsome boy. Dulc. The Duke is troubled? Cleona He's a prettie youth. Dulc. I hope he wo'not take me from my Lady, I'e say I am her Seruant. Duke, Something bindes My speech, my heart is narrow of a suddaine, Giotto take some opportunity To enquire that youthe condition▪ name, and Country, And giue vs priuate knowledge, to cut off * Circumstance Lady, I am not your fresh, And vnacquainted Louer, that doth wast Soranzo whispers with Iacomo The tedious Moones with preparation To his amoous suite, I haue beene Cleona, A long admirer of your vertues, and Doe want the comfort or so sweet a Partner,
In our young state. Cleon. You mocke your humble handmaid. Soran, A stranger sayest? Iacom: He brought some welcome Letter To my Lady. Soranz. Not know his name nor whence? Iacom. No my good Lord. So so, I like this well, My Lady does apply her to the Duke, There is some hope agen, things may succeed This Lords discoursing with me, is an Omen To my familiarity with Greatnesse. Duke, Grimundo not come yet? I am not well. Cle. Good Heauen defend, Angels protect your Highnes. Duke, Your holy prayers cannot but doe me good. Continue that Deuotion, Charitie Will teach you a consent, to my departure, Cleon. I am vnhappy. Duke, Make not me so Lady, By the least trouble of your selfe, I am Acquainted with these passions, let me breath A hart vpon thy lip farewell agen Your pardon. Exit. Soranz, 'Tis a very strange distemper, And suddaine, noble Lady we must waite Vpon the Duke. Exeunt. Iacom. My bud is niptagen, Would all the Banquet were in his belly for't. Dulc. Let not my eyes betray me. Iac. I'm sicke too, Let not your Ladiship repent your cost, Ile haue a care the Sweet meates bee not lost. Exit. Cleon. Acquaint him with these passages of the Duke. Tell him I long to see him, and at last To crowne the story, say my heart shall know No other Loue but his. Dulc, I flye with this Good newes. Exit. D. Enter Iac.
Iac. Madam here is Prince Lodwicke, Newly discoach'd. Cleon: Attend him? Iac: Most officiously. Cleon: Stay it can doe no harme. Ast. Eene what you please. Cleon. If he enquire for his Lady, answer She is not very well, and keepes her Chamber. Iac. Ile say she's dead if you please, 'tis my duty Ile neuer speake truth while I liue, that shall Offend your Ladiship. Cleon: You may heare all, Enter Lodwieke, and Piero. And when you please appeare. Lodw: Sicke? where's her Doctor, Ile be acquainted with him, noble Lady. Cleon: Your Grace is here most welcome, Lodw: I am bold? Piero: I'm happy that my duty to the Prince Brought me to kisse your hand. Cl. Beside the honour done to me, your person Will adde much comfort to Astella, your Weake Lady, Lodw, She is sicke, mend let her mend, sheele spend her time worse, yet she knowes my minde, and might doe mee the curtesie to die once, ide take it more kindly, then to be at charge with a Phisitian. Cleon: You wo'd not poyson her? Lodw: I thinke I must be driuen to't, what shall a man doe with a woman that wo'not be ruled, I ha giuen cause e∣nough to breake any reasonable womans heart in Savoy, and yet you see how I am troubled with her, but leaue her to the Destinies, where is my Brother all this while? I came to meet him, what ist a match alreadie? when shall we daunce, and tryumph in the Tilt-yard, for honour of the high and mighty nuptials: where is he? Cleon: My Lord he is gone. Lodw: How? Cleona▪ Distempered.
Lodw. Not with wine? Cleon: Departed sicke. Lodw: She jeeres him, by this lip Ile loue thee, and thou wot abuse him, I knew he would but shame himselfe, and therefore durst not come with him, for mine owne credit, I warrant, he came fierce vpon thee with some parcell of Po∣etry, which he had con'd by hart out of Tasso Guarrini, or some other of the same melting Tribe, and thought to haue brought thy Maiden Towne to his obedience, at the first noyse of his furious Artillerie. Cleon. My Lord, you vnderstand me not, your Brother Is not in health, some vnkind paine within him Compeld him to forsake vs, Lodw. Is it true? That he is sicke, my Brothers sicke Piero. Pier. I am very well here. 1. Lady? So am not I, pray Sir appeare more ciuill Or I shall leaue you. Lodw: True? Cleona: Tis too true my Lord. Lodw: No, no, truth is a vertuous thing, and we cannot haue too much on't, d'ee heare, if I may counsell you be wise, and stay for me, you may bee my wife within this Moneth, and the Durchesse too. Cleon: Your Wife my Lord, why you are married, What Shall become of her? Lodw: Is she not sicke? Cleona: But are you sure sheele dye? Lodw; What a ridiculous question, do you make, if death wo'not take a faire course with her, are there not reasons e∣nough in state thinke you, to behead her, or if that seeme cruell, because I do not affect bloud, but for very good ends, I can be diuorc'd from her, and leaue her rich in the Title of Lady Dowager. Cleona: Vpon what offence can you pretend a Diuorce? Lodw: Because she is not fruitfull, is not that a sinne. Cleon. Would your Lordship haue her fruitfull, and you Ne're lye with her.
Lodw. Haue not I knowne a Lady, whose husband is an Eunuch, vpon Record, mother to three or foure children and no free conscience but commends her. Cleon. But these things wo▪not be easily perfect, vnlesse You were Duke to enforce em. Lodw. Is not my brother in the way? sicke already, and perhaps as fit for Heauen, as an other, I know hee cannot lue long▪ he's so well giuen, they neuer thriue, and then d' thinke il keepe such a Religious Court, in this corner lodge a Couey of Capouchins, who shall zealously pray for mee without stockins, in that a nest of Carthusians, things which in fi turne to Otters, appeare flesh, but really are fish, for that they feede on: no▪ no▪ giue me a Court of flourishing pleasure where delight in all her shapes, and studied varie∣ties, euery minute courts the Soule, to actuate her chiefe felicitie. Cleon. Doe you neuer thinke of Hell? Lodw. Faith I doe, but it alwayes makes me melancho∣ly, and therefore as seldome as I can, my contemplation shall point thither, I am now in the spring of my life, winter will come on fast enough, when I am old, I will be as methodicall an hypocrite, as any paire of lawne sleeues in Sauoy. Cleon. I dare not heare him longer, Madam releae me. Enter Astella. Lodw. How now, whence come you, were you sicke? Ast. At heart my Lord, to thinke of your vnkindnesse. Lodw. At heart? ile nere beleeue, without inspection, am I vnkind, goe to, there's not a friend in the whole world can wih you better, would you were Canonis'd a Saint, 'tis more then I wish my selfe yet, I doe not trouble thee much on earth, and thou wert in Heauen, I would not pray to thee, for feare of diturbing thy Serapicall deution. Ast. What sinne haue I committed Sir, deserues This distance? Cleon. In Christian charitie salute her. Lodw. I would not haue your Ladiship too vetrous, The ayre is some what cold, and may endanger A weake body.
Ast. There's an other duty, my Lord required frō husband▪ Lodw. My Madam would to rutte, hath your honour, no pretty dapper Monkey, each morning to giue you a heat in a dance, is not your Doctor gamesome. Ast. If the suspition that I am vnchast— Lodw. Vnchast? by this hand I doe not know one honest woman i the Dukedome. Cleon. How my Lord, hat doe you thinke of me? Lodw. know not whether you be a woman or no, yet. Cleon. Fye my Lord. Lodw. What would you haue me doe, I haue not seene her this sixe Moneths. Cleon. Oh rather my Lord conclude my sufferings, T thus with tortures lengthen out my death, O kill me, and I beseech you I will kisse The instrument, which guided by your hand, Shall giue my griefe a period, and pronounce Enter Gri∣mudo. With my last breath, your free for giuenesse. Lodw. No kill your selfe, more good will come on', how now? nay then w'are like to haue a precious time on't. Cleon. The Duke my Lord enquir'd for you. Grim. I met His Highnesse in returne, and he employ'd me To bring backe knowledge of his better health, Which hee sayes, shall enable him, but to Expesse how much he honours faire Cleona. Cleon. I am his studious Seruant, and reioye In this good newes: your Brother is recouered. Lodw. II, I knew he would doe well enough, now Sir? Grim: I haue some businesse, with you my Lord, Were you at opportunitie. Lodw. Some morall exhortations, they are fruitlesse, I shall neuer eat garlike with Diogenes in a Tub, and specula the Starres without a shirt, prethee enioy thy Religion, and liue at last most Phylosophy call lousie. Grim: My designe is of an other nature. Cleon: May I obtaine so great a fauour Sir, You'ld be my Gut in absence of the Duke,
I'm but ambitious, to remember His health in Greeke-wine. Lodw. So this Lady will be temperate, and vse mee but like a stranger, without pressing me to inconueniences of kis∣sing her, and other superstitious Courtship of a Husband. Cleona▪ I will engage sheele not offend you▪ Lodw. And yet it goes against my conscience to tarry so long in honest company, but my  is I doe not vse it, come away Piero, you haue had a fine time on't. Cleona: My Lord. Grim: I follow Madam, yet haue comfort, Though reason and example  our feares, Heauen will not let you loose so many teares. Enter Foscari, and Dulcino. Fosc. Did she receiue my Letter with such ioy? Dulc. I wont expreson my Lord, to giue you The circumstance, with a flowing Loue, Or rather with what glad deuotion She entertain'd it, at your very name, For so I guest, to which her couetous sight Made the first hase, one might haue seene her heart Dance in her eyes, and as the wonder stroue To make her pale, warme loue did fortifie Her cheekes, with guiltie blushes, she did read And kisse the paper often, mingled questions, Some halfe propounded, as her Soule had beene Too narrow, to receiue what you had writ, She quite forgot. Fosc: This was before the Duke Came thither? Dulc: Yes my Lord. Fosc: And didst thou not Obserue her at his presence slacke that feruour, Hr former passion had begot of me? Was shee not cotly to him boy? Dulc. So farre As her great birth, and breeding, might direct
A Lady to behaue her selfe to him, That was her Prince. Fosc. She kiss'd him, did she not? Dulc. She kiss'd. Fosc. He did salute her? Dulc. Yes my Lord. Fosc: And didst not see a flame hang on her lip, A spirit busie to betray her loue, And in a sigh conuey it to him? Oh, Thou canst not read a woman, did he not Woe her to be his Dutchesse? Dulc: Yes my Lord. Fosc▪ Thou shouldst ha watcht her cheke then, there a blush Had cene a guilt indeed, a feeble answere, With halfe a smile, had beene an argument ee had beene lost, and the temptation Aboue her strength, which hd I knowne, I could Ha slept, and neuer beene disturb'd, although I had met her in a dreame. Dulc: My Lord, you weae A causelesse trouble to your selfe. Fosc, Oh Iealousie. I am asham'd— Dulc. If euer woman lou'd With faith, Cleona honours you aboue Mankind, 'twere sinne but to suspect so chast, So furnish'd with all vertue, your Cleona, Fosc. It were indeed, I am too blame Dulcino, Yet when thou com'st to beso ripe, for so Much miserie, as to loue, thou wo't excuse me, Dulc. My Lord if I might not offend with my Opinion, it were safest that you loose No time, your presence would confirme a ioy To eyther, and preuent the Duke, whose strong Solicits, may in time. endanger much The quiet of your thougts. Fosc. Why can there be Supition she will varie, doe not chke
The confidence thou hadst, vnsettle not, The faith I haue in thee, shee cn proue false. Dulc. Mistake me no, I do not doubt her truth, But shee's a woman, and if you dlay To inerpose your selfe, his Greatnesse may In time, without iniustice to your Loue, Winne vpon her affction, you shall doe A great impietie to  her now. With so mch proofe, and loyale of honour. Fosc: On neuer, neuer, and I will Hr lo▪ beyond example, thus Dulc Th  returne. Dulc: My Lord I had much rather Waite on ou to her. Fosc. Iush, hou vnderstandst not What I haue pupos'd, thou shal presently Goe backe, and tell Cleona, I am dead. Dulc: How dead? Fosc. I boy, that I am dead, may marke The isue. Dulc: But my Lord, she hath your Letter To checke that. Fosc. Thou shalt frame something, to take That off, some fine inuention may be made, To say 'twas forg'd, wee'l study that anon, In the assurance of my death, which must Be so deliuered, as she shall beleeue the, She may affct the Duke. Dulc: How Sir, the Duke? Fosc: I, I, the Duke, for that's the plot, I must aduance. Dulc: And will you thus reward So great a loue to you. Fosc: Best, bst of all, Shall I be so vngratefull to  Lady, Of such rare merit, when a Prince desires To make her geat, by my vnworthy interest Destroy her blessing, hinder such a fortun
From faire Cleona, let her loue the Duke, In this I will expresse the height, and glorie Of my best seruice. Dulc. Are you sir in earnest? Fosc. I loue her, and can neuer see her more, Posteritie shall learne new pietie In loue from me, it will become me looke on, Cleona a farre off, and onely mention Her name, as I doe Angels in my Prayer, Thus she deserues I should conuerse with her▪ Thus I most nobly loue her. Dulc. Doth shee languish Expecting you, and shall I carry death To comfort her? good Heauen forbid this Sir. Fosc. Heauen d  me to it, she shall raigne Glorious in power, while I let fall my beads That she might prosper, be not tho an enemy To her and mee, I see thouart vnwilling To this imployment, if th'ast any wish To see me happy, to preserue my life, And honour, which was neuer more engag'd, If I shall thinke thou art not very wicked, A false, disembling boy, deny me not This office, vse what circumstance thou wilt, To thriue in this report, and thy sad breath, Shall giue a faied, saue a reall death. Exit. Dulc. I'me lost ith springing of my hope, shall I Obey him to destroy my selfe? I must, I dare not be my selfe, no neede haue they▪ Of other force, that make themselues away. Exit. ACTVS, 3. SCAENA, 1. Enter Iacomo. Jac. I smell a match agen, the Duke will fetch her about, here was another Ambaadour at Dinner, and his Highnesse
is againe expected, in confidence of my place that shall bee, I will continue my state posture, vse my toothpicke with dis∣cretion, and cough distinctly, what can hinder my rising? I am no Scholler, that exception is taken away, for most of our states men, doe hold it a sawcie thing, for any of their Ser∣uants, to be ser then themselues, obserue the inuentorie of a great Nobl mans house, marke the number of the learned, Ile begin with them. mprimis, Chaplaines and Schoole▪ ma∣sters one, two Pags, 3. Gentlemen, 4. Footemen, 6. Horses, 8 Seruing crures, and 10. couple of Dogs. a very Noble family. Enter Dulcino. Dul. Worthy Sir— Jac. My Lady shall be at leisure for you presently— It may bee you would speake with mee first? Dulc. I only entreat my Lady may haue knowledge that I wate hee. Iac, I will enrich my Ladies vnderstanding, Ile say no∣thing else but that you are here shall I? that's enough if you haue another Letter. Dulc. What then? Iac▪ I would wish you deliuer it to her owne hand, but vnder your fauour, the contents of the last Chapter, had like to vndone vs all, and Cupid had not bin more mercifull. Dulc Feare nothing, the newes I bring, will make you mer∣ry. Jac. de laugh at that, howsoeuer you are heartily welcome and euer shall bee, you doe heare no harme of the Duke? Dulc. No harme? Iac▪ You shall heare more shortly, I say no more, but hea∣uen blesse my Lady and his Highnesse together, for my part though I speake a proud word—Ile tell my Ldy that you attend her. Exit. Dulc. I prethee do, and hasten the discharge Of my sad Embassie, which when I haue done, And that it prospers in mine owne misfortune, Ile teach my breath to pray. Enter Cleona, Fabri, Iacomo. Fabr. A glorious fate Corts your aceptance, and I hope your
Will teach you how to meete it, y'aue receiu'd His Hghnesse bosome, now Ile take my leaue, Cleon: Will you not see the Prince againe? Fabr. I saw his Highnesse walking with Grimund▪ Toward the Garden, and the Duke expects me▪— Thinke of a Dutches Madam. Clena: I'me not worthy, And needs must sinke, vnder the weight of such A title, my humblest Seruice to his Grace, I am his beades-woman. Exit Fabrichio. Jac. Madam, here's the Youth. Cl. Art thou return'd already? why were you So rude to make him waite. Dulc. Since I arri'd, Tis but a paire of minutes. Cleon. They are worth As many dayes. Iac. He shall be with your Ladiship, Next time, before he come, when I but spy him A mile off, Ile acquaint you, in my duty To your selfe, and my honour vnto him. Cleon. Withdraw. Jac. Here is no couch, I doe not like My Ladies familiarity with a boy, Me thinkes a man were fitter, and more able To giue her a refreshing, but this Lobby Shall be my next remoue. Exit and ayes behind the hang∣ings. Dulc. You will repen This welcome Madam. Cleon. What harsh sound is that? Thy lookes vpon a suddaine are become Dismall, thy brow dull as Saturnes i. Thy lips are hung with blacke, as if thy tongue Were to pronounce some Funrall. Dulc. It is, But let your vertue place a gard about Your are, it is too weake a sence to trust With a sad tale, that may disperse too soone.
The killing Syllables, and some one, or other Find out your heart. Cleon: The Mandrake hath no voice Like this, the Rauen, and the night birds sing More soft, nothing in Nature, to which feare Hath made vs superstitious, but speakes gently Compar'd with thee, discharge thy fatall burden, I am prepar'd, or stay, but answere me, I will and saue thee breath, and quickly know The totall of my sorrow, is Fosari Dead since I saw thee last? Or hath some wound, Or other dire misfortune seal'd him for The graue, that though he yet liue, I may bid My heart dispaire to see him? Dulc. None of these, Since last I saw you Madam. Cleona. None of these? Then I despise all sorrow boy, there is Not left another mischiefe in my fate, Call home thy beautie, why dost looke so pale? See I am arm'd, and can with valiant bloud, Heare thee discourse of my terrour row, Me thinkes I can in the assurance of His safety, heare of Battailes, Tempest, Death, With all the horrid shapes that Poets fancie, Tell me the tale of Troy, or Rome on fire, Rich in the trophies of the conquered world, I will not shed so many teares, to saue The temples, as my ioy doth sacrifice, To heare my Lord is well. Dulc. Turne them to griefe, Agen, and here let me kneele, the accuser Of him, that hath deseru'd more punishment, Then your wrong'd pietie will inflict. Cleon, Dost kneele, And call thy selfe accuser? Dulc. Yes. Cleon. Of whom?
Thy Lord, take heed, for if I be a Iudge I shall condemne thee ere thou speake. Dulc. You may, But I accuse my selfe, and of an iniurie To you. Cleona. To mee? Dulc, Too great to be forgiuen. Cleon: My loue to him thou seru'st, hath found a pardon Already for it, be it an offence Against my life. Dulc. For his sake, you must punish, Deare Madam, I haue finn'd against his Ghost, In my deceiuing you. Cleona. His Ghost? Dulc. And if. His Soule hath not forgotten how he loued you, I must expect him to affight my dreames. And prooue my waking euill, the truth is, My Lord is dead. Cleon. How dead? when? where? did I Not heare thee say, since I receiu'd his Letter, He was aliue? Dulc. No Madam. Cleon. Be not impious. Dulc, I said that neither death, nor any blacke Misfortune had befalne him, since I gaue The Letter to you. Cleona. Grant this truth, I am Secur'd agen. Dulc: 'Las he was dead before, I'm sure you could not chuse but heare as much, It was my wickednesse arriu'd, to mocke Your credulous heart, with a deuised Letter, I know you are in wonder, what should moue mee, To this imposture, sure it was no malice, For you nere iniur'd me, and that doth make My crime the more deform'd, all my ayme was, Beeing a stranger here, and wanting meanes After my Lords death, by this cunning, to
Procure some bounty from you, to sustaine My life, vntill by some good fortune, I Might get another Master, for I knew There was no hope to benefit my selfe, By saying he was dead, good Heauen forgiue me And keepe my eyes from weeping. Cleon. Thou hast vndone me, Like a most cruell boy. Dulc. Madam, I hope I shall repaire the ruines of your eye, When I declare the cause, that leades me to This strange confession, I haue obseru'd The Duke does loue you, loue you in that way, You can deserue him, and though I haue sinn'd, I am not stubborne in my fault, to suffer you, In the beliefe of my deceitfull story, To wrong your fortune, by neglect of him, Can bring your merit such addition, Of state and title. Cleona: Doest thou mocke agen? Dulc: Heauen knowes, I haue no thought of such impiety, If you will not beleeue, that for your sake I haue betrayed my selfe, yet be so charitable, To thinke it something of my duty, to The Duke, whose ends, while they are just, and noble, All loyall Subiects, ought to serue, for him. Whom I am bound to honour, and I loue him, Else may I neuer know one dayof comfort, I durst not without guilt of treason, to His chast desires, deceiue you any longer, Collect your selfe deere Madam, in the graue, There dwels no musicke, in the Dukes embrace You meete a perfect happinesse. Cleona: Begon, And neuer see me more, who euer knew Falshood so ripe at thy yeares? Exit, Dulc: Is not yet My poore heart broke? hath nature giuen it
So strong a temper, that no wound will kill me? What charme was in my gratitude to make me Vndoe so many comforts with one breath, Or was it for some sinne I had to satisfie? I haue not onely widowed Cleona, But made my selfe a miserie beneath, An Orphant, I nere came to haue a friend, I ha destroy'd my hope, that little hope, I had to be so happy. Iacom comes forth. Iacom. Is't e'ne so? My friend, what make you here? who sent for you? begon dee heare, begon I say the word too, there is a Porters lodge else, where you may haue due chastisement, youle be∣gon. Dulc. I'm sorry, I haue offended Sir. Exit Dulc. Iac. So am not I, Let me see, somebody is dead, if I knew who, no matter 'tis one that my Lady lou'd, and I am glad to heare it, for mine ownesake, now Uenus speed the Dukes plough and turne me loose to a priuy Conncellor. Enter Sorzo. Sor. Signior Iacomo, where's your Lady? Iac. She is within my good Lord, wilt please you Walke this way? Sor. Prethee make hast, the Duke is comming. Exeunt. Iac. I small him hither to, Enter Iacomo presently. So so, I will take this opportunity, to present my selfe to his Highnesse, that hee may take particular notice, of my bulke and personage, hee may chance speake to me, I haue common places to answer any ordinary question, and for other, he shall find by my impudence, I come not short of a perfect Courtier. Here hee comes, I will dissemble some contemplation, and with my hat on, giue him cause to ob∣serue me the better. Enter the Duke, and Lords. Duke, What fellowes that? Giot. A Seruant of Cleona's. Fabr. Signior? The Duke extends his band, Iacomo kisses it.
Jacom, Your Highnesse humble creature, you haue blest my lips, and I will weare them thredbare, with my prayers, for your Graces immortall prosperitie. Enter Soranzo. Duke, Soranzo is return'd, How fares Cleona? Sor. My Lord not well, I found her full of sadnesse, which is increast, shee cannot as becomes her duty, obserue your Highnesse. Iacom: One word with your Grace in priuate, shee is as well, as either you, or I. Duke, Sayst thou so? Jacom, There came indeed before you certaine newes, that a noble Gentleman, I know not who, and therefore he shall bee namelesse, but some deare friend of hers, is dead, and thats all, and that has put her into a melancholy mood, with your gracious pardon, if I were worthy to bee one of your Counsellours— Duke, What then? Iaco. I would aduise you, as others doe, to take your owne course, your Grace knowes best, what is to be done. Duke. So Sir; Didst thou not see that pretty boy I told thee of? Soranzo. No my good Lord. Duke, We are resolu'd to comfort her, set forward. Grim. You had simple grace? Iac. A touch or so, abeame with which his Highnesse, Doth vse to keepe desert warme, good my Lord, It is not come to that yet. Exeunt. Enter Foscari. and a Servant. Fosc: Goe to the next religious house, and pray, Some Holy Father come and speake with mee, But hasten thy returne, I dare not looke on Exit Serv. My selfe, least I forget to doe her honour, And my heart prooue a partiall Aduocate, I must not entertaine with the same thought, Cleona and my Loue, least my owne passion Betray the resolution, I ha made, To make my seruice famous to all ages,
A legend that may startle wanton bloud, And strike a chilnesse through the actiue veines Of noblest Louers, when they heare, or read, That to advance a Mistresse, I haue giuen her▪ From mine owne heart, if any shall be so Impious at my memory, to say I could not doe this act, and loue her too, Some power diuine, that knew how much I lou'd her, Some Angell that hath care to right the dead, Punish that crime for me, and yet me thinks, In such a cause my owne enraged Spirit, In pitty of my ashes, so prophan'd, Should nimbly lift my sweating marble vp, And leape into my dust, which new inlifen'd Should walk to him, that questioned my honor, And be its owne reuenger, he is come. Enter Valentio, a religious man. Welcome good Father, I sent to intreat your helpe, but first, pray tell me, I haue no perfect memory, what Saint Giues title to your Order? Val. Wee doe weare The Scapular of Saint Bennet Sir. Fosc. Your Charity Make you still worthy of that reuerend habit, I haue a great Deuotion, to bee made A Brother of your sacred institution, What persons of great birth hath it receiu'd? Val. To fashion my reply to your demaund, Is not to boast, though I proclaime the honours Of our profession; Foure Emperours, Forty sixe Kings, and one and fiftie Queenes, Haue chang'd their Royall Ermines for our sables, These Cowles haue cloth'd the heads of fourteene hundred, And sixe Kings Sonnes, of Dukes, great Marquises, And Earles, two thousand and aboue foure hundred Haue turn'd their Princely Coronets, into An humble Corronet of haire of haire▪ left by The Razour thus.
Fosc. No, it is not. There is a Sunne ten times more glorious, Then that which riseth in the East, attracts me To feed vpon his sweet beames, and become A Bird of Paradice, a religious man To rise from earth, and no more to turne backe, But for a buriall. Val. Thinke what tis you doe, It is no thing to play the wanton with, In the strong bended passion of an humour, For a friends death, a Kings frowne, or perhaps Losse of a Mistresse. Fosc. O still blesse the guide What euer, that shall leade this happy way. Val. My Lord, the truth is like your coate of armes, Richest when plainest, I doe feare the world Hath tir'd you, and you seeke a cell to rest in, As Birdes that wing it o're the Sea, seeke ships, Till they get breath, and then they slie away. Fosc. Doe not mistake a piety, I am prepar'd And can endure your strict mortifications, Good Father then preferre my humble Suite, To your Superiour for the habit, and Let me not long expect you, say I am, Noble, but humblest in my thoughts. Val. I goe, Meane time examine well this new desire, Whether't be a wild flash, or a Heauenly fire. Exit. Fosc. Now my good boy. Enter Dulcino. Dulc. Sir, your command is done, And she beleeues? Fosc: That I am dead Dulcino? Dulc: That you are dead, and as shee now scorn'd life▪ Death lends her cheekes his palenesse, and her eyes Tell downe their drops of siluer to the earth, Wishing her teares might raine vpon your graue▪ To make the gentle earth produce some flower, Should beare your names and memories.
Fosc. But thou seest, I liue Dulcino. Dulc: Sir I should bee blest, If I did see you sought the meanes to liue, And to liue happily, O noble Sir, Let mee vntread my steps, vnsay my words, And tell your loue, you liue. Fosc. No my sweet Boy, Shee thinkes not much amisse, I am a man But of an houre or two, my will is made, And now I goe, neuer more cheerefully, To giue eternall farewell to my friends. Dulc. For Heauens sake Sir, whats this you meane to do? There is a feare sits cold vpon my heart, And tels me— Fosc: Let it not misinforme thee Boy, Ile vse no violence to my selfe, I am Resolu'd a course, wherein I will not doubt, But thou wilt beare mee company? weele enter Into Religion. Dulc: Into Religion? Fosc. O tis a Heauenly life, goe with me boy, Wee'l imitate the singing Angels there, Learne how to keepe a Quire in Heauen, and scorne Earths transitory glorie, wo't Dulcino? Dulc. Alas my Lord, I am too young. Fosc▪ Too young To ferue Heauen? Neuer, neuer, O take heed. Of such excuse. Dulc: Alas, what shall I doe? And yet I'me weary of the world, but how Can I doe this? I am not yet discouered, Sir, I shall still attend you. Fosc: Th'art my comfort, I haue propounded it already, to A Benedictine, by whose meanes we may Obtaine the habit, stay thou and expect him, I must bee absent for a little time,
To finish something, will conduce, to my Eternall quiet, if th'haft any scruple, Hee will direct thee, hauing both made euen With earth, weele trauaile hand, in hand to heauen. Exit. Dulc. Fortune hath lent me a prospectiue glasse, By which I haue a looke beyond all ioyes, To a new world of miserie, whats my best Let it be so, for I am hopelesse now, And it were well, if when those weedes I haue, That I might goe disguised to my graue. Exit. Enter Lodwicke, and Grimundo. Lodw, This is strange. Grim. You know I haue giuen you many precepts of honestie? Lodw. And you know how I haue followed em. Grim. To mine owne heart, I haue made tedious dis∣courses of Heauen to yee, and the morrall vertues, numbred vp the duties of a good Prince, vrg'd examples of vertues, for your imitation. Lodw. To much purpose. Grim. Seem'd to sweat with agony and vexation, for your obstinate courses, reproou'd you, nay sometimes made complaints of you, to the Duke. Lodw, And I ha curst you for it, I remember. Grim. Alas my Lord, I durst doe no otherwise, was not the Duke your Father an honest man, and your Brother now foolishly takes after him, whose credulities, when I had al∣ready coozened, I was bound to appeare stoicall, to preserue the opinion they had conceiued of me. Lodw. Possible. Grim. It speakes discretion and abilities, in States-men, to apply themselues to their Princes disposition, vary a thou∣sand shapes, if he be honest, we put on a forme of grauity, if he be vitious, we are Parasites, indeed in a politique Com∣mon wealth, if you obserue well, there is nothing but the ap∣pearance, and likenesse of things that carrieth opinion, your great men will appeare odde, and phantasticall, and fooles
are often taken for wise Officers, your most actiue gallants, seeme to carry their owne haire, and your handsomest La∣dies their owne faces, you cannot know a Secretary from a Scholler in blacke, nor a Gentleman Vsher in Scarlet, from a Captaine, your Iudge that is all compos'd of Mercy, hath still the face of a Phylosopher, and to some is more ter∣rible and crabbed, then the Law it selfe. All things are but representation, and my Lord, howsoeuer I haue appear'd to you, I am at heart one of your owne Sect, an Epicure, bee but so subtle to seeme honest, as I doe, and we will laugh at the foolish world in our Cels, declaime against intemperate liuers, and hug our owne Licentiousnesse, while wee surfet our Soules in the darke with Nectar and Ambrosia. Lod. Can this be earnest, you did talke of Hell and Bug∣beares. Grim, I confesse, and were you in publique, I would vrge many other empty names to fright you, put on my Ho∣lyday countenance, and talke nothing but diuinity, and gol∣den sentences, looke like a superlicious Elder, with a starch'd face, and a tunable nose, whilst he is edifying his Neighbors woman. Lod. You were a Christian, how came you to be conuerted. Grim. I thinke I had a name giuen me, and thats all I re∣taine, I could neuer endure really, their seuere discipline, marry for my preferment, and other politique ends, I haue, and can still dispence, with fasting, prayer, and a thousand fond austerities, though I doe penance for em in priuate. Lod. Let me aske you one question, were you neuer drunk? Grim, A thousand times in my study, that's one of my re∣creations. Lodw. How chance I could neuer see't in you, you know I would ha beene drunke for company. Grim. But I durst not trust so young a sinner, for I al∣wayes held it a maxime, to doe wickednesse with circum∣spection. Lodw. Wickednesse? Grim. I speake in the phrase of the foolish world, that holds voluptuousnesse a crime, which you and I, and euery
wise man knowes, to be the onely happinesse of life, and the inheritance, we are borne to. Lodw. But stay, how comes it to passe, that accounting me so young a sinner, you now aduenture to discouer your selfe? Grim. To you? Loaw. To mee. Grim. Good my Lord conceiue me, you were a young sinner, and in your Nonage, does that inferre that you haue made no growth, that y'are a child still, doe thinke that I ha not wit to distinguish a Principiant in vice, from a Gradu∣ate, shall I be afraid to lay open my secretst impieties to you, that are almost as perfect as my selfe in Epicurisme, I beseech you, doe not thinke, I ha so little manners to vndervalue you. Lodw. Very well, proceed. Grim. And yet my Lord, with your princely license, you may learn too, and indeed the first vertue that I would com∣mend to your practice should be that, by which I haue at∣tain'd to this height, and opinion, and thats Hypocrisie. Lodw. Hypocrisie? Grim. Yes, a delicate white diuell, doe but fashion your selfe to seeme holy, and studie to be worse in priuate, worse, youle find your selfe more actiue in your sensualitie, and it will be an other titillation, to thinke what an asse you make a'the beleeuing world, that will be readie to dote, nay super∣stitiously adore you, for abusing them. Lodw. This is pretty wholsome doctrine, and harke you, ha you no wenches now and then? Grim. Wenches? would the Duke your Brother had so many for his owne sake, or you either. Lodw. Hast ifaith? Grim. Faith? why judge by your selfe, how dee thinke a man should subsist, wenching? why tis the top-branch, the heart, the very Soule of pleasure, ile not giue a chip to bee an Emperour, and I may not curuet as often as my consti∣tution requires, Lecherie is the Monarch of Delight, whose Throne is in the bloud, to which all other sinnes doe homage, and bow like seruiceable Vassailes, petty Subiects in the Dominion of flesh—Wenches
Why I haue as many—yet now I thinke better on't, Ile keepe that to my selfe, store makes a good prouerbe. Lodw. Nay nay, be free and open to mee, you haue my oath not to betray. Grim. Well, Ile not bee nice to you, you little imagine (though I be married,) that I am the greatest whoremaster 'th Dukedome. Lodw. Not the greatest? Grim: Haue a strong faith and saue my proofes, I? the Vsurer doe not hoard vp his gold, nor the Countrey op∣pressor his Corne more against a deare yeare, but Caute si non Caste, my Nunne at home knowes nothing, like a Mole in the earth, I worke deeps, but inuisible; I haue my priuate Houses, my Granaries, my Magasines bully, as many Concubines, as would collected, furnish the Great Turkes Seraglio. Lodw. How doe you conceale 'em, I should nere keepe halfe so many▪ but't would be knowne. Grim: You are then a Nouice in the Art of Uenus, and will tell Tales out a'the Schoole, like your weake Gallants o'the first chin, that will brag what Ladies they haue brought to their obedience, that thinke it a mighty honour, to discourse how many Fortes they haue belea∣guerd, how many they haue taken by battery, how many by composition, and how many by Stratagem; that will proclaime, how this Madam kisses, how like Iuie the tother bona Roba embraced em, and with what actiuity, a third playes her amorous prize, a fine commendation for such Whelpes ist not? Lodw: A fault, a fault, who can deny it? But what are those you practice with? A touch, come, what Commodities? Grim: Not Sale-ware, Mercenary stuffe, that yee may haue i'th Suburbs, and now maintaine traffique with Am∣bassadours Seruants, nor with Laundresses, like your Stu∣dents in Law, who teach her to argue the case so long, till she find a Statute for it, nor with Mistris Silkeworme in the Citty, that longs for creame and cakes, and loues to
Cuckold her Husband in fresh ayre, nor with your waiting Gentlewoman, that is in loue with poetry, and will not part with her honour, vnder a Copie of fine verses, or an Ana∣gram, nor with your course Lady her selfe, that keepes a Stallion and cozens the old Knight, and his two paire of Spectacles, in the shape of a Seruingman, but with your rich, faire, high▪ fed, glorious and springing Catamountaines, Ladies of bloud, whose eyes will make a Souldier melt, and he were compos'd of marble, whose euery smile, hath a magneticke force to draw vp Soules, whose voyce will charme a Satyre, and turne a mans prayers into ambition, make a Hermit runne to Hell for a touch on her, and there hug his owne damnation. Lodw. I haue eard you, and now I thinke fit to discouer my selfe to you, you are a Rascall. Grim. Sir, I thinke I am one. Lodw. Let not your wisdome thinke, I can bee so easi∣ly guid. Grim. How Sir? Lodw. Hou thinke you haue talked very methodically, and cunningly all this while, and that I am as they say, a creduous coxcombe, and cannot perceiue, that by your po∣litique jeeres vpon my pleasures, you labour to discredit, not onely my recreations, but my selfe to my owne face, D'ee heare? the time may come you will no dare these things, and yet you shall see, I will not now so much as seeme angry, pre∣serue your humor, 'twill appeare fresh o'ch Stage my lear∣ned Gymnosophist, very well, excellent well. Grim. Why does not your Lodship beleeue me then? Lodw. Do't thou thinke throughout the yeare, I will loose one minute of my pastime, for this your tooth-lesse Satyr▪ your mocke▪ balled, goe get some pretty tune, 'twill doe you a great deale of credit, the next Lent to be presen∣ted by folly in an Anti▪ maske, ile to a wench presently. Grim. I came to carry you to one. Lodw. How? thou? Grim. Doe not deceiue your selfe, come you shall beleeue and thanke mee, will that serue turne, shall I bee thought worthy to bee trusted then, if I doe the office of a Bawd
for you, and play the Pander wit dexteritie, will that co∣uince you? Lodw. Yes, yes, then I will beleeue thee. Grim. Ten goe with me, and I will demonstrate. Lodw. Whither? Grim. I will carry you to a Lady bee not afraid shee is honst, a haome peece of flsh, a Lady that will bound yee, and rebound, a Ladie that will rauish you. Lodw. Me? Grim. Wih delight and admiration, one in whom doth flouris all the excellencie of women, honesty only excepted, such a charming brow speaking eye, springing cheeke, temp∣ting lip, swelling bosome. Lodw. Wl you leade me to such a creature? Grim. Yes. Lodw. And shall I enjoy her in dalliance? Grim. Yes, and thinke your selfe , then to be Lord of both the Indies, heres my hand cut it off if I doe not this feate for you, when you please, and when you are satisfi∣ed with her, Ile helpe you to forty more, but wee are in∣terrupted. Enter Giotto, Soranzo. Giot. There he is with Grimundo. Sor. His late Gouernour, he is giuing him good counsell. Giot. Pray heauen he haue the grace to follow it. Grim. Consider Sir, but what will be the end▪ Of all these wicked courses. Lodw. Pretious villaine. Grim. We must be circumspect. Lodw. No more, I haue a croet new sprung, Where shall I meere thee? Grim. Ile expect you in the parke—be very secre My Lord I can but grieue for you. Exit. Lodw. How haue we all beene con'd? What is my brother here? Sor. This houre my Lord▪ he is now vpon terne. Lodw. Ile see him, and then prepare me for this Ldy.
I feele a boyling in my veines already, This is the lie of greatnesse, and of Court They'r fooles that will be frighted from their sport. Exeunt ACTVS▪ 4. SCAENA, 1. Enter Lodwicke, and Piero. Lodw. Do't and thou lou'st me? Pier. What d'ee meane my Lord? Lodw. Nay ee must haue such a deale of circumstance▪ I say doe it. Pier. What, that? Lodw. That? Is that such a piece of matter, does it ap∣peare so horrid in your imagination, that you should looke as if you were frighted now? Pier. My Lord it is— Lodw. A thing your lust will prompt you to, but that You affct Ceremony, and loue to bee entreated. Piero. With your Lady? Lodw. Yet againe, must I voyce it like the Towne∣Cryer, and ramme it into your head with noyse, you haue not beene obseru'd so dull, in a businesse of this supple Na∣ture. Pier. But thinke on't agen, I pray you thinke a little bet∣tr, I ha no great ambition to ha my throat cut. Lodw, By whom? Piero. By you, you cannot chuse but kill me for't, when I haue done, name any other Lady, or halfe a score on 'em, as farre as flesh will goe, I ha but a body, and that shall ven∣ture vpon a disease to doe you seuice, but your Lady. Lodw. Haue I not told thee my end? Piero: I Sir, but I am very loath to begin with her, I know she will not let me doe the feate, I had as good neuer attempt it. Lodw. Is your mountanous promise come to this? Re∣member, if I doe not turne honest— Piero. My Lord doe but con sider—well I will do
what I can, and there be no remedy—but Lodw. No butting. Piero, Nay for butting, your Lordship is like to doe that better, when I haue done with your Lady, vpon one con∣dition, Ile resolue. Lodw. Whats that? Piero. I must be a little plaine w'ee my Lord, that you wonot aske me blessing, I am like to bee one of your God∣fathers. Lodw. How? Piero. The ew name that I shall adde to your other title will sticke in your head and I feare corrupt your braines too many wise men haue runne mad vpon't in the Citty. Lodw, Neuer feare it, for if thou canst but corrupt her. Ile shew a diuorce presently. Piero, And bring me in for a witnes. Enter Astella. Lodw. She's here feare nothing, Ile be thy protection, it were not amisse to cast away some kindnes vpon her, nay I was comming to take my leaue. Ast. I know you neuer meant it▪ Lodw. Thus my best intents are rewarded still, the more sinne vpon your conscience, y'haue a hard heart, but heauen for giue vs all, Astella farewell, Piero expect my re∣turne here—pray entertaine this Gentleman courteously in my absence, you know not how kindly I may take it. Ast. I would you would enioyne me any testimony, So I might be in hope to winne your loe. Lodw. Tis in the will of women to doe much, doe not dispaire, the proudest heart is but flesh, thinke a that. Ast. Of wat? Lodw. Of flesh, and so I leaue you. Pier. Wilt please you Madam, walke into your chamber▪ I haue something to impart, will require more priacie. Ast. If it bee griefe, tis welcome. Exeunt. Enter Duke, and Lords. Duke. My Soule I haue examin'd, and yet find No reason for my foolish passion
Our hot Italian doth affect these boyes, For sinne, l'ue no such flame, and yet me thought He did appeare mot louely, nay in's absence I cherish his Idea, but I must Exclude him, while he hath but soft impression, Being remou'd already in his person, I loose him with lesse trouble. Enter Giotto. Gitto. Please your Highnesse, A stranger but some Gentleman of qualitie, Intending to leaue Sauoy, humbly prayes To kisse youe hand. Duke. A Gentlman, admit him. Enter Foscari disguised, and kisses the Dukes hand. Fosc. You are a gracious prince, and this high fauour Dfernes my person, and my Sword, when you Vouchsafe so much addition to this honour, To call them to your Seruice. Duke. You are noble. Focari. It is not complement my Lord alone Made me thus bold, I haue a priuate message, Please you command their distance, Duke. Waie without. Fosc. Haue you forgot this face? Duke. Focaries shadow? Fosc. The substance Sir, and once more at your feet, Duke. Return'd to lise. Rise, meet our armes▪ why i This Cloud? Fosc. Your pardon royall Sir, it will Concerne your Highnesse to permit me walke In some Eclipse. Duke. How? Fosc. Be but pleas'd to grant A little freedome to my speech, I shall Demonstrate the necessity of this Action, I said I had a messuag, I come Sir from Cleona. Duke. From Cleona? Fosc. From her indeed, and in her name, I must
Propound a question, to which she prayes, You would be just and noble in your answer, Duke. Without disputing your Commission, Vpon mine Honour— Fosc. Princes cannot staine it, dee you loue her? Duke. Doe I loue her? Strange? Frsc. Nay she would haue you pause, and thinke welle're You giue her resolution, for she bad me tell you She has beene much aflicted since you left her, About your loue. Duke. About my loue? I prethee Bee more particular. Fosc. I shall, so soone As you were gone, being alone, and full Of melancholly thoughts. Duke. I left her so. Fosc. Willing to ease her head vpon her couch, Through silence, and some friendship of the darke, Shee fell asleepe, and in a short dreame thought, Some Spirit told her softly in her eare, You did but mocke her with a smooth pretence O Loue. Duke. Ha? Fosc, More, that you are fallen from honour, Haue taken impious flames into your bosome, That y'are a Bird of prey▪ and while she hath No houshold Lar, to waite vpon her thre shold You would fle in, and  vpon her honour. Duke. I hope she ha's no faith in dreames▪ Fosc. And yet Diuinity hath oftentimes descended Vpon our sl mbers, and the blessed troupes Haue in the calme, and quiet of the Soule, Conuers'd with vs, taugt men and women happy Wayes to preuent a tyrants rage, and lust. Duke. But this was some most false malicious Spirit, That would insinuate with her white Soule, There's danger if she cherish the infusion.
Fosc▪ She cannot tell, she hath some feares my Lord, Great men haue left examples of their vice, And yet no iealousie of you, but what A myracle doth vrge, if this be one; If you but once more say you loue Cleona, And speake it vnto me, and to the Angels, Which in her prayers, she hath inuok'd to heare you, She will be confident, and tell her dreame, She cannot be illuded. Duke. Though I need not Giue an account to any, but to Heauen And her faire selfe, Foscari, thou fhalt tell her With what alacritie I display my heart, I loue her with chast and noble fire, my intents are Faire as her brow, tell her I dare proclaime it, In my deuotions, at that minute, when I know a million of adoring Spirits Houer about the Altar, I doe loue her— Fosc. Enough, enough, my Lord be pleas'd to heare, What I haue now to say, you haue exprest A braue and vertuous Soule, but I must not Carry this message to her, therefore take Your owne words backe agen—I loue Cleona With chast, and noble sire, my intents are Faire as her brow, I dare proclaime it Sir, In my deuotions, at that minute, when I know a Million of adoring Spirits, Houer about the Altar. Duke, Doe ye mocke me? Fosc▪ Pardon a truth my Lord, I haue apparreld My owne sence with your language. Duke. Doe you come To affront vs, you had better ha beene sleeping In your cold vrne, and fame late gaue you out, And mingltd with the tude forgotten ashes, Then liue to moue our anger. Fisc, Spare your frownes.
This earth weighs not my Spirit downe, a feare Would dy the palenesse of my Fathers dust, Into a blush, Sir many are aliue, Will sweare, I did not tremble at a Canon, When it strooke thunder in mine eare, and wrapt My head in her blew mists, it is not breath Can fright a noble truth, nor is there Magicke I'th person of a King that playes the Tyrant, But a good Sword can easily vncharme i, Duke. You threaten vs. Fosc. Heauen auert so blacke a thought, Though in my honours cause I can be flame, My bloud is frost to treason make me not Bely my heart, for I doe loue Cleona? And my bold heart tels me, aboue all height, You can affect her with, no birth or state Can challenge a Prerogatiue in loue; Nay be nor partiall, and you shall ascribe To mine loues victory, for though I admit, You value her aboue your Dukedome, health, That you would sacrifice your bloud, to auert Any mishap should threaten that deare head, All this is but aboue your selfe, but I Loue her aboue her selfe, and while you can But giue your life, and all you haue, to doe Cleona seruice, I can giue away Her selfe, Cleona's selfe, in my loue to her, I see you are at losse, Ile reconcile All, she is yours, this minute ends my claime, Liue, and enioy her happily, may you Be famous in that beautious Empire, shee Blest in so great a Lord. Duke, I must not be Orecome in honour, nor would doe so great A wrong, to enioy the blessing, I knew not You were engag'd. Fosc. Ere you proceed, I must Beseech you heare me out, I am but fresh,
Return'd from trauaile, in my absence, she Heard I was slae, at my returne, vpon The hearing of these honours you intend her, And which I now beleeue from your owne lip, I found a meanes, and haue wrought her already, Into a firme beleife that I am dead, (For I haue but pretended I came from her) If for my sake you leaue her now, I can Make good her faith and dye, 't sha'not be said, I liu'd▪ and  Ceona's fortne. Duke▪ Stay myracle of honour, and of loue. Fosc. If you proceed, as i concernes your happinesse, I can secure all feare of mee, I am Rsolu'd  course wherein I will bee dead To he, yet liue to pray for her, and you, Although I neuer see you more, will you M Ryall Lord? Duke. Dd euer Louer plead Againt himselfe before? Fosc. I lou her still, And in that study her advancement Sir, In you. I cannot giu her. Duke. Well, I will still loue her, and solicite. Fsc, And not open That I am liung. Duke. Not a Syllable. Fos. I am confident, let me but kisse your hand. Agn, may blessings dwell with you for euer. Exit▪ Dulc. He was awayes noble, but this passion Has outgone Hystorie, it makes for me, Haile to my curteous fate, Foscri thankes, Like the aged Penix, thy old loue expires, And from uch Death, springs lie to my dfires. Exit. Enter Dulino. Dulc. The Father is not come yet, nor my Lord , yet when they doe, I haue no way T lpe my selfe, nor haue I power to goe From hence, sure this is the Religious man.
Enter Valentio. Val. Ha tis the sme. Dulc. Father Valentio? Val. Deare Leonra. Dulc: Sir the same. Wal. Oh let My teares expresse my ioyes, what myracl Gaue you this liberty? Dulc. I was rescued, By th'happy valour of a Gentleman, To whom in gratitude, I pay this seruice, He bad me here expect a holy man, And is it you? Val. The cicumstance confirmes it. Dulc. Are you the goodman whom my Lord expect▪ Tis so me refreshing in the midst of sorrow, To meete agen. Val. And Heauen hath heard my prayer. Dulc. But I am miserable still vnlesse Your counsell doe releeue me. Val. Why my charge? Dulc. This noble Gentleman, to whom I owe My preseruation, who appointed you To meet him here, hauing resolu'd to enter, Into Religion, hath beene very vrgent, For mee to doe so too, and overcome With many importunities, I gaue Consent, not knowing what was best to doe, Some cure or I am lost, you know I cannot Mixe with religious men. Val. Did you consent? Dulc. I did, and he is now vpon he point Of his returne. Val. Y'are in a straight▪ I must Confesse, no matter, hold your purpose, and Leaue all to mee, he is return'd. Enter Foscari. Fos. Good Father. Now I am ready, haue you dispos'd him For such a life.
Val. Hee is constant to attend you, I haue prepar'd him, and made way to the Abbot, For your reception, Fos. I am best, Dulcimo, Nay no distinction now, me thinkes we moue Vpon the wings of Cherubins already, Tis but a step to heauen, come my sweet boy Wee climbe by a short ladder to our ioy▪ Exeunt. Enter Lodowick and . Gri. This my Lord is her garden, into which you see My key hath giuen vs priuate accesse, Lod: Tis full of curiositie, Gri: You see that goue. Lod. I doe. Gri. There is her house of pleasure, let your eye entertaine Some delight here, while I giue her happie Knowledge you are entred▪ Exit. Lod. Doe so, an honest knaue I see that, how happy Shall I bee in hi conuersation, I sha'not neede To keepe any in fee to procure, and he bee So well furnished, i euer I come to be Duke, I will Erect a magnificent Colledge, endow it With reuenw to mintaine wenches, and With great pensions inuite the faire Ladies From all part of Christendome, into my Seraglio, Then, wil I haue this fellow gelded, and make him My chiee Eunuch ranger, or ouerser of all, My pretious tame fowle Enter 3. like Satyres▪ and lydown How now? What's this so me fury asleepe, Ile take ano∣ther path, another? Into what wildernesse has this firedrake brought mee? I dare not cry out for feare of waking 'em, would Grimundo were come backe. Enter one like . Silv. Rise you drowsie Satyres rise, What strong charme doth bind your eyes? See who comes into your groue, To imbrace the Queene of Loue, Leape for ioy, and friske about, Find you prettie Dryad out,
Hand in hand compose a ring, Dance and circle youe new King, Him, Silanus must obay, Satyres rise and runne in. Hence and cry a holy day. Exit. Lod. Some maske, a deuice, to entertaine me, ha? And yet I see not how they should prepare so much ceremony, vn∣lesse they had expected me, a curse vpon their ill faces, they shooke mee at first, how now? Enter Satyres pursuing Nimphes they dance together, Exeunt Sat. 3. Nimphes seeme to intreat him to goe with them. Haue yee no tongues? yes I will venture my selfe in your company, and you were my destinies, wo'd there were no worse in Hell, must I walke like a bride too, fortune set on afore then, and thou doest not guide into a hansome place, wo'd thy eyes were out, and so thou maist be taken for the blind Goddesse indeed, forward to Venus Temple. Exit. Recorders: Enter againe where the Nimphs suddenly leaue him, a banquet brought in. Lod. Vnished like Fayries? Ha what musicke this? the motion of the Spheares, or am I in Elisium. Enter Grimundo bare leading Belinda richly attired and attended by Nimphs. Here is  ha? What glorious creatures this commit a rape vpon my senses on euery side, but when I looke on her, all other admirations are forgot, and leslen in her glorie. Bel My Lord y'are welcome, nay our lip is not too pre∣tious, for your salute, most welcome, Gri: I haue kept my, word Sir, Lod. Thou hast oblig'd my soule, Gri. Be high and frolike, she loues to see one Dmineere, when y'are throughly acquainted, you'le Giue me thankes. Lod. Let vs be priuate with as much speed as may be. Away with those gipsies, so so. Exeunt allbu  and Belinda. I forgot to ske her name-Lady I am com.
Bl. Wilt please you vse that Chaire▪ Lodw. You are not ignorant O the intents my bloud hath brought with me▪ Grimundo, I hope, hath told my comming Lady▪ And you l'me confident, will justifie his promise O some pastime. Belind. He's a Seruant, Whose boome I dare trust, the Sonne of night, And yet mor cret then his mother, hee Hath power to engage me, and I shall Tak pde in my obedienc, first be pleas'd T tast, what in my duty I prepar'd F your first , these but serue To  appetie. Ldw I like this well, Recorders. I  vse muc couship, where's this musicke? ▪ Doth it  your eare? Lw. 'is rauishing Wence doth it breath? Bind. If you command, weele change A housand ayres▪ till you find one is sweet, And high enough, to rocke your wanton Soule Ino  smbers. Lodw Spare them all, I hare 'm in thy accents. Belinda. Callopes fam'd Sonne, vpon whose lute Myrds of lours Ghosts doe waite, and hang Vpon the golden strings to haue their owne Giefes softnd with his noble touch, shall come Agine from hell, with fresh, and happier straines, Tomoue your fancie. Lodw. That were very trange, She is poeticall, moe then halfe a Fury, But wee prate all this while, and loose the tim W should imploy more pretiously, I need No more prouocatiu, my veynes are rich And swell with expectation, shall we to
This vaulting businesse? Bel. I shall hope my Lord You will be silent in mine honour, when You haue inioy'd me, and not boast my name, To your disgrace, not mine. Lodw. Your name, why Lady? By my dsires I know it not, I hope You haue receiu'd a better Character, Then to suspect my blabing, Ile not trust My Ghostly Father with my sinnes, much lesse Your name. Belind. O let me flye into your armes, These wordes command my freedome, I shall loue you Aboue my selfe, and to confirme how much, I dare repose vpon your faith, Ile not Be nice to tell you who I am. Lodw. Pray doe. Bel. I am a Princesse. Lodw. How? Bel, Beleeue me Sir. Lodw, I'm glad a that, but of what Country Lady? Bel. And my dominions are more spreading then Your Brothers. Lodw. H? thats excellent, if the villaine De prosper with my wife, Ile marry her. Bel. I was not borne to perch vpon a Dukedome▪ Or some such spot of earth, which the dull eyes Examine by a multiplying glasse, And wonder at, the Roman Eagles neuer Did spread their wings vpon so many shores, The Siluer Moone of Ottoman lookes pale Vpon my greater Empire, Kings of Spaine, That now may boast their ground, doth stretch as wide As day▪ are but poore Landlords of a Cell, Compar'd to mine inheritance, the truth is▪ I am the Diuell. Lodw. How a Diuell? Bel. Yes.
Be not arighted Sir, you see I bring No horror to distract you, if this presence, Delight you not Ile weary a thousand shapes To please my Lord. Lod. Shapes quotha, Bel. Doe not tremble, Lod. A Diuel? I see her clouen foote, I ha'not, The heart to pray, Grimundo has vndone me, Bel. I did command my spirits, to put on Satyres, and Nmphes to entertaine you first Whiles others in the ayre, maintain'd a quire For your delight, why doe you keepe such distance, Wth one that loues you? recollect your selfe, You came for pleasure, what doth fright my loue, See I am couetous to returne delight, And saisfie your lustfull genius, Come lets withdraw, and on the bed prepar'd Beget a race of smooth and wanton Diuels— Lod. Hold, come not neere me, ha? now I compare, The circumstances, they induce me to A sad beliefe, and I had breath enough, I would aske a question. Bel. Any thing, and be Resolud. Lod. How came Grimnndo, and your deuilship, Acquainted▪ Bel. He hath beene my agent long, And hath deseru'd for his hipocrisie, And priuate sinnes, no common plce in Hell, Hes now my fauorite, and we enioy, Each other daily, but hee neuer did, By any seruice more endeare my loue, Then by this bringing you to my acquaintance, Which I desir'd of him long since▪ with many, And fierce sollcite, but e vrg'd his feare, You were not ripe enoug in sinne, for his, Discoery. Lod. I feel my selfe dissolue▪
In sweate, Bel. My Lord I must acknowledge▪ I Haue euer had you in my first regard, Of any mortall sinner, for you haue The same propention with me, though with Lesse malice▪ spirits of the lower world Haue seuerall offices assign'd, some are To aduance pride, some auarice, some wrath, I am for lust, a gay, voluptuous Diuell, Come lets embrace, for that I loue my Lord, Doe, and command a regiment of hell, They all are at your seruice. Lodw. O my foule! Bel. Beide my Lord, it is another motie To honour you, and by my caines which now I haue lft behind, it makes me grow enamor'd, Your wife, that sayes her prayers at home, and weepes Away her sight, O let me hug you for it, Dispise her vowe still, spurne her teares agen Into her eyes thou shalt be prince in hell And haue a Crowne of flames▪ brighter then that, Which Ariadue weares of fixed stares, Come shall we dally now? Lodw. My bones within Are dust already, and I weare my flsh Like a loose, vpper garment, Bel. Y'are afraid▪ Be not so pale at liuer, for I see Your blood turne Coward, how would you be frighted To looke vpon me cloth'd with all my horrour, That shudder at me now? call vp your spirit. Lodw. There are too many spirits heere already, Would thou wert coniur'd, what shall I doe? Bel. What other then to bath your soule in pleasure And neuer heard of rauishings, wee two, Will progresse through the ayre in Uenu charret▪ And when her siluer doues grow faint, and tir, Cupid and Mercury shall lend vs wings,
And we will visit new worlds, when we are, Weary of this, we both will backe the winds. And hunt the Phaenix through the Arabian Dserts Hr we will spoyle of all her shining plumes. To make a blazing Coronet for thy temples, Which from the Earth beheld, shall draw vp wonder And puzzle learned Astronomy, to distinguish it From some new Constellation, the Sea Shall yeeld vs pastime, when inuelopd With Clouds, blacker then night, wee range about And when with stormes we ouerthrow whole Nauies, We'll laugh to heare the Marriners exclaime In many thousand shipwrackes, what doe I Vrge these particuers? let vs be one Soule, Ayre, Earth and Hell, is yours. Lodw. I haue a suit, But dae ot speake. Bel. Take courage, and from mee Be confident to obtaine. Lodw. I am not well, The name of Diu ll came to quicke vpon me, I was not well prepar'd for uch a sound, It turn'd my bloud o ice, and I ha not Rcouered so much warmth yet, to desire The sport I came for, would you please but to Dmisse me for a time, I would returne, When I haue heate and strength enough, for such A sprightfull action. Belinda: I do finde your cunnig, You pretend this excuse, but to gaine time, In hope you may repent. Lodw. And please your Grace, Not I. Bel. You will acquaint some Priest, or other, A tribe of all the world, I most abhorre, And they will oole you with their Ghostly councell, Pe plxe you with some fond diuinity, To make you loose the Glories I haue promis'd.
Lod. I could neuer abide such mel neholly people. Bel. In this I must betray, we spirits haue No perfect knowledge of mens thoughts, I see Your bloods nfeebled, and although my loue Be infinite, and euery minute I Shall languish in your absence, yet your health I must preserue, tis that that feeds my hopes, Hereafter I shall perfectly enioy thee, You will be faithfull, and returne. Lod. Suspect not, Bel. One kisse shall seale consent, Lod. Her breath smels of brimstone. Bel. When next wee meete, like to the Gemini Weele twine our limbes in one another, till Wee appeare one creature in our actiue play, For this time le dismisse you—doe not pray, A spirit shall attend you. Lod. Doe not pray, when did I last? I know not, farewell horrour. He wants a wench, that goes to the Duell for her. Exeunt. ACTVS 5. SCAENA. 1. Enter Astella and Piero. Astel: Touch me not villain, pietie defend me Art thou a man, or haue I all this while Conuerst with some ill Angll in the shape Of my Lords friend, Piero. What needeth all this stirre I vrge your benefit. Astel. To vndoe my name Nv Soule for euer with one act. Piero. One act, There be those Ladies that haue acted it A hundred times, yet thinke themselues as good Cristians as other women, and doe carry As much opinion too for vertue.
Astel. Heauen. Piero. What harme can there be in't, can you neglect Reuenge so iust, so easie and delightfull? Ast. Ty breath doth scatter an infection. Piero. Scatter a toy, be wise, and loose no time You know not when-such opportunity, May tempt you too't agen, for my owne part I can but doe you pleasure in't, your bloud Should need no other argument. Astella: Ile sooner Empty my veynes, not to redeeme thy Soule, Should Sinne betray mine honour to one loose Embrace, hence traytor I doe feele corruption I'th ayre already, it will kill me if I stay, heereafter Ile not wonder how My Lord became so wicked. Piero. You will lead me To some more priuate roome, Ile follow Madam. Exeunt. Enter Iacomo. Jacom. More priuate roome, said hee? I smell a businesse I thought this Gamester had beene gone, is it e'ne so, haue at your burrough Madam, hee's a shrewd Feret I can tell you, and iust in the nicke here comes the Warrener. Enter Lodwicke. Lodw. This diuell does not follow me, nor any of her Cubs I hope, I'm glad I came off so well, I neuer was so hot to engender with the Night-mare, could Grimundo find no other creature for my coupling but a Succubus, me thinkes I smell the Fiend still. Iac. He talkes on her already. Lodw. I am very jealous. Jac. Not without a cause my Lord. Lodw. Ha? there she is agen. Jac, No my Lord, she is new gone into the withdrawing Chamber. Lodw. Ha? who? who is gone? Iac. A Gentlewoman that you were late in company with. Lodw. The Diuell? looke well about you then, a Spirit, Of her constitution will set the house on fire
Instantly and make a yonghell on't when Came she? I shall be euerlastingly haunted With goblings, are sure thou sawest her? Iac. Saw her, yes and him too. Lod. Grimundo? Iac. No not Grimundo, but I saw an other Gentleman That has been held a notable spirit, Familiar with her. Lod. Spirit and familiar. ac. Piero my Lord Lod, Piero? Iac. I wonot say what I thinke, but I thinke somewhat, And I know what I say, if she be a Deuill▪ as shee Can be little lesse, if shee be as bad as I imagine Some bodies head will ake for't, for mine owne Part, I did but see and heare, thats all, and Yet I ha not told you halfe. Lod. Let me collect sure this fellow by th'circumstance Meanes Astella, thou talkest all this while of my Lady Doest not? Iac. Yes my Lord, she is all the Ladies in the house, For my Lady and mistris was sent for To the Abbey. Lod. I had forgotten my selfe this is new horrour, Is my Lady and Piero so familiar saist and In priuate? Iac. What I haue said, I haue said, and what they haue Done, they haue done, by this time. Lod. Done? and Ile be actiue too. Iac. Shew what feates of actiity you please but I beleue hee hath vaulted into your sadle Exit Lod. Already—so so now I am alone which is as The learned say, Solus cumsola I will entertaine Some honorable thoughts of my preferment, Enter Piero. Hum the gamester is returned what melancholy, then Hee ha's don't I lay my head to a fooles cap on't I was alwaies so my selfe after my capring▪ Did you not meet the Prince sir.
Pier. No, whre is he? Iac. He was here but now, and enquir'd how his Lady did, and I told him you could tell the ate of her body bet∣ter then I, for I thought you were gone in before him. Piero. I did but see her. Jac. Thats not the right on't, it runnes for I did but kisse her, for I did but kisse her. Piero. It was enough for me to kisse her hand. Jac. And feele her pulse. Piero. How Sir? Iac. As a noble Gentleman should Sir? Piero. I am suspected, I must turne this fooles discourse, Another way, the present theame is dangerous; What I heare say , your Lady is like to rise? Iac. My Lady does rise as earely as other Ladies doe that goe to bed late. Piero, And there will be notable preferment for you? Iac. Tis very likely my Lady vnderstands her selfe▪ Piero. There is a whisper abroad▪ Jac. Tis a good hearing. Piero. What if she be married in this absence? Jac. Very likel, I say nothing but I thinke I know my Ladies secrets for the tryumph, as pageants, or running at tilt, you may heare more shortly, there may bee reasons of state to haue things carried priuately, they will breake out in Bels and bonefires hereafter; what their Gra∣ces haue intended for me, I conceale. Piero, He is wound vp already. Iac. You are a Gentleman I shall take particular notice of. Piero. I hope a man may get a place for himselfe or his friend for ready mony. Iac. Twere pitty of my life else, you shall command the first that falls, but you must sweare you came in without cha∣fering or buying, imagine it a plump Parsonage, or other Church liuing, the oath will goe downe the more easily. Di∣uines make no scruple. Piero. But what if after all this imagination of a marri∣age, fortune should forbid the banes.
Jac. How? Fortune's a slut, and because she is a whore her selfe, would haue no Lady marry and liue honest. Enter Lodwicke. Lodw. Piero, where's Piero? Piero: Ha, my Lord, I ha don't. Lodw. Ha? what. Piero. I haue pleas'd thy Excellence, and you had made more hast, you might ha come to the falla'th Deere, deli∣cate Venison. Lodw. Th'ast not enioy'd her? Piero. They talke of Jupiter and a golden shewer, Giue me a Mercury with wit and tongue He shall charme more Ladies on their backes, Then the whole bundle of Gods pshew. Lodw. Shoote not so much compasse, bee briefe and an∣swer me, hast thou enioy'd her? Piero. I haue, shall I sweare? Lodw. No, thou wilt bee damn'd sufficiently without an oath, in the meane time, I do purpose to reward your nimble diligence, draw? Piero. What dee meane. Jac. And you be so sharpe set, I do e meane to withdaw. Lodw. I doe meane to cut your throat, or perish'th at∣tempt you see your destinie, my birth and spirit wo'not le me kill thee in the dake, draw and be circumpect. Piero. Did not ou engage me to it, haue I done any thing but by your directions? my Lord. Lodw. Tis all one, my minde is altered, I will see what complexion your heart beares, doe not neglct my fury, bu guard your selfe discreetly, if I hit vpon the right vyne I may cure your diseasea'th bloud. Piero. Hold, and there bee no remedy, I will dye better then I ha liu'd, you shall see Sir that I dare fight with you, and if I tall by your Sword, my base consent to act your will de∣serues it. Lodw. Ha? Piero. I find your policie, and by this storme, You'd proue my resolution, how boldly I
Dare stand too't when this great Dishonour comes to question prepare To be displeased—she is a miracle Of chastity impenterable like. A marble she returned my sinfull arroes And they haue wounded me, forgiue me Lady. Lod. I prethee tell me true, now thou shalt sweare Hast thou not don't. Pior. Not by my hope of heauen Which I had almost forfeited, had not shee Releeued me with her vertue, in this truth I dare resige my breath. Lod. I dare beleeue thee What did I see in her to doubt her firmenesse. Enter Jacomo and Astella. Iac. Here they are Madam, you doe not meane to Run vpon their naked weapons. Lod. Piero thou shalt wonder. Ast. What meanes my Lord? Lod. You shall know that a non My Lady goe with me. Ast. Whither you please You shall not need to force mee si, you ma Lead me with gossamere, or the least thread The industrious spider weaues. Iac. Whimseyes caribit soes. Pier. What fury thu transports him at some distance Ile follow him, he may intend some violence Shee is too good to suffer I shall grow In loue with my conuersion. Exit. Iac. Grow in loue with a cockscomb his last wordes Sticke on my stomacke still fortune forbid the banes Quotha, slid if fortune should forbid the banes And my Lady be not conuerted into a Dutchesse Where are allmy offices? Hum where are they quoth I, I doe not know But of all tunes I shall hate fortune my foe. Exit. Recorders. Chaires prepared.
Enter Soranzo, Giotto. Sor. Know you not who they are my Lord this day Receiue the habit. Gio. I can meete with no intelligence. Sor. They are persons of some quality. Gio. The Duke does meane to grace their ceremony. Sor. He was inuited by the Abbot to their clothing. Gio. Which must be in priuate too heare in his lodgings. Sor. Well, we shall not long expect'em his grace enters. Enter Duke, Grimundo. Gri. It helpt much that he neuer saw my wife. Du. Dost thinke 'twill take. Gri. Ther's some hope my Lord already And heauen may prosper it. Du. Wee cannot endeere thee to thy merit. Sor. How the Duke imbraces him. Enter Cleona attended. Duk. Cleona you are welcom' tis a blest Occasion that makes vs meete so happily. Cle. It pleased my Lord Abbot to inuite mee hither. Duk. I appear'd too vpon his friendly sommons Weele thanke him for this presence, Sor. The Abbot enters. Enter the Abbot attended with Religious men hauing bowed to the Duke, he taketh a chaire being sate, Va∣lentio goes out and presently enters leaing Foscarie and Dulcino in St. Bennets habit, hee presents them they keele at the Abbots feete. Abb. Speake your desire. Fos. We kneele to be receiued into the number, O those religious men that dedicate Themselues to Heauen, i'th habit of St. Bennet, And humbly pray, that you would rectifie And teach our weake duotion, the way To imitate his life, by giuing vs The precepts of your order,
Abbot. Let me tell you, You must take heed, the ground of your resolue Be perfect, yet looke backe into the spring Of your desires, religious men should be Tapers, first lighted by a holy beame, Meteors may shine like starres, but are not constant. Fosc. We couet not the blaze, which a corrupt, And flimy matter may aduance, our thoughts Are slam'd with Charity. Abb. Yet ere you embarke Thinke on your hard aduenture, there is more To be examin'd, beside your end, And the reward of such an vndertaking, You looke on Heauen a farre off, like a Land▪ skip, Whether wild thoughts, like yours imperfect eye, Without examination of those wayes, Oblique, and narrow are transported, but I'th walke, and try all of the difficulties That interpose, you tire like inconsiderate, And weary Pilgrims. Fosc. We desire to know The rules of our obedience, Abb. They will startle Your resolutions, can your will, not vs'd To any Law beside it selfe, permit The knowledge of seuere, and positiue limits? Submit to be controul'd, imploy'd sometime, In seruile offices, against the greatnesse Of your high birth, and sufferance of nature? Can you, forgetting all youthfull desires, And memory of the worlds betraying pleasures, Checke wanton heate, and consecrate your blood To Chastity, and holy solitude? Sor. I wo not be religious Giotto? Giot. Nor I, vpon these tearms I pitty em. Abb, Can you quit all the glories of your state, Resigne your titles, and large wealth to liue Poore and neglected, change high food and surfets,
For a continuall fasting, your downe beds For hard and humble lodging, your guilt roofes, And galleries for a melancholly Cell The patterne of a graue, where, stead of musicke To charme you into slumbers, to be wak'd With the sad chyming of the sacring bell; Your robes, whose curiosity hath tired Inuention, and the silke-worme to adorne you, Your blaze of jewels, that your pride hath worne To burne out enuies eyes, must be no more Your ornament, but course, and rugged clothing Harrow your soft skinnes, these and many more Vnkind austerities will much offend Your tender constitutions, yet consider. Du. Hee does insist much on their flate and honour May wee not know'em yet; Val. One of them sir Doth owe this character. Giues him a paper. Du. It is Foscary I find his noble purpose, hee is perfect I honour thee young man, she must not see This paper. Giues another paper. Val. This doth speake the other Sir. Du. Tis at large—ha—Grimundo I prethee read, I dare not credit my owne eyes Leonora So it begins, Leonora. Gri. Leonora daughter to the late Gonzaga Duke Of Millan, fearing she should be compelled to marry Her Vncle, in the habit of a Page and the conduct Of Father Valentio, came to Sauoy, to try the Loue and honor of his Excellence, who once Sollicited by his Embassador— Du. No more, I am extasied If so much blessing may be met at once Ile doe my heart that justice to proclaime Thou hadst a deepe impression, as a boy I lou'd thee too, for it could be no other, But with a Diuine flame, faire Leonora
Like to a perfect Magnes, though inelos'd Within an Iuory box, through the white wall Shot foorth imbracing vertue, now, oh now Our Destinies are kind. Fos. This is a misterie, Dulcino? Leo. No my Lord, I am discouered, You see Lenora now, a Millan Lady, If I may hope your pardon— Du. Loue; and honour Thou dost inrich my heart, Cleona reade And entertaine the happines, to which Thy fare predestin'd thee, whilst I obey Mine here. Cleonae reades. Cleo. How, my Lord Foscary? If he beliuing, I must dye before This separation be confirm'd, my ioy Doth ouercome my wonder, can you leaue The world while I am in't? Fos. Decr' Leonora! Then willingly I dispence with my intention And if the Duke haue found another Mistris, It shall be my deuotion to pray here, And my religion to honour thee. Ab. Many blessings crowne This vnlon. Fos. Your pardon gracious Princesse I did impose too much. Leo. I studied To be your gratefull seruant, as your selfe Vnto the faire Cleona wee are all happy. Enter Ldowicke, Astella, and Piero. Lod. The'yr here; by your leaue brother, my Lord Abbot? Witnesse enough. Du. Why thus kneeles Lodowick? Lod. To make confession brother, and beg heauens And euery good mans pardon, for the wrong I 'done this excellent Lady, whom my soule New marries, and may heauen—ha doe not hold
A Iustice backe, Grimunde is a traitor Take heed on him and say your prayers, hee is The Deulls grand solliciter for soules, Hee hath not such another cunning engine I'th world, to ruine vertue. Gri. I my Lord? Lod. You are no hipocrite, he does euery night Lye with a Succubus, he brought me to one Let him deny it, but heauen had pitty on me. Enter Bellinda. Ha? there she is, doe you not see her? Deuill! I doe defie thee, my Lord stand by me, I will be honest, spight of him and thee, And lye with mine owne wife. Gi. Sure the Prince is mad, Duk. Oh rise most noble Lady, well deserning A statue to record thy vertue. Lod. Ha? Duk. This is Grimundoes wife, Lod. 'Tis so my Lord. Bel. No Deuill but the seruant of your vertue, That shall reioyce, if wee haue thriu'd in your Coersion. Ast. I hope it. Lod. Haue I bin mock'd into honesty? are not you a fury? And you a lye and subtile Epicure? Gri. I doe abhorre the thought of being so, Pardon my seeming Sir. Ab. Oh goe not backe, Preuent thus seasonably your reall orment. Lod. I am fully wakened, be this kisse the pledge Of my new heart. Pi. True loue streame in your bosomes Lady forgiue mee too. Ast. Most willingly. Duk. Our ioy is perfect, Lodowisk A  in this Lady, Leonora,
The obiect of our first loue, take the story As wee   Abbot wee must thanke You  conriuing this, and you good Father, Ebassedors shall be dispatcht to Millan, where and how their absent Princesse Leonora  dispos'd her selfe, meane while, Poets shall stretch innntion, to expresse Triumphs for thee, and Sauoyes happinesse. Extunt Omnes. FINIS.
