25342 99846970 11972
4 My Muse is bound, by seruice, zeale, and loue, The spight of death, and fortune here to showe: The Sire, & Sonne, whose soules are crownd aboue, With ethers corse, posses the earth below, Untill the daye of Christe his glorious showe. By natures corse the one bereft of breath, By fortunes spight, the other brought to death. 5 First of the first, that Earle of Bedford hight. A gratious Lord, as euer lui'd on earth. A Counseller, and of the Garter knight. Right honorable, in vertue, lore, and birth. Image of Grace, and goodnes here on earth, Whose life may be a Mirrour for the best, Whose death (nay life) proclaimes his soule at rest. 6 The Order of the Ro∣maine fune∣rals, to be at∣tired▪ withall his honors.His purple rohe doth show his honor sound, His armed sword, the metle of his hart: His forward leg, in S. Georges Garter bound. A token is of courage and desart. His Counselers place, to valour ioyneth Art. His loyall truth, aboue the rest doth shine, His Godly zeale, may well be cal'd deuine. 7 Ill men are not lamented being dead.His mourners clothd, in harts as sad as weedes, His vertues blasd, for few bad men bemone. Among the rest, his charitable deedes, with his sweete soule, to Abrahms brest are flone. He was a li∣berall Com∣forter of the poore.The poore dismayd crye out that he is gone, Whose sights and teares, their eyes do scald or blind, as men past hope, his like againe to finde.
8 But to discribe, this gratious Lord at large, His birth, life, death, his gifts and godly feare: For Homers pen, or Virgils ware a charge, Whose vertues firme, beseemes the noble peere, (As Honors Grace) within his brest to beare. His perfect life, the best devines might teach, What workes become, the holy words they preach. 9 First,His Ance∣stors were Lords of the manner of Barwick in Dorcetshire of his birth (which in his actes appeare) By oft decents, a Gentleman he was: Ten worthy Squiers, the Russels Armes did beare. To Knights likewise, decended of the race. And through desart (which hath the hyest place) His noble Sire,H. . (in Henries eye a pearle) Clim'de by degrees, vntill he was an Earle. 10 Eight Cotes he bare, which hereditare were, The Russels first, of all men knowne his owne. Delatowres the next, a Westerne heire, Muschamp the third, Dorcetsh. a Northerne Baron knowne. Herringham the fourth, a neighbour of his owne. Frewxmer the fift, from Worcetshire, which came. Wise was the sixt, in Devonshire long of name. 11 Deriu'd from Truth, and lawfull Pedigrewe, These former six, his noble Father bare. The other too, were to his Mother dewe. Sabcote she hight, Inheritrix and heire. With Saint Marke ioynde, both in Northampton shire. Long thus he was (as I haue sayd before) A Gentleman, and Caesar was no more.
12 And sith his howse is built of Honer now, You well shall see, the ground worke to be found: Aduaunce (I graunt, to weake desart may bow, And weaker Grace, the building may confound. But this strong forte, is raisde on noe, such ground, The noble Lord, first Earle of all his race, The ground-worke layde, by Vallor, lore, and Grace. 13 His noble fathers ver∣tues and dig∣nities By H. 8.He did not mount, as some men with a starte: Vallor him proud, a Scevola to be, Baronde he was, on tryall for desarte. Through wisedome then, he climed by degree. King Henries eyes, did iudge, as well as see, Who with these roomes, and Garter did him staule Lord Preauy zeale, and eke Lord Admirall. 14 He was crea∣ted Earle of Bedford by E. 6. His saying: Sans ayde de Dieu, le ne puis.Edward the sixt, of Christ endeme the pearle, For seruice great, and loyalty vnstainde: Created him, of Bedford then the Earle. Who still confest, these guts, by God he gainde, And blest of God, his vertues all remainde. (as ioynde vnto, the honnor he begonne) Unto this Lord, the noble Earle his sonne. 15 Gods wisedome oft, euen from the Iawes of death. Saues those whome he, to worthy charges caule. Throwne in the deepe, he gaue to Moyses breath. He was in mortall peril of drowning, and yet pre∣serued.At Lycaonia Stonde, he did reuiue S. Paule. That there escapes, might cōfort thraules, in thraule, To shew his strength, and for a thousands good, The Lord (this Lord) preserued in the stood.
16 In tender yeares, where one Instruction might, Grafte lore and grace, which make the noble shine: His vertues blasde, so cleare in all mens sight. As by the same,His seruice in King Henry 8. dayes. His Father being a gene∣rall, he had chardge at Muttrill, whē he was but 18 yeares of age. His most va∣liant seruice in suppres∣sing the Western Re∣bels, in King Edward the▪ 6 dayes. a number did deuine. What frutes would grow vpō those bloomes in fine? At eighteene years, when youth would wāder far, This Lord was stayd, & tooke a chardge in war. 17 The West doth know, the valour of his hart, The Rebels strong, he nobly did dismaye. The people since, haue honord his desart. His Syre (and he) did bring them to obaye. And euer since, haue kept them at that staye. His deeds were knowne, by Iustice, Trueth, & zeale, To God, his Prince, and to the Common Weale▪ 18 His holy zeale, he builded on Gods word, In all his pompe the Pope he did defie.He was al∣wayes a most godly Prote∣stant. The bishops in Queene Maries dayes narrowly searched him, Vide acts & monum. When Mary rain'de, and bishops rul'de the sworde. To cut him short, who all his Acts did eye. A godly feare, his loyall truth did trye. His seruice then, and hye regard therefore, Doth Papists teach, their Princes to adore. 19 Yet, eare I showe his seruice vnconstrain'de, I neede must showe how hardly he was vide. A Prisoner with the Lord Rich he remainde. Till papists had,He was Pri∣soner with the old . Rich  Queene M∣nes dayes. his actions all pervide. Which fauteles were, but he reuenge resusde. He layd his wrong, not to his Countries chardge But heaping trueth, did sheild her with his tearge.
20 His seruice in Queene Ma∣ries dayes at S. Quintes, at his owne charge. Queene Mary made him Lieutenant of the West Countries.Well armed with a stout and loyall hart, At S. Quintins, he seru'd with proper charg: There needs no trompe, to sounde his hye desart. Truth bydes the push, vnarm'd, with shield or targe Malgre his foes, his merits were so large, As that the Queene esteemde him with the best, And made him then, lieutenant of the Wet. 21 The trust was great, but far more great his trueth, Yet he profest the faith he did before: When as he saw, the Clergie voyde of ruth: The tyranny of the papists in Queene Maries dayes.Wherin their rage, they seamde a Forest Bore. And Christians blood, they dronke vp more & more. He grieu'd to liue, where as such Tyrants rainde: Yet loyally this bitter Crosse sustainde. 22 To trauell then his noble minde was set. He was most honorably ntertained y forraine Princes.(Which knowledge sought, to do his Coūtrey good) Abroade his port, such noble praise did get, As Princes when his fame they vnderstood. They honord him by all the meanes they could, God did him shield, in spight of all his foes, And yet he liu'de, vnder the Pope his nose. 23 Disposition of english fugitiues.Abroade he did not as our papistes doe, In practise ioyne, their Countrey to confownde: Although his Queene, were to gods word a foe. He neuer wrought, that she should be vncrownd, Tyranny, no warrant to rebolt.No, no, his faith, and honour both were sound. Who oft had read, and did regard it well, That Tyrants were, no warrants to rebell.
24 No: Tyrants are the scourges of Gods Ire Sent from aboue, to chasten sinne below: But as the Rod, the father throwes in fire. If in his sonne, he sees that grace doth grow, The soueraigne God,The short raignes of Tyrants. with Tyrants dealeth soe: Their rules are short, and long his mercies raigne, When as he sees that we our sinnes refraine. 25 England doth know, my censure to be iust, When God from heauen,Example by England. our patient bondage eide: The Papists hope, he soone consumde to dust: Queene Mary dy'de euen in their whottest pride, Then downe did fall their pompe of evry side.Queene Elizabeth. The Image then of Plenty, Power, and Peace, His mercy sent, whose raigne, the same encrease. 26 This noble Lord,He was the first that was sworne of Queene Eli∣zabethes Counsell. vpon this blessed chaunce, In Counsell sate among the grauest Wights. His care was set the Gospell to aduaunce, His zeale out shinde, the Papists taper lights. To do good deedes, were set his whole delights. His noble howse of Conscience seemd a Court, Such heapes of men for succour did resort. 27 While fortune smilde,Hr great zeale to ad∣vaunce the Gospell. he did not like the world. Bye, vild, serach, craue, & gape are gaine could fall. Behinde his backe, these worldly Ioyes he whurld. He fixt his eyes vpon Gods Church in thrall. Which he too free,Hee made high accou of good preachers. set hand hart, purse and all. His bordes were spred, his gates wyde open stoode, For Pastors pure, which ministred heauenly foodee.
28 Hee litle pas∣sed of dum Preachers.The Idle Dronne, the forme that onely had, He thought vnmeete, to take a holy charge: But some saye, though the minister be bad, Gods word is pure: which we must make our targe. I say no les, and yet they roue at large. A Diamond keepes his vertue set in bras, But set in Gold, it hath a perfect grace, 29 Gods word is pure, though preached by the Deuil. The holy Ghoste, yet seldome comes in hell: Without whose gift, mans nature is most euill. Much like a foole, that bytes the bitter shell, And leaues the nut, the barke, not tasting well. The multitude, of perfect iudgement barde. The Preachers words, so by his life regard. 30 This noble Lord, this grocenes did perceiue, That simple men Iudge by the outward face: And therefore did his benefices giue To such as had, both learning, gift and grace. Would God the like, ware seene in eury place. The God of Heauen should be glorified then, Euen, by the workes, the liues, and lights of men. 31 Although this Lord, was honord by the sword. His wisedome iudg, d that learning was deuine. Which to aduaunce, his bounty did afford. Allowance great, as if he had a mine. Schollers poore, in whome good gifts did shine. In mournfull Cryes, he both his eares bestowde. His purse wide ope, a fruitefull pitty showde.
32 To show he bilt his acttions of the Lord,Hes poesie applied to Gods power ouer all ac∣tions. Not as the most, on fortunes smiling cheare: He chose Che sera, sera, for his word. Gods will shal be, in heauen aboue and heare. The Thunder bolte, the strongest towres teare. The lightning flash consumes the house of reede, And plagues do raigne, vpon the wicked seede. 33 What did become,Antipater was driuē by a subtill pol¦licie to get Alexanders body bu∣ried. of Caesars clyming head? Of Pompeis rule, and Alexanders raigne? A light account, so soone as they were dead, Yea they whose mindes, a world could not cōtaine, With much a doe: a seemely Tombe did gaine. Their conquestes great, returnde and waxed lesse, For nought may stand, but what gods hād doth bles. 34 The Plow in vaine, is set into the ground, Unlesse the seede, God blesseth with encrease: The bilding of the wicked is vnsound: Although of bras he frameth euery peace. Yea sinketh oft, before his owne disseace. This Prouerbe old, doth profecie his fall. Though man propose, yet God disposeth all. 35 This noble Lord, that hath both seene and read, The Rules and Raignes, yt Time, did sinke & shake. That euen those men, that fortune most had fead. That liu'de like Gods, their leaues as mē did take. And haue no name, of whom ten thousands spake. By his Poesie, in true construction then: Gods power showes, ore all the works of men.
36 And that the Lord, might all his labours blesse, His chiefest workes, his temple was to bilde, To comfort those, that languisht in distresse, Such to receiue, as Tyranny exilde. To cloth, and feade, the widdow and her childe. On these good deedes, which holy men may name. This Godly Lord, did build his forte of fame. 37 the glory that Caesar esteemed.Caesar oft sayd, he gloried most in this, Vnto his friend, he neuer was vnkinde: And oft forgaue, his foe that did amis, Two worthy gits beseeming Caesars minde, Which in this lord, his vertues brightly shinde: His bounty and mercy very great.For to his friend, none could more fauour show. Nor none that liu'd that more forgaue his foe. 38 This gratefull part, though many I could show, Among the rest, a good remembraunce: Gods will this Lord into the Theames did throw, A waterman did rush among the waues, And by Gods ayde, his dangered life he saues. Whose ayde this Lord, did nobly then reward, And afterward to multiply regard. 39 A gratefull parte.The thriftles man, by some vnhappy corse, Offended in, a veniall cause of death. The law did pas: This Lord then tooke remorse On him that once, his life did helpe to saue. In lewe whereof his perdon he did craue. And afterward, that he might truly liue. This man he did, a yearely pension giue.
40 Ambition, wrath, enuy, and disdaine, Haunt Princes Courts,Passiōs which followes Princes Courts. and doe the most enthrall: But none of these his honor once could staine. Like to the snaile, he neuer clymde to fall. No, wrathfull moode his wisdome could appaule: On worldly pride, he fixt no enuious eye, Nor scornde the poore, where he good gifts did spye. 41 Although he liu'd in fauour of his prince, He neuer rose,An honora∣ble disposi∣tion. by any mans disgrace: His actes so iust, as Enuy did convince, To noble to craue, for to inrich his race: Ready to giue, and gaue in evry place. On Honour he, and Uertue made his stay, And neuer faund, where fortune bare the sway. 42 His wisedome knowne, in many a cause before, Right meete, his prince, and Cōmō weale to serue: Her maiestie by him did set much store. And to say trueth,Her Maiestie sēt him Am∣bassadour in∣to Fraunce. no man could more deserue. Who with a charge, from which he did not swerue. In noble sorte, as seemde so sad a chaunce, Went to Condole, the King his death of Fraunce. 43 His honor thus by noble actions grewe, And all was grace, in which he was attir'd: At home, abroade, in peace, and warre most true, Aboue his hart, his vertues farre aspir'de. And crownde him with more praise then he desir'de The Scottish traines, did axe a trusty eye, Then through the North with speed this lord did hie.
44 He was Go∣uernour of Barwicke in her Maiest. Time.Of Barwicke he, the Gouernour was made. In which hye charge, he ruld without suspect. The Souldiers old, he did reresh and ayde. Who well deseru'de, he nobly did respect. Who did offende, he mildely, did correct: With Iustice he, did euer measure Grace, Which made him fear'd▪ though loue in evry place. 45 A reuenge contrary to Martiall or politicke Iustice.The deadly foode, that thirsteth after blood. His wisedome in those parts appeased much. The hollowe Scots (that seldome wisht vs good) Would often saye, there neuer gouernd such. Tride by his foes, his vertues bid the tuch. And truth to say, generall was the song: Th'earle of Bedford, did neuer Person wrong. 46 He was her Maiesties de∣putie to cristen the scottish king.In Scotland, when that in our soueraignes place, He Cristened the seemely Scottish King. He did the Rytes, with such a royall Grace. As that his ame, the Scottish writers ring. Enuyed there, Renowne, he home did bring. Lord Darley, her Maiest▪ subiect.The Scottish Prince, our Soueraignes subiect was, And so (this Lord, euen there, by him did pas. 47 Returned home, where Lawrell rules the launce: Where Peace doth shine, which plenty doeth afford Where lawes do Trueth, and Equitie aduaunce. e was War∣den of the stanerie in the West.In Iustice seate, though Girt with Mars his sword: Nothing but right was censurd by this Lord: Of many he: was Iudge, and wrongs redrest. As Warden of the stanerie in the West.
48 An office great, which some would wrest to gaine. Yet through his gaine,The true cō∣mendatiō of the Iustice which he ad∣ministred. there was not one that lost: A multitude belong vnto the traine. In ruling (whome of this) he chiefe may boast. His Iustice gaind, the fauour of the most. And for the rest, vpon a true account, His charge did neare vnto his gaine amount. 49 Lieutenant he was of the Westerne Coast,He was Lieu∣tenant of the Counties of Dorcet, Deuō of Cornwaule at the time of his death, and oftentimes before. The Lawiers in the We∣sterne Circuts murmured that he ended so many mat∣ters Vnkind sutes vnnaturall in this peace∣able Gouern∣ment. Where as he found, a number loued strife: What meanes he wrought (the Lawiers do not boast) For to appease, the discords that ware rife. He mou'd strong foes, to loue like man and wife. That lacke of worke, made Lawiers to exclame, But what of that? it was a godly blame. 50 And truth to say, where peace and plentie raignes. It is a fault, to see our papar war: They know God wet, that tasted haue the paines. Where bookes do wound, as deep remaines ye scar. As browne bill strokes, which nothing reach so far. The reason is, the beast doe not accord, Their neighbours Iars, by sample of this Lord. 51 Though holsome lawes, do strēgthē Cōmō weales, Law is to strong for evry trifleling cause: The fogging mate,The Peti∣fogger, a dā∣gerous neigh¦bour. is worse, then he that steales. Where sute is raisde, for wind & wagging strawes A foxe is found, among a sort of dawes. For you that sewe,The best end of law. put this in your beleefe, Law measures right, with toyle, expence and griefe▪
52 To appease smal discords a speciall du∣ty of Iustices of peace.If like this Lord (whose fame cannot disseace, Make friends of Foes, the meaner Iustice would: To Iustices, might well be ioyned peace. This quit raigne, doth challenge that they should: Their blame, nay shame that will not if they could. If not be sure each wheare will light the lote, Which once vpon a worldlings house was wrote. 53 Written vpō a cruel world¦lings house.Thy Grownd worke bilt, on discord and debate, Thy front of brick, Temperd with widowes teares, The Orphants spoyle, Thy windowes and thy state. Good yeomens falles, the beames that thee vp beares. A wonder if, thou, stand in this repaire, When built of wrongs, thy fairest beauties are. 54 Now to the Lord, of whome I lately spake, The Prouerbe goes (although more true then iust) The way is safe,A most hono¦rable vertue in this Lord. the strongest parte to take: But sure e weake, that to the wall was thrust: His noble minde, did ayde in causes iust. Which made mensing, in open streetes this song. There rydes the Lord, their strength that suffer wrong. 56 The Thralls which led for persecutions feare: When as they saw the Pope,He was a gret comforter of persecuted strangers. He was high∣ly regarded of forraigne princes▪ and Papists frowne. His purse and toung, in banishment did chere All forraine states, yea persons of renowne. Whome Tyrants sought, to tumble hedlong downe. Upon his zeale: In England greatly stayde, Which Realme, they saw, god blessed for their ayde.
57 Whose grieues he did, in all he might releaue. His care for them,which profes the ospell. He greatly & in what he might, ur∣thered the succour of Flaunders. he shewed to the end: The Holland States, his loue did soundly preaue. Flaunders may say, that she hath lost a frend; To mende her state, much trauell he did spend, His helping hand, her sutors did not lacke, Which still appeard, till sicknes kept him backe. 57 The very bad, did reuerence his name, And all the good,He was high∣ly honored of strangers. with griefe his lose deplore. The strangers praise, doth blow abroade his fame, Loud of his prince, for Valour, Truth, and Lore. A happy man, whome all men did Adore, Happy and blest, of God euen in his birth. Who here possest, the blessing of the earth. 58 Blessed he was,His wiues were most gratious La∣dies. of God in mariage twise, His noble wiues the samples were of Grace: His Children such, as that in all mens eyes, Their actions did,Daughters of his, were al maried to Earles. His sonnes were all Lords or Knights in his life time. Pharos, a wō∣derfull light made by Ptholomie Philodelphus for the de∣rectiō of sea∣faring men. their fathers vertues blaze, His Daughters macht, with Earles of noble rase. His sonnes, himself, all Lords, or Knights did see, By vertue raysd, asmuch as by degree. 59 What would you more, he was a Pharoes blase, To prye into whose gilts, doth dimme my eyes: Like him that long against the Sonne doth gase. Of honour sound, in Iudgement graue and wise. In all good deeds, he euer was precyse. Aliue refuge▪ to those whome wrong did paine. Aliue and dead, vnbleamisht with a staine.
60 He was af∣flicted with a most violent sicknes, one yeare and more past.Long thus he liu'd, euen blessed from aboue. And tride in fine, as gold is in the fire. God chastiseth (quoth he) whome he doth loue, And trueth to say, his torment might attaint The strongest hart, yet, he did neuer faint: Yea martred long, with furious griefe and paine. No one can say, they hard him to complaine. 61 The griefe of hart, showde in the watry eyes, Of friends that saw,He was won∣derfully mar¦tered by the Phisitions & Surgieons. The gretnesse of his patiēce. the mangling of his flesh. But he that felt, what griefe man may deuise, With comfort, did his Comforters reresh. His patience then, my pen cannot expres. His sicknes straunge, as straungely was he vsde. More strangely calde, when Art had him refusde. 62 What should I say? that Science is deuine: Yet knowledge failes,The Doctors and Surgions gaue him o∣uer. vnlesse God blesseth skill. The maister Docters, gaue him ore in fine. And left his Cure, vnto the Lord his will. The mournfull cryes, the howse with sorrowes fill. The Lord then had,M. Marrad & Fower we∣sterne men, Surgion. Discription of the world, and of all estates. compassion of our mone, And blest the workes, of men that ware vnknowne. 63 But o their Cure, did but prolong his paine, Euen from this Crosse, he longed Christ to see. He heald this world, and all her beauties vaine. The prowdest pompe, a short felicitie. The regall care, a Golden misery, The Maiestrate, an honorable thrawle. The poore man blest, whose cōscience hath no gawle.
64 But ware mishap from worldly pleasure free, So short a vse may not be counted Ioy. Mans life is like, a bloome vpon a tree,The vncer∣taintie of Life. The certain∣ty of death. Which evry storme, is ready to destroy. No threatning can the Monster death annoy. From all his pompe, he takes the Prince away. Euen as the night, doth clowde the brightest day. 65 A sory tale,The worldly mans felicity Nemo ante obitum ea∣tus. vnto the worldly thrawle, Which hath health, wealth, & in his bowels peace: But foolish man, that these thy pleasures cawle▪ Thy lasting Ioye, is after thy decease. A graine of wheate doth rot ere it increase. Euen so the flesh, a lasting Ioye to giue, Must tourne to dust, and then the sowle doth liue. 66 And from this ground, this Lord did neuer smaue he likened life to voyages at Sea:Life like, voyages at Sea. Some short, some long, as winde and wether aue, And as men Ioy, their ships retourne to see, Because their wealth, within their bowels bee. The godly so, in death their comfort eye, Which made him liue, as he would dayly dye. 67 Retourne of health▪ which visibly was seene,Hee neuer had great care of world¦ly causes, since his for∣mer sicknes. Her Maiestie oftentime most gra∣tiously visi∣ted him, in his former sicknes. To tempt this Lord, was but an ydle traine: The visiting of our most gratious Queene, Did glad his hart, but with no clyming vaine: Which swelleth still, where princes fauours raigne. She lou'd him as her strength in time of need, He honord her, with duty, zeale, and dread.
68 He straind him selfe, farre more then was his case▪ To serue her highnesse, in his latter health: In Parlament, he did himselfe dissease, About sound lawes, to arme the Common wealth: But priuate gaine, he grounded on a shelfe, Came the Brydegrome by day or els by night. In his cleare lampe, he euer more had light. 69 Not like his worth, his life before is showne, The more our losse his death doth now draw neare:His most godly and blessed ende. What was his life, his godly death made knowne, His sharpe assaulte, his faith did nothing scare: His care was past,One of his godly say∣inges, in his last ende. he found his Conscience cleare, He saw by faith, the perfect life in dead, The VVomans seede, trode on the Serpents head. 70 The senses of a number, fayle before they deseace.In those fearce panges, mans sences often quaile Their feeble heads, are full of Idle thought: Their hollowe eyes, of worldly sight do faile. Their foltring tonges, do wag and vtter nought: Their harts do pant, as they with death had fought. But he whose life, by none of these did wrōng, In death had vse of eye, hart, head, and toung. 71 He had par∣fect vse of his senses vnto his latter gaspe. He lyuely cō∣fessed his fa∣ythe, in the tremblyng passage of deathe.His head was free, from worldly thought and care, His harte did still contemplate of gods booke: His toung, his faith, did in his end declare: His eyes abroade, did towards heauen looke. His hands he heau'd, when strength the rest for sooke, His chamber seem'd, a heauenly preaching place, Him selfe euen then, the soundest teacher was.
72 Among the rest, his sayings full of Grace, For our regard, this one would here remaine. I do thanke God, that I shall dye in peace, And do not liue,A frutefull admonition vpon hi last sayinge. for to beholde the paine, Which for our sinnes, on earth is like to raigne. Regard it well, and each man one amend, What good men dreed, God forth most doth send. 73 S. Austine saith, that God is all in all, And with his Grace▪ is euer with the good: It followes then, the wicked to appaule. His vengeance is, euen mixed with their blood. His mercy long, his Iustice hath forestood: But tempt not farre, the lothest man to fight, When he is wou'd, the soundest blowes doth smight. 74 England beware, bewarnd if thou be wise, Thy ecret sinnes, or open vengeance crye: The words are mine, but his the sound aduise. What men forshaue, that ready are to dye. The sage do hold, euen for a prophesie. His eyes (no dobut) the hyest heauens did peace, And saw euen that, his toung did then rehearce. 7 For to conclude, the word, the deuill, and death, He vanquished, in all his housholds sight. From Gaspes,His departure most quiet. or Grones, ware free his latter breath, His life did weare, euen like, a Taper light: O happy soule, that made so strong a fight, And thus in fine, he mildly did disseace, Euen in the place, where long he liu'd in peace.
76 A happy ende, that Plato calleth blest: The end that he most gladly did imbrace. The ende, his, end that many since haue mist. The end that failes, his memory to deface, Whose vertues liue, and shineth in his race. The end that soone, had raisd this heauy mone: Alas the Earle of Bedford now is gone. 77 Yea, he forth of this sinfull world is gone, Gone from the traines, of Enuy and disdaine: Gone, gone, before the knowledge of this mone, Which would haue grieu'de him more then all his paine: His noble sonne, treacherously is slaine, Of the valiāt Lord Russell.His sonne, his heire, of honor, Grace, and all. Stout Lord Russell, whom Mars we well might call. 78 A passion heare so dul my heauy muse, As that I faint, to sound his high renowne, My hand, and iudgement haue forgot their vse, To staine my worke, the teares do trickle downe. O dismall tune, where in the heauens should frowne To reaue at once, two Starres of Russels Fame, The Sire, and Soe, to all this Realme amame. 79 Frauncis the Sire, derrast by natures Corse: Frauncis the Sonne, was slaine by Fortunes spight. By Fortunes spight, armed with treacherous force. But yet in spight, of all the spights their might, His fame shall shine, when shame shall raigne & light, Upon his foes, and all the cursed seede, That gilty are, of this most impious deede.
80 God wil be iust: you Murthrers then vniust, Your iudgement heare (although pronounst by me) The God that sayd,God pun∣eth murder, for the most paie with vi∣sible ven∣geance. to Cain most accuest. Who Caine doth kill, shall scanenfolde punisht be. Your Murther heare, euen in the worst degree, Where law of Armes, and martiall faith was broke Of God and man, will feele the wrathfull stroke. 81 I iudge not who are gilty of this deed: God will reueale, the deepth of all this reach: But this I say:At the spu. In the last siege of E∣denbrough Vide Ho∣lengh, Cre. his valour they did dread, Experience erst, before their eyes did teach, Where danger stood, his courage made a breach, Which made them seeke, by Cowardise his breath. Who would himselfe haue els reveng'd his death. 82 A shamefull part, vpon a day of Truse, Where mortall foes,He was trea∣cheously slaine, vpon a daye of Truse. no sharpe reuengement trye, But once againe: who set this fowle abuse? T'ware good that he, the  ye, And desarts haunt, till vengeance  dye: Yea there to dreede, vntill his , Each bush that strrres a RVSS  frend. 83 But leaue we here,Euer  last rebellion in the . He followed all oters of seruice, in Scotland and the Norther partes. his foes vnto their fall, And see how hye e vertue ad this Lord, When Treason arm'd the Northerne parts with thrall, In tender yeares, with noble courage sturde▪ He left the Court, and tooke him to the sword: But did not with the multitude retower, When Rebels fled, before their Princes Power.
84 He maried the daughter and heire of S. Iohn Foster Knight. L. Warden of the midle marcher.To stay him there, he maried in those parts, A louing wife: and S Iohn Fosters heire, Who dyed soone, yet for her sweete desarts, And for the zeale, he to that seruice bare. To leaue those parts, he neuer since had care: Whose gouerment, and hazard oft of blood, Approu'd him arm'd, to do his Country good. 85 The Romaine warres, record a noble fight, By Mantius sonne: in Combat with his foe: TITVS MANLI∣VS being Consul, com∣maunded that none of his Souldiers should fight, but when he commaunded them Geiu Metius one of his Enimyes pric∣ked forth of his Campanie, and chalenge Maius Sonne. The comman∣dement of his father was that h should not fight. But he being the Con∣sul Sonne, rather then the Ehim  him with Cowadise, pre∣ferred a certaine death, by breac  Commandement, before a dishonorable life in refusing : Hee slew his enimie and was himselfe put to death,  iustice. Euen so this noble Lord, although not so  because hee valiauntly ad∣uentured his person in a , at the assaults of Edin∣brough Castell, which Sir W Drurie, enant, had appointed for men of meaner reputation, was by the sayd Lieutenant Committed toward. But albeit, discipline in martiall pollicie it to be reuerēsed. The noble courage of this Lord, aunswered  saying:  matters of honorable danger, there ought to be no difference betweene a king and a meane Souldier: and through that thought vpon a mortall drought, hee powred a present of  the  because it sufficed not to re∣leaue his whole Armie, Vid oling Cro.His father yet, in all his Souldiers sight, Put him to death, because he did vndoe, His Order made, that none should hazard so. This Lord likewise, commaunded was to ward, For valiantues, beyonde his lifes regard.
86 Knighted he was (and worthy in the field) Who neuer yet did faint,He was Knighted by the Earle of Sussex, gene∣rall of the field. His stont aunswere to his treache∣rous enimies. He liued, vn∣till the daye, after that hee was woun∣ded. to see his foe: Yea thus betrayde, when he was wild to yeld, He aunswered thus: That will I neuer doe, Add drewe his sword, but o they shot him through: Yet home he went, and caried death aliue, So lōg as strēgth, with mortal woūds might striue. 87 What should I say? In field a Mars he was, In time of peace, a stayde and noble Knight: In pride of yeares: to be cut vp like gras, Giues cause of mone, to many a worthy wight Of Chiualrie, who held him for the light: But all in vaine, To market to be sold, The young sheape comes, aswell as doth the old. 88 To ward Deaths Dart, Honnour is no shield, Yong yeeres,Spes famae solet ad vir∣tutom impel∣lere multos. Iohannes de Temporibs, liued in Charles the 5. time. faire lookes, nor prayer may intreate. The Prince, the Peere, and evry estate must yeld, Of fame yeat Death, the  not get Desire whereof mens mindes  set And sure this Lord, by Fame  here, Old Iohn of Tymes, that saw  dred yeare. 89 He liued so, as he shall neuer dye. In Heauen nor earth, while any earth remaine: His godly life, is crownde aboue the skye: His noble deedes, which no fowle deed doth staine (Though veniall sinne, in evry flesh doth raigne) Doth make his life, his mortall life I saye, In fame to liue, till Morall Tyme decaye.
90 I say no more, that can not praise too much, This Lord, that liued well and dyed blest: Fame spreades abroade, reports I dare not tuch, Til leaue do ioyne, in knowledge with the rest, Truth shields frō shame, and Truth is yet exprest, And I in time, God willing will expose, With leaue obtainde, the practise of his foes. Viuit post funera virtūs. AN EPITAPHE VPON THE DEATH of the right honorable Frauncis, Earle of Bedford, Baron Rus∣sell &c. And of his most valiant Sonne, and heire S. Frauncis, Lord Russell, treacherously slaine by a Stratageme of the Scotes, and dyed the day before his noble father. HEare vnderneathe the Earle of Bedford lyes, Whose head was fraught, with Grace, & godly care. Who eares were ope, to heare the poore mās cries. Whose eyes to wih, his neighbours goods forbare: VVhose toung pronounst, but good and godly speach. VVhose hands  and seldome did receiue, VVhose holy  rts of men might teach. This painted wod, did nothing but deceiue. He liu'd and dy'de, as he with God should raigne: But O his losse ioynes with an other rod. His noble Sonne slaine by a Scottish traine. His father lead, the happy way to God, Vpon a day of trute, they did him wound, VVhome shame (no doubt) by vengeance will confound. Nemo ante obitum beatus.
