5120 99851278 16548
THE Anuals of great Brittaine. OR, A MOST EXCEL∣lent Monument, wherein may be seene all the antiquities of this King∣dome, to the satisfaction both of the Vniuersities, or any other place stir∣red with Emulation of long continuance. Excellently figured out in a worthy Poem. LONDON: Printed for MATHEW LOWNES. 1611.
ROSALINS COM∣PLAINT, METAPHORI∣cally applied to Dame Nature at a Parlia∣ment held (in the high Star-chamber) by the Gods, for the preseruation and increase of Earths beauteous Phoenix. A Solemne day of meeting mongst the Gods, And royall parliament there was ordained: The heauenly Synod was at open ods, And many harts with earthly wrongs were pained; Some came to craue excuse, some to complaine Of heauie burdend griefes they did sustaine. Vesta she told, her Temple was defiled: Iuno how that her nuptiall knot was broken; Venus from her sonne Cupid was exiled: And Pallas tre with ignorance was shoken: Bellora rau'd at Lordlike cowardice, And Cupid that fond Ladies were so nice. To this Assembly came Dame Nature weeping, And with her handkercher through wet with teares, She dried her rosie cheekes, made pale with sighing, Hanging her wofull head, head full of feares: And to Ioues selfe plac'd in a golden seate, She kneeld her downe, and thus gan to intreate: Thou mightie Imperator of the earth, Thou euer-liuing Regent of the aire, That to all creatures giu'st a liuely breath,
And thundrest wrath downe from thy firie chaire, Behold thy handmaid, king of earthly kings, That to thy gracious sight sad tidings brings. are rich Phoenix of exceeding beautie, -like Lillie in the earth I placed; , to whom men owe dutie: countrey with a milke-white Doue I graced: Oe and none such, since the wide world was found, Hath euer Nature placed on the ground. Head. Her head I framed of a heauenly map, Wherein the seuenfold vertes were enclosed, When great Apollo slept within my lap, And in my bosome had his rest reposed, I cut away his locks of purest gold, And plac'd them on her head of earthly mould. Haire. When the least whistling wind begins to sing, And gently blowes her haire about her necke, Like to a chime of bels it soft doth ring, And with the pretie noise the wind doth checke, Able to lull asleepe a pensiue hart, That of the round worlds sorrowes beares a part. Fread. Her forehead is a place for princely Ioe To it, and censure matters of import: Wherein men reade the sweete conceipts of Loue, To which hart-pained Louers do resort, And in this ablet find to cure the wound, For which no salue or herbe was euer found.
Eyes. Vnder this mirrour, are her princely eyes: Two Carbuncles, two rich imperiall lights; That ore the dy and night do soueraignize, And their dimme tapers to their rest she frights: Her eyes excell the Moone and glorious Sonne, And when she riseth al their force is donne. Cheekes. Her morning-coloured cheekes, in which is plac'd, A Lillie lying in a bed of Roses; This part aboue all other I haue grac'd, For in the blew veines you may reade sweet posies: When she doth blush, the Heauens do wax ed, When she lookes pale, that heauenly Front is dead. Chinne. Her chinne a litle litle pretie thing, In which the sweet carnatian Gelli-flower, Is round encompast in a christall ring, And of that pretie Orbe doth beare a power: No storme of Enuie can this glorie touch, Though many should assay it ouermuch. Lippes. Her lippes two rubie Gates from whence doth spring, Sweet honied dew by an intangled kisse, From forth these glories doth the Night-bird sing, A Nightingale that no right notes will isse: True learned Eloquence and Poetrie, Do come betwene these dores of excellencie. Teth. Her teeth are hewed from rich crystal Rockes, Or from the Indian pearle of much esteem, These in a closet her deep counsell lockes,
And are as porters to so faire  Quene, They taste the diet of th  traine, Other base grosenesse they do still disdaine. Tongue. Her tongue the vtterer of all glorious things, The siluer clapper of that golden bell, That neuer oundeth but to mightie Kings, And when she speakes, her speeches do excell: He in a happie chaire himselfe doth place, Whose name with her sweet tongue she means to grace. Necke. Her necke is Vestas siluer conduict pipe, In which she powers perfect chastitie, And of the muskie grapes in sommer ripe, She makes a liquor of ratietie, That dies this swanne-like piller to a white, More glorious then the day with all his light. rastes. Her breasts two crystall orbes of whitest white, Two little mounts from whence lifes comfort springs, Betweene those hillockes Cupid doth delight To sit and play, and in that valley sings: Looking loue-babies in her wanton eyes, That all grosse vapours thence doth chasesize. Armes. Her armes are branches of that siluer tree, That men surname the rich Hsperides, A precious circling shew of modestie, When she doth spread these glories happines▪ Ten times ten thousand blessings he doth aste, Whose circled armes shall cling about her waste.
Hands. Her hands are fortunes palmes, where men may reade His first houres destiny, or weale or woe, When she this sky-like map abroad doth spreade, Like pilgrimes many to this Saint do go, And in her hand, white hand, they there do see Loue lying in a bed of yuorie. Fingrs. Her fingers long and small do grace her hand; For when she toucheth the sweete sounding Lute, The wild vntamed basts maz'd do stand, And crroll-chanting birds are sudden mute: O fingers how you grace the siluer wires, And in humanitie burne Venus fires! Bellie. Her bellie (ô grace incomprehensible) Far whiter then the milke-white lillie flower, O might Arabian Phoenix come inuisible, And on this mountaine build a glorous bower, Then Sunne and Moone as tapers to her bed, Would light loues Lord to take hr aidenhead. Nota. Be still my thoughts, be silent all yea Muses, Wit-flowing eloquence now grae my tongue: Arise old Homer and make no excuses, Of a rare peec of art must be my song, Of more then most, and most of all beloued, About the which Venus sweete does haue houered. There is a place in louely paradize, From whence the golden Gehon ouerflowes, A fountaine of such honorable prize,
That none the sacred, sacred vertues knowes, Walled about, beok'ning sure defence, With trees of life, to keepe ad errors thence. Tighs. Her Thighs two pillers fairer far then faire, Two vnderprops of that celestiall house, That Mansion that is Iunos siluer chaire, In which Ambrosie VENVS doth carouse, And in her thighs the prety veines are running Like Christall iuers from the maine streames flowing. Leggs. Her Legges are made as graces to the rest, So pretie, white, and so proportioate, That leades her to loues royall sportiue nest, Like to a light bright Angel in her gate: For why no creature in the earth but she, Is like an Angell, Angell let her be. Feee. Her Feete (now draw I to conclusion) Are neat and litle to delight the eye, No tearme in all humane inuention, Or in the veine of sweet writ Poetrie Can ere be found, to giue her feet that grace, That beares her corporate Soule from place to place. And if by night she walke, the Marigold, That doth inclose the glorie of her eye, At her approch her beauty doth vnfold, And spreads her selfe in all her royaltie, Such vertue hath this Phoenix glassy shield, That Floures and Herbs at her faire sight do yeeld.
And if she grace the Walkes within the day, Flora doth spreade an Arras cloth of flowers, Before her do the prety Satires play, And make her banquets in their leauie Bowers: Head, Haire, Brow, Eyes, Cheeks▪ Chin and all, Lippes, Teeth, Tong, Neck, Brests, Belly are maiesticall. This Phoenix I do feare me will dcay, And from her ashes neuer will arise An other Bird her wings for to display, And her rich beauty for to equalize: The Arabian fiers are too dull and base, To make another spring within her place▪ Therefore dread Regent of these Elements, Pitie pooe Nature in her Art excelling, Giue thou an humble, are to my laments, That to thee haue a long true tale beene telling, Of her, who when  please the to behold, Her outward sight shall bewties pride vnfold. At these words Ioue stood as a man amazed, And Iunos loue-bred bewtie turnd to wight, Venus she blusht, and on dame Nature gazed. And Vesta she began to weepe outright: And litle Cupid poore boy▪ strucke in loue, With repetition of this earthly Doue. But at the last Ioue gan to rouse his spirit, And told dame Nature in her sweet discourse; Her womans Tong did run before her Wit,
Such a faire soule her selfe could neuer nurse, Nor in the vastie earth was euer liuing, Such beauty that all beauty was excelling. Nature was strucke with pale temeritie, To see the God of thunders lightning eyes; He shooke his knotty haire so wrathfully, As if he did the heauenly rout despise: Then downe vpon her knee dame Nature fals, And on the great gods name aloud she cals. Ioue thou shalt see my commndations, To be vnworthie and impartiall, To make of her an extallation, Whose beauty is deuine maiesticall; Looke on that painted picture there, behold The rich wrought Phoenix of Arabian gold. Ioues eyes were setled on her painted eyes; Ioue blushing smil'd▪ the picture smil'd againe: Ioue spoke to her, and in his heart did rise Loues amours, but the picture did disdain To loue the god, Ioue would haue stole a kisse, But Iuno being by, denyed him this. When all the rest beheld this counterfeit, They knew the substance was of rarer price: Some gaz'd vpon her face, on which did waite As messengers, her two celestiall eyes; Eyes wanting fire, did giue a lightning flame, How much more would her eyes mans sences tame?
Then all the Gods and Goddesses did decree, In humble maner to intreat of Ioue, And euery power vpon his bended knee, Shewd faithfull seruice in dame Natures loue, Intreating him to pacifie his Ire, And raise another Phoenix of new fire. Her picture from Ioues eyes hath banisht Hate, And Mildnesse plaind the furrowes of his brow, Her painted shape hath chastised debate, And now to pleasure them he makes a vow: Then thus Ioue spake, tis pittie she should die, And leaue no ofspring of her Progenie. Nature go hie thee, get thee Phoebus chaire, Cut through the skie, and leaue Arabia, Leaue that il working peece of fruitlesse ayre, Leaue me the plaines of white Brytania, These countries haue no fire to raise that flame, That to this Phoenix bird can yeeld a name. There is a country Clymat fam'd of old, That hath to name delight some Paphos Ile, Ouer the mountaine tops to trudge be bold, There let thy winged Horses rest awhile: Where in a vale like Ciparissus groue, Thou shalt behold a second Phoenix loue. A champion country full of fertill Plaines, Greene grassie Medowes, little prettie Hils, Aboundant pleasure in this place remaines,
And plenteous sweetes this heauenly clymat filles: Faire flowing bathes that issue from the rockes, Aboundant heards of beasts that come by flocks. High stately Caedars, sturdie bigge arm'd Okes, Great Poplers, and long trees of Libanon, Sweete smelling Firre that frankensence prouokes, And Pine apples from whence sweet iuyce doth come: The sommer-blooming Hauthorne; vnder this Faire Venus from Adonis stole a kisse. Fine Thickets and rough Brakes for sport and pleasure, Places to hunt the light-foote nimble Roe: These groues Diana did account her treasure, And in the cold shades, oftentimes did goe To lie her downe, faint, weary on the ground, Whilest that her Nimphs about her daunt a round. A quire of heauenly Angels tune their voyces, And counterfeit the Nightingale in singing, At which delight some pleasure she reioyces, And Plenty from her cell her gifts is bringing: Peares, Apples, Plums, and the red ripe Cherries, Sweet Strawberries with other daintie berries. Here haunt the Satyres and the Driades, The Hamadriades and pretie Elues, That in the groues with skipping many please, And runne along vpon the water shelues: Heare Mermaides sing, but with Vlysses eares, The country Gallants do disdaine their teares.
The Crocadile and hissing Adders sting, My not come neere this holy plot of ground, No Night worme in this continent may sing, Nor poison-spitting Serpent may be found: Here Milke and Hony like two riuers ran, As fruitefull as the land of Canaan. What shal I say? their Orchards spring with plentie, The Gardens smell like Floras paradice, Bringing increase from one to number twentie, As Lycorice and sweet Arabian spice: No place is found vnder bright heauens faire blisse, To beare the name of Paradise but this. Hard by a running streame or crystall fountaine, Wherein rich Orient pearle is often found, Enuiron'd with a high and steepie mountaine, A fertill soile and fruitful plot of ground, There shalt thou find true Honors louely Squire, That for this Phoenix keepes Prometheus fire. His bower wherein he lodgeth all the night, Is fram'd of Caedars and high loftie Pine, I made his house to chastice thence despight, And fram'd it like this heauenly roofe of mine: His name is Liberall honor, and his hart, Aymes at true faithfull seruice and desart. Looke on his face, and in his browes doth sit, Bloud and sweete Mercie hand in hand vnited, Bloud to his foes, a president most fit
For such as haue his gentle humour spited: His Haire is curl'd by nature mild and meeke, Hangs carelesse downe to shrowd a blushing cheeke. Giue him this Ointment to annoint his Head, This precious Balme to lay vnto his feet, These shall direct him to this Phoenix bed, Where on a high hill he this Bird shall meet: And of their Ashes by my doome shal rise, Another Phoenix her to qualize. This said the Gods and Goddesses did applaud, The Censure of this thundring Magistrate, And Nature gaue him euerlasting laud, And quickly in the dayes bright Coach she gate Downe to the earth, she's whirled through the ayre; Ioue ioyne these fires, thus Venus made her prayer. An Introduction to the Prayer. GVide thou great Guider of the Sunne and Moone, Thou elementall fauourer of the Night, My vndeserued wit, wit sprong too soone, To giue thy greatnesse euerie gracious right: Let Pen, Hand, Wit and vndeseruing tongue, Thy praise and honor sing in euerie song. In my poore prayer guide my Hand aright, Guide my dull Wit, guide all my dulled Senses, Let thy bright Taper giue me faithfull light,
And from thy Booke of life blot my offences: Then arm'd with thy protection and thy loue, Ile make my prayer for thy Turtle-doue. A Prayer made for the prosperitie of a siluer coloured Doue, applyed to the beauteous Phoenix. O Thou great maker of the firmament, That rid'st vpon the winged Cherubins, And on the glorious shining element, Hear'st the sad praiers of the Seraphins, That vnto thee continually sing Hymnes: Bow downe thy listning eares thou God of might, To him whose heart will praise thee day and night. Accept the humble Praiers of that soule, That now lies wallowing in the myre of Sinne, Thy mercie Lord doth all my powers controule, And searcheth reines and heart that are within: Therefore to thee Iehouah Ile begin: Lifting my head from my imprisoned graue, No mercie but thy mercie me can saue. The foule vntamed Lion still goes roring, Old hell-bread Sathan enemy to mankind, To leade me to his iawes that are deuouring, Wherein no Grace to humane fleshs assign'd,
But thou celestiall Father canst him bind: Tread on his head, tread Sinne and Sathan downe, And on thy seruants head set Mercies crowne. Thus in acceptance of thy glorious sight, I purge my deadly sinne in hope of grace, Thou art the Doore, the Lanthorne and the Light, To guide my sinfull feete from place to place, And now O Christ I bow before thy face: And for the siluer coloured earthly Doue, I make my earnest prayer for thy loue. Shrowde her ô Lord vnder thy shadowed wings, From the worlds enuious malice and deceit, That like the adder-poisoned serpent stings, And in her way layes a corrupted baite, Yet raise her God vnto thy mercies height: Guide her, ô guide her from pernitious foes, That many of thy creatures ouerthrowes. Wash her O Lord with Hysope and with Thime, And the white snow she shall excell in whitenesse, Purge her with mercie from all sinfull crime, And her soules glorie shall exceed in brightnesse, O let thy mercie grow vnto such ripenesse: Behold her, O behold her gratious King, That vnto thee sweet songs of praise will sing. And as thou leadst through the red coloured waues, The hoast of thy elected Israel, And from the wrath of Pharoe dids them saue,
Appointing them within that land to dwell, A chosen land, a land what did excell: So guide thy siluer Doue vnto that place, Where she Temptations enuie may outface. Increase thy gifts bestowed on thy Creature, And multiply thy blessings manifold, And as thou hast adorned her with nature, So with thy blessed eyes her eyes behold, That in them doth thy workmanship vnfold, Let her not wither Lord without increase, But blesse her with ioyes ofspring of sweet peace. Amen. Amen. To those of light beleefe. YOu gentle fauourers of excelling Muses, And gracers of all Learning and Desart, You whose Conceit the deepest worke peruses, Whose Iudgements still are gouerned by Art: Reade gently what you reade, this next conceit Fram'd of pure loue, abandoning deceit. And you whose dull Imagination, And blind conceited Error hath not knowne, Of Herbes and Trees true nomination, But thinke them fabulous that shall be showne: Learne more, search much, and surely you shall find, Plaine honest Truth and Knowledge comes behind. Then gently (gentle Reader) do thou fauour,
And with a gracious looke grace what is written, With smiling cheare peruse my homely labour, With Enuies poisoned spitefull looke not bitten: So shalt thou cause my willing thought to striue, To adde more Honey to my new made Hiue. A meeting Dialogue-wise betweene Na∣ture, the Phoenix, and the Turtle Doue. Nature. ALl haile faire Phoenix, whither art thou flying? Why in the hot Sunne dost thou spread thy wings? More pleasure shouldst thou take in cold shades lying, And for to bathe thy selfe in wholsome Springs, Where the woods feathered quier sweetely sings: Thy golden Wings and thy breasts beauteous Eie, Will fall away in Phoebus royaltie. Phoenix. O stay me not, I am no Phoenix I, And if I be that bird, I am defaced, Vpon the Arabian mountaines I must die, And neuer with a poore yong Turtle graced; Such operation in me is not placed: What is my Beautie but a painted wal, My golden spreading Feathers quickly fal. Nature. Why dost thou shead thy Feathers, kill thy Heart, Weep out thine Eyes, and staine thy golden Face? Why dost thou of the worlds woe take a part, And in relenting teares thy selfe disgrace? Ioyes mirthful Tower is thy dwelling place:
All Birdes for vertue and excelling beautie, Sing at thy reuerend feet in Loue aud Dutie. Phoenix. O how thou feed'st me with my Beauties praising! O how thy Praise sounds from a golden Toung! O how thy Toung my Vertues would be raising! And raising me thou dost corrupt thy song: Thou seest not Honie and Poison mixt among; Thou not'st my Beautie with a iealous looke, But dost not see how I do bayte my hooke. Nature. Tell me, ô tell me, for I am thy friend, I am Dame Nature that first gaue thee breath, That from Ioues glorious rich seate did descend, To set my Feete vpon this lumpish earth: What is the cause of thy sad sullen Mirth? Hast thou not Beauty, Vertue, Wit and Fauour: What other graces would'st thou craue of Nature? Poenix. What is my Beauty but a vading Flower? Wherein men reade their deep-conceiued Thrall, Alluring twentie Gallants in an hower, To be as seruile vassals at my Call? My Sunne-bred lookes their Senses do exhall: But (ô my griefe) where my faire Eyes would loue, Foule bleare-eyed Enuie doth my thoughts reprooue. What is my Vertue but a Tablitorie: Which if I did bestow would more increase? What is my Wit but an inhumane glorie: That to my kind deare friends would proffer peace?
But O vaine Bird, giue ore in silence, cease; Malice perchaunce doth hearken to thy words, That cuts thy threed of Loue with twentie swords. Nature. Tell me (O Mirrour) of our earthly time, Tell me sweete Phoenix glorie of mine age, Who blots thy Beauty with foule Enuies crime, And locks thee vp in fond Suspitions cage? Can any humane heart beare thee such rage? Daunt their proud stomacks with thy piercing Eye, Vnchaine Loues swetnesse at thy libertie. Phoenix. What is't to bath me in a wholesome Spring, Or wash me in a cleere, deepe, running Well, When I no vertue from the same do bring, Nor of the balmie water beare a smell? It better were for me mongst Crowes to dwell, Then flocke with Doues, whē Doues sit alwayes billing, And waste my wings of gold, my Beautie killing. Nature. Ile chaine foule Enuy to a brazen Gate, And place deepe Malice in a hollow Rocke, To some blacke desert Wood Ile banish Hate, And fond Suspition from thy sight Ile locke: These shall not stirre, let anie Porter knocke. Thou art but yong, fresh, greene, and must not passe, But catch the hot Sunne with thy steeled glasse. Phoenix. That Sunne shines not within this Continent, That with his warme rayes can my dead Bloud chearish, Grosse cloudie Vapours from this Aire is sent,
Not hot reflecting Beames my heart to nourish. O Beautie, I do feare me thou wilt perish; Then gentle Nature let me take my flight, But ere I passe, set Enuie out of sight. Nature. Ile coniure him, and raise him from his graue, And put vpon his head a punishment: Nature thy sportiue Pleasure meanes to saue; Ile send him to perpetuall banishment, Like to a totterd Furie ragd and rent: Ile baffle him, and blind his Iealous eye, That in thy actions Secrecie would prye. Phenix. Ile coniure him, Ile raise him from his Cell, Ile pull his Eyes from his conspiring head, Ile locke him in the place where he doth dwell; Ile starue him there, till the poore slaue be dead, That on the poisonous Adder oft hath fed: These threatnings on the Helhound I will lay, But the performance beares the greater sway. Nature. Stand by faire Phoenix, spread thy Wings of gold, And daunt the face of Heauen with thine Eye, Like Iunos bird thy Beautie do vnfold, And thou shalt triumph ore thine enemie: Then thou and I in Phoebus coach will flie, Where thou shalt see and tast a secret Fire, That will adde spreading life to thy Desire. Arise thou bleare-ey'd Enuie from thy bed, Thy bed of Snakie poison and corruption,
Vnmaske thy big-swole Cheekes with poyson red, For with thee I must trie Conclusion, And plague thee with the Worlds confusion. I charge thee by my Power to appeare, And by Celestiall warrant to draw neare. Poenix. O what a mistie Dampe breakes from the ground, Able it selfe to infect this noysome Aire: As if a caue of Toades themselues did wound, Or poysoned Dragons fell into dispaire, Hels damned sent with this may not compare, And in this foggie cloud there doth arise A damned Feend ore me to tyrannize. Nature. He shall not touch a Feather of thy wing, Or euer haue Authoritie and powr, As he hath had in his dayes secret prying, Ouer thy calmie Lookes to send a shower: Ile place thee now in secrecies sweet Bower, Where at thy will in sport and dallying, Spend out thy time in Amarous discoursing. Phoenix. Looke Nurce, looke Nature how the Villaine sweates, His big-swolne Eyes will fall vnto the ground, With fretting anguish he his blacke-breast beates, As if he would true harted minds confound: O keepe him backe, his sight my heart doth wound: O Enuie it is thou that mad'st me perish, For want of that true Fire my hart should nourish. Nature. But I will plague him for his wickednesse,
Enuie go packe thee to some forreine soyle, To some desertfull plaine or Wildernesse, Where sauage Monsters and wild beasts do toyle, And with inhumane Creatures keepe a coyle. Be gone I say, and neuer do returne, Till this round compast world with fire do burne. Phenix. What is he gone? is Enuie packt away? Then one fowle blot is mooued from his Throne, That my poore honest Thoughts did seeke to slay: Away fowle griefe, and ouer-heauie Mone, That do orecharge me with continuall grones. Will you not hence? then with dowue-falling teares, Ile drowne my selfe in ripenesse of my Yeares. Nture. Fie peeuish Bird, what art thou franticke mad? Wilt thou confound thy selfe with foolish Griefe? If there be cause or meanes for to be had, Thy Nurse and nourisher will find reliefe: Then tell me all thy Accidents in briefe; Haue I not banisht Enuy for thy sake? I greater things for thee ile vndertake. Phoenix. Enuie is gone and banisht from my sight, Banisht for euer comming any more: But in Arabia burnes another Light, A darke dimme Taper that I must adore, This barren Countrey makes me to deplore: It is so saplesse that the very Spring, Makes tender new-growne Plants be with'ring.
The noisome Aire is growne infectious, The very Springs for want of Moiture die, The glorious Sunne is here pestiferous, No heabes for Phisicke or sweet Surgerie, No balme to cure hearts inward maladie: No gift of Nature, she is here defaced, Heart-curing Balsamum here is not placed. Nature. Is this the summe and substance of thy woe? I this the Anker-hold vnto thy bote? Is this thy Sea of Griefe doth ouerflow? Is this the Riuer sets thy ship alote? Is this the Lesson thou hast learn'd by rote? And is this all? and is this plot of Ground The substance of the Theame doth thee confound? Phoenix. This is the Anker-hold, the Sea, the Riuer, The Lesson and the substance of my Song, This is the Rocke my Ship did seeke to shiuer, And in this ground with Adders was I stung, And in a lothsome pit was often flung: My Beautie and my Vertues captiuate, To Loue, dissembling Loue that I did hate. Nature. Cheare vp thy spirit Phoenix, prune thy wings, And double-gild thy Fethers for my newes; A Nightingale and not a Rauen sings, That from all blacke contention will excuse Thy heauy thoughts, and set them to peruse Another Clymat, where thou maist expresse, A plot of Paradice for worthinesse.
Ioue in diuine diuinesse of his Soule, That rides vpon his firie axaltree, That with his Mace doth humane flesh controule, When of mans deedes he makes a Registrie, Louing the good for singularitie: With a vail'd Count'nance and a gracious Smile, Did bid me plant my Bird in Paphos▪ Ile. Phenix. What ill diuining Planet did presage, My timelesse birth so timely brought to light? What fatal Comet did his wrath engage▪ To worke a harmelesse Bird such worlds despight, Wrapping my dayes blisse in blacke ables night? No Planet nor no Comet did conspire My downefall, but foule Fortunes wrathful ire. What did my Beautie moue her to Disdaine? Or did my▪ Vertues shadow all her Blisse? That she should place me in a desart Plaine, And send forth Enuie with a Iudas kisse, To sting me with a Scorpions poisoned hisse? From my first birth-right for to plant me heare, Where I haue alwaies fed on Griefe and Feare. Nature. Raile not gainst Fortunes sacred Deitie, In youth thy vertuous patience she hath tyred, From this base earth shee'le lift thee vp on hie, Where in Contents rich Chaiot thou shalt ride, And neuer with Impatience to abide: Fortune will glorie in thy great renowne, And on thy feathered head will set a crowne.
Phoenix. T'was time to come, for I was comfortlesse, And in my Youth haue bene Infortunate: This Ile of Paphos I do hope will blesse, And alter my halfe-rotten tottering state; My hearts Delight was almost ruinate. In this rich Ile a Turtle had his nest, And in a Wood of gold tooke vp his rest. Nature. Fly in this Chariot, and come sit by me, And we will leaue this ill corrupted Land, We'le take our course through the blew Azure skie, And set our feete on Paphos golden sand, There of that Turtle Doue we'le vnderstand: And visite him in those delightfull plaines, Where Peace conioyn'd with Plenty still remaines. Phonix. I come, I come, and now farewell that strond, Vpon whose craggie rockes my Ship was rent; Your ill beseeming follies made me fond, And in a vastie Cell I vp was pent, Where my fresh blooming Beauty I haue spent. O blame your selues ill nurtred cruell Swaines, That fild my scarlet Glorie full of Staines. Nature. Welcome immortall Bewtie, we will ride Ouer the Semi-circle of Europa, And bend our course where we will see the Tide, That partes the Continent of Affrica, Where the great Cham gouernes Tartaria: And when the starrie Curtaine vales the night, In Paphos sacred Ile we meane to light.
Phoenix. How glorious is this Chariot of the day, Where Phoebus in his crystall robes is set, And to poore passengers directs a way: O happie time since I with Nature met, My immelodious Discord I vnfret: And sing sweet Hymnes, burn Myrrhe & Frankensence, Honor that Isle that is my sure defence. Nature. Looke Phoenix ore the world as thou dost ride, And thou shalt see the pallaces of Kings, Great huge-built Cities where high States abide, Temples of Gods, and Altars with rich offrings, To which the Priests their sacrifices brings: Wonders past wonder, strange Pyramides, And the gold-gathering Strong of Euphrates. . O what rich pleasure dwelleth in this Land! Greene springing Medowes, high vpreared Hils, The white-fleest Ewe brought tame vnto the hand, Faire running Riuers that the Countrie fils, Sweet flowers that faire balmy Deaw distils, Great peopled Cities, whose earth-gracing show, Time is asham'd to touch or ouerthrow! Nature. Besilent gentle Phoenix▪ Ile repeate, Some of these Cities names that we descrie, And of their large foundation Ile intreate, Their Fonnder that first rear'd them vp on hie, Making a glorious Spectacle to each eie: Warres wald Defender and the Countries grace, Not battred yet with Times controlling Mace.
Alfred the father of faire Eleda,This Alfed first deuided England into Shires, being King of No∣thumbrs. Founded three goodly famous Monasteries, In this large Ile of sweete Britania, For to refresh the poore soules miseries, That were afflicted with calamities: One in the Towne surnamed Edlingsey, Which after ages called Athelney. The second House of that Deuotion, He did erect at worthy Winchester, A place well planted with Religion, Called in this age the new-builded Minster, Still kept in notable reparation:Alfred buried in the Cathe∣drall Church of VVinchester. And in this famous builded Monument, His bodie was interd when life was spent. The last not least surpassing all the rest, Was Oxfords honorable foundation,The Vniuersity of Oxford built by Alfred. Since when with Learnings glorie it is blest, Begun by the godly exhortation Of the Abbot Neotus direction: From whose rich womb pure Angell-like Diuinitie, Hath sprong to saue vs from Calamitie. Leyre the sonne of Baldud being admitted, To beare the burden of the British sway, A Prince with Natures glorie being fitted,This Sore is a Riur that run∣neth by Leice∣ster, called of some Brenber vvater. At what time Ioas raigned King of Iuda, To make his new got Fame to last for aye, By Sore he built the Towne of Caerleir, That to this day is called Leycester.
Belin that famous worthy Brytaine King,In this Citie were tree fa∣mous Churches one of S. Iulius the Martyr, the second of S. A∣ron: and the o∣ther the mother Church of all Demetia. That made the Townes of France to feare his frowne, And the whole Romish Legion to sing. And to record his gracious great renowne, Whose host of men their Townes were firing: Builded in Southwals height Caerlion, Or termed Arwiske Caerlegion. This glorious Citie was the onely Pride, In eldest age of all Demetia: Where many notable Monuments abide▪This Belin also buildd a nota∣ble Gate in Lon∣don now called Billings gate & Belins Castle. To grace the Countrey of Britania, That from Times memorie can neuer slide: Amphibulus was borne in this sweete place, Who taught S. Albon, Albon full of grace. King Lud surnam'd the great Lud-hurdibras, The sonne of Leil, builded the famous Towne Of Kaerkin, with a huge Tower of brasse,Lud, father t Baldud, a man well seen in the Sciences of A∣stronomie and Necromancie. Now called Canterburie of great renowne, Able to bide the raging Foes stout frowne: The Metropolitans seate where Learning sits, And chiefe of all our English Bishoprickes. This noble King builded faire Caerguent, Now cleped Winchester of worthie fame,This Baldud sonne of Lud-Hurdibras, made first the hot Baths at Caerbran, now called Bathe. And at Mount Paladour he built his Tent, That after ages Shaftsburie hath to name, His first foundation from King Leyls sonne came: About which building Prophet Aquila, Did prophesie in large Brytania.
King Leill a man of great religion,He also repai∣red the Citie of Caer lon, now called Chester. That made his bordring neighbours for to yeeld, And on their knees to pleade Submission, Being eldest sonne to Brute surnam'd Greeneshield, The Cittie of Caerleits he did build, Now called Carleyle by corruption, And Time that leades things to confusion. Cambridge a famous Vniuersitie,The Citie of Cambridge built in the dayes of Gur∣guntius the son of Beline, by one Cantaber a Spaniard, bro∣ther to Partho∣lony, or as some write by Gor∣bonian. The Nurse of Learning and Experience, The Chearisher of true Diuinitie, That for the Soules good wisedome doth commence, Confuting Vice, and driuing Error thence: Was built by Sigisbert: but wrought effectually By Kings and Lords of famous memorie. Ebranke the sonne of stout Mempritius, Hauing in matrimoniall copulation, Twentie one wiues in largeRithmi gra∣tia. Britanicus, And thirtie daughters by iust computation, And twentie sonnes of estimation, Builded Caerbranke famous for the name, Now called Englands Yorke a place of Fame. He in Albania large and populous, Now termed Scotland of the Scottish Sect, Because his deedes should still be counted famous, The Castle of Maidens there he did erect, And to good purpose did this worke effect: But iron-eating Time the Truth doth staine, For Edingburgh the Citie doth remaine.
And in that Maiden Castle he did frame, To grace the building to the outward eie, Nine Images of stone plac'd in the same, Which since haue stay'd times perpetuetie, In the true forme of worke-mans excellencie: Not any whit diminisht, but as pefect As in the firstdayes minute they were set. Phoenix. Nature I muse at your description, To see how Time that old rust-cankard wretch, Honors forgetfull Friend, Cities confusion, That in all Monuments hath made a Breach, To auncient names brought alteration: And yet at this day snch a place remaines, That all Times honor past with honor staines. Nature. Those carued old-cut stonie Images, That beautifie the Princes stately Towers, That graces with their grace the Pallaces, And high imperiall Emperizing bowers, Were neuer raz'd by Times controlling houres: Nine worthie women almost equiualent, With those nine worthie men so valient. Three of the nine were Iewes, and three were Gentiles, Three Christians, Honors honorable Sexe, That from their foes did often beare the spoiles, And did their proud controlling neighbours vexe, Which to their name did Noblenesse annexe, An Embleame for true borne Gentilitie, To imitate their deedes in chiualrie.
The first Minerua a right worthie Pagon, That many manlike battailes manly fought, She first deuiz'd Artillerie of yron, And Armour for our backes she first found out, Putting our lies deare hazard from some doubt: She gouerned the Libians, and got Victories, With Honor by the lakeLacus Mi∣ae. Tritonides. Our maine pitcht Battels she first ordered, Setting a Forme downe to this following Age, The orders of Incamping she first registred, And taught the lawes of Armes in equipage, To after time her skill she did engage: Apollo was her deare begotten sonne, In Abrahams time she liu'd till life was donne. Semiramis Queene of Assiria, Was second worthie of this worlds great wonder, She conquered large Aethiopia, And brought the Necke of that stout Nation vnder, Wasting the Countries of rich India: Her dayes of Honor and of Regiment, Was in the time of Isaacks gouernment. The third and chiefest for Audaciousnesse, And Enterprises that she tooke in hand, Was Tomyris full of true Noblenesse, Queene of the North (as I do vnderstand,) From forth her eyes she lightned Honors Brand, And brandished a Sword, a sword of Fame, That to her weake Sexe yeelded Hectors name.
When she receiued newes her sonne was dead, The Hope and Vnderprop of Scithia, She put on Armour, and encountered The Monarch Cyrus King of Persia, And Gouernor of rich Getulia: Slue him in sight her Fame for to renew, Two hundred thousand Souldiers ouerthrew. Amongst the Hebrew women we commend, Iahel the Kenite for the first in bountie, Whose vncomprehensible valour in the end, Did free and set at large her captiu'd Countrie, Oppressed with tyrannicall Miseri: From dangers imminent of irie Warre, By killing hand to hand her foe great Sisar. Debora an Hebrew worthie the second place, She fortie yeares did gouerne Israel, In peace preseru'd her Land, her land of Grace, Where honest sportiue Mirth did alwaies dwell: Her holy holinesse no tongue can tell, Nations astonied at her happinesse, Did grieue to loose her Wisedomes worthinesse. Iudith the third that redeliuered, The strong besieged Citie of Bethulia, And when the prowd Foe she had vanquished, And ouercame hot-spur'd Assiria, Bringing in triumph Holofernes head, She got a great and greater Victorie, Then thousand Souldiers in their maiestie.
The first of Christians was faire Maud the Countesse, Countesse of Aniow, daughter to a King▪ Englands first Henry: Almaines Empresse, Heire in dubitate, and her Fathers ofspring, She titles to the English Crowne did bring: She ne're desisted from the warlike field, Till that vsurped Stephen of Blois did yeeld, And condiscended to her sonnes deare right, That war-like Maude had reobtain'd by might. The second was Elizabeth of Aragon, Queene and wife to honorable Ferdinando: She stoutly fought for propagation Of Christian Faith; brought to subuersion, The forsaken infidels of Granado, Reducing that poud prouince all in one, To follow Christs vnspotted true Religion. The last was Iohane of Naples true borne Queene, Sister to Ladislaus King of Hungarie, A woman that defended (as twas seene,) Her countries great and gracious libertie, By force of laudable Armes and Chiualrie, Against the Sarasins inuasion, And proud hot warres of princely Aragon. Thus haue I in the honor of their worth, Laid ope their Progenie, their Deedes, their Armes, Teir ofspring, and their honorable Birth, That is a Lanthorne lightning their true Fames, Which Truth can neuer burne in Enuies flames:
Worthie of wonder are these three times three, Folded in brazen Leaues of memorie. Windsor a Castle of exceeding strength, First built by Aruiragus Brytaines King, But finished by Arthur at the length, Of whose rare deedes our Chronicles do ring, And Poets in their verse his praise do sing: For his Round-table and his war-like Fights, Whose valiantnesse the coward Mind affrights. This Brytish King in warres a Conquerer, And wondrous happie in his Victories, Was a companion of this noble Order, And with his person grac'd these Dignities, Great dignities of high exceeding Valour: For he himselfe the selfe-same Honor tooke, That all his following States did euer brooke. This Paragon whose name our time affrights, At Windsor Castle dubbed in one day, One hundred and iust fortie valiant Knights, With his keene trustie Sword, and onely stay, (Cald Dridwin) that his Loue did ouersway: And with that Sword the very day before, He slue as many Saxon fos or more. But English Edward third of Memorie, In blessed and religious zeale of Loue, Built vp a Colledge of exceeding glory, That his kind care to England did approue,
This Colledge doth this Castle beautifie: The Honor of the place is held so deare, That many famous Kings are buried thre. But one rare thing exceeding admirable, That to this day is held in great renowne, And to all Forreiners is mmorable, The Name of which makes Englands foes to frowne, And puls the pride of forreine Nations downe, Knights of the Garter and Saint Georges Crosse, Betok'ning to the Foe a bloudie losse. Here followeth the Birth, Life and Death of honourable Arthur King of Brittaine. To the courteous Reader. COurteous Reader, hauing spoken of the first foundaton of that yet renowned castle of Windsor by Aruiragus king of Britain, & finished by that succeeding prince of worthy memory famous king Arthur; I thought good (being intrea∣ted by some of my honourable-minded Friends, not to let slip so good and fit an occasion, by reason that there yet remaines in this doubtfull age of opinions, a controuersie of that esteemed Prince of Brittaine) to write not according to ages obliuiō, but directed onely by our late Historiographers of England, who no doubt haue taken great paines in the searching foorth of the truth of that first Christian Worthie: and wheras (I know not
directed by what blindnes) there haue bene some Writers (as I thinke enemies to truth) that in their erronious censures haue thought no such mā euer to be liuing; How fabulous that should seeme to be, I leaue to the iudgement of the best readrs, who know for certaine, that that neuer dead Prince of memory, is more beholding to the French, the Romane, the Scot, the Ita∣lian, yea to the Greekes themselues, then to his owne Country∣men, who haue fully and wholly set foorth his fame and liuely∣hood: then how shamelesse is it for some of vs, to let slip the truth of this Monarch? And for more confirmatiō of the truth, looke but in the Abbey of Westminster at Saint Edwards shrine, there shalt thou see the print of his royal Seale in red wax clo∣sed in Berrill, with this inscription, Patricius Arthurus Gallie, Germaniae, Daciae Imperator, At Douer likewise you may see Sir Gawins skull and Cradocks mantle: At Winchester, a Citie well knowne in England, his famous round Table, with many other notable monuments too long to rehearse: Besides I my selfe haue seen imprinted, a french Pamphlet of the armes of king Arthur, and his renowmed valiant Knights, set in co∣lours by the Heraulds of France: which charge of impression would haue been too great, otherwise I had inserted them or∣derly in his Life and Actions: but (gentle Reader) take this my paines gratefully, and I shal hereafter more willingly striue to employ my simple wit to thy better gratulation; I haue here set downe (turned from French prose into English meeter) the words of the Herald vnder the arms of that worthy Brittaine. King Arthur in his warlike Shield did beare Thirteene rich Crownes of purified gold▪ He was a valiant noble Conquerer, As ancient Memorie hath truly told: His great Round-table was in Britanie▪ Where chosen Knights did do their homage yearely.
The strange Birth, honorable Coro∣nation, and most vnhappie Death of famous Arthur King of Bry∣taine. OF noble Arthurs birth, of Arthurs fall, Of Arthurs solemne Coronation, Of Arthurs famous deedes Heroyicall, Of Arthurs battels and inuasion, And that high minded worthie Brytish King, Shall my wits memorie be deifying. In the last time of ter surnam'd Pendragon▪ So called for his wittie pollicies, Being a King of estimation, In famous Brytaine mongst his owne allies, There was a mightie Duke that gouern'd Cornwaile, That held long warr, and did this King assaile. This Duke was nam'd the Duke of Tintagil: After these hot bred warres were come to end, He soiourn'd at a place cald Terrabil, From whence Pendragon for this Duke did send, And being wounded sore with Cupids sting, Charg'd him his Wife vnto the Court to bring. His Wife a passing Ladie, louely, wife, Chaste to her husbands cleare vnspotted bed, Whose honor-bearing Fame none could supprize,
But Vesta-like her little time she led: Igrene her name on whose vnequall beautie Pendragon doted, led by humane folly. At length e broke his mind vnto a Lord, A trustie Councellour and noble Friend, That soone vnto his minds griefe did accord, And his Kings louing loue-thoughts did commend, Telling Pendragon this should be his best, To tell the Dutchesse of his sweete request. But she a Woman, sterne, inexorable, Willing fond Lusts inchauntments to resist, All his tongues smoothing words not penetrable, In her chaste bosomes Gate could not insist, But straight she told her Husband how she sped, Lest that his grace should be dishonoured. And counseld him to passe away in haste, That Nights darke duskie mantle might ore shade, Their flying bodies, least at last they taste, More miserie then Time did ere inuade, " For Lust is such a hot inflamed thing, " It gouerneth mans senses, rules a King. And as the Duchesse spake, the Duke departed, That neighter Vter nor his Councell knew, How his deepe bosomesCupid. Lord the Dutchesse thwarted, But marke the story well what did ensue: Soone as the King perceiued their intent, Intemperate Rage made him impatient.
Away with Musicke for your strings do iarre, Your sound is full of Discords, harsh and ill, Your Diapazon, makes a humming warre Within mine eares, and doth my sences fill With imlodious mourning; She is gone That rul'd your selues and Instruments alone. Away fond riming Ouid, lest thou write Of Prognes murther, or Lucreti rape, Of Igrens iouney taken in the night, That in the blacke gloom'd silence did escape: O could no Dogge haue bark'd, no Cocke haue crow'd▪ That might her passage to the King haue show'd. No mirth pleasde Vter, but grimme Melancholy Haunted his heeles, and when he sate to rest, He pondred in his mind Igrenas beautie, Of whom his care-craz'd head was full possest: Nothing was now contentiue to his mind, But Igrenes name, Igrene to him vnkind. At last his noble Peeres with pitie mou'd, To see the Kings sodaine perplexitie, With a great care that their Liege Emperour lou'd, For to allay his great extremitie, Did counsell him to send for Garloyes wife, As he would answer it vpon his life. Then presently a Messenger was sent, To tell the Duke of his wifes secret folly: This was the substance of his whole intent,
To bring his wife to Court immediatly: Or within threescore dayes he did protest, To fetch him thither to his litle rest. Which when the Duke had warning, straight he furnish' Two Castles with wel-fenc'd artillerie, With vitailes and with men he garnish'd, His strongest Holds for such an enemie: And in the one he put his hearts-deare Treasure, Faire Igrene that he loued out of measure, That Castle which the Duke himselfe did hold, Had many Posternes out and issues thence, In which to trust his life he might be bold, And safely the wares Furie to commence: But after-telling time did wonders woke, That Foxes in their holes can neuer luke. Then in all haste came Vter with his hoast, Pitching his rich pauilions on the ground, Of his aspiring mind he did not boast, For Loue and Anger did his thoughts confound, Hot warre was made on both sides, people saine, And many Death-doore-knocking Soules complaine. Loue and minds anguish so perplext the King, For Igrene that incompaable Dame, That Cupids sicknesse pearc'd him with a sting, And his warres lowd Alarums ouercame, Venus intreated Mars awhile to stay, And make this time a sporting Holiday.
Then came sir Vlis a most noble Knight, And askt his king the cause of his disease, Being willing in a subiects gracious right, Vt  mind in heart to please: Ah said the Kng, Igrene doth captiuate My Heart, and makes my Seses subiugate. Courage my gracious Liege▪ I will go find That true diuining prophet of our Nation, Mrlin the wise that shall content your mind, And be a Moderator in this action: His learning, wisedome, and vnseene experienc, Shall quickly giue a Salue for loues ofence, So Vlius at the length from him departed, Aking for Merlin as he past the way, Who by great fortunes chance sir Vlius thwarted, As he went by in beggers base aray: Demanding of the Knight in basenesse meeke, Who was the man he went so farre to seeke? Vlius amazed at his base attire, old him it was presumption to demaund The name of him for whom he did enquire, And therefore would not yeeld to his command: Alas said Merlin I do plainly see, Merlin you seeke, that Merlin I am he. And if the King will but fulfill my hest, And will reward my true deseruing heart, In his loues agonies he shal be blest,
So that he follow what I shall impart, Vpon my Knighthood he will honor thee, With fauour & rewards most royally. Then Vlfius glad departed in all hast, And rode amaine to king Pendragons sight, Telling his Grace Merlin he me at last, That like a Lampe will giue his Louelaies light. Where is the man? I wisht for him before. See where he stands my Liege at yonder doore. When Vter saw the man, a sudden ioy, And vncompre'nded gladnesse fid his hart: With kind embracements met him on the way, And to him gan his secrets to impart. Leaue off, quoth Merlin, I do know your mind, The faire-fac'd Lady Igrene is vnkind. But if your Maiesty will here protest, And sweare as you are lawfull King annointed, To do my will, nothing shall you molest, But follow my directions being appointed. I sweare quoth Vter by the Euangelists, He dyes for me that once thy will resists. Sir, said the Prophet Merline, this I craue, That shall betoken well what ere betide, The first faire sportiue Night that you shall haue, Lying safely nuzled by faire Igrenes side, You shall beget a sonne whose very Name, In after-stealing Time his foes shall tame.
That child being borne your Grace must giue to me, For to be nourished at my appointment, That shal redound much to his maiestie, And to your Gaces gracious good intent: That shall be done: (quoth Merlin) let's away▪ For you shall sleepe with Igrene ere't be day. And as Ioue stole to faire Almens bed, I counterfeiting great Amphytrio, By the same lust-directed line being led, To Igrenes louely chamber must you go: You shall be like the Duke her husbands greatnesse, And in his place possesse her Husbands sweetnesse▪ And you my noble Lord sit Vlius, Shall be uch like sir Brustias a faire Knight, And I will counterfeit the good Iordanus, And thus weele passe together in the night, But see you question not, say you are diseased, And hie to bed there shall your heart be pleased. But on the morow do not rise my Liege, Vnill I come to councell for the best, For ten miles off you know doth lie the Siege, That will not turne these night-sports to a iest▪ Pendragon plas'd hasted for to embrace, The sweet'st got pray that euer King did chase. Soone as the Duke of Tintagill did perceiue, That Vter left alone his royall armie, He issued from his Castle to bereaue,
The souldiers of their liues by pollicie: But see his fortune, by that wily traine, That he had laid for others he was slaine. The subtill-lust directed King went on, Maskt in a strange deuised new found shape, To simple-minded Igrene vnlike Pendragon, And three long houres lay in his louers lap: There he begat the christian King of Kings, Whose fame Caister Swannes in pleasure sings. Assoone as day-betok'ning Phoebus Chariot, Had crost his sisters waggon in the skie, Merlin in haste to Vters chamber got, Bidding good morrow to his Maiestie: And told him vnrecalled Time did stay, To haste him from his pleasure thence away. Vter amaz'd with Igrene in his armes, Wisht that the Prophet had no vse of tongue, Whose dolefull sound breath'd forth these harsh Alarmes, And like the night-Crow craokt a deadly song▪ Ah what a hell of griefe t'was to depart, And leaue the new-got Treasure of his heart. Then by the lawne-like Hand he tooke his louer, Being warm'd with blood of a dissembling Husband, Desire in her cheekes she could not smother, And her Loue-dazeling eye none could withstand: He kist her twice or thrice and bad adu, As willing his nights pleasure to renue:
But when the late betrayed Lady knew, How that her true betrothed Lord was slaine, Ere that nights reuelling did first ensue, In secret to her selfe she wept amaine: Amaz'd and maruelling who that should be, That rob'd her husband of his treasurie. And to her selfe she gan for to relate, The iniuries of her vnspotted life, And in her mind she liu'd disconsolate, Banning her base-bad Fortune being a wife; Wishing for euer she had liu'd a maide, Rather then her chast thoughts should be betraid. The noble Councell that attended Vter, Began with grauitie for to deuise, That (where their King had doted much vpon her) Her beautie his young thoughts to equalize, To knit them both in Hymens sacred right, And then in lawfull wie to ast delight. This motion made vnto their Soueraigne, Of a warme luse stomacke youthfull bloud, Thought it a heauen such a Saint to gaine, That would reuiue his spirits, do him good: And gaue consent to haue her honoured, With mariage Rites, the which were soone performed. Halfe a yeare after as the King and Queene, Then growing great with child a bed were lying, The Curtaines drawne vnwilling to be seene:
This pollicie the King himselfe deuising: Asking whose child it was that she did beare, Speake gentle Igren tell me without feare, The Qeene amazed at this question, Being fully wrapt in pale timiditie, Knew not to answer this sad action, Because she fully knew her innocencie: He vrg'd her still, at length she waxed bold, And stoutly to the King the truth she told. With that he kist his Queene that was beguil'd, And did recomfort her being halfe forlorne, Telling t'was he that did beget the child, The child that from her faire wombe should be borne: With that a sudden ioy did repossesse Her pensiue hart, whome Fortune late did blesse. Then Merlin (that did alwaies loue the King, As bearing chiefe affiance to his countrey) Sought to prouide for the childs nourishing, Therein to shew his well disposed dutie. As thou decreest said Vter, must it be, My deare Sonnes fortunes Ile commit to thee. Well said the Prophet, I do know a Lord, A faithfull passing tru disposed man, That to your Graces pleasure will accord, And in your seruice do the best he can: Commit your child vnto his custodie, A man renoun'd in famous Britany.
His name Sir Hector: send a Messenger, To will him come vnto the Court with speede, And that your Maisti must needes conferre, Of matters helpefull in a Princes neede. When he is come your Grace may certifie, You'le put your sonne & heire to his deliuerie. And when that Fortunes child kind Fortunes heire, (For so the Destinies prognosticae) Shll be brought foorth into the open aire, That of faire Igrene lately was be gate: At yonder piuie Posterne being vnchristened, You must deliuer it me to be baptized. As Merlin had deuised, so t'was done: For all the Court to him did yeeld obysance: And now Sir Hector to the King is come, And to Pendragon made his deare affiance, Wishing his Wife might nourish that bright sonne, Whose Mornings glorie was not yet begunne. Then when the louely Queene was soone deliuered, Of that rich bearing Burthen to her ioy, The King himselfe in person hath commaunded, Two Ladies and two Knights to beare the boy▪ Bound vp in cloth of gold being rich of State, And giue it to the pooreman at the gate, So Merlin had the Prince at his disposing, Committing it to Hectors faithfull wife: Now nothing wanted but the sweete baptizing.
To grace the Prince of Princes all his life: A holy reuerent Man ind'de with fame, Arthur of Britaine cald the Princes name. After the royall Solemnation, Of that blacke mournfull weping funerall, Of Vter that we name the great Pendragon, By subtill practise brought vnto his fall: The sixteenth yeare of his victorious raigne, By poison was this braue Pendragon slaine. His body vnto Stone-heng being brought, Hard by his brother Aurlius is he laid, In a faire Monument then richly wrought, Dead is the King whose life his foes dismaid, But from his loyues he left a sonne behind, The right Idea of his fathers mind. Great Arthur whom we call the Britaines King, A man renown'd for famous victories, Saxons and Pictes to homage he did bring,. As you may read in auncient histories: Our later Chronicles do testifie, King Arthurs noble mind in Chiualrie. Twelue noble battels did King Arthur fight, Against the Saxons men of hardie strength, And in the battels put them still to flight, Bringing them in subiection at the length: He neuer stroue to driue them quit away▪ But stragling here and there he let them tay▪
In Southry, Kent, and Norfolke did they dwell, Still owing homage to king Arthures greatnesse, Whose puissance their pride did alwaies quell, Yet did he temper rigour with his meeknesse: And like a Lion scorn'd to touch the Lambe, Where they submissiue-like vnto him came, Against the Pictes he held continuall warre, The which vnto the Saxons were allide, And with the subtill Scot did alwaies iarre, Who neuer true to Arthur would abide: But (sconing his adancement to the Crowne) Did thinke by force to pull his greatnesse downe. The chiefest cause of this hot mortall strife, That mou'd these Kings to be dissentious, Was that the King of Pictes had tane to wife The ldest sister of Aureliu, And Cornon king of Scots had married The youngest sister to his Princely bed▪ Wherefore they thought the Brytish Regiment, Should haue descended to the lawfull heires Of Anna, wife to both in gouernment, Aud he as King to rule their great affaires: And do infere king Arthures barstardie, And vniust claime to that high dignitie. And presently they do dispatch i hast, Ambassadours to famous Brytanie, Of their great Peeres for to demaund at last,
The kingdomes Crowne and kingdomes Royaltie: Who scorning for to heare a stranger nam'd, Crowned king Arthur, whom the world hath fam'd. The Coronation of King Arthur, and the Solemnitie thereof: the proud message of the Romanes, and the whole resolution of King Arthur and his Nobles. THe appointed time and great Solemnitie, Approched of king Arthurs Coronation, To which high states of mightie Dignitie, Assembled at the Citie of Caerlean, In Caesars time cal'd Vrbs Legionum: A Title dubtlesse bring some import, Where many famous Brytaines did resort. To grace king Arthur whom the Britaines loued▪ Came thee Arch bishops Englands chiefe renowne, Both London, Yorke▪ and Dubright Hnor moued, On Arthurs head to set the British Crowne, That after puld the pride of Nations downe: Vnto the Pallace of this  King▪ They were conuay'd   born Fame did spring. Dubright (because the Court at that time lay Within the copase of hi ) In his owne pson o thi Roall day, Richly to furish him he did , His loue vnto his King he did expresse,
And at his hands the King was dignified, When Aue Caesar lowd the people cride. This happie Coronation being eded, The King was brought in sumptuous royaltie, With all the peoples harts being befriended, To the Cathedrall church of that me See, Being the Metropoliticall in nobilitie, With lowd exclaiing ioy of peoples voyce, That God might blesse their Land for such a choice▪ On either hand did two Archbishops ride, Supporting Arthur of Britaia, And soure Kings before him did abide, Angisell King of stout Albania, And Cadual King of Venedoci, Cador of Cornewaile mongst these Princes past▪ And Sater of Demetia was the last. These oure attired in ich ornaments, Foure golden Sword before the King did beare, Betokening foure royall Gouernments, And foure true Noble harts not dreading feare, That Enuie from their  can neuer teare: Before them play -tun'd melodie, That birds did sing to make it heauenly. King Arthurs Queene vnto the Church was brought▪ With many noble Peer being conducted: Her Armes and Titles royally were wrought, And to her noble Fame were ganished▪
That Inamie had neare diminished: Foure Queenes before her bore foure siluer Doues, Expressing their true Faith and husbands Loues. To braue King Arthur on this soleme feast, This day of high vnspeakeable dignitie, Came foure graue discreet persons of the best, From Romes Lieutenant, proud in Maiestie, Carying in token of their Embassage, Greene Oliue boughs, and their deare Lieges message▪ The Epistle of Lucius Tiberius the Romane Lieutenant, to Arthur King of Britanie. LVcius Tiberius, Romes great gouernour, To Arthur King of large Britania▪ As he deserueth fauour a our hands: Rome and the Romane Senators do wonder▪ And I my selfe exceedingly do muse, To thinke of thy audacious haughtie mind, And thy tyrannicall dealing to our State: Hote firie Anger boyleth in my breast, And I am mou'd with honour of the cause, For to reuenge thy Iniuries to Rome: And that like one or'proud of his estate, Refusest to acknowledge her thy head, Neither regardest speedily to redresse, Thy base and blind obliuious ouersight, And uniust dealing to offend the Senate▪
Vnto whose high imperiall Dignitie, Vlesse Forgetfulnesse do bleare thine eyes, Thou knowst the whole huge Circle of the world, Are made Contributorie and owe vs homage. The tribute that the Britaines ought to pay, The which the Senate did demaund of thee, Being due vnto the Romaine Emperie: For that braue Iulius Caesar had enioy'd, And many worthy Romanes many yeares, Thou in contempt of vs and our Estate, Our honorable Estate and dignitie, Presum'st iniuriously for to detaine: The consines of wel-seated Gallia, The Prouinces of Sauoy and Daulphine, With hot-stam'd fierie warre hast thou subdude, And gotten in thy large possession; The Ilands of the bordring Ocean, The Kings whereof so long as we enioy'd them, Payd tribute to our Noble auncestors. The Senate highly mou'd with thy presumption, Determine for to redemaund amends, And restitution for thy open wrongs: I therefore from the noble Snatours, Commaund thee on thy true Allegiance, To Rome, to them, to me, and our Estate, That in the midst of August next ensuing, Thou do repaire to Rome, there for to answer, Before the worthie Senate and the Lords Thy Trespasse; and abide arbitrment, Such as by them shall there be ordred, And iustic shall impose vpon thy head:
Which thing if thou presumptuously refuse, I will forthwith inuade thy Territories, Wast thy whole Countrey, burne thy Townes and Cities; And what so ere thy rashnesse hath detain'd, From Rome or from the Romaine Emperie, I will by dint of sword subdue againe. Thus arm'd with hopefull Resolution, Weele stay thy answer of submission. Lu. Tib. Cador the Duke of Cornewaile his Oration to the King. REnowmed Arthur and thrice-worthie Britaine: O how a liuely bloud doth fill my veines, At this proud message of the hawtie Romaines, I hitherto my Lord haue bene in feare, Lest that the worthy Britaines with much ease, And long continuall, peace and quietnesse, Should grow to too much slouth and cowardize, And lose that honorable Reputation, Of Chiualrie and Martiall discipline: Wherein (right Noble King) we haue bene counted, For to surmount all Nations of the world. For where the vse of Armes is not esteem'd, But buried in Obliuions loathsome caue, And want on dallying held in aestimate, It cannot chuse but pale-fac'd Cowardize, Must dimme and cleane deface all worthy Vertue▪ Fiue yeares haue fully runne their monthly course,
Sine  pu off our aour from our backes, Or heard the Trumpets clang or in our eares, Or marct in triumph with the ratling Drum, Being uzzeled in essmnate delights, Gd wiling that our names should not be blotted, ith the oule staine of beastly sluggardi, Hth stirred vp the proud insulting Romanes, To wht our dull edg'd swords not now in vse, To ut their heads off in this rightfull cause, And scoure our rustie Armour long laid vp, To buckle with so proud an enemie, Therefore great Arthur in thy greatnesse raise Thy colours vp, for to vpreare thy praise. Ca. Cor. The Oration of King Arthur to his Lordes and Followers. MY Fellowes and my deare Companions, th in the aduerse chances of our age, And prosperous successefull happinesse, Whose true vnspeakable fidelities, In giuing counsell touching warres abroad, And home-bred mutinies amongst our selues, With good successefulnesse haue I perceau'd, In your deepe wisedomes and your gitie. Affoord me now your honorable , Wisely foreseeing what you thinke conuenient, Touching the proud command'ment sent from Rome, A thing at first carefully deliberated, Is in the end most easily tollerated:
We therefore shall with easier burden brooke, The hawtie message of Tiberius Lucius, If mongst our selues in wisedome we conferre, How and which way to answer his demaund, And surely (noble Followers) I suppose, We haue no cause to feare their forreine braues, For that vpon a most vniust request, He seekes to haue a tribute paid from Britaine, Because forsooth in Iulius Caesars time, Through iarres and discords of the ancient Brytaine, The tribute hath beene due and payable: For when our countrie was at full possest, With ciuill garboiles and domesticke brawles, Their Caesar did ariue wihin this land, And with this armed souldiers full of force, Brought in subiection that vnquiet Nation, By this alleadgance they vniustly craue, Tribute and satisfaction at our hands, For nothing that is got by violence, May iustly be possest by violence. Sith therefore he presumeth to demaund, A thing being most vnlawfull at our hands, By the same reason let vs demaund of him, Tribute at Rome mauger their Romish power, And he that is the mightier in force, Let him possesse the honor of the tribute, For if his allegations and demaunds, Be forcible and worthie to be kept, Because their Caesar and some Romane Princes, Haue sometimes conquered Brytania, By the like reason I do thinke that Rome,
Ought to pay tribute and to do vs homage, Because my Predecessors conquered it: Bellin the noble King of Brytanie, With his braue brother Brennus warlike ayde, Being then accounted Sauoies noble Duke, Razed the wals of Rome, and set his Standard With victorie vpon the Citie gates, And in the middle of their Market place, Hung vp twentie of their chiefest Noblemen. And Constantine the sonne of Helena, And Maximinianus my neere Couins, Wre both inthroniz'din the Imperiall seate, And gouernment of Romes great Emperie▪ As touching Fraunce and other Ilands there, We neede not answer their out-brauing termes: For they refused to defend their owne, When we by force redeem'd them from their hands. Then counsell me thrise-worthy Brytaine Peeres, Abandoning base cowardize and feares. K. Arthur. The Answer of Howell King of litle Brytaine. THough all your wisedomes and your grauities, Handmaides to Counsell and Nobilitie, Should be engraued in one golden leafe, More to the purpose could not you inferre, Then thy most graue and exquisite Oration, They eloquent and Tully-like aduise
Hath furnisht vs with such experiment, Whereby we ought incessantly to praise, In you the wisedome of a constant man: For if with all post expedition, You will prepare a voyage vnto Rome, That doh expect our haste and royall comming▪ According to the reasons you alleage, I doubt not but that faire Victoria, Will sit in triumph on our conquering Helmes, To fright the mindes of Romish aduersaries, Sith we defend our auncient libertie, Disdaining for to beare a seruile yoke, Which to this day the Britaines do maintaine: Let vs go chearefully and demaund of them, With Iustice what vniustly they demaund: For he that doth deface anothers right, And thinkes vniustly for to dispossesse, And take from him his owne inheritance Deseruedly, and with a worthy meanes, Not violating large and hostile Armes, May he be put from that which is his owne, By him to whom the wrong is offred. Seeing therefore that the Romanes would vsurpe, The royall dignitie of worthy Britaine, Due to your honorable auncestors, I doubt not (noble King) but weele regaine, That which your Predecessors haue possest, Euen in the middle of their proudest Citie, If we may come to buckle with our foes. This is the conflict that true hearted Britaines, So long haue wisht to happen to our age.
These be the prophesies of wise Sibilla, Long time agoe, plainly and truly told, And now at length fulfilled to our ioy, That of the third race of the worthie Britaines▪ There should be borne a Prince to repossesse, The Romish Empire and their Dignitie: For two of these the prophesie is past, In Belin and that worthie Constantine, Who ouercame, and gaue the Armes of Rome: Now haue we none but you my gracious Liege▪ The third and last, not least in all our eyes, To whom this high Exploit is promised: Make haste therefore most royall Soueraigne, For to receiue that which our God will giue, Hasten for to subdue their willing minds, Which profer vp their honor to your hands, Hasten deare Liege for to aduance vs all, That willingly will spend our liues and lands, For the aduancement of our libertie. And to achieue this Labour worthie King, Ten thousand armed souldiers will I bring. Ho. K. of Brit. Angusel King of Albania his Answere to the King. SInce first I heard my Soueraigne speake his mind, Ful fraught with Eloquēce and learned Counsel, A sodaine ioy did so possesse my soule, As that in words I cannot vtter forth
The explanation of my willing thoughts: In all our Victories and Conquests wonne, Subduing many Regions, many Kings, Nothing at all in honour haue we gain'd, If that we suffer the proud-minded Romanes, And hautie Germaines to vsurpe vpon vs, And do not now reuenge those bloudie sughtert▪ Enacted on our friends and countrymen. And sith Occasion now is profered, And Libertie to trie our force of Armes, I do reioyce to see this happie day, Wherein we may but meet and ioyne with them: I thrist my Lord in heart for sweet reuenge, As if three dayes I had beene kept from drink▪ The wounds I should receiue vpon that day, Would be as pleasant to my labouring soule, As Water to a thirstie Traueller, Or else Releasement to a man condemn'd, Nay Death it selfe were welcome to my bosome, For to reuenge our Fathers iniuries, Defend our libertie, aduance our King: Let vs giue onset on that meacocke Nation▪ Those fond effeminate vnruly people, And fight it out vnto the latest man; That after we haue spread our wauing Colours, In signe of Triumph and of Victorie, We may enioy the Honors they possesse, And for my part renowned valiant King, Two thousand armed horsemen will I bring. An. K. Ab.
A Royall armie Arthur hath prouided, To beard the brauing Romanes in their Countrie, And like a Martialist hath them diuided, To buckle with so proud an Enemie: And Courage ioyn'd with Resolution▪ Doth pricke them forwards o this Action. The Britains hawtie and resolued men, Stout, valiant, of Bellonas warlike brood, Chear'd on their Followers, and began agen For to reuiue their new decayed blood: And to redeeme to Arthur and his Line▪ What once was wonne by valiant Constantine. Now sounds his Drumme a march in chearfull sort, Now his loud winded Trumpets checke the aire, And now the Britaines to him do resort, Not fearing warres affliction or despaire: But all with one voyce promise victorie To Arthur King of famous Britainy. His Colours they are wauing in the wind, Wherein is wrought his Armes of ancestrie, His Pendants are in formall wise assign'd, Qartred at large by well read Heraldrie: Cuffing the ayre that struggles for to kisse, The gaudinesse of faire King Arthurs blisse. Within his spreading Ensigne first he bore, Allotted from his royall familie▪ Three flying Dragons and three Crownes he wore,
Portraid de Or, the field of Azure die, His fathers Coate, his Mothers Countries grace, His honors Badge, his cruell foes deface▪ At last vnto himselfe he hath assumpted, And tooke to Armes proper to his desire, As in his faithfull mind being best accounted, And fitting to those thoughts he did require: A crosse of Siluer in a field of Vert, A gracious Embleame to his great desert. On the first quartr of this field was figured▪ The image of our Ladie with her Sonne Held in her armes; this he desired, Wherein his new-growne valour was begonne: And bearing this same Figure forth right nobly, Did maruellous Actes and feates of Chiualrie▪ This Signe in elder ages being odious, And hated of the bad deseruing mind, By his deare blood is made most pretious, Our vnpure Sinne by him being full refind: A great triumphant Signe, a Signe of ioy, A blessed Crosse to free vs from annoy. To this the righteous man bowes downe his head, And this the heauenly Angels do dore, By this our vnpure soules with life is fed, And Diuels fearing this do much dplore: Hereon he vanquisht Sathan, Hell, and Sinne, And by this Signe our new-life we begin.
Wise, learned Historiographers do write, That this pure Signe of the most holy Crosse Was sent from God, to Mercuries delight, Iulian the Apostta's onely losse, And that an Angell brought to Mercurie▪ All Armour for his backe most necessarie. A Shield of Azure herein coloured, A flowrie Crosse betweene two golden Roses, That the prowd Iewes minds much distempred, Whose vertue in it selfe true Time encloses A rich wrought Shield and a most heauenly Armour▪ That to the proud Foe strucke a deadly terrour. And in the time of Charles the seuenth french King, The Sunne giuing glorie to the dim-fac'd Morne, When early rising Birds alowd did sing, And faire cleare clouds the Element did adorne, To Englishmen and French from heauen was sent A milke-white Crosse within the Firmament. Which heauenly Signe of both these nations seene, The haughtie French mou'd with rebellion Against their lawfull King and true-borne Queene, Began to yeeld their true submission, And tooke it as a great admonishment, And Sigue betok'ning bitter detriment. Thus we may see, that the Religion Which they conceiued of this blessed sight▪ Altred their minds to veneration▪
And mollified their harts then full of spight, Yeelding vnto their Prince obedience, And true submission for their great offence. This sight of honor, to the French Kings fame They did behold, a spectacle to Fraunce, At the same time when the third Edward came, And in the land his colours did aduaunce, Sending to Clodoueus then their King, Which there became a Christian by Baptizing. Haec sunt Francorum celebranda insignia Regum, Quae demissa polo, sustinet almafides Et nobis coelica dona: Et pia Francorum placeant insignia Regum, Aurea coelesti primum suffulta colore Lilia, Caesarijs olim iam credita ceruis Auri flammadehinc, veterum victoria Regum. And euer since great Clodoueus raigne, They did remaine as Ensignes to that Nation, Where still before three Toades they did sustaine, Their onely pourtraiture of commendation, By honor to the English Kings pertaining, That conquer'd Fraunce, when all their pride was waining. His barbed Horses beat the yeelding ground, And with their neighing terrifide their foe, Prowd of their riders, in whose harts are found A promise to the Romanes ouerthrow.
The glistering shine of their well-fashion'd armour, Tels all men here doth ride a Conquerour. Their Armour strongly made and firmely wrought, Not to the vse of old decayed Time, Who with their guilded shewes are good for nought, But like to stonie wals not made with lime, The Brytaines went not proudly armoured, But strong, as scorning to be conquered. In Calis he his colours doth aduance, Who all for feare do entertaine this Prince, And passeth through the regiment of France, And doth with puissance the French conuince: Still marching vp to Paris and to Roane, Bringing that Countrie in subiection. And hauing got his Title and his Name, A Title got with famous victorie, He marcheth forward to enlarge his Fame, Leauing faire France in his authoritie, By sword and clemencie he conquer'd Island, And wonne by famous warre the land of Gothland. Now more and more his armie doth increase, And mightie Kings do offer him their aide, So in the country they might liue in peace, His warlike followers so their minds dismaid▪ The name of Arthur King of Britanie, Hath fear'd the Romish force from Italy.
At last he comes to meete his enemie, High-harted Lucius that his letters sent, To great Carleon with such Maiestie, That stiffly did demaund a base intent: But now he wisht King Arthur were away, For feare he lost the Honor of the day. The Britaines valour was so admirable, As when a Lion meeteth with his Pray; King Arthurs courage so inestimable, That nere a Romaine durst his strength assay: But like the dust with wind did take their flight, Yeelding by Warre what they demaund by Might. Here lay a heape of Romans slaughtered, Trode vnder foote by proud victorious Steedes, And here one Friend another murthered, Not able for to helpe him in his neede: Here bruised Souldiers that alowd did cry, Braue Arthur helpe vs in our miserie. And after he had wonne so great a Field, And ouerthrew the Romaine Lucius, He pardon'd those that graciously would yeeld, And leaue their Leader proud Tiberius: Who left his men for feare, and would not fight, But hid himselfe in darknesse of the Night. This base retraite and glorious Victorie, To Arthurs honours and Tiberius shame, Was spred through Rome, through France, through Italy,
An extollation to the Bryish name: Who forraged about, yet all did flie, Till Arthur tooke them to his pitying mercie▪ Forward towards Rome these Britaines make their way, Sounding Defiance as they passe along, Their conquering Ensignes still they do display, In Armes and hautie courage passing strong: All Cities offer peace, all Townes submit To Arthurs greatnesse, as a thing most fit. But as they passe huge Mirmedons do striue, Surnamed Giants, for to stop this King▪ And vow by Paganisme (by which they thriue,) His bodie in Oceanus to fling: And daunt his followers, who as Fame hath said, Of great bigge monstrous men were not afraid. At last they march vpon a large broade plaine, When first these hautie Giants he doth spie, The Britaines scorne for to retire againe, But either winne the honor, or else die: Courage quoth Arthur, better die with fame, Then yeeld or turne to our immortall shame. At length they meete, and meeting cope together, As when two sauage Boares are full of ie, The Victorie as yet inclin'd to neither, But from their Creasts and Shields did sparckle fire: Inkindled Wrath from Arthurs breast hath sprong, That he made passage through the thickest throng.
The King of Giants Arthur meetes withall, And copes with him: for in his strength did stand His Kingdomes great aduancement, or his fall, His Subiects peace, his quietnesse of land: But this renowne to Britaine doth remaine, The Giant, Arthur hand to hand hath slaine. When he was downe the rest did faint for feare, Which when the British armie had espied, Their true-borne valour did they not forbeare, But all the greene grasse with their bloud they died: And made such slaughter of these monstrous men, That after-time hath registred agen. After this Conquest is King Arthur minded, With all his royall power to march to Rome▪ And with his Lords he hath determined, This gallant Resolution, and this Doome: To crowne himselfe by warre their Emperour, And ouer all a mightie Gouernour. And had not Fortune and Rebellion, Stir'd vp his Cousin Mordreds hautie mind, At home to make ciuill inuasion, Who sought King Arthurs glory for to blind, With honour had he re-inkindled fire, To burne the wals of Rome to his desire. But O false Mordred, thou deceitfull Kinsman, (Begot of Treasons heyre) thus to rebell, Against thy noble Nephew, who hath wonne
Cities and peopled Townes that did excell: And all he did was for to glorifie His Royall kindred and his Noble countrey. But thou some base-borne Haggard mak'st a wing, Against the Princely Eagle in his flight, And like a hissing Serpent seek'st to sting The Lion that did shield thee from despight: But now being wakened by his Countries wrong, With warre he meanes to visite you ere long. The newes of this proud Rebell in his Land, Was like deepe piercing arrowes at his hart, Intemperate Rage did make them vnderstand King Arthurs furie, and fond Mordreds smart, Who vow'd reuengement most vnnaturall, On him that sought to bring his friends to thrall▪ He sounds Retrait with heart-swolne heauinesse, That he must leaue faire Rome vnconquered, And marcheth through the Land in quietnesse, To be reueng'd on the Vsurper Mordred: At this sweet newes of his departing thence▪ The Romaines praise the Rebels excellence. King Arthur heard at his returne towards Brytaine, How Mordred had proclaim'd himselfe there King, Those that resisted, he by force hath slaine, Vnto their Countries ground a gentle offring, And to the Saxon Cheldricke is allide, Who landing to their lawfull King denide.
By force they riue King Arthur from the shore, And like rebellious Monsters kill his men, Which when he viewes, he striueth more and more, And his great pissant strength renewes againe, And maugre all the power they withstand, At Sandwich Noble Arthur taketh Land: And ioyning battell with his enemes, The traytrous Rebels are discomfited, And Mordred all in hast away he flies, By treasons bloudie Traine & murther led, To gather Power to renew the fight, Vrg'd forward by the Saxon Cheldricks spight The Noble Arthur in this conflict lost Some of his followers whom he lou'd too deare; The death of gentle Gawen grieu'd him most, As by his outward sorrow did appeare: This Gawen was proud Mordreds lawfull brothe, Legitimate by father and by mother. O mirrour of true borne gentiliti, Faire mappe of Honor in his gentle blood, That rather chose to loue his noble counrie, And seeke the meanes to do his life Liege good, Then to defend his kindred by that warre, That made the Sonne and most kind Father iarre. Kind Gawen, trustie worthie Gentleman, Belou'd of Arthur, as deseruedly▪ Recording Time thy faithfulnesse shall scan,
And loyall Truth wrapt vp in memorie: Shall say in thy Kings quarrell being iust, At last thou didst, not in thy Brothers trust. Thy gentle King prepad thy Funeral, And laid thy bodie in a Spulchre, Inthine owne country richly done and royall, At Rosse whose auncestrie shall still endure: And like a Nephew, mourn'd and wept for thee, Grieuing to loose Brytish Nobilitie. But to proceede in this vnluckie fight, King Angusel was slaine whom Arthur loued, A man in whom his countrie tooke delight, That ne're with home-bred Treacherie was moued, In false-faith'd Scotland was his bones interd, To which before King Arthur him preerd, That vniust Mordred▪ Mischiefes nourisher, Times ad infamer, Traitor to the State▪ Of his whole Countrie bounds the chiefe perturber▪ Whose name to this day mongt them growes in hate, Fled from the battell▪ getting ships he saild Westward towards Cornwail, whē his force was quaild. But when King Arthur heard of his departure, Causing the refuse Rebels for to flie, To make the way of his defence more sure, With speed he re-inforst his royall armie, With new supplie of hardie men at Armes, Whose Resolution fear'd no following harmes.
With his whole force he marcheth after him, Where all the Kentish men reioyce to see King Arthurs Colours, whose rich pride doth dim The faire-fac'd Sunne in all his Maiestie: Not resting till he came vnto the place, Where Mordred was incamped for a space. By Winchester a Citie of renowne, The Traitorous armie of this Mordred lay, On whose proud gather'd troupe the Sunne did frowne, Fore-shewing to his men a blacke-fac't day▪ And so it prou'd before the selfe-same night; Mordred and his best friends were slaine in fight. At Camblane was this bloudie battell ended, Where fame-athieuing Arthur sore was wounded, With gallant Britaine Lords being attended, Whose sword (cald Pridwin) manie had confounded▪ Yet Fortunes vnseene immortalitie▪ Sometime cuts downe sprigs of a Monarchie. At this dayes dolefull stroke of Arthurs death, The glorious shining Sunne lookt pale and wanne, And when this Monarch losed forth his breath, The Britaines being amaz'd about him ranne: And with their nailes did teare their flesh asunder▪ That they had lost their King the worlds great Wonder. Ouer this litle Iland he had raigned, The full iust terme of sixe and twentie yeares, When twelue most famous battles he obtained,
As in our auncient Chronicles appeares, And in the Church-yard of faire Glastenburie▪ They held King Arthurs wofull obsequie. And in the time of second Henries dayes, Betweene two pillars was his body found, That in his life deseru's immortall praise, Layd sixteene foote deepe vnderneath the ground; Because his Saxon foes whom he did chase, Should not with swords his liuelesse corps deface. In the last yeare of Henries royaltie, More then sixe hundred after his buriall, By the Abbot of the house of Glastenburie, At last they found King Arthurs funerall▪ Henry de Bloys the Abbots name they gaue, Who by the Kings commaund did find the graue. The principall and chiefe occasion That moou'd King Henry for to seeke the place, Was that a Bardth in Welsh diuision, Recorded Arthurs actes vnto his Grace: And in the foresaid Church-yard he did sing, That they should find the body of the King. And those that dig'd to find his bodie there, After they enterd seuen foote deepe in ground, A mightie broade stone to them did appeare, With a great leaden Crosse thereto bound, And downwards towards the corpes the Crosse did lie, Containing this inscripted poesie.
Hic iacet sepultus inclytus Rex, Arthurus in Insula Aualoniae. His bodie whose great actes the world recorded, When vitall limitation gaue him life, And Fames shrill golden Trump abroad had sounded, What Warres he ended, what Debate, what Strife, What Honor to his countrey, what great Loue, Amongst his faithfull subiects he did proue. Was not interd in sumptuous royaltie, With funerall pompe of kindred and of friends, Nor closde in marble stone wrought curiously, Nor none in mourning blacke his King attends, But in a hollow tree made for the once, They do enter King Arthurs princely bones. Their outward habite did not shew their mind, For many millions of sad weeping eies, In euery streete and corner you might find, Some beating their bare breast, and some with outcries, Cursing and Banning that proud Mordreds soule, That did by warre his princely life controule. The Kings that were attendant on his traine, Forgot their kingdomes, and their royall crownes, Their high proud hautie hearts with griefe were slaine, Strucke in amaze with Fortunes deadly frownes: For they had lost their Scepter, Seate, and all, By princely Arthurs most vnhappie fall.
The trunke being opened, at the last they found The bones of Arthur King of Brytanie, Whose shin-bone being set vpon the ground, (As may appeare by auncient Memorie) Reacht to the middle thigh within a spanne, Of a tall proper well set bigge lim'd Man. And furthermore they found King Arthurs skull, Of such great largenesse that betwixt his eyes, His foreheads space a spanne broad was at full, That no true Historiographer denies: The forenam'd Abbot liuing in those daies, Saw what is written now to Arthurs praise. The print of tenne wounds in his head appeared, All growne together except onely one, Of which it seemes this worthie Brytaine died: A true Memoriall to his louing Nation; But that was greater far then all the rest, Had it bene lesser Brytaine had bene blest. In opening of the Tombe they found his wife, Queene Guiniuere interred with the King, The Tresses of her haire as in her life, Were finely platted whole and glistering: The colour like the most pure refin'd gold, Which being toucht straight turned into mould, Henry de Bloyes at the length translated The bones of Arthur and his louely Queene, Into the great Church where they were interred,
Within a Marble toombe, as oft was seene: Of whom a worthie Poet doth rehearse, This Epitaph in sweete Heroicke Verse. Hic iacet Arthurus flos regum, gloria regni, Quem mores, probit as commendant laude perenni. Iohannis Leylandij antiquarij Ecomion funerale, in vitam, facta, mortem{que} Regis Arthuri inclitissii. SAxonicas toties qui fudit marte cruento Turmas, & peperit spolijs sibi nomen opimis, Fulmineo toties Pictos qui contudit ense, Imosuitque iugum Scoti ceruicibus ingens, Qui tumidos Gallos, Germanos qui{que} feroces Pertulit, & Dacos bello confregit aperto: Denique Mordredum è medio qui sustulit illud Monstrum, horrendum ingens, dirum seuumque tyrannum, Hoc iacet extinctus monumento Arthurius alto, Militiae clarum decus, & virtutis alumnus, Gloria nunc cuius terram circumuolat omnem, Aetherijque petit, sublimia tecta tonantis. Vosigitur gentis Proles generosa Britannae Induperatoriter magno assurgite vosiro: Et tumulo scro Roseas inferte Corollas, Officij testes redolentia muncra vestri, Thus Englished. He that so oft the Saxon Troupes did foile, And got a name of worth with richest spoile: He that with brandisht sword the Picts destroyed, And yok'd the Scots, their stubborn necks annoyd: He that the loftie French and Germaines fierce did ,
And Dacians force with Warre did vanquish quite: He lastly which cut off that monster Mordreds life, A cruell Tyrant, horrible, mightie, full of strife: Arthur lyes buried in this Monument, Warres chiefest garland, Vertues sole intent; Whose Glorie through the world stil swiftly flies, And mounts with Fames wings vp to the thundring skies. You gentle Off spring of the Britaines blood, Vnto this puissant Emperour do honours good▪ And on his Tombe lay Garlands of sweete Roses, Sweete gifts of Dutie, and sweete louing posies. Finis Epitaphij. No. Arth. The true Pedigree of that famous VVorthie King Arthur, collected out of many learned Authors. TWelue men in number entred the vale of Aualon: Ioseph of Arimathea was the chiefest we confesse, Iosué the sonne of Ioseph his father did attend on, With other ten, these Glaston did possesse, Hilarius the Nephew of Ioseph first begate Iosue the Wise: Iosue Aminadab, Aminadab Castellors had by fate: Castellors got Manael that louely Lad, And Manael by his wife had faire-fac'd Lambard▪ With another deare sonne surnamed Vrlard; And Lambard at the length begot a sonne,
That had Irene bone of his wife, Of this Igrene, Vter the great Pndragon Begot King Arthur famous in his life▪ Where by the truth this Pedigree dth end, Arthur from Iosephs loynes did first descend. Peter Cousin to Ioseph of Arimathea, Being sometimes King of great Arcadia, Begat Erlan that famous worthy Prince, And Erlan gat Melianus, that did conuince His neighbour foes, Melianus, did beget Edor, and Edor Lothos name did set, That tooke to wife the sister of King Arthur▪ A Virgine faire, chaste, louely, and most pure, Of whom this Lotho had foure louely boyes, Their fathrs comfort and their mothers ioyes▪ Walwanus, Agranaius, Garelus and Guerelise, That in their countrey much did soueragnize: All which were men of great authoritie▪ And famous in the land of Britaine. Here endeth the Birth, Life, Death, and Pedigree of King Arthur of Britanie, & now, to where we left. Phoenix. O Nature tell me one thing ere we part, What famous towne and situated Seate, Is that huge Building that is made by Art, Against whose wals the crystall streames do beate, As if the flowing tide the stones would eate: That lies vpon my left hand built so hie, That the huge top-made Steeple dares the Skie?
Nature. That is the Britaines towne old Troynouant, The which the wandring-Troyans Sonne did frame, When after ship wracke he a place did want, For to reuiue his Honor-splitted Name, And raisd againe the cinders of his Fame, When from Sydonian Dido they did steale, To reare the Pillars of a Common-weale. Since when to come more nearer to our time, Lud the great King did with his wealth enlarge, The famous builded Citie of this Clime, And Ludstone to be cald he gaue in charge, And London now that Towne is growne at large: The flowing Riuer Thamasis is nam'd, Whose Sea-ensuing Tide can neare be tam'd. Phoenix. O London I haue heard thee honoured, And thy names Glorie rais'd to good intent, Lawes Councell chamber in thy wals is bred, The school of Knowledge and Experiment: Wise Senators to gouerne thee is lent. All things to beautifie a Royall Throne, Where Scarsitie and Death did neuer grone▪ Nature. Leaue off thy Praises till we haue more leasure, And to beguile the wearie lingring Day, Whose long-drawne Howers do tire vs out of measure: Our cunning in Loue-songs let vs assay, And paint our Pleasure as some good Array▪ I will beginne my cunning for to tast▪ And your Experience we will try at last. Here Nature singeth to this dittie following. WHat is Loue but a toy To beguile mens Senses?
What is Cupid but a boy, Boy to cause expences, A toy that brings to fooles oppressed thrall, A boy whose folly makes a number fall. What is Loue but a child, Child of little substance, Making Apes to be wild, And their pride to aduance, A child that loues with guegawes to be toying, And with thinne shadowes alwaies to be playing. Loue is sweete, wherein sweete? In fading pleasures, wanton toyes, Loue a Lord, and yet meete, To crosse mens humours with annoyes: A bitter pleasure, pleasing for a while, A Lord is Loue that doth mans thoughts beguile. O sing no more, you do forget your Theame, And haue prophan'd the sacred name of Loue, You dip your tongue in an vnwholsome Streame, And from the golden Truth your notes remoue, In my harsh Dittie I will all reproue: And vnaccustom'd I will trie my skill, To pleasure you, and to confute your will▪ The Phoenix her Song to the Dittie before. O Holy Loue, religious Saint, Mans onely hony-tasting Pleasure, Thy glory, learning cannot paint, For thou art all our wordly Treasure▪ Thou art the Treasure, Treasure of the soule, That great celestiall powers dost controule▪ What greater blisse then to embrace
The perfect patterne of Delight, Whose heart-enchaunting Eye doth chase Al stormes of sorow from mans sight: Pleasure, Delight, Wealth, and earth-ioyes do lye In Venus bosome, bosome of pure beautie. That mind that tasteth perfect Loue, Is farre remoted from annoy: Cupid that God doth sit aboue, That tips his Arrowes all with ioy: And this makes Poets in their Verse to sing Loue is a holy, holy, holy thing. Nature. O voice Angelicall, O heauenly song, The golden praise of Loue that thou hast made, Deliuerd from thy sweete smoothd honied tong, Commaunds Loue selfe to lye within a shade, And yeeld thee all the Pleasures may be had: Thy sweete melodious voice hath beautifide And guilded Loues rich amours in her pride. Phoenix. Enough, enough, Loue is a holy thing, A power deuine, deuine, maiesticall: In shallow witted braines as you did sing, It cares not for the force materiall, And low-borne Swaines it nought respects at all: She builds her Bower in none but noble minds, And there due adoration still she finds. Nature. Stay Phoenix stay, the euening Starre drawes nie, And Phoebus he is parted from our sight,
And with this Wagon mounted in the Skie, Affoording passage to the gloomie night, That doth the way-faing Passenger affright: And we are set on foote neere to that Ile, In whose deepe bottome plaines Delight doth smile. Phoix. O what a muskie sent the ayre doth cast, As if the Gods perfum'd it with sweete Myrthe▪ O how my bloud's inspired and doth taste, An alteration in my ioynts to stirre, As if the good did with the bad conferre: The ayre doth moue my Spirites, purge my Sence, And in my body doth new warre commence. Looke round about, behold you fruitfull Plaine, Behold their meadow plots and pasture ground, Behold their chrystall Riuers runne amaine, Into the vaste huge Seas deuouring sound, And in her bowels all her filth is found: It vomiteth by vertue all corruption, Into that warie plaine of desolation. And while the day giues light vnto our eies, Be thou attentiue, and I will relate, The glorie of the plaines that thou descri'st, Whose fertill bounds farre doth extenuate, Where Mars and Venus arme in arme haue sate: Of plants of hearbs, and of high springing trees, Of sweete delicious sauors, and of Bees. In this delightsome countrey there doth grow,
The Mandrake cald in Greeke Mandragora, Some of his vertues if you looke to know, The iuyce that freshly from the roote doth passe, Purgeth all fleame like blacke Helleborus: Tis good for paine engendred in the eies; By wine made of the roote doth sleepe arise. Theres Yellow Crowbels and the Daphadill, Good Harry, herbe Robert, and white Cotula, Adders grasse, Eglantine, and Aphodill, Agnus Castus, and Acatia, The Blacke Arke-angell, Coloquintida, Sweete Sugar Canes, Sinkefoile and boies Mercurie, Goosefoote, Goldsnap, and good Gratia Dei. Mosse of the Sea, and yellow Succorie, Sweete Trefoile, Weedwind, the wholesome Wormewood, Muskmealons, Moustaile, and Mercurie, The dead Arkeangell that for wennes is good, The Souldiers perrow, and great Southernewood: Stone hearts tongue, Blessed thistle, and Sea Trifoly, Our Ladies cushion, and Spaines Pellitorie. . No doubt this Clymate where as these remaine, The women and the men are fam'd for faire, Here neede they not of aches to complaine, For Phisickes skill growes here without compare: All herbes and plants within this Region are, But by the way sweete Nature as you go, Of Agnus Castus speake a word or two.
Nature▪ That shall I briefly; it is the very handmaid To Vesta, or to perfect Chastitie, The hot inflamed spirite is allaid By this sweete herbe that bends to Luxury, It drieth vp the seede of Venerie: The leaues being laid vpon the sleepers bed, With chastnesse, cleannesse, purenesse he is fed. Burne me the leaues, and straw then on the ground, Whereas foule venemous Serpents vse to haunt: And by this vertue here they are not found, Their operation doth such creatures daunt, It causeth them from thence for to auant: If thou be stung with Serpents great or lesse, Drinke but the seede, and thou shalt find redresse. But to proceed, heres Clary or Cleare-eie, Calues snout, Cukoe flowers, and the Cuckoes meate, Calathian Violets, Dandelion, and the Dewberrie, Leopards foote, and geene Spinage which we vse to eate, And the hot Indian Sunne procuring heate: Great wild Valerian, and the Withie wind, The water Cresses, or ague-curing Woodbind. There's Foxgloue, Forget me not, and Coliander, Galingal, Goldcups, and Buprestis, Small honesties, Eye-bright, and Coculus Panter, Double tongue, Moly, and the bright Anthillis, Smelling Clauer, and Aethiopis: Floramore, Euphorbium, and Esula, White Bulbus violet, and Cassia fistula.
Phoenix. But by the way sweete Nature tell me this, Is this the Moly that is excellent, For strong enchauntments and the Adders hisse? Is this the Moly that Mercurius sent To wise Vlysses, when he did preuent The witchcraft, and foule Circes damned charmes, That would haue compast him with twentie harmes? Nature. This is the Moly growing in this land, That was reueal'd by cunning Mercurie To grea Vlysses, making him withstand The hand of Circes fatall sorcerie, That would haue loden him with miserie: And ere we passe Ile shew some excellence▪ Of other hearbs in Phisickes noble Science. There Mugwort, Sena and Tithimailes, Oke of Ierusalem, and Lyryconfaucie, Larkes spurre▪ Larkes claw and Lentiles, Garden Nigella, Mill, and Pionie, Woody Nightshade, Mints, and Sentorie, Sowbread, Dragons, and Goates oregan, Pelemeum, Hellebore, and Osmond the Waterman▪ First of this Mugwort it did take the name, Of Artemesia wife to Mansoleus, Whose sunne-bred beautie did his heart inflame, When she was Queene of Helicarnassus, Diana gaue the herbe this name to vs: Because this vertue to vs it hath lent, For womens matters it is excellent.
And he that shall this herbe about him beare, Is freed from hurt or daunger any way, No poisned Toade nor Serpent shall him fare, As he doth trauell in the Sunne-shine day, No wearinesse his limmes shall ought assay: And if he weare this Mugwort at his breast, Being trauelling, he nere shall couet rest. There is blacke Hellebore cald Melampodium, Because an Arcadian shepheard first did find This wholsome herbe Melampus nam'd of some, Which the rich Proetus daughters wits did bind, When she to extreame madnesse was inclind: It cured and reuiu'd her memorie, That was possest with a continuall frenzie. There Centrie in Greeke Centaurion, That from the Centaure Chiron tooke the name, In Spaine t'was cald Cintoria long agone, And this much honor must we giue the same, Wild Tygers with the leaues a man may ame: Tis good for sinewed aches, and giues light To the blacke mistie dimnesse of the sight. Fames golden glorie spreadeth this report, Vpon a day that Chiron was a guest, To arme-strong Hercules, and did resort Vnto his house to a most sumptuous feast, And welcome was the Centaure mongst the rest. But see his lucke, he on his foote let fall, Great Hercul's shaft, and hurt himselfe withall.
A mightie arrow not for him to weeld, The wound being deepe, and with a venom'd point, To Deaths arestment he began to yeeld, And there with sundrie Balmes they did annoint, His wounded foote being strucken through the ioynt: All would ot serue till that an old man brought, This entaurie that ase to him hath wrought, There's Osmond balepate, Plebane, and Oculus Christi, Sleeping nightshade, Salomons seale, and Sampire, Sage of Ierusalem, and sweete Rosemarie, Great Pilosella, Sengreene, and Alexander, Knights Milfoile, Masticke, and Stocke gillofer, Hearts ease, herbe twopence, and Hermodactill, Narcissus, and the red flower Pimpernell. Phoenix. That word Narcissus is of force to steale, Cold running water from a stony rocke: Alas poore boy thy beautie could not heale The wound that thou thy selfe too deepe didst lock; Thy shadowed eyes thy perfect eyes did mocke. False beautie fed true beautie rom the deepe, When in the glassie water thou didst peepe. O Loue thou art imperious full of might, And dost reuenge the crie disdaining louer His lookes to Ladies eyes did giue a light, But pride of beautie, did his beautie smother, Like him for faire you could not find another▪ Ah had he lou'd, and not on Ladies lower, He neare had bene transformed to a flower.
Nature. This is an Embleame for those painted faces, Where deuine beautie rests her for a while, Filling their browes with stormes and great disgraces, That on the pained soule yeelds not a smile, But puts true loue into perpetuall exile: Hard hearted Soule, such fortune light on thee, That thou maist be tranform'd as well as he. Ah had the boy bene pliable to be wonne, And not abusde his morne excelling face, He might haue liu'd as beauteous as the Sunne, And to his beautie Ladies would giue place, But O proud Boy, thou wroughtst thine owne disgrace: Thou lou'st thy selfe, and by the selfe same loue, Did'st thy deuinesse to a flower remoue. But to proceed, there's Christioculus, The seede of this Horminum drunke with wine, Doth stirre a procurations heate in vs, And to Libidenous lusts makes men incline, And mens vnable bodies doth refine: It brings increase by operation, And multiplies our generation. There's Carrets, Cheruile, and the Cucumer, Red Patiens, Purslane, and Gingidium, Oxe eie, sheepe killing Penygrasses, and the golden flower Cuckoepintell, our Ladies seale, and Sagapinum, Theophrastus violet, and Vincetoxicum: Saint Peters wort, and louely Venus haire, And Squilla, that keepes men from foule despaire.
O this word Carrets, if a number knew The vertue of thy rare excelling roote, And what good help to men there doth ensue, They would their lands, and their liues sell to boote, But thy sweete operation they would view: Sad dreaming Louers slumbring in the night, Would in thy honie working take delight. The Thracian Orpheus whose admired skill Infernall Pluto once hath rauished, Causing high Trees to daunce against their will, And vntam'd Beast with Musicks Harpe hath fed, And Fishes to the shore hath often led, By his experience oftentimes did proue, This Roote procur'd in Maides a perfect loue. Purslane doth comfort the inflamed hart, And healeth the exulcerated kidnies: It stoppeth all defluxions falling smart, And when we sleepe expelleth dreames and fancies: It driues Imaginations from our eyes, The iuyce of Purslane hindreth that desire, When men to Venus games would faine aspire. Theres Rocket, Iacke by the hedge, and Loue in idlenesse, Knights water Sengreene, and Siluer maidenheare, Paris Naews, Tornesol, and towne Cresses, Starre thistle that for many things is deare, And Seia that in Italy Corne doth beare: Wake-robbins, Hyacinth, and Hartichocke, Letuce, that mens sence asleepe doth rocke.
Phoenix. O poore boy Hyacinthus thy faire face Of which Apollo was enamored, Brought thy lifes Lord too timely to that place, Where playing with thee thou wast murdered, And with thy bloud the grasse was sprinckled: Thy bodie was transformed in that hower, Into a red white mingled Gilli-flower. Nature. But yet Apollo wept when he was slaine, For playing with him, cleane against his will He made him breathlesse, this procur'd his paine: True loue doth seldome seeke true loue to kill; O Loue thou many actions dost fulfill! Search, seek, & learn what things there may be shown, Then say that Loues sweet secrets are vnknowne. And as a token of Apolloes sorrow, A siluer coloured Lillie did appeare, The leaues his perfect sighes and teares did borrow, Which haue continued still from yeare to yeare; Which shewes him louing, not to be seuere, is written as a mourning Dittie, Vpon this flower which shewes Apolloes pittie. O Schoole-boyes I will teach you such a shift, As will be worth a Kingdome when you know it, An herbe that hath a secret hidden drift, To none but Treauants do I meane to show it, And all deepe read Phisitios will allow it: O how you play the wags, and faine would heare Some secret matter to allay your eare.
Theres garden Rocket, take me but the seed, When in your Maisters brow your faults remaine, And when to saue your selues there is great need, Being whipt or beaten you shall feele no paine, Although the bloud your buttocks seeme to staine: It hardneth so the flesh and tender skin, That what is seene without comes not within. The Father that desires to haue a boy, That may be Heire vnto his land and liuing, Let his espoused Loue drinke day by day, Good Artichocks, who buds in August bring, Sod in cleare running water of the spring; Wiues naturall Conception it doth strengthen, And their declining life by force doth lengthen. In Sommer time, when sluggish idlenesse Doth haunt the bodie of a healthfull man, In Winter time when a cold heauie slownesse Doth tame a womans strength, do what she can, Making her looke both bloudlesse, pale and wan, The vertue of this Artichocke is such, It stirres them vp to labour verie much. Theres Sowbread, Stanwort, and Starre of Hierusal, Base or flat Veruine, and the wholesome Tansie, Go to bed at noone, and Titimalem, Hundred headed thistle, and tree-clasping Iuie, Storks bill, great Stonecrop, and seed of Canary, Dwarfe gentian, Snakeweed and sommer Sauory, Bell rags, prickly Boxe, and Raspis of Couentry.
This Sowbread is an herbe that's perillous, For howsoeuer this same Roote be vsed, For women growne with child tis dangerous, And therefore it is good to be refused: Vnlesse too much they seeke to be misused, O haue a care how this you do apply, Either in inward things or outwardly. Those that about them carrie this same Sowbread, Or plant it in their gardens in the Spring, If that they onely ouer it do tread▪ Twill kill the issue they about them bring, When Mother Lullabie with ioy should sing: Yet wanton scaping Maides perhaps will tast, This vnkind herbe, and snatch it vp in hast. Yet let me giue a warning to you all, Do not presume too much in dalliance, Be not short-heeld with euery wind to fall: The Eye of heauen perhaps will not dispence With your rash fault, but plague your fowle offence, And take away the working and the vertue, Because to him you broke your promis'd dutie. Theres Iuie, that doth cling about the tree, And with her leauie armes doth round embrace The rotten hollow withered trunke we see, That from the maiden Cissus tooke that place, Grape-crowned Bacchus did this damzell grace: Loue-piercing windowes dazeled so her eye, That in Loues ouer-kindnesse she did dye.
A rich-wrought sumptuous Banquet was prepared, Vnto the which the Gods were all inuited: Amongst them all this Cissus was insnared, And in the sight of Bacchus much delighted: In her fair boome was true Loue vnited, She daunc't and often kist him with such mirth, That sudden ioy did stop her vitall breath. Assoone as that the Nourisher of things, Or Grandam Earth had tasted of her bloud, From foorth her bodie a fresh Plant there springs, And then an Iy-climing Herbe there stood, That for the lxe Dissenterie is good: For the remembrance of the God of wine, It therefore alwaies claspes about the Vine. There is Angellica or Dwarfe Gentian, Whose  being dride in the hot shining Sunne, From deh it doth preserue the poysoned man, Whose extreame torment makes his life halfe gone, That from deaths mixed potion could not shunne: No Pestilence nor no infectious aire, Shall do him hurt, or cause him to dispaire. Theres Carduus benedictu cald the Blessed thistle, Neswort, Peniroyall, and Astrolochia, Yellow Wolfs-bane, and Rose-smelling Bramble, Our Ladies Bedstraw, Brookelime, and Lunaria, Cinque foile, Cats taile, and Cresse Sciaica, Hollihockes, Mouseare, and Pety Morrell, Sage, Scorpiades, and the garden Sorrell.
First of the Nesewort, it doth driue away, And poysoneth troublesome Mice and long-tail'd Rats, And being sod in milke, it doth destroy Bees, Waspes, or Flies, and litle inging Gnats: It killeth Dogs, and rest disturbing Cats, Boyled with vineger it doth asswage The ach proceeding from the tooths hot rage. Sage is an herbe for health preseruatiue, It doth expell from women barrennesse: Aetius saith, it makes the child to liue, Whose new-knit ioynts are full of feeblenesse, And comforteth the mothers wearinesse: Adding a liely spirit, that doth good Vnto the painefull labouring wiues sicke bloud. In Egypt when a great mortalitie, And killing Pestilence did infect the Land, Making the people die innumerablie, The plague being ceast, the women out of hand Did drinke of iuyce of Sage continually, That made them to increase and multiply, And bring foorth store of children presently. This herbe Lunaria, if a horse do grase Within a medow where the same doth grow, And ouer it doth come with gentle pace, Hauing a horslocke at his foote below, As many haue, that sauegard we do know, It openeth the Locke, and makes it fall, Despight the barre that it is lockt withall.
There's Standergras, Hares ballockes, or great Orchis, Prouoketh Venus, and procureth sport, It helpes the weakned body that's amisse, And fals away in a consumptuous sort, It heales the Hectique feauer by report: But the dried shriueld roote being withered, Hindreth the vertue we haue vttered. If Man of the great springing rootes doth eate, Being in matrimoniall copulation, Male children of his wife he shall beget, This speciall vertue hath the operation, If Women make the withered rootes their meate, Faire louely Daughters, affable, and wise, From their fresh springing loines there shall arise. Theres Rosemarie, the Arabians iustifie, (Phisitions of exceeding perfect skill,) It comforteth the braine and Memorie, And to the inward sence giues strength at will, The head with noble knowledge it doth fill. Conserues thereof restores the speech being lost, And makes a perfect Tongue with little cost. Theres Dwale or Nightshade, tis a fatall plant, It bringeth men into a deadly sleepe, Then Rage and Anger doth their senses haunt, And like mad Aiax they a coile do keepe, Till leane-fac'd Death into their heart doth creepe, In Almaine graue experience hath vs tought, This wicked herbe for manie things is nought.
Oke of Ierusalem being throughly dried, And laid in presses where your clothes do lie, No Mothes or venome mongst them shall abide, It makes them smell so odoriferosly, That it doth kill them all immediately: It helpes the breast that's stopped with corruption, And giues mans breath fit operation. . Blest be our mother Earth that nourisheth, In her rich womb the seede of Times increase, And by her vertue all things flourisheth, When from her bosome she doth them release, But are their Plants and Trees in this faire Ile, Where Floras sweete spread garden seemes to smile? Natur. As plentifull vnto these Ilanders, Are the fruit-bearing Trees, as be the Flowers: And to the chiefest Lords that are commandrs, They serue as pleasant ouer-shading bowers, To banquet in the day, and sport being late, And most of them I meane to nominate. Ther's the great sturdie Oke and spreading Vine, Vnder whose branches Bacchus vsd' to sleepe, The Rose-tree and the loftie bearing Pine, That seemes (being toucht with wind) full oft to weep, The Hawthorne, Christs-thorne and the Rosemary, The Tamariske, Willow, and the Almond-tree. The most chast tree, that Chastnesse doth betoken, The Hollyholme, the Corke and Gooseberrie,
That neuer with tempestuous stormes is shooken, The Oliue, Philbert, and the Barberie, The Masticke tree whose liquid gumme being dride. Is good for them that Rheume hath terrified. Theres Iudas tree, so cal'd because that Iew, That did betray the innocent Lambe of God, Thee first of all his sorrowes to renew, Did hang himselfe, plagu'd with a heauy rod, A iust reward for such an vniust slaue, That would betray his Maister to the graue. Theres Ash-tree, Maple, and the Sycamore, Pomegranate, Apricokes and Iunipere: The Turpentine that sweet iuyce doth deplore, The Quince, the Peare-tree, and the young mans Medlar, The Fig-tree, Orenge, and the sweet moist Lemmon, The Nutmeg, Plum-tree, and the louely Cytron. Now for the Mirtle tree, it beares the name, Being once the gods Pallas best beloued, Of Mersin the young faire Athenian Dame, Because in actuenesse she muh excelled: The lustie young men of Athenia, She still was honour'd of the wise Minerua. Who willing her at Tilt and Tournament, At running, vaulting, and Actiuitie, And other exercise of gouernement, Not to be absent from her Deitie: Because that she as Iudge might giue the Crowne,
And garland to the Victors great renowne. But no forepassed age was free from Enuie, That spitefull honor-crazing enemy: For on a time giuing the equall glorie To him that wan it most deseruedly, The vanquisher in furie much displeased, Slue Mersin whom the Goddesse fauored. Pallas offended with their crueltie, Did gratefully reuenge her Maidens death, Transforming her into a Mirtle tree, Sweetly to flourish in the lower earth: The berries are a meanes for to redresse (Being decocted) swolne-fac'd Drunkennesse. The stormie Winters greene remaining Bay Was Daphne, Ladon and the Earths faire daughter, Whom wise Apollo haunted in the day, Till at the length by chaunce alas he caught her: O if such faults were in the Gods aboue, Blame not poore silly men if they do loue. But she not able (almost out of breath) For to resist the wise Gods humble sute, Made her petition to her mother Earth, That she would succour her, and make her mute: The Earth being glad to ease her miserie, Did swallow her, and turn'd her to a Bay tree. Apollo being amazed at this sight,
Named it Daphne for his Daphnes honour, Twisting a Garland to his hearts delight, And on his head did weare it as a fauour: And to this day the Bay trees memorie, Remaines as token of true Prophesie. Some of the heathen, men of opinion, Suppose the greene-leau'd Bay tree can resist Inchauntments, spirites, and illusion, And make them seeme as shadowes in a mist, This tree is dedicate onely to the Sunne, Because her vertue from his vice begonne. The Mose tree hath such great large spreading leaues, That you may wrap a child of twelue months old In one of them, vnlesse the truth deceaues, For so our Herborists haue truly told: By that great Citie Aleph in Assyria, This tree was found hard by Venetia. The fruite hereof (the Greekes and Christians) That do remaine in that large-spreading Citie, The misbeleeuing ewes and Persians, Hold this opinion for a certaintie: Adam did eate in liuely Paradise, That wrapt mans free-borne soules in miseris. . These trees, these plants, and this description, Of their sweete liquid gums that are distilling, Are to be held in estimation, For faie-fac'd Tellus glorie is excelling▪
But what white siluer'd rich resembling plaine, Is that where wooddie moouing trees remaine? . That is the watry kingdome of Neptunus, Where his high wood-made Towers dayly flote, Bearing the title of Occanus, As hony-speaking Pots oft do quote: And as the branches spreading from the tree, So do the Riuers grace this louely Countrie. Wherein is bread for mans sweete nourishment, Fishes of sundrie sorts and diuerse natures, That the inhabitants doth much content, As a relieuement to all mortall creatures, But for to make you perfect what they be, I will relate them to you orderly. There swimmes the gentle Prawne and Pickerell, A great deuourer of small little fish, The Puffin, Sole, and Sommer louing Mackrell, In season held for a high Ladies dish: The bigge bon'd Whale, of whom the skilfull Marriner, Sometimes God knowes stands in a mightie terrour. The musicke-louing Dolphin here doth swimme, That brought Arion on his backe to shore, And stayd a long while at the Seas deepe brimme, To heare him play▪ in nature did deplore, As being loth to leaue him, but at last Headlong himselfe into the Sea he cast.
Here swimmes the Ray, the Sea-calfe and the Porpoise▪ That doth betoken raine or stormes of weather, The Sea-horse, Sea-hound, and the wide-mouth'd Plaice, A Spitchcoke, Stocke-fish, and the litle Pilcher, Whose onely moisture prest by cunning Art, Is good for those troubled with Aches smart. Here swimmes the Shad, the Spisish, and the Spurling▪ The Thornebacke, Turbut, and the Perewincle, The Twine, the Trout, the Scallop and the Whiting, The Scate, the Roch, the Tench and pretie Wrincle: The Purple-fis, whose liquor vsually, A violet colour on the cloth doth die. Here swimmes the Pearch, the Cuttle and the Stocke-fish, That with a wooden staffe is often beaten, The Crab, the Pearch, which poore men alwayes wish, The Ruffe, the Piper good for to be eaten: The Barbell that three times in euery yeare, Her naturall young ones to the waues doth beare. Phoenix. His great deuine Omnipotence is mightie, That rides vpon the Heauens axeltree, That by increase amongst vs sends such plentie, I to his Mightinesse gratefull we will be: But stubburne necked Iewes do him prouoke, Till he do loade them with a heauie yoke. Nature. Truth haue you said; but I will here expresse The richesse of the Earths hid secrecie, The salt Sea vnseene, vnknowne worthinesse,
That yeelds vs precious stones innumerably, The rarenesse of their vertue fit for Kings, And such this countrie climate often brings. Herein is found the Amatist, and Abestone, The Topaze, Turches, and Gelatia, The Adamant, Dionise, and Calcedon, The Berill, Marble, and Elutropia, The Ruby, Saphire, and Asterites, The Iacinth, Sardonix, and Argirites. The Smaragd, Carbuncle, and Alablaster, Cornellis, Crusopasse, and Corrall: The sparkling Diamond, and the louely Iasper, The Margarite, Lodestone, and the bright-y'd Chrystall, Ligurius, Onix, Nitrum, and Gagates, Absistos, Amatites, and the good Achates. Here in this Iland are there mines of Gold, Mines of Siluer, Iron, Tinne and Lead, That by the labouring workman we behold: And mines of Brasse, that in the Earth is fed, The stone Lipparia, Galactites, and Pantron, Enidros, Iris, Dracontites, and Astrion. The Adamant, a hard obdurate stone, Inuincible, and not for to be broken, Being placed neare a great bigge barre of Iron, This vertue hath it, as a speciall token, The Lodestone hath no power to draw away The Iron barre, but in one place doth stay.
Yet with a Goates warme, fresh and liuely blood, This Adaman doth breake and riue in sunder, That many mightie, huge strokes hath withstood: But I will tell you of a greater wonder, It reconciles the womans loue being lost, And giueth proofe of Chastnesse without cost. The purple colourd Amatit doth preuaile Against the wit-oppressing Drunkennesse, If euill Cogitations do assaile Thy sleepie thoughts wrapt vp in heauinesse, It soone will driue them from thy minds disturbing, And temporize thy braine that is offending. The white-veind enterlin'd stone Achates, Bespotted here and there with spots like blood, Makes a man gracious in the peoples eyes, And for to cleare the sight is passing good: It remedieth the place that's venemous, And in the fire smels odoriferous. The Gemme Amatites hath this qualitie, Let a man touch his vesture with the same, And it resisteth fier mightily: The vertue doth the force of burning ame, And afterwards cast in the fiers light, Burnes not at all, but then it seemes most bright. The faire stone Berrill is so precious, That mightie men do hold it verie rare: It frees a man from actions perillous,
If of his lifes deare blood he haue a care, And now and then being put into the Eyes, Defends a man from all his enemies. The stone Ceranicum spotted ore with blue, Being safe and chastly borne within the hand, Thunders hote raging cracks that do ensue It doth expell, and Lightnings doth withstand, Defending of the house that many keepe, And is effectuall to bring men asleepe. The Diamond the worlds reflecting eye, The Diamond the heauens bright shining starre, The Diamond the earths most purest glorie: And with the Diamond no Stone n compare; She teacheth men to speake, and men to loue, If all her rarest vertues you will proue. The Diamond taught Musicke first his cunning, The Diamond taught Poetry her skill, The Diamond gaue Lawyers first their learning, Arithmeticke the Diamond taught at will: She teacheth all Arts: for within her eye, The knowledge of the world doth safely lye. Dradocos is a stone that's pale and wan, It brings to some men thoughts fantasticall: It being layd vpon a cold dead Man, Loseth the vertue it is grac'd withall; Wherefore tis called the most holy stone: For▪ whereas Death frequenteth it is gone.
Achites is in colour violet, Found on the Bankes of this delightsome place, Both male and female in this Land we get: Whose vertue doth the Princely Eagle grace; For being borne by her into her nest, She bringeth foorth her young ones with much rest. This stone being bound fast to a womans side, Within whose purest wombe her child is lying, Doth hasten child-birth, and doth make her bide But litle paine, her humours is releasing. If anie one be guiltie of Deceit, This stone will cause him to forsake his meate. Enidros is the stone thats alwayes sweating, Distilling liquid drops continually: And yet for all his daily moisture melting, It keepes the selfe same bignesse stedfastly: It neuer lesseneth, nor doth fall away, But in one stedfast perfectnesse doth stay. Perpetui fletus lachrymas distillat Enidros, Qui velut ex pleni fontis scaturigine manat. Gagates smelling like to Frankensence, Being left whereas the poisnous Serpents breed, Driues them away, and doth his force commence, Making this beast on barren plaines to feed, And there to starue and pine away for meate, Because being there he finds no food to eate. This stone being put in a faire womans drinke,
Will testifie her pure Virginitie, A most rare thing that some men neuer thinke, Yet you shall giue your iugdement easily, For if she make her water presently, Then hath this Woman lost her honestie. The lacinth is a neighbour to the Saphire, That doth transforme it selfe to sundrie sights, Sometimes tis blacke and cloudie, sometimes el And from the mutable ayre borrowes lights: It giueth strength and vigor in his kind, And faire sweete quiet sleepe brings to the n Rabiates being clearely coloured, Borne about one doth make him eloquent, And in great honour to be fauoured, If he do vse it to a good intent, Foule venemous Serpents it doth bring in awe, And cureth paine and griefe about the awe. The iron-drawing Lode-stone if you set Within a vessell, either Gold or Brasse, And place a peece of Iron vnder it, Of some indifferent size or smallest compasse, The Lodestone on the top will cause it moue, And by his vertue meete with it aboue. The Meade stone coloured like the grassie greene, Much gentle ease vnto the Goute hath donne, And helpeth those being troubled with the Spleene, Mingled with Womans milke bearing a Sonne:
It remedih the wit-assailing Frenzie, And purgeth the sad mind of Melancholie. The stone Orites spotted ore with white, Being worne, or hung about a womans necke, Prohibiteth Conception and Delight, And the child-bearing wombe by force doth checke: Or else it hast'neth her deliuerie, And makes the birth vnperfect and vntimely. Skie colour'd Saphire Kings and Princes weare, Being held most precious in their iudging sight: The veie touch of this doth throughly cure The Carbuncles enraging hatefull spight: It doth delight and recreate the Eyes, And all base grossenesse it doth quite despise. If in a boxe you put an inuenomd Spider, Whose poisonous operation is annoying, And on the boxes top lay the true Saphire, The vertue of his power shewes vs his cunning, He vanquisheth the Spider, leaues him dead, And to Apollo now is consecrated. The fresh greene colour'd Smaragd doth excell All Trees, Boughs, Plants, and new fresh springing Leaues: The hote reflecting Sunne can neuer quell His vertue, that no eye-sight ere deceiues, But ore faire Phoebus glorie it triumpheth, And the dimme duskie Eyes it polisheth.
The valiant Caesar tooke his chiefe delight, By looking on the  excellence, To see his Romane souldiers how they fight, And view what wards they had for their defence, And who exceld in perfect chiualrie, And noblest bore himselfe in victorie. This Stone doth serue to Diuination, To tell of things to come, and things being past, And mongst vs held in estimation, Giuing the sicke mans meate a gentle tast: If things shall be, it keepes in the Mind, If not, forgetfulnesse our Eyes doth blind. The Turches being worne in a Ring, If any Gentleman haue cause to ride, Supports, and doth sustaine him from all falling▪ Or hurting of him selfe what ere betide: And ere he suffer anie fearefull danger, Will fall it selfe, and breake, and burst a sunder. . These wondrous things of Nature to mens eare Will almost proue (sweete Nature) incredible, But by Times ancient record it appeares, These hidden secrets to be memorable: For his diuinesse that hath wrought this wonder, Rules men and beasts, the lightning and the thunder. . For the worlds blindnesse and opinion, I care not Phoenix, they are misbeleeuing, And if their eyes trie not conclusion,
They will not trust a strangers true reporting. With Beasts and Birds I will conclude my storie, And to that All-in-all yeeld perfect glorie. In yonder woodie groue and fertile plaine, Remaines the Leopard and the watrie Badger, The Bugle or wild Oxe doth there remaine, The Onocentaure and the cruell Tyger, The Dromiduy and the princely Lion, The Bore, the Elephant, and the poisnous Dragon. The strong neck'd Bull that neuer flt the yoke, The Cat, the Dog, the Wolfe, and cruell Viper, The lurking Hare that pretie sport prouokes, The Goatebucke, Hedgehogge and the swift foote Pnther, The Horse, Cameleopard and strong pawd Beare, The Ape, the Asse▪ and the most fearefull Deare. The Mouse, the Mule, the Sow and Salamander, That from the burning fire cannot liue, The Weasell, Cammell and the hunted Beauer, That in pursute away his stones doth giue: The Stellio, Camelion and Vnicorne, That doth expell hot poison with his Hore. The cruell Beare in her conception, Brings forth at first a thing that's indigest, A lump of flesh without all fashion, Which she by often licking brings to rest▪ Making a formall body good and sound, Which often in this Iland we haue found.
Hic format lingua foetum, quem protulit Vrsa. The great wild Bore of nature terrible, With two strong Tushes for his Armorie, Sometimes assailes the Beare most horrible, And twixt them is a fight both fierce and deadly: He hunteth after Marioram and Organie, Which as a whetstone doth his need supplie. The Bugle or wild Oxe is neuer tam'd, But with an iron ring put through his snout, That of some perfect strength must needs be fram'd, Then may you leade him all the world about: The Huntsmen find him hung within a tree, Fast by the hornes and then thy vse no pittie. The Camell is of nature flexible, For when a burden on his backe is bound, To ease the labourer, he is knowne most gentle, For why he kneeleth downe vpon the ground: Suffering the man to put it off or on, As it seemes best in his discretion. They liue some fiftie or some hundred yeares, And can remaine from water full foure dayes, And most delight to drinke when there appeares, A muddie spring that's troubled many wayes: Betweene them is a naturall honest care, If one conioyneth with his Damme, tis rae. The Dragon is a poisnous venom'd beast,
With whom the Elephant is at enmitie, And in contention they do neuer rest, Till one hath slaine the other cruelly: The Dragon with the Elephant tries a fall, And being vnder he is slaine withall. The bunch-backt, big-bon'd, swift-foote Dromidary Of Dromas the Greeke word borrowing the nam, For his quicke flying speedy property: Which easily these countrey men do tame, Hel'go a hundreth miles within one day, And neuer seeke in any place to stay. The Dogge a naturall, kind, and louing thing, As witnesseth our Histories of old: Their maister dead, the poore foole with lamenting Doth kill himselfe before accounted bold: And would defend his maister if he might, When cruelly his foe begins to fight. The Elephant with tushes Iuorie▪ Is a great friend to man as he doth trauell: The Dragon hating man most spitefully, The Elephant doth with the Dragon quarell: And twixt them two is a most deadly strife, Till that the man be past, and sau'd his life. The Elephant seene in Astronomy, Will euery month play the Phisition: Taking delight his cunning for to try, Giuing himselfe a sweete purgation▪
And to the running springs himselfe addresse, And in the same wash off his filthinesse. The Gote-bucke is a beast lasciuious, And giuen much to filthy venerie; Apt and prone to be contentious, Seeking by craft to kill his enemy: His bloud being warme suppleth the Adamant, That neither fire or force could euer daunt. The Hedghogge hath a sharpe quicke thorned garment, That on his backe doth serue him for defence: He can presage the winds incontinent, And hath good knowledge in the diference Betweene the Southerne and the Northren wind, These vertues are allotted him by kind. Wheron in Constantinople that great City, A marchant in his garden gaue one nourishment: By which he knew the windstrue certainty, Because the Hedgehogge gaue him iust presagement: Apples, or peares, or grapes, such is his meate, Which on his backe he caries for to ate. The spotted Linx in face much like a Lyon, His vrine is of such a qualitie, In time it turneth to a precious stone, Called Ligaris for his property: He hateth man so much, that he doth hide His vrine in the earth, not to be spide.
The princely Lion King of forrest-Kings, And chiefe Commaunder of the Wildernesse, At whose faire feete all Beasts lay downe their offrings, Yeelding alleageance to his worthinesse: His strength remaineth most within his head, His vertue in his heart is compassed. He neuer wrongs a man, nor hurts his pray, If they will yeeld submissiue at his feete, He knoweth when the Lionesse playes false play, If in all kindnesse he his loue do meete: He doth defend the poore and innocent, And those that cruel-hearted Beasts haue rent. Then is't not pittie that the craftie Foxe, The rauenous Wolfe, the Tyger, and the Beare, The slow-past-dull-brain'd heauie Oxe, Should striue so good a state to ouerweare? The Lion sleepes and laughes to see them striue, But in the end leaues not a beast aliue. The Onocentaur is a monstrous beast; Supposed halfe a man and halfe an asse, That neuer shuts his eyes in quiet rest, Till he his foes deare life hath round encompast, Such were the Centaures in their tyrannie, That liu'd by humane flesh and villanie. The Stellio is a beast that takes his breath, And liueth by the deaw thats heauenly, Taking his Food and Spirit of the earth,
And so maintaines his life in chastitie, He takes delight to counterfeit all colours, And yet for all this he is vemous. . Tis strange to heare such perfect difference, In all things that his Mght  hath ram'd Tis strange to heare their  of denc, Amongst all creatures that my Nurse hath nam'd: Are there no Wormes nor Serpents to be found In this sweete smelling Ile and fuitfull ground? Nature. Within a little corner towards the Fat, A moosh plot of earth and dampish place, Some creeping Wormes and Serpents vs to rest, And in a manner doth this bad ground grace: It is vnpeopled and vnhabited, For there with poisonous ayre they are ed. Hre liues the Worme, te Gnat and Grashopper, Rinatrix, Liard and the fruitfull Bee, Te Mothe, Chelidras, and the Bloodsucker, That from the flsh sukes bloud most speedily: Cerastis, Aspis and the Crocadile, That doth the way-faring passenger beguile. The labouring Ant, and the bespeckled Adder, The rogge, the Tode, and Smmer-hauting lie, The prettie Silkeworme, and the poisnous  iper, That with his teeth doth wound most cruely: The Hornet and the poisonous Cockatice, That kils all birds by a most se deuice.
The Aspis is a kind of deadly Snake, He hurts most perillous with venom'd sting, And in pursute doth neare his foe forsake, But slaies a Man with poysnous venoming: Betweene the male and female is such loue, As is betwixt the most kind Turtle doue. This is the Snake that Cleopatra vsed, The Egyptian Queene belou'd of Anthony, That with her breasts deare bloud was nourished, Making her die (faire soule) most patiently, Rather then Caesars great victorious hand, Should triumph ore the Queene of such a land. The Lizard is a kind of louing creature, Especially to man he is a friend: This propety is giuen him by nature, From dangerous beasts poore Man he doth defend: For being sleepy he all sence forsaketh, The Lizard bites him till the Man awaketh. The Ant or Emote is a labouring thing, And haue amongst them all a publike weale, In sommer time their meate they are prouiding, And secrets mongst themselues they do conceale: The monstrous huge big Beare being sickly, Eating of these, is cured presently. The fruitfull prety Bee liues in the hiue, Which vnto him is like a peopled City, And by their daily labour there they thriue,
Bringing home honied waxe continually: They are reputed ciuill, and haue kings, And guides for to direct them in proceedings. When that their Emperour or King is present, They liue in peacefull sort and quietnesse, But if their officer or king be absent, They flie and swarme abroad in companies: If any happen casuall-wise to dye, They mourne and bury him right solemnly. The Crocadile a saffron colour'd Snake, Sometimes vpon the earth is conuersant, And other times liues in a filthy lake, Being oppressed with foule needy want: The skin vpon his backe as hard as stone, Resisteth violent strokes of steele or iron. Rinatrix is a poysenous enuenom'd Serpent, That doth infect the riuers and the fountaines, Bringing to cattell hurt and detiment: When thirsty they forsake the steepy mountaines, Rinatrix violator Aquae, and infects the earth, With his most noysome stinking filthy breath. The Scorpion hath a deadly stinging taile, Bewitching some with his faire smiling face, But presently with force he doth assaile His captiu'd praie, and brings him to disgrace: Wherefore tis cald of some the flattering worme, That subtilly his foe doth ouerturne.
Orion made his boast the earth should bring O yeeld no serpent forth but he would kill it, Were presently the Scorpion vp did spring, For so the onely powers aboue did will it: Where in the peoples presence they did see, Orion stung to death most cruelly. Of Wormes are diuers sorts and diuers names, Some feeding on hard timber some on trees, Some in the earth a secret cabbine frames, Some ue on tops of Ashes, some on Oiues; Some of a red watrish colour, some of greene, And some within the night like Fire are seene. Te Silkworme by whose Webbe our Silkes are made, Fo she doth dayly labour with her weauing, A Worme that's rich and precious in her trade, That whilst poore soule she toyleth in her spinning, Leaues noting in her belly but empty aire, And toyling too much falleth to despaire. Here liues the Caddes and the long leg'd Crane, With whome the Pigmies are at mortall , The Larke and Lapwing that with nets are tane, And so poore silly soules do end their life: The Nightingale wrong'd by Adulterie, The Nightrow, Goshawke, and the chattring Pi. The Pheasant Storke, and the high towring Faulcon▪ The Swanne that in the  takes delight, Te , Blackebird, and the big neck'd Heron,
The skreeching Owle that loues the uskie night, The Partridge, Griffon, and th liely Peacocke, The Linnet, Bulsinch, Snipe, and rauening Puttocke▪ The Robin Redrest that in Winter igs, The Pellican, the ay, and the chirping Sparrow, The little Wrn that many yong ones brings, Herin, Ibis, and the swift wingd Swallow: The princely Eagle and Caladrius, The Cuckow that to some is prosperous. The snow-like colour'd bird Caladrius, Hath this inestimable naturall properitie, If any man in sicknesse dangerous, Hopes of his health to haue recouerie, This bird will alwayes looke with chearefull glance, If otherwise, sad is his countenance. The Crane directed by the leaders voice, Flies ore the seas, to countries farre vnknowne, And in the secret night they do reioice, To make a watch among them of their owne; The watchman in his clawes holds fast a stone, Which letting fall the rest are wak'd anone. The Spring-delighting bird we call the Cuckow▪ Which comes to tell of wonders in this age, Her prettie one note to the world doth show Some men their destinie, and doth presage The womans pleasure and the mans disgrace, Which she sits singing in a secret place.
The Winters enuious blast she neuer tasteth, Yet in all countries doth the Cuckoe sing, And oftentimes to peopled townes she hasteth, There for to tell the pleasures of the Spring: Great Courtiers heare her voyce, but let her flye, Knowing that she presageth Destiny. This prety bird sometimes vpon the steeple, Sings Cuckoe, Cuckoe, to the parish Priest, Sometimes againe she flies amongst the people, Ad on their Crosse no man can her resst, But there she sings, yet some disdaining Dames, Do charme her hoarse, lest she should hit their names. She scornes to labour or make vp a nest, But creepes by stealth into some others roome, And with the Larkes deare yong, her yong-ones rest, Being by subile dealing ouercome: The yong birds are restoratiue to eate, And held amongst vs as a Princes meate. The Princely Eagle of all Birds the King, For none but she can gaze against the Sunne, Her eye-sight is so cleare, that in her flying She spies the smallest beast that euer runne, As swift as gun-shot vsing no delay, So swifly doth she flie to catch her pray. She brings her birds being yong into the aire, And sets them for to looke on Phoebus light, But if their eyes with gazing chance to water,
Those she accounteth bastards, leaues them quight, But those that haue true perfect constant eyes, She cherisheth, the rest she doth despise. The Griffon is a bird rich feathered, His head is like a Lion, and his flight Is like the Eagles, much for to be feared, For why he kils men in the vgly night: Some say he keepes the Smaragd and the Iasper, And in pursute of Man is monstrous eager. The gentle birds called the faire Hircinie, Taking the name of that place where they breed, Within the night they shine so gloriously, That mans astonied senses they do feed: For in the darke being cast within the way, Giues light vnto the man that goes astray. Ibis the bird flieth to Nilus flood, And drinking of the water purgeth cleane: Vnto the land of Aegypt he doth good, For he to rid their Serpents is a meane; He feedeth on their egges, and doth destroy The Serpents nests that would their Clime annoy. The Lapwing hath a piteous mournefull cry, And sings a sorowfull and heauy song, But yet shee's full of craft and subtilty, And weepeth most being farthest from her yong: In elder age she seru'd for Southsayers, And was a Prophetesse to the Augurers.
The birds of Aegypt or Mmnodides, Of Menon that was slaine in rescuing Troy, Are said to flie away in companis, To Priams pallace, and there twice a day They fight about the turrets of the dead, And the third day in battell are confounded. The Nightingale the nights true Chorister, Musickes chiefe loer in the pleasant Spring, Tunes Hunts-vp to the Sunne that doth delight her, And to Arions harp aloud will sing: And as a Bridegroome that to hurch is comming, So he salutes the Sunne when he is rising. The Romane Caesars, happie Emperors, Especially those of the yongest sort, Haue kept the Nightingale within their towers, To play, to daly, and to make them sport, And oftentimes in Greeke and Latine tong, They taught those birds to sing a pleasant song. This bird as Histories make mention, Sng in the infant mouth of Stesichors, Wich did foretell due commendation, In all his actions to be prosperous: So Bees when Plato in his bed did lie, Swarm'd round about his mouth, leauing their honie. The slggish slouthfull and the dastard Owle, Hating the day, and louing of the night, About old sepulchers doth dayly owle,
Frequenting barnes and houses without light, And hides him often in an Iuy tree, Least with small chattring birds wrong'd he should be. Foedaque sic volucris venturi nuntia luctus, Ignauus Bubo, dirum mortalibus omen. The filthy messenger of ill to come The sluggish Owle is, and to danger some. This ill be dooming Owle sate on the speare, Of warlike Pirrhus marching to the field, When to the Graecian armie he drew neare, Determining to make his foes to yeeld, Which did foreshew sinister happinesse, And balefull fortune in his businesse. The Parrat cald the counterfeiting bird, Deckt with all colours that faire Flora yeelds, That after one will speake you word for word: Liuing in wooddie groues neare fertile fields, They haue bene knowne to giue great Emperors wine, And therefore some men hold them for deuine. The proud sun-brauing Peacocke with his feathers, Walkes all along, thinking himselfe a King, And with his voyce prognosticates all weathers, Although God knowes but badly he doth sing: But when he lookes downe to his base blacke Feete, He droopes, and is asham'd of things vnmeete. The mighty Macedonian Alexander,
Marching in louely triumph to his foes, Being accounted the worlds conquerour, In Indie spies a Peacocke as he goes, And maruelling to see so rich a sight, Charg'd all men not to kill his sweete delight. The Pellican the wonder of our age, (As Ierome saith) reuiues her tender yong, And with her purest bloud, she doth asswage Her yong ones thirst, with poisonous Adder stong, And those that were supposed three dayes dead. She giues them life once more being nourished. The vnsatiate Sparrow doth prognosticate, And is held good for diuination, For flying here and there, from gate to gate, Foretls true things by animaduertion: A flight of Sparrowes flying in the day, Did prophesie the fall and sacke of Troy. The artificiall nest-composing Swallow, That eates his meate lying along the way, Whose swiftnesse in our eysight doth allow, That no imperiall Bird makes her his pray: His yong ones being hurt within the eies, His helpes them with the hebe Calcedonies. Cecinna and the great Volateran, Being Pompis warlike and approued knights, Sent letters by these Birds without a man, To many of their friends and chiefe delights,
And all their letters to their feete did ti, Which with great speed did bring them hastily. The sweet recording Swanne Apolloes ioy, And firy scorched Phaetons delight, In footed verse sings out his deep annoy, And to the siluer riuers takes his flight, Prognosticates to Sailers on the seas, Fortunes prosperitie and perfect ase. Cignus in auspicijs semper laetissimus ales, Hoc optant nautae, quia se non mergit in vndis. Phoenix. But what sad-mournefull drooping soule is this, Within whose watry eyes sits Discontent, Whose snaile-pac'd gate tels someting is amisse: From whom is banisht sportig Meriment: Whose feathers mowt off, falling as he goes, The perfect picture of hart pining woes? Nature. This is the carefull bird the Turtle Doue, Whose heauy croking note doth shew his griefe, And thus he wanders seeking of his loue, Refusing all things that may yeeld reliefe: All motions of good turnes, all Mirth and Ioy, Are bad, fled, gone, and fane into decay. Phoenix. Is this the true example of the Heart? Is this the Tutor of faire Constancy? Is this Loues treasure, and Loues pining smart? Is this the substance of all honesty?
And comes he thus attir'd, alas poore soule, That Destinies foule wrath should thee controule. See Nourse, he stares and lookes me in the face, And now he mournes, worse then he did before, He hath forgot his dull slow heauy pace, But with swift gate he eyes vs more and more: O shall I welcome him, and let me borrow Some of his griefe to mingle with my sorrow. Nature. Farwell faire bird, Ile leaue you both alone, This is the Doue you long'd so much to see, And this will proue companion of your mone, An Vmpire of all true humility: Then note my Phoenix, what there may ensue, And so I kisse my bird. Adue, Adue. Phoenix. Mother farewell; and now within his eyes, Sits sorrow clothed in a sea of teares, And more and more the billowes do arise: Pale Griefe halfe pin'd vpon his brow appeares, His feathers fade away, and make him looke, As if his name were writ in Deaths pale booke. Turtl. O stay poore Turtle, whereat hast thou gazed, At the eye-dazling Sunne, whose sweete reflection, The round encompast heauenly world amazed? O no, a child of Natures true complexion, The perfect Phoenix of rariety, For wit, for vertue, and excelling beauty.
Haile map of sorrow: Tur. Welcome Cupids child. Let me wipe off those teares vpon thy cheekes, That stain'd thy beauties pride, and haue defil'd Nature it selfe, that so vsurping seekes To sit vpon thy face, for Ile be partener, Of thy harts wrapped sorrow more hereafter. Trte. Natures faire darling, let me kneele to thee, And offer vp my true obedience, And sacredly in all humility, Craue pardon for presumptions foule offence: Thy lawne-snow-colour'd hand shall not come neare My impure face, to wipe away one teare. My teares are for my Turtle that is dead, My sorrow springs from her want that is gone, My heauy note sounds for the soule that's fled, And I will dye for him left all alone: I am not liuing, though I seeme to go, Already buried in the graue of wo. Phoenix. Why I haue left Arabia for thy sake, Because those fires haue no working substance, And for to find thee out did vndertake: Where on the mountaine top we may aduance Our fiery alter; let me tell thee this, Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris. Come poore lamenting soule, come sit by me, We are all one, thy sorrow shall be mine, Fall thou a teare, and thou shalt plainly see,
Mine eyes shall answer teare for teare of thine: Sigh thou, Ile sigh, and if thou giue a grone, I shall be dead in answering of thy mone. Turtle. Loues honorable Friend, one grone of yours, Will rend my sicke-loue-pining hart asunder, One sigh brings teares from me like Aprill showers, Procur'd by Sommers hote loud cracking thunder: Be you as mery as sweet mirth may be, Ile grone and sigh, both for your selfe and me. Phoenix. Thou shalt not gentle Turtle, I will beare Halfe of the burdenous yoke thou dost sustaine, Two bodies may with greater ease outweare A troublesome labour, then Ile brooke some paine, But tell me gentle Turtle, tell me truly The difference betwixt false Loue and true Sinceritie. Turtle. That shall I briefly, if youle giue me leaue, False loue is full of Enuie and Deceit, With cunning shifts our humours to deceiue, Laying downe poison for a sugred baite, Alwayes in constant, false, and variable, Delighting in fond change and mutable. True loue, is louing pure, not to be broken, But with an honest eye, she eyes her louer, Not changing variable, nor neuer shoken With fond Suspition, secrets to discouer, True loue will tell no lies, nor ne're dissemble, But with a bashfull modest feare will tremble.
False loue puts on a Maske to shade her folly, True loue goes naked wishing to be seene, False loue will counterfeite perpetually, True loue is Troths sweete emperizing Queene This is the difference, true Loue is a iewell, False loue, hearts tyrant, inhumane, and cruell. Phoenix. What may we wonder at? O where is learning? Where is all difference twixt the good and bad? Where is Apelles art? where is true cunning? Nay where is all the vertue may be had? Within my Turtles bosome, she refines, More then some louing perfect true deuines. Thou shalt not be no more the Turtle-Doue, Thou shalt no more go weeping al alone, For thou shalt be my selfe, my perfect Loue, Thy griefe is mine, thy sorrow is my mone, Come kisse me sweetest sweete, O I do blesse This gracious luckie Sun-shine happinesse. Turtl. How may I in all gratefulnesse requite, This gracious fauor offred to thy seruant? The time affordeth heauinesse not delight, And to the times appoint weele be obseruant: Command, O do commaund, what ere thou wilt, My hearts bloud for thy sake shall straight be spilt. Phoenix. Then I command thee on thy tender care, And chiefe obedience that thou owst to me, That thou especially (deare Bird) beware
Of impure thoughts, or vncleane chastity: For we must wast together in that fire, That will not burne but by true Loues desire. Turtle. A spot of that foule monster neare did staine, These drooping feathers, nor I neuer knew In what base filthy clymate doth remaine That spright incarnate; and to tell you true, I am as spotlesse as the purest whight, Cleare without staine, of enuy, or despight. Phix. Then to yon next adioyning groue we'le lye, And gather sweete wood for to make our flame, And in a manner sacrificingly, Burne both our bodies to reuiue one name: And in all humblenesse we will intreate, The hot earth parching Sunne to lend his heate. Turtle. Why now my heart is light, this very doome Hath banisht sorrow from my pensiue breast: And in my bosome there is left no roome, To set blacke melancholy, or let him rest; Ile fetch sweete mirrhe to burne, and licorice, Sweete Iuniper, and straw them ore with spice. Phonix. Pile vp the wood, and let vs inuocate His great name that doth ride within his chariot, And guides the dayes bright eye, let's nominate Some of his blessings, that he well may wot, Our faithfull seruice and humility, Offer'd vnto his highest Deiety.
Great God Apollo, for the tender loue, Thou once didst beare to wilfull Phaeton, That did desire thy chariots rule aboue, Which thou didst grieue in hart to thinke vpon: Send thy hot kindling light into this wood, That shall receiue the Sacrifice of bloud. rtle. For thy sweet Daphnes sake thy best beloued, And for the Harpe receiu'd of Mercury, And for the Muses of thee fauored, Whose gift of wit excels all exellency: Send thy hot kindling fire into this wood, That shall receiue the Sacrifice of bloud. For thy sweet fathers sake great Iupiter, That with his thunder-bolts commands the earth, And for Latonas sake thy gentle mother, That first gaue Phoebus glories liuely breath: Send thy hot kindling light into this wood, That shall receiue the Sacrifice of bloud. Stay, stay, poore Turtle, ô we are betraid, Behind yon little bush there sits a spy, That makes me blush with anger, halfe afraid, That in our motions secrecly would pry: I will go chide with him, and driue him thence, And plague him for presumptions foule offence. Turtl▪ Be not affraid, it is the Pellican, Looke how her yong-ones make her brest to bleed, And drawes the bloud foorth, do the best she can,
And with the same their hungry fancies feede, Let her alone to vew our Tragedy, And then report our Loue that she did see. See beauteous Phoenix it begins to burne, O blessed Phoebus, happy, happy light, Now will I recompence thy great good turne, And first (deare bird) Ile vanish in thy sight, And thou shalt see with what a quicke desire, Ile leape into the middle of the fire. Phoenix▪ Stay Turtle stay, for I will first prepare; Of my bones must the Princely Phoenix rise, And ift be possible thy bloud wele spare, For none but for my sake, dost thou despise This frailty of thy life, ô liue thou still, And teach the base deceitfull world Loues will. urtle. Haue I come hither drooping through the woods, And left the springing groues to seeke for thee? Haue I forsooke to bath me in the flouds, And pin'd away in carefull misery? Do not deny me Phoenix I must be A partner in this happy Tragedy. Phix. O holy, sacred, and pure perfect fire, More pure then that ore which faire Dido mones, More sacred in my louing kind desire, Then that which burnt old Esons aged bones, Accept into your euer hallowed flame, Two bodies, from the which may spring one name.
urtle. O sweet perfumed flame, made of those trees, Vnder the which the Muses nine haue song The praise of vertuous maids in misteries, To whom the faire fac'd Nymphes did often throng; Accept my body as a Sacrifice Into your flame, of whom one name may rise. Phoenix. O wilfulnesse, see how with smiling cheare, My poore deare hart hath flong himselfe to thrall, Looke what a mirthfull countenance he doth beare, Spreading his wings abroad, and ioyes withall: Learne thou corrupted world, learne, heare, and see, Friendships vnspotted true sincerity. I come sweet Turtle, and with my bright wings, I will embrace thy burnt bones as they lye, I hope of these another Creature springs, That shall possesse both our authority: I stay to long, ô take me to your glory, And thus I end the Turtle Doues true story. Finis. R. C. Pellican. VVHat wondrous hart-grieuing spectacle, Hast thou beheld the worlds true miracle? With what a spirit did the Turtle flye Into the fire, and chearfully did dye? He look't more pleasant in his countenance Within the flame, then when he did aduance, His pleasant wings vpon the naturall ground,
True perfect loue had so his poore heart bound, The Phoenix Natures deare adopted child, With a pale heauy count'nance, wan and mild, Grieu'd for to see him first possesse the place, That was allotted her, her selfe to grace, And followes cheerfully her second turne, And both together in that fire do burne. O if the rarest creatures of the earth, Because but one at once did ere take breath Within the world, should with a second he, A perfect forme of loue and amitie Burne both together, what should there arise, And be presented to our mortall eyes, Out of the fire, but a more perfect creature? Because that two in one is put by Nature, The one hath giuen the child inchaunting beautie, The other giues it loue and chastitie: The one hath giuen it wits rarietie, The other guides the wit most charily: The one for vertue doth excell the rest, The other in true constancie is blest. If that the Phoenix had bene separated, And from the gentle Turtle had bene parted, Loue had bene murdred in the infancie, Without these two no loue at all can be. Let the loue wandring wits but learne of these, To die together, so their griefe to ease: But louers now adayes do loue to change, And here and there their wanton eyes do range▪ Not pleased with one choise, but seeking many, And in the end scarce is content with any:
Loue now adayes is like a shadowed sight, That shewes it slfe in Phohus golden light, But if in kindnesse you do striue to take it, Fades cleane away, and you must needs for sake it. Louers are like the leaues with Winter shoken, Brittle like glasse, that with one fall is broken. O fond corrupted age, when birds shall show The world their dutie, and to let men know That no sinister chaunce should hinder loue, Though as these two did, deaths arrest they proue. I can but mourne with sadnesse and with griefe, Not able for to yeeld the world reliefe, To see these two consumed in the fire, Whom Loue did copulate with true desire: But in the worlds wide eare I meane to ring The fame of this dayes wondrous offring, That they may sing in notes of Chastitie, The Turtle and the Phoenix amitie. Conclusion. GEntle conceiuers of true meaning Wit, Let good Experience iudge what I haue writ, For the Satyricall fond applauded vaines, Whose bitter worme-wood spirite in some straines, Bite like the Curres of Aegypt those that loue them, Let me alone, I will be loth to moue them, For why, when mightie men their wit do proue, How shall I least of all expect their loue? Yet to those men I gratulate some paine, Because they touch those that in art do faine▪
But those that haue the spirit to do good, Their whips will will neuer draw one drop of bloud: To all and all in all that view my labour, Of euery iudging sight I craue some fauour At least to reade, and if you reading find, A lame leg'd staffe, tis lamenesse of the mind That had no better skill: yet let it passe, For burdnous lodes are set vpon an Asse. From the sweet fire of perfumed wood, Another princely Phoenix vpright stood: Whose feathers purified did yeeld more light, Then her late burned mother out of sight, And in her heart restes a perpetuall loue, Sprong from the bosome of the Turtle-Doue. Long may the new vprising bird increase, Some humors and some motions to release, And thus to all I offer my deuotion, Hoping that gentle minds accept my motion. Finis. R. C. Cantoes Alphabet-wise to faire Phoe∣nix made by the Paphian Doue. A. 1. A Hill, a hill, a Phoenix seekes a Hill; A promontorie top, a stately Mountaine, A Riuer, where poore soule she dippes her bill, And that sweete siluer streame is Natures fountaine, Accomplishing all pleasures at her will: Ah, be my Phoenix, I will be thy Doue, And thou and I in secrecie will loue.
B. 2. Blaze not my loue, thou Herald of the day, Blesse not the mountaine tops with my sweet shine, Beloued more I am then thou canst say, Blessed and blessed be that Saint of mine, Balme, honie sweet, and honor of this Clime: Blotted by things vnseene, belou'd of many, But Loues true motion dares not giue to any. C. 3. Chastnesse farewell, farewell the bed of Glorie, Constraint adew, thou art loues Enemie, Come true Report, make of my Loue a Storie, Cast lots for my poore heart, so thou enioy me, Come come sweet Phoenix, I at length do claime thee, Chaste bird, too chaste, to hinder what is willing, Come in mine armes and wele not sit a billing. D. 4. Deuout obedience on my knees I profer, Delight matcht with delight, if thou do craue it, Denie not gentle Phoenix my sweet offer, Despaire not in my loue, for thou shalt haue it, Damne not the soule to woe if thou canst saue it: Doues pray deuoutly, O let me request, Delicious loue to build within thy nest. E. 5. Enuie is banisht, do not thou despaire, Euill motions tempt thee sooner then the good: Enrich thy beautie that art fam'd for faire, Euery thing's silent to conioyne thy blood, Esteeme the thing that cannot be withstood: Esteeme of me, and I will lend thee fire,
Euen of mine owne to fit thy sweet desire. F. 6. Faint harted soule, why dost thou die thy cheekes, Fearfll of that which will reuiue thy sence, Faith and obedience thy sweet mercy seekes, Friends plighted war with thee I will commence, Feare not at all, tis but sweet Loues offence, Fit to be done, so doing tis not seene, Fetcht from the ancient records of a Queene. G. 7. Gold beautifying Phoenix, I must praise thee, Granut gracious heauens a delightsome Muse, Giue me old Homers spirit, and Ile raise thee, Gracious in thought do not my Loue refuse, Great map of beauty make thou no excuse, Gainst my true louing spirit do not carpe, Grant me to play my Sonnet on thy Harpe. H. 8. Health to thy vertues, health to all thy beauty, Honour attend thy steps when thou art going, High heauens force the birds to owe thee duty; Hart-groning care to thee still stands a woing, Haue pitty on him Phoenix for so doing: Helpe his disease, and cure his malady, Hide not thy secret glory least he die. I. 9. I Loue, ô Loue how thou abusest me, I see the fire, and warme me with the flame, I note the errors of thy deity: In Vestas honor, Venus lusts to tame, I in my humors yeeld thee not a name,
I count thee foolish,  Adultrous boy, I touch the sweete, but cannot tast the ioy. K. 10. Kisses are true loues pledges, kisse thy deare Turtle, Keepe not from him the secrets of thy youth: Knowledge he'le teach thee vnder a greene spred Mirtle▪ Kend shalt thou be of no man, of my truth, Know first the motion, when the life ensueth: Knocke at my harts dore, I will be thy porter, So thou wilt let me enter in thy dorter. L. 11. Loue is my great Aduotrix, at thy shrine Loue pleads for me, and from my tongue doth say, Lie where thou wilt, my hart shall sleepe with thine, Lamenting of thy beauty fresh as May, Looke Phoenix to thy selfe do not decay: Let me but water thy dead saplesse floure, Loue giues me hope t'will flourish in an houre. M. 12. Make not a Iewell of nice Chastity, Muster and summon all thy wits in one, My heart to thee sweares perfect constancy: Motions of zeale are to be thought vpon, Marke how thy time is ouerspent, and gone, Mis-led by folly, and a kind of feare, Marke not thy beauty so my dearest deare. N. 13. Note but the fresh bloom'd Rose within her pride, (No Rose to be compared vnto thee) Nothing so soone vnto the ground will slide, Not being gathered in her chiefest beauty,
Neglecting time it dies with infamy: Neuer be coy, lest whil'st thy leaues are spred, None gather thee, and then thy grace is dead. O. 14. O looke vpon me, and within my brow, Officious motions of my hart appeares, Opening the booke of Loue, wherein I vow, Ouer thy shrine to shed continuall teares: O no, I see my Phoenix hath no Eares, Or if she haue Eares, yet no Eyes to see▪ O all disgraced with continuall follie. P. 15. Proud Chastity, why dost thou seeke to wrong Phoenix my Loue, with lssons too precise? Pray thou for me, and I will make a song, Pend in thine honor, none shall equalize, Possesse not her, whose beauty charmes mine eyes, Plead, sue, and seeke, or I will banish thee, Her body is my Castle and my fee. Q. 16. Question not Phoenix why I do adore thee, Quite captiuate and prisner at thy call, Quit me with Loue againe, do not abhor me, Queld downe with hope as subiugate to thrall, Quaild will I neuer be despight of all; Quaking I stand before thee, still expecting Thine owne consent, our ioyes to be effecting. R. 17. Remember how thy beauty is abused, Ract on the tenter-hookes of foule disgrace, Riuers are dry, and must be needs refused,
Restore new water in that dead founts place, Refresh thy feathers, beautifie thy face: Reade on my booke, and there thou shalt behold Rich louing letters printed in fine gold. S. 18. Shame is ashamed to see thee obstinate, Smiling at thy womanish conceipt, Swearing that honor neuer thee begat, Sucking in poyson for a sugred baite, Singing thy pride of beauty in her height: Sit by my side, and I will sing to thee Sweet ditties of a new fram'd harmony. T. 19. Thou art a Turtle wanting of thy mate, Thou crok'st about the groues to find thy Louer, Thou fly'st to woods, and fertile plaines dost hate: Thou in obliuion dost true vertue smother, To thy sweet selfe thou canst not find another: Turne vp my bosome, and in my pure hart, Thou shalt behold the Turtle of thy smart. V. 20. Vpon a day I sought to scale a Fort, Vnited with a Tower of sure defence; Vncomfortable trees did marre my sport, Vnlucky Fortune with my woes expence, Venus with Mars would not sweet war commence, Vpon an Alter would I offer Loue, And Sacrifice my soule poore Turtle Doue. W. 21. Weepe not my Phoenix, though I daily weepe, Woe is the Herald that declares my tale,
Worthy thou art in Venus lap to sleepe, Wantonly couered with God Cupids vale, With which he doth all mortall sence hale: Wash not thy cheekes, vnlese I sit by thee, To dry them with my sighes immediatly. X. 22. Xantha faire Nimph; resemble not in Nature, Xantippe Loue to patient Socrates, Xantha my Loue is a more milder creature, And of a Nature better for to please: Xantippe thought her true Loue to disease, But my rare Phoenix is at last well pleas'd, To cure my passions, passions seldome eas'd. Y. 23. Yf thou haue pitty, pitty my complaining, Yt is a badge of Vertue in thy sexe, Yf thou do kill me with thy coy disdaining, Yt will at length thy selfe-will anguish vexe, And with continuall sighes thy selfe perplexe: Ile helpe to bring thee wood to make thy fire, If thou wilt giue me kisses for my hire. Z. 24. Zenobia at thy feete I bend my knee, For thou art Queene and Empresse of my hart, All blessed hap and true felicity, All pleasures that the wide world may impart, Befall thee for thy gracious god desart: Accept my meaning as it fits my turne, For I with thee to ashes meane to burne.
Cantoes Verbally written. 1. Pittie me that dies for thee. Pittie PIttie my plainings thou true nurse of pittie, me Me hath thy piercing lookes enioynd to sighing, that That cannot be redressed, for thy beautie dies Dies my sad heart, sad heart that's drown'd with weeping: for For what so ere I thinke, or what I doe, thee. Thee with mine eyes, my thoughts, my heart, I woe. 2. My life you saue, if you I haue. My My eyes, my hand, my heart seeke to maintaine life Life for thy loue, therefore be gracious, you You with your kindnesse haue my true heart slaine, saue, Saue my poore life, and be not tyrannous, if If any grace do in thy breast remaine, you You women haue bene counted amorous; I I pine in sadnesse, all proceeds from thee, haue. Haue me in liking through thy clemencie. 3. Do thou by me, as I by thee. Do Do not exchange thy loue, let in exchanging, thou Thou beare the burd'nous blot of foule disgrace, by By that bad fault are many faults containing, me, Me still assuring nothing is so base, as As in the worlds eye alwayes to be ranging: I I sweare sweete Phoenix in this holy case, by By all the sacred reliques of true loue,
thee. Thee to adore whom I still constant proue. 4. Voutsafe to thinke how I do pine, In louing thee that art not mine. Voutsafe Voutsafe with splendor of thy gracious looke, to To grace my passions, passions still increasing: thinke Thinke with thy selfe how I thy absence brooke, how How day by day, my plaints are neuer ceasing, I I haue for thee all companies forsooke; do Do thou reioyce, and in reioycing say, pine, Pine nere so much Ile take thy griefe away. In In that great gracing word shalt thou be counted louing Louing to him, that is thy true sworne louer, thee Thee on the stage of honor haue I mounted, that That no base mistie cloud shall euer couer: art Art thou not faire? thy beautie do not smother; not Not in thy flouring youth, but still suppose mine. Mine owne to be, my neuer dying Rose. 5. My destinie to thee is knowne, Cure thou my smart, I am thine owne. My My time in loues blind idlenesse is spent, destinie Destinie and Fates do will it so, to To Circes charming tongue mine eare I lent, thee Thee louing that dost wish my ouerthrow: is Is not this world wrapt in inconstancie, knowne. Knowne to most men as hels miserie? Cure Cure of my wound is past all Phisickes skill, thou Thou maist be gracious, at thy very looke
my My wounds will close, that would my bodie kill, smart Smart will b easde that could no plaisters brooke; I I of my Phoenix being quite forsooke, am Am like a man that nothing can fulfill: thine Thine euer-piercing eye of force will make me, owne. Owne heart, owne loue, that neuer will forsake thee. 6. Ore my heart your eyes do idolatrize. Ore Ore the wide world my loue-layes Ile be sending, my My loue-layes in my Loues praise alwayes written, heart Heart-comfortable motions still attending, your Your beautie and your vertuous zeale commending, eyes Eyes that no frosts-cold-rage hath euer bitten: do Do you then thinke that I in Loues hot fire, idola∣trize. Idolatrize and surphet in desire. 7. I had rather loue though in vaine that face, Then haue of any other grace. I I being forc'd to carrie Venus shield, had Had rather beare a Phoenix for my crest, rather Rather then any bird within the field, loue Loue tels me that her beautie is the best: though Though some desire faire Vestas Turtle-doue, in In my Birds bosome resteth perfect loue. Vaine Vaine is that blind vnskilfull herauldrie, that That will not cause my bird that is so rare, face, Face all the world for her rarietie, then Then who with her for honor may compare? haue Haue we one like her for her pride of beautie, of Of all the feathered Quier in the aire?
any Any but vnto her do owe their dutie: other Other may blaze, but I will alwaies say, grace. Grace whom thou list, she beares the palme away. 8. What euer fall, I am at call. What What thunder stormes of enuie shall arise, euer Euer to thee my heart is durable, fall, Fall fortunes wheele on me to tyrrannize, I I will be alwayes found inexorable: am Am I not then to thee most stable? at At morne, midnight, and at mid-dayes sunne, call. Call when thou wilt, my deare, to thee Ile runne. 9. I had rather loue, though in vaine that face, Then haue of any other grace, I I now do wish my loue should be relieued, had Had I my thoughts in compasse of my will, rather Rather then liue and surfeit being grieued, loue Loue in my breast doth wondrous things fulfill, though Though loues vnkindnesse many men do kill, in In her I trust, that is my true sworne louer, vaine Vaine he doth write that doth her vertues smother. that That she is faire, Nature her selfe alloweth, face, Face full of beauty, eyes resembling fire, then Then my pure hart to loue thy hart still voweth, haue Haue me in fauour for my good desire, of Of holy loue, Loues Temple to aspire; any An but thee my thoughts will here require, other Other sweet motions now I will conceale grace. Grace these rude lines that my hearts thoughts reueale,
10. Disgrace not me, in louing thee. Disgrace Disgrace be banisht from thy heauenly brow, not Not entertained of thy piercing eie, me Me thy sweete lippes, a sweet touch will allow, in In thy faire bosome would I alwayes lie, louing Louing in such a downe-bed to be placed, thee. Thee for to please, my selfe for euer graced. 11. I had rather loue though in vaine that face, Then haue of any other grace. I I liue enricht with gits of great content, had Had my desires the guerdon of good will, rather Rather then taste of Fortunes fickle bent, loue Loue bids me die, and scorne her witlesse skill, thogh Though Loue command, Despaire doth stil attend, in I hazard proues oft times but doubtfull end. vaine Vaine is the loue encountred with denayes, that That yeelds but griefe, where grace should rather grow, face, Face full of furie, voide of curteous praise: then Then since all loue consists of weale and woe, haue Haue still in mind, that loue deserues the best, of Of heats the touchstone, inward motions louing, any Any that yeelds the fruite of true-loues rest, other Other I loue vnworthie of commending, grac. Grac'd with bare beautie, beautie most offending. 12. My selfe and mine, are alwayes thine. My My care to haue my blooming Rose not wither, selfe Selfe-louing Enuie shall it not denie, and And that base weed thy growth doth seeke to hinder,
mine Mine hands shall pull him vp immediatly, are Are they not enuious monsters in thine eie, alwayes Alwayes with vaine occasions to inclose thine Thine euer growing beautie, like the Rose? 13. The darting of your eies, may heale or wound, Let not empiring lookes my heart confound. The The ey-bals in your head are Cupids fire, darting Darting such hot sparkles at my brest, of Of force I am enthrald, and do desire your Your gracious loue, to make me happie blest: yes Eyes, lippes, and tongue haue caused my vnrest, may May I vnto the height of grace aspire, heale Heale my sicke heart with loues great griefe opprest, r Or if to fire thou wilt not yeeld such fuell, wound. Wound me to death, and so be counted cruell. Let Let the wide ope-mouth'd world slaunder the guiltie, not Not my dead Phoenix, that doth scorne such shame, empiring Empiring honor blots such infamie, lookes Lookes dart away the blemish of that name; my My thoughts prognosticate thy Ladies pittie: heart Hearts-ease to thee, this counsell will I giue, confound Confound thy foes, but let true louers liue. 14. You are my ioy, be not so coy. You You best belou'd, you honor of delight, are Are the bright shining Starre that I adore, my My eyes like Watchmen gaze within the night,
ioy Ioy fils my heart when you do shine before, be not Be not disgrasiue to thy friend therefore: too Too glorious are thy lookes to entertaine coy. Coy thoughts, fell peeuish deeds, our base disdaine. 15. For you I die, being absent from mine eye. For For all the holy rites that Venus vseth, you You I coniure to true obedience: I I offer faith, which no kind hart refuseth, die, Die periur'd Enuie for thy late offence, being Being enamored of rich Beauties pride, absent Absent, I freeze in Winters pining cold, from From thee I sit, as if thou hadst denide, my My loue-sicke passions twentie times retold: eye. Eye-dazling Mistris, with a looke of pittie, Grace my sad Song, and my hearts pining Dittie. 16. Send me your heart, to ease my smart. Send Send but a glaunce of amours from thine eie, me Me will it rauish with exceeding pleasure, your Your eye-bals do enwrap my destinie, heart Heart sicke with sorrow, sorrow out of measure, to To thinke vpon my loues continuall olly: ease Ease thou my paine from pitties golden treasure; my My griefe proceeds from thee, and I suppose smart. Smart of my smart, will my lifes bloud inclose. 17. Seeing you haue mine, let me haue thine. Seeing Seeing my passions are so penetrable, you You of all other should be pittifull, haue Haue mind of me, and you'le be fauourable,
mine Mine hart doth tell me you are mercifull, let Let my harts loue be alwayes violable, me Me haue you found in all things dutifull, haue Haue me in fauour, and thy selfe shalt see, thine. Thine and none others, will I all wayes be. 18. Within thy brest, my hart doth rest. Within Within the ciruit of a Christall spheare, thy Thy eyes are plast, and vnderneath those eyes, brest, Brest of hard flint, eares that do scorne to heare my My dayes sad gronings, and night waking cries, hart Hart sore sicke passions, and Loues agonies, doth Doth it become thy beauty? no, a staine rest. Rests on thy bright brow wrinckled with disdaine. 19. O let me heare, from thee my deare. O O tongue thou hast blasphem'd thy holy Goddesse, let Let me do penance for offending thee, me Me do thou blame for my forgetfulnesse: heare, Heare my submission, thou wilt succor me: from From thy harts closet commeth gentlenesse, thee Thee hath the world admir'd for clemency, my My hart is sorrie, and Ile bite my tongue, deare. Deare that to thee, to thee I offred wrong. 20. My Phoenix rare, is all my care. My My life, my hart, my thoughts, I dedicate, Phoenix Phoenix to thee, Phoenix of all beauty, rare, Rare things in hart of thee I meditate, is Is it not time, I come to shew my duty? all All fauors vnto thee I consecrate,
my My goods, my lands, my selfe, and all is thine, care Care those that list, so thou faire bird be mine. 21. I would I might, be thy delight. I I wish for things, would they might take effect, would Would they might end, and we enioy our pleasure, I I vow I would not proffred time neglect, might, Might I but gather such vnlook't for treasure, be Be all things enuious I would the respect, thy Thy fauours in my hart I do enroule, delight. Delight matcht with delight, doth me controule. 22. If I you haue, none else I craue. If If adoration euer were created, I I am a Maister of that holy Art, you You my aduotrix, whom I haue admired, haue, Haue of my true deuotion bore a part: none None but your selfe may here be nominated, else Else would my tongue my true obedience thwart: I I cannot flatter, Loue will not allow it, craue. Craue thou my hart, on thee I will bestow it. 23. Be you to me, as I to thee. Be Bee the poore Bee, sucke hony from the flower, you You haue a spacious odoriferous field, to To tast all moysture, where in sweet Floras bower▪ me, Me shall you find submissiuely to yeeld, as As a poore Captiue looking for the hower; I I may haue gracious lookes, else am I kild, to To dye by you were lfe, and yet thy shame, thee. Thee would the wide world hate▪ y olly blame.
24. You are the first, in whom I trust. You You in your bosome hauing plac'd a light, are Are the chiefe admirall vnto my Fleet, the The Lanthorne for to guide me in the night, first, First to the shore, where I may set my feet in In safegard, void of Dangers cruell spight, whom Whom in disgrace Loue and fel Enuie meet, I I muster vp my spirits, and they flie; trust. Trust of thy faith controules mine enemie. 25. You are the last my loue shall taste. You You standing on the tower of hope and feare, are Are timerous of selfe-will foolishnesse, the The onely Viper that doth loue-laies teare▪ last, Last can it not, tis womans peeuishnesse, my My kind affections can it not forbeare, loue Loue tels me that tis bred in idlenesse, shall Shall such occasion hinder thee or me? taste. Taste first the fruit, and then commend the tree. 26. If you I had, I should be glad. If If the Sunne shine, the haruest man is glad, you You are my Sunne, my dayes delight some Queene, I I am your haruest laborer almost mad, had, Had I not my glorious commet seene, I I wish that I might sit within thy shade, should Should I be welcome ere thy beautie fade: be Be not Narcissus, but be alwaies kind, glad. Glad to obtain the thing thou neare couldst find.
27. Though place be far, my heart is nar. Though Though thou my Doue from me be separated, plac Place, nor the distance shall not hinder me, be Be constant for a while, thou maist be thwarted, far, Far am I not, Ile come to succour thee. my My heart and thine, my sweet shall nere be parted, heart Heart made of loue, and true simplicitie: is Is not Loue lawlesse, full of powerfull might? nar. Nar to my heart that still with Loue doth fight. 28. My thoughts are dead, cause thou art sped. My My inward Muse can sing of nought but Loue, thoughts Thoughts are his Heralds, flying to my breast are Are entertained, if they thence remoue, dead, Dead shall their master be, and in vnrest; cause Cause all the world thy hatred to reproue, thou Thou art that All-in-all that I loue best: art Art thou then cruell? no thou canst not be sped. Sped with so foule a find as Crueltie. 29. I send my heart to thee, where gladly I would be. I I of all other am faire Venus thrall, send Send me but pleasant glances of thine eie, my My soule will leape with ioy and dance withall, heart Heart of my heart, and soules felicitie: to To beauties Queene my heart is sanctified, thee. Thee aboue all things haue I deified. Where Where is Affections? fled to Enuies cau? gladly Gladlie my Thoughts would beare her companie, I I from oul bondage will my Phoenix saue,
would Would she in loue require my courtesie, be. Be louing as thou art faire, else shall I sing, Thy beautie a poisnous bitter thing. 30. If you me iust haue knowne, Then take me for your owne. If If you be faire, why should you be vnkind? you You haue no perfect reason for the se, me Me thinkes it were your glorie for to find iust Iust measure at my hands, but you to blame, haue Haue from the deepest closet of your heart, known, Knowne my pure thoughts, and yet I pine in smart. Then Then in the deepest measure of pure loue, take Take pittie on the sad sicke pining soule, me Me may you count your vnknowne Turtle-Doue, for For in my bosomes chamber, I enroule your Your deepe loue-darting eie, and still will be owne. Owne of your owne, despight extremitie. 31. My heart I send, to be your friend. My My deare soules comfort, and my hopes true solace, heart Heart of my heart, and my liues secret ioy, I I in conceit do thy sweete selfe embrace, send, Send cloudie exhalations cleane away to To the blind mistie North, there for to stay: be Be thou my arbour and my dwelling place, your Your armes the circling folds that shall enclose me, friend. Friend me with this, and thou shalt neuer lose me. 32. I haue no loue, but you my Doue.
I I pine in sadnesse, and in sad songs singing haue Haue spent my time, my ditties harsh and ill, no No sight but thy faire sight would I be seeing: loue Loue in my bosome keepes his castle still, but But being disseuered I sit alwayes pining, you You do procure me Niobes cup to fill, my My dutie yet remembred I dare proue, doue. Doues haue no power for to exchange their Loue, 34. I will not change, though some be strange. I I cannot stir one foote from Venus gate, will Will you come sit, and beare me company? not Not one but you can make me fortunate: change Change when thou wilt, it is but cruelty, though Though vnto women it is giuen by fate, some Some gentle minds these ranging thoughts do hates be Be thou of that mind, else I will conclude, strange. Strange hast thou alter'd Loue, to be so rude. Thoughts keepe me waking. Thoughts Thoughts like the ayrie puffing of the wind, keepe Keepe a sweet faining in my Loue-sicke brest, me Me still assuring that thou art most kind, waking. Waking in pleasure, sleeping sure in rest: That no sleepes dreamings, nor no waking cries, To our sweet louing thoughts, sweet rest denies. Seeing that my hart made choise of thee, Then frame thy selfe to comfort me. Seeing Seeing Loue is pleas'd with Loues enamor'd ioyes, that That Fortune cannot crosse sweet Cupids will,
my My Loues content, not with fond wanton toyes: heart Hart of my hart doth Loues vnkindnesse kill, made Made by fond tongues vpbraiding hurtfull skill: choise Choise now is fram'd to further all annoyes: of Of all sweete thoughts, of all sweete happie rest, thee, Thee haue I chose, to make me three times blest. Then Then let our holy true aspiring loue, frame Frame vs the sweetest musicke of Desire: thy Thy words shall make true concord, and remoue selfe Selfe-will it selfe, for Venus doth require to To be acquainted with thy beauties fire: comfort Comfort my heart, for comfort tels me this, me. Me hast thou chose of all to be thy blisse. My heart is bound to fauour thee, Then yeeld in time to pittie me. My My Phoenix hath two starre-resembling Eyes, heart Heart full of pittie, and her smiling looke, is Is of the Sunnes complexion, and replies, bound Bound for performance by faire Venus booke to To faithfulnesse, which from her nurse she tooke: fauour Fauour in her doth spring, in vertuous praise, thee, Thee Eloquence it selfe shall seeke to raise. Then Then in performance of this gracious right, yeeld Yeeld vp that piteous heart to be my Louer, in In recompence how I haue lou'd thy sight, time Time shall from time to time to thee discoer: to To thee is giuen the power of Cupids might, pittie Pittie is writ in gold vpon thy hart,
me. Me promising to cure a curelesse smart. I ioy to find a constant mind. I I am encompast round about with ioy, ioy Ioy to enioy my sweete, for she protesteth to To comfort me that languish in annoy, find Find ease if any sorrow me molesteth, a A happie ma that such a loue possesseth: constant Constant in words, and alwayes vowes to loue me, mind. Mind me she will, but yet she dares not proue me. My heart by hope doth liue, Desire no ioy doth giue. My My loue and dearest life to thee I consecrate, heart Heart of my hearts deare treasure, for I striue by By thy deuinenesse too deuine to nominate, hope Hope of approued faith in me must thriue: doth Doth not the God of Loue that's most deuine, liue. Liue in thy bosomes closet and in mine? Desire Desire to that vnspeakable delight, no No sharpe conceited wit can nere set downe, ioy Ioy in the world to worldly mens ey-sight, doth Doth but ignoble thy imperiall crowne: giue. Giue thou the onset and the foe will flie, Amazed at thy great commanding beautie. Death shall take my life away, Before my friendship shall decay. Death Death that heart-wounding Lord, sweet louers foe, shall Shall lay his Ebone darts at thy faire feete,
take Take them into thy hand and worke my woe, my My woe that thy minds anguish will regreet: life Life, hart, ioy, greeting and all my pleasure, away. Away are gone and fled from my deare treasure. Before Before one staine shal blot thy scarlet die, my My bloud shall like a fountaine wash the place, friendship Friendship it selfe knit with mortality, shall Shall thy immortall blemish quite disgrace: decay. Decay shall all the world, my Loue in thee Shall liue vnstain'd, vntoucht perpetually. Let truth report what hart I beare, To her that is my dearest deare. Let Let not foule pale-fac'd Enuy be my foe, truth Truth must declare my spotlesse loyalty, report Report vnto the world shall plainely show what What hart deare Loue I alwayes bore to thee, heart Hart fram'd of perfect Loues sincerity: I I cannot flatter, this I plainely say, beare, Beare with false words, ile beare the blame away. To To change in loue is a base simple thing, her Her name will be ore stain'd with periuy, that That doth delight in nothing but dissembling? is Is it not shame so for to wrong faire beauty, my My true approued toung must answer I dearest Dearest beware of this, and learne of me, deare. Deare is that Loue combin'd with Chastity. Seene hath the eye, chosen hath the hart:
Firme is the faith, and loth to depart. Seene Seene in all learned arts is my beloued, hath Hath anie one so faire a Loue as I? the The stony-hearted sauage hath she moued, eie, Eye for her eye tempts blushing chastitie, chosen Chosen to make their nine a perfect ten, hath Hath the sweet Muses honored her agen. The The bright-ey'd wandring world doth alwaies seeke, heart, Heart-curing comfort doth proceed from thee, firme Firme trust, pure thoughts, a mind that's alwayes meeke, is Is the true Badge of my loues Soueraigntie: the The honor of our age, the onely faire, faith, Faiths mistris, and Truths deare adopted heire. And And those that do behold thy heauenly beautie, loth Loth to forsake thee, spoile themselues with gazing, to To thee all humane knees proffer their dutie, depart. Depart they will not but with sad amazing: To dimme their ey-sight looking gainst the sunne, Whose hot reflecting beames will neare be donne. No woe so great in loue, not being heard, No plague so great in loue, being long deferd. N No tongue can tell the world my hearts deepe anguish, woe Woe, and the minds great perturbation so So trouble me, that day and night I languish, great Great cares in loue seeke my destruction: in In all things gracious, sauing onely this, loue. Loue is my foe, that I account my blisse.
Not Not all the world could profer me disgrace, being Being maintained fairest faire by thee, hard, Hard-fortune shall thy seruant nere outface, nor No stormes of Discord should discomfort me: plague Plague all the world with frownes my Turtle-do, so So that thou smile on me and be my loue. great Great Mistris, matchlesse in thy soueraigntie, in In lue and recompence of my affection, loue Loue me againe, this do I beg of thee, being Being bound by Cupids kind direction: long Long haue I su'd for grace, yet stil I find, deferd. Deferd I am by her that's most vnkind. And if my loue shall be releeu'd by thee, My heart is thine, and so account of me. And And yet a stedfast hope maintaines my hart, if If anie fauour fauourably proceede my My deare from thee, the curer of my smart, loue Loue that easeth minds opprest with neede, shal be Shall be the true Phisition of my griefe, releeu'd Releeu'd alone by thee that yeeld'st rliefe. by By all the holy rites that Loue adoreth, thee, Thee haue I lou'd aboue the loue of any, My My heart in truth thee alwayes fauoureth, heart Heart freed from any one, then freed from many: is Is it not base to change? yea so they say, thine Thine owne confession loue denies delay. and And by the high imperiall seate of Iou, so So am I forc'd by Cupid for to sweare, account Account I must of thee my Turtl-doe,
of Of thee that Times long memorie shall outwere: me. Me by thy stedfast truth and faith denying, To promise any hope on thee relying. My passions are a hell and death to me, Vnlesse you feele remorce and pitie me. My My sweetest thoughts sweet loue to thee I send, passions Passions deeply ingrafted, vnremouable are Are my affections, and I must commend a A stedfast trust in thee most admirable: hell Hell round enwraps my bodie by disdaine, and And then a heauen if thou loue againe. death Death haunts me at the heeles, yet is affraid, to To touch my bosome, knowing thou lou'st me, me, Me sometimes terrifying by him btraid, vnlesse Vnlesse sweete helpfull succour come from thee: you You well I know, the honor of mine eie, feele Feele some remorcefull helpe in miserie. remorce Remorce sits on thy brow triumphantly, and And smiles vpon my face with gentle cheere; pitti Pittie, loues gracious mother dwls in thee, me. Me fauouring, abandoning base feare, Death is amazed, viewing of thy beautie, Thinking thy selfe perfect eternitie. My purest loue doth none but thee adore, My beartie thoughts ar' thine, I loue no more. My My comfortable sweete approued Mistris, porest Purest of all the pure that nature framed, loue Loue in the height of all our happinesse,
doth Doth tell me that thy vertues are not named: none None can giue forth thy constancie approued, but But I that tride thy faith, my best beloued. Thee Thee in the temple of faire Venus shrine adore, Adore I must, and kneele vpon my knee, my My fortunes tell me plaine that thou art mine, heartie Heartie in kindnesse, yeelding vnto me: thoughts Thoughts the much-great disturbers of our rest are Are fled, and lodge in some vnquiet brest. Thine Thine euer vnremou'd and still kept word, I I pondred oftentimes within my mind: loue Loue told me that thou neuer wouldst afford, none None other grace but that which I did find, more. More comfortable did this sound in mine eare, Then sweete releasement to a man in feare. I do resolue to loue no loue but thee, Therefore be kind, and fauour none but me. I I sometime sitting by my selfe alone, do Do meditate of things that are ensuing, resolue Resolue I do that thou must end my mone, to To strengthen Loue if loue should be declining. loue Loue in thy bosome dwels, and tels me still, no No enuious stormes shall thwart affections will. Loue Loue hath amaz'd the world, plac'd in thy brow, but But yet slauish disdaine seekes for to crosse thee Thee and my selfe, that haue combin'd our vow, therefore Therefore that monster cannot worke our losse:
be Be all the winds of Anger bent to rage, kind. Kind shalt thou find me, thus my hart I gage. and And from my faith that's vnremoueable, fauour Fauour be seated in thy maiden eie, none None can receiue it loue more acceptable but But I my selfe, waiting thy pittying mercie: me. Me hast thou made the substance of delight, By thy faire sunne-resembling heauenly sight. Ah quoth she, but where is true Loue? Where quoth he? where you and I loue. I quoth she, were thine like my loue. Why quoth he, as you loue I loue. Ah Ah thou imperious high commauning Lord, quoth (Quoth he) to Cupid gentle god of Loue, he, He that I honor most will not accord, but But striues against thy Iustice from aboue, where Where I haue promist faith, my plighted word is Is quite refused with a base reproue: true True louing honour this I onely will thee, loue? Loue thy true loue, or else false loue will kill me. Where Where shall I find a heart that's free from guile? quoth Quoth Faithfulnesse, within my louers brest▪ he, He at these pleasing words began to smile, where Where Anguish wrapt his thoughts in much vnrest: you You did with pretie tales the time beguile, and And made him in conceited pleasure blest, I I grac'd the words spoke with so sweet a tong, loue, Loue being the holy burden of your song.
I I grac'd your song of Loue, but by the way▪ quoth (Quoth true Experience,) sit and you shall see, she She will enchaunt you with her heauenly lay: were Were you fram'd all of heauenly Pollicie, thine Thine eares should drinke the poison of Delay, like Like as I said, so did it proue to be, my My Mistris beautie grac'd my Mistris song, loue. Loue pleasd more with her Eyes then with her Tong. Why Why then in deepenesse of sweete Loues delight, quoth Quoth she, the perfect Mistris of Desire, he He that I honor most bard from my sight, as As a bright Lampe kindles Affections fire: you You Magicke operations worke your spight, loue Loue to the mountaine top of will aspires: I I chalenge all in all, and this I sing, loue. Loue is a holy Saint, a Lord, a King. Ah Loue, where is thy faith in sweete loue? Why loue where hearts conioyne in true loue: Why then my heart hopes of thy Loues loue, Else let my heart be plagu'd with false loue. Why art thou strange to me my Deare? Not strange when as I loue my deare: But thou esteem'st not of thy deare. Yes when I know my dearest deare. Why is my Loue so false to me? My loue is thine if thou lou'st me: Thee I loue, else none contents me.
If thou lou'st me, it not repents me. Ah quoth he, wher's faith in sweete loue? Why quoth she, conioynd in true loue. Ah quoth he, I hope of thy loue: Else quoth she, Ile die a false loue. Ah my Deare, why dost thou kill me? No my deare, Loue doth not will me. Then in thine arme thou shalt enfould me. I, my deare, there thou shalt hold me: And holding me betweene thine armes, I shall embrace sweete Louers Charmes. Though death from life my bodie part, Yet neare the lesse keepe thou my hart. Though Though some men are inconstant, fond, and ickle, death Deaths asie count'nance shall not alter me: from From glasse they take their substance being brittle▪ life Life, Heart, and Hand shall awaies fauour thee, my My Pen shall write thy vertues registrie, bodie Bodie conioyn'd with bodie, free from strife, part, Part not in sunder till we part our life. Yet Yet my soules life to my deare lifes concluding, nere Nere let Absurditie that villaine, theefe, the The monster of our time, mens praise deriding, lesse Lesse in perseuerance, of small knowledge chiefe, keepe Keep the base Gate to things that are excelling, thou Thou by faire vertues praise maist yeeld reliefe,
my My lines are thine, then tell Absurditie, heart. Hart of my deare, shall blot his villanie. Where hearts agree, no strife can be. Where Where faithfulnesse vnites it selfe with loue, hearts Hearts pin'd with sorrow cannot disagree: agree, Agree they must of force, for from aboue no No wind oppressing mischiefe may we see: strife Strife is quite banisht from our companie. can Can I be sad? no, Pleasure bids me sing, be. Be blessed, for sweete Loue's a happie thing. Thy vowes my loue and heart hath wonne, Till thy vntruth hath it vndonne. Thy Thy true vnspeakable fidelitie. vowes Vowes made to Cupid and his faire-fac'd mother, my My thoughts haue wonne to vertuous chastitie: loue Loue thee alone I will, and loue none other, and And if thou find not my loues secrecie, heart Heart faoting thee, then do thou Fancie smother. hath Hath all the world such a true Bird as I, wonne, Wonne to this fauour by my constancie? Till Till that leane fleshles cripple, pale-fac'd Death, thy Thy louely Doue shall pierce with his fell dart, vntruth Vntruth in my faire bosome nere takes breath: hath Hath any loue such a firme constant heart? it It is thine owne, vnlesse thou keepe it still vndonne. Vndone shall I be, cleane against my will.
Time shall tell thee, how well I loue thee, Time Time the true proportioner of things, shall Shall in the end shew my affection, tell Tell thee from whence all these my passions spring▪ thee, Thee honoring that of loue haue made election: how How often I haue made my offerings, well Well knowne to Venus and her louely sonne, I I to the wide world shall my passions runne: loue Loue is a Lord of hearts, a great Commander, thee. Thee chalenging to be my chiefe defender. Most deuine and sacred, Haue I found your loue vnspotted. Most Most reuerend Mistris honor of mine eie, deuine Deuine, most holy in religious loue, and And Lord it selfe of my hearts emperi, sacred Sacred in thoughts admitted from aboue, haue Haue in remembrance what affection willeth: I I it reuiues the mind, and the mind killeth. found Found haue I written in your skie-like brow, your Your neuer ceasing kind humilitie, loue Loue for your sake to me hath made a vow, vnspotted Vnspotted shall I find your constancie, And without staine, to thy pure stainlesse beautie, Shall my hearts bosome offer vp his dutie. The want of thee is death to me. The The day shall be all night, and night all day, want Want of the Sunne and Moone to giue vs light,
of Of a blacke darknesse, before thy loue will stay thee Thee from thy pleasure of thy hearts delight. is Is not Affection nurse to long Delay? death Deaths Messenger, that barres me from thy sight? to To be in absence, is to burne in fire, me. Me round enwrapping with hot Loues desire. I loue to be beloued. I I do acknowledge of all constant pure, loue Loue is my true thoughts herrald, and Ile sing to To be of thy thoughts closet, firme and sure, be Be the world still thy vertues deifying: beloued. Beloued of the most, yet most of many, Affirme my deare, thou art belou'd of any. I scorne if I be scorned. I I being not belou'd by my affection, scorne Scorne within my thoughts such bad disgrace, if If thou of me do make thy firme election, I I to none other loue will giue my place: be Be thou my Saint, my bosomes Lord to proue, scorned. Scorned of all, Ile be thy truest loue. The heart's in paine, that loues in vaine. The The griefe poore louers feele being not beloued, heart's Hearts anguish, and sad lookes may testifie: n In night they sleepe not, and in day perplexed, paine, Paine of this sorrow makes them melancholy,
that That in disdaine their silly minds are vexed, loues Loues terror is so sharpe, so strong, so mightie, in In all things vnresistable, being aliue, vaine. Vaine he resists that gainst loues force doth striue. What greater ioy can be then this, Where loue enioyes each louers wish? What What may we count the world if loue were dead? greater Greater in woe, then woe it selfe can be, ioy Ioy from mans secret bosome being fled, can Cannot but kill the heart immediatly, be Because by ioy the heart is nourished: then Then entertaine sweete loue within thy brest, this, This motion in the end will make thee blest. Where Where two harts are vnited all in one, loue Loue like a King, a Lord, a Soueraigne, enioyes Enioyes the throne of blisse to sit vpon, each Each sad heart crauing aid, by Cupid slaine: louers Louers be merrie, Loue being dignified, wish. Wish what you will, it shall not be denied. Finis. quoth R. Chester.
HEREAFTER FOLLOVV DIVERSE Poeticall Essaies on the former Sub∣iect; viz: the Turtle and Phoenix. Done by the best and chiefest of our moderne writers, with their names sub∣scribed to their particular workes: neuer before extant. And (now first) consecrated by them all generally, to the loue and merite of the true-noble Knight, Sir Iohn Salisburie. Dignum laude virum Musavetat mori. MDCI.
INVOCATIO, Ad Apollinem & Pierides. GOod Fate, faire Thespian Deities, And thou bright God, whose golden Eies, Serue as a Mirrour to the siluer Morne, When (in the height of Grace) she doth adorne Her Chrystall presence, and inuites The euer-youthfull Bromius to delights, Sprinckling his sute of Vrt with Pearle, And (like a loose enamour'd Girle) Ingles his cheeke; which (waxing red with shame) Instincts the senslesse Grapes to do the same, Till by his sweete reflection fed, They gather spirit, and grow discoloured. To your high influence we commend Our following Labours, and sustend Our mutuall palmes, prepar'd to gratulate An honorable friend: then propagate With your illustrate faculties Our mentall powers; Instruct vs how to rise In weighty Numbers, well pursu'd, And varied from the Multitude: Be lauish once, and plenteously profuse Your holy waters, to our thirstie Muse, That we may giue a Round to him In a Castalian boule, crown'd to the brim. Vatum Chorus.
To the worthily honor'd Knight Sir Iohn Salisburie. NOblest of minds, here do the Muses bring Vnto your safer iudgements tast, Pure iuice that flow'd from the Pierian springs, Not filch'd, nor borrow'd, but exhaust By the flame-hair'd Apollos hand: And at his well-obseru'd command, For you infusde in our retentiue braine, s now distild thence, through our quilles againe. Value our verse, as you approue the worth; And thinke of what they are create, No Mercenarie hope did bring them forth, They tread not in that seruile Gate; But a true Zeale, borne in our spirites, Responsible to your high Merites, And an Inuention, freer then the Times, These were the Parents to our seuerall Rimes, Wherein Kind, Learned, Enuious, al may view, That we haue writ worthy our selues and you. Vatum Chorus.
The first. THe siluer Vault of heauen, hath but one Eie, And that's the Sunne: the foule-maskt-Ladie, Night (Which blots the Cloudes, the white Booke of the Skie,) But one sicke Phoebe, feuer-shaking Light: The heart, one string: so, thus in single turnes, The world one Phoenix, till another burnes. The burning. SVppose here burnes this wonder of a breath, In righteous flames, and holy-heated fires: (Like Musicke which doth rapt it selfe to death, Sweet'ning the inward roome of mans Desires;) So she wast's both her wings in pteous strife; " The flame that eates her, seedes the others life: Her rare-dead ashes, fill a rare-liue vrne: "One Phoenix borne, another Phoenix burne. Ignoto.
LEt the bird of low dest lay, On the sole Arabian tree, Herauld sad and trumpet be: To whose sound chaste wings obay. But thou shriking harbinger, Foule precurrer of the fiend, Augour of the feuers end, To this troupe come thou not neere. From this Session interdict Euery foule of tyrant wing, Saue the Eagle feath'red King, Keepe the obsequie so strict. Let the Priest in Surples white, That defunctiue Musicke can, Be the death-deuining Swan, Lest the Requiem lacke his right. And thou treble dated Crow, That thy sable gender mak'st, With the breath thou giu'st and tak'st, Mongst our mourners shalt thou go. Here the Antheme doth commence, Loue and Constancie is dead, Phoenix and the Turtle fled, In a mutuall flame from hence. So they loued as loue in twaine, Had the essence but in one,
Two distincts, Diuision none, Number there in loue was slaine. Hearts remote, yet not asunder; Distance and no space was seene, Twixt this Turtle and his Queene; But in them it were a wonder. So betweene them Loue did shine, That the Turtle saw his right, Flaming in the Phoenix sight; Either was the others mine. Propertie was thus appalled, That the selfe was not the same: Single Natures double name, Neither two nor one was called. Reason in it selfe confounded, Saw Diuision grow together, To themselues yet either neither, Simple were so well compounded▪ That it cried, how true a twaine, Seemeth this concordant one, Loue hath Reason, Reason none, If what parts, can so remaine. Whereupon it made this Thren, To the Phoenix and the Doue, Co-supremes and starres of Loue, As Chorus to their Tragique Scene.
Threnos. BEautie, Truth, and Raritie, Grace in all simplicitie, Here enclosde, in cinders lie. Death is now the Phoenix nest, And the Turtles loyall brest, To eternitie doth rest. Leauing no posteritie, Twas not their infirmitie, It was married Chastitie. Truth may seeme, but cannot be, Beautie bragge, but tis not she, Truth and Beautie buried be. To this vrne let those repaire, That are either true or faire, For these dead Birds, sigh a prayer. William Shake-speare.
A narration and description of a most exact wondrous creature, arising out of the Phoenix and Turtle Doues ashes. O Twas a mouing Epicedium! Can Fire? can Time? can blackest Fate consume So rare creation? No; tis thwart to sence, Corruption quakes to touch such excellence, Nature exclaimes for Iustice, Iustice Fate, Ought into nought can neuer remigrate. Then looke; for see what glorious issue (brighter Then clearest fire, and beyond faith farre whiter Then Dians tier) now springs from yonder flame? Let me stand numb'd with wonder, neuer came So rong amazement on astonish'd eie As this, this measurlesse pure Raitie. Lo now; th'cracture of deuinest Essence▪ The Soule of heauens labour'd Quintessence, (Peans to Phoebus) from deare Louer's death, Takes sweete creation and all blessing breath. What strangenesse is't that from the Turtles ashes Assumes such forme? (whose splendor clearer flashes, Then mounted Delius) tell me genuine Muse. Now yeeld your aides, you spirites that infuse A sacred rapture, light my weaker eie: Raise my inuention on swift Phantasie, That whilst of this same Metaphisicall God, Man, nor Woman, but elix'd of all My labouring thoughts, with strained ardor sing, My Muse may mount with an vncommon wing.
The description of this Perfection. DAres then thy too audacious sense Presume, define that boundlesse Ens, That amplest thought tanscendeth? O yet vouchsafe my Muse, to greete That wondrous rarenesse, in whose sweete All praise begins and endeth. Diuinest Beautie? that was slightest, That adorn'd this wondrous Brightest, Which had nought to be corrupted. In this, Perfection had no meane To this, Earths purest was vncleane Which vertue euen instructed. By it all Beings deck'd and stained, Ideas that are idly fained Onely here subsist inuested. Dread not to giue strain'd praise at all, No speech is Hyperbolicall, To this perfection blessed. Thus close my Rimes, this all that can be sayd▪ This wonder neuer can be flattered. To Perfection. A Sonnet. OFt haue I gazed with astonish'd eye, At monstrous issues of ill shaped birth, When I haue seene the Midwife to old earth, Nature produce most strange deformitie▪
So haue I marueld to obserue of late, Hard fauour'd Feminines so scant of faire, That Maskes so choicely, sheltred of the aire, As if their beauties were not theirs by fate. But who so weake of obseruation, Hath not discern'd long since how vertues wanted, How parcimoniously the heauens haue scanted, Our chiefest part of adornation? But now I cease to wonder, now I find The cause of all our monstrous penny-showes: Now I conceit from whence wits scarc'ie growes, Hard fauourd features, and defects of mind. Nature long time hath stor'd vp vertue, fairenesse, Shaping the rest as foiles vnto this Rarenesse. Perfectioni Hymnus. WHat should I call this creature, Which now is growne vnto maturitie▪ How should I blase this feature As firme and constant as Eternitie? Call it Perfection? Fie! Tis perfecter thē brightest names can light it: Call it Heauens mirror? I. Alas, best attributes can neuer right it. Beauties resistlesse thunder? All nomination is too straight of sence: Deepe Contemplations wonder? That appellation giue this excellence▪ Within all best confin'd, (Now feebler Genius end thy slighter riming)
No SuburbesDifferentia Deorum & ho∣minum (apud Senecam) sic ha∣bet nostri melior pars a∣nimus in illis nulla prs ex∣tra animum. all is Mind As farre from spot, as possible defining. Iohn Marston. Peristeros: or the male Turtle. NOt like that loose and partie-liuer'd Sect Of idle Louers, that (as different Lights, On colour'd subiects, different hewes reflect;) Change their Affections with their Mistris Sight, That with her Praise, or Dispraise, drowne, or flote, And must be fed with fresh Conceits, and Fashions; Neuer waxe cold, but die▪ loue not, but dote: " (Loues fires, staid Iudgemēts blow, not humoous Passions, Whose Loues vpon their Louers pomp depend, And quench as fast as her Eyes sparkle twinkles, " (Nought lasts that doth to outward worth contend, " Al Loue in smooth browes born is tomb'd in wrinkles.) But like the consecratedThe Turtle. Bird of loue, Whose whole lifes ap to hisThe Phoenix. sole-mate alluded, Whome no prowd flockes of other Foules could moue, But in her selfe all companie concluded. She was to him th' Analisde World of pleasure, Her firmenesse cloth'd him in varietie; Excesse of all things, he ioyd in her easure, Mourn'd when she mourn'd, and dith when she dies▪ Like him I bound th'instinct of all my powres, In her that bounds the Empire of desert, And Time nor Change (that all things else deuoures, But truth  in a constant heart) Can change me more from her, then her , That is my forme▪ and giues my being, sprit. George Chapman.
Praeludium. WE must sing too? what Subiect shal we chuse? Or whose great Name in Poets Heauen vse▪ For the more Countenance to our Actiue Muse? Hercules? alasse his bones are yet sore, With his old earthly Labors; t' exact more Of his dull Godhead, were Sinne: Lets implore Phoebus? No: Tend thy Cart still. Enuious Day Shall not giue out, that we haue made thee stay, And foundred thy hote Teame, to tune our Lay. Nor will we beg of thee, Lord of the Vine, To raise our spirites with thy coniuring Wine, In the greene circle of thy Iuy twine. Pallas, nor thee we call on, Mankind Maide, That (at thy birth) mad'st the poore Smith afraide, Who with his Axe thy Fathers Mid-wife plaide. Go, crampe dull Mars, light Vens, when he snorts, Or with thy Tribade Trine, inuent new sports, Thou, nor their loosenesse, with our Making sorts. Let the old Boy your sonne ply his old Taske, Turne the stale Prologue to some painted Maske, His Absence in our Verse is all we aske.
Hermes the cheater, cannot mixe with vs, Though he would steale his sisters Pegasus, And rifle him; or pawne his Petasus. Nor all the Ladies of the Thespian Lake, (Though they were crusht into one forme) could make A Beauty of that Merit, that should take Our Muse vp by Commission: No, we bring Our owne true Fire; Now our Thought takes wing, And now an Epode to deepe eares we sing. Epos. " NOt to know Vice at all, and keepe true state, " Is Vertue; and not Fate: " Next to that Vertue, is, to know Vice well, " And her blacke spight expell. Which to effect (since no breast is so sure, Or safe, but shee'l procure Some way of entrance) we must plant a guard Of Thoughts, to watch and ward At th' Eye and Eare, (the Ports vnto the Mind;) That no strange or vnkind Obiect arriue there, but the Heart (our spie) Giue knowledge instantly. To wakefull Reason, our Affections King▪ Who (in th'examining) Will quickly taste the Treason, and commit
Close, the close cause of it. " Tis the securest Pollicie we haue, " To make our Sense our Slaue. But this faire course is not embrac'd by many; By many? scarce by any: For either our Affections do rebell, Or else the Sentinell, (That shal ring larum to the Heart) doth sleepe, Or some great Thought doth keepe Backe the Intelligence, and falsely sweares They'r base, and idle Feares, Whereof the loyall Conscience so complaines. Thus by these subtill traines, Do seuerall Passions still inuade the Mind, And strike our Reason blind: Of which vsurping ranke, some haue thought Loue The first; as prone to moue Most frequent Tumults, Horrors, and Vnrests, In our enflamed brests. But this doth from their cloud of Error grow, Which thus we ouerblow. The thing they here call Loue, is blind Desire, Arm'd with Bow, Shafts, and Fire▪ Inconstant like the Sea, of whence 'tis borne, Rough, swelling, like a Storme: With whome who sailes, rides on the surge of Feare▪ And boiles as if he were In a continuall Tempest. Now true Lou No such effects doth proue: That is an Essence most gentile, and fine. Pure, perfect; nay diuine: It is a golden Chaine let downe from Heauen,
Whose linkes are bright, and euen That fals like Sleepe on Louers; and combines The soft and sweetest Minds In equal knots: This beares no Brands nor Darts To murder different harts, Bt in a calme and God-like vnitie, Preserues Communitie. O who is he that (in this peace) enioyes Th' Elixir of all ioyes? (A Forme more fresh then are the Eden bowers, And lasting as her flowers: Richer then Time, and as Times Vertue, are, Sober, as saddest Care, A fixed Thought, an Eye vntaught to glance;) Who (blest with such high chance) Would at suggestion of a steepe Desire, Cast himselfe from the spire Of all his Happinesse? But soft: I heare Some vicious Foole draw neare, That cries we dreame; and sweares, there's no such thing As this chaste Loue we sing. Peace Luxurie, thou art like one of those Who (being at sea) suppose Because they moue, the Continent doth so: No (Vice) we let thee know, Though thy wild Thoughts with Sparrowes wings do flie, "Turtles can chastly die; And yet (in this t'expresse our selfe more cleare) We do not number here Such Spirites as are onely continent, Because Lusts meanes are spent: Or those, who doubt the common mouth of Fame,
And for their Place, or Name, Cannot so safely sinne; Their Chastitie Is meere Necessitie, Nor meane we those, whom Vowes and Conscience Haue fild with Abstinence: (Though we acknowledge who can so abstaine, Makes a most blessed gaine: " He that for loue of goodnesse hateth ill, " Is more Crowne-worthy still, " Then he which for sinnes Penaltie forbeares, " His Heart sinnes, though he feares.) But we propose a person like our Doue, Grac'd with a Phoenix loue: A beauty of that cleare and sparkling Light, Would make a Day of Night, And turne the blackest sorrowes to bright ioyes: Whose Od'rous breath destroyes All taste of Bitternesse, and makes the Ayre As sweete, as she is faire: A Bodie so harmoniously composde, As if Nature disclosde All her best Symmetrie in that one Feature: O, so diuine a Creature Who could be false too? chiefly when he knowes How onely she bestowes The wealthy treasure of her Loue in him; Making his Fortunes swim In the full floud of her admir'd perfection? What sauage, brute Affection, Would not be fearefull to offend a Dame Of this excelling frame? Much more a noble and right geerous Mind,
(To vertuous moodes enclin'd) That knowes the weight of Guilt: He will refraine From thoughts of such a straine▪ And to his Sence obiect this Sentence euer, " Man may securely sinne, but safely neuer. Ben: Iohnson. The Phoenix Analysde. NOw, after all, let no man Receiue it  Fable, If a Bird so amiable, Do turne into a Woman. Or (by our Turtles Augure) That Natures fairest Creature, Proue of his Mistris Feature, But a bare Type and Figure. Ode . SPlendor! O more then mortall, For other formes come short all Of her illustrate brighnesse, As farre as Sinne's from lightnesse. Her wit as quicke, and sprightfull As fire; and more delightfull Then the stolne sports of Louers, When night thei
Iudgement (adornd with Learning) Doth shine in her discerning, Cleare as a naked vestall Closde in an orbe of Christall. Her breath for sweete exceeding The Phoenix place of breeding, But mixt with sound, transcending All Nature of commending. Alas: then whither wade I, In thought to praise this Ladie, When seeking her renowning, My selfe am so neare drowning? Retire, and say; Her Graces Are deeper then their Faces: Yet shee's nor nice to shew them, Nor takes she pide to know them. Ben: Iohnson. FINIS.
