5118 99840702 5229
CHESTERS TRIVMPH IN HONOR OF HER PRINCE. As it was performed vpon S. GEORGES Day 1610. in the for said CITIE. SVRSVM printer's or publisher's device LONDON Printed for I. B. and are to be Sold in Saint Dunstanes Church-yard in Fleete streete. 1610.
ICH DIEN HP blazon of Prince Henry of Wales
To the High and Mightie Prince, HENRY Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall and Rothsay, Earle of Che∣ster, Knight of the most noble Order of the GARTER, &c. CHESTER to her Prince. VNto the boundlesse Ocean, most dread Prince, Of thy surmounting Great magnificence, Doe we (poore Palatines) from our best hearts, (Enlarg'd with Loue of thine admired Parts) Blushing, obiect to thy deepe Iudgements eye, The fruit (though poore) of rich Loues industrie. Not that we are Ambitious, or that wee Can thinke it worthy; of (most worthy) THEE. But, with our best integritie, to show The Awfull Duetie which our Loues doe owe, To thy great Greatnesse; who (beyond compare) Doth shine so bright in our Loues Hemisphere That, in thy right, our Hearts, Liues, Limmes and Swords, Shall stretch our Actions farre beyond our Words. Her ill Townesman, Ri. Dauies.
TO THE READER. REader, to make a large Narration of nothing, were scarce woorth any thing; Yet, since it hath pleased the great giuer of all things, to infuse life into poore Animals (as well as Spirit into more worthy Creatures) I haue by the importunitie of some friends (vpon honest conditions) let slip this prisoner, who like a poore Peregrinator (to purchase enlarg∣ment) is contented to passe through the Purgatorie of the Printing-house: Where (if by his good behauiour, he doe not merit Redemptiō) let him be prest without pity a Gods name, and like a vituperous offender, be Stamped and Sta∣red at, by the seuerest Corrector, and truest Compositor. To be briefe, what was done, was so done, as being by the Approbation of many, said to bee well done, then I doubt not, but it may merit the mercifull Construction of some few, who may chance to Sweare t'was most excellently ill done. Zeale procured it; Loue deuis'd it; Boyes perform'd it; Men beheld it, and none but fooles dispraised it. As for the further Discription of the businesse, I referre to further relation; onely thus: The chiefest part of this people-plea∣sing spectacle, consisted in three Bees, viz. Boyes, Beasts, and Bels, Bels of a strange amplitude and extraordinarie propor∣tion; Beasts of an excellent shape, and most admirable swift∣nesse, and Boyes of rare Spirit, and exquisite performance. Which glorious Triumph, with much more, was meerely intended (as it was then thought) for the ioyfull celebrati∣on of Cambers boundlesse glory. R. D.
¶A briefe Relation of the most delight∣full, pleasant and rare Shewes, the which haue beene Enacted, set forth, and performed, within the most Auncient renowned Citie Caer-leon, now named CHESTER, vpon the Festiuall of our most worthy appro∣ued English Champian S. George his Day, being the 23. of Aprill 1610. and shall remaine and continue perpetually to future ages, as a memorable and worthy proiect, founded, de∣uised, and erected onely by the most famous, generous, and well deseruing Citizen, Mr. ROBERT AMERIE, late Sherieffe of the said Citie, redownding to the glory and praise of Almightie God for his benefits, immediately and bounte∣ously powred vpon vs Christians, and also in liew of the Ho∣mage, Fealtie, Alleagance, and Duetie, which wee doe owe and attribute vnto the KINGS most Excellent and magnifi∣cent Maiestie, his Crowne and dignitie, and to the most ver∣tuous and hopefull Heire Apparent, the PRINCE of Wales, with that Noble victor Saint George, our aforesaid English Champion. 1 A Man by strange deuises clyming to the toppe of a very high spire Steeple (standing at the Market (rosse, called S. Peters Steeple) carying an Aun∣cient of our Colours of S. George, displaying the same vpon the said Steeple, and fixing the same to the barre of Iron, that the Vane hangeth vpon: Likewise, sounding a Drumme, shooting off a Peece, and flourishing a Sword, and standing vpon the Crosse of the said barre of Iron, stood vpon his hands with his feete into the Ayre, very dangerously and wonderfully to the view of the beholders, with casting Fire-workes very delightfull.
2. Two disguised, called Greene-men, their habit Embroy∣dred and Stitch'd on with Iuie-leaues with blacke-side, hauing hanging to their shoulders, a huge blacke shaggie Hayre, Sauage-like, with Iuie Garlands vpon their heads, bearing Herculian Clubbes in their hands, an artificiall Dragon, very liuely to be∣hold, pursuing the Sauages entring their Denne, casting Fire from his mouth, which afterwards was slaine, to the great plea∣sure of the spectators, bleeding, fainting, and staggering, as though hee endured a feeling paine, euen at the last gaspe, and farewell. 3. One mounted on Horsebacke, bearing the Helmet and Shield of S. George, attended by three: One leading his Horse, a Drumme sounding before him, with S. George his Scutchin in the forehead of his Horse. 4. Fame mounted on Horsebacke, with a Trumpet in her hand, pronouncing an Oration. 5. Mercurie, descending from heauen in a cloud, artificially Winged, a Wheele of fire burning very cunningly, with other Fire-workes, mounting to the height of the foresaid Steeple vp∣on Coardes: with most pleasant and mellodious harmonie at his approach. 6. Another representing the forenamed and most worthy Citie Chester, mounted on Horsebacke: two Drummes soun∣ding before him, with the Armes of S. George vpon a Scutchin in the forehead of his Horse. 7. Another with the Kings Armes, very richly Haroldi∣zed vpon a Shield: Also mounted on Horsebacke, with the Kings Armes vpon a Scutchin in the Horses forehead. 8. Another, making an Oration, in Honour of the King his Crowne and Emperiall Monarchie, likewise mounted on Horsebacke, with the Armes correspondent in the forehead of his Horse.
9. Another, mounted on Horsebacke with a great Bell double Gilt, supported by foure Lyons Rampant, standing vpon a lesser Bell with a Clapper in it, the Kings Armes engrauen there∣on, caried vpon a Scepter, Dedicated to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie, with many Trumpets sounding cheerefully before him, with the Kings Armes vpon a Schutchin in the Horses forehead. 10 Another with the Princes Armes vpon a Shield, very richly Haroldized, mounted on Horsebacke, with the Princes Armes vpon a Scutchin in the Horses foretoppe. 11. Another mounted on Horsebacke, deliuering an Oration in Honour of the Prince his Birth-right, and magnificent Cre∣ation, viz. To the High and Mightie Prince HENRIE, Prince of VVales, Duke of Cornwall and Rothsay, Earle of Chester, &c. with the Princes Armes vpon a Scutchin in the Horses forehead. 12. Another mounted on Horsebacke, with a massie Bell of Siluer, parcell Gilt, with the Princes Armes engrauen vpon it: Likewise supported by three Lyons Rampant, standing vpon a lesser Bell, with a Clapper in it, caried vpon a Scepter, a noyse of Cornets before the Bell, Dedicated to the Prince, with the Princes Armes vpon a Scutchin in the Horses forehead. 13 Another mounted on Horsebacke with the Armes of S. George vpon a Shield, with the Armes of Saint George vpon a Scutchin in the forehead of the Horse. 14 Rumot mounted on Horsebacke, pronouncing an Ora∣tion, in Honour of the most worthy Christian English Cham∣pian S. George, mounted on Horsebacke with the Armes of S. George, vpon a Scutchin in the forehead of the Horse. 15. Another mounted on Horsebacke, with the most ancient and famous Standard of S. George, with the Armes of Saint George vpon a Scutchin in the Horses forehead. 16. Another mounted on Horsebacke, bearing vpon a Scep∣ter
a great piece of Plate, parcell Gilt, Bell fashion, Dedicated to the Honour of Saint George, with the Armes of S. George in the Horses forehead. 17. Another, representing S. George, Accoutred and Ar∣med at all points, attended by two Squires: Also in compleat Ar∣mour, a noyse of Drummes before them, likewise mounted on Horsebacke, with the Armes of S. George vpon a Scutchin in the Horses forehead. 18. Another on Horsebacke, representing Peace, who made a Speech agreeable to her nature. 19. Another on Horsebacke, representing Plentie, made likewise a Speech, &c. A Wreath of Wheat-cares vpon her head, with a Garland of the same athwart her body, casting and strew∣ing VVhcate abroad amongst the multitude, as shee roade along. Garbe or Wheat-sheffe Ore, in a Scutchin vpon her Horses fore∣head. 20. Another on Horsebacke, representing Enuie, with a VVreath of Snakes about her head; another in her hand, her face and armes besmeard with blood. 21. After her (on Horsback) came one, rpresenting Loue, who finding Enuie dismounted from Horsebacke, and mounted on a Stage to shew her nature, was coniured by Loue to depart, and not to interrupt (with her detractions) that dayes Triumph, vndertaken and performed through Loue, which done, Loue and Ioye marshall the succeeding sport. 22. Lastly, Ioye mounted on Horsebacke, reioycing at so great a concourse of people, neuer there before seene, and pray∣sing the good meaning of what there was vndertaken and per∣formed. Whereupon all departed for a while, to a place vpon the Riuer called the Roodes, Garded with one hundred and twentie Halberders, and a hundred and twentie Shotte, brauly furni∣shed. The Mayor, Sheriffs and Aldermen of Chester, a∣rayed
in their Scarlet, hauing seene the said shewes, to grace the same, accompanied, and followed the Actors vnto the said Roode, where the Ships, Barques, and Pinises, with other vessels Har∣bouring within the Riuer, displaying the Armes of S. George, vpon their maine Toppes, with seuerall pendants answerable thereunto; discharged many voleyes of Shotte in Honour of the day. The Bels Dedicated (as before is remembred) being pre∣sented to the Mayor, Proclamation being generally made, to bring in Horses to runne for the saide Bels, there was runne a double Race, to the great pleasure and delight of the specta∣tors: Men of great worth, running also at the Ring for the said Cuppe, Dedicated to Saint George, and those that wonne the Pri∣ses, according to the Articles agreed vpon in that behalfe, had the same with the Honour thereunto belonging: The said seue∣rall Prises, being with Speeches, and seuerall Wreathes set on their heads, deliuered in ceremonious and Try∣umphant maner, after the order of the Olim∣pian Sportes, whereof these were an imitation.
CHESTERS TRIVMPH IN HONOVR OF HER PRINCE. FAME. FRom blisfull Bowres of faire Elizian fields, (The happy harbour of Ioues deerest Deere) From thence these Worthies (noted by their shields Are (by my conduct) thus ariued here. I Fame that with a trice, doe ouer-fill The Worlds wide eares with what I please to say, Haue brought them thus, as t'were against the hill Of highest Lets, to celebrate this Day! This Day, that I so farre haue famouzed That not a nooke of Earths huge Globe but knowes, How in great Britaine t'is solemnized With diuine Offices, and glorious Showes. Then for th'encrease of this triumphant Mirth, I'le inuocate the Gods Embassadour, To be the President of Heau'n to Earth; And, from the Gods, salute your Gouernour. Then come great Nuntius of th'immortall Gods, From that all-swaying Senate of their State; Come, I inuoke thee, with thy charming-rod In glory come, this Day to celebrate. The nine-fold Orbes of Heau'n, my words doe pierce; Descend then, Tongues-man of the Vniuerse.
A Song of eight voyces for the shew in CHESTER on S. GEORGES day. COme downe thou mighty messenger of blisse, Come: we implore thee, Let not thy glory be obscur'd from vs Who most adore thee: Then come, O come great spirit That we may ioyfull sing, Welcome, O welcome to earth Ioues dearest darling. Lighten the eyes thou great Mercurian Prince, Of all that view thee, That by the lustre of their optick sense They may pursue thee: Whilst with their voyces Thy praise they shall sing, Come away Ioues dearest darling. MERCVRIE comes downe in a Cloude and speakes thus. DOwne from the Throne of the immortall Gods, From out the glorious euer-during Heau'ns, And from the sacred Powres celestiall From thence I come, commanded by them all To visite Him whose rare report hath rung
His erned fame on earth hath pierc'd the skie, Ascending vp vnto the highest Heau'ns; And therewithall procur'd the sacred Senate In great regard to hold his worthinesse: For which intent, They all (with one accord) To manifest the Loue to Him they owe, Haue sent me Mercurie, their Messenger, To bring him ioyfull tydings of the same. And to this place, directed by their Powres, I am ariu'd (in happy time I hope) To finde this happy God-beloued Man. And loe behold on suddaine where I spie This Fauorite so fauor'd of the Gods: I will salute him with such courtesie As best beseemes a wight of such account. All haile to thee high Iustice Officer; Mercurie, Nuntius to the Powres diuine, Hath brought thee greetings from their Deities. And know (deere Sir) thy deedes and good deserts, Thy well disposed Nature, Minde, and thought, Thy zealous care to keepe their Lawes diuine, Thy great compassion on poore wights distrest, Thy prudence, iustice, temp'rance, and thy truth, And, to be briefe, thy vertues generall, Haue mou'd them all from Heau'n, with one assent, To send Me downe, to let thee vnderstand That thou art highly in their Fauors plac'd: And, for the more assurance of the same, Loe here a Fauour fauourably sent From them, by me, to thee, that thou maist know Thy vertues here shall there rewarded bee
With endlesse ioy, and perfect happinesse. Receaue the same, returning naught but thankes, Which is as much as they require of thee, My message done, my taske thus brought to end, I must returne and to the Heau'ns ascend. CHESTER. HAile sage Spectators, haile yee reu'rend Sires, Haile yonger Brutes, whose worth self Worth admires. Whose ardent Loues both to the place, and vs, Constraines our Loues to entertaine yee thus. Welcome ten thousand times yee blisfull criew, Whose light lends luster to the vulgar view. Whose seuerall vertues, link'd with seuerall Graces, Deserues the Best, of our best Loues embraces. The Romaine Curtius Romes great Fauorite, (Whose daring Death did her from scathe acquite) Was ne're more Welcome to the Romanes sights, Then are your selues, to these our choise delights. To which kinde purpose our desire intends To entertaine you as our fastest friends, With such Olympian sports as shall approue Our Best deuotion, and sincearest Loue. Such entertaine as best beseemes your Rancks, Wee'le striue to giue you with our hartiest thankes. And so, to please your nicer appetietes, VVee'le feast your paines with Pleasures honied Sweets. The rarest viands Choise it selfe affords, Shall o're abound vpon our bounteous bords, And in the midst of all our Iouiall solace,
VVee'le sucke sweet Nectar from the Paps of Pallas. VVee'le cozen France of those delitious Vines, VVhere-hence they draine their brain-enchanting VVines To cheere our hearts, and make you frolique so As you shall swim in ioy, though sunke in woe. VVee'le Banquet you with such variety Of dulcet Fruites, whose sweete Satiety Shall seeme so pleasing; as it shall intice The Gods themselues to surfet on their iuice. Our best Pauilions, in their best attire, Remonstrate shall how much we doe desire, To satisfie your Expectations eyes, VVith all that Arte can possibly deuise. VVee'le paue our Streetes, with that Eye-pleasing sand, VVhich is of powre whole Kingdomes to command: And for your more delight perfume we will The Aire: nay, it sweete Aires shall ouer-fill. Our verdant Pastures three pil'd greene in graine Shall weare, to honour so your entertaine. And round about the Meadowes as yee goe, For peeping flowers the Grasse shall scarsely show VVhat may be done, and willing hearts can doe Shall be effected with aduantage too. Wee'le furrow vp those pety hills or heights, That lie but in the way of our delights: And with the Surplusse of this surquedrie, Fill vp the places that too lowly lie VVithin the list or prospect of that place, Assign'd this Triumph and triumphant Race. VVhat e're our more then strained vtmost-All, Can possibly performe; performe we shall.
BRITAINE. ILlustrious Britaine, stately Seate of Kings, VVhose boundlesse glories inequiualent, Doe so reflect on Fames orientall wings. That o're the world they spred their blandishment. VVhose influence (past compasse of conceit) Endarts such Sun-beames to obscurer places, That all the world by that resplendant light, Deriues from her their most peculiar graces. Whose royall, clement, chast, and bounteous King, (King; O too base a stile for his great worth) Such radiant luster to the Earth doth bring, That like the Sunne it cheeres the totall North. Then yeeld him honor Kings that glorious be; Vaile to this (next the high'st) great King of Kings: Who by his vertues graceth your degree, And to the same immortall glory brings. Great Britaines Greatnesse (wonder of the North: Admir'd of All whom vertues height admires) VVe doe ascribe vnto thy Match-lesse worth, Surmounting praise, to mount thy vertues higher. And while me (Britaine) Neptune shal embrace, Ile ruine those, that spight thee, or thy Race. CAMBRIA. REnowmed Camber, Britaines true repose, VVhose ardent zeale to her admired Prince, Hath euer beene approu'd to friends and foes
To sacrifice her bloud in his defence. With high-swolne words of vaunt to thunder forth How much we dare to doe in this respect, Were more then meerely idle; since our worth Shall shew it selfe in such words true effect. Our hopefull Prince whilst Cambers Race doth Breath, Shall they with fast vnited might, In his iust cause will their best Swords vnsheathe Against the stout'st Opposer of his Right. We scorne that Wales such weaklings should afford, That dare not brauely front the eagerst foe At any Weapon (Pistoll, Pike, or Sword) And (like stout Warriours) giue him bloe for bloe. But to our Prince (Great Britaines matchlesse Heire) As humbly low, as is his Greatnesse high, Our liues wee'le prostrate with our best Deuoire, To doe what may vndoe the Enemie. Whose Grace is thought vpon this present day, Which day Saint George hath blisfully created, To take his Birth-right; with such great ioy, As such a day was neuer consecrated. To memorize which more then blisfull Feast, We are incited by the loue we owe him, The same to celebrate, or at the least Our great, great ioy most thankfully to shew him. Then naught remaines but that we all doe pray, God blesse Prince HENRY Prop of Englands ioy. RVMOR. SAint George for England, is the Patrone Knight, Whose euer-conquering, and all-daring hand, Did put whole Hoasts of Heathens foes to flight,
That did the vigour of his strength with-stand. He that did euer liue (a Champion stout) With such vndaunted holy-high resolue, That through the earth his fame did flie about, Which shall not die till heauen and earth dissolue. Against the Heathen folke his force he prou'd, By which he did decline their highest pride: For which of heau'n and earth he was belou'd, And made a glorious Saint when as he dide, Vpon a hideous Dragon (whose thick scales Like shields, that nought could pierce by force nor Arte Did Bulwarke him) so fast his Faulchion falls, That he through them made way vnto his heart. Whose rare atchiuements and whose rich renowne (Flowing from matchlesse Magnanimity) Still makes them owners of great Britaines Crowne, As in this day to crowne his memory. Whose Fames bright Splendor, rarely to depaint In colours rich according to his worth, Would try the tongue of Hermes, sith this Saint Thus trauels Britaines glory to bring forth, Many a Monster he by force subdude, And many a fiend incarnate he supprest, Whose Sword did still mowe downe their multitude, So to imbarne them in hells restlesse rest. When loe at length returning to the soile, VVherein he first receau'd his vitall breath, He spent his time religiously a-while, Till Death had slaine him, who now conquers Death: So, Britaines when they fight with cheere, they say, God and Saint George for England to this day.
PEACE. TO bring glad newes of future happy yeares, Peace is the Nuntius that such tydings beares. VVho while the Scotch the English faire entreate, And me embrace withall, I'le make them great. No forraigne Nation shall affront their force As long as I direct them in that course. All rash dissentions and litigious braules, I shall expell from their vnshaken walls. All ciuill Mutinies shall then surcease, And Peace shall bring them euerlasting Peace. Inueterate hate so will I turne to loue, As with one motion both shall iointly moue. Brother with brother, nay, the foe with friend, For mine and thine shall neuer more contend. No massacre nor bloudy stratageme, Shall stirre in Peaces new Ierusalem. No ciuill Discord, nor Domestick strife Shall e're annoy their Peace, much lesse their life, For (like to Oliue branches) they shall beare Fruite that giues loue an appetite to beare. VVhich mutuall concord datelesse shall endure As long as loue can Peace to loue procure. I'le binde their Loues with true Loues Gordian knot, That rude Dissentions hands vndoe it not: And with a VVreath of euer-during Baies, Crowne all your browes with peace-procured praise, I'le rend the close-mouth'd rage of emulous strife, And wound Distraction, with Connexions knife. And when damn'd Malice comes but once in sight I, with a vengeance, will suppresse her straight.
I'le send pale Enuie downe to hell with speed, VVhere she vpon her Snakes shall onely feed. And with some pois'nous and inuenom'd Toade, Her much more poysonous selfe shall make aboade. VVhich being done I'le send that base infection (VVhose onely vertue is but base) Detraction Her to associate; where they both shall liue As long as hell can life with horror giue: And thus shall Peace their ioy perpetuate, That loue (in loue) to stay this blessed State. PLENTIE. SInce Plenty still co-operates with Peace, Plenty shall blesse your basket of encrease. From whose aboundant ne're exhausted store, You shall receaue much more then had before, I'le stuffe your Barnes vp to the throat with graine, VVhich shall all yours, and others still sustaine. I'le fructifie the earth with rarest fruites Of sundry shapes, and seuerall kinde of suites, So as the Soile (that beares seed timely sowne) Vnder the burthen of their waight, shall groane. In all aboundance I will reare your Beasts, VVhich shall maintaine your o're abounding Feasts, Fish, fowle, hearbs, grasse, and all things whatsoere, Shall at your dore be cheape, and nothing deere I'le sinke into the concaues of earthes molde, And there hence pull and cull her purest golde, And then will diue into the Ocean Deepes, To raise the Treasure which their Neptune keepes. I'le fraight your ships with such o're-fraighting store, That greedinesse her selfe shall seeke no more.
No scarsity shall in your Land be found, As long as I with Nature till your ground. What shall I say? your life-supporting staffe, The staffe of bread; I'le throw abroad like chaffe. Then see how graciously the High'st hath sent yee Peace, in all fulnesse, in all fulnesse Plentie. ENVIE and LOVE. Enuie. HIsse. Loue. Why how now Enuie? do'st thou hisse at Phoe∣bus? E. Yes; and at Cinthia too, if shee anger vs. L. Your reason Enuie? E. Why? My reason's this, To heare a Cat cry mewe, who can but hisse. L. Out hissing Scorpion: E. Out yee filthy Foole, Enuie hath wit, to set such Apes to schoole. L. Malitious Monster, thou incarnate Diu'll, VVhose base condition, is the source of euill. Thou enuious Bandogge, speake and doe thy worst, He that regards it; is the most accurst E. And he that thinks that Loue can e're be wise, Hath neither iudgement, wisedome, wit, nor eies. L. Say thou abortiue, men-detested slaue, VVhose onely vertue is, but to depraue Mans best proceedings, speake thou squint-eide Monster, VVhat is the cause which makes thee still misconster? E. Because I hate to heare a want-wit preach Beyond wits bounds, and wisedomes boundlesse reach: To see a superficiall Sot make show Of deeper skill then wit it selfe doth know.
L. VVhat is the solace Enuie counteth deepe? E. Marie to see a VVolfe deuoure a Sheepe. To see men-diuels breeding still dissention Is sport (me thinks) beyond all comprehension: Or else a rich man hunger-pin'd with want, To see an Army (when their foode is scant) Eate their owne excrements; O this is sport For Enuie, that without this is all amort. To see a droue of Drunkards like to Swine Swilling their soules, in soule-o're-whelming wine. To see a City burnt, or Barnes on fire, To see a Sonne the Butcher of his Sire. To see two Swaggerars eagerly to striue, VVhich of them both shall make the Hang-man thriue. To see a good man poore, or wise man bare, To see dame Vertue ouer-whelm'd with care. To see a ruin'd Church, a Preacher dumbe, A Kings childe perish in the Mothers wombe. To see a Miser, who to haue his pelfe, VVill take a rope and (desp'rate) hang him selfe: To see a virgine by a varlet vs'd, Till she by him to death be so abus'd. Or else to see a Father sucke the blood Of his owne Spawne, O! these would doe me good. But to behold a ranke of rustick Boyes Shewing as childish people childish toyes To grace a day with; O it grates my gall To heare an apish Kitling catterwall. Is it not harsh to heare a Marmeset squeake Vpon a stage a most vnioynted speake? And then to heare some ignorant Baboone, Sweare that this Monky did surmount the Moone.
VVhen as the Infants best is too too bad, And which to heare would make a wise-man mad. L. Thou damn'd Infection; damned from thy birth. Abhor'd of heau'n, and odious to the earth, How canst thou euer hope to merit grace, VVhen thy delight is but detraction base? But since there is no signe of grace in that Damn'd face of thine, which hell doth wonder at, Loue shall coniure thee; that from this time forth, Thou ne're frequent this Iland of the North. Diue to the depth of deepest Stigian flood; There sucke thou Snakes, and Snakes there suck thy blood. Or sinke thou quite to the infernall deepe, Where crawling Scorpions may about thee creepe. And there among those vermine vile beneath, Belk vp that poison which thou here dost breath. Goe, I coniure thee, least I make thee feele The keenest edge of Wraths reuenging steele. Burthen the earth no more, thou hatefull Toade VVith such a pondrous earth-anoying loade, Goe with a vengeance goe, and ne're retire, But we are out Time in euerlasting fire. Enuie. O I could grind and grate thee with my teeth, L. No more thou Monster; hence be gone forthwith; E. Confusion, death, plague, pestilence, and piles, Confound their soules who at mine anguish smiles, Yet, ere I goe, I'le bid the best farewell, Hoping ere long to meete their Ghosts in hell. L. Goe vgly Monster, Loues Misanthropos, Sinke downe to tortour and continuall woes. Heau'n excludes thee; Earth abhors thy sight, And greeues to beare the burthen of thy weight.
Sinke to her center, there's thy Natiue rest, And neuer more be seene to spot her brest: So, hast thee hence; and hence-forth I'le direct My speech to those, whom I doe best affect: Loue bids you welcome that are come in loue, To see our sports that Enuie doth reproue. IOY. ENuie auaunt, thou art no fit Compeere T'associate these our sweet Consociats heere. Ioy doth exclude thee, who (to thy disgrace) Here spets Defiance in thy vgly face. And that is more; thy euerlasting shame Shall be still blasted by the Trumpe of Fame: The powerfull tongue of facund Mercury, Shall to the world display thy Infamy. Chester abhors thy presence; Britaine hates thee; And for a damned fury, Camber takes thee. Peace, as a Herrald, shall proclaime to All, That thou art damn'd by Iustice-Generall. Plenty detests thy base Society, VVho scornes thy hell-bred grosse impietie. And last of all; My Loue, in Loues defence In spight of Enuie, shall send Enuie hence. Wherefore auaunt; that all the I'le may sing, Now Enuies gone, in peace w'enioy our King.
After the running of the Horses FAME speakes. WIth rich Characters of resplendant gold, Fame hath your names within her booke enrold: Which till Time stayes his course shall glitter bright, Maugre Detractiou and fell Enuies spight. BRITAINE to him that wan the best Bell. IN signe of victory which thou hast gain'd, This VVreath by thy faire front shall be sustain'd. VVhose greene leau'd branches vnto Fame shall tell That thou didst best deserue the better Bell. CAMBER to the second. TO crowne thy Temples with a second vvreath, Loe here doth Camber vnto thee bequeath This fragrant Garland: sith thou didst excell The best that ran but at the second Bell. RVMOR to him that wan the Ring. THou that by either cunning, or by chaunce, Didst take the Ring with thy thrice happy Launce: Here take of me (to raise thy vertues vp) This vvreath of Balme, and pollisht siluer cup. All together. And so we all in all your seuerall Graces, VVill with fames o're-fill all times and places.
CHESTERS last Speech. NO Action, though admir'd for Excellence, No Practize, though of high'st preheminence That can escape the Poliphemian eye Of Enuie, that for euer lookes awry: Yet notwithstanding on your Loues depending, Whose patient eares excludes all reprehending. We here submit our selues in humblest wise, Before the barre of your iudicious eyes, What we present vnto your dainty eares Is freed from scandalls: so is free from feares. Onely your Loues which are our fairest markes, Must muzzle Enuie, when the Fury barkes Vnto the best, we doubt not but our best May purchase fauour; and for all the rest We doe expect but this poore kindnesse from them, That they would speake but what shall well become them. This being graunted: Chester doth inuite Each noble worthy, and each worthy Knight, To close their stomacke with a small repast, Which may content a temperate curious tast. Measure our ardent Loues, with such kinde measure, As we afford you sport, and giue you pleasure: And so wee'le leaue you with this solemne vow, That whilst we breath, our hearts shall honour you. IF any Reader shall desire to know VVho was the Author of this pleasing show:
Let him receaue aduertizement hereby A Sheriffe (late of Chester) AMERIE. Did thus performe it; who for his reward, Desires but Loue, and competent regard. ROBERT AMERIE. FINIS.
A
