6913.5 S122417 99857566 23324
THE DROVSIE DISEASE; OR, AN ALARME TO AWAKE Church-sleepers. Wherein not onely the dangers hereof are de∣scribed, but remedies also prescribed for this sleeping evill▪ MAT. 26. 40. What, could yee not watch with mee one houre? LONDON, Printed by I. D. for Michael Sparke junior, and are to be sold at the blew Bible in greene Arbor. 1638. THE DROVSIE DISEASE. Or, An Alarme to awake Church-sleepers.
CHAP. I. The severall kindes of sleepe: and what kinde is here treated of. SLeepe (as it is refer∣red The severall kindes of sleepe. to man) is used in Scripture, either properly, or figura∣tively. Properly, for that naturall The proper acception thereof. rest which God hath appointed for the continuing and moiste∣ning
of naturall heat; the re∣freshing of the wearied spirits; the quickening and strengthe∣ning of the weake members, and the preservation of wearied Nature. It is occasioned by vapours Whence it commeth. and fumes rising from the sto∣mack to the head, where through coldnesse of the braine they become congealed, and so stop the conduits and wayes of the senses, that they become unable to execute their office, and may seeme for a time to be tied and bound up, which is therefore not without cause tearmed of some: The bond of Arist. de som. & vig. the senses. Hereof the Lord is the Au∣thor The Author thereof. Iam. 1. 17. , Homer. Mat. 5. 45. (even the Father of lights, from whom every good gift, and every perfect gift commeth downe) who (as hee maketh his Sunne to rise on the evill, and on the good, and sendeth raine on the just, and on the un∣just) equally communicated
this blessing to good and bad, yet is it not more common then necessarie, for, It helpeth and perfecteth digestion, recovereth How need∣full it is. strength, refresheth the body, reviveth the mind, pacifieth an∣ger, driveth away sorrow, and bringeth the whole man to good state and temperature, accor∣ding to that of the Poet; Thou rest of things, most meeke Somne, quies rerum, i∣dissime Somne Deorum, &c. Ovid. metam. lib. 11. Trans∣lated by Mt. G. Sandys. of all the Gods: O sleepe, the peace of mindes, from whose abods Care ever flies: restoring the decay Of toyle-tir'd limbs to labour-burdening day. Yea, as without this man could not consist, (for There is no creature that can Quod caret altern&acirc; requie durabile non est, Ovid. E∣pist. 4. alwayes last, Which wholly of his sleepe is dis∣possest.) So for the fruition thereof, hee hath in a manner no lesse time
allotted unto him, then for the workes of his calling (for this Psal. 104: 23 craveth the night, as those the day) yea as it is used, or rather abused, it is the better part of Pars humanae melior vitae, Senec. mans life, during the continu∣ance whereof (which is at the least the one halfe of mans life) there is no difference betweene masters and servants, kings and beggers; Craesus and Codrus, Dimidio vitae nihil differunt foelices ab in∣foelicibus. E∣ras. Chil. as well those as these entertai∣ning the same; or rather with a kind of willing unwillingnesse, nill they, will they, subjecting themselves hereunto. Hereof another Poet speaking to, and of sleepe. Thou charme to all our cares, Tu{que} ô domi∣tor, somne malorum, re∣quies animi, &c. Senec. Her. fur. act. 4. translated by Master G. Sandys. that art Of human life the better part: Wing'd issue of a peacefull mo∣ther, Of rigid death, the elder bro∣ther: Father of things, the life of port: The dayes repose, and nights consort.
To Kings and vassals equall free, The labour-tir'd refresht by thee. Who man (whom death doth terrifie) Inur'st continually to die. This is either ordinary, or The kindes of sleepe properly ta∣ken. Sleepe, when lawfull. extraordinary. Ordinary, lawfull, or unlaw∣full. Lawfull, when 1. Seasonable, as in the night, implied in that of the Psalmist. Man goeth forth to his worke, Psal. 104 23 1 Thess. 5. 7 and to his labour untill the eve∣ning. And, in that of the A∣postle, They that sleepe, sleepe in the night. So in the time of weaknesse, sicknesse, and such other bodily infirmities, whe∣ther it be by day, or night. 2. Moderate: Not so short, as that thereupon our health is endangered, or so long, as that thereby we are hindered from the duties of our Calling.
3. Sanctified by prayer, with∣out which no creature of God 1 Tim. 4. 4, 5. is to be received. 4. Occasioned by the works of our Calling. Eccles. 5: 12. 5. Our soules are awake in the meditation of heavenly Isa. 26. 9. Gen. 28. 12. Cant. 5. 2. things; as it was with Iacob, and the Spouse in the Canticles, if that may bee understood of bodily rest. 6. Wee are therby the more fitted for the workes of our cal∣ling. When un∣wfull. Ʋnlawfull, when. 1. Ʋnseasonable, as at pray∣er, and the preaching of the Word, for wee are to watch in Col. 4. 2. am. 1. 19. the one, and be swift to heare the other. 2. Immoderate, as the slug∣gards in the Proverbs; Yet a rov. 6. 10. little steepe, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleepe. 3. No blessing of God is cra∣ved thereupon, which is too too usuall with most.
4. Following upon the Com∣mission of sinne, as theirs, of Prov. 4. 16. whom Salomon, They sleepe not, except they have done mis∣chiefe, and their sleepe is taken away, unlesse they cause some to fall. 5. Our soules during the con∣tinuance thereof satiate them∣selves with the seeming plea∣sures of sinne, whereof our u∣suall dreames may sufficiently informe us. 6. Wee become thereby the more strengthened to continue in sin, and to commit the same. Extraordinary, occasioned Naturall meanes occa¦sioning ex∣traordinary sleepe. either through naturall, or through supernaturall meanes. Naturall, through 1. Care, and griefe, as was that of the Disciples. Luk. 22. 45. 2. Wearinesse, as was that of Sisera's. Judg. 4. 21. 3. Long watching, as was that of Eutychus. Act. 20. 9. 4. Intemperance, as was that of Noahs. Gen. 9. 24.
5. Labour, according to that of the Preacher; The sleepe of Eccles. 5. 12. a labouring man is sweet, whe∣ther he eat little or much. 6. Heate, as was that of Ish∣bosheth. 2 Sam. 4. 5. 7. Artificiall Potions made of Poppy, Lettuce, &c. which is brought to passe, sometimes for a good end, as when meanes are used to bring sicke, weake, and aged persons into a sleepe; Sometimes for a bad, as when Dalilah made Sampson sleepe, Iudg 16. 19. that shee might betray him into the hands of his enemies. Supernaturall, as which com∣meth immediatly of God, and that sometimes on the godly, as on Adam, when Hevah was Gen. 2. 21. Gen. 15. 12. formed; and on Abraham when God confirmed his pro∣mise to him by a vision; Some∣times on the ungodly, as on Saul, when David tooke his 1 Sam. 26. 12 Speare, and the cruise of wa∣ter which stood at his bolster. Figuratively, and that as well The accepti∣ns of sleepe figuratively taken in re∣spect of the godly.
in respect of the godly, and the ungodly severally, as in respect of both joyntly considered, Severally, In respect of the godly. 1. For abundant prosperity, tranquillitie, peace of consci∣ence; quietnesse, and rest of minde, voide of carking care, and free from such distractions, as during the state of Nature disquiet the whole man; I laid Psal. 3. 5. me downe and slept, said David. And againe, He giveth his be∣loved Psal. 1 27. 2 sleepe. Agreeable here∣unto is that of Ezekiel, They Ezech. 34. 2 shall dwell safely in the wil∣dernesse, and sleepe in the woods. 2. For a spirituall slumber, and drowsinesse in the mind and heart touching heavenly things, occasioned through abundance of peace and pleasures, where∣with a Christian may bee at sometimes so overtaken; as that (though bodily awake) with David hee falleth into the 2 Sam. 11. 4 sleepe of sinne. Such was the
Spouses slumber. I sleepe (saith ant. 5. 2. she) but my heart waketh. Such also the slumber, even of the five wise virgins. When the at. 25. 5. Soule (either through careles∣nesse, or by reason of some temptation) ceased from good, then doth it thus sleepe. Here∣of what one is there, which may not justly complaine? How often doth man seeme unto himselfe, wise, just, hum∣ble, rich in grace? how often goeth hee on in his vanitie glo∣rying in the multitude of his spirituall riches, and saying in the pride of his heart, I shall Rev. 3. 17. not be moved for ever, I am rich and increased with goods, and have need of nothing? but when hee shall awake, hee will be ashamed of such fancies and dreames. In respect of the ungodly, The ungodly for sin, con∣sidered in ge∣nerall. and that as well for sinne, as the effects of sinne. Sinne, considered both in generall, and in particular.
In Generall. As in that of the Apostle. Now it is high Rom. 13. 11. time to awake out of sleepe. And againe; Awake thou that Eph. 5. 14: 1 Thes. 5, 6. sleepest. And againe, let us not sleepe as doe others. Neither is it without especiall cause that sinne is thus expressed, there Resemblan∣ces betweene sleepe and sinne. being indeed betweene sinne and sleepe, no small resemblance as may thus appeare. 1. Sleepe is naturall to the body: so is sinne to the Soule. Naturally, every imagination Gen. 6. 5. of the thoughts of our hearts is onely evill continually. Wee leave the paths of uprightnesse Prov. 2. 13. 14. Isa. 5. 18. to walke in the wayes of dark∣nesse: wee rejoyce to doe evill, and delight in the frowardnesse of the wicked, wee draw iniqui∣ty with cords of vanity, and sinne as it were with a cart∣rope. 2. Sleepe steales upon man as it were by degrees, so in like manner doth sinne. Suggestion produceth delight. Delight,
consent; Consent, act; Act, the habite thereof. 3. Man being overtaken with sleepe, feares no danger, bee it never so neere, never so great, as the examples of Ishbosheth, 2. Sam. 4. 6. and Ionah witnesse; so sinne driveth into security. We have Ionah 1. 5. made a covenant with death (said some in the daies of Esay) Isa. 28. 15. and with hell, are wee at an a∣greement; when the over-flow∣ing scourge shall passe through, it shall not come unto us. A∣greeable here unto is that of the Lord by Amos, All the sinners Amos 9. 10▪ of my people shall die by the sword, which say the evill shall not overtake, nor prevent us, of whom Zephaniah; They eph. 1. 12. uk. 17. 27, 28. say in their heart: The Lord will not doe good, neither will he doe evill. Of this sort were the old world, and Sodomites. 4. A man given to sleepe, doth for the most part retyre himselfe from the company, society, and fellowship of o∣thers,
to some one corner or other, that so neither himselfe may be perceived, nor his rest disturbed. Such a one also nei∣ther Lycost. Thee vitae human▪ affecteth light, nor noise, as Sibertus, who banished dogs, and trades-men from the place of his residence, lest thereby his sleepe should be broke, agreea∣ble unto the Poets description of sleepe in these words; Neere the Cimmerians, lurkes Est propè Cimmerios longo Spe¦ca recessu, ¦mons cavu &c. Ovid Met. 11. Translate by Maste G. Sandys. a cave, in steepe And hollow hills; the mansion of dull sleepe. Not seene by Phoebus, when he mounts the skies At height, nor stouping: gloo∣ming mists arise From humide earth; which still a twilight make No crested fowles shrill crowing here awake The cheerefull morne, no bar∣king sentinell Here guards, nor geese, who wakefull dogs excell.
Beasts tame, nor savage: no wind-shaken boughs, Nor strife of jarring tongues, with noises rouse. Secured ease, &c. So sinners (if not past shame) zech. 8. 10. doe especially in secret commit their villanies. Cain getteth his en. 4. 8. brother out into the fields, and then slayeth him. Achan hi∣deth sh. 7. 21: his stollen goods. Gehezi without the knowledge of his Master (as hee conceived) ta∣keth money and raiment of Naaman, and they that are drunke (saith the Apostle) are ing. 5. 24. drunke in the night. And lest they should not thus sleepe hes. 5. 7. long enough, and safe enough, they stop the light of the Word, put out the light of their owne consciences, and forbid even those whose office it is to awake them out of sleepe, to awake them till they please. As for the word which thou 4. 16. hast spoken to us in the name of
the Lord, we will not hearken Amos 7. 12, 13. to thee, said the people unto Ieremiah, O thou Seer (said Amaziah unto Amos) goe flee thee away into the land of Iudah, and there eat bread, and prophecie there, but prophecie not againe any more in Bethel, for it is the kings Chappel, and it is the Kings Court. Yea, as a man being asleepe, doth for the most part take it ill, when he is awaked; so a sinner when hee is called upon to forsake his sinnes; yet a little sleepe (saith Prov. 6. 10. he) a little slumber, a little fol∣ding of the hands to sleepe. The time is not come, the time that Hag. 1: 2. the Lords house should be built, said the people unto Haggai. Hast thou found me, O mine 1 King. 21. 20. enemy, said Ahab unto Elijah. If Iohn the Baptist say unto Herod, It is not lawfull for thee Math. 14, 3 to have thy brother Philips wife; hee will lay hold on him, and put him in prison. If Paul reason of righteousnesse, tem∣perance,
and judgement to come; Felix will tremble, and answer, Goe thy way for this Act. 24. 25. time, when I have a convenient season, I will call for thee. If Micaiah detect the forge∣ry and falshood of Zedekiah, Zedekiah will smite him on the 1 King. 22. 24. cheeke, saying, Which way went the Spirit of the Lord from me to speake unto thee? 5. Sleepe, during its conti∣nuance, hindereth and letteth men, even from the Perfor∣mance of civill offices, as the Souldier from fighting, the La∣bourer from working, the Car∣penter and Mason from buil∣ding, and the like; so cannot wee by reason of sinne per∣forme any thing which is ac∣ceptable to God (though the same bee in it selfe lawfull and warrantable) till wee be raised there-from. What hast thou al. 50. 16, 17. to doe (saith God unto the wicked) to declare my statutes, or that thou shouldest take my
Covenant in thy mouth? Seeing thou hatest instruction, and ca∣stest my words behind thee. To what purpose is the multitude Jsa. 1. 11. of your sacrifices unto mee? (saith the Lord, unto his peo∣ple) I am full of the burnt of∣fering 15. of rams, &c. your hands are full of bloud. As Cain Gen. 4. 5. could not offer up an accepta∣ble sacrifice unto God, being asleepe in sinne; so whilest it goeth over our soules, binding up the faculties of the same, and bringing an heavinesse, or ra∣ther deadnesse into all the powers thereof, we are altoge∣ther unfit to goe about the acti∣ons of an holy life. Hence commeth it to passe, that the mind never thinketh seriously of God: the conscience never or seldome accuseth for sinnes committed: the will never or seldome willeth that which is truly good: the affections sel∣dome or never are moved at Gods word or workes, yea, so
long as it beareth sway over us, we can neither pray aright, heare the Word aright, nor rightly performe any other dutie. 6. In sleepe wee doe often conceive our condition to bee better, then indeed it is. The poore man dreameth of riches, the sicke of health, the impri∣soned of liberty, the hunger∣starved of dainty fare, deligh∣ting themselves with a kind of content, in the (imaginary) fruition of these things. So doth a sinner blesse himselfe in his course. I am (saith Baby∣lon) and none else beside me: I . 47. 8. shall not sit as a widow, neither shall I know the losse of chil∣dren. k. 12. 19. Soule (said the rich man in the Gospel, to his owne soule) thou hast much goods laid up for many yeares, take k. 18. 11. thine ease, eat, drinke, and be merry. God I thanke thee (said the vaine-glorious, selfe∣conceited, hypocriticall Phari∣see)
that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adul∣terers, or even as this Publican. In Particular In particular. 1. For carelesnesse. Sloath and negligence whether in Pa∣stors, or people. His watchmen Isa. 56. 10. are blind (saith Esay) they are all ignorant: they are all dumbe dogs, they cannot barke, slee∣ping, lying downe, loving to slumber. Their baker sleepeth Hos. 7. 6. all the night, saith Hosea. But while men slept (saith our Sa∣viour) his enemy came, and Mat. 13. 25. sowed tares among the wheate, and went his way. How long Prov. 6. 9. wilt thou sleepe, O sluggard? (saith the Wise man) when wilt thou arise out of thy sleepe? 2. For whoredome or un∣cleannesse. Come (said Lots eldest daughter unto her sister) Let us make our father drinke Gen. 19. 32▪ wine, and we will lye (or sleepe) with him, that we may preserve seed of our father. The effects of sinne. The effects of sinne.
1. On the Soule (even in this life) a spirituall lethargie or Eph. 4. 19. deadnesse of heart by the cu∣stome of sinne, when as the heart is made past feeling, and altogether senslesse, through continuance, therein. Whereof Isaiah, For the Lord hath pou∣red Isa. 29. 10. out upon you the spirit of deepe sleepe, and hath closed your eyes. 2. Perpetuall and irrevoca∣ble destruction, whereof the al. 76. 5. sal. 13. 3. Psalmist, The stout-hearted are spoyled, they have slept their sleepe. And againe, lighten mine eyes, lest I sleepe the sleepe of death. So the Lord by Ieremiah, er. 51. 39. In their heat I will make their feasts, and I will make them drunken, that they may rejoyce, and sleepe a perpetuall sleepe, and not wake, saith the Lord. Ioyntly, in respect both of he godly d ungodly yntly con∣ered. the godly and ungodly, either death being by sleepe signifi∣cantly expressed. The godlies, as David slept  King. 2. 10
with his fathers. Our friend Ioh. 11. 11. Mat. 27. 52. Lazarus sleepeth, and the graves were opened, and many bodies of saints which slept a∣rose. The ungodlies, as Iero∣boam slept 1 King. 14 20 1 King. 15. 8 1 King. 16. 6. with his fathers. A∣biam slept with his fathers. Ba∣asha slept with his fathers, &c. Quest. But as David of Ab∣ner,  (died Abner as a foole 2 Sam. 3. 33. dieth?) Is there no difference betweene those, and these, (the godly and the ungodly) in death? Ans. In some respect there  is no difference at all, according to that of Solomon; How dieth Eccles. 2. 16. the wise man? as the foole. But in others very great, according to that of the same Author. The Prov. 14. 32 wicked is driven away in his wickednesse, but the righteous hath hope in his death. Their agreement consisteth in Wherein th death of the godly and  wicked agre these particulars. 1. Our beds represent our graves: the sheetes wherein wee lye our winding-sheets,
wherein wee shall bee wrap∣ped. The cloaths that lye on us, the clods of earth that shall bee cast upon us, when wee are laid in our graves, yea as they that are asleepe are for the time voide of care, and insensible ei∣ther of joy or paine, neither being affected with the mise∣ries of others to mourne with them, nor with their prosperity to rejoyce with them, but (ha∣ving their eyes bound up from seeing, their eares from hea∣ring, as their other senses from the execution of their severall functions) are wholly ignorant of things done about them, so is it with those that are dead. To this purpose Job, Why did the ob 3. 12, 13. knees prevent me? or why the breasts that I should sucke? for now should I have lyen still, and beene quiet, I should have slept, then had I beene at rest. And Isaiah tells us, that now a. 63. 16. Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel doth not acknow∣ledge
us. Hence it is, that as a Iob 7. 2. servant earnestly desireth the shadow, and as an hireling loo∣keth for the reward of his worke, so not a few doe daily gape for death, that thereby they may bee freed from their troubles. It is now enough, O Lord, (said 1 King. 19. 4 Elijah) take away my life, for I am no better then my fathers. Take I beseech thee my life Jonah 4. 3. from me (said Jonah) for it is better for me to die, then to live. And in those dayes (saith Rev. 9. 6. S. John, namely when unto the locusts, that came out of the bottomlesse pit, power was gi∣ven to torment those men which have not the seale of God on their foreheads) shall men seeke death, and shall not find it, and shall desire to die, and death shall flye from them. Agreeable hereunto is that of Philo; who being asked what Anton. & Max. ser. de somno. Aelian. lib. 2▪ sleepe was, answered, The i∣mage of death, and rest of the senses; and that of Gorgias,
who being very aged, and fee∣ling deadly sleepe or death to creepe on him, unto a friend, who asked him how hee did, answered, Sleepe now begin∣neth ras. lib. 6. ap. 8. to commend me unto his brother, and that of Epaminon∣das who having slaine one of the watch whom hee found sleeping, thus justified his fact, Such a one, as I found him (saith he) I have left him. To uslat. ad om. Ibid. ertull. de a∣ma, Chrys.  pop. ant. mil. 5. rist. lib. 19. nimal. this purpose is it, that of some sleepe and death are said to bee brethren or cousin-Germans, Sleepe Deaths looking-glasse, death a sleepe longer then usu∣all, yea sleepe a kind of middle thing betweene death and life. 2. Sleepe as it is common to all men, and cannot bee dri∣ven away or avoided of a∣ny, how sparing soever, or well-spenders of time, so it is eb. 9. 27. om. 5. 12. appointed unto him once to die: Death passeth upon all men, and al. 89. 48. what man is he that shall not see death?
3. Sleepe, though usually it commeth by degrees, as after labour, meat, wearinesse, wat∣ching, and the like; yet doth it often steale on men at una∣wares; So death though usu∣ally, and by course of nature it 1 King. 13. 24. followeth sicknesse as the fore∣runner thereof, yet seazeth it often on men both good and bad on the very sudden. So did it on the man of God that came Act. 5. 5. 10: unto Bethel, so on Ananias and Luk. 12. 19, 20. Sapphira, Then said God unto the rich man; Thou foole, this night shall thy soule be required of thee, when he had said unto his soule; Soule, thou hast much goods laid up for many yeares, take thine ease, eate, drinke, and be merry. 4. Sleepe is proper to the bo∣dy, not the soule, (for even Corde vigila∣mus, etiam cùm corpore dormimus, Aug. de verb. dom. Ser. 22. Isa. 26. 19. then are we to be awake in soule, when wee sleepe in body) so dieth man in respect of his body, not his soule. Though the body rests and dwells in the
dust of the earth, yet doth not the soule so rest. The dust (that is the body) returneth to the earth, as it was, and the Eccles. 12. 7. spirit returneth unto God, who gave it; yea, if the soule doe Anima quieti nunquam suc∣cedit. Tertul. de anima. not now sleepe, whilst it is in the prison of the body, much lesse shall it, being freed there∣from. As the soules of the god∣ly are carried into heaven, so Luk. 16. 22. are the soules of the ungodly into hell, eithers bodyes in the meane time remaining in their graves. As Cosimo the Floren∣tine Hist. Florent. lib. 7. to some Rebels that sent him word they slept not, an∣swered, that hee beleeved the same, because their sleepe was taken from them. So may it be affirmed of mens soules, that as here they cannot sleepe, so hereafter they cannot die. 5. Sleepe, though it bee of longer continuance with some, then with others, yet lasteth it not alwayes with any; even the sluggard being at the length
awaked, or awaking there∣from, so death must at the last restore her dead, how long so∣ever they have beene under the power, and in the possession thereof, For the trumpet shall 1 Cor. 15. 5 sound (saith the Apostle) and the dead shall be raised incor∣ruptible, and we shall be chan∣ged. Agreeable hereunto is that of S, Iohn; And the sea gave Rev. 20. 13. up the dead which were in it, and death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them. The difference between them Wherin th differ. in these. 1. Though such as are asleepe may or shall awake, yet doth not their awaking prove alike comfortable (for Pharaohs Butler was restored, and his Baker hanged, according to Iosephs interpretation of their dreames.) So both the ungod∣ly and the godly die, yet doth not eithers death prove advan∣tagious. The houre is comming Ioh. 5. 28.
in the which all that are in the graves shall heare the voyce of the Sonne of man, and shall come forth, they that have done good unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done evill unto the resurrection of damnation, Saith our Saviour himselfe; All the ten virgins which slumbered (as well the wise as the foolish) arose, but at. 25. 7. . 12. the wise onely went in with the Bridegroome unto the mari∣age, the others being excluded; Depart from me ye cursed, shall at. 25. 34. . it be said unto the wicked on the day of judgement; but unto the godly, Come yee blessed of my Father. Unto these death is not as death (as having the Cor. 15. 56. . Chrys.  Heb. , rist. sting thereof removed, which is sinne) but as a sweet sleep, unto those it is otherwise: even of fearfull things the most fear∣full. Those lose, but these gaine thereby, a palace for a prison, rest for labour, liberty for bon∣dage, God for men, the com∣pany
of Angels for the com∣pany of sinners, and finally, heaven for earth. 2. As sleepe proveth unto many fatall, wherein they die, and from which they never rise; so unto the ungodly the death of the body is a fore∣runner of that second death, the death both of body and soule; under which they shall lye world without end. But it is not so unto Gods children. Thereby is put an end unto all their miseries, for they rest from Rev. 14. 13 their labours, neither doe they hunger any more, or thirst any more, and all teares are wiped from their eyes. Thereby are they freed from all sorts of Rom. 6. 7. sinnes: (for hee that is dead is freed from sinne) thereby from the beeing of sinne: from the infection of sinne: from the guilt of sinne: from temptati∣ons unto sinne: from the au∣thority, dominion, and rule of sinne: from the imputation of
sinne: from the reward or dan∣gerous effect and consequents of sinne, and that wholly, fully, perpetually. Thereby from all sorts of crosses. Thereby from all sorts of feares. Thereby from all sorts of cares; In a word, thereby freed from all sorts of evill, past, present, and to come. They lye downe in . 57. 1 sure and certaine hope of resur∣rection to eternall life. Their  Cor. 15. 42 , 44. bodyes are sowne in corruption, but raised in incorruption, sowne in dishonour, but raised in glo∣ry; sowne in weaknesse, but rai∣sed in power; sowne naturall bo∣dyes, (as many goe heavily to bed) but raised spirituall bo∣dyes, when through the glori∣ous beames of the Sunne of righteousnesse shining on them, they shall fully recollect both their spirits and strength, in all which respects that of Salomon may bee applyed unto them, that Their day of death is bet∣ter, then the day wherein they were borne.
3. As every one is not alike willing to sleepe, especially such as are unusually terrified by dreames; so neither are all alike willing to die. The god∣ly wait for death: All the Iob 7. 14. dayes of my appointed time will I wait (saith Iob) till my change Job 14. 14. come; yea, with the Apostle desire to be dissolved, and to bee Phil. 1. 23. Heb. 9. 27. with Christ, But the ungodly whose consciences tell them that after death commeth judge∣ment, Act. 24. 25. doe with Foelix tremble at the very mentioning there∣of: yet (how loath soever to undergoe it, what paines or charges soever they are at, when they feele it or feare it approaching to remove it and put it off) doe most of them even willingly (as it were) through intemperancie, incon∣tinencie, carking cares, and such like courses bring it upon them∣selves. 4. As through sleepe they that are in misery are fitted and
enabled to undergoe more mi∣sery, and they that are in a good condition become capable of more happinesse, so through death are the ungodly, as it were fitted for hell, the godly for heaven; those for uncon∣ceivable misery, these for un∣speakable happinesse. Take we it in this Treatise Sleepe how taken in this Treatise. in its proper signification, but for such a sleepe as is altogether unlawfull, howsoever ordina∣rie and common, for then to sleepe, when wee ought to bee swift to heare, and then to bee drowsie, when it concernes us to be most vigilant (as at the prea∣ching of the word, and prayer) who will not judge the same unreasonable, and so neither lawfull nor warrantable. Be this then, this unreasona∣ble, unlawfull, unwarrantable kind of sleepe, or rather slee∣ping evill (sleeping at Church) this inordinate, ordi∣nary bodily drousinesse, I say,
whereby the Word read or preached becommeth wholly ineffectuall, and no blessing from God, but rather an un∣doubted curse can bee expected thereupon, the subject of this discourse. CHAP. II. How convenient and necessary it is to handle this Argument. NEither needs any to Reasons shewing the utility, and necessity of this Trea∣tise. wonder that this should bee medled withall, or conceive him to have little to doe, unlesse to keepe himselfe awake, which busieth himselfe about such a sleepy subject. These with the like warranta∣ble reasons will (questionlesse) justifie our proceeding. 1. Because this is by most no otherwise (if at all) medled withall, then by a bare cursory
speaking against it, and that not of set purpose, but occasionally upon the view of some one or other sleeping; yea, and that but in generall tearmes, which how fruitlesse and ineffectuall it proveth to reclaime any there-from daily experience sheweth. As therefore for the subduing of other vices, there must bee both Precept upon sa, 28. 10. precept, and lyne upon lyne, so must there be for the subduing of this. 2. Because there are so many which offend herein, and yet thinke, that either they have not at all, or but a little offen∣ded. Those standing upon their justification; These go∣ing about to excuse their pra∣ctise. Such had need to bee wrought on, brought on, to see the greatnesse of this sinne, and that (as Lot of Zoar) they en. 19. 20. may not conceit, that it is but a little one. Before those must the evils hereof bee laid open,
Reasons disswading from the same be propounded, as in like manner, their severall objections to the contrary, plainly and so∣lidly dissolved. 3. Because there are so ma∣ny, which being customarily ad∣dicted hereunto (yet excee∣dingly desirous and willing to leave the same) are notwith∣standing wholly ignorant how to effect it. Those must bee made acquainted as well with the Causes hereof, as Remedies how to be rid of the same. 4. Because there are but a few, which doe truly take notice of the danger ensuing hereby, or consider the wrongs occasio∣ned through the same. The ignorant therefore and care∣lesse are to bee shewed, that hereby they wrong the blessed Trinitie, hereby are stumbling blocks unto others, which through their evill example in this kind prove no lesse wicked then themselves. Hereby the
Word becommeth ineffectuall, and the Ministers thereof dis∣couraged: yea, that this is one maine cause, why they doe so long continue in their sinnes, to the griefe and hurt of their owne soules. 5. Because this sinne cannot be so well met withall by spea∣king against it, as by writing. For if a Minister should in his Sermon, when an occasion is presented unto him (as when is there not?) inveigh against the same, hee might haply through weaknesse or want of memory forget himselfe, nei∣ther bee able againe without much adoe to come to his mat∣ter, or rather be forced by new objects of drowsinesse to re∣new his reproofes, and conti∣nually to goe on in that argu∣ment; yea, though there were no feare of such destruction, yet in as much as a Minister is not to nominate any of his auditors in particular. Neither haply
(if it were lawfull for him to name them) knoweth hee his Auditors by name, though hee should observe them to bee a∣sleepe, his reproofes must bee generall, which (as in other things) who doth not almost put from himselfe, as if they did not at-all concerne him, or the Minister therein had no ayme at him? Our Saviour Mat. 26. 21▪ having informed his Disciples in generall tearmes (not parti∣cularizing the name of any) that one of them should betray Verse. 25. him; Iudas thereupon (who indeed was (the villaine, the man aymed at) could say not∣withstanding; Is it I Master? so doe too too many in the case we have in hand. 6. Because there are no law∣full meanes (who will judge this unlawfull?) which Chri∣stians Deut. 22. 2, 3. are not to use for the good one of another; Yea, if the Lord require of us the manife∣station of brotherly love, even
in such things as concerne our eut. 22. 1, 3. neighbours (our enemies) e-estate, much more doth hee it in such things as concerne the welfare of their bodies, and if of their bodies, much more of their soules. Now what can be more advantagious unto their soules, then their carefull and conscionable hearing of the Word? and how can they thus heare it, if they sleepe thereat? and sleepe they will if meanes be not used to keepe them a∣wake. As therefore one of the Persian kings Chamberlaines was every morning to come unto his Masters bed-side, and to awake him with these words; Arise O King, and be , carefull of the businesses, where∣of Mesoromasdes willed thee to take care; So may every Chri∣stian (must every Christian) carefully use meanes whereby as well to with-hold them∣selves, as withdraw others from this sleeping evill. May
it be lawfull in the words of Solomon to rowse up the slug∣gard? Prov. 6. 9. How long wilt thou sleep O sluggard? when wilt thou arise out of thy sleepe? And will any judge this unlawfull? yea, should wee not thus ende∣vour our selves according to our abilities to prevent, or to amend the same, we might as∣well be truly reputed as justly punished for partaking with others in sinne, which (accor∣ding to S. Pauls caveat) who 1 Tim. 5. 2: is not bound carefully to a∣voide? 7. Because, this is a breach Canon 18. of one of our Church-Constitu∣tions, which requireth, that None, either man, woman, or child, of what calling soever shall bee otherwise busied (in time of Service or Sermon) then in quiet attendance to heare, marke and understand that which is read, preached, or ministred; And that They shall not disturbe the Service or Ser∣mon
by walking and talking, or any other way. 8. Because as toward the rearing up of the Tabernacle, Exod. 35. 22. some brought bracelets, and earnings, and rings, and tablets, Verse 23. all jewels of gold, and the Ru∣lers brought Onix-stones, and Verse 24: stones to be set for the Ephod, and for the brest-plate; So o∣thers brought goats haire, and red skinnes of rams, and bad∣gers skinnes; neither of which were rejected, but the offerings of either accepted (yea, and our Saviour did more com∣mend the poore widow, for her two mites which shee cast into uk. 21. 3. the treasury, then the rich for their liberall offerings, inas∣much as they out of their abun∣dance erse. 4. cast into the offerings of God, but she of her penurie cast in all the living she had.) So if towards the encrease of the kingdome of Christ, and buil∣ding up one another in our most holy faith; Some with the
Captaine of the Aramites 1 King. 22: 32. medled onely with the king of Israel, that is, great sinnes, as swearing, adultery, murther, and the like, (as some worthi∣ly and profitably have done) or detect and confute heresies, resolve cases of conscience; set forth large commentaries on the Scriptures, and handle con∣troversies (which are as gold, silver, and pretious stones) and all to the singular good of Gods people, why may not others bring their goates haire? I meane, discover and oppose, even the pettiest offences. As there must bee meat for men, (of which kind are the Fa∣thers, Councels, Schoole-men, large Commentaries on the Scriptures, &c.) So must there milke for babes, of which kind are Catechismes, plaine Ser∣mons, Prayer bookes, books of Meditations, and such like short godly discourses, where∣of questionlesse no small bene∣fit
daily ariseth, as their often impressions cleerely witnesse. Nay, even the greatest schol∣lers, and most learned men have not thought their time ll be∣stowed in writing on such low discourses (as Salomon spake of the hysope that springeth out  King. 4. 33. of the wall) to the capacitie of the meanest. CHAP. III. Whence it is, that Church-sleeping is so ordinary, and usuall. THE causes hereof (not to mention Gods justice on the contemners of his Word, who for the most part being come to Church are cast into such a deepesleepe, that though they have both eyes and eares, yet (for the time) they are depri∣ved
of the use of either, nei∣her seeing with the one, nor earing with the other, of whom it may be said as of Saul nd his troups, a deepe sleepe of 1 Sam. 26. 12 God is upon them that they doe not awake;) The causes I say hereof may be reduced especi∣ally into these three; The first arising from Satan. The causes of Church-sleeping. The second arising from our selves. The third arising from others, both Preachers and people. Sect. 1. Satan. From Satan. As Dalilah made Sampson Iudg. 16. 19. sleepe on her lap to the losse as well of his liberty, as life: so doth Satan rocke us asleepe at Church, that hee may leade us captive at his pleasure, to the utter and everlasting ruine both of bodies, and soules. Hereof tooke Machetes (of whom Lorinus in Acta Apost. pag. 591. Cassianus maketh mention) good notice, for observing his
fellow-Monkes when hee be∣gan to speake unto them of hea∣venly things suddenly there∣upon to fall asleepe, but when of other matters, to lend their attentive eares, hee informed them that the same came of Satan; yea, how many are there found, which if they had no mind nor inclination to sleepe a day or two before, will notwithstanding sleepe at Ser∣vice and Sermon? whence commeth it to passe? assuredly from Satan who is ready and busie enough to besprinkle their temples with his spirituall opi∣um of evill motions and sug∣gestions, and having malicious∣ly enclined them to drowsi∣nesse, diligently rocketh the cradle, that they may sleepe the more soundly. This hee bring∣eth Who bring∣eth to passe. diversly to passe, as 1. By working with out∣ward meanes occasioning sleepe, such as heat, weaknesse, griefe, long watching, and the like.
2. By keeping men and wo∣men in ignorance, or without the knowledge of the Word. 3. By perswading, that the Preacher is not worth the hea∣ring, and so that his words are not to be regarded, or that in his Sermons he venteth his owne spleene and malice. 4. By propounding, that though the Minister should preach never so well, and they should give never so diligent heed thereunto, yet that it will be to no purpose, they being una∣ble to conceive any thing by him delivered, which for the most part through his meanes in most proveth too too true. 5. By working a generall dislike of the Word preached, in respect of its opposition unto those things, which are with most, in most request. 6. By drawing the atten∣tion, and intention another way.
Sect. 2. Our selves. From our selves in sun∣dry particu∣lars. 1. Through sloathfulnesse, according to that of Salomon, Pro. 19. 15. Slothfulnesse casteth into a deep sleepe, which may bee no lesse appointed unto this, then unto any other. Hee that is sloath∣full cannot but sleepe whereso∣ever he is. Neither the feare of danger, nor hope of reward will keepe him awake; wee Languido su∣mus ingenio, & in somnum ituro. Senec. de Provid. cap. 5. are all naturally of a very dull and drowsie disposition, by reason of that lumpish flesh of ours, that abideth much even in the best, by meanes whereof it commeth to passe, that wee doe often-times sleepe and slumber, be we never so care∣full and diligent, much more being sloathfull. As it is with drowsie persons, if they sit still and doe nothing, they will soone fall asleepe, so if we give our selves over to slothful∣nesse, wee shall soone be over∣taken
with this dismall sleepe. 2. Through carelesnesse, or want of attention, when the mind is not set on its right ob∣ject, the preaching and reading of the Word, but roveth on by-matters, neither are the eyes fixed on the Preacher, but walke hither and thither, then is it no wonder but that sleepe by degrees creepeth on. There∣fore have we caveats and war∣nings propounded. Hee that Rev. 2. 7. hath eares to heare, let him heare. Take heed how yee heare. Mar. 4. 24. Jam. 1. 19. Be swift to heare, and the like. 3. Through intemperancie; When the stomacke is full, how can the eyes bee but heavy? Thereby the senses are so op∣pressed, that during the same they cannot execute their of∣fice; and experience sheweth that wee doe oftener and more readily sleepe at Church in the afternoone, then in the fore∣noone. Yea, if this shutteth
out the Spirit, (according to that of the Apostle, and be not Eph. 5. 18. 2 Pet. 2. 5. Gen. 9. 21. 2 Pet. 2. 8. drunke with wine wherein is ex∣cesse, but be filled with the Spi∣rit) made Noah (a Preacher of righteousnesse) discover his nakednesse: occasioned just Lot (who dwelling among the Sodomites, in seeing and hea∣ring Gen. 19. 33, 34, &c. vexed his righteous soule from day to day with their un∣lawfull deeds) in beastly man∣ner to abuse himselfe (by fil∣thy incest) with those that came out of his owne loynes, and through the same the day of judgement shall take men at unawares (as is implied in that of our Saviour; And take heed uk. 21. 34. to your selves, lest at any time your hearts bee over-charged with surfetting and drunken∣nesse, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you una∣wares.) How can it but in like manner occasion this? Sound sleepe (saith the sonne of Si∣rach) cclus. 31. 20 commeth of moderate
eating, but this for the most part of immoderate. 4. Through hatred of the Preacher, when wee cannot a∣bide him, as Ahab could not indure Micaiah, when we are so affected towards him, as the Iewes towards Paul and Ste∣ven, will wee attentively heare what he delivereth? Many in∣deed (even thus affected) af∣ford the Preacher their bodily presence, but like images, ha∣ving eyes, they see not, having Psal. 115. 5. eares, they heare not; or if they afford them their eyes and eares it is to a sinistrous end, even that they may have some ground or other from his cari∣age, or from what hee delive∣reth to bring him into trouble and molestation. 5. Through disesteeme of the Word read or preached. Too too many thinke that there is no more wisdome therein, then their Teachers shew out of it, which in their conceit being
very small, or none at all, they neither watch thereat, nor thereunto. As no man cares for grace, but hee that knowes its worth; so none cares for the Word, but hee that hath it in high esteeme for its unspeakea∣ble excellencie. Those prize it above thousands of gold and sil∣ver; Psal. 119. 72. 78. 148. Psal. 19. 10. and unto them (as unto David, who meditated therein day and night) it is sweeter then the honey and the honey combe. They that have drunke of this water of life, doe more and more thirst after it, and (as Peter being informed how ne∣cessarie it was that our Saviour should wash his feet, said unto him, Lord, not my feet onely, Joh. 13. 8, 9. but also my hands and my head) rest not satisfied with sipping or tasting hereof, but long as it were (as David to drinke of the water of the well of Beth∣leem 2 Sam. 23. 15 which is by the gate) even to be drunke therewith. Where this desire is, there is watch∣fulnesse,
where it is wanting, drowsinesse. 6. Through disobedience un∣to the admonitions and reproofes of the Word, when being ad∣monished of our drowsinesse, wee notwithstanding doe not amend, but rather grow worse and worse, as the people in the dayes of Ieremie; As for the Ier. 44. 16. word which thou hast spoken to us in the name of the Lord, wee will not hearken unto thee: When I say being againe and againe admonished, wee not∣withstanding amend not, doe we not as it were through our obstinacie, put out the light that wee may sleepe the more se∣curely? 7. Through shamelesnes. When we become so impudent, that though we be detected, noted, pointed at, spoken of, spoken against, spoken to, as common sleepers at Church, and so con∣sequently contemners of the Word; yea, and certainly in∣formed,
that thereby we make our selves as gazing stocks, or common objects of laughter, yet having as it were an whores forehead, wee are not ashamed, but doe the more goe on in the same. Of us may it be said; The shew of their counte∣nance Isa. 3. 9. doth witnesse against them, and they declare their sinne as Sodome, they hide it not; Yea, (as drowsie sluggards which love to sleep) how loath are we, how unwilling to be awaked? how froward? how angry when wee are awaked. 8. Through inconsideratnesse, or want of consideration, as well of the excellencie of the Word, and necessity of hea∣ring the same, as of our owne pronenesse unto drowsinesse: Satans endevours to lull us a∣sleepe, and our owne weak∣nesse to resist the same; Were wee affected with those, wee could not but bee more watch∣full.
9. Through the want of Gods feare. As Abraham unto A∣bimelech Gen. 20. 11. (enquiring of him, why hee had said of Sarah, that shee was his sister) because I thought, surely the feare of God is not in this place, and they will slay me for my wives sake. So may wee of Church-sleepers, that wanting Gods feare, they will make no con∣science of sinne. Yea, as Da∣vid Psal. 36. 1, 2, 3, 4. layeth downe the want of Gods feare to be the ground of the ungodlies, ungodly both workes, words, and thoughts, so may wee no lesse confidently affirme, that it is the ground of this wickednesse, and as Salo∣mon, The feare of the Lord is Prov. 1. 7. the beginning of knowledge, so wee, The want of it, is the be∣ginning of this particular fol∣lie. Iudg. 16. 20. Sampson not being afraid of the Philistims, slept to the destruction of his body, as too too many being voide of Gods feare sleepe at Church, to the
destruction both of soule and  body. 10. Through custome and willingnesse. For when being come to Church, and no soo∣ner set, but wee set our selves to sleepe (so with the dogge returning to our vomite) hol∣ding downe our heads, and leaning them on our elbowes, as on pillowes, pulling our hats over our eyes lest wee should see (an unreverent thing in Gods house) and stopping our eares as it were, lest the noise or voyce of the Preacher should awake us, or hinder us from our sleepe, doe not wee wil∣lingly bring the same upon us? and doth not this willingnesse occasion the same? Sect. 3. Others. Preachers. From Prea∣chers. 1. When they doe not at any time, or upon any occasion re∣prove this sinne, or disswade
their Auditors from the same. 2. When they take no paines in their ministrie, neither stu∣dy to any purpose, for what they doe deliver. 3. When they doe either preach their owne inventions, Ezek. 22. 2 mens traditions, or lies and er∣rours in the name of the Lord. 4. When they doe not sute and fit their doctrine to the ca∣pacitie of their hearers. 5. When they doe not what in them lyes to bring their peo∣ple unto a love and liking of the Word. 6. When they continue too long in their Sermons. 7. When they lead a scan∣dalous life, walke inordinatly, and their conversation is such as becommeth not the Gospel of Christ, like unto those of whom the Prophet makes mention. His watchmen are blinde: they are all ignorant: they are all Isa. 56. 1 dumbe dogs, they cannot barke, sleeping, lying downe, loving to
slumber, yea they are greedy dogges which can never have enough, and they are shepheards which cannot understand; they all looke to their owne way, eve∣ry one for gaine from his quar∣ter, &c. and of whom the A∣postle; All seeke their owne, hil. 2. 21. not the things which are Iesus Christs. And againe, many hil. 3. 18. walke of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the ene∣mies of the crosse of Christ, rse. 19. whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things. Through the sinne of Eli his sonnes men am. . 17. abhorred the sacrifice of the Lord; So by reason of the a∣riage of such Pastors, their mi∣nistry becommeth odious and loathsome, and not a few (even of the best) sleepe thereat. People, both by doing and  people gh mission. leaving undone. Doing, namely by giving
themselves over hereunto, whereby they become stum∣bling-blocks unto others, invi∣ting them as it were to follow their course, and as readily to embrace sleepe as themselves doe. Leaving undone; namely to Omission. awake those, whom they shall ob∣serve to be asleepe. Hereby doe they wrong both themselves and them that sleepe; as who by letting them alone commu∣nicate with them in their sinne, and so shall bee punished for their sleeping, they themselves in the meane time being awake.
CHAP. IIII. Reasons disswading from Church-sleeping, they are of divers sorts, and may be re∣duced into these eleven. The 1. may be taken from God. The 2. from The word of God. The 3. from The Preacher. The 4. from The Congrega∣tion. The 5. from The place of mee∣ting.Arguments against Church-sleeping from The 6. from The end of com∣ming. The 7. from The time. The 8. from Satan. The 9. from Our selves. The 10. from Sleepe. The 11. from Sleepers at Church.
Sect. 1. God: The Father. Sonne. God. Holy Ghost. 1. In respect of his absolute precept and command to attend, and give eare unto his Word; Heare instruction, and be wise, Prov. 8. 33. Eccles. 5. 1. and refuse it not. Keepe thy foot when thou goest to the house of God, and be more ready to heare, then to give the sacrifice of fooles. Hee that hath eares Math. 11. 1 to heare, let him heare, let eve∣ry Iam. 1. 19. man be swift to heare. 2. In respect of the gracious promises which hee hath made unto them which are hearers indeed. Blessed is the man that Pro. 8. 34. Pro. 15. 31▪ Ioh. 5. 24. heareth me. The eare that hea∣reth the reproofe of life abideth among the wise. Hee that hea∣reth my Word, and beleeveth on him that sent me, hath everla∣sting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death unto life. He that is Ioh. 8. 47▪ of God heareth Gods word.
3. In respect of his presence about us, and with us, the knowledge which hee hath of us, and notice which hee taketh (though of us unperceived) whether wee wake or sleepe. The wayes of a man are before rov. 5. 21. the eyes of the Lord (saith the wise man) and he pondereth all his paths; Yea, not his wayes alone (those which are most conspicuous) but the secret motions of the mind, and the inward intentions of his heart, they are all naked and eb. 4. 13. . opened (as the inwards of a beast that is cut up, and quarte∣red, as the originall word sig∣nifieth) unto the eyes of him, with whom we have to doe. And is God present in the Church so fearfull and glorious a ma∣jestie, of so sharpe sight, and deepe understanding, who dares sleepe at Church? As hereby Salomon disswadeth ro. 5. 20. 21 from lewd and licentious cour∣ses, and hereby Elihu deterreth  34. 21, 22
men from wicked practises, so by the same may wee be with∣drawne from Church-sleeping. 4. In respect that it is God which speaketh unto us in his Word. So thought the Thessa∣lonians; When yee received the word of God, which ye heard of 1. Thes. 2. 13. us (saith S. Paul) yee received it not as the word of men, but (as it is in truth) the word of God, which effectually worketh also in you that beleeve. Would a subject sleepe in the presence of his Prince, advising him for his good: threatening him for some evill committed by him: offering him prefer∣ment for the performance of this or that noble enterprize, and the like? hee would not. Care, feare, hope, joy, would keepe him awake. And will a∣ny sleepe, whilst God offereth, promiseth, rewardeth, threa∣teneth, instructeth, and the like? When Samuel was in∣structed 1 Sam. 3. 9.  by Eli, that it was the
Lord which spake to him, sleepe did then depart from his eyes; So should not we sleepe, if we would but perswade our selves of Gods presence. 5. In respect of his power, not onely to blesse his Word Rom. 15. 4. that it may bee profitable unto us, for comfort, for doctrine, for 2 Tim. 3. 16. reproofe, for correction, and for instruction in righteousnesse (whereof out of his love to∣wards us, and willingnesse to doe us good, hee is most desi∣rous, and without whose bles∣sing, though Paul plant, and  Cor. 3. 6. Apollos water,) it bringeth not increase, but in justice, to inflict grievous judgements on them which doe not, or wil not heare, judgements I say, both corporall, as on Eutichus, and spirituall, as on the contemners ct. 20. 9. of wisdome, Prov. 1. 24, 25, &c. And those obstinate ones, of whom the Lord speaketh to his Prophet; Make the heart of a. 6. 10. this people fat, and make their
eares heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and heare with their eares, and understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed. Sect. 2. The Word of God. The Word its 1. In respect of its dignitie, which is from the Author Dignity evi∣denced by it▪ thereof: the Nature thereof: the Matter therein contained, together with the Antiquity and perpetuity of the same, may be cleerely evidenced. The Author thereof, God, Author. which is therefore tearmed Gods wayes: the speach of Gods Psal, 25. 5. & 29. 9. & 33. 6. Isa. 2. 3. & 26. 19. Luk. 11. 49▪ Heb. 4. 12▪ Luk. 1. 70▪ glory: the breath of Gods mouth: Gods paths: the dew of the Lord: the wisdome of God: the sword of the Spirit. As hee spake of old by the mouth of his holy Prophets, which have beene since the world began; So doth hee now speake by his Ministers, whom
as his Ambassadors, hee hath raised up in their roomes. The Nature thereof, both as The nature thereof. it is in it selfe, and as it is un∣to us. As it is in it selfe, it is per∣fect, As it is in it selfe. Psal. 19. 7. Psa. 119. 160 eternall, immortall, most pure and precious. A most true, right, certaine, infallible, sim∣ple, faithfull, absolute, sincere, unspotted, and undeniable Word, alwayes constant, one and the same for ever, wherein there is no errour, no falshood; no defect, no imperfection. As it is unto us. It is wine to s it is unto . comfort us; bread to feed us: drinke to quench our thirst: fire to purge us: an hammer to beate upon our hardned hearts: a staffe to uphold us: a treasure to inrich us: a lant horne to di∣rect us: a guide to conduct us: a weapon to defend us: seed to beget us: meate for men: milke for babes. Yea, as the Sunne is to the world, so is it to us, the light of our lives, and
the life of our soules. The Matter therein contai∣ned, The matter therein con∣tained. such as may give content unto all, the same so farre ex∣ceeding all other subjects, as the Creator (whose workes and will it principally setteth forth) doth the creatures. It revealeth unto us the blessed Trinitie. It maketh knowne unto us Christ, and him cruci∣fied. It pointeth out unto us the vertue of his death and resur∣rection. It setteth forth the ex∣cellencies of a better life, which for the present are wholly hid from the ungodly, and but in part revealed unto the godly. Doth any loath it for its plain∣nesse? It is milke for babes: Eccles. 11. 10. It is pleasant, affording unto each Christian heart more sweetnesse then is in the honey, and the honey combe. It is up∣right, as being voide of errour. It is a word of truth, pure wheat without chaffe: pure gold without drosse. It is a
word of wisdome, whereby alone we become wise. It is as a goad, whereby being pricked, whilst wee sleepe in sinne, wee doe thereupon awake. It is as a naile, whereby indeed wee are fastened and confirmed. Is any delighted with history, prophe∣cies, Rener. Clavis Script. parables, lawes, morall, ju∣diciall, and Ceremoniall, Geo∣graphie, Cosmographie, Astro∣nomie, Arithmeticke, Logicke, Rhetoricke, Musicke, and what∣soever else? Yea, who so lon∣geth after newes, from heaven aboue, from the earth beneath, from the waters which are un∣der the earth; Newes of wars, peace, plenty, famine, and the like. Hereby may hee in each receive satisfaction. The Antiquitie and perpo∣tuitie The Anti∣quity and perpetuity thereof. thereof. As it yet con∣tinueth, so hath it done, even from the very beginning, and even the Word written is more ancient, of greater antiquity, then all other writings now ex∣tant in the world.
2. In respect of its necessitie, which may appeare by consi∣dering; Necessity, from first the estate where∣in we are. 2. The estate where∣in we should be. 3. The estate of such as are altogether de∣prived thereof. The estate wherein naturally The estate wherein we are, wee are, dead in trespasses and sinne; wanderers from God: preyes unto the divell, poore and blind, unregenerate: pollu∣ted with sinne both in soule and body: stony-hearted; unfruit∣full and barren, guilty of death and damnation, &c. It is not then needfull? a trumpet to a∣wake us: a guide to conduct us: a buckler to shield us: a treasure to enrich us: eye-salve to anoint us: seed to beget us: a fountaine to wash us: raine, both to mol∣lifie us, and make us fruitfull. The estate wherein we should The estate wherein we should be. be, Alive unto God: the soul∣diers and servants of Christ: temples of the holy Ghost: fruitfull in good workes, and
the like▪ and hereunto doe we attaine through Gods word. The estate of such as are al∣together The estate f such as are ithout it. deprived therof, wret∣ched and miserable. No judge∣ment greater then famine, no famine so grievous, as this of the Word. 3. In respect of its utilitie, which may appeare, 1. By the mos 8. 12. s utility ap∣aring by similitudes whereby it is ex∣pressed. 2. By the effects which are thereby produced. 3. By the duties which are thereto of us required. 4. By the meanes which for the suppressing and hindering thereof have beene at all times by Satan and his in∣struments used. The similitudes whereby it is ilitudes. expressed are divers, as Manna, bread, water, light, a rod of strength, wine, fire, silver, a pre∣cious stone, a new garment, a banner, a sharp sword, a glasse, a staffe, &c. This being no lesse (or rather much more) profi∣table for the soule then those
(and the like) for the body. The effects which are thereby effects. produced, are such as concerne either this, or the life to come. This. It clenseth us. It inligh∣teneth us. It regenerateth us. It changeth us. It makes us fruitfull. It maketh us wise to Salvation. It gladdeth our hearts with spirituall joy. It begetteth faith in us. Wee are hereby informed of the duties which wee owe one towards another. It tells the Magistrate how hee should rule, who else might be either too severe, or too milde. As Machetes ap∣pealed Eras. apoph lib. 4. from Philip asleepe (for whilst his cause was pleading he was asleepe) to Philip a∣wake, so sendeth it them from their ungodly government, un∣to that which is lawfull. It tels Iudges, that with Festus they Act. 24. 26. must not looke for bribes. It tels Subjects, that with Sheba, 2 Sam. 20.  they must not be rebellious. It tels husbands, that they must Col. 3. 19.
love their wives, and not be bit∣ter to them. It tells wives that they must not be taunting Pe∣ninnaes, painted Jezabels, who∣rish Dalilaes, scolding Zippo∣raes. It informes Ministers to be instant (in preaching the  Tim. 4. 2. Word) in season, and out of season. It tells Lawyers, how and for whom they are to plead: It directs the Merchant 1 Thes. 4. 6. and tradesman, how to buy and sell, &c. Now if it were not for the Word, would any of those performe their duties? nay, by it (as Socrates from his ic. de fat. naturall constitution by the stu∣dy of Philosophie) they are bettered both in their judge∣ment and practise. Through it doe the covetous forsake their Mammon; the drunkard his wine; the adulterer his lust, which (till it thus worke) are unto them no lesse precious then their lives. Would Herod have heard Iohn Baptist; and Eli his sonnes their Father, ei∣ther
might have learned their duty; and escaped the judge∣ments Rev. 16. 15. which befell them. By hearing this and watching Luk. 16. 29. Mat. 26. 41. hereat we are blessed; hereby are saved from hell, and hereby avoide temptations. If here∣at we be informed of the ma∣lice of Gods enemies, shall we not hereupon profit the Church by calling upon God, in the words of the Psalmist, Awake, Psal. 44. 23. why sleepest thou O Lord? arise, cast us not off for ever. And as when Ahasuerus could not Ester 6. 3. sleepe, hee had his Chronicles brought unto him, and there∣upon came to know what Mordecay had done for him, so if wee would awake at the reading and preaching of the Word, we should heare what deliverance the Lord hath wrought for our poore soules. The life to come. The Word Joh. 12. 48. must judge us. The Duties required of us. The duties required of us To write it in the tables of our
heart. To keepe it as the apple of in respect of it. Prov. 3. 3. Prov. 7. 2. Col. 3. 16: Iam. 1. 19. 21 our eye. To let it dwell in us plenteously. To bee swift to heare. To have it ingrafted in us, and receive it with meeke∣nesse; Yea, not onely to be hearers, but doers thereof, pri∣zing it above Rubies, and ac∣counting it sweeter then the honey and the honey combe, even as the words of eternall life. The opposition which by Satan and his instruments hath beene made against the same from time to time. Some have beene brought to dislike it, o∣thers not to believe it, others to fall from the hearing of it, others to deprave it, by mang∣ling, mingling, perverting and misapplying the same. Others to prohibite the reading and hearing thereof, and diver the like, which might particularly be instanced. Every of which implieth the utilitie of the same.
Sect. 3. The Preacher. The Prea∣cher. 1. Because at his peoples sleeping hee cannot choose but be much discouraged. 2. Because hereby he cannot but be much disturbed. 3. Because such cariage ar∣gueth their contempt of him. 4. Because thus hee should lose his paines, as if one should preach to a deafe man, or wash an Aethiopian. 5. Because hee is in Gods steed, as his ambassador, and 2 Cor. 5. 20. who bringeth the glad tydings of salvation, whom if we shall Rom. 10. 1. not heare, we heare not Christ himselfe, they being Wisdomes his maidens. Sect. 4. The Congregation. The Con∣gregation. 1. Because the best are here∣by offended, and their attenti∣on hindered. 2. Because hereupon the ig∣norant
either come not to Church, or if they come, sleight the Word, as not worth the hearing. Yea, as those which did eat in Idols temples, occa∣sioned 1 Cor. 8. 9. others also there to eate by their example, and as the very sight of those that yawne, is wont to set others on yaw∣ning; so the very sight of others sleeping, may make a man sleepie, that were otherwise wakefull, much more shall one slothfull man infect another, and the rather, because wee are prone enough of our selves to take infection without helpe, our inbred and inward corrup∣tion being as flaxe, easie enough by the least sparkle to bee set on fire. Sect. 5. The place of meeting. The place of meeting. 1. It is Bethel, Gods house. As Jacob when hee had the vi∣sion of the ladder, could say, how dreadfull is this place? Gen. 28. 17.
This is none other but the house of God; and this is the gate of heaven. So (the Lord being here present in his owne ordi∣nances) are we to conceive of this. 2. It is as Bethesda, where the blind, lame, paralyticke, and Joh. 5. 3. such other soule-diseased crea∣tures may have comfort; and are not wee such? Wee thinke wee see, but wee are indeed blind; thinke wee know, but doe not indeed understand. 3. It is a store-house of all needfull commodities. Here are Gods stewards, his almners, his Jsa. 55. 1. Physitians? lackest thou meat, drinke, money, raiment, or whatsoever else? here is for thee. Ho! every one that thir∣steth, come; and who so hunge∣reth, come, &c. 4. It is as Athens, where newes were to bee heard; and Ephesus where shewes were to Isa. 9. 6. be seene. What newes? that unto us a child is borne; that
hee is the propitiation for our sinnes; that God is reconciled 2 Cor. 5. 18. unto us through Christ, &c. What showes? God resisting 1 Pet. 5. 5. the proud, but giving grace un∣to the humble. God breaking the hornes of the ungodly. Lit∣tle David, vanquishing great Goliah, with store both of Co∣medies and Tragedies. Sect. 6. The end of comming. The end of comming. Not to gaze, laugh, chide, prate, neither yet to sleepe, as once one who had not slept wel the night before, and in the morning hearing the bell toll to Church, willed her maid to make ready, for shee would goe to Church to take a nap, but to heare, pray, and sing, and why Luk. 21. 38. & 22. 46. then wilt thou sleepe? Thou must rouse up thy selfe, till which time thou must often heare, rise and pray, and heare, and sing.
Sect. 7. The Time. The Time. 1. It is time now to awake. As when the Sunne shines wee Rom. 13. 11. are to make hay, and wee must strike whilst the iron is hot. The Pismire followes her busi∣nesse Prov. 10. 5. in the Summer, and pre∣pareth meat for Winter. 2. It is Gods harvest; Now he that sleepeth in harvest is a sonne that causeth shame. 3. They that sleepe, sleepe in the night, and the night com∣meth 1 Thes. 5. 5. wherein no man can worke. 4. The time is but short, could yee not watch with mee one Mat. 24. 42. houre? 5. Wee must give an account for the same; and at what houre wee shall bee called to an ac∣count wee know not. It is re∣quired of us to number our dayes, which assuredly whilst Psal. 90. 12 we sleepe we cannot doe. 6. No time but should be well
spent; how much more this? Titus conceived that he had lost Hist. of the Church. that day, wherein hee had not done some good, and so dost thou the profit which commeth of the Word, by sleeping thereat. Sect. 8. Satan. atan. 1. He and our other enemies, the world without, and the flesh within (as Israels ene∣mies) . 5. 27. sleepe not. Philip said, he might safely sleepe, for An∣tipater as. apophth. was awake; but we con∣trarily, must awake, for the di∣vell (an Anti-pater indeed) is not asleepe. Bee sober and et. 5. 8. watch (saith the Apostle) for your adversary the divell, goeth about continually, like aroaring lyon, seeking whom he may de∣voure. Shall men watch (saith the heathen man) to slay and destroy others, and wilt not thou ugulent ines, &c. at. lib. 1. st. 2. watch to save thy selfe? So say I, shall Satan bee more vigilant to doe us a shrewd turne, or a
mischiefe, then we in watching to keepe our selves safe from his malice? Those that would Simile: tame Deere, keepe them from sleepe, but the divell to make us wilde, sets us to sleepe. As hee watcheth continually to as∣sault us, especially when wee are at Church, wee must then especially awake to resist him. 2. Not any thing doth hee more endevour to hinder, then our hearing the Word, as who knoweth well, what harme would ensue, if he could here∣in prevaile, even that grace should decrease, and sinne in∣crease. This doth hee labour both by himselfe and by his instruments. As a kingdome Mar. 3. 24. divided cannot stand; So could he divide us from the Word, we were undone. 3. He is a theefe; The Scribes and Pharisees set a watch, lest Mat. 27. 66. Christ should be stollen, and so must we, lest being asleepe all goodnesse bee taken from us:
and as the Souldiers, of Christ, though untruly, whilst we slept Mat. 28. 13. 15. his disciples came and stole him away. Wee may say truly, whilst we have slept, the divell came and deprived us of much good; yea, as whilst Sampson Iudg. 16. 20. was asleepe his strength was gone, which to his unspeakable misery he quickly felt being a∣wake, so through thy Church∣sleeping hast thou not experi∣mentally found decay of spiri∣tuall strength? 4. The divell is the envious man, who soweth tares whilst Math. 13. 25. we are asleepe. Sect. 9. Our selves. Our selves. 1. Our Religion and honestie will be called into question; yea, hereupon shal we be suspected (and that not without cause) that wee did spend the night before in riot, wantonnesse, or doing some other mischiefe. 2. Our profession. Wee are of the day, and they that sleepe, Thes. 5. 5. sleepe in the night. In this re∣gard,
as unto Peter, Simon slee∣pest Mar. 14. 37. thou: So may it bee unto us. It is unseemly that the Sun August. should at any time find us a∣sleepe, but much more at Church. 3. The thankefulnesse which we owe unto God for our bodily Eccles. 8. 16: Prov. 3. 28. Iob 7. 4. 14. rest. God gives us quiet rest and sleepe (whereas others haply have it but seldome, and therein are much terrified by dreames) and should wee not then employ on God the whole man, when wee come to his house. 4. The uncertainty of our death. Watch therefore (saith Mat. 24. 42. our Saviour againe and againe) for you know not in what houre your master will come. So Pe∣ter, 1 Pet. 4. 7. The end of all things is at hand, bee sober therefore and watch unto prayer. Though we be neither weake, nor sicke, nor old, yet may death seize on us, and our Sunne may even set at noone. How many have
risen well in the morning that never went to bed▪ againe? Some have died whilst they were a preaching the Word; Some in hearing the same; why may not others in sleeping thereat? and that in justice, but who would willingly so die? Didst thou thinke that when thou settest thy selfe to sleepe at Church, thou shouldst never sleep more, thou shouldst die upon the doing thereof, and be presently called to give an account, and make answer to God for it, wouldst thou so doe? wouldst thou that thy master should find thee thus ar. 13: 36. doing? thou wouldst not. If thou lookst not to it, who can tell but that thou maist be taken away in this act of iniquitie? oh that they were wise, that Deut. 32: 29. they understood this, that they would consider their latter end! 5. Our ignorance in points of Christianity, and of such things
as tend unto our soules salvati∣n. How few are there which 1 Cor. 14. 20. re indeed men and women of knowledge, or rather are not hildren in understanding? unto ow many is not the Scripture, as a booke sealed up? who is Jsa. 29. 11. able to tell the meaning almost of any place of Scripture? how many take such things li∣terally, which are to be under∣stood figuratively, and such things figuratively, which are literally to be taken? where is the fault? when by the Word they might receive instruction, and wisdomes maidens are of∣fering Prov. 9. 4. them understanding, they are asleepe. 6. Wee watch about our cal∣lings, Non princi∣pem solidam dormire no∣ctem. Eras. chil. Luc. 2. 8. and in respect of tempo∣rall businesses, Captaines, Ma∣riners, Souldiers, Shepheards, &c. watch in their places, and servants must not sleepe when their Masters speake to them. 7. Wee would bee angry, if when wee speake, others would
not h&eacute;are us, or sleepe there∣at. 8. Wee can wake, if a tale be told us. Wee sleepe not, when we are informed of our world∣ly businesses, we sleepe not, if one tell us of some great estate befallen us, or some great good procured for us, as pardon be∣ing rebels, riches being poore, happinesse being miserable, and the like; every of which the Scripture revealeth unto us. 9. Our care to doe good. The wicked sleepe not before they Prov. 4. 16. have done some mischiefe, nei∣ther should we before we have done some good, which wee doe not, if with Lydia, wee at∣tend Act. 16. 14. not on the things deli∣vered. Sect. 10. Sleepe. Sleepe. It is a Publican, A Culler, Quantum ad debitum con∣tinui profectus, nihil ita de∣perit de vita nostra, quà quod somn deputatur.  Bernard. or rather devourer of time, it neither doth any part of time waste to lesse purpose, then
that which is spent in sleepe, and what then is to bee thought of that, which is spent in sleepe at Church? Sect. 11. Sleepers. Sleepers. 1. Such as are given hereun∣to are of bad report. 1 Thes. 5 2. Such as will not hearken are given over. Psal. 81. 3. Their prayer is abomina∣tion. Pro. 28. 4. Doing the worke of the Lord negligently they are ac∣cursed. 5. They are in danger of Gods judgements, and so continuing shall not escape them. What befell Noah, Sisera, Sampson, being asleepe, who knoweth not? Theirs might bee lawfull after a sort, yet were then met withall, but how much more this, being wholly unlawfull? The mother being asleepe, had 1 Ki her live child taken away, and a dead child put in the roome;
If thou beest not watchfull, in stead of a living, thou maist bee possessed of a dead heart. As the Disciples unto Christ being . 8. 24. asleepe, Master wee perish; so may it unto us thus sleeping, if thou doest not awake, thou perishest, there being prepared (as once one which crying fire, fire, and being demanded where, answered in hell for sleepers at Church.) Prepared (I say) for such, fearefull judgements. 6. They are for the present as dead. 7. They are as Images, ha∣ving eares, but not hearing  15. 5. therewith. 8. They lose the comfort or admonition intended for them. 9. They shall be cloathed with rags. As hee that loveth sleepe  21.  18. commeth to poverty; So he that loveth to sleepe at Church can∣not but bee poore in grace, and seeing the abundance of the rich  12. will not suffer him to sleepe, thy
sleepe bewrayes thy povertie. 10. They receive no benefit by the Word preached, the same being unto them wholly un∣fruitfull. CHAP. V. Objections for Church-sleeping answered. THey are of divers sorts, (some justi∣fying it, others ex∣tenuating it, others translating the fault thereof on others) all which may bee reduced into these five; Whereof the 1. may be taken  from The sinne it selfe. The 2. from The person com∣mitting it. The 3. from The Preacher. The 4. from The matter delive∣red. The 5. The persons reproving it.
Sect. 1. The sinne it selfe. From the sin itselfe. I. It is no great sinne. It is at the most but one of the little ones, and so not worth the re∣garding.  A. 1. If it bee a sinne, it is to be avoided, how small soever in it selfe? How small soever in comparison of other sinnes. The Lord taketh no∣tice even of vaine thoughts, Ier. 4. 14. Isa. 3. 16. disdainfull and proud lookes, wanton eyes, walking with stretched-forth necks, and such other unseemly gestures, and of every idle word that men at. 12. 36. shall speake, they shall give an account on the day of judge∣ment; how much more then taketh he notice of this sinne? How much more shall wee be called to an account for the same?  2. Even small sinnes utta cavat pidem non , sed saepè dendo. continued in, and unrepented of, becomming at the length sinnes of custome are most dan∣gerous. A drop of water by
falling on the hardest stone ma∣keth it at the length hollow, and the smallest sinne continued in, doth at the length no lesse wound the conscience then the greatest; yea, those which at the length prove hainous crimes, were but (as we may so speake) pettie offences. Did not Mari∣ners daily pumpe out the wa∣ter, that by little and little (un∣perceived) entereth the ship, it would be thereby no lesse en∣dangered, then by some sudden great leake; so did not Gods children daily mortifie their smallest corruptions, they could not but at one time or other, make shipwracke of Faith and of a good conscience.  3. It is even in it selfe a great sinne, and in like manner the cause of o∣thers, as hath beene already shewed.  4. Gods children make conscience even of their smal∣lest sinnes. If David doe but 1 Sam. 24. 5 cut off the lappe of Sauls gar∣ment, his heart smites him for
it. As Moses would have the Exod. 10. 26. cattell to goe with them, and not an hoofe to bee left behind for Pharaoh, that thereof they might take to serve the Lord their God in the wildernesse, so must not we employ any one member on the service of Satan, but our whole man in Rom. 12. 1. every part and facultie thereof on the service of God at all times.  5. Even for small sinnes (as wee may so speake) hath Gen. 20. 2. 6. 18. God inflicted fearefull judge∣ments, as on the familie of A∣bimelech, who had taken (but not touched) Sarai Abrahams wife: On the men of Beth∣shemesh for looking into the Sam. 6. 19. Sam. 6. 7. Arke, and on Vzza for putting his hand thereon, when the oxen shaked it.  6. As the least sinne displeaseth God, and for the least wee are to call upon God for mercy (as David for the sinnes of his youth) so even sal. 1. 25. 7. the least occasioned the death of Christ.
II. It is an ordinary usuall thing, and so the lesse to be re∣garded.  A. Therefore it is the more dangerous, the more to be avoided, Gods judgements being chiefly inflicted because 1 Pet. 3. 20: of Nationall sinnes. Was not disobedience the common sinne of the old world? yet was not it left unpunished. God spared 2 Pet. 2. 5. not the old world (saith S. Pe∣ter) but saved Noah the eight person a Preacher of righteous∣nesse, bringing in the flood upon the world of the ungodly, were Ezek. 16. 49. not pride, fulnesse of bread, a∣bundance of idlenesse, and un∣mercifulnesse to the poore the common sinnes of Sodome? yet 2 Pet. 2. 6. urned he it into ashes, and con∣demned it with an overthrow. Agreeable hereunto is that of he Prophet touching Israel; The Lord hath a controversie Hos. 4. 1. ith the inhabitants of the and, because there is no truth or mercy, nor knowledge of od in the land. By swearing Verse 2.
and lying, and killing, and stea∣ling, and committing of adul∣tery, they breake out, and blood coucheth blood. Therefore shall the land mourne, and every one Verse 3. that dwelleth therein shall lan∣guish. The Benjamites (one Iudg. 20. 14. and all) tooke part with those wicked men in Gibeah, and did they not (notwithstanding) smart for it? Though then Church-sleeping bee common, it followeth not, that therefore it is warrantable. The rifer a∣ny evill is in the places or ages we live in, the more carefull should wee be to shun and a∣voide the same. See then (saith the Apostle) that yee walke Eph. 5. 15, 16 circumspectly, not as fooles, but as wise, redeeming the time because the dayes are evill. Are the times then wee live in, or the places wee abide in more then ordinarily evill in this kind? That giveth us no liber∣ty, but should make so much the more wary, lest wee be
taken napping. Noah was a just Gen. 6. 9. man in his generation, even in that generation, wherein the whole world was over-grown with wickednesse; so should wee watch at Church, though others be thereat taken with the sleeping evill. To sleepe at Church is not hurtfull or prejudiciall unto others.  III. A. But what good is  there hereby done unto any? Malum est non fecisse bo∣num, Chrys∣de virt. & vit. To doe no good, is in effect, the same with to doe evill; yea, thus doing, thou dost both hurt thy selfe and others. Thy selfe as being hereby deprived of the sincere milke of the Word. Others, as being unto them through thy evill example, a stone of offence. IIII. To sleepe at Church is not so bad, as then and there to have thoughts of covetousnesse, Ezek. 33. 31▪ eyes of adultery, revenge, dis∣daine, and the like by being a∣wake.  A. 1. The question is not, which of the two are the
lesser evill, this, or that. 2. If thou didst seriously consider in whose presence thou art, (even in his who is a God cloathed with majestie and honour, a Heb. 12. 29. consuming fire, and an everla∣sting burning, who cannot a∣way with sinne (the least sinne) in any) and to what end thou didst come into Gods house, thou wouldst neither sinne, so nor so.  3. Thy thoughts and lookes being such, it appeares that thou makest but small con∣science of thy wayes.  4. If thou wouldst pray with the Psalmist, Incline mine heart Psal. 119. 36. unto thy Testimonies, and not to covetousnesse. And, Turne a∣way Verse 37. mine eyes from beholding vanity, and quicken thou me in thy way, thou shouldst have no such cause to object. V. It is not done of set purpose. A. Of set purpose leave it un∣done. Let it be thy stedfast reso∣lution whilst thou art at Church, not to give sleepe to
thine eyes, norslumber to rhine eye lids. VI. Sleepe there is but nap∣ping; asmall time, a shutting of the eyes, a winke and away.  A. Yet so that thou there∣by loseth the whole Sermon. Though thou hearest the Word now and then, yet how it han∣geth on the former, how it precedeth the latter, thou canst not tell. Sect. 2. The persons commit∣ting The persons committing it. it. I. I am accustomed hereun∣to, that either I must stay at home, or (notwithstanding of mine unwillingnesse to sleepe, and paines which I take to shake it off) sleepe, when I come to Church.  A. 1. Though thou customarily sleepest at Church, yet come, for haply (as Master Mr. Latimers Serm. Latimer once said) thou maist be there taken napping.  2. If thou dislikest it, art humbled for
it, and strivest against it, it is not thy sinne, neither shall it be laid unto thy charge.  3. If thou findest thy selfe prone thereunto, it is the sinne that God especially calleth thee to keepe watch and ward a∣gainst. II. I am old and weake, and so am to bee borne withall. Whatsoever it is in others, in me I hope it is no great sinne to sleepe at Church.  A. 1. The older thou art, the more need hast thou to abstaine there∣from, as being nigh thine end.  2. Thou wouldest be loath, that whilst thou art thus sleeping death should seize on thee.  3. As old as thou art, thou canst watch longer about thine owne businesse, or in hearing some vaine, triviall, sinfull discourse, or in seeing a Play, or some vaine show. Canst thou thus watch, and not watch one houre in hearing Gods Word?  4. Simeon was as old as thou
art, yet when he came into the Temple, did hee not thus be∣have Luk. 2. 28. himselfe, and Anna the Prophetesse, who was a widow Verse 36. about fourescore yeares depar∣ted not from the temple, but served God with fastings and Ioh. 3. 2 prayers, night and day: yea, and Nicodemus to enjoy Christs company came by night unto him, when hee should have slept. III. I watch on the other dayes of the weeke, and labour hardly.  A. 1. Thou wert then in thy calling for the good of thy body: and therefore didst watch, and when thou com∣mest to Church thou art then also in thy calling for the good of thy soule, and therefore shouldst watch.  2. Thou hast watched indeed, but was it for Eras. apophth. lib. 4. thy neighbours good (as Par∣menio excused Philip of Ma∣cedon unto the Grecians which complained one time that hee slept by day, wonder not (saith
he) that Philip now sleepeth, for when yee slept (and seemed carelesse of your owne affaires) hee was awake) was it not ra∣ther for his good, or to worke him some mischiefe? The murtherer rising with the light Iob 24. 14, 15, 16, 17. (saith Iob) killeth the poore, and needy, &c. for the morning is to them, even as the shadow of death. To the same purpose is that of the Poet, The eves rise Horat. by night, that they may slay men, as hath beene already al∣leaged. If thou hast thus wat∣ched unto villany, whilst o∣thers were at their rest, thou shalt find one day, that better it had beene for thee, that thou hadst beene asleepe.  3. If thou hast done thine owne workes on the other dayes, thou must doe Gods on his. Since he hath not deprived thee of thy due (which notwithstanding is onely thine by his gift) thou must not rob him of his.  4. Thou must not so toile on
the weeke-dayes, as thereby to make thy selfe unfit for the san∣ctifying of the Lords day.  5. Even by night are wee to watch in Gods service, much Psal. 134. 1. more then by day, and on Psal. 119. 55. Gods day. IIII. I rose very early. A. 1. Didst thou not rise about thine owne worldly affaires, and art thereby made unfit for this duty? was it not to meet such a friend, in such a place, to bee merry with him for an houre or two before Sermon? was it not to make up such and such a bargaine formerly spo∣ken of? was it not to cast up thy accompts, and looke after thy Debtors? If thou didst rise for these or the like ends, better it had beene for thee to have lyen a bed.  2. If thou ro∣sest not for those or the like ends, thou hadst the more time to prepare thy selfe in private, for the performance of thy du∣ty in publike, neither would
that have beene any let unto this, nay rather, prayer, rea∣ding, meditation, and confe∣rence preceding it, would bee especiall furtherances there∣unto. V. I have farre to Church, sit farre from the pulpit, am thicke of hearing, and the Preachers voyce is weake.  A. Though thou canst not doe as thou wouldest, doe so much as thou canst. Rise earlier, and come sooner, and sit or stand nigher, waiting on Gods pro∣vidence, who as he hath given Mar. 7. 37. thee eares (and both can and hath made the deafe to heare) so may be pleased to bestow on them their proper office of hearing; yea, though thou canst not heare, and so profit thy selfe, yet thou must not sleepe lest thou offend others, which may and would heare. VI. I know my duty alrea∣dy, as well as they that give best attention.  A. Suppose thou
doest, yet shouldest thou know it much better by thy watch∣fulnesse, neither doth the Word onely teach thee to know Gods will, but calleth upon thee to be a doer thereof. Bee Iam. 1. 22. yee doers (saith S. Iames) and not hearers onely. VII. What I shall lose at one time by sleeping at Church, I can get up, either when I come home, or at another time when I goe to Church. At home, either by reading as good a Sermon, or one on the same subject, if not the very same words, or by hearing the same repeated by some one in my fa∣mily which writeth the Ser∣mon. At Church, by giving attendance, unto what shall bee then and there delivered.  A. To the first branch of the former, To the for∣mer and 1. branch ther of. Mal. 2. 7. 1. Experience teacheth that the lively voyce is more effectuall then ocular reading.  2. As the Priests lips are to preserve knowledge; So art thou requi∣red
to heare it at his mouth. Mal. 2. 7. &c.  3. If thou canst so well profit at home, why dost thou come to Church at all?  4 Sermons are not therefore printed, that thou mightest heare no more, but to put thee in mind of what thou hast already heard.  5. Thou art to profit as well by the Ser∣mon which thou hearest, as those which thou readest. The second branch.To the second branch.  1. Doth hee so write it as that hee neither addeth thereto, nor taketh ther∣from? I suppose few or none have such cunning.  2. No hea∣rer can deliver it with that force and efficacie that the Preacher doth.  3. If thou ma∣kest no conscience of the pub∣like hearing of it, much lesse wilt thou to heare it privatly repeated, how exactly soever written.  4. As the divell hin∣dered thee from that, so will he from the performance of this o the lat∣er. duty. To the latter.  1. That thou sinnest, if thou doest at all
sleepe at Church.  2. Thou maist give such offence at one time, that thou canst not salve it at another.  3. May not God justly give thee over, that thou shalt not repent thereof, nor bee re∣claimed there-from?  4. Know∣est thou the contrary, but that death may then seaze upon thee, and so how miserable were thy condition? VIII. Even the precisestsleepe at Church.  A. 1. It is none of their vertues, neither are they herein to be imitated.  2. They doe as much as in them lyes strive against it, and are no doubt humbled for it.  3. It is not ordinary with them, but occasionally enforced.  4. Others should hereupon bee so farre from being emboldened or en∣couraged hereunto, as that they are to be so much the more wary in avoiding the same.  5. Herein they differ from thee, Thou at Church seekest sleepe, but their sleepe findeth
them.  6. Thou there sleepest quietly, but so unquiet is theirs, that even whilst they are a∣sleepe, they may be said in some sort to bee awake.  7. Too too many which are or would bee reputed for such, are farre e∣nough from being such in∣deed. Sect. 3. The Preacher. The Prea∣cher. 1. Hee is no scholler; Hee is not read in humane Writers. Hee is no Logician, Historian, linguist. He is not acquainted with the Schoole-men. He ci∣teth not the Testimonies of the Fathers, and Doctors of the Church.  A. 1. How knowest thou that hee is no scholler? because hee useth no Latine, Greeke, or Hebrew. But should he use Welch in stead of any of those, wert thou able to detect him? nay, rather wouldst thou not applaud his learning?  2. Cannot a Shoe∣maker
sell his shoes, but hee must needs sell or shew his Scultet. meth. concionandi, Artis est ce∣lare artem. lasts, whereby hee maketh them? It is art to conceale art. 3. There is none so learned, but he may learne something from the very meanest, even from those that bee farre his inferi∣ours in gifts, as Apollos did of Act. 18. 26. Aquila and Priscilla, a lear∣ned Teacher, and well read in the Word, of a silly Tent∣maker, and weake woman.  4. As they are not alwayes the richest merchants, which out∣wardly make the greatest show, so are not they the grea∣test Clerkes which make most shew of their cunning.  5. Thou commest to Church to learne, not to teach.  6. Though lear∣ning be required in a Minister, yet is it plaine preaching that gaines mens soules unto God.  7. None forbids to speake with tongues, if it bee to edification. 1 Cor. 14. 3 1 Cor. 14. 1 19. 8. S. Paul a learned scholler thus saith, I thanke my God, I
speake with tongues more then you all, yet in the Church I had rather speake five words with my understanding, that by my voyce I might teach others also, then ten thousand words in an unknowne tongue.  9. Hast thou not heard many a learned Ser∣mon? that being fulfilled Jsa. 28. 11. which in the law is written, with men of other tongues, and 1 Cor. 14. 21. with other lips will I speake unto this people, yet for all that wouldest thou not heare.  10. A Minister is to gaine mens soules unto God, not seeke applause Act. 12. 21, &c. unto himselfe with Herod.  11. How many are there which hearing learned Ser∣mons, will thereupon censure the Preachers, as if thereby they did affect applause, sought themselves, were ambitious, vaine glorious.  12. What hath Horace to doe with the Psalter, Hier. ad Eust. e custod. Vir. Virgil with the Gospel, or Tul∣ly with the Epistles? as S. Hie∣rom saith.
II. His life is not answera∣ble to his doctrine.  A. 1. Though there can be no more noysome smell, then the smell of a can∣dle, yet will men rather endure it, then live in darknesse.  2. The Scribes and Pharisees lived scandalously, in so much that our Saviour did often re∣prehend them, yet was this his direction; The Scribes and the Mat. 23. 2, 3. Pharisees sit in Moses seat, all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and doe, but doe not yee after their workes, for they say, and doe not. III. He hath done me wrong.  A. How? wherein? By spea∣king against thee in the Pulpit; Who is able to ustifie the same? Thou art, but thou art a party, and through selfe-love maist be mistaken. Others are, but are not they pick-thankes and flatterers? yea, are not both of you guiltie of the same sinne? But commest thou unto
the Physician, and wilt thou not let him rip up thy wounds? Complainest thou of the di∣sease of sinne, and wilt thou take no purge to remove it? Thou complainest that the Mi∣nister hath wronged thee in thy name and reputation, and wilt thou wrong thine owne soule? IIII. He continueth long in his Sermons, and wearieth his hearers.  A. 1. It is peradven∣ture not ordinary with him.  2. It is recorded of S. Paul, that upon occasion offered, hee did at one time continue his speech Act. 20. 7. & 28. 23. untill midnight, and at another, from morning till evening.  3. Thou canst without being wearied stay twice as long at thy vaine pastimes, then thou doest at Church.  4. Though every Preacher is as much as in him lyeth to prevent wearinesse and irkesomenesse in his hea∣rers, and so (ordinarily) no Lorin. in Acta, pag. 591. to exceed his houre, yet are no
hearers so to tie Gods word, Sed & Audi∣tor meminerit non esse alli∣gandum ver∣bum Dei. &c▪ or stint his Spirit, as if it were not lawfull at some times upon speciall occasions to exceed that time. Sect. 4. The matter delivered. The matter delivered. 1. It is not worth the hearing.  A. 1. That must needs bee a poore Sermon whereby thou maist not reape some profit.  2. The sinne is the Preachers not thine.  3. By thy watchful∣nesse thou shalt bee able to discerne the spirits, whether they are of God, or not, and thereupon encourage, admo∣nish, pitty, or pray for them.  4. Is there no Sermon delivered by any Minister that rellisheth thy palate? Is there none of them worth the hearing? when there are (as when are there not?) thou shouldest not then sleepe by thine owne con∣fession.  5. But being asleepe, how canst thou tell that thy Mi∣nister
delivers nothing worth the hearing? surely thou con∣ceitest it, or fainest it (as the souldiers which watched the Sepulchre gave out, that the Mat. 28. 13. Disciples came by night, and stole Christ away while they slept) for know that thou canst not. But thou wilt say, thou hast often heard him so preach, let it bee granted, what then?  doth it therefore follow that he doth alwayes preach?  yea, I make no question, but (as Phi∣lip ras. apophth. b. 4. of Macedon being asleepe whilst Machetes his cause was pleaded before him, and there∣fore having against equity de∣termined against him upon his appeale to him being awake, and better notice taken there∣of, repealed his sentence,) so whereas thou condemnest thy Preacher being asleepe, thou wouldst justifie him being a∣wake.  6. But as Ahab hated Micaiah (for that hee did not ing. 22. 8. prophecie good concerning him
but evill) doest thou not hate thy Minister? bearest thou him no grudge? If it bee for well∣doing, neither shalt thou escape punishment, nor hee lose his reward.  7. Others blesse God for it, acknowledge themselves to be edified by it, and in their daily practise conforme them∣selves unto it, and why should not thy saying and doing be an∣swerable unto theirs? II. It is the very same before insisted on.  A. 1. Did not S. Paul the like (and that at the earnest entreaty even of those which heard him be∣fore.) So Christ himselfe, the Act. 13. 42: Apostles Peter and Iohn, and before them the Prophets?  2. Is there no alteration? Though haply the subject bee the same, yet is the prosecution thereof distinct and different, as being at one time handled catechetically by way of que∣stion and answer, at another, by way of common place, at ano∣ther
by way of doctrine, and Vse, at another by-way of pa∣raphrase, and the like. 3. Hast thou indeed amended by that which thou hast formerly heard? Thou hast not. Thou shouldst then bee content, yea, willing and desirous to heare the same things againe and a∣gaine, untill they shall worke on thee, that for which they were at the first intended and delivered. Being addicted to whoredome, thou shouldst e∣specially affect such Sermons (though often repeated, and long insisted upon) which may withdraw thee there-from. The like may be said of every other sinne.  4. When Iehojakim had burnt the roll which Jeremiah had written, the Lord comman∣ded r. 36. 32. his Prophet, to write it a∣new, whereunto were added many of the like words.  5. If thevery same formerly delivered tooke the Preacher more then two houres (it selfe but an
houre long) in penning it, it will take thee farre more to conceive or remember it. III. It is invective, most times in the generall, some∣times in particular. In gene∣rall. A man cannot bee a little joviall with his friends, or sweare an oath, but it is brought up in the pulpit, and takes up a good part of the Sermon. In particular; There is scarce a Sermon preached, wherein the Preacher to my great discredit aymeth not at me.  A. To the Generall,  1. Whatsoever is To the ge∣nerall. sinne is to bee spoken against, how small soever the same seemeth unto many, if any at all.  2. When thou shalt indeed make conscience of thy wayes, thou wilt abstaine as from sinne, so from the very appearance thereof.  3. The Word is of such a piercing nature, that it divides betweene the marrow Heb. 4. 12. and the bones, and taketh no∣tice aswell of the smallest as
of the greatest sinnes. 4. Canwee not use Gods creatures (as Gat. spirit. watch. pag. 46 one saith) unlesse wee abuse them, and make that the baine and poyson of our soules, that was given us to be the food and stay of our bodyes? or can wee not bee merry, unlesse wee make the divell our play-fellow? Is there no mirth at all but in swearing and swaggering, and in blaspheming of Gods blessed name? Is our mirth nothing worth if it be not mixed with prophanesse? farre be it from us to bee thus merry. To the To the par∣ticular. particular.  1. How knowest thou that hee aymes at thee? hath he confessed so much, or rather doth not thy guilty con∣science, take occasion there∣upon to accuse thee? If so, thou shouldst blesse God for his Word, that hath wrought so effectually on thee.  2. Art thou the onely bad man in the parish? the onely drunkard, swearer, adulterer, covetous
person, &c. are there not o∣thers as bad as thy selfe? There are. Why then may not the Preacher be conceived to speake against them, not against thee?  3. It is not thy person, but thy sinnes which are aymed at, whereof when thou shalt once be rid, of them thou shalt heare no more.  4. The lesse thou art soothed in thy sinnes, the grea∣ter paines are taken to reclaime thee there-from; the more the Preacher strives to make thee ashamed thereof, the greater is his love unto thee; so shalt thou find it in time, though now thou doest not, thou wi∣stest not. IIII. It is frequently of hell and damnation, and so enough to drive a man into desperation.  A. 1. The law is a schoole-ma∣ster to bring us to Christ, nei∣ther can any bee raised up by Gal. 3. 26. evangelicall consolations, who is not first throwne downe by legall comminations. First
must Preachers bee Boanerges, sonnes of thunder, then Bar∣nabasses, sonnes of consolation.  2. We are to preach as well of judgement, as of mercy: dam∣nation, as salvation; hell, as heaven: the torments of the one, as oyes of the other. So preached the Prophets. So Isa. 30. 27. &c. Luk. 11. 42. &c. 2 Thes. 1. 8. Rev. 15. 6, 7. Christ and his Apostles. This seemeth figured in that vision of John; The seven Angels which came out of the Temple, though clothed in pure and white lin∣nen, and having their breasts girded with golden girdles, yet had the seven plagues, and to them one of the foure beasts gave seven golden vialls full of the wrath of God, to poure them out upon the earth.  3. It wounds thee, that it may heale thee; casts thee downe, that it may raise thee up; drives thee as it were into desperation, that thou maist truly repent, and at∣taine unto humiliation. V. It is often erroneous
and hereticall, wherwith (were I awake) I could not but bee in danger to bee infected, or o∣therwise forced to present the broacher thereof to his utter undoing.  A. 1. Not every thing which thou conceivest to bee erroneous and hereticall, is therefore to bee so reputed. Thereof Gods word must de∣termine.  2. Thou knowest not, but as the broacher thereof, was by Satan stirred up to broach those errours; so Gods Spirit will draw him to a re∣cantation.  3. A Preacher may through ignorance or heedles∣nesse mistake, and afterwards upon good ground revoke the same.  4. If thou shouldst ob∣serve any to continue in their errour, thou couldst doe the Church no better service, then through thy detecting of them, to have them cut off, whereat others haply through feare or favour will connive. VI. It is that wherewith I
am already very well acquain∣ted.  A. 1. Art thou the onely hearer? Though thou knowest the truth, yet peradventure o∣thers in the assembly doe not, who are therefore to bee in∣structed in those very things, which thou knowest, that they also may know the same.  2. If thou knowest so much, why then is not thy practise answe∣rable.  3. Werst thou not a partiall judge, thou mightest truly and ingenuously confesse, that through the Word (though out of the mouth of a weake man by thee too much despi∣sed) thy knowledge is dai∣ly bettered and augmented.  4. Though thou knowest much, yet by the Word thou maist learne to know more, which the Word knoweth of thee, namely, that thou knowest no∣thing yet as thou oughtest to know. VII. It is such, as whereby I have not profited all this
while, though I have beene an hearer thereof these many yeares; yea, and have beene so watchfull, as that I have not given leave unto mine eyes to sleepe, nor my eye-lids to slum∣ber thereat. I am no lesse sin∣full, then before; no lesse cove∣tous, malicious, lascivious, and the like.  A. The woman with the bloody issue was diseased twelve yeeres, yet at the length cured. The woman which had the spirit of infirmity for Mat. 9. 20. the space of 18. yeares, and was Luk. 13. 16. bowed together, and could in no wise lift up her selfe, yet was at the length loosed from her bonds. The man of the palsie was diseased for the Joh. 5. 9. space of 38. yeares, and yet at length at Christs command, and by his power, rose, tooke up his bed and walked. The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound Joh. 3. 8. thereof, but canst not tell, whence it commeth, and whi∣ther
it goeth; So is every one that is borne of the Spirit. Abide an hearer, waite Gods good leisure, for assuredly if thou belongest to God, thou shalt heare something at the length which will doe thee good. Sect. 5. The Persons repro∣ving The persons eproving it. it. I. They have little to doe that meddle herewith.  A. They are never out of their calling which would worke in thee a dislike of sinne, and further thy salvation, whether in this or other particulars. Some are enabled to encounter the grea∣test. Every one may seeme sufficiently qualified to cope with this. II. Such often-times as are most faultie herein doe most find fault hereat.  A. Though their zeale against this sinne in thee doth not excuse or tolerate
them thus to sinne, yet art not thou thus to sinne, because thy reprovers may be justly repro∣ved for the same. CHAP. VI. Remedies for the cure of this sleeping evill. IT is observed that those grounds doe beare most corne, and are freest from weeds, which be∣fore they are sowne, are duly prepared, and after the seed is owne, are carefully harrowed, What is to be done to avoid Church-sleeping. ell fenced in, and diligently ooked unto; So those which would profit by the Word, and e free from this dowsie di∣ease, must both before they ome to Church, when they are ome to Church, and when they re returned home set them∣elves on worke.
Sect. I. Before wee come to Church we must, Before we come to Church. 1. Take notice of Gods great goodnesse towards us, in affor∣ding his Word unto us; the same being so needfull, as with∣out which our condition could not bee but indeed miserable, the same being so profitable, as Amos 8. 11. Rev. 2. 5. that no greater judgement can befall a land, then the reme∣vall thereof therefrom, no greater happinesse then its con∣tinuance. 2. Examine our owne hearts throughly, for what cause, and to what end it is, that wee goe to Church; as whether it be not more, for feare, then love; out of custome, then conscience; to see and to bee seene, then in obedience unto Gods Com∣mandement. This is to ponder the path of our feet: and sure∣ly Prov. 4. 26. Prov. 14. 15. the prudent man looketh well to his going.
3. Observe our naturall con∣stitution, and by what meanes it commeth to passe, that sleepe at Church seazeth upon us, as whether it comes not, through long waking; excessive eating and drinking, distracting cares of the world (for as Abraham Gen. 22. 5. when hee went to sacrifice his sonne upon the Mount, left his asse and servants at the foot of the hill; So when we come to the holy hill of God, with the Congregation, wee must aban∣don all by businesses) preju∣dice against the person of the Teacher. Pride for some mea∣sure of knowledge received, Amputemus causas morbi, ut morbus pa∣riter aufera∣tur. Hier. carnall securitie, or the like; for the cause being knowne and ta∣ken away, the effect will of it selfe cease. Upon this disco∣very will ensure an holy jealou∣sie, whereby we shall be made so wary, as that wee shall not trust our selves, but use meanes to prevent this evill; for as they that know themselves to
have a weake stomacke are very chary of their diet, so hee that is suspicious of himselfe, and jealous of his owne drowsi∣nesse and pronenesse thereto will bee carefull to avoid the same. And as they that have gun-powder in their houses, are carefull that fire come not neere it, so finding our corruption as gun-powder, and the fore∣mentioned causes of drowsi∣nesse, as fire, wee shall ende∣vour that they may not meet together; yea, hereupon (if wee shall at any time be stirred up to a dislike of the Teacher, to an admiration of our owne knowledge, and the like) wee shall thus argue. If I shall give way unto this suggestion, then will sleepe seaze on mee, then shall I lose the benefit of the Word, &c. 4. Labour for a true hatred, and detestation of this sinne. Rom. 12. 9. Never shall wee closely cleave unto that which is good, till we
have brought our hearts to de∣test and abhorre that which is evill, were this throughly wrought, there needed no rhe∣toricke to disswade us from Church-sleeping. As Amnon loathing Thamar thrust her 1 Sam. 13. 16 out of doores, so (it being the Pro. 8. 13. feare of God to hate evill) would we drive it away. And as a man cannot indure the sent or savour of the meate which he loatheth, our very hearts would rise against the same. 5. Hunger after the Word. Bodily hunger may occasion sleepe, or sleepe may seaze e∣ven on the hungry (according to the Proverb, Sleepe commeth Vulpiesurient somnus obre∣pit. Eras. chi upon the hungry fox) but this hunger driveth away sleepe, for as the stomacke hungering for meat, cannot bee contented without it, so neither can our soules without the Word, be∣ing once taken with an earnest desire thereof. Great was Da∣vids longing for a little water 2 Sam. 23. 1
of the Well of Bethleem; Oh! (saith he) that one would give mee drinke of the water of the Well of Bethleem, which is by the gate) but much more ve∣hement was it for the Word. My soule (saith he) thirsteth Psal. 42. 2. for God, for the living God, when shall I come and appeare before God? And againe, My Psal. 84, 2. soule longeth, yea even faint∣eth for the courts of the Lord. (Assuredly had David had leave at this time to have come to the hearing of the Word, he would not have slept thereat.) And who will not hunger after the Word, if hee doe but 1. Take a tast thereof in pri∣vate By what meanes an aunger after the Word may be wrought n us. by reading and meditati∣on. Hereby the soule cannot but get much both instruction and consolation. 2. Consider the excellencie, necessity, and utilitie of the same, whereof I have already spoken at large: and wereof both David and Psal. 19. 10. Prov. 3. 15. and 8. 10. Salomon did make so much ac∣account,
that they esteemed it above gold, silver, rubies, and what not? 6. Resolve to attend unto, and make conscience of the sacred ordinance of preaching there delivered. As Job, I have made Job 31. 1. a covenant with my eyes, why then should I thinke upon a maide? So doe we make a co∣venant, as with our eares to heare, so with our eyes not to sleepe at Church. Such was Davids religious care for the Arke, that hee would not give Psal. 132. 4. sleepe to his eyes, nor slumber to his eye-lids, untill he found out a place for the Lord, an habi∣tation for the mighty God of Jacob; And such must ours bee at the Word, if wee would have any communion with God in that sacred ordinance. Jacob being Labans shepheard, Gen: 31. 40. and making conscience of his duty, his sleepe (by night) de∣parted from his eyes, and assu∣redly so would sleepe depart
from ours, (especially by day) if we made conscience of hea∣ring the Word. 7. Vse the creatures sparing∣ly, both sleepe (for what is said of drinking water, may be said of this, the more it is ta∣ken, Quo plùs sunt poae, plùs siti∣utur aquae. the more it is desired) and meate and drinke; for when men have over-liberally eate and drunke, they are wont to bee heavie and drowsie, ready to slumber as they sit, fit for nothing, but for sleepe. Such excesse, as it is a meanes even to drowne the mind, and by casting reason and understan∣ding into a deepe and deadly sleepe, to make men unable to watch against the motions of sinne, to shut the doore of the heart against all vertues, and to set it open to all vices, so much more stupifieth it the body. Contrarily, Sobrietie is an e∣speciall Thes. 5. 6. helpe to vigilancie, which therefore the Apostles Pet. 4. 7. are usually wont to joyne toge∣ther.
8. Consider whither wee are going, before whom, to what end, and who wee are? To Gods house, into the presence of the God of heaven, to bee made partakers of the Word for the good of our soules, wee being (as of our selves) of all others the most unworthy. 9. Pray, as for the Preacher (that his lips may preserve Mal. 2. 7. knowlede; he may be faithfull in delivering the whole Coun∣sell Act. 20. 27. of God unto us, and hee may powerfully and wisely speake to our consciences) and the Word read or preached Rom. 1. 16. (that it may bee unto us the power of God unto our salvati∣on, 2 Cor. 2. 16. the savour of life unto life, and as good seed sowne in a good ground) so for our selves and others, that our eares may be attentive, our eyes fixed on the Preacher, our mindes bee opened to understand, and our hearts and affections sanctified to obey the holy Word.
Ob. I cannot possibly spare so much time from my Calling, as to thinke on these things, or be thus prepared. A.  1. As our Saviour unto Martha; Martha, Martha, thou art carefull, and troubled Luk. 10. 41: 42. about many things, but one thing is needfull; and Mary hath chosen that good part which shall not bee taken away from her, so may I unto thee. The soule is to bee preferred unto the body, and thou art more carefull of this, then that. 2. Bodily exercise profiteth little, but godlinesse is profi∣table unto all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come.  3. Seeke ye first the kingdome of God, and his righteousnesse, 1 Tim. 4. 8. and all these things shall bee added unto you.  4. Even in the doing of the workes of our Calling, wee may both medi∣tate, pray, resolve, &c. and so that bee no let to this.  5. Wee
omit not our bodily recreation notwithstanding the workes of our calling, and why should we this?  6. Wee take time to sinne, and why should wee not take time to prevent sinne? Sect. 2. When wee come to When wee come to Church. Church wee must In Generall; In generall. 1. Take heed unto our affe∣ctions (which the Preacher sig∣nifieth by these words) Keepe Eccles. 5. 1. thy foot when thou goest to the house of God, and be more rea∣dy to heare, then to give the sacrifice of fooles. 2. Get our eyes to bee anoin∣ted with eye-salve, that we may see, and our eares open that wee Rev. 3. 18. may heare. Remembring that as God hath bestowed upon us eyes and eares, so when wee are come into his house, both must be set on worke. As our eyes must bee seeing, so must our eares bee hearing, and obe∣dient,
as we our selves swift to Iam. 1. 19. heare. To this purpose is that so often reiterated phrase, Hee that hath eares to heare, let him Mat. 11. 15. heare. Yea, as it is usuall for one that is drowsie to wash and rub his eyes, or that feeleth a∣ny impediments in his eares to picke them; so when wee per∣ceive drowsinesse to creepe on us at Church, wee must then rouse up our selves. 3. Bee possessed with Gods feare, that wee may tremble at sa. 66. 2. Sam. 4. 13. the Word. As Eli whilst hee sate on a stoole by the way side, watched, because his heart trembled for the Arke of God; So if when wee are at Church, our hearts shall tremble in re∣spect of our present danger through Satan, wee shall be kept waking. Nebuchadnez∣zar n. 2. 1. being troubled, his sleepe went from him, so were wee troubled for sinne, or did stand in awe of God, because of the same, it would not fall on us.
Griefe and sorrow occasion Luk. 22. 44. Vigilabis, si ti¦mebis. August Timor domin janitor animi Ber. formido facit solicitu∣dinem. Ter. Psal. 4. 4. Pro. 16. 6. sleepe, but feare and care make vigilant and watchfull. This is as a Porter set at the doore of our soule; and will also keepe our eyes waking. There is no affection more watchfull then this. Stand in awe and sinne not; yea, as by this men depart from evill, so shall wee through it, from this of sleeping at Church. This being kept fresh in our hearts, will make us carefull to shunne, and fearefull to doe ought that may offend him whom we feare. In feare of invasion men are wont to keepe due watch and ward, but when there is no such dan∣ger misdoubted, like the men of Lachish, they are the more Iudg. 18. 7. carelesse and secure, and there∣upon are often upon the sudden oppressed. At the hearing of the Word, wee are at all times in danger of the assaults of Sa∣tan, there is then neither time nor place to sleepe thereat.
The Crane which is by the rest Franc. Se∣nens. de Ex∣ub. & vigil. appointed for Sentinell, hol∣deth in its foot a small stone, whereby it may be kept awake; and Alexander the Great, held in the night a silver ball, over a brazen bason, that if he should sleepe, by the sound thereof he might be awaked, such a stone, such a ball, will Gods feare prove unto us, to keepe us from Church-sleeping. 4. Bee perswaded that the Scriptures to bee read, or the Sermon ready to be uttered, may doe us more good, then all those we have yet heard. Yea, that they may be the last which we shall ever heare, as that very houre, the last of our lives. As Miltiades his triumph hin∣dered tar. Themistocles from slee∣ping; So did we consider the benefit of the Word, and duly weigh what good God may thereby convey into our soules, (as he hath done to others) we would questionlesse not sleepe
thereat. The care of riches Ecclus. 31. 1. driveth away sleepe, saith the sonne of Sirach. So did wee care for the durable riches which the Word affordeth, we would not sleepe thereat. 5. Consider, that as God sleepeth not for our good, and Psal. 121. 4. the divell sleepeth not for our hurt; So if we should sleepe at Church, God would leave us, and the divell would make a prey of us. 6. Call to mind, that there will be store of witnesses to rise up against us on the day of judgement, if wee shall thus sin. Then will the Lord say, I spake unto them, but they would not heare me; I was present with mine owne ordinance, but they would not looke upon mee. Then will Christ say; I offered, my selfe unto them, but they would none of me; I called up∣on them, but they would not answer me; I would have shewed them what I had done
for them, but they did not re∣gard me. Then will the Holy Ghost say, I would have ente∣red into their hearts, I would have there lodged; I would have made the Word to take roote in them, but by their slee∣ping thereat they grieved me. Then will the Word say; They despised me. The Saints say, They offended us. The ungod∣ly say, They hardened us in our sinnes, and occasioned our con∣tempt of the Word. It were not amisse, that (as an. 5. 5, 6. Belshazar was driven from his carnall mirth by viewing the hand-writing which appeared on the wall) they that are ac∣customed to sleepe at Church, would imagine at least, that it were written over their Pewes, Awake thou that sleepest. h. 5. 14. In particular, in hearing we  particular must use, 1. Attention, which is when the whole body, especially the ention. eare and the eye, are reverently
composed about hearing the Word. The eare; as Cornelius Act. 10. 33. and his houshold were alrea∣dy, waiting for Peter to heare the Word. The eye; as the Luk. 4 28. eyes of all that were in the Sy∣nagogue were fastened on him; that is, on Christ when hee be∣gan to teach them; wee must with Mary sit at Jesus feet, Luk. 10. 39. and heare his Word. Doth not the hungry stomack watch for meat? and should not wee watch for the food of our soules? 2. Intention, which is of the mind, when wee diligently Intention. marke those things which wee are taught; We see by experi∣ence, that in a deepe meditati∣on, though our eyes be fixed on some certaine object, yet wee smally regard it, so if the mind bee not present aswell as the body, all is to no purpose. To this purpose is that of Salomon, Prov. 2. 2: Cause thine eare to hearken, and encline thine heart to wis∣dome
and understanding. 3. Retention, which is of the memorie, when wee lay up Retention. Luk. 2. 52. the word of God in the heart, as the Virgin Mary, the sayings concerning Christ. Hee that maketh conscience hereof will hardly sleepe hereat. 4. Devotion, which calleth for an heart truly religious. A Devotion. devout soule, never heares of mercy but with comfort; of Gods justice but with feare; of his truth without assenting to it, of his workes without ad∣miration, and where devotion dwelleth, drowsinesse is shut out. 5. Subjection. God speakes, and must not wee heare? yea, ubjection. yeeld obedience therunto, how repugnant soever the same see∣meth unto our corrupt nature? now how can there bee obedi∣ence, when there is no subje∣ction? how subjection, where knowledge wanteth? how knowledge bee had without in∣struction?
how receive instru∣ction without hearing it? how heare it if sleepe bee enter∣tained? 6. Discretion. The eare is to Discretion. the soule, as the mouth is to the body; The mouth refuseth unsavoury meat, that may bee hurtfull to the body, so must our eares reject erroneous and hereticall doctrine. But if the mouth bee out of taste, what food will it not receive, how noysome soever? so if the eares bee dull and heavy, will not falshood be embraced for truth? mens traditions, as Gods com∣mandements? Those that we may the bet∣ter Means wher∣by to per∣forme those. performe, we must 1. Remember that we are in Gods presence; at Bethel, Gods house, and that hee both seeth Psal. 16. 8: 1 Cor. 11. 1 us, and speaketh to us, we must set the Lord alwayes before our eyes, especially at this time. If Paul will have women reve∣rently to behave themselves
in the congregation, because of the Angels; much more ought all both men and women, to be∣have themselves reverently, because of the presence of God, who is the Lord both of men and Angels. This was that which kept David in com∣passe; Psa. 119. 168 I have kept (saith hee) thy Precepts and Testimonies, for all my wayes are in thy sight. Doe wee at any time begin to find our selves drowsie at Church? speake we thus unto our owne soules, Should I thus doe in Gods presence? yea, as the Lord called Samuel; Sa∣muel, 1 Sam: 3. 10. Samuel, and the ship∣master unto Jonah, What mea∣nest Ionah 1. 6. thou, O sleeper? So doe we imagine that the Lord speaketh unto every one of us in parti∣cular; Why sleepest thou, O sluggard? awake thou that sleepest. 2. Stand up. It is very me∣morable, which is reported of Euseb. de vita Constant. lib. 4 ap. 33. Constantine the Great by Eu∣sebius.
Being requested by Di∣vines that disputed before him, that after long standing hee would sit downe and take his ease, answered; It is an impi∣ous thing to heare negligently disputations concerning God. 3. Rouse up our selves ever and anone; as the cocke clap∣peth his wings, that he may the more cheerfully crow, wee must stirre up the grace of God 2 Tim. 1. 6. in us; yea, wee must check our selves when wee perceive our drowsinesse. How long wilt Prov. 6. 9. thou sleepe, O sluggard? when wilt thou arise out of thy sleepe? We must say unto our selves, art thou in a way to heaven? will the Lord bee pleased here∣with? 4. Vse now and then short and sudden ejaculations, as in Psal. 13. 5. the words of the Psalmist, lighten mine eyes lest I sleepe the sleepe of death. 6. Goe along with the Prea∣cher from point to point, ap∣plying
the Word in particular to the part affected, as the stomacke conveieth nourish∣ment to each member. Heare we comfort? wee are to apply it to our feare, as Gods promi∣ses against distrust; So if wee heare threatnings against sinne, whether whoredome, cove∣tousnesse, pride, or any else, and know our selves guilty thereof, wee are to apply it to our selves for our humiliation, saying of both upon occasion; This is for mee; This promise; This comfort; This threatning. Sect. 3. After we are come from Church we must After we are come from Church, use 1. Call our selves to an ac∣count how wee behaved our Examinati∣on. selves at Church, as about Church-sleeping, whether wee be guilty thereof, or not, that upon our not guilty wee may expresse our thankfulnesse, as See Gatak. pirit. Watch ag. 81. upon guilty remorse and humi∣liation.
2. Recall and revolve in our minds such gracious instructi∣ons, Meditation. as the Word afforded us; thus bringing into out remem∣brance, what we heard former∣ly delivered, as the Bereans who as they received the Word with all readinesse of mind, searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things (which they heard) were so. Where∣upon will arise such profit and pleasure, as that wee shall en∣devour thereafter, not to de∣prive our selves through unsea∣sonable sleeping, of the good which may bee gained by the Word. This is the very life of hearing, neither can wee with∣out meditation bring the Word into practise. 3. Impart unto others by re∣petition, what the Lord in his Repetition. Word hath communicated to us, not doing the same at some one time, but constantly (as a duty whereunto we are tied) upon our hearing the Word.
4. Conferre of such things at home, as have beene delive∣red Conference. at Church, and that especi∣ally by way of Catechising, or by question and answer. 5. Put in practise such graci∣ous things, as the Word hath Practise. revealed unto us. If thou didst profit by one Sermon (as assu∣redly thou mightest, if thou didst practise, what thou art therin prescribed) thou wouldst not sleepe at the next. A cer∣taine rompt sap. efor. pag. 456 Lady having asked her servants, whether the Sermon was done, to whom affirming that it was; shee answered, It was said, not yet done; imply∣ing that though the Minister had performed his part, they had not yet done theirs; that is, though he had taught them, yet they had not yet followed all his instructions. CHAP. VII.
The Application of the foregoing discourse for Reprehension. Vse of Re∣prehension unto Prea∣chers. Exhortation. Sect. 1. Reprehen∣sion of Preachers. People. Preachers, 1. Which doe any way occa∣sion this evill, Whether by ta∣king no paines in their Mini∣sterie, by ayming more at ap∣plause unto themselves then at Gods glory therein; by delive∣ring erroneous and hereticall doctrine; by wearying their auditors; by leading their lives scandalously, and the like. 2. Which doe not what in them lyes to remove this evill. Should they not at sometimes fall into a commendation of
Gods word, to bring their peo∣ple into a liking thereof? should they not at other times set forth the misery of such as are without it? should they not now and then inveigh a∣gainst those, which doe negli∣gently heare it, or sleepe there∣at? should they not be as Boa∣nerges, even filled with zeale against those that thus despise it? Must not their voyces bee lift up as a trumpet, and upon occasions sound these words of the ship-master, unto Jonah, What meanest thou, O sleeper? Ionah 1. 6. and that of Salomon to the slug∣gard? When wilt thou arise out Prov. 6. 9. of thy sleepe? how long wilt thou sleepe, O sluggard? And those of the Spirit, awake thou Eph. 5. 14. that sleepest? People, People▪ 1. Which (whilst the Word is taught) laugh, talke, reade, gaze up and downe in every cor∣ner, and the like, every of which (through the just judge∣ment
of God,) doth (for the most part) end in sleeping, when the senses are wearied with those, then doe they re∣tyre unto sleepe for their re∣creation. 2. Which make a jest of it; as if that which doth so much displease God; so much wrong Gods word; so much preju∣dice Gods people; so much ad∣vantage Satans kingdome, and hath beene so severely punish∣ed, were indeed to bee laugh∣ed at. Unto such I say, Bee Iam. 4. 9. afflicted, and mourne, and weepe, let your laughter bee turned to mourning, and your joy to heavinesse. 3. Which doe what in them lyes to continue in it; yea, doe so love to sleepe, as that they will further their inclination hereunto, through intempe∣rancie, worldly cares, selfe∣conceit, prejudicate opinions, and the like; thus entertaining such things as may make
them more drowsie. 4. Which are angry with those that doe awake them; They come to Church against their will; They there stay a∣gainst their will; and if they there heare any thing, it is a∣gainst their will. They love Ecclus. 22. 7. sleepe, set themselves to sleepe, and cannot abide to be awaked. Their untoward faces, fro∣ward words (Let mee alone, what have yee to doe with me? meddle with your selves, &c.) and uncivill behaviour toward those that doe awake them, were worth the observation. Wouldst thou when thou com∣mest to Church sleepe all the while? farre bee it from thee. As the Disciples unto our Sa∣viour Christ being asleepe, Ma∣ster, Mar. 4. 38: carest thou not that wee perish? So may it be said unto thee that affectest drowsinesse; Carest thou not though thou perishest? Dost thou already Mar. 4. 24. know too much? or hast thou
already heard too much? wouldst thou heare, more should be given unto thee. 5. Which being guilty here∣of, doe notwithstanding use one Non fenestra nunc, non fa∣mes, non som∣nus intertur∣bat; (ait Chrysostomus) attamen non audimus, non angustia loci, non aliquid horum. Lorin, in Acta. p. 591. or other excuse for their justi∣fication. What canst thou pre∣tend? long preaching, much crowding, heat, hard labour; and the like? Beware lest in pleading not guilty unto one sinne, thou beest not guilty of lying, and so punished for both. 6. Which will not by any meanes bee reclaimed there∣from. God calleth thee, as hee did Samuel, and wilt thou not 1 Sam. 3. 3. heare? Hee would acquaint thee with his will, and shall thine eyes bee alwayes heavy? How long wilt thou sleep, O slug∣gard? Prov. 6. 9. 10. yet a little sleep, a little slumber, & a little folding of the hands to sleep. Knowest thou not that many littles make a great, and that but a nappe at a time comes in time, to a good deale
of time? Of old, they that slept, slept in the night, as they 1 Thes. 5. 7. that were drunke, were drunke in the night; and wilt thou now sleepe in the day, and that in Gods house? Art thou an Image? or wilt thou make thy selfe one? having eyes, seest thou not? and having eares, Mar. 8. 18. why wilt thou not heare? wouldst thou die, whilst thou sleepest at Church? were that the way unto heaven? Not any thing the divell more hin∣ders, then hearing the Word, Mar. 9. 25. and shouldest thou be possessed with a deafe divell? As it was Homer. Vlysses his chiefest care for his owne preservation to deprive Polyphemus of his eye-sight, so is it Satans to deprive thee both of seeing and hearing at Church, for thy destruction. As Christ came the second and Mat. 26. 43. third time, and found his Disci∣ples asleepe; So when shall one observe thee, but asleepe at Church? Hee that being often Pro. 29: 1:
reproved hardeneth his necke, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedie (saith Salomon.) And hast not thou beene often reproved for this fault, and yet art never the bet∣ter? As both Moses and the Deut. 32: 1. Prophets directed their speech, unto the heavens, earth, and Isa. 1▪ 2. mountaines; so might wee well doe, considering the generall drowsinesse, which hath taken hold on most men and women. As the Prophet of old, Who Isa. 53. 1. hath beleeved (so may wee now, who hath heard) our re∣port? How many like the dor∣mouse, sleepe all Winter, that it may live the better in Sum∣mer; So doe they sleepe at Church, that they may wake about their worldly businesses. Alexander the Great knew Eras. A∣pophth. himselfe to bee a man by sleepe, so maist thou know thy selfe to bee a sinfull man by sleeping at Church. What a shame is it, that when for the time yee ought Heb. 5. 12.
to bee Teachers, yee have need that one teach you againe, which bee the first Principles of the Oracles of God, and are be∣come such as have need of milke, and not of strong meat. What is the reason? how commeth this to passe after so Prompt. sap. eformat. pag. 456. many Sermons? Even because yee are dull of hearing, either heare not at all, or to no pur∣pose. 7. Which when the Sermon is done, will not sticke to cut the points delivered into que∣stion, and dispute about the same, themselves notwithstan∣ding for the most part ha∣ving beene asleepe thereat; or when they are come from Church will commend the Preacher, and his Sermon, tel∣ling how zealous, how lear∣ned. how eloquent it was, &c. when as haply they heare but a little thereof. Thou com∣mendest it. It is well (so may a sick person commend a phy∣sitian,
whose Physick hee never tried) but what profit hast thou gained thereby? what fruit hath it produced on thee? If none, thou wert no otherwise an hea∣rer, but in imagination. Sect. 2. Exhorta∣tion to Preachers. Vse of ex∣hortation unto Prea∣chers. People. Preachers. Be wee carefull as well to prevent this evill, as to remove it, when it seazeth on our Au∣ditors. As wee are not to have Iam. 2. 1. the faith of our Lord Iesus Christ, the Lord of glory, with respect of persons. So let not our Sermons bee with respect of persons, but so study, and so preach at all times, that there∣by wee may enforce hearing eares, and the eyes of all may be set on us. Lift wee up our voyces like trumpets, especi∣ally when we shall observe our people drowsie; So shall wee, nill they, will they, rowse them up. Endevour wee also that our Auditors may truly
love us, as children their pa∣rents (for where the man is despised, how is it possible that his doctrine should bee re∣garded?) which they will doe, through our love of them, and their soules salvation. What∣soever may bring our ministry into contempt, be wee carefull to avoid, being assured that such as shall loath our doctrine, (though haply they come to Church, that thereby they may avoid the danger of the law) will rather set themselves to sleepe, then give eare thereun∣to. Such indeed will take ex∣ceptions at our doctrine, as be∣ing either too harsh, or too mild, too vehement, or too cold, at our utterance, as being either too slow, or too quicke, at our voice, as either being too high, or too low, and at our conversation, as being either too loose, or too austere, but wee must not be discouraged. But why should. I offer to instruct
you, both knowing what you should doe, and doing what you know? People. People. When thou commest unto Gods house, give not sleepe un∣to Prov. 6. 4. thine eyes, nor slumber unto thine eye-lids; Here must thou keepe the watch of the 2 Chro. 23. 6▪ Lord; yea, lest sleepe should assault thee to thy prejudice, thou must set a watch against the same, as the Israelites did against Sanballat and Tobijah. Neh. 4. 9. Psal. 123. 2▪ Behold as the eyes of servants looke unto the hand of their masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mi∣stresse: So here especially should our eares and eyes wait upon the Lord our God. If thou sleepest at Church, thou shalt assuredly find that Gods judgements sleepe not; yea, if Rev. 3. 3. thou shalt not watch, hee will come on thee as a thiefe, wee are all children of the light, and children of the day, wee are
not of the night, nor of dark∣nesse, 1 Thes. 5. 5. Eph. 5. 14. therefore let us not sleepe as doe others; but let us watch. Sleepest thou? Oh! awake thou that sleepest. The eyes of all wait on the Lord; oh! let Psal. 145. 15. thine also wait on him, love not Pro. 20. 13. sleepe, lest thou come to poverty; sleepe not at Church, lest thou be poore in grace. As Abra∣ham Gen. 15. 11. drave away the fowles from his sacrifice, so must thou drowsinesse, or what else may bring thee to sleepe at Church. A wake here, as thou wouldst ro. 6. 22. have the Word to keepe thee, when thou sleepest else-where. Didst thou consider how Satan hath intangled thee, from which thou canst not be loosed but by the Word, thou woul∣dest not give sleepe to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eye∣lids, rov. 6. 4, 5. till (by heating the Word) thou went delivered as a Roe erse 6. from the hunter, and as a bird from the hand of the fowler. Goe to the Ant thou sluggard,
consider her wayes and bee wise. The sleepe of a labouring man Eccles. 5. 12. is sweet, whether hee eate little, or much, but such will not bee thine at Church. Lydia heard Act. 16. 14. attentively, and profited won∣derfully (for, hearing is the sense of learning) so if thou wouldst learne, thou must needs heare. Here especially let not thine eye bee satisfied with see∣ing, Eccles. 1. 8. nor thine eare with hearing. Yea (attention being the fore∣runner which prepareth the way to the Preacher, as the plough-share cutteth up the ground, that it may receive the seed) doe thou carefully attend unto the Word preached, nei∣ther let Satan who labours ei∣ther to stay thee from comming to Church, or comming from hearing, or hearing from mar∣king, or marking from liking, or liking from practising, pre∣vaile against thee either way. Resist him and hee will flie from Iam. 4. 7. Ionah 1. 5. thee. Jonah was fast asleepe
when the boat was ready to perish; assuredly now there is no time for us to sleepe, consi∣dering Gods judgements han∣ging over our heads. The Prophet said of Baal, unto  King 18. 17 Baals Priests by way of ironie, peradventure hee sleepeth. I would that touching us there were a peradventure, and not rather, that wee doe indeed Turkish. hist. ag. 654. He was mur∣hered slee∣ing, because Solyman  whilst he as in fa∣our) had worne to im, that hee ould never ill him hilst hee li∣ed, whom w being a∣epe he did pute as ad, and so  used him to e murthe∣d. sleepe at Church; and (as Baal) doe not heare at all. Abraham the Turkish Basha would not have so carelesly laid himselfe downe to slumber, if hee had knowne that then the angry Sultan would inflict on him the fury of his wrath to his destruction; and thou wouldst not at Church, if thou didst conceive that the Lord would then cut thee off by his destroy∣ing angell. What meanes doth not the Lord use to awake us; mercies, judgements, promi∣ses, and what not? Oh that some of them, or all of them
would awake us throughly! Thou hast heretofore slept at Church, but haply (as Samp∣son forgot belike, that the Phi∣listins Iudg. 16. 19. had once and againe bound him, whilst hee was asleepe, and so still ventured on Dalilah to his destruction) thou hast not taken notice of the hurt which hath come through the same. Hadst thou remembred it, thou wouldst bee more vigilant, whereunto also, if thou wouldst consider thine heavy constitution and drowsie disposition, thou couldst not but be stirred up. The Disci∣ples said of Lazarus, If hee Ioh. 11. 12. sleepe, hee shall doe well. But contrarily, if thou sleepest at Church, thou shalt doe ill. Christ would awake thee, Christ calleth upon thee, doe thou therefore awake and heare, lest as unto his Disciples, hee say unto thee in justice, Sleepe on now. There is that Eccles. 8. 16. neither day nor night seeth
sleepe with his eyes, saith the Preacher; So let it, so may it bee said of thee, whilst thou art at Church, The Spirit truly Mar. 14. 38. is ready, but the flesh is weake, watch yee therefore and pray, lest yee enter into temptation; And what I say unto you, I say unto all, in one word Mar. 13. 37. of our Saviour; Watch. FINIS.
