B2003 R2224 12015050 52508
Lives of the ROMAN EMPERORS From Suetonius to the Fall of the Empire London Printed for Charles Harper at the Flower de luce over against St. Dunstans Church in Fleet street. 1698. engraved title page
THE LIVES OF THE Roman Emperors FROM DOMITIAN where Suetonius ends, to Constantine the Great. Containing Those of NERVA and TRAJAN from Dion Cassius: A Translation of the six writers of the Augustéan History, And Those of DIOCLESIAN, and His Associates, from Eusebius and Others. With the Heads of the Emperors in Copper Plates, AND A Chronology Running through the whole Time, being the Space of two hundred and ten Years. Dedicated to His Most Sacred Majesty. By JOHN BERNARD, A. M. In Two Volumes. London: Printed for Charles Harper, at the Flower de Luce over against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. 1693.
TO THE KING. May it Please Your Most Excellent Majesty; THESE Histories, Now first Published in the English Language, do most Hum∣bly beg to Offer themselves to the Royal Patronage of Your Majesty; whereunto they are Encouraged by
this; that in the Originals, to which there are Prefixed the Im∣perial Names of Constantine the Great and Dioclesian, They have been an∣tiently Consecrated unto Princes, the most Glorious, and the most In∣vincible, Then, on Earth. Your Majesty is the Constantine of This Age; and by as Great a Hand, and as Peculiar a Happiness, and with as Immortal Glory, hath Re∣scued the Liberties of all Europe; and more especially, the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of this Church and Nation, as that Emperor did the Primitive Christians from the Powers of Paganism. Nor could the Potentates, whose Lives are here Represented, find any where a more Illustrious Patron, and a Better Judge of their Great
Actions, than Your Majesty. Had Your Majesty swayed the British Scepter in those days, Hadrian and Severus had visited, as they Then did, Your Coasts; but not to pre∣tend to Conquests, but to Adore You. Happy I! That I have this Op∣portunity of Presenting, with all Humility, a small Oblation to Your Majesty, as a Mark of my entire Fi∣delity and Affection to Your most Sacred Person and Government. The God of Arms hath Miraculously Acted for you against Your Ene∣mies. And may He be pleased to Grant, that Your Majesty, sup∣ported ever by His Hand, may long Continue to Adorn, as You do, the Gloriousest Crown, joyn∣ed with the best Church, in the World, by a Reign, which is so
Infinitely Worthy of the One and the Other. I am, with the most Profound Veneration, SIR, Your MAJESTY'S Most Humble, Most obedient Servant, and Most Faithful Subject, John Bernard.
THE PREFACE. I Hope, it will appear, that there are many things in these Lives of that great Moment, and which are no where else in the World to be found, that This Publication of them will not be unacceptable to the In∣genuous Reader. They are the most Authen∣tick accounts of the Princes of whom they speak, that are Extant to us at this day. I had almost said, they are the very only Histories which we have of them. For Victor and Eutropius give us no Better than a few Sketches upon them. Herodian begins a great deal too late, and ends a great deal too soon for the Reigns of many of these Princes; and Dion Cassius Concludes his History with his own Consulship under Alexander Severus. Neither is Herodian. in what he says, much less the Imperfect Part of Dion Cassius, so Particular and
of that Latitude, as the Method is, that is taken by these Historians: and therefore whoever would inform himself, or the world, of the Lives and Actions of these Princes, he Unavoidably comes hither for his Materi∣als; and all that any of the Moderns have done, or can do, upon the same Subject, is, to gather from this Stock, and Glean from this Harvest. This I presume is enough for me to say, to represent at once the Authority, and the Value of the Augustéan Historians. They were Persons, who were Employed upon what they did by the Command of the Emperors, to whom they Dedicate; and I take that to be a very good reason to think, that they took all the care they could of their Per∣formance, and that they had the Reputation in their own Age of being None of the worst Hands. Yet it is very certain, that the Originals are strangely Coarse, and wonderfully Rug∣ged. The Learned Salmasius, Casaubon, and Gruterus, but especially the two first, have bestowed incredible Pains upon them, to make them intelligible. The Text, and the Manuscripts out of which the Text hath been Printed, are all so very Vitious. But there is no Necessity, that I should Pub∣lish
here, all that I have observed as to those Matters. I must confess, it hath been a Work of no small difficulty to me to Translate them. So obscure and dark as they are in their own Language, it was almost im∣possible to make them shine in another. But yet when I observed, how very much these Lives have been long wanting to the Pub∣lick, and no Collections I thought out of them could be so satisfactory, nor comparable with the Original; I was pleased, that I had chose the Part that would be the most beneficial to the Reader, although at the same time it was the most painful to me. In what manner I have acquitted my self, I must leave it to his Candor, and to his Goodness to determine. I have endeavoured to make both the Language and the Story so Easie and so Natural, by the Liberty that I take, and which I think is no more than just, that whilst they are in the Original some of the difficultest Books in the World, he that Runs may Read them here, and there is no need of the least Notes to Explain any thing. I have for the most part given to Places the Modern Names, under which they are now known to us: except when it is inconsistent with the Modern Geography so to do, or when they are such Places, as have been long
Extinct, and we have no modern Names for them. Nor is the Reader to be surprised, if he should see the City of Byzantium called Con∣stantinople, even before Constantine. This is a Solecism in point of time. But I stand not upon that, when I consider; that howsoever my Authors writ to the Ages long since past, yet I do translate them to my own. There is a Question amongst the Criticks, but of not much more moment, than generally the Questions of those Gentlemen are; whether the several Persons, to whose Names these Lives are attributed as the Authors, were really the Authors of them or not; and whether Aelius Spartian and Aelius Lampridius be not the same Person under three Names; because Sal∣masius says, that in the Palatine Manuscript, all the Lives of the first Volume, contrary to the Example of other Manuscripts, and to the received Opinion, are attributed to the Name of Spartianus. Now, as to this, I need say no more, than that I cannot think, that Spartia∣nus was the Author of all the first Volume, for this Reason; because the same Person would ne∣ver have made so many Repetitions: And so it seems the most probable to me to be, that each Part was written by the Hand that it pretends to; but yet all, or however, most of them, writ∣ten by a common Consent, and Undertaking of the Authors, one amongst another.
One thing there is, wherein I crave the Li∣berty farther to speak my Opinion, as to the Praise of these Authors. The Acts which they have faithfully extracted out of the Journal of the Senate, and out of the Ulpian Library; the Bitter Exclamations of the Senate against the Memories of their evil Princes, and their Applauses of their good Ones; the Letters and Speeches which are Here, not as in other Historians invented, but all true Ori∣ginals; These I say, I think, are such Beauties, as are not to be parallell'd out of the best of the Antients, that have ever writ the Roman Hi∣story. The Lives of Nerva and Trajan, I have translated from the Original Greek of Dion Cassius: He being the only Historian of the Antients, that are now extant, that hath them. And it was necessary that those Two Lives should be premised to the rest, to make the Line of the Roman Emperors perfect, from the end of Suetonius. Where the Augustéan Historians have themselves ended, I have been obliged to adjoyn a few Collections of my own, for the Lives of Dioclesian, Maximian, Constantius and Galerius: Because we have no antient Origi∣nals left us of those Emperors; and to end with Carinus, it was thought improper, it
being no period; whereas the Addition of those Four, after him, brings down the Account en∣tirely unto Constantine the Great. To Regulate the better the whole, I have added a Chronology for the satisfaction of any who shall be pleased to turn to it. The Extract out of the Learned Vossius, which follows, prevents me in the rest, that I might have to offer; it was done to my hand, by an ingenious Gentleman. I shall only add, that after I had entirely finished this Translation, I received a French one, made about thirty Years ago by the Abbé de Villeloin, a great Writer, who dedicates it to the French King; and, I ob∣serve, takes the Liberty to say, that it is the Tenth Book which he hath had the Honour to dedicate to him. It begins but with Ha∣drian, and ends with Carinus. I perused it, and compared Mine with it; and I shall be glad, if this may be something the better for that Labour. These Historians have not affected to be eloquent, but they may the more be depended upon for the Truth.
THE LIVES OF THE Roman Emperors FROM DOMITIAN where SUETONIUS ends, TO CONSTANTINE the Great. VOL. I.
THE Lives in Vol. I. COcceius Nerva, Trajan. By Dio Cassius. Hadrian, Aelius Verus Caesar. By Aelius Spartianus. Antoninus Pius, Marcus Antoninus, Verus. By Jul. Capitolinus. Avidius Cassius, By Volcatius Gallicanus. Commodus, By Aelius Lampridius. Pertinax, By Julius Capitolinus. Didius Julianus, Severus, Pescennius Niger. By Aelius Spartianus. Clodius Albinus, By Julius Capitolinus. Caracalla, Geta, By Aelius Spartianus. Opilius Macrinus, By Julius Capitolinus. Alexander Severus, Diadumenus, Heliogabalus. By Aelius Lampridius.
IMP. NERVA CAES. AVG. GERM. P. M. TR. P.P.P. portrait of Cocceius Nerva IMP. CAES. NERVA. TRAIAN. AVG. GRM. P. M. portrait of Trajan IMP. CAESAR TRAIANVS HADRIANVS AVG portrait of Hadrian ANTONINVS AVG. PIVS P. P. TR. P. II. portrait of Antoninus Pius IMP. CAES. M. AVREL. ANTONINVS AVG. P. M. portrait of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus L AVR. VERVS AVG. ARM. PARTHICVS. MAX portrait of Lucius Verus P: 1 Vol. 1.
THEA. Christi XCVII. Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR COCCEIƲS NERVA. BY DIO CASSIUS: Rom: Hist. Lib. 68. VOL. I. AFTER the Death of Domitian, the Senate set up Cocceius Nerva to suc∣ceed upon the Throne of the Em∣pire of Rome. The Statues of Domitian which were of Sil∣ver,Domiti∣an's Sta∣tues de∣molish'd. and others which were of Gold, as he had
many of both, were out of hatred to his Me∣mory melted down: A great quantity of Mo∣ney was made of them, and the many trium∣phal Arches were destroyed that had been erected to his Glory. Nerva remitted the Persecution which wasPersecuti∣on of the Christians remitted. raised against the Christians by Domitian, and pardon'd such as stood Condemned, and re∣called home others that were fled. He put to Death all the Slaves and Servants, who had taken the Advantage of that Reign, by In∣forming, to seek the Lives of their Masters. He ordered, that that Rank of People should not be heard in any Accusation against their Masters at all. He ordered, that none should be Prosecuted for being either of the Reli∣gion of the Christians, or that of the Jews. But yet as he was a Prince who was slack in his Government, many Persons were not∣withstanding upon the Accusations of Syco∣phants condemned, and particularly Suras a Philosopher, was one of this number. In fine, the Correction which he took of the ill Ministers of the last Reign, and the Liberties which he gave in his own, were an occasion that the Mouths of all the People were opened against one another, till Rome was in a Mutiny; hereupon Tirenta the Con∣sul said, It is ill when a Prince ties up the People so, that there is no Liberty of any thing for any one; but yet a Liberty for every thing for every one is worse than none. Nerva was made sen∣sible of it, and gave Orders for the time to come, to redress it.
He was Old when he came to the Empire, and very weak and infirm. His Stomach sel∣dom retain'd what he eat. He allowed noModera∣tion of Nerva. Statues of him to be set up either in Silver or Gold. All the Goods about the Court, belong∣ing to such as had been injured by Domitian, he restored to the Owners. He gave Six Hun∣dred Sestertiums to be laid out upon a Purchase of Land to be divided amongst the Poor of Rome, and he appointed some of the Senators to buy it, and to make the Distribution. His Coffers being empty, he sold a great many rich Robes, and Plate, and Furniture both of what was his own before his elevation, and of the Furniture Royal, several Estates also, and Houses, and in general, all things, except the Necessaries that he could not be without. He was not difficult in the Prices for which he sold them. He did a kindness to many in the Peny-worths that he gave them. He took away divers Sacrifices, Races of the Cirque, and other publick Shews to save Char∣ges, and retrench his Expences as much as he could. He assured the Senate upon his Oath, That he never would be that Prince who should spill the Blood of any Senator. Which Oath he kept, notwithstanding the Conspiracy afterwards form'd against him, which might well have provoked him to other Sentiments. He did nothing without the Counsel of the Great Men. He made several Laws. Amongst the rest, he made a Law, To forbid the Gelding of any one for an Eunuch; and another, That no
body should Marry his Brother's, or his Sister's Daughter. He appointed Virginius Rufus to be the Con∣sulMakes Viginius his Col∣league. in conjunction with himself, although Vir∣ginius Rufus was one, who when he com∣manded in Germany, and had overcome Vindex in the time of Nero, had been often importuned by the Army to take upon him the Empire, which he refused. In Honour whereof, it was written afterwards upon his Tomb when he died, That overthrowing Vindex, he had asser∣ted the Empire, not to himself, but to his Coun∣trey; whose Service, signifying, he had in∣tirely regarded without any Ambition in it of his own. Nerva comported himself in his Reign in that manner, that he sometime said, He had done nothing to make him think, but that he could resign the Empire, and lead a private Life again in Safety. Calphurnius Crassus of the famous Family of the Crassi, had with some others confederatedConspira∣cy against him. in a Plot against him, which he was made acquainted with, to them unknown. He ob∣served them, and placed them by his own Per∣son at a Shew of the Combats of the Gla∣diators in the Cirque; where he took up the Weapons, as if it were only to see if they were sharp, as is usual, and then he gave them out of his Hand into the Hands of the Conspi∣rators. What think you, says he, will not these do? Are they not sharp enough? He intended this as a secret Reflection to them of his knowledge of that Design of theirs, and at
the same time he seemed to shew such a Ne∣glect of his Life, as if he did not care tho' they killed him upon the place. The Captain of the Guards under him was Casperius Aelianus, who was the same before under Domitian. This Officer set the Soldiers against Nerva, and work'd them to a heighth, that they demanded the Heads of several that were about his Person, to which Nerva opposed himself so, that stripping bare his Bosom, and offering it bare to them in a Passion, says he, Take my Life, not theirs. However, this did not save them, for as many as Casperius Aelianus had mark'd out, fell a Sa∣crifice to the Pleasure of the Guards. The Age of Nerva was one thing which lost him much Respect. After this Action of the Guards, he went to the Capitol, and de∣claredHe adopts Trajan. his Adoption of Marcus Ulpius Trajan with a loud Voice thus, Together with my hearty Wishes for the Prospe∣rity of the Senate and People of Rome, and that what I do may be Happy to them and my self; I make Marcus Ulpius Trajan my Son. Then he created him in the Senate his Cae∣sar, which is the Title of a Person when he is chosen to succeed in the Empire; and having done this, he wrote to Trajan, who at that time commanded in Germany, with his own Hand, amongst other things a Greek Verse out of Homer, .
by which he seemed to signifie, that he left it to him to do him Justice, and to revenge him of that Mutiny of the Guards. Thus Trajan was appointed to succeed to the Empire, even in preference to Nerva's own Relations; whereof there were some whom he might have so honoured, if he had not been a Man who regarded the Good of the Publick above the Consideration of his Blood. Nor did it incline him the less to what he did, to know, that Trajan was a Spaniard, neither an Italian, nor of Italian born Parents; and that no Alien, as he was, had ever possessed the Roman Empire before. For he considered, That it was the Worth and not the Countrey of any one that was the thing, which he ought to respect. After which Nerva died, having Reigned one Year, four Months, and nine Days: And lived sixtyHis Death. five Years, ten Months, and ten Days. Dio Cassius, Lib. 67. AS Nerva was a Person of very great Worth and Honour, he was offered the Empire before Domitian was killed, by the same Party, who to save their Lives, because they found that they were privately mark'd out for the Slaughter by Domitian, made them∣selves the Masters of the Life of that Prince. He was also as much under Danger from that Prince, as they, which made him the more easy to be persuaded to accept their Offer, and to run their hazards. For the Astrologers,
with whom Domitian had advised about the Nativities of Great Men, had accused Nerva as one that was to be suspected of having an Eye upon the Empire. And as Domitian put several upon that account to Death, even of Men who perhaps never flattered themselves with those hopes, so he had put to Death Nerva, if it had not been for a kinder Astro∣loger than the rest, who to save him, said, That it was good to let him alone, in a few days he would die of himself. That which above all things deserves to beProclus his Pro∣gnostica∣tion. admired, is, one Larginus Proclus had said pub∣lickly in Germany, that upon a certain a day, which he named, Domitian should die; for which the Governour of the Province sent him up to Rome, where he was brought be∣fore Domitian, and still he continued to say the same thing. He was condemned for't, and to be executed the day after that Domitian had out-lived the Danger; but Domitian was killed upon that very day, and Larginus Proclus esca∣ped, and received a Reward from Nerva of four thousand Crowns. Aur. Vict. Epitome. NERVA was born at the City of Narni, which is under the States of the Church in Italy. Presently after he had accepted the Empire, there was a rumour, that Domitian was not killed, but living, and was coming to him, which put him into that Fright, that he changed colour, was struck Dumb, and could
scarce stand upon his Feet, till he was assured of the contrary again, and received a Confir∣mation of the Death of Domitian. All the Punishment that he took of the Con∣spirator Calphurnius Crassus was, he banish'd him and his Wife to Taranto in Naples, for which the Senate blamed his Clemency. When the Guards demanded the Heads of those who were so dear to him about his Per∣son, the Passion which he was in was so great, that it cast him into a Vomiting and Loosness; they were dear to him for this reason, because as they were those who had taken off Domitian, so they were the Authors of the Election of himself to the Empire. His Body was interred in the Sepulchre of Augustus.
THEA. Christi XCIX. Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Marcus Ulpius Trajan. BY DIO CASSIUS: Rom. Hist. Lib. 68. TRAJAN, before he was Empe∣ror had a Dream, which seemed to tell him, that the Senate of Rome had Chose him, and Seal'd him, as it were for their own. A Person in the like Dress andTrajan's Dream. Form of one, that in Picture the Senate is represented by, that is, in a Robe of State guarded with purple, a Vest purled with large
Knaps of purple, a Crown upon his Head, a little elderly, came to him, he dream'd, and with a Seal which he had in a Ring, sealed him now on the right and now on the left Breast. He wrote to the Senate after he was de∣clared Emperor, several things with his own Hand, and amongst the rest, he assured them of this; That the Blood of no Man, who was an honest Man, should ever be spilt by him, neither should he be touch'd in his Fortunes or Honour. He assured them of this upon his Oath, and not only then, but he repeated the same to them at other times. He sent for Aelianus Casperius, together withHe puni∣shes the old Muti∣neers. such of the Soldiers of the Guards, as had mu∣tined against Nerva, as though it were upon some Business to employ them. But he did not suffer their Crime and the Murders which they had committed to pass unpunished, for he put them to Death. When he came to Rome he altered seve∣ral things for the greater Good of the Pub∣lick, and in the Favour of Persons who had deserved well. He shewed himself particular∣ly careful of the Cities of Italy. He settled Alms and Pensions towards the Maintenance of Children of poor Families, and did a great deal of Good of that nature. Plotina his Empress, at her first entranceHis Em∣press. into the Imperial Palace at Rome, turned her∣self upon the Steps to the People and said, I go in here the same as I would wish my self to come out again; and through her whole Reign
she preserved her esteem with a Conduct which was without Reproach. After some stay at Rome, Trajan undertook an Expedition against the People of Dacia; unto which he was provoked by the Proceed∣ings of that People who had augmented their Forces, and were become insolent; the Mo∣ney besides which was paid to them every Year, and with which the Romans bought their Obedience, was a Burther, that Trajan was wil∣ling to throw off. Decebalus the King of Dacia was sufficient∣lyThe Daci∣an War. apprehensive of a War made upon him under the Conduct of a Prince so formidable. He was sensible that he had another Force, and another Person to deal with, than when he had overthrown Domitian. For Trajan was a Prince with whom the Roman State intirely accorded. A Prince that excelled in Justice,Character of Trajan. Gallantry and Integrity of Life: Strong; in Body: In the Forty second Year of his Age when he began his Reign: In the full Ma∣turity of his Mind: Past the Rashness of Youth, and not yet arrived to any thing of the feebleness of old Age. He was one, who envied no Man, and disobliged no Man. All such as he found were really deserving, he esteemed and preferred. The Estates of Men, no less than their Lives, remained un∣touch'd by him. If he spent much Money upon his Wars, he spent much also to adorn the Times of Peace. This is seen in the Roads, Ports, and publick Edifices which are his, and which are great and necessary Works. As he
was by Nature of a Temper to appear in what he did, Great and Magnanimous; he rebuilt the Cirque, which was decay'd, much larger than it was before, and more Beautiful. He wrote an Inscription upon it to signify, that heHis Inscri∣ption on the Cirque had done it so, to make it worthy to receive the People of Rome. He desired rather to be loved than Adored. He was affable to the People, and respectful to the Senate. All loved him. None dreaded him but the Enemy. He Hunt∣ed, he Feasted with his Ministers, Visited their Offices, Jested with them: Many times sate amongst them in the fourth Place; came to their Houses without a Guard, and made his Conversation pleasant. Tho' he was not one who was studied in all Parts of Learning, yet he acquitted himself in that respect very well; every thing he did was Excellent. I know that he was given to love Boys, and to Drink; and had he been guilty of any thing in either respect that is Base, he would have been to be blamed. But in Drinking he went not to excess, and as to his love of the Boys, he forced or injured no one. He loved War; yet when he had adjusted Affairs, and weakened the E∣nemy, and increased his Alliances, he was sa∣tisfied. No such thing ever befel him, as is commonly happens to others that command Armies; that is, for the Soldiers to Mutiny and be Insolent. This was a Happiness owing to the Excellency of his Conduct, and there∣fore if the King of Dacia feared him, it was not without reason.
As he was upon his March against the Ene∣my, and near the place where they lay, some body had pretended to cut upon a large Mush∣room, which was brought to him, with words in Latin, signifying, That others of his Allies, and particularly the Byrrhi, who bordered upon Dacia, advised him to make a Peace with the Enemy, and retire. But yet this did not hinder, butHe fights the Ene∣my. he began the Fight, in which many of the E∣nemy were killed, and many of his own Men were wounded; to bind up whose Wounds he did not spare to tear his own Cloaths into Rags for Binders to give them; and for others of his Men that were killed, he built an Al∣tar, and ordered that there should be Sacri∣fices every Year offered thereupon in their Honour. He pursued his Blow, directing his March over the Hills and Mountains from one to a∣nother, not without great danger, till he came up to the Capital City of Dacia, whilst Lucius employed the Enemy on another side, and killed and took great Numbers of them. Then Decebalus sent to Trajan to desire Peace, by some of his chief Officers, whoDecebalus desires Peace. coming into his Presence, laid down their Arms, and prostrated themselves upon the Ground before him, and said, That Decebalus did above all things covet the Honour to come and confer with him in Person, being ready on his Part to receive all his Commands. But if this was otherwise to be resolved on, he desired that some Persons might be sent to him with Powers to Treat a Peace. Suras, and Claudius Livianus,
the Captain of the Guards, were sent from Trajan upon this Subject; who were met by others on the side of Decebalus. But nothing being concluded, because Decebalus refused to appear, Trajan took his Castles, and therein his Arms, Artillery and Stores, together with a Roman Standard which had been lost for∣merly under Fuscus. A Sister of Decebalus fell at the same time a Prisoner into the Hands of Maximus; and a strong Town in the Coun∣try was taken by the same. All which coming upon the heels of one another, Decebalus re∣collected himself again, and intirely compliedDecebalus submits. with the Conditions that were offer'd him. He promised to deliver up his Arms, Artillery, the Artificers that made them, and the Deser∣ters that had run over to him: To dismantle his Fortresses, retire from the Land that he had taken from his Neighbours, and have the same Friends and Enemies with the People of Rome: To entertain no Deserters, and to take no Soldiers into his Service, out of Places in the Dominions of the Romans; because most of his best Men were such, as he had inticed into his Service from thence. All which he promised, against his Mind, and being conducted to an Interview with Trajan, he threw himself upon the Ground and adored him. He sent to the Senate of Rome his Em∣bassadors, to have the same Peace con∣firmed from them, that he had made with Trajan. The Embassadors were introduced into the Senate, where they laid down their Arms upon the Ground, and standing before
the Senate with their Hands within their Fin∣gers, as if they were Captives, they spoke in Terms of great Submission to the Senate, who ratified the Peace, and then they took up their Arms again. Warhel the Capital City of Dacia received a Garrison of the Ro∣mans, and the rest of the Countrey being served accordingly, Trajan returned back to Italy. He was received in Triumph, and the TitleTrajan's Triumph. of the Conquerour of Dacia was given him, and inserted into his Stile. The Combats of the Gladiators, in which he delighted, and the di∣versions of the Stage in which Pylades was one that gained much of his Favour; were cele∣brated for his Entertainment. Though he was a Military Prince, he took never the less Care of the Civil Policy, and minded the Affairs of Peace and Justice. In the Forum of Augustus, or in the Portico of Livia, or in other Places, he many times assisted in Person at the Causes which were pleaded there. In the mean time Decebalus could not per∣suadeDecebalus renews the War. himself to keep the Conditions of the Peace which he had made. He proceeded to raise Men, provide Arms, entertain Deserters, re-fortify his Castles, and invite the Nations that were his Neighbours to joyn with him, to whom he represented; That if he was for∣saken by them now, their own Ruine was the next thing to follow. It was easier, and the safest way for them, he said, to preserve their Liberties, by standing all by one another whilst
they might, for the Common Defence, than it would be to do this after Decebalus was ruined, which would open a Gap to the Enemy to devour them one by one. Pursuant to this, he began the War by falling upon such as had appear'd against him in the former War, and by possessing himself of a part of the Countrey of the Jazyges, which was upon the Danube towards Dacia. Hereupon the Senate declared Decebalus again an Enemy, and Trajan without com∣mitting the War to another, went in Person to reduce him a second time. He marched against him with an Army which Decebalus was in an ill Condition by fair Force to resist; but by Deceit and Treachery, he was within aTreachery of Deceba∣lus defeat∣ed. little of effecting that, that he could not by his Arms. He sent Persons under the no∣tion of Deserters into Moesia to assassine him, as Trajan was always easie of access; but then more particularly upon the Incidents of the War, any one was admitted to speak to him. That which disappointed this Design was, one of the Conspirators was taken up on suspi∣cion and put to the Torture, who confessed the whole Plot. There was a Commander of a Legion in the Roman Army of great Skill, and who hadLonginus trapan'd. often signalized himself in the Wars against Dacia, called Longinus; Decebalus found means by Treachery to get this Colonel into his hands, and then sent to Trajan to tell him, That upon Condition the Countrey as far as the Danube, might be restored to him, and
that Trajan allowed him for the Charges of the War, he courted his Friendship, and would re∣turn Longinus again in safety. To which Tra∣jan answered in a manner, that was to let him know, that he neither made a small, nor yet such a high Account of the Life of Longinus, as to buy it too dear. In the mean time, whilst Decebalus was resolving with himself what more to do, Longinus found means to procure a quantity of Poyson by the help of a Servant, and he took it in the night and died. Trajan built a Bridge over the Danube, forTrajan's Bridge o∣ver the Danube. which I know not how I can sufficiently ad∣mire him. The other Works of his are very Magnificent, but this is above them all. It is a Bridge of Nineteen Arches, all of square Stone; the Heighth one Hundred and Fifty Foot above the Foundation; the Breadth Sixty Foot, and the Distance between each Arch one Hun∣dred and Seventy Foot. How shall I admire the Charge that this cost, and which way also it was possible to Found it in a great River, and a difficult Water which hath an ozy Gra∣vel at the bottom, when in the mean time there was no turning the Stream aside into another Chanel? The River is in other places double and treble the breadth, that it is here where this Bridge covers it. Here it is at the straightest, and therefore so much the more fit place for a Bridge; but yet the Account that I have given, makes it a pretty broad Passage here also. But that which I would chiefly observe from the Breadth of the River
in this and in other places is, that the broader and the more spatious a Flood it is as it comes hither, and the broader and the greater Com∣pass that it challenges as it goes from hence, so much the deeper and the more rapid must it be where it is streightned in its Course; and this must make it the more difficult to cover it with a Bridge, where it is so deep and so rapid. Certainly the Greatness of the Soul of Trajan, shews it self in this Work; tho' it be of no use to us now, nor passable. The Peers are yet standing, which look as if they were only built to shew, That nothing is impossible to the Wit of Man. The reason of Trajan's Build∣ing this Bridge was, to pass his Forces with rea∣diness to the Succour of the Romans on the other side of the Danube, in case the Barba∣rians attack'd them at a time when the River was frozen up. Hadrian fearing on the con∣trary, that the Barbarians might sometime Force the Passage of this Bridge, and give themselves an easie descent by it into the Country of Moe∣sia, demolished it, and broke down the Ar∣ches. Trajan passing his Army over the Danube by this Bridge, made rather a safe than a quick War, and with time and difficulty fi∣nished the Conquest of the Kingdom of Dacia. He signalized his Conduct and his Gallan∣tryHis Per∣sonal Va∣lour. in many things himself. The Soldiers by his Example were encouraged to contemn Dan∣gers, and acquit themselves with Honour. A∣mongst the rest a Horseman who was very much wounded, was brought out of a Fight to
the Surgeon to be dress'd; but perceiving that his Life was desperate, and that his Wounds were uncurable, he quitted the Tent again before his Spirits failed him, and rejoyned the Battel, and died, fighting with great Bra∣very. In fine, Decebalus, after his Capital CityDecebalus kills him∣self. was lost, and his Country all taken, and him∣self in danger to be taken, killed himself. His Head was brought to Rome: Dacia was made a Province of the Empire, and Trajan planted it with Colonies of Romans. He had hid his Treasure in the Bed of the River Istrig, not far from Warhel. For he had made his Slaves turnHis hid∣den Trea∣sure. the Water aside another way, and into the Channel dig a Pit, in which he buried a great deal of Gold and Silver, and precious Things that could endure the Wet, which he covered with a heap of Stones and Earth, and then brought the River to run over them in its usual Course again. He hid his Robes and other things of that nature, in Caves of the Earth, by the Hands of the same Slaves, who when they had done their Work, were killed, be∣cause they should say nothing. But one Bi∣cilu, who was one of his Favourites, knowing the thing, and being taken Prisoner by Trajan, he discovered all to him, and the buried Treasure was brought to Light again. About this time Palmas the Governour of Syria reduced the Stony Arabia under the Obe∣dience of the Empire of Rome. After Trajan was returned to Rome, Em∣bassiesTrajan re∣turns to Rome. were sent to him from many Nations
of the Barbarians, and amongst the rest from the Indians. The Publick Games and Shews were Celebrated one hundred twenty and three days together: in which eleven thou∣sand Beasts of all sorts were killed, and ten thousand Gladiators diverted the People, spilling their Blood over the Fenns called Au∣ferte Palude in the Campagnia di Roma. He made Causeways, and built Houses upon the Roads, and built Bridges which were very Magnificent. He Called in, and Melted down all the Di∣minishedHis Friend Licinius Suras dies. Coin. He buried Licinius Suras, when he died, with a Publick Funeral, and set up his Statue: who had attain'd to be so Rich and so Great, as to Found at his own Expence a Publick School for the Plays and Exercises of the Romans. This Person, and Trajan, had such a Friendship, and such an In∣timacy in one another, that many times when the Enemies of Suras, who were such as en∣vyed him, had Accused him to Trajan, Tra∣jan went nevertheless to his House to Sup with him, Uninvited; and dismissing all his Guards, First he trusted himself to the Phy∣sician of Suras, to do something to his Eyes and Eyebrows; then he trusted himself to his Barber to shave him; For this was antiently the Custom, as of all other Romans, so of the Emperours: For Hadrian was the first Em∣peror that let his Beard grow unshaved. When this was done, he washed, and went to Sup∣per. The day after he said to those about him, who were always suggesting something
ill to him of Suras, If Suras had a mind to kill me, he would have done it Yesterday. This was a great thing in him, to trust his Person in the least with one, who was pursued with such Accusations. But yet it is more to be ad∣mired, how unalterably he preserved with him his Friendship, and how that nothing was able to make him believe that ever Suras would hurt him. When first he made him a Captain of the Guards, which is to be done by a Cere∣mony of delivering to him a Sword; he drew the Sword, and as he gave it, he said, Take this Sword to Use it for me, if my Reign de∣serve it; or otherwise, to Use it against me. He set up the Statues of Sossius, Palmas, and Celsus, who were three, that he had a Favour for before others. He referred the Conspi∣racies at any time against him, to the Cogni∣zance of the Senate, by whose Sentence the Offenders were Punished of which Number was Crassus. He built Libraries for Books. HeHis pub∣lic Works. set up in his own Forum, a vast Column, partly for a Tomb for himself, when he dyed, and partly for an Historical Monument of all his Exploits. All the Ground, on which that Forum stands, was before a Mountainous Earth, which he digged down as deep as his Column is high, and so built the Forum Level. After this, He began a War against the Ar∣menians and Parthians; pretending, it was, be∣cause the King of Armenia had received his Crown at the Hands of the King of Parthia, and not of him; but really it was out of a de∣sire of Glory.
When he came as far as to Athens on thisHis Par∣thian Ex∣pedition. Expedition, the Ambassadours of Chosroes the King of Parthia met him; who were sent to desire a Peace with him, and brought Presents to give him from their Master. For when Chosroes had received advice of the Preparati∣ons of Trajan, and that Trajan was resolved to second his Words with good Blows, the Fear, that he was in, obliged him to abate of his Heighth, and to send to beg, That he might not be troubled with a War: For he hum∣bly asked the Crown of Armenia at his Hands, in the behalf of Parthamasiris, his Nephew, the Son of Pacorus, the late King of Armenia; Exedreas, having, as being neither agreeable to the Romans nor the Parthians, Abdicated, he said, the Crown again. Trajan refused to Ac∣cept their Presents, and returned no other Answer; than that a Man's friendship is to be proved by Actions, and not Words; and that when he came into Syria, he should do all things that were fitting. Persisting in which Opi∣nion, he took his way through the Lesser Asia, Cilicia, and the rest of the Provinces, and so came to the City of Seleucia, and from thence to Antioch in Syria. As he was at Antioch, Abgarus the King ofCourted by the Eastern Kings. the Osrhoeni in Mesopotamia sent him Presents, and Messages of Friendship. But being e∣qually in fear of the Romans and the Parthi∣ans, and desiring to please both Sides, he de∣clined for that reason the waiting upon him in person. Others of the Kings and Governours of the Countries, where he came, met him,
brought him Presents, and amongst the rest, they Presented him with a Horse, that was taught to Adore; kneeling upon his Fore∣feet, and bowing his Head to the Ground, as Trajan stood before him. He accepted all their Presents. But the behaviour of Parthamasiris upon thisBehavi∣our of Par∣thamasiris. Conjuncture, who had taken upon him the Crown of Armenia, was altogether a piece of Rashness. First, he wrote a Letter to Trajan, in which he gave himself the Name of King of Armenia: and receiving no Answer, He writ another, in which he omitted that Name, and desired that Marcus Junius the Governour of Cappadocia might be sent to him, as if he intended to mediate something by him. Tra∣jan sent to him, the Son of that Junius. In the mean time Trajan march'd to the City of Schemsat in Comagena in Syria, and took it with∣out a Blow. Then he came to Satala, which was the Seat of Anchiolus, the King of the Heniochi, and the Macheloni. Him he obliged so much, as to make him a Present. Then he came to the City of Elegia in Armenia, where Parthamasiris met him, and was re∣ceived; but the manner thus. Trajan sate, as in a Council of War, in theHis Ap∣pearance. before Trajan. Camp. After Parthamasiris had saluted him, He took the Crown, with which he came, off of his Head, and prostrated it at the Feet of Trajan, and stood silent; expecting when Tra∣jan would return to him the Crown again. The Soldiers seeing this, set up an Huzza, and Congratulated Trajan, as is usual, after a Vi∣ctory:
For they cryed, This was a Victory without a Battel, an unbloody Victory; to see a King of the House of the Arsacidae, the Son of Pacorus, and the Nephew of Chosroes King of Parthia, stand before Trajan like a Captive with∣out a Crown. Parthamasiris amazed at the Noise, and thinking that it was designed for an Affront to him, and to his ruin, turned himself about in a Passion to be gone. But as he was so well surrounded that he could not, he desired, Not to be obliged to speak, what he had to say, in that Crowd. So he was taken into the Tent of Trajan, to whom there he offered the Propositions that he had to make; but Trajan was not pleased to consent to them. Then he threw himself in a Passion out of the Tent, and was retiring through the Camp; when Trajan sent for him back again, and in the Council of War, where he had received him at first, he desired him to speak what he had to say Publickly, in the hearing of the Company; because Persons, who were igno∣rant of what had passed betwixt them in Pri∣vate, should not suggest false Accounts of it, and misrepresent it to the World. Hearing this, Parthamasiris could not contain himself longer; but with a great Courage, amongst other things, said, That he neither had been Conquered, nor taken Prisoner. He came thitherHis Speech in the Coun∣cil of War. voluntarily, in confidence that no Injury would have been offered to him, and that he should re∣ceive his Kingdom of Trajan, as Tiridates did of Nero. Trajan answered him, what he saw fitting, and withal told him; That Armenia
should be no bodies Kingdom. It belonged to the Romans, and should receive a Roman Governour. As for himself, he gave him the liberty to go where he pleased. So he sent Parthamasiris,He is dis∣mist. together with the Parthians that came with him, out of the Country under a Guard, that he should speak with no one, nor attempt no Novelties; but all the Armenians that came with him he ordered to abide in their Proper Dwellings, as being now his own Subjects. Trajan secured the Country with conveni∣ent Garrisons, and came from thence to the City of Rhoa in Mesopotamia, where he sawTrajan's Congress with Ab∣garus. King Abgarus, whose Seat was there. Ab∣garus had before sent Presents and Persons to him often, to Complement him: but some∣times for one, sometimes for another reason that he pretended, he had not as yet waited upon him himself, as neither had Manos the Governour of the Arabia next adjoyning, nor Sporaces the Governour of Arthemisia in Me∣sopotamia. Now the Son of Abgarus, Arban∣des, was a handsom charming Youth, whom Trajan had seen, and could not choose but love for his beauty. By the persuasion of this Son, and partly by the fear which Abgarus had of the presence of Trajan, Abgarus met him at his coming to Rhoa, and excusing him∣self to him, Trajan received him very well, and admitted him to his Friendship. His handsome Son was indeed Apology enough for him. He entertain'd Trajan at a Banquet, in which he brought in his Son to dance be∣fore him after the Barbarian Mode.
The Senate of Rome, among other thingsA new Title de∣creed him. which they decreed in the honour of these Successes of their Prince, gave him the Title of Optimus, or the Best of Princes. He always marched on foot at the Head of all his Army; whom against every Expedition he Review'd and Furnished; and sometimes marched them in one manner, sometimes another. If they crossed the Rivers on Foot, so did he: some∣times he told them a piece of false News, and acted the part of a Spy amongst them, to make them keep themselves the more carefully to their Duty, and to be ready and intrepid against every thing. He took the Cities of Nisibis: and Ecbatana, from the Parthians, upon which he was Saluted by the Style of Conquerour of the Parthians by the Army. But in none of all the Titles, that he acquired, did he delight so much as in that of the Best of Princes: because this was a commendation rather of his own Nature and Virtues, than of his Arms. Whilst he Wintered at the City of AntiochA great Earth∣quake. in Syria, a dreadful Earthquake happened, which did a great deal of mischief to many Cities in that Country, but Antioch was in a more particular manner afflicted with it. There was at that time a great number of Soldiers, and an extraordinary Concourse of others from all parts in the place, either upon Business of Law, or upon Embassies, or Trade, or Cu∣riosity: whereby it was so, That there was no Nation, nor no Province but what had a share in the Calamity, and all the Roman World suffered in that one City. This Earthquake
was preceded by great Thunders, and unusual Winds: but yet no body suspected from thence the mischief which followed. First, a mightyFore-run∣ners thereof. bellowing Noise was heard on a sudden, from the Earth; then followed a Shock which was was so violent, that it made all the Earth Bounce and Swell. The Houses Danced: some immediately fell with the Toss, and broke into pieces; some reeled to and fro like a Ship in the Sea, and took a com∣pass on one side and the other, and then fell: And the noise of the cracking, and burst∣ing of the Timber, the Brick, and Stones to∣gether, was most dismal. A Dust was raised, that it was impossible to see any one, or speak, or be heard to speak. Many who were with∣out their Houses suffered. They were so tos∣sed up, and then down again, as in a Preci∣pice, and struck against one another: some were wounded, some killed. Trees were torn up from the Roots. But of the rest, who were overtaken within their Houses, an infinite number perished; a great many with the Houses falling upon their Heads; a great many were suffocated under the Ruins: Others, who were held under the Wood and Stones so, by any part of their Bodies, that they could not possibly recover themselves, were in the highest degree miserable: they could not live, and yet they could not soon expire. If, out of such an infinite number as were overtaken within their Houses, several escaped with their lives, yet they were generally hurt; their Legs broken, or their Arms, or their
Heads, or they vomited Blood. Pedo the Consul was one of these, who died soon af∣ter. In short, there was no figure of Misery and Destruction but what was to be seen a∣mongst these People. GOD shook the Earth for many Days and Nights together. The People were all in a Distraction, and withoutMiserable Effects of it. help to fly to. Whilst some were immedi∣ately killed, and buried under the Ruins, others were starved to death, who were pen∣ned up in any void Spaces left by the Tim∣ber, or betwixt Pillars, and in Vaults. After the Earthquake was ceased, a Person who had the Courage to go presently upon the Ruins, heard the Voice of a Woman crying. Nor was she alone: the sucking Infant was with her; and she had kept both her Child and herself alive, with her Milk. They were digged up and saved: and search was made for others. But they found no body more alive, besides one Child, which was hanging upon the Breasts of its Mother, and the Mo∣ther dead. When they took the Dead up out of the Ruins, it was so lamentable a sight, that the living had no Hearts to rejoyce so much as for their own safety; so great was the Calamity which then afflicted Antioch. Trajan escaped through a Window out of the House where he was, by the help of a Man who was extraordinarily Tall, and who came and carried him off, but not without some small Hurts. As the Earthquake continued several days, he kept himself all that time in the open Air, in the Cirque. The Moun∣tain
Lison was so shook, that the Top of it bowed and burst, and threatned to fall down upon the Town. Other Mountains fell, and great Waters started up where none was before, and Streams that had flown before, forsook their Course and vanished. The Spring being returned, Trajan carriedTrajan proceeds in his Ex∣pedition. his Arms into the Country of the Enemy. He furnish'd himself with Boats for a Bridge to transport his Forces over the River Tigris, from the Woods about the City of Nisibis; because the Country upon the Banks of that River affords no Timber for that purpose. The Boats were all brought from thence to the River upon Land-Carriages; being built in that manner, that they were to be taken asunder, and joyned again into a Bridge at Pleasure. Which was done; and the Bridge was laid over the Tigris at the Foot of the Mountain Cardynus; not without the great annoyance of the Enemy on the other side, who were Posted to oppose it. To give whom a Diversion, whilst the Bridge was fitting with all speed, as Trajan had Men and Boats in plenty, he Armed out some Boats with Archers and other Soldiers, and detached them against the Barbarians. He detached others to be moving up and down, as it were to try to Land in other places, which so distracted the Barbarians, and especially they were so surprized to see such a number of Shipping gotten together in a Country that is destitute of Wood, that they gave way, and the Ro∣man Army passed the River.
The Roman Army landed in the Country of Adiabene, which is a part of Assyria, and Assy∣ria was then under the Obedience of the King of Parthia. They took all Adiabene, and the Towns of Arbela and Gaugamela, where Alexander the Great did heretofore overthrow Darius. The Barbarians call it Atyria, instead of Assyria, changing the Letters ss into t. But as the Forces of the Parthians had been di∣minished in their Civil-Wars, and still they were at Variance with one another, there was such a scarcity of the Enemy to make Opposition to the March of the Romans, that they came up to the City of Babylon. Here Trajan beheld the Lake of Bitumen,He comes to Baby∣lon. with which the famous Walls of Babylon were built. It is a sort of a Slime so Clammy and so Strong, that when it is mixt with Brick and Pebbles, it makes a Wall that is stronger than any Stone, and Iron it self. He view'd the Mouth of it, from whence proceeds such a noxious Stench, that it kills all the Beasts, and all the Birds that are brought within its reach. And certainly did it arise much higher, to disperse it self far and wide in the Air, it would render the place Uninhabitable. But it Circulates within it self, and does not ex∣ceed its limits. I have seen such another Lake as this at the City of Hierapolis in the Lesser Asia, and I made an Experiment of it in Birds; my self being in an Upper Apartment, from whence I overlook'd it. For it is shut up in a sort of a Cistern, and above it is built a Con∣venience, where you look down and see the
fatal effects of this Stench in safety. It kills every thing, Living: Men only excepted, that have been Gelt. I do not understand the rea∣son of this. But I speak the things that I have seen, as I saw them, and the things that I have heard, as I heard them. Trajan was once designing to make a Cutt for the River Euphrates upon which Babylon stands, to fall into the Tigris; that passing his Vessels by that Cut, out of the First into the other River, he might give himself a Bridge to March his Army over the Tigris to the Siege of Ctesiphon in Assyria. But when he understood that the Bed of the Euphrates was much higher than the Bed of the Tigris, he forbore that design, lest the abundance of the Water running into the Lower Bed should ren∣der the Euphrates unnavigable. So he mount∣ed his Vessels upon Land-Carriages, and brought them to the Tigris over the little Streight of Land which is betwixt the two Ri∣vers; and having passed his Army, and taken the City of Ctesiphon from the Parthians, heCtesiphon taken. was Confirm'd in the Title of the Conquerour of the Parthians, and the Senate of Rome de∣creed, that he should enjoy what Triumphs, and what Festivals for the Honour of his Vi∣ctories, soever he pleased. After he had taken Ctesiphon, his CuriosityHis Expe∣dition to the Red Sea. led him to go on Board his Fleet, and Sail for the Red Sea; which is a Branch of the Indian Ocean, and called Erythraeum Mare, that is, the Red Sea, from a King of the Name of
Erythrus, who was sometime very Powerful upon it. He took in his way the Island of Messene, which is in the Tigris, the King whereof was Athambylus, without any difficul∣ty: only the Winter, the rapidity of the Tigris, and the Tides of the Ocean were something dangerous. The Town of Spasinum, belong∣ing to Athambylus, received him well. From thence he came upon the Ocean, where in∣forming himself in the Nature thereof, and discovering a Ship that was bound to India, he said, Was I Young, I would certainly make a Visit to the Indians. He enquired much about them, and their Actions, and admired the Happiness of Alexander, who had Conquered them, and who had gone so much further than he. He writ the same to the Senate; But yet at the same time he was not able, what he had already Conquered to keep. The Senate de∣creedHonour done to him by the Senate. several things in his Honour; and a∣mongst the rest, that in relation to as many Nations as he pleased, his Successes should be adorn'd with Triumphs. For they were more than were known to them, so much as by Name, as they continually understood by his Accounts. They set up in his Honor a Trium∣phal Arch in his own Forum, and the Citizens prepared themselves to go a great way to meet him, at his return to Rome. But he never came thither; nor was the End of his Acti∣ons suitable to his Beginnings, because what he had Conquered, he lost again.
In the time that he was Sailing for his Plea∣sure upon the Indian Ocean, all his ConquestsA general Revolt. were chang'd and revolted, and the Garrisons which he had left amongst them were either turned out or killed. It was nothing but the Fame of the Indian Ocean which had drawn him thither, together with his Honour for the Memory of Alexander the Great, to whom he had sometime sacrificed in the House, in which he dyed at Babylon. But as he met with nothing worthy of that Fame; Fables and Prospects of Ruins were his only Entertain∣ments. He was as yet on Board, when the News was brought to him of the revolt of his Con∣quests; against whom, he dispatched Lucius and Maximus. Maximus was deseated and killed. Lucius acquitted himself very well, and amongst other things recovered the City of Nisibis, Storm'd, Plundered, and Burnt the City of Rhoa, whilst Erycius Clarus, and Ju∣lius Alexander took and burnt the City of Se∣leucia. In the mean time, fearing lest the Parthians of Ctesiphon should attempt some∣thing, Trajan was willing to oblige them, by giving them, instead of a Roman Governour, a King of their own. He Assembled, whenTrajan gives a King to the Par∣thians. he came to Ctesiphon, all the Romans, and all the Parthians that were there into a large Plain; and raising himself upon a high Throne, and glorying in the great Actions that he had done, he appointed Parthamaspates King of the Parthians, and put the Crown upon him.
Then he came into Arabia, to ReduceExpediti∣on against the Haga∣rens. there the People called the Hagarens, who had also Revolted. Their Town is neither Great nor Rich; but the Country adjoyning to it is for the most part a Desart; without Water, which it seldom hath, and then it is naught; without Wood, and without Forage: all which make it impossible for a great number of Men to lye long before it, defended as it also is by the heats of the Sun, to which it is exposed. So it was neither taken by Trajan then, nor by Severus afterwards, though they both made Breaches in part of the Walls. Trajan disguised himself, and Headed a Body of Horse up to the Walls in Person; but his Horse returned in an ill Condition to the Camp, and himself escaped very narrowly: For the Barbarians believing it was he, by his Age and Presence, shot at him, and killed a Horseman that was next him. It Thundered and Lightened, Rainbows appeared in the Clouds, Storms of Hail and Wind fell upon the Romans, when they made their Attacks. The Flyes rendred their Victuals and their Drink nauseous. So Trajan raised the Siege, and fell sick not long after. About this time the Jews about Cyrene inJewish Barbari∣ty. Africa, Commanded by one Andrew, whom they had set up over them, committed great Slaughters upon both the Romans and Grecians, They Eat their Flesh, made themselves Gar∣lands of their Guts, washed themselves in their Blood, and Cloathed themselves in their Skins.
They sawed many in Two, from the Head, with Saws. They threw others to Wild Beasts. They forced others to fight till they kill'd one another. About two hundred and twenty thousand Persons were destroyed by this means. They did the like in Egypt, and in the Island of Cyprus, under the Command of Artemion; where two hundred and forty thou∣sand Persons more were destroy'd. For which reason, it is, that it is forbidden a Jew to set foot upon that Island; even though by Storm he is driven upon it, he is to be put to death. At length they were reduced under Obe∣dienceJews quell'd. again, as by others, so particularly by Lucius, who was sent against them by Trajan. Trajan was resolved to have carried the War anew into Mesopotamia, if his sickness, increasing upon him, had not obliged him to set Sail towards Italy, and to commit to Publius Aelius Hadrian the Command of the Army in Syria. And now all the Pains that had been taken, and all the Dangers which had been run by the Romans, in the Conquest of Ar∣menia, the greatest part of Mesopotamia, and the Parthians, became in vain: for the Par∣thians turn'd off King Parthamespates, of the appointment of Trajan, and betook them∣selves to be Governed by their own Mea∣sures. Trajan suspected, in his own mind, that he was poisoned: but others say that he had been used every year to void Blood downward, and
that this Evacuation had stopped; that he had a Dead Palsie upon him, and was insensible in a part of his Body, and that he was all over Dropsical. He came as far as to the Ci∣ty Iclenos, which is otherwise called TrajanopleDeath of Trajan. from him, in Cilicia, in the Lesser Asia, and there immediately dyed; having Reigned nineteen Years, six Months, and fifteen Days. Dio Cass. lib. 67. HE had been Consul in Conjunction with Acilius Glabrio, in the Reign of Domiti∣an, and then received some Omens of his fu∣ture Reign. Dio Cass. lib. 69. HE was a Native of the same Town in Spain with Hadrian, whose Guardi∣an he was, and to whom he married his Niece. He dyed without Children, and his Ashes were interred in the Column of his own Work. Eutrop. Cassiodor. & Victor. THE Town in Spain, at which Trajan was born, was Old Sevil in the Lower Andaluzia. He lived sixty three Years, nine Months, and four Days. He was Proclaim'd Emperor at Cologne in Germany. The Height
of his Column was one hundred and for∣ty, or one hundred forty and four Feet. The Younger Pliny, born at the City of Com in the Dutchy of Milan, who was a famous Orator and Historian, flourished in his time, who has left us a Panegyric on this Emperor, pronounc'd by him the first day of his Consulship.
THEA. Christi, CXVIII. Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Publius Aelius Hadrian. Written by AELIUS SPARTIANUS: And Addressed to the EMPEROR DIOCLESIAN. IF we take the Original of the EmperorHis Ex∣traction. Hadrian at the highest, it is to be derived from the Antient People of the Marca d' Ancona, and particularly from the Town of Adria in Italy, which was the Place which his Ancestors were of, before they removed into Spain; where, as himself says in the
Account which he writes of his own Life, they settled in Sevilla la Viegia, or Old Sevile, in the times of the Scipio's. His more imme∣diate Descent was from that Family in Spain. Aelius Hadrian Afer was his Father, who was Cousin-German to the Emperor Trajan. His Mother was Domitia Paulina, who was Origi∣nally of Cadiz. His Sister Paulina married Servianus. His Wife was Sabina, and his great Grand-father's Grand-father, Marullinus, was the first of the Family who was a Senator of the City of Rome. He was born at Rome up∣on the Nineth of the Calends of February, in the Year when Vespasian and Titus were the Consuls, which was then the Seventh time of the Consulship of the first, and the Fifth of that of the other. In the Tenth Year of his Age, he lost his Father, and received for his Guardians, his Kinsman, Ulpius Trajan, who had been then a Praetor, and afterwards arri∣ved to be Emperor, together with Caelius Ta∣tianus, a Roman Gentleman. In his Fifteenth Year after having finishedHis Stu∣dies. his Greek, unto which his Genius inclined him in that manner, that by some he was called by the Name of the Little Grecian; he went into Spain, where he entred immediately into the Army, and was eager of exercising himself in Hunting, almost to a Fault. Trajan re-called him out of that Country unto Rome again, where he lived with him as his Son; and it was not long before he was put into the Commission of the Decemviri. He was removed from thence to be the Tribune or Colonel of the Second Auxi∣liary
Legion. After that, he was translated in∣to the Lower Moesia, which was about the lat∣ter end of the Reign of Domitian. In Moesia, he was informed by an Astrologer of the samePresages concern∣ing him. thing, as to his future Succession to the Em∣pire, which he had heard, that his great Uncle Aelius Hadrian, who also was skill'd in the Doctrine of Nativities, had sometime before predicted concerning him. He was sent out of Moesia at the time that Trajan was adopted by Nerva, with the Congratulations of the Army to the Emperor, upon the Subject of that Adoption. Nerva translated him into the Upper Germany, from whence he hastned, upon the News of the Death of Nerva, to be the first who should bring it unto Trajan. AndHis Di∣ligence. altho' he was by Servianus, his Sister's Hus∣band, who had endeavoured to possess Trajan against him, by telling him of his Expences, and his Debts, not only a long time detain'd, but furnished also with a Carriage that broke by the way, on purpose to stop his haste: He nevertheless prosecuted his Journey after∣wards on Foot with that diligence, that he came up to Trajan before the Express, which the same Servianus dispatched upon the same occasion. And Trajan continued to love him, but yet he was not without those Enemies who represented him to that Prince, who was a Lover of Boys, to be as it were his Rival i that sort of Pleasure. And because he was solicitous in this Conjuncture, to know what the Inclination of Trajan towards him was, as to his Adopting him to succeed in the Em∣pire,
he consulted his Fortune by Lots, in which he was answered in certain Verses out of Virgil that favoured his desire. Others say, That he received a Lot of the same na∣ture out of the Verses of the Sibyls. But that which was a greater Presage to him still than all this, of the Empire unto which he should succeed, was, an Answer which he received from an Oracle of Jupiter Nicephorus, which Apollonius Syrus the Platonist hath set down in his Works. In fine, by the interposition of Suras in his Favour, he easily attained unto a higher Degree than ever of Favour with Trajan, whose Niece by his Sister's side, he married, which was a Match that was encouraged by Plotina, and consented unto by Trajan, as Marius Maximus says, at least in some mea∣sure. He was a Questor in the Year when TrajanHe is made Que∣stor. and Articuleius were the Consuls, which was then the Fourth time of the Consulship of Trajan. In this Office being to recite in the Senate, an Harangue made by the Emperor to them, and being laught at for his ill pronun∣ciation of it, he set himself upon the Study of the Latin in that manner, that he acquired himself at length the greatest Skill and Elo∣quence in that Language. After his Questor∣ship, he was made the Clerk to the Senate. Next he waited upon Trajan to the War against Dacia; at which time, how intimate he was with him, may be seen by this; that he says himself, That he indulged to Drinking out of Obe∣dience to the Pleasure and Methods of Trajan,
and this gained him yet greater Favours from him. He was made a Tribune of the People inAnd Tri∣bune. the Year of the Second Consulships of Candidus and Quadratus. In this Magistracy, it was an Omen (he says) to him of a perpetual Tribuni∣tian Power; that is, of the Crown, that in wearing the Paenulae, (a sort of Hanging-Coat) as the Tribunes of the People were used to do in time of Rain, but the Emperors of that Age never, that Garment had slipped off from him. In the second Expedition against Dacia, Trajan gave him the Command of the First Legion of the Name of Minervia, and took him along with him. He distinguish'd him∣self there by a great many fine Actions, in∣somuch that Trajan presented him with the same Diamond that himself had been before presented with by Nerva, which served far∣ther to raise his Hopes. He was a Praetor un∣der the second Consulships of Suranus and Ser∣vianus; at the same time he received from Trajan Forty Thousand Sesterces towards the Charges of the publick Games, with which he treated the People. After this, being made the Pro-Praetor of the Lower Pannonia, he brid∣led the Sarmatae, disciplined the Army, and restrained the Procurators of the Province from exceeding, as they did, the just Limits of their Power; for these Services he was made a Consul. In which Magistracy, as soon as itAnd Con∣sul. was understood from Suras, that he was to be adopted by Trajan, he was accordingly re∣spected by all, who desired to preserve the Favour of their Prince. After the Death of
Suras, his Interest with Trajan did still increase, because he succeeded into the Office of Suras, to write his Prince's Speeches, and his Letters as his Secretary; besides all which, he had the Favour of Plotina, by whose means he was appointed the Lieutenant of Syria, in the time of the Expedition against Parthia. The Persons with whom he at this time en∣tertainedHis Friend∣ships. a Friendship, were Sossius Pappus and Pletorius Nepos, of the Order of the Senators; and Tatianus, who was before his Guardian, and Martius Livianus Turbo, of that of the Gentlemen; Palmas and Celsus had been al∣ways his Enemies. But now those two being faln into Disgrace upon a Suspicion of a Design to usurp the Empire. This facilitated the Business of Hadrian's Adoption, so that be∣ing through the Favour of Plotina, created a Consul a second time, he indeed conceived within himself entire Assurances of that Hap∣piness. It was the Opinion of many, that he had to this end corrupted also the Servants of Trajan, and had made very much of the Boys who were Trajan's Paramours, and had fur∣nished them with Oyntments and Washes in the time that he was conversant about the Court. However that is, the Letters of hisHe is a∣dopted. Adoption came to him into Syria, whereof he then was Lieutenant, upon the Fifth of the Ides of August, which Day he therefore com∣manded to be celebrated for a Festival for the same. Upon the Third of the same Ides, he received the News of the Death of Trajan, he commanded that Day to be celebrated for the
Festival of his accession to the Empire. It had been many times before thought, that Trajan's Design was to have left Neratius Priscus, and not Hadrian his Successor; because many of his Friends had agreed with him in Priscus, to whom he sometimes also had said publick∣ly, If I die, I recommend the Empire to you. Others say, That Trajan sometime had it in his Thought to die after the Example of Alex∣ander of Macedonia, without appointing any certain Successor. Again, others tell us, That it was likewise in his Mind to have sent a Let∣ter to the Senate, to let them know, that if he died, they themselves should give a Prince to the Empire of Rome; adding, as from him, some Names only, out of which they were at their Liberty to chuse the Best. Neither do we want those who have pretended, that the Adoption of Hadrian was a Trick, wrought by the Power of Plotina, after Trajan was dead, by suppositing a Person to speak the Thing for Trajan, in a languishing Voice. However it was, Hadrian possessed himselfAnd pos∣sest of the Empire. of the Empire, and falling in immediately with the usual Methods of Business, he desired to secure and establish, as much as possible, the Peace of all Parts. In the mean time the Nations which Trajan had Conquered, had Re∣volted. The Moors were making Incursions upon the Frontier Provinces; the Sarmatae had declared Open War, the Britains could not be contained under the Roman Power, Egypt was disturbed with Seditions, and Lycia and Pala∣stine lifted up their Heads to a Rebellion.
Therefore as for all the Countries beyond the Euphrates and the Tigris, Hadrian even relin∣quished these by the Example as he said of Cato, who pronounced the Macedonians a Free People, because they would not be kept in subjection. And as he had observed, that Parthamaspates, the King of Parthia, of the Appointment of Trajan, was of no great Consideration amongst that People, he removed him from thence to be the King over some other Neighbouring Na∣tions. He began his Reign in Clemency,His Cle∣mency. whereunto he shew'd a great Regard by this Instance; that having in some of the first Days of it, had Notice given him by Tatianus, by Letters, of Three Persons, whom he advised him, that he should put them to Death; who were, Baebius Macer, the Governour of the City, in case he in the least opposed his Au∣thority; Laberius Maximus, then in Banish∣ment in an Island, because he was suspected to aspire at the Empire, and Frugi Crassus; yet nevertheless, he spared them all Three: For altho' the Governour of the Island where Crassus was, did execute him for an Escape which he would have made, with a Design of fomenting New Disorders, yet was that Ex∣ecution a thing that was done without Ha∣drian's Command. He doubled the usual Donative to the Soldiers, for a good Presage, to welcome in his Reign. He took away the Government of Mauritania from Lusius Quie∣tus nd dismiss'd him, because he was one wh was suspected to aim also at the Empire; and when Martius Turbo had finished the Re∣duction
of the Jews, he appointed him Go∣vernour of Mauritania, and to go and repress the Commotions which were there. He made a Journey out of Antioch to meet and receive with Respect the Ashes of Trajan, as they were upon the Road, under the Conduct of Tatianus, Plotina, and Mattidia. And having imbarked them in a Vessel for Rome, and being return∣ed again into Antioch, he constituted Catilius Severus Governour of Syria, and then came himself to Rome by the way of Illyricum. He first sent Letters which were very accu∣ratelyHonour done to Trajan. writ to the Senate, to desire, That they should make Trajan a God; to which the Senate agreed unanimously, and even voted a great many more Things of their own accord, to his Ho∣nour than what Hadrian had mentioned to them. At the same time, Writing to the Se∣nate, he asked their Pardon, That he had not submitted his Judgment to them in the Affair of his assuming the Empire, the Occasion whereof had been this, that he had been saluted Emperor by the Army in Haste, because the State could not be without a Head to it. The Senate voted him the same Triumph, which was to have been given unto Trajan. He refused it for himself, but accepted it for the Image of Trajan to be carried in a Triumphal Chariot, that that In∣comparable Emperor should not be without the Honor which he so well merited, no not though he was dead. The Title of Pater Pa∣triae, or Father of his Country, which was Twice offered him, he declined, because it had n late in the Reign of Augustus e'er this Title
had been assumed by that Prince. He remit∣ted to Italy all the Duties which they were to pay him upon his coming to the Crown, and abated the same to the Provinces, altho' it was very well known, that at the same time the Treasury was streightened for Money. Then receiving Advice of an Insurrection of the Sarmatae, and the Roxolani, he commanded his Troops into Moesia, and went thither in Per∣son after them. He preferred Martius Turbo, after he had administred the Government of Mauritania, to the Presidentship of Pannonia and Dacia. As to the Affair of the Roxolani, he composed that by a Treaty, and a Peace was established betwixt them and Hadrian. He had sometime designed to appoint Ni∣grinus to be his Successor in the Empire; but Nigrinus became guilty of a Conspiracy againstA Conspi∣racy a∣gainst him. the Life of Hadrian, which was to be exe∣cuted as Hadrian assisted at the Sacrifices: Lusius and many others were in the same Plot with him, which Hadrian escaping, here∣upon Palmas at Terracina, Celsus at Baiae, Ni∣grinus at Faenza, Lusius upon the Road, by the Order of the Senate, were all killed. And because these Executions might be a means of creating an ill Opinion of him in the Minds of the People, as if it had been, tho' really it was not, as he says, by his Will, but by the Will of the Senate, that Four Persons, all of Consular Dignity, were sacrificed so all toge∣ther: Hadrian came presently to Rome, com∣mitting Dacia unto the Government of Turbo, whom to add to his Authority, he had likewise
honoured with the Title of the Praefecture of Egypt: And at Rome he caressed the People to stifle the Apprehensions which were there of him, with a double Largess upon his arri∣val,His Boun∣ty. which was over and above a Bounty of three Pieces of Gold a head, which had been divided amongst them, in his absence before. He acquitted himself before all the Senate of the Fact that had passed; and as for his own part, he took his Oath, that he would never punish a Senator, otherwise than according to the very Sentence of the Senate. He proceed∣ed to ease the particular Towns and Magi∣strates of the Charge of the publick Post and Carriages, by ordering them to be maintained out of the Exchequer; in fine, to omit nothing to make himself to be esteemed, he forgave an infinite number of Debts, which were due to the Exchequer from private Persons in the City, and all over the Country; as also he re∣mitted the Arrears of great Sums which were due from the Provinces; the Bonds and Regi∣sters relating whereunto were all burnt in the Forum of Trajan, for a full Security to every one against those Claims. He suffered it not, that the Estates of Persons condemned, should be confiscated into his private Coffers, but or∣dered them all to be return'd into the publick Treasury. And as Trajan had begun to pro∣vide for the Support of the poor Infants of both Sexes, who were not by the Law to be admitted to the general Dole before such an Age, so Hadrian enlarged that Munificence, and made an Addition to their Pension. Unto
such of the Senators as were reduc'd, but had not consumed their Fortunes by their ill Lives and Debauchery▪ he set out Pensions suitable to their Quality, and suitable to the Number of the Children which they had; continuing the same to many to their Deaths. It was not only to his Favourites to whom he exten∣ded his Bounty, but to others he generously gave great Things, to enable them to acquit themselves in their Offices with Honour. To some necessitous Women he allowed Pensions towards their Maintenance. The Games of the Gladiators were exhibited Six Days toge∣ther, and a Thousand wild Beasts at his Charge were exposed to be hunted and taken upon the Anniversary of his Birth. He chose himself out of the principal Per∣sonsHis Pru∣dence and Modera∣tion. of the Senate, an Imperial Council. He refused to accept of any other of the Games of the Cirque, which were decreed in his Ho∣nour, than such as those which were cele∣brated upon his Birth-Day. He said many times, both in his Discourse, and to the Se∣nate, That his Government should be such, that the World should see, it was the Interest of the People which he minded, and not his own. As he was three times Consul himself, so he advanced se∣veral Thrice to that Dignity: And for the Honor of a Second Consulship, he bestowed that upon a multitude of Persons. The Third time that himself was Consul, he officiated it no longer than Four Months; but yet he of∣ten sat in Person in Judgment. He never was absent from the Senate, when he was either
in Town, or nigh the Town upon the Solemn Days of meeting. He carried the Honour ofHis Re∣spect for, the Senate. the Senate so high, and made such a Difficul∣ty of creating Senators, that when he created Tatianus, who was a Captain of the Guards, and had had all the Ornaments given him of a Consul; he told him, That he had nothing in his Power to confer upon him, that was a greater Honour. He did not give leave to those of the Order of the Knights and Gentlemen, to sit in Judgment either without, or with him, in a Cause which concerned the Life of a Sena∣tor; altho' until then, it had been the Custom, that when the Emperor takes the Cogni∣sance of a Cause in Person, he call'd not only the Senators, but the Roman Gentlemen unto his Assistance, and pronounced Sentence according to the Opinions of all together. In fine, he proceeded even to execrate those Princes who had had a lesser Consideration for the Senators than they ought. He retained so great a respect for Servianus, his Sister's Hus∣band, who had been Twice Consul before him, that he always went out of his Cham∣ber to meet him coming; and he created him a Consul the Third time, without his solicita∣tions for it; the Honour whereof was imper∣fect in nothing but this, that he did not take him to be his own Colleague in that Third Consulship. In the mean time, this is yet to be remem∣bredHis Im∣perfecti∣ons. of this Prince, that he abandoned a great many Provinces which had been by Trajan acquired to the Empire; and the Theatre
which had been built by Trajan in the Campus Martius, he destroyed, contrary to the desires of all the World. And certainly these things seemed to be so much the worse, as he knew very well himself that they were displeasing, and yet he pretended that in doing them, he accomplished the Orders which had been left him by Trajan. He was willing when he be∣came weary of the Power of Tatianus, the Captain of the Guards, who had been former∣ly his Tutor, to have had him murdered; but that which call'd him off from those Thoughts, was, he had already a great deal of ill will up∣on him, upon the occasion of the Murder of those Four Consular Persons before-mentioned, the Odium whereof he endeavoured to throw upon Tatianus. At length Tatianus, of his own accord laid down his Commission, which Ha∣drian conferred upon Turbo. Similes the other Captain of the Guards, laid down his, which Hadrian conferred upon Septimius Clarus. Never∣theless those two, Tatianus and Similes, were Per∣sons who very well might have deserved his ut∣most Favour. After this, he went a Progress intoHis Affa∣bility and Complai∣sance. Campania, where he endeavoured to oblige all Places into which he came, with the Kindnesses he did them, and the Largesses which he bestow∣ed amongst them; admitting every where the Gentlemen of Estates and Quality to the Ho∣nour of his Friendship. At Rome he repair'd of∣ten in Person into the Courts of the Praetors and the Consuls. He honoured his Ministers with his Company at their Houses. When they were Sick, he visited them Twice or Thrice a Day.
He visited some, when Sick, who were no more than Servants that he had manumit∣ted, Comforting them in their Infirmities, and Assisting them with his Counsels. He received his Friends to his Table, and was as Easy always with them, as if he was a private Man. The Honours which he bestowed up∣on his Mother-in-Law at her Death, were the greatest that were possible, in the Games of the Gladiators, which he exhibited, and in all other Rites, whereby he shewed his Duty to her. Then he went into Gallia, where he signa∣lizedHe goes into Gaul and Ger∣many. himself by his great Bounties, and his for∣wardness to Relieve all Persons that were in Necessity and Want. From thence he went into Germany, and tho' he was one who was a greater Lover of Peace than War, yet here he Exercised the Soldiers, as if he was imme∣diately making ready for a War. He incul∣cated to them the Precepts of Patience, toHis de∣meanor towards the Sol∣diery. teach them to be hardy, and to be able to suffer. He gave them in himself a Model of the Life of a Soldier, visited them in their Tents; Eat and Drank in Publick of the same Provision as they did, that is, Bacon, Cheese, and sower Wine mixt with Water, after the Ex∣amples of Scipio Aemilianus, Metellus, and his Father Trajan. Were his Commands harder upon them than ordinary, he gave them Mo∣ney, or preferred them for their Encourage∣ment. He revived as much as it was possi∣ble the antient Military Discipline, which through the Negligence of many Princes his
Predecessors, had been going to decay ever since the time of Augustus. He settled the Order of the Offices, and the Expences of the Army. He suffered no one to be absent from the Camp without a just Cause. The Tribunes of his Creation were such, as whose Merits re∣commended them to him, and not the Fa∣vour of the Soldiers. He excited all to do their Duty by the Example that he set in himself. He walked Twenty Miles together on Foot at the Head of them in his Arms. He put down the use of Arbors, shady Walks, Grot∣to's, and Bowers in the Camp. He was dres∣sed many times in a very ordinary Coat, with∣out any thing of Gold to his Belt, without Jewels to his Cloaths or Buckles, and the Hilt of his Sword scarce of Ivory. He visited the Soldiers when they were Sick in their little Huts. He mark'd out the Camps. He made none a Centurion, who was not a strong Man, and of good Repute: Nor a Tribune, unless he was of such an Age, as by his Prudence and his Experience to be fit to sup∣port the Weight of that Command. Neither did he permit the Tribunes to make the least unlawful Gain of the Soldiers; nor any Per∣sons to serve themselves of nice and delicate Things, which were therefore wholly cashiered the Camp. He examined their Arms and their Equipages whether Clean and Neat, and a∣mended them as he saw Occasion. He con∣sidered what Age every one was of, because he would have none to serve in the Field con∣trary to the antient Custom, who was either
too young to be of a proper Strength to bear Arms, or too old and past it. He took Care that his Soldiers were personally always known to him, and he kept an Account how many of them precisely they were. He gave himself the Trouble to examine into the State of the Magazines of Ammuni∣tion and Provisions; and whether the Con∣tributions of the Provinces were well paid, and into the State of the Provinces, that if any thing was amiss any where, he might supply the Defect. Particularly, he desired to cut off all superfluous Expences, and that his Officers should lay out their Money upon no∣thing that was of no use. So having model∣led his Army to his own Pleasure, he next set upon an Expedition into Great Britain, where as he corrected a great many Defaults, so he was the first who made a Wall there, that wasHis Wall in Britain. Fourscore Miles in Length, to serve for a Di∣vision betwixt the Barbarians and the Romans. Septimius Clarus, a Captain of the Guards, and Suetonius Tranquillus, Secretary of the Dispatches, with others, having conversed without his Leave, a little more familiarly with the Em∣press Sabina, than was well consistent with the Honour of the Court, he turned them out, and put others into their places. And certain∣ly, he would, as he said, have discharged his very Empress, as one that he conceived disagreable and ill humored, had be been but as a private Per∣son. He was not only inquisitive into all thatHis Intel∣ligence. passed in his own Houshold, but likewise into the Houses of his Neighbours; insomuch, that
by his Spies, he was told of all the secret Actions done amongst them, whilst they in the mean time never suspected it, nor knew any thing of it, until himself discovered it. Upon which occasion, it will not be unpleasant to insert a Passage wherein we may certainly see what a Knowledge he had of a great many things as to his Neighbours. A Person had received a Letter from his Wife, in which she told him, That he was so taken up with his Pleasures and the Baths, that he made no Thoughts of returning again to her Arms. Hadrian was informed of this by his Spies; so when that Person came to him to desire the leave of him to retire Home, Hadrian gave him a gentle Rub of his Baths and his Pleasures. Sir, says the Gentleman, Hath my Wife written the same to your Majesty, that she hath written to me? Indeed this Inqui∣sitiveness was thought to be a very great Fault in Hadrian; all the Amours of the Sparks, and the Secret Adulteries of the married La∣dies he took the Pains to pry into; but which was worse, he did not keep the Counsel when he had done, of his greatest Friends. After having settled the Affairs of Great Bri∣tain, he crossed over into Gallia, where he re∣ceived Advice of a Sedition in Alexandria in Egypt, arisen about their God Apis; who ha∣ving been brought to Light anew, after many Years that he had been lost, the Dispute in what City he ought to be plac'd, created strange Disorders amongst the People, because all of them earnestly contended to have him. At Nismes in Languedoc, he built a Temple to the
Honour of Plotina, which was an admirable Work. Then he went into Spain, and passedHe ar∣rives in Spain. the Winter at Tarragona, where at his proper Charge he re-edified the Temple of Augustus; and having Assembled all the States of Spain together at Tarragona, he consulted with them with great Prudence and Dexterity in the Po∣liticks, considering their Divisions about the raising of Levies amongst them. At Tarra∣gona he escaped a very great Danger, and in a manner, which was not inglorious. As he was walking in a Garden, a Servant belonging to the Master of the House where he was, ran upon him furiously with a drawn Sword, to kill him, Hadrian closed with the Man, and took him Prisoner and delivered him to the Custody of the Guards, who were flocking in to his Assistance. But when it was plainly seen that the Man was Mad, he sent him to the Physicians to be cured, and took no more Notice of the Matter. In many Places where the Barbarians are not separated from the Ro∣mans by Rivers, but only by Land-marks, he made Walls of Earth, supported by Stakes, and strengthened with Pallisadoes for a Partition betwixt them. He appointed a King over the Germans; he suppressed the Commotions of the Moors, so that he merited the Honour from the Senate to have Sacrifices and Solemn Prayers offered for him. The Parthians did but make a meen or single Motion towards a War, but it was composed again by one Con∣ference with Hadrian.
After this he came by Sea along the CoastSeveral o∣ther of his Voyages, &c. of Asia, and the Islands, unto the Province of Achaia, where he was initiated in the Eleusi∣nian Rites, after the Examples of Hercules, and King Philip. He was very generous to the Athenians, and presided at their Games. He sailed from thence to Sicily, where he had the Curiosity to visit the top of the Mountain Aetna, from thence to view the Rising Sun; how various they say, it appears there in its Colours, in the Nature of those of the Rain∣bow. From Sicily he came home to Rome, and from Rome he crossed the Sea again into Africa, leaving many Marks of his Liberality upon the Provinces of that Country; so that one may say, that scarce never hath there been a Prince known to Travel over so much Land, and with so much dispatch as he. He had no sooner returned back to Rome out of Africa, but he set upon a New Voyage into the East, and took his way through Athens. The Works which he had begun at Athens, he now finish∣ed and dedicated; amongst the rest, the Tem∣ple and the Altar of Jupiter Olympius. In Asia, as he travelled, he likewise Consecra∣ted Temples there, which abide as so many Memorials of his Name. Whilst he was in Cappadocia, he admitted a Number of the People of that Country into the Service of his Army. He invited the Princes and the Kings of the Dominions where he came, to joyn in Friend∣ship with him. Particularly he invited to his Friendship Chosroes the King of Parthia, to whom he returned his Daughter that Trajan
had formerly taken Captive, promising the same as to a Chair of State, which had been then likewise taken and carried away in that War. He received those Kings when they came, so generously, and treated them in that manner, that others who staid away upon the Account, especially of Pharismanes, who in∣solently slighted him, might have an occasion to repent themselves. As he traversed the Provinces, he punished some Procurators, and some Presidents of them for their Malversa∣tions so severely, that they said, he had a mind certainly to encourage Accusers to appear a∣gainst them. He had a great Displeasure against the People of Antioch, wherefore it was in his Thoughts to separate Syria from Phoenicia, that Antioch should not be said to be the Metro∣polis of so many Cities. The Jews about this time broke into a War, because they were for∣bidden to Circumcise themselves. He went upon the Mountain Lison, which is near An∣tioch, in the Night, for the Curiosity of obser∣ving from thence the Rising-Sun. Jupiter was worshipped upon that Mountain, to whom, as Hadrian was Sacrificing there, a violent Storm arose with Thunder and Lightning, which blasted both the Victim and the Priest. He traversed Arabia, and came to the City of Pelusium or Belvais in Egypt. The Tomb of Pompey which is at this City being decayed, he rebuilt it with greater Magnificence. As he was sailing upon the Nile, his dear Antinous died, for whom he wept with all the
tenderness, and the weakness of a WomanHis Grief for Anti∣nous. weeping for her Husband. There are several reports about that Youth. Some say that he devoted himself a Sacrifice for Hadrian. Others, that he was what his Beauty might probably incite him to be, and the too great Pleasure which Hadrian took in a Burdash However it was, the Grecians, at the desire of Hadrian, made a God of him; and we are told of Oracles which have been uttered by him; but they are rather some supposed Compositi∣ons of Hadrian; who was excellent at Verse, and indeed at all sorts of the Belles Lettres. For he had a great Hand at Arithmetick, Geometry, and Painting. He understood Musick, and played perfectly well upon ma∣ny Instruments, and Sung. Loving his Plea∣sures so excessively, as he did, he could not but Compose many Poems of his Amours. Together with which he was a Master in the matter of Arms; had the Military Art in per∣fection, and was skilled at the Weapons of the Gladiatours. He was a Person equally Severe and Pleasant, Affable and Grave; Active and Considerate, Close and Liberal, Cruel and Merciful, in all things ever various. He enriched his Friends, though they ne∣ver did ask him any favour; and to others upon their asking he denyed nothing. But yet he was easie to give ear to every Tale which was but whispered concerning them. And this was the occasion, that almost all those whom either he had dearly loved, or whom he had raised to the highest Honours,
were afterwards treated by him as Enemies;His Seve∣rity and Injustice. as was Tatianus, Nepos, and Septimius Clarus. Thus also Eudaemon, who had once been Pri∣vy to all his Counsels, and his Confident in the very Affair of his aspiring to the Empire, was reduced by him to extreme Beggery. He constrained Polyaenus and Marcellus to mur∣der themselves. He made the most notorious defamatory Libels upon Heliodorus. He suf∣fered Tatianus, under a pretence of his being in a Conspiracy against him, to be Arraigned and Proscribed. He persecuted Numidius Quadratus, Catilius Severus, and Turbo, very grievously. He put to death Servianus, his Sisters Husband, when he was in his Nineti∣eth Year, only because he would be sure, that he should not out-live him. In fine, he Persecuted without remission both his Ser∣vants and his Soldiers. As ready as he was at his Compositions, always in Prose and Verse, and skilled in all the Liberal Arts; he yet laught at the Publick Professors of the Arts, and triumphed over them; entered many times into Solemn Disputes with all of them together, and with all the Philosophers; only for the Glory of Composing better Books, or better Verses than they. He excepted once particularly against a Word, which was used by Favori∣nus: who modestly submitting himself to him in it; but being blamed by his Friends for yielding the Cause so in a Word for which there was sufficient Authority to be produced out of good Authors; Favorinus made a very pleasant Jest upon it. Says he, My Friends,
you are much mistaken, if you do not allow me to believe him to be a Learneder Man than us all, who is the Master of Thirty Legions. So fond was he of his Glory, as to this Ta∣lent, that he writ his own Life, and after∣wards gave it to his Servants (that were Scho∣lars) to publish it only under their Names: Thus the Books under the name of Phlegon, are Hadrians. The Catachriani are his, which are extremely obscure pieces, in imitation of Antimachus. The Poet Florus, having writ∣ten to him, thus, as follows; Ego nolo Caesar esse, Ambulare per Britannos, Scythicas pati Pruinas. That is, I desire not to be Caesar, To Ramble amongst the Britains, And be starved with the Frosts of Scythia. He answered him again thus; Ego nolo Florus esse, Ambulare per Tabernas, Latitare per popinas, Culices pati rotundos. That is, I desire not to be Florus, To Ramble amongst the Taverns, Skulk about the Eating-Houses, And be stung to death with Gnats.
He took more delight in the Antient Wri∣tingsHis Learning. than the Modern, and was pleased with making Declamations. He preferred Cato to Cicero, Ennius to Virgil, and Caelius to Salust; the like Judgement he passed upon Homer and Plato. He pretended to understand Judicial Astrology so very well, that upon the Calends of January in the Evening he would con∣stantly set down in Writing, what in the whole ensuing year afterwards was to happen to him; insomuch that in that Year in which he died, he had written a Scheme of things, as far as to his last hour. But although he gave himself the liberty, as hath been said, to reprehend the Musicians, Tragedians, Come∣dians, Grammarians, Rhetoricians, Philoso∣phers, and Oratours, and to teize them per∣petually with Questions, yet he preserved a real kindness for them, and honoured them with the marks of his esteem: If he had been the occasion, that many times they went dissatis∣fied from him, he said, He however took it ill, if he saw any body do so. He was more par∣ticularly familiar with the Philosophers Epicte∣tus and Heliodorus, Phavorinus, was much in his favour. And when these Doctors became by Age unfit any longer for their Professions, he took care of them, and dismist them from their Labours, with marks of Honour. The Enemies which he had in his PrivateSome par∣ticular Liberali∣ties, &c. Life, he forgave after he was Emperor. To one of them, his Expression was, after he was Emperor, It is well, you have Escaped me. He gave always Horses, Mules, Cloaths, Mo∣ny,
and all their Equipages to his Officers that he sent into the Provinces. He often sent his Ministers upon the Feasts of Saturn Presents, and accepted of others from them again. When he made a Royal Banquent for the En∣tertainment of a great number of Persons of the Court and the City, he hath ordered Dishes to be brought up to him from the lowermost Tables, to see whether they were well used there by the Servants of his Houshold. His Presents which he sent at any time to Princes, always exceeded those which they sent to him: He frequently Bathed in Publick, and in the Company of all the World without distincti∣on: which gave an occasion to a pleasant Pas∣sage, which was this. There was a Veteran Soldier at the Bath, whom he had known in the War, scrubbing his Back and his Body a∣gainst the Wall in a Corner, by himself. Ha∣drian seeing him, asked him what was his fancy to rub himself so against the Walls? The Man said, It was, Because he had never a Servant to rub him. Immediately Hadrian sent him one, and withal gave him an Estate to keep one. Another day, several other Old Men, in the like manner, were rubbing themselves against the Wall, in hopes to provoke Hadrian to be as bountiful to them. But instead of that he ordered them to be called out, and to take their turns to rub down one another. He was a lover of the Common People, and took a glory in shewing it. Fond of Travelling, and whatever he had read in Books concern∣ing any part of the Earth, he was willing to
learn the truth of it upon the Place. He en∣dured the Cold and the Weather so hardily, that he never went with his Head covered. To several Kings of the Countries where he came, he paid a great deal of respect. The most part of whom entred into Leagues of Friendship with him; some indeed slighted him. And to many he made great Presents, but no one Person greater than he did to Pha∣rismanes the King of Iberia; to whom, besides other things which were Magnificent, he sent fifty Elephants. The Presents in return, which that King sent to him, were also great. But among the rest he had sent Tunicks Embroy∣dered in Gold: in derision of which, Hadrian ordered Three hundred Malefactours to be dressed in the like Tunicks embroydered in Gold, wherein to fight upon the publick Stage the Prizes of the Gladiatours. When he sate upon Judgment in Person, he took to his assistance not only his Courtiers and Friends, but the professed Lawyers; espe∣cially Juventius Celsus, Salvius Julianus, Nera∣tius Priscus, and others, who were Men Uni∣versally approved by the Senate. He ordered amongst other things, that no Houses in any City should in any wise be taken down, for the sake of rebuilding them in another, or transferring the Materials to another. He granted unto the Children of Persons pro∣scribed, the twelfth part of the Estates of their Fathers. He admitted of no informations of High Treason. He refused to stand Heir to such as he did not know; neither would he
accept the Inheritances of those he did, in case they had Children of their own to enjoy them. Concerning Treasure-Trouve, his Con∣stitution was; that if the Party had found it in his own Ground, he should take it to him∣self; if he found it in anothers, he should give a Moiety of it to the Proprietor of that Ground; if he found it upon the publick Ground, he should share it equally with the Exchequer. He made it unlawful for Ma∣stersSome of his Laws. to put their Slaves to death; and order∣ed, that Slaves should be Tried and Condem∣ned by the publick Judges as they deserved it. His Law against such as had consumed their Estates, was, that if they were under their own Authority, they should be exposed to a publick Shame in the Amphitheatre, and then turned out of the Town. He took away the Private Prisons, for Servants and Slaves, which had used to be before in the Hands of their Masters. He separated the Baths for the di∣stinct use of either Sex. If a Master was found kill'd in his House, he ordered that not all the Slaves should be put to the Question about the Murder, but those only who were near e∣nough to have perceived and prevented it. The Country of Hetruria nominated him to be their Praetor, and he was so, when he was Emperour. In like manner he was the Di∣ctator, the Aedilis, and the Duumvir, that is, the Chief Magistrate so called, of several Towns in Latium. The City of Naples chose him to be their Demarchus. The City of Sevil in Spain, and that of Adria in Italy, which
were the two Places of the Descent of him and his Ancestours, chose him to be their Quinquennalis. At Athens he was the Archon. In almost all the Cities where he came he Built, and gave publick Sports to the People. At Athens he exhibited a Chase in the Stadi∣um, of above a Thousand Wild Beasts. He never served himself upon these occasions of any Huntsmen, or Players from the City of Rome. At Rome the Pleasures of the Festi∣vals, which he Celebrated to the Honour of his Mother-in-Law were infinite. Amongst the rest he made the People a Largess of Aromatick Sacrifices: and upon the Festi∣vals to the honour of Trajan he commanded the several Seats of the Theatre to be perfumed with Balm and Saffron. He had Plays of all sorts acted in the Theatre, as antiently. He permitted the Comedians of the Court to Act in the Plays which were given by private Per∣sons. He exhibited in the Cirque many wild Beasts, and many times a hundred Lions to be killed at a time. He often treated the People with Anticks and Masquerades. He often went to see the Combats of the Gladiators. A∣mongst the infinite number of Works which he built in several places, he never caused his own Name to be Engraved upon any of them, but upon the Temple of Trajan. He re-edi∣fied the Pantheon at Rome, together with the Septa, the Temple of Neptune, a great many Religious Houses, the Forum of Augustus, and the Bagnio of Agrippa: all which he Conse∣crated anew, but still under their Proper, and
their Antient Names. He built a Bridge over th Tiber, which he called by his own name, together with a Sepulchre for himself near the Tiber. He translated the Temple of the God∣dess Cybele from the place where it was to ano∣ther. He did the same to a Colossus which stood there, where now is the Temple of the City. This was a great and a laborious Task. It was removed in the Posture in which it was standing; being raised by the Architect Daetrianus; four and twenty Elephants were Employed upon it. After he had Re-conse∣crated this vast Coloss to the Sun, which be∣fore was Consecrated to Nero, whose Head was to it, he proposed to build such another Monument to the honour of the Moon, by the Hand of the Architect Apollodorus. He was most extremely Affable and Cour∣teous in his Discourses which he had with Persons of low degree; and he hated such as should Envy him a Pleasure which was so sensible to him, upon the pretence of main∣taining the Gravity and Port of a Prince. At Alexandria, in the Academy, he both pro∣posed several Questions to be answered by the Professors, and answered others which they proposed to him. Marius Maximus says, that he was in his own Nature Cruel; but yet that he did many Pious and obliging things: the reason whereof was his fear, that he might otherwise have the same Fortune with that which befel Domitian. Although he did not love Titles and Inscriptions upon his Works, he however called several Cities, even Car∣thage
it self, and a part of Athens, together with a multitude of Aqueducts, after his own name. He was the first who Created the Of∣ficer called Advocatus Fisci, that is, Advocate of the Exchequer. He had a happy Memory,His Me∣mory and Wit. and admirable Parts. He dictated all his own Speeches, and answered to every thing him∣self. There are several of his Jests; being a very pleasant Man in Conversation. Amongst the rest, this is one: an old Man in Gray Hairs having asked him something, which he denyed him, and coming to ask it again, but with his Hair tinged first unto a youthful co∣lour; says he to him, I have already denyed this thing to your Father. He remembred Per∣sons by their Names so very well, without the help of a Prompter, that though he had heard them but once, he presently corrected any one that mistook them. He remembred even the Names of all the old Soldiers, whom he had disbanded. The Books which he read, though they were out of the common way, and difficult, he would repeat to you again al∣most entirely by heart. At one and the same time, he Writ, Dictated, hearken'd to Dis∣course, and discoursed himself with his Mini∣sters. He retained in his mind all the Pub∣lick Affairs so well, that no diligent Master of a Family, better knows those of his own House. He loved his Horses and Dogs to that degree, that he built them Tombs, and writ them Epitaphs. He built a Town, which he caled Adrianotherae, in a certain place, in Moesia; only because he had hunted with
good Success there; at what time he kill'd a Bear with his own hand. He made an exact enquiry always into all things acted by the Presidents of the Pro∣vinces, until he was satisfied in the Truth. He suffered not his Servants, whom he had Manumitted, to Influence him, nor to be thought to do so. He said, that it was the easiness of the Princes his Predecessours, which had been the occasion always of the Vices of those Men. Therefore if any of his pre∣tended to have gained an Interest in him, he presently punished them. We have an in∣stance of this Nature, in what he did particu∣larly to one of them, whom he saw out of a Window walking in the midst betwixt two Senatours. It is severe, and yet it comes something near to a piece of Raillery. He sent one to him, to give him a Box on the Ear, and to tell him; That it was not for him to walk betwixt two Senatours, to whom he might still be reduced to be a Slave. Of all Dishes of Meat, his fancy was especially for an Oglio of Pheasants, Brawn, &c. In his time a Famine, a Plague, and an Earthquake happen'd. For all which he expiated the Gods by Sacrifices as much as it was possible; and generously succoured the People and the Cities, that were laid wast by them: There was also an Inundation of the Tiber. He made several Cities free of Rome, and to others he remitted their Tribute. No great Expeditions happened under his Reign. His Wars passed over almost in silence. He was beloved by the Soldiers; because he took
always a great Care of them, and was very bountiful to them. The Parthians were his stedfast Friends, because he delivered them from the Yoke which Trajan had imposed up∣on them. He permitted the Armenians to have a King of their own; whereas under Trajan they received a Roman Lieutenant. He did not exact of the Mesopotamians the Tribute which was imposed upon them by Trajan. The Countries of Albania and Iberia were very affectionate to him: The Kings of the Bactri∣ans sent their Ambassadors to him, and hum∣bly desired his Friendship. He oftentimes himself appointed the Per∣sonsHis Care of the Publick. who should be the Guardians to minors. He took Care of the publick Manners, no less than he did of the Discipline of the Army. He commanded the Senators and the Roman Gentlemen to appear always in Publick in Gowns. Accordingly himself, when in Italy, went always in a Gown. He received the Se∣nators standing, when they came to wait up∣on him at his Banquets. He settled, with the help of the Magistrates for that purpose, the Expences, beyond which no one should ex∣ceed in their Feasts; which he reformed ac∣cording to the antient Julian Law. He for∣bad the Citizens to appear attended with so much heavy Equipages as they did, coming out of the Country. He suffered not the Baths to be opened before Two a Clock in the Af∣ternoon, unless it was for the Sick. He was the first of the Emperors who took of the Knights and Gentlemen to serve him as his
Secretaries. He had a Compassion for such a∣mongst them as were poor, and he knew were of an innocent Life; as much as on the other hand, he hated a Man who was grown Rich by Craft. He took great Care to observe the Holy Rites of the Religion of the Romans: But as for others which were of Foreign Insti∣tution, he slighted them. He officiated in Per∣son as High Priest. He many times had Cau∣ses tried before him at Rome, and in the Pro∣vinces; admitting the Consuls, the Praetors, and some of the best Heads of the Senate to his assistance, as his Council. He cleansed the Lake Fucinus. He appointed Four Pro∣consuls for the Administration of Justice throughout all Italy. At his coming into Africa it rained, which it not having done in that Country before in five Years; this was an occasion that he was very dear to that People. Going always in his Travels in all Parts, with his Head uncovered, and many times in the greatest Showrs, and the greatest Colds, at last he fell into a Sickness, which obligedHe sickens him to take to his Bed; and being solicitous a∣bout the Person whom he should make a Choice of for his Successour, his first Thoughts carried him upon Servianus; but upon a fur∣ther Consideration, as hath been said, he put him to Death, together with Fuscus, whom he hated upon the account of certain Presages and Prodigies which had happened, and which might give Fuscus the Encouragement to dare to hope for the Empire. The like jealousie
which he was inclined to have of Pletorius Nepos, made him, that now he hated him, as much as before he had loved him. Thus he hated also Terentius Gentianus, and so much the more, as he knew, that he was beloved by the Se∣nate. In short, he had an aversion to every one,His Jea∣lousie. upon whom he look'd with an Eye of jealousie, as if they aspired to the Empire in his place. But still he however stifled all the Motions of that Cruelty which was in his Heart, till such time as he was brought almost to his last, of a Flux of Blood at Tivoli; and then he ordered Ser∣vianus directly to be put to Death, pretending he was one who had affected the Empire, ha∣ving treated the Servants of the Court with Suppers, and sat himself down in the Chair which is for the Emperor, and courted the Favour of the Soldiers. Several others at the same time by his Order, either publick or pri∣vate were put to Death; which is the less to be admired, because Sabina, his own Consort, died suddenly after, not without a Suspicion of her being Poysoned by him. In the next place, he took up a Resolution to adopt Cejo∣niusHe adopts Aelius Verus. Commodus Verus, the Son-in Law of Ni∣grinus the Conspirator before-mentioned; be∣ing a Youth whose Beauty had formerly re∣commended him to him. So he accordingly did it, and called him by the Name and Title of Aelius Verus Caesar, how displeasing soever this was to others. To honour whose Adop∣tion, he gave the Games of the Cirque to the People, and bestowed upon both the People and the Soldiers a Free Bounty. He made him a Prae∣tor,
and gave him immediately the Charge of the Province of Pannonia. He created him a Consul, and furnished his Expences. He ap∣pointed him a second time Consul, till seeing him in so ill a Condition of Health, as not to be one likely long to live. I have, said he, depended upon a falling Wall, and the Four Thou∣sand Sesterces are lost, which I spent upon the People and the Soldiers upon the Adoption of Commodus. And indeed Commodus was so ill, he was not able so much as to go and re∣turn his Thanks to Hadrian in the Senate, for the Honour which he had done him. And ha∣ving taken at last a Dose which happened to beWho dies. too strong for him, his Illness redoubled, and he fell into a Sleep, in which he died, the first Day of January; which being a solemn Day for Congratulating the Emperor upon the New Year, and of making Oblations to the Gods, there was an Order from Hadrian to put off the Mourning on that Day for his Death. Aelius Verus Caesar being dead, and Hadrian finding himself still worse, as to his own In∣disposition,He adopts Antoninus he adopted next Arrius Antoninus, who was afterwards called Antoninus the Pious; that is, he adopted him upon this Condition, that Antoninus should adopt two others, who were Annius Verus, and Marcus Antoninus: who as they were both afterwards Emperors, were the first Two that sate upon the Throne toge∣ther, and reigned in Conjunction with one another. The reason of giving to Arrius An∣toninus the Title of the Pious was, because he
shew'd himself so careful of his Father-in-Law in his great Years, that he led him by the Hand, as he went to, or came from the Se∣nate; or according to others, because he was the Occasion of the Preservation of the Lives of several of the Senators, when Hadrian was in his Frensie for killing them; or lastly, be∣cause he performed great Honours to the Me∣mory of Hadrian after his Death. However it is, there were many who regretted the Adoption of Antoninus, and especially Catilius Severus, the Governour of Rome; who was diligently paving himself a way to the Throne, which be∣ing discovered, he was deprived of his Place, and another Person put into it. Hadrian im∣patientHis Impa∣tience in his Sick∣ness. under the last Pangs of Life, com∣manded a Servant to run him through with a Sword. Antoninus being made acquainted with this, went in to him, in Company with the Officers of the Court, and beseeching him to take his great Sickness, as it was unavoidable, with more constancy, he was angry at them, and commanded that the Discoverer of what he had said to the Servant should be put to Death. But Antoninus saved him, and said, That he should think himself a Parricide, if he should suffer Hadrian, who had adopted him, to be murdered. Then he made his last Will, not forgetting therein the Interest of the State. He endeavoured, after he had made his Will, to kill himself with his own Hand. But the Weapon was wrested from him; and this made him perfectly furious. He commanded a Physician to give him Poyson, who, it is
said, chose to kill himself upon the Place, ra∣ther than to Poyson his Prince. About this time, there came a certain Wo∣man, who said, She had been admonished in a Dream, that she should go and advise Hadrian not to kill himself, because he would one day re∣cover; which she not observing to do as she was ordered, she pretended she had been struck blind upon it. However, she said, she was com∣manded upon the same Errand again, and told, that when she had done it, and had kissed the Feet of Hadrian, she should receive her sight; so she did it, and she received her Sight ac∣cordingly, after washing her Eyes in the Wa∣ter of the Temple from whence she came. There came out of Pannonia to Hadrian, whilst he was in a Fever, a Man, who also preten∣ded he had been long blind; who touching Hadrian, not only received his Sight, but also Hadrian was quitted of his Fever: that is, says Marius Maximus, These things were all a Fi∣ction, of the Contrivance of Antoninus, to heal the wounded imagination of Hadrian, and divert him from murdering himself. Then Hadrian went to Baiae, leaving Antoninus at Rome to govern: but nothing at that Place doing him good, he sent for Antoninus to him, and died in his pre∣sence at Baiae upon the Sixth Day of the IdesHis Death of July. A little before his Death, he ordered Servianus, who was Ninety Years old, as I said, to be kill'd, only because he should not out∣live him, and as he imagined, gain the Em∣pire. Many others for pretended Offences he ordered likewise to be so served; but
Antoninus preserved them. Dying, he spoke these Verses; Animula vagula, blandula, Hospes comesque corporis, Quae nunc abibis in loca? Pallidula, rigida, nudula, Nec ut soles dabis jocos. That is, My little fluttering flattering Soul, My Body's constant Guest and Mate To what gloomy Place dost go? Pale and numm'd, and stript of all, No more to jest, as thou hast wont. He was the Author of some Greek Verses of this sort, which were not much better. He lived Seventy Two Years, Five Months, and Seventeen Days; and reigned Twenty One Years and Eleven Months. He was tall and wellHis Per∣sonage. made as to his Person; his Hair naturally Curling; a long Beard, which covered some Spots which he had upon his Face, and of a robust Constitution. He rid and walked very well; exercised himself constantly at Arms, and the Javelin; often hunted, and hath kill'd a Lion with his own hand; his Friends hun∣ted in Company with him. At his Banquets, he had the divertisements of Tragedies, Co∣medies, Dancing, Musicians, Rehearsers, and Poets. He built a House at the City of Tivoli, which was an extraordinary Structure; and gave the Names of the Lycaeum, Academia,
Prytanaeum, Canopus, Paecile, and Tempe, which are the most Famous Names of Places abroad, together with others of the Provinces, unto the several Parts of it; and that he might leave nothing undone to adorn it, he repre∣sented in another Part in Painting, the In∣fernal Regions. The Signs which fore-shew'd his Death, were these: As he was in his Pray∣ersHis Death fore-shew∣ed. on the last Anniversary of his Birth, recommending Antoninus, his Son, to the Gods, the Lappet of his Robe which he threw over his Head, slipt down of it self, and left him un∣covered. A Ring which had his Effigies cut upon it, fell in like manner of it self, off his Finger. The Day before that, there came one, I know not who, scrieking and crying into the Senate; none of the Senate understood what he said; but yet Hadrian was moved at him, as if he had said something concerning his Death: Speaking to the Senate, instead of post filii mei mortem, after the Death of my Son, which he intended to say, he said, post mortem meam, after my Death. He dreamt that he had asked, and had obtained of his Father a Potion to make him sleep: Another time, that he was oppressed by a Lion. After his Death a great many Persons spoke very hard things against him. The Senate would have made void his Acts; neither had he been deifyed, but that Antoninus begged it; who not only did this, but built a Tem∣ple to him at Pozzulo, and instituted in his Honour Games to be celebrated every Five Years, and appointed him his Priests and Fra∣ternities,
with all other things belonging to the Service of a God. Upon which account it was, as many think at least, and as I have already intimated, that the Title of the Pious was given to Antoninus.
THE LIFE OF Aelius Verus Caesar. BY AELIUS SPARTIANUS: TO THE EMPEROR DIOCLESIAN, AELIUS SPARTIANUS his Slave wisheth Health. AS it is my Design, Sir, humbly to lay at the Feet of your Majesty, who are the greatest of so many Princes, an Account, not only of those who have sate upon the Roman Throne before you, as I have already done in the Princes from Julius Caesar, down un∣to Hadrina, but of those also who either have
been honoured with the Title of Caesars, or upon any other Account have had the Reputation to be proposed for the Crown, although they did not after∣wards succeed to it. I cannot omit here the Life especially of Aelius Verus Caesar, who was incor∣porated into the Royal Family by the adoption of Hadrian, but enjoy'd the Name only of a Caesar, and did not live to be Emperor. And because there is but little to be said of him, and the Preface ought not to be long in a such small Nar∣ration as this, I immediately proceed. Cejonius Commodus, or as he is otherwise cal∣led Aelius Verus, was adopted by Hadrian, when the Maladies of that Prince increasing upon him with his Age, pressed him to appoint his Successour, after his return from his many Travels about the World. His Life affords us nothing that is more memorable than this, to wit, His Quality as a Caesar; given him not by a last Will and Testament, as formerly itThe signi∣fication of Caesar. had descended; nor yet was it given him in the manner, in which the Adoption of Trajan was by Nerva; but so as in our time, Maximia∣nus and Constantius have been created Caesars by your Majesty; that is, to signify they are as it were, the Princes of the Blood, and the ap∣pointed Heirs of the Empire. And because it may be fit that something here should be said concerning the Name of Caesar; the Opinion of the most Learned about it, is, That he who was the first called so, was either called Caesar from an Elephant, which in the Language of the Moors is called Caesa, which he bravely slew
in the Field; or because his Mother dying in her Labour with him, he was Ventre Caeso natus, cut out of her Belly; or because he was born cum magna Caesarie, with much Hair upon his Head; or because oculis Caesiis viguerit, he had Grey Eyes, which were bright and vigorous to a Miracle. However it is, it was certainly a happy Necessity that was the occasion of a Name so famous, which is like to be as Eter∣ternal as the World: The person, of whom we at present speak, receiv'd it in virtue of his Adoption by Hadrian. His Father was Cejonius Commodus, whom others call Verus, others Lucius Aurelius, others Annius. All hisHis An∣cestors. his Wife. Ancestours were Persons of good Quality, whose Original for the most part was out of the Country of Hetruria, or the City Faenza. Of which Family we shall have an occasion to speak more fully hereafter, in the Life of Lu∣cius Aurelius Cejonius Commodus Verus Antoninus, the Son of this Verus, whom Antoninus the Pious was commanded to Adopt. For in that Life will be contained every thing which concerns the Stem of this House, as it gives an account of a Prince who hath a great many more things to be said of him than this here. So Aelius Verus being Adopted by Hadrian, n he time, as I have said, that he was very weak, and was necessarily to think of a Suc∣cessour, and being presently made a Praetor pon it, and appointed to be the President of Pannonia, he was in the next place Created Consul: and in regard that he was the Person
design'd for the Empire; he was appointed to be Consul a second time. A Largess was given to the People upon the occasion of his Adoption, and three thousand Sestertiums a∣mongst the Soldiers, and the Games of the Cirque Celebrated; so that nothing was o∣mitted to be done in order to proclaim a pub∣lick Joy: and his Interest with Hadrian becameHis Be∣haviour in his Province. in fine so great, that he alone obtained from him whatever he desired, upon the least Let∣ter which he wrote to him. Nor was he want∣ing to the Province to which Hadrian preferred him. For although he might not arise to the fame of a Governour of the highest Form; yet he managed his Affairs so well, or rather so fortunately, that he was esteemed to come up to the next step to that Character: but on the other Hand he was so sickly and so feeble, that Hadrian soon repented himself of his Adoption, and perhaps if he could, he would willingly have removed him again, if he had lived, out of the Royal Family, because he was often placing his thoughts on others, whom he might admit to the same. Some, who have been very diligent to Collect the Life of Ha∣drian, pretend to say, that Hadrian under∣stood very well the Nativity of Verus; and not so much approving him for a Person to make an Emperour of, he had Adopted him ra∣ther to serve his Pleasures, and to satisfie a certain Passion which he had conceived for him: and what upon this occasion was acted betwixt him and Verus, was kept secret un∣der an Oath. Indeed that Hadrian was really
skilful in the Science of Astrology, is what is so fully attested by Marius Maximus, that he says, that he Calculated the future Passages of all the days of his own life, to the very hour in which he dyed. It is besides certain enough, that Hadrian hath many times applied to Verus, out of Vir∣gil, these words; Ostendent terris hunc tantum fata, nec ultra Esse sinent.— The Fates will, he shall but to th' World be shown, And from its earnest Grasp be hurried soon. Walking one day in his Garden, he was pleased very much with repeating these words, and a learned Man being with him, in which sort of Conversation he delighted, because it was popular, who desired to add, as it is in Virgil, —Nimium vobis Romana Propago Visa potens, superi, propria haec si dona fuissent; To th' Gods the Roman Power would seem too great, If their own Sway they could perpetuate. Hadrian replyed, that that part of the Cha∣racter did not consist with the Fate of Ve∣rus; and then he added himself, as follows, —Manibus date lilia plenis, Purpureos spargam flores, animamque nepot is His saltem accumulem donis, & fungar inani Munere—
—Come, hither bring Handfuls of Lilies, Flow'rs of purple hew Upon his baleful Corps I'le freely strew, With these poor Gifts I'le please his fleeting Ghost, Vainly bestow'd, alas, on one for ever lost. Another time he expressed himself concern∣ing him thus, and laughed, I have Adopted my self a God, and not a Son. Nor was the Event different from the Horoscope which he had drawn of it: For when Aelius Verus was returned from his Province, and had provided himself a very fine Oration, which is now Extant; whether it was of his own Com∣posing, or that his Secretaries, or his Rhetori∣cians did it for him, in which, upon the Ca∣lends of January he was to have return'd his thanks to Hadrian for the honour which he had done him; he instead of that died uponHis Death. that very day, and it was forbidden by Ha∣drian to observe the Mourning for him then, because of the Vows and the Congratulations intervening, which are the peculiar business Dedicated to the first day of January. He was one who passed his time in a courseHis Cha∣racter. of Pleasure, and had been instructed in Let∣ters; but more acceptable unto Hadrian, at least as some would have it, more for the sake of his Beauty, than any thing else. He had not been long at the Court. His private life, as it was not admirable nor much to be commended for his Virtues; so neither was it much subject to be reproached. He was mindful of the Fa∣mily
into which he was Adopted. Went al∣ways neat and proper in his Dress; had the Meen and Air of a Prince, an obliging Aspect, a handsome way of expressing him∣self, ready at the making of a Verse, and no unfit Person for the Service of the State. Those who have written his life, have made mention of a great many Pleasures which heHis Plea∣sures. delighted in; and which although they are not infamous, yet perhaps he was a little too much addicted to them. The Oglio of Pheasants, Brawn, &c. which was Hadrians great Dish, is said to have been of the invention first of Aelius Verus. And another sort of Pleasure of his invention was this: he made himself a Bed with four Heads to it; that is to every Quar∣ter of it a Head, with Curtains all about of fine Net-work: and strewing it full of the Leaves of pick'd Roses, there he lay enjoying his Concubines, and his Company, covered with a Sheet of Flowers, and perfumed with the Odours of Persia. He had always the Books of Ovid's Amorum upon the Bed with him, together with Martial the Epigramma∣tist, who he said, was his Virgil. And not to omit his other, though more inconsiderable Actions; he gave his Lackeys and his Cour∣riers Wings to their Cloaths, like so many Cu∣pids; and he called them by the names of the Winds. One he called Boreas, another Notus, another Aquilo or Circius, and so of the rest: and he made them run perpetually, and un∣mercifully. He told his Wife, when she
complained, it is said, to him, of the liber∣ties which he took with other Women, A Wife was a Name of Honour, but not of Pleasure; you will give me leave, Madam, to have my Pleasures therefore elsewhere. His Son was An∣toninus Verus; who was Adopted at the same time with Mareus Antoninus; which two, Ve∣rus and Marcus, Reigning in Conjunction af∣terwards with one another, are they who are called the Duo Augusti, in the Calendars of the Consuls: Some of which Calendars have taken the Consulships of the Duo Augusti for the Aera, from which they Commence their Accounts of the Consuls. At the time of his Adoption, Hadrian spent an Infinite deal of Money upon the Soldiers and the People. But when he saw him so sickly, and so far gone in health, that he had not the force left to manage a Shield, I have lost, says he, the four thousand Sestertiums, which I spent upon the Soldiers and the People: I have lean'd my self against a falling Wall, and upon a Man, who is so far from being able to support the weight of the State, that he is no support to my self. This it seems he spoke to an Officer of the Houshold, who repeated it again, till it came to the Ears of Aelius Verus: who growing every day worse and worse with the concern to be sensible, that he was so de∣spair'd of, Hadrian turned that Officer for discovering it, out of his place; and was il∣ling to seem to mitigate, what he had said; but this was all one. For in fine, as we have
already said, Lucius Cejonius Commodus Verus Aelius Caesar, for he was called by all these names, died; and was buried with all the Ce∣remonies observed at the Funerals of Princes;Honour done him at his Fu∣nerals. the only Royal honour, which he ever had, being those at his death. Hadrian, who re∣gretted his death like a good Father, was a long time afterwards dubious upon what he should do: at last he Adopted Antoninus the Pious, as he was called; upon whom he im∣posed this condition, that Antoninus should like∣wise Adopt Marcus and Verus, and should Marry his Daughter, not to Marcus, but to Verus. And this was one of the last things he spoke to. He had been used to say; that a Prince ought to dye sound of mind. Then he grew worse, and the Complication of his Maladies carried him off. He had ordered large Statues to be set up in all parts to the honour of Aelius Verus Cae∣sar, in some Cities and Temples. Also he ad∣mitted his Son, whom he had obliged Antoni∣nus to Adopt, into the Royal Family, as his own Grandson; often saying, Let the Empire have all that it can of Aelius Verus. Verus the Son brought no small Lustre to the Imperial Family, especially by his Clemency. This is what I have thought fit to observe concern∣ing Aelius Verus Caesar: whom I would not o∣mit, because I have made it my resolution to write the History of all those, who since Ju∣lius Caesar, the Emperour, have been either called Emperours, or Caesars, or have been
Adopted into the Imperial Family, and Con∣secrated the Sons or Kinsmen of Emperours, by the name of Caesars. In which, though there is no necessity that obliges me to it, as some think, I shall satisfie, at least, my own Inclinations, whatever I do as to others.
THE Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR ANTONINUS the Prous. Dedicated to the EMPEROR DIOCLESIAN. By JULIUS CAPITOLINUS. TItus Aurelius Fulvius Bononius Antoninus, called the Pious, derived his Origin by his Father's side, from Nismes in Lan∣guedoc. His Grandfather by his Father's sideHis Ex∣traction. was Titus Aurelius Fulvius, who through se∣veral
other Honours, came to be twice a Con∣sul, and to be the Governour of the City of Rome. His Father was Aurelius Fulvius, who was also a Consul, and a Person of great Virtue and Integrity. His Mother was Arria Fadilla. His Grandmother by his Mother's side, Bojo∣nia Procilla. His Grandfather by the same side, Arrius Antoninus who was twice Con∣sul, and a holy virtuous Man; who instead of Congratulating, compassionated Nerva, to see him advanced to that difficult Station of a Prince. His Wife's Father was Julius Lupus, a Consul. His Sister, by the same Venter, was Julia Fadilla. His Wife was Annia Fau∣stina: by whom he had two Sons and two Daughter. The eldest Daughter married Za∣mia Syllanus: the yonger to Marcus Antoninus. Antoninus Pius was born at a Seat near Lavi∣nia, in the Campagna di Roma, upon the thir∣teenth of the Calends of October, in the Con∣sulships of Domitian and Cornelius Dolabella; which was then the twelfth time of the Con∣sulship of Domitian. He was brought up at another Seat, called Laurium, upon the Aure∣lian way: where he afterwards built a Palace, which hath some remains of it, standing at this day. He passed his Infancy hetwixt his two Grandfathers, sometimes with the one, and sometimes the other; and being very du∣tiful and observant to all his Relations, several of them left their Estates to him, which made him very Rich. He was handsome as to his Person, full ofHis Per∣sonage and Con∣ditions. Wit, of a sweet and courteous Behaviour, a
generous Countenance, Easie, Eloquent, and of a polite Literature. He was Sober, a great lover of the Country and Agriculture; Mild, Bountiful; not coveting other Men's Goods; Discreet, and all this without Vanity. He was every thing, which is commendable; and may be very justly compared with Numa Pompilius, according to the Opinion of most good Men. The Senate conferred upon himWhy sur∣nam'd the Pious. the Title of the Pious, either because he was used to lead by the Hand, in their sight, his decrepit Father-in-Law to and from the Se∣nate; (tho' it would, be rather, an impious thing not to discharge such a Devoir, than it is an Argument of great Piety to do it;) or be∣cause it was he, who had preserved the lives of those whom Hadrian in his Frenzy had com∣manded to be murdered; or because he decreed such infinite and unexpected Honours, to Ha∣drian his Father, after his death; or because when Hadrian would have killed himself, he hindred him from it with all the care he could; or lastly, because he was in his Nature a most mild Person, and had done nothing that was disoblinging or Cruel in all his life. He lent out his Money at the small Interest of four per Cent. to assist the Poor in their Occasions, with that Fortune which he had. He was a generous Questor; splendid and noble when he was a Praetor, and Consul in Conjunction with Catilius Severus. He lived for the most part in the Country, all the time he was a private man; but wherever he was, he was in great renown. So that when Hadrian com∣mitted
the Affairs of Italy unto the Admini∣stration of four Proconsuls, he made a choice of him to be one of them, to Govern in that part where he had the greatest Estate: in which he equally consulted the Honour and the Repose of this great Person. He received an Omen of his future Succes∣sion to the Empire, in the time of this his Ad∣ministration.Omens of his Suc∣cession to the Em∣pire. For amongst the Acclamations which were made to him, as he sat upon the Bench in the Court, some cried, Auguste, Dii te servent; The Gods save your Majest Next he was made the Proconsul of Asia: where he behaved himself so well, that he alone out-did his Grandfather Arrius Antoninus; the Equity of whose Government no Person had ever surpassed before. In this Proconsul∣ship he received another good Omen of his future Reign. The Priests, at the City of Tralles in Lydia, who according to Custom saluted the Proconsuls upon their arrival there with an Ave Proconsul, did not say Ave Pro∣consul to Antoninus, but Ave Imperator, Hail, O Emperour. At the City Ciziqua upon the Propontis, a Crown which before stood upon the Head of an Image of a God, was tran∣slated from thence, and found upon a Statue of Antoninus. His Statues throughout all the Country of Hetruria were covered with swarms of Bees. As he went to Asia, he lost his eldest Daughter. His Wife, they say; 'was one that contracted a great many Censures, by the too great Liberties which she allowd herself in her Life and Conversation; which
Antoninus dissembled as much as he could; but not without some trouble to support her Credit. After his Proconsulship, he lived or∣dinarily at Rome: where he was of the Council to Hadrian; and in all things upon which Ha∣drian consulted him, he made appear the sweetness of his Sentiments; and gave his Ver∣dict always on the most mild and merciful side. The occasion of his Adoption was thus,His A∣doption. When Aelius Verus Caesar died, whom Hadrian had Adopted in order to succeed in the Em∣pire, a day being appointed for the Senate to Assemble; Antoninus came amongst the rest, leading and supporting by the Hand his decre∣pit Father-in-Law; which was so agreeable a sight, that Hadrian, some say, Adopted him for that very reason. But yet this could not be all: because Antoninus was one, who challenged his consideration upon other ac∣counts. For he had always executed his part in the Government very well, and in his Pro∣consulship had approved himself a Person of great Fidelity and Ability. Therefore when Hadrian had declared to the World that it was his intention to Adopt him, he took a time to deliberate with himself, whether he should consent to it, or no. This Condition was imposed upon him; that as Hadrian did A∣dopt him, so he should Adopt Marcus Anto∣ninus, who was his Wife's Brother's Son; and Lucius Verus, who was afterwards called Verus Antoninus, the Son of Aelius Verus Caesar who had been the first Adopted by Hadrian. So Antoninus was Adopted upon the fifth of the
Calends of March; and having thanked Ha∣drian in the Senate for the great honour which he had done him; he received the Proconsu∣lar and the Tribunitian Powers upon him, as a Colleague in the Empire with his Father. Then he presented the Soldiers and the People with a Largess upon this occasion; he gve them besides, what his Father Hadrian pro∣mised them. He contributed a great deal to∣wards the Works of Hadrian. The Tribute which upon the occasion of his Adoption was presented him by Italy and the Provinces, h remitted wholly to the first, and a Moiety of it to the latter: and he was most religiously Observant of Hadrian all the time that they afterwards lived together. When Hadrian died at Baiae, Antotinus re∣movedHis Be∣haviour when Emperor. his Reliques with all due Respect and Ceremony to Rome: where he laid him in State in the Gardens of Domitian; and though contrary to the general Opinion, he caused him to be received as a God. The Senate gave to Faustina, who was the Consort of Antoninus, the Title of Augusta, which he permitted. To himself they gave the Title of Pius; he ac∣cepted it. He accepted very freely the Sta∣tues, which they likewise decreed to the honour of his deceased Father, Mother, Grand∣fathers, and Brothers. He accepted the Games of the Cirque, which were appointed to Cele∣brate his Birth-day. But other Honours which they offered him he refused. He hung up a most magnificent Shield to the honour of Ha∣drian, and appointed him his Priests. He
removed none of those, out of their Places, after he was Emperour, who had been pro∣moted by Hadrian. He continued the same Persons Presidents and Governours, seven or nine year's together, if they deserved it, he was so little given to change. He made many Wars by his Lieutenants. He overcame the Britains by Lollius Urbicus: who at the same time repulsed the Barbarians, and built ano∣ther Wall, which was of Turf, in that Coun∣try, for a Partition betwixt the Roman-Britains and them. He forced the Moors to sue to him for a Peace; he Germans, the Daci, and se∣veral other Nations. The Jews in their Re∣bellion were repressed by his Presidents, and his Commanders. He repressed the rebelli∣ous in Achaia and Aegypt; and the Alani in their Attempts were constrained to contain themselves within due Bounds. He ordered that his Receivers should pro∣ceed with all moderation in gathering the Tri∣bute of the Provinces. If they exceeded their proper limits, he called them by his Authority to an account; because he was never pleased with a Gain, by which the Subject was op∣pressed. He was always willing to hearken to the Complaints, which were made against his Officers and his Receivers. He moved the Se∣nate for a full Indemnity for those whom Ha∣drian had in his Frenzy condemned to die; because he said, Hadrian himself, had he lived, would have done it. He mixt the Grandeur and the Majesty of an Emperour with all the Civility of a Gentleman; which the more ad∣ded
to his Grandeur. His method as to Busi∣ness, was, not to pass it through the Hands of others, but to speak to the Party himself: which disabled the Courtiers from amusing and cheating People out of their Money, at any time, with empty Pretences. He paid as great a respect to the Senate, when Em∣perour, as he could wish, when he was a Pri∣vate Man, it should receive from any other Prince. The Title of Pater Patriae, or Fa∣ther of his Country; which the Senate gave him, but which he had declined to accept in the beginning, he afterwards received with a great deal of thanks. In the third Year ofHonour done to his Reign he lost his Consort Faustina. The Senate Consecrated her a Goddess. They appointed her a Temple and Priestesses; Games in her honour, and Statues of Gold and Silver. And Antoninus ordered that her Ef∣figies should be carried in the Procession al∣ways to the Games of the Cirque. He ac∣cepted the honour of having his own Statue set up in Gold, which the Senate had decreed him. He created Marcus Antoninus from a Quaestor a Consul, at the Prayer of the Se∣nate. He created Annius Verus, who was af∣terwards called Verus Antoninus, a Quaestor be∣fore the due time by the Law. He Enacted nothing, neither concerning the Provinces, nor any other Affairs without the advice of his Ministers, and then he formed his Constituti∣ons according to their Judgments. He per∣mitted himself to be seen by his Friends, un∣dressed; and sometimes wore within his House, Cloaths like any private Man.
So great was his Diligence, and so entire hisHis Dili∣gence and Modera∣tion. Application to Business, that he took a Care of all Persons and all Things, as particularly as tho' they were his own. All the Provinces flourished under him: He put down the Trade of Informers. Never fewer Estates were con∣fiscated: The only Person proscribed, was Attilius Tatianus, who was convicted of a De∣sign upon the Empire. For Antoninus forbad the Senate to enquire into his Accomplices, and continued his Kindness even to his Son, always in all things. It is true, Priscianus died also, for having favoured him: But his Death was what he voluntarily committed upon him∣self; and he suffered no more search to be made into that Conspiracy. The Table ofHis Fru∣gality. Antoninus was such, as to be Rich without Ex∣travagance, and Frugal without any unhand∣someness: His own Servants furnished it: His own Fowlers, Fishers, and Huntsmen. He exposed the use of his own Bath to the People, gratis; and alter'd in nothing from the Cu∣stoms of his private Life. He subtracted Pen∣sions from such as he saw did nothing for them to deserve them; because he said, It was most absurd and cruel, to suffer that a State should be pilled and gnawed by Persons who contribute no∣thing to it by their Service, but live in Idleness. He diminished the Pension of Mesomedes, the Lyrick Poet of Crete. He informed himself in the Accounts of all the Provinces and their Tribute perfectly well. He gave his Daugh∣ter his Paternal Estate, but yet so, as to hold
it of the Crown. He sold such of the Furni∣ture of the Palace, and all Superfluities, as had only served for the Luxury of former Empe∣rors; and lived by times, according to the Sea∣son, at his own private Seats. He took no Journeys, but to go to his own Lands in Cam∣pania; because he said, The Retinue of a Prince is always heavy upon the Country through which he passes, let him be as sparing as he can. Ne∣vertheless, his Authority was great amongst all Foreign Nations, whilst he kept himself in re∣pose at Rome, the Heart and Centre, as it were, of the Empire; where by his Expresses, he ea∣sily received the News of all Parts. He conti∣nued to give Largesses to the People, and the Soldiers. He made a charitable Establishment for the Maintenance of certain young Chil∣dren, whom he called by the Name of Faustina's Children, in the memory of his Consort. His Works at this day extant at Rome, are these;His pub∣lick Works a Temple to the Honour of Hadriun: The Gracostadium, after a Fire, he rebuilt: He re∣pair'd the Amphitheatre, the Sepulchre of Ha∣drian, the Temple of Agrippa, and the Bridge elsewhere call'd Pons Sublicius over the Tyber: he repair'd the Light-Tower at the Port of Gajetta, and the Harbour at Terracina; as also the Bagnio at Ostia, the Aqueduct at Antium, and the Temples of Lavinia. He furnished seve∣ral Cities with Money, either to make them∣selves. New Works, or to restore their Old: He gave to Magistrates and to the Snatours Money, to inable them the better to discharge
their Functions with Honour. He refused the Inheritances which were left him, where there were Children to enjoy the same. He never turned a good Officer out of his Place, to put in another: Orphitus the Governour of the City desired leave to lay his down: Gavius Maximus was Twenty Years together, the Cap∣tain of the Guards under him; a severe Man: Succeeded afterwards by Tatius Maximus. After whose Death he made Two Captains of the Guards, who were Fabius Repentinus, and Cor∣nelius Victorius: Some said, That a Mistress of Antoninus was the cause of the Preferment of the first. No Senatour was put to Death un∣der this Prince. Nay, one who had con∣fessed himself a Parricide, and by the Laws of Nature, deserved not to live, was banished in∣to a Desart Island, rather than to execute him. He relieved in a Famine, the want of Corn, Wine and Oyl, amongst the People, at the Expence of his own Coffers; by buying those Commodities up, and giving them to the People for nothing. The Prodigies, and the Calamities whichCalami∣ties in his Reign. happen'd in his time were these; the Famine we now mentioned; then the Cirque fell into ruin; an Earthquake destroyed the Towns of the Island of Rhodes, and others in Asia, which he rebuilt to admiration; a Fire at Rome con∣sumed Three Hundred and Forty great Houses, which he rebuilt; a Fire at the City Narbon in Languedoc; another at Antioch; another in the Forum at Carthage. There was also an Inun∣dation
of the Tyber, and a Blazing-Star ap∣peared.Prodigies. A Boy was born with Two Heads, and a Woman was delivered of Five Boys at a Birth. A Snake of a great Magnitude was seen in Arabia, which had devoured one half of its own Body from the Tail. A Pestilence in Arabia. Four wild Lions in Arabia came tame to the hand, and suffered themselves to be taken. Pharasmanes the King of Iberia came to RomeRespect of foreign Princes to him. to see Antoninus, and paid him a greater Re∣spect than he had done to Hadrian. He con∣stituted Pacorus King of the Lazi, a People near Iberia. He obliged the King of Parthia to withdraw his War against Armenia, by only his Letter. King Abgarus out of the East came to Rome to wait upon him, induced by only the Authority of his Name. He arbitrated Differences betwixt Kings and Kings. The King of Parthia desired him to restore the Chair of State which had been carried away from that Kingdom by Trajan: But this he re∣fused. He restored Rimethalces unto the Go∣vernment of the Bosphorani upon the Maeotis, after a hearing of the Affair betwixt the Pro∣curator there and him. He sent Succours by the Euxine Sea to the People of Olbiopolis upon the Nieper, to assist them against the Tartars; and he reduced the Tartars to give Ho∣stages to the Olbiopolites for the performance of the Conditions of Peace. No Emperor had ever that Authority, as he, amongst Foreign Nations. He was always a Lover of Peace,
and often used that Sentence of Scipio, That he had rather save one Subject, than kill a Thou∣sand of the Enemy. The Senate had decreed, that the Months of September and October should thenceforth be called Antoninus and Faustinus, in Honour of him and his Consort: But this Honour he refused. He celebrated the Espousals of his Daughter Faustina with Marcus Antoninus, so Nobly, that he gave the Soldiers a great Bounty upon that occasion. He created Verus Antoninus, after his Questorship, a Consul. He sent for Apollonius the Stoick, as far as from the City Chalcis in Syria, to educate Marcus Antoninus; and ha∣ving invited him to the Court, in order to de∣liver his Scholar to him, and Apollonius making Answer, That the Master was not to come to the Scholar, but the Scholar to the Master; he smiled and said, As if it was easier for Apollonius to comeHis Can∣dour. from Chalcis to Rome, than to come from his Lodg∣ings to the Court. The Avarice of which Philo∣sopher, he remarked by his acceptation of the Recompences which were promised him. A∣mongst other Arguments of the Piety of An∣toninus, this is one; that as Marcus Antoninus was weeping for the Death of one who had been his Educator, and the Courtiers would have diverted him from it, as an unsuitable Ostentation of the Kindness which he had for him, he said to them, Give him leave to be, as he is, a Man; for neither Philosophy nor an Em∣pire takes our Natural Affections from us. The Officers of the Provinces in his time, received
from him, not only great Presents, but such as had not been Consuls, he honoured with the Marks of those that had. But if he found them guilty of Extortion and Bribery, tho' he restored the Fortunes of Fathers unto the Children, yet he did it under this Condition; that the Children should restore to the Pro∣vinces all that their Fathers had unjustly stoln from thence. He had all the Inclinations imaginable to Acts of Grace and Pardon. In the publick Shews which he gave the People, he produced Elephants, Rhinocerots, Cro∣codiles, Sea-Horses, Tygers, and all sorts of Beasts from all Parts of the World. He hath exposed a Hundred Lions together at one Shew. His behaviour towards his Friends in his Reign, was just the same as before, when he was a private Person; and neither they, not his Servants, whom he manumitted, pretended to make any Gain to themselves of their In∣terest in him; particularly, he was very strict with the Latter. He was much delighted withHis Recre∣ations. the Diversions of the Comedians, and in Fish∣ing, Hunting, Walking, and Talking with his Ministers, to whose Entertainments he went; and sometimes to the Feasts of the Vintage. He gave Honours and Recompences in Money, in the Provinces, to the Rhetoricians and the Philosophers. The Speeches which are extant under his Name, are said by many to have been of the Composition of another: but Marius Maximus says they are truly his
own. He made Entertainments for his Friends in particular, and in publick. He never Sa∣crificed by a Proxy, unless he was Sick. When he desired any Honour for himself or his Sons, he did all things as a private Candidate in the same Case. He dined with his Ministers many times at their Houses. He went one time to see the House of Omulus; where admiring the Porphyry-Pillars which he had, and asking him from whence he procured them, Omulus said, When you came, Sir, into a Strangers House, you are to be both Dumb and Deaf. He took this patiently, as he did a great many other Jests of the same Person. He made divers Laws, in which he servedHis Laws. himself of the best Lawyers of his time, who were Vinidius Verus, Salvius Valens, Volusius Metianus, Ulpius Marcellus, and Jabolenus. He put an end to whatever Seditions in any Part arose; not by Force and Cruelty, but by the Modesty and the Gravity of his Judgments. He prohibited the burying of the Dead with∣in the City. He limited the Expences of the Games of the Gladiators. He facilitated things for the convenience of Travelling with all the Care he could. He gave Reasons for every thing he did, either to the Senate or in his E∣dicts. He died in his Seventieth Year, but wasHis Death. as much lamented, then, as if it had been in the flower of his Age: And the manner of his Death, they say, was this; he had eaten with great Appetite at Supper, of the Cheese which is made upon the Alps, but he brought it up
again in the Night, and the next Day was taken with a Fever; the third Day being worse, he recommended the Empire, and the Care of his Daughter unto Marcus Antoninus, in the presence of the Court. Then he or∣dered the Golden Image of Fortune, which always stands in the Emperor's Bed-Chamber, to be removed out of his Room into that of Marcus Antoninus. Then he gave the word to the Tribune, which was Equanimity; and turn∣ing himself as it were to sleep, he died at his own Seat at Laurium. He was light∣headed in his Fever; at which times, all his Discourse was concerning the State, and the Kings who had given him an occasion of Displeasure. He left his Paternal Estate to his Daughter, and Legacies by his Will to all his Domesticks. He was tall and graceful; but being apt toHis Per∣sonage. stoop a little in his old Age, he then wore a pair of Bodice on purpose to keep himself strait. In a morning, when he grew in years, before he was visited, he eat a little dry Bread for his Health. He spoke a little broad, but yet agreeably enough The Senate made him a God, in which all People were forward to concur with them, because his Goodness, Cle∣mency, Wit, and Sanctimony were universally esteemed. They decreed him all the Honours which had ever been bestowed upon the best Princes. They appointed him an Order of Priests of his own Name, a Temple, and the Honour of the Games of the Cirque. He was
absolutely the only one of all the Emperors who lived without having ever shed the Blood either of Citizen or Enemy; and as his Reign was attended with the same Felicity and Goodness, the same Security and Reli∣giousness, with that of Numa Pompilius, he may very well be put in the Comparison with that Prince. He reigned Twenty Three Years.
THEA. Christi CLXII. Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, The PHILOSOPHER. BY JULIUS CAPITOLINUS: Addressed to the EMPEROR DIOCLESIAN. MArcus Antoninus was a Lover of Wis∣dom, a Philosophical Man all his time, and the best, as to the Sanctity of his Life, of all the Emperors before him: His Father was Annius Verus, who died in his Praetor∣ship:His Ex∣traction. His Grandfather was another Annius
Verus, who was twice Consul, and the Gover∣nour of the City of Rome; having been ad∣mitted amongst the Patricians by Vespasian and Titus, when they were Censours. His Uncle by his Father's side was Annius Libo, a Consul; the Empress Galeria Faustina was his Aunt: his Mother was Domitia Calvilla, the Daughter of Calvisius Tullus, who was twice Consul: his Father's Grandfather was Annius Verus, origi∣nally of Succubae in Spain, who was a Praetor and a Senator: his Mother's Grandfather was Catilius Severus, who was twice Consul, and Governour of Rome: his Grandmother by his Father's side was Rupilia Faustina the Daugh∣ter of Rupilius Bonus, who was a Consul also. Marcus Antoninus was born at Rome, upon Mount Caelius, in the Gardens e, the Sixth of the Calends of May, under the Consulships of his Grandfather and Augur, which was then the Second Consulship of his Grandfather. His Family, if we carry it up to the highest, is proved to partake of the Blood of Numa Pompilius by his Father's side, according to Marius Maximus; and by his Mother's, to come from Malennius, a King of the antient Salentini in Naples, who was the Son of Da∣sumnus, who built Lopiae. He was brought up where he was born, and partly in the House of his Grandfather Verus, hard by the Lateran Palace. He had a Sister who was younger than he, called Annia Cornificia. His Wife was Annia Faustina, who was his Cousin German by his Mother's side. At first his Name was
Annius Verus, from his Father and his Grand∣father. Hadrian called him Annius Verissimus, because of the Integrity of his Temper. But afterwards he re-assured his first Name again of Annius Verus, because his Grandfather (his Father dying) adopted him, and educated him. He was from his first Infancy grave and se∣rious; and after he was out of those Years in which Children are in the hands of the Women,His Edu∣cation. he was delivered to the Tuition of great Ma∣sters, who prepared his way for Philosophy. His Masters to teach him his first Elements of Letters, were Euphorion the Grammarian, Ge∣minus a Comedian, and Andron, who was both a Musician and a Geometrician. As these Three were they, who laid the Foundation for him to eed to all other Learning, so he ever had  n very great Respect. His Masters to teach him Grammar were, for the Greek, Alexander; for the Latin, Trosius Aper, Pollio, and Eutychius Proculus of Sicca in Africa. His-Masters to teach him Rhetorick, were for the Greek, Annius Marcus, Caninius Celer, and Herodes Atticus; for the Latin, Fronto Cornelius; amongst all which, he had a particular Re∣spect for Fronto, and desired the Senate to set up his Statue; and Proculus he advanced to be a Proconsul. He applied himself extremely to the Study of Philosophy, whilst he was but yet a Youth. In his Twelfth Year he entredAnd Pro∣ficiency. himself amongst the Philosophers, wore their Habit, practised their Severities, studied as they did, lay upon the Ground, and was with great
Difficulty persuaded by his Mother to make use of an ordinary Couch. Commodus, whose Daughter it was designed that he should mar∣ry, was another of his Masters; and also Apollonius a Stoick Philosopher of Chalcis in Syria. Such was his great Love to the Study of Philosophy, that after his adoption into the Im∣perial Family, he went himself to the House of Apollonius to learn there of him. He likewise went to hear the Dictates of Sextus a Philosopher of Chaeronea in Beotia, and the Kinsman of Plu∣tarch, as also Junius Rusticus, Claudius Maximus, and Cinsia Catullus, all Stoicks. For the Peri∣patetick Philosophy he heard Claudius Severus. Amongst these, he had particularly a RespectHis Re∣spect for his Pre∣ceptors. for Junius Rusticus, and followed him; being one who was not only excellent at the Stoick Philosophy, but a very understanding Person besides, whether in Peace or War. With him he communicated all his publick and private Counsels: He saluted him always before he did the Captain of the Guards: He made him twice Consul, and after his Death, desired the Senate to set up his Statue. He had that great Honour for his other Masters, that he set up their Images in Gold in his Closet, and vi∣sited their Sepulchres, which he adorned with Crowns, and Victims, and Flowers. To all this, he studied the Law, in which he heard the Dictates of Lucius Volusius Metianus. In fine, the Labour and the Travel which he be∣stowed in Study, really affected his Health; his excess in it, was the only Fault of his
Youth. He went often to the Declamations at the Publick Schools. His fellow Students, whom he more particularly loved, were Sejus Fuscianus, and Aufidius Victorinus, of the Se∣natorian Families: and Baebius Longus, and Calenus, of the Gentlemen: to whom he was very generous, and such as he could not for the condition of their lives prefer to Employ∣ments, he inriched by other means. He was Educated in some sort in the bo∣some of Hadrian, who called him, as I have said, Annius Verissimus, and at six years of Age conferred a mark of Honour upon him, and at eight years of Age, put him into the College of the Priests of Mars: in which he passed through the several Functions and Offices of that Order, not without receiving an Omen there of his succession to the Em∣pire. He put on the Roman, that is, the Man's Gown in his fifteenth year; and presently theHe is Contra∣cted. Daughter of Lucius Cejonius Commodus was Contracted to him, according to the last Will of Hadrian. He was left the Governour of Rome, in the interim whilst the Consuls went to the Sacrifices of the Latinae Feriae upon Mount Alban. In which honour he ac∣quitted himself to the general Approbation. He released all his Paternal Estate to his Sister. His Mother would have advised him to divide it only; but he said, he was contented with the Estate of his Grandfather; and if she pleased, she also might give his Sister her Estate to make her the better match for her Husband: He had so much complaisance for others,
that he suffered himself to be persuaded, some∣times against his will, to go either to the Chases of the Amphitheatre, or the Plays of the Stage, or other Shews. He learnt Paint∣ing, in which his Master was Diognetus. HeHis Exer∣cises and Chara∣cter. loved the Games of Fencing, Wrestling, Run∣ning, Fowling and Hunting, for Exercise. He played at the Ball. But above all these things the study of Philosophy gained his Heart; and rendred him perfectly grave and serious. Not but that yet he was in all respects obliging and courteous to every one; especially his Friends, and such as were but in the least known to him. So that he was Reserved with∣out Opiniatrety, Modest without Flatness, and Grave without Austereness. This being his Character, when Hadrian, after the death of Aelius Verus Caesar was to chuse some other Person to be his Successour in the Empire, which this Youth was not Pro∣per for as yet, upon the account of his Age, being then only eighteen years old; he A∣dopted Antoninus the Pious, who was Uncle to him, under a condition that Pius should Adopt Marcus, and that Marcus should A∣dopt Lucius Commodus Verus. Marcus receivedHis A∣doption. the News of his Adoption, more with a Con∣sternation, than Joy; and when he was or∣dered to be removed into a House of Hadrian's, it was with an unwilling mind, that he took his leave of that of his Mother. Insomuch that his Servants asking him, why he came so sad into the Royal Family, he reasoned with them upon the Evils which are contained in
the life of a Prince. Then he began first to be called, instead of Annius, Marcus Aurelius; because by the Right of his Adoption he was Translated into the Aurelian Family, that is, into that of Antoninus Pius. This was in the eighteenth year of his Age, under the Second Consulship of Antoninus his (now) Father: and the Senate dispensing with him, as to that Age, at the request of Hadrian he was made a Quaestor. He paid to all his Rela∣tions, after he was Adopted, the same Re∣spects altogether, as before. He observed his Studies as much, and was as good a Husband of his Expences: and he resigned himself wholly both to act, speak, and think, according to the instructions of his Father. When Hadrian dyed at Baiae, and Pius was also gone thither to remove his Body to Rome; Marcus Antoninus was left at Rome to order the Funeral Obsequies of his Grandfather; and being then Quaestor, he exhibited to the People the Games of the Gladiatours. Now Hadrian had ordered, when he Adopted Antoninus Pius, that Pius should Marry his Daughter to Verus the Son of Aelius Verus Caesar, and that the Daughter of Lucius Cejonius Commodus should Marry Marcus Antoninus. But Verus was not as yet of an Age for that Daughter. There∣fore when Hadrian was dead, it was thought fit by Pius and his Empress, to break off the Match of Marcus Antoninus with the Daughter of Commodus, and to Marry their own Daugh∣ter Faustina to him; to which Marcus con∣sented. Hereupon Pius advanced him, from
a Quaestor, to be Consul in Conjunction with himself, and gave him the Title of Caesar. He made him one of the six Seviri; and honoured him with his presence at his Publick Games. He appointed his Apartments in the Court, and ordered him to be there attended (contra∣ry to his own Inclination) with all Pomp and Ceremony. He passed him thro' the Colleges of the Priests, according to the desire of the Senate. He made him a second time Consul with himself; when himself entred upon his fourth Consulship. But at the same time that Marcus was possessed of these high Honours, and assisted at all things which his Father did in order to be formed to the Go∣vernment of the Empire, he went passionately nevertheless to his Studies. He married Fau∣stina,His wife and Rela∣tions. by whom he had a Daughter. Then the Tribunitian, and the Proconsular Powers were given him, and the right of a fifth Re∣ference: so that his Interest became so great, that his Father never easily Promoted any one without him. He was always the most duti∣ful to his Father, that it was possible for any one to be; howsoever some were willing to whisper Pius in the Ear with things against him; particularly Valerius Omulus; who one day taking notice of Calvilla the Mother of Marcus, as she was at her Devotions in a Gar∣den before an Image of Apollo, says he to Pius, That Lady there is now Praying for your death, and for the Reign of her Son. But this was al∣together of no weight with him: because he aw the great Probity of Marcus, and with
what Modesty he carried himself under the Honour of his Ascension to the degree of a Prince. He was so careful to weigh all things well, to preserve his Reputation, that in his youth∣ful years he always ordered his Servants to do nothing that was hard upon any body; and sometimes when Estates were left to him, he refused them, if he could, to give them to the next of the Family, He lived three and twenty years together in the Court with his Father, and yet he was every day beloved more and more; and in all that time he was not absent from him above two nights. Where∣fore when Antoninus Pius came to dye, he cal∣led his Ministers and his Friends about him; and recommended to them all, Marcus, as his Successour in the Empire. He gave the Tri∣bune the Word, which was Aequanimity, and immediately he ordered the Golden Image of Fortune, which stood in his Bedchamber, to be translated into the Bed-chamber of Marcus. After the death of Pius, the Senate constrain∣ingHe is cre∣ated Em∣peror, and Verus his Partner. Marcus to take the Publick Government upon him, he nominated Verus to be his Part∣ner in the same; declaring him Caesar and Em∣peror; from which time they equally began to Reign together, and were the first two Em∣perours, who sate at once upon the Throne of Rome. He called himself by the name of Marcus Antoninus; and he called his Brother Emperour by the name of Verus Antoninus; to whom he Contracted his Daughter Lucilla For an Act of goodness upon the occasion of
this Conjunction, they inlarged the Charity of their Predecessors, for the Maintenance of the Children of poor Families, and added other Pensions to them. From the Senate, af∣ter having finished their Affairs there, they both went together to the Camp of the Guards: where they promised the Soldiers a Bounty of twenty thousand Sesterces, and to the Officers proportionably, as usual, upon the occasion of their joynt Reigns. They made a magnificent Funeral for their Father, whom they interred in the Sepulchre of Ha∣drian. They proceeded to Consecrate him a God. Each made an Oration in Publick in his Praise; and having appointed him his Or∣der of Priests out of the number of his Friends, they distinguished them, by calling them after the name of his Family. Possessed thus of the Empire, they bothTheir good Govern∣ment. comported themselves so well, that none could complain of the loss of the gentle Reign of Pius. Marullus, the Satyrical Poet of that time, had some flings at them, but he passed un∣punished. They concluded the Funeral Ob∣sequies of their Father, with the Games of the Gladiatours. In the mean time Marcus gave himself still to Philosophy, and courted the love of the People. But the felicity and the quiet of their Reigns was interrupted, first by an Inundation of the Tyber, which was very terrible. It not only carried away several Buildings of the City, and destroyed a great many Cattle, but it produced a most grievous Famine: which Calamities were moderated
as much as possible by the Care and the Pre∣sence of Marcus and Verus. Then the Par∣thianSeveral Wars be∣gun. War arose; which Vologesus, the King of that Country, had been hatching under Pius, but he did not Proclaim it till the Reign of Marcus and Verus; at what time he attack'd Atidius Cornelianus, the Lieutenant of Syria, and put him to flight. Also a War with the Britains was upon the point of kindling, and the Catti had already made Incursions into Germany and Rhaetia. So against the Britains Calphurnius Agricola was sent. Against the Catti, Aufidius Victorinus. But to the Parthian War the Emperour Verus was appointed to go, with the advice of the Senate; whilst Marcus tarried at Rome, where the Civil Affairs re∣quired the presence at least of one Emperour. He accompanied Verus as far as to Capu, and honoured him with a Retinue of Great Men out of the Senate, and Officers for his Court of all sorts, to be both his Ministers and his Companions with him in the Expedition. But no sooner was Marcus returned to Rome, but he received advice, that Verus was sick at Ca∣nosa in Naples. He offered his Vows in the Senate for his Recovery, and then went in all haste to see him there: and being return'd to Rome the second time, he next received an ac∣count, that Verus was safely arrived in Syria; where he passed his time in Sports and Hunt∣ing, and lived at Antioch and the Village of Daphne in the greatest pleasure, whilst his Ge∣nerals carried on the Parthian War; in which they had the Victory of the Enemy. In
the mean time Marcus was continually attent upon the Affairs of the State; and seemed to take the Pleasures of his Brother, as if he was indifferent to them, or knew nothing of them. He ordered and managed all things necessary for the War, and yet lived the distance of Rome from it. The Affairs of Armenia were prosperous,Their Suc∣cess. and the City Teflis upon the Araxis was taken by Statius Priscus. Hereupon both the Em∣perours were presented with the Title of Con∣querours of the Armenians, which Marcus in modesty first at refused, but afterwards accepted. They were both in like manner, after the War was over, presented with the Title of Con∣querours of the Parthians; and this also Mar∣cus at first refused, but afterwards accepted. The Title of Pater Patriae, or Father of his Country, which had been offered to Marcus in the absence of Verus, he deferred to meddle with, till the return of Verus: because he would not assume it, but in Conjunction with him. In the mean time having Contracted his Daughter Lucilla in Marriage to him, he presented her richly, and sent her into Sy∣ria, in the midst of the War, attended by his Sister, and Civica, the Uncle of Verus. He went with her himself, as far as to Brin∣disi in Naples, and had intended to see her over the Water, if the Discourses of some, as if he had desired to Challenge to himself the glory of finishing the War, and upon that account was for going into Syria, had not cal∣led him back to Rome. He writ to the Pro∣consul
to take care, that she was not inter∣rupted by any in her Journey. Whilst these things passed, Marcus AntoninusPublick Constitu∣tions. made a Law, which is an extraordinary secu∣rity to People, in cases concerning their Free∣dom; he was the first that contrived it, and it is thus; he ordered every Roman Citizen, who had a Child born, to enter the name of the Child before the Treasurers of the Ex∣chequer, within thirty days. In the Provinces he erected Publick Notaries, before whom the same thing should be done upon the Births there, as before the Treasurers of the Ex∣chequer at Rome: so that when any Person born in any Province hath a Cause in Hand concerning his Freedom, he hath no more to do, than to bring from that Province a Testi∣ficate of his Birth; this corroborated the whole Law concerning Freedoms. He made other Laws concerning Bankers and Auctions. In divers Causes, in which himself espe∣ciallyGreat De∣ference to the Senate. was concerned, he made the Senate the Judge. He ordered, that Actions, having reference to the Freedom or Servitude of Persons Defunct, should be brought within five years from their deaths, or be ex∣cluded for ever. No Prince ever deferred more to the Senate than he. He delegated to several of them, of the degree of Praetors and Consuls, the decision of many Affairs; only that their command so far in the Law should be a means to possess them with the greater Honour. He admitted several of his Relations into the Senate, whom he had made
Aediles or Praetors. He granted to several Se∣natours, that were poor, provided that it was without reproach, the Offices of Tribunes and Aediles. He made no one a Senatour, un∣less he had a very good knowledge of him. In this also he shew'd his respect to them, that whenever a Senatour underwent a Tryal for his life, he heard him first in private, be∣fore he tryed him in publick; and he suffered none of the Order of the Knights and Gen∣tlemen to assist in such a Case. He went con∣stantly, as much as possible, to the Senate, though he had nothing to propose to them, if he was at Rome: but when he had any thing to propose to them, he came in Person to do it, if it were out of Campagnia. He often assisted in the Courts of Judicature, till it was night; and never withdrew out of the Senate till the Consul himself dismist it. He made the Senate the Judge in cases of Appeals from the Consuls. He shew'd himself very di∣ligent upon all Judiciary matters. He marked out the Law-days in the Kalendar, when Business was to be done, and Causes tryed. In the whole year, they were to the number of two hundred and thirty. He first gave the Praetors a power to appoint Guardians to Mi∣nors, who before were appointed by the Au∣thority of the Consuls; which he did, to ex∣pedite the Actions in that case. He regulated the excess of the Publick Ex∣pences in Feasts and Games. He interposed against the Trade of Informers; and when he found them false, he branded them. He con∣temned
the Accusations, which were suggested to him to enrich his Exchequer. He contrived many things very Prudently relating to the Publick Stores. He made Senatours the Cu∣ratours to several Cities; to extend so much the more, the glory of their Order. He re∣lieved the Cities of Italy in a time of great Fa∣mine, with Corn sent from Rome. He look∣ed after every thing, that concerned the Ma∣gazines of Corn. He moderated the Games of the Gladiatours, all manner of ways. He diminish'd the Gratuities, given to, or ex∣acted by the Comedians. He took a great care of the Streets of the City, and the High∣ways. He appointed Officers over the Pro∣vinces of Italy, for the Administration of Ju∣stice, in the Nature of the Proconsuls, which had been before appointed by Hadrian. He repeopled Spain, which was exhausted by con∣tinual Levyes, with Colonies from Italy. In which contravening the Ordinances of Tra∣jan, he expressed himself with great modesty and respect to the memory of that Prince. He added other Laws concerning the Tax called Vicessima, the Tutelage of Servants, Maternal Estates, and the succession of the Children unto them. He ordered, that such Senatours, who were Foreigners, should however buy themselves a fourth of their Estates in Italy. He gave power to the Curatours of the Towns and the Highways either to punish, or to re∣mit to the Governour of Rome to be punished, such as exacted more from any Persons, than what they were justly taxed to. As to the
rest, he rather restored the old Laws, than created new ones. He had Lawyers always with him, by whose Opinion, and according to whose Forms he gave Sentence in Law, and published his Ordinances. Particularly Scaevola, was one excellent Lawyer that he much used. The People lived under him, altogether asModera∣tion of Antoni∣nus. in a Free-City. He was extremely well disposed in all things, to deter Persons from evil, and to invite them to good. He re∣warded plentifully, and pardoned graciously: he made them of ill, good Men; and of good Men, he made them extraordinary good. He took a Raillery upon these occasions very patiently. One Veterasinus, who was of an ill Fame, begging an honourable Employment of him, he advised him to clear himself first from the Censures of the People. Veterasinus answering, he saw some that were made Prae∣tors, that he had fought Prizes with upon the Publick Stage; the Emperor took it, and said nothing. He was not forward to punish. If any Praetor had behaved himself in some things ill, yet he did not turn him out of his Praetorship, but ordered him to remit his Busi∣ness intirely into the Hands of his Col∣league. He never in his Judgments favoured the Exchequer in a Matter of Gain, when it hath been upon himself to give Sentence. He was firm to himself, and his purpose; and yet his Resolution was set off with Modesty, espe∣cially where he was even obliged to give re∣pulse. After his Brother was returned a Con∣querour
from Syria, the Title of Pater Patria was given to them both. For Marcus had in his absence comported himself to all the Sena∣tours, and all People, well. An Oaken, or which is otherwise called a Civick Crown, was equally presented to them both; and Ve∣rus desired that Marcus should Triumph with him. He desired that the Sons of Marcus should be also called Caesars. But such was the great moderation of Marcus, that though he joyned in the Triumph, in Company with him, he relinquished to him intirely (when Verus was dead) the Title of the Conquerour of the Parthians; and stiled himself only the Con∣querour of the Germans; which was a Title he had from a War of his own. So they car∣ried the Children of Marcus of either Sex, in the Triumph with them; even his Virgin-Daughters; and they beheld the Games which were Celebrated upon the occasion, with their triumphal Habits upon them. Amongst other remarkable things of the Pity of Marcus, it is not fit to forget this; that he ordered Fea∣ther-beds to be spread under the Rope-dancers, after an accidental fall of a Boy from the Rope: which is the reason that we have a Cu∣stom of hanging a Net under them at this day. Whilst the Parthian War was yet on Foot,War with the Mar∣comanni. another War kindled with the Marcomanni in Germany: which was suspended a good while by the Art of the Officers upon the Frontiers, that it should not trouble us till the Oriental War was over. It was five years from the begin∣ning
of that War, to the return of Verus. At whose return, Marcus declared to the Senate, that as he had sometime before given them In∣timations of a War in Germany, so it was ne∣cessary that now both the Emperours in Person should repair to it. Now the terrour of this Marcomannick War was so great, that Marcus was obliged to send for Priests from all parts, to dispatch the vast number of Sacrifices, which were vowed and offered upon this occasion. He Celebrated all the Sacred Foreign Rites that were ever seen at Rome; and purged the City of Rome all manner of ways; and Cele∣brated the Feasts of Lectisternia seven days together. A Pestilence at the same time pre∣vailed,A great Plague. which was so great, that the dead were carried off in Carts and Wagons. This obliged the two Princes to make strict Laws con∣cerning Burials and Sepulchres: in which they provided, that it should not be at the Liberty of Persons to build their Sepulchres in what place they pleased; which is still in force at this day. Many thousands dyed of this Pesti∣lence; several of the Nobility: whereof the most considerable had their Statues set up by Marcus Antoninus. Who in his great Cle∣mency took that care of the Common People, that he ordered them to be buried upon his own Expence. The Marcomanni and their Confederates being now actually in Arms, and putting all things into Confusion, the two Emperours, arrayed in their Military Apparel, set forward together upon the Expedition. Their March had no small effect with it, as
soon as they came, but as far as to Aquileia. For the Kings of the Enemy for the most part not only retreated with their Men, but put to death the Authors of their Insurrection. The Quadi, whose King was dead, said that they would not confirm the Person his Successour, who had been Created in his place, till our Emperours approved him: others sent Am∣bassadours to them to ask their Pardon for their disobedience: so that Verus his Opinion, who had set out much against his will in the beginning, was for returning back to Rome: especially having lost the Captain of the Guards, Furius Victorinus, and a part of the Army. But Marcus believing that the Bar∣barians dissembled, and that both their Re∣treat, and the other things which they did, were only out of a fear of being oppressed with the weight of so great a Force, he de∣clared himself to be for pursuing the War. Therefore they marched on, and crossed the Alpes, having settled all things in order, for the safety of Italy and Illyricum. However Verus was urgent for going back to Rome: to which Marcus at last consented, and that the Senate should have notice given them of it by Letter. But as they were afterwards upon the Road in the Coach together Verus wasDeath of Verus. suddenly taken with an Apoplexy and died. Marcus was so little affected for his part with those Pleasures, which were the real Rea∣son of Verus his desire to return to Rome, that he both Read, and hearkned to any one's Business, and signed Orders whilst he hath
been at the shews of the Cirque; which made the People, they say, sometimes pass their Raille∣ries upon him. Geminas and Agaclytus, two manumitted Servants of Verus, had a great In∣fluence over their Master. But yet Marcus dissembled, and even excused the Faults of Verus, tho' they displeased him never so much. He deified him after his Death. He provided honourably for his Aunts and his Sisters. He appointed a great many Sacrifices to his Ho∣nour. He appointed his Priests, and gave him all the other Respects which are paid to the Gods. But as there is no Prince but is subject to the most outragious Censure; Marcus was for all this represented, as if he had either poy∣soned Verus by a Knife invenom'd on one side, with which he cut a piece of a Sacrifice, and gave Verus the invenomed part to eat, whilst he reserved the sound to himself, or at least, that he killed him by his Physician Posidip∣us, by letting him Blood unseasonably. After the Death of Verus, Avidius Cassius re∣volted from Marcus. Tho' Marcus was so indulging to Verus his Relations, and all that belonged to him, that he did them all the Ho∣nours that it was possible. Commodus his Son,Commo∣dus decla∣red Caesar. as wicked and profligate as he was, received from him the Title of Caesar, the Dignity of the Priesthood, the Title of Emperor, a share n the Triumph with him, and the Consulship. At the same time the Father attended the Tri∣umphal Chariot of the Son on Foot, in the Cirque. Now when Marcus reigned alone after the Death of Verus, he was much more
easie, and more abundant in good Actions than he could be before, because he was hin∣dered with the Errours of his Brother. He was one for his own Part, of that Tranquil∣lity of Mind, that he never changed his Coun∣tenance either with Sorrow or Joy; following exactly the Precepts of the Stoick Philosophy, which he had learnt from all the best Masters, and which he had diligently collected from all Parts. Hadrian would have made him his im∣mediate Successour, had not his Minority the hindred it. Nevertheless, he chose him for one, whom he obliged Pius to adopt; that a he was deserving of the Roman Empire, i should sooner or later certainly come to him. So he treated the Provinces with a great deal of Moderation and Goodness, and managed his Affairs happily against the Germans. He went through with the Marcomannick WarEnd of the Mar∣comannic War. than which a greater hath not been known in any Age, with a Bravery equally extraordi∣nary as the Success; and this at a time when a grievous Pestilence swept away many Thou∣sands of the People and the Army. The Marcomanni, the Sarmatians, the Vandals, the Quadi, being extinguished by him, he deli∣vered the Country of Pannonia out of its Ser∣vitude; for which he triumphed at Rome, and his Son Commodus with him, whom he had created Caesar. He had exhausted all his Coffers upon this War; and because he could not persuade himself to command any thing from the Provinces to over-charge them, he
made an Auction in the Forum of Trajan of the Goods of his Houshold. He sold the Ves∣sels of Gold, Crystal and Myrrh, the Royal Services, Rich Garments of his Wife's which were embroidered with Gold, and several Je∣wels which were laid up in the Cabinet of Hadrian. The Sale continued Two Months, and such a considerable Sum was produced by it, that having prosecuted the Reliques of the Marcomannick War with it, according to his desire, he gave the Buyers the Liberty to re∣turn if they pleased their Purchases, and take their Money again. But whether they did or no, he was satisfied, and allowed Gentlemen to have their Tables as splendid as himself. In the publick Shews which he gave the People at his Triumph, he was so Magnificent, that he exposed a Hundred Lions together, to be shot to death with Arrows. Having therefore Reigned to the general Love of all the People, who called him by the endearing Terms of, sometimes their Brother, sometimes Father, sometimes Son, as every one's Age was, he died in the Eighteenth YearDeath of Antoninu of his Empire, and the Sixty First of his Age. The Love of him amongst all the People ap∣pear'd on the Day of his interment. Because none thought him then an Object to be lamen∣ted, but assured themselves, that as he had been formed and lent them by the Gods, so he was returned to the Gods. Before his Fune∣ral was well finished, a thing which never was known to be done before, nor since, the Se∣nate and the People in one Body upon the
place, pronounced him a Propitious Deity. This great Man, who was so Excellent him∣self, and so ally'd to the Gods, both in his Life and Death, left a Son, Commodus, who was so ill on the other hand, that it had been happy he had never had him. Nay, it was a small thing, that Persons of all Ages, Sexes, Conditions and Dignities, honoured Marcus as a God; for he was judged Sacrilegious, who∣ever had not his Image in his House, if his fortune permitted him. To this day in many Families, the Statues of Marcus Antoninus stand, amongst the Houshold Deities; and some Per∣sons have firmly and publickly averred, that he hath predicted many future and true thing to them in Dreams. A Temple was erected to him, and an Order of Priests of his own Name appointed him, with all other things which to consecrated Persons have ever been ascribed by Antiquity. Some say, and it is not unlikely, that Com∣modus Antoninus his Successor and his Son, was a sort of an Adulterous Birth, the Story where∣of is represented commonly thus. FaustinaStory of the Birth of Com∣modus. the Wife of Marcus, and formerly the Daugh∣ter of Antoninus Pius, seeing one Day the Gla∣diators enter the Amphitheatre, fell in love with one of them to that degree, that she la∣boured under a long Sickness upon it, till at last she confessed the Cause to her Husband. Marcus advised with the Magicians, whose Counsel it was, to put to Death that Gladia∣tor, and that Faustina should wash her Secrets with his Blood, and then lie with her Hus∣band:
This was done, and her Love cured. But Commodus was born after it, more a Gladiator than a Prince; because when he was Emperor, he fought almost a Thousand Combats with the Gladiators, in the publick view of the People, as we shall have occasion to say in his Life. And that which makes this Story the more credible, is, this Son of so Holy a Father, was a Man of those profligate Manners, that no com∣mon Sword-player, Actor, Baiter of Beasts, nor in fine, no one, tho' of the sink of all Shame and Wickedness, was like him. O∣thers say, that he was absolutely a Bastard; and that Faustina, when she was at the Port of Gajetta, chose herself there by the Eye, the Seamen generally working naked, what Men she saw were the best provided, both out of the Sea-men and the Gladiators; wherefore Mar∣cus Antoninus was advised by one, if he would not punish her by Death, to divorce her. To which he answered, If I divorce my Wife, I must return her her Dower. But her Dower was the Empire which he had received from her Father, who had adopted him at the de∣sire of Hadrian. Certainly the Virtue, the In∣tegrity, the Tranquillity, the Piety of a good Prince, is a thing of that prevalence, that the ill Character, not so much as of the nearest Relation, can defame him. And so it was with Marcus Antoninus, who persevering still in his own virtuous way, and not changing in any thing upon the whispers or calumnies of the People, neither his Gladiator-Son was a prejudice to him, nor his impure Consort.
He is (as he hath ever been) esteemed a God to this Day; and particularly by you, O most Sacred Emperor Dioclesian, who have a Vene∣ration for him, even above the rest of your Gods, and are pleased often to say, That you chiefly wish yourself like him in his Life, and the Clemency which he always exercised; tho' should Plato return into the World again, he could not parallel him with all his Philosophy. The things that passed under Marcus Antoninus, after the Death of Verus, were these: First, the Body of Verus was brought to Rome, and interred in the Sepulchre of his Ancestors, and Ver made a God. Then Marcus thanked the Se∣nate for having Consecrated his Brother, but intimated at the same time, As if the Counsels by which the Parthians were overcome, had been much owing to himself; and that now, he would govern as it were upon a new and better Founda∣tion. The Senate took it in the Sense which Marcus meant, and seemed to congratulate, that Verus was departed this Life. However, Marcus provided very honourably for Verus's Sisters, Relations and Servants. Indeed he was very Curious of his Reputation, and enquired always what every one said of him, and cor∣rected himself accordingly in such things as they seemed to blame him for, with reason Going to the War in Germany, he re-married his Daughter to Claudius Pompeianus, the Eldest Son of a Roman Knight, of a Family of the City of Antioch, but not of the highest No∣bility. He afterwards made him Twice Con∣sul, in consideration that his Daughter was
so much his Superior; which Match however, did neither please her nor her Mother. The Moors laying waste almost all Spain, heTumults, &c. quel∣led. employed his Lieutenants against them, who reduced them: In Egypt, the Robbers about the Parts called Bucolia, committing divers great Disorders, they were also reduced by Avidius Cassius, who afterwards set himself up for the Empire. About this time Marcus An∣toninus, whilst he was at his Retreat at Pale∣strina, lost his Son called Verus Caesar, of the Age of Seven Years, by lancing a Tumour which he had under his Ear. The Mourn∣ing for whom was kept but Five Days, and then he applied himself again to the publick Business. It was the time of the Celebration of the Games of Jupiter, which he would not suffer to be interrupted by a more solemn Mourning; so he only ordered Statues to be set up to the Memory of the deceased, and his Image in Gold to be carried in Pomp in the Cirque, and his Name to be inserted into the Hymn of the Priests of Mars. In the time of the Pestilence beforementioned, Marcus was especially diligent to restore the Worship of the Gods. Against the Marcomannick War, he made Soldiers of Slaves and Gladiators. Others he had who were called Voluntiers. He listed the Robbers of Dalmatia and Dar∣dania. He served himself of some Troops out of Phrygia, and fought Auxiliaries of the Ger∣mans against the Germans. He used all man∣ner of Diligence to compleat his Legions for this War; and because he would not exact
Money upon the Provinces, he made an Au∣ction, as I said, of the precious Moveables of his Houshold in the Forum of Trajan; in which, besides Cloaths and Plate, he sold the Images and the Pictures which were of the Hands of the Great Masters. At length, he defeated the Marcomanni at the Passage of the Danube, and restored their Spoils to the Provinces. All the Nations from the Borders of Illyri∣cumThe Con∣federate Nations. as far as to Gallia, had confederated a∣gainst us. The Marcomanni, the Narisci, the Hermunduri, the Quadi, the Suevi, the Sarmatae, the Latringes, and the Bursi. To these were joyned, the Victovali, the Sosives, the Sicobotes, the Roxolani, the Bastarnae, the Alani, the Pe∣cini, the Costoborei, and others. His other Wars were the Parthian War, and the Britannick War. Now it was with great Pains and La∣bour, that he overcame as he did, Nations so stubborn as all these. The Soldiers followed his Example; the Lieutenant-Generals, and the Captains of the Guards marched in Per∣son at the Head of their Men; so he obliged the Marcomanni to surrender themselves, and a great many of them were transplanted into Italy. But before he went upon any thing of Importance, not only in War, but in the Civil Affairs, he advised always with his great Officers. It was always his saying, It is more fitting that he should follow the Counsel of so many faithful Friends, as they were, than that they all should follow him who was but one. A great many of the Nobility were kill'd in that German or Marcomannick, or rather, that War of a mul∣titude
of Nations, whose Statues he set up in the Forum of Trajan. Therefore his Friends intreated him often to retire from the Dan∣ger and come to Rome: But he persisted in his own Resolutions, and did not withdraw till all was finished. He changed the Pro∣consular Provinces into Consular, and the Con∣sular into Proconsular, or Praetorian, accor∣ding as the occasions of the War required. He composed by his Severity, and the rigour of his Discipline, the Troubles that were arisen in Burgundy and in Portugal. He sent forCommo∣dus puts on the Gown. his Son Commodus to the Frontiers of Ger∣many, where he put upon him the Man's Gown; upon which occasion he gave a Lar∣gess to the People, and next he made him a Consul, although it was before his proper time. When any Person was at any time proscri∣bed by the Governour of Rome, he did not at all take the News well. He was always very reserved how he gave away publick Money; which is rather to his Praise than to his Re∣proach. And yet he was always disposed to give Money to good Men, towards the Relief of Towns which were fallen into decay; and where he saw a Necessity for it, he remitted the Tribute and the Taxes. In his absence he ordered that the publick Divertisements of Rome should be taken care of by such as were the richest to publish them. This obviated a Discourse which was amongst the People, when he had carried away the Gladiators to the War, as if he designed to put down those
Sports, and to force all the World to Philoso∣phy. He commanded that the Stage-Players, Tumblers, and those sort of Men should not be∣gin their Shews upon the Market-days, till later than ordinary, because they should not hinder the Market. Some talk'd of some of those sort of Men, being beloved by his Wife; but he purged himself of all that by his Let∣ters. He forbad the going in the Town onSome of his Con∣stitutions. Horseback, or in Coaches. He took away the promiscuous Bagnios, wherein Men and Women washed together. He moderated the Luxury of the Women, and of the young No∣bility. He rescued the Sacrifices of the God Serapis from that Rabble, and those Disturban∣ces which annoy them at the City of Belv in Egypt. It was said, that some, under the pretence of being Philosophers, had that Inte∣rest in him, that they were a prejudice to the publick, no less than private Persons. But of this he purged himself, and shew'd that it was in no wise true. He generally inflicted upon all Crimes a lesser Punishment, than what it was the Cu∣stom to do by the Laws; and yet sometimes against notorious and high Offenders he con∣tinued inexorable. He took the Cognizance himself of the Capital Causes of Persons of the better Quality, and managed them with all imaginable Equity. He would reprimand a Praetor that gave Judgment upon too shor a hearing, and order him to try the Cause over again; saying, It is for the Honour of him who judges for the People, to hearken to the Rea∣sons
of the accused to the last. He observed to do Justice impartially as to Prisoners taken in War, and he settled infinite Numbers of the Barbarians in the Roman Territories. When the Enemy had by a Stratagem so shut up his Army that they could come to no Water, he extorted from Heaven by his Prayers a Storm of Rain which relieved them, when they were ready to perish with Thirst. He had designed to erect Marcomannia into a Province, and likewise Sarmatia; and he had done it, if Avidius Cassius had not rebelled against himAvidius Cassius rebels. in the East, who set himself up as Emperor, by an Intrigue, some say of Faustina, when she began to despair of the long Life of her Husband. Others say, it was pretended that Marcus was dead, and that Cassius did not set up himself till after Marcus was declared a God. But however it was, Marcus was not very much moved at the Defection; neither did he Revenge himself upon the Wife, or Fa∣mily, or Friends of Cassius: But Cassius was adjudged an Enemy by the Senate, and his Estate was confiscated into the publick Trea∣sury. Then leaving the War against the Sarmatae and the Marcomanni, he marched against Cassius. In the mean time, some at Rome were in a fear, that Cassius in his absence would haveWho is kill'd. come thither. But Cassius was presently kill'd, and his Head brought to the Emperor, who without rejoycing at his Death ordered the Head to be buried. A Son of Cassius, called Maecianus, to whom he had committed Alex∣andria,
met with the same Fate; and the Cap∣tain of the Guards that Cassius had made, was also killed by the Army. He forbad the Se∣nate to take Vengeance upon the Accomplices of the Defection; desiring, if possible, at the same time, that no Senator might be put to Death in his Reign, because it should not be polluted with Blood. He ordered such Per∣sons as were banished, to be recall'd. Some few Centurions lost their Heads. He pardon∣ed the Cities which had complied with Cassius. He pardoned the Antiochians, who had said se∣veral things against himself, and in Favour of Cassius; from whom, however, he took a∣way their Shews, their publick Conventions, and all sorts of Assemblies, by a strict Edict; because they were a seditious People, as he in∣timates in his Speech in Marius Maximus, which he made to his Ministers upon the Sub∣ject of this Defection. He designed not to see Antioch, when he went into Syria, nor the City Cyr, or Carin, of which Cassius was. But however, afterwards he went to Antioch. He was at Alexandria, and was very obliging to that City. He transacted many things with the Kings of those Parts, who met him, to∣gether with the Ambassadors of the Persians, and he established a Peace with them. He made himself dear to all the Oriental Pro∣vinces, and left the Prints of his Philosophy amongst them, by his weighty Discourse. He acted the Citizen and the Philosopher in Egypt, in all the Academes, Temples, and publick Places where he came. Though the Alexan∣drians
had said several things to the Advan∣tage of Cassius, he pardoned them, and left a Daughter of Cassius with them. After this he lost his Consort Faustina, at a Village calledDeath of Faustina. Halala, at the Foot of the Mountain Taurus, where she died suddenly. He desired the Se∣nate to make her a Goddess, and give her a Temple; praising her, though she had labour∣ed under such a Censure of Unchastity, which either he knew nothing of, or at least he dis∣sembled it. Some Alms-Children for whom he made a Provision, he called by her Name, in her Honour. She had accompanied him into the Field in the Summer, and therefore had the Title of the Mother of the Camp. He made the Village a Colony where she died, and erected her a Temple there; which was afterwards re-dedicated to Heliogabalus. At the same time that he marched against Cassius, he gave no Commands for the killing him, out of his Clemency. Heliodorus his Son was banished. Others, who banished themselves, were allowed a part of their Estates. And for the rest of the Children of Cassius, they enjoyed above a half of their Father's For∣tune. His Daughter Alexandra, and Druncia∣nus her Husband, had their free Liberty of going any whither. And certainly Marcus Antoninus was sorry for the Death of Cassius; because, he said, He desired to have passed his Reign, with∣out shedding the least drop of the Blood of the Senators.
After he had settled the Affairs of the East, he came to Athens; where amongst other things, he visited the Temple of the Goddess Ceres, to shew his Innocency, because this was solemnly forbid∣den to wicked Persons; and he was admitted in∣to the Sacresty all alone. In his return by Sea into Italy, he was overtaken with a great Storm. At his Landing at Brindisi in Naples, he bh put on the Roman Gown himself, and commanded the Soldiers to habit themselves accordingly, who never went in their Soldiers Coats in Italy in his Reign. Being come to Rome, he trium∣phed there, and from thence he went to Lavinia. He made his Son Commodus his Colleague in the Tribunitian Power. He entertain'd, the People with a Largess, and extraordinary fine Shews. He reformed many things in the Ci∣vil Policy, and set proper Bounds to the Ex∣pences of the Games of the Gladiators; ha∣ving this Sentence of Plato much in his Mouth, Happy the States where either the Philosophers are the Emperors, or the Emperors are Philosophers. He match'd a Daughter of Bruttius Praesens, who was of the Consular Dignity, to his Son Commodus: But the Espousals were celebratedEspousals of Com∣modus. with no more than ordinary Magnificence; on which occasion he gave a Largess to the People. Then he re-assum'd the Old War with the Marcomanni again. For he had made War with those, and with the Hermunduri, the Sarmatae, and the Quadi, three Years before together; and now if he had lived but one Year longer, he had reduced them into Pro∣vinces. But he died as he was making his
preparations for that Conquest. Two days be∣fore he died, his Officers being admitted into his Chamber, he gave them to understand that he had as ill an Opinion of his Son Commodus, as Philip of Macedon had a good Opinion of his Son Alexander; saying, as Philip did, he was not sorry to dye, since he left behind him such a Son; but meaning that the Roman Empire would scarce be large enough to hold the Vices of him; who made it appear already, de∣parting from the Rules of Life, which his Fa∣ther had prescribed him, that he was Cruel,The Death of Antoni∣nus. and Infamous. His death was thus: when he began to be sick, he called his Son to him, and advised him first of all not to slight the Reliques of the War, for fear that he should seem to betray the Empire. To which Commodus an∣swering, that he should be obliged for his own safety to be gone from the Army, because of the Pestilence which raged: he told him a∣gain, He might do as he would; but he desired him rather to tarry, at least a few days, because he would do well to appear to hold it a little against the Barbarians: After this, he would neither eat nor drink, because he desired to dye, and this increased his Distemper. The sixth day he called in his Friends, and discoursing to them about the Vanity of Humane things, and the Contempt of death, he said, Why are you sorry for me, when you ought rather to think of the Pestilence which rages, and of the com∣mon death of every one? As they retired from him, he sighed and said, If you see me no more, I bid you farewel; I go before you. They asked
him to whom he recommended his Son. He said; To all you, if he deserves it, and to the Gods Immortal. The Army upon the notice of his sickness was very much troubled; for they loved him dearly. The seventh Day he was worse, and saw none but his Son: whom he presently dismissed again, for fear he should be infected. His Son being gone, he threw the Cloaths over his Head, as if he went to sleep; and died that night. Some say, that when he saw that Commodus would prove such a Man, as afterwards he did, he rather wished him dead, than that he should make another Nero, Caligula, or Domitian, by his Reign. One thing Marcus Antoninus is blamed for, which is, That he promoted to several Honors Tertullus, Utilius, Orphitus, and Moderatus, who were his Wife's great Lovers. He hadLicenti∣ousness of Faustina. surprized Tertullus one day actually at Dinner with her. The Buffoon upon the Stage gave him a Rub as to this Man, in his own Pre∣sence. What, says he to him that was with him, is the name of that Man, that you say Gallants my Wife; the other answered, Tul∣lus, Tullus, Tullus. He asked him the same Question again: says the other, I have told you. By which the Audience plainly saw, that he meant, that his crying three times Tullus, signified Tertullus. So every body talk'd very much of this Spark, and blamed the Patience of Antoninus. Sometime be∣fore his death, and before he went the second time to the Marcomannick War, he took his
Oath in the Capitol, that not one single Se∣natour by his knowledge, had been put to death. And he said, He should have saved the lives even of the Rebels with Cassius, if it had been left to him. He was so far from seek∣ing to enrich himself with the Estate of Pro∣scribed Persons, that he abhorred and shun'd nothing more than the scandal of Covetous∣ness: against which he purges himself in se∣veral Letters. Some pretend to say that he was a Dissembler and not really of that Sin∣cerity as he seemed to be, or as either Pius or Verus was of. And again they say, that he too much raised the Pride of the Court, by estranging his Friends from his Company and his Banquets. He ordered a Deification for his Parents, and honoured the Friends of his Relations with Statues, though they were Persons that were dead. He did not easily believe things upon Trust; but gave himself always time enough to find out the truth. Af∣ter the death of Faustina, Fabia the Sister of Verus was Ambitious to Marry him. But he rather chose to content himself with a Con∣cubine, of a Daughter of a Servant to his late Wife, than over so many Children, which he had, to superinduce a Step mother.
THEA. Christi CLXII. Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR VERUS ANTONINUS. By JULIUS CAPITOLINUS Addressed to the EMPEROR DIOCLESIAN. I Know very well, that several Persons who have written the History of the Actions of Marcus and Verus, have done it in such a method, as to give the Reader an ac∣count of Verus in the first place; following the order not of their Reigns, but their Deaths.
But I have thought it my Duty to give the pre∣cedence, as to this, to Marcus, and to treat of Verus afterwards; because Marcus was the first of the two upon the Throne; and because his survival after the death of Verus made but a continuation still of the same Reign. Lucius Cejonius Aelius Commodus Verus Anto∣ninus, who by his Adoption into the Aelian Family by the Will of Hadrian, was called Aelius, and by his Alliance with Marcus Antoni∣nus, received the name of Verus Antoninus, was a Prince, whom we do not reckon in the number of the Best, nor yet on the contrary in the number of the Worst Princes. For as his Virtues were not abundant, so neither were his Vices formidable. One thing is, he did not Reign an Independent Monarch of himself; for he was under Marcus; but yet of an equal Majesty with him in the Empire; and at the same time he very much differed from him in this, that he was Licentious in his Manners; and was of an humour that was frank and open, and could dissemble nothing. His Father was Lucius Aelius Verus, who for∣merly had been Adopted by Hadrian, being the first of the Title of a Caesar, as it is used to denote the Person appointed to be the Suc∣cessour to the Empire; and who died in that Quality. His Grandfathers, and Great Grand∣fathers, together with many of his other An∣cestours,Verus his Birth and Extracti∣on. had been Consuls. He was born at Rome in the Praetorship of his Father, upon the eighteenth of the Calends of January, which was heretofore also the Birth-day of the
Emperor Nero. His Family by his Father's side was for the most part out of the Coun∣try of Hetruria, and by his Mother's, out of the City Faenza. This being his Extraction, he, upon the A∣doption of his Father by Hadrian, came into the Family of that Emperour; continuing wherein after his Father's death, when Ha∣drian was pleased, out of his care for the good of Posterity, to take Antoninus Pius to be his Son, and Marcus Antoninus to be his Grand∣son; he not only obliged at the same time the former to Adopt this Verus, but to give him al∣so his Daughter to Wife: which Daughter was married however to Marcus Antoninus, and not to Verus, because Verus in respect of his Age was not then judged proper for her, (as we have said above,) and Verus married Lucilla, the Daughter of Marcus. He was brought up in the Court. His Master in Grammar,His Pre∣ceptors. for the Latin, was Scaurinus, the Son of that Scaurus, who was the Grammarian to Hadrian: For the Greek, he had Telephas, Hephaestion, and Harpocration. His Masters in the Greek Eloquence were Apollonius, Celer Caninius, and Herodes Atticus; for the Latin, Cornelius Front. His Masters in Philosophy were Apollonius and Sextus: all whom he loved very well, and they loved him; but he was one, that had little of a natural Genius to Learning. He pleased himself the most at first in making Verses; and afterwards in making Orations. It is said, he was a better Oratour than a Poet; or rather, to speak more properly, that
he was a worse Poet than he was an Orator. Others say, he had the Wits of his Friends to assist him; and that in those very things of his which are Extant, whatsoever they are, he served himself of the same. For, they say, he had several Men of Learning and E∣loquence always with him. The Governour of his Youth was Nicomedes. He was Vo∣luptuous; and shew'd great gaiety in all sorts of Pleasures, Sports and Divertisements, which became him but too well. He was Adopted at the Age of seven years, and was formed upon the Manners and Authority of Marcus Antoninus. He loved Hunting, Wrestling, and all the Exercises of Youth; and was as a private Person in the Court no less than three and twenty years together. The day that he put on the Roman, that is, the Man's Gown, Antoninus Pius dedicated a Temple to his Father Aelius Verus, and gave a Bounty to the People. When he was made Quaestor, and entertained, at his admittance into that Office, the People, with the Pub∣lick Games, he took his place in the midst be∣twixt Antoninus Pius and Marcus. After his Quaestorship he was presently made Consul,He is made Con∣sul. in Conjunction with Sextilius Lateranus. Some years after that he was made a second time Consul, in Conjunction with Marcus Antoni∣nus: after which, he continued a long time n the Estate of a private Man, and was not adorned with the same Honours as Marcus was. He did not sit in the Senate, before his Quae∣storship: neither did he accompany so much
with the Emperor, as with the Captain of the Guards; and he had no other name of Honor added to his own more than this, that he was called the Emperor's Son. He much delighted in the Races of the Cirque, and in the Games of the Gladiatours; but as his Pleasures and his Luxury were continually the occasions of his falling into many errours; it seems, as if he was not retained in the Royal Family by Antoninus Pius, but upon this account; because Hadrian had commanded him to Adopt him so expresly, that he call'd him his own Grand∣son: and so he retained him, it is supposed, more to discharge his Trust, than as a mark of his Love. That which he approved in hi was the Simplicity and the Debonaireness of his Temper: he advised him, as much as he could to form himself upon the Model of his Brother. In fine, when his Father was dead, his Brother conferred all things upon him, even to the participation of the Sovereignty; and made him his Colleague, although the Se∣nateHe is made Col∣league in the Em∣pire. had deferred the Empire to himself a∣lone. Elevated thus to the Empire, and the Tri∣bunitian Power being given him, and the honour of a Proconsulship, his Brother Mar∣cus Antoninus ordered him to be called by the name of Verus Antoninus. As a testimony o his Sense of so high Favours, he received Mar∣cus, upon all occasions, with the respect of a Lieutenant to a Proconsul, or of a President of a Province to the Emperour. He con∣formed himself in all things at first with grea
care to the intentions and will of Marcus; who at the same time harangued the Soldiers in the name of them both upon this occasion. But when Verus was gotten into Syria, the greatHis Lu∣xury. liberty which he gave himself in living at his ease; with his lewd Amours, and the Debau∣cheries of all sorts, to which he was abandon∣ed, so changed him to another Man, that he defamed his Reputation. In like manner, af∣ter his return out of Syria he made a perpe∣tual Tavern of the Court; where after having dined with Marcus, he retired to his own Com∣pany, and diverted himself with all sorts of filthy Persons. He passed whole nights at Game, according to a Custom that he had learnt in Syria: and to such a degree did he Rival the Vices of Caligula, Nero, and Vitellius, that he roved up and down in the night amongst the Taverns and the Stews in disguise; and pleased himself to make Debauches with the Mob, and to joyn in their Quarrels; out of which he often however came off with a black Face: But notwithstanding his Disguises, he was known in the publick Houses where he came; where, at other times, he was for Breaking the Glasses and other Vessels, and then he paid very well for them. He favoured very much the Green-Coat-Party in the Races run in the Cirque. He had Gladiators fre∣quently to fight at the Entertainments which he made, and which he prolonged till mid∣night; till he fell a sleep upon his Coach, and was taken up in his Cloaths, and carried to Bed. He slept but little, and had an easie
digestion. In the mean time Marcus dissem∣bled all these things, as if he knew nothing of them, out of Modesty, not to put to shame his Brother. One Banquet, that he made, is remarkable: he had in the first place twelve Guests; where∣as the known Proverb, as to the number at such a time, is, Septem convivium, novem convi∣tium; that is, Seven's a Company, Nine is but Noise. Every one of these had a handsome Boy at his Back to serve him. Every one his Sewer, and his Dishes to himself, which were of their own chusing. Every one his fresh Cup of Myrrh, or of the Crystal of Alexan∣dria as oft as he drank. There were also Cups of Gold and Silver, and others set with Jew∣els. Then they had Crowns upon their Heads, adorned with golden Labels, and Flowers, such as for the Season were Rarities. They had their golden Boxes filled with pretious Oint∣ments; and at parting they all had their Ca∣leshes drawn with Mules in Harness of Sil∣ver, presented to them, to carry them home. The whole Treat was estimated at sixty hun∣dred thousand Sesterces: which when Marcus heard of, he sighed, and lamented the mis∣fortune of the Publick in the Person of his Brother. After Supper they played at Dice all that night, till it was morning. And this he did after his return from the Parthian War, to which Marcus had sent him purposely, that he should not commit those sort of Actions in the sight of all the World at Rome; think∣ing besides that Travelling might teach him
frugality, and the dangers of War make him better, and more sober, or at least teach him to know himself to be an Emperour: but how much the better he was for it, this Sup∣per alone shews, as well as the rest of his Life. His love of the Races of the Cirque was such, that he sent and received many Letters about them, into, and out of the Provinces. When present at them, and in Company with Marcus, he has suffered several Affronts from the contrary Party, for his over great Zeal to that to which he sided. He had a Horse cal∣led Swift, whose Image he cut out in Gold, and fed him with Raisins and Almonds, in the Manger, instead of Corn; covered him with a Cloath of Purple, and ordered him to be kept in a Room in the Court. When this Horse died, he Erected a Monument to him upon the Vatican. And it was first in the fa∣vour of this Horse, that they began the Cu∣stom of gathering Money for the Winning Horses, in the way, as it were, of a Praemium. For this Horse was so much beloved; that a Bushel of pieces of Gold hath often been thrown to him by those of his Side in the Cirque. When Verus set forward upon his Expe∣ditionHis negli∣gent Con∣duct. to the Parthian War, Marcus accom∣panied him as far as to Capua. But going on his way from Capua, he Revelled it so, at all the great Houses where he came, that he contracted an Illness, and fell Sick at Canosa in Naples, whither Marcus took a second Jour∣ney to visit him there. Certainly many ill
and unhandsome things appear in the Conduct of Verus, which he did during the time of the War. For when both the Lieutenant of Sy∣ria was killed, and the Legions there were cut off; the Syrians Meditating a Revolt, and the East laid Waste by the Enemy, then was he passing his time in Hunting in Apuleia. At Corinth and Athens, he had his Musical Con∣sorts, and Entertainments of Voices and In∣struments. At every Port of note in Asia, Pamphylia, and Cilicia, where he came, he made a stay to take his Pleasures. After he was come to Antioch, he followed his Luxuries to excess for his own part, whilst his Generals carried on the Parthian War; who were Statius Priscus, Avidius Cassius, and Martius Verus. In four years they went through Babylon, the Kingdom of Media, and recovered Armenia: which procured to him the honourable Title of Conquerour of the Armenians, Parthians, and Medes, which was also Communicated to Marcus at Rome. He passed the Winters in those four years, at the City of Laodicea; the Summers at the Village of Daphne, and the rest of the time at An∣tioch. All the Syrians made a jest of him; and several Railleries, which they passed up∣on him upon the Stage in their Plays, are ex∣tant. He admitted his Slaves to be as free with him at all times, as the Custom is to be upon the Feasts of Saturn. He went, at the solicitation of his Courtiers, as far as to the Banks of the Euphrates twice; and he came up to Ephesus to meet his Wife Lucilla, who was
sent to him from Marcus her Father. But his design in this last Journey principally was to prevent Marcus, that he should not come down with her into Syria, and so detect his ill deportments: because Marcus had told the Se∣nate, that he would bear his Daughter Com∣pany into Syria. At last, when the War was ended, he appointed Kings over the respective Kingdoms, and gave the Governments of the Provinces amongst his Officers: and then re∣turnedHis re∣turn to Rome. himself to Rome, but much against his inclination, though it was to take the honour of a Triumph; because to leave Syria, was to leave, as it were, his own Proper Kingdom. So he came and triumphed in Company with his Brother, and the Senate consirmed the Titles to him, which he had before received from the Army. He shaved his Beard (which he had not done before) in Syria, only to pleasure an ordinary Mistress, that he had gained there; which gave the Syrians an occasion to say se∣veral things upon him. The time of his return to Rome was unfortunate: for it seemed, as if he brought the Plague with him thither, and into the Provinces through which he passed. This Plague arose first in the Country of Ba∣bylon; where out of a small golden Coffer, which a Soldier had plundered in the Temple of Apollo, proceeded, it is said, such a Pesti∣lentious stench, as spread itself from thence into Parthia, and so over the World. Not that this was yet a fault of Verus, but of Cas∣sius; who, contrary to his Faith given, rased
the City of Seleucia, after it had received our Forces, as Friends. At the same time, a∣mongst others, Quadratus, a Writer of the Parthian War, Vindicates Cassius too against this accusation; and lays the blame upon the Seleucians themselves, for breaking their Faith with Cassius the first. But however that is, Verus had so much reverence for Marcus, that he desired to Communicate to him, upon the day that they triumphed together, the same Titles and Names of Honour which had been deferred to himself. But yet, after his return from the Parthian War, he was not altogether so very observant of Marcus as formerly, suf∣fering his Servants to have too great an influ∣ence over him, and acting in many things by them, without the advice of his Brother. To which it is to be added, that he brought aHis other Vanities. Company of Mimicks with him out of Syria, as if they had been so many Kings to adorn his Triumph. The principal of whom called by the name of Paris. Then he built himself a famous Seat upon the Via Clodia; where he Revelled with great Luxury for several days together in Company with his Servants, and such of his chosen Friends, whose presence brought no constraint upon him. He invited Marcus thither one day to see him; who came, but it was to shew to him the sanctity of his life, which was great and worthy to have been the subject of his imitation. Mar∣cus tarried with him five days; but employed his time all the while in continual Business,
whilst Verus was either Feasting, or providing for his Feasts. Another Mimick that he brought with him out of Syria, as a Trophy of the Parthian War, was one, that he called by the Name of Apolaustus; but his former Name was Agrippus Memphis. He brought with him besides, for his diversion, Fidlers, Pi∣pers, Players, Buffoons, Juglers, and of all those sorts of Slaves which Syria and Alexan∣dria are so delighted with; that really one would think by his Captives, that he had been making War, not against Parthia, but against the Stage. It was not openly visible to the World, but yet it was privately whispered, that this diver∣sity of his Life to that of Marcus, with many other things, occasioned an ill Understanding betwixt them. Especially, this was said upon the Death of Libo, who was a Cousin German to Marcus, and who had been sent by him, as his Lieutenant into Syria; where behaving him∣self more haughtily than a Senatour in that Quality ought to have done, and saying, That be would write to Marcus to be satisfied, if per∣haps he doubted in any thing; Verus could not take it, that he paid no more Respect to him, who was an Emperor upon the Place; and after this Libo died suddenly, with almost the Marks of Poyson upon him. From which some thought, that he was poysoned by the hand of Verus. And though Marcus was not of this Opinion, yet the thing served to en∣crease the rumor of their disagreement. Ge∣minas and Agaclytus, two Servants of Verus, had
a great Influence over him, as I have already said in the Life of Marcus. He married the latter to Libo's Widow, although contrary to the desire of Marcus, who therefore denied his Presence to the Espousals. Codes, and Aelius Laetus or Electus, were two others of his ma∣numitted Servants: He had more besides, who were all ill Men enough, and whom Marcus dismissed, after the Death of their Master; only Aelius Laetus he retained, who afterwards was the Author of the Death of his Son Commodus. In fine, when the German WarThe Ger∣man Ex∣pedition. came on, because Marcus neither thought fit to send Verus to it alone, nor yet to leave him in the Town alone, upon the Account of his great Luxury, they went both together to it, and came to the City of Aquileia; where Verus did nothing but divert and enjoy himself, whilst Marcus took upon him the Care of all things. They crossed the Alps, although this was much against the Inclination of Verus; and as for what passed afterwards betwixt the Ambas∣sadors of the Barbarians on the one hand, beg∣ging Peace, and our Emperors on the other, it hath been already represented sufficiently in the Life of Marcus. So the heat of the War being over, and Verus urging to return to Aquileia again, because he longed for the Pleasures of Rome, it was resolved by both to go back to Rome. But as Verus was in the Coach, not far from the City of Altino, he was taken suddenly with an Apoplexy; for which, lifting him immediately out of the Coach, and letting him Blood, they brought
him alive unto Altino, where he continued three Days speechless, and then died.Death of Verus. There was a Discourse, as if he had been Incestuous with his Wife's Mother, Faustina; and that Faustina had contrived his Death, by putting Poyson in his Oysters, because the Conversation which he had with the Mother, he discovered to the Daughter. There was another Story made of his Death, which I have set down in the Life of Marcus, but which is utterly inconsistent with the Virtue of that great Man. Others attributed his Death to his own Wife, because he was a little too indulgent to the Love which he had for Fabia his Sister, whose Power she could not brook. And cer∣tainly there was that great Kindness betwixt Verus and Fabia, that it was also reported, that they two had consulted together to kill Marcus; but when this was discovered to Marcus by Agaclytus the Servant of Verus, Faustina pre∣vented the Murder of Marcus, and she herself killed Verus. As to his Person, he was well shaped, withHis Per∣sonage. a good Visage, and a Beard, before he shaved, extraordinary long, like a Barbarian; tall, and a frown upon his Brow that was awful. He had yellow Hair, which he took a great Care of, and used an Art with Gold Dust, to make it glitter, and look yellower still. He was a little slow in Speech, a great Lover of Game, always Luxurious, and in many things a Nero, ex∣cepting Cruelty and Buffoonry. Amongst the rest of his Curious Furniture for his Luxury, he had a Crystal Cup, that he called Swift,
after the Name of his beloved Horse; and it was of so large a size, it held a Draught in∣deed more fit for a Horse, than any thing else. He lived Two and Forty Years, and reigned Eleven, in Conjunction with his Brother. His Body was interred in the Sepulchre of Hadrian, where his Father the Caesar also lies. The Story which I now said, is inconsistent with the Virtue of Marcus Antoninus is well known, and it is this; That Marcus with a Knife empoysoned on the one side of it, di∣vided a Piece of a Sacrifice to Verus, and gave that Part thereof to Verus to eat, which was touched with the Poyson; which is a Crime impossible to be conceived of Marcus, what∣ever the Life and Actions of Verus might per∣haps deserve. Neither do we leave it in doubt, but wholly reject it as a false and supposititi∣ous thing; being assured, that excepting your Majesty, O Dioclesian, as yet, since Marcus, Flattery it self hath not been able to form a better and a more accomplished Prince than he.
THE LIFE OF AVIDIƲS CASSIƲS, BY VULCATIUS GALLICANUS: Addressed to the EMPEROR DIOLESIAN. AVidius Cassius, was, as some think, de∣scendedHis Ex∣traction. from the Antient Family of the Cassii; but yet this was only by the side of his Mother: for his Father was Avidius Severus, who from a private Extra∣ction, and the Degree of a Centurion, raised himself unto the highest Honours; of whom
Quadratus makes mention in his History; and indeed so much to his Advantage, that he calls him a great and necessary Man in the State, and who had a great Interest with the Emperor Marcus Antoninus, in whose Reign he died. This Cassius, of the Family, I say, of those Cassii, who had conspired against Julius Caesar, was one that secretly hated a Monarchy, and could scarce endure the very Name of an Emperor: He said, That no State was so in∣tolerable, as an Empire, which cannot be put down without another Emperor. In his younger Years, he had attempted to depose Antoninus Pius. It is true, his Father being a great and worthy Person, covered him against the Charge of that Ambition, but yet he was al∣ways looked upon as a suspicious Person. A LETTER of Verus Antoninus concerning him; written to the Emperor Marcus Antoninus, says thus. AVidius Cassius hath a greedy Eye upon the Empire, at least as I think, and as some time ago it was known he had, under the Reign of Antonius Pius our Father. I desire you to take good Notice of him: Every thing we do displeases him. He grows extraordinary Rich, laughs at us both; calls you a Doating Philosopher, and
me a Luxurious Fool. Consider, what is to be done: I hate not the Man, but do you see whe∣ther it is not ill for you and your Children to keep such a one in your Army; and one besides that the Soldiers love, and hearken to with pleasure. The ANSWER of Marcus An∣toninus, concerning Avidius Cassius, was this. I Have read your Letter, in which you are too apprehensive, than I would have an Emperor to be, or than suits well with our Reigns: For if the Empire is allotted to Avidius Cassius by Heaven, we should not be able to cut him off, if we would: You know the saying of your Grand∣father Hadrian, That no Man kills his Succes∣sour. But if it is not so allotted him, he will fall of himself into the fatal Snare, without our Cruelty. Neither can we make a Man a Crimi∣nal, who is accused by none, and who as you say is beloved by the Army. In Actions of Treason also, so it is, that even tho' they are proved up∣on Men, the World is apt to think the Sufferer in∣jured; which made your Grandfather Hadrian say, O the hard Fate of Emperors, who can∣not be believed, that they are Usurpt upon, until they are killed! I chose to name Hadrian for it, rather than Domitian, who was the first
indeed that said so; because when a thing is well said, yet if it is the saying of a Tyrant, it hath not the Authority with it, as it deserves. Therefore let Avidius Cassius have his own ways, being a good Officer, Strict and Stout, and of great Use in the State. For as to what you urge about the taking Care of my Children, if Avidius Cassius shall deserve to be better beloved than they, and it is expedient for the Publick, rather that he live, than the Children of Marcus An∣toninus, let them perish. This is what Verus and what Marcus Anto∣ninus, severally wrote concerning Cassius. Now we shall explain in short the Temper and the Manners of this Person; which is all that can well be known of such, whose Lives, no one presumes to write to their Advantage, out of Respect to those by whom they were destroy∣ed; only we shall add something of his as∣sumption of the Empire, and of his Death. Having in this Design that we are upon, pro∣posed to ourselves to take in the Histories of all that in any wise have born the Title of Em∣perors, whether justly or unjustly, to the end that your Majesty, O Dioclesian, should have a perfect Account before you, to your own Person, of the Events of the Empire of Rome. He was a Man of that Variety in his Man∣ners, that now he was cruel and ill humored, then mild and obliging; now he was very Religious, then Profane; sometimes he drank hard, then he was as abstemious; sometimes he eat very much, another time he fasted as
much; sometimes he was all for Women, then he was all for Chastity; so that People were not wanting to call him a Catiline; and he said, they might call him what they pleased, so he but gained his Point of the Dialogist; by which Name he meant Marcus Antoninus, who was so eminently skill'd in Philosophy, that going to the War against the Marcomanni; and every body being in fear for him, lest any thing ill should happen to him, they de∣sired him before he went, that he would dis∣cover to them his Precepts of Philosophy; which at their Entreaty he did, in Discourses to them, which he continued three Days toge∣ther. Besides this, Avidius Cassius was a strict Man for Military Discipline; insomuch, that he was willing to have himself be called a Marius. Now having begun to make mention of hisHis strict Discipline Strictness, there are many Instances not to be omitted, in which he shew'd himself not so pro∣perly to say strict, as he was cruel. For first, if the Soldiers had taken but the least thing by vio∣lence from the People of the Provinces, he crucified them immediately upon the place, where they committed the Fact. He had a∣nother way of executing them, which was purely of his own Invention, which was this. A great Stake of Timber was set up, which was Eighty, or a Hundred Foot high; the con∣demned were tied to this Stake in Ranks, from the top to the bottom; at the bottom was a Fire, which burnt some to Death, whilst o∣thers were suffocated with the Smoak, and
others were sometimes frightned to Death. He hath ordered Ten in a Body to be chain'd, and thrown into a River, or into the Sea to∣gether. To Deserters, he many times cut off their Hands, or their Legs and Thighs; say∣ing, The Example of a Criminal living in that manner in misery, is of a greater Force, than if he was kill'd at a blow. A Party of the Auxi∣liaries, once in the Army under his Command, had without his knowledge surprised the Sar∣matae, as they were lying carelesly upon the Banks of the Danube, of whom they killed Three Thousand, and returned to their Corps again, with a great Booty. And as it was their Centurions that had put them upon this Action, the Centurions expected to be re∣warded for it; because with a handful of Men they had killed such a Number of the Ene∣my, whilst the Tribunes and the other Offi∣cers had neglected the Opportunity that was offered. But for their Reward, he ordered them to be all taken, and, which is a thing without Example, crucified like Slaves. He said, It might have happened, that the Enemy had had a Trick in it, and an Ambuscade, which would have much reflected upon the Honour of the Roman Name. So a great Mutiny upon this arising in the Army, he came immediately to them, and said, Kill me, if you think fit, and add that Fact more to this Corruption of Disci∣pline At which they were all appeased. He shew'd he did not fear them; and this made him to be feared by them: Which added such Strength to the Discipline of the Romans, and
struck such a Regard on the other side into the Enemy, that they came and begged of the Emperor Antoninus an Hundred Years Peace, having had the Satisfaction to see those very Persons who had gotten a Victory over them, condemned to Death, by the Judgment of the Roman General himself; because without his permission, they had without Orders gained that Victory. Many more of his Severities upon the Sol∣diers are to be seen in Aemilius Parthenianus; he caused them to be beaten with Rods in the Markets, and in the midst of the Camp; he cut off their Heads, or many times their Hands. He forbad them to carry any thing with them in an Expedition, beside Bacon, Bisket, and Vinegar; which if he found they transgressed, he not a little punished their Luxury. A LETTER from the Emperor Marcus Antoninus to the Lieute∣nant of Syria, says thus of him. I Have given the Legions of Syria, which Cae∣sonius Vectilianus says, that he found all in Hot Baths, dissolved in Luxury, and living in all sorts of Pleasures, to the Command of Avidius Cassius, and I think, I have not done amiss. You know him a Man of the Severity and Disci∣pline of the antient Cassii; and to speak truly
without the Antient Discipline, the Soldiers can∣not be well governed. You remember that good Verse of the Poet, Moribus antiquis res stat Romana virilis. That is, the Customs of our Fore-fathers, and such Persons as were in those days, are the best Sup∣ports of the Empire of Rome. Do you take care that there be sufficient Provisions laid up for the said Legions, and if I am not mistaken in Avi∣dius Cassius, he is one that will not let them be lost. The ANSWER of the Lieutenant to Marcus Antoninus was this. IT is well dove, Sir, that your Majesty hath pre∣ferred Cassius to the Command of the Legions of Syria. For there is nothing so convenient, a a severe sort of a Man for those Grecianised Sol∣diers. He will strip them of all their hot Baths, and shake all their fine Flowers off of their Heads, their Necks, and their Bosoms. All the necessary Provisions for the Legions are ready, and nothing will be wanting, so long as they have so good a Commander over them.
Nor were they mistaken in their Judgments which they had of Avidius Cassius. He im∣mediately commanded the Soldiers to their respective Colours, and published an Order, that if any one of them was but seen at Daphne, he should be cashiered. Every Seventh Day he examined their Arms, and Cloaths, and E∣quipages. He banished all sorts of Pleasures from the Camp, and unless they corrected their Manners, he assured them, they should pass the Winter there in their Tents; which cer∣tainly had been done, if they had not lived more soberly. He exercised the whole Body of them every Seventh Day at their Arrows and their Arms. It was a miserable thing, he said, that Wrestlers, Huntsmen, and Gladiators should be continually exercised, and not Soldiers; to whom their Labours are always the less, after they are once accustomed to them. Thus corre∣cting the Discipline of the Army, and order∣ing all things well in Armenia, Arabia, and Egypt, he made himself to be beloved by all the Eastern People, especially by those of Antioch; insomuch, that that City consented to his As∣sumption of the Empire, as Marius Maximus says in the Life of Marcus Antoninus, who in his Second Book of the same Life says also, that when the Robbers of the Parts called Bu∣colia in Egypt, had committed many Disorders there, which were heavy upon that Kingdom, they were reduced again under subjection by Cassius. Now this Cassius set himself up in the EastCassius u∣surps the Empire. to be Emperor, some say by an Intrigue of
Faustina, who despairing of the long Life of her Husband Mareus Antoninus, was in a fear, that she alone should not be able to protect her Infant-Children, and that somebody should come upon the Throne, who would destroy them. But however this is, to take the Sol∣diers and the People off of their Love to Marcus Antoninus, in order to bring them to consent to himself, Cassius served himself of an Artifice, which was, to give out, that Marcus was dead, and to qualify the Regret of his Loss, he mentioned him with the Re∣spect of one made a God. Then as Empe∣ror, he chose himself a Captain of the Guards, and made one of his Sons Governour of the City of Alexandria, which Two were after∣wards both kill'd by the Army, but it was done against the Will, and without the Know∣ledge of Marcus Antoninus; who neither fell into any Passion to hear of the News of the Rebellion, nor sought his Revenge upon the Children or Friends of Cassius. The Senate declared him an Enemy, and confiscated his Estate, which Marcus Antoninus forbidding to be returned into his proper Coffers, it was paid by the Order of the Senate into the pub∣lick Treasury. Some pretended, which struck a Terror into the City, that in the absence of Antoninus, Avidius Cassius, as he was entirely beloved by all, excepting the looser sort of People, would come to Rome, and expose it to Free-Plunder; upon the Account of the Senatours especially, who had declared him an Enemy, and confiscated his Estate. On
the other hand, the Love of Antoninus him∣self to Cassius, appeared very much in this, that when he was killed, and every body, unless the Citizens of Antioch were contented at it, he was not killed by the Command of him; for there is no doubt, but he would have spared him, if it had been in his Power so to do. And when his Head was brought to him,Clemency of Antoni∣nus. he did not rejoyce, nor was he elevated at it at all, but on the contrary, he was very sorry that he was deprived of an occasion to shew his Mercy; and said, He would rather have had him taken alive, to have convinced him of his Ingratitude, and then saved him. One said, That Antoninus was to blame for being so fa∣vourable to his Enemy, and to his Enemy's Friends and Children, and all his adherents: Adding, That if Cassius had got the better, what then? Antoninus answered, We have not so served the Gods, nor so lived, as that it should be his luck to Conquer us. Upon which he reckoned up all the Princes that had been killed, and said, That there were Reasons for which they had de∣served it; for scarce ever any good Prince had been either killed or conquered by an Usurper; for Nero deserved it; Caligula deserved it; Otho and Vitellius were not fit to reign. He thought as much of Galba for his Covetousness, and said, That Avarice in an Emperor is a most bitter Fault. In fine, not Augustus Caesar, nor Tra∣jan, nor Hadrian, nor Antoninus Pius his Fa∣ther, could ever be surmounted by the Rebols, tho' they had many of them; but it was the Re∣bels
Fate to be destroyed, sometime even without the Knowledge, and contrary to the Will of those Princes. So he desired the Senate not to ani∣madvert too severely upon the Accomplices of the defection of Cassius, wishing that no Se∣natour might be put to Death in his Reign; which gained him an extraordinary deal of Love. Some few Centurions were punished, and then as for others who were banished, he ordered them to be re-called and pardoned them. He pardoned the Antiochians, who had so firmly adhered to the Usurpation of Cassius, together with other Cities that had assisted him. For tho' at the first he was very angry at the for∣mer, so as to take away their publick Games, and many other Ornaments of their City, yet he afterward restored them to them again. He bestowed a Moiety of the Estate of Cassius up∣on his Sons, and gave his Daughters the Gold, Silver; and Jewels. Alexandra, who was one of them, and Druentianus her Husband, had free Power from him to go whither they would, and lived in the greatest Security, not like the Pledges of an Usurper, but the Chil∣dren of a Senatour. He forbad the Fortune of their House, so much as to be cast in their Teeth; and some who were rude to them up∣on that Account, were by his Order prosecu∣ted and punished for it.
Here follows a Letter from the Em∣peror Marcus Antoninus to Faustina his Wife. VErus formerly wrote the Truth to me con∣cerning Avidius Cassius, when he said, That he had a greedy Eye upon the Empire. For I suppose you have heard, what the Expresses bring of him. So come thou to Albano, that we may consider together of Matters by the Will of the Gods, and fear nothing. This obviates what Marius Maximus says of Faustina, who desiring to defame her, makes her accessary to the Usurpation of Cassius. Her Answer in which she presses him to be very severe was this. I Will come strait to Albano, to morrow, as you command. However, I now advise, that if you love your Children, you would prosecute this Rebellion most severely: And you may assure your. self, that unless you oppress them, they will you. Another Letter of Faustina to Marcus Antoninus upon the same Subject. MY Mother Faustina, in the time of the Defection of Celsus, advised your Father her Husband Antoninus Pius, that he should first shew his kindness to his own Family, and next
to Others. Because he cannot be a good Prince, who does not take care of his Wife and Children. You see what Age our Son Commodus is of Pompeianus your Son-in-Law is already Old, and a Stranger. Mind what you do about Avi∣dius Cassius and his Associates. Do not spare Men, who have not spared you, and who if they had conquered, would neither have spared me, nor our Children. I shall follow you in your Journey quickly. I could not come to Formiae, because our Fadilla is Sick. But though I find you not at Formiae, I shall overtake you at Capua, which City may do good both to me and our Children in our Healths. I desire you to dispatch Soteridas the Physician to Formiae. I cannot trust to Pisi∣theus; he knows not what Physick to give to a young Girl. I receiv'd your Letter, which you snt by Calphurnius, and I shall answer it, if I stay, by Caecilius the old Eunuch, a trusty Man whom you know, and by whom I will send you an ac∣count by Word of Mouth, what the Wife of Avi∣dius Cassius, and Son, and Son-in Law, are re∣ported to say of you. By these Letters, one may see that Faustina was not at all Privy to the Enterprise of Cassius, upon whom she is so severe. What Antoninus writ to her again, the following Letter shews us You, it is true, my Faustina, Advise very well in your love to your Husband and Children. I have Read your Letter, in which you desire me to prosecute the Accomplices of Cassius. But yet I shall spare his Children, Son in-Law, and Wife, and write to the Senate to be Favourable
to all the Party. For there is not any thing that more recommends a Roman Emperour to all the World, than Clemency. This made Caesar a God. This Consecrated Augustus. This particularly adorned your Father with the Title of Pious. In a word, if they had gone according to the judg∣ment of my Advice upon the War, not so much as Cassius should have been killed. So be then satisfied. The Gods protect me: my Piety is pleasing to the Gods. I have declared our Pom∣peianus, Consul for the next year. This is what Antoninus writ to his Wife. Now let us see what an Oration, upon this occasion, he sent to the Senate. A part of it is thus. Fathers of the Senate; you have now my Son∣in Law to be your Consul: I say, Pompeianus; whose Age had long ago been rewarded with that Office, but that other extraordinary Men have intervened, to whom it was just to pay the Honour, that the State hath owed them. Now as for what concerns the Defection of Cassius, I beg and con∣jure you Fathers of the Senate, that you would continue to me, nay to your selves, the Character of Piety and Clemency, and let the Senate put none to death. Let not one member of the Senate be put to death, nor the blood be spilt of any one that is Noble. Let the banished return, and the Pro∣scribed receive their Estates. I wish I could raise even the dead to life again. For Revenge is never good in an Emperor, it appears ill in his own Caus let it be never so just. You will give a Pardon therefore to the Children of Avidius Cassius, his Son-in-Law, and his Wife. But why do I say
Pardon, when they have committed nothing? Let them live in safety, knowing that they live under the Reign of Marcus Antoninus. Let them en∣joy the Patrimony of their Parents, which hath in part been already granted to them. Let them have the Gold, the Silver, and the Wardrobe. Let them be rich. Let them be safe. Let them have their full Liberty, and in the sight of all People. Let them be as so many instances of mine, and in∣stances of your Clemency. Nor is this such a great Grace, Fathers of the Senate, to grant a Pardon to the Wives and Children of persons Proscribed. I do further desire of you, that such of the Se∣natorian, and Equestrian Orders, as have been Accomplices in this Defection, be Protected also by your Authority from Murder, from Proscription, from Fear, from Infamy, from Envy, and from all kind of Injury; and that you allow this Honour to my Reign, that none upon these accounts are killed in it, but who only in the very Tumults are killed. This great Clemency of his was followed by the Senate, with these Acclamations. The Gods preserve Antoninus the Pious, the Gods save Antoninus the Merciful. O Antoninus the Merciful! the Gods save you. Your Maje∣sty hath refused to do what you very well might have done: we have done but what became us. Make Commodus, your Son, Emperor with you Strengthen your Race. See that your Children are safe. No Force can touch a good Reign. We beg the Tribunitian Power for Commodus An∣toninus. We beg the Presence of your Majesty with us. We Congratulate you for your Philoso∣phy,
your Patience, your Learning, your Nobility, your Innocence. You conquen your Foes. You sur∣mount your Enemies. The Gods save you. So the Posterity of Avidius Cassius lived in Safety, and were admitted unto Honours, till Commodus Antoninus succeeded after the Death of his Father, and then commanded them all to be burnt alive, as much as if he had surpri∣sed them in the very Act of some Treason. This then is what we have found concer∣ning Avidius Cassius, who in his Temper was always various, but more especially propense to Correction and Cruelty: But yet if he had carried the Empire, he would have been flatter∣ed with the Name of not only of a Gracious, but an Useful, and an Excellent Prince. A Letter to his Son-in-Law, which he writ in the time, that he acted the Emperor, is in part as follows. UNhappy State! How miserably does it suffer under the Power of the Rich, and Men thirst∣ing to be so? Marcus is an excellent Person truly; who to get himself the Title of Merciful, suffers those to live, whose Lives he condemns at the same time! Where is now that Lucius Cassius, whose Name I bear, tho' I am unworthy of it? Where is that Marcus Cato, the Censor? Where is all the Discipline of our Fore fathers, which decayed long ago, but now is not so much as asked for? Marcus Antoninus Philosophises, and Disputes about Cle∣mency
and the Soul, to Justice and Honesty; and ne∣ver thinks of the State. You see there is eed of a se∣vere Hand, to reduce things to the Condition they were in in antient Times. For my part, I wish to those Presidents of the provinces, all the Chastise∣ment that they deserve. What can I think them Proconsuls, or think them Presidents, who live, as if the Provinces were given them by the Senate, and by Marcus the Emperor, only to be Luxurions in, and to get to be Rich? You have heard of the Captain of the Guards to our Philosopher. He who three Days before was a Beggar, and a poor Rat, is now become a rich Man on a sudden. From whence, I pray, but out of the Bowels of the State, and the Fortunes of the People of the Pro∣vinces? Well, let them be Rich, let them be Weal∣thy, they will so much the more enrich the pub∣lick Coffers. The Gods favour only an honest Cause, and the Friends of Cassius shall restore the Empire. This Letter very well shows, what a strict sort of an Emperor Cassius would have made, if he had reigned.
M. COMMODVS ANTONINVS AVG. PIVS. portrait of Commodus Antoninus DIVVS PERT. PIVS PATER. portrait of Pertinax IMP. CAES. M. DID. SEVER. IVLIAN. AVG. portrait of Didius Julianus L. SEPT. SEV. PERT. AVG. IMP. VIII portrait of Septimius Severus D. CLOD. SEPT. ALBIN. CAES. portrait of Clodius Albinus M. AVREL. ANTONINVS PIVS AVG. BRIT. portrait of Caracalla P. 175. Vol 1
THE Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Commodus Antoninus, BY AELIUS LAMPRIDIUS: Addressed to the EMPEROR DIOCLESIAN. AS for what concerns the Family ofHis Ex∣traction. Commodus Antoninus, we have spoken sufficiently already upon that Head in the Life of his Father Marcus. He was born at Lavinia, the Day before the Ca∣lends of September, under the Consulships of
his Father and his Uncle. It is said, his Grand∣father by his Mother's side had been formerly born at the same place. When Faustina was big of him, she dreamt, She should be brought to Bed of two Serpents, but that one of them was more Fierce than the other. So she was brought to Bed of Commodus and Antoninus, at one Birth; the latter died at four Years of Age, and yet the Mathematicians had promised him by his Stars, an equal Fortune and Life with Commodus. Marcus Antoninus educated Commodus as well,His Pre∣ceptors. according to his own Precepts, as to those of the great and the best Men. Onesicritus was his Master in the Greek; Capella Antistius in the Latin, and Atteius Sanctus in Rhetorick. But as many Masters as he had in the good Arts, they signified nothing to him; whether the Fault was in his natural Genius, or in those who had the Conduct of his Youth at the Court. For from a Boy, he was Naught, Fil∣thy, Cruel, Lewd without Shame; at the same time, Excellent at things not belonging to the Quality of an Emperor, as Glass-making, Dan∣cing, Singing, Playing upon the Pipe; a Buf∣foon, and a Gladiator in Perfection. He gave an early mark of his Cruelty at Civita Vecchia, in the Twelfth Year of his Age; when Ba∣thing, and the Water happening, to be a little too hot, he commanded his Servant to take the Man that attended the Bath, and throw him into the Furnace: In whose stead, the Ser∣vant threw in a Sheep-skin, which he did, to make him believe, that it was indeed the
Bagnio man, by the filthiness of the Stench. He had the Title of Caesar given him, when a Boy, together with Verus, a Brother of his; and in his Fourteenth Year, he was entred in∣to the College of the Priests. He was declared Prince of the Roman Youth, at the same time that he put on the Man's, that is, the Roman Gown; before which, he had already given a Largess to the People. He put on that Gown upon the Nones of July, the Day that Romulus died, and the Year that Cassius revolted from Marcus Antoninus. He went with his Father into Syria and Egypt, and returned with him again back to Rome. Then by a Dispensation of the Law, as to his Age, he was made Consul; and upon the Fifth of the Calends of December, under the Con∣sulships of Pollio and Aper, he was declared Em∣perorHe is de∣clared Em∣peror, A. C. CLXXXI. in Conjunction with his Father, and tri∣umphed with him; the Senate having de∣creed it so to his Honour. He went with his Father to the German War: But as for such of the Officers of his Court, and of his At∣tendants, as were Persons of Virtue, he could never endure them. All the worst sort of Men he gladly kept in his Service; and if they were removed from him, he was sick till he had them again. Hence he made a Tavern andHis De∣bauchery. a Bawdy house continually of the Court, ne∣ver sparing for Cost or Modesty; playing at Dice, and hiring the lewd Women of the Town, which were any thing pretty, to be with him, to make a Sport with in all manner of Debauchery. Sometimes he went about
the Markets with small Wares like a Pedlar; sometimes he was a Horse-Merchant, some∣times he drove his own Chariots in the Coach∣men's Cloaths. He eat and drank with Gla∣diators, pimped to the Whores with Washes, and appeared to be born rather for the most infamous uses, than for that Place unto which Fortune raised him. He turned off at his coming to the Empire, his Father's old Servants, and his old Friends. And one day he made an attempt upon the Modesty of a Son of Salvius Julianus, who was one of his Commanders. But being re∣pulsed, he ever after stuck upon the skirts of his Father. All the best sort of Men about the Court were turned away, either in dis∣grace, or by removing them to other places which were unworthy of them. The Mimicks represented him, as a Burdash, for which he presently banished them. He quitted the War which his Father had almost finished, and granted to the Enemy every thing that they desired, and then came to Rome; where when he triumphed, he had one Soaterus in the Cha∣riot with him at his back, to whom he many times turned about, and kissed him publickly; and so he did in the Cirque. In the Evenings he gave himself the Liberty to run up and down to the Taverns and the Bawdy-houses; he made Men Governours of the Provinces, who were either the Companions of his Crimes, or recommended by as ill as those that were: which brought him so much on the one hand into the hatred, and on the other into the contempt
of the Senate, that he set himself in Revenge upon the destruction of that great Order. In fine, the Cruelty of Commodus was a thing that moved Quadratus and Lucilla to en∣ter into a Conspiracy to kill him, not without the privity of Tarruntinus Paternus the Captain of the Guards. The care of giving him the fatal Blow, was committed to Claudius Pompeia∣nus his Kinsman; who going in to him with a Ponyard, prepared for that purpose, as he had his Opportunity to strike, he broke out first into these Words, The Senate sends you this; whereby detecting his Design too soon, heA Conspi∣racy a∣gainst him defeated. failed to accomplish it, the Company taking the Part of Commodus. Upon this in the first place, Pompeianus and Quadratus, were put to Death; then Norbana, and Norbanus, with Pa∣ralius and his Mother; and Lucilla was banish∣ed. Another Reason of Commodus his falling into so great an odium, being upon the Ac∣count of Saoterus, whose Power the People of Rome could not brook; the Captains of the Guards very civilly drew this Man out of the Court, under the colour of going to assist at some Sacrifice, and as he was returning back again, their Spies (that they had set) fell up∣on him, and killed him. This was worse taken by Commodus, than the Conspiracy that had been form'd against himself; and looking up∣on Tarruntinus Paternus to be the Author of it, as he was, and privy also to the intended Assassination of his own Person, he first re∣moved him from his Place and Power of Cap∣tain
of the Guards, by the way of doing him the Honour to make him a Senatour, (because these two Places were then inconsistent with one another) and in a few days after, he charged him, not only with the said Conspi∣racy, but with promising his Daughter in mar∣riage to the Son of Julianus, in order as he pretended, that the Empire should be trans∣ferred upon Julianus. So both Paternus, andHis cruel Severity. Julianus, and Vitruvius Secundus, who was a particular Friend of Paternus, and who was one of the Secretaries to Commodus, were put to Death. All the House of the Quintilii were extinguished, except Sextus the Son of Condia∣nus Quintilius who passed under the notion of being dead. Vitrasia Faustina, Velius Rufus, and Egnatius Capito were put to Death; the latter of which had been a Consul. The Consuls Aemilius Junctus, and Attilius Severus were banished, and many others were severely treat∣ed in divers ways. Commodus did not so easily appear after this in Publick, nor suffer himself to be spoken with upon any Business, but what was first referred to Perennis; who knowing very wePerennis. governs all. the Inclinations of his Master, took the Op∣portunity which was now in his hands, to ag∣grandize his own Person. He persuaded Com∣modus, that he had nothing to do, but to pur¦sue his Pleasures, while he took care of th Affairs of the State, to which Commodus con∣sented without Difficulty. So Commodus ¦ving with his Three Hundred Concubines, o the handsomest he could get of the Ladie
and the Mistresses of the Town, and with Three Hundred other Bardaccio's which he had collected indifferently out of the Plebeians and the Gentry by their Beauties, passed his time in Revels, and in Feasts, and the Baths; sometimes he butchered the Sacrifices himself, in the stead of the Sacrificator, whose Office that was; sometimes he fought upon the pub∣lick Stage with the Gladiators at Foils, and sometimes at home with own Servants at sharps. Perennis was the Minister in the mean time that did every thing. Whom he would, he put to Death; others he plundered. He sub∣verted all the Laws, and whatever he took, he put it into his own Pocket. As for Commodus, he first ravished, and then killed his SisterHis In∣cests. Lucilla. He violated in like manner the rest of his own Sisters, and lay with a Cousin-German of his Fathers, and gave the Names of his Mother and of his own Wife to one of his Concubines; which Lady he afterwards taking great with another Man, he turned her off, banished her, and then killed her. Yet he hath other times commanded his own Concubines to be enjoyed by others in his sight; nor was he without the most scandalous use of Boys. He corrupted himself with both the Sexes, in every part of his Body, even to his Mouth. Claudius Pompeianus, whose Son had gone into the Chamber to him with the Poinyard, was set upon, as if it were by Thieves at this time, and killed. Many other Senators were, without Law or Judgment up∣on them, executed, and some rich Ladies. O∣thers
in the Provinces were for their Riches, first falsly accused, then plundered or killed. And if they wanted a Crime to fasten upon them, it was enough to say, that they had re∣fused to assign the Inheritance of their Estates to the Emperor. The Affairs of Sarmatia about this time passed very well, which Perennis attributed to the Conduct of his Son there, when indeed the Honour of it was due to the other Com∣manders. But at last this Perennis, who wasPerennis slain. so Omnipotent in the Government, having displaced some Senatours to put in others who were of the Equestrian Order, to command in the Army that served in the War in Great Britain; and the thing being remonstrated a∣gainst by their Deputies, he was on a sudden declared an Enemy of the Army, and deli∣vered up to be torn in pieces by the Soldiers; and Cleander, one of the Officers of the Bed-Chamber, was appointed to succeed in his place. Then after the Death of Perennis and his Son, who was also killed, Commodus re∣scinded several of his Acts, as if they had not been done by his Order, and as if he was re∣establishing all things in their first Estate. But he could not hold on this shew and pre∣tence of Repentance above Thirty Days; committing worse things afterwards by the Ministry of Cleander, than he had before byCleander succeeds in his Mi∣nistry. that of Perennis. It was in his Ministry only that Cleander had succeeded to Perennis. For as for his Place of Captain of the Guards, Niger had that, and possessed it, they say, but
six hours. For the Captains of the Guards were changed daily and hourly; Commodus carrying himself in every thing now, worse than he had done before. Martius Quartus was Captain of the Guards five Days; the rest that followed after him, were either re∣tained or put to Death at the Pleasure of Cleander; by whose Authority, manumitted Slaves were brought into the Senate, and made Patricians. We had then Five and Twenty Consuls in One Year, which was never known before. The Governments of all the Provinces were sold. For Cleander made a Sale of every thing for Money. He re-called what Exiles he pleased, and put them into Offices, and re∣scinded the Acts of the Courts. He prevailed so much over the Weakness of Commodus, that when Byrrhus, who was Commodus's Sister's Husband, took the Liberty to blame his Mi∣nistry, and to tell Commodus what had been done, he made no more, but charged him with High-Treason in Revenge for it, upon which he put him to Death, and many others with him, who had stood in the Defence of him. Amongst the rest was Aebutianus the Captain of the Guards, in whose place Clean∣der himself succeeded in Conjunction with Two others of his own nomination; which was the first time that there were Three Cap∣tains of the Guards together, and one of those was a late Slave made free. But at length Cleander also met with that end that his Life deserved. For having by Treachery, and upon false Accusations, con∣demned
and put to Death Arrius Antoninus, the Proconsul of Asia, in favour of Atallus, at which the People were so incensed, that Commodus could not sustain the Envy that it had brought upon him; he was delivered up as a Sacrifice to the People, and ApolaustusCleander slain. and others of his Creatures about the Court, were killed with him. Amongst other things that he had done, he gave himself the Liber∣ty to use his Master's own Concubines, by whom he had Children, who after his Death were killed, together with their Mothers. His Successours were Julianius and Regillus, who were afterwards also killed by Commodus. The same Fate befel Servilius and Duillius, with all that belonged to them. Then he killed Antius Lupus, Petronius Mamertinus, Suras, and Anto∣ninus, who was his Sisters Son by Mamertinus. Then he put to Death six others at once, who had all been Consuls, to wit, Allius Fuscus, Celius Felix, Luceius Torquatus, Lartius Euripianus, Va∣lerius Bassianus, and Pactumeius Magnus, together with all those that belonged to them. In Asia he put to Death Sulpitius Crassus, the Pro∣consul; Julius Proculus, and Claudius Lucanus, a Consul. He put to Death Faustina Annia, his Father's Cousin-German in Achaia, and an infinite Number of others. He had marked out Fourteen others ready for the Slaughter, then when his own time came, and when the Roman Empire with all its Power was no longer able to sustain his Weight.
Now whilst these things past, the Senate in secret Derision of him, upon his making his Mother's Gallant a Consul, called him theCommo∣dus flat∣ter'd by the Se∣nate. Pious Commodus; and when he had cut off Perennis, they called him the Happy Commodus. So this Pious, this Happy Commodus, to add to the many Murders that he had committed dai∣ly, as if he was a New Sylla, contrived and invented a Plot upon himself, for an occasion still of Murdering more. By flattery they sti∣led him likewise, Conquerour of the Britains, when the Britains would have set up an Em∣peror against him. They called him the Ro∣man Hercules, because he had slain Wild Beasts in the Amphitheatre at Lavinia; which was a common Exploit with him. He arrived to that degree of Vanity, that he would have the City of Rome to be called the Colony of Commodus; which was a thing that he was put upon amidst his Gallantries with Martia his Mistress. He drove in Person the Cha∣riots in the Races in the Cirque. He ap∣peared in publick in a Dalmatick, which is an effeminate Habit, and gave the Signal to the Chariots to start. When he signified his Pleasure to the Senate about New Naming the City of Rome, Colonia Commodiana, they pretended, not only willingly to accept the Proposition, but called by derision their own Assembly, the House of Commodus, and him nothing less than a Hercules and a God. He once pretended, that he would make a Voyage into Africa; but it was for no other end, than under that pretence, he might exact
Money for his Charges, as he did, and spent it when he had done, in Feasting and Gaming. He poysoned Motilenus, a Captain of the Guards with a Fig. He had his Statues set up in the Habit of a Hercules, and they sacrificed to him as to a God. He observed the Sacrifices of Isis,His strange Pranks. insomuch, that he shaved his Head, and bore the Image of Anubis upon his Shoulders about the City. He obliged the Priests of Bellona, out of a Spirit of cruelty, really, to cut and slash their Arms; and the Priests of Isis, to beat their Breasts with Pines, in earnest, till they had almost killed themselves. As he assisted at the carrying about of the Image of Anubis, he di∣verted himself with giving the Priests now and then, a good knock with the Head of it. Old Men that were lame and weak that they could not walk, he took, and dressed them up so, that with the Clouts and Patches which he put about them, they looked like so many Dragons, and then he made it his Sport to shoot them through with Darts. He polluted the Sacrifices of the Sun with real Homicides; whereas what at o∣ther times is used to be said or acted there of that kind, is only a Matter of Shew. From an Infant, he was ravenous and disso∣lute; he debauched all sorts of Persons that came about him; and if any dared to deride him, he cast them to the Wild Beasts. He did this to one who had but read to him the Life of Caligula out of Suetonius, because it appeared, that he and Caligula were born upon the same day. If any one had happened to say, Would I was dead, he put him to death at his word,
whether he would or no. He was a pernicious Man in his Jests. He slashed open a fat Man cross the Belly, for the Curiosity to see in an instant his great Guts. When he had cut off a Leg of any one, he said, He was now of the Nation of the Monopodii; and when he had cut out an Eye, he called him Luscinius (a Nightingal) by an allusion to the word Luscus, which signifies one-eyed. He murdered many in a way of gayety in places up and down; sometimes because he met them ill dressed, some∣times on the contrary, because they lookt no∣ble and handsome. He was pleased with Men of obscene Names, and often kissed them. He had one Man with him called Onon, who ex∣ceeding in a private Part, the measure of almost any Animal, he was extremely dear and kind to him, and preferred him to be the Ruler over the Priests of Hercules Rusticus. With humane ordure it is said, he defi∣led often his best Dishes of Meat, and then pleased himself in drawing in the Company to eat of them. He pusht Julianus a Captain of the Guards, into a Pond in his Cloaths, as he was waiting; and at another time he comman∣ded him to Dance naked before his Concu∣bines, playing upon a Cymbal, with his Face disfigured. He seldom was without all sorts of Beans, Pease and Pulse-meats at his Table, for the benefit of their provocativeness. He bathed seven or eight times a day, and sometimes eat in the very Baths. He polluted the Temples of the Gods with Whoredoms, and Murders; some∣times he pretended to play the Surgeon, and
to let Blood: but then he cut off an Ear, or a Nose, with the Instruments. The Months of the Year were new-named by his Flatter∣ers, according as he was pleased to have them. August was called Commodus, September was called August, October was called Hercules, No∣vember was called Invincible, December was called Exuperatorius, and January Amazonius: which last Title was one that was occasioned by his Concubine Martia; whom he fell in love with, by seeing her pictured in the dress of an Amazon; for which reason he some∣times also appear'd in the Amphitheatre himself in an Amazonian Dress. He entred the Lists with the Gladiators, and hath been as much pleas'd to be huzza'd by the Mob upon those times, as if he had received a Triumph. He practised the Weapons in the Common School, where the Gladiators learn them. Every time that he Fought he ordered it to be entred up∣on the Publick Records; and in all, it is said, he Fought seven hundred and thirty five times. He was created the Caesar, the fourth of the Ides of October, under the Consulships of Pudens and Pollio. He received the honour of the Title of Conqueror of the Germans upon the same Ides, in the Consulships of Maximus and Orphitus. He past into the Colleges of the Priests upon the thirteenth of the Calends of November, when Piso and Julianus were Consuls. He went into Germany, the 14. of the Calends of June (which Month he af∣terwards called Aelius) under the Consulships
of the same Persons. He put on the Roman Gown, and was declared Emperor in Con∣junction with his Father, the fifth of the Ca∣lends of December, when Pollio and Aper were Consuls, which was then the second Consul∣ship of Pollio. He triumphed upon the tenth of the Calends of January, the same Persons being Consuls. He went his second Journey into Germany, the third of the Nones of Au∣gust, when Orphitus and Ruffus were Consuls. And as he was thinking upon a third Expedi∣tion, the Senate and the People of Rome de∣tained him from it. Together with these things, it is upon Record, that he fought in Publick before his Father died, three hundred sixty and five times. He did it again so often after∣wards, and still with success, that he subscribed himself the Conqueror of a thousand Gladia∣tors. He killed many Thousands of wild Beasts of divers sorts with his own hand, a∣mongst the rest Elephants; and this he did often, in the sight of all the People of Rome. In all these things as vigorous as he was,His great Strength. he had yet a Rupture in his Scrotum, so large that one might discern it through his Silks. Many Verses were made upon him, which Ma∣rius Maximus hath Collected with care. His strength in killing the wild Beasts was such, that at once he hath struck an Elephant thro' with his Spear, and pierced the Horn of a wild Goat with his Lance, and killed thousands of great wild Beasts, one after another, at a blow. He came to the Theatre and Amphi∣theatre often in Women's Cloaths, in which
he impudently called for Wine, and drank in the sight of all the Company. It was thus that he past his time, whilst his Lieutenants abroad overcame the Moors and the Dacae, and composed the Troubles of Pannonia. For the Provinces of Great Britain, Germany and Dacia, had endeavoured to reject the Yoak of his Empire: but his Lieutenants quieted them. He did not care to trouble himself so much asHis Neg∣ligence. to subscribe his Dispatches. In many of which he used the same form; and in several of his Letters all that he writ was the word Fare∣wel. By this sort of Negligence, and with that waste of Provisions together, which was made by those who were in Power under him, there arose a great scarcity at Rome, in a year that was not itself unfruitful. So upon this, he put several that had made that waste, to Death, and Confiscated their Estates. Then he les∣sened the Prices of things; but that made the Scarcity still greater. Many in his time bought off another's Punishment, and purchased their own safety with Money. He made Money by Commutations of one Punishment for another, and by the Sepultures of the dead, and by putting to death some in others steads. He sold the Governments of the Provinces: part of the Money going to those by whom he sold them, and part to himself: He sold to some Persons the Massacre of those they hated: and by his example, his Servants made a Sale of the Justice of the Courts. He did not long continue either Paternus or Perennis,
Captains of the Guards. Neither did any of their Successors, keep in so long as three en∣tire years under him: because he dispatched them either with Poyson, or the Sword: and with the same facility he chang'd the Go∣vernors of the City of Rome. He made nothing of putting to death the Officers of his Houshold, though they were Men who had been used to advise him in all things. One of them, by name Electus or Aelius Laetus, perceiving this, resolved to be before Hand with him, and so engaged with the Party that Conspired to his death. Besides, he had this Custom with him, that every thing he did, though never so Base, Impure, Cruel, Gladiator, or Pimp-like, he order'd it to be entred upon the Records of the City. One day fighting as a Gladiator, and fancy∣ing that the People derided him, he had given Orders to Massacre them all upon the place, and burn the City: which had been Executed but that the Captain of the Guards deterred him from it. He hath been called six hundred times by the name of Patus, that is, the name of the Chief of the Gladiators; and tri∣umphed in it. The Prodigies that attended his Reign, whe∣ther Publick or Private ones, were these. AProdigies in his Reign. Comet appear'd. The Statues of the Gods in the Forum moved their Feet, as if they had a mind to be gone. An excessive heat of Wea∣ther. On the Calends of January a great darkness on a sudden covered the Cirque. Ominous Birds came in the night. He re∣moved
out of the Palace; because, he said, he could not possibly sleep there, unto a House upon Mount Caelius. The Temple of Janus opened of it self, and the Marble Image of Anubis appeared to move. The Brazen Statue of Hercules, which is at one of the Gates of Rome, Sweat for several days. An Owl ap∣peared over his Bed-chamber, both at Rome and at Lavinia. He obliged Persons to come to the Games of the Gladiators, not in their Gowns, but in such other Coats as they ordina∣rily were at Funerals, and presided at them himself dressed in Black. His Helmet fell off of his Head twice at the Gate called the Gate of Death, through which the dead are car∣ried out of the City. At length, although too too late, Quintus Aelius Laetus the Captain of the Guards, and Martia, one of the Concubines of Commodus, entred upon a Conspiracy to kill him. They first gave him Poyson; but that operating in∣effectually,He is slain. they strangled him by the Hands of one with whom he was used to Wrestle for Exercise. He was of a just size and shape of Body, aHis Per∣sonage. heavy sottish sort of a Look, no fine Discourse, yellow Hair, which he used Art with to make it still yellower: his Beard he took off him∣self, for fear of trusting to a Barber. Both the Senate and the People desir'd to have him drag'd, and thrown into the Tyber: but Per∣tinax buried him in the Sepulchre of Ha∣drian.
There are no Works of his extant, besides the Baths, which Cleander built in his name. He did not so much as perfect those of his Father. Where he had cut his own name upon the Works of others, the Senate erased it again. He set up a Corn-fleet to Carthage, to be for a relief, in case that other from Alex∣andria, and the Corn from thence should chance to fail: upon which he ridiculously called the City of Carthage, Alexandria Com∣moda Togata, and this Fleet of his Commodiana Herculea. He added some Ornaments to the Statue of the Sun, which were all afterwards abolished. In the Place of the Head of Nero, he had put up his own upon the Body of it, with all his empty Titles at the bottom; not forgetting that of his Conquests over so many Gladiators, and that of Amazonius, which he took from his Mistress. All which not∣withstanding the Emperor Severus, who was one that in no wise indeed differed from his name, made this Prince a God, out of his opposition, as it is supposed, to the Senate: and he appointed him the same Chief Priest, under the same Title, to ferve him, that Commodus had provided for himself before he died. He left behind him three Sisters. The same Emperor Severus ordered the Anniversary of his Birth to be observed. The Imprecations of the Senate against him after his death were extraordinary: and because it is fit to know them, I will set them down out of Marius Maximus, together with the Decree of the Senate.
Let the Enemy of his Country be degraded ofThe Se∣nate's De∣cree upon him. all his Honors. Let the Parricide be degraded of his Honors. Let the Parricide be dragged. An E∣nemy of his Country, a Parricide, a Gladiator, let him Rot upon the Dunghil. An Enemy of the Gods. A Butcherer of the Senate. An Enemy of the Gods. A Parricide of the Senate. An Enemy of the Gods. An enemy of the Senate. A Gladiator, to the Dunghil. He Murdered the Senators, throw him to the Dunghil; drag hi about the Streets. He murdered the Innocent, drag him about the Streets. An Enemy, a Par∣ricide, that spared not his own Blood, let him be dragged about the Streets. He who would have murdered your Majesty, let him be dragged about the Streets Your Majesty was in the same fear with us, in the same danger with us. Preserve Pertinax, thou most great, most excellent Jupi∣ter; so we also shall be safe. We Congratulate the Fidelity of the Guards. We Congratulate the Prae∣torian Bands. We Congratulate the Roman Ar∣mies. We Congratulate the Piety of the Senate. Let the Parricide be dragged. We beg of your Maje∣sty, that the Parricide may be dragged. We beg this, that the Parricide be dragged. Hear us, Caesar; the Delatours to the Lions! Hear us Cae∣sar; Delators to the Lions! Hear us Caesar, Speratus to the Lions. We Congratulate the Vi∣ctory of the People of Rome. We Congratulate the Fidelity of the Soldiers. We Congratulate the Fidelity of the Guards. We Congratulate the Praetorian Bands. Down every where with the Enemies Statues. Down every where with the Parricide's Statues. Down every where with the
Gladiator's Statues. Down with the Statues of the Gladiator and the Parricide. Let the Mur∣derer of his People be dragged. Let the Parri∣cide of his People be dragged. Down with the Statues of the Gladiator. Under your Majesty we are safe. Now we are Free; now we are Secure; and the Delators in fear. Let the De∣lators be ever in fear, and we in safety: De∣grade them, Cudgel them, cast them to the Li∣ons, Cudgel them to death. Let the memory of the Parricide, the Gladia∣tor, be abolished. Let the Statues of the Par∣ricide, the Gladiator, be taken down. Let the memory of the filthy Gladiator be abolished. The Gladiator, to the Dunghil. Hear, Caesar, let the Murtherer be dragged about the Streets. Let the Murtherer of the Senate be dragged about the Streets, after the manner of old. He who was Crueller than Domitian, and Filthier than Nero; thus did, thus let him suffer. Let the Memories of the Innocent be preserved with Honor. We beseech your Majesty, restore the Honors of the In∣nocent. Let the Carcase of the Parricide be drag∣ged about the Streets. Let the dead Body of the Gladiator be dragged about the Streets. Let the Carcase of the Gladiator be thrown upon the Dunghil. Ask, ask us all, if we do not all Judge him to be dragged about the Streets. He who Murdered all sorts of Persons, let him be dragged about the Streets: that spared no Age, let him be dragged about the Streets, that spared no Sex, let him be dragged about the Streets: that spared not his own Blood, let him be drag∣ged about the Streets. He who Plundered the
Temples, let him be dragged about the Streets: that abolished the last Testaments of the dead, let him be dragged about the Streets: that robbed the living, let him be dragged about the Streets. We have been Slaves to his Slaves: He who sold the Lives of his People, let him be dragged about the Streets: that took the Money, and yet kept not his faith, let him be dragged about the Streets. He who sold the Senate, let him be dragged about the Streets: that deprived Children of the Inheritance of their Fathers, let him be dragged about the Streets: Delators, Informers, Suborners of false Witnesses, be for ever banished the Senate. Even your Majesty hath been in the same fear with us. You know all things. You have seen the good, and the bad. You know all things. Amend all things. We have been in fear for you. O happy we in your Life and Reign! This about the Parricide, is the Advice, the Judgment, the Decree of us all round. We beg your Presence among us. The Innocent lye unburied; let the Carcase of the Parricide be dragged. The Parricide hath pulled the very Dead out of their Graves, let the Carcase of the Parricide be dragged. But the Body of Commodus being how∣ever by Livius Larensis his Servant, delivered into the hands of Fabius Chilo, the Consul,  was privately buried in the night by the order of Pertinax. Hereupon the Senate exclaimed, By whose doing is this, that he is Buried? Let the Parricide be taken up again out of the place where he is, and be dragged. Then Cineius Severus said, He is Buried against Law: as I say this, as a High-Priest, the whole College of
the Priests says the same: And I am further ob∣liged to declare and pronounce, That as he lived to the destruction of the People and his own shame, his Statues are every where to be destroyed, de∣stroyed: His Name to be erased out of all the pub∣lick and private Monuments, and the Months of the Year to return to be called by the old Names they had, when first this Pest befel the State.
THEA. Christi CXCIV. Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Publius Helvius Pertinax. BY JULIUS CAPITOLINUS. PUblius Helvius Pertinax was the Son ofHis Ex∣traction. Helvius Successus, who was the Son of a late Slave made free. He had the Name of Pertinax given him by his Fa∣ther, from nothing but his wilful and pertina∣cious adherence for a long time, to the poor Occupation of his Father, which was drying and burning of Wood, and making of Char∣coal. He was born in a Village in the Apen∣nine; and at the same time, an Accident hap∣pened at his Birth, which moved his Father
to go to an Astrologer to enquire about his Fortune; who telling him such great and such extraordinary things of him, as were past his belief, he said, he had but flung away his Mo∣ney in consulting him. After he had be∣gun to take to Letters, and had studied A∣rithmetick and Greek, and was put into the hands of Sulpitius Apollinaris, he came to be a Professor of Grammar himself. But making but little Advantage by it, he changed that course of Life, and by the means of Lollius Avitus, who was his Father's Patron, and had been a Consul, he got himself made a Cen∣turion. Then he rose to be a Captain of a Cohort in Syria, which is a Body of Foot of, it may be, Six Hundred Men; and going Post into Syria in the Reign of Antoninus Pius, with∣out the Authority of the Emperor's Letters so to do, the President of Syria obliged him to follow the rest of his Journey, to his Com∣mand, on Foot, as far as from the City of Antioch. He deserved very well by his Services in theHis pub∣lick Em∣ployments. Parthian War, which made him be translated into Bithynia. Then he commanded a Part of the Army in Moesia, and afterwards in Germany, where his Mother who had followed him thi∣ther died, and her Sepulchre is said to be stand∣ing at this day. From Germany he was remo∣ved to be the Governour of Dacia, with a Sa∣lary of Two Hundred Sestertium's; but the Emperor Marcus Antoninus, being made to suspect him as one that was ambitious of the Empire, he was re-called from that Govern∣ment,
and was afterwards chosen by Claudius Pompeianus, the Son-in-Law of Marcus Antoninus, to be his Assistant in the Command of the Auxiliaries. He behaved himself so well, that he was created in the next place a Senator. And his Innocency appearing, as to the Am∣bition of which before he was maliciously ac∣cused, for a compensation of that Injury done him, the Emperor made him a Praetor, and gave him the Command of the First Legion; by the means whereof, he presently recovered Rhaetia, and the Country of Noricum from the Enemy. This was so Eminent a Service, that the Emperor made him a Consul; who very often in publick in his Speeches, which it would be too long here to insert, but one of them is extant in Marius Maximus, commended him both to the Soldiers and the Senate, and ex∣pressed himself before all the World, sorry, that he could not make him a Captain of the Guards, because of his being a Senator. After the Rebellion of Cassius was at an end, Pertinax was commanded out of Syria, to the Defence of the Danube. Next he was made Gover∣nour of both the Moesia's, and then of Da∣cia; and from his well managing of those Provinces, he gained the Government of Syria. Hitherto, that is, to his Government of Syria, he had conducted himself, in a manner that was altogether unblameable. But after the Death of Marcus Antoninus, he strangely ap∣plied his Care to the amassing of Money; which failed not to bring upon him the Re∣proaches
of the People. He came a very rich Man into the Senate; where he first appear∣ed to take his place in Person, in the time of Commodus, after he had been the Governour of Four Consular Provinces, and had had the Honour of a Consulship given him in his ab∣sence. But it was not long before Perennis, the great Minister under that Prince, banished him, and commanded him to retire to the Vil∣lage, in the State of Genoa, where his Father had kept his Charcoal-Kiln. So he came, and being there, he bought himself a great quanti∣ty of Land, and surrounded his Father's Kiln, which he left standing in the same Form as it was before, with an infinite company of fine Buildings. He resided there three whole Years, in which he past his time in his old Trade, which he carried on by his Servants. After Perennis was kill'd, Commodus took Per∣tinax into Favour, and ordered him to go in∣to Great Britain. He went, and repressed the Mutiny of the Forces there, who were for setting up a New Emperor. They would have set up even Pertinax himself. Nor was it with∣out much difficulty that he appeased their Seditions. He was almost killed in one of them, at least he was left among the dead; which he severely resented and punished. Then he desired leave to be re-called, because he said his Discipline amongst them had made the Army averse to him. So another Person being appointed to succeed him, he was first made General of the Provisions, and soon after the Proconsul of Africa.
During his Proconsulship of Africa, he was, they say, troubled with several Seditions there also, occasioned by the pretended Prophesies of the Goddess Caelest is at Carthage. Then he was made the Governour of the City of Rome, in which place succeeding Fuscianus, who was a most severe Man, and he behaving himself on the contrary with the greatest mildness and humanity, he pleased every one, and a∣mongst the rest, Commodus so well, that heHe is made Consul, took him to be Consul in Conjunction with himself; which was then the Seventh time of the Consulship of Commodus. Then came on the Conspiracy to kill Commodus, which Per∣tinax did not reject, when made acquainted with it; and the thing being done, the Cap∣tain of the Guards, and Electus a great Offi∣cer of the Houshold, came to him, and set him up for the Empire, and carried him to the Camp. Pertinax harangued the Soldiers, and promised them a Donative. He told them, how that those Two great Officers had thought him a Person, not unworthy to be proposed for the Empire, since Commodus was dead; not saying, that Commodus was killed, but that he was dead of a Sickness only. In fine, Per∣tinaxAnd de∣clared Emperor. was saluted Emperor at the first but by a few. This was the day before the Calends of January; and he was then above Sixty Years of Age. After this, late that Night, he came from the Camp to the Senate; and the Chappel of the Senate not being ready open∣ed for him, he went into the Temple of Con∣cord; where Claudius Pompeianus, the Son-in-Law
of Marcus Antoninus meeting him, and Complementing him, Pertinax would have per∣suaded him, to have taken upon him the Em∣pire; but he refused it, because he saw that Pertinax was already the Man. Immediately all the Magistracy with the Consuls came to the Senate, and as soon as they were entred, they declared Pertinax Emperor, tho' it was then midnight. After the Consuls had set forth his Praises in such Speeches as the occasion required, and that the Senate had also ended their Impreca∣tions against the Memory of Commodus, Per∣tinax returned his Solemn Thanks to them. He returned his Thanks particularly to the Captain of the Guards, by whose means it was, both that Commodus was cut off, and that him∣self was raised to be Emperor: And tho' it was true, he said, as Falso objected, that the said Captain of the Guards, and Martia toge∣ther, had been the Instruments of many of the wicked Deeds of Commodus, yet he told them, that they were to consider the Necessity there was of obeying the Orders of that Prince; for otherwise, what they had done was against their own Inclination. The same day, his Wife Flavia Titiana was declared Empress. He was the first Emperor that ever received the Title of Father of his Country, together with the Proconsular, and the Tribunitian Powers, and the Right of a fourth Reference, the first day of his Reign. Which thick and sudden accumulation of so many Honours, was lookt upon as an Omen but of a short Reign.
Then he went to the Palace, which was void, because Commodus had been killed in a House upon Mount Caelius, and the Tribune coming to him the first day for the Watch-word, his Word was, Militemus, let us Fight; which was the same indeed that he had given before un∣der all his Administrations; but upbraiding by it, as it seemed, the remissness of the times past, the Soldiers were touched to the Quick, and presently thought of changing the Empe∣ror again. The same day, being the first of the New Year, he invited the Magistrates, and the Chief of the Senate to a Banquet, which was an antient Custom that had been however omitted by Commodus. The next day as the Statues of Commodus were thrown down, the Soldiers appeared to be troubled, and so much the more, because Pertinax had given them again the same Word as before; and War was a thing not to be admitted, they thought, under an Emperor so old as he. Upon the Third of the Nones following, tho' it was the Thanks∣giving Day for his accession to the Empire, they would have drawn Triarius Maternus La∣scivius, a Noble Senator, into the Camp, to have set up him to be Emperor; but he re∣fused it, and escaped from them, and came to the Court to Pertinax, to assure him of his Fidelity, and afterwards withdrew out of the Town. In the mean time, all this obliged Pertinax in fear, to confirm to the Soldiers and the Veteranes, all the Pay, and all the Gifts that had been granted them by Commodus. He
also courted the Senate, and owned himself to receive the Empire at their Hands. He as∣sured them under his Oath of his innocency from having had any hand in the malversa∣sation of the last Reign. He re-called such as were in Banishment, and restored the Memo∣ries of others to their Honour, who had been unjustly put to Death. The Senate conferred the Title of Caesar upon his Son: But as he had not yet approved the Honour which they had shewn to his Wife, so as to this of his Son; he said, Let it be when he deserves it. And whereas Commodus had added by his Authority many Persons to the Order of the Praetors, who had never exercised the Office of a Praetor, and yet he allowed them to take their Places in common with those that had; Pertinax passed an Edict as to this, to command, that those who had never exercised the Office of a Praetor, but had received that Honour only by the Creation of Commodus, should give place to such as had been Praetors indeed; which brought an odium from many upon him. He ordered the publick Account of theHis pub∣lick Ordi∣nances. Estates, and the valuation of all Persons to be over-look'd, and stated a new. He ordered severe Punishments to be taken upon Persons that had informed against others falsly. But yet he was not altogether so severe, as his Pre∣decessors, with Relation to Persons of Qua∣lity, who were brought before him for any Crime. He made a Law, for the first Will al∣ways to stand good, until another that is Po∣sterior
to it is established and received in due Form in its stead. He declared, that as for himself, he would never enter upon any Inhe∣ritance, which either was devoted to him in Flattery, or by any litigious Right, or to the prejudice of the Lawful Heirs; using these Words upon the same occasion, It is better, Fathers of the Senate, that the Crown should be poor, than that it should get never so much Riches by ill means, and dishonourable Actions. The Largesses to the Soldiers and the People, which himself, and also Commodus had promised them, he paid. But yet the Exchequer was so ex∣tremely low at his coming to the Crown, that he declared, he had not found in it above Ten Sestertiums; so that this obliged him to ex∣act some Payments which Commodus had im∣posed, although he had before promised to remit them. Lollianus Gentianus a Consul, asking him therefore why he broke his Word, he told, him the Reason was, Necessity. He made an Au∣ction of the Goods belonging to Commodus; ordered his very Bardaccio's and Concubines to be sold, excepting such of them, as ap∣peared to have been retained in the Court by him by violence. And of those which were sold, there were many that afterwards redeem∣ed their Fortunes, and under other Princes ar∣rived as high as to be Senators. The Buffoons and Jesters of Commodus, such as were Men of obscene Names, he sold, and of the Money that he made of this Negotiation, which was a great deal, he gave a Bounty to the Soldiers. He exacted also from the Servants of Com∣modus,
an Account of all things that their Master had lavishly given them, to enrich them. The most principal Things in the AuctionAuction of Com∣modus's Goods. of the Goods of Commodus were these, Gar∣ments of Cloth of Gold, Tunicks, Cloaks, Hanging-Coats, Dalmaticks, Fringed Vests, Coats of Mail, and others of other sorts; Arms for the Exercises of the Gladiators, en∣rich'd with Jewels and Gold, vast Herculean Swords; Collars for the Gladiators; Vessels of fine Gold, Ivory, Silver and Citron; Drinking-Vessels, which were some of them of obscene Fi∣gures; other Vessels belonging to the Arts of the Gladiators; Chariots of a rare Invention, with the Seats to turn so, as either to decline the Sun, or take in the Air, as you please; with other things to measure the Way, and shew the Hour; and whatever else was agreeable to the Plea∣sures of that Prince in all sorts of Vices. As for such Servants as had been taken out of private Houses into the Court, Pertinax re∣stored back those to their proper Masters. He reduced the Table, and cut off all the prodi∣gious Expences of Commodus. He contented himself with a little, and the Example of his Frugality was of great effect upon all things. In fine, he reduced the Expence of the Hou∣shold of the Emperor, to a Moiety of what it was accustomed to be before. He appointed certain Recompences for the Soldiers that acquitted themselves with Ho∣nour. The Debts that he contracted on the first occasions of his Reign, he discharged. He
restored the Credit of the Exchequer. He set a-part a Sum for Publick Works. He gave Money for the Reparation of the High-ways. He paid a great many Soldiers that had served well, their Arrears. He put the Exchequer, in a word, in a Condition to discharge its Debts. But whereas there was due to the Alms-Chil∣dren of Trajan's Establishment, the Allowan∣ces of Nine Years, he quite sunk that Debt, which was severe, and a great Reflection up∣on him. It is true, he was not exempt from the aspersion of Covetousness, in the time he was a private Man. He had oppressed with Usury his Neighbours upon the Lake di Sabat, and had turned them out of their Lands, to extend further the Limits of his own. He was called really a Money-monger; and many have writ, that he did sordid things in the Consular Provinces which he governed; they say, that he sold the Discharges from, and the Commands in the Army. His Parents had little or no Estate to leave him, and no Inheritances fell to him from others, yet he was grown a rich Man on a sudden. He restored after he was Emperor, to every one, the E∣states which were taken from them by Com∣modus, but yet he exacted a Consideration for it. He came constantly to the Senate, and always reported some thing or other to them. He shew'd himself always gracious to all those that came to pay their Reverences to him, or ask him any Favour. He discharged some from the Accusations of their Slaves, and a∣venged the Death of others by crucifying their Accusers.
Whilst these things pased, Falco the Consul formed a Design against him, out of an Am∣bition to set up himself. Pertinax complained in the Senate of it; but however, forgave him, and begg'd his impunity of the Senate, where∣by Falco lived in Safety upon his Estate, and his Son was his Heir when he died. Many in∣deed said in his behalf, that whatever Design there might have been amongst others to make him Emperor, he knew nothing of it himself; and that the Slaves who were his Accusers, did him wrong, and were corrupted, and had not agreed in their Evidence. But however it is, a worse Faction than this was made against Pertinax by Laetus, the Captain of the Guards, and those to whom the Sanctimoniousness of this Prince was offensive. For Laetus had re∣pented himself of his Services in having ad∣vanced him to the Crown, because he had re∣proved his Conduct in some things. Nor were the Soldiers without their Resentments, because Pertinax had put to death several in the Business of Falco, upon the simple Deposition of one Slave. Therefore a Party of Three Hundred Sol∣diersPertinax slain. of the Guards, well equipped, assaulted the Palace, and killed him. The same Day, no Heart was found in the Sacrifice, at which Pertinax had assisted; and in another, no Li∣ver. Therefore having intended to have gone that Day to the Athenaeum, to hear the perfor∣mances of a Poet; but putting it off, because of the ominousness of the Sacrifices; the Guards that were to attend him, had Orders to retire
to their Camp, whn on a sudden they turned upon the Palace, from whence it was not pos∣sible to repel them, nor yet to give Advice to Pertinax of them in due time: for all the Courtiers regarded him so little, that they en∣couraged rather the Soldiers on to the Enter∣prise. So they surprized him, as he was giving some Orders about the Affairs of his Houshold; and being come up into the Gallery, as far as to a place which is called Sicily, and the Ban∣queting-Hall of Jove, as soon as Pertinax knew of it, he sent Laetus to them: but Laetus avoided them, and went another way, hiding his Face, and slinked Home. After they were broken in further, Pertinax came forth to them him∣self, and be spoke them in a long and a grave Oration which sweetned them: till one Tau∣sius, one of the Troop of Tongres that served in the Guards, putting them into a new fre, darted his Javelin at Pertinax's Breast; who then Invocating Jupiter the Avenger, threw his Gown over his Head, and the rest fell upon him, and Stabbed him. Electus died with him, having first killed two of the Assas∣sines. The other Officers of the Chamber that were about him, fled: some say that the Sol∣diers had broken into the Bed Chamber, and that they killed him there, hiding himself a∣bout the Bed. He was a Venerable old Man, with a longHis Per∣sonage. Beard, curling Hair, pretty Gross, his Belly standing a little out, of a Princely Stature; wanted not Eloquence, but was rather Grati∣ous in his Words than thought Sincere. He
obliged every body in Words, but in Deeds was illiberal and almost sordid; and particu∣larly in his Entertainments and Presents. He had as yet made no Change in the Officers that had been put into the Government by Commodus; expecting the Anniversary of the Birth-day of the City of Rome, (that is the eleventh or twelfth of the Calends of May) be∣cause he design'd to date from thence his be∣ginning of all things. And therefore they say the Officers of the appointment of Commodus, who were afraid to be turned out, had resolved to kill him in the Baths by that time, if it had not been done to their Hands before. Certainly Empire, and all the Honors there∣untoHis Cha∣racter. belonging, made so little an impression upon him, that he always shew'd himself greatly displeased with them, and he desired to appear still the same Man, that he had ever been. He carried himself to the Senate, the most respectfully in the World. When they Congratulated him, he Complemented them again, and divided his Discourses to all of them, as if he was but the Governour of the City of Rome. He would willingly have laid down the Empire, and have return'd to a pri∣vate life; and he would not suffer his Children to be brought up in the Court. Indeed he was so saving, and such a lover of Profit, that he Trafficked at the Lake di Sabato by his Ser∣vants, when he was Emperor, in the same manner, as he did when he was a private Man. Persons who spoke freely of him, said, he was one that promised Well, but did No∣thing.
Those of his own Country, who re∣sorted much to him upon his being made Em∣peror, obtained as good as nothing from him, and said the same. Yet he was free to suffer himself to be presented, with any thing to his advantage. He left a Son and a Daughter behind him; together with his Wife, who was the Daughter of Flavius Sulpitianus, whom he made the Governor of Rome in his own place. He did not much concern himself with the im∣pudicity of his Wife; who in the sight of all the World entertained for her Lover, a Musi∣cian. On the other hand he had for his Mistress, one Cornificia; to whose love they say he was extremely abandoned. He was extraordinary strict upon the Servants about the Court: and this therefore made him be much hated by them. The signs forerunning his Death were theseSigns of his Death. Three days before he was killed, he thought he saw a Man by reflexion in a Pond, making at him with a Sword. The day that he was killed, it was observed that the Pupils of his Eyes, as if they were dead, did not represent the Images of Persons that look'd on him: and as he sacrificed in his private Oratory, the Fire went out; and neither the Heart, nor the Liver were found in the Victims. Stars very bright, though near the Sun, appeared in the day time some days before. What him∣self said of Didius Julianus, was an Omen of the succession to him of that Person. For Ju∣lianus bringing his Kinsman, his Brother's Son to him, to whom he had promised to give
his Daughter in Marriage, he advised the young Man to observe the Commands of his Uncle, for says he, He is my Colleague and my Successor: For he had been his Colleague in his Consulship, and had succeeded him in his Proconsulship: and at last he succeeded him in the Empire too. The Soldiers and the Courtiers both hated Pertinax. But the People took his death with Indignation, because they saw he was one, who might have re-settled all things in the good order as they were of old. The Soldiers that had killed him, stuck his Head upon a Spear, and brought it through the City into the Camp. But it was retrieved again, and together with his Body buried in the Sepulchre of his Wife's Grand-father, by Julianus, with all the honour that he could do it: only he made no publick Harangue upon him, either to the People or the Senate; but yet when afterwards it was his own fate to be in like manner deserted, and killed, then the Senate and the People did translate Pertinax into the number of the Gods. This was done in the time of the EmperorHonours paid to him af∣ter. Severus; when Pertinax having had a very great Character given him by the Senate, a Royal Funeral was solemnized for him, in which he was represented by his Effigies, and Severus himself did him the honor to make the Ora∣tion in his praise: loving the memory of him to that degree, that he was pleased to be cal∣led by the Senate by the same name of Perti∣nax. The Son of Pertinax was made the Chief Priest to his Father; and the Priests of the
Emperor Marcus Antoninus were appointed, as his Associates. The Games of the Cirque were Celebrated for his Ascension to the Em∣pire, and the day of his Birth was kept: which last is remaining still: but the others were afterwards laid aside by Severus. He was born upon the Calends of August, under the Consulships of Verus and Bibulus. He was kil∣led upon the fifth of the Calends of April, in the Consulships of Falco and Clarus. He lived sixty six Years, seven Months, and twenty six Days. He Reigned two Months, and twenty seven days. He gave a Largess to the People of a hundred Roman Penies a Man: and he had promised another to the Guards of twelve thousand Sesterces; but he gave them but the half: what he had promised the Army, was not given them, because his death prevented him. There is a Letter of his, in the History of his life, written by Marius Maximus, which I have not thought fit to insert here, because of its too great length, but which is a certain Proof, that Pertinax was one that had a Hor∣ror for the Station of an Emperor.
THEA Chris. CXCIV. Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR DIDIUS JULIANUS. By AELIUS SPARTIANUS. Addressed to the EMPEROR DIOCLESIAN. DIdius Julianus, who succeeded in theHis Ex∣traction. Empire after Pertinax, had for his Great Grandfather, Salvius Julianus; who was twice Consul, the Governor of the City of Rome, and which rendred him yet the more remarkable, was that he was
a Professor of the Law. His Mother was cal∣led Clara Aemilia; his Father Petronius Didius Severus; his Brothers, Didius Proculus and Num∣mius Albinus; his Uncle by his Mother's side, Salvius Julianus; his Grandfather, by his Fa∣thers side, an Insubrian of Milan: and his Great Grandfather by his Mothers side was Salvius Julianus, who was of the City Maho∣meta in the Kingdom of Tunis. He was brought up by the hand of Domitia Lucilla, who was the Mother of the Emperor Marcus Antoninus; and by whose Interest he was first put into the Commission of the Viginti Viri. Then he was made a Quaestor, although a yearHis Ad∣vance∣ment. sooner than the Law permitted him in point of age. Then he was made an Aedile and a Praetor, by the favour of Marcus Antoninus. And after his Praetorship, he had the Com∣mand in Germany of the Twenty Second Le∣gion, called Primigenia. After that he Go∣verned in Gallia Belgica very well, and very long: where the Cauchi, a People of Germa∣ny, who bordered upon the River of Elbe, making an Eruption upon him, he resisted them so well with only the tumultuous Forces of the Province, that he merited by it a Con∣sulship. In like manner he overcame the Catti. Then he was translated to the Govern∣ment of Dalmatia; which he very well main∣tained against the bordering Enemies. Next he was removed to the Lower Germany, and after that he was made the General of the Provisions in Italy.
He was once accused by one Severus Claris∣simus, a Soldier, of being in a Conspiracy with Salvius Julianus, against Commodus. But because Commodus had already put many Sena∣tors to death, who were great and powerful Persons, and because he was willing a while to forbear his further Cruelty, Didius Julia∣nus was discharged at that time, and his Ac∣cuser Condemned; after which he was re∣manded again to his Province. Then he had the Government of Bithynia given him; in which however he came short of that Fame, that he had acquired in his other Govern∣ments. Next he was made a Consul in Con∣junction with Pertinax, and he succeeded to Pertinax in the Proconsulship of Africa; who therefore always called him his Collegue and his Successor: But this was more especially re∣marked to be Ominous, one day when Juli∣anus came with his Kinsman to him, when Emperor, to be Contracted to a Daughter of Pertinax. For as Pertinax received him with the respect and kindness that was due; he said to him at the same time, You, Sir, Are my Colleague and my Successor: and presently after that, followed the death of that Prince. Now he who first put up to be Emperor after the death of Pertinax, was Sulpitianus, who was then in the Camp of the Guards. In the mean time the Senate as∣sembled; whither Julianus together with his Son-in-Law coming, and finding the Doors shut, and the two Tribunes P. Florianus and Vectius Aper standing at the Door, those two
Tribunes began to persuade him to possess him∣self of the Empire that was vacant. To which he answering, that it was already di∣sposed of to another, they nevertheless took him even against his will, and carried him to the Camp: where they found Sulpitianus, who was the Governor of Rome, and Son-in-Law to Pertinax, haranguing the Soldiers in his own favour so strongly, that they refused to hearken in the least to Julianus, till he had wisely advised them not to make Choice of one who would Revenge the Murder of Pertinax, who was Father-in-Law to him; and then they all immediately tacked about to Julianus; who giving it them under his Hand in Writing, that he would restore the Memory of Commodus, they proclaimed him, engaging him to bear no displeasure however against Sulpitianus for the Pretensions which he had made to their Favour. Then he Chose, by their Advice, Flavius Gentalis, and Tullius Crispinus to be the Cap∣tains of the Guards; and whereas he had pro∣mised, that he would give the Soldiers a Boun∣ty of five and twenty thousand Sesterces, he gave them thirty. In the Evening, after he had Harangued them according to Custom, he came from the Camp to the Senate, to whom he intirely referred himself: the Se∣nate accepted him; and first Inrolled him a∣mongst the Families of the Patricians; then they declared him Emperor. The TribunitianDeclar'd Emperor. and the Proconsular Powers were conferred upon him; and his Wife called Mallia Scan∣tilla,
and his Daughter Didia Clara were ho∣noured by them with the Titles of Empress, and Princess. From the Senate he repaired to the Palace, whither he took his Wife and Daughter with him; but they went trembling, and against their wills, as if their minds gave them some secret Presages of an approaching Destruction. He made Cornelius Repentinus, his Son-in-Law, the Governor of the City of Rome, in the place of Sulpitian. But in the mean time the Populace bore to Julianus a Publick hatred, as if he would revive the times of Com∣modus, and as if he had been the Murderer of Pertinax, because he proposed to amend his Faults. They pretended to say further, that despising the Frugal Table of Pertinax, he had from the first day provided himself ano∣ther that was Luxurious, full of all sorts of excellent Meats; but this however was false. For besides that his Table was sufficiently Fru∣gal, he did not Eat at all the first day, till the Body of Pertinax was buried; and then he did it with a great Melancholy upon him, and spent all the night afterwards sleepless, he was so concerned for his Friend's death. The next Morning, as soon as it was light, the Senate and the Gentry coming to wait upon him at the Palace; he admitted them, and called them all, with a great deal of Civility, according to every one's Age, his Father, or his Son, or his Brother. Nevertheless the Populace both in the Forum, and before the House of the Se∣nate, loaded him with perpetual Reproaches, as if they hoped by that means to oblige him
to lay down the Empire, that he had received at the Hands of the Soldiers. They threw a Shower of Stones at him; and as he came to the Senate Cursed him publickly, and Cursed him again as he was at his Devotions, by which they wished he might never obtain any thing of the Gods. In the mean time as they threw Stones at him, he only waved his Hand to∣wards them to Pacifie them: and what he said to the Senate was very sweet and prudent. He thanked them that they had admitted him to Administer, in Conjunction with them, the Soveraign Power; and for the Honor they had done, not only to himself, but to his Wife and his Daughter. He accepted from them the Title of the Father of the Country; but he re∣fused to have his Statue set up in Silver, which they offered him. Going from the Senate a∣gain to the Capitol, the Populace made a stop to him; till they were forced aside, partly by Blows with Sword in Hand, and partly by good Words and promises of Money. From thence he went to the Publick Games in the Cirque; where the People Crowding them∣selves indifferently into all the Seats, redoubled their outragious Reproaches against him; and called aloud upon Pescennius Niger, who was said to have already taken upon him the qua∣lity of the Emperor, to come to the Succour of the City of Rome; yet all this took he quietly, and appeared to be of an extraordinary sweet Temper all the time of his Reign. The People inveighed no less bitterly against the Soldiers, who had kill'd Pertinax, they said for Money. To
conciliate therefore the favour of these People, several things which Commodus had well ap∣pointed, and Pertinax had abolished, Didius Julianus restored again. He spoke nothing, neither good nor bad, as to Pertinax himself; which seemed to several to be very strange; but the only reason, why he was silent of his Honor, was the fear of the Soldiers, who had killed him. Now Julianus had no apprehension of any Opposition being made to him on the side either of the Forces in Great Britain, or those in Illyricum. But fearing especially those in Syria, which were commanded by Pescennius Niger, he sent a Centurion thither with Or∣ders to cut him off. Hereupon Pescennius Ni∣gerNiger and Severus revolt. in Syria, and Septimius Severus in Illyricum, revolted from Julianus with the Armies under their Commands. Being told of the latter, from whom he had suspected nothing; he came in Anger to the Senate, and caused him to be declared an Enemy, and the Soldiers with him, unless they deserted him by such a day: to whom Messengers were sent at the same time from the Senate, to persuade them to renounce Severus, and adhere to Julianus. Amonst whom was Vespronius Candidus, who was a great Senior in the Rank of the Con∣suls, but hated of old by the Soldiers, because of his Severities. Valerius Catulinus was sent in the Quality of Successor to Severus: as if it was an easie thing to be the Successor of a Man, who had an Army to defend him. Together with these was sent Aquilius, the Centurion, a
known Assassin, who having already mur∣dered many Senators, might try his Hand once again, and do no less to Severus. In the mean time Didius Julianus ordered the Guards to be exercised, and their Camp to be refortified. But as the Soldiers were become idle, and dis∣solute by being accustomed to the Luxuries of Rome, it was very much against their wills, that they were brought to their Arms; inso∣much that they hired others for Money to sup∣ply their places, and do their duties in their steads. Septimius Severus took his march towards the City of Rome, with the Army under his Command; whilst the People there, every day more both hated and derided Julianus. Nor was he able to do any good upon the Soldiers of the Guards; and thinking that Laetus was a Favourer of the Cause of Severus, he un∣gratefully commanded him to be killed, who was one that had formerly saved his life from the Hands of Commodus; and Martia he com∣manded to be killed with him. But whilst these things were in passing, Severus possessed him∣self of the Fleet and City of Ravenna; and the Embassadors of the Senate, that had pro∣mised this Succour to Julianus, changed sides, and engag'd on the part of Severus. Also Tul∣lius Crispinus, the Captain of the Guards, who had been sent to make Head against his Troops, received a defeat, and returned back by Rome. When Julianus saw all this, he pro∣posed to the Senate, that the Vestal Virgins and all the Priests, together with the Senate,
should march forth to meet the Army of Se∣verus, Arrayed all in their several Habits, and should conjure and persuade him fairly to de∣sist his Hostilities. A vain thing indeed, to sup∣pose of an Army of desperate Soldiers. There∣fore Faustinus Quintillus, an Augur, and a Consul, took the liberty to contradict him in that Proposal; and boldly said, to which ma∣ny of the Senators gave their consents; That a Man was not fit to Command, who could not resist his Adversary by force of Arms. Julianus in great Anger sent for Soldiers out of the Camp, to force the Senate into a Compliance with him, or Massacre them upon the place. But neither did this take. For certainly it was very unreasonable, that when the Senate had adjudged Severus an Enemy upon the account of Julianus, the same Julianus should turn such a Butcherer of the Senate. So he came to the Senate with another and a better Pro∣posal, which was that there might be an Act for the participation of the Empire betwixtSeverus declar'd Partner in the Empire. Severus and him, and this was done imme∣diately. Every one now called to mind an Omen of all this, which came from the Mouth of Julianus himself, when he had the Empire given him. For when the Consul had said in the name of the Senate, I order Didius Julianus to be proclaimed Emperor, Julianus prompted and corrected him thus, say Didius Ju∣lianus Severus, that is, because Severus was a third name which he took from his Grandfather, and Great Grandfather. Some indeed deny, that there was any such Order of his, as that of
murdering the Senate, who had been so kind to him. But however that is, after passing that Act, he sent immediately Tullius Crispinus, his Captain of the Guards, to Complement Severus. He also Created Veturius Macrinus, another Captain of the Guards; because he un∣derstood that Severus had sent Letters to make him one. In the mean time the People said a∣loud, and Severus suspected as much, that this Peace was but a Feint, and that Tullius Crispinus was sent to him rather with private Orders to kill him. So Severus, with the advice of his Army, chose to be his declared Enemy, rather than his Partner; and accordingly he writ to a great many Persons in Rome, his Friends, who secretly received and dispatched his Or∣ders. As for the rest, Julianus tried all sorts of things by the Magicians, that could be de∣vised to mitigate the hatred of the People, or to bridle the Arms of the Enemy. And cer∣tainly the Magicians offered such Sacrifices for him upon this occasion, as were by no means consonant to the Rites of the Romans. They tried their Charms in Profane Verses, and o∣ther Charms which they do with a Looking∣glass: but yet all went ill on the side of Ju∣lianus; and all that they discovered from them was, the coming in of the one, and the departure of the other Emperor. As Tullius Crispinus came as far as to meet the Avant-Guards of Severus, he was killed by his order, in which he followed the ad∣vice that was given him by Julius Laetus. Then Julianus convoked the Senate again,
and asked their Opinions, what more was to be done; but the Senate could not resolve him. He ordered after that, of his own motion, the Gladiators of Capua to take Arms under the Command of Lollianus Titianus. He in∣vited Claudius Pompeianus, from his Retreat at Tarracina, to joyn with him in the Government, because he had long commanded Armies, and was the Son-in-Law of an Emperor. But Pom∣peianus excused himself, and said, he was an Old Man, and wanted his sight. In the mean time, the Army of Severus was encreased, by Soldiers that came to him out of the Province of Ombria; and he sent Letters before him to Rome, to order the Murderers of Pertinax to be secured. So in a little time, Didius Julianus was abandoned by all the World, and remained in the Court, with only Genialis, one of his Cap∣tains of the Guards, and his Son-in-Law Repen∣tinus with him▪ The next thing was to deposeHe is de∣posed. him from the Empire, by the Sentence of the Senate: This was done, and all his Power abro∣gated, and Severus immediately declared Empe∣ror in his place. Afterward it was pretended that he had poysoned himself; but in effect, there were Persons immediately sent on the part of the Senate, who caused him to be killed by the hands of a mercenary Soldier, imploring, as he fell, the Faith of Caesar; that is, Severus. He had given all his Paternal Estate to his Daughter, and emancipated her upon his Elevation to theAnd slain. Empire. But as well her Riches, as her Illustrious Title of Princess, were soon taken from her again. His Body was delivered by Severus, to
Manlia Scintilla his Wife, and to his Daughter, to be buried; who put it into a Tomb of his great Grandfather, five Miles from Rome, upon the Via Lavicana, that is, the High-way, called by that Name. Now the things condemned in this Prince were these; that he gormandized, that is, eat to excess, gam'd much, plaid at the Wea∣pons of the Gladiators; and did all this, being an Old Man, tho' he had never before been at∣tached to those Vices in his Youth; and that he was Proud; but this is not to be believed, for in his Reign he shewed himself the most humble Man in the World; the most obliging in his Entertainments; the most courteous in his Subscription of himself in his Letters, and of a most excellent Temper in allowing of the Liberties of his Friends. He lived Six and Fifty Years and Four Months; and reigned but Two Months and Five Days. Therefore his great Error was, that he ought by his absolute Au∣thority to have governed those, whom on the contrary he made absolute over himself, to go∣vern the State.
THEA. Christi CXCIV. Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Septimius Severus, Dedicated to the EMPEROR DIOCLESIAN. BY AELIUS SPARTIANUS. SEVERUS, who enjoyed the Empire after the Death of Didius Julianus, was born in Africa, at the Town of NapoliHis Ex∣traction. di Barbaria, in the Government of Tripoli. His Father's Name was Geta. His Ancestors had been Knights of Rome of old Time. His Mo∣ther
was Fulvia Pia. His Uncles by his Fa∣ther's side were Marcus Agrippa and Severus, who had both been Consuls. His Grandfather by his Father's side was Macer; by his Mo∣ther's, Fulvjus Pius. He was born under the Consulships of Erucius Clarus, and Severus, which was then the second Consulship of the first, upon the sixth of the Ides of April. When he was but a Child, and before he had any Tincture of the Latin and Greek Letters, in which he was afterwards so very perfect, he loved to play altogether at a Sport, in which having Bundles of Rods and Axes carried be∣fore him, and a row of Boys standing about him, he sate himself down as a Judge, and tried Causes. In the Eighteenth Year of his Age, he d∣clamed in Publick. Afterwards he came to Rome to make his Studies; where through the Favour of his Kinsman, Septimius Severus, who had been twice Consul, he received the Ho∣nour of the Emperor Marcus Antoninus to beHe is made a Senator. created a Senator. Now his Landlord with whom he lodged at Rome, upon his first coming thither, was at that moment Reading the Life of the Emperor Hadrian, which he was quick to observe, as an Omen to himself of future Grandeur. Another Omen that he had, was more parcicularly, as to his Reign, which was this; being once invited to a Banquet of the Emperor, he came in his Cloak, when he ought to have come in his Gown; which the Emperor taking Notice of, he gave him a Gown of his own to put on, which was the
same that he wore when he sate in Judgment. The same Night he dreamt that he sucked the Breasts of a Wolf, as if he was a Remus or a Romulus. He sate himself down in the Em∣peror's Chair, which a Servant had put out of its place, without thinking any thing of it, nor knowing that this was not permitted. As he was asleep once at his Lodgings, a Serpent came and had twisted it self about his Head; which the Servant perceiving, cried out, and he awaked, and the Serpent went from him again without doing him any hurt. His Youth was full of Fury and Wildnesses, which were sometimes criminal. He was ar∣raigned for Adultery, but was acquitted by Didius Julianus, the Proconsul of Africa, to whom he succeeded in the Charge of that Pro∣consulship, and was his Colleague in his Con∣sulship, and again succeeded him in the Em∣pire. He discharged his Questorship of the City of Rome, very well, into which he was elected unanimously. Afterwards he was cho∣sen a Military Questor, that is, Pay-Master, or Commissary to the Army, for the Province of Hispania Boetica. From thence he went into A∣frica to receive the Succession to his Father who was dead there. And whilst he was in Africa, instead of the Province of Boetica, he was made the Questor for the Island of Sardinia, because the Moors had laid waste Hispania Boe∣tica. This Administration being over, he was advanced to be the Proconsul of Africa; in which place a Plebeian of his own Town of Napoli di Barbaria coming to him, whilst the
Rods were carried before him, and presuming to embrace him, as his old Companion, he ordered him to be taken and well Cudgelled, with this Inscription over his Head, You who are a Plebeian, have a care of touching so a Pro∣consul of the People of Rome. Since which time, the Custom is for the Proconsuls to go out al∣ways in a Coach, whereas before they walked on Foot. He consulted, being in Africa, with an Astrologer, about his Fortune, which he was solicitous to know. The Astrologer took the Hour of his Birth, and observing great things from it, says he to him, Give me your own Horoscope, and not another Man's: Sever protesting, that it was his own, he told him of all the things which afterwards arrived to him. By the Favour of the Emperor Marcus An∣toninus, he was made a Tribune of the People, which he discharged with the greatest Exact∣ness, and all the Strictness that could be de∣sired. Then he married Martia, of whom he says nothing himself, in his History of his pri∣vate Life. But after he was Emperor, he set up her Statues. In the Thirty Second Year of his Age, he was chosen a Praetor, before a Number of others that were Competitors a∣gainst him. At the same time, he was sent into Spain. Upon which he dreamt, that i was said to him, that he should restore the Temple of Augustus at the City of Tarra∣gona, which was falling into ruin; and the that from the top of a very high Moun∣tain, he had a Prospect given him of a the Earth, but particularly of the City o
Rome, about which all the Provinces were joyn∣ing in a Consort of Harps, Voices, and sweet Flutes. He gave the People the diversion of the publick Shews in his absence. Then he had the command of the Fourth Legion, cal∣led Scythica, which was in Syria. In his way to which, he went to Athens, for the Curio∣sity of observing the Studies and the Rites, the Works, and the Antiquities of that Seat of the Muses: But because he received some Injuries there from the Athenians, he became their Enemy; and when he was Emperor, he was willing to avenge himself of them, by cut∣ting short their Privileges Next he was re¦moved to the Province of the Lionnois in Gal∣lia, to be the Lieutenant there. And having lost his Wife, and proposing to marry ano∣ther, he took the Care first to be informed, being very well vers'd in the knowledge of Astrology himself, in the Nativities of his Mi∣stresses; and as he had heard, that there was a Lady in Syria, who had found by her Nativity, that she was to be married to a King, he court∣ed her, and in fine, married her, whose NameHis second Marriage was Julia, by whom he was soon after made a Father. His Exactness, his Honour, and his great Sobriety, caused him to be so much beloved a∣mongst the Gauls, as never Person was. He was translated from thence to the Government of Pannonia, with a Proconsular Power. From Pannonia to Sicily, which was another Procon∣sulship; and when he had made his return a∣gain to Rome, he received of his Wife a se∣cond
Son. Being in Sicily, he was accused of consulting the Chaldaeans and the Astrologers about his coming to the Empire, for which he was ordered to be heard before the Captains of the Guards; who, it then being the time that the Emperor Commodus began to fall into an universal odium, acquitted him, and cru∣cified the Man that calumniated him. He was Consul the first time in Conjunction with Apuleius Ruffinus, by the particular appoint∣ment of Commodus. After his Consulship, he continued an entire Year at Rome, without Employ; and then by the recommenda∣tion of Laetus, he was preferred to the Com∣mand of the Army in Germany. He had li∣ved till now at Rome, in a very little House with one small Plat of Ground to it. But as he went to take the Possession of this last Charge, he purchased himself a spatious Villa; where once taking a small Repast together with his little Infants, and Fruit being brought, his Eldest Son, who was then of the Age of Five Years, distributed it amongst the Children, his Play. Fellows, so liberally, that his Father said to him, Not so fast, my Son, you have not the Riches of a King. The Child of Five Years old, answered, But I shall have. So being gone to his Command in Germany, he acquitted himself in that sort, that he raised his Name, which was already ennobled, to a far higher pitch of Glory. Hitherto he had followed Arms, but in the Quality of a private Person. But now the News coming that Commodus was killed,
and that Didius Julianus, who for the present was upon the Throne, was universally hated; the German Legions encouraged him no less than he declined it, to put up for the Empire. They declared him Emperor upon the Ides ofDeclared Emperor by the Army. August; at the same time he gave them a Bounty of Fifty Thousand Sesterces, which was more than any Prince had ever done before; and having secured the Provinces which he left at his Back, he hastened his March to Rome. Every one opened the way to him in all the places where he came. The Armies of Illyricum and Gallia, swore Fidelity to him. And every where they received him, as the Avenger of the Murder of Pertinax. In the mean time, Didius Julianus prevailed with the Senate to declare him an Enemy, and the Se∣nate sent their Commissioners to his Army to command the Soldiers in their Names to de∣part from his Service. It is true, it put him first into a great concern: but afterwards he managed the thing so, that he corrupted those very Commissioners, so that they spoke to the Soldiers for him, and came over themselves to his side. Julianus who was soon advertised of a Conduct so extraordinary, obtained then a Decree of the Senate, in which it was de∣clared, that the Empire should be participated betwixt himself and Severus: but whether this was with a sincere, or a treacherous Intention, it is uncertain, because in truth, he had before sent some known Assassines to him, to kill him; and others, at the same time, to kill Pescennius Niger, who had also taken up the
Empire against him, upon the Authority of the Forces in Syria. However it was, Severus escaped their Hands, and writ Letters to the Guards at Rome to abandon and slay Julianus; which was executed upon him accordingly, as he was in the Court, and Severus was invited to enter into Rome; who with a Fortune, which hath never happened to any before him, be∣came a Conqueror as it were with a Word,Enters Rome. and so marched on to Rome at the Head of his Troops. He kept himself all the while in his Camps and Tents, in his march in Italy, no less than if he still appeared there with the face of an Enemy. The Senate deputed a Hundred out of their Body, as their Envoys to compliment and congratulate him; who came up to him at the City of Teramo in Abruzzo. He re∣ceived them when they saluted him, all in Ar∣mour, and in the midst of his armed Troops. The next day all the Domesticks of the Court arrived to pay their Reverences to him. He pre∣sented the Envoys of the Senate with seven hun∣dred and twenty Pieces of Gold, and dismissed them. But yet if they pleased, he welcomed them to stay and to return to Rome in his Company. Then he immediately made Flavius Juvenalis the Captain of the Guards, who was one that Julianus had chosen to be a third Captain of the same under him. In the mean time, the Trouble was very great at Rome, amongst the Soldiers and the Citizens; because Severus whom they judged their Enemy, approached to them with a puissant Army. At the same
time the Legions in Syria had set up Pescennius Niger, Emperor; whose Edicts therefore, and whose Letters to the People or to the Senate, Severus intercepted, that they should not be read to the one or the other. And as he judged very well, that it concerned him to secure himself a∣gainst him, he sent Heraclius to take in the Coun∣try of Bithynia; and Plautianus, to make himself Master of the Children of Pescennius Niger. Then coming up to the City of Rome, before he made his entrance into it, he ordered the old Guards there to appear before him without their Arms, which they did, and he held a Council of War upon them, and surrounded them with Guards of his own Troops. In fine, as he made his publick Entrance into the City, himself and his Soldiers, all under their Arms, he took his way strait up to the Capitol. From the Capitol, he proceeded in the same form to the Palace, with the Banners which he had taken from the old Guards carried before him, not fly∣ing, but furled, as in mourning. All the City over did the Soldiers spread themselves, and filled the Temples, the Piazza's, and the Houses of the Court, like so many Inns. At their Discretion they took all things, without Buying, and threatned to plunder all the City; so that certainly one may say, the Entrance of Severus was odious and terrible. The next day he came, accompanied with his Friends, and a great Guard of his armed Soldiers, to the Senate, where he gave the Senate an Ac∣count of his assumption of the Empire, and
complained, that Didius Julianus had sent Men, who were known Assassines, to him, to kill him. He obliged them to pass an Act, that it should be unlawful for the Emperor to put to death a Senator, without taking the ad∣vice of the Senate. But whilst he was there, the Army that had brought him in, demanded of the Senate seditiously ten thousand Sester∣ces, after the example of those who had for∣merly brought in Augustus Caesar, and had received that Sum. Severus would have re∣pressed them, but he could not, without sweet∣ning them with Money; which sent them a∣way pacified. In the next place, in honour of the Memory of Pertinax, he solemnized a Royal Funeral for him, in which he was represented by his Image; and he Consecrated him a God, and appointed his Priests. He was willing to be called Pertinax himself, till the complaints of his Friends made him abolish the name again, as if it was ominous of a short Reign. After this he rendred to every one what belonged to him; and he married his two Daughters, having endowed them well, to Probus and Aetius. To the former of whom he offered the Government of the City of Rome; but he refused it, and said, That he thought it less to be the Governor of Rome, than to be the Son in Law of a Prince. He made both of them Consuls, and gave them great Riches. Another day he came to the Senate, and made a Proscription of the Friends of Didius Julianus; such as against whom there were Accusations brought, and afterwards or∣dered
them to be Executed. He heard a great many Causes Pleaded before him. He se∣verely punished the Magistrates of the Pro∣vinces, who stood accused by their People, if he found the matter of their Accusations proved against them. He looked so well after the affair of the Magazines of Corn, which he found in a very low condition, that when he died, he left enough for seven years to come. He took up an Expedition into the East to establish the State of Affairs there; not speak∣ing any thing as yet openly of Pescennius Ni∣ger, only he immediately sent some Legions into Africa, for fear that Niger should possess himself of Alexandria or Carthage by the way of Libya and Egypt, and so afflict the People of Rome with a want of Corn. He left Domitius Dexter, Governor of the City of Rome, in the place of Bassus, and within thirty days of his coming thither, he set out from it again. Af∣terHis Ex∣pedition against Niger. he had marched as far as to a place called Saxa Rubra, he had an occasion to appease a great Sedition which was arisen in his Army up∣on the subject of their Encampments. Here his Brother Geta met him; whom he Commanded to do his Duty in what had been ordered him; but Geta had been full, when he came, of other Hopes. Here also the Children of Pescennius Niger were brought to him, whom he received and entertained with the same Kindness, as if they were his own. He had sent a Legion to secure the Countries of Greece and Thrace, a∣gainst Niger. But, notwithstanding that, Ni∣ger had already seized upon Byzantium and
pretended to do the same to the City of He∣raclia; and having put to death a great many Persons of his Army, because he suspected them, Severus declared him, together with Aemilianus, the Proconsul of Asia, an Enemy. Niger invited Severus to agree to a Participati∣on of the Empire; but this was slighted. Se∣verus promised him, if he pleased, his Life in Safety: But he would give no Quarter to Ae∣milianus; who therefore being beaten soon af∣ter upon the Coasts of the Hellespont by the Captains of Severus, fled first to Cyziqua, and then to another City, in which he was killed: and the Troops of Niger were also put to theNiger defeated, Rout by the same. Severus with the News of this, sent Letters to the Senate, as though his Work was done. He fought next in Person with Niger, and killed him by the City of Cyziqua, and orderedand slain. his Head to be carried about upon a Spear: whose Children, after this, whom he had hi∣therto received with the same kindness as his own, and their Mother, he banished. Im∣mediately he gave the Senate, by Letter, an ac∣count of his Victory; and he put none to death of the Senators, who had been of the side of Niger, except only one. He was an∣gry with the City of Antioch; because they had both made a mock of his Administration of things in the East, and had furnished Ni∣ger with Provisions; so he deprived them of many of their Privileges. He deprived also the People of Sichem in Palestine, of their Freedom of Rome: because they had been a
long time armed for the service of Niger. He chastised several other Cities that had followed him; and by the losses and damages which he made them suffer, he left upon them the marks of his Resentments. After this, he did a great many things about Arabia. He obliged the Parthians to yield to him, and the People of the Country of Adiabene, who were all in the same Interests with Pescennius Niger. Where∣fore at his return, he was offered the honour of Triumph, and was Entitled Conqueror of the Arabians, Adiabenians, and Parthians; but the Triumph he refused; lest it should be pre∣tended that he triumphed a for Victory, gained as it were over his own Subjects, and he re∣fused the Style of Conqueror of the Parthians, not to offend the Parthians too sensibly. But no sooner was he returning to Rome from the Civil-War of Pescennius Niger, but he had the News of another, which he was toRevolt of Clodius Albinus. sustain against Clodius Albinus, who had re∣volted in Gallia. This occasioned him to com∣mand the Children of Niger, and their Mo∣ther to be put to death. Then he immediately declared Albinus an Enemy, and all his Adhe∣rents, if they had but written tenderly to him, or answered his Letters. And as he was upon his way against him, meeting with his eldest Son Bassianus at the Village of Vimy near Lions, he conferred upon him the Title of Caesar, and called him by the name of Aurelius Antoninus Bassianus. The reason whereof was, to cut off his Brother Geta from the hopes which he had conceived of the Empire. And he called
him by the name of Antoninus, either because he had dreamt that an Antoninus should succeed him, for which reason some say that Geta had had given to himself the same name; or be∣cause Severus himself had sometime formerly been of a mind to pass out of his own Fami∣ly into that of Marcus Antoninus. The Cap∣tains of Severus were at first defeated by those of Clodius Albinus; which cast him into that concern, that he consulted with the Augurs of Pannonia about his Fortune; who told him that he should be the Conqueror, but yet th his Adversary should neither fall into h power, neither save himself; and that h should perish by the side of a Water. No was it long after this, before several of the Friends of Albinus abandoned him, and came and presented themselves before Severus, and others of his Captains were taken Prisoners, upon whom he exacted a rigorous Chastise∣ment. After a great many things had past variously on both sides, the Battel of Tournom near Lions was fought, in which Severus carried the DayAlbinus over∣thrown. with the greatest success; only he was once thrown from his Horse, and the Army believing him to be killed, was just upon the point of making another Emperor. The Senate had a this time read some things, which were in the praise of Clodius Celsinus, who was of the City of Mahometa in Africa, and the Kinsman of Albinus: which disobliging Severus, as if they had meant it in the favour of Albinus himself, and thinking that he could not better revenge
t upon them, than by Consecrating Commo∣dus a God; he first of all pronounced him a God amongst the Army, and then writ the same to the Senate, with a recital of the Vi∣ctory, and commanded that the Bodies of the Senators who were killed in the fight, should e left abandoned and unburied. The Body of Albinus being brought to him, but half dead, he ordered his Head to be cut off, and arried to Rome with the Letters which he writ pon this Subject. He was overcome the ele∣enth day of the Calends of March; his ody was exposed before his own Tent till stunk: Severus rid his Horse over it; and e Horse boggling at it with horror, he forced im on with the Spur. At last he ordered it  be thrown into the River of Rhosne, toge∣er with those of his Wife and Children. He put to death after this an infinite num∣erHis ex∣treme Se∣verity. of Persons of the Party of Albinus, and mongst the rest, many of the Chief of Rome, nd several Ladies of Quality. All whose states were Confiscated, and returned into he Exchequer. He did the same, on this oc∣asion, with several of the Grandees of Spain nd Gallia. So that he gave the Soldiers the reatest Pay by this means, that any Prince ver did; and to his Children by virtue of this roscription he left the most of any Prince at s death. For he had amassed to himself the eatest part of the Gold and Silver that was Gallia, and in all Spain, and all Italy. He as the first that Constituted the Officer of rocurator of the Private Affairs of the Em∣peror;
or Keeper of the Privy Purse. Many others of the Party of Albinus, keeping their Faith to him, which they had promised, were defeated in Battel, likewise by Severus. The Arabian Legion had revolted to him. All which aggravated the Revenge of Severus upon the Party; of whom having killed a great many more, and extinguished the whole Family of the Albini, he came to Rome in a Choler a the People and the Senate: where he applauded Commodus publickly both to the one and the other: called him a God; said they were only infamous Persons and Poultrons, to whom be had been displeasing: you might see, he was evidently furious. Then he discoursed upon his own Clemency, though of all Men he had been the most Cruel, and had murdered th Senators following, without any legal Tryal, who were all illustrious Personages: Mu∣us Secundinus, Asellius Claudianus, Claudius R∣fus, Vitellius Victor, Papius Faustus, Aeli Celsus, Julius Rufus, Lollius Professus, Aru∣leius Cornelianus, Antoninus Balbus, Posth Severus, Sergius Lustratus, Fabius Paulinus, N∣nius Gracchus, Mustius Fabianus, Casperius A∣grippinus, Cejonius Albinus, Claudius Sulpit∣nus, Memmius Rufinus, Casperius Aemilia Cocceius Verus, Erucius Clarus, L. Stilo, Cldi Rufus, Egnatuleius Honoratus, Petronius Junior Festus, Neratianus, Aurelianus, Materianus, J∣lianus, and Albinus, of the Family of the Pes∣cennii; Macrinus, Faustinianus, Julianus, o the Family of the Cerellii; Herennius Nep Sulpitius Canus, Valerius Catulinus, Novius Re∣fus,
Claudius Arabidnus, and Marius Ascellio. Of these, the greatest part wre of the de∣gree of the Consuls, others Praetors, but all certainly very excellent Men: the murdering of whom, so many and so illustrious, as they were, made the Africans admire Severus as a Deity. He charged Cincius Severus with a de∣sign to have Poysoned him, and so likewise put him to death. He threw Narcissus, who had strangled Commodus, to the Lions. Many of obscure Note and Birth besides he killed, not to speak of the rest who were taken off by the rights of War. After all this, being willing to recommend himself to the People, he removed the Charge of the Post, and the Publick Carriages from Private Persons, to lay it upon the Exchequer. He ordered his Son Bassianus Antoninus, to beDeclares his Son Caesar. declared Caesar by the Senate, and to wear the Ensigns of Majesty accordingly: and next of his own absolute Authority, he erected Sta∣tus to his Father, Mother, Grandfather, and his first Wife. He conceived such a great disgust against Plautianus, after knowing his Life, that from an intimate Favourite, he de∣clared him a publick Enemy, and did him the disgrace to throw down his Statues which before had been placed next to those of the Relations and Allies of Severus, in all places of the Empire where they were. He remitted the People of Palestine, the Punishments which  had menaced them with in the Cause of Pescennius Niger. Afterwards he received Plau∣ianus into favour again, and banished his Ene∣mies:
who entred the City, as it were in Tri∣umph, and went up to the Capitol; and yet in Process of time, for all that he killed him. He gave the Man's, or the Roman Gown, to Geta his youngest Son; and married his Eldest to a Daughter of Plautianus. He made them both Consuls; but Geta, his own Brother, he killed. Then the Parthian War came on; upon his going to which, he first treated the People with the Games of the Gladiators, and gave them a Largess. But still he put to death several Persons, whether for real, or pre∣tended Causes, whilst these things past. Some because they Rallied upon him; others because they held their Tongues and said nothing. Some because they had said, He was an Em∣peror that had not his name for nothing. A right Pertinax, a right Severus. As for the Parthian War, certainly it wasThe Par∣thian Ex∣pedition. generally said that Severus affected it out of a desire of Glory, rather than that he was car∣ried upon it by any necessity. He imbarked his Army at the Port of Brindisi; from whence continuing on his Journey, he came into Sy∣ria, where he prepared himself to make Wa upon the Parthians in their own Country, after he had driven them out of their Footings i this. Together with which, by the advice o Plautianus, he hunted after the Reliques of th Faction of Pescennius Niger, and slew the without Mercy. Others he slew, pretendin that they had consulted the Astrologers an the Diviners concerning his death. Partic∣larly he suspected every one that was but pro∣per
to make an Emperor of. Whilst his Sons were yet little, which was the time for Men to try their Fortunes, either he heard, that it was said by them, or he imagined, that they said so. But yet as to some, who were mur∣dered, he excused himself, and denied that it had been done by his order; and particularly Marius Maximus says, he did it in the Case of Laetus. His own Sister making him a Visit from the Town of Napoli di Barbaria, where he was born, had brought her Son along with her: and as she was one that was scarce able to speak the Latin Tongue, she made the Emperor blush for her very much: who gave her several rich Presents, and made her Son a Senator; but when that was done, he ordered her to go back to her own Country again, and take her Son with her, who soon after died. The Summer being over, because in those Parts the Winter is the best Season for War, he entred into the Kingdom of Parthia; and obliging the Enemy to give way to him, he marched forward, and set himself down before Ctesiphon, which he took. But as his Soldiers had lived but upon the Roots of the Herbs which they found, whereby they had contracted great sicknesses, and particularly the Flux, which hindered their Marches, he satisfied himself with the Conquest which he had made, having killed a great number of the Enemy, and put to slight their King, which gained him the Title of Conqueror of the Parthians. His eldest Son the Caesar Bas∣sionus Antoninus, of thirteen years of Age, was
upon this occasion by the Army proclaimed a Partner in the Empire with his Father; and his younger Son, Geta Antoninus, was declared at the same time Caesar. Wherefore Severus gave to the Army a very large Donative, and all the Booty of the Town of Ctesiphon, accord∣ing to their desire, which they were become the Masters of. From thence he returned a Conqueror into Syria. The Senate offered him the Honor of a Triumph: which he re∣fused,Refuses a Triumph. bese he could not sit in the Chariot, by reason of the Gout, which afflicted him. But he permitted his Son to receive it in his Place; to whom the Senate had decreed a Triumph in relation to the successes over the Jews. For all things had passed well in Syria, as well as Parthia, under the Conduct of Se∣verus. In fine, being come to Antioch, he granted to his eldest Son the Roman Gow, and appointed him to be Consul with himself. Accordingly they both entred upon their Con∣sulships in Syria. After which, having gratified the Army with a Bounty upon that Subject, they took their way to Alexandria. In this Expedition he made a great many Laws to Establish the Rights of the People of Palestine. He forbad Men to turn Jews, un∣der a great penalty, and he made the like Ordi∣nances as to the Christians. He granted to the City of Alexandria the Privilege of a Senate; besides which he changed their Laws in several things. He was much pleased with his Voy∣age into these Parts, to see the Worship of the God Serapis, and because of the singular strang∣ness
of the Animals, and places which he saw here. He viewed Memphis and Memnon, the Pyramids and the Labyrinth, with great Care and great Satisfaction. It would be too tedious to pursue the Life of this Prince in Matters of a lesser Note. Therefore his diminishing the Power of the Pretorian Guards at Rome, after Julianus was conquered and killed, and his consecrating Pertinax a God, contrary to the Will of the Sol∣diers, were bold and great Actions. He seems to have deserved the Name of Pertinax, (which once he assumed) not so much for his Affection to Pertinax the Emperor, as for the austerity of his manners, and his own pertinaciousness in what he did. As one of the Enemy, who was taken had cast himself humbly at his Feet, and said to him; Sir, what would your self have done in my place? He not at all softened with so pru∣dent an Expression, commanded him to be killed without remorse. He was bent upon utterly extirpating the Parties that were against him, and almost from no place did he come off less than Conqueror. He conquered Abgarus, the King of Persia.His other Successes. The Arabians yielded themselves under his Obedience. He made the Adiabeni Tributary to him. He fortified Great Britain, which is the greatest Ornament of his Reign, with a Trench drawn cross the Island, from the one Ocean to the other, from whence he received the Title of Conqueror of the Britains. He put his Native Country of Tripoli into a Condi∣tion of the greatest Security, and a lasting
Peace, by subduing those most Warlike Na∣tions, which lie all about it; for which the Tripolines in return, presented him with Oyl and Corn, every Year in abundance; and gave for that purpose some fruitful Fields for ever to the People of Rome. As he was of a Temper to be implacable towards such as trans∣gressed their Duty; so on the other hand, he was of a singular good Judgment in making Choice of Persons to serve him, who were Men of Fidelity. He was much addicted to the Studies of Philosophy and Eloquence, and had a desire to know the rest of the Sciences He was a mortal hater of Robbers. He writ his own Life himself faithfully, as he was a private Man, and as he Emperor; in which however, he excuses as much as he can, the Fault of his Cruelty. The Senate gave this Judgment upon him, that either he ought ne∣ver to have been born, or he ought never to die. Because he seemed at once to be too Cruel to keep, and too useful to lose. In the mean time, as to his Affairs within hisHis Wife suspected. own Family, he was not so very Prudent. For the Virtue of his Wise Julia was much to be su∣spected. She was also an Accomplice in a Con∣spiracy that was form'd against him, yet he spa∣red her, and kept her with him. Whilst he lay lame of the Gout in his Feet, which retarded the Operations of the War, which the Army bore impatiently, they had nominated his Son Bassia∣nus, to march as Emperor at the Head of them. Severus immediately upon this, called a Coun∣cil of War, to which, causing himself to be
taken up, and carried and placed upon the Tribunal; and having cited to it all the Tri∣bunes, Centurions, Captains, and the principal Officers of the Army, that had been the Au∣thors of that Action, together with his Son; he demanded of them all, Whether they were returned to their Duty? who all, except his Son, whom he had pardoned, prostrating themselves before him for mercy; says he, I hope now you are satisfied, it is the Head that rules, and not the Feet. Another very remarkable Expres∣sion of his, is, being one whom Fortune had raised from a low Birth by several degrees to the Empire, with the Assistance of Letters, and the Knowledge that he had acquired in Arms; says he, I have been all things, and all's worth nothing. He died at York in Great Britain, in an ad∣vancedHis Deaht. Age, and the Eighteenth Year of his Reign, of a very violent Malady, the Gout, after having subdued the Nations which were troublesome to the Repose of that Country. He left Two Sons, Antoninus Bassianus and Geta, to which latter he gave the same Name of Antoninus, in Honour of the Emperor Mar∣cus Antoninus. He was interred in the Sepul∣chre of Marcus Antoninus, for whom of all the Emperors, he had that Honour, and held his Memory so dear, that he consecrated even his Son Commodus Antoninus a God, and thought that for the future, the Name of Antoninus ought to be inseparable from the Person of the Emperor, as well as that of Augustus, for ever. The Senate, his Children, and those of his Fa∣mily, joyned to make a magnificent Funeral
for him, and he was likewise enrolled in the Number of the Gods. The publick Works of his that are extant, are chiefly these; the Sep∣tizonium, his Baths, and his Jani. The Judg∣ment that was passed upon him after his Death was so much the more to his Honour, as his Son, and those Princes that came after, proved unfortunate to the State; when all things were abandoned into the Hands of Robbers, that made a Prey of all the Grandeur and the Ri∣ches of the Romans. He was so little curious of fine Cloaths, that his Vest had scarce any Studs of Purple upon it; and over that, he wore a loose shagged Coat. He eat little, and loved above all things the Pease, Beans, and Pulse of his own Native Country; he sometimes drank pretty freely; often quite abstained from flesh. He was handsome as to his Person; big, withHis Per∣sonage. a long Beard; his Hair naturally curl'd; of an awful Countenance; a sweet Voice, but some∣thing of an African Tone with it to the last. After his Death, he was more beloved than ever he had been during his Life; because People then had ceased to envy him, and be∣cause they were out of the fear of his Cruelty. I remember, I have read in Aelius Maurus, the manumitted Servant of Phlegon of Tralles, that this Prince, when he died, rejoyced infi∣nitely, that he left behind him two Sons of the Name of Antoninus to succeed in the Em∣pire, and to be of equal Power with one ano∣ther, after the Example of the Emperor Anto∣ninus Pius, who was succeeded at once by Marcus Antoninus and Verus Antoninus, who
yet being the Sons of that Prince but by A∣doption; it pleased Severus so much the more, to think that his two Sons were his own, and derived of his own Blood; that is, Bassianus Antoninus, whom he had by his first Wife, and Geta Antoninus, whom he had by Julia. But he was much mistaken in his good hopes as to them both. The untimely Murder of the one, and the Vices of the other equally de∣prived the State of reaping any Good by them. And really when I have sometime reflected upon this, I have with astonishment observed, may it please your Majesty O Dioclesian, that seldom any of the great Men have ever left a good and an useful Son behind them. But either they have died all without Issue, or if they have had Children, their Children have been such, that it had been better for their Glory to have left none at all. To begin with Romulus, he left the World no Children; nor Numa Pompilius, who were of any Service to the State. What shall I say of Camillus? Had he any Children like himself? What had Scipio? What had the Cato's, who were all such great Men? What shall I say of Homer, De∣mosthenes, Virgil, Salust, Terence, Plautus, and so many other excellent Persons? What shall I say of Caesar? What shall I say of Tully? but that it had been much better, that he had left no Children neither. What shall I say of Augustus himself? who had not a good even adoptive Son, though he had all the World to chuse out of. Trajan was also mistaken in the
Choice that he made of his own Country man, and one of his own Blood. But to o∣mit any more adoptive Sons for the sake of Antoninus Pius and Marcus Antoninus, who were Two such Divinities: What had been hap∣pier than Marcus Antoninus, if he had not left Commodus his Heir? what more Glorious than Septimius Severus, if he had never begotten Bassianus? who murdered his Brother, for a Crime maliciously invented by himself, and then charged it upon him who married his Mother-in-Law, who was as good as an own Mother to him, and in whose Arms he had before killed her Son, his Brother; who killed Papinian, that Sanctuary, that Treasure of all the Doctrine of the Laws, only because he would not justify so cruel a Fratricide Therefore in comparison with this Son, Severus the Father, though he was in all Respects a hard, or rather a cruel Prince, was accounted Pious, and worthy of the Consecration of a God; who as he lay on his Death-Bed, sent, they say, to this his Son, that Divine Oration in Salust, of the King Micipsa to his Children. But it was so quite lost upon Bassianus Anto∣ninus, that he lived long in the hatred of the People, to whom although he gave a Bounty of those Coats called Caracalla, from whence himself hath the Name of Caracallus; and though he built those Baths of his Name, which are very Magnificent, yet that Holy and Ve∣nerable Stile of Antoninus, became much the less beloved for his sake. He, as we are told, built besides the Portico which is at Rome, with
very great Splendor, in which there are repre∣sented, the memorable Exploits of Severus his Father. The Signs fore-running the Death of theSigns fore∣running his Death. Emperor Septimius Severus, were these. He dreamt, that he was carried up to Heaven in a Chariot, drawn by four Eagles, and enrich'd with precious Stones, and I know not what large humane Form flying before him: that as he was elevated in the Air, he display'd the Numbers Eighty Nine, beyond which Age pre∣cisely he did not live; for he was already old, when he came to the Empire. Then that he continued a long time alone and destitute of help, in a great Circle by himself, till at last, fearing to fall to Earth again, he saw himself called by Jupiter, and placed amongst the Anto∣ninusses. One day whilst the Games of the Cirque were celebrating, as there were three Figures of Victory, with Palms in their hands placed according to Custom upon the Platform where the Emperor's Throne is; that in the middle bearing a Globe, on which was in∣scribed the Name of Severus, was blown down with a blast of Wind to the Ground, and there lay. The other, which was inscribed with the Name of Geta, fell, and was broken to pieces; but that which was inscribed with the Name of Bassianus stood, but with much ado, and lost its Palm-branch in the Wind. After he had finished his Wall or Trench in Great Britain, and was returning to the next Garrison victorious, having hereby assured the Peace of that Country for ever, he was think∣ing
in his mind, what sort of Omen he should meet with upon it; a Black-moor who was of the Number of his Soldiers, and who was a famous Droll, always ready to make some plea∣sant piece of Rallery, presents himself before him, with a Crown in his hand made of Cy∣press; Severus in anger, commanded him im∣mediately to retire out of his sight, being sen∣sibly touched with the double ill Omen of his Hew, and the Matter of his Crown. In the mean time said the Man, Your Majesty hath been all Things, and conquered all Things, no be a God. Being afterwards returned to the City of York, and going to discharge his Devo∣tion, he was conducted by a mistake of an Augur, into a Temple of Bellona, and next the Beasts which were presented to him to Sa∣crifice, were black: But he refusing to Sacri∣fice in that colour, retired to the Palace, and the same black Victims being left neglected by the Priests, went after him as far as to the Gates of the Palace. In a great many Cities there are WorksHis pub∣lic Works. which he ordered to be done, which are excel∣lent; but particularly at Rome, all the publick Edifices which were decaying by old Age, and the course of time, he restored, and which was a great Action in him, without scarce ever in∣scribing his own Name upon one of them, but every where continuing upon them the Names of their antient Founders. At his Death he left in the publick Stores, Corn to serve for Seven Years to come, at the rate of expending Seventy Five Thousand Modii a day, whereof
each Modius was a Peck and half. And for Oyl, he left such a Quantity, as was sufficient not only for the City of Rome, but all Italy upon occasion, for Five Years. They say that his last Words were these; I found the State when I received it, every where in Disturbance. I leave it in Peace even to the Britains. Old and Lame, as I am, I leave the Empire firm to my Sons, if they are good: But in a feeble Con∣dition for them, if they are bad. The last Watch∣word which he ordered to be given to the Tri∣bune, was, Laboremus, let us take Pains; as that of Pertinax, the first day that he was ad∣mitted to the Empire, was, Militemus, let us fight. He had designed a second Royal Image of Fortune to be made and added to that which always stands in the Emperor's Cham∣bers, and is used to accompany them in all Places where they go; he desired to leave of those most sacred Figures, to each of his Sons one. But when he found himself pressed with the approaching hour of his Death, it is said, he ordered that that Image of Fortune, which there was, should be carried alternative∣ly into the Chambers of his Two Sons; but Bassianus Antoninus slighted that Order, even before he had killed his Brother. His Body was brought from Great Britain to Rome, where it was received with the greatest Reverence of all the Provinces; though some say, it was only his Ashes which were brought to Rome, reposed in a little Urn of Gold, which was interred in the Sepulchre of the Antoninusses; and that the Body was burnt up∣on
the place where he died. When he built the Septizonium, he had no other Design in it, but to make appear the Magnificence of his Work, to the Eyes of those, who particularly should come out of his Native Country of Africa; and if he had not been prevented, it is supposed, he would have made a stately Intrado from thence to the Palace Royal; as afterward the Emperor Alexander Severus would have done, but that the Soothsayers prohibited him, for Reasons in their Art.
THEA Christi CXCIV. LIFE OF PESCENNIUS NIGER, Dedicated to the EMPEROR DIOCLESIAN. BY AELIUS SPARTIANUS. IT is a difficult thing, and such as we rare∣ly see done, to publish to the World a just Account of Persons who die under the Notion of Rebels and Usurpers, by being Conquered, and because they are concluded o by another Person's Victory. All the Cir∣cumstances
of such are scarce ever fully ex∣pressed in the Monuments, and the Annals of the Antients; for that which is great of them, and to their Honours, is either generally de∣praved and turned another way, or it is sup∣pressed. Neither is there so much Care taken to seek into the things that concern their Ori∣gine and their Lives, as to recount their Ends. For when they have brought them to that, and told the War, in which they were over∣come, and how they suffer'd for the boldness of their Attempts, they persuade themselves they have said enough about them. Thus Pesce∣niusHis Ex∣traction. Niger was, as some say, born of very or∣dinary, as others, of honourable Parents; that is, the latter say, that his Father was An Fuscus, his Mother Lampridia, his Grandfather the Curator of the Town of Aquino; accor∣ding to which, his Family was of the Eque∣strian Order: but yet this is a thing which  this day, others will dispute. His Instruction in Letters was but indifferent, no more tha was his Estate. His manner of Life was mo∣derate; his Temper hot enough; but particu∣larly of an unbridled Passion to Liberty. H was a long time a Centurion, and afterward through several other Commands in the Wa came to be the General of the Forces  Syria, unto which the Emperor Commodus  preferred him, by the Credit and the reco∣mendation chiefly of that very Person, as  things went at that time, who afterwar strangled Commodus.
After the Death of Commodus, and the Death also of his Successor Pertinax, Pescennius Niger set up for the Empire upon the Authority of the same Forces of Syria; encouraged to it from Rome, where Didius Julianus, who had suc∣ceeded to Pertinax, was so hated by the People, that they publickly cursed him, and threw Stones at him, and prayed, that the Gods would give them Niger to be their Prince, and Niger to come to the Succour of the City. Here∣upon Julianus sent a Centurion with Orders to bring him the Head of Niger, which was a very imprudent Fancy indeed, as if it was such an easie matter for a single Centurion to make himself the Master of one, who was at the Head of a puissant Army, and could very well main∣tain himself. With the same imprudence it was that he proposed to take off the Head of Se∣verus, after he had already been declared Em∣peror, and to send a Man to command in his place. For he had sent the known Assassine, Aquilius a Centurion, to him to kill him; as if so powerful a General, was so easily to be killed by a Centurion. But yet all this was as Judicious, as his pretending to prohibit Se∣verus from the Empire by Law, because him∣self was in the prior Possession of it. In fine, the Inclinations of the People to∣wardsHe is be∣lov'd by the People Pescennius Niger, and their aversion to Julianus, appeared sufficiently in this; that whilst Julianus was Entertaining them with the Games of the Cirque; even then, they called upon the Name of Pescennius Niger, and wished publickly for his coming to the
Succour of the City. Upon which occasion Julianus it is said pronounced these Words, That if they had him, he would not Reign long over them, no more than himself. But Severus, he said, might, though he was the most of all to be hated by every body; which in the event proved true. Now in the time that Severus was the Lieu∣tenantBefrien∣ded by Severus. of the Province of Lugdunum in Gallia, Pescennius Niger and he had contracted a very great Friendship with one another; insomuch, that the latter having acquitted himself in some Actions there with a great deal of Bravery and Honesty against the Enemy; he rendred himself so perfectly agreeable to Severus, that Severus recommended him to the Emperor Commodus, and engaged for him, as a Person that was necessary to be employed in the State. And certainly he was a very good Sol∣dier, and understood the Discipline of War perfectly well. He never suffered his Men to extort from their Quarters in the Provinces, Wood or Oyl, or any manner of Service. He never made Gain to himself out of their Pay; nor when he was a Tribune, did he suffer the other Officers to do so: And after he was set up to be Emperor, he commanded two Tri∣bunes who were guilty of making Advantages to themselves out of the Pay of their Soldiers, to be stoned to Death.
A LETTER of Severus him∣self, written to Ragonius Celsus the Governour of Gallia, says thus of him. IT is a miserable thing, that we cannot imi∣tateLetters in his Favor the Military Discipline of him whom we have overcome in the Field; whereas your Men do nothing but ramble here and there; the Tri∣bunes are Bathing themselves at Noon day, Dine nn Taverns, and Lye in Inns; Dance, Drink and Sing, and call this the only Rule that they have, that they Drink without all Rule. Certainly, should these Things be, if we had the least Vein of the Discipline of our Fore fathers in us? First therefore, correct the Tribunes, and then you will amend the Soldiers; who will no longer stand in fear of you, if you are in fear of them. You may know this by Pescennius Niger, that the Soldiers will never be kept to their Duties, unless the Tri∣bunes and the Captains that are over them, ap∣prove themselves before them, good and virtuous Men. So much the Emperor Severus owned con∣cerning his Rival Pescennius Niger, of whom he had gotten the Victory. The Emperor Marcus Antoninus hath a Letter to Cornelius Balbus concerning him, which says thus.
YOU commend Pescennius to me. I know him. For your Predecessor told me, that he was a brave Man, of an honest Life; and that he was worthy to be promoted to a higher Station. So I have sent Letters, which are to be read at the Head of the Troops, wherein I have or∣dered him the command of a body of Three Hun∣dred Armenians, One Hundred Sarmatians, and One Thousand of our own Men. It is for y to tell them, that it is not the Ambition f Pescennius, because this is not consonant with o Principles; but it is his Valour and good Manners, which hath raised him to that place, that  Grandfather Hadrian, and my great Grandfather Trajan did never bestow, but upon Persons of whose Merits they were most assured. The Emperor Commodus says thus of the same Person. Pescennius, I know, he is a Valiant Man;  have employed him Twice as a Tribune, and i a little time, I will advance him to be a Gene∣ral, as soon as the old Age of Aelius Corduenu engages him to quit the Service of the State. These were the Opinions of all Person therefore about him. Severus had often said he would give him his Life with all his heart if he would desist from his Enterprise. H was made Consul by the Emperor Commodus who in that point gave him the precedenc even to Severus, at which Severus was disobliged
Severus says in his own Life, that before that his Sons were come to be of an Age to succeed him, he had intended when he was sick, if he had died, to appoint before all others Pescennius Niger, and Clodius Albinus to be his Successors; though afterwards they were both the one and the other his greatest Enemies. But however, this is an Argument of the good Opinion that once Severus had of Niger. If we may believe Severus, Pescennius Niger was a Man ambitious of Glory, of a Life close and reserved, and of an advanced Age, when he invaded the Empire; from which last Cir∣cumstance he takes the Liberty to blame him, as if himself had come to the Empire much younger; whereas he reigned but Eighteen Years, or thereabouts, and yet died at the Age of Eighty Nine. At the same time that Severus sent Heraclius into Bithynia to secure that Country, he sent Fulvius to go and get into his Custody the Children of Pescennius Niger, who were then in the Flower of their Youth. He took no notice at all of their Father to the Senate, but immediately began an Expe∣dition to compose the State of the East. But withal, he commanded some Legions into Africa, to prevent that Niger should not possess himself of that Quarter, and thereby afflict the People of Rome with a want of the Corn from thence. For though the Passage both by Sea and Land was difficult, yet it did not seem impossible for Niger to do this, especial∣ly if he took his way through the Countries of Egypt and Libya.
In the mean time, Niger was in the posses∣sion of Greece, Thracia and Macedonia, when Severus came against him into the East. He proposed to Severus, that they might be Part∣ners in the Empire, with one another, but this was slighted; on the other hand, Severus of∣fered him his Life in Exile, but this Niger slighted. So whereas he had put to death se∣veral illustrious Persons, Severus declared him, together with Aemilianus, an Enemy. Then the Captains of Severus engaged first withHe is defeated and slain. Aemilianus, and beat him. After which they enged with Niger himself, over whom ha∣ving gotten the Victory, he fled, but mortal∣ly wounded; and being taken by a Lake, which is by the City of Ciziqua, and brought in the Condition that he was in to Severus, he expired presently after. His Head was carried about upon a Spear, and sent to Rome; his Sons killed, his Wife killed, his Estate confiscated, and his whole Family extinguished. But yet it was not till after the News of the Rebellion of Clodius Al∣binus, that all this was done; because till then, the Banishment of his Wife and Chil∣dren had contented Severus; who was made much worse, and much more unmerciful, than he was in this, by the next War he had with Clodius Albinus; for then he slew an infinite number of Senators, and some called him a African Sylla, some a Marius, for all that civi Blood which he spilt.
Pescennius Niger was very tall, and well madeHis Per∣sonage. as to his Person; his Hair curling up to his Ears, a Voice so very clear and strong, that he could make himself to be heard, when he spoke in the Camp, if the Wind was not a∣gainst him, a Mile; a modest Countenance, apt to blush; rather fat than meager; loved a Glass of Wine, eat but little; never lay with his Wife but to Conception, and then he abstained, which made him when he was in Gallia, be publickly celebrated for his Chastity. In the Arch of the Gallery which is in the Gardens of Commodus, we have to this day his Picture done in Mosaick Work, amongst the great Friends of that Prince, assisting at the Mysteries of the Goddess Isis. Niger was therefore a very Excellent Soldier, a Valiant Tribune, a Wise General, an Illustrious Con∣sul; happy in his Affairs at home and Employ∣ments abroad; but an unhappy Emperor. He might have been of great use to the State, under such a Prince as Severus, if so be that he would have served on his side. But he was misled by the Counsels of Scevus Aurelianus, who had contracted his Daughters to his Sons, and who for that reason had urged him on, to persist, as much as he could, to make the Empire his own. We may see how considerable a Man he was by this; that his Authority and his Cre∣dit at the Court was so great, that he writ first to the Emperor Marcus Antoninus, and afterwards to Commodus, when he perceived how much the Provinces were ruined by
making too frequent changes in the Persons who governed them; that in the first place, no President, or Lieutenant, or Proconsul ofHis Skill in Civil Affairs. a Province should be succeeded by another, be∣fore the term of Five Years; that when that term was expired, the said Magistrates should give an Account, how they had administred the Power which they had been intrusted with; and then that no Persons who were not of good Extractions, should be ad∣mitted to serve in those high Offices of State. Besides this, it was a suggestion of his, that the Assessors attending upon the Gover∣nours and other Magistrates of the Provinces, to assist them in Counsel, should be prefer∣red in their turns unto the highest Honours; which was observed afterwards by the Empe∣ror Severus, and thenceforward by many o∣thers, as appears by the Examples of Paulus and Ulpian, who had been both Assessors to Papinian, and were both of them afterwards, first employed in the Office of Secretaries, the one for the Dispatches, the other for the Registers, and then soon after they were made the Captains of the Guards. It is also from him that no body is an Assessor to a Judge, but in his own Province; and that no one admini∣sters that Charge at Rome, but what is a Na∣tive of the City. He added besides, that there should be Salaries appointed for certain Coun∣sellors, that they might not be a Charge up∣on those who were the Assessors, because a Judge (he said) was neither to give nor take any thing. As for the Soldiers, he was so
strict upon those, that when some of themAnd Mili∣tary Disci∣pline. who were in Garrison upon the Frontiers in Egypt had asked him for some Wine, he an∣swered, You have the River Nile there, and do you ask me for Wine? And certainly, the Water of that River is so sweet and so pleasant, that those of the Country have no desire at all to drink Wine. Others that had been beaten by the Saracens, murmuring, and being upon the point of a Sedition, saying, We have had no Wine to drink, we cannot Fight. He answered, For shame, when those that beat you drink Water! The People of the Province of Palaestine, pray∣ing, that the Tax which was upon their Lands might be abated, because they cried they were overcharged; he made them Answer, You would have the Tax taken off of your Lands, but I will tax your very Air that you breath. During that great Commotion of the State, when there were three Emperors set up at one and the same time, that is, Septimus Se∣verus, Pescennius Niger, and Clodius Albinus; the Oracle of Delphos was consulted, which of them would be the best for the Publick to carry it. The Oracle answered in some obscure Words in Greek, but which were understood to signify, that Niger was the best, Severus was well enough, and Albinus the worst of the Three. After this, their Curiosity lead them to ask the Oracle, which of the Three then should be the Person that should at last carry it; the Answer was to this effect, That the White and the Black, that is, Albinus and Niger should be killed, and an African born (which
Severus was) should possess the Empire of the World. Then they asked further, who should succeed that African, the Oracle answered, That he should be one, who was of the Name of the Pious. Which was not at all understood, till Bassianus the eldest Son of Severus assumed the Name of Antoninus, who was the only Per∣son of the Title of the Pious, and then it was concluded to be meant of Bassianus. Lastly, it was asked, how long a time he, who of the Three Competitors carried the Empire, should Reign; and the Answer was to this effect, In twice ten Ships he'll ride the Italian Sea, Or from that Sail, let one deducted be. That is, understanding by the Italian Sea, the Roman Commonwealth; it signified very plain∣ly, that Severus should, as he did, Reign about Ninetten or Twenty Years. This is what I humbly present before your Majesty, O Dioclesian, who are the greatest of Emperors, concerning Pescennius Niger. I have collected it for the purpose out of seve∣ral Writings, wherein he comes to be but oc∣casionally mentioned. For as for the entire Lives of Persons, who either have not actually reigned, or have not been declared Emperor by the Senate, or perhaps have been killed be∣fore they have establish'd their Fame in the World, it is seldom, as I said in the beginning, that any body dares to write them. Which is the reason that we have none of the Life of Vindex, and that we know nothing of the Life of Piso; nor almost of all those who either
have been only adopted to be Caesars, and no more, or have been barely saluted Emperors by the Soldiers, and no more, as Anthony was under Domitian; or by being betimes killed, have pre∣sently ended their Usurpations, and their Lives together. But yet that I may not seem to omit any thing here, of what relates to this Person, that I can any where find, the Astrologers made this Remark upon him; that neither living nor dead, should he fall into the hands of Severus, but that he should perish by the side of a Water. Some say, Severus himself had said this of him, by his own Skill in Na∣tivities. Nor was the Prognostication void altogether of Truth, for he was found half a∣live, and half dead by a Lake. He had one day observed some Soldiers inHis strict Orders. an Expedition, drinking out of a Cup of Sil∣ver; whereupon he was so strict, that he com∣manded that all Silver at such times should be cast out of use, and that they should drink out of Vessels of Wood; which however, they did not very well like, because he said, it may pos∣sibly be, that the Baggage may fall into the Power of the Enemy; and he would not have it, that the Barbarians should find any such opportunity to set themselves off with our Silver, when there are other things to be car∣ried, which if taken, will give them a less oc∣casion of Glory. He ordered, that no Man upon an Expedition should drink Wine, but that all should content themselves upon a day of Battel with Vinegar. He forbad Bakers to follow the Army, being not willing that the Soldiers
should eat any thing that day but Bisket. For the stealing of one Pullet, he had ordered Ten Comerades, that were at the eating of it, tho' only one of them had stoln it, to lose their Heads; which had certainly been execu∣ted, but that all the Army interposed for them, in a manner so high, that they were al∣most in a Mutiny; to prevent which, he mo∣derated his Sentence, and ordered, that the Ten that had eaten together of the Theft, should pay to the Country-man the Price of Ten Pullets, for that One that he had lost. He suffered them not to make Fires to get themselves any hot Meat, but caused them to be contented with dry Bread on something that was cold, and set Spies upon them, to see that it was justly observed. He for bad the Soldiers, when they went to Battel, to keep any Gold or Silver about them in their Pockets, but to trust it in such safe and pub∣lick hands, as should restore it again to them faithfully, after the Battel was over; or other∣wise pay it to their Children, or Wives and Executors, who should come to demand it; because if any Blow of Fortune should hap∣pen, yet he would have no Booty to fall into the hand of the Enemy All which Orders, by reason of the dissoluteness of the times of Commodus, gained him then but only so much the more ill will. For though no Man made an exacter Commander in his time, than he, yet it redounded rather to his prejudice, till after his Death; when Envy and Malice being laid aside, such sort of Examples were valued.
Upon every Expedition that he took, heHis perso∣nal Hard∣ships. eat himself of the Soldiers Amunition-Bread, and Victuals in publick. He never wore any thing upon his Head to cover him, either a∣gainst the Sun, or against the Rain, in which he had no Persons like him. He set before them all an Example of Industry in himself and his Servants. For he imposed Burdens of things upon the backs of his Servants, because they should not appear to walk at their ease, whilst the Soldiers were loaded, which might make them envy them. He protested in a Speech that he made to them, that as long as he had been, or should be ever employed in the occasions of War, he should behave him∣self as freely with them, as if he was a pri∣vate Man: having always Marius and such great Generals as he before his Eyes, and ma∣king his Discourses always of Hannibal and the like. When a certain Person would have recited a Panegyric before him, upon his be∣ing saluted Emperor, he said to him, Write the Praises of Marius or Hannibal, or some such excellent Captain that is dead; and tell us what he hath done, for us to imitate him in: But to praise the Living is a Jest, especially Emperors; from whom there are expectatiosn of all things on the one hand, and fears on the other. They can reward, protect, kill, proscribe; as for me, I desire only to please while I live; when I am dead, then praise me. Above all the Emperors, he loved Augustus, Vespasian, Titus, Trajan, Antoninus Pius, and Marcus Antoninus. The rest, he said, were ei∣ther
effeminate and shadows of Emperors, or they were Vipers. He always was particular∣ly pleased with the Accounts in History of Camillus, Marius, and Quintus Martius Corio∣lanus. Being asked what he thought of the Scipio's; he said, They were rather happy Men, than great Captains; which he proved by their domestick Lives and their Youths, which were too loose and too easie in the one and the o∣ther. Therefore it is a thing very evident, that if Peseennius Niger had gained, and peace∣ably enjoyed the Empire, he was one who would have amended all things, which Severi either could not, or he would not amend; and all this without Cruelty. He would have done it, on the contrary, with great sweetness, and yet in a manner becoming a Soldier, and with out that lenity that is foolish and ridiculous. His House is to be seen at this day at Rome, in the Campus Jovis, retaining his Name; in which, in one of the Rooms is his Statue, which was set up by Statius Postumius in the black Marble of Thebes, who had received it from the King of Thebes, who had caused it to be done to the Life. Upon the Basis there∣of is written an Epigram in Greek to this pur∣pose; Here stands the Great Niger, the Terror of Egypt, the Allie of Thebes, who had proposed a Golden Age to all. Kings, Nations, Rome it self loved him. He was dear to the Antoninus's, and to the whole Empire. As his Name was Niger, (that is, Black) so we have fashioned him in Black, that the Statue and the Person should cor∣respond. Severus would never suffer this In∣scription
to be erased, altho' the Captains of his Guards, and others of his great Officers advised him to it. For, save he, if Pescen∣nius Niger was so great a Potentate as this makes him, let the World know what a Man we have conquered; if he was not, let them however think, that we have conquered such a Man. It remains, that now I proceed to an Ac∣count of Clodius Albinus, who was as it were the Companion of this Person, both in his Rise and Fall. For they both in effect, re∣volted about the same time against Severus, and were both of them overcome and killed by Severus. But though the Fortune of Clodius Albinus was much what the same, and ran pa∣rallel with this of Pescennius Niger, yet his Life was sufficiently different.
THE LIFE OF CLODIƲS ALBINƲS, Dedicated to the EMPEROR Constantine the Great. BY JULIUS CAPITOLINUS AFTER the Death of the Emper Pertinax, who was killed by an i¦trigue of Clodius Albinus, these Fo Persons were proclaimed Empero almost at one and the same time: Did Julianus by the Senate at Rome, Septimius S¦verus
by the Army in Illyricum, Pescennius Niger in the East, and Clodius Albinus in Gallia. As for Clodius Albinus, he was, according to Herodian, declared by Severus in order to make him his Successor, actually a Caesar. But whilst out of their Envy to one another, the one thought scorn of the other's Reign; and that the Army in Gallia on the one hand would not endure Severus, nor the Army in Germany on the other accept of Clodius Albinus, because they were each for their own Prince; all things in all Parts went to confusion. Clodius Albinus was of an Honourable RomanHis Ex∣traction. Family, although born of the Town of Ma∣hometa in Africa. And being therefore ori∣ginally an African, as well as Severus; he was willing to apply himself to the Oracle of Del∣bi, which we have before mentioned in the Life of Pescennius Niger; and which said, That n African born should possess the Empire of the World. But before I shall enter further into the Ac∣count of his Life or Death, I think fit to take n here a Passage, which is the thing of the World that renders him the most Noble. The Emperor Commodus had formerly written a Letter to him, in which he did him the Ho∣our, so long ago, to constitute him a Caesar. The Letter was this.
The Emperor COMMODUS to Clodius Albinus. BEsides the other Letters which I have sent toLetter of Commo∣dus, offer∣ing him the Title of Caesar. you, relating to your Successor, and the pub∣lick Business; this here is, as you see, all written with my own Hand; a familiar and domestick Letter; in which, I give you leave, when ever you shall see occasion, to go to the Army, and assume to yourself before them the Name and Quality of Caesar. For I hear, that Septimius Severus, and Nonius Marcus have given ill Accounts of me to their Soldiers, with design, that they may by that means, pave themselves a way to the Throne; so when you do this, you shall have free Power, of present∣ing the Soldiers with a Donative of three pieces of Gold a Man. Accordingly, I have sent Letters to my Receivers, which will come to you sealed with the Seal of an Amazon, that when you have occasion for that Money, you are to deliver to the said Receivers those Letters, lest other∣wise they may not serve you in your demands of Money belonging to the Treasury. And for som illustrious Mark of the Majesty of a Prince, f you to receive, you have the leave of wearing  Cloak of Scarlet, even in my presence; the Purpl you shall have when you shall come to visit me or to be with me, but without its being enrich' with Gold, because my Great Grandfather Aeliu Verus, who died young, used it in this manner when Hadrian adopted him Caesar.
But however, upon the receipt of this Let∣ter, Clodius Albinus would by no means offer to take upon him to do what Commodus had appointed him, because he was afraid of the Odium that Commodus was in, by reason of his Manners, by which he ruined the State, and dishonoured it from day to day, killing the People with both Hands; and because he was afraid besides of being found some time or o∣ther in the number of those whom he should order to the same Massacre. In fine, his own Speech, which he made to his Army at the time that they set him up to be Emperor, takes notice of this; and likewise shews, that his advancement to the Empire was what was con∣firmed, or at least was once pretended to be confirmed by Severus himself, when he called him his Caesar and his Brother; the Speech was this. My Fellow Soldiers, TO shew you that it is contrary to my own In∣clination, that I am elevated to the Empire, you cannot have a better Argument of it than this; that I contemn'd the offer of Commodus, when that Prince would have created me his Caesar. But I must obey this day your Will, and the Will of the Emperor Severus. And I doubt not, but under so Excellent and so Valiant a Prince as he is, the State will be happily governed. Nor can it be denied, but that Severus did at first intend, as Marius Maximus says, if he had died early, to substitute Pescennius Niger, and
Clodius Albinus to be his Successors. But after∣wards his own Sons growing up, whose For∣tunes he had a desire to make, and envying Albinus the love which he had amongst the Senators; he changed those Sentiments, and oppressed both Albinus and Niger by a War, upon which he was more especially urged by the Entreaties of his Wife. This besides he had done for Albinus, he made him a Consul, which if he had not believed him to be an ex∣traordinary Person, without doubt he would never have done; so very careful as he was, in the choice that he made of the publick Of∣ficers of the Empire. But to return to the beginning of his Story, Clodius Albinus was born, as I said, at the Town of Mahometa; but yet that which made him Honourable in the Eyes of all who knew him, was, that he derived his Descent from the Roman Family of the Post humii, and the Albini Cejonii, which is at this day very Noble, and hath been much augmented by the Benefactions of your most excellent Majesty, O Constantine; and there is reason to believe, that your Majesty will augment it yet much more, as formerly it received a great encrease from the Empe∣rors Gallienus and the Gordiani. He was born but to a very small Patrimony, of a Father, who was called Cejonius Post humius, and a Mo∣ther called Aurelia Messalina, to whom he was their first Child. When he was taken from the Birth, instead of having according to the usual manner of other Children new-born, hi Flesh red, he was extreme white, and wa
therefore called Albinus. And that this is true, appears by a Letter of his Father sent on pur∣pose to notifie it to Aelius Bassianus, the then Proconsul of Africa; who, as the same Let∣ter signifies, was a Relation of the Family of the Albini, as well as he. A LETTER of Cejonius Posthu∣mius, to Aelius Bassianus. I Had a Son born upon the 7th. of the Calends of December, so white all his Body over; he was whiter than the very Linen that he was received in. I have therefore given him the Name of Albinus, and have dedicated him to the Fa∣mily of the Albini, which is common to me with you. I wish you to love him, and to continue, as you do, to love the State, yourself, and us. He passed all his Infancy in Africa, took his Greek and Latin Learning pretty well, but had a Martial Heart, and was of a haughty Disposition by Nature. Amongst the little Boys of his Age, at School, he was often, they say, singing that Verse of Virgil, Arma amens capio, nec sat rationis in armis. repeating, especially the first part of it, Arma amens capio, that is, I am for being a Soldier right or wrong, and come what will. They say,
that several things happened after his Birth, which were so many Omens of his futureOmens of his Ad∣vance∣ment. Greatness. And certainly the same day there was born a Calf as white as Snow, with Horns upon his Head, of a deep purple; which Horns were a long time afterwards to be seen in the Temple of Apollo at the City of Cumae, where himself had bestowed them, when he was a Tribune. Enquiring at the same Tem∣ple one day of the Oracle about his Fortune, he was answered in these Verses of Virgil, Hic rem Romanam magno turbante tumultu Sistet eques, sternet, Poenos Gallumque rebellem Accordingly, it is very true, as to what the latter Verse says of the Gauls, that Clodius Al∣binus did subdue many Nations of them. A∣nother Omen was this; whilst he was a little Infant, a Fisher-man happened to take a Tor∣toise which was of a very great bigness, and made a present of it to Albinus's Father; who being a Person of some Learning, and look∣ing upon it as a good Sign, accepted it, and or∣dered the Shell of it to be kept, and set apart for the use of his young Son to wash in; be∣cause it was a peculiar Custom in the Imperial Family, for the young Princes to wash in Shells of Tortoises. It was a rare thing, to see Ea∣gles in that place, where Clodius Albinus was born; and yet upon the seventh Day after, which was appointed for the Solemnity of gi∣ving him his Name, seven young Eagles were taken out of a Nest, and brought to the side
of his Cradle; which his Father, not rejecting the good omen, ordered to be well kept, and that they should take great care of them. These things therefore, and such others that occurred, were so many assured Presages of his future Elevation; which are more particularly pursued by Aelius Cordus; to whom I must refer the Reader, if he shall desire any fur∣ther satisfaction. He betook himself to the Army early in his Youth; and became known to the Em∣perors the Antoninusses, by the means of Lollius Serenus, Baebius Maetianus, and Cejonius Post hu∣mianus, who were all related to him. He was some time a Tribune of Dalmatian Horse. Af∣terHis Mili∣tary Pre∣ferments. that he commanded the First and Fourth Legions. He kept the Army in Bithynia, which next he Commanded, very well to their Duty, in the time of the Rebellion of Avidius Cassius. The Emperor Commodus translated him from thence into Gallia, where after having defeated some Nations on the other side of the Rhine, he gained himself a famous name equally amongst the Romans, and a∣mongst the Barbarians: insomuch that it moved Commodus, to honour him the more, to offer him the Title of Caesar, with the leave to pre∣sent the Soldiers with a Bounty upon it, and to wear a Cloak of Scarlet in his presence. All which he prudently, and with great satisfaction declined, as if he suspected, that Commodus's design was only to find Persons, whom to in∣volve in his own ruin, and whom to Massacre under some sort of pretence.
He had not served in the Office of an Ae∣dile above ten days, before he was made a Quaestor, and sent with precipitation to the Army: His Praetorship, which he passed un∣der the Reign of Commodus, was very famous. For to the usual Games, with which he enter∣tained the People, Commodus himself added Fights, both upon the Theatre and Amphi∣theatre. Then the Emperor Severus made him a Consul; which was done about that time, that he proposed to have called him to his Succession, in Conjunction with Pes∣nius Niger. He was advanced in years, and even older than Pescennius Niger, as Severus says, when he was set up to be Emperor. The Senat had a more than ordinary kindness for him, be∣cause of the Antiquity of his Family. There∣fore Severus having changed his first Senti∣ments, as to the Honour that he had intended to Pescennius Niger and him, and resolving to preserve the Empire to his own Children, and having beaten and killed Pescennius, he in the next place sent the following Letter to Clodius Albinus, which I have met with in Cordus, in these Words.
The Emperor Severus to Clodius Al∣binus, Caesar, his most beloved and dearest Brother, Greeting. PEscennius Niger having been vanquished by my Arms, I sent my Letters of it to Rome, which the Senate, who have the greatest Affection for you, received very agreeably. I desire you to assist me in the Government of the State with the same Spirit, by which you make your self to be so beloved; being now become the Brother of my Soul, and my Brother in the Empire. Bassianus and Geta, salute you. My Wife Julia salutes you, and presents her recommendations to her Sister. Pray preserve the Army in their Duty to the State, and to Us, my Soul, my Dearest, my en∣tirely Beloved. Now the Persons who were sent with this Letter by Severus, being such as had the great∣est Affection for his Service, so that he knew he could confide in them; he ordered them to delivered it to Clodius Albinus in Publick: but when they had done, they should say, thatTreachery of Seve∣rus. they desired privately to speak to him about some things, which were of the secrets of the Camp and the Court. And having taken him aside, as if it were only to deliver what they were charged with, five strong Men of their
Retinue, having Ponyards hid under their Robes, should fall upon him and kill him. And certainly they did not betray the Confi∣dence imposed in them; nor were wanting in their Endeavours to execute their Orders. For when they were come to Albinus, and had given him the Letter, which he Read, and had told him that they had some other things in particular to discover to him, which were to be spoken more privately, he took them apart into a long Gallery; but in the mean time they were so over-careful that no other Persons should follow them, pretending as if it were out of a fear lest their Message should be discovered, that Albinus began to suspect something; upon which he immediately caused them to be seized, and put them to the Que∣stion. Who at first denyed it; but being at last forced to yield to the violence of the Tor∣ment, they confessed then all that Severus had given in Charge to them. Wherefore, Albi∣nus being satisfied in the just suspition that he had conceived, gathered together a great Ar∣my, and put himself upon his March with them to make War against Severus, and a∣gainst his Commanders. In his first Engagement which he had with the Lieutenants of Severus, Albinus had cer∣tainly the better of it. After which Severus went in Person against him, having first pre∣vailed with the Senate to adjudge him an Enemy. They fought it very severely on both sides, in Gallia, not without always a great va∣riety of Fortune: insomuch that Severus was
so concerned at it, that he thought fit to con∣sult the Opinion of the Augurs; who answered him, as Marius Maximus says, that Clodius Al∣binus should indeed fall into his Power, but it should be neither living nor dead; and it was so. For when the last Battel was fought, Al∣binus, after an infinite number of his Men were killed, a great many others put to flight, and others taken Prisoners, fled himself; and whether it was that he struck himself through the Body, or whether, as some say, one of his own Slaves, or some of the Soldiers did it, de∣manding some acknowledgment from him of Severus, I cannot say; but he was brought half alive, and half dead to Severus; which made good the Prediction. He left one Son, or as Maximus says two; to whom at the first Severus was pleased to shew favour; but after∣wards he ordered them and their Mother to be kill'd, and their Bodies to be thrown into the Ri∣ver. The Head of Albinus was cut off, and carri∣ed about upon a Javelin, and then sent to Rome; accompanied with Letters to the Senate, where∣in Severus insulted them for the Affection which they had a long time born to Albinus, and for the Honours and Kindnesses that they had shewn to his Brother and his Relations: but e∣specially his Brother. His Body was exposed in its Gore for several days before the Tent of Severus, till it stunk, and then it was torn into pieces by Dogs, and thrown into the River. As for the Manners of Clodius Albinus, theyHis Tem∣per and Manners. are represented variously. Severus says, he was deformed with Vices; Malicious, Lewd, Wick∣ed,
Dishonest, Envious, and Luxurious. But it is to be observed, that it was in the time of the War with him, or after, that he speaks so ill of him, which makes it the less to be be∣lieved. Because before, he frequently sent Letters to him as his particular Friend, and certainly many People had a much better Opi∣nion than that of him. Besides, that Severus himself, had once called him his Caesar, and had set him the first before his Eyes for his Suc∣cessor. There are also some Letters of the Emperor Marcus Antoninus concerning him,Antoninus his good Opinion of him. which give a great Testimony of his Virtues and Manners. One of which, written to the Captains of the Guards, it will not be impro∣per, I think, to insert here. Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, to the Captains of the Guards, Greeting. I Have committed two Cohorts to the Command of Albinus, of the Family of the Cejonii; he is an African born, it is true; but he hath not many things in him of that Country, and he is the Son-in-Law of Plautillus. A Man of Experi∣ence, of a serious Life, and Grave in his Man∣ners. I think he will do good in the Camp. I am sure he will do no hurt. I have doubled his Sa∣lary, and quadrupled his other Allowances: Do you encourage him to signalize his Services; and assure him he shall be rewarded as he deserves.
Another Letter, which the same Prince writ in the time of Avidius Cassius concerning him, is this. THE Fidelity of Albinus is to be commended: who when the Forces in Bithynia were upon the Revolt, and upon flying over to Avidius Cas∣sius, (as certainly they had all done, if he had not been with them) was very careful in pre∣serving them in their Duty. We think therefore that he deserves a Consulship. I shall accordingly sub∣stitute him in the place of Cassius Papirius, who I am told is so sick, that there is no appearance of his Recovery; But I would not have you to take notice of it, before he is dead; lest it may come to the Ears either of Papirius himself, or his Friends; which would not look so well. These two Letters therefore make it appear that Clodius Albinus was an useful Person. And certainly his sending of Money towards the restoration of those Cities, which had been laid waste by Pescennius Niger, is another great Argument of a Publick Spirit, and what had gained him Friends amongst the Inhabitants there. Aelius Cordus, pretends at the same time to say, that he was such a Glutton, that particularly he would eat more Fruit at a time, than it is possible to imagine. He says,
that he has eaten, at a Breakfast five hundred Figs, one hundred Peaches, ten Melons, twenty Bunches of Grapes, a hundred of the little Birds called Beccafico's or Fig-Peckers, and four hundred Oisters. But yet he says that he drank but little; in which Severus does not a∣gree with him: for he tells us that he drank to excess, even in the time of the War. And whether it was because of this his great drink∣ing, which Severus charges him with; or be∣cause of his Moroseness of Humour, it is said, he never lived well with his Family: but was very disagreeable to his Wife, and unjust to his Servants; as well as hard upon the Sol∣diers. As to which latter, he many times crucified Centurions, when there hath been as good as no occasion given for it. He beat others often with Rods, and pardoned not the least fault. He was proper in his Cloaths, and as improper in his Repasts; in which he minded nothing but Abundance. He was a great lover of a Mistress, but not at all of a Bardaccio; being so far from that, that he severely punished it upon such as were. He was perfectly well skilled in Agriculture; in∣somuch that he writ a Book of Georgicks. He was as much beloved by the Senate as any Prince ever was: but the great occasion of it was; their mortal hatred to Severus, which they had against him upon the account of his Cruelty. Therefore as many of them, as either were, or such as were but suspected to have been of Albinus's side, he put to death after the Victory. He ordered the Letters of Albi∣nus
to be searched, to discover his Correspon∣dents: and all that he found whatever, he first caused them to be declared Enemies by the Senate; then put them without mercy to death, and Confiscated their Estates into the Treasury. There is a Letter, which he writ to the Senate, that shews his very Soul, as to these things; a Copy whereof is as follows. CAN any thing oblige me more, Fathers of the Senate, than to hear that Albinus should have your good Opinions, rather than Se∣verus. With great care I have furnished the State with Corn, and have maintained several Wars for the State, and have supplied the People of Rome with more Oil than the World scarce ever beheld: and by my overcoming Pescennius Niger I have delivered you from the miseries of a Tyranny. Indeed you have made on your part a great return to me for all this. For here's a Man, who is not only an African as my self, but one of the poor Town of Mahometa, and only because he pretends to derive his blood from the Roman Cejonii, you have extolled him so far, that you would have him to be your Emperor, whilst as yet I am upon the Throne, and my self and my Children are in safety. Was the noble Se∣nate at a loss I pray, for a Prince whom you ought to love, and who loves you? Because from this Man you hope perhaps to be made Consuls, to be made Praetors, and what not, therefore you
have for your better Interests in him conferred Honours upon his Brother. Which is not to make that return to me, as was formerly done by your Ancestors against the Faction of Piso; nor as it was lately done to the Emperor Marcus Antoni∣nus against the Rebellion of Avidius Cassius. But you have preferred a Man to me, who is a de∣ceiver, who tells you nothing but lies, and does but impose upon you in the matter of his Nobility. Sta∣tilius Corfulenus undoubtedly must be heard by the Senate to his Motion, that they would please to decree some Honours to Albinus, and to his Bro∣ther. In the mean time I should think, that that Noble Person had forgot himself, that he did not decree a Triumph for me in my turn. It troubles me more than all, that so many amongst you should think that Albinus is to be commended for a Man of Letters, who spent all his time in Apuleius, and those Ludicrous Pieces, which are no better than some Ditties of the old Wives. By this it is to be seen how eager Severus was, and how he always blamed the Factions both of Pescennius Niger, and of Clodius Albi∣nus; of all which, if any one desires a more particular account, let him read Marius Maxi∣mus for the Writers in the Latin Tongue, and Herodian for the Greek, who have delivered a great many things very faithfully. Clodius Albinus was Tall, his Hair naturallyHis Per∣sonage. Curling, full Visaged, but withal so wonder∣fully fair and clear in Complexion, that mos thought he took the the name of White, that is
Albinus, from nothing else. He had an Ef∣feminate Voice, as shrill almost as an Eunuchs. He had an easie meen; but yet he was ill to be angred, and worse to be opposed. He was changeable in his Luxury; for many times he would Drink, and many times again Abstain. He was perfectly brave for Arms; one may, not improperly, call him the Catiline of his time. As for what remains, it will not, I think, be amiss to shew how it was that he gain'd him∣selfReason of his Popu∣larity. so much of the love of the Senate. Whilst he Commanded the Army in Great Britain by the orders of Commodus, a Report came, but yet it was false at that time, that that Prince was killed; upon which occasion he came to the Head of the Army, and Ha∣rangued them thus. If the Senate, and the People of Rome had evermore retained their antient Empire; and that a State so great had never been submitted to the power of a single Person, there had been no Vi∣tellius, no Nero, no Domitian, to have fallen by the Stroke of an Assassine. And then it was during the time of the Consular Government, that those Families flourished, of the Cejonii, the Al∣bini, and the Posthumii: of whom your Fathers have many things to say, which they have heard from their Grandfathers before them. Certainly it was the Senate that annexed Africa to the Ro∣man Empire. The Senate subdued Gallia and Spain. The Senate gave Laws to the Provinces of the East. The Senate had often attempted the
Parthians, and had reduced them, if so Covetous a General as Crassus; had not then been at the Head of the Roman Army. It was when Cae∣sar was a Senator; that he conquered Great Bri∣tain: at least he had not been declared Dictator then. And how much better had it been for Com∣modus himself, if he had stood in fear of the Se∣nate. Their Authority held good, as far as to the times of Nero; being not afraid to Condemn that sordid and impure Prince, nor to pronounce their Judgments against him, though he then had the full Power of Life and Death in his hands. Wherefore, my Fellow Soldiers; I for my part, who have had the Title of Caesar conferred up∣on me by Commodus, renounce that preten∣sion, and the Gods grant that others may do so too. Let the Senate Reign, and distribute the Provinces. Let the Senate make us Consuls: or why do I say the Senate? Let your selves, and your Fathers. For your selves will also be Se∣nators. This Speech was brought to Rome, whilst Commodus was yet living; who was so moved by it against the Author, that he presently sent to turn him out, and gave his Place to Junius Severus, who was one of his Guards. However the Senate was pleased with the Speech, and as well before as after Commodus was killed, they honoured Albinus in his ab∣sence with extraordinary Acclamations; so that some of them advised Pertinax, to take him for his Colleague in the Empire: in
whose sudden Fall afterwards the Authority of this Person was very considerable; being provoked to it by a turn of Affairs, for the un∣derstanding of which I shall add a Letter of Commodus to his Captains of the Guards, wherein he signifies his mind as to the killing of Clodius Albinus, thus. Aurelius Commodus, to the Captains of his Guards, Greeting. I Suppose you have heard, How that first of all it was pretended, that I by the Conspiracy of those about me was killed; and then that Clo∣dius Albinus made an Harangue to my Soldiers upon that occasion, in which he recommends him∣self mightily to the Senate, not without a de∣sign thereby, as I suppose, of advancing himself to the Empire. For he that is against the Go∣vernment of the Empire by one Prince, and says that it ought wholly to be Governed by the Se∣nate, seeks but to get the Empire to himself through the favour of the Senate. Look to him therefore very strictly. For this shews he is a Man to be avoided as Death; and so are all such who carry on designs to your pre∣judice. Now Pertinax, who was advised to chuse Albinus for his Partner in the Empire, and did not do so, falling upon this Letter, published
it to bring an Odium upon the Person that he had thought fit to refuse. In revenge where∣of Albinus sat so close upon his Skirts, that he was the Author of the design against the life of Pertinax, in favour of the Succession of Didius Julianus.
THEA. Christi CCXII. Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Bassianus Antoninus Caracallus. By AELIUS SPARTIANUS. THE Emperor Septimius Severus left two Sons, Bassianus and Geta. The first and eldest had the name given him of Bassianus Antoninus, and was Cre∣ated a Caesar by his Father; the other had the name given him of Geta Antoninus, and was declared a Caesar by the Army. The first succeeded to enjoy the Throne; the other was quickly adjudged an Enemy, and murdered by his Brother: concerning whose Ance∣stors I think it in vain to make any repeti∣tion here, because I have said enough upon that Head, in the account of the Life of their Father.
Bassianus Antoninus was when he was a youthHis Cha∣racter when a Youth. and under the Tutelage of his Parents, endear∣ing, ingenious, dutiful to them, obliging to all o∣thers, acceptable to the People, and to the Senate, and ready to offer at any thing to ingra∣tiate himself. He was not slow at his Learning. He was not sparing of his Bounty. He was not negligent in giving Marks of his Clemency. If he was present, whenever any condemned Per∣sons were thrown to the Beasts, he either wept, or turned away his Eyes from the Sight, which was an extraordinary pleasing thing to the Peo∣ple. When he was a Boy of seven Years old, and saw another Boy who was his Play-fellow beaten severely for making profession of the Christian Religion, he was a long time out of humour both with his own, and with the Boy's Father, and all such as were the occasion of the Boy's beating. He obtained that the Cities of Antioch and Constantinople should be restored to their antient Rights, by his interposition in their behalf with his Father, under whose displeasure they had faln, for assisting in the Rebellion of Pescennius Niger. He conived a hatred against Plautianus, because of his Cruelty. If his Parents had presented him with things, as is usual to do, about the Feast of Saturn, he gave them away again of him∣self to either his Masters or his Servants. A which good Qualities made up his Carriage when a Youth. But afterwards, as he grew more a ManAnd when a Man. whether it was by the suggestions of his Father or whether he did it of his own head, becaus
he thought to equalize himself with Alexander the Great, of Macedonia, he turned very re∣served and grave, and affected such a fierce∣ness in his Countenance, that many who knew him a Boy, could scarce believe him to be the same Person. He had always Alex∣ander the Great in his Mouth. He was often in publick Company praising Tiberius and Sylla. He was prouder than his Father, who was one that was high enough, and he despised his Bro∣ther Geta, because of his great Modesty. Where∣fore after the Death of his Father, he came to the Camp of the Guards, and complained that Geta had been in a Conspiracy against him, for which he had caused him to be put to deathPuts his Brother to death. in the Palace, and his Body to be immediate∣ly burnt. He told them particularly, that he had designed to poyson him, and that he had been undutiful also to his Mother; concluding, that to engage them to be the more faithful to himself, he presented them with a Bounty. There was another encampment at this time, near the City of Albano, where the Murder of Geta was highly resented; all the Soldiers say∣ing, that as it was to both the Sons of Severus equally, that they promised Fidelity, so they ought to keep to them both, refusing to open their Gates; so that Bassianus was a long time in getting entrance to them, nor could he cool them at last, but with the finest words and promises of what a prodigious Bounty he would give them, as this way seldom fails of quieting the Heats of Soldiers. From thence he returned to Rome, where he came to the
Senate in a Cuirass under his Robes, and his Soldiers in Arms guarding him, whom he placed in Files in the middle betwixt the Seats, and made his Speech; in which he much com∣plained of the evil designs of his Brother against his Life, to whom he said, to charge his Me∣mory, and excuse himself, he had been so kind, and that he had denied him nothing, and had delivered him from the dangers that he had been in; but instead of having a due Sense of these Favours, he had attempted his Life, and had not answered his good Inten∣tions. But yet he uttered all this confusedly, and with such an ill Grace, that the Senate did not very well accept what he said. After this Speech, he declared, that it was his pleasure to restore all that were in exile to the Liberties of their Country again; and then from the Senate he return'd to the Guards, and lay in the Camp. The next day he came to the Capitol; from the Capitol he repair'd to the Palace-Royal, supported by Papinian and Chilo. In the mean time, those that he had a design to murder, he bespoke himself the most kindly to. He had observed the Mother of Geta, with other Women, weeping bitter∣ly, and had it not been that he was restrain∣ed with the Sense, that it would make the Cruelty of his Brother's Murder look much worse, he was for putting them all to Death. He sent Poyson to Laetus, and obliged him to take it; who, as he was the first of those that had persuaded him to the Murder of Geta, was the first that fell a Sacrifice to his Ghost.
He afterwards often pretended to lament Geta's Death, and killed several that had been privy to it, and honoured his Memory and his Image. He had sent a Present to one, that was his Cousin-German, an African by Nation, but the day before that he ordered him to killed; who throwing himself down from a Window to escape his Persecutors, broke his Leg, but yet had crept to his Wife, where they took him, and afterwards made a very sport of kil∣ling him. He put to death Pompeianus, theHis many Cruelties. Grandson of the Emperor Marcus Antoninus, and the Son of that Pompeianus, to whom Lucilla married, after the Death of the Empe∣ror Verus, who had made him a Consul twice, and had intrusted him with the Command of his Armies in all his Wars. The way which he took to do this Murder, was, he ordered him to be set upon as it were by Thieves. Papinian was executed in his presence by the Soldiers, with an Axe; and after it was done, he said to the Murderer, You ought according to my Order, to have done it with a Sword. Petronius was killed by his Command before the Temple of Antoninus Pius, and both the Bo∣dies of the one and the other were dragged about the Streets, without any regard to hu∣manity. He put to death the Son of Papinian, who but three days before had treated the City with a magnificent Shew, upon his entrance into the Office of a Questor. An infinite Number of others were killed upon the same days, who had favoured the side of Geta. The Servants that had waited upon him. In all
places, and in the very Baths, were there Mas∣sacres committed upon some as they were at their Suppers; amongst whom was Sammoni∣cus Severus, who is known by his many Learn∣ed Books. Chilo who was twice Captain of the Guards and Consul, was in the greatest danger, for only having advised the two Bro∣thers to an agreement with one another. For the Soldiers had stript him, and were hurrying him away to the Execution when further Or∣ders came to spare him. He put to death Helvius Pertinax, for no other reason, but be∣cause he was the Son of an Emperor. He ne∣ver ceased to kill, upon some occasion or other, those who had been his Brother's Friends. He frequently and proudly inveighed both against the Senate and the People, not forbearing to value himself one day, because he was another Sylla. Then he went into Gallia, whither he was no sooner come, than he put to death the Pro∣consul of the Narbonnoise. He made such a havock, and such a confusion amongst the Ma∣gistrates of this Province, that he was as much hated, as the most outragious Tyrant ever was. Sometimes nevertheless he would disguise his sanguinary and cruel Nature, and pretend to be gracious. He did a great many things here against the Rights of the Country, and the People. And then he was taken with a great sickness, and yet he was afterwards very Cruel to those; who even recovered him. NextHis Da∣cian Ex∣pedition. he prepared himself for an Expedition into the East, and so came into Dacia. He new
great Numbers of the Barbarians about the Country of Rhaetia, encouraging on his Sol∣diers, and gratifying them with his Bounty, as if they were the Soldiers of a Sylla. He suffered not himself to be called indeed by the Name of any God, as Commodus was, whom they called a Hercules, because of his killing a Lyon, and other Wild Beasts. But having received a Victory over the Germans, he called himself Germanicus, without any regard to the nearness of that Name to Germanus, that is, his own Brother whom he had killed. And had he, he said, overcome the Lucani, he would have been called Lucanicus, although it is a word which in another Sense, signifies an A∣ction of Dishonour. He put to death such as had but made Water in the place, where stand the Statues or the Images of the Emperor; or had taken off the Crowns from the Heads of any Images to place them elsewhere, or used Amulets about their Necks, for Charms a∣gainst Quartan and Tertian Agues. He took his way by Throce, in company with the Captain of the Guards; and thence crossing the Sea into Asia, his Sail-yard broke, and he was in danger to be wreckt, had he not got∣ten into the Pinnace, and so was taken into a stout Vessel, where the Admiral was that convoy'd him. He often with his Sword inHis Strength. hand, hath stood a Combate with Wild-Boars. Once he fought a Lyon, of which he gloried much in his Letters, which he sent to his Friends, and boasted, that he was arrived to the Power of Hercules.
Coming into Asia, he applied himself to the matter of the War with the Armenians and Par∣thians, in which he appointed a General to com∣mand, who was of the same Kidney with him∣self. He went to Alexandria, where assem∣blingHis Bar∣barities in Egypt. the People together in the Schools, he made a sharp Speech to them, and commanded a draught of the stoutest Men to be made out of them for Recruits, as he pretended, for his Forces. But when this was done, he put them all to the Sword, after the Example of Ptolemy Euergetes, the Eighth of that Name, King of Egypt, who had practised the like Bar∣barity. At the same time, upon a signal given to his Soldiers, they fell every one upon his own Host and murdered him, and committed a vast slaughter throughout the City of Alex∣andria. Afterwards he marched against the Parthians, by the Borders of the People called Cadusii, and the Country of Babylon; and coming to a tumultuary Engagement with them, he let loose amongst them Wild Beasts; after which he sent his Dispatches about it to the Senate, to the end, to obtain the Title of Conqueror of the Parthians, as if he had got∣ten never so great a Victory. He was pre∣paring himself for another Campaign, when going from the City of Rhea in Mesopotamia, where he wintered, to Heren or Charan, to as∣sist at the Worship of the Moon, and by the way, alighting from his Horse to make Water, he was stabbed the same moment upon the Eighth of the Ides of April, being his Birth-Day, and the Festival of Cybele, by a Con∣spiracy,
which was laid for the purpose by Macrinus the Captain of the Guards, who in∣vaded the Empire after him. Those who were privy to the same besides, were Nemesianus, and his Brother Apollinaris, and Rhaetianus who commanded the second Legion; nor was the design unknown to Martius Agrippa the Ad∣miral, nor to a great many other principal Of∣ficers, who had been brought into it by the in∣stigation, especially, of one Martial a Centu∣rion. He was killed in the midway, betwixt the Cities of Rhea and Heren, where he had an occasion to alight, as I said, from his Horse. The Guards were of the number of the Con∣spirators; and so as the Quirry lifted him up to his Horse again, he struck him into the Body with a Dagger. Now concerning the Death of Papinian, IPapinian's Death. know very well, that it is variously represented by a great many, as if they did not know the real cause it. However, I think fit to pub∣lish what to me seems to be the Truth, ra∣ther than I will be silent upon the Murder of so great a Person. Papinian, it is said, was one in very great Favour with the Emperor Septi∣mius Severus, to whom, some add, that he was somewhat akin by his second Wife. There∣fore Severus had recommended unto him the Care of his two Sons, whom accordingly he exhorted to a good Agreement with one ano∣ther, and so interposed against the Murder of Geta. But for this, he, together with the rest who were Favourers of Geta, was killed by the
express Order of Bassianus, who, as some fur∣ther add, had desired Papinian to extenuate for him, to the Senate and the People the death of Geta. But Papinian answered, That it was not so easie to excuse a Murder, as it was to commit it. They say also that Papinian did de∣cline to dictate the Speech, in which Bassianus was to inveigh against his Brother, to the end, to render his own Cause the better in killing him; and that Papinian said, that, to accuse the Innocent, who had been murdered, was in the nature of another Murder. But all this however, does not very well agree. Because it was not for the Captain of the Guards to form the Emperor's Speeches; and then it is certain that Papinian was for no other reason killed, but as he was a Fautor of Geta. As the Soldiers were hurrying him away to his Execution, he said, That he should be very im∣prudent, who was the Captain of the Guards after him, if he did not severely revenge the Cruelty that was shewn to his place. Which was afterwards done. For Macrinus his Successor, was the Author of the Death of Bassianus, and was afterwards himself made Emperor in the Camp; whose Son Diadumenus, was immediate∣ly new named Antoninus Diadumenus, to gra∣tify the Soldiers, because the name of an Anto∣ninus was so dear to them. Bassianus Antoninus Caracallus lived Forty Three Years, and reigned Six. He was No∣bly buried, and left a Son, who was after∣wards called Varius Antoninus Heliogabalus; the dear Name of Antoninus being so fixt in the
Hearts of Men, that it was no more to be re∣moved, than that of Augustus from the Person of the Emperor. He was a Prince of ill man∣ners, and crueller than his too cruel Father. He eat and drank freely, but was hated by his Servants, and by all the Men of the Sword, only the Guards. The Works which he leftHis pub∣lie Works. behind him at Rome were, the famous Baths of his own Name, in which there is one Room so Curious, that the Architects say, it is alto∣gether inimitable. He left also a Portico of the Name of his Father, representing the prin∣cipal Actions of his Father's Life, with his Wars and Triumphs. He received the Name of Caracallus from a Garment so called, which he first brought up and gave to the People of Rome for a Bounty. He repaired the Via Nova, which is below his Baths, so well, that you will scarce find a Street in Rome, that is fairer than it. He erected stately Temples in all places to the Honour of the Goddess Isis, whose Sacrifices he celebrated with much greater Reverence than ever had been used before at Rome. His Body was interred in the Sepulchre of the Antoninus's, that the same place should receive his Reliques, which had given him that Name. It is now fit that I should relate how it is said that he came to marry his Mother-in-Law, Julia; she was very handsome, and as she hap∣pen'd one day in negligence, to discover her Body a little naked; Ah, Madam, said he to er, I would, if I might. Sir, said she again, If you please, you can; you are an Emperor, and
to give Laws to all the World, and not take them from any. He no sooner had under∣stood the sense of those Words, but his un∣bridled Passion led him to resolve upon the accomplishment of the Crime, and so he real∣ly celebrated those Nuptials with her, whichHis in∣cestuous Marriage. were in effect the same, as to take to Wife his own Mother, and to add Incest with his Mo∣ther, to the Murder of his Brother. It will not be improper here to remark a very picquant thing, which was said of him. As he had a∣scribed to himself the Titles in his stile of Germanicus, Parthicus, Arabicus, and Aleman∣nicus, because of his Conquests over the Ger∣mans, and those other Nations; Helvius Per∣tinax, the Son of the Emperor Pertinax, smi∣ling said, His Majesty might be pleased to add Geticus Maximus: In which word Geticus, there is an equivocation, with a double relation to Geta his Brother, whom he had killed; and with relation to the Goths, called Getae, whom he had overcome in some running Fights, in his passage into the East. The Death of Geta was prognosticated by several Prodigies, as we shall shew by and by in his own Life, which follows. In the mean time we shall only observe farther, that for∣merly, when the Army had proposed Bassianus Antoninus to march at the Head of them, in the place of Severus his Father, who was so sick of the Gout, that he could not well follow the War; Severus was then for putting to death th his Son Bassianus, if the Captains of the Guards had not over-persuaded him against it. On
the contrary, others say, that the Captains of the Guards were for punishing Bassianus with Death, but that his Father was against it; be∣cause he was not willing, that the foolish Rash∣ness of a young Man should be resented so se∣verely, as for his own Father to kill him, when the Soldiers rather were the great occasions of the Crime. However it is, this most cruel Prince Bassianus Antoninus Caracallus, who in a word was a Parricide, Incestuous, an Enemy of his Father, Mother, and Brother, was yet by Macrinus that killed him, out of fear of the Soldiers, and especially those of the Guards, after his Death made a God. A Temple was given him, and an Order of Priests appointed to serve him. Even the Temple of Faustina, built by Marcus Antoninus at the Foot of the Mountain Taurus, was re-dedicated to him; and his Son Antoninus Heliogabalus, translated the same again afterwards, to either Jupiter Syrius, or the Sun, or himself, but to which of the Three, I cannot very well assert.
THE LIFE OF ANTONINƲS GETA, BY AELIUS SPARTIANUS. Dedicated to the EMPEROR Constantine the Great. I Am sensible, Sir, that your Majesty, wit many others, may perhaps admire, why I do take in here the Life of Geta Antoni For indeed, I must confess that there is no much to be said of him, because he was ca out of the World, as soon almost as he came
IMP. CAES. P. SEPT. GETA PIVS AVG. portrait of Publius Septimius Geta IMP. CAES. M. OPEL. SEV. MACRINVS AVG portrait of Macrinus M OPEL. ANTONINVS DIADVMENIANVS CAES portrait of Diadumenus IMP. CAES. MAVR. ANTONINVS PIVS AVG. portrait of Heliogabalus IMP. CAES. MAVR. SEV. ALEXANDER AVG. portrait of Alexander Severus MAXIMINVS PIVS AVG. GERM. P. 318. Vol. 1. portrait of Maximin I
upon the Throne as a Partner with his Brother, however I shall observe, that he had the name of Antoninus given him, no less than his Brother, by the Order of the Emperor Seve∣rus, his Father; and the reason of it, which I shall premise, before I proceed further, was this. His Father sometime, had had a Dream,Occasion of his Names. that he should be succeeded by an Antoninus. Upon which he immediately went to his Sol∣diers, and at the head of them gave his eldest Son Bassianus, the name of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Bassianus. And when he had done this, whether it was out of his Paternal Affe∣ction unto Geta, or whether it was that Julia his Wife, who knew the Dream, had put him upon it, because Geta should not be altoge∣ther precluded Access to the Empire, he or∣dered that he also should be called by the name of Antoninus Geta: and always in his fa∣miliar Letters, which he writ afterwards in his absence to his Friends, he said of them both equally, Salute from me my Antoninusses, my Sons, and my Successors. But yet however all this Caution of neither the Father, nor the Mother availed any thing. For only the elder possessed the Empire, who was the first honoured with the name Antoninus. His other name of Geta was what he had from either his Father's Brother, or from his Grandfather, whose names were Geta. There were yet other reasons for the addition of that name of Antoninus, to this of Geta. Severus would have had it to be a Rule, that all Princes in the time to come should be Entitled Antonini,
in the same manner as they are Augusti. Which was the effect of his great love to the Em∣peror Marcus Antoninus, whose Son he was pleased to call himself, and whose Wisdom and the Precepts of his Philosophy he always endeavoured to imitate. And not only the effect of his love to that Prince, who was an Antoninus but by Adoption, but of his Love and Honour also to Antoninus Pius the Suc∣cessour of Hadrian; by reason, that it was Antoninus Pius, who had preferred him from a Practicer in the Law to be the Keeper of the Exchequer; which was a happy Rise to him, and which had opened him the way to those great Advantages, that afterwards he came to attain unto: who thought therefore, that he could not borrow a name from any Prince better, than from one whose Reign had been so happy; nor a name more honourable than that, that had already run through four Emperors. Being skilful in the Doctrine of Astrology, as many of the Africans generally are, he said one day, because he knew the Na∣tivity of Geta; I admire, dear Juvenalis, (who was the Captain of the Guards to him) to think, that my Geta shall be a God, in whose Nativity I see nothing to make him an Em∣peror. Nor did his skill at all deceive him; for after Geta had been killed by his Brother, and his Brother apprehended that he had drawn upon himself the hatred of a Tyrant by the Crime, he understanding that it would be sweetned if he did but declare Geta a God, cried, Sit Divus dum not sit Vivus; Let him be
a God, so he is not an Emperor; and so he Con∣secrated him; by which the Murderer in some measure retrieved to himself the good Grace of the People again. Geta Antoninus, was born at the City of Mi∣lan, under the Consulships of Severus and Vi∣tellius, upon the sixth of the Calends of June. His Mother was Julia; who was Severus's se∣cond Wife, being her whom he had chosen to Marry, because he had heard, that she had itGood and bad O∣mens. in her Nativity to be the Wife of a King; though himself was at that time a private Per∣son, only in a good Employment in the State. As soon as he was born, it was told by one that a Hen had laid an Egg in the House, which was of a Purple colour. So the Egg was brought up; but Bassianus taking it in his hands and letting it fall, like a Child, to the Ground, that it brake, Julia said to him laughing, You wicked Villain, you have killed your Brother. Severus took more notice of this Expression at that time, than any other Body: but afterwards all the Company lookt upon it as a thing spoken, as it were, by In∣spiration. Another Omen that happened was this: upon the same day, and in the same hour that Geta was born, a Plebeian of the name of Antoninus, had at his Farm in the Country a Lamb kidded, with a mark upon his Head of the colour of Purple: and being informed by a Soothsayer, that an Antoninus should suc∣ceed to the Empire after Severus, he very fondly interpreted it of himself; but how∣ever killed the Lamb (in which consisted the
sign of the death of Geta) for fear that the Omen of so high a Fortune should bring him into danger. I would add one thing more, which the Event made People to interpret to the same purpose; which is, that when Seve∣rus one day Celebrated the Birth of Geta, his Brother Bassianus killed the Sacrifice himself, in the place of the Priest. A Circumstance not then considered nor taken notice of; but it was afterwards very well understood, when that Brother had sacrificed his Brother. Geta, was in his temper a rough sort of aHis Perso∣nage and Conditi∣ons. Youth; though not to a Fault; handsome, a little eager, a lover of delicious Wines and good Chear. There is this Story of him, which is remarkable, when he was a Boy. His Fa∣ther the Emperor Severus being for Eradicating wholly the Parties that opposed him, said once to his Sons, I do but rid you of your Enemies. So Bassianus advised him to cut them off all Root and Branch; them and their Children: but Geta askt the question, how many of them they were? His Father telling him, says he again, Have they Parents and Relations living? Yes. Then, says he, there will be more People in Rome sorry for your Victory, than there will be that are glad of it. And certainly Geta's Opinion had carried it, had not Plautianus the Captain of Guards, and Juvenal who had great interests, insisted upon the contrary, in hopes of enriching themselves by the Confis∣cation of the Estates: which was again se∣conded by the excessive Cruelty of Bassianus, who persisting in his first Opinion, and say∣ing,
He would have them all cut off; them and their Children; says Geta to him; You; who spare no Body, would kill your own Brother. Which, as then spoken, signified nothing: but afterwards it appeared to be a sort of a Prophesie. He had an excellent Memory to improve himself by what he read in the Antients, and by what his Father taught him. His Brother had always hated him; but he was more be∣loved by his Mother Julia, than ever Bassianus was by his. He spoke agreeably, though some∣thing Stammering: he was curious in his Dress, to excess: and whatever was presented him, he applied it to his own Ornament, without giving it away to any body living. After the Parthian War, at what time his Father flourish∣ed in great glory, as Bassianus was declared a Part∣ner in the Empire with his Father, so Geta was Created a Caesar, and honoured with the name of Antoninus Geta. It was an usual diversion with him to propose to the Grammarians, Que∣stions about the several Cries and Voices of Animals, As the Sheep Bleats, the Swine Grunts, the Dove Coos, the Lion Roars, the Elephant Brays, the Frog Croaks, the Horse Whinnies, the Ass Brays, the Ox Lows; and to prove the use of the proper Latin Terms for each, out of the Antients. He read much in the Books of Se∣renus Sammonicus, written to Antoninus. As to the Table, he took a pleasure to observe an Alphabet; according to which, as every Letter came on each day in its Course, his Servants that knew it, and were well skilled in the
Arts of eating, provided things of the names, beginning with that Letter. As for example, for the Letter P. Puddings Plover, Pullet, Par∣tridge, Peacock, Pig, Piscis, Plumbs, and so upon other days for the other Letters in order. Which is an Argument that from his Youth he had a gay choice of things, and was a very pleasant Person. After he was killed by his Brother, a Party of the Soldiers who had not been Corrupted, re∣sented his Murder very ill; saying all of them, That they had promised Fidelity to the two Sons of Severus, and ought to keep it equally to them both. Accordingly they kept fast the Passes of their Camp; and refused to give entrance to Bassia∣nus, till he had flattered them up, and had ap∣peased their Heats by giving them a Bounty, which was vastly great. After this Papinian, and many others were Massacred, who had either encouraged the good agreement of the two Brothers, or had appeared to be of the Side of Geta. Persons of Quality of both the Senatorian and the Equestrian Orders were Butchered, up and down publickly in the Baths and other places. Papinian died by the Axe; Bassianus finding fault with the Executioner that he had not done it with a Sword. In the mean time he was so afraid of his own Person, that he wore a Coat of Mail under his Purple, when he went to the Senate, to give them an account of what he did, and of the death of Geta. At which time, as Faustinus the Praetor repeated the Imperial Style, saying, Sarmati∣cus Maximus, and Parthicus Maximus, Titles
which Bassianus had gained by his Victories over the Sarmatae and the Parthians, Helvius Pertinax, the Son of the Emperor of that name, suggested it to him to say, and add to the rest Geticus Maximus; as if he meant it, in relation to his Victories over the Goths, who were then called Getae; but there was an Equi∣vocation in the Word; for it also referred to the Murder of his Brother Geta. This sunk deep into the Breast of Bassianus, as it appeared afterwards by his putting to death the Author, and not him only, but those others, as I have said above. More particularly, as to Helvius Pertinax, he was willing to cut him off, upon the account that he was in the good esteem of all the World; and then besides he was the Son of an Emperor, which it self was no very safe Circumstance for a private Person. The Funeral of Antoninus Geta was so veryHis so∣lemn Fu∣neral. Fine, that one would not have thought the same Brother that buried him, had killed him. He was buried in the Sepulchre of his Ance∣stors, that is to say, of Severus his Father, which is upon the Appian way. In fine it is to be observed, that the Caresses of Antoninus Ca∣racallus Bassianus, were more to be dreaded than his Frowns. He had an unaccountable Quality with him, to speak the fairest and the kindliest to those in appearance, whom he re∣solved to destroy. And again, it was a Mi∣racle to all to see him lament, as he did, the death of Geta, as often as his name was menti∣oned, or his Picture, or his Statue came in sight. He was therefore a Man of many
Windings and Turnings in his Humour; and this being accompanied with as much Cruelty as if he thirsted after Blood, it made him, that he would one time Massacre the Friends, ano∣ther time the Enemies of Geta, as Fortune of∣fered them to him; so that the loss of Geta, by the same means, became lamented more and more.
THEA. Christi CCXVIII. Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR OPILIUS MACRINUS. Dedicated to the EMPEROR DIOCLESIAN. By JULIUS CAPITOLINUS. WHen Princes, either have not sat very long upon the Roman Throne, or have not been Per∣sons of any extraordinary Characters before their Accession to it, so that there is but little to be said of their Reigns, for the shortness of
them, and less perhaps of their private Lives, in which they might never have been known, if they had not aspired to the Empire; It is not to be admired if their Memories should sometimes lye buried in obscurity. Therefore for my part, what I can find, that I do think may be deserving to be committed to Poste∣rity, and worthy to be reseued out of the ac∣counts of divers Historians, I shall produce it to the World; apprehending this to be the Duty of him, who proposes to write the Lives of others; that is, not to recount every thing tht a Man does, but with Judgment to make a Choice of what is more particularly deserving of Memory. So that I should think, that Aelius Junius Cordus, who hath taken the Pains to publish the Lives of those Emperors, whom he believes to be more obscure and less known than others, hath not yet acquitted himself of his Design with the greatest Success. Because as short as he is, he hath yet reported things that are scarce worth the Labour of the Writing them. He suffers not the least trifles to escape him, as if concerning Trajan, Antoninus Pius, or Marcus Antoninus, it signifieth any thing to know every time that they went abroad, or how they changed their Habits, and who every Person was that they preferred, and when; or when they were served with other Viads upon their Table, than ordinary: all which he recounts, and fills his Books with them, and so makes his History a Tale of a Tub. Where∣as, I think, that as for things that are so cheap, and of no value, no mention at all ought to be
made of them; unless it is, when it is proper to give a Judgment by them of certain Incli∣nations, which may be really worth the know∣ledge; and even then, it is fit to touch them only in part and to leave the rest to be gather∣ed by the Reader. After the Death of the Emperor Bassianus Antoninus Caracallus, his Captain of the Guards, Opilius Macrinus, who had before that been the keeper of his Privy-Purse, possessed him∣self of the Empire. A Man of a low Birth,His Ex∣traction and Cha∣racter. not a Gentleman born or bred; full of assu∣rance both in his Humour and his Looks; sometimes he called himself by the Name of Severus, sometimes Antoninus; but yet every body hated him, as well the Soldiers, as the People. He ingaged himself immediately in the War with the Parthians, to take away by that means from the Soldiers the leisure to make Reflections upon him, and so to con∣firm his Power, or at least to stop the ill Re∣ports from growing, as much as it was pos∣sible, under which he lay. The Senate in∣deed willingly accepted him to be Emperor; but yet it was chiefly, out of their hatred to the memory of Antoninus Caracallus, in relation to whom they oried out with one Voice, Any body rather than a Parricide; any Person rather than an incestuous, and an impure Homicide; any one, rather than a Murderer of the Senate and the People. It may be perhaps a Matter of some admiration, why Macrinus, having been the Author of the Death of his Predeces∣sor, who was by Name an Antoninus, should
nevertheless order his Son Diadumenus, to be called Antoninus Diadumenus. Now that which I find upon the Annals, as to that matter, is this. The Oracle of the Goddess Coelestis in Car∣thage, having been consulted by the Proconsul, about the State of the Empire, and the pub∣lick Affairs, in the time of Antoninus Pius, about the Emperors. After other things, she particularly repeated the Name of Antoninus eight times; whereby it was understood, that the Emperor Antoninus Pius should Reign eight Years. But when that Prince had out-lived that term, so that if any Faith was to be given to the Oracle, something else than that was designed by it, which time was to produce. It was supposed at last to signifie, that the number of the Emperors of the Name of Antoninus, should be eight; and so they are. To wit, Antoninus Pius, the First; Marcus Antoninus, the Second; Verus Antoninus his Colleague in the Empire, the Third; Commodus Antoninus, the Fourth; Antoninus Caracallus, the Fifth; An∣toninus Geta, the Sixth; Antoninus Diadume∣nus, the Seventh; and Antoninus Heliogabalus, the Eighth. For as for the Two Gordiani, or Severus, or Pertinax, or Julianus, or Opilius Macrinus, who did all of them sometimes call themselves Antonini, they are never to be ac∣counted of the number of the true Antonini, but only those Eight now mentioned, by whom that Name was more retained, than any of their own. Now Macrinus was willing to give his Son the Name of an Antoninus, for
this reason, because the People should have the less occasion to suspect, that the late Em∣peror of that Name had been kill'd by his Orders; and because he knew very well, that every one had such an extraordinary Love for that Name, that unless the Emperor was cal∣led Antoninus, they could scarce think him an Emperor. After Opilius Macrinus was also kill'd, and the Senate was assured that Varius Heliogabalus the Son of Antoninus Caracallus, was declared Emperor by the Army; then it was, that it was loudly represented in the Senate, what an ignoble Person Macrinus was. Aurelius Victor Pinnius spoke thus. Macrinus, a Slave the other day, that drud∣gedHis mean Original. in the servile Offices of the Emperor's Family! a Bougre! a Hireling! He lived a paltry Life der Commodus. Severus thought him not fit at first for the most miserable Employments, but turned him out, and banished him into Africa; where to cover his Infamy, he betook himself to Letters, and came to plead some small Causes, and to declaim, and at last to be a Justice. Then he was created a Gentleman, and so at length, ar∣rived to be the Keeper of the Exchequer under Severus, by the Favour of Festus, who was an infranchised Slave of that Prince. This relation however, is not so undoubted, but that others give us the Steps of his Promo∣tion thus. That he was a Gladiator, and had sought in that quality publickly. Obtaining afterwards his Freedom, he went into Africa, where he was a Notary, and raising himself
after that, to be the Keeper of the Emperor's Exchequer, from thence he succeeded unto the highest Honors. Whilst he was the Captain of the Guards, he contrived the Death of his Ma∣ster, with that dexterity of Intrigue, that it could not be perceived, that he had the least hand it it. He gained upon a Quirry to give the Blow; what with the Money he bri∣bed him with, and what with the great Pro∣mises that he made him. And then it was so ordered, that it should be said, that he was killed in a Mutiny of the Soldiers; because for his murdering his Brother, and the Incest of his marrying his Mother, he was so odious to them. But no sooner was this done, but MacrinusMake his Son Caesar. possessed himself of his place, and made his Son Diadumenus, whom he immediately called by the Name of Antoninus Diadumenus, his Part∣ner with him in the same. Then he sent the Body of the deceased to Rome, to be interred in the Sepulchre of his Ancestors; and com∣manded his Captain of the Guards, who was his own late Colleague in that Office, to take care of burying him in all respects honoura∣bly; knowing that the Common People loved him for the Habits and the Largesses that he had given amongst them. As he was afraid of a popular Emotion, and that some body should intervene and hinder his Reign, so he was glad to take the Empire, as it were by surprise; but yet in the mean time he served himself of that common Artifice to pretend, that it was against his Inclination.
Particularly he was jealous of the Captain of the Guards, his late Colleague, because some People hoped, that if he had the Consent but of one Legion, he would not refuse an Op∣portunity, in which they would be ready to serve him, out of the hatred they had to Opilius Macrinus for his ill Life, and for the ignoble∣ness of his Education and Birth. He took up∣on himself, as I said, the Name of Severus, though he had no relation to that Prince; which occasioned a good raillery upon both him and his Son; Macrinus is a Severus, as Dia∣dumenus is an Antoninus. Now to put a stop to any Commotion of the Soldiers, he immediately gave a Bounty, as well to the Legions, as the Guards, which was more than ordinarily large; and as it is the Custom so to do, his Money supplied the de∣fect of his Innocence; and what he wan∣ted in one, he made up with the other; by virtue whereof, he continued in the Em∣pire for some time, although he was a Man of all manner of Vice. He writ Letters to the Senate, concerning the Murder of Antoninus Caracallus, in which he stiled him a God; protesting as to himself, that he was innocent, and had known nothing of it; and so he ad∣ded to the Crime that he had committed Per∣ury, to begin his Reign withal. It is fit to know, what a sort of an harangue t was which he made, when he writ to the Senate upon this occasion; that we may see he Confidence of the Man, and the Sacrilege with which he commenced his Reign. The
Heads of it were these, done in the joynt Names of the Emperors Macrinus and Diadume∣nus. We should have been heartily glad, Fathers ofHis Mes∣sages to the Se∣nate. the Senate, to have had our Sovereign Antoni∣nus yet in safety, and returning to you in Tri∣umph. We should all have been happy in such a flourishing State of the Empire, and under a Prince, who was a Successour of the Antonini, and given us from the Gods. But since this Happiness hath not befaln us, by reason of a Mutiny of the Sol∣diers, which hath deprived us of it, we make you acquainted with what the Army hath done as to us in the first place; and next we with your Consents, decree an Apotheosis to be given imme∣diately to our late Prince, whose Murder the Army hath thought no Man more worthy to avenge than his own Captain of the Guards, to whom himself had left it, to chastise the Faction, had he escaped their hands and lived. In another place, says he, They have presented me with the Empire, which I have therefore taken into my Protection; and I shall continue it, if the same thing be pleasing to you, Fathers of the Se∣nate, which is so pleasing to them, to whom I have given a Bounty, and done every thing as the Cu∣stom is for the Emperors to do upon these occa∣sions. Again, My Son Diadumenus, whom you know, the Army hath made my Partner in the Empire, and hath not denied him the Name of Antoninus. Indeed, they have done him a greater Honour by that Name, than by that de∣gree of a Prince; which we desire may be ap∣proved
by you, Fathers of the Senate, as a good and happy Omen, that you shall never want a Prince of a Name which you do so dearly love. Again, We and all the Army have equally de∣creed the Honours of a God unto Antoninus Ca∣racallus. And though we might with the Autho∣rity of Emperors command the same from you, Fathers of the Senate; yet we rather desire you to do it, and to dedicate to him, two Statues on Horseback, two more standing in Military Habit, and two others sitting in a Civil one. We dedi∣cate also two triumphal Statues to the Emperor Severus. All which, Fathers of the Senate, you will command to be performed, at our earnest Request. When this was read in the Senate, they took the news of the death of Antoninus Caracallus very well, and hoping that Opilius Macrinus would maintain the publick Liberty, they first made him a Patrician, who was a Man originally of no Family, and little known; then they made him High-Priest, (a Title annexed to the Em∣perors) who sometime before, had been a Clerk to the minor Priests: And lastly, they voted him the Title of Pious. Nevertheless, at the first, upon the News of the Death of Cara∣callus, there was a long silence in the Senate, because no body dared to be forward to be∣lieve it. But it was no sooner confirmed to them, that he was really killed, but they in∣veighed against him as a Tyrant; immediate∣ly they conferred the Proconsular and the Tribunitian Powers upon Macrinus, who ac∣cepted from them the Title of the Happy, in∣stead
of that of the Pious, and was pleased that the Name of Antoninus should be confirmed by them to his Son. And here I may observe, that this Name which began in a Prince, who was in reality, as well as by Title Pious, came by degrees, through a number of others one after another, who impaired its Reputation more and more, to end at last in a Man so impious, that he was the very scum of the Earth. Marcus An∣toninus was the only Prince after Pius, who adorned it by a Life worthy of it: Verus An∣toninus his Partner, degenerated from it, and Commodus Antoninus even polluted it. What shall I say of Antoninus Caracallus? Or what of Antoninus Diadumenus? What shall I say of Antoninus Heliogabalus? But as he was the last of the Antoninusses, and base born, so he is re∣membred to have lived in the greatest im∣purity. Opilius Macrinus being thus established in theHis Par∣thian Ex∣pedition. Empire, he made great preparations to conti∣nue the War against the Parthians; and pro∣posed to abolish the infamy of his former Life, and the baseness of his Birth, by the greatness of his Victories. He engaged the Enemy, as they were commanded by Artabanus their King, who fought obstinately. But after this, a Peace being agreed upon, then Macrinus re∣tired to the City of Antioch, where giving him∣self up to Luxury, his Legions took a just pre∣tence from thence to revolt from him to Varius Heliogabalus, who was the reputed Son of Anto∣ninus Bassianus Caracallus; and who coming with
an Army against him, defeated him, and killedHe is slain. him, after he had reigned but a little more than one Year. There was a Lady called Moesa, alias Varia, a Phoenician, of the City of Emissa, the Sister of Julia, the Wife of the Emperor Severus, who after the Death of Antoninus Caracallus, was banished the Court by Macrinus; but yet she was allowed to take along with her, all the effects which she had amassed in the long time of her continuance there. This Lady had two Daughters, called Semiamira and Mam∣maea: The first and eldest was the Mother of Varius Heliogabalus, who was a Priest of the Sun, and had taken the Name of Heliogabalus, in the Phoenician Language, from the Name of the God that he worshipped. And being as well by his noble Stature and his Beauty, as by his Office remarkable to all that came to the Temple, especially the Soldiers, his Grand-Mother Moesa, alias Varia, took her opportu∣nity to say to them, that he was the Son of the Emperor Antoninus Bassianus Caracallus, which from one to another, came to be made known to all. And as she was herself very rich, and Heliogabalus very prodigal, she made such Pro∣mises to them in his behalf, that she seduced the Legions to a revolt; who accordingly re∣ceived him and his Mother, and their follow∣ers into a Garrison by Night, and proclaimed him Emperor, by the Name of Antoninus, and invested him with the marks of that Dig∣nity.
When this Account was brought unto Ma∣crinus at Antioch, he admiring at the boldness of the Woman, which he could not but slight at the same time, sent Julianus the Captain of his Guards with his Legions to besiege her. But no sooner did the New Antoninus shew himself in Person to those Men, but they were all so marvellously inclined to love him, that they killed Julianus their Captain, and passed over in a Body to his side. Then Antoninus Helio∣gabalus having formed his Army set himself to march against Macrinus, as Macrinus was march∣ing against him; and joyning Battel, Macri∣nus was defeated; occasioned by the Trea∣chery of his own Soldiers, by reason of their Love to Antoninus. So he fled with some few in company with him, and particularly his Son. But both he and his Son were after∣wards pursued and killed in a Village of Bi∣thynia, and his Head cut off and brought to the Conqueror. And all that his Son had gotten by the Empire, was his Destiny only to be killed with his Father. Certainly Macrinus was in the time that he reigned more rigorous, and more austere than he had ever been before, thereby hoping to suppress the Reports of all his by-past Actions, and to bury them in oblivion; on the contrary, that Severity did but open a fresh occasion to People to blame him. Thus he was for ha∣ving himself to be called a Severus and a Pertinax: And when the Senate had given him the Titles of the Happy, and the Pious, he
only accepted the first, and refused the other, which occasioned a Libel to be made upon him, which was put up in the Forum in Greek and Latin Verse to this purpose; That an old, ugly, troublesome, sour, and unreasonable Man of a Stage-player (alluding to his fighting, formerly, as a Gladiator) pretending to be Happy, with∣out being at the same time Pious, it was a thing unnatural and irrational, for those were two Vir∣tues not to be separated. An impious Reign will make his Subjects unhappy, and he who makes his Subjects so, must be unhappy himself.His Tem∣per and Cruelties. Macrinus was therefore one of a proud and bloody Mind; he loved to govern with the arbitrariness of a Soldier; accused the Disci∣pline of former times, and praised Severus a∣lone, of all the Emperors. He condemned his Soldiers to the Cross, and always punished them with the punishments of Slaves. In any Mutiny he generally decimated; sometimes he contented himself to centesimate them; which last was a peculiar word of his own, when he drew out but every hundredth Man when to execute, which he accounted a Mercy, he had said, they deserved to be decimated, or vicesimated. Certainly, it would be too tedious here to recount all his Cruelties. How∣ever, one I will mention, which was not great as he thought it; and yet it is something worse than the Barbarities of all the Tyrants that ever were. Two Soldiers were reported to have forced their Landlord's Maid against her Will, to lye with them, at the same time she
was one that had been debauched long before He hearing of it by his Spies, sent for them and examined the Matter; and it appearing to be true, he ordered Two vast great Oxe to be opened alive suddenly, and the Men to be stuffed into their Bellies, there to remain till they died, with only their Heads out, that they could talk to one another; which was a sort of a Punishment that had nothing like it then, or in any former times, in the case of Adultery itself. In his Wars, always in∣deed, against the Parthians, Armenians, and Arabians, he quitted himself with equal bra∣very and success. A Tribune one day having neglected to appoint the Guard, he draggedHis ex∣treme Se∣verity. him alive and dead in a miserable Condition at a Cart's Tail, all his march. He revived the Punishment of Mezentius, of tying the li∣ving to the dead, for both to rot together: Therefore it was said by the People in the Cirque, in favour of his Son Diadumenus, who was a very lovely Youth, —dignus, cui pater haud Mezentius esset. It was pity he had a Mezentius for his Father. He shut up others betwixt four Walls, till they died starving. For Adultery he always tied the Parties body to body, and burnt them to∣gether alive. Servants that had run from their Masters, he condemned to be made Gladia∣tors of. Unless Informers proved what they said, he made it Capital to them; if they did
it, they received a Reward in Money, but he dismissed them with all their Infamy upon them. He was not a little versed in the Know∣ledge of the Laws of the Romans, insomuch, that he made no scruple to supersede all the Rescripts of the antient Emperors, to act ac∣cording to Right, and not according to Re∣scripts. And it was a shame, he said, that the Wills of such as Commodus and Caracallus, and others that were unworthy to be Emperors, should be Laws; when Trajan would not al∣low that a Rescript that is written perhaps in favour in one case should be made a precedent in another; because things ought to be examined by the Rules of good Sense. He was liberal in his allowances of Bread and Provisions to the Poor, but sparing in giving Money. Towards his Ser∣vants he was so severe, and so cruel, that they called him instead of Macrinus, Macellinus, from Macellum a Shambles; because his House, like a Shambles, flowed with the Blood of the Servants that he killed. He eat and drank very freely, sometimes to excess in the Eve∣nings. If he had dined at any time more sparingly, in his supper he would be very pro∣fuse. He admitted the Men of Letters to his Table, with whom talking, he prolonged his Meals. But as every one called to mind the base∣ness of his Birth, and former Life, and on the other hand, observed his Cruelty, which
was excessive, and the many horrid things that he did, which the Soldiers, especially, very well knew, they were not able longer to endure such a Nusance upon the Throne, and so they resolved to rid themselves of him. There was a Libel once made upon hisA Libel upon him. Son to this purpose. I dreamt I saw a Youth of the Name of Antoninus, who hath a Slave to his Father, his Mother such a Whore, she hath had a Hundred, and ask'd a Hundred more. From such a Father, such a Mother, let him be a Pius or a Marcus, he cannot be a Verus Antoninus; alluding to the Empe∣ror of the Name of Verus, but intending to to say, that he cannot be a true, but only a visionary, and a Bastard Antoninus. When Macrinus was told this, he answered it in some Iambics, which they say were very well done; but we have them not, because they perished with him in the Fray that he was kill'd in, when all that he had was plunder∣ed by the Soldiers. The manner of his Death was such as we have represented it before already; that is, his Army revolting, and carrying all their Inclinations upon Antoninus Heliogabalus, he fled, and was afterwards taken and kill'd in a Village of Bithynia; his Attendants all yielding, or otherwise cut in pieces or disper∣sed in flight. This made Heliogabalus famous, because he appeared to have revenged the Death of his Father. So he succeeded to
the Empire, and as he certainly disgraced it afterwards with Vices of Luxury, Impurity, Riot, Pride, and Cruelty, and as he lived an unhappy Life, so he met with the like tragical Death. This is what I have discover'd concerning Macrinus, out of a great many Historians that mention him. I humbly present it to your Majesty, O Dioclesian; being assured, that your Majesty takes a pleasure in view∣ing the Accounts of the Emperors of the an∣tient Times.
THE Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Antoninus Diadumenus. BY JULIUS CAPITOLINUS. ANtoninus Diadumenus being but a Youth when the Army created him Empe∣ror, together with his Father, after the Death of Antoninus Caracallus; his Life affords us little that is remarkable, more than the Account of his reception of the Name of Antoninus, and the stupendious Omens that appeared to fore-tell his Reign, and also that it was to continue but a short time. For as to the first, as soon as it was known amongst
the Legions, that the fatal Stroke was given to Antoninus Caracallus, that which was a matter of great trouble to them all, to observe, was, that they had not another Antoninus to suc∣ceed him, as if they thought that the very Roman Empire was certainly to perish with that Name. Macrinus hearing this, and fear∣ing, by reason that there were several Rela∣tions of Antoninus Pius that were Captains in the Army, lest the Army might cast their In∣clinations upon some one or other of those, for the Empire; he immediately put himself at the Head of them, with this Harangue. You see here, my Fellow Soldiers, my self, and myHe is de∣clared an Antoninus Son Diadumenus. I am well advanced in years, but my Son by the mercy of the Gods, you will have long to be your Emperor. I understand that there is remaining amongst you, a great Affection for the Name of Antoninus. Wherefore since for my own part, according to the Condition of humane Frailty, I have not much time left me to live, I name this young Son, an Antoninus, with your Consents, and wish you long to enjoy him. They cried, The Gods save the Emperor Ma∣crinus. The Gods save Antoninus Diadumenus. We all beg, that Antoninus Caracallus may be made a God. Then most Excellent and most Power∣ful Jupiter, preserve the Lives of Macrinus and Antoninus. Thou knowest, O Jupiter, Macri∣nus is invincible. Thou knowest, O Jupiter, Ma∣crinus is inconquerable. Having an Antoninus, we have all things. The Gods, have given us
an Autoninus. Antoninus and his Father me∣rit the Empire. Macrinus replied, My Fellow Soldiers, we give you a Bounty of three pieces of Gold, to each of you, upon the occasion of our Accession to the Empire; and for the Name of Antoninus, five pieces of Gold more, besides your ordinary Pay, which shall be doubled to you. The Gods grant that this may be done often; for as much as we now give you this day, we will repeat it to you, every Fifth year of our Reigns.His Speech to the Army. After this, Antoninus Diadumenus the young Emperor spoke to them in these words. I thank you, my Fellow Soldiers, for the Honour of the Empire, and of the name which you have given me, for it is you that have thought my Fa∣ther and me, worthy to be the Emperors of Rome, and to command the State: to the Government whereof My Father will take the Care not to be wanting, and it shall be my best endeavours not to be wanting to the Glory of the name of Antoninus. I am sensible, it is a name in which the Emperors Pius, Marcus, and Verus, have gone before me: who were Persons, to whom it is a difficult thing to answer worthily. I can only say, I will do all that is in my power: and in the mean time, upon the joynt occasion of my Reign and my Name, I promise you the same, as my most honoured Fa∣ther hath done; who hath but considered you at you deserve. The Greek Historian Herodian, hath omit∣ted these passages, and speaks Diadumenus un∣der no higher a quality than a Caesar. How∣ever after this Harangue, a Coin was
stamped at Antioch, in the name of Anto∣ninus Diadumenus: the other, which was to be in the name of Macrinus was deferred, till they had the express Orders of the Se∣nate; to whom Letters were sent to ac∣quaint them, with what was past, and with the New Antoninus, who desired their approbation. And whether it was as some say, because their hatred to Antoninus Caracallus made them wil∣ling to have any other Emperor, rather than him, they accepted of this Change freely. Had Macrinus lived, he intended to have given to the People of Rome a Present of some Vest∣ments, after the example of the Donation of Caracallus: and also to establish a Charity, for the maintenace of the Children of some Poor Families; whom he intended to call by the name of his Son; to the end, as his own Words in the Edict are, to render so much the more agreeable and more recommendable the glory of the name of Antoninus. At the same time, he says, that he wishes that he was pre∣sent with the People of Rome; that his Son, their new Antoninus, might with his own hand distribute a Largess of Corn amongst them. In the next place he ordered the Colours, and the Standards of the Antoninusses to be put up in the Camp. He erected the Statues of Antoninus Bassianus Caracallus, in Gold and Silver; and Celebrated a Festival of seven days, for the Honour of the name of Antoninus.
Antoninus Diadumenus was certainly one ofHis Per∣sonage. the beautifullest Youths in the World. He was pretty tall, with bright yellow Hair, black Eyes, and a pretty long Nose; his Chin perfect∣ly handsome, and a grace to his whole Face; a full kissing Lip, and then he was natural∣ly Stout, and proper in his Exercises. When first he was dress'd in the Imperial Robes of Scarlet and Purple, and the other Military En∣signs of the Empire; he shined like a Star, or as one newly dropt from Heaven, and every body loved him, for the Charms of his Beau∣ty. In the next place, as to the Omens which pro∣gnosticatedOmens of his Reign. his Reign, they are indeed stupen∣dous. The day that he was born, his Father over-seeing and examining the Purple Robes of the Emperor in his Office, had ordered some of them to be brought where his Son Diadumenus was born in two Hours after. And as some Children that are born, have a skin upon their Heads in the nature of a Coif, being a natural sort of a Cover upon the Head, which is afterwards taken away by the Mid∣wives; Diadumenus, instead of this had a per∣fect Diadem in the place of it, which was a thin, but strong Flesh, made of a great many Veins and Fibres, like the strings of a Bow, from whence he was called at first Diadematus; but as he grew up, he was called by the Name of Diadumenus, from his Grandfather by the side of his Mother; and there is not much difference betwixt the one Name and the o∣ther. At a House of his Father's in the Coun∣try,
twelve Lambs were kidded, all of a Wool of the colour of Purple, except one, which was of divers Colours. The same day that he was born, an Eagle came and dropt a Ring-Dove into his Cradle as he slept, and retired without doing him any hurt. Other Doves, from whence the Soothsayers prognosticated great Riches and Honour, came and made their Nests in his Father's House. As he was one day walking in the Fields, an Eagle came and took from off his Head his Cap, and afterwards dropt it upon the Head of a Statue of an Emperor. He was born, not only upon the same day of the Month, but in the same hour, and almost under the same Constellations, as was the Emperor Antoninus Pius. Therefore the Astrologers said, That he would be both the Son of an Emperor, and an Emperor himself. A Woman, who was of his Kindred, observing that he was born upon the Birth-day of that Prince, cried, Let him be called an Antoninus. But Macrinus was a∣fraid to do that, because it was an Imperial Name, which none of his Family had ever had; and he thought it was safer to let it a∣lone, especially, the Report being already put about of the greatness of his Birth. Another Omen that still more particularly deserves our observation, is this; as Diadumenus was in his Cradle in a Garden, a Lyon that had broken loose, and was very fierce, came and lick'd him, and left him without offering him the least violence; but yet meeting his Nurse, he fell upon her, and bit her so cruelly, that she died.
This is what hath seemed to me to be wor∣thy of memory concerning Antoninus Diadu∣menus, whose Life I had even intermixt with the Actions of his Father, but that my Honour for the Princes of his Name, obliged me toGreat Honours paid to the Name Antoni∣nus. such a particular Account of him. And cer∣tainly, it was a Name so amiable to these times, that it seems, as if he who was not call'd an Antoninus, was not fit to be Emperor. There is a Letter of Opilius Macrinus, in which he declares, that he glories not so much of his elevation to the Empire, whereof he was the second Person in rank before, as Cap∣tain of the Guards, as of being the Father of a Son, of the Name of Antoninus, which at that time was so Famous, that not any Name of the Gods themselves was more. Therefore, said one, It is a thing void of all Reason, and unsuitable to the Dignity of Commo∣dus, to covet, as he did, the Name of Hercules, as if that of Antoninus was not Honour enough. For would he be a God, he could never more eminently be so, than as he was an Emperor of so excellent a Name? I mention this, in this place, only to shew, how highly the Antoni∣nusses were valued, to have their Names set a∣bove the very Gods. And yet all this was wrought by only the Charms of three Princes of that Name, whose Wisdom, whose Good∣ness, and whose Piety consecrated them for ever to Posterity; that is, Wisdom in the Per∣son of Marcus Antoninus, Goodness in his Bro∣ther Verus, and Piety in the first of the three, Antoninus Pius. I come now to the Letter which I mention'd of Opilius Macrinus.
Opilius Macrinus, to Nonia Celsa his Wife. THE Blessing we have received, my dear Wife, is above all Estimation; but perhaps you may think now, that I speak of the Empire, which is no such great matter; Fortune bestows that upon unworthy Persons often. I am made the Father of an Antoninus. Thou art become the Mother of an Antoninus. O happy we! And Fortunate our House! Now is our Reign happy, and to be highly Renowned. The Gods, and particularly the good Goddess Juno, whom you Worship, grant, that he may sustain worthi∣ly the merit of his Name; and that I, who am the Father of an Antoninus, may also appear worthy of that Honour to all the World. By this Letter we see, how great an Ho∣nour he looked upon it to be, that his Son was received by the Name of an Antoninus. However, this fine Son was killed, together with his Father, in the Fourteenth Month of their Reigns. And it is to be observed, that as young and as amiable as he was, he was yet one that was very severe upon many Per∣sons beyond his Age; witness these two Let∣ters following, written to his Father and Mo∣ther; which as they are Pieces contributing to this History, so I have thought fit to insert them here.
The Emperor the Son, to the Em∣peror his Father. I Am apt to think, Sir, in consequence of my Love and Duty to you, that you have not been sufficiently careful of your self, in sparing the Ac∣complices of the intended Revolt; whether it is because you hope that your Mercy will make them more your Friends for the future, or because they are your old Acquaintants, and that therefore you spare them. For first of all, as they are Per∣sons that have been once exulcerated in their minds against you, they can never love you a∣gain; and then when old Friends forget them∣selves, so as to turn Enemies, they make the most cruel Enemies of all Men. To which add, what the Army cries, Si te nulla movet tantarum gloria rerum,Virg. Aen. 4. 274. Ascanium surgentem, & spes haeredis Iuli Respice; cui regnum Italiae, Romana{que} tellus Debetur—— If Thirst of Glory cannot push you on, Yet pray regard the Fortune of your Son, To whom Rome's Empire has been destin'd long. You must put them to death, if you would expect to live in Safety. For if those be spared, others will not fail to trouble you as much, according to the natural viciousness of Mankind.
Now whether himself, or Caelianus his Ma∣ster in Rhetorick formed this Letter, it shews what a severe young Man he would have been if he had lived. The other LETTER to his Mother, was this. CErtainly, my Father, the Emperor, neither loves you nor himself, to spare, as he does, his Enemies. Therefore, pray endeavour, that Arabianus, Thuscus, and Gellius be dispatched, for fear, lest, if occasion serve them, they do not suffer us to escape them so easily. These Letters, says Lollius Urbicus, in the History that he hath made of his time, being betrayed to the Soldiers by his Secretary, did Diadumenus the greatest prejudice, and cost him his Life. For some of them considering that he was but a Youth, had been at first for saving him, after they had killed his Father. But when these Letters were produced andHe is slain by the Sol∣diers. read, then they killed him also; and both their Heads were carried about upon the top of a Javelin. Then all the Army agreed to set up Varius Antoninus Heliogabalus, being the re∣puted Son of Bassianus Antoninus Caracallus. They say, he was a Priest of the God Helio∣gabalus; that is, in the Phoenician Language,
the Sun; but certainly the most impure, and the most dissolute Man upon Earth, and by some Fate, sent entirely to dishonour the Roman Empire. As there are a great many things to be said of him, I shall reserve my self to speak of him in his place.
THEA. Christi CCXIX. Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Varius Antoninus Heliogabalus. Dedicated to the EMPEROR Constantine the Great. BY AELIUS LAMPRIDIUS. VArius Antoninus Heliogabalus, passed his Life in a manner, which was so very impure, that I should eternally excuse my self from committing it to Writ∣ing; nor should it be known by my hand, that ever such a Person was the Emperor of
Rome, if we had not had a Caligula, a Nero, and a Vitellius upon the same Throne before him. But as we see the same Earth produces as well Poysons as good Grain; and is diversified with things which are some wholsome, and some hurtful; here Vipers, and there other Crea∣tures, that are tame, and good for the Life of Man: the prudent Reader will easily make himself an amends for such prodigious Ty∣rants, if he pleases but to read the Reigns of Augustus, Vespasian, Titus, Trajan, Hadrian, A∣toninus Pius, and Marcus Antoninus, in opposi∣tion to them. For by the comparison, he will perceive the Judgments of the Romans upon the one and the other; how that these latter reigned long, and ended their days at last with natural Deaths. But the others were murder∣ed, shamefully dragged, branded as Tyrants, their Names thought unworthy so much as to be mentioned; or not to be mentioned without horror. After the Death of Macrinus and his Son, the Empire was conferred upon Varius Antoninus Heliogabalus, for this reason especi∣ally, becaused he was the reputed Son of Bassianus Antoninus Caracallus. He had beenReason of his Names. before a Priest, either of Jupiter, or the Sun, and had taken to himself the Name of Anto∣ninus, not only for an Argument of his Birth, but because he knew that that Name was so very dear to the World, that even the Parti∣cide his Father was loved for its sake. His other Name from his Grandfather Varia, was Varius. Then he called himself Heliogabalus, from the Name of the God in the Phoenician
Language, whose Priest he was; and when he came to the Empire, he was declared an Antoninus, and he was the last of the Roman Emperors of that Name. His Mother was Semiamira, to whom he was so devoted, that he did nothing in the Govern∣ment without her. She in the mean time lived in the manner of an impudent Courtezan, and pursued her lewdnesses of all sorts in the very Palace. For as it was under that Character, that formerly Antoninus Caracallus had had commerce with her, so the promiscuous Issue, her Son, might very well also be called Varius, if it had been only from thence, who after his Father was killed, fled, it is said, for fear of Macrinus into the Temple of the God Helio∣gabalus, as into an Asylum, and made his Priest∣hood there his Protection. But thus much as to his Name; that holy Name of Antoninus, so pol∣luted by this Man, but which is, however, so venerated by you, Most Sacred Constantine, that your Majesty hath the greatest Honour in the World for the Emperors Antoninus Pius, and Marcus Antoninus; setting them before you, no less than you do Constantius and Claudius, for your Royal Imitation; whereby you in∣deed adopt the Virtues of the Antients to be your own, and certainly they very well suit with the happy Inclinations of your Majesty. After then, Varius Antoninus Heliogabalus was in the possession of the Empire, he sent his Ac∣counts of it to Rome, where all the Orders of the Nobility, Gentry and People being eleva∣ted at the Name of an Antoninus, which seem∣ed
in him to be restored, not as it was in Antoninus Diadumenus in Title only, but also in Blood, because he writ himself the Son of Antoninus Caracallus: There was great Joy made for him; and this was yet further in∣creased by those good Apprehensions, which Men generally have of a New Prince, who succeeds after a Tyrant; and by that great Af∣fection, that they are then prone to express, but which yet is not lasting, unless where i meets with an extraordinary deal of Virtue for its support, because many indifferent Prin∣ces have soon lost it again. So when the Let∣ter of Heliogabalus was read in the Senate, they received it with as many Acclamations of Joy and Kindness to him, as on the other hand they inveighed against Macrinus and his Son. All were willing to declare him Em∣peror, and industrious to believe him a wor∣thy Antoninus; as the wishes of Men are apt to impose upon their Credulity, and what they desire that it should be true, they love to make themselves believe that it is so. But he was no sooner come to Rome, to omit theComes to Rome. things which he did in the Provinces, but he set up the Worship of his God Heliogabalus, which he had brought with him out of Syria. He built upon Mount Palatine, near the Pa∣lace, a Temple to him, into which he was al∣together for removing the Image of the great Mother of the Gods, Cybele; the Vestal Fire, the Palladium, or Image of Pallas; the Sacred Shields, and all the Holy Utensils of the Ro∣mans; not being willing that any other God
should be worshipped at Rome but his own. He said, that he would command the Wor∣ship of the Jews, the Samaritans, and the Chri∣stians, to be thither also transferred; that the Mysteries of all Religions should be contained within the Temple, and applied to the Honour of Heliogabalus. The first day afterwards that the Senate sat,His Mo∣ther sits with the Senate. he caused his Mother to be admitted as a Member of that Assembly, who was called in, and came and took her place by the Seats of the Consuls, and was present at the pas∣sing of a Decree of the Senate. Indeed, he is the only Person of all the Emperors, whose Reign hath given us a Senatress; a Woman to come into the Senate, to act as a Man. He also created a little Senate of Women, which met on Collis Quirinalis; whose Decrees, assembled under the Direction of Semiamira, and the Laws that they made concerning the Ladies are very diverting. They made Laws, What Cloaths every one should wear; who should give place to whom; who salute whom; who go in a Coach; who ride upon a Horse; who upon an Ass; who go in a Litter, drawn by Mules; who to be drawn by Oxen; who carried in a Chair, and whether the Chair should be of Lea∣ther, or inlaid with Bone, or Brass, or Ivory, or Damaskt with Silver; and who should wear Gold or Jewels at their Shoes. Whilst he wintered in the City of Nicomedia in Bithynia, which was before his coming to Rome, he carried himself so lewdly there, be∣ing carnally enter'd by Men, and grunting at
the Work, like a Sow that is brimmed, that the Soldiers soon repented themselves of ha∣ving conspired against Opilius Macrinus to make this Person a Prince; and then turned their Thoughts upon Alexander a Cousin-German of Heliogabalus, whom the Senate had created Caesar upon the Death of Macri∣nus. For who indeed could endure to see a Prince more than bestial, leaving no conca∣vityHis Be∣stiality. of his Body unpolluted by those he loved. And coming afterwards to Rome, he made it his great Business to be furnished with Men out of all Parts that were the best provided for his purpose. He had the Comedy of Paris per∣formed in his Apartments, in which himself acted the part of the Venus, and suddenly his Cloaths falling down to his Heels, and leaving his Body all naked, he put himself into a Posture fit for his Associates to make their lewd Approaches. He made himself to be drawn in the figure of a Venus, with a delicate Face, and all his Body smooth, and thought it the greatest Happiness of his Life to be tempting and agreeable to the Lusts of more and more Men. Himself, his Servants, and his Pimps, oneHis base Govern∣ment. with another, made a common Sale of the Degree and Places of Honour, and the Places of Power and Command. He created any one indifferently a Senator for Money, without regard to Age, Estate, or Birth. The Mili∣tary Offices of Captains, Tribunes and Gene∣rals, were sold, as also the Governments of the Provinces, and the Offices of the Hou∣shold.
Two Coach-men, whom he took out of the Cirque, that is, Protogenes and Gordius, he made the great Companions of his Life, and his Privadoes to every thing he did. He took several into the Court out of both the Theatre and the Amphitheatre, where they had been Players, Charioteers, or Gladiators, only because their Bodies promised him to the Eye, something filthy that pleased him. He loved a Youth called Hierocles so, that he used to kiss what it is immodest to name in him, and said, That it was to celebrate a Game to the Goddess Flora. He committed Incest uponHis Incest and Sacri∣lege. a Vestal Nun. He profaned the most Holy Rites and Mysteries of the Romans, breaking into the Sacristies of their Temples, and car∣rying all things away thence into that of his own God. He would have extinguished the perpetual Vestal Fire. Nor was he only this upon the Religions of the Romans, but all the World over, he desired to have no other God worshipped but Heliogabalus. He broke into the Sanctuary of the Temple of the Goddess Vesta, polluted as he was, with all kind of Filthiness, and his Company as bad and as vi∣cious as he, to take from thence the inviola∣ble Image of Pallas. He thought that he had really carried off the Jar which is consecrated to the Temple, and the Rites of the Goddess Cybele; but only the superior of the Virgins belonging to that Goddess, had shewn him a false one in the room of the true; and finding nothing in it that was extraordinary, he broke it in pieces. So he also seized upon an Image
of Pallas; which was adorned with Gold; but which he likewise mistook for the true Palladium, and he placed it in the Temple of his own God. He initiated himself in the Rites of the Goddess Cybele; and was washed in Bull's Blood; only to get an opportunity by the means to steal away the Image of that Goddess, and other Sacred Utensils that are kept altogether lockt up. He tossed his Head and his Hair about, as the Fanatick Priests of that Goddess do, amongst whom he offi∣ciated: every thing that those Priests do, so did he; till at length, he stole off the Ve∣nerable Image of the Mother of the Gods, and reposed it in the Sacristy of his own God. He Celebrated the Feasts of Adonis, with all the Mourning and the Tossing the Body, which is used in the worship of that God in Syria. He imitated Venus, weeping and bewailing his loss; which was but a presage from himself of his own approaching ruin. All the Gods, he said, were the Servants of his God; to whom some were his Chamberlains, some his Ushers, and others, were destin'd to serve him in all sorts of Offices. He endeavoured to possess himself of the Statue of the Goddess Diana; being the same Sacred Statue which Orestes had stoln out of her Temple in Scythia Tau∣rica, and had afterwards reposed it in another Temple Dedicated to her at the City of Lao∣dicea in Asia. The same Orestes built a City of his own Name, Oresta, upon the Bank of the Hebrus, in the Country of Thrace; which the Emperor Hadrian ordered to be re-called Hadri∣anople,
from himself, about the time that heCity of Adriano∣ple. was in his Frenzy, when he commanded so many Senators to be killed: whom Antoninus on the contrary saving, and afterwards bring∣ing them into the Senate, when every body had thought them dead, he very well deserved to be Entitled, as he was, the Pious Antoninus: And some allay it gave to that Frenzy of Ha∣drians, at that time to tell him; That whilst his Majesty was giving his Name to a City, it was to be feared that some mad House should take it up. Antoninus Heliogabalus offered Sacrifices toCruel I∣dolatry. his God, of young and pretty Boys, that were Gentlemens Sons, whom he Kidnapped for the purpose over all the Country of Italy, and whose Fathers and Mothers were yet living. The reason of his choice of such, as whose Fa∣thers and Mothers were yet living, I cannot understand, unless it was this; to make the Trouble of their loss so much the more sen∣sible as it reached to both their Parents, and that their deaths should be accompanied in the Ears of his God, with á more general La∣mentation. He had all sorts of the Diviners, Magicians, and Priests of the East with him, daily employed in the bloody Works of his Religion; in which he encouraged them on; thanking the Gods, that he was so well sup∣plied with the peculiar Friends, as he called them, and Servants of theirs: and then he pryed himself into the Entrails of the murder∣ed Children; and discussed the Victims, ac∣cording to the Rites of the Country, from whence this Service came.
The Largess with which he Caressed the People, when he entred upon his Consulship, was not little pieces of Money (of Gold or Silver) cast amongst them, nor a Collation of Fruits, Wines, and the like; but he gave them Fat Oxen, Camels, and Asses, to divide a∣mongst them; and Slaves to serve them: This, he said, was great, and becoming an Emperor, and for the Honour of Heliogabalus his God. He was very severe upon the memory of O∣pilius Macrinus; but yet worse against his Son for assuming the name of Antoninus: he called him a Pretended, a Spurious Antoninus; and he could not endure to hear him wel spoken of; nay he obliged some Persons, that writ his Life, to Slander him with things tha were horrid and intolerable. He set up a Pub∣lick Bath in the Court, which he exposed to the free use of all the World; the design where∣of was only to see, what Men were the bes Provided for his use, and to take them to him∣self: for those were the Creatures, in the World, the most in Vogue with him, and great Care was used to find them out, abou all the Town, insomuch as out of the very Water-men. In the mean time, the Persons who disco∣vered his Practises the most to the World, wer such especially, as had born him Company i the Exercises of his Lusts, and had been wea∣ried, with his Men, that were so Potent, an so filthily Hung. His death was a thing, be∣gun first to be thought of amongst those of h
own Family. Neither could the Soldiers en∣dure to see such a Pest upon the Throne, and therefore they all turned their inclinations up∣on Alexander, his Cousin German, whom the Senate (as it was said) had Created Caesar at the death of Macrinus. Aurelius Zoticus Ma∣girusHis fil∣thiness with Ma∣girus. was a very great Favourite unto Helioga∣balus. All the Principal Officers of the Court respected him, as if Magirus was the Husband, and Heliogabalus the Wife; Magirus the Ma∣ster, and Heliogabalus the Mistress. But the Master did so abuse the Tye of the Familia∣rity which he had with this Mistress, that he made a Practise by it of really cheating, out of their Money all the World at once. Some he threatned; some he promised; took Money of all: and coming out from Heliogabalus, His way was, Sir, I told the Emperor this of you; I heard him say this of you, (to another.) This will be done about you, (to a third.) And yet all false; as all these sort of Men do, who when admitted to too great a Familiarity with Princes, make no scruple to Sacrifice the Re∣putation of them to their own advantages: Let the Princes themselves be bad or good, it is the same; for so long as either through their Folly, or their Innocence, they do not per∣ceive the Cheat; it is Meat and Drink, and Honour, and Riches to such as pursue it. He∣liogabalus perfectly Married this Man, and lay with him as his Bride; and his word was, Vi∣gorously, Magirus: not bating him so much as the time that Magirus was sick of a Dose that had been palmed upon him by an angry Ri∣val.
Then he askt the Philosophers, and the gravest Persons about him, whether they in their Youths had not done the same thing. Which he expressed in the lewdest words, for he never spared for those, and acted the Postures upon his Fingers, without any sense of Shame, to be seen and heard by all the Company. He made his infranchised Slaves the Pre∣sidents, Lieutenants, and Proconsuls of the Provinces. The Commands in the Army and all Places of Honour, he polluted with baseborn and profligate Men. When he kept the Feast of the Vintage, to which he had invited several of the Nobility and Gentry, and the Company being repos'd, began im∣pudentlyHis hr∣rid Im∣modesty. to ask first the Gravest of them, one after another, Was be ready for the Exer∣cises of Venus? They blushing at the Question, he cryed; He Blushes, that's enough, his silence gives consent; and then he told them of his own Performances, and how he was ready to do all things for his part without seeking a Veil for his Modesty. The Graver Men blushing still, and saying nothing, because either their Age or their Honour refuted such Stuff, he proceeded to apply his Discourses to the young Fry, to whom he uttered all sorts of filthy Questions; who answering him again such things, as come from those of their Years: he was mightily diverted, and said, This now is to be free, and this is the right way of keeping the Feast of the Vintage. There were those in the Company that were lewd enough, and some too that were old, and in appearance
Philosophers, with their Heads in Caps, who confessed that they did indeed love the Female Part, and what Men they had that had served them in the Faculty of Husbands. But I can∣not tell whether they did not dissemble, to in∣gratiate themselves the more in the favour of Heliogabalus, by the Correspondence of their Vices unto his. He preferred one Man to be a Captain ofPrefers base Per∣sons. the Guards, who had been a Publick Stage-Dancer at Rome. He made Gordius, a Coach∣man, Captain of the Lieutenancy of the City: he made Claudius, a Barber, the Commissary of the Stores, and to other Places he pro∣moted Men as they recommended themselves to him by the large size of their Secrets. He made a Mule-driver a Commissioner of the Tax, called Vicesima, together with a Post∣man, a Cook, and a Locksmith. When he came either to the Camp or the Senate, it was in the Company of his Mother, whose Au∣thority kept him a little in Countenance, and who was the first Woman, as we have said, that ever had that access to the Senate, to give her Vote there. At his Banquets he particularly loved to place by himself, and to Favour, the Bardashes; and took a great delight to Handle them, and to Provoke their Lusts, though it was before all the Company. Whilst these things passed, he conceived a great displeasure against Alexander his Cousin German, whom before he had Adopted; and yet it was only, because he would not be as lewd as he. He ordered him to be removed from
him; and repented that he had adopted him, and ordered the Senate to Depose him from the Dignity and Title of Caesar. But as Alexander was a very excellent Youth, and ac∣ceptable to both the Senate and all the Gen∣try, and beloved by the Soldiers, as he ap∣proved himself worthy thereof afterwards in his Reign, the Senate when this motion was made to them, was very silent upon it. Then Heliogabalus's Fury carried him upon the worstHis Hate to Alex∣ander Se∣verus. of Wishes. He set Men expresly to Murder him. In order to which, he retired himself from the Palace, to the Gardens by the old Temple of Hope; as if he had designed that Place, in the way of an Omen, that he might succeed in his Hopes against this so promising, and so ne∣cessary a Youth; whom he left behind him, in the Palace, in Company with his Mother and his Grandmother; and had commanded that he should be killed there. At the same time he sent Orders to the Camp to abrogate, amongst them, his Title and Honour of Cae∣sar. He sent Persons to besmear with Dirt his Statues, which were in the Camp; and to de∣face the Inscriptions upon them, as it is done usually to the Statues of Traitors. He sent to others, that were his Attendants, to engage them by promises of Rewards and Honour, to kill him by what way soever they pleased; either in the Bath, or by Poison, or the Sword. But the Counsels of the Wicked are of no ef∣fect against the Innocent. No Body by any en∣deavours, could be prevailed with, to the per∣petration of a Fact so Villainous. On the contrary, all his Weapons recoiled against
himself; and those Persons, by whom he aimed to take away Alexander's Life, became the Masters of his own. All the Soldiers were in a Flame to see the Statues and the Titles of Alexander besmeared with Dirt. Some made towards the Palace, some towards the Gardens in which Heliogabalus was; directly to assert the Cause of Alexander, and to drive away this Impure Man, and in his Heart a Murderer, by violence from the Throne. Coming to the Palace, they first took a care of the preservation of the Person of Alexander, and his Mother, and Grandmother; and sent them to the Camp; whither Semiamira the Mother of Heliogabalus, followed them on Foot, in a great disquiet for her Son, and to see what she was able to effect in his Favour. From the Palace, they went to the House where Heliogabalus was. They found him employed about a Match for a Chariot-Race; but withal full of expectation of the News, when it should come, that his Counsin-German was killed. The sudden Noise of the Soldiers frightned him. He threw himself into a Cor∣ner, and by the help of a Curtain hanging over a Chamber-door, escaped out of their sight. So he dispatched one of the Captains of the Guards immediately to the Camp to appease the Soldiers there; and another to sweeten those, that were come into the House. An∣tiochianus was he who was employed to the latter: who spoke to them, and upon their Oaths Conjured them to be satisfied, and in∣treated them so kindly, that in fine he pre∣vailed with them (they not being very many in
number) to abandon their Enterprise for that time. As to the other Officer, who was sent to appease the Camp, the Soldiers there re∣plyed to him; that they were willing to for∣give Heliogabalus; provided that he would re∣move the Impure Men, and the Charioteers, and Stage-Players from his Person, and would betake himself to Reason: particularly they desired the removal of such as had made use of their Ministry for a Cloak to Cheat all the World out of their Money. So Hierocles, Gordius, Murissimus, and two more of his LewdA Mutiny of the Soldiers appeased. Favourites; who as ill as he was, made him much worse, by the absolute power which they had over him, were removed. The Sol∣diers further desired, that the Captains of the Guards should take care not to suffer him to lead so ill a life again; and that Alexander should be preserved in safety from him, and not be visited by any neither of his Company; because no Taint of their filthiness or example should reach his imitation. But yet Heliogaba∣lus, not only instantly redemanded Hierocles, who was one that was most extremely Lewd; but he daily carried on designs against the life of the young Prince. Upon the Calends of January, when they both were appointed Con∣suls together, he refused to appear with him in the Procession, according to Custom, to the Senate, and the Capitol: till at last his Grand∣mother, and his Mother told him, that the Soldiers were ready to Murder him, unless he agreed better with his Cousin, German; and then, though it was twelve a Clock, first he
put on his Robes, and marched to the Senate; whither his Mother repaired in a Chair at the same time: but he would by no means be per∣suaded to go from thence to the Capitol to fi∣nish the Ceremony, and to perform the ac∣customed Vows and Rites there. For all things were done there by the Governour of the Ci∣ty, as in the case of the absence of both the Consuls. Nor did he still forbear to prosecute his de∣sign against the life of Alexander. But in the mean time fearing, that after he had killed him, the Senate would in return cast their thoughts upon another Emperor, he resolved to be before hand with them, and on a sud∣den he banished the Senate out of the City. AllThe Se∣nate ba∣nish'd. of them though their Chariots or Servants were wanting, and their Equipages not in a readi∣ness, were commanded nevertheless immedi∣ately to be gone. So they went; some of them upon Carts, and others by any manner of Con∣veniences, that Chance offered to them. Sa∣binus, who had been a Consul, and one to whom Ulpian the Lawyer Dedicates his Books, tarrying a little behind the rest, he sent for a Centurion, and commanded him to kill him. But speaking it something low, and the Cen∣turion being a little deaf, the Centurion thought that his command had been to drive him out of the Town by force: which he did, and the mistake saved Sabinus his life. At the same time he Banished Ulpian, for no other reason, but because he was an Honest Man, and like∣wise the Rhetorician Silvinus, who had been
Alexander's Master; and the latter he after∣wards put to death: but Ulpian was spared. But the Soldiers, and especially those of the Guards, knowing what Rods Heliogabalus was making for their Backs, and observing the grudge that he bore them, for their last at∣tempt, in which they had rescued Alexander out of his Hands, resolved upon a Conspiracy with one another, for the deliverance of the State. Accordingly they fell first upon his Lewd Associates; whom they put to death in several ways; some by ripping them up, and taking out their Entrails; some by boring them through the Fundament; that their deaths andHis Asso∣ciates and himself slain. their lifes should be alike. Next they broke by violence in upon himself; who fled for shelter into a House of Office. They killed him there; then they dragged him through the Streets. They added this Despite to his Body that they threw it into the Kennel; and the Kennel not being big enough for it, they fastned a weight to it, that it should not float and be afterwards found, and buryed, and so cast it from the Aemilian Bridge into the River of Tyber. But before they threw him into the Tyber, they had dragged him up and down the Cirque. His Name, that is, that of Antoninus was erased, and nothing but that of Varius Heliogabalus was left to stand upon the Records, because he had so much affected, to retain nothing but the Name, to shew him∣self to be the Son of an Antoninus. They called him after his death, the Tyberine, Drag∣ged, Impure Heliogabalus, and by many other
such Names, upon any occasion of remark∣ing the Passages of his Reign. Of all the Princes, he was the only one that was both dragged and thrown into the Kennel, and thrown into the Tyber too. It was what befel him from the general hatred in which he died, and which Princes by his Example ought to take great heed how they incur; because, if so be that they live so, as not to merit the Love of either the Senate, People, or Soldiers; nei∣ther will they be thought to deserve the Ho∣nour to be buried. His publick Works were,Hsi pub∣lic Works. he built a Temple to his God Heliogabalus, whom some interpret the Sun, some Jupiter. He repaired the Amphitheatre after a Fire. He carried on the Work of the Baths, that had been begun by his Father, but which had been left imperfect for want of some Galleries to them, which therefore this Prince enterpri∣sed; but neither were those brought unto their last perfection till the Reign of Alexander Severus. He was the last of the Princes of the Name of Antoninus. And certainly the Life, the Man∣ners; and the Lewdness of him are so odious, that as the Senate erased out of the publick Re∣cords his Name of Antoninus, my self should not give it him, but for the sake of distinction, and the Laws of History, which oblige me. His Mother Semiamira was killed with him; a Woman without Honour, and worthy of such a Son; upon whose account, it was before all things ordained by the Senate, after his Death, that no Woman for the future should ever be
received a Member there again, and the Head of him by whom this had been done, contrary to the Sentiments of all the World, they de∣voted to Hell for it. Many were the obsceni∣ties of his Life, which I think not fit to men∣tion. His Riot in some things, when a private Man, and in others when Emperor, and what concerns his Luxury in that kind, I may the better describe. For even in his private Life, he professed to imitate the Luxury of Apicius; and when Emperor, his Examples were Nero, Otho, and Vitellius. He was the first of all private Men, who co∣veredHis Lu∣xury in his House. his Bed with furniture of Cloth of Gold, which he did in virtue of an Act, that had admitted it of Marcus Antoninus, when that Em∣peror made an Auction of all the unnecessary moveables of his Houshold to raise Money for the Marcomannick War. He garnished his En∣tertainments throughout the Summer, with Glasses and things, all of the same colour, and the colour every day various. He was the first that furnished his Kitchin with Pots and Pans of Silver, whereof some were of a hundred pound weight, and ingraved with venereal Fi∣gures. He first brought up the Wines of the infusion of Mastick, Roses, and other things, which the Luxurious have at this day. For though the Wine of the infusion of Roses had been invented before, yet he rendred that still more fragrant by a mixture in it of the Pine. Neither do we read of so many several mix∣ture of Wines before the time of Heliogabalus, every moment of whose Life was spent in
quest of new Pleasures. He is the first that made a sort of Saulages of Fish, such as Oy∣sters, Muscles, Lobsters, Crabs, Shrimps. His Dining Rooms, Tables, Couches, and Galle∣ries where he eat or walked, were strewed with Roses, Lilies, Violets, Hyacinths, Daffa∣dils, and all sorts of Flowers. He went not into the Baths, but they were first perfumed with noble Oyntments, or Saffron. The Pallets, upon which he reposed himself at Table, were of the Skins of Hares, or the Feathers of Par∣tridges, and he often changed his leaning Pil∣lows for softness. Sometimes he vilified the Senate so, that he called them Slaves of the long Robe; and the People of Rome, the poor Labourers of one Field; and slighted the Eque∣strian Order, as worth nothing. He often took the Governor of the City, and the Cap∣tains of the Guards, to drink with him after Supper, and spared them not their measure. He had designed, if he had lived, to appoint a distinct Governour to every Region of the City, in all fourteen, which was to be a pre∣ferment for so many of his Pimps, the filthiest of Men, and of the basest profession of Life. He had Couches of Massy Silver, both for his Dining-Rooms and his Chambers. He was served with Dishes frequently in imitation of the Luxury of Apicius, of the Hoofs of Camels, the Combs of Cocks cut off from them alive, and the Tongues of Peacocks and Nightingals; because he said, These are good things against an Epi∣lepsie. He taught the Court the Dainties of the Intrails of Barbels, the Brains of Red Tails.
the Eggs of Partridges, the Brains of Thrushes and the Heads of Parrets, Pheasants, and Peacocks. It is to be admired, how he gathered together such a quantity of the Fins of Barbels, that he had great Dishes and large Plates served of them, being things as rare as they are useless. And which is altogether astonishing, he fed his Dogs with the Livers of Geese. Lions and Leopards, being first disarmed ofOther of his immo∣derate Va∣nites. their Claws and Teeth, and taught by Masters to be tame, and to know their Commands, he had a great delight in. And at the second or third Services, on a sudden, he called them into the Room to him, where the Company not knowing that they were disarmed, it was a mighty laughing matter to him to see what a vain Fright it gave them. He sent Raisins in the Sun to be put into the Mangers to his Horses. He sed his Lions and his other fierce Beasts, with Parrets and Pheasants. For ten days together, he had once every day served up to him thirty of the Meats that are made of the hinder Part of so many Sows newly far∣rowed. His Pease were garnished with Grains of Gold. His Lentils with precious Stones, which matched them. His Beans with Beads of Amber, and his Rice with Pearl. Pearl was sprinkled amongst his Fish and his Mush∣rooms, like so much white Pepper. He some∣times stifled some of his Company at Table, with the vast number of Violets, and other Flowers, made by a Contrivance to fall upon their Heads. It is said, that he represented a Fight of
Gallies in the Amphitheatre, upon a Sea all of, Wine, which was let in by the Pipes. At the same time he perfumed the Seats for the People, with sweet Oyntments. He ran a Race of four Chariots drawn by four Elephants a piece, upon the Vatican, being himself the Driver, and le∣velling the ground for the purpose; and another within the Circuit of his Palace, of as many Ca∣mels drawing the Chariots. He once ordered a great quantity of Serpents to be gathered toge∣ther for him; so when he had them, he let them fly suddenly amongst the Company that was as∣sembled in the Cirque at a publick Shew, of whom many were bitten, and others put to the scamper to save themselves. He had some Tu∣nicks so thick beset with Jewels, that he said, He was even loaded with the eight of his finery. He wore at his Shoes, Jewels of the Cut of the greatest Artists, which was but thought ridicu∣lous; as if the fineness of the Stone, and the gravery, signified at the Foot any thing where it could not be distinguished. He dressed his Head with Jewels, to make him look more of the Countenance of a Lady. He made great Ponds of Sea-water in the inland Parts at a great distance from the Sea, and filled them with Fish from the Sea. He had Mountains of Snow in Summer preserved for him, which was fetched from all Parts. He never would eat Fish near the Sea; but in places at a very great distance from the Sea, he would be al∣ways served with the Curiosities of the Sea; and treated the very Rusticks there with the soft Roes of Lampries and Sturgeons.
His Fish was dressed with an Art, that when they were brought upon the Table, they look∣ed as if they were alive, just taken out of the Water. He bathed and swam in Ponds of Aromatick Wine, which were filled in an in∣stant for him, and sprinkled with the Flowers of Roses; himself and all the People drink∣ing of the Wine of the Ponds, and his Seat in them perfumed with exquisite Nard. For his Lamps, he had of the Oyl of Balm. He never lay with the same Woman twice, unless it was his Wife. His House was a Bawdy-house for all his Company, Friends and Servants. His Suppers never cost less than one hundred thousand Sesterces; and sometimes reckoning all things, he ed at the rate of thrice that Expence. He it did the sumptuous Suppers both of Apicius and the Emperor Vitellius. His Fishing-Nets were drawn out of the Ponds, by a Yoke of Oxen. He tied some of his poor Retainers sometimes to a Wheel which went under Water; in which, giving them a good plunge, and then up again, he said, Those were his Friends of the Race of Ixion. He pav'd the Courts before the Palace, with La∣cedamonian and Porphyry Marble, which was also yet in being in our memory, and but late∣ly taken up and changed. He had designed to give to the City a large Column, having an ascent within it to the top, where he intended to place the God Heliogabalus. But though he proposed to fetch the Stone from Thebais in Egypt, he could not be provided with a Rock that was great enough for his Work.
He many times had an humor, when hisHis vain Frolicks. Company was well in drink, to lock them up, and in the Night on a sudden to send in Lions, Leopards, and Bears (disarmed) into the Room to them; that when they awaked in the Morning, or which was worse, in the Night, and found themselves in the same Room with Lions, Bears and Panthers, they were sometimes, struck dead with the fright. As to others of his Guests of an inferiour Con∣dition, he placed them upon Sacks about the Ta∣ble, filled only with Wind, which being let out suddenly, they were thrown down in an instant at the foot of the Table, with their Meat in their Mouths. When the Players upon the Stage ad sometimes pretended to punish a Man for Adultery, for example thus and thus, in shew; e hath commanded the said Punishments to e literally executed. He was so kind to the Whores, that he often redeemed them at the Hands of all such as made a Traffick of them; nd paid for their freedom, and then set them t Liberty. He had often Gladiators to fight before him, as he and his Company were at Table together. He caused a Banquetting-Room to be set up for him in the Amphi∣heatre, where, as he dined, he fed his Eyes with the Combats of Gladiators, and the Chase f Wild Beasts. He was the first of the Ro∣ans that ever wore a Garment of Velvet. He never put on the same Linen twice; he id, It was for Beggars to wear Linen twice ashed. He appeared in publick after Supper ftentimes in a Dalmatick, calling himself a
Fabius and a Scipio, when he was in this effe∣minate Dress, only because those Persons had sometime worn it in their Youths, which were delicate to a Fault. He pickt up all the Wo∣men of Pleasure that he could find about the Cirque, the Play-house, the Race, the Baths, and wherever they were; and assembling them all together in some publick House, he made an Harangue to them in the Phrase of my Fel∣low Soldiers, as it was a General speaking to his Army, and then he treated upon the Questi∣ons with them concerning the several sorts of Postures and infamous Pleasures. Next he had the like Conference with all the Pimps and lascivious Catamites, old and young, that were to be gotten from all Parts. he dressed himself in the Habit of a Lady, being to meet these, with his Breasts bare; and having con∣cluded his Speech to them, he promised them for their Encouragement, as if they were so many old Soldiers that had well served in his Cause, a Donative of three pieces of Gold each, desiring them to pray to the Gods, to make him happy in the good encrease of their Com∣pany. He commanded his Servants upon a piece of Work which is sufficiently ridiculous, and yet he did it with promises to them of a Re∣ward for their care and pains in it, which was this; that they should bring him a thousand pound weight of Spiders. He had gotten to∣gether, at length, by this means, no less than ten times that weight; from whence he said, it was easie to make a Judgment of the Great∣ness
of the City of Rome. He sent the Ser∣vants of his Kitchin to some with Vessels, sup∣posed to be full of Provision that he had pre∣sented them with; but when they were open∣ed, they were found full of Frogs, Scorpions, Serpents and Flies. Dining, or supping he had continually Chariot-Races run before the Rooms and Galleries, where he was; in which he obliged old Men, and some of the most honourable too, to mount the Box, for the greater diversion. He ordered ten thousand Mice, one thousand Weasels, and another thou∣sand of Rats to be gathered together, and shewn to him at once. He often tantalized his poor Retainers, with Mock-Dinners, done all in Glass, or Wax, or Ivory, or Earthen Ware; upon their Tables and their Napkins, they had Services curiously represented in Paintings, all which did not hinder them, but they might starve for Hunger, and yet none dared to complain of the excellency of the Feast, but washed, and went away, as if they had dined never so well. He commanded that out of the publick Stores of Corn, which Trajan and Severus had amassed for the Ser∣vice of the People of Rome, for seven Years, at a certain Rate of so much a Year, there should the allowances of two Years, be given to the Whores, Pimps, and Catamites about the Town; the first Year, to go to as many of them as lived within; the second, to as many of them as lived without the Walls of the City.
He had sometimes four great Dogs to draw his Chariot, as well after he was Emperor as before, when he was at his private Seat in the Country. He appeared at other times in pub∣lick, drawn by four great Stags; at other times by Lions; and then he caused himself to be called the Mother of the Gods: Sometimes Tygers, and then he named himself Bacchus, whose Chariot is drawn by Tygers; and at the same time he habited himself as those Dei∣ties are represented, whom he imitated. He had at Rome of the little Dragons of Egypt, as also Sea-horses, a Crocodile, a Rhinocerot, and of all the strange Beasts of Egypt, that were ca∣pable to be transported. Ostriches were often a part of his Bill of Fare. He once entertain∣ed the principal Persons of the City, upon Seats all made of Saffron, which was wonder∣ful; and to complement them, he said, It was but Grass in comparison to what they deser∣ved. He passed the Actions of the Day in the Night, and those of the Night in the Day; esteeming this as necessary a part of Luxury, as any thing. In the Evening he rose, and received the Complements of the Court for that Day; when it was Morning, he went to Bed again. He daily presented his Favourites with something or other of importance. He suffered no one scarce to go from him, but he made him a Present, as if it was of a thing only that he had found, and that he did not value it so much, as to keep it himself. His Coaches and his Chariots were gilt, andHis ex∣treme Pr∣digality. all covered with Jewels; he scorned such as
were but silver'd over, or done with Ivory or Brass. He sometimes caused his Chariot to be drawn by naked, young, and very handsome Girls; two, or three, or four, or more of a Front; and as they were all naked, so for the most part was he. He had also this Custom, to invite to his Banquets eight old Men, all with bald Heads; eight others blind of one Eye; eight others lame of the Gout; eight o∣thers that were Deaf; eight Blacks; eight o∣thers that were so fat, that their Table could scarce hold them; and then his Fancy was to make himself and the Court merry with them all round. All the silver Plate that was served at his Banquets, and all the drinking Cups, and Side-board Vessels, he gave away frankly amongst the Company, and did this often. Then as a matter of great importance, he proposed it to the Company, to invent e∣very one some new Rules about Pickles, and Sawces, and fine Eating; they did so, and he whose Invention was pleasing to his Palate, received for it a great Reward in a Gar∣ment of Silk, which at that time was a Ra∣rity, and held in great Honour. But he whose Invention had displeased him, he desired him to eat only always of that Dish, till he should find a better out. He was always placed him∣self in a Seat in the midst of Flowers, and precious Odours. He loved nothing but what he was told, was very dear; Because, he said, the greatness of the Price raiseth the Appetite. He was a perfect Monsieur-Ragou in his House, as also a Perfumer, a Vintner, and a Pimp,
and caused himself to be drawn in Pictures ac∣cordingly. At one Supper he hath had the Heads of six hundred Ostriches, for the sake only of the Brains. Sometimes his Banquet was in this manner. He had two and twenty Services of all sorts of Viands, whose Names at each Service, which was made in the order of the Letters of the Alphabet, began all with one and the same Letter. Then betwixt every Service they washed, and after that, every Man betook himself to his Mistress; he and his Friends, and they were to swear, that it was not without an accomplish'd Pleasure. Ano∣ther time, his Banquet was in this manner; he ordered each Service to be made ready at the House of a several Friend, and as one li∣ved by the Capitol, another upon Mount Pa∣latine, another at a third place, another upon Mount Caelius, and another on the other side of the Tyber; the Company all went to every one's House to eat each Service in order; and then washing at each Service and enjoying their Mistresses, the whole day was scarce time enough for them to finish one Feast. Some say, that he built Baths in several Places, and only washed once in them, and then imme∣diately destroyed them, for fear of accustom∣ing himself to any; and that he did the same with several Houses and Apartments that he built. But I am apt to think, that those things and many others, which exceed all belief are rather imposed upon him by Persons who have been willing entirely to blacken his me∣mory, only to make him so much the better foil for his Successour.
It is said, that he redeemed one Courtesan, who was very handsome, at the Price of a Hundred Thousand Sesterces, and afterwards honoured her, as much, as if she was a Virgin untouched. One asking him, whilst he was a private Man, being then so Extravagant, if he did not fear the becoming Poor; he an∣swered, What can I do better for my self, than to be my own Heir, and the Heir of my Wife? However, he had Estates demised to him by a great many, in consideration of his Father. He said that he desired to have no Children, for fear, that it should make him a good Hus∣band. Instead of Coals, he burnt Frankin∣cense, Cinnamon, Cassia, and other Indian Sweet-Woods for his Fires, in his Dining Rooms. He never when a private Man, tra∣velled with less than a Train of sixty Car∣nages; which made his Grandmother many times to say of him, that he would spend all. But when Emperor, he never went but with a Train of six hundred; saying that the King of Persia, when he travels, employs Ten Thou∣sand Camels; and Nero had been attended in∣to the Country with Fifteen Hundred Chari∣ots: The occasion of which great Train of Heliogabalus, was the multitude of his Pimps, Bawds, Whores, Bardasses, and his filthy Crew of Men and Women, that he had always with him. Bathing he was always accom∣panied with Women; whom he most offici∣ously rubb'd and smooth'd, and took away their superfluous Hair, with a depilatory Unguent, made for that purpose; and which,
after them, he used to himself, and took off his Beard with it: and after this, he with a Rasour, with his own Hand shaved, what can∣not modestly be spoken of; the Men also that he loved, and to whom he subjected his Body in the nature of a Mistress; for the filthy plea∣sures that he found in them. He strewed one whole Gallery belonging to the Baths, all over with the Dust of Gold and Silver; regretting that it could not be done with Amber too: and this he did often, whithersoever he stirred out on Foot, if it was but to his Horse, or to his Coach; as the Custom is, to do it with the finest Sand to the Emperors at this day. He never wore the same Pair of Shooes twice. It is denyed that he ever put on the same Rings twice. His best Robes he often∣times tore and slashed in pieces. He com∣manded Ships to be sunk in the Port, that were come in from abroad, laden with Mer∣chandises; saying that this was a mark of a great Spirit. His Closestools were of Gold; and his Chamber Pots were of Alabaster and Myrth. Had I, he said, Ever an Heir, I would appoint him such a Governour, as should oblige him to do all the things that I have done, or shall do. He had also this Custom with him; that one day, he would have nothing at his Table but Pheasants, and all his Services should be of the flesh of Pheasants drest in several ways. Another day nothing but Pullets. A∣nother day all of one sort of Fish. Another, of another. Another day all Pork. Another day all O riches. Another day all Herbs;
and so of Fruits, and milk Meats, and sweet Meats. He often said to his Company, that he had provided them Mistresses of extraordinary Beauty to lie with; as they would find when they went to their Beds. But he sent them to Bed in the dark, because they should not see their Faces, till the next Morning; and then, who were they, but old Negroe Women? He put the same Trick upon them, with Negroe Boys. He laughed so loud in Publick, that sometimes in the Play-house, no body was heard but only he. He Sung, he Danced to the sound of the Flute, he sounded the Trum∣pet, he played upon the Shepheards Pipe, and touch'd very well the Organ. He hath gone about in one day to all the Whores of the Cirque, the Play-house, the Amphitheatre, and all parts of the City disguised: and giving them, every one, some pieces of Gold in their Hand; without effecting any with them: says he, Antoninus gives you this, but tell no body. He invented certain new ways for his Lusts, in which he out-did the monstrous Postures of all former times, and all the Conjunctions of Tiberius, Caligula and Nero. His Fortune wasHis death foretold. foretold him by the Priests of Syria, that as he would be a great Profaner of the means that serve to Generation; so he should one day come to dye by his own Hands. He believed it, and provided himself therefore for it. For he had provided himself silken Cords, if ne∣cessity was, to Hang himself. He had provi∣ded himself Swords of Gold, if necessity was, to Stab himself. He had provided himself
Poysons, which he carried about him in Eme∣ralds, Jacynths, and other Pretious Stones, if any thing ill happened, that he could no o∣therwise avoid, to Poyson himself. He had built a very high Tower, with steps to it of Gold, enriched with pretious Stories, from whence to throw himself down headlong: be∣cause he would have his death, he said, to be, as his life was, sumptuous; there should be a lively Image of Luxury in it; and it should be said, that no body had dyed so, as he. But all this signified nothing. For he was killed by a Rabble ofHe is kil∣led by the Rabble. For he was killed by a Rabble of Soldiers; and dragged most nastily through the Streets; and drawn through the Kennel, and at last thrown into the River of Tyber; with whom ended the Princes of the name of Antoninus. A name, to which if his Birth, as it was Spurious, was any Title; yet his Life was the last Disgrace to it, in the sight of all the World. Your most Sacred Majesty, O Constantine, will perhaps think it strange, with others; that this Pest, which I have given this account of, was suffered to Reign so long, as almost three whole years; and that none appeared in the mean time to rescue out of his Hands the Honour of the Roman Empire: because in the Reigns of Nero, Caligula, Vitellius, and the rest of the Princes of this stamp, there never wanted a Man to murder a Tyrant. But above all things, Pardon me if I have been offensive to your modesty in any of the Passages of so dissolute a Life: I have willingly suppressed a great many other of his Lewdnesses, because
I could not name them for shame: and as for those, that I have named, as they are what I have sound amongst divers Writers, so I have wrapped them up in as clean a Napkin as I could; remembring very well, what your Ma∣jesty is used to say; That to be an Emperor is a stroak of mere Fortune; which raises sometimes very Indifferent, and sometimes the Worst of Men to be so: and your Majesty does very graciously to add to that, That it lies upon the Persons themselves, whom Fortune hath reduced under that necessity of an Empire, to make them∣selves worthy of the Place, where they are. Thus much concerning therefore Varius An∣toninus Heliogabalus. It is what I have col∣lected indifferently out of the Greek and La∣tin Historians. Your Majesties Commands to me, to present you with this Life in its place, after the others which are antecedent to it, and which your Majesty hath accepted, was an Authority abundant to me to super∣sede all those thoughts that had otherwise made me unwilling, and possessed me with a Reluctancy to meddle in a thing of this Nature. I shall now proceed to the Lives of those that follow. The first of which is, that most excellent Prince, Alexander Severus; who was one of thirteen years Reign. Then there will be Aurelian, who was another excel∣lent Prince; and Claudius, of whom, being the Author of your Majesty's Race, I should be afraid to write the real Truth to you, lest those who have not all the respect that they ought, for the praises which are due to great
Souls, should pretend that I Flatter, if I did not know, that I should be fully justified by others in all that I have to say. To these is to be added Dioclesian, the Father of an Age of Gold; and Maximian, the Father of an Iron Age, as they commonly call them; with all the rest, to the Person of your Majesty; whose Reign, I would say, Sir, yours, will be a Subject to employ the Eloquentest Pens, and happy are they to whom Nature is so kind, to have enabled them with gifts for so grand a Work. Nor yet are we to omit Licinius, or Marcus Aurelius Severus, or Maxentius; whose Rights are all devolved upon your Majesty; and from whose Virtues we ought not to dero∣gate: For though it is the method of the Ge∣nerality of Writers to take away from the un∣successful and the beaten Side, yet I shall think this an unfit thing to be done, when I consi∣der, that when I shall have faithfully said all the good of them, that I can find in our Me∣moirs to be never so true, yet it will all but make so much the greater Accession to your Glory.
THE A. Christi CCXXIII. Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Aurelius Alexander Severus. Addressed to the EMPEROR Constantine the Great. By AELIUS LAMPRIDIUS. AFter that Pest of an Emperor, Varius Heliogabalus was killed, who had re∣ally nothing of a true Antoninus in him; and therefore as the Senate, by their Authority, degraded him from that name, and erased it out of the Records, so neither am I
very willing to give it him. Aurelius Alexander Severus his Cousin-German, who was Born atHis Ex∣traction. the City of Arca Caesarea in Phanicia in Syria, being the Son of Varius Marcellus by Mammaea, the Sister of Semiamira, the Mother of Helioga∣balus, received the Empire to the general Re∣lief and Comfort of Mankind. He had some years before been Created Caesar by the Senate, at the time of the death of Opilius Macrinus; and now the Senate both made him Emperor, andHonours done to him. gave him the Title of the Father of the Coun∣try, and invested him with the Tribunitian and Proconsular Powers; and with the right of a fifth Reference, all in one and the same day. And for fear that such an accumulation of Honours should seem to be Precipitate, I will here in the first place mention the Reason, as well why he suffered it on his part, as why the Senate had thought fit to do it on theirs; because certainly otherwise, it was neither for the Gravity of the Senate to confer all those things at once; nor for the Reputation of a good Prince so to accept them. The Army had several times been guilty of a Practice of making whom they pleased Emperors in a hurry, and changing them as easily, when they had done; saying, in the defence of themselves, that they did not know that the Senate had on their part nominated any Person at all to the Empire. For thus they had set up Pescennius Ni∣ger, Clodius Albinus, and Avidius Cassius; as here∣tofore they did Julius Vindex, and Lucius Anto∣nius. Severus was himself set up by them, in one place, about the same time that Niger was in
another, and Albinus in another; and yet then the Senate had actually appointed Didius Juli∣anus to succeed after Pertinax. And this thing had occasioned Civil-Wars in the Empire; in which Countrymen against Countrymen fighting, what were they but Murderers one of another? Upon this account therefore it was that all expedition was used to invest A∣lexander Severus with all the Honours of the Crown immediately, and at once, which he should otherwise have received successively and in the course of many years. And this was yet further promoted, by the very great inclinati∣on which both the Senate and the People had towards him, after that Pest, who had not on∣ly dishonoured the name of the Antoninusses, but was a shame to all the Roman Empire. So all the marks of Power, and the Titles of Honour, belonging to the Crown, were given him with a forwardness, in which every one appeared to have an Emulation to excel. He was the first of all the Emperors that ever received so many Royalties all at one time: and indeed his Quality, as he had been al∣ready for some years a Caesar, spoke for him; but yet the honesty of his Life and Manners did it much more; and it had gained him be∣sides a great esteem, that Heliogabalus had at∣tempted to kill him, but could not, because of the Opposition to it of the Soldiers and the Se∣nate. And then that which Crowns all, is; he approved himself worthy of that Care that the Senate had taken of his Preservation, wor∣thy of the Affections of the Soldiers, and
worthy of the Sentiments all good Men had to prefer him, as they did, to the Empire. His Mother being called Mammaea, as I said, he is mentioned by a great many by the name of Alexander Mammaeus, from her. This Alexander from a Child, was so instructed inHis Edu∣cation and Masters. the knowledge of the good Arts concerning the things, as well Civil as Military, that he willingly suffered not one day to pass, in which he did not exercise himself in the one or the other. His first Masters, in his Infancy, for the Elements, were Valerius Cordus, Titus Ve∣turius, and Aurelius Philippus, a Servant of his Fathers, who hath since writ his life. His Ma∣ster in the Grammar, was Neon; in Rheto∣rick, Serapion; and in Philosophy, Stylion: that is, this was in his own Country, and for the Graecian Learning. At Rome, for the Latin, his Master in the Grammar was Scau∣rinus, the Son of the famous Doctor of that name; in Rhetorick, Julius Frontinus, Baebius Macrinus, and Julius Granianus; of the lat∣ter of which, there are Declamations now extant. But in the Latin Learning, his Pro∣ficiency was not over-great; as it sufficiently appears by his Speeches which he made to the Senate; and those others that he made to the Soldiers and to the People. Nor did he very much love the Latin Eloquence. But the learned Men in it, he had a great esteem for, and apprehended thir Pens; for he was not willing that they should give him an ill report in their Writings; therefore he thought them worthy to be By him upon all occasions; and
with every thing that he did, publickly or privately, if they had not been present at it, he acquainted them himself, and desired them to be informed carefully of the truth of all things, and accordingly to represent them to the World. He renounced the Title of Dominus, thatHis Mo∣desty and Moderati∣on. is Lord; and ordered that they should write Letters to him, as to a private Person, reser∣ving only the name of Emperor. He refused the Jewels, to his Shooes and his Cloaths, which had been worn by Heliogabalus. He went in a White Vestment, as he is commonly Drawn; and plain, not Embroidered nor Fringed with Gold; and of the Common Stuffs. He car∣ried himself so frankly with his Friends, that he often obliged them to sit down by him; and went to their Houses to their Entertain∣ments without Ceremony; and received them again continually to his own Table without a formal Invitation. He was to be waited upon, with as easie Access as a Senator: whereas be∣fore in some other Reigns, a Prince would not suffer himself. to be seen. He was Hand∣some,His Per∣sonage. as to his Person, and well made, as we see him at this day in his Pictures and Statues. He had a Cavalier Meen and Stature, his Strength answerable; and he both knew his Vigour, and took care to preserve it. Some called him the Pious Alexander, he was so ami∣able, at least as a good and useful Prince, all the Earth esteemed him. He drew a Lot at the Temple of Fortune, at the City of Palestrina, in
the time that Heliogabalus waited for his Life, out of Virgil; which was this, Aen. 6. —Siqua fata aspera rumpas, Tu Marcellus eris.— Which was as much as to signifie; That if he but escaped the present Danger, that he was in, he would be a glorious Emperor. The occasion of his Name of AlexanderOccasion of his Name. was from hence. In his Native City of Arca Caesarea in Phaenicia, there was a Temple Dedi∣cated to Alexander the Great, whither upon the Festival of that Prince, according to the Custom of the Country, his Father, and Mammaea his Mother, went to assist at the usual Solemnities. But by accident his Mother fell into Labour, and was delivered of him in this Temple; so she called him Alexander: and the day of the Birth of Alexander the Son of Mammaea, is the same with the day of the Death of Alexander the Great. The Senate offered him, the name of Antoninus. But he refused it; although he had an Affinity, as well as Heliogabalus, to the Emperor Antoninus Ca∣racallus; and an Affinity, which was so much better than his, as it was without the stain of his Bastardise: For the Emperor Septimius Se∣verus had Married a Noble Lady out of the East, whose Horoscope, as he had heard it was; That, she should be the Wife of a Prince; though he was then but in a private Conditi∣on. Which Lady's Sister's Daughters, were one of them the Mother of this Alexander, and
the other the Mother of Varius Heliogabalus. So the two Sons were truely Cousin-Germans to one another, and equal upon that Foot in their Relation to Antoninus Caracallus. But it was not only the name of Antoninus which he refused; but the Senate by a Decree presented him the Title of Alexander the Great, and he refused that also. Now it will not be amiss here to subjoyn his Speech to the Senate, in which he excuses his Acceptation of the one and the other Name. Only in the first place I will report the Se∣nate's Acclamations upon this occasion, out of the Records of the City, as I find them up∣on the Day, but one, before the Nones of March; when the Senate being assembled in the Temple of Concord, and Alexander at their repeated request dispensing at last with him∣self to repair to them, though he knew that their Business was to treat of the Honours which they designed to give him, they cried as he entred thus; The Gods save our Innocent Augustus. TheAcclama∣tions of the Se∣nate. Gods save the Emperor Alexander. The Gods have given you to us. The Gods preserve you. The Gods have delivered you out of the Hands of the Impure. The Gods Eternalize your Reign. You suffered a great deal under the Impure Ty∣rant, Impure and Obscene as he was, you always regretted to see him. The Gods have Rooted him up. The Gods preserve your Majesty. That Infa∣mous Emperor hath justly been Condemned. Under your Reign we are happy. The State is happy to
be subjected to you. The Infamous Emperor hath been dragged for an Example. That Luxurious Prince is justly punished. The Profaner of all Honour hath been justly Punished. The Immortal Gods give a long Life to your Majesty. The Judgments of the Gods appear in your Eleva∣tion. Here Alexander gave them thanks; and then they went on again. Antoninus Alexander, the Gods save you. Antoninus Aurelius, the Gods preserve you. Antoninus the Pious, the Gods preserve you. We beseech your Majesty to take the name of An∣toninus. To do that Honour to the good Emperors of that Name, to be called an Antoninus. Pu∣rifie the Name of the Antoninusses. What Heliogabalus hath Deformed, let your Majesty Purifie. Re-establish the Honour of the Name of the Antoninusses. Let the blood of the Antoni∣nusses know it self again. Antoninus Marcus hath been injured. Let your Majesty Avenge him. Avenge the injury done to Verus Anto∣ninus. Avenge the injury done to Antoninus Caracallus; whose Fortitude at least was ad∣mirable. Worse than ever was Commodus, was Heliogabalus only; who really was no Em∣peror, nor an Antoninus, nor a Citizen, nor a Senator, nor a Gentleman, nor a Roman. Health and Life attend your Majesty. The Lives of the Antoninusses attend Alexander, and let him Prosper. Let him be called an Antoninus, and let him Prosper. Let Antoninus Consecrate a∣gain
the Temples of the Antoninusses. Let An∣toninus surmount the Parthians and Persians. Let a Sacred Person receive a Sacred Name. The Gods preserve you. In you, Antoninus, we have all things: with you, Antoninus, we have all things: After these Accclamations, the Emperor took the Liberty to speak thus to them. Fathers of the Senate, THis is not the first of my Obligations to you. I am to thank you for the Honour of my Name of Caesar, which you gave me so long since, and for my Life which you also have pre∣served. I thank you, as for the Empire, so for the Style of Augustus, which you now give me; and for the Pontifical, the Tribunitian, and the Proconsular Powers; all which by altogether a new Example, you have liberally conferred up∣on me in one day. The Senate reply'd, and cry'd; As your Majesty hath accepted these things, so accept the Name of Antoninus. Let not the Se∣nate, let not the Princes the Antoninusses be un∣worthy to receive this favour of your Majesty. The Gods save the Emperor Antoninus. The Gods preserve you. Let a Coin be made in the Name of Antoninus. Let Antoninus Consecrate again the Temples of the Antoninusses. The Emperor resumed his Discourse, and said;
Fathers of the Senate, I earnestly desire you not to engage me to be called to the necessity of sa∣tisfying so great a Name as that is, when my Own, which I have from my Birth, and which is but a Foreign one, I find is too Burdensome to me. For so it is with these Great Names, they are Burdens; and not to answer them, it is as ill as if the Name of Cicero should be born by a Mute, or the Name of Varro, by a Blockhead, or that of the Pious Metellus by a Villain. And that the Gods may avert so ill an Omen, who is there that can be pleased to see, that a Name from whence great Actions are expected, is not sustained in its Grandeur, by him that bears it; if he is in a Sta∣tion so to do. Here the Senate interrupted him, with the like Acclamations as before; and then he went on. You know, Gentlemen, to what a heighth of Glory, or rather to what a Divinity the Name of Antoninus hath been carried in the Persons of four Princes; whose Piety, whose Learning, whose Innocence, and whose Fortitude, if we consider them severally; What could be more Religious than Antoninus Pius? What more knowing than Marcus Antoninus? What more sincere than Ve∣rus Antoninus? And what more Brave and Valorous than Antoninus Caracallus? I am not willing to mention Commodus Antoninus up∣on this occasion to you; except it is to say that he was so much the worse, because with that ill life of his, he yet continued in the use of the
Name of Antoninus. Antoninus Diadumenus, had not time, nor Age to shew himself: an Art of his Father, had put that Name upon him. Here the Senate broke out into the like Acclamations as before: and then he said, But especially you may easily remember, Gen∣tlemen, How things lately went, when the Filthi∣est not only of all Men, but Brutes, took it upon him to bear the Name of Antoninus; who at the same time in Impurity and Luxury outdid Nero, Vitellius, Commodus, and all their wicked Con∣federates. You remember, what Sighs passed at that time, in all Companies of the People and the Gentry: and how they all cryed with one Voice, that this Wretch is not fit to be at all called an Antoninus. This Pest violates that Holy Name. Here the Senate replyed in these Acclama∣tions. The Gods Protect us from all the like evils a∣gain. We fear them not under your Reign. We are secure under the Government of your Majesty. Your Majesty is above all Vice. Your Majesty hath surmounted, hath vanquished the Temptation of all such Crimes and Disgraces. You are an Honour to the Name of Antoninus. We are certain of this; we are well persuaded of it; we presume upon it, without the fear of ever repenting our∣selves: we have approved you from your Youth, and this day, we are confirmed in our Senti∣ments.
The Emperor replied again and said, It is not, Fathers of the Senate, that I appre∣hendRefuses the Name Antoni∣nus. my falling at any time into such Vices, that I desire to decline a Name, which is to all so Ve∣nerable; nor yet can I distrust the Merits of my past Life so, as to be ashamed to take it upon me. But it is in Truth, because in the first place, I do not delight to assume what is the Name of a strange Family; and next, because I see very well, that it is to impose too great a burden upon me. Here the Senate repeated their Acclamati∣ons as before. He went on, For with as much reason as I should take the Name of Antoninus, I might take that of Tra∣jan too: I might as well take that of Titus: I might as well take that of Vespasian. The Senate answered him to this. Your Majesty is an Augustus, and accepts that Name; so be you also an Antoninus. The Emperor said, I see very well, now, Fathers of the Senate, what it is that moves you to press this Name upon us. You think, that we may as well be called Antonini, although it is the Name of another's Family, as all we who succeed to the Empire are entitled in our Stiles Augusti: which we are, be∣cause we have an hereditary Right to be so, as
being as it were by Adoption, the Sons of the first Augustus, who was the Founder of the Empire. The Antoninusses themselves were called Augusti. Now Antoninus Pius adopted Marcus and Ve∣rus, to be his Sons and Successors. This Adoption made it a Right to them, to take his Name, which became also hereditary to Commodus, by reason that he was the Son of Marcus; but with∣out this Right, it was a Trick of his Father, which put the Name upon Diadumenus. It was affected in the Person of Caracallus, and it was profaned to the last degree by Heliogabalus. Here the Senate cried, The Gods save the Emperor Alexander, our Augustus. We congratulate your Modesty, your Prudence, your Innocence, your Integrity. This shews us what will be the excellency of your Reign. We are ravish'd at it. Your Majesty will direct the Senate hereafter to make a Choice of the best Princes. Your Majesty will justifie the Judgments of the Senate. The Gods save Alexander, our Augustus. Let Alexander our Augustus, con∣secrate the Temples, of the Antoninusses. Our Caesar, our Augustus, our Emperor, the Gods save you. Conquer, Prosper, and Reign many Years. The Emperor resumed himself again, and said, I understand then, I have obtained from you, Fathers of the Senate, what I desired. I take this very obligingly, and I give you, and owe
you infinite Thanks. It shall be my endeavour, that my own Name, which I bring with me, the first of any upon the Throne of Rome, may be∣come such as not to be unworthy to be coveted by others after me, and to be recommended by the good Opinions of this most Pious Senate. Here the Senate cried, Alexander the Great, the Gods save you. Tho' your Majesty refused the Name of Antoninus, receive the Title of the Great. The Gods save Alexander the Great. They repeated this often. The Emperor said, You have offered to me, Gentlemen, in this, aand the Appella∣tion of Great. thing of a greater difficulty to do, than it was to assume the Name of Antoninus; to which if I had consented, it might have been attributed to either my Affinity to the Princes of that Name, or to a mutual Love of the same Name, upon the same Throne. But why me, to take your Title of Great? What have I yet done, that is so? If Alexander and Pompey were so called, yet it was after the great Exploits of the one, and the great Triumphs of the other. Therefore speak no more of this, my honoured Fathers, and rather than suggest to me the Title of the Great, be∣lieve me to be one of yourselves, and you cer∣tainly are a magnificent Assembly. After this, they repeated the Acclamation, The Gods save Aurelius Alexander our Augustus, and so ended this matter.
There were several other things done in the Senate, that day. But when the House had risen, the Emperor returned as it were in Triumph home, with much more Honour up∣on him by refusing, than if he had accepted of those supposed Names. His Firmness to himself in it, and the entire Gravity of his be∣haviour gave him a Reputation, which every body was sensible of, to observe, that the whole Senate together was not able to over-persuade one young Man. He discovered the same Vi∣gour of mind in his Affairs with the Soldiers, and a wonderful and singular Constancy in correcting their Insolencies; so that although he could not be persuaded by all the solicita∣tions of the Senate, to receive either the Name of Antoninus, or of Alexander the Great; yetWhy call'd Severus. the Soldiers fixed upon him that of Alexander Severus; and this not only conciliated him a great Respect in his own time, but it will much redound to his Glory to all Posterity; consi∣dering that it is derived purely from his own Bosom, and it is what his intrinsick Merit and Courage, directed them to give him. He did not stick indeed to cashier whole Legions at a time, for daring to mutiny; nor to animadvert very severely upon the Soldiers, that had com∣mitted any thing which but seemed to be un∣just, wherein he exceeded the Exactness and Boldness of all the Princes his predecessors, since the formation of the Empire under Julius Caesar. There were some Omens which from his Birth had presignified his future Reign, which
were these. First, the day of his Birth was theOmens of his future Reign. same with the day of the Death of Alexander the Great; in whose Temple his Mother was delivered of him, and whose Name he there∣fore took from thence. Then the same day that he was born, a Pigeon's Egg of the co∣lour of Purple, was taken, and by a good Wo∣man presented to his Mother; from whence the Soothsayers said, That he would one day, and it would be quickly too, be an Emperor, but not that he would reign long. In the mean time, whilst his Mother was delivered of him in the Temple, a Picture of the Emperor Trajan, which was hanging over the head of her Bed at home, fell down into the Bed. His Nurse was of the Name of Olympias; and the Mother of Alexander the Great was of the same. His Fo∣ster-Father was a Country-man, of the Name of Philip, and the Father of Alexander the Great was the same. Upon the day that he was born, they say, there appeared a Star of the first magnitude in the Heavens, all the day long over the City of Arca Caesarea; and the Sun was crowned with a bright Circle about it, whilst it pointed upon his Father's House. A Laurel in his Father's Garden which was set by the side of a Peach, in one year had over-topped the Peach. The Peach being malum Persicum; this, those who pretended to Augury, said, was an Omen that he should one day Conquer the Persians. The Night be∣fore his Mother was delivered of him, she dreamt she should be brought to Bed of a little purple-coloured Dragon; and his Father had
dreamt at the same time that he was carried up to the Heavens upon the Wings of the I∣mage of Victory, which is in the House of the Senate at Rome. He consulted, when he was a Youth, with a Soothsayer about his Fortune in the way of drawing Lots. The first Lot which he drew said, That the Empire of the Heavens, the Earth, and the Sea, awaited him; by which it was easie to understand, that he should one day be Deified. The second said, That the Empire paramount, awaited him; which was plainly no other, than the Empire of Rome. Another Lot that he drew, was these Verses of Virgil, Aen. 6. Excudent alii spirantia mollius aera. Tu regere imperio populos, Romane, memento: Hae tibi erunt Artes, pacique imponere morem: Parcere subjectis, & debellare superbis. That is, That his Arts should be Government, and the giving of Laws of War and Peace; and that he should be the Minister of Mercy and Justice to the People. There were several o∣ther signs of his future Grandeur besides all these. He had a Fire and a Vivacity in his Eyes extraordinary. He looked one down with it, you could not hold your Eyes against his long. His Mind discovered a Power of Divination in it very frequently, so that he spoke of things to come, as really they did. He had a Memory so happy, that none but Acholius, hath said, that he was once prompted or assisted in any thing.
Coming very young to the Empire, he acted altogether in all things with the Advice of his Mother, as if she had reigned in Conjunction with him. And indeed shew was a good and pious Lady, but covetous, and loved to amass Money to a fault. He began his Reign with a general purgation of all the Magistrates and Officers of the promotion of the impure Helio∣gabalus; being Persons whom that Prince had preferred to the greatest Dignities out of the very Lees of Mankind. He clear'd the State of them. He purged the Senate and the Order of theReforms the Go∣vernment. Gentry of them. He purged the Tribes of the City. He turned out all obscene and in∣famous Persons from all Places in the Court, in which last, he made such a Reform, that retain'd not a Mouth, but what was necessary. Because an Emperor, he said, was an ill Ste∣ward of the People; who out of their Bowels feeds a Company of unnecessary Mouths, that are useless to the State. He looked carefully after the Magazines of Provisions, and the admi∣nistration thereof to the Soldiers; out of whose allowances, if the Tribunes had made any unlawful Gain to themselves, he punish∣ed it with Death. As for Causes and Mat∣ters of Law, he ordered them first to be well considered in all their Circumstances by his Ministers, and his Council Learned in the Law, whereof Ulpian was the Chief; and when they had done, he directed them to make a Report of their Judgments to him. He moderated an infinite number of Laws concerning the Rights of the People, and those
of the Exchequer. In which cases he always communicated them with twenty great Law∣yers, besides others who were wise and elo∣quent Men, to the number of no less than fifty generally; so that there were as many Votes to a Constitution of his, as to an Act of the Senate. These Persons spoke admi∣rably well in his Councils; every one's suf∣frage was asked, which they writ down one after another; time being allowed them first to examine things very well, and to weigh what they had to say, because no one should complain that he had been obliged to give his Judgment upon such Matters of Importance, without a due premeditation. Then he had this Custom, that if it was a thing of Right to be trted upon, he called only the Learn∣ed and the Eloquent Doctors to speak to it. But if it was a Military Affair, he sent for the old Officers and Soldiers, Men skilled in War and Encampments, and the Situation of pla∣ces; and together with those he particularly advised with such as understood that History; of whom he enquired, what had at any time been done in the like rencounters, by the an∣tient Emperors, or other great Captains, whe∣ther at home or abroad. If at any time he happened to see a Man who lay under the Character of having robbed the Province un∣der his Government, he was ready with his Fingers as it were (says Encolpius, who was one that was very familiar with him) to pull out his Eyes, he had such a hatred to that baseness. To which Septimius adds, that altho'
they had not been as yet convicted, yet he had such an aversion to them, for the Scandal only, that if he saw them by any sudden Ac∣cident, the Commotion he was in, would set him vomiting, and all his Face on a Fire, and he would not be able to speak for some time. And certainly, as one called Septimius Arabi∣nus, who had been tried for this, but acquit∣ted in the Reign of Heliogabalus, came one day in Company with some of the Senators to salute him, he no sooner saw him, but he cried; O ye supreme Powers! O Jupiter! O ye immortal Gods! Is Arabinus alive, and a Sena∣tor? It may be, he hopes for the same favour from me, that he had from Heliogabalus. But I am sorry he takes me to be such a Fool. The Complement in saluting hi was ery plain, and by his own Name, Hail Alexander. If any one had pretended to do, or say any thing that was sweeter than the Custom was to be, he was sent away as a Flatterer, if the place permitted it; or he was laught at sufficiently in case that his Condition did not make him subject to a greater Affront. He ordered to all the Senators, as they had sa∣luted him, Chairs to sit down. But he de∣clared to admit none to pay their Reverences to him in this kind, but Persons of Honesty and good Repute; forbidding all such as knew themselves to be otherwise, by the common Crier, to come near him; for if he once dis∣covered them, it should cost them their Lives. He refused to be adored as Heliogabalus was, after the manner of the Kings of Persia. The
most corrupt Magistrates, he said, always com∣plain the most of Poverty, thinking by that means to conceal the Crimes of their Bri∣beries and ill Lives. This he said often, and it was his real Sentiment. To which he added a known Observation upon this Subject, That he who takes away a great deal, and gives but a little to Vouchers to speak for him, will how∣ever always be safe. He chose himself one Captain of the Guards,His Defe∣rence to the Se∣nate. and appointed a Governour of the City of Rome entirely by the Advice of the Senate. He made a second Captain of the Guards, of one who had retired out of the way, purposely to avoid it; saying, The unwillingness of a Man to accept of Commands in the State, was the best Recommendation to them. He never created a Senator without the Concurrence to it of all the Members of that House that were present; whose Votes were asked round, after Testi∣monies given of the Life and Manners of the Party to be chosen, by grave Persons; who if they falsified, were to be degraded, and cast into the lowest Class of all the People; and sometimes condemned, as in Cases of Perjury, to lose their Estates, and be banished for ever without Mercy. He created no Men Sena∣tors, but upon great Recommendations; say∣ing, That a Man ought to be very considerable, th is worthy to be so advanced; and he never neither advanced the Sons of infranchised Servants, to be Gentlemen; because he said, The Order of the Gentry was the Seminary of the Senate.
He was a Prince of that great Temper, thatHis excel∣lent Tem∣per. he never suffered his Servants to part with him when once they were placed. He was so cour∣teous and so gracious to every body, that he visi∣ted when sick, his Friends, of whatever Condi∣tion they were. He desired every one to speak their Sentiments freely to him, and he hear∣kened to what they said patiently; and or∣dered things according to their Advices, as much as in Justice it was possible. And if any thing by them had not been done so well as it ought, he convinced them of it, but it was without haughtiness and without bitterness. He obliged them all to sit down upon Chairs by him, and informed himself always about the absent. In fine, his Mother Mammaea, and Memmia his Wife, who was the Daugh∣ter of Sulpitius, of the Consular Order, and the Grand-Daughter of Catulus, objected to him his too great Civility, and told him, It weakned his Sovereign Power, and rendred it de∣spicable; to which he answered, That on the contrary it was the way to live long, and with safety. He passed no day without doing some∣thing that was sweet, obliging and pious; but yet with that measure, as not to exhaust the publick Coffers. Rarely any Estates were con∣fiscated into the Exchequer in his Time. He remitted the Tribute to several Cities, towards their publick Buildings. He lent Money out of the Exchequer at four in the hundred. And to a great many poor, he lent them▪ Money without use, to purchase themselves Grounds, under the condition of paying the
Debt only in the Product. He added to his Captains of the Guards the Senatorial Dig∣nity,His Care of his Sol∣diery. which had seldom or never at all been done before in other times; because it was inconsistent then, to be a Captain of the Guards, and a Senator, as Marius Maximus hath often observed. But Alexander Severus was willing that his Captains of the Guards should be Senators for this reason, because no body should have the Power to judge a Sena∣tor, but who was himself a Senator. He had the Muster-Rolls of his Armies in all Parts, always in his Cabinet by him; and when he was alone, he was reviewing their Accounts, Numbers, Actions, Officers, Stations, and Ap∣pointments; so that where-ever they were, he had a perfect knowledge of them, and up∣on occasion, he mentioned a great many of their Names. He kept a Register of all such as merited to be considered for their Services. He refreshed his Memory of things, by look∣ing into his own Memoirs, in which he set down the dates, and who, and what every one was, and upon whose recommendation promoted. He assisted the Convoys of the annual Provision of Corn for the People of Rome in that manner; that whereas Helioga∣balus had dissipated the Stores which were a∣massed in the Granaries, he re-established them again at his proper Charge and Expence. He encouraged the Merchants to come to Rome to Traffick, by allowing to them great Immunities. The quantity of the Oyl, which the Emperor Severus had gained to the City,
but which Heliogabalus had diminished, by put∣ting the Stores into the hands of Men, cor∣rupted with all sorts of Vice, he intirely re∣established. He set up a great many Me∣chanick Works at Rome. He tolerated the Jews, and the Christians. He deferred so much to the Chief Priests, and to the Quindecimviri, and the Augurs, in Sacred Things, that after some Causes of that kind had been heard and determined by himself, he hath suffered those Persons to re-examin them, and to decide them otherwise. Such of the Presidents of the Provinces, as he found that he should truly esteem, being Men of Integrity and Honour, and whose Praises, were not directed by a Spi∣rit of Faction, he always took in the Coach with him abroad, and made them Rich Pre∣sents, saying, That as much as others who are corrupt in their Governments ought to be turned out and beggered; these deserve to be purchased and inriched. The People of Rome petitioning him to lower the Prices of Provisions, when they were one time at an excessive heighth; he asked what sort of Provisions particularly they were, that they thought too dear. They answered, Beef and Pork. Now he did not think fit to fix a cheaper Price upon them immediately, according to the Letter of their desire; but instead of that, he ordered, that no body should kill a Sow, Pig, Cow or Hei∣fer, under such an Age prefixt: And by this means, that which before was eight Pence a Pound, was at length brought down to two Pence.
He hearkened to the Complaints of the Sol∣diers against their Tribunes, in that manner, that if he found the Tribunes in a Crime, he punished them according to the Quality of it, without Favour. He made enquiry about all sorts of Persons by his secret service Men, whom he continually employed, to others un∣known. He kept his Slaves always in the Cloaths of Slaves, his infranchised Men in the Habits of Free men. He suffer'd no EunuchsHe slights the Eu∣nuchs. to be in any Places about himself, but left them to serve his Wife in the quality of her Slaves. He reduced them to a certain Number, and suffered them to have to do with nothing in the Court, but the Baths of the Ladies; where∣as Heliogabalus, who was the Slave of these Slaves, had preferred many of them to great Offices. He took from them even their an∣tient Privileges; saying, They were a third Spe∣cies of humane kind that ought not to be seen or imployed amongst Men, and scarcely neither a∣mongst Women of Honour. One of them par∣ticularly who had pretended to have an Inte∣rest in him, and had received of a Gentle∣man a hundred pieces of Gold to assist him in something, he crucified for an Example up∣on the High-way. He changed several Praetorian Provinces in∣to the nature of Praesidial Provinces, and di∣sposed of the Proconsular Provinces according to the will of the Senate. He forbad the use of mixt Baths at Rome of both Sexes together, as they had been forbidden formerly under the Reigns of other pious Princes, till only Helio∣gabalus
had revived them. He suffered not the Tax upon the Pimps, Whores, and Bur∣dashes to be returned into his own Coffers, but he assigned it towards the Reparation of the Theatre, the Cirque, and the Amphithe∣atre. He had sometime had the Thoughts of making a Law against the Burdashes, as the Emperor Philip afterwards did. But he was a∣fraid that it would only occasion more lewd∣nesses to be coveted in private, because Man∣kind run with a greater gust upon some things when they are denied them; and the prohi∣bition encreases the desire to obtain. He im∣posed a Tax upon the Drapers, Glass-makers, Tanners, Locksmiths, Silversmiths, Goldsmiths, and several other Crafts, out of which he ordered the Baths to be fitted and maintained for the publick use of the People. He furnished the same Baths with Wood and Oyl, for the Lamps in the Night, whereas before they were not used to be opened till Nine in the Mor∣ning, and at Sun-set were shut up again. It is not altogether true, what some Persons have writ, that his Reign was without Blood. For as the Soldiers had given him the Name of Severus; he made it appear in the Corre∣ctions that he exacted, that he had not that Name for nothing. He repaired the Works ofHis pub∣lic Works. the antient Emperors, and added many new ones to them of his own. Amongst which are the Baths of his Name, hard by those of Nero, which are supplied by an Aqueduct that carries also his Name at this day. He added thereunto a Plantation of a Grove, in the
place of a private House adjoyning, which he bought, and afterwards expresly pulled it down for this purpose. He finished the Galleries to the Baths of Antoninus Caracallus, and adorned that whole Work. He first brought up the Alexandrian Work of Building and Paving with two sorts of Marble together, the Porphyry and the Lacedaemonian; with which he adorned the Court. He set up several Colossusses in the City, fashioned by the hand of the most excel∣lent Artists that he could procure from all Parts. He made a great many Medals with impresses of his Portraiture, some of fine Brass, but the most of Gold. He forbad Wo∣men of an ill Repute, of what Quality soever, to come to visit his Mother or his Wife. He made many Harangues to the People, in places about the City, as heretofore the Tribunes and the antient Consuls did. He thrice gave the People a Largess, and thrice the Soldiers a Bounty; and to the Bread and the Corn which he gave to the People in their Largesses, he ad∣ded Portions of Flesh. He brought down the Use of Money to fourHe re∣forms the Interest of Money. in the hundred, at the hands of the Money∣changers, and the Usurers themselves. As for the Senators in this case, he first of all had or∣dered that no Senators should take Use, un∣less it was some Present in the way of ac∣knowledgment, for having assisted a poor Friend in his Necessity. But afterwards he allowed them to take a moiety of the Use, which was paid to the Usurers; but then nothing in the way of a Present at all. He translated the
Statues of the great Men from all parts of the City, into the Forum of Trajan. Paulus and Ulpian were in singular esteem with him, and the Captains of his Guards; the latter had been always his Counsellor, and both of them Assessors to Papinian. He had built a RoyalOther of hsi pub∣lic Works. Structure of his Name, betwixt the Field of Mars and the Bars of Agrippa, being one hun∣dred Foot in breadth, and one thousand in length, and supported all by Columns; but however, he could not perfect it, because he was prevented by his Death. He beautified extremely the Temples of the Egyptian Dei∣ties, Isis and Serapis, furnishing them with Ima∣ges, and Vessels of the Marble of Delos, and with all the things belonging to the mystical Ceremonies of that Worship. He was entire∣ly affectionate and pious towards his Mother Mammaea; insomuch, that he gave her Name to some Buildings which he added to the Pa∣lace at Rome; as also to a Royal Mansion, and to a Pond which he made at Baiae, where they do still retain it at this day. In the same place he built other magnificent Structures, and made Ponds of a prodigious greatness (by letting in the Sea, when he pleased) in honour of his o∣ther relations. The Bridges of Trajan he re∣paired almost in all places where they were; some he built New himself, but for those that he had repaired, he still continued upon them the Name of Trajan. He was sometime thinking to appoint unto every degree of Men, from Slaves to the highest Magistrates and Officers of all sorts, a particular
Habit, whereby they should be distinguish'd; which he said, would be a Bridle, especially upon all the Slaves, and would keep them also from mixing and confounding themselves with the Free-People; but Ulpian and Paulus did not approve of this, because, they said, it would be an occasion of a great deal of Mischief, should Men be easily disposed to quarrel. So then he judged it was enough, that the Order of the Gentry should be distinguished from that of the Senators or Nobility, by the quality of their Gowns; the latter having their Gowns purled with Knaps or Studs of purple of a larger size, and the others with less. He per∣mitted the Senators to wear within the City, against the Cold and the Rain, the Paenula, that is, a Hanging Coat, which otherwise is a Vestment only proper for the Road; but how∣ever, he forbad the Dames to use the like sort of Wear, that is, Mantles within the City; but upon the Road, they might do, as they pleased. He had a greater Command of the EloquenceHis At∣tainments in Arts. of the Greek Tongue, than of the Latin; and he made no bad Verse. He loved Musick, and was skill'd in the knowledge of Astrology, which was taught and publickly professed at Rome by his Command. He was also very well versed in the Science of the Soothsayers, both as to the Entrails of the Sacrifices, and as to the Flights and Notes of Birds; insomuch, that he out∣did in these, the Biscayners of Spain, and the Augurs of Pannonia. He was a Geometrician; he painted admirably, he sung very well; but yet never but in the hearing of his own Do∣mesticks.
He writ the Lives of the good Prin∣ces his predecessors in Verse; he played well upon the Harp, Flute, and Organ; he soun∣ded well upon the Trumpet, only he did not make this to appear after he was Emperor. He was the best at the Exercises of the Body of any of his time; those of Arms he per∣formed perfectly well; and how great a Cap∣tain he was, his Wars leave us no room to doubt, in which he acquitted himself so hap∣pily, and reaped so much Glory. He was only Thrice pleased to accept the Consulate, and then he always substituted others to his place with the first opportunity. He was a most se∣vere Judge against Thieves and Robbers; with, all the rigour imaginable, he condemned them, and said, That they were ordinarily the occasion of all the Crimes that were daily committed, and that they were the only Plagues and Enemies of the State. A certain Clerk once having given in a false breviate to the Council, he ordered him to be cut into the Sinews of his Fingers, so, as never to be able to write again, and then to be banished for ever. He set up Co∣lossusses, and Statues, some on foot, and some on Horseback, to the honour of the deified Emperors in the Forum of Nerva, with Inscri∣ptions upon Columns of Brass containing all their memorable Actions, after the Example of the Marble Statues of the great Men, and the Elogiums of their Lives, which Augu∣stus set up in the Forum that bears his Name. He desired to appear to derive the Origine of his Blood from the Romans; for he was a∣shamed
to be called a Syrian; and was much affronted by that Name, by the People of An∣tioch, Egypt, and Alexandria, when once they called him, not only a Syrian, but a High-Priest, and a Ruler of the Synagogue, as if he was a Jew too. Before I give an account of his Arms and his Military Expeditions, I will here premise a few things touching his particular Life, and his dome∣stick Affairs. He had in his private Oratory with∣in the Court; that is, there were indeed two Oratories there which he used, but this was theHis dome∣stick De∣portment. chief, and the holiest, the Images of the seve∣ral deified Emperors of the best Note, and the greatest Virtue, together with which he had the Images of other pious Souls, whom he re∣spected as Gods; and amongst the rest, Apol∣lonius Thyanaeus; and as a Writer of those times also says, CHRIST, Abraham, Orpheus, and such others, as likewise the Images of his own Ancestors. Hither therefore in the morn∣ing early, if he had the leisure, he came to perform his Devotions. But else, if he did not do this, he either took the Air in his Coach, or went a Fishing, or Hunting, or Walking, according to the quality of the place. After this, if he had time, he bestowed him∣self for a good hour, to the care of the pub∣lick Affairs, which indeed required so much the less of his attention, as both the Military and the Civil Affairs were treated amongst his Councellors, who were Men Holy and Faithful, and were never to be corrupted for Money; so that their Resolutions finally passed,
unless he had offered something himself that was New. But yet if necessity so required, he was set down to Business in a morning be∣fore it was day, and continued in it many hours, and never thought the time tedious, nor retired either more to appearance, pleased or displeased, than he came; his Countenance being always equal, and being of a Soul equal∣ly contented with every thing that passed. He was certainly one of a great Prudence, which was not to be imposed upon in any thing; for though it were attempted with never so good a Grace, he discovered it, and obliged the Author to repent of his Labour. After his application to the publick Business, whatever it was, Military or Civil, he imploy∣ed the greatest part of his leisure to Reading. He read the Greek Books, and amongst theHis addi∣ction to Learning. rest, particularly those of the Commonwealth of Plato. When he read in Latin, he delighted in nothing more, than the Offices of Cicero, and his Books upon the same Subject of a Commonwealth. Sometimes he read the O∣rators and the Poets, and amongst others par∣ticularly, Serenus Sammonicus, who was one that he had personally known, and had much loved. He was much pleased with the Verse of Horace. He read very much also the Life of Alexander the Great, whom he endeavoured to imitate; but in whom, he condemned his Drinking, and his Cruelty towards his Friends; if yet those Imputations upon him are true, because there are good Authors that do de∣fend him, as to the one and the other, to
whom this Prince gave a great Credit. After Reading, he moderately employed himself in Exercises of the Body, as Wrestling, Tennis,His bodily Exercises. Running, or Fencing. Then he was anointed, and afterwards put himself into the Bath, which was seldom or never a Bath of warm Water, but of the natural Waters of cold Baths, where he continued about an hour, Fasting, he drank about a Pint and a half of cold Spring-Water. Then when he had done with the Bath, he took a Breakfast upon Bread and Milk, and Eggs and Wine. After this, when the hour of Dinner was come, he dined. Sometimes he deferred to eat till Supper, but for the most part he dined. And he was often served with the Oglio, which was the great Dish of Hadrian, and which Marius Maximus hath mentioned in his account of the Life of that Prince. In the Afternoon, he bestowed himself con∣stantly to the reading and signing of Letters and Orders to one part or other, in which he was attended by his Secretaries, and the Ma∣sters of the Requests; whom, if they could not conveniently stand by reason of their indispo∣sition, he permitted to sit down, whilst the Clerks read over to him the things that they had writ, to which he added with his own hand what he thought convenient, and changed some Terms for others, that he thought were more elegant and more just. After these were di∣spatched, he admitted the Company of all his Friends together, and spoke to them all, but he saw none of them ever alone, but his Cap∣tain of the Guards, and particularly Ulpian,
whom he had always had near him, to give him Light in the knowledge that he professed of the things that concern Law and Justice. If he admitted any other privately to him, yet it was by the introduction of Ulpian. Virgil, he said, was the Plato of the Poets. He had the Images of him and Cicero, in his second or lesser Oratory, together with that of Achilles and others of other great Men. But for that of Alexander the Great, he had consecrated him amongst the Gods of his chief Oratory, and the best Persons, whom he more especially ho∣noured there. He never did an Injury to any of his Friends, nor to any of the Officers of State, or Servants of his Houshold. He always deferred the Judgment of particular Affairs to the Captains of the Guards. And a Captain of the Guards, he said, who hath done any thing to deserve to lose his place, ought ra∣ther to be secured and arraigned, than to be dismissed. If at any time he discharged an Of∣ficer, he ordered it to be accompanied with a Complement, That the State thanked him for his Service. At the same time he failed not to gratify him in that manner, that he might live afterwards a private Life with Credit. He fur∣nished him with Grounds, Oxen, Horses, Corn, Iron, Materials to build himself a House, and Marble to adorn it, and Labourers to assist him; Silver or Gold he seldom gave to any, unless it was to the Soldiers, saying, It would be a Crime in him, who was the publick Steward of the People, to employ that in superfluities, or upon the Pleasures of himself or others, which the
Provinces had contributed to serve the Necessities of the State. He remitted the City of Rome the DutiesHis Kind∣ness to the City of Rome. which upon certain accounts they were to pay into the Exchequer, and particularly the Duty which they were to pay to him, according to Custom, upon the occasion of his elevation to the Empire. He constituted fourteen Cura∣tors to the several Quarters of the City, out of the Persons of the Consular Order, whom, together with the Governour of the City, he ordered to take the Cognizance of the Civil Causes, in such sort, that all of them, or the greater part, should be present, when any thing was to be done. He distributed all the Vint∣ners, Victuallers, Regraters, Hosiers, and gene∣rally the Persons of all Crafts, into Companies and Corporations, to whom he appointed Go∣vernours and Officers to judge in the Dispat∣ches that might arise amongst them in the Matter of their several Crafts and Professions. He never gave to the Players those Gratuities which other Emperors have done. He made a difficulty to pay them their Salaries, and he took away from them the rich Cloaths which had been given them by Heliogabalus. His band of Archers or Pensioners, who were a Guard used for Pomp and Shew, more than for Service, he cloathed, not with rich, but yet proper and convenient Habits, without super∣fluity; nor were his Standards or other Royal Habiliments rich; saying, It was not for a Prince to seek his esteem in fine Cloaths, but to recom∣mend his Reign by Actions of Virtue and Bravery.
As for himself, he wore the coarse shagged Coats of the Emperor Septimius Severus, and Wastcoats all plain, with no other embroidery of Gold at them, and only a single Border of purple. In his publick Entertainments, he knew notModera∣tion of his public En∣tertain∣ments. what it was to be served in Vessels of Gold. His Cups were ordinary, but always very neat. All the Silver-service of his Table, never ex∣ceeded the quantity of two hundred Pound in weight. The Dwarfs of either Sex, the Je∣sters, the Singers, the Actors, the Mimicks, that had before retained to the Court, he gave away amongst the People. And for such of them as were of no use, he ordered them to be sent to places, where they were maintain∣ed at the publick Expence, because they should not be troublesome in the way of Beggars. The Eunuchs whom Heliogabalus had made his great Companions in Lewdness, and had promoted them to high Offices, he distributed amongst his Ministers, with this Order, that if for the future they did not return to good Man∣ners, it should be lawful for them to put them to death without attending the Authority of the Magistrate. Women of a Licentious Life, of whom he had heard that the number was prodi∣gious, he ordered to be sold, and the Burda∣shes banished, with whom that Pest Heliogaba∣lus had taken his infamous, and abominable Pleasures. Not a Servant in his time at a pub∣lick Banquet appeared in a Coat embroidered with Gold. To his private Table, he admitted either Ulpian, or some other Learned Men,
whose Conversation, he said, was not only a Pleasure to him, but it was Food to his Mind. At other times, when he eat alone, he had a Book with him upon the Table, where he read, and generally it was some Greek Book, though he read also in the Latin Poets. His publick Banquets were performed with the same sim∣plicity as his private Repasts; and no diffe∣rence but in the greater Number of the Ta∣bles, and the Company; which sometime be∣ing excessive, it rather offended him; saying, It was like Dining in a Play-house, or in the Cirque. He took no pleasure to hear the Orators recite Panegyricks, or the Poets Verses in his own Praise; saying as Pescennius Niger had done, That it was an idle thing. But Orations or Verses upon the Praise of the great Men amongst the Antients, he heard freely, and was very well pleased, when either they had Alexander the Great for their subject, or someHis Re∣spect for Alexander the Great. of the excellent Emperors his Predecessors, or of the virtuous Personages of Rome in the an∣tient times. He often went to hear the Rhe∣toricians, and the Greek and Latin Poets in the publick Schools upon such Subjects. He loved to hear also the eloquent Pleadings of the Ad∣vocates at Law, whether before himself, or before the Governour of the City. It was very agreeable to him to preside at the publick Games; particularly those that are in the Ho∣nour of Alexander the Great. He desired to be retired ordinarily after Dinner, and in the hour of his Levee. He never saw Persons alone, as I have said, and it was for this reason, because
he had found, that they, to whom he had sometime granted that favour, had misre∣presented their Conversation with him to the World. Particularly Vetronius Turinus, was one, who had very much abused the Familia∣rity,Vetronius Turinus his Folly and Pu∣nishment. which he had treated him with. He dishonour'd the Empire of Alexander, as of a Man, that was so stupid and so impertinent, that he governed him which way he pleased, and made him believe whatever he would; and this he pretended to make all the World believe, in order only to advance the Credit of his Interest, and so to Cheat them by the means out of their Money. But at last A∣lexander surprised him with this Artifice. He sent a Person to address himself to him pub∣lickly for some thing; but afterwards to take him aside, and to pray him to speak secretly in his favour: who promised him that he would; and afterwards assuring him, that he had done his Business to the Emperor, when really he had not spoken one word to him about it, and acting the same false part over again a second time, and all the while exacting and receiving great recompences for his Services. The Em∣peror, who was made acquainted with all that had passed, caused him to be accused and pro∣secuted; and proving to him before all the World, upon Evidence, what Sums he had re∣ceived, and what empty Promises, and false Reports he had made to his Client to Cheat him out of the same, he Condemned him to dye, and the manner of his Execution to be thus; that he should be tied to a Stake, and
there be quite smoaked to death with green Wood and Stubble; the Common Cryer in the mean time Proclaiming his Words were Smoak, and so he dies with Smoak. For this was not the only Fact of the kind that he had committed. The Emperor for fear of ap∣pearing Cruel, had made a particular scrutiny into his Life before he Condemned him; and found that he often had received Money of both sides in Causes, whereof he undertook the Protection; and had sold the Events of things, in which he had had no part, and taken Money of all, who had been admitted to the Offices of Praetors, or other considerable Charges in the State. With a great Retinue did this Emperor often go to the Publick Shews; but he was extremelyHis M∣ration in his Li∣ving and Diet. sparing of his Liberality to the Actors, and said, That those Publick Charioteers, and Huntsmen of the Cirque, and the Players of the Stage, ought to be so entertained, as we do the Servants, Hunts∣men, Coachmen, and Jesters of our private Families. In his Repasts he was neither Sumptuous, nor too Frugal: his Table was neither splendid nor mean; but very proper without any superfluity. His Carpets, sometimes trimmed with Studs of Purple or Scarlet; but never of Cloth of Gold; as Heliogabalus had used; and as some say be∣fore him, it had been used by the Emperor Hadrian. In a word, his Table was served al∣ways with great moderation. He indulged himself the most in Fruit. He eat very hear∣tily, and so did he also drink; but without ex∣cess. He washed always in cold Water, and
in the Summer he drank of the Wine of the infusion of Roses; which was the only thing that he had retained, of all the fine Wines and Methods of the invention of Heliogabalus. It is observable, that he was every day served at his Table with a Hare. Now there is an usual saying with some, that Eating of Hare will make one Fair for seven days following; as it is signified in that Epigram of Martial which he writes to a Lady, whom he calls Gellia; who, always, (he says) when she sent him a Hare, told him, how Fair it would make him for so many days. To which he replies very severely again upon her; That if it was true, what she said, certainly she had never eaten of a Hare in her life. (Lib. 5. Ep. 30.) So from this vulgar conceit, a Poet in the time of Alexan∣der Severus took occasion to say, in two or three Verses, That as he was a Syrian born, it would be a Miracle to see him so Fair and so Handsom as he was, if he did not eat Venison and Hare continually to make him so. The Emperor being told of this by some of his Friends, it is said, That he returned this answer; That so sorry a Poet was welcome to think him Handsome from any thing. But he only wish'd him to eat upon nothing but Hare, till it had done as much for him; and then he would envy no body. After the last service, he drank once to the Health of his Friends, and the honour of the memory of Alexander the Great. Women he used moderately; and as for the dishonest A∣mours of the other Sex, he was so free from them, that as I have already said, he was some∣time
thinking to intirely prohibit them by a Law. He established publick Magazines in all the Quarters of the City of Rome; whi∣ther those, who had not Conveniencies of their own to lodge their Provisions, might car∣ry them, and have them lodged there with safe∣ty. He added Publick Baths to all the Quar∣ters of the City, where before they were want∣ing; many of which retain his name at this day. He built very good Houses to give them to his Friends; especially such as had lived al∣ways without reproach. He moderated the pub∣lick Impositions, so that he brought them down to the thirtieth part of what they were under Heliogabalus. To which purpose he founded a new Coin of the value of the third part of an Aureus, that is a Crown of Gold; and could he have moderated the Impositions still more, he would have founded another new Coin of a Quarter Crown: but when he found that the publick Necessities of the State could not admit a Fall so low, he let that matter alone. The large Gold Coins of the value of two, three, four, ten, fifty, and some a hundred Aurei a piece, which Heliogabalus had founded, he ordered to be suppressed, and melted as Coins which particularly had this inconveni∣ence with them, they put the Emperor upon occasions of lavishing away more money than otherwise he would. Because when his money is in lesser pieces, he can moderate his Bounty better as he pleases.
He seldom wore Silks, and Velvets never;Not sum∣ptuous in his Ap∣parel. nor allowed them to any in their Salaries; nor gave them in Presents. He envied the Riches of none. He aided the Poor; especially Gen∣tlemen that he saw were really decayed, and yet had not brought their misfortune upon themselves by their Luxury, he always be∣friended as much as he could: giving them Grounds, Servants, Cattle, and Utensils for Tillage. He viewed all the Habits himself that he gave away to others, and often weighed his Gold and his Silver. He gave to the Sol∣diers Shooes, Boots, Breeches, Coats and Cloaks. The Alexandrian Purple which is so exquisite, is so called at this day from him; be∣cause it was his Dier that invented it. Not that Alexander used it neither at all himself; but it was a fine Wear for the Ladies, and he obliged them to pay well for it. He often used a Cloak of Scarlet; but yet in Rome, and in the Cities of Italy, he was always in a Gown. He never put on the Praetexta, nor the Toga Picta, that is, Robes of State so called, but when he was Consul; and then they were the common Robes which are preserved for the purpose in the Temple of Jupiter. Only, when he Sacrificed in the quality of the So∣veraign Pontiff, then he put on also the Prae∣texta. He loved plain Linen, without Em∣broidery, with either Purple or Gold. For the Purple, he said, did but make it rough; whereas the excellency of Linen is it smooth∣ness: and the Gold made it worse, that is stiff. His Stockins were always either Linen, or
Woollen; and his Breeches White, not Scarlet; contrary to the Custom of the Emperors be∣fore him, whose Mode had been Scarlet. The Jewels and the Pretious Stones that he had, he sold; and put the money into the Trea∣sury; saying, it was not for Men, to wear Jew∣els. He obliged the Princesses Royal to con∣tent themselves with one String of Pearl; some Pendants for the Ears, one Necklace of Pearl, one Coronet, when they assisted at the Sacri∣fices, or Sacrificed themselves; one Gown, Em∣broider'd with Gold, and one Petticoat with not above six Ounces of Gold. He did him∣self the Office of a Censor, upon the Man∣ners of the Age. The Great Men imitated him, and the Ladies of Quality followed the example of his Wife. He diminished the num∣ber of the Officers of his Houshold: in which he made such a Reform, that he retained no more Servants in any of the Offices than ne∣cessity required. And therefore because his Servants were few, and his whole Service of Silver that he had, was not above two hun∣dred pound weight, when ever he made any publick Banquet, he borrowed both Plate and Servants of his Friends. He never admitted the Diversions of the Stage-Players at his Ban∣quets. He diverted himself the most in the Aviaries, that he had built in the Court. Where he had Peacocks, Feasants, Pullets, Ducks, Partridges, and Pidgeons. Of the latter particularly, it is said, that he had to the number of twenty thousand. And because their Feeding should not be a burden upon
the Publick Stores, he had Servants that main∣tain'd them out of the Profit that arose from the Eggs, and the young that they produced. He often Bathed, both in his own Baths, and in those of the Antients, in Company with the People, especially in the Summer, returning from thence to the Palace in his bathing Habit, with only a Scarlet Cloak thrown over him, to mark his Dignity. His Run∣ning Footmen were always some of his Slaves: saying, a Freeman ought never to Run, but in the Sacred Games. His Cooks, Fishermen, Fullers, and Bagnio-men, wereHis Or∣dering of his Ser∣vants and great Of∣ficers. always also Slaves; into whose places, as they fell, he bought others. There were in all seven Physicians to the Court under his Reign: the chief of whom received a more extraordi∣ry allowance. When he appointed any Per∣sons to the Presidentships of the Provinces, he furnished them according to the Antient Custom, as Cicero calls it in his time, with Money and Necessaries, that is, a President of a Province received in Silver twenty pound weight, eight Mules, a couple of Horses, two Gowns, one wearing Suit, one bathing Suit, a hundred pieces of Gold, one Cook, one Coachman; and if he had never a Wife, he was allowed one Concubine: but then at his return he was obliged to restore again all the Mules and the Horses; and the Coachman and the Cook, retaining the rest, if he had comported himself well. But if ill, he was obliged to restore fourfold; besides the Con∣sequence of being Condemned for Embezel∣ling
the Publick Goods and Money, and for cheating the State; and in Actions also of Recovery, on the part of the particular Per∣sons, by him unjustly used. The Laws, that he made, are infinite. He permitted all the Senators to have their Chari∣ots, and their Coaches at Rome, silvered over: believing it to be for the Honour of the Ro∣man Name, that the Senators of so great a City should appear abroad in such Equipages. The Consuls, the whole year round, whether the two first appointed upon the Calends of January, whose names were entred upon the Records; or the others, the secondary ones, who were appointed every two Months after∣wards, were all Nominated and Created by him, with the Advice of the Senate. He re∣gulated their Expenses; and revived and Re∣established the days for their Elections, every two Months, in due Order. He ordered that the Quaestors, at their entrance into their Offices, should make the accustomed Presents to the People, at their own Expence; and that after their Quaestorships, they should be raised to be Praetors, and in Consequence to go to Admini∣nister the Government of the Provinces. He suffered the Officers who had the Guard of the Coffers of the Treasury, to be furnished with Mony to make their Publick Shews to the People out of the said Coffers: but this was to be done however with great management. He had it sometime in his thoughts, so to dispose those Publick Shews throughout the whole year, that the People should be entertained with them
once in every thirty days. But why he did not do it, is a thing that remains under the ob∣scurity of silence. Upon the seventh day of the Week, if he was in Town, he went al∣ways for his Devotions to the Capitol. At other times he went often to the other Tem∣ples. He was willing to have built a TempleHis Re∣gard to Christ. unto Christ; and had a design to receive him into the number of the Gods, as it was also sometime in the thoughts of Hadrian, it is said, to do; who had expresly order'd, in all Cities, Temples to be built without Images; which at this day being left unfinished and uncon∣secrated are called the Temples of Hadrian: who had however disposed them for this pur∣pose: but then he was hindred from procee∣ding any further by those who having con∣sulted the Affairs of Religion had found, that all the World would turn Christian, if this thing was once suffered, and the other Temples would be deserted. He made very pleasant Railleries; and was of an agreeable Conversation: and he was kind and gracious in his Entertainments; in which it was permitted to ask him, whatever one would. He was intent upon the amassing of Money, Prudent in preserving it; and In∣genious to find it where it was; but however without doing a prejudice to any. He would not be said to be a Syrian; but boasted himself to be Originally a Roman, by those from whom he had the Honour to Descend; and whose Genealogy he drew, in which he shews, that his Family was Descended from the Marcelli.
To the Rhetoricians, Grammarians, Physici∣ans, Soothsayers, Astrologers, Geometricians, and Architects, he appointed Salaries, and Pub∣lick Schools to Teach in, and sent them Scho∣lars, that is, Children of a free condition, but of little or no Fortunes; for whose Education he allowed them himself. He deferred a great deal also in the Provinces to the Advocates at Law, and where he hath found, that they have Pleaded Gratis, which a great many did, he encouraged them, and gratified them. He confirmed the Laws from year to year, and carefully kept them in his own Person. He went often to take the Divertisement of the Stage, and had designed to repair the Theatre of Marcellus. To several Cities, that had been defaced by Earthquakes, he allowed Money out of the Taxes towards the Rebuilding of their Publick and Private Edifices. He ne∣ver employed but very little Silver upon the Temples, and not one Leaf of Gold; having always in his Mouth that Verse of Persius, —In Sacris quid facit Aurum? That is, What should Gold do in sacred mat∣ters? I come now to speak of his Expeditions of War; which I shall do in their order: And in the first place I shall observe what his Custom was, as to these, for things, that were to be held in silence, and others that he discover'd. He never discovered the secret Design; but yet the day that he was to march up∣on, was two Months before Proclaimed in a
Publick Edict in these words; Upon such a Day, and such an hour I shall depart from this City; and by the help of the Gods I shall march the first day to such a place; and so he told his several Stations and Encampments in order; and marked the places, where he was to receive in Provisions, as far as till he arrived upon the Frontiers of the Country of the Barbarians: for from thence all things were hushed, and all marched without the Barbarians being able to know the design of the Roman Army. It is certain, that he never was deceived in any design that he proposed; because his Counsels were never sold by his Courtiers; as all things under Heliogabalus had been by the Eunuchs; who are a sort of Creatures that will be always Prying into all the Secrets of the Court, to the end to appear to be the only Persons from whom nothing is hid; that they may obtain by that means what they desire; whether it is to satisfie their Vanity, or their Avarice. In the mean time, in his Choice of Persons toHis Choice of Publick Officers. be either Governors, or Procurators, or Con∣trollers, or other great Officers in the Pro∣vince, he first proposed their names to the People; and desired them, that if they knew any Crime of which they suspected and char∣ged any of those Persons to be guilty, he should be put to justifie himself by certain Proofs; or otherwise answer for it, with his Head. For it was not a thing fit, he said, That the Chri∣stians and the Jews should do this for the recom∣mendation of their Priests, that are proposed to be Ordained; and that it should not be done as to
the Governours of Provinces, unto whom are committed the Fortunes and the Lives of so many Men. He appointed Salaries to those that are cal∣led Assessours; attending upon the Governors of the Provinces: but yet he often said, That such Persons especially ought to be promoted to the Government of the Provinces, who know how to Govern by themselves, and not by Assessours: ad∣ding, that the Men of the Sword have their Ad∣ministrations proper to them; and the Men of Let∣ters theirs; and so every one ought to act according to the knowledge that he hath. Treasure that had been hidden and was found, he gave a∣way amongst such as had found it: only if it was very much, he added some of his Cour∣tiers to them. He took their names down in Writing, and refreshed his memory there∣with upon any occasion, to whom he everHis pru∣dent Li∣berality. gave any thing: and if he knew some, that had askt him nothing, or very little, whereby to augment their Fortunes, he spoke to them and said, What is the matter, that you ask me for nothing? Do you intend to make me your Debtour? Ask me, for fear I should be reduced to be a private Man again, and then you should complain of me. What he bestowed by way of Gifts, were Estates of Malefactors Condemned, excepting the Gold, Silver, and Jewels; for all that was remitted into the Coffers of the Ex∣chequer. Then he disposed of the Offices in the Army, and the Governments of the Provin∣ces, and other Civil Offices in the Provin∣ces: where he changed his Receivers from
time to time. Not one of them accomplish'd a full year; indeed he hated them, though they might be Men of Honesty too; because, he said, They were Necessary Evils. As for the Presidents, Proconsuls, and Generals, he ne∣ver made those by Favour, or with the single design to enrich them: but he made them ei∣ther by the Judgment of the Senate, or the best of his own. He disposed his Armies in the time of an Ex∣pedition,His Care of his Sol∣diers. so that they received their Provisions in the places where they rendevouz'd; without carrying with them Subsistance for more than seventeen days; unless it was in the Country of the Enemy, and there he also assisted them with Mules and Camels; saying, That he de∣sired to look more after his Men, than himself; be∣cause the Publick Safety was in them. He vi∣sited them (when Sick) in their Tents; even those of the lowest Ranks; and caused them to be carried upon Waggons, and to be sup∣plyed with all sorts of Necessaries. But if they were too Sick to Travel, he recommended them to the care of the good Housekeepers, and the virtuous Women in the Cities and the Villages, where he passed; to whom he paid the Charges of their looking after, whether they recovered or died. Ovinius Camillus, a Senatour of an AntientStory of Camillus. Family, had once the Vanity, being conceited on that account, to think of Revolting, and setting up himself to be Emperor. Which being Discovered, and certainly Proved to A∣lexander Severus, he sent for him to the Court.
Telling him, That he gave him Thanks, that he was so willing to take upon him the Care of the Empire; how contrary soever it was to the Sen∣timents of others, that yet were good Men. So he took him with him to the Senate, and cal∣led him his Colleague. In the mean time Ca∣millus was in the greatest Confusion and Re∣morse of Conscience. He received him af∣terwards into the Court; and admitted him to his Table, and Habited him with the same Imperial Ornaments, or better than his own. Then the War against the Persians being de∣clared, he asked him if he would go to it and bear him Company. They began their march together on Foot; Severus, earnestly inviting him to bear the Fatigue with Patience. But after five Miles walking, Camillus tired; and then Severus ordered him a Horse. After two days more march, he was tired again with his Horse; and then Severus put him upon a Car∣riage; but yet neither did this make him ea∣sie: but whether it was with Fear, or that he truly desired no more of the Glory that attended those Travels; he Abdicated the Em∣pire with all his Heart, and would rather have died than continued in it. Then Severus dis∣missed him, and sent him under a Guard, whom he desired to take a care of him, Home, to his own House in the Country in safety; where he afterwards lived a long time; but was at last killed by the Soldiers, but yet with∣out the Command of the Emperor, who had altogether gained his Heart, and had treated him with so much Humanity. I know very
well, that this hath been thought amongst the Vulgar to have been the Action of the Em∣peror Trajan. But since neither Marius Maxi∣mus hath taken any notice of it, nor Fabius Marcellinus, nor Aurelius Verus, nor Statius Valens, who have all of them written the Life of that Prince: And on the contrary, since Septimius, Acholius, and Encolpius, who have written the Life of Alexander Severus, and all others that speak of him, have remarked this Action to be his; I hope that the Authority upon which I also do so, will appear to be of more Weight and Credit; than vulgar Fame, and any common Rumour of the People. He never suffered Offices, to which belong'd Power of Life and Death, to be sold: saying, He that Buyes, must necessarily Sell again in his turn. But I will have no Merchandise made of the Powers of that Nature; should I suffer them, it would not be in my power to Condemn them. For I should be ashamed to punish a Man that Sells as he Buyes, to make up his Accounts. He made Ordinances touching the College of the Chief Priests, the Commission of the Quindecimviri, or fifteen Priests for Religious Affairs, and the College of the Augurs; which merited to beHe fa∣vours the Christi∣ans. received in the Senate. The Christians having gotten into the Possession of a certain Publick Place for the Exercise of their Religion, and on the contrary the Company of the Cooks and Victuallers claiming the same, and pre∣tending that it of right belonged to them; he decided the matter betwixt them by his Re∣script in these words; It is better rather than to
leave a place to the Cooks, to give it to Men that will Honour God in it, let it be in any manner whatsoever.The Man∣ner of his Persian Expediti∣on. With these great Qualities therefore both for Peace and War, this Emperor entred upon an Expedition against Persia; in which he Com∣ported himself with that Discipline, and that consideration for the Dignity of the Empire, that it was said, they were more like so many Senators, than Soldiers that he brought with him. Where-ever the Legions marched, the Tribunes, the Centurions, the Soldiers were so quiet, so modest, and so belov'd for their Discretion; and then the Presence of their Prince was accompanied with so many excel∣lent Qualities; that the People of the Pro∣vinces considered him as a God. And cer∣tainly the Soldiers loved him, as if he was their Brother or their Son; and infinitely respected him as their Parent. They were handsomely Cloathed, and nobly Armed: their Cavalry well mounted, and compleatly Furnished and Caparisoned: so that to see the Army of A∣lexander Severus, it was enough to give one an Ieda of the Grandeur of the Roman Empire. He particularly, with all his Power, endea∣voured to appear worthy of the name that he carried, and which is more, to surpass the Macedonian of the same: and said, That there ought to be a great difference betwixt Alexander of Rome, and Alexander of Macedon. He had Companies in his Army, as that Macedonian had, that were amed with Shields of Silver, and Shields of Gold. He made a Phalanx, con∣sisting
of thirty thousand Men, whom he called by the name of his Phalangieres; by whose means he did a great many Noble Ex∣ploits in Persia. This Phalanx was composed of Six Legions, who were all equally well armed, and for their great Services judged worthy to be all at double Pay after the end of the War of Persia. The Royal Presents, which were made him, he bestowed upon the Temples; but Jewels he sold: because he thought it was an Effemi∣nate thing to keep Jewels; which are neither fit to be given amongst the Soldiers, nor to be worn by a Man of Bravery. An Embassa∣dour having presented his Wife, the Empress, by him, with two Unions of a great Weight, and an extraordinary Size, he ordered them to be sold; but there was no body to be found to come up to the Price. And for fear that they should draw from the Empress herself, an ill Example, if she used a thing that was not to be Purchased, he Dedicated them to serve for Pendants to the Ears of a Statue of Venus. His Protectour in his Minority was Ulpian; to whom his Mother Mammaea was at first averse; but afterwards she thanked him, when she saw that her Son had attained to be so great an Emperor, by following especially his Coun∣sels, in the Government of himself and the State. And yet Ulpian laboured under the ill will of the Soldiers; and but that the Em∣peror defended him, certainly they would of∣ten have murdered him in his Presence. In all his Marches, and all his Expeditions, he
dined and supped in Publick, with his Tents open for all the Soldiers to see him, which pleased them well. He eat the commonHis strict Disciplie Ammunition Bread, and made the Round in every Quarter, and suffered no one whatso∣ever to be absent from his Colours. If in Marching any one had but stepped aside to take the least thing from the Inhabitants of the Country, where-ever it was, he was ei∣ther beaten with Rods in his presence, or con∣demned in a Mulct; or if his Quality had set him above this, he reprimanded him himself publickly, to make him ashamed, and said, Would you be willing that this should have been done upon your own Estate, which you do to ano∣ther's? It was a great Expression with him at all times, Do not that to another, which you would not that another should do to you; whether he had heard it from the Jews or from the Chri∣stians, he retained it well, and it was altoge∣ther conformable to his Sentiments. There∣fore he ordered it to be proclaimed by the common Cryer, when he corrected any Per∣son. He loved it so, that he made Inscrip∣tions of it upon his own Palace, and upon the publick Works. Having been told once that a poor old Wo∣man had been outragiously injured by a Soldier, who was by Trade a Carpenter, he not only cashiered him the Army, but gave him to be the Woman's Slave, to maintain her ever after, by his Labour. And though the Soldiers complained of this, he persuaded them all to support with patience such an Example of Mi∣litary
Discipline, and at the same time he made them to fear him. His Reign was without Blood in this Sense, that he spilt not the Blood of any one of the Senators, as the Grecian Hi∣storian Herodian hath observed; but yet he shewed a great deal of sharpness, and of seve∣rity in his Reign; and especially, he was so rigorous upon the Soldiers, that he often dis∣carded entire Legions of them at a time; ne∣ver fearing the Mutineers of his Army, be∣cause he knew that they could say nothing a∣gainst his Life, nor could reproach him, that the Tribunes or the Captains under his Au∣thority, had ever retained any thing of their Pay from them. And when a Soldier is well cloathed and armed, his Belly full, and some∣thing in his Purse, then, he said, it is that he the most fears you; for it is Necessity that reduces Soldiers to all sorts of Despair. In fine, he or∣dered the Officers of the Army to be waited upon by none but Soldiers, whose Number was limited; that is, he ordered, that there should be four Soldiers to march always before a Tri∣bune, six before a Commander, and ten be∣fore a General. Now to the end to shew you his Severity,An in∣stance of his steady Severity. and how he carried himself in his Affairs with his Soldiers, it will be convenient to give you one of of his Harangues that he made to them. When he was come to the City of Antioch, and had been told one day, that some of the Soldiers had put themselves into the Baths there with the Women of Pleasure, he ordered them all to be taken, and laid in Irons. This be∣ing
known to the Legion unto which those Soldiers belonged, they were all immediately in a Mutiny. He called a Council of War, and the Prisoners being all brought before him, and all the other Soldiers standing round about him in their Arms, he spoke thus; My Fellow Soldiers, I Hope, you will be easily persuaded to disallow with me, the things that have been commit∣ted by some of your Comrades. For the Discipline of our Ancestors is what must necessarily take place here, if we would preserve the State. For when once that Discipline is lost, then adieu to the Glory of the Roman Name, and the Roman Empire. Nor is it to be suffered, that Men should take the same Liberties in my Reign, which late∣ly they did under the Debaucheries which were committed in the time of the impure Helioga∣balus. Shall the Roman Soldiers, your Comrades, and my Fellow-Companions in Arms and War, Drink, Bath, Whore, and live in all the soft and luxurious ways of the Greeks, and shall I endure this long, and those there, shall I not punish them? With this the Tumult increased, and they set up a Clamour against him. But he went on and said; Nay, keep your Clamours to terrifie your Enemy in the Field, and bestow them not in vain upon your Emperor. Certainly your Masters who first taught you Arms, have told you, that you are to cry out so against the Sarmatians, the Germans,
the Persians your Enemies, and not against him who out of the Contributions of the Provinces feeds you, and gives you Cloaths, and gives you your Pay. Forbear then that savage Noise, which is only fit for Battel, lest in a word, and in a breath, this day I break you all, and send you home to your Houses, scarcely with the Name of Romans. For how deserve ye, to be of the num∣ber of the least of the Common People of Rome, unless you acknowledge the Right of the Laws of the Roman Empire. Here they began to grow worse, and to me∣nace him with their Swords. He went on; Threaten your Enemy, and turn your Arms a∣gainst those, if you are so Valiant; me you do not affright with it: and should you kill here a single Man, the Empire, the Senate will not be wanting to me, the People of Rome will revenge me. They still murmuring not the less for this, he cried with a loud voice, I disband you, be gone, and lay down your Arms. After these words, they all laying down their Arms, and discharging themselves of their Military Accountrements, by a wonder∣ful Example, retired every one, not to the Camp, but up and down to the Inns, which was the first time that he made it appear what his Severity could do. In fine, his Guards that had attended upon his Person, took up the Standards that the others had laid
down, and carried them to the Camp, and their Arms were gathered up by the People, and brought to the Palace. But however, this Legion which he had thus cashier'd, in thirty days afterwards, upon Intercession made for them, before he set forward to engage the Persians, he restored again to the same Rank which they had held before in the Army; and the Bravery which they in particular shew∣ed upon that occasion, in which they did Won∣ders, was the great thing that gained him the Victory. Some of the Officers, in the mean time, he had not spared to punish with death, because it had been by their negligence, that the Soldiers had been so debauched with the Pleasures of Daphne, and because they had not taken the Care that was sufficient to have hindred this Sedition of the Army. He marched from the City of Antioch to give Battle to the Persians, well provided, and with great magnificence. Artaxerxes, the most Po∣tentHe de∣feats the Persians. King of Persia, came against him with seven hundred Elephants, one thousand and eight hundred armed Chariots, and a Body of Horse of many thousands. But the Victory was on the side of the Roman Emperor, who in the Fight visited the one and the other Wing, and encouraged the Soldiers, and was often within Perils himself, and signalized his Valour with his own hand. After which, he returned again to Antioch, and made his Army rich with the Booty that they took, and the Depredations that he permitted the Tribunes, the Captains, and the Soldiers to make upon
the Provinces of the Enemy. The Persians then first began to submit to the Dominion of the Romans. But because the Kings of Persia think it an Indignity for those that belong to them to be made Slaves, he sent their Ran∣soms, and the Prisoners were restored, and the Money given either to such as had taken them Prisoners, or else put into the Trea∣sury After this noble Expedition he came to Rome, where he received the honour of a Triumph,He tri∣umphs. performed with great Magnificence, and then he made this Speech to the Senate upon the occasion; which I have taken out of the Jour∣nal of the Senate, upon the seventh day of the Kalends of October. Fathers of the Senate, WE have vanquished the Persians, and we have no need of any great Eloquence to recount the particulars to you. You may please only to know, what their Arms were, and how well provided they came. They came with seven Hun∣dred Elephants, and this is the first time that we have ever seen in the Field so great a Num∣ber; and these carried Towers upon their backs full of Archers, and Loads of Arrows. Three Hundred of these we took, Two Hundred more were killed upon the place and Eighteen we have brought hither with us. Then they had Eighteen Hundred Chariots, armed with cutting Scythes. We could have brought with us of those Chariots Two Hundred, whereof the Beasts were killed. But however, we thought fit to forbear that, be∣cause
it is an easie thing to make them ourselves. We have cut in pieces an Army of a hundred and twenty thousand Horse; and ten thousand Compleat Cuirassiers, with whose Spoils we have armed our Men. We took a great number of the Persians Prisoners, whom we have sold. The Country of Mesopotamia, betwixt the two Ri∣vers of Tigris and Euphrates, which had been so neglected by my Impure Prodecessour, Helio∣gabalus, we have Re-conquered and received in∣to our Obedience. We have put the most Potent King Artaxerxes, as he is entituled; but who is so in effect, as well as by Name, to flight. The Country of Persia beheld him flying; and in the same place, where the Romans heretofore in the defeat of Crassus lost their Banners, the Persians now have left us theirs. You see, Fathers of the Senate, what we have Atchieved; the Subject needs no Eloquence to adorn it. The Army is come home Rich. None think their Pains too great, that Conquer. It is for you to appoint Publick Thanksgivings to be made upon this occasion; to the end that we may not seem ungrateful to the Gods for the success of our Arms. The Acclamations of the Senate followed. The Gods preserve our Emperor, Alexander, Conquerour of the Persians. We Congratulate your Majesty, your most great Victory; your Ma∣jesty hath merited most truly the Name of Con∣queror of the Persians and Parthians. The Gods save you. We behold your Trophies. We see your Victory. All thanks to our young Emperor; the
Father of his Country; our Soveraign Pontiff. By you we will hope for Victory over the Ger∣mans. By you we will hope for Victory from all Parts. Your Majesty takes the way to Con∣quer. You Command the Soldiers. The Senate is enriched. The Army is enriched. The People of Rome are enriched by your Majesty. Then the Senate Adjourning, he went from thence to the Capitol: where having per∣formed the Sacred Ceremonies, and Dedicated to the Temple of Jupiter some Armour of the Persians to be hung up there, he spoke to thi purpose to the People. Citizens and Commons of Rome, I Have overcome the Persians, and my Ar is returned Rich home with the Booty that  have made. We promise to give you a Larg and to Morrow we will give you the Gam the Cirque, on the occasion of our Conquests. This is the account of this Expedition,  I have found upon the Annals, and  Works of many Historians. And as for  some say, on the contrary, That He  trayed by a Slave, and instead of Conquer∣ing Artaxerxes, fled, for fear of being Con∣quered himself; or particularly what Hero∣dian says, That Artaxerxes lost his Army by Famine, Cold, and Sickness; in which Opini∣on he is very singular, I leave them to be contradicted by the Judgments of all such as
have Read, and are best acquainted with this History. After all these things, full of Glory, ac∣companied by the Senate, the Order of the Gentry, and all the People, through Crowds of Women and Children on all sides, and a∣bove all the Soldiers Wives; contemplating his Presence and his Meen, and observing him as he passed with admiration. He marched from the Capitol to the Palace, on Foot; fol∣lowed by a Triumphal Chariot, drawn by four Elephants. He was so born up in the Hands of all People; that he scarce finished this Space in four Hours, and from all sides they cried, how happy is Rome in such a Prince. The following day, was spent in the Games of the Cirque, and the Diversions of the Stage. And then he gave the Poor a Largess; and Esta∣blished Pensions for the maintenance of the Children of the Poor, according to an Ex∣ample of Antoninus Pius; and in the Honour of his Mother Mammaea, those Children were called the Children of Mammaea. The Affairs of the Province of MauritaniaHis Suc∣cesses by his Ge¦nerals. Tingitana in Barbary had been in the mean time very successful under Furius Celsus; as were those of the Province of Illyricum un∣der Varius Macrinus, his Kinsman; and those of Armenia under Junius Palmetus: so that from all places they sent him Letters, Crown∣ed with Lawrels; which being publickly Read to the Senate and the People, he found him∣self adorned and saluted by all the Titles that could appertain to him. Therefore as for
Men that had behaved themselves so well in the Provinces, committed unto their Govern∣ment, and yet had never been Consuls, he appointed them the Honour of wearing the same Marks and Ornaments, as those that had. He put them into Estates, if they were Poor and advanced in years; and gave them Places in the College of the Priests. He gave the Captives that he had made of divers Na∣tions, amongst his Friends; unless they were of Royal Blood, or of more than Ordinary Quality; and then he Deputed them to the Services of War, but in no great Posts. The Lands of the Enemy, which were Conquered upon the Frontiers, were given by his consent amongst the Officers and Soldiers; under a Condition that their Heirs after them should be obliged to take to Arms; and that those Lands should never come to Persons of ano∣ther Condition; because he said, that the thoughts that they were to defend their own Estates, would make them fight more freely. He furnished them with Cattle and Servants, necessary for Tillage; lest either through the want of Hands, or the Old Age of the Pos∣sessors, the said Places should come to be a∣bandoned again; which he thought would be a thing very shameful. After these things, forasmuch as he lived in a great love and esteem of the Senate and the People, they were unwilling to let him go to the War against the Germans, although they all hoped for Victory from his Arms. Gallia was at this time incessantly ravaged by
the Incursiosn of that People: which was a matter of great trouble to the State, and to himself; and that which yet encreased their resentments, was, that after the reduction of the Country of Mesopotamia, and the defeat of the Forces of so great a People as the Persians, the Nation of the Germans should now menace the Heads of the State, which yet had been always subject to Emperors, that had not Reigned with so much Glory. So he enterprised this Voyage by great Marches, and all the Soldiery were very much pleased with it. But yet meeting again in Gallia with some Mutinous Legions, which he rejected; and the Gauls being of a Temper to be hot and fierce, and often troublesome to their Em∣perors, they could not find themselves disposed to support a Treatment which was so severe, especially after so soft a Reign as that of He∣liogabalus; And whether that it was they, or Maximin that had set Assassines upon him, he was killed at a Village called Cecil, in the Pro∣vince of Bretagn; not by a consent of all, but by a party of Soldiers, who took their oppor∣tunity to do it, when he had few Persons a∣bout him. At the same time they inveigh'd outragiously against him and against his Mo∣ther; as a Covetous Woman, earnest to a∣mass Riches; and by whose Counsel he had acted in all things. He Reigned thirteen years and nine days; and had lived twenty nine years, three months and seven days, And his Mother Mammaea was killed with him.
The Signs that fore ran his death, wereOmens of his Death. these. Upon the Anniversary of his Birth∣day, as he assisted at the Sacrifice, the Beast, which was the Victim, betook itself to its feet, and would have escaped in its blood: and rushing into the Company, where the Em∣peror was, it left some of its blood upon his Robes. A large and old Laurel, at a certain place where he passed to the War, dyed on a sudden. Three Figtrees, to which his Tent had been fastened, and which were of those sort, that they call the Alexandrian Figs, dyed also on a sudden. A Woman, that was a Druid cried after him in her Language, You may go; but never hope for Victory, nor trust to your Army. He began an Harangue, that he made to his Soldiers, before he went to seek the E∣nemy, with these fatal words; The Emperor Heliogabalus having been killed. But all these things however he mightily despised; and put∣ting himself upon his March to meet the Ene∣my, he was killed at the Place above men∣tioned. He had Dined that day, as it was his Cu∣stom to do, Publickly, and had eaten of the common Bread, and Provisions of the Army; nor, when his Tent was searched and ran∣sackt, was there any thing extraordinary found in it. After Dinner, as he had reposed him∣self to Sleep a little, which was about the hour of One, a Spy of the Conspirators, that be∣longed to the Guards, had entred into his Tent, and had found him awake; but every body else asleep: and the Emperor seeing him,
said; What is the matter, my Friend: any News of the Enemy? The Man withdrew to his Con∣federates, and spurred them on to the Enter∣prise, by the excellency of the Opportunity, which offered itself. So a great number of them immediately broke in, and cutting off every one they found, they came to the Em∣peror, and struck him several times through the Body; of which he died instantly. Some say, that there was not a word spoken; but only the Soldiers cryed to him, Away with you! Be gone. Maximin, who succeeded him, and who carried on the War against the Enemy served himself, for that purpose, of all the Military Preparations of this Prince. Amongst the rest, especially of all the Auxiliaries of the Armenians, Mesopotamians, Parthians, and others out of the East; because being excellent Ar∣chers, none were of greater use against the Germans, than they. His contempt of Death had shown itself not only in that fierceness, with which he had always humbled the Soldiers; but also in this. That when Thrasybulus an Astrologer, who was his particular Favourite, had told him; that his Fate was to dye by the Sword of the Barbarians, he was glad of it, in the Opinion which he had, that he was like to dye in the Field of Battel; which he thought a death wor∣thy of an Emperor. Then he argued upon it, and observed, what excellent Men in all times, have died Violent Deaths, in which number he recounted the Great Alexander of his own
name; Pompey, Julius Caesar, Demosthenes, Ci∣cero, and other famous Personages; so that he desired no greater Honour than to die in the Field of Battel. He believed that it would make him comparable to the Gods. But he mistook the Prediction, for he died not in the Field of Battel; although it was in the time of a War; and yet died by the Sword of a Bar∣barian. For that Spy, who had first broken into his Tent, was a German, and one that killed him. The rest of the Army were sensibly touch∣ed at his death, and revenged it upon the Authors of it: and the People of Rome, all the Senate, and all the Provinces never re∣sented any thing worse. Nor were they less astonished, when they heard that he was suc∣ceeded in the Empire by Maximin, and his Son. Wherein all the World judged very well the hard necessity of his Destiny; because they saw a Man raised to his place, who was of no Birth nor Breeding, and whose gross Rusticity gave them an occasion to apprehend all things. The Senate Consecrated him a God; and a Monument was Erected to his Memory in Gal∣lia, whilst his Body was interred in a most Noble Sepulchre at Rome. His Priests were appointed, as likewise his Festival; which is at this day Celebrated with great Devotion. But some pretend to say, that the occasion of his Murther was; because by his Mother's advice he was for quitting the War against the Ger∣mans, and for returning, out of Vanity, with her again into the East. But to say the truth,
I take this to be nothing but a Fiction of the Creatures of Maximin; to the end, that it should not be thought that so very good an Emperor had been killed by their Friend, con∣trary to the Laws of God and Man. Hitherto the Empire of the People of Rome, hath had for the most part Princes, whose Reigns have been in their duration some∣thing considerable. But after Alexander Seve∣rus arose many, who as they had hastily rusht in, so they were as hastily, one after another, driven away from the Throne again. For some Reigned half a year: some a year: o∣thers perhaps reached to two years: but three is the most, till we come to those Princes who far extended the bounds of the Empire; I would say Aurelian, and those that follow; of whose Lives, as much as we can find to be said hereafter; we shall not fail to write and publish it. That which is Condemned in Alexander Se∣verus,Faults of Severus. is; that he denyed his Native Country, and would not at all pass for a Syrian; that he loved Money; was extremely Suspicious; invented many new Taxes; desired to appear as another Alexander the Great; was too se∣vere upon the Soldiers; and was too inquisitive into the Affairs of particular Persons. But as for those who deny, that he had not been Created a Caesar by the Senate, but by the Soldiers; or that he was the Cousin German of Heliogaba∣lus; they are greatly mistaken; and to see their error, let them peruse, as we have done,
the Historians of his time; especially Acholius, who is very particular upon him. Your Majesty, O most Sacred Constantine, is pleased many times to ask; from whence it comes, that a Stranger and a Syrian did make such an excellent Prince; when such a great number of others of Roman Blood, and out of the Provinces of the Empire, that have Reign∣ed, have been Wicked, Impure, Cruel, Ab∣ject, Unjust and Dissolute. I humbly desire therefore your Majesty to observe, as to this; that according to the Sentiments of good Men, Nature which is the Common Mother of us all, is sufficient to Act in this sort, and so he might be Born a good Prince. But be∣sides, he had an Example immediately before his Eyes, of a very ill Prince that was killed, and after his Death dishonoured; and the fear which is suggested by such a Fate, could not but have an influence upon him, to make him better. But because these Reasons are a little remote, and too general, and I am sen∣sible, that I ought to suggest the Truth to Your Majesty, I shall refer my self to your Royal Goodness, and your Clemency, in declaring what at least I have read upon this Subject. Your Majesty remembers very well, what no doubt you have seen in Marius Maximus; that a State in which the Prince is himself bad, but his Counsellours good, is in a better Conditi∣on, and in much greater Safety, than when the Prince is good, but his Counsellours are bad. For certainly one ill Genius may very well be Amended and Corrected by many, that are
good. But a great many, that are all bad, will never be Corrected by one, let him be never so good. And this is what was once said by Homullus, unto the Emperor Trajan; where he compared the Examples of Claudius and Domitian, with one another. Domitian, he said, was a very ill Prince, but yet he had Counsellours that were good. Claudius was not so ill a Prince as Domitian; but his Coun∣sellours were bad. But yet Claudius was of the two the most hated in his time. And certainly it is always better to suffer under the weight of one that is bad, than under many. But to return to my purpose. It is true, that Alexander Severus was a very excellent Person himself; and was also directed by the good Coun∣sels always of his Mother, who was a very ex∣cellent Woman; which last thing alone is cer∣tainly a great Argument of his goodness. But be∣sides all this; he was served by Counsellors whoCharacter of his Counsel∣lors. were Holy and Venerable Personages: without Malice, without Faction, without Knavery, without inclination to Evil, without Animosi∣ty against the Virtuous; without Dissoluteness, without Cruelty, without design of Surprising, or Mocking, or making a Property of their Prince. But full of Integrity, Venerable, Continent, Religious, lovers of their Prince; they exposed nothing that he did; nor suf∣fered it in others: they made a secret Gain to themselves in nothing; they falsified nothing; they Dissembled nothing; they never betray∣ed him; and they loved, and advanced his Reputation. Add to this another thing, that
he Banished the Eunuchs from his Counsels, and his Service; as being the only Creatures who ruin Princes. For it is they, that have put them upon the living after the Examples of Foreign Nations; and the Mode especially of the Kings of Persia; that sow Divisions be∣twixt the best Prince and his People; that are Spyes from side to side; and report an answer contrariwise often, than it is given, and keep their Prince lock'd up, and carry all things so secretly, that he knows nothing. For being but Slaves bought with a Price, how should we expect better from them? No, said Alexander Severus, My Captains, Consuls, and Senators, shall never lye at the mercy of Slaves, that are bought and sold. I am sensible, Great Sir, of the danger which there is in speaking these things before an Emperor, who should repose himself in such hands as these, and should be the Slave of these Slaves. But our Felicity is, that as soon as Your Majesty had well understood, what Mischiefs these Pests do bring along with them, and how they Circumvent the Princes whom they serve; You, out of your Royal Care to the Interests of the State, have re∣duced them to that pass, that you suffer them not to continue within your Houshold; not so much as to be your Menial Servants. Another eminent thing which Contributed to the Felicity of Alexander Severus, is this; that he saw no one at the Court alone, un∣less it was his Captain of the Guards, and par∣ticularly Ulpian. For otherwise he had al∣ways
Company present; to the end, to give to no Person whatsoever an opportunity of re∣presenting their Conversation with him falsly to others, nor of speaking ill of others to him. Especially he did this after the Cor∣rection, that he took of Turinus; who had often vaunted of speaking things to him, which he never did; and of receiving answers from him, which he never gave him; and this, only to squeeze Money, and enrich himself by that means out of the Pockets of his Clients; though at the same time he made a Cully and a Fool of his Master. To all which we must add, that if Alexan∣der Severus had found, that either his Coun∣sellors or his very Relations had done ill, he punished them; or if the Obligations of his former Friendship with, or his nearer Alliance to them, did not suffer him to punish them; yet he sent them from him; and said, The whole State is dearer to me than these. Now if your Majesty pleaseth to know by Name, what Men they were, whom he called to his Counsels, this is a List of some of them. Fabius Sabinus, the Son of another famousA List of his Coun∣sellors. Sabinus; a Person of sublime Virtue; and the Cato of his time. Domitius Ulpian, a most Eminent Professor of the Law. Antoninus Gordianus, the Son of the Emperor Gordianus, and afterwards Emperor himself, a Person of great merit.
Julius Paulus, a most excellent Professor of the Law. Claudius Venatus, an Oratour of a profound and diffused Eloquence. Pomponius, an Eminent Professor of the Law. Alphenus. Africanus. Florentinus. Martianus. Callistratus. Hermogenes. Venuleius. Triphonius. Maetianus. Celsus. Proculus. Modestinus. All Professors of the Law, and sometime the Scholars of the most Renowned Papinian. They all were the Familiar Friends of this Prince; as both Acholius and Marius Maximus assure us. Catilius Severus, his Kinsman, a very learn∣ed Person. Aelius Sereninus, the most Holy Person of his time. Quintilius Marcellus, than whom all History does not afford a better Person. All these therefore, and others, to them suitable, being his Counsellors, and unani∣mously Conspiring to the good of the State, what could there be done or imagined to hurt it? It is true, that in the beginning of his Reign, for some days a multitude of ill Per∣sons, of whom the Court was full at the death of Heliogabalus, had neglected no means to engage his Affections in their own favour. But his early Prudence discovered them: He
nipt them in the Bud, and drove them all from him; and then formed himself a Council of such Holy and Upright Members, that They very much guided him, who was otherwise a Stranger, and a Syrian, to be that good Prince that he was. Whereas, on the con∣trary, those ill Princes, whom your Majesty hath observed to have been Romans, labouring under the misfortune of ill Councils also, that made them yet worse; we Have them deliver∣ed down to us, heavy laden with a Burden of Vices, of those of their Counsellours, and those of their own. FINIS.
INDEX TO THE First Volume. A. ABgarus, Pag. 12, 25, 100. Abraham, 421. Adiabene, 30. Adonis, 362. Adria, 38. Adrianotherae, 68. Advocatus Fisci, 68. Aelius Junius Cordus, 328. Aelius Laetus, 154, 191. Aelius Maurus, 250. Aelius Verus, his Adoption, 72, 84. Family, 81. Behaviour in his Province, 82. Death, 84. Pleasures, 85. Funeral, 87. Aemilianus, 238. Aemilius Parthenianus, 163. Aetna, 57. Albini Cejonii, 288. Alexander M. 33, 422, 427. Alexander Severus, his Extraction, 392. Ho∣nours, ibid. Education, 394. Modesty and Moderation, 395. Personage, ibid. Names, 396, 405. Speech to the Senate, 399. Go∣vernment,
408. Deference to the Senate, 411. Temper, 412. Care of the Soldiery, 413, 440. Works, 416. Attainments in Arts, 419, 422. Domestick Deportment, 421. Ex∣ercises, 423. Ordinances, 425, 431, 435. Table, 429. Apparel, 432. Houshold, 434. Regard to CHRIST, 436. Officers, 438. Favours the Christians, 442. Persian Expe∣dition, 442. Discipline, 445, 448. Triumph, 450. Death, 455. Counsellors, 461, 463. Alexandria, 55, 312. Alps, 103. Altiu, 155. Annia Faustina, 90, 91, 94, 96. Antinous, 58. Antioch, 58, 136, 238, 306. The Eight Antonini, 330. Antoninus Pius; his Extraction, 89. Personage and Conditions, 90. Title, 91. Adoption, 93, 73. Diligence and Moderation, 97. Fru∣gality, ibid. Works, 98. Honours, 100. Candour, 101. Laws, 103. Death, 103. Per∣sonage, 104. Recreations, 107. Anubis, 186. Apis, 55. Apollonius St. 101, 144. Apollonius Thyanaeus, 421. Aquilius, 221. Arabia, 19, 34. Arbela, 30. Area Caesarea, 392, 396. Arrius Antoninus, 90, 92, 184. Artaxerxes, 449. Athens, 57, 66, 231. Attidius Cornelianus, 116. Attilius Tatianus, 97. Aufidius Victorianus, 116. Avidius Cassius; His Revolt, 135, 165. Death, 135. Family, 157. Discipline, 161.
B. BAbylon, 30. Baiae, 75, 418. Baebius Macer, 45. Bridge over the Danube, 17. Britain, 44, 54, 95, 116, 185, 201, 247. Byrrbus, 183. C. CAelest is, 202, 330. Caesar, 80. Calphurnius Agricola, 116. Calphurnius Crassus, 4, 8. Canosa, 116. Caracallus; his Character when Boy, and when Man, 306. Kills his Brother, 307. Cruel∣ties, 309. Strength, 311. Expeditions, 310, 312. Barbarity in Egypt, 312. Death, 312. Works, 315. Incestuous Marriage, 316. Dis∣simulation, 325. Carthage, 68. Casperius Aelianus, 5, 10. Cassii, 157. Catachriani, 61. Catilius Severus, 46, 60. Catti, 216. Cauchi, ibid. Celsus, 43, 47. Ceres, 138. Chilo, 308, 310. Chosroes, 22, 57. CHRIST, 421, 436. Christians, 414. Cicero, 422. Cincius Severus, 243. Cirque, 12. Civita Vecchia, 176. Claudius Pompeianus, 130, 171, 179, 181, 202, 225. Cleander, 182, 184. Clodius Albinus; his Employments, 241. Name, 284. Extraction, 285. Offered the Title of Caesar, 286. War with Severus, 294. Cha∣racter,
295. Death, 295. Personage, 300. Popularity, 301. Clodius Celsinus, 240. Coins, 431. Cologn, 36. Coloss. 67. Commodus; his Birth, 128, 175. Espousals, 138. Education, 176. Debauchery, 177. A Con∣spiracy against him, 179. Severity, 180. In∣cests, 181. Flattered, 185. Pranks, 186. Strength, 189. Negligence, 190. Death and Personage, 192. The Senate's Decree upon him, 194. Auction of his Goods, 207. Constantinople, 306. Cornelius Repentinus, 219. Crassus, 45. Ctesiphon, 31, 33, 245. Cybele, 361, 362. Cyprus, 35. Cyziqua, 92. D. DAcian War, 11. Daphne, 150, 165. Decebalus, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 19. Delphos, 277. Diadumenus named an Antoninus, 345. His Speech, 346. Beauty, 348. Letters, 352. Death, 353. Diana, 362. Didia Clara, 219. Didius Julianus; his Extraction, 215. Prefer∣ments, 216. Declared Emperor, 218. De∣posed, 225. Killed, ibid. Dominus, 395. Domitian's Statues demolished, 1.
E. EArthquake at Antioch, 26. Elegia, 23. Epictetus, 62. Eudaemon, 60. Eunuchs, 415, 426, 462. Euphrates, 31. Eutychius Proculus, 108. Exedrates, 22. F. FAbia, 141, 155. Fabius Maximus, 99. Fabius Repentinus, ibid. Falco, 209. Favorinus, 60, 62. Faustina, 113, 128, 135, 137, 140. Faustinus Quintillus, 223. Flavia Titiana, 203. Flavius Genialis, 218. Flavius Sulpitianus, 212, 217. Florus, 61. Fortune, 104. Forum of Nerva, 420. Fronto Cornelius, 108. Fucinus, 71. Fuscianus, 202. Fuscus, 71. G. GAugamela, 30. Gavius Maximus, 99. Germans, 56. Geta, 237. Geta Antoninus; his Death, 307. Names, 319. Personage and Conditions, 322. Funeral, 325. H. HAdrian; demolishes Trajan's Bridge, 18. Personage, 20, 76. Extraction, 38. Stu∣dies, 39. Diligence, 40. Adoption, 43. Cle∣mency, 45. A Conspiracy against him, 47.
Bounty, 48, 62. Prudence and Moderati∣on, 49. Respect for the Senate, 50. Imper∣fections, ibid. Affability 51. Discipline, 52. Intelligence, 54. Wall in Great Britain, ibid. Voyages, 54, 50, 57. Grief for Antinous, 59. Severity and Injustice, 60. Verses, 61, 76. Learning, 62. Laws, 65. Memory and Wit, 68. Civil Administration, 70. Sickness, 71, 74. Jealousie, 72. Death, 75. Temples, 436. Hadrianople, 36. Hagarens, 34. Hare, 430. Heliodorus, 60, 62. Heliogabalus; his Names, 356. Comes to Rome, 358. Makes his Mother a Senatress, 359. Bestiality, 360. Base Government, 360. In∣cest and Sacrilege, 361. Cruel Idolatry, 363. Filthiness with Magirus, 365. Horrid Immo∣desty, 366. Prefers base Persons, 367. Ha∣tred to Alexander Severus, 368. Banishes the Senate, 371. Death, 372, 387. Works, 373. Luxury, 374. Immoderate Vanities, 376. Vain Frolicks, 379. Extreme Prodigality, 382. Helvius Pertinax, 310, 325. Helvius Successus, 198. Heraclius, 235. Herodian, 300. Hierapolis, 30. Hierocles, 361. I. JAzyges, 16. Jews, 34, 46, 95, 246. India, 32, 33. Isis, 186, 275, 418. Istrig, 19. Julia, 248, 315. Junius Rusticus, 309. Jupiter Nicephorus, 41. Juventius Celsus, 64.
L. LArginus Proclus, 7. Laetas, 209, 222, 308. Laurium, 90, 104. Lavinia, 90. Letters of Verus Antoninus, 158. M. Anto∣ninus, 159, 163, 169, 170, 271, 296, 297. Faustina, 169. Severus, 271, 293, 299. Com∣modus, 272, 286, 303. Macrinus, 351. Dia∣dumenus, 352. Cejonius Posthumius, 389. Libo, 153. Licinius Suras, 20, 41, 43. Lison, 58. Lollianus Gentianus, 206. Lollius Urbicus, 352. Longinus, 16. Lots, 41, 395. Lucilla, 114, 117, 179, 181. Lucius, 13, 33, 35. Lucius Quietu, 45, 47. M. MAecianus, 135. Macrinus. His Extraction and Character 329, 331. Creates his Son Caesar, 332. Mes∣sage to the Senate. 334, Parthian Expedi∣tion, 336. Death, 337. Cruelties, 339. A Libel upon him, 342. Magirus, 365. Mallia Scantilla, 218. Mammaea, 337, 392, 455. Marcommanick War, 122, 154. Marcus (Antoninus.) His Education, 101, 108. Family, 106. Exercises, 111. Adoption, ibid. Espousals, 113. Good Government, 115. Wars, 116, 122. Laws, 118, 134. Deference to the Senate, ibid. Moderation, 121. Death, 127, 130. Clemency, 167. Letters, vid. Letters. Speech, 171.
Marius Maximus, 300. Martia, 185, 188, 192, 222. Martial, 85. Marullus, 115. Maximin, 458. Maximus, 33. Mesomedes, 97. Messene, 32. Months, 188. Motilenus, 186. N. NApoli di Barbaria, 227, 229. Narcissus, 243. Neratius Priscus, 44, 64. Nerva Remits the Persecution of the Christi∣ans, 2. Moderation, 3. Adopts Trajan, 5. Death, 6. Burial, 8. Nigrinus, 47. Nisibis, 33. Nismes, 55, 89. O. OLbiopolis, 100. Omens, 77, 92, 212, 228, 253, 290, 321, 348, 406, 456. Omulus, 103, 113. Ordination of Jewish and Christian Priests, 438. Orpheus, 421. Orphitus, 99. Ovid. 85. Ovinius Camillus, 440. P. PAcorus, 100. Paenula, 419. Pallas, 361. Palmas, 19, 43. 47. Papinian, 308, 309, 313. Paris, 360. Parthamasiris, 22, 23. Parthamaspates, 33, 35, 45. Paulus, 419. Pelusium, 58. Perennis, 180, 182.
Pertinax. His Extraction, 198. Employments, 199. Declared Emperor, 202. Ordinances, 205. Death, 209. Personage, 210. Cha∣racter, 211. Honours, 213. Pescennius Niger. His Extraction, 268. Per∣sonage, 275. Skill in Civil Affairs, 276. and Military Discipline, 277. Defeated, 238, 274. Beloved, 269. Personal hardships, 281. Expressions, ibid. Epitaph, 282. Petronius, 309. Phalanx, 443. Pharismanes, 58, 64. 100. Phlegon, 61. Plague, 123, 151. Plautianus, 235, 243. Plato, 422, 138. Pletorius Nepos, 43, 60, 72. Pliny, 37. Plotina, 10, 43, 44, 56. Pompeianus, 309. Posthumii, 288. Pozzuolo, 77. Priscianus, 97. Probus, 236. Prodigies, 100, 191. Q. QUadratus, 158, 179. Quindecim Viri. 414. Quintillii, 180. R. REd Sea, 31. Rhoa, 33. Rimethalces. 100. Rome, 185. Rope-Dancing, 122. Roxolani, 47.
S. SAbina, 39, 54, 72. Sabinus, 371. Salvius Julianus, 64, 178, 180, 215. Satala, 23. Scaurinus, 394, 144. Scevus Aurelianus, 275. Schemsat, 23. Seleucia, 33. 152. Semiamira, 357, 359, 373. Senate. Acclamations, 177, 397. Act a∣gainst Commodus, 194. Act in favour of Severus, 397. Senate of Women, 359. Septimius Arabinus, 420. Septimius Clarus, 51, 54, 60. Septimus Severus declared Emperor, 221, 233. His Extraction, 227. Advancements, 228. Marriage, 231, 396. Enters Rome, 234. Expedition against Niger, 237. Against Al∣binus, 239. Severity, 241, 247. Laws, 246. Refuses a Triumph, 246. Successes, 247. Death, 248. Personage, 250. Works, 254, Treachery, 293. Serapis, 134, 246, 418. Serenus Sammonicus, 310, 422. Servianus, 40, 50, 60. Seville, 36, 39. Sextus, 109, 144. Sichem, 238. Silvinus, 371. Similes, 51. Soaterus, 178, 179. Spasinum, 32. Speeches of Albinus, 287, 301. Pinnius, 331. Macrinus, 334, 345. Diadumenus, 346. A∣lexander Severus, vide Alexander Severus. Of Marcus Antoninus, vide Marcus Antoninus. Statius Priscus, 150. Suetonius, 54. Sulpitius Apollinaris, 199. Swift, 149, 155.
T. TArragona, 56, 230. Tarruntinus Paternus, 179, 180. Tatianus, 39, 43, 50, 51, 60. Teflis, 117. Terentius Gentianus, 72. Tertullus, 140. Thrasybulus, 457. Tigris, 29, 31. Tivoli, 76. Trajan. His Adoption, 5. Dream, 9. Character, 11. Triumph, 15. Bridge over the Danube, 17. Works, 21. Courted by the Eastern Kings, 22. Titles, 26. Passes the Tygris, 29. At Babylon, 30. Expedition on the Red Sea, 31. Death, 36. Deified, 46. Image carried in Triumph, 46. Trajanople, 36. Tralles, 92. Treasure Trouve, 65. Triarius Maternus, 204. Tripoli, 247. Tullius Crispinus, 218, 222, 224. Turbo, 43, 47, 51, 60. Turinus, 428. Tyber, 115. V. VErus (Antoninus) His Birth and Family, 143. Education, 144. Preferments, 145. Emperor, 146. Luxury. 147. Negli∣gence, 149. Return out of Syria, 151. Vanities, 155. Death, ibid. Personage, ibid. Letter, 158. Vespronius Candidus, 221, Vesta, 361. Veterasinus, 121. Virgil, 424. Virginius Rufus, 4. Vitruvius Secundus, 180. Ulpian, 371, 408, 423, 444.
Ulpius Marcellus, 103. Volusius Metianus, 109. W. WArhel, 15, 19. Wife, 86.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Charles Harper at the Flower-de-luce, over-against St. Dunstan's-Church in Fleet-street. THE Life of our Blessed Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. An Heroic Poem: Dedica∣ted to Her most Sacred Majesty, in Ten Books. Attempted by Samuel Wesley, M. A. each Book illustrated by necessary Notes, explaining all the more difficult Matters in the whole Hi∣story: Also a Prefaratory Discourse concer∣ning Heroic Poetry. The Second Edition re∣vised by the Author, and improved with the Addition of a large Map of the Holy-Land; and a Table of the Principal Matters; with Sixty Copper-Plates, by the celebrated Hand of W. Faithorne. Folio. The Second and Third Parts of the Works of Mr. Abraham Cowley. The Second con∣taining what was written and published by himself in his younger Years, re-printed toge∣ther: The Sixth Edition. The Third Part con∣taining his Six Books of Plants, viz. the First and Second of Herbs, the Third and Fourth of Flowers, the Fifth and Sixth of Trees; now made English by several Hands, with necessary Tables to both Parts, and divers Poems in praise of the Author. Folio. Resolves: Divine, Moral, Political. With several New Additions in Prose and Verse. In
this Eleventh Edition, References are made to the Poetical Citations heretofore much wanted. By Owen Felltham Esq; Folio. Price 12 s. The Works of the Famous Nicholas Machival, Citizen and Secretary of Florence. Newly and faithfully Translated into English. Fol. Price 15 s. The Whole Duty of Man, according to the Law of Nature, by that Famous Civilian Sa∣muel Puffendorf; now made English. Octavo. Price 3 s. 6 d. Dr. Willis's Practice of Physick, being the whole Works of that Famous Physician; ren∣dred into English; second Edition, with Forty Copper-Plates. Folio. The Historical and Miscellaneous Tracts of the Reverend and Learned Peter Heylin, D. D. now collected into one Volume. And an Ac∣count of the Life of the Author, never before published. Folio. The Religion of Protestants, a Safe way to Salvation; with a Discourse of the Apostolical Institution of Episcopacy. By W. Chilling∣worth, M. A. To which in this Edition, is ad∣ded his Letter, shewing the Reason why he left Popery. Folio. The History of Q. Elizabeth, by W. Cambden, King at Arms. Fourth Edition. Folio. An Impartial Collection of the great Affairs of State, from the beginning of the Scotch Re∣bellion in the Year 1639. to the Murder of King Charles the First. Folio. In two Vol. By Dr. Nalson. Dugdale's Monasticon Anglicanum. Folio. In three Volumes.
The History of King Edward II. King of England, and Lord of Ireland, Folio. Dr. Willis's Practice of Physick. Octavo. With his Treatise of the Plague Price 7 s. Bishop Usher's Power of the Prince, and the Obedience requir'd of the Subject, with a large Preface, by Bishop Sanderson. Octavo. Animadvers. on a Book Entitled, The Theory of the Earth. By Herbert Lord Bishop of Hereford. A Treatise of Moral and Intellectual Virtues, wherein their Nature is fully explained, and their Usefulness proved. By J. Hartcliff, B. D. Price 4 s. Contemplations Moral and Divine, in two Parts. By Sir Matthew Hale, Knight, late Chief Justice of the King's-Bench. Octav. Price 5 s. A Voyage to Suratt, in the Year 1689. giving a large Account of that City, and its Inhabitants, and of the English Factory there: Likewise a Description of Madera, St. Jago, Annobon, Ca∣benda, and Malemba (on the Coast of Africa) St. Helena, Johanna, Bombay, the City of Mu∣scatt, and its Inhabitants in Arabia Felix, Mocha, and other Maritim Towns on the Red-Sea, the Cape of good Hope, and the Island of A∣scension. By J. Ovington, M. A. Chaplain to His Majesty Octav. Price 6 s. A plain Method of Christian Devotion; laid down in Discourses, Meditations, and Prayers, fitted to the various Occasions of a Religious Life: Translated and Revised from the French of Monsieur Jurieu, the two and twentieth E∣dition, with a Preface. By W. Fleetwood, Chap∣lain in ordinary to his Majesty. Price 2 s. 6 d.
THE LIVES OF THE Roman Emperors FROM DOMITIAN where Suetonius ends, to Constantine the Great. Containing Those of NERVA and TRAJAN from Dion Cassius: A Translation of the six Writers of the Augustéan History, And Those of DIOCLESIAN, and His Associates, from Eusebius and Others. With the Heads of the Emperors in Cper Plates, AND A Chronology Running through the whole Time, being the Space of two hundred and ten Years. Dedicated to His Most Sacred Majesty. By JOHN BERNARD. A. M. VOL. II. London: Printed for Charles Harper, at the Flower de Luce over against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. 1698.
THE Lives in Vol. II. MAximine, Father and Son, Gordianus, Father and Son, Gordianus III. Maximus and Balbinus. By Jul. Ca∣pitolinuus. The Emperors from Gordianus III. to Valerian; A Supplement. Valerian, Father and Son, Gallienus, Father and Son, The Thirty Tyrants, Claudius. By Trebellius Pollio. Aurelian, Tacitus, Florianus, Probus. By Flavius Vopiscus. Firmus, Saturninus, Proculus, Bonosus. By Flavius Vopiscus. Carus, Numerianus, Caesar, Carinus. By Flavius Vopiscus. Dioclesian, Maximian, Constantius Chlorus, Galerius. By J. Bernard.
ADVERTISEMENT. THE Continuation of These Lives from Constantine the Great inclusively down to Augustu∣lus, under whom that mighty Em∣pire received its Period, is now in Hand, and will be finished with all Convenient Expedition.
ERRATA in Vol. I. PAG. 2. line 28. for Tirenta read Fronto. p. 20. l. 7. r. in spilling their Blood. Over. l. 8. r. di Roma, he p. 81. in the marg. dele his Wife. p. 87. l. 21. r. Cities, Temples also. He. p. 96. in the marg. r. Honour done to his Wife. p. 125. l. 23. dele Tho'. p. 147. l. 32. for Coach r. Couch. p. 147. l. 8. dele without Orders, and r. unlaw∣fully. p. 164. l. 4. for virilis r. viris{que} p. 222. l. 27. for this r. their. p. 252. l. 11. after him add; p. 280. l. 15. for on r. or. p. 285. l. 17. r. apply to himself. p. 330. l. 9. dele about the Emperors. p. 339. l. 24. dele when. l. 25. r. when he said they had deserved. p. 366. l. 15. r. he began. ERRATA in Vol. II. PAG. 2. line 30. for Bells read Belts. p. 6. l. 18. r. gave him. p. 18. l. 17. for see r. secure. p. 22. l. 33. r. Towns. p. 28. l. 5. r. Palace. p. 84. l. 33. r. the Aquaeducts. p. 89. l. 26. r. the Senate's own Power. p. 107. l. 11. r. devoted, Sir, p. 116. l. 9. r. a sudden. p. 126. l. 6. for Po∣milions r. Pavilions. l. 16. r. of a God. p. 134. l. 7. dele all. p. 136. l. 19. r and in consort. p. 177. l. 20. r. no small Miracle. p. 299. l. 11. r. that you have taken. p. 303. l. 16. r. there were three.
THEA. Christi CCXXXVI. Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Maximin the First. Address'd to the EMPEROR Constantine the Great, BY JULIUS CAPITOLINUS. VOL. II. MAXIMIN the First was a Bar∣barian Born, of a Village of the Province of Romania, that is, the Antient Thrace. His Father'sHis Ex∣traction. Name was Mecca, his Mother's Hababa: The one a Goth, the other an Alan. Under the Reign of the Emperor Septimius Severus, he
became first a Soldier. Under the Reign of the Emperor Alexander Severus he Rise and Flourish'd; insomuch that he succeeded him in the Empire; and being unwilling, after he was Emperor, to have it known, that his Fa∣ther and his Mother were both Barbarians, he ordered the Names of them, which he had discovered at the beginning, to be as much as was possible, suppressed again, and conceal∣ed from the World. He was a Shepherd in the beginning of his Youth; and as he grew, he sometimes even then, was the Champion of the Village of which he was. His First Service as a Soldier, was amongst the Horse, because of his great size and strength of Body, which fitted him more especially and cut him out for a Trooper. He acquitted himself in that Quality to ad∣miration. He was of a Manly Look, Rough∣hewn, Fierce, Proud, apt to Contemn; which yet did not hinder him from being oftentimes Just in what he did. The Occasion which in∣troduc'dHis Rise. him into the Knowledge of the Em∣peror Septimius Severus, was this: That Prince, upon the Birth of Geta his younger Son, appointed a Divertisement of some Games and Exercises to be performed by the Soldiers, and proposed Prizes for the Conquerors, in pieces of Silver of fine Bracelets, Collars, and little Bells. Maximin was as yet a Youth, and could scarce speak the Latin Tongue. How∣ever he took the Courage upon him, in Words which were partly Latin and partly Thracian, publickly to beg leave of the Emperor, that
he might try his Skill against some who ap∣peared in the Lists, and who were Men of a more than ordinary Account amongst the Sol∣diers. Severus admiring him for his Size, match'd him, being a Barbarian, not with the Soldiers, but some of the stoutest Slaves and Drudges of the Camp; of whom he over∣came sixteen one after another: for which he received as many Praemiums, proportionable to the meanness of the Combat, that is, they were of an inferiour Value to those that were appointed for the Soldiers; and withal he was ordered to be taken into the Army. Another day as Severus went to the Camp, he observed Maximin in the Crowd Dancing and Leaping after the Barbarian way. Severus ordered a Tribune to Reform him, according to the Discipline of the Romans. Maximin under∣standing that the Emperor had spoken of him, and being proud to be taken Notice of, ad∣vanced to the side of the Emperors Horse, and began to Run by him as he Rid. Severus, to try his Running, gave a loose to his Horse, and took several Rounds, till fatigued by rea∣son of his Age, and seeing Maximin still keep close by him, You Thracian, says he to him, can you Wrestle as well as you Run? Sir, says Maximin, as much as you please. After this Severus dismounted, and ordered some of the freshest and the strongest Soldiers to be pickt out, to Wrestle with him: Maximin over∣threw seven of these one after another, with∣out Breathing; for which he received the before mention'd Prizes in Silver, and Severus
besides, did him the particular Honour to pre∣sentHis Pre∣ferment. him with a Collar of Gold, and he placed him in his Guards du Corps, because he should be always by him. This made Maximin a Remarkable Man, and acquired him a great Esteem. The Tribunes loved him. His Fel∣low-Soldiers admired him. He obtained of the Emperor any thing that he desired; who pre∣ferred him above the rest of the Soldiers, though he was as yet a Youth. He excelled all in the Heighth and Vastness of his Body, with which he had at the same time a good Meen; and in the largeness of his Eyes, which were no less Bright and Handsome. It is cer∣tain, that Maximin often drank Eight Am∣phors of Wine in a day; and eat either Forty, or as Aelius Cardus says, Sixty pound of Flesh. But he kept himself wholly from Herbs, and rarely eat any Cold Meats, unless it was, when he was under a necessity of drinking. He of∣ten preserved his Sweat, and received it into Cups, or a little Vessel for the purpose; so that he could shew you, two or three Quarts of his Sweat at a time. Under the Reign of Antoninus Caracallus, he long Commanded as a Centurion, and con∣ducted Parties, and served several other Oc∣casions of the Army. He hated the succeeding Reign of Opilius Macrinus; because that Prince had been the Author of the Murder of Anto∣ninus Caracallus, who was the Son of Severus, who was Maximin's first Master. In this Reign therefore he quitted the Army, and bought himself an Estate in a Village of Ro∣mania,
where he was born. There he conti∣nually entertain'd a Commerce with the Goths. The Goths loved him entirely, as if he was their own Fellow-Citizen: The Alans did the same, and brought him, whenever they approached to the Banks of the River, Presents, which he returned in others to them again. But when Opilius Macrinus, together with his Son, was killed, and Maximin found that Heliogabalus was preferred to the Empire, as the Reputed Son of Antoninus Caracallus, Maximin, who was then of a mature Age, waited upon him with a Complement, That as he had had the Ho∣nour of the good Opinion of his Grandfather the Emperor Severus, so he wish'd, he might be so happy as to have his. Heliogabalus rallied with him in his Impure way, and said, Maximin, Thou hast Tyred thyHis Re∣ception from He∣liogabalus Sixteen or Twenty, or sometimes Thirty Lusty Sol∣diers I hear, in Playing and Wrestling with them; How many Times canst thou Perform with a Wo∣man; I warrant thee, thou canst do that Thirty times too. Maximin, not satisfied with this sort of Reception, would have retired himself in∣to the Country again, but that the Friends of Heliogabalus detained him, and thought it a Scandal to let the Bravest Man of the Age go off so, who was another Hercules, another A∣chilles, another Ajax, as the People called him. They did him the Honour to Create him a Tribune; but yet he never attended upon the Person of that most Impure Prince, nor came to salute him in all the three Years of his Reign; but was always either moving from
place to place upon one specious Occasion or other, or he pretended himself Sick, that he could not wait upon the Court. After Heliogabalus was killed, and that Maxi∣min had an Account, that Alexander SeverusAnd by Alexander Severus. the Son of Mammaea, was advanced to the Empire, he came to Rome; where he was re∣ceived by the New Prince with all the Joy and all the Satisfaction in the World. Insomuch that he spoke to the Senate of him in these Words: Gentlemen, Maximin the Tribune is come to me, who could not reconcile himself to the Service of that Impure Beast my Predecessor. I have given him a Robe Embroidered with Studs of Gold. His Merit recommanded him to my Fa∣ther the Emperor Septimius Severus, and you know the Reputation that he hath attained to since. Immediately he gave the Command of the Fourth Legion, which was one that himself had raised, and consisted all of young Soldiers; and at the same time he expressed himself thus: My very dear and entirely Beloved Maximin, I have not thought fit to Trouble you with the Com∣mand of a Legion of Old Soldiers for this reason; because I question, whether the Vices of such, be∣ing confirmed in them under the Command of o∣thers, are capable of your Amendment. I give you a Legion of Novices, whom you may bring up your self to your own hand. Mould them, Form them as you please. It will be a great Ser∣vice to the State and to me, to teach them their Arms so, that they may produce many Maximins, that is, many such good Soldiers as you.
No sooner had Maximin received this Legi∣on, but he began to Exercise them. Every fifth Day he did the same; and represented with them Fights and the Taking of Towns. He inspected their Swords, Javelins, Targets, Helmets, Cloaths, and all their Arms and E∣quipages perpetually, to their very Shooes. He was as a Father to them. And when some of the other Tribunes pretended to blame him, saying; Why should you take so much Pains, who are in a Post to be preferred to be a General when you please? Says he, The Greater I ever am, the more Pains I shall take still. He Wrestled with his Men himself, and Threw half a do∣zenHis mighty Strength. or more of them one after another, though perhaps he was an Old Man grown to them then: This created him much Envy. One Tribune particularly, who was Prouder and more Angry than the rest, and of a large Size, and known Gallantry, said to him; What great Matter is it for a Tribune to Throw his own Sol∣diers? Says Maximin, Shall you and I try then our Strength together? The other consented: But Maximin gave him such a Thrust with his open Hand on his Breast as he came, that he fell flat upon his Back; and Maximin cryed, Come on any other Tribune that will. Aelius Cordus tells us, that Maximin was such a Vast Man, that he was Eight Foot and almost a half High. His Hand so big, that his Wife's Bracelet for her Arm made him but a Ring for his Thumb. These other things are com∣monly reported of him, That he could draw a Chariot after him by his Arms, and move a
loaded Litter himself; That if he gave a Horse a Blow on the Mouth with his Fist, he struck out his Teeth; and if he Kicked him, he broke his Legs. Hard Stones he squeezed into pieces betwixt his Fingers: The younger Trees he tore up. Some have call'd him a second Milo, a Hercules, and an Antaeus, for his Strength and Vastness. These things therefore rendring him soHe is made a General. Conspicuous, the Emperor Alexander Severus, who was a great Judge of Persons of Merit, preferred him to the General Command of his Army, with the universal Satisfaction of all the Tribunes, Officers, and Men. This was afterwards Fatal to that Prince. All that Army which was grown in a manner unser∣viceable, under the Reign of Heliogabalus, Max∣imin brought to be Disciplined to his own mind. So that when Alexander Severus was in Gallia, Encamped not far from some Town there, whether it was that Maximin set the Soldiers upon him, as some say; or whether it was, the disaffected Tribunes amongst the Gauls, whom Alexander Severus Disbanded (for he Disbanded whole Legions there, with the same severity as before he had done in the East) I know not; but a Party of Soldiers broke in on a sudden upon him, and killed both him and his Mother; and Maximin was immediately proclaimed Emperor. The Age of Alexander Severus, who was otherwise an excellent Prince, was one thing that might be liable to create in some measure a Contempt of him.
Maximin, who never was any thing but aHe is pro∣claim'd Emperor. Soldier, and had not yet been a Senator, was Proclaimed Emperor by the Army, without any Decree of the Senate; and his Son (of whom hereafter) was given him to be his Colleague. Now Maximin was always so Wise, that he not only Commanded his Sol∣diers by his Authority, but he made them love him very much, by the Rewards and Advan∣tages that he gave them. He never injured them in their Pay. He never Mustered Smiths or any sort of Artisans as others do in his Ar∣my. He often took them to Hunt with him. But together with these Vertues, he was so Cruel, that he was called by all the Names ofHis Cruel∣ty. a Cyclops, a Busyris, a Sciron, a Phalaris, a Ty∣phon, and a Gyges. The Senate dreaded him so, that their Wives and Children made Prayers in the Temples, in publick and in private, that he might never see the City of Rome. They had heard, how in his method of Reforming the Discipline of the Army, some he Crucified, some he stuffed into the Bodies of Beasts new∣ly killed, some he cast alive to Wild Beasts, some he Cudgel'd to death, and all this with∣out distinction of the Quality of the Person. They feared, he would pretend to Reform the State the same way: which yet is not a Course for a Prince to take, who designs to be Loved. But it was Maximin's Persuasion, that the Empire was not to be held by him without Cruelty. He suspected, that the No∣bility would contemn his Low and Barbarian Birth. He remembred, that he had been
slighted at Rome formerly, even by the Ser∣vants of some of the Nobility, who would not admit him to see them. And as the Consci∣ousness of an Ignoble Mind is of strange Effect, he thought, that as many as were privy to his Base Original, would use him accordingly still. All such therefore he Killed, and amongst those, some that had been his Friends, and had given him often several things in Charity and Pity to the poor Condition he was in, at his first coming to Rome. Never was any thing on the Earth crueller than he. He thought himself almost Immortal; he scarce thought he could be Killed; he confided so much up∣on his Strength and the Magnitude of his Bo∣dy, and his Parts. But, as an Epigram said, which was made upon him in relation to this, He that cannot be killed by one, is to be killed by many; As Great as an Elephant is, an Elephant is to be Killed; As Strong as a Lion is, a Lion is to be Killed; As Strong as a Tyger is, a Tyger is to be Killed; So he that does not fear to be killed by One Man, let him have a care however of a Number. This Epigram was repeated by a Mimick in his presence from the Stage. But being repeated in Greek, which was a Lan∣guage which he who was a Thracian and a Bar∣barian did not understand, and not being told the true meaning of it, it pass'd upon him. He retained no Persons of the Nobility about him. He Reigned like another Spartacus or an Athenion, with a Court, as it were of Mobb. All the Ministers of Alexander Severus he put to Death after several ways. He envied the
Designs of that Prince, and his Disposition of things; and the Suspicion which he had of e∣very one who had served or loved him, pro∣voked Maximin to be more and more Cruel. This being his way, to Live and Reign like a Fury, he was made yet far more Cruel and Inhumane by a Conspiracy against him of oneA Conspi∣racy a∣gainst him Magnus a Consul, who with a number of Sol∣diers and Centurions, had laid a design to Kill him, and to Translate the Empire upon himself. The Manner that they pretended to take to do it was this: Maximin having made a Bridge to pass the River into Germany, the Conspirators who were to accompany him, after he was Landed, were to break the Bridge and Kill him, and cry, he was killed by an Ambuscade of the Enemy. In the mean time Magnus should take upon him the Empire. It is true, Maximin, as he perfectly understood the matter of War, was fond of that War a∣gainst the Germans: He knew his being a good Soldier was the occasion that he was made Emperor; and he was ambitious to keep up the Reputation which he had, and to outshine particularly the Glory of the late Prince, whom he had Murdered. He kept his Men daily to their Exercises, when he was Emperor, as he did when he was a Tribune: He put himself in Arms at the Head of them, and with his Hand and the movements of his Body, taught them a great many things. But whether or no, that Plot of Magnus to Kill him, was real, or whe∣ther it was a Fiction of Maximin's own, for an opportunity to increase the matter of his
Cruelty, I cannot say. However it was, he put to Death above four thousand Men upon it, and was not satisfied neither with all that Blood. He put them all to Death without In∣former, without Accuser appearing against them, without Tryal, without any Defence of themselves; and all their Estates he Confisca∣ted. The Emperor Alexander Severus had taken into his Army a Body of Auxiliaries of Parthi∣ans, Mesopotamians, and others out of the East, who being excellent Archers, he judged would be of great Use in the War against the Ger∣mans. These Archers upon the Death of thatThe Re∣volt of the Auxilia∣ries. Prince, whom they very much loved, Revolt∣ed from Maximin, because they would not be persuaded, but that Maximin had been the Au∣thor of this Murder. They set up Titus Quar∣tinus, who was a Captain of their own, to be their General and their Emperor. They put upon him the Purple, and adorned him with all the State of a Person in such a Place. Titus complyed with them in it, but it was against his Will: But being afterwards killed in his Tent as he lay asleep by one of his own Men called Macedon, who envied him only because he was Preferred before him, and his Head being brought to Maximin, this Defection ceased; and Maximin at first gave Thanks to Macedon for the Service which he had done him; but afterwards he hated him as a Tray∣tor, and put him to Death. Still this Defecti∣on served to increase the Tyranny of Maxi∣min; as a Beast when he is Wounded, frets
and rages so much the more for it. He pass'd into Germany with all his Army: The Moors, Parthians, Mesopotamians, and all those that Alexander Severus had mustered out of the Countries of the East, marched with him; For being Light, and the best Archers, none were of greater Use against the Germans than they. The Preparations of Alexander Severus for this War had been great: But yet Maximin added such things to them, as rendred them much more Puissant and more Formidable. He passed the Rhine, and entring into Ger∣many,His Expe∣dition a∣gainst the Germans. he Burnt the Villages of the Enemy for three or four hundred Miles about. He drove their Cattel, killed great numbers of the Bar∣barians, took innumerable others Prisoners, and made his Army Rich with Plunder. He had certainly reduced all the Country of Ger∣many under the Obedience of the Romans, but that the Germans betook themselves to Swim the Rivers and the Lakes, and to seek their shelter in the Woods. He did a great deal with his own Hand: He had indeed been cut off in a Lake, in which his Horse stuck fast, and the Enemy surrounded him, but that his Men came timely up to his Rescue. It was a piece of his Barbarian Temerity to think, that an Emperor ought always to Fight with his own Hand. He maintain'd a sort of a Naval Fight in the Lake, and killed several. So Germany being conquer'd, he wrote an Account of it to the Senate and People of Rome, to this Pur∣pose:
It is impossible, Fathers of the Senate, to express all that we have done: For 400 Miles about we have Burnt the Villages of the Germans, driven away their Cattel, taken Prisoners, and slain all that opposed us. We maintained a Fight in a Lake. We had penetrated their Woods, but that the depth of their Lakes permitted us no passage over to them. Together with this, he ordered Pictures of this War, as it was, to be drawn and laid be∣fore the Senate, that they might read, as well as hear his Exploits. Which Pictures after his death the Senate commanded to be taken down and burnt. Indeed he hated the Senate in his heart, because he imagined that they despised him. In all his other Engagements, which were many, he came off always Conqueror, and took great Booties, and many Prisoners. He says in another Letter which he sent to the Senate, thus: In so short a time, Fathers of the Senate, I have Fought more Battels than any of the Antients ever did. I have brought away as much Booty from the Enemy's Country, into our own, as exceeds all manner of Expectation; And so many Captives, that the Dominions of the Empire are scarce suf∣ficient to hold them. From Germany he came to the City SirmiumHe designs upon Scla∣vonia. in Sclavonia, intending to make War upon the Sarmatae; and very ambitious he was to reduce the Northern Parts as far as to the O∣cean, unto the Obedience of the Roman Em∣pire. Which if he had lived, he would have done, says Herodian, who favours him, out of
a Prejudice, it is to be thought, to Alexander Severus. But when the People of Rome were no longer able to support his Cruelty, because he revived the Practises of the Informers and false Accusers, Counterfeited Plots to kill the Innocent, Condemned all that came before him without Mercy, made Beggars of the rich∣est Men, and raised himself Money upon o∣thers Ruins; put to Death divers who had been Consuls, and Great Commanders with∣out cause; sent for them from the utmost Bounds of the Empire, in a Barbarous manner, to appear before him; kept others in Prison, and omitted nothing in fine, that seemed to flatter his Cruel Inclinations, they resolved toA univer∣sal Revolt. Revolt. And not the Romans only, but the Forces that were in Africa; because he was so Cruel upon the Soldiers, Conspired in their Opinions with the Romans, and made a great and a sudden Revolt, in which they set up Gordianus to be Emperor, who was the Pro∣consul of Africa, and a Person of much Worth, in this manner: There was a Receiver of the Exchequer in Libya, who in favour of Maximin, to raise him the more Money, grievously Exacted upon e∣very body; till the People of the Country, and some of the Soldiers fell upon him and killed him, in spight of the Opposition of his Party which defended him, and which stood up for the Honour and the Interests of Maximin. The Proconsul of Africa at this time, was Gordianus; a Man advanced in Years, but of very great Worth and Virtue, which made him to be be∣loved;
and one who had been put into that Command by the Emperor Alexander Severus, with the Concurrence of the Senate. Now the Party that had killed that Receiver of the Ex∣chequer to Maximin, could not think themselves in safety after what they had done, unless they proceeded to some further Measures, which might give a New Turn to the Face of Affairs. So they came to Gordianus to constitute himGordian forc'd to accept the Empire. Emperor. He threw himself upon the ground, and refused it with all the Aversion and Ear∣nestness in the World. They drew their Swords upon him, and presented all their Arms against him to kill him, unless he complyed with them, upon the place; and not only him, but his Son after him, and all his House. Then he Con∣sented. He accepted the Purple, and was Pro∣claimed, he and his Son together as his Col∣league, at the Town of Thysdrus. From thence he came to Carthage, attended with a Body of Guards, and all the Pomp of a Prince. He sent an Account from Carthage of what had passed to Rome, to the Senate; who received his Letters with Joy, and acknowledg'd and Proclaim'd him and his Son Emperors of Rome. All the Delators that had Pimp'd to Maxi∣min, and all his Friends, particularly Vitalianus the Captain of the Guards, were hereupon put to death, and Sabinus the Governour of the City of Rome, was knocked on the head in the Streets. The Senate at the same time, openly and publickly declared Maximin and his Son Enemies: They sent Letters into all the Pro∣vinces, to call upon them to Assist to the Com∣mon
Safety and the Publick Liberty: Which Letters were generally received well; some few Towns continued in their Fidelity to Maximin, and betrayed the Orders and Persons that were sent to them. In all others, the Friends, Magistrates, Commanders, Tribunes and Sol∣diers of Maximin, followed the Fate of his o∣ther Friends at Rome. The Senate's Letter to the Provinces was this: To all Proconsuls, Presidents, Lieutenants, Com∣manders,The Se∣nates Letter. Tribunes, Magistrates, and to all Cities, Free Towns, Towns, Villages, and Castles; The Senate and People of Rome, whose Deliverance from the Tyranny of the most Cruel Maximin is Commenced by the Princes the Gordiani, wish Health and the same Safety with themselves. By the Favour of the Gods, we have obtained Gor∣dianus, a Person of the greatest Merit and Vir∣tue, a Senator, and a Proconsul, to be our Sove∣raign. We have Proclaimed him. And not him alone, but his Son in Conjunction with him, who is a Noble Youth, for the greater Security of the State. It is for you to Concur with Us, to the Common Good and Safety; to oppose in the mean time the wicked Designs of those that threaten us; and as for Maximin and his Friends, where ever they are, to pursue them to Death We have ad∣udged him an Enemy, together with his Son. Now the Act of the Senate for Constituting he two Gordiani, the Father and the Son, Em∣erors, passed in this manner: On the 6th. f the Calends of June, the Senate being Assem∣led in the Temple of Castor and Pollux, Junius yllanus the Consul, read the Letter of Gordia∣nus
to them, which he had received out of Africa. The Letter was this. Fathers of the Senate, It was altogether against my Will, that the People of this Country, and the Army to whom the preservation of it is committed, have called me to the Empire. But with an eye to you, I content my self to sustain that Necessity. It is for you to consider what you will do. For till I receive the Judgment of the Senate, I shall be uncertain and full of doubt, what course to take. As soon as this Letter was read, the Senate Answered it in these Acclamations. The Gods preserve our Augustus, and our Em∣peror Gordianus. The Gods give a happy Reign to your Majesty, who hath Delivered us. May your Majesty, who is our Deliverer, Reign in safety. The State is see in you. We give you all possible Thanks. Then the Consul moved the Senate, and said: Fathers of the Senate, what is your Judg∣ment as to the Maximins? They cryed, Ene∣mies, Enemies. The Consul moved the Senate again, and said, What is your Judgment as to the Friends and Adherents of Maximin? They cryed, Enemies, Enemies! whoever kills them, shall receive a Praemium. Then these Acclamations followed: Let the Enemy of the Senate be Crucified. Let the Ene∣mies of the Senate in all Parts be destroyed. Let the Enemies of the Senate be burnt Alive. The Gods save our two Emperors the Gordiani! May you both Live; May you both Reign together in Happiness! We Decree the Praetorship to Gordianus the Third, the Grandson. We promise a Consul∣ship
to the Grandson of Gordianus. Let the Grandson of Gordianus receive the Title of Caesar. Let Gordianus the Third, enter upon the Office of a Praetor. When this Ordinance of the Senate wasRage of Maximin upon the News. brought to Maximin, he, who was naturally fierce, broke out into such a rage and passion, you would think him more like a Lion than a Man. He beat himself against the Wall, and sometimes threw himself upon the ground. He roared extravagantly, and drew his Sword, as if he would kill the Senate: he tore in pieces his Royal Cloaths, and struck at such as were next him; and if his own Son had not retired out of his way, they say, he would have pull'd out his Eyes. The reason of his Passion against his Son was this: He had ordered him at their first entrance to the Empire, to go and live at Rome; which his Son out of his too great love to his Father, having neglected, Maximin thought, that if but his Son had been at Rome, the Senate would never have dared to attempt this Revolt. Whilst he was in this extream Passi∣on, his Friends carried him to his Bed. The next day, because he could not otherwise con∣tain himself, nor lay aside the thoughts of his Resentments, they set him to drown them in Wine; which he did. The day after he as∣sembled a Council of his Friends, to consider what was best to be done. They said little; some of them in their hearts applauded the Act of the Senate. From this Council, he went to his Army; whom he harangued in a Speech, which was full of Passion against Gor∣dianus
and the Africans that had set him up, and especially against the Senate; and then he exhorts them to Revenge their common Injuries. The Speech was this: My Fellow-Soldiers, I am to tell you a Thing,His Speech to the Ar∣my. which you will not think to be any News to you, you know the Country so well, which is this; The Africans have revolted and broken their Faith with me. I would fain know, when did they ever keep it with any? Gordianus a feeble Old Man, with one Foot in the Grave, hath taken upon him the Empire. And our Holy Fathers of the Senate, have made his Son Emperor, with him. Those most Holy Fathers of the Senate! who, as they once Murdered the Thrice Noble Julius Caesar, so now they have adjudged me an Enemy, at the same time that I am Fighting for them, and Conquering for them. Nor is it Me only, whom they have adjudged so, but You and all that are with me. Therefore if you are Men, and Men of Bravery and Courage, let us march against the Senate and against the Africans, and you shall have all their Estates amongst you. Having said this, he gave them a great Boun∣ty, and began to March them towards Rome. In the mean time Gordianus in Africa having displaced Capellianus from the Government of the Province of Mauritania, because he was a Friend of Maximin, Capellianus had put himself upon his defence, and gathered together a Body of Men against him. Gordianus the Father sent his Son Gordianus to meet and Fight Capellianus. They Engaged one another with great obstinacy. Gordianus was killed and lost
the Battle: which his Father much lamenting,Young Gordia∣nus slain. and knowing that Maximin was very strong, and that on the contrary the Africans were a People not sufficient for him to trust to, andOld Gor∣dianus kills him∣self. full of Treachery, he, rather than to fall into the hands of Maximin, put an end to his own days, and Strangled himself. Capellianus made good use of this Victory. He slew and proscribed all he found of the Party of Gordianus; he spared none, as if he acted with the very Soul of Maximin in him. He subverted whole Cities, plundered the Temples, distributed the Booty of the Temples amongst his Soldiers. He cut in pieces Poor and Rich together; ingratiating himself much with the Soldiers, that in case Maximin should dye, himself might have a fair hit for the Empire. When the News of this was brought to Rome, the Senate being more in fear than ever upon it, of the Cruelty of Maximin, which upon so much provocation given, he had Rea∣son, as much as it was his Nature, to exert, they set up Pupienus Maximus and Clodius Bal∣binus to be Emperors, together with Gordianus the Third, a Youth, who was the Grandson of Gordianus the First. So they had three Em∣perors to support them against Maximin, at once. The first had been the Governour of the City of Rome; had passed through many high Offices with reputation, and was one of great Worth and Note, but not of Birth. As he was of the severer Life, so was he the most Prudent and most Valorous of all the three:
and therefore both the Senate and Balbinus, his Brother, who was a more easie Man, com∣mitted the War against Maximin to him. He went, Balbinus tarried at Rome; where there arose intestine Broils and domestick Seditions in a manner that was more violent, than Bal∣binus was able to suppress; till the Soldiers of the Guards cut in pieces several of the People. Gallicanus and Mecaenas were particularly killed in this Fray, and a great part of the City was burnt. Maximin was well refreshed, to hear of the death of Gordianus and his Son, and of the Victory of Capellianus. But when again he received the further News of the Act of the Senate for the constituting Maximus, Balbinus, and Gordianus Emperors, he concluded that the Hatred of the Senate to him was Perpe∣tual, and that they did all really make him a publick Enemy; so he was the more violent to advance his Expedition into Italy: He crossed the Alps, and came to Hemona, a City which anciently stood in the way to Aquileia. Some say he found this City empty, and de∣serted, which he was pleased to see, as if it was, that they had all ceded to the Power of his Arm. However it was, when he came to Encamp on the Plain, he could not find Pro∣visions to recruit his Army. For the People of the Country, according to the Advices that were sent them, had every where driven their Cattel and their Provisions, and retired within the Town, on purpose that Maximin and his Army should perish for want of Provisions.
This incensed his Army against him. They did not think to be starved in Italy, but to be mightily refreshed after their Journey over the Alps. They began first to murmur within themselves, then to speak some things openly, which he pretending to revenge upon them, they Mutined still more; but deferred to dis∣cover it, till a convenient time, which pre∣sented it self not long after. He advanced to the City of Aquileia; who shut their Gates a∣gainstMaximus besieges Aquielia▪ him, and were resolved to defend them∣selves, under the Conduct of Menophilus and Crispinus, two Officers of the Order of the Consuls, who were sent to them from the Se∣nate. He offered them Propositions, where∣on to Surrender: To which the People had well nigh consented, but that Menophilus and his Partner withstood them, and said, That they were assured of Conquering Maximin; because Apollo, the Tutelar God of the Place, had dis∣covered as much to them by his Soothsayers. Hence the Party of Maximin, after they were defeated, took occasion to say, That it was Apollo who fought against them; and the Victory which was obtained, was not a Victo∣ry of Maximus, nor of the Senate, but it was a Victory of the Gods. At least they pretended to say this for themselves, because they were ashamed indeed, that so weak and so ill-pro∣vided a Place had held it out against so strong an Army. Maximin passed the River upon a Bridge of Boats, and began to lay close Siege to it. This Service was hot on both sides. Maximin and his Son went round the Walls,
as near as possible, and sometimes encouraged on their Men, sometimes made Overtures to those in the Town. But all did them no great good. Both his Son and he had many Re∣proaches thrown upon them, because of the Beauty of the one, and the Cruelty of the o∣ther. At length thinking that it was the Laziness of his Officers, which was the cause that the Siege was protracted, he put some of those to death, at a time when he the least should have done it; because it made his Army the more dissatisfied with him. In the mean time his Army was in a great want of Provisi∣ons: For the Senate had sent Orders to all the Provinces, and to the Governours of the Ports, that they should suffer no Convoys to pass to him: They had also sent Praetors and Quaestors to all Towns to keep strong Guards, and to dispose all manner of things, to his pre∣judice. So that he who was the Besieger, suf∣fered the distress of Persons besieged. And it was said, that all the World conspired to hate him. His Soldiers seeing this, and fearing what might be the Consequences of it, whose Wives and Children were assembled together upon the Mountain Albano not far off, they took their opportunity, when they were at lei∣sure from Action, and whilst Maximin and hisBoth the Maximins slain. Son were reposed in their Tent about Noon, to fall upon them, and kill them. Their Heads they fix'd upon Spears, and shew'd them to the Garrison of Aquileia. The Statues and Images that were of Maximin in the Camp, were immediately defaced and taken down;
the Captain of the Guards to him killed, with others of his particular Friends, and the Heads of both the Father and the Son were sent to Rome. This was the End of the two Maximins. An End, just upon the Father, who deserved it for his Cruelty, as much as it was severe upon the Son, who was a good Prince. All the Pro∣vinces received the News with great joy. But the Barbarians regreted his loss. His Army submitted: whereof such as were declared pub∣lick Enemies, were put to death; the rest were received by the Town of Aquileia: A great Convoy of Provisions was sent to them into their Camp, which was almost starving, and the next day they all took the Oath of Fidelity to Maximus, Balbinus, and Gordianus; AdoredThree new Em∣perors. before their Images, and acknowledged the two late Gordiani as Gods, who had lost their Lives in the Cause against Maximin. It is not easie to express the great Joy that ap∣peared, as the Head of Maximin was carried through the Country of Italy to Rome. Every body was glad to run to meet it. The Empe∣ror Maximus was then at Ravenna; where he had raised himself some Auxiliary Troops of the Germans, and was making Preparations for the War. But as soon as he received the News, that the Maximins were both killed, and that their Army had yielded, and sworn Fidelity to him and his Colleagues, he dismissed those Troops, and immediately writ Letters of the Victory to Rome: where it produced such an Universal Joy, that every body repaired to the
Altars, Temples, the Chappels and the Reli∣gious Houses, to give Thanks unto the Gods for it. The Emperor Balbinus, who was by nature a Timerous Man, and who trembled when he but heard the Name of Maximin, offered a Sacrifice of an hundred Beasts, and ordered the same to be repeated through all the Cities of Italy. Then Maximus returned to Rome: Coming to the Senate, he Congra∣tulated to them the Success of his Expedition, and made a Speech. After which he, Balbinus, and Gordianus, went together to the Court, at∣tended with all the usual Acclamations of Joy and Victory. It is fit to know, what a Decree the Senate passed upon this, and what a Day it was with the People at Rome, when the News arrived of the Death of Maximin. The Express sent with it from Aquileia, took his way by Ravenna to deliver it first to the Emperor Maximus, and yet he made such haste by change of Horses, that he reached Rome in four days, which was never known done before. The two Empe∣rors Balbinus and Gordianus, with all the People, were then assembled in the Theatre, at the Publick Divertisements. Immediately as the Express came into the Theatre, before he could have the time to say any thing, all the People cryed out with great Joy, Maximin is Killed; which was a grateful Hearing to the Emperors. So the Company rose, and every one went strait to the Temples and the Chappels, to re∣turn their Thanks to the Gods. From thence the Emperors went to the Senate, which Assem∣bled
upon this Occasion, as likewise did the People; and after the Emperor Balbinus had read to the Senate the Letter which was arri∣ved from Maximus, the Senate passed this De∣cree, as follows. The Gods Pursue the Enemies of the People of Rome. We return our Thanks to thee for the same, O most Excellent Jupiter, and to Thee, O Holy Apollo! We Thank the Emperor Maximus. We Thank Your Majesties here present, Balbinus and Gordianus. We Decree Temples to the Honour of the Emperors the Gordiani, deceased. The Name of Maximin, as it hath already been erased out of the Publick Monuments, so now let it be erased out of our Thoughts, and be forgotten for ever: Let the Head of the Publick Enemy be thrown into the River, and no Man Bury his Body. He that threatned the Senate with Death and Bonds, is Killed as he deserved. We give our Thanks for it to your most Sacred Majesties, Maximus, Balbinus and Gordianus. The Gods Preserve you. We all wish you Victory over your Enemies. We all desire the Return and Presence of Maximus. The Gods Save Your Majesty Balbinus. Your Majesties will be pleased to be the Consuls this Year. After this, Cupidius Celerimus said thus. Having Erased the Name of the Maximins, and Deified the Emperors the Gordiani, we on the other hand Decree Triumphal Statues, with Elephants, to our present Princes Maximus, Bal∣binus,
and Gordianus: We Decree them Tri∣umphal Chariots, Statues on Horseback, and Tro∣phies, upon the Subject of this Victory. Then the Senate Adjourn'd. The Empe∣rors retired to the Palaces, and Publick Sa∣crifices were appointed throughout all the City of Rome.
THE Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Maximin the Second. TO THE EMPEROR Constantine the Great, BY JULIUS CAPITOLINUS. MAXIMIN the Second, or the Younger, and the Son of the fore∣going, was a Youth of that extra∣ordinary Beauty, that generally the Ladies of Wit were in Love with him: some of them even wished themseves a part in his Caresses, and to have Children by him. He
was so Tall, that had he lived, it is probable, he would have reach'd the heighth of his Fa∣ther. But he dyed in the Flower of his Youth, in his one and twentieth Year, or, as some say, in his eighteenth. He had learn'd theHis Lear∣ning and Masters. Greek and Latin Languages to a Perfection. In the Greek his Master was Fabilius, who hath several Epigrams in the Greek, yet extant; and particularly some that he made upon the Picture of his Scholar. In the Latin he had the Grammarian Philemon, Modestinus the Law∣yer, and Titianus the Orator. The Father of which last was he, who hath written a Choro∣graphy of the Provinces of the Roman Empire, and was called the Ape of his Age; because he Imitated all things. He had a Greek Rheto∣riian called Eugenius, who was Famous in his time. Junia Fadilla, a Daughter of the Fa∣mily of the Princes, the Antonini, was Con∣tracted to him; who afterwards was Married to Toxotius, a Senator of the same Family, who dyed after his Praetorship, and hath written some Poems, which we have at this day. The Presents which were given to her by Maximin when he Contracted her, are particularly re∣counted by Aelius Cordus. A Locket of nine great Pearls, a Head set with eleven Emeralds, a Bracelet of four Jacynths, Garments of Cloth of Gold, and all the Ornaments of Princely Attire, which were fit for a New Spouse. As this Maximin was very Beautiful, so he carried a Pride to the highest degree: he kept himself Sitting, when his Father, as Cruel as he was, many times rose to Persons of Honour,
that came to wait upon him. He was of a gay Humour, Drank little, but loved good Eating, especially of the wild Creatures of the Field; the Wild Boar, Duck, Crane, and the like, were his constant Dishes. Those of the Party of the Emperors Maximus, Balbinus, and Gordianus, and particularly the Senators, were willing to slander him because of his great Beauty: Pretending, that it was im∣possible, that so charming a Gift of the Gods could be kept uncorrupt. So also, when he went about the Walls of Aquileia, in Com∣pany with his Father, to persuade that City to a Surrender. All that they pretended to object against him, was, the matter of Un∣cleanness, because of his tempting Beauty, which however was very far from him. He was so Proper in his Cloaths, that no Lady in the World could be more. He was extreamly Obsequious to such as were of his Father's Friends; that is, so far as to give them what was in his power, and make them Largesses. But when they paid their Reverences to him, he received them in a manner, which was again as high. He gave them his Hand to kiss; he suffered them to kiss his Knees, and sometimes his Feet: which his Father would never do; who said, The Gods forbid, that any free-born Man should lay his Lips to my Feet. Having mention'd his Father, I desire to in∣sert one pleasant Passage of him. He was, as I have observed before in his Life, Eight Foot and almost a half high. Therefore his Shoe, or Royal Buskin, was given by some,
to be seen publickly, in a Religious House in a Grove, which is betwixt the City Aquileia, and a place called Arzia: which Shoe, it is certain, is bigger by a Foot, than the Mea∣sure of any other Man: And hence it is be∣come a Proverb to say of one, who is of an extraordinary Height, without much Wit, Ca∣liga Maximini. i. e. He is the Print of Maxi∣min; He treads in his Shoe. But I return to speak of the Son. The Emperor Alexander Severus in a Letter to his Mother Mammaea, appears to have had some thoughts of Matching this Maximin to his own Sister Theoclia. The Letter was this. Madam, I Would propose to you, to Marry your Daughter Theoclia to the younger Maximin, did not his Father, who is a Commander in our Forces, and I assure you a very good one, retain some∣thing in him, that savours of the Barbarian. I fear my Sister, who is so acquainted with all the Politeness of the Grecian Education, will not en∣dure a Father in Law of that Nature. Other∣wise, as for the Youth himself, he is Beautiful and Ingenious, and seems to be bred, and polished to the Mode of the Grecians too: This is what I think. You may please to consider with your self, whether you will rather choose to have to be your Son in-Law Him, or Messala; who is of an Ho∣nourable Family, and a very Powerful Orator, a Learned Man, and who, if I mistake not, would make a good Soldier, if he was put to the War.
Thus that Prince speaks of the Younger Maximin. I have little more to add concern∣ing him, besides a Letter of his Father's, ex∣pressing the Reasons of his creating him Em∣peror in conjunction with himself. I, says he, have permitted my Son Maximin to be made Emperor together with me, both out of the Affection which a Father owes to a Son, and also because the People of Rome and that Antient Senate may see, and swear, That they never had a more Beautiful Prince in their lives. His Coat of Mail was all of Gold, after the Example of the Ptolomies of Egypt. He had another all of Silver. His Shield was of Gold, enriched with Precious Stones, and his Javelin of Gold; he had Swords of Silver, and others of Gold He neglected nothing that could serve to assist his Beauty. His Helmets were set with Jewels and Embossed. As for what concerns his Pleasures and his Amours, with which Aelius Cordus asperses him, I must refer the Reader, if he desires to know them, rather to that Author, than delay my prosecution of the Lives of the other Princes that follow, in obedience to the Commands which I have received. The Omens of his Reign were these: AHis Ad∣vance∣ment fore∣shew'd. Serpent came and twined it self about his Head as he slept. A Vine which he Planted, produced at the end of the Year large Grapes, of the colour of Purple, and grew to a won∣derful greatness. His Shield burnt by being exposed to the Sun. His Javelin was cleft
perfectly in two from the top to the bottom, by Lightning. Which the Soothsayers remark'd as an Omen, that there should arise Two Emperors upon the Throne of the same House and the same Names, but that they should not long Reign. When he was under his Master that taught him Grammar, a Lady his Rela∣tion presented him with a Homer in Purple, written in Characters of Gold. Being invited, when a little Youth, by the Emperor Alexan∣der Severus to Supper, out of respect to his Fa∣ther, and wanting the proper Vest to sit down in, that Prince furnish'd him with one of his own. As a Chariot of the Emperor Antoninus Caracallus passed the Streets empty, immediate∣ly he leapt into it, and sat himself down, and was with much ado, prevailed to come out a∣gain. Caracallus was told of it, and withal desired to have a care of such an Auspicious Boy. Nay, says Caracallus, He is a great way off of being my Successor: For at that time he was too inferior for that Matter, by his Qua∣lity, as well as his Years. The Omens of his Death were these: AsPresages of his Death. he and his Father were on their March against the Emperors Maximus, Balbinus, and Gordia∣nus, a Woman met them with her Hair all disheveled, and in a mournful figure, crying, The Maximins, the Maximins, the Maximins; as if she meant to say, Help: But she could speak no more, and dyed. The second days March, at Night, above a dozen Dogs set up a most miserable Howling about his Tent, and in the morning were found dead. Five hundred
Wolves together entred into the City of He∣mona after him: that is, the same, which up∣on his arrival was deserted by all its People. But it would take me up too much time to re∣cite all the things of this nature. He who is so over-curious to desire to know them, I would wish him only to read Aelius Cordus, who lets nothing escape him, even to a Fable. There are no Sepulchres of the Maximins extant. Their Bodies were thrown into a River, and their Heads burnt in the Field of Mars, with great Insults and Rejoycings of the People. I am not however to omit an Observation of Aelius Sabinus. He says, The Younger Maximin had a Face so fine and so well made, that after his Head was cut off, as much as it was macerated, blackened and besineared with Gore, any one might see, that it was the Face of one, who had been an extraor∣dinary beautiful Person: and therefore when the Head of the Father was carried about upon a Spear, and great Joy made to see it; People were almost as much on the contrary troubled, to see the Head of the Son served so too. A Greek Historian Dexippus adds, that the Son, together with the Captain of the Guards, Anolinus, was killed in the sight of the Father. Others say, that after the Father had seen his Son killed before his eyes, he with his own Hand killed himself, to avoid the Treatment of his Enemies. However that is, we cannot forbear to re∣member the extraordinary Firmness of the City of Aquileia to the Interests of the Senate
against the Maximins. They maintain'd the Siege with that Obstinacy, that when theyWomens Bravery. wanted Strings for their Bows, they served themselves of the Womens Hair, to make Strings of: which had been sometime done before by the City of Rome. In Memory whereof, and to the Honour of the Ladies, the Senate there Dedicated a Temple to Venus with this Title, Veneri Calvae; To Venus the Bald.
IMP. M. ANT. GORDIANVS AFR. AVG. portrait of Gordianus I IMP. CAES. CLOD. PVPIENVS MAXIMVS AVG portrait of Pupienus IMP. CAES. D. CAEL BALBINVS AVG. portrait of Balbinus IMP. CAES. M. ANT. GORDIANVS AVG. portrait of Gordianus III IMP. M. IVL. PHILLIPPVS AVG. portrait of Philip IMP. CAES. C. MESSIO DECIO TR. AVG. portrait of Decius P. 37. Vol. 11.
THE Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Gordianus the First. BY JULIUS CAPITOLINUS. Address'd to the EMPEROR Constantine the Great. THere were Three Princes of the NameHis Ex∣traction. of Gordianus, according to the Ac∣count of the best and faithfullest Hi∣storians. The first of the Three, or Gordianus the Elder, was the Son of Maecius Marullus, of the Family of the Gracchi, and Ulpia Gor∣diana, of the Family of the Emperor Trajan.
His Father, Grandfather, and Great Grand∣father had been Consuls. His Wife's Father, and her Grandfather and Great Grandfather had been Consuls. Himself had been a Con∣sul, and a very Rich and very Powerful one also. He lived in the House which was for∣merly Pompey's the Great at Rome; and he had more Land belonging to him in the Provinces, than any one private Man besides. After his Consulship, in which the Emperor Alexander Severus was his Partner, he was made the Pro∣consul of Africa by an Ordinance of the Senate. Whilst he was a Youth he writ severalHis Stu∣dies, and Munifi∣cence. Poems, now Extant: in which he offers to outdo at least the Attempts of Cicero in Poetry upon the same Subjects: And as Virgil writ Aeneids, Statius his Achilleidos, and Homer Il∣liads, so Gordianus wrote his Antoniniados; which is a Poem in Thirty Books, and very Elegant Verse, containing the Lives and Wars, the Publick and Private Actions of the Empe∣rors Antoninus the Pious, and Marcus Antoninus. Afterwards, as he grew, he Declaimed in the Publick School upon Controversies, in the presence of the Emperors themselves. He was very Magnificent in his Quaestorship. The Year that he was Aedile, he Entertained the People of Rome at his own expence, Twelve times, with the Publick Shews: that is, once every Month: and sometimes he presented five hun∣dred couple of Gladiators at a Shew, never less than one hundred and fifty. He had a hundred Wild Beasts of Africa Hunted in one day; another a thousand Bears: his sixth day
is very Memorable. There were two hundred stout Stags Hunted by Britains; thirty Wild Horses, a hundred Wild Sheep, ten Elks, a hundred Cyprian Bulls, three hundred Red Bar∣bary Ostriches, thirty Wild Asses, one hundred and fifty Boars, two hundred Wild Goats, and two hundred Deer. All these he gave in One, which was his sixth day, to be Hunted, taken and divided amongst the People. There is a Painting of it yet to be seen, in the House where he lived, of the Great Pompey: which House was his, and his Father's, and his Grand∣father's before him: but since confiscated in the time of the Emperor Philip. In his Praetorship he acquitted himself No∣bly. After which, he was Consul the first time in conjunction with the Emperor Anto∣ninus Caracallus, the second time in conjunction with the Emperor Alexander Severus. He had two Children: a Son, who was a Consul, and afterwards his Colleague in the Empire, who was killed in the Battel in Africa near Car∣thage; and a Daughter, called Maecia Faustina, who married Junius Balbus, who was also a Consul. In his Consulships he was the most Famous of all of his time: insomuch that the Emperor Caracallus envied him, and ad∣mired sometimes his Robes, sometimes his Shews extreamly. He was the first Private Man of the Romans, that had a Consular Tu∣nick and Gown Embroidered with Palm-leaves and other Devices in Gold, of his own: Be∣cause before, the Emperors themselves, when Consuls, received those Robes upon solemn
Occasions, either out of the Capitol where they were reposited from time to time, or out of the Wardrobe of the Court. He gave, by the Emperor's leave, ten Sicilian Chariot-Horses, and ten others bought out of Cappadocia, to be Run in the Cirque. So that he rendred himself dear to the Populace, who are always affected with these things. Aelius Cordus says, that in all the Cities of Campania, Hetruria, Flaminia, Ombria, and the Picenum, he divert∣ed the People with the Sports of the Stage, and other Divertisements, upon his own Charges, for four days together. He writ in Prose the Praises of all the Princes before him of the Name of Antoninus; which Name he so loved, that when he entred his Son into the Publick Register, before the Keeper of the Exchequer, according to the Roman Law, it is certain, he called him, Antoninus Gordianus. After his Consulship he was chosen the Pro∣consulMade Proconsul of Africa. of Africa, with the consent of all, who wished well to the Honour of the Reign of Alexander Severus, in that Country. That Prince hath a Letter extant, in which he re∣turns his Thanks to the Senate for making choice of so Deserving a Person for that Em∣ployment. You could not do any thing, says he, Fathers of the Senate, which is more Grateful and more Pleasing to me, than your making Choice of Gor∣dianus to be the Proconsul of Africa. A Man of Honour and Gallantry, Eloquent, Just, Continent, Good, and so he goes on.
This shews, how Great a Man he then was. When therefore he came into Africa, the Peo∣ple Loved him, as they never did any Procon∣sul before. Some called him a Scipio, some a Cato, some a Mutius Scaevola, a Rutilius, and a C. Laelius. One day particularly, says Ju∣ius Cordus, as he was Reading in publick to them an Order, from the Emperor his Master, which began with these words, Since the Pro∣consulship of the two Scipio's, the People took the Hint from thence to cry, A New Scipio, a True Scipio, is the Proconsul Gordianus: All Happiness to Him: And several such Acclama∣tions as these, he heard frequently. He was as to his Person, of a Roman Height,His Per∣son and Character with comely gray Hairs, and a stately Visage, rather ruddy than fair, a good full Face, his Eyes, Mouth and Brow, carried a Majesty. He was pretty big in the Body. As to his Actions, he was so Moderate, that you can say nothing that he ever did passionately or immodestly, or to any manner of excess. He loved his Son and Grandson, his Daughter and his Grand-daughter, very entirely, and according to all the Rules of Duty: He de∣ferred so much to his Wife's Father, Annius Severus, that, as if he was in the Quality of a begotten Son to him, he never presumed to Bath in the same Water with him, nor before he was a Praetor, to sit down in his presence. When he was Consul, he either dwelt with him always in his House, or if he was at his own, he went to wait upon him, Morning or Night daily. He Drank little, and Eat less:
was proper in his Cloaths: loved Bathing; so that in Summer he Bathed four or five time a day, and twice in the Winter: he Slept very much. If he dined any time abroad with hi Friends, he made no scruple to fall asleep up∣on the Couches; which any body might se was natural to him, and not caused by any Ebriety or Luxury. Yet did not this good Life procure him  happy End and Death. He who was in th conduct of himself so Venerable, and was al∣ways entertaining himself sweetly with Plat Aristotle, Tully, Virgil, and the rest of the An∣tients, suffered an Exit that was very differen from his deserts. As he remain'd the Procon∣sul of Africa in the time of the Cruel and Vio∣lent Maximin, after the decease of his first Ma∣ster the Emperor Alexander Severus, the Senat sent his Son to him into that Province, in th Quality of a Lieutenant to assist him. No there was a Receiver of Maximin's, who w Barbarous upon a great many of the People o the Country, beyond even what Maximin him∣self would have suffered. Some he Proscribed, others he put to death; enterprizing many things beyond his Commission, till at length the Proconsul and the Lieutenant took it up∣on them to reprove him. He nevertheless pursuing his Courses, and threatning with death Persons of the Nobility, and of Con∣sular Dignity, and the Africans not being able to endure such unwonted and outragious In∣juries, they first of all joyning some of the Soldiers to them, killed this Receiver. Then
they began to think, what they should do next to secure the repose of the Country, and their own Lives, against the Party of Maximin. And it being the time that Maximin had ren∣dered himself odious unto all the World, one Mauricius a Captain of Note amongst the A∣fricans, and a Gentleman of good Birth, as∣sembled a Party of them together upon his own Grounds, near the City Thysdrus, and putting himself at the head of them, he Ha∣rangued them thus. Gentlemen and Fellow-Citizens, I thank the immortal Gods that they have givenSpeech of Mauricius to the A∣fricans. us this necessary occasion of providing for our selves against that furious Creature Maximin. For since we have killed his Receiver, who was just such another as himself, there is no safety for us, unless we set up a New Emperor. We have here a most Noble Person, who is our Proconsul, together with his Son, a Consul, his Lieutenant. They were both of them threatned with Death by that Villain of a Receiver. If therefore you will agree with me, we will Constitute them our Em∣perors, and Array them with the Purple, and the Ornaments of the Empire, according to the Laws of the Romans. The Audience answer'd, It is Just: It is Just. The Gods save the Emperor Gordianus. We Welcome His Majesty to the Empire. Be You, Gordianus, our Emperor, and your Son Reign with you. Having done this, they went in haste to the Town of Thysdrus, where Gordianus was. They
found the Venerable Old Gentleman reposed upon the Bed, they told him the Resolution that had brought them thither, and presented him with the Purple. He threw himself up∣on the ground, and refused it with all the earnestness in the World. They took him up from the ground; and at last when there was no possible remedy for it, nor no other way to avoid the Peril, which was undoubtedly Great from the Party of Maximin, he sufferedHe is de∣clar'd Emperor. himself to be proclaimed Emperor. Now he was of the Age of Eighty Years, and had been the Governour of many Provinces in his time; and his Actions had ever recom∣mended him so to the People of Rome, that he was lookt upon as one, that altogether de∣served the Empire. After he was Declared, his Party cast down the Statues of Maximin, broke in pieces his Images, and by common consent erased his Name out of the Publick Monuments. But upon Gordianus they con∣ferred the Title of Gordianus Africanus; not only because he began his Reign in Africa, but upon the account of his Relation to the Family of the Scipio's. Some likewise surname both him and his Son Antonini; others Antonii. However that is, after their Elevation at the Town of Thysdrus, they came from thence to Carthage, attended with all Princely Pomp. Gordianus, the Son, who before was the Lieu∣tenant to his Father, was appointed to be the Prince, that should take the Field and be the General of the War. An Embassy was di∣spatched to the Senate at Rome with Letters,
to give an Account of all this: which Letters were very well received by the Senate, whose President at that time was Valerian, who was afterwards himself Emperor. Private Letters also were sent to their Friends, who were Men of Power and Quality, to invite them to ap∣prove the African Revolution, and to make themselves more their Friends by contributing their assistances to maintain it. The Senate received the News of the set∣tingWhich is approv'd by the Se∣nate. up of two such Emperors against Maximin with so great satisfaction, that they not only approved of what was done, but made a choice of twenty Persons out of themselves, amongst whom to divide the Country of Italy, in order to defend it in the behalf of the Gordiani. Of which number was Maximus and Balbinus, who after the death of the same Gordiani in Africa, succeeded to the Empire by the Au∣thority of the Senate. In the mean time, an Embassy from Maximin arrived at Rome, with the promises of an Abolition of what was pass'd to his prejudice. But the Embassy of the Gor∣diani prevailed above it; from which all the Good was to be expected, that any one could desire: It promised the Soldiers a great Bounty, and the People Lands and Largesses: It was a great deal more credited, than that of Maximin: so that the Senate proceeded thereupon to cut off Vitalianus, who was the Captain of the Guards to Maximin at Rome. For Vitalianus was his Creature, and had already shewn himself of such another cruel Disposition as his Master, the further effects whereof they
dreaded: and it is commonly said, That the Method taken to do this, was contrived for the greater privacy thus. The Quaestor and some Soldiers with him, who were Bold Men, were sent to VitalianusVitalianus slain. with Letters, pretended to be arrived for him from Maximin. The Letters were sealed, as it were with Maximin's Signet. Having deli∣ver'd them, they told him, that they had some things to speak to him in private. He took them from the Company, into a long Gallery: where, as his Eyes were upon the Letters in his Hand, and as he was expecting to hear what they had to say further, they killed him; and then persuaded the rest of the Guards, that it was done by the Order of Maximin himself. It is fit, that I should give you the Decree of the Senate for Constituting the two Gor∣diani Emperors, and the denouncing Maximin an Enemy. An Extraordinary Assembly of the Senate being called, the Consul attended with the Praetors, Aediles and Tribunes of the People came to the House. The Governour of the City of Rome was not with them. He absented himself for Reasons he knew best: And as he was a Favourer of the Maximins, it was a kindness to the Cause of the Gordi∣ani, that he did so. The Consul opened the Session with this Speech. Fathers of the Senate, The two Gordiani, the Father and the Son, who have both of them been Consuls, and the one
your Proconsul of Africa, the other your Lieute¦nant, are by a great Attempt of the Africans, declared Emperors there. Let us now therefore Thank the Town of Thysdrus, and return our Thanks to our Beloved People of Carthage, that they have thus delivered us from that Cruel Beast, that Savage Beast, Maximin. What are you afraid of, Gentlemen? What look you about for? What would you stagger at? This is the thing you have always wish'd for. Maximin is an Enemy. Let the Gods immediately take him off, and give us to know with joy, the Prudence and the Felicity of Gordianus the Father, and the Constancy and Virtue of the Son. After this he read their Letters to them, which were sent to the Senate and to himself. Then followed these Acclamations of the Senate. We give Thanks unto you, O ye Gods. Per∣fect the Deliverance of us from our Enemies, which you have begun. We all adjudge Maxi∣min an Enemy. We devote Maximin and his Son to the Region of Hell. We declare the Gor∣diani our Emperors. We acknowledge the Gor∣diani our Soveraigns. The Gods Preserve the Em∣perors who are elected out of the Senate. Let us enjoy our Noble Emperors as Conquerors. Let us have the Presence of our Emperors at Rome with us. Whoever kills the Publick Enemies, he shall receive a Reward. Junius Cordus calls this a Tacit Decree of the Senate; but what that means, I must explain
in short; for we have no Example amongstA acit Dcree, at. us of it at this day. Only, as when your Majesty calls your Chief Ministers into your Cabinet, to Consult about Matters that are not immediately to be made known to all the World, your Ministers are under their Oaths to speak nothing of them, till such time as the Business is compleated; so when any Publick Necessity in Antient Times press'd the State, as for Instance, an imminent Dan∣ger from the Enemy, which obliged them either to take inferiour Measures perhaps, or, to make an Order which was no sooner to be known, than done, or that they would not have their Friends nor any body to know any thing of it, then the Senate assembled them∣selves in Private, and their Decree was Tacit: They had no Clerks, no Publick Servants, no Assessors present: the Senators did all, and executed the Offices of the Necessary Men themselves; that nothing that was done should be betrayed. And in this manner it was, that according to Junius Cordus, the Decree of the Senate against Maximin passed, to Conceal it so much the more from Maximin. But, as there are some Men, who cannot keep a Secret for fear, as it were, that it should burst them, and who blush that what they know should not be discovered by themselves, and imagining that they shall be Men of no Consequence, unless they make it appear that they are intrusted with great Matters. Maxi∣min, notwithstanding this Secrecy, soon came to the knowledge of what had passed, and
had a Copy of this very Decree sent him, which was never known to be done before. Here∣upon he writ a Letter to Sabinus the Governour of the City, offended at his absence from the Senate at the time when that Decree was car∣ried; because as he was a Friend of his, he ought to have been there, to have opposed it. The Letter was this. I Have read the late Secret Decree of those Se∣nators of yours at Rome; which perhaps you, who are the Governour of the City, know nothing of; for neither was you present at it. I have sent a Copy of it to you, that you may consider what Measures to take, and how to Conduct your self. The Emotion which Maximin was in when he received the News of the Revolt of Africa, and the Concurrence of the Senate to it, was such as cannot be expressed. He threw him∣selfExtreme Passion of Maximin. against the Wall; tore his Cloaths, drew his Sword as if he could kill all the World, and seem'd absolutely like a Man out of his Wits. His Statues and Images in the mean time, as he was a declared Enemy, were thrown down; and the Senate made all the use imaginable of the Power which they had taken into their hands. The Informers, Ca∣lumniators, Receivers, and all those Firebrands of the Party of Maximin they condemned to death. But this did not satisfie the People; who dragged them also through the Streets, and threw them into the Kennel. Sabinus
the Governour of the City, who had been a Consul, was then knockt on the head, and left in the Street dead. When Maximin had heard of these things, he came presently to his Army, and harangu'd them to this purpose. My sworn Fellow-Soldiers, you who are engaged in my Fortunes, and who endure all the Hazards of the War with me, whilst we defend the Ho∣nour of the Roman Name in Germany, and with our Arms maintain the Country of Illyri∣cum against the Barbarians, I am to acquaint you, that the Africans, who are false to a Pro∣verb, are now Revolted. They have set up the two Gordiani, Emperors against me. One of them so Old, that he can scarce rise from his Chair: the other so weakned with his Debauchery, that he is as feeble, as if he was as Old as his Father. This is not all. That Worthy Senate at Rome hath approved of the Fact of the Afri∣cans; and those for whom, and for whose Chil∣dren's Good after them, we carry our Arms, have appointed Twenty Persons of the Order of the Consuls, to make Head against us in Italy, and have declared us all Enemies. Now that which I say to you is, Let us play the Men and marc forthwith to Rome, and let us Bravely and Con∣ragiously, as we always do, cut our way through them all. The Army was not so moved at this Speech, but Maximin perceived a slackness in their March, and a Backwardness, which he did not relish. So he writ a Letter to his Son, who was a great way behind, to hasten to him
with all speed, for fear the Soldiers should take the advantage of his Absence to set something on foot against him. The Letter was this, as it is in Junius Cordus. THis Express, who is one of my Guards, will tell you, the News that I have received both from Africa and Rome; and also, how my Army stands affected. Pray, make all the haste you can to me, for fear of any Attempt that should be made, as is usual: He whom I have sent, will acquaint you further. Whilst these things passed, Capelianus in A∣fricaCapelia∣nus's Op∣position in Africa. took up Arms against the two Gordiani. He had always been an Enemy to the Father, before he was Emperor; and being the Gover∣nour of Mauritania for Maximin, and an old Soldier, Gordianus after he was Emperor turn'd him out: which provoked him to raise a Body of the Moors, with whom he hastily directed his March towards Carthage, where all the People with a right Punick Infidelity, were ready to revolt to him from the Gordiani again. Gordianus the Father desired however to try the Fortune of a Battel. He sent his Son to fight Capelianus, and the Party of the Maxi∣mins that was with him. The Son was then of the Age of six and forty Years; younger than Capelianus, and not so experienced in the matter of War; because he had been more conversant in the Delights, ordinary to Persons of his Quality, than the Affairs of the Field. They Engag'd. Capelianus, as he was the Bolder
and the skilfuller Soldier won the day, and Gordianus was killed upon the place. The number of the slain in this Battel on the side of Gordianus was so very great, that his Body after a long search which was made forThe young Gordian slain, the Elder strangled himself. it, could no where be distinguished amongst such a prodigious multitude. That which fa∣cilitated the Victory, was, a great Storm, which is seldom seen in Africa, arose before the Fight, and shattered the Forces of Gordianus so, that it in a manner disabled them. Gordianus the Father, hearing this, and considering that his Strength was now small, and Maximin's great, and that Capelianus was at his Heels; That the Carthaginians were a People rarely true to their Trust, and there was no more safety for him in Africa; And being troubled to think, that he should fall alive into the hands of his Enemies, to avoid that, he took a Cord and strangled himself. This was the End of the two Co-Emperors of the Name of Gordianus. As the Senate had Recognized them both, so they afterwards Deified them. They Reigned one Year and six Months.
THE Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Gordianus the Second. BY JULIUS CAPITOLINUS. GORDIANUS the Second was the Son of the precedent Gordianus the Proconsul of Africa, and was set up Emperor by the Africans, and by the Se∣nate of Rome at the same time, and in con∣junction with his Father. He was one, whose Ingenuity and Carriage of himself, gave him as great a Reputation, as did the Honour of his Birth; by which he was related to the several Noble Families of the Scipio's, that of Pompey the Great, the Antoninusses, and the Antonies.
His Mother was Fabia Orestilla, a Great Grand∣daughter of the Emperor M. Aurelius Antoni∣nus; which was the reason that he was Regi∣stred in his Infancy by the Name of Antoninus Gordianus. But yet Gordianus was the Name which adhered to him, and which he was com∣monly called by. He was his Father's first Child. In his Studies he always followed the best and gravest Opinions. He was very Hand∣some,His Cha∣racter, when young. of an extraordinary Memory, and a kind and sweet Disposition; insomuch, that at School, when a Child, if he saw some of the Boys beaten, he could not forbear to cry for them. His Master was Serenus Sammonicus, who extreamly loved him, and bequeathed to him at his death a Library which consisted of Sixty two Thousand Books; being the whole Library of another Serenus Sammonicus the Father, who was put to death under the Emperor Caracalla: The same of which Treasure of Learning ex∣tolled Gordianus to the Heavens, and gave him a great Name amongst the Ingenious. The Emperor Heliogabalus made him a Quaestor; to whom he was known, by being a young Man that loved Pleasure; but yet without Scandal, and without ever bearing part in the infamous Luxury of that Prince. Alexander Severus made him a Praetor, for the Affairs of the City of Rome: He discharged himself so well, and gained so great an Esteem, that he presently after was made a Consul, though his Father had come late to that Honour: After which, either in the time of the same Alexan∣der
Severus, or in that of Maximin, he was sent into Africa, as Lieutenant to his Father, the then Proconsul there; where what Fortune befel him, we have already recounted under the Life of his Father. He loved Wine; but he always had it In∣fused,And in his advanc'd Age. either with Roses, or Mastick, or Wormwood, or other things, that pleased his Palate. He eat very little. He had dined and supped, as it were in a moment. Wo∣men he passionately loved. It is said, he kept two and twenty Concubines; by all which, he had three or four Children a-piece. He was called the Priamus of his Age, for the multitude of his Issue. In Drollery, instead of Priamus, they many times called him a Priapus. He spent his time betwixt the Gardens, the Baths, and the delightful Groves. Nor did his Father Correct him; but often said, That he would one day die a Great Man. For as freely as he lived, he did not depart from that Vigor, which was natural to him; nor from the Vir∣tues of Persons of Honour. He was always amongst the most Illustrious Company, and ready with the best of his Judgment to serve either the Publick, or his Friend. Therefore the Senate were very glad to Proclaim him Emperor together with his Father, and placed the Publick Hopes in him. He was just in his Dress, beloved by his Domesticks and all that belong'd to him. Aelius Cordus says, that he never would consent to Marry. But on the contrary we are told by Dexippus, that Gordi∣anus the Third was his Son, who afterwards,
whilst he was a Youth, was advanced to the Empire, in conjunction with Maximus and Balbinus. When his Father some time consulted an Astrologer about the Nativity of him, it was answer'd, they say, That he would be both the Son and the Father of an Emperor, and an Emperor himself. Gordianus laughing at it as a Jest, the Astrologer shew'd him his Ho∣roscope, and undertook to prove out of the Books of the Antient Masters of the Art of Astrology, that what he said was true. He told him the Day, the Manner, the Place of the Death of both the First and Second Gordianus; and justified himself with the greatest obsti∣nacy: All which Gordianus the Elder reflect∣ing upon, when he saw himself an Emperor, he even when there was no reason, for him to be afraid of any thing, spoke very often both of his own and his Son's Death, and applied to his Son those Verses of Virgil, Ostendent terris hunc tantum, &c. i. e. This Man will only to the World be shown, lamenting his Condition, that he was not long to live. We have several Discourses and also Verses of Gordianus the Second, extant, which at this day are often remembred amongst his Friends. They are not Great, nor yet Mean; but of a middle Character, and such as bespeak him to have been an Ingenious Man, of a Luxuriant Wit, and negligent of the Parts that Nature gave him.
He was a great lover of Fruit and Herbs: In his other Diet he was very sparing: but he was always eating some New Fruit or other: A great lover of all Cold things: in the Sum∣mer he eat little else. He was Gross, and much inclined to be Fat, and therefore he the rather chose this Diet, to keep himself down. This is what I have judged worthy to be remarked, concerning the Second Gordianus. For as for his domestick Pleasures, and other petty things of no Observation, which are with so little judgment recollected by Junius Cordus, let any Person who is desirous to know them, read him; who tells you, how many Coats and Cloaks every Prince had, what Courtiers, how many Servants; the knowledge whereof signifies nothing. Nor do I think, that it is the part of an Historian to trouble himself, but about things which it is either good to follow, or good to avoid. I shall only add a Passage, which I find in Vulcatius Terentianus, who hath writ a History of his Time. He says, that Gordianus the First was the Reverse of Augustus Caesar; he spoke so like him, and he resembled him so much in his Face and Stature. That the Second Gor∣dianus was very like Pompey the Great. But as to this, I know not what to say: Because it is denied, that Pompey was Fat or Gross: And he further says, That Gordianus the Third, whose Statues we have now extant, resembled the A∣siatick Scipio. This I thought was Remarkable and more for their Honour, than to be wholly pass'd in silence.
THE A. Christi Ccxxxviii. Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Gordianus the Third. BY JULIUS CAPITOLINUS. AFter the death of the two preceding Gordiani, as on the one hand the Se∣nate whom that News had struck with a great Consternation, and put them very much in fear of Maximin, elected, out of the twenty Persons appointed for the defence of Italy, Maximus and Clodius Balbinus to be Em∣perors; so on the other, the People and the Guards made it their Request, that Gordianu the Third, a Youth of about Eleven, or some say, Thirteen, or as Junius Cordus says, Sixteen
Years of Age, might be created and declared the Caesar, that is, the Person who should next succeed to the Empire; who therefore accor∣dingly was brought to the Senate and investedHe is de∣clar'd Emperor. with that Quality with the usual Solemnity. He was the Grandson of the Emperor Gordi∣anus the First; but whether by a Daughter, as many say, or by his Son Gordianus the Second, who died with him in Africa, as Dexippus thinks, I cannot determine. His Mother Educated him. Maximus and Balbinus Reigned two Years, and then were kill'd in a Mutiny of the Sol∣diers. The two Maximins were extinct before. So there remaining, without any Competitor, Gordianus the Third, who had for the two years last past, been honoured with the Qua∣lity of the Caesar, the Soldiers, the People, Se∣nate and all the Country, with great Joy and Alacrity, and with extraordinary demonstrati∣ons of their Affection, agreed to proclaim him Emperor: Loving him in Memory, and for the Merits of his Grandfather Gordianus the First, and of his Father, or otherwise his Uncle Gordianus the Second, who both of them took up Arms for the Senate and the People of Rome against Maximin, and lost their lives in their service by the Fortune of that War. It was look'd upon as a Sign, That Gordia∣nus the Third would not be a Prince of a long Reign; that such a great Eclipse of the Sun happen'd about that time; that the Day was turn'd into Night, and you could see to do no∣thing without Candles. He entertained the City
of Rome with Sports and Pastimes upon his coming to the Empire; not only the more to ingratiate himself with them, but to make them also forget the Heats and Divisions which they had had amongst themselves. Then an Insur∣rection commenc'd in Africa, headed by Sabi∣nianus, in the Year when Venustus and Sabinus were the Consuls. Gordianus Armed the Pre∣sident of Mauritania against that Revolter: who besieged and reduced him to that extre∣mity, that all his Party left him, and came and acknowledged their fault. After this, he com∣menced a War with Persia, the Emperor him∣self, which was his second Consulship, and Pompeianus being then Consuls. The young Emperor, before he went to that War, mar∣riedHis Fa∣ther-in-Law. the Daughter of Mysitheus; who as he was a Person of great Erudition and rare Elo∣quence, Gordianus thought him not unworthy to be admitted into his Alliance; and pre∣sently he made him his Captain of the Guards. This strengthen'd his Reign. Himself was for his Age very Sage and very Advised: but being also assisted with the Counsels of so excellent a Father-in-Law, nothing was acted by him that was puerile or despisable; nor was he made a Property of by the Eunuchs and Ser∣vants of the Court, which he was but too much subject to be before this Match, whilst he continued under the Regency of his Mo∣ther. We have a Letter of his Father-in-Law writ∣ten to him, and another from him written to his Father-in-Law, in which are contained
great Marks of the Reformation of the Times by virtue of the Counsels of Mysitheus. The Letters are these. To my Lord and Emperor, my Son, Mysitheus his Father-in-Law and Captain of the Garuds. IT is a Pleasure to me to observe the Altera∣tion of the Times, since every thing was bought and sold by the Eunuchs, and such as pretended themselves to be Friends, but were really the greatest Enemies to your Majesty. I am glad, that that Blot is removed from your Reign; Your Majesty is your self also very glad of it; which I am the more pleased to see, because it shews, that howsoever badly Affairs have been be∣fore managed, the fault was not in you, my Son. Nor was it to your mind, that the Commands in the Army were disposed of through the favour of the Eunuchs; or that Persons were denied the Rewards due to their Services; or that they were either saved for Money and Affection, when they deserved to die, or put to death, when they de∣served to live. It was not by your fault that the Treasury was exhausted; but all these things lie at the door of those who were continually Plot∣ting and entring into Cabals to deceive you; whereby they prevented the Access of Men of Virtue and Honesty to your Person, prepossessing you against such, and on the contrary, insinuating others into your favour, as vitious as themselves,
through whose and their own Methods together, they made a Prey of you. The Gods be thanked that your Majesty is sensible of all this, and that you have taken it into your Consideration to Reform the State. I am happy in being the Fa∣ther-in-Law of so good a Prince: A Prince who examines into, and who will know all things, and who hath banished from him those, by whom be∣fore he was made an Auction of, and sold to whosoever offered most. The Emperor Gordianus, to Mysitheus, my Father, and my Captain of the Guards. BUT that the Almighty Gods continue to Pro∣tect the Roman Empire, the Slaves, the Eunuchs, would ere this have even Ruined that and me. I now see very well, that Faelicio was not a fit Person for the Command of the Guards, which I gave him; nor Serapammo, to be trust∣ed with the Fourth Legion. I am sensible, not to reckon up all Particulars, that I have done many things otherwise than in Prudence I ought; and I thank the Gods, that through your Insinua∣tion, who are entirely Just and True to me, I un∣derstand my Error, and that I know the things which have been before shut up from me. Mau∣rus imposed upon me, and by a Confederacy with Gaudianus, Reverendus, and Montanus, at his Witnesses to confirm what he said in order to win upon my belief, he either commended or discom∣mended
Persons to me as he pleased. My Father, I would desire you to search into the Truth of things. An Emperor is in a miserable Condition, that hath the Truth hid from him. For since he cannot walk abroad to examine what he would himself, of necessity he must take up with such as he hears, and what comes to him upon the Credit of others. By these two Letters it is easie to see, that this young Prince was much amended and rectified in his Conduct, by the Advices of Mysitheus. The Gravity and the Uprightness of that Man had such an influence upon him, that he made Gordianus Famous, who other∣wise might have pass'd his time in great Ob∣scurity, without any thing but his Quality to recommend him to Posterity. An Earthquake happened in the Reign of this Emperor, so terrible, that whole Cities with their People were swallowed up in it. On which occasion a great many Sacrifices were celebrated in all Parts of Rome, and generally all over the World. The Books, says Aelius Cordus, of the Sibyls, were consulted, and all the Ceremonies being performed that seemed to be prescribed therein, then this universal Ca∣lamity ceased. After the Earthquake, and in the time of the Consulships of Praetextatus and Atticus, the Temple of Janus was opened (which was a sign of War Proclaim'd) and Gordianus march∣edThe Persi∣an Expe∣dition. upon an Expedition against Persia. He took so great an Army with him, and such a
quantity of Riches to support it, that he might easily assure the Victory to his side. He passed through the Province of Maesia, and so into Thrace, where he Conquer'd as he went; and whosoever of the Barbarians disputed his Pas∣sage, he fought them, routed them, and drove them before him. He arrived in Syria and ad∣vanced to the City of Antioch, which was then in the hands of the Persians. Here he engaged the Enemy in several Battels, in which he had so much the better, that Sapores the King of Persia, was obliged to retire and leave him to possess himself of the Cities of Antioch, He∣ren, and Nisibin, that had all been reduced be∣fore under the Empire of Persia. Indeed the King of Persia was made so sen∣sibleHis great Success. of the Power of the Emperor Gordianus, that though he was provided with great Forces to stand upon his defence, he voluntarily with∣drew his Garrisons out of our Towns, and left them intire to their Inhabitants, without the least Plunder or diminishing any thing of their Fortunes. All which was much owing to the Conduct of Mysitheus. In fine, the Persians, who had made themselves redoubtable in Italy, retired within their own Kingdom from the Arms of Gordianus, and all the East submitted to the Obedience of the Empire of Rome. The Account sent by Gordianus himself to the Se∣nate, of this Expedition, says thus: Fathers of the Senate, To add to the Victories which we obtained in our passage into the East, whereof each merits a Triumph, we have deliver∣ed
the Necks of the Antiochians from the Per∣sian Yoke, and have removed from them the Kings and Laws of Persia. We have reconquer'd He∣ren, and its Dependences, to the Roman Em∣pire; and are come up to Nisibis; and if the Gods favour us, we shall proceed further to Ctesiphon. I write to you in short; Praying for the good Health of Mysitheus, my Father and my Captain of the Guards, by whose Conduct and his good disposition of Things, as we have happily transacted this, so we hope to finish the rest also. It is for you to appoint Publick Sacrifices and Thanksgivings for the same, and to recommend us to the Gods, and return Thanks to Mysitheus. When this was read in the Senate, they de∣creed to Gordianus, to represent him Triumph∣ing after the Persian Mode, in Chariots drawn with four Elephants. To Mysitheus they ap∣pointed a Chariot with four Horses, a Trium∣phal Chariot, and this Inscription, To the High∣ly Worthy Mysitheus, the Father of Princes, Cap∣tain of the Guards, and the Guardian of the Em∣pire, the Senate and People of Rome return Thanks. But this Felicity did not continueDeath of Mysitheus. long: Mysitheus dying, whether of Sickness, as some say, or whether he was taken off by the Arts of Philip, who was made the Captain of the Guards after him, as most others say, I know not; but he left the Publick his Heir, and all that he had was added to the Stock of the City of Rome. So advantageous had been the Ministry of this Great Man, that there was no Frontier Town of note, but what he
had furnished with stores of Provision, suffi∣cient to entertain an Emperor and his Army: There was Vinegar, Corn, Bacon, Barley andHis Care of the Publick. Straw, laid up for a Year. Lesser Towns had Stores, some thirty, some for forty Days, and two Months. The least provided, were pro∣vided for fifteen days. As he was the Captain of the Guards, he continually examined the Arms of the Soldiers; he suffered no superan∣nuated Man, nor no Boy to serve, whose re∣spective Ages excused them: He made the Tour of all the Camps, and view'd their Tren∣ches himself, and went the Rounds many times in the Night. All loved him, because he was so equal a Friend to both the Emperor and the Empire. The Tribunes and the Ge∣nerals had such regard for him, that they ne∣ver failed in their Duties before him, nor di∣sputed his Orders. Philip, who succeeded him in his Place of Captain of the Guards, for some reasons, apprehended him very much: and this fear put him upon a contrivance to attempt his Life, which was thus: Mysithe being ill of a Flux, the Physicians had order∣ed him a Dose to stop it: but by the means of Philip, that Dose was exchanged, and a contrary one given him, which encreased his Flux to that degree, that he died. After his Death, which happened under the Consulships of Arrianus and Papus, Philip, anPrefer∣ment of Philip. Arabian born, was made the Captain of the Guards. A Man of mean Parentage, Proud, and not able to contain himself in so high and new a Fortune. He soon began to form
designs to prejudge the Army against the Emperor Gordianus. He brought them one time into places where there were no Provisions in the Granaries: Another time, the Vessels, which came charged with Corn for them by Water, were through his means diverted ano∣ther way. This he did maliciously to disgust them against Gordianus: because there had been such vast Stores laid up by Mysitheus for the use of the Army, that with good Conduct they knew they could not fail to be supplied; at the same time they did not suspect that Gor∣dianus was so imposed upon by Philip: who to add yet to their Resentments, and to blow up the Fire, caused a Rumour to be spread, that Gordianus, being so very young, was not a Per∣son of Ability sufficient to govern the Empire; and that it was much better that Philip should be in his place, who understood it, and how to Command an Army. He corrupted the Principes, who are a Body of the strongest and the stoutest Men amongst them, to his side; till at length, by his management he brought it about, that Philip was openly demanded to be made Emperor; which the Friends of Gor∣dianus immediately opposed to the utmost: but when the Army was in a condition of star∣ving for want of Provisions, the Empire was devolved upon Philip; and it was agreed, thatHe is made Em∣peror. he should Reign in conjunction with Gordianus, and should be as it were the Guardian of the young Prince. Philip, thus possessed of the Empire, com∣ported himself with so much Pride and Haugh∣tiness
in all things towards Gordianus, that as Gordianus was a Prince who had come to the Throne with Honour, of a Noble Family, and of a Race of Princes, his Father and his Grand∣father being both Emperors before him, so that he could not endure the intrusion of a Person of so ignoble an Original as Philip, he assem∣bled, in the presence of Maecius Gordianus his Kinsman, who was the Captain of the Guards, the Officers and Soldiers of the Army together, and complained to them; how ungrateful Philip was for the Kindnesses he had done him, and he hoped that it would be thought fit, to depose him from the Empire again. He spoke as much as he could, to that purpose; but af∣ter all, the Faction of Philip prevailed and carried it so against him, that they turned the Tables upon him, and deposed Gordianus from the Empire. He seeing that his Credit was not so great as Philip's, demanded that at least the Power should be equal betwixt them. This was denied. Then he offered to content him∣self with retaining the Quality of the Caesar. This was also denied. Then he desired, that they would not refuse him the Office of the Captain of the Guards. But this was also de∣nied. His last Prayer was his Life, and to serve Philip as a Commander in the Army. Philip had almost consented to this; who said nothing himself, but directed his Party in all things by Nods and private Signs. But when he considered with himself the Affection which the Senate and People of Rome, together with all Africa and Syria, and indeed all the Em∣pire
had for Gordianus, as being of a Noble Fa∣mily, and both the Son and Grandson of an Emperor, and one that had done great Services to the Empire in the Wars, he thought that it might one day happen, that the Army by some unforeseen Accident, might take a fancy to re-inthrone him again, because their pre∣sent Animosity, which was upon the occasion of their want of Provisions, was but a Passion that might not last always; and therefore he ordered him to be carried out of sight (Gordi∣anus crying as he went) and to be disrobed of the Purple and killed; which after a little he∣sitation was done accordingly, after he had reigned six Years. Thus by Blood, and not by Right, did the Emperor Philip raise himself. In the mean time Argunthis, King of Scythia, ravaged the Kingdoms adjoyning to him, unto which he was encouraged, especially by the death of Mysitheus, by whose Counsels the Empire had been so well governed before under Gordianus. Philip, willing to conceal his accession to the Empire by Blood, sent Letters to Rome with a quite different Account; in which he said, that Gordianus was dead of a Sickness, and that as for himself, all the Army had elected him Emperor. The Senate was easily to be de∣ceived in the Truth of things at that distance. They accepted and proclaim'd Philip Emperor, and reposed the deceased Gordianus in the num∣ber of the Gods. He was a handsome, gay,Character of Gordi∣anus. amiable Youth, obliging to all, of an agree∣able Life, and good Erudition; he wanted
nothing but Age for the Throne. The Peo∣ple and the Senate loved him, and so also did the Army, before the Faction of Philip, be∣yond any Prince that they had ever had yet. All the Soldiers and the Senate, says Cordus, called him their Son, and all the People called him their Darling. Nor did Philip after he had killed him, take away his Images, or throw down his Statues, or raze out his Name: He always gave him the Title of a God, amongst the very Party with whom he had confedera∣ted against him: He seriously honoured him; but not without mixing with his Worship, a great deal of foreign Craft and Dissimulation. The House of the Gordiani is standing atHis Buil∣dings. this day. It was very finely beautified by this last Prince. Their Villa or Country-Seat, is upon the Way that leads to Palestrina, consisting of two hundred Pillars of four several Orders; fifty of the Marble of Carysto in the Island of Negrepont, fifty of the Claudian Marble, fifty of that of the City Synnada in Phrygia, and fifty of that of Numidia, all of the same measure: There are three Galleries three hundred foot long: The rest is suitable to the Work, and the Baths such, as no part of the World, ex∣cept Rome, can parallel. The Senate decreed this extraordinary privilege to the Family of the Gordiani, that their Posterity, if they plea∣sed, might for ever be exempted from Tute∣lages, Embassies, and all other publick Duties. There are no Publick Buildings by this last Prince extant at Rome, besides some Fountains and Baths: The Baths he built not neither
for publick, but only private use. He had be∣gun to build a Royal Structure in the Field of Mars, at the foot of the Mount, consisting of two Galleries of a thousand foot length each, and the distance of five hundred foot from one another; the Interspace on either side to be adorned with Greens, composed of Laurel, Myrtle, and Box; and in the middle a Terrass of the length of the Galleries, su∣stained with rows of small Pillars, and having over head another stately Gallery of five hun∣dred foot. Besides this, he, with the direction of Mysitheus, had designed to build a Summer Bath, which should bear his own Name; and also other Baths for the Winter, for the use of this Place, to render both the Greens, the Galleries, and the whole Work the more use∣ful. But all these things have since been in the occupation of private Persons, and are now taken up in their Houses, Gardens, and Te∣nements. There was at Rome, in the time of this Em∣peror, two and thirty Elephants, whereof two and twenty were of his own sending thither; the other ten were brought by the Emperor Alexander Severus. Besides these, there were ten Elks, ten Tygres, sixty tame Lions, thirty tame Leopards, ten Hyaena's, a thousand couple of Gladiators, who were maintained at the Charge of the Exchequer: One Sea-Horse, one Rhinoceros, ten White and Wild Lions, ten Camel-Panthers, twenty Wild Asses, forty Wild Horses, and an innumerable company of other Beasts of divers kinds; all which Gordianus had
prepared to adorn his Persian Triumph. But in this the Publick Wish had not its effect. For they were by Philip given to be hunted and killed at the Secular Games, and the Games of the Cirque; when, during the Consulship of himself and his Son, he Celebrated the Anniversary of the Foundation of the City of Rome, which was then arrived to its Thou∣sandth Year. That which is upon the Records concer∣ning the Murderers of Julius Caesar, is obser∣ved by Aelius Cordus to have happened, now again, to the Murderers of the Emperor Gor∣dianus. All those, who embrued their hands in his Blood, who (it is said) were Nine, after the death of the two Philips, came to kill them∣selves, with the same Swords with which they had stabbed him. This was therefore the Life and End of the three Princes of the Name of Gordianus. The two first were killed in Africa; the third upon the Borders of Persia: where, at the Castle of Circessum, which is upon the Eu∣phrates, a Sepulchre was erected by the Sol∣diers for him, with this Inscription, written in both the Greek, Latin, Persian, Hebrew, and Aegyptian Languages, that all the World might read and understand it; To the Honour of theInscripti∣on on his Tomb. Emperor Gordianus, Conqueror of the Persians, Conqueror of the Goths, Conqueror of the Sar∣matians, Represser of the Tumults of the Ro∣mans, Conqueror of the Germans, but not the Conqueror of the Philips. For the Philips killed him: The Alans had sometime also the better
of him in a Fight in the Plains of Philippi in Macedonia. Licinius at the same time, that he set up for the Empire, it is said, defaced this Sepulchre; because he pretended to de∣rive his Extraction from the Philips. All which I have therefore been willing to observe, most Excellent Constantine, to the end that you should be unacquainted with no∣thing that might seem in any wise to be wor∣thy of the knowledge of your Majesty.
THE Lives and Reigns OF THE EMPERORS MAXIMUS AND BALBINUS. By JULIUS CAPITOLINUS. AFter the Death of Gordianus the First, and his Son Gordianus the Second in Africa, which happened in the time that Maximin was marching against Italy, in a great rage to revenge his own deposition from the Empire, and their elevation to it in his Place: the Senate full of fears of the Attempts and Fury of so Cruel an Enemy, assembled
themselves in the Temple of Concord, upon the Seventh of the Calends of July, being the Anniversary of the Games in Honour of A∣pollo, to consider what course to take in order to their security against him. Maximus and Balbinus were then two Persons of the first Note in the Senate, who had been Consuls; whereof the one, that is, Maximus, excelled in Valour and in strictness of Discipline; and the other, Balbinus, excelled as much in Good∣ness. These two coming into the Senate, and expressing in their very entrance their concern for the News of the Design of Maximin, the Consul, who was making a Report to the Senate of some things of another Nature, was Answer'd by the Senator of the First Voice thus: We trouble our selves here about Matters of small Moment, and little better in comparison than Old Wives Stories, at a time that really challenges the highest Consideration of the Senate. For what have we to do to Treat now upon the Repairing of Temples, and the Adorning a Basilica, of the Baths of Titus, and the Rebuilding the Amphitheatre, when Maximin is at our Heels, whom you with me have declared an Enemy. The two Gordiani, in whom our Security was, are dead; nor is there at this present any Remedy for us whereunto to recur. Come, Gentlemen, appoint who shall be our Emperors. What do you lose Time for? Lest whilst you perplex your selves every one with your Fears, your rather perish in those Fears, than by Valour and Bravery seek to effect our Deli∣verance.
The Senate was in a profound silence, up∣on this, when Maximus, whose Age as well as his Merits, and his Valour and Severity of Discipline rendred him most Illustrious, offer∣ing to speak his Opinion the next; which was, that it was necessary, that there should be two Emperors appointed, who should Go∣vern in conjunction with one another: Vectius Sabinus of the Family of the Ulpii, desired the leave of the Consul to be heard, which was granted, and he spoke thus: It is certain, Gentlemen, that in Changes that are so sudden as this, there is nothing like Re∣solving; and the Counsels, which offer themselves to our Thoughts, are rather to be immediately ex∣ecuted, than disputed. To what purpose are many Words, and fine Speeches, where Affairs are so urgent? Let every one have a care of his own Neck; and think upon his Wife and Children, and the Estate which he inherits from Ancestors. All which are under imminent danger from Maxi∣min; whose Nature it is to be Furious, Truculent, Barbarous; but yet his Cause, which as he thinks, is so Just, will make him still much worse. He hath put himself at the Head of a good Body of Troops, and fix'd every where his Garrisons, and is marching towards Rome; and you in the mean time spend the day in sitting and Consulting. With∣out more Words, which there is no need of, a new Emperor is to be made. Nay, I would say, two ew Emperors: one to look after the Civil Affairs the other to be charged with those of the War.  to reside at Rome, the other to march with  Army against the Invaders. I my self will Nne
the Persons. Do you Confirm them, if you please: or if not, produce better. Maximus and Balbi∣nus. The one so great a Soldier, that he has ennobled his Birth by the splendor of his Valour; the other a Man of High Birth, the Lenity of whose Temper, and the Excellency of his Life, which from his Youth he hath bestowed always in Studies and Letters, is of the greatest Consequence to the State. You have my Opinion, Gentlemen, which is perhaps more dangerous to my self, than to you: But yet neither is it very safe to you, unless you make either some other, or these Per∣sons, our Emperors. The whole House unanimously answer'd, It is Just: It is Just: We all agree to the Opinion of Sabinus: Maximus and Balbinus, the Gods save your Majesties: The Gods have made you our Emperors: The Gods preserve you. Do you defend the Senate against the Robbers of the Party of Maximin. We commit the War against the Robbers to you. Let Maximin, the Publick Enemy, with his Son perish. Pursue the Publick Enemy. You are happy in the Judgment of the Senate: The State is happy in you to sit upon the Throne. What the Senate hath deferred to you, undertake with Courage: What the Senaete hath given you, accept it freely. So with these, and such other Acclamations,Maximus and Balbi∣nus decla∣red Empe∣rors. Maximus and Balbinus were constituted Em∣perors. From the Senate they went first to the Ca∣pitol, and assisted at the Sacrifices there. Whilst they were at the Capitol, the Populace contra∣dicted the Election of Maximus, because they
fear'd his Severity; and they desired, that the In∣fant Gordianus, Grandson of the Emperor Gor∣dianus the First, of about thirteen Years of Age, should be made the Caesar. From the Capitol, Maximus and Balbinus went to the Rostra, which is the Place to Harangue the People in upon the subject of their Election. As they had done this, the People there, to∣gether with some Soldiers who joined them, cried, We all desire to have Gordianus Caesur. Nor would they permit the Emperors, who were attended with their Guards, to depart from thence, to go to the Palace, till this was granted: so that Gordianus was presently taken and carried into the Senate, and the Senate the same day, which was a new thing, that they had passed the Act in the favour of Maxi∣mus and Balbinus to be Emperors, Assembled a second time, and passed another Act in theGordiaus declar'd. Caesar. favour of Gordianus to be the Caesar. The first Motion, which the two Emperors after their Elevation made to the Senate, was, That the two Gordiani, who were dead in A∣frica, should be Deified. Some say, this Mo∣tion was made only for the Father, who had strangled himself. But as the Son died the ho∣nourabler death, by being killed in the Field, I choose rather to believe the Report of Junius Cordus, in whom I remember that I have read, that they were both Deified. After this, they conferred the Office of Governour of the City of Rome upon Vectius Sabinus: who was a Grave Person, suitable to the Temper of Max∣imus; and they made Pinarius Valens the Cap∣tain of the Guards.
Before I speak more of their other Actions, I will give you some Account of their Man∣ners and Families: which is done before me indeed by Junius Cordus, and by Curius Fortu∣natianus. The first suffers nothing to escape him: so that many times he takes in things that are Vile, and not Handsome. The lat∣ter hath gone through all this History; and hath amassed together several things which are not to be found elsewhere. But he is so short, that he only touches upon them. I shall not follow the Method of the one or the other; but rather that of the Histories of Suetonius Tranquillus and Valerius Marcellinus. Maximus's Father was one out of the lowestExtracti∣on of Max∣imus. Rank of the People; a Coach-maker, or as some say, a Blacksmith; whose Wife's Name was Prima, by whom he had four other Boys, and four Girls, that all of them died young. When Maximus was born, an Eagle, they say, dropt into the Chamber where he was, through some Passage, several pieces of raw Flesh: which no body daring to meddle with, or touch, out of a scruple of Religion, the Eagle came and took it away again, and carried it into the next Chappel, which was dedicated to Jupiter Praestes. This at that time seemed to be a thing of no consequence; but his coming afterwards to the Empire shew'd, that it was not done with∣out a cause, and that it was an Omen of his Reign. He passed all his Infancy in the House of his Uncle Pinarius, his Father's Brother; whom he raised to the Dignity of the Captain of the Guards, as soon as he was made Empe∣ror.
He employed his time to the study of Grammar, but not much to Rhetorick; for his inclination was always to Arms and the severe discipline of War. At length he came to be a Tribune in the Army, and Comman∣ded several Legions, and after that was made a Praetor. His Charges at his entrance into his Praetorship, were born by Pescennia Marcel∣lina, who had adopted him, and maintain'd him as her own Son. Next, he was made the Proconsul of Bithynia; from Bithynia he was removed to Greece; and from thence, in the third place, to be the Proconsul of the Pro∣vince of Gallia Narbonensis. He was sent, in the Quality of Lieutenant-General, into Illy∣ricum, where he beat the Sarmatae: From thence he was commanded to the Rhine, where he managed things very happily against the Germans. Then he was made the Governour of the City of Rome, in which place he acquitted himself with a great deal of Prudence, Inge∣nuity and Exactness. Therefore the Senate, though he was one of a Novel Family, which without extraordinary Merits must have pre∣vented their Favour, did not forbear to con∣fer the Empire upon him; confessing, as did all the World, that at time there was no Per∣son in the Senate more fit to sustain the Name and Dignity of a Prince, than he. As to his Person and his Manners, whichPerson and Man∣ners of Maximus. are Circumstances, tho' of the lesser moment, into which People generally delight to enquire, he was one that Eat much, but Drank very little; and Venery he extraordinary rarely used.
Always of a severe Carriage at home and a∣broad; a very grave Look, and a hard Face; so that they epitheted him Maximus the Trist. He was Tall, Strong, and Healthy in Body: one of no great Complaisance, but Just, and never guilty to the last of Inhumanity or Un∣mercifulness towards any. He always forgave, when he was asked; nor was he ever Angry, but where it became him so to be. He ad∣dicted himself to no Parties: he was stedfast in his own Judgment, and would never so much trust to the Sentiments of others, as to his own. The Senate loved him the better for all this, and the People feared him. Those latter knew the weight of his Censure, being a Subject; and they thought, that the same rigour would but increase upon him being a Prince. Balbinus was a Man of a very Noble Race;Character of Balbi∣nus. had been twice Consul, and the Governour of a multitude of Provinces. He had been the Governour of Asia, and Africa, and Bithynia, and Galatia, and Pontus, and Thrace and Gallia, and had headed sometimes Armies. But to say the truth, his Excellency lay not so much in the Military, as in the Civil Affairs. His Goodness, his Integrity, and his Modesty, gain∣ed him a great deal of love. His Family was very Antient; and as he said, derived from Balbus Cornelius Theophanes; who was made Free of the City of Rome by Pompey the Great, and who was a Man of the first Note in his own Country, and also a writer of History. Balbinus was as Tall as Maximus, and Hand∣some:
he loved his Pleasures extremely, in which he had a great Estate to assist him: for he was left Rich by his Ancestors; and he had added to that Stock much, by being made the Heir to several of his Friends. He was fa∣mous for his Eloquence; a very good Poet at a sudden and an extempore Verse. He loved Wine, Women, and good Eating; was proper in his Dress, and in fine, wanted nothing to render him commendable to the People. The Senate no less loved him. This as to the general Cha∣racters of Maximus and Balbinus: whom some, as Salust compares Cato and Caesar, so some think, ought to be compared in this manner. That as Maximus was severe, Balbinus was sweet: As the one was Firm and Constant, the other was Good. The one gave away no∣thing, the other abounded in all things, and was as generous to all the World with them. Maximus and Balbinus, being possessed with all the other Royal Honours and Ensigns of the Empire; that is, having received the Tri∣bunitian Power, the Proconsular Power and the Soveraign Pontificate upon them; the Title of Fathers of the Country, was likewise added to them. They entertain'd the People with the diversions of the Stage, the Games of the Cirque, and the Combats of the Gladia∣tors; and then Maximus, after the dispatching his Vows in the Capitol, was sent to the War against Maximin with a great Army; the Guards continuing with Balbinus still at Rome. I may here take an occasion to say, in a word, from whence the Custom comes, That when
the Emperors are going to a War, they first entertain the People with the Combats of Gladiators, and the Chase of Beasts. Some will have it, That it is an antient sort of a Sa∣crifice to Nemesis, the Goddess of Fortune; to satiate her with Roman Blood in the beginning; that she may have the less thereof to require in the Engagements with the Enemy. But that which I take to be the truest, and the most probable Account of it, is; That the sight of Fights, Blood, Arms, and naked Men engaging each other, should harden them a∣gainst they met the Enemy, and accustom them not to be afraid, nor to shrink at all at Death and Wounds. The Guards tarrying, as I said, at Rome, whilst Maximus went to the War against Maximin, there happened such a violent Se∣dition betwixt the People and them, that itA Mutin at Rome. came to a War, within the Bowels of the City. The greatest part whereof was set on fire, the Temples prophaned, the Streets all of them polluted with Blood, and Balbinus with his utmost Lenity was not able to pacifie them: to do which he appeared in publick in Person. But he was in danger to be knock'd down with a Stone: some say, that he recei∣ved a blow with a Club; and he could never have quieted them, if he had not thought up∣on producing the young Caesar Gordianus, whom he took, dress'd in his Purple, and set him upon the Shoulders of one that was very tall, and exposed him to them: who seeing him, both the People and the Soldiers were
so appeased, that for his sake they all retur∣ned again to their former Amity: For never was one of his Years, so much beloved as he; in Memory particularly of his Father, and his Grandfather, who had laid down their Lives in the defence of the People of Rome, against Maximin in Africk. A great Instance of the Gratitude of the Romans. As Maximus set forwards for the War, the Senate dispatched into all parts of the Coun∣try of Italy Consuls, Praetors, Quaestors, Aediles and Tribunes, to see, that every City was pro∣vided with Corn, Arms, Walls, and Fortifi∣cations, to give Maximin at every turn a Check, and to fatigue him with Sieges one after ano∣ther. They ordered all the Provisions to be reaped, and to be brought out of the Fields into the fortified Towns, that the Publick E∣nemy should find nothing whereupon to sub∣sist. They sent Orders into all the Provinces, to forbid all Persons to Assist him, under the penalty of being treated as Enemies. In the mean time another Mutiny happened at Rome betwixt the City and Guards. The Em∣peror Balbinus published his Edicts to suppress them, but without effect. The Guards betook themselves to their Camp. The People began to besiege them there. Nor was this Mutiny, in which Thieves and Robbers mixed with the rest, to steal and plunder what they could, to the ruin of the City, and the loss of a great deal of Riches, quieted, till the People had gone so far as to cut Aquaeducts that carried the Water to the Camp.
Whilst these things passed at Rome, the Em∣peror Maximus was at the City of Ravenna, making great preparations for the War against Maximin; whom he very much apprehended, and often said, that he went to fight not against a Man, but against a Cyclops. But Maximin was so defeated of his Designs before the City of Aquileia, that his own Men killed him, and both the Heads of him and his Son were brought to Ravenna to Maximus, who sent them from thence to Rome. The Zeal of the People of Aquileia for the Cause of the Romans in this Siege was remarkable. They shaved off the Womens Hair in their necessity, to make Strings with it for their Bows. The Emperor Balbinus was so overjoy'd at the Vi∣ctory, who had dreaded the very thoughts of Maximin before, that as soon as his Head was brought to Rome, he offered a Hecatomb to the Gods; which is a Sacrifice in this manner: A hundred Altars made of Turf, are set upOffering of a Heca∣tomb. all in a place. Upon these Altars are killed a hundred Swine, or a hundred Sheep. If it is an Imperial Sacrifice, the Victims are a hun∣dred Lions, or a hundred Eagles, and such like. A Custom which many Emperors have Celebrated; and it formerly was in use a∣mongst the Grecians, to appease the Gods, in time especially of a Pestilence. This being over, Balbinus in the next place with great joy expected the return of his Bro∣ther-Emperor from Ravenna, with his Army and Forces entire, which had had no occasion to strike a blow. For the People of Aquileia,
and only a few Soldiers with them under the Command of Crispinus and Menophilus, who had been sent thither from the Senate, had pre∣vented their Work, and defeated the Enemy without them. Maximus took his way from Ra∣venna first to Aquileia, to see that he left all the Country safe, as far as to the Alps; and if there were any Reliques of the Barbarians remaining who had favoured Maximin, to reduce them. In the mean time the Senate deputed twenty of their Body (to wit, four of the Order of the Consuls, eight Praetors and eight Quaestors) whose Names are set down by Cordus, to Com∣plement Maximus, and to present him with the Crowns, as also an Act, in which they had de∣creed to set up his Statues on Horseback in Gold. The Emperor Balbinus was disgusted at this, and said, that Maximus had been put to less trouble than he, who had extinguish'd the fire of a great intestine War at home, whilst Maximus enjoy'd himself in quiet at Ravenna. But tho' this was true, the readiness of Maximus to serve the State in Person in this War, was so well ac∣cepted, that the Victory received was totally imputed to him; and yet it was got, before he so much as knew any thing of it. The Army of Maximin, after his death, surrendring them∣selves to Maximus, he received them, and marched with great Pomp and a numerous Retinue to Rome. He often said to that Army, that as for what was past, it ought to be for∣gotten; and he presented them a great Do∣native; and sent their Auxiliaries every one home. But as when Soldiers have once their
minds possessed with a hatred, it is a hard mat∣ter to govern them. These Men repented that they had lost an Emperor, who was of their own Election, now to be reduced under the Command of those, who were of the E∣lection of the Senate. They discover'd as much in their very Looks, and sometimes in Words. But when they also heard the reflect∣ing Acclamations of the Senate upon them, for having adhered so to Maximin, they be∣came the bitterer against Maximus and Balbi∣nus, and every day bethought themselves of setting up some other Persons for the Empire, if occasion served. As Maximus entred into the City of Rome,Reception of Maxi∣mus at Rome. Balbinus, the Senate, and the People came out to meet him, reflecting upon the Soldiers of the Party of Maximin, in their Publick Accla∣mations. From thence they conducted him into the Senate: where after some other things of course, it was said; See the Happiness of Princes, that are chosen by the Wisdom of the Senate; and on the other hand, see the Fate of those that are chosen by Fools: Now the Army were they that had first set up Maximin; as the Senate were they who had chosen Maxi∣mus and Balbinus. The Soldiers could not hear this without being more incensed against the Senate; especially because the Senate pre∣tended, as it were, to have got a Triumph over them. Maximus and Balbinus governed in the City of Rome with great Prudence, and to the equal satisfaction of the Senate and the People.
They deferred very much to the Senate; made excellent and Wise Laws; sat in Person in Judicature, and admirably ordered all the Mi∣litary Affairs. Maximus prepared all things for a War against the Parthians; and Balbinus prepared himself for another against the Ger∣mans; designing to leave the young Caesar, Gordianus, behind them at Rome. But the dis∣contented Soldiers in the mean time, sought an opportunity to kill them, but had not yet found any, because they were so well guarded with a Body of Germans. Some Differences there were betwixt Maxi∣musJealousies between the Em∣perors. and Balbinus; but they were secret, and such as were rather to be guessed, than seen Balbinus look'd upon Maximus, as an Ignoble Man, of no Birth; and Maximus spurned at Balbinus again, as a weak Man of no Policy. This gave an occasion to the Soldiers, that had Wit, to understand, that it was easie to kill two such Princes, as could not agree betwixt themselves. Whilst therefore a great many both of the Guards and the Courtiers were diverting themselves at the Publick Games a∣broad, and the two Emperors were left alone in the Palace, with only some Germans near them, they Attacked them. The Germans were at a particular part of the Palace, wait∣ing upon Balbinus. The Storm fell upon Maxi∣mus: who not finding any means to save him∣self without the succour of the Germans, sent to Balbinus to desire him to send him a Guard. Balbinus suspecting a Plot against himself, out of an ambition of Maximus to Reign Sole Mo∣narch,
delayed to send him any so long, that whilst they stood in contradiction of one ano∣ther upon that Subject, the Soldiers came upon them both, and stript them of their Royal Vestments, and drew them by violence out of the Palace, and abused them, and cut them, and were hurrying them through the City in∣to the Camp; when perceiving that the Ger∣mans advanced to relieve them, they killedThey are both slain. them both and left them dead in the Streets. At the same time they took the young Caesar Gordianus with them into the Camp, whither they retired, and proclaimed him Emperor, as he was the only Person left at present to be so, Triumphing and Insulting over the Senate and the People. The Germans having nothing to do to Fight, after their Masters were killed, betook themselves to their own Quarter, which they had without the City. Thus died those two good Emperors, in a manner unworthy of their Virtues and Actions; for nothing was more Brave than Maximus, and nothing more Sweet than Balbinus. One may be certain of this, from the Nature of the thing it self: For when the Election is in their own power, why should they make choice of ill Princes? They were Men, that had been exercised before in several employments of Honour and Power. The one had been twice Consul, the other the Governour of the City of Rome; and both were of an advanced Age when they came to the Empire, and were beloved by the Senate; and though the People at the first apprehended the Reign of Maxi∣mus,
yet finding him more Gracious than they expected, even those had begun to lay aside their Fears, and to Love him also. Maximus and Balbinus reigned one Year. Maximin and his Son reigned two, or as some say, three Years. The House of Balbinus is still to be seen at Rome, a large and stately Buil∣ding, possessed by his Family to this day. There is a great disagreement amongst the Greek and Latin Historians about the Names of Maximus and Pupienus: which are indeed but two Names for the same Person: But yet the Greek Historians, as Herodotus and Dexip∣pus, whom I have followed, never using the Name of Pupienus, and the Latin Historians scarce ever using the Name of Maximus; but what the one says was done by Maximus, the o∣ther saying it was done by Pupienus, and making Pupienus and Balbinus to be Emperors together instead of Maximus and Balbinus. To avoid this distraction, we are only to confide in the Account of Curius Fortunatianus, where he tells us, that as both the Names understand the same Person, he was called Pupienus, as by his own Name, and Maximus, as by the Name of his Father. The Letter of Claudius Julia∣nus, the Consul at that time, in which he Con∣gratulates the Elevation of him and Balbinus to the Empire, is directed to him by the Name of Pupienus: which is this.
To their most Sacred and most In∣vincible Majesties, Pupienus and Balbinus, from Claudius Julianus. YOur Majesties by the good Appointment of the most Excellent and most Mighty Jupiter and the Immortal Gods, and by the Judgment of the Senate and the Consent of all Mankind, having received the Empire, to be by you pro∣tected against the Assaults of the wicked Maxi∣min, and to be Governed according to the Laws of the Romans, though as yet your Majesties have not sent unto me your Advices, yet I could no sooner read the Act of the Senate for that purpose, which hath been transmitted to me by my Brother-Consul Celsus Aelianus, but I must Con∣gratulate the City of Rome, for whose preserva∣tion you have been Elected: I Congratulate the Senate, to whom, according to the judgment which they had of your Merits, you have restored their Pristine Dignity: I Congratulate the Country of Italy, whose defence you in a particular manner undertake against the devastation of the Enemy. I Congratulate the Provinces, which the insatiable Avarice of ill Governours have rent and torn in pieces, they are raised to some hopes of safety, and do wait their deliverance from you. I Con∣gratulate also the Legions themselves, and the Auxiliaries, who from all Parts of the World have their Eyes upon you to Adore you, and pro∣mise themselves from you a Reign, worthy of the
Roman Empire. There is therefore no Language so Powerful, there is no Eloquence so Happy, there is no where that Wit, that is so fruitful, as to express sufficiently the Felicity of the Publick in you: We may judge, what Great things we are to expect from you, by only the beginnings of your Reigns; in which you have re-established the Roman Laws, and the course of Justice, which was before abolished: You have made your selves Examples of Clemency, which had been also forgotten; and you have secured unto the Subject their Lives, Liberties, Customs, and Pro∣perties. These are things ti is not easie to recount, much less is it to prosecute with that Dignity th they deserve. For how shall I express the sense of the Duties which we owe to you, for your having preserved our Lives to us against the Cut-throats, sent by the proud and bloody Maximin every where into the Provinces to revenge himself o the whole Order of the Senate? Especially, we may my Inferiour Parts fall below the Dignity of such a Subject, when I cannot describe so much as the peculiar Joy of my own Mind, to set those two Persons raised to be the Emperors of Rome, and the Princes of the whole Race of Mankind, to whom and to whose Censures I have ever submitted my self, and have religiously en∣deavoured to approve my Carriage and Actions: And although I may take a great deal of confi∣dence in the Testimonies which have been give given of me, by the Princes the Predecessors to you, yet it is the Gravity of your. Judgments which will carry the greatest Weight with me, and in which I shall choose to Glory. The Gods long con∣tinue
the Felicity of your Reigns to the Roman World. As Scipio, the Conqueror of Carthage (it is said) pray'd, That the Gods would preserve the State in the Condition in which it then was, because there could not be a better; so when I re∣flect upon you, and upon the Establishment which you have made of the Empire, which was Totter∣ing, till you came unto it, I can only pray, that the Gods would preserve the same to you, in that State, wherein your selves have placed it. Under these two Princes there was a War betwixt the Carpi, and the People of Moesia: About the same time commenced the War of the Scythians, and the ruin of Istria. Dexippus gives great Commendations of Balbinus; he says, that he resisted the Soldiers, when he was killed, with a Couragious Mind, not fearing Death; and that he was one, who was well instructed in all things: But as to Maximus, he does not agree to the Characters which is given him by most other Grecian Historians.
A SUPPLEMENT OF THE EMPERORS FROM Gordianus the Third, UNTO Valerian the First. FRom the Death of Gordianus the Third, unto the beginning of the Reign of Valerian, it is accounted to be about Nine, or at the most Ten Years. In which short time, these Fifteen following Princes, of whom we have little left upon History, besides their Names, successively carried and lost the Empire of Rome.
I. Marcus. The Senate, upon the News of the Death of Gordianus, immediately exerted their own Right, and created Marcus Empe∣ror, according to Zonaras. He was of their own Order, a Venerable Person, addicted to the study of Wisdom and Philosophy. But he soon fell sick, and died in the Palace at Rome. II. Severus Hostilianus. After Marcus, the Senate by their Suffrages, according to Zona∣ras also, set up this Prince; who likewise had the fortune to fall sick soon after, and died. III. Marcus Julius Philip the Father. This was the Person, who was the Author of the Murder of Gordianus the Third. He associa∣ted his Son with him in the Empire. His Wife was Marcia Otacilia Severa; who it is thought, was an occasion, being her self instructed in the Christian Religion, that her Husband was Fa∣vourable to the Christians. IV. Marcus Julius Philip the Son. He was otherwise called, Caius Julius Saturninus Philip∣pus. But after his Assumption to the Empire by his Father, he took the same Names with him. They reigned together five, some say six Years. V. Jotapianus. This Person set up himself for the Empire in Syria, in the time of the Philips. But was soon oppressed again, and ended his Pretences with his Life.
VI. Marinus. Some call him Publius Carvi∣lius Marinus. He was set Emperor up by the Legions in Garrison in Pannonia or Maesia, at the same time that Jotapian made his Pretences in the East; and was killed soon after. VII. Meslius Quintus Trajanus Decius the Fa∣ther. The Army in Illyricum advanced this Prince in opposition to the Philips. He enga∣ged the Emperor Philip the Father in a Bat∣tel at the City of Verona, and slew him there. Philip the Son was killed at Rome. VIII. Decius the Son. He was called Quin∣tus Herennius Etruscus Meslius Decius. He reign∣ed in conjunction with his Father. IX. Caius Valens Hostilianus. Some Medals and Antient Inscriptions mention him; and he is supposed to have set up himself against the Decii, as did the two following. But nei∣ther the Greek nor the Latin Historians are found to say any thing of him. X. Lucius Priscus. He was the President of Macedonia, when he was set up to be Emperor against the Decii. XI. Valens Licinianus This is the same, whom Trebellius Pollio makes the Nineteenth in his Catalogue and Account of the 30 Tyrants. He had much of the Love of the People. XII. Caius Vibius Trebonianus Gallus, the Fa∣ther.
IMP. CAES. C VIBIVS TREBONIANVS GALVS AVG portrait of Trebonianus Gallus IMP. CAES. C. VIB. VOLVSIANVS AVG. portrait of Volusianus IMP. CAES. AEMILLIANVS P. F. AVG. portrait of Aemillianus IMP. C. P. LIC. VALERIANVS AVG. portrait of Valerian IMP. C. P. LIC. GALLIENVS AVG. portrait of Gallienus IMP. C. M. CASS. LAT. POSTVMVS AVG. portrait of Postumus P. 97. Vol. 11
XIII. Vibius Volusianus, his Son. These two succeeded together to the Empire after the Decii; with whom some joyn a Third, namely, XIV. Hostilianus Perpenna. He was prefer∣red to the Empire by the Senate, in the time that Gallus and his Son were Created by the Army. XV. Caius Julius Aemilianus. This Prince was Created by the Legions in Maesia; and after the death of Gallus and his Son, who were killed by their own Soldiers, he reigned the space of three Months, and governed the Em∣pire with a deal of Prudence. Then dying of a sickness, he left it vacant to the Emperor Valerian. In fine, the History of these Princes, and of the whole Interval from Gordianus the Third, to Valerian, is inveloped in so much Darkness, that certainly it is very difficult to find any one place, in which the Antient Writers are of any Agreement amongst them∣selves.
THEA. Christi CCLIV. EMPEROR Valerian the First. BY TREBELLIUS POLLIO. VALERIAN was in the Province of Rhaetia, when the Army set him up to be Emperor, with the unanimous consent and approbation of the Senate and the People. He was a Man of an Honourable Birth, the Son of Valerius; and he was one, who in his time had passed through all the Gradual Offices and Honours of the State, with great applause, which paved the Way for him to the Throne. To let you see the Esteem, which the Pub∣lickRespect of the Senate to him. had of his Merits, and how well he stood in the opinion of the most Noble Senate, at the time when he was chosen to be a Censor, I will give you the Act of the Senate, which passed for his Election.
Upon the sixth of the Kalends of November, the Year in which the two Decii were the Con∣suls, the Senate having received from those Princes Letters, in which they left it to the Senate's Power to appoint a Person to the Place of a Censor, met for the purpose in the Temple of Castor and Pollux, and the Motion being made and the Question put, whom they should Choose, instead of waiting to be asked their Votes severally according to the Custom, they all cried with one Voice, in the absence of Valerian, who was then in the Field with the Emperors: The Life of Valerian is a continued Censorship. As his Manners are Better than all the World besides; so let him be the Judge of the Manners of all the World. Let him judge of the Crimes of the Senate, who hath none of his own: Let him give Judg∣ment upon our Lives, who leads such a one himself, as nothing can be objected to it. Valerian hath been a Censor from his Infancy. Valerian hath all his Life been a Censor. He is a Prudent, a Modest, a Grave Senator; a Friend to the Good, an Enemy to Rebellion, an Enemy to all Vice and Wickedness. We all Accept him to be our Censor. We will all Observe him. A Man of the First Quality, Noble by Blood, of a Correct Life, and Singular Manners, Eminent in his Learning, and a perfect Model of Antiquity. This was often repeated, and then the Senate Adjourned. When the Emperor Decius had received this Act, which was sent to him from the Senate, he assembled all those of his Court, and a∣mongst the rest, he order'd Valerian to be cal∣led;
and after the Act of the Senate was read to the Company, he made the following Speech to Valerian. You are Happy Valerian, in the JudgmentSpeech of the Empe∣ror to him. which all the Senate hath of you, and in the share that you bear in their Hearts and Affections. Re∣ceive the Office of being a Censor to the whole Roman World, unto which they have appointed you, and which you alone deserve to bear. By this you are made a Judge of our Manners. You will Judge, who ought to abide in the Senate: You will reduce the Equestrian Order unto its Antient State: You will prescribe Bounds to the Revenues of all. You will confirm the Tribute which is raised upon the People. You will take an Account of all Offices in the Government. You will have the Authority of making Laws, of Judg∣ing of the Orders of the Soldiers, and of having your Eyes upon the Conduct and the Employs of Arms. You will have the Power of carrying your Judg∣ment to my own Court, and to the Governours of the Provinces, and the most Eminent Commanders in my Service. Excepting only the Governour of the City of Rome, the two Consuls for the Year, the Chief Officer of the Sacrifices, and the Mother of the Vestal Virgins, provided that she keep her self Uncorrupt, there is no Body, nor no Cause, but will fall under your Sentence. And even those who are excepted, will labour nevertheless to please you, and to be agreeable in your sight. The Reply which Valerian made to the Em∣peror, was in this manner: May it please Your most Excellent Majesty, I beseech you, not to tie me to such a necessity of
Judging of the People, the Soldiers, the Senate, and all the World indeed, the Magistrates of the Provinces, the Tribunes, and the Generals. These are things, for which your Majesty possesses the Name of an Emperor; the Censorship revolves upon your self; a private Man cannot perform it. I beg therefore, that I may be excused from this Honour: Neither my Life, nor my Assurance makes me suitable for it: The Times also are so re∣pugnant, that it is the Voice of Mankind, to desire not to see a Censorship of a private Person of this Nature. However Valerian acquitted himself in his Censorship with all Equity. I could produce several other Instances of the Favour, both of the Senate and the Emperors towards him, if they were not things that are already generally known. From whence, I would only observe, that it appears, that when Valerian was after∣wards called to the Empire, it was not done by a Tumultuary concourse of the People, nor by a Noise of the Soldiers, but he was chosen justly for his Merits, and as it were by the U∣nanimous Voice of Mankind: in which, if every Person in particular had been to be al∣lowed the power of speaking his Opinion, they would all have made choice of no other than Valerian. After Valerian was upon the Throne, no Man acted in the disposition of Commands and Offices, better, and more justly than he. His Son Gallienus, the Brother to Valerian the Second, by another Venter, was at the same time made Caesar, at the request of the People.
In fine, the fatal Overthrow of Valerian and his Captivity that followed it, makes me almost asham'd to extol him so highly, as he otherwise deserves. For this Prince marching with a great Force against Persia, and invading that Kingdom, and being through the Conduct, whether Treacherous or Unfortunate, I know not, of one of his Officers, on whom he greatly relied, brought into such Circumstances, that no Force, nor no Military Discipline, could save him, was Conquer'd, and fell a Prisoner into the hands of Sapores King of Persia; who swelled with the success of so glorious Victory, not only proudly detained him, contrary to the Honour of Arms, but treated him in the Language of a vile and abject Slave, and some say, condemned him to the infamous Office of making his Back a Footstool to him to tread upon, whenever he mounted his Horse. How∣ever that is, it is certain, that several of the Neighbouring Kings, who had assisted on the side of Sapores against Valerian in the War, sent Letters afterwards of kind Intercession to Sa∣pores on behalf of the Royal Prisoner, where∣of two or three were as follows: To Sapores the King of Kings, Belsotus sendeth Greeting. IF I could think it possible, that the Romans were to be totally at last Vanquished, I should Congratulate you upon the Exalted manner, in which you use your Victory. But as they are a
Nation who by the power of Fate, and their own Virtue together, are of an extraordinary Force in the World, you will do well to have a care, that your taking into Captivity the Old Emperor, and that too by a Fraud, does not redound to the Ill of you and your Posterity. You may please to observe, what great Nations the Romans have, of Enemies, made their own; and Nations that have often had the advantage of beating them too. It is certain we have heard, how the Gauls beat them, and set fire to their great City. But yet the Gauls are now Slaves to the Romans. What! Have not the Africans Beat them? But yet the Africans now serve the Romans. And not to instance in Examples, which are of a great distance from us, and therefore the less known, Mithridates King of Pontus, was once the Ma∣ster of all Asia. But yet Mithridates was Con∣quered, and Asia is now certainly under the Obe∣dience of the Romans. If you will be advised by me, embrace the Means of Peace, which you have in your hands, and restore Valerian to his Country again. I Congratulate your Felicity, pro∣vided this altogether, that you know how to use it well. Balerus, the King of the Cadusii, writ thus. I Am glad, that the Succours with which we furnished you, are remitted to me again entire and safe, as I have received them: But I can∣not wish you so much Joy of your carrying into
Captivity that Great Prince Valerian, as I should Congratulate you, if he was Restored again. The Romans are the most dangerous Enemies for be∣ing beaten; Act therefore as it becomes you in Prudence; nor let Fortune puff you up, which hath deceived so many. Valerian hath a Son an Emperor, and a Grandson a Caesar. And what! Hath he not all the Roman World on his side, which will universally rise up against you? Therefore Restore him, and make a Peace with the Romans; which will also be an Advantage to us, as well as you. Artabasdes, the King of Armenia, sent this Letter to Sapores. I Share with you in the Glory of your Victory. But yet I fear, that you have not so much Conquer'd, as sown the Seeds of more and more Wars. The Son of Valerian, and his Grandson, and the Captains of the Romans, all Gallia, all Africa, all Spain, all Italy, all the Nations which are in Illyricum, and in the East and Pontus, that either are the Allies, or the Subjects of the Romans, will be sure to re-demand the Person of Valerian. So you have a Prisoner of one Old Man, and in the mean time you render all the Nations of the Earth implacable Enemies to you, and it may be to us, who sent you our Suc∣cours, as we are your Neighbours, and are al∣ways concerned in the Troubles of your State. Other Nations of the Bactriani, the G∣gians, the Albanians and the Tartars, rejected
the Applications of Sapores to them, and writ to the Roman Generals to promise them their assistances, to deliver Valerian out of his Cap∣tivity. Valerian nevertheless remained and died a Prisoner in Persia, at an advanced Age. His Quarrel was pretty well reveng'd by Odenatus of Palmyra: who getting together an Army, asserted the Roman Interest greatly in those Parts; insomuch that he took the Treasures of the King of Persia, and what those Kings hold dearer to them than their Treasures, he took his Concubines Prisoners. Upon which, King Sapores retired himself immediately with∣in his own Kingdom, and so ended the Persian War. This is the Story of Valerian the Father; who was 70 Years Old, when he was with great Applauses first advanced to be Emperor. I come next to Valerian, the Son.
THE EMPEROR Valerian the Second. BY TREBELLIUS POLLIO. VALERIAN the Second was the Son of the precedent Prince, and the Brother of Gallienus by another Mo∣ther. He was Handsome, Modest, and very Ingenious for his Age; of a Charming Hu∣mour and Manners; far different from the dissoluteness of his said Brother. His Father had made him a Caesar, and Celestinus says, that his Brother did afterwards receive him, as Emperor, in conjunction with himself. There is nothing to be remembred of him more, than that he was Nobly born, very well educated, and that he was miserably killed. He was buried about the City of Milan, with
this Inscription put upon him afterwards, by the order of Claudius; The Emperor Valerian. Some have understood it of Valerian the Fa∣ther; as if the Body of him, who was a Pri∣soner in Persia, had been returned out of that Country: But that is a mistake, and therefore to prevent it for the future, I mention it as such here▪ I pass on next to the Reign of Gallienus and his Son, called Saloninus Gallienus; being en∣tirely devoted to your Service, and to the glory of your Reputation, to which I neither ought nor can refuse any thing.
THE Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Gallienus the First. BY TREBELLIUS POLLIO. FRom whence should I begin the Life of Gallienus, but from the time of the Cap∣tivity of his Father? Who, that is, Va∣lerian the First, being taken and kept a Pri∣soner by the King of Persia, though it was a great Affliction to all to see an Emperor of Rome treated so like a Slave, the Army in the mean time without a Head, the Generals murmuring, and the Empire in a tottering condition, especially in the East, yet did Gal∣lienus
rather rejoyce in the Misfortune of his Father, and carried himself so negligently, that Macrianus and Balista, together with the Reliques of the Army which they assembled with them in the East, consulted in fine, whom to set up to be Emperor in opposition to him. For as for him, his Name was scarce so much as mentioned amongst them. Macrianus was accounted one of the most knowing Captains of that time, and no Man fitter for the Government of Affairs than he. Withal he was very Rich, and one that could supply the publick Occasions out of his private Fortunes. His Sons, Macrianus the Second and Quietus were two stout young Men, who loved the War, and might be of good Example to the Legions, upon all opportunities, where the matter of Arms might call them. Wherefore it was resolved, in preferenceSeveral Persons set up for Emperors to others, to commit the defence of the Em∣pire unto Macrianus and his Sons. This was in the Year, that Gallienus and Volusianus were the Consuls. Macrianus gathered himself an Army, and took all the necessary precautions for his security against his Enemies. He sent Piso, who was one of the chief Persons of the Senate, into Achaia, to oppress Valens there, who governed that Country with a Procon∣sular Power by the appointment of Gallienus. But Valens finding that Piso came against him, and that there was no other way to save him∣self, but by an Absolute Authority, and by setting up himself Emperor, he did so, and Piso withdrew from thence into Thessalia;
whither Valens sent those after him that killed him. In the mean time Piso had also in Thes∣saly set up for an Empire, with the Title of Emperor of Thessalia. After this, Macrianus leaving his Son Quietus in the East, and the Affairs under him there in a peaceable Condi∣tion, began his Expedition against Gallienus. He came first into the Lesser Asia, and then into Illyricum. In Illyricum was Aureolus, who pretended to Reign there; being one that had taken Arms, and the Empire upon him, against Gallienus. Macrianus had his Son Ma∣crianus with him, and a Body of five and forty thousand Men. With these he fought the Forces of Aureolus, which were Commanded by his General Domitian: but Macrianus lost the day, and both he and his Son were killed, and all their Army surrendred to the Emperor Aureolus. The News of the death of Macrianus, the Father and Son, coming to Odenatus of Pal∣myra in Syria, who had made his pretensions to the Empire of the East from the CaptivityOdenatus attempts the Em∣pire. of Valerian, Odenatus considering the Remiss∣ness of Gallienus on the one hand, and the Usurpation of Aureolus on the other, and in∣deed the disturbed Condition of the whole Empire every where, hastned upon this op∣portunity with an Army, to see if he could take the other Son of Macrianus, Quietus, who had been left behind in the East. This Busi∣ness was soon concluded by the Treachery of such, as were about the Person of Quietus: For they, Confederating with Odenatus, and
particularly Balista, the Captain of the Guards, killed the young Man and threw his Body over the Wall to Odenatus; to whom every one, af∣ter that, immediately submitting, Odenatus be came the Emperor of almost all the East, whilst Aureolus reigned in Illyricum, and Gallie∣nus reigned at Rome. The City of Emissa was nigh destroyed by the severity of Balista at this time, and many of the Inhabitants killed, with the Treasurer and such others of the Party of Quietus, as had fled for shelter thither. Odenatus ordered an Account of every thing that had passed, to be faithfully sent to the Emperor Gallienus at Rome; as if it was in his Cause, that he had done what he did. Gallie∣nus was pleased with the security, which ac∣crued to him by the death of Macrianus, and his Sons: But the use that he made of it, wasDissolute∣ness of Gallienus. only to indulge his Lusts and Pleasures the more, which he pursued without the least re∣gard to the Condition of his Captive Father. He gave the Publick the diversions of the Races of the Cirque, Stage-plays, the Games of Leaping, Running and Wrestling; a Chase of Wild Beasts, and the Games of the Gladia∣tors; whereunto he invited the People to assist and be Merry, as upon Days of the greatest Joy and Triumph. However, several could not but lament the Captivity of his Father: but Gallienus gloried rather in it; because his Father (he said) had lost his Crown by I know not what love of Virtue, which he renounced; and so he solaced himself above measure. It was plain, that he could not endure the Eye of his
Father upon him; and he thought himself happy, that the Old Man with his Gravity was so far off removed. About the same time, Aemilian in Egypt Revolted, and set up for himself as Emperor, and seized upon the Granaries and the Maga∣zines of that Country, till several Towns there were almost laid under a Famine. Against him Theodotus, a General of Gallienus, march∣ed, and fought him and took him, and sent him alive to the Emperor his Master. Gallienus still persisting in his Sports and his Luxury, and no better looking after the Publick Weal, than a Boy that is made a King in a Play of a Company of Boys. The Gauls, to whom it is Natural to be Light, and a People that cannot contain themselves under Princes, which are luxurious and which degenerate from that Roman Valour, which did at first subject them, called Posthumius to the Empire; where∣unto the Forces of that Province consented, who were very sensible, and accordingly com∣plained of the slavery of Gallienus to his Lusts. Against Posthumius, marched Gallienus him∣self with a Body of Troops. He besieged Posthumius in the City where he was: But as he was viewing the Walls, the Gauls distin∣guish'd him, and gave him a Wound by the shot of an Arrow. Posthumius reigned seven Years in Gallia, and asserted that Country bravely against the Incursions of all the Bar∣barians round about. The War betwixt Gal∣lienus and him was long protracted, through a number of Sieges and Battels: Sometimes
the one, sometimes the other carried it: inso∣much that Gallienus was obliged by the difficul∣ties which beset him, to make a Peace with the pretended Emperor Aureolus, for the bet∣ter opportunity of opposing Posthumius. ToMany Commoti∣tions and Wars. these Mischiefs, the Scythians invaded the Pro∣vince of Bithynia in the Lesser Asia, and de∣stroyed whole Towns there. They came up to the City of Nicomedia, and burnt it and grievously laid it waste. Besides which, as if all the World conspired at once to afflict us, in Sicily there arose as it were a servile War, by the means of a company of Robbers, that roved up and down, and required a great deal of pains to suppress them. All these things happened out of a Contempt of Gallienus: because there is nothing which gives so much Boldness to the Wicked, nor so much Hopes and Encouragement to the Good, as when either on the one hand a Good Prince is feared, or on the other a Dissolute Prince is despised. Amongst so many Commotions and Wars, an Earthquake in the Year when Gallienus andA dread∣ful Earth∣quake. Faustinianus were the Consuls, in a violent manner shook the Cities of Asia; it shook Libya, and the City of Rome, and there was a Darkness for several days. The roaring of the Earth from beneath, was like the Voice of Thunder from above. Many Fabricks were consumed in this Earthquake, and their Inha∣bitants with them, and others killed with the fright. The Earth opened in abundance of places, and salt Water came up into the Breaches, and several Cities were covered with
a Flood of Waters. Above all, it did the most mischief in Asia. At the same time so great a Pestilence raged at Rome, and in the Cities of Achaia, that five thousand Persons died of it in one day. So the Books of the Sibyls were Inspected, and the Peace of the Gods begged and sought into, and a Sacrifice was offered to Jupiter, the Author of Health, according as it was prescribed by the said Books of the Sibyls. Fortune raged on all sides. Here the Earth shook and trembled; there it gaped and opened;The many Misfor∣tunes of the Times. in other Parts a Pestilence laid us waste; Vale∣rian in the mean time a Captive, Gallia distract∣ed with the Wars of Posthumius, and the Barbari∣ans; the East under the Empire of Odenatus, Aureolus the Master of Illyricum, and Aemilian the Master of Egypt; Thrace taken up betwixt the Goths and Claudius, who laid waste Mace∣donia and besieged Thessalonica: No moderate degree of quiet had we on any side. And all this in a great measure, as I have said, was yet occasioned by the Contempt, in which Gallienus was with all the World: which he drew upon himself by his excessive Luxury; and not only that, but he was a Man, who be∣sides, if he was out of Danger, was fit enough for all kind of Wickedness. In Achaia, Mar∣tianus, with the Forces of Gallienus, Engaged the Goths, and obliged them to retire. The Scythians, who are another part of the Goths, at the same time laid waste Asia, and plundered and burnt the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, the Fame of the Riches whereof is so well known to all the Earth.
It is a shame almost to say, what Expressions, what Jests, came upon these occasions from the mouth of Gallienus, when he was told of the Revolt and Troubles of this and the other Place. Egypt, it was told him, was Revolted: And what then, says he, cannot we be with∣out the Flax of Egypt? Asia, it was told him, was laid waste, both by the Earthquakes, and the Scythian Enemy. What then, says he, can∣not we be without Salt-petre? When Galliá was lost to Posthumius, he laughed and said; Cannot the State be safe, unless we have our Stuffs from Arras? And so of all Parts of the World, when he had lost them, he Jested, and was no more concerned, than for his old Cloaths, or the loss of any vile Slave. And that nothing which is Ill, should be wanting to his Times, the City of Byzan∣tium, which is the Key of the Hellespont, and famous for its Naval Powers, was rendred total∣ly desolate by the Soldiers of the same Gallie∣nus, that scarce any body was left alive in it. There is no Antient Family to be found now there, to represent the Nobility and the Anti∣quity of its former People, but what perhaps hath sprung from some Person or other, who escaped the slaughter, by being at that time absent on his business, or in the service of the War. After the Peace with Aureolus, Gallienus, with the assistance of him and Claudius as his General, who was afterwards Emperor, and who is the Head of the Family of Constantius the Caesar, began the War afresh against Post∣humius
in Gallia. Posthumius was assisted with many succours from the Celtae and the Franks; and being joined by Victorinus, whom he had made Partner with him in his pretended Em∣pire, he marched to the Battel against Gallie∣nus. They fought several times with variety of success on both sides. The Victory at lastPosthu∣mius de∣feated. fell to Gallienus; who, it is to be owned, had sudden Valour, which came hot upon him, when he was in a Choler and well provoked. In this Choler he went next to revenge him∣self of Byzantium; where he did not expect to be received within the Walls. But upon Con∣ditions, he was. The day after, he first dis∣armed, and then put all the Garrison and Town in cold blood to the Sword, contrary to his Faith and the Promises that he had made them. About the same time the Scythians in Asia were beaten by the Valour and the Con∣duct of the Roman Commanders there, and obliged to retire from their Incursions. Winged with these Successes, Gallienus flewGallienus his return to Rome. with great speed to Rome; and Convocating the Senate, he Instituted and Celebrated his Decennial Games, the Pomp and the Pleasures whereof, were as Exquisite as they were New. He went to the Capitol, in a Procession of the Senators in their Robes, the Gentry, the Soldiers clad in White, all the People, Slaves a very great many, and Women marching before with Wax Tapers and Lamps in their hands. These were preceded by a hundred white Oxen, yoaked two and two, with their Horns gilt, and Cloths of Silk thrown over
their Backs of divers Colours, which made a great Show. In like manner, marched two hundred pure white Lambs: Ten Elephants, that were then at Rome: One thousand two hundred Gladiators, pompously dressed in Cloaths embroider'd with Gold, such as the Ladies of Quality wear: Two hun∣dred tam'd Wild Beasts of several kinds, very finely adorned; Chariots full of Mimicks, and all sorts of Players; Pugils fighting, but not with true, but counterfeit Weapons; Drolls playing the Anticks, and others imitating the Gestures and Looks of the Cyclops, which was wonderful. All the Streets resounded with Acclamations, and the Plays, and the Noise. In the midst, amongst the Senators, marched Gallienus himself in a Triumphal Gown and Tunick, accompanied with all the Priests in their Robes. There were five hun∣dred Spears of Gold born on each side, one hundred Standards, the Standards of the Col∣leges of the Priests, the Arms and Ensigns of the Temples, and all the Legions. Then went also separate Bodies of Men, representing Captives of Vanquish'd Nations: as Goths, Sarmatians, Franks and Persians; to the num∣ber of no less than two hundred in a Body. And with this Pomp did Gallienus vainly think to elude and put upon the People of Rome; who nevertheless seeing through the disguise, one Man favoured Posthumius, another Regil∣lianus, another Aureolus, another Aemilian, and another Saturninus, as they fancied. Great lamentation was made for the Captivity of
Valerian, the Father; and it was admired, that his own Son should leave him so unrevenged, when strangers and foreign Potentates had been ready to vindicate him. But nothing of this moved Gallienus, his heart was stupified with his Pleasures. All his discourse to those that were about him, was, What have we for Din∣ner? What are the Diversions that are pre∣pared to day? What will be the Play to mor∣row? What are the Races to be run in the Cirque? The Procession being over, and the Hecatombs being offered to the Gods, Gallie∣nus returned to the Court, where there was an Entertainment: which when finished, he appointed the other days for the publick Pa∣stimes. One thing I must not omit, and that is an unlucky Jest, which was made upon the Pro∣cession. Amongst the pretended Captives, which were ridiculously led in Triumph, there was a Body of supposed Persians. As this Body was marching, some Drolls, that had a mind to be pleasant, came in amongst them and sought, and look'd all about, and viewed every ones Face, and wondred, and were very in∣quisitive; till at last they were asked, what they would have? and what was it they wanted? Say they, we would see the Emperor's Father. This coming to the ears of Gallienus, no re∣gard either to his Father, or to Pity, or his own shame could prevail with him, but he or∣dered the Men to be burnt. The People re∣sented their deaths, beyond expectation, very ill; and the Soldiers worse: who were so troubled, that they reveng'd it upon Gallienus himself, not long after.
In the Year that Gallienus and SaturninusSuccess of Oednatus against the Persi∣ans. were the Consuls, Odenatus King of the Pal∣myreni in Syria, whose Valiant Actions spoke him worthy to be the Emperor of all the East, as indeed he was, and so he declared himself, because Gallienus minded either nothing, or only his Luxuries and his Follies, took up the War against Persia, to revenge the Captivity of Valerian, which was so little regarded by Gallienus his Son. He presently possessed him∣self of the Cities of Nisibis and Charrae, by the Surrender of the Inhabitants, who blamed Gallienus for his Neglect. Yet was not Odena∣tus wanting in his Respect to Gallienus neither. He sent the Great Men of the Persians, whom he took Prisoners, to Rome to him, to give him the opportunity of insulting over their Misery in their turn: which he did in a Triumph, though the Victory was not his own, but Ode∣natus's; and still he mentioned nothing of his Father; nor upon the report which came of his Death, but, which proved afterwards false, did he Deifie him, till he was constrained to it. Odenatus advanced to the City of Ctesiphon, and besieged it, with a multitude of the Persians therein. He laid all the Country about waste, and killed innumerable of the Enemy. All the Great Men of the Persians out of all the Provinces flew to this Siege, for the common defence. They Fought. Fortune was a long time various, and the Victory hard in getting. But however it fell at last on the side of Ode∣natus; who as he had no other end in the War, but to deliver Valerian, so he daily pushed for
it, but the Circumstances of Places in a strange Country, incumbred the good Prince with great difficulties. Whilst these things passed in Persia, the Scy∣thians broke in into Cappadocia, which they Ra∣vaged: and having made themselves Masters of some Towns, after the War was a long time doubtful, they withdrew from thence into Bi∣thynia. Therefore the Soldiers were at this time for choosing another Person Emperor: whom when Gallienus could not pacifie in his favour, he killed them all, which was his way, as he did at Byzantium. As ill as his Affairs on all sides stood, Gallie∣nus prosecuted his Vanities. He desired to be made a Citizen and President of Athens, and to be admitted to all the Religious Rites of that place, and to be made one of the number of the Areopagites. This was a Contempt up∣on the People of Rome, and the Honours which he enjoy'd from thence; as if he valued it more to be an Areopagite and the Archon of Athens, than to be the Roman Emperor. It is true, that both Hadrian and Marcus Antoninus had the cu∣riosity to be initiated in the Eleusinian Rites. But the Emperor Hadrian was, when he did it, in the height of his prosperity; and the Em∣peror Antoninus did not affect it, till after a firm Peace; and both of them were so well seen in the Greek Learning, that seldom were the learnedest Doctors there, superiour to them,His Skill in the Arts. in the judgment of the Great Men. It can∣not be denied indeed, but Gallienus was emi∣nent in Oratory, Poetry, and all the Arts.
He made an Epithalamium upon the Marriage of his Brother's Sons, extempore, which was better than a hundred others, made at the same time by all the Greek and Latin Poets, though they studied several days upon it, and every one did his best to excel. The Epithalamium of Gallienus was these three Lines. Taking them by the Hands, Ite, ite, O pueri; pariter sudate Medullis Omnibus inter vos: Non murmura vestra Columbae, Brachia non Hederae, non vincant oscula Conchae. That is, Go, go, young Pair; and be your Mutual Loves Express'd in every Part and Pore: As Doves In softest Murmurs speak your mighty Bliss, Like Ivy Twine, and close as Cockles Kiss. I have not the time to adjoyn the rest of his Verses, nor to speak of his Prose, which made him shine both amongst the Poets, and the Orators of his Age. But this is not the Mat∣ter. It is one thing to be an Orator or a Poet; and something else is expected in an Emperor. One thing Gallienus did, by the advice of his Brother Valerian and his Kinsman Lucillus, which was extraordinary well done, and was much commended. When he heard of the Victories of Odenatus over the Persians, and how he had reduced Nisibin and Charran, and all the Coun∣try of Mesopotamia, and was come before Ctesi∣phon;
the King of Persia put to flight, his Great Men taken Prisoners, and many of the Ene∣my killed; Gallienus voluntarily divided the Empire to Odenatus, and presented him with the Royal Style as his Brother, and ordered Money to be coined in his Name with a Stamp, of the Persians taken Prisoners. This the Se∣nate, the City, and People of all Ages, took well. Nor was Gallienus one that wanted Wit. To give you an Instance or two of it. AInstances of his Wit. great Bull appearing upon the Sands of the Amphitheatre to be hunted, and the Man that undertook it, missing his blow at him Ten times, Gallienus sent the Man a Crown, or Garland, which is a Reward for a Victory: Every body wondred what was the matter; and thinking it strange, that such a baffled Sportsman should be Crowned, he ordered it to be proclaimed by the Cryer, It is a difficult thing not to Hit a Bull in Ten times. A Mer∣chant had sold to Gallienus's Lady, false Glasses for true Jewels. She, when the Cheat was discover'd, called to have the Man punished. Gallienus ordered him to be thrown to a Lion, to be devoured. But instead of a Lion, a Ca∣pon was let out upon him. The People won∣dring at so ridiculous an appearance, says Gal∣lienus, He committed a Cheat, and be hath suf∣fered a Cheat, and so he dismissed the Man again. Whilst Odenatus was taken up with the Per∣sian War, and Gallienus with his Follies, the Scythians with a Fleet came and Plunder'd the City of Heraclia in Thrace, and returned home
with the Booty: but by the way they were beaten in a Naval Fight, and lost many of their Men also by a Wreck. Then Odenatus was killed by the Treachery of a Kinsman of his own, and his Son Herod was killed with him. His other Sons, Herennia∣us and Timolaus, being very young, their Mo∣ther Zenobia took upon her the Empire of their Father, and long governed it: Not effeminately, nor with the expected weakness of her Sex: She not only understood to reign better than Gallienus, but she was such a Virago, that many brave and prudent Emperors have come short of her. After the death of Odenatus, Gallienus under∣took the War with Persia himself, to revenge the Calamity of his Father: This good Action came too late. His General was Heraclianus: who marching with an Army against the Per∣sians, the Palmyreni and others of the Easter∣ings who were for the Empire of Zenobia met him, and defeated him so, that he lost all his Army again. The Scythians in the mean time, by the way of the Euxine and the Danube, made Descents upon the Roman Territories, and did very much mischief. Gallienus sent against them Cleodamus and Athenaeus, two Byzantines, to repair the Towns, and fortifie such Places as wanted it. The Barbarians were met with a∣bout Pontus, and defeated: Venerianus defeated them also in a Sea-Fight, in which he was killed himself. Then they Ravaged the City of Cyziqua, and other Places in Asia, and af∣terwards
all Achaia: in which last the Atheni∣ans, under the Command of Dexippus the Hi∣storian, beat them, and repulsed them. Then they roved about the Countries of Epirus, M∣cedonia and Baeotia. As they were in Illyricum, Gallienus with much ado, rowz'd by the Publick Evils, came against them, and luckily slew a great number of them; which put the rest to flight, who insconsing themselves behind their Carts, escaped by the Mountain Gessaces. Mar∣tianus pursued them, and had several Batte with them afterwards with various success▪ Such of them as reached home, excited all their whole Country to a Rebellion against the Ro∣mans. The ill Government of Gallienus continuing in a manner insupportable, Martianus and He∣raclianus entred into a Consultation about the disposing the Empire to another. Claudius above others, was pitched upon, though he was not then present. He was an extraordi∣nary Man, and so much in every bodies esteem, that he seemed really to deserve the Empire; and from him it is, that the most Vigilant Caesar Constantius, derives his Descent. But, inasmuch as they could not accomplish this design without the cutting off a Pest, who with dancing after the Play and the Cirque, and following his Pleasures, let the State in the mean time go to ruin, they contrived to draw him out into the Field, pretending that Aure∣lus, betwixt whom and Gallienus a difference had happened since their Peace, was coming against him to fight him; and as he was in the
Field, they killed him. He was killed, someGallienus slain. say, by the hand of Cecropius, a Colonel of the Dalmatians, who by his Address and Prudence had much assisted towards the pretensions of Claudius, about Milan; and his Brother Vale∣rian was also killed with him at the same place; whom though some deny to have been honou∣red with the Imperial Style, and some make him a Caesar, and some neither the one nor the other; yet this is certain, that after the Captivity of his Father, we find in the publick Registers a Note, of the Emperor Valerian's being a Consul: which can only mean the Son Valerian. The Soldiers fell into a great Muti∣ny upon the death of Gallienus, and cried him up for an Useful, Brave and Powerful Prince, taken off only to serve private Interests. But, as it is the known way to appease Soldiers, to give them Money, and great Promises, Mar∣tianus, with the advice of others of the prin∣cipal Officers, having done this, and given them upon the spot, because they had Money enough at hand, twenty pieces of Gold a Man, they submitted, and were satisfied to have Gal∣lienus entred as a Tyrant, upon the Publick Records: And then Claudius, a good and truly Venerable Person, a lover of his Country and the Laws, and dear to all of worth, accep∣table to the Senate, and well known to the People, took the Empire upon him. In this manner lived and died Gallienus, who was born to serve his Belly and his Lusts:Character of Gallie∣nus. He spent Days and Nights in Drinking and Whoring, without caring what became of all
the State. About thirty Persons in his time set up for Emperors, to the dishonour of the Roman Name; nay, even Women-RevolteHis horrid Luxury. Governed better than he. In the Spring, to tell you some of his miserable Devices, he made himself Beds of Roses, and Pomilions of Apple-Trees, and all sorts of Fruits; Grapes he pre∣served three Years. He had Melons in the depth of Winter; Sweet Wine all the Ye long: Green Figs and Apples fresh from t Trees in Months which were out of their pro∣per Season. His Table Linen was always em∣broidered with Gold: His Services of Gold set with Jewels. The Powder for his H was of Gold dust. He often went abroad i a Crown radiated like that of God. At Rom, where the Emperors appear always in Gowns, he wore a Purple Cloak, with Buttons of Jewels set in Gold, and a Purple Tunic embroidered with Gold. His Belt was beset with Jewels. His Shoes were covered with Jewels. He Eat in Publick. The People h softned and attracted to him by Largesses. He invited the Ladies to the Feast of his Consul∣ship; who kissed his Hand, and he presented them with four Pieces of Gold of his Coin. A a great Philosopher Xenophon once said, whe he had lost his Son, I knew that when I beg him, I begat a Mortal; so said Gallienus, whe he heard that his Father was taken Prisoner; I knew my Father was a Mortal: For which Saying Annius Cornicula vainly commends his Constancy. Going out and coming in, he was often attended with Musick, Voices and
Instruments. He Washed in the Summer six or seven times a day; in the Winter twice or thrice. He drank always in Vessels of Gold; scorning Glass, because, he said, nothing was commoner than it. He changed his Wine every time he drank; never at one Meal drank twice of the same. His Mistresses often sat at the Table with him. A second Table was always by, of Jesters and all sorts of Mimicks. When he removed to the Gardens whh bear his Name, all the Houshold followed him; who were admitted to Eat and Bath, and Swim with him: Women also, young and old, handsome or unhandsome, were often admitted, with whom he jested and diverted himself, whilst the Empire every where went to ruine at the same time. He was extremely Cruel however upon the Soldiers; for sometimes he killed three or four thousand of them together in a day. He or∣dered a vast great Coloss to be made of him, in the form of that of the Sun; which was begun, but when he died, it was left un∣finished. He designed to have placed it upon the Esquiline, holding a Spear, in the hollow of whose Shaft a Child might go up by steps to the top. He had ordered a Chariot and Horses, in imitation of those of the Sun, to be made proportionable to this Statue, and to be set upon a vast Basis. But the Emperors Claudius and Aurelian, who came after, thought all this foolish. He did also design to continue the Work of the Portico Flaminia, as far as to Ponte Molle; and to make it with four or five Orders of Pillars. But it would be tedious
to say more of him. Let whoever desires to know any thing more, go to Palfurius Sural, who hath written a Journal of his Life. I shall proceed to Saloninus Gallienus, his Son. And then I will say something in short, of the Thirty pretended Emperors, or Tyrants, in particular, who set up themselves against this Prince. I must own, I have here studiously preter∣mitted several things, out of a respect to his Postery: You know, Sir, very well, what a War a Man many times raises against him∣self, who writes of the Ancestors of another: I do not doubt, but you remember what Tully says in his Hortensius. Gallienus, with the time that he enjoy'd the Empire in conjunction with his Father, reign∣ed, it is certain, in all Fifteen Years: that is, Six Years in conjunction with Valerian, who then was taken Prisoner, and Ten afterwards, in which he reigned by himself. I mention this, because some have said, that Gallienus died in the Ninth or Tenth Year of his Reign. By which, if they mean the Years that he reigned alone, after the Captivity of his Father, it is true, that he died in his Ninth Year. But other∣wise, those Decennial Games, which we have spoken of, were celebrated by him in his Tenth Year. And after them, he overcame the Got or Scythians, made a Peace with Odenatus and Aureolus, fought against Post humius and Lolli∣nus, and did many other things; some to his Honour, but more to his eternal Shame; he even Raked about the Taverns always in the Night, and passed the greatest part of his time in the Debauched Company of Pimps, Players and Poltrons.
Gallienus the Second. BY TREBELLIUS POLLIO. THIS Gallienus was the Son of Gallienus the First, and the Grandson of the Emperor Valerian the First. There is little to be said of him more, than that he was Nobly born, Educated like a Prince, and at last killed, not upon his own account, but upon the account of his Father. Some call him Saloninus Gallienus, because he was born at the City of Salona in Dalmatia; or because his Mother's Name was Cornelia Salonina Pipara, the Daughter of a Barbarian King; who whe∣ther she was the Wife, or the Mistress of his Fa∣ther, it is certain, that she was one that he ex∣tremely loved. There is extant to this day in Rome a Statue, which did stand before the Street of the Sacra Via, but is since taken into the Temple of Faustina, which hath this Inscrip∣tion upon it, To Gallienus Junior Saloninus. Now let us proceed to the Thirty Tyrants, or Pretended Emperors, who set themselves up in the time of Gallienus the First. I shall
be short upon them. Some were Persons of no small Merit, and did a great deal of good to the Publick. But others of them deserve not much to employ our Time and Pains. And we have already observed several things con∣cerning them, in the Life foregoing. The Grandfather Gallienus was a conside∣derable Man in the State in his time.
THEFrom CCLIV. To CCLXIX. Thirty Tyrants, OR Pretended EMPERORS, Who set themselves up against Valerian the First, AND Gallienus the First. By TREBELLIUS POLLIO. I Come now, with the Reader's Pardon for the plain and familiar way in which I write, to those Thirty Pretended Empe∣rors, or Revolters, who set up themselves for the Empire, in several parts of the World, in
opposition to Valerian and Gallienus. I shall put them all together, and the two Empresses with them; for not the Men only, but the Women pretended to revolt against Gallienus; and I shall be the shorter upon them, because I would not repeat the things that have been already mentioned concerning them, and be∣cause some of them were Persons so obscure, that there is little or no Notice taken, nor any certain Account given of them, in either the Greek or Latin Historians. I. CYRIADES. CYRIADES was one, who first Plunder∣ed and then ran away with a great deal of Gold and Silver from his Father, of the same Name, into Persia: To whom his Luxury and his ill Manners, had been before a great Affliction; because his Father was a good old Gentleman, of quite another Life. In Persia he joined and entred himself into the Service of Sapores the King; whom he stirred up to make a War upon the Romans. This War was first of all Conducted by Odomastes, a Persian General, and next by King Sapores in Person. The Cities of Antioch and Caesarea Philippi were taken. From the latter Cyriades assumed to himself the Title of Caesar: which afterwards was improved into that of Emperor, and all the East shook at the Terror, or at least the
Audaciousness of his Arms. Some say, that he killed his own Father; others deny it. However it is, when the Emperor Valerian came to the Persian War against Sapores this Cyriades was killed by his own Men. His De∣sertion and Flight, his Parricide and great Luxury, are the only Memorable things of him. 2. POSTHƲMIƲS. POSTHUMIUS was a very Great Man in War, and as Virtuous in Peace; and in all his Life and Actions of so grave and strict a Behaviour, that when Gallienus esta∣blish'd his Son Saloninus Gallienus, a Youth, in the Government of Galia, he committed him to the care of Posthumis as his Guardian, and as one whom he desired to be the Institutor of his Princely Accomlishments. Some say, that Posthumius afterwards broke his Trust, and killed Saloninus, as the way to his own rise to the Government of Gaia in his place. But it seems to be more true and more agreeable to the Manners of Posthmius to believe, that the Gauls vehemently haing Gallienus the Fa∣ther, and not enduring to have a Boy over them, which the Son was, set the Soldiers up∣on him to kill him, and then made Posthumius Emperor. All the Army there and all the Gauls embraced with joy the Government of Posthumius. He behaved himself so well a∣mongst
them seven Years, that he attained the Title of The Restorer of Gallia, whilst Gal∣lienus in the mean time followed his Luxury and his Riot, and was a slave to the Amours of a Barbarian Woman. At length Gallienus came against him, and received a Wound with the shot of an Arrow. The whole Nation of all the Gauls could not but extremely love him, be∣caused he deliver'd them from the power of the German Invaders, and restored the State of Gallia unto its Pristine security. But yet as the Gauls are naturally a People fond of Novelties; Posthumius upon the occasion of his Rigour, was killed through the means of Lolli∣anus, who rebelled against him; and Lollianus was set up Emperor by the Gauls in his stead. The Judgment of the Emperor Valerian con∣cerning the Merits of Posthumius, when he made him the President of Gallia, appears by this Letter. WE have made Posthumius the Commander on the Quarter beyond the Rhine, and the President of Gallia. A Man, the fittest for the Temper of that Nation. He will keep the Camp, the Courts of Judicature, the Tribunals, every particular Person in Order, and in their pro∣per Rights; and he will maintain his own Dignity. He is one, whom I do most particularly admire; and in my opinion deserving a Great Post. I doubt not but you will thank me for him. If I am mistaken in him, you may assure your selves, there is no where in the World to be found a Person that I can wholly approve. I have made
his Son a Tribune over th Gallia Narbonensis, who is a Youth, that will ne day approve him∣self worthy of the Examp of his Father. 3. Posthumius Junior. THis Posthumius, the Son of the precedent, was made by his Father first a Caesar, and then Emperor with him; in which Honour he died at the same time with his Father, in the Rebellion of Lollianus. The only Memorable thing of him, is, that he was a Master of so much Eloquence, that his Controversial De∣clamations are said to be inserted into Quinti∣lian; who is the most Acute Orator of all the Romans of that kind, as with the least reading in him, any one will see immediately. 4. LOLLIANƲS. BY the Rebellion of this Person it was, that the Valiant Posthumius was killed, after he had retrieved and secured the Interest of the Roman Empire in Gallia, which were in danger to be lost under the Luxury of Gallie∣nus. Lollianus was a Valiant Man himself: But yet the sense of his Rebellion made his Authority the less amongst the Gauls. How∣ever
he was not unprofitable to the Publick: For he not only Reform'd several of the Cities of Gallia, but likewise the Castles, which Post∣humius in his seven Years Reign had built upon the Enemies Country, and which after his death the Germans by a sudden Irruption plun∣dered and burnt, he rebuilt; and then he was killed by his own Soldiers, only because they thought him too Assiduous, and put too much Labour upon them. Thus first of all Posthumius, then Lollianus, after him Victorinus, then Tetricus, (to say no∣thing of Marius) arose to be the Assertors of the Roman Name in Gallia; I believe they were all given from Heaven for that purpose, whilst Gallienus with his unheard of Luxury, neglected the State at that rate, that had the Germans broken out upon us in the same man∣ner in consort with the Goths and Persians, so that all had conspired to our ruin, this Vene∣rable Empire of the Romans had received its last period then. As for all other things, the Lives of both Posthumius and Lollianus are obscure. Being not Persons of any great matter of Quality, they are chiefly noted for their Personal Bra∣very.
5. VICTORINƲS. AFter the death of the Posthumii and Lollia∣nus in Gallia, Victorinus remained the sole Emperor there; who being a great Soldier, had been before chosen by Posthumius to be his Colleague, when the Emperor Gallienus with a great Force came against him from Italy: In which War, assisted with the succours of the Germans, Posthumius and Victorinus together, fought several Battels with the Forces of Gallie∣nus; but at last received a defeat. Victorinus was one, that gave himself very much to corrupt the Soldiers and other Men's Wives, which proved his destruction: A Clerk to a Troop, whose Wife he had debauched, with a Party that he made, killed him at the City of Cologne; and his Son, a Youth, who was just before created a Caesar, was killed with him. Setting aside this one Vice, Victorinus was a very brave and an excellent Emperor, by many commen∣ded. Julius Aterianus hath written this Cha∣racter of him. I know no one that ought to be preferred be∣fore Victorinus, who reigned in Gallia sometime after Junius Posthumius. Neither did Trajan excel him in Bravery, nor M. Antoninus in Clemency, nor Nerva in Gravity, nor Vespasian in his Care of the Publick Money, nor Pertinax or Severus in Military Discipline. But then his
Lust and his extream passion for the Pleasures of Women, undid all so again, that People have not dared to record his Virtues, because of that Vice, for which he justly deserved the end that he had. He was the Son of Victorina, or Victoria, who was called, The Mother of the Camp; and who was the Person, that excited one after another Posthumius, Lollianus, her Son and Grandson Victorinus, and after them Marius and Tetricus, to assume the Empire of Gallia. 6. Victorinus, Junior. VICTORINUS the Son, was declared Caesar by his Father, and by his Grand∣mother Victoria, but about an hour before his Father was killed, and himself was killed with him. There is a small Sepulchre of them a∣bout Cologne in Marble, extant; which hath this Inscription, Here lye the Two Victorini, Pretended Emperors of Gallia. 7. MARIƲS. MARIUS, whom Victoria put up after the death of Victorinus, reign'd but three days, and was originally a Smith. What Tully says of a Consul, who enjoyed that Office no longer than six hours one afternoon; We have
had a Consul, says he, so severe and so strict, that no Man during his Magistracy either dined or supped or slept; one might also say the like as to this Emperor. He was created one day, appeared to Reign the next, and was killed upon the Third. Not but that he was a stout Man, and one that had passed through the se∣veral degrees of Command in the Army, be∣fore he came to this, He was the strongest in the Hand and Fingers, of any one that hath been almost ever known. His Veins were more like strong Cords or Ropes about his Fingers. With one Finger he would hurt as much, as if you had a blow given with a Cud∣gel or a Hammer. Some say, he would only set his fore finger against a Cart, and stop it coming. Betwixt two Fingers he bruised to pieces hard Stones. A Soldier killed him up∣on some disgust, who had formerly been a Work-man with him in his Forge; as he struck, the Man said to him, This Sword is of your own making. I will give you his Speech which he made to the Army, after he was declared Emperor. I Know, my Fellow Soldiers, that my former Trade of a Smith, of which all you yourselves are Witnesses, may be objected against me. But let any Man say what he will, I desire always to have to do with good Iron, rather then to spend my days as Gallienus does in Wine, Flowers, Mistresses, and the Taverns, so unworthily of his Father and his Quality. Let them tell me of my old Trade, so long as I can reduce Foreign
Nations with the effects of it, and make all the Almains, the Germans, and their Neighbours know, that the Romans are a People indeed of Iron, and their Swords to be the most dreaded of all things. In the mean time, I would desire you, Gentlemen, to observe, that you have made a Man your Prince, who never knew how to handle any thing but a Sword. Which I therefore take notice of to you, because I know that Gallienus, that Pest, hath nothing to oppose to me, but this. 8. INGENƲƲS. IN the Year of the Consulship of Fuscus and Bassus, whilst Gallienus lived the Life we have already so often mentioned, with his Whores, Players and Pimps, and depraved the good Parts which he had by nature in him, in a continued Luxury. Ingenuus, who was then the Governour of Pannonia, was by the concurrence of that Province, and the Le∣gions which were in Moesia, created Emperor. And it was very well for the publick Good, because it was a time, that the Sarmatians were so pressing, that there was a necessity of a vigorous Prince to oppose them, and remedy the publick Misery. However, Gallienus, as he was quick, fierce, furious, vehement and cruel, when necessity required, as well as pro∣fligate and lewd, came against Ingenuus, and
in a Battel overcame him, and killed him. After which, he raged severely against all, as well Soldiers as Citizens of Moesia. He left no one without a share of his Cruelty, and in several Towns he killed the whole Male Sex, so that they had not a Man-Child left alive amongst them. See the following Orders to Celer Verianus. The EMPEROR Gallienus to Verianus. IT is not enough to satisfie me, if you kill only such as were in Arms, who exposed their Lives of themselves to the Fortune of the Battel, and might have been killed there: All the Male Sex is to be killed, old and young. Whoever hath but wished ill to me, is to be killed. Whoever hath spoken ill against me, against me the Son of Valerian, and the Father and Brother to Princes, let him be killed. Ingenuus, an Emperor! Cut, Kill, Slay! You see my Mind. I write this with my own Hand; do you it as I would my self. Ingennus was a very brave and serviceable Man, and also beloved by the Soldiers, which wonderfully raises the Courage of such as have an Ambition to Command. Some have said, that he escaped out of the Fight, and after∣wards killed himself, rather than to fall into the cruel Hands of Gallienus.
9. REGILLIANƲS. BY the publick Destiny, it was so, in the time of Gallienus, that every one who could, started up an Emperor. Thus Regil∣lianus in Illyricum, where he commanded, was advanced by the Assistance of those Moesian Legions, who had served before on the side of Ingenuus, and upon whose Families, after the Defeat, Gallienus had exercised an incre∣dible Cruelty. The Story of the manner of the elevation of Regillianus, is pleasant, and a sort of a Jest. Some of the Military Men supping with him, says a Lieutenant-Tribune, From whence think we comes the Name of Regillianus? From regn, answers one presently, to reign. Then begins a∣nother to derive his Name Grammatically from Rex, thus; Rex, Regis, Regi, Regulus, Regillus, Regillianus. Then, says one, Cannot be very well be a King? Says another, Cannot be be our King? Says a Third, He is a King born; God hath given him the Name of one. And the next day the Chief of the Army in reality set him up to be Emperor. It cannot be denied but he always appro∣ved himself a good Soldier. Gallienus had be∣fore suspected him for his Merits. He was a Dacian by Nation, and related, it is said, to Decebalus, the once Famous King of Dacia.
Regillianus did several gallant Actions a∣gainst the Sarmatae; but however, for fear of the further Fury of Gallienus, he was betrayed to the Roxolani, and killed. Claudius, who succeeded to the Empire after Gallienus, and whose Judgment undoubtedly was of great weight in his time, writ the fol∣lowing Letter to Regillianus, whilst they were both as yet private Persons, to give him Thanks for his Care of Illyricum, during the Negligence of Gallienus, where Regillianus then commanded as General. I met with it in the Archives, and therefore it is of Au∣thority to be inserted here. Claudius to Regillian, wisheth all Health. I Congratulate the Happiness of the Publick, in having such a Captain as you, to fight their Battls at this time. Gallienus is happy in you, though he is one, to whom no body tells the Truth, neither of the Good nor Bad. Bonitus and Celsus, Two of his Guards, have informed me of your Action at Scupi, in the Upper Moesia, and how often in one day you have fought, and with what dispatch. You would be thought to deserve a Triumph, did we live as in the antient Times. In short, I would only wish you to be cautious, how you Conquer at this rate, remembring a cer∣tain Person, and the jealousie it may give him. Pray send me some of the Bows of the Sarma∣tians,
and a Couple of the Soldiers Coats, such as you have in Illyricum, with Buttons; I have sent you a Couple of ours. It is to be observed, that Regillianus was one who had not received his promotion from Gallienus, but from the Emperor Valerian; and that Claudius, Macrianus, Ingenuus, Posthumius, and Aureolus, were all likewise made Com∣manders by Valerian; whose Judgment in the Choice of them was therefore admirable, and would have been, had he continued upon the Throne, a great happiness to us; because all these, and all the General Commanders what∣ever, that were of his promotion, were Per∣sons so well chosen, that they merited after∣wards the Favour and Votes of their Soldiers to be Emperors. And I wish, that either they could have held it out, and maintained their Empires longer, or that Gallienus had not reign∣ed so long; it had been much better for the Liberty of our State. But Fortune was pleased to indulge herself extraordinarily, to take a∣way, not only Valerian from us, but several others who would have made us good Princes in his stead, and at the same time to continue to us a Gallienus longer, than it was certainly fit that such a one should reign.
10. AƲREOLƲS. AUreolus was another Commander of the Forces of the Province of Illyricum, who in contempt to Gallienus, as all the rest, with the instigation of the Soldiers, set himself up an Emperor. Against him came Macrianus and his Son with a considerable Army out of the East, in their way, as they were directing their March to depose Gallienus. Aureolus cor∣rupted some of this Army to his side, and fought and slew Macrianus and his Son, so that the rest yielding afterwards, and joyning them∣selves with Aureolus, this additional Force made Aureolus a Potent Emperor. In vain did Gallienus attempt to reduce him. Gallienus made a Peace with him, and accepted of his Assistance to oppose Posthumius in Gallia. After the Death of Gallienus, the Emperor Claudius fought Aureolus, and slew him at the Bridge, which is called the Bridge of Aureolus at this day, and there he built him a small Sepulchre, with an Inscription in Greek upon it, signifying, That the Emperor Claudius having overcome the power∣ful Tyrant Aureolus, had given him a Sepulchre, and he would in his Clemency, have spared his Life, but that the Soldiers refused it, and with∣out his order killed him. The Bridge he de∣dicated to him.
II. MACRIANƲS. THE once Famous Senator and Patriot, and afterwards the Valiant, but of all at last, the most unfortunate Emperor Valerian, being taken Prisoner by the Persians, amongst whom he lived and died in Captivity, and left behind him Issue unworthy of such a Father; Balista who was Captain of the Guards to him, and Macrianus a principal Officer of the Army un∣derstanding what a Person Gallienus was, who was also at a great distance from them, and that Aureolus had already usurped upon him in Illy∣ricum, met and consulted with the Forces which were with them in the East at their de∣sire; what was to be done as to the Election of another Emperor in the place of Valerian Maeonius Astyanax was present in Person at this Council, who says that Balista spoke thus. My Age, as well as my Inclination, and my Business sets me far from aspiring to an Empire. I cannot deny but that I should be glad to see a good Prince in the place of Valerian. But who is there for it, unless it be such a one as you, Macrianus,  who are brave, resolute, honest, tri∣ed and approved in the publick Service, and what especially concerns an Emperor to be, Rich. Take you therefore the Place which is due to your Deserts. You may command my Services as
long as you please, only remember to discharge well the Duty which is imposed upon you, and then all the Roman World will rejoyce to see you made their Sovereign. Macrianus answered, I confess, Balista, it is of consequence to have such a Prince as you have described; and I should be willing to serve the State, in order to depose that Pest Gallienus, from the Govern∣ment of it. But this is not a Work for my Age. I am Old, I cannot Ride, as I shall be obliged to do for an Example to the Soldiers. I am one that must be frequently bathing, and must eat well; my Pleasures and my Riches have taken ne off of the usages of a Soldiery Life long since. You must set up rather, Two or Three stout young Men, who may distribute themselves nto several parts of the Empire, to restore it again to its former Splendor, which by the Mis∣ortune of Valerian, and the ill Life of Gal∣ineus is at present ruined. Balista, understanding that he seemed to int something about his Sons, who were rave young Men, Macrianus Junior, and Quietus, he replied thus; We commit the Empire and the Government f it to your Prudence. You have Two brave oung Men of your own, Macrianus and Quie∣us, who sometime since were made Tribunes by he Emperor Valerian. Take them to be your
Colleagues in the Empire: They cannot be safe, because they are good, under Gallienus. Macrianus finding that his Meaning had been rightly taken, answered; I submit, and as to the Soldiers, I will give them a double Pay with my own Money. Be you Balista, a careful Officer to me, and provide me Provisions in the places, where it is neces∣sary; and I will make Gallienus, a Man be∣yond any thing of a Woman loose and effeminate, to understand the Power of his Fathers Com∣manders. So Macrianus and his Two Sons were with the Consent of all the Troops made Empe∣rors. The Father, and his Son Macrianus, marched presently against Gallienus, leaving the Affairs of the East in good order, under the other Son Quietus. They brought with them an Army of Five and Forty Thousand Men, with whom they engaged with Aureolus in Illyricum, or upon the borders of Thrace, but they were beaten, and both of them kil∣led, and Thirty Thousand of their Men after∣wards yielded themselves to the Power of Au∣reolus. Domitian was the General of Aureolus in this Battel, a very brave and active Soldier, who derived his Family from the Emperor D∣mitian and Domitilla. Not to omit the Judg∣ment of Valerian, concerning this Macrianus and his Sons, in a Letter which he sent to the Senate from the Borders of Persia.
I Have entrusted in my absence, whilst I am up∣on the Persian War, all the Affairs of the State relating to the Military part to Macrianus. He is faithful to you, Fathers of the Senate, af∣fectionate to me, and the Soldiery both love him and fear him. Upon all occasions he will act in concert with the Armies. Nor are you, Fa∣thers of the Senate, strangers to the bravery of Macrianus from his beginning to this day. You have known him a Boy in Italy, a Youth in Gal∣lia, a Man in Thrace, in his full Prime in A∣frica, an old Man in Illyricum and Dalmatia; in all which places his Bravery hath been ap∣proved in several Battels, in which he hath ac∣quitted himself exemplarily well. To this it is to be added, that he hath Sons worthy to be of your Body, and worthy of your Favour. And so he goes on. 12. Macrianus the Son. THIS Youth had not been made an Em∣peror, but only with Respect to the Pru∣dence of his Father, in whose Hands he was. He was wonderfully Brave for his Age, and had gained himself by it great Commendations. But what signifies the Fortitude of any one Man in a Battel? He was overcome and kil∣led by Domitian, together with his Father. His Mother was a Lady of Quality. His Fa∣ther
had raised himself to the Empire from the degree of a private Soldier. 13. QƲIETƲS. QUietus was a Youth worthy of his Father and his Brother, in conjunction with whom, as we have said, he was made Empe∣ror, which he also deserved. But when Ode∣natus, the King of the Palmyreni, who had pre∣tended to the Empire of the East from the Cap∣tivity of Valerian, heard of the entire defeat of both his Father and his Brother by Aureolus, he came with a Force against this Youth, vin∣dicating as it were the Cause of Gallienus, and slew him first, and Balista soon after him. Yet had Quietus and his Brother lived, they might have done the State very great Service. Their Family flourishes at this day, and one thing is very remarkable of it; that it is a Fa∣mily which hath, and hath always had such an Honour for Alexander the Great of Mace∣donia, that the Men continually wear his Pi∣cture in their Rings, and have it cut upon their Plate; the Women wear it finely wrought in their Heads, Bracelets, Rings, Gowns, Bor∣ders, Mantles, and all manner of Dresses. The other day, a Gentleman of that Family, Cor∣nelius Macer, giving an Entertainment in the Temple of Hercules, he had a Gold and Silver Bowl there, on which in the midst was engra∣ved
a Head of Alexander, and round it was all the History of him, contained in short and pretty Figures, which every one that had an Honour for that great Man was very Curious to see. I mention this, because also there is an Opinion, that such as carry about them such an Image either in Gold or Silver, are di∣vinely assisted in all that they do. 14. ODENATƲS. ODenatus Prince of the Palmyreni in Syria was the Person that really secured the Af∣fairs of the East, by his taking up Arms against the Persians, in the behalf of the captive Em∣peror Valerian. His Wife Zenobia, and his Sons Herod, Herennian, and Timolaus accompanied him in that Expedition. He first reduced under his Power the City of Nisibis, and all Mesopotamia. Then he fought Sapores King of Persia, and beat him, and put him to flight. He pursued Sapores and his Children, as far as to the City of Ctesiphon. He took the Con∣cubines of Sapores Prisoners, and a great deal of Booty. He intended next to direct his Army against the pretensions of Macrianus, who had set himself up against Galenus. But Macrianus, with the Son of his own Name, was killed in the Battel with Aureolus in Illyricum. Then Odenatus fe upon the other Son Quietus,
who was left in the East, and him he killed. And after he had composed in a great mea∣sure the State of Affairs in the East, himself and his Son Herod were likewise killed by Maeo∣nius. I believe that God was angry with the Roman Empire, in that he did not continue Odenatus longer to us. For certainly Odenatus and his Lady Zenobia together, had re∣establish∣ed, not only the East, but all the parts of the Empire. He was a great Warriour, and he is for ever Famous besides for an indefatigable Huntsman. For from his Youth he accustom∣ed himself to the Hunting the Lion, the Leo∣pard, the Bear, and the rest of the wild Beasts of the Field. He was always in the Woods and upon the Mountains, enduring the Heat and the Rain, and all the Injuries that ordina∣rily accompany that Sport; and this hardened him again for all Weathers which he suffered in his Wars with Persia. His Lady Zenobia, no less accustomed herself so, that many say she was as valorous and as indefatigable as he: A Woman the noblest of all her Sex; and, says Crnelius Capitolinus, the Beauty too of all the East.
15. HEROD. HErod, the elder Son of Odenatus; born to him, not by Zenobia, but a former Wife, concurred with his Father in assuming the Em∣pire of the East. He was a Man of an ex∣treme delicacy of Life, wholly devoted to the Oriental and the Graecian Luxury. His Tents were embroidered, his Pavilions done with Gold, and he had all things after the Persian mode. Odenatus loved him, and indulging him his Humour, he gave him all the Royal Concubines, the Riches, and the Jewels that he took from the King of Persia. Zenobia was a right Step-mother to him, which only the more recommended him to his Father. 16. MAEONIƲS. THis Person was a Cousin-German to the Excellent Odenatus, whom he killed; drawn to that Fact by nothing but a cursed Envy at the Pleasures of Herod, though in the mean time he was very lewd himself; so that the Soldiers who had put him up to be Empe∣ror after Odenatus by a mistake, killed him
quickly again, as he deserved, for his Luxury. Zenobia, some says, favoured the Envy of Maeo∣nius, because she could not endure to see a Step-son, made a Prince, before the Sons of her own Body. 17. BALISTA. THE Account about Balista is very va∣rious. Some say, Odenatus gave him his Pardon; yet because he would neither trust to Gallienus, nor Aureolus, nor Odenatus, he set up himself Emperor. Others say, that he was killed at the Village of Daphne by Antioch, where he lived a private Life upon an Estate which he bought there; and again, that he was kil∣led as he lay in his Tent, by a private Soldier of Odenatus; and again, that he was killed by the Persons sent by Aureolus to take Quietus, after his defeat and slaughter of his Father and his Brother. However it is, Balista was a Famous Person, an experienc'd Statesman, of great Force in his Counsels, Eminent in his Expeditions, and a singular Manager of the Quarters and Provisions for the Soldiers. The Emperor Valerian gave this Character of him to Ragonius Clarus.
The Emperor Valerian to Ragonius Clarus, the Praefect of Illyricum and Gallia. IN the disposition of the Quarters, and the Pro∣visions of the Soldiers, I would have you my Kinsman, if you are a good Husband, as I know you are, to follow the Example of Balista. Do you see, how he makes the thing easie to the People of the Country? Where there is Forage for the purpose, there he sends his Horse; where Corn, there he places the Foot. He compels no Man, no Landlord to find Corn there, where he hath it not; nor to feed a Horse, where he cannot. And it is certainly the best way to take things as they grow upon the place without charging the Publick with Carriages and Expences. Thus the Province of Galatia abounds in Corn; Thrace and Illyricum are full of Corn, let the Foot be quartered there. In Thrace, the Horse also might Winter very well, without damage to the Inha∣bitants, because the Fields afford a great deal of Grass: So where there is plenty of Bacon, or any o∣ther Commodities, the best way is, to raise and to de∣mand the said Commodities from thence. All which are the Counsels of Balista, who charges only one Commodity upon one Province, abounding with it, and in the mean time he frees that Province from the quartering of Soldiers, because those are there, where the Corn and the Grass most is. This is now become a publick Order.
In another Letter, the same Emperor re∣turns his thanks to Balista for all the good Me∣thods of Government, which he owns himself to have learnt from him. Particularly he is glad, he says, that by his Counsel he hath re∣trenched all Persons, which do him no ser∣vice; that is, to entertain no Supernumerary Officers in the Court, nor Tribunes or Soldi∣ers in the Army without Employs: all which he attributes to the Counsels of Balista. And this is as much as I have met with, that I can rely upon, concerning him. He is often commended for a good Officer; but little is spoken of him, as an Emperor. 18. VALENS. THIS Person, being of great Note and Knowledge both in the Military and the Civil Affairs, had the Honour to be made by Gallienus the Proconsul of Achaia. Macrianus very much fearing him, and envying his Me∣rits, knowing him to be his Enemy, sent Piso against him to kill him. Valens foresaw the danger, and took the care to provide himself well against it. He had no other way, as he thought, to escape, but by setting himself up an Emperor, as well as Macrianus had done. He did so, and escaped the power of Piso. But he was soon after killed by his own Men.
19. Valens, Senior. THIS Valens was either Uncle, or Great Uncle to the precedent, and one that set himself up in the time of the Emperor Decius. It comes into my mind to mention him here, because of his Relation to, and the parity of his Fortune with the other: for after he had a few days Reigned in Illyri∣cum, he was killed also. 20. PISO. PIso was sent with a Force by Macrianus, to kill Valens, the Eighteenth in this Cata∣logue of Tyrants; but finding that Valens was provided against him, he changed his Course into the Province of Thessaly, and was there by the consent of a small Party, himself made an Emperor, with the Title of Emperor of Thessalia. He was a very good and Provident sort of a Man, to a Proverb; so that he was called in his time the Thrifty Piso; and he was of that Noble Family of the Piso's, into which Cicero says, to do his own an Honour, he Mar∣ried his Daughter Tullia. He was much in the esteem of all the Great Men. Valens,
who sent Ruffians after him into Thessalia, who Murdered him, confessed, that though he was his Enemy, he knew not what account to give of that Fact to the Gods, the Infernal Judges, because the Roman Empire had not then such another Person as Piso. The Senate upon the News of his Death, met upon the seventh of the Kalends of July, and unanimously de∣creed the Honours of a God, with this Elo∣gium, that there never was a better Man, nor one more firm and constant than he. They decreed him a Triumphal Statue and a Cha∣riot, to be put up to his Honour. The former is yet to be seen, amongst the others of the same kind. The latter did sometime stand about the place, where since hath been built the famous Bath of Dioclesian, of eternal, as well as sacred, memory. 21. AEMILIAN. IT is a Familiar thing with the People of Egypt, to break out, like Mad-Men, into the violentest Seditions and Disorders, upon any the slightest occasions. Often have they for a matter of a Complement neglected, or for a Place in the Baths, or about the Flesh in their Markets, Herbs, Shooes, and the like, raised such Commotions, as have hazarded the Ruin of the State, and required an Army to repress them again. Thus one day a Slave
belonging to the Curatour of the City of A∣lexandria was killed by a Soldier, for saying, that he had a better pair of Shooes on his Feet, than that Soldier had. The People hereupon rose, and made an Assault upon the House of Aemilian, who was the Roman General of the Province. They came upon him in a furious manner, with Stones and Swords, and all sorts of Instruments, as is usual in a Sedition. Aemi∣lian had no other way in fine, to take, but with the consent of the Egyptian Army, who were willing to it, chiefly because they hated Gallie∣nus, to make himself Absolute, and set up for an Empire. This he did, with Vigour. He went thorough the Thebais, and all Egypt, and displayed his Authority over the Barbarians. He gained himself the Title of the Alexan∣drian Emperor. But as he was preparing for an Expedition into India, Gallienus sent Theo∣dotus against him, who took him and sent him Prisoner to Rome; where he was Strangled in the Prison, according to an Antient Custom of putting Captives to death. Gallienus would have after this, made Egypt a Proconsular Pro∣vince, and given it to Theodotus; but the Priests prohibited him, pretending an Inscription up∣on a golden Column at Memphis in Egypt, in Letters, saying, that Egypt would then be a Free People, when the Romans attempted to Govern it by Consuls; and therefore the Rods of the Consuls were never to enter into A∣lexandria. Cicero, against Gabinius, mentions the same Notion in his time: I find it also in Proculus, the Learned Grammarian, who is
of great Authority, when he speaks of Fo∣reign Countries. So that when Herennius Cel∣sus, your Kinsman, the present Praefect of E∣gypt, not contented with the Honour which he hath, desired lately to be made a Consul, he was answered that he asked a thing, that was not to be granted; because it was con∣trary to an observation of the Empire. 22. SATƲRNINƲS. SAturninus was made a Commander by the Emperor Valerian, and continued so with great Applause in the Reign of Gallienus; till no longer being able to endure the Dissolute∣ness of that latter Prince, and the neglect of his Government, the Army set him up to be Emperor. He was a Man of singular Pru∣dence and great Gravity, beloved by all, and very well known for his Victories over the Bar∣barians. The same day, that the Soldiers put upon him the Purple, he told them in a Speech; Gentlemen you have lost a good Captain, to make of him an ill Prince. He did several things in his Reign which were Brave: but be∣ing severe as to the Discipline of the Soldiers, the same that had raised him, killed him.
23. TETRICƲS. AFter Victorinus and his Son were killed in Gallia, their Mother Victoria persuaded Tetricus a Senator, who then exercised the Of∣fice of a President in Gallia, and was her Re∣lation, to take upon him the Empire there. Accordingly she caused him to be Proclaim'd, and his Son to be Entitled the Caesar. Tetri∣cus Reigned long, and performed several things happily; but being beaten at last by the Em∣peror Aurelian, and unwilling to give himself further trouble with a perverse and an insolent Army which he had to Command, he volun∣tarily yielded to Aurelian. Aurelian, not be∣ing one overmuch inclined to Lenity, led him in a solemn Triumph, at the same time when he led in Triumph Zenobia, the Wife of Ode∣natus, and her two Sons Herennianus and Ti∣molaus. But being sensible, that this was very severe to be done to a Roman Senator, and one who had been a Consul, and President of Gallia, he made him, after he had thus Triumphed over him, the Governour of all the Cam∣pagna, Abruzzo, Puglia, Lucania, Calabria, Hetruria, Ombria, and generally all the Pro∣vinces of Italy; he suffered him not only to live, but to live in the greatest Splendour; and oftentimes called him by the name of either his Colleague, or his Companion in Arms, or Emperor.
24. Tetricus, Junior. THIS Youth, the Son of the other, ha∣ving been declared Caesar by the Lady Vi∣ctoria, was led in Triumph by Aurelian in Company with his Father. He enjoyed after∣wards all the Honours of a Senatour, and his Estate untouched, and left the same to his Po∣sterity. My Grandfather hath said, that he was acquainted with him very well, and that no Man was more esteem'd either by Aurelian, or the following Princes, than he. The House of the Tetrici is extant at this day, and a ve∣ry fair one upon the Mount Caelius, betwixt two Groves, over against a Temple of Isi. You have in it, in Mosaick Work, a draught of the Emperor Aurelian, holding out to each of these two, over whom he Triumphed, a Senatorian Robe, to signifie his investing them again in that Dignity; and they holding out to him a Sceptre and Crown, as the ac∣knowledgements of his Victory. At the De∣dication of which Piece, they say, that Aure∣lian did them the Honour to be present at their Entertainment, at their humble Request.
25. TREBELLIAN. I Am almost ashamed to recount so many several Upstart Emperors, that all appeared under the single Reign of Gallienus, and were occasioned by his own fault: his Luxury de∣serving no other than to be confronted with them, and yet his Cruelty was such, that one might very well be afraid to do so too. Tre∣bellian, amongst the rest, was made a Prince, in the Province of Isauria, by the Isaurians themselves. Some called him an Arch-Rob∣ber; but he gave himself the Title of an Em∣peror, and ordered a Medal to be made of him as such, and appointed his Court in the Castle of the City Isaura. He maintained his Empire for some time, by the help of the Mountains, and the Fastnesses, in which he took refuge▪ But being by Causisoleus an E∣gyptian, the General of Gallienus, and the Brother of Theodotus, who had before taken Aemilian Prisoner, drawn down into the open Field, where he could not avoid the Com∣bat, he was overcome and killed. Yet could not the Isaurians, for fear of the Cruelty of Gallienus, be prevailed with afterwards upon any terms of Kindness and Humanity to submit. They have ever since remained as Barbarians: their Country, though in the Heart of the Roman Empire, is so shut up, and stands as it
were a Boundary against it, defended by its own Natural Limits, more than by its Men: who in truth are neither skilled in Arms, nor Brave, nor Virtuous, nor Wise and Prudent. But yet they are secure in only this, that they live in places inaccessible. 26. HERENNIAN. ODenatus, the Prince of the Palmyreni in Syria, and sometime Emperor of the East, left at his death his Wife Zenobia and two Sons, Herennianus and Timolaus: who being very young, Zenobia in their names assumed and governed the Empire of their Father, longer than it was for the Honour of the Ro∣man Name to endure in a Woman. She Ar∣rayed those Children in the Purple Habit of the Roman Emperors, and brought them with her to the Head of her Army, and to the As∣semblies of the People, whither she often went, and Harangued them like a Man. She was the Dido, the Semiramis, the Cleopatra of her Age. It is a thing uncertain, what the end was of these her two Sons; whether they were killed by Aurelian, or whether they died their own deaths. But there are of the Posterity of Zenobia, living at Rome, in Honour, at this day.
27. TIMOLAƲS. THE Account of Timolaus is, I suppose, the same with that of Herennian, his Brother. Only in one thing he is distinguished from him; which was his great Ardour for the Roman Studies; which Timolaus so readily im∣bibed, that he might have made, it is said, one of the greatest Orators in his time. 28. CELSƲS. WHilst the parts of Gallia, Thrace, Illyri∣cum, Pontus, and the East were taken up, and Cantoned into separate Empires by the several Pretenders there, and Gallienus passed his Life in the mean time amongst the Ta∣verns, Baths, and Bawdyhouses; the Africans by the instigation of Vibius Passienus their Pro∣consul, and Fabius Pompeianus the Comman∣der on the Frontier of Libya, set up Celsus Emperor, adorning him for the purpose with a Robe of Purple, taken off of a Statue of the Goddess Caelestis. He had been a Tribune, but lived at this time a private Life upon his Estate, and was a Man of that Justice, and that Presence, that he seemed very well to de∣serve
their Choice. But the seventh day after∣wards, a Woman, Galliena by Name, a Re∣lation of the Emperor Gallienus, killed him; so that he had no time to shew himself in. His Body was thrown to the Dogs: His Effigies, was mounted upon a Cross, and Crucified a∣midst the Insults of the People, as if it had been Celsus himself in Person. This was a new Devise of punishing the memory of a Man. The truth is, the City of Sicca stood out against him, keeping their Faith to Gal∣lienus; and it was those especially, that urged on this disgrace. 29. ZENOBIA. TO the last shame of the Reign of Gal∣lienus, and of the Roman Empire under him, the Women Revolted against him, and managed their Enterprise also extraordinary well. Zenobia by name, a Foreign Lady, whom we have often already mentioned; of the Lineage of the Cleopatra's, and the Pto∣lomey's of Egypt, as she herself said; the Wife of Odenatus of Palmyra, the Emperor of the East: who dying, she assumed the Purple, the Crown, and the Authority in his place, in the name of her Sons, Herennian and Timolaus, being Infants; and she was accordingly ac∣cepted; so that whilst Gallienus lived as he did, and Claudius was taken up with the War with
the Goths, she continued her Reign longer, than it was otherwise sufferable in one of her Sex. And it was with great difficulty that she was overcome at last, and carried in Triumph by the Emperor Aurelian; who being reflected upon by some, for making a Woman a Sub∣ject of a War, and a Triumph, gives this ac∣count of her, and thus defends himself in a Let∣ter to the Senate. Fathers of the Senate, I Hear that it is Objected to me, that I have not performed a manly part in Triumphing over Zenobia. I assure you, those who blame me, would on the contrary sufficiently commend me, did they know, what a Woman she is. How Prudent in her Counsels, how Diligent in her Bu∣siness, how Powerful with her Soldiers, how Ge∣nerous when Necessity requires, and how Severe when there is occasion for Severity. I can say, that it was through her means, that Odenatus overcame the Persians, and putting to flight King Sapores, advanced his Arms as far as to the City of Ctesiphon. I can assure you, that this Woman was so great a Terror to the East, and to the People of Egypt, that neither the Arabians, nor the Ar∣menians, nor the Saracens dared to move for her. Nor had I preserved to her, her life, but that I know, that she did great service even by her very Usurpa∣tion; because she kept up and asserted the Bounds of the Empire. Let them therefore, who are pleased with nothing, take the Poison of their own Tongues
to themselves. If it is not Handsome to have Con∣quered and Triumphed over a Woman, what shall I say of the Emperor Claudius, that Good and Venerable Commander, who had done the same, if he had not been wholly taken up with his Expe∣ditions against the Goths. He Privately and Prudently suffered her to Reign, to give himself the greater opportunity of effecting what he was a∣bout, whilst she preserved inviolate the antient Bounds of the Empire of the East. This shews what an Opinion Aurelian had of Zenobia. Zenobia was a Lady of that Chastity, that she never accompanied with her Husband, more than to attempt a Conception. For after she had lain with him, she contained, and expected her Terms, to know whether she was with Child: If she was not, then she gave way to the Repetition. She lived with the Pomp of a Queen, but much according to the Persian Mode. She was Adored after the manner of the Kings of Persia, and her manner of Eating was like theirs. But she went to Harangue her Soldiers, as the Roman Emperors do, with a Helmet upon her Head, and an Imperial Robe of Purple upon her Back, buttoned with a Jewel, and Jewels a∣bout the Borders, and she shew'd one Arm ma∣ny times bare. She was of a Brown Com∣plexion, Black Eyes which were incomparably lively and glittering, a Divine Esprit, a most delicate Shape and Presence: her Teeth so bright, one would think them rather to be
Pearls: a Clear and Manly Voice. She had the Severity of a Tyrant, when necessity re∣quired; and all the Clemency of a good Prince, where there was occasion for her Goodness. Her Generosity was ruled by Prudence. She managed her Publick Treasure with a care be∣yond the Conduct of her Sex. She used a Coach, seldom a Litter, but often rode a Horse; and she walked often on Foot, it is said, three or four Miles together. She was born with the Tenaciousness of a Spaniard. A sober Woman, yet she made no scruple fre∣quently to drink with the great Officers of her Army; and also with Persians and Armenians, whom in her Table she excelled. The Vessels for her Table were of Gold, beset with Jewels. Eunuchs advanced in years served her; very seldom Women. She obliged her Sons to speak in Latin; they rarely or hardly at all spoke Greek. Nor was she altogether ignorant of Latin herself; but her modesty for fear of not doing it well, forbad her to speak it. She spoke the Egyptian Language perfectly well. It is said, she had Epitomized the Alexandrian, and the Oriental Histories, she was so well acquainted in them; and the Roman History she had Read in the Greek. When therefore she was taken and brought into the Presence of Aurelian, O Zenobia, said Aurelian to her, why have you dared to Insult, as you have done, the Emperors of Rome? she answered, I know you to be an Emperor, who are a Conqueror. But I have not thought Gallienus, nor Aureolus, or those others to be so; and
believing that Victorina might be such another as my self, I desired, if it was possible, that she and I might share the Empire betwixt us. She was led in Solemn Triumph at Rome, in that manner, that nothing ever appeared more Pompous, and with that Grace, in the Eyes of that City. She laboured under the Burden of her Ornaments. She had such great Jewels upon her, that though she was a strong Wo∣man, she stopt many times, and cried, she could not go on for their Weight. Upon her Feet and Hands, she had Chains of Gold; and about her Neck a Chain of Gold, sup∣ported by one of her old Guards, a Persian. Aurelian gave her her life; which she spent af∣terwards with her Children at Tivoli, in the Quality, and according to the usage of a Roman Matron: an Estate was given her there for her support, near the Palace of Hadrian, and the same carries her name at this day. 30. VICTORINA. VIctorina, or Victoria, or Vitruvia, was a∣nother Lady, who is to be remembred here, as she was one, who was encouraged to her Enterprizes by the ill manners of Gallienus. She set up both her Son and her Grandson Victorinus to be Emperors in Gallia, who were afterwards killed by the Soldiers. She set up Posthumius: she set up Lollius; she set up Ma∣rius
there, who were all first declared Em∣perors by the Soldiers, and then after some time, that they reigned more or less, killed. At last she set up Tetricus, because she would never forbear to carry on the Masculine part, which she had begun. In Tetricus's time, she was either killed, or taken off by a Natural Death. She gave herself the Title of the Mo∣ther of the Camp. She had Money both in Brass, Silver, and Gold Coyned for her, at the City of Trier; whereof there are pieces extant at this day. I have now finished the number, and given you, Sir, the best account I can, out of the se∣cret Paths of History, which I have traced on purpose for them, of these thirty Tyrants. You may please to accept of it, and take my Pains in good part. It is not so Eloquently, as it is faithfully writ. Because it is not fine Language, which I pretend to, but the matter of Fact. And what I write, I dictate to my Servant with that haste, that if you should ask me any thing, I have scarce a breathing time left me to answer you in. There were two other Persons, in other Reigns, of this stamp; the one in the time of Maximin, the other in the Reign of Clau∣dius; whom, as an Appendix, I shall think fit to produce here, to bring up the Rear of the rest, and so I shall close this point of History.
1. Titus Quartinus. TItus, as both Dexippus, Herodian, and all Historians write, was a Tribune of the Moors, whom Maximin had dismist from his Service. Some say, he voluntarily set himself up Emperor for fear of his life afterwards, from Maximin: others, that the Armenian Archers in Maximin's Service, having been disobliged, compelled Titus against his will to take upon him that Post. However it is, he was a Man of the first Note for his laudable Services to the State both at home and abroad. But his Reign was but little happy to him. He reigned six Months, and then after the discovery of the intended Defection of Magnus, was killed by his own Soldiers. His Wife was Calphurnia, a Holy and Venerable Woman of the Family of the Piso's, a Priestess, but once married, and adored by our Ancestors amongst the best of her Sex. Her Statue is that, which we have yet in the Temple of Venus, of Stone gilt. She wore in her time Unions, such as Cleopatra was said to wear; and she had a Charger of twenty Pound weight of Silver, whereon was Ingraved the History of her Family. This might be too much perhaps to mention, if it did not naturally come in my way.
2. CENSORINƲS. THE next is Censorinus: a Man, who was very much a Soldier, and of an Antient stamp of Honour in the Senate. He had been twice a Consul, twice a Captain of the Guards, thrice the Governor of the City of Rome, four times a Proconsul, thrice the Lieu∣tenant of a Province with Consular power, twice a Propraetor, four times an Aedile, thrice a Questor, besides two extraordinary Com∣missions which he had into Persia and Sarma∣tia. In the Persian War, in the time of the Emperor Valerian, he received a Wound, of which he halted in one Foot. After all these Honours, as he lived an old Man upon his E∣state, he was taken out by the Soldiers, and made Emperor, which was under the Reign of the Emperor Claudius. Those who jested upon him, called him also a Claudius; because of his halting, from Claudico, to Halt. In se∣ven days afterwards, from his Elevation, the same Persons that had raised him, killed him; they thought he was too strict, and of too severe a Discipline for them. His Sepulchre stands about the City of Bologna, where in great Letters are written upon it all his Honours, concluding with this; Happy in eve∣ry thing, but an Emperor. His Family, who are yet Extant, and famous by the name of
the Censorini, betook themselves out of a dis∣gust to Rome, and the Publick Affairs, some to the Country of Thrace, and some into Bi∣thynia. They have a sine House belonging to them in Rome, adjoyning to that of the Fla∣vian Family: It was the House of Titus, the Eleventh Emperor of the Romans, they say formerly, in his time. So now I proceed to the Emperor Claudius, with whom I shall joyn his Brother Quintillus, and some few things, that relate to that Ex∣cellent and Noble Family. But whatever I shall say of the Life of Claudius; it must be expected beforehand to fall short of the Me∣rits of so great a Prince.
SALON VALERIANVS CAES. portrait of Saloninus DIVO CLAVDIO GOTHICO. portrait of Claudius Gothicus IMP. CAES. QVINTILLVS AVG. portrait of Quintillus IMP. AVRELIANVS AVG. portrait of Aurelian IMP. C. M. CL. TACITVS P. F. AVG. portrait of Marcus Claudius Tacitus IMP. C. M. AN. FLORIANVS P. F. AVG. portrait of Florianus P. 175. Vol. 11
THEA. Christi CCLXIX. Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR CLAUDIUS, Dedicated to the EMPEROR Constantine the Great. By TREBELLIUS POLLIO. IAM happily come to the Emperor Claudius; whose History I shall endeavour to write with the greater care, because of his Re∣lation to Constantius the Caesar. Nor can I re∣fuse this piece of Service to the Memory of
so great a Prince. For since I have already given my self the trouble of writing upon those Tumultuary Reigns, and such Petty Kings as the Thirty foregoing, and upon the Actions also of Zenobia and Victorina two Women; the Condition of Affairs under the Emperor Galli∣enus coming to that pass, that even the Wo∣men as well as Men Usurped upon him; It would be a Crime in me to choose to be silent of a Prince, who was Great Uncle to Constan∣tius the Caesar, and who by his Bravery over∣came the Goths, and put an end to the publick Calamities of the State: who, though not him∣self the Author of the Design against Gallienus, yet for the Publick Good, was made an Instru∣ment of our deliverance from that Prodigy of an Emperor; and had he lived long upon the Throne, he had revived to us by his Virtues; his Counsels, and his Conduct, the Scipios, and the Camillus, and all those Noble Romans of Antient Times. His Reign was short. But yet the same would have been thought of it, though he had attained to the greatest Age. Every thing in him was Admirable, every thing in him was Conspicuous, and to be preferred even before the most Triumphant Actions of the Antients. He had the Bravery of Trajan, the Piety of Antoninus, the Moderation of Augustus, and the Excellencies of all the Great Princes in that manner, that instead of taking an Example by others, had those Princes never been, his single Example had been enough for all the World. The Learned in the matter of Nativities are of
an Opinion, that one hundred and twenty Years is the greatest Age given to a Man to live; and more, they pretend, hath not been permitted to any; only to Moses the Friend of God, as the Books of the Jews speak, who attained unto one hundred and twenty five Years: And when he complained that he died, whilst as yet he had all his Senses intire and vigorous, it was answer'd him, by I know not what Deity, that no Person was to live above that Age. Now had Claudius lived to one hundred and twenty Years, though his Death must have of necessity proceeded at that time, yet would no body have desired it then, as Tully speaks concerning Scipio, because his Life was stupendous and admirable. Take him, whe∣ther at Home or Abroad, and what is there, that is Great, that he did not discover? He Loved his Parents, shall I say? He Loved his Brothers, and this is no Miracle. He Loved his Relations, a thing which is in our times to be compared unto a Miracle. He Envied no one: The Wicked he punished. Corrupt Magistrates he openly and publickly Condem∣ned. He overlook'd the Indiscretions of Fools. He made excellent Laws. He was that Per∣son upon the Throne, that those of his Race have been since Courted to the Empire by the greatest Princes, and are dear in the best Af∣fections of the Senate. I may be thought perhaps to speak this in flattery to Constantius, the Caesar. But I ap∣peal as well to the Conscience of your Maje∣sty, as to my Manner of Life, to be my Wit∣ness,
Whether I have ever thought, or uttered, or acted any thing at any time, that is of that Nature. I have before my eyes the Emperor Claudius; whose Life, Probity, and all the Actions of his Reign have given such a Fame of him to Posterity, that both the Senate and the People of Rome conferred upon him un∣parallel'd Honours, after his Death. A Shield in Gold, wherein is engraven his Image, was by the Voice of the whole Senate, set up in his Honour in the House of the Senate, where it is extant at this day. The People of RomeHonours done to him by the People of Rome, (which never was done before) at their own expence, set up his Statue of Gold of the heighth of ten Foot in the Capitol, before the Temple of the most High and Excellent Jupiter: In the Publick Forum was his Statue in Silver, in a Triumphal Robe, erected upon a Column, with the Acclamations of all Mankind; the Silver being of one thousand and five hundred pound weight. As if he had a prospect of things future, he revived and propagated the Honour of the Family of the Flavii, of which was Vespasian and Titus, not to mention Domi∣tian, because he was one unworthy of it. In a short time he finished the War with the Goths. So that if I must be thought to Flat∣ter, the Senate, the People of Rome, the Foreign World, and the Provinces are all Flatterers with me. For all Orders of Men, all Ages, and every City have honoured Claudius with Statues, Banners, Crowns, Shrines, Arches of Triumph, Altars, and Temples.
It is fit for all the World, but especially those who would imitate the Examples of good Princes to know, with what Acclamations and Affection the Senate received this Prince: and in the Voice of the Senate, one may see in a manner the Sense of Mankind. The News came to them of his Elevation, upon the Ninth of the Kalends of April, which is the Festival of Cybele, whilst they were in the Chappel of that Goddess. But they could not perswade themselves to continue longer there, to Cele∣brate the Duties of the Day. They took their Robes, and repaired to the Temple of Apollo; where reading the Letters which were sent toand by the Senate. them from Claudius, they expressed themselves in his Honour as follows: The Gods continue Claudius our Emperor to us. This was repeated sixty times. We have always wished to have Claudius to be our Emperor, or such a one as you. This was repeated forty times. The State wanted a Claudius to Govern it. This was repeated forty times. You are a Brother, a Father, a Friend, a Good Senator, and Truly a Prince. This was repeated eighty times. Avenge us, O Claudius our Emperor, of Aureo∣lus. This was repeated five times. Avenge us, O Claudius our Emperor, of the Palmyreni in Syria. This was repeated five times. Deliver us, O Claudius our Emperor, from the Usurpati∣ons of Zenobia and Victorina. This was re∣peated seven times. Tetricus hath done nothing why we should Complain of him to your Majesty.
The first Action of Claudius, after his ac∣cession to the Empire, was his Victory over Aureolus, who had made himself the more troublesome, because he was much in the fa∣vour of Gallienus. Claudius fought him, and defeated him, and published Edicts to the People, and sent Letters to the Senate, where∣in he declared him, upon his refusal still to submit himself, an Usurper. Aureolus desired a Treaty of Accommodation with him: ButHe de∣feats Au∣reolus. Claudius was deaf to that Motion, and told him very gravely, that he was not a Gallienus to be ask'd such a thing, who might comply with him, because he feared him. At length Aureolus was killed by the Soldiers at Milan, and received that End which his Life and Man∣ners deserved. Some Historians ridiculously endeavour to Commend him. Gallus Antipater calls him a Golden Emperor; as if he was the better Man, because his Name in the Latin refers to the word Aurum or Gold. But as that Writer is the Father of Flatterers, and the Re∣proach of Historians, so I have often known the Name of Aureolus given to a Good Gladia∣tor; and your Majesty's Book of the Publick Sports hath this very Name in the List of the Names of the Gladiators. But to return to Claudius. The Goths, that had made a shift to escape home from the Army of Martianus, as we have said before in the Life of Gallienus I. excited at their arrival, all the Nations and People of their Confederacy, to fall to make Depredati∣ons upon the Lands of the Empire. So seve∣ral
Nations of the Scythians, the Peuceni, the Trutungi or Gruthungi, the Ostrogoths, the Vir∣thungi or Vithungi, the Gypides, the Celtae, and the Heruli, broke in together upon us and laid many places waste, whilst Claudius was taken up elsewhere. Especially he was so tedious with the Preparations that he was making for this Gothick War, to conclude the same effectu∣ally, as he ought, that he tryed, as it were, the utmost Patience of the Fates: And yet I think, that this really redounded the more to his Glory, and made his Conquest the more Illustrious in the Eye of all the World. OfVast num∣bers of the Barbarians the Enemy, there were three hundred and twenty thousand Fighting Men. Tell me now, he, who accuses me of Flattery, whether he thinks, that Claudius, who Conquer'd all these, is but little to be admired. A Body of three hundred and twenty thousand Fighting Men! It is an Army for Xerxes. One would think such a Number Fabulous, the Invention of a Poet. The Enemy were three hundred and twenty thousand Fighting Men! To which add the Servants, the Families, and the Car∣riages following them, and ones Mind will be full of Imaginations of their drinking up Ri∣vers, and consuming whole Woods, and that the Earth it self laboured under the weight of so much Barbarian Proud Flesh. The Letter of Claudius to the Senate, which he ordered should be read to the People, con∣cerning the Enemy, was this: Dictated by himself, and not by his Secretary.
To the Senate and the People of Rome, the Emperor Claudius. Fathers of the Senate, YOU may believe, that I send you the real Truth. The Barbarians that have broken in upon the Roman Empire, are three hundred and twenty thousand strong. If it shall be my fortune to overcome them, you will not be Ungrate∣ful to my Services. But if I overcome them not, you are only to remember, that I Fight after the Reign of a Gallienus. The whole Empire is spent and exhausted. And I now shall Fight, after the Loss of Valerianus, and the Revolts of Ingenuus, Regillianus, Lollianus, Posthumius, Celsus, and a thousand others, that set up them∣selves in Contempt of the Emperor Gallienus. I want Shields, Swords, and Spears for the pur∣pose. The Provinces of Gallia and Spain, which are the Strength of the Empire, are in the Hands of Tetricus. All our best Archers are kept from us by a Lady Zenobia; which is a shame to mention. Whatever therefore we do, it will in our Circumstances be great enough. But yet the brave Claudius overcame the nu∣merous Enemy, and in a small time crushed them to pieces: He scarce left any of themThe Bar∣barians de∣feated. living to return home. And what's a Shield, I beseech you, hung up in the Senate; or what's one Statue of Gold, in proportion to
the just Reward of so great a Victory? Says the Poet Ennius of Scipio, O the Statue, which the People of Rome will make of you, and what a Pillar will they erect, on which to express your Atchievements? But we may say, that It is not Columns, nor Statues, but the strength of his own Fame, which Immortalizes the ever Renown∣ed Flavius Valerius Claudius. The same Enemy had with them besides this, two thousand Sail of Shipping; which is double the number of all the Grecian and the Macedonian Fleet, that heretofore went against Troy and the other Cities of Asia. And yet the Fictions of the Poet have magnified that too: whereas this that I speak of, is the very Matter of Fact. And can we be said then to Flatter Claudius, who defeated, oppressed, and cut in pieces a Barbarian Fleet of two thou∣sand Sail, and an Army of three hundred and twenty thousand Men? All the Carriages and Train that attended so great a number, he either burnt, or reduced, and made Slaves of the Families belonging to their Camp: I will give you his own Letter to Junius Brocchus, the Governour of Illyricum, in which himself re∣lates the Victory. The Emperor Claudius to Brocchus. WE have defeated an Army of three hun∣dred and twenty thousand Goths, and we have destroy'd their Shipping, which was two thou∣sand Sail. The Rivers are covered with Shields,
and all the Shores with Swords and Javelins: The Fields are not to be seen for the Bodies of the dead. No Road is clear of them. A vast Car∣riage is left to us. We have taken so many Wo∣men Captives, that our Victorious Army may, e∣very Man of them, have to himself two or three a piece. I cannot but deplore the Misfortune of the Reign of Gallienus, and the Condition of the State under six hundred Usurpers, that set up themselves against him. Had those Soldiers and those Leigions all been safe, which were so unhappily lost in the several Battels fought betwixt Gallienus and his Adversaries, what an addition of Strength would it have been to the Empire? It is to be ascribed to Claudius, that the Honour of the Arms of the Empire was retrieved after so publick a Loss. He had se∣veral Battels with the Enemy in the Province of Moesia, and before the City of Marcianopoli in Bulgaria, and divers of their Kings were taken, and Noble Women of divers Nations, and great numbers of others perished in the Rivers. The Roman Provinces were filled with Gothick Slaves, who were employed to Till the Ground. No Town or Quarter but could shew you Goths, acquired by the Triumph of our Arms. What Foreign Barbarian Cattle did our Ancestors then see? what Sheep? what Horse? All this redounds to the Glory of Claudius, who at once secured, and infinitely enriched the Empire.His seve∣ral Victo∣ries. He fought the Enemy at Byzantium; the People there, as many as had escaped the bloody
Hands of the Soldiers of Gallienus bravely assist∣ing him. He fought them at the City of Thessalonica in Macedonia, which the Barbarians had laid Siege to in his absence. He fought them in divers Countries, and every where beat them. One would almost think, that he had a Prescience of his future Kinsman Con∣stantius the Caesar, and that he was settling the Empire in safety for him against his Reign. This brings it to my mind to say, that Clau∣dius was indeed foretold by the Oracles which he consulted, and the Lots that he drew, not only of his own Elevation, but that others of his Race should come to the Empire after him. He consulted also about his Brother Quintillus; because he was willing to take him to be his Colleague in the Empire. But he was answer'd so, as to signifie, that Quintillus had not long to live. And I have the rather inserted this, because it shews, that Constantius the Caesar who is of the Blood of Claudius, was foreseen and prognosticated so long ago as in the Reign of his Great Uncle; and consequently he is a Person of a Divine Appointment, of an Im∣perial Family, and we may hope for many Princes to descend from him: which I presume to offer at least with all due submission and re∣spect to their Majesties, Dioclesian and Maxi∣mian, and to Galerius his Brother, to whom I wish all Health. During the time that Claudius was managing the War against the Goths, the Palmyreni in Syria under the Arms of Sabas, or Zabdas, and Timagenes, made War upon the Aegyptians.
The Aegyptians, who are an obstinate and an indefatigable People in War, defeated them, but with the loss of Probus their General, who was killed by the Arts of Timagenes. The Aegyptians, after this, submitted themselves all to the Obedience of the Emperor of Rome, and accordingly swore Fealty to Claudius, though he was not then present with them. In the Year of the Consulships of Atticianus and Orphitus, the very Heavens signally assisted the War of Claudius. A great multitude of the Barbarians, that were yet remaining, had fled for refuge to the Mountain Haemus, and the adjoyning Province in Thrace. But they were so distressed there with a Famine and a Pestilence, that their own Calamities antici∣pated the Work of our Arms; nor would Claudius give them that honour to Conquer them in the Condition they then were. Thus this fierce War ended, and the Roman Name was eased of those Terrors with which it was threatned in the beginning. One thing the Truth obliges me to observe; that such, as think we Flatter, may know that we conceal nothing, which it is requisite, that a History should publish. Once after a full Victory that Claudius had received of the Enemy, his Men, grown careless with the Success, which is apt to disorder the wisest Heads, fell so to Plunder, that they forgat all thoughts and fears of the Enemy. Therefore a Party of the Ene∣my that had fled, returning unexpectedly again upon them, whilst they were yet ingaged whol∣ly in Plundering, cut off of them two thou∣sand.
But as soon as Claudius saw it, he drew up his Troops, and took all that Party of the Enemy Prisoners, and laid them in Irons, and sent them to Rome, to be kept for the bloody Purpose of the Fights of the Gladiators. So Claudius with his good Conduct retrieved that Miscarriage of his Men, or rather that Blow of Fortune; and the Enemy by their Stratagem only heightened his Victory, and their own ruine. In this War the Dalmatick Horse signaliz'd themselves much. Claudius himself hath been sometime thought to derive his Origin from their Country; though others make him a Trojan, and pretend to bring him down even from Ilus and Dardanus, the two most Antient Kings of Troy. The Enemy had in this War, thrust them∣selves into the Island of Crete, and attempted to lay waste that of Cyprus. But their Army every where labouring under Sickness, they were likewise easily reduced there. Then, the Gothick War being finished, and the general Sickness raging more and more, Claudius fell sick of the same and died, and theDeath of Claudins. Heavens received him, to whom his Virtues so particularly allyed him. After his death, his Brother Quintillus with universal Consent ascended the Empire: Not as if it was by Inheritance; but he was preferred to it for his deserts. He was so good a Person, and so truly, as I may say, in Virtue, his Brother's Brother, that he would have been made Em∣peror, though he had never had that Relation by
Blood. Under him the Barbarians that yet re∣mained, laid waste the City of Kenkis in Thrace, and attempted Nigeboli in Bulgaria: but they were defeated and suppressed again by the Va∣lour of those of the Country. His Reign was so short, that he had not the time to be Master of any great Action. The Soldiers killed him,Death of Quintillus as they did Galba and Pertinax, the seventeenth day of his Reign; only because he was strict up∣on them, and shew'd himself a better and more truly a Prince, than they desired to have him to be. Dexippus indeed does not say so plainly that he was killed; but only that he'died, without mentioning the manner of his Death, as if he thought it dubious. Having given this Account of the Military part of Claudius, I should be wanting to the Reader, if I did not in the next place ob∣serveExtracti∣on and Family of Claudi∣us. some few things concerning his Family and Person. He had two Brothers Quintillus and Crispus. Crispus had a Daughter called Claudia, who was married to Eutropius, a Noble Trojan by descent, who was the Father of Con∣stantius the Caesar. Claudius had some Sisters; one of which was called Constantina, married a Tribune of the Assyrians: but she died young. Concerning the Father and Ancestors of Clau∣dius, I know little, because most Persons have written differently about them: Claudius him∣self was grave in his Manners, of a singular good Life, extraordinary Chaste and Virtuous. He drank little, eat quick, was Tall, his Eyes bright and flagrant, a full Visage, and so strong in the Arms, that he hath oftentimes struck
out the Teeth of a Horse, or a Mule, with a blow. He did this once, when he was a young Man, Wrestling with the strongest there in the Field of Mars, at the Publick Exercises of the Soldiers, the Party with whom he Wrestled, giving him a twist by the Cods, which was un∣lawful, Claudius in a passion lift up his Hand, and struck out all his Teeth at once. The Emperor Decius was then present; who, it not being an Action to be punished, because it shew'd both the Bravery and the Modesty of Claudius, commended him rather publickly for it, and presented him with the Collars and Bracelets, and ordered him to Wrestle no more, to avoid further occasions of Quarrel. He left no Children: Quintillus left two, and Crispus, as I said, one Daughter. What an opinion the Emperors Valerian, Decius, and Gallienus had of Claudius, whilst he was their Subject: and the probability that then appeared of his future Elevation, we may see in these following Letters. A Letter of the Emperor Valerian to Zosimion the Procurator of the Province of Syria. I Have given the Command of the Fifth Legion, called Martia, unto Claudius; who is an Il∣lyrian born, and a Man of so much Bravery and Honour, that his Equal is not easily to be found in Ages past. You shall allow him for his Salary,
out of our Granaries every Year, 3000 Bushels of Wheat; 6000 Bushels of Barley; 2000 Pound of Bacon; 3500 Quarts of Old Wine; 150 Quarts of the best Oyl; 600 Quarts of other Oyl; 20 Bushels of Salt; 150 Pound of Wax; Hay, Straw, Vinegar, Roots, Herbs, as much as he wants: 20 Parcels of Skins (with 10 to each Parcel) for his Tents; Mules every Year 6; Horses every Year 3; Camels every Year 10; She-Mules every Year 9; of Wrought Silver every Year 50 Pound weight; Philips 150, having our Image upon them, yearly; 47 more in Occasional Presents, and 160 Denieres. Also for Pots, Flaggons, Cups, and other Vessels of Brass, 22 Pound weight; Officers Coats, 2; Clasps of Silver, gilt, 2: One Buckle of Gold; one Silver Belt, gilt; one Ring set with two Gems of an Ounce weight: One Bracelet of 7 Ounces; one Collar of a Pound weight; one Helmet, overlaid with Gold; two Shields, inlaid with Gold; one Cuirasse, which he shall restore again; two Herculean Javelins; short Darts, two; Sithes, two; Hedge-Bills, four: One Cook, whom he shall restore: One Muletier, whom he shall restore: Two Handsome Women of the Captives, for his Mistresses: One Albe or White Vest of Silk, trimmed with Purple: One Robe, de Chambre, trimmed alike: One Secretary, whom he shall restore: One Sewer, whom he shall restore: Cyprian Table-Bes, two Pair: Linnen Vests plain, two: One Gown, which he shall restore: One Senatorian Robe, which he shall restore: Running Footmen, two: One Carpenter: One Controller of his Houshold; One Water-Bayliff; One Fisherman: One Confectioner. Of Wood every day, a thousand
Pound weight, if it is to be had; or if not, as much as you conveniently can. Of Charcoal, every day four Pans. One Bagnio-man; and Wood for the Bath; unless he goes into the Publick Baths. And for other things, which for their minuteness cannot be specified here, you will furnish him with them according to discretion; that is so, as to give him the things themselves in Specie; and not accor∣ding to the Value of them. If any thing of all this cannot be had at any place, let it not be Accounted, nor the Price of it be allowed in Money. I have particularly appointed him all this Provision and E∣quipage, not as a Tribune, but as a General; because he is a Man, who deserves to have this and greater Honours shewn him. A Letter of the Emperor Valerian to Ablavius Muraena, the Captain of the Guards. CLAUDIUS, of whom you complained, and said, the Senate and the People did the same, that he was still a Tribune, and not pre∣ferred to Command Armies; to cease your Com∣plaints, is made the General of all the Province of Illyricum. He hath under his Command the Armies of Thrace, Moesia, Dalmatia, Panno∣nia, and Dacia. I think him so great a Man, he may expect, that I shall make him a Consul; and if it is agreeable to his mind, to be so, a Cap∣tain of my Guards. I assure you, I have appointed him as great a Salary, as is allowed to the Gover∣nour
of Aegypt: And the same Cloaths as I give to the Proconsul of Africa, and as much Money as the Chief Justice of Illyricum receives, and as many Officers as I allow to my self in every City; whereby all the World may see the Esteem which I have for him. A Letter of the Emperor Decius concerning Claudius. Decius to Messala, the President of Achaia, wisheth Health. AFter some other things, says he, Claudius the Tribune is a very fine Young Man, a stout Soldier, and a faithful Servant. He is fit for the Service of either the Camp, or the Senate, or the Court. We have order'd him to the Streights of Thermopylae, and to take care of the Pelopon∣nese: Knowing no Person, who can acquit him∣self better than he, of the Charge which we give him. You will furnish him with a Draught of 200 of the Dardarian Horse, 100 Cuirassiers, 160 Light Horse, 60 of the Cretian Archers, and 1000 well-Arm'd Men of the New Recruits; who are very fit to be put under his Command, be∣cause there is no Person that hath more Zeal, more Valour, more Prudence than be.
A Letter of the Emperor Gallienus. NOthing troubles me more, than what you have intimated, That Claudius my Kins∣man and my Friend, is very Angry, upon some Suggestions against me, which are most of them false. I desire you therefore, my Venustus, as you are faithful to me, by the means of Gratus and Heremianus, to reconcile him again, unknown to the Army in Dacia, who are out of Order al∣ready, for fear they should break out worse: I have sent a Present, which you will take care that it be well Accepted; and not to let him know, that I understand his Resentments, lest he think me angry at him, and a seeming necessity should oblige him to betake himself to the last Measures. I have sent him two Cups of Silver of three Pound weight, set with Precious Stones: Two Cups of Gold of three Pound weight, set also with Precious Stones: A Bason of Silver of twenty Pound weight, engraven with clusters of the Berries of Ivy: A Charger of Silver of thirty Pound weight, wrought in the Vine Leaf: Another great Plate of Silver of 23 Pound weight, wrought in the Ivy Leaf: Another Serving-Dish in Silver of 20 Pound weight, with a Man a Fishing represented upon it: Two Pots of Silver inlaid with Gold, of the weight of 6 Pound; and other lesser Vessels of Sil∣ver, to the weight of 25 Pound: Ten Aegyptian Cups of several sorts of exquisite Work: Two Cloaks of right Purple, Bordered all about: Six∣teen several Vests: One White Tunick of Silk,
wrought with three Ounces of Gold. Three pair of Buskins of the Parthian Mode: Ten Dalma∣tian little Girdles: One Cloak of the Dardanian Mode: One Illvrian Coat: One French Cloak: Two good Thick Ruggs: Four Spanish Handker∣chiefs: 150 Valerian's in Gold, and 300 Salonin's. To this I shall only add the Judgment of the Senate, and the High Acclamations which they gave him, whilst yet a Private Person, uponThe high Approba∣tion of him by the Senate. the News of his Success against the Goths and Scythians in Illyricum, in a Battel in which he and Martianus Engaged them. They cryed, The most Valiant Claudius, we Salute you; We Congratulate your Bravery and your Fidelity. We unanimously Decree a Statue to be erected to the Honour of Claudius. We all desire to have Clau∣dius to be a Consul. He hath acted like a Man, that loves his Country and his Prince. The An∣tient Roman Warriors did thus. You are Happy, Claudius, in the good Opinion of the Princes. We Congratulate your Virtues, and desire your Promo∣tion. May you Live, and be beloved by the Emperor. It would be too long, to go through all the Elogies, which this Great Man deserved. Only one thing I ought not to forbear to, say more, which is, That both the Senate and the People Loved him, before his Reign, in his Reign, and after his Reign; that certainly nei∣ther Trajan, nor the Antoninusses, nor any other former Prince hath, in that respect; been so very Happy as he.
THEA. Christi CCLXXI. Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR AURELIAN. Written by FLAVIUS VOPISCUS. UPON the Festival of the Goddess Cybele, which is a time that with us we know is very pleasant, and full of all Mirth and Freedom both in our Words and Actions; the honourable the Governour of the City of Rome, Junius Ti∣berianus,Occasion of the Au∣thor's wri∣ting this Life. whom I cannot mention but with a particular Respect, took me with him, after the Ceremony of the Day was over, in his
Chariot from the Palace to the Gardens of Varius; and as his Mind was then at ease, and free from the Cares and the Thoughts of the publick Affairs, he did me the Honour to En∣tain me with a great many things, and espe∣cially about the Lives of the Roman Empe∣rors. Passing by the Temple of the Sun, which had been built by the Emperor Aurelian, from whom Junius Tiberianus derived in part his own Blood and Family, he ask'd me, what Person had writ the Life of that Prince; I told him, I had read his History by some Greek Authors, but never by any Roman. At which he sighed and said, Amongst the Antients, not a Thersites nor a Sinon, nor any remarkable, tho' a monstrous sort of a Man appeared, but we, know him very well, and his Character is recor∣ded to Posterity. And shall the Memory of so renowned and so incomparable a Prince, as Aure∣lian be forgotten, by whom the whole World was regained to the Obedience of the Romans? God deliver us from this folly! If I mistake not, we have a Journal of this Prince by us, and his Wars digested in a due order of History. I would wish that you would take them and consider them, and add the things to them that you find rela∣ting to his Life. I will promise to furnish you with that Journal, out of the Ulpian Library. You will see, it contains almost all things concer∣ning him; because it is a Book in which the Oc∣currences of every day, as they happened, were set down by his own especial Order. So I would de∣sire you to represent him to the World, justly as he was, to your Power.
I submitted to what the Governour said and commanded me, and I furnished my self both with the Greek Historians, and all things else necessary to my purpose, out of which I have compiled according to the best of my Judg∣ment, his small Treatise which I here de∣sire to make a Present of, Sir, to you. And if this does not satisfie you, I can only refer you to the Greek Originals, and to the Jour∣nal in the Ulpian Library, which you may be free to examin when you please. We had some Discourse, whilst we were in the same Chariot together, concerning Trebel∣lius Pollio, who hath written an Account of all the Emperors, whether of famous or of ob∣scure Note, from the Two Philips to the Em∣peror Claudius and his Brother Quintillus. The Governour said, That Trebellius Pollio had de∣livered several things without due care, and o∣thers too short. To which I made him answer, That there is no Writer of History, but what hath his Mistakes in one kind or other. I shew'd him par∣ticularly in what Livy, in what Salust, in what Cornelius Tacitus, in what Trogus Pompeius are evidently mistaken, and proved to be so. He agreed with me, and giving me his Hand very pleasantly, said, Write, as thou wilt. You may be sure, whatever you say, you lye with good Com∣pany, and no less than the Chief Historians that are so much admired in the World. To make no further Preamble then, whichExtracti∣on of Au∣relian. would but be impertinent; the Emperor Au∣relian was born at the Town of Sirmium, in the Lower Pannonia or Sclavonia; that is, the ge∣nerality
of Men place his Birth there. Some give him to the Province of Dacia Ripensis; and one Author I remember I have read, that makes him to be born in Moesia. As it often happens in Persons, who raise themselves so from a low Birth, that the true place of their Nativity is unknown; and in the mean time others are devised or dissembled for them, which may seem to reflect upon them a greater Honour. However, it is not a matter of such moment to know of a great Prince where he was born; as what signalized him, and made him great. Do we admire Plato because he was born at Athens, or because he was so sin∣gular and so illustrious a Philosopher? Or are Aristotle and Zeno, the less because they were born in the little Villages of Stagira and Elea? Or is Anacharsis the meaner, because he was a Scythian born? When the Merits of the Phi∣losophy of all these have every where raised their Fame to the Heavens. Aurelian was born of an obscure Family, and mean Parents. He had a great vivacity of Wit from his first Years. He was remark∣ably strong of Body, and never passed a Day, though it was a Holy-day, and a time of pub∣lick rest, without exercising himself at the Ja∣velin, the Arrow, and other Arms. Callicrates Tyrius, who is one of the most Learned Gre∣cian Writers, says, that the Mother of Aure∣lian was a Priestess of the Temple of the Sun, in that Village where she and her Husband lived, and that she had something of the Power of Divination in her; particularly once revi∣ling
the follies of her Husband, and his low Condition, she said to him, You, the Father of an Emperor! As if she had a prescience of Aurelian's being hereafter an Emperor; which yet further he: says, was predicted by many o∣ther Tokens. A Serpent came and incircledOmens of his future Reign. it self often about the Vessel, in which he was washed; nor would his Mother, when she saw it, suffer it to be killed, but made much of it; and it escaped the Attempts that were made by any to kill it. The Emperor then reign∣ing, having made an Offering to the Temple of the Sun, where Aurelian's Mother was a Priestess, of a Cloak of Purple, she took it and cut into Swathing Cloaths for her Child. At the same time she had a Calf born of a won∣derful bigness, white, spotted with purple, and upon his Skin, on the one side, was the figure of a Crown; on the other, the word Ave, that is, Hail; a Salutation given to the Em∣peror. The before-mentioned Callicrates Tyrius produces many more Omens, which I shall o∣mit, because I think them superfluous. When Aurelian was sent Embassador into Persia, he was presented there with a piece of Plate of the like sort as the Kings of Persia are used to present to the Roman Emperors, and upon it was engraved the Sun, in the same form in which he is worshipped in that Temple, where his Mother was a Priestess. Together with this, the King of Persia gave him a noble Ele∣phant, which Aurelian presented again to the Emperor his Master: These, to mention no more, were Omens of his future Grandeur.
He was handsome as to his Person, wellHis Per∣sonage. made, tall, robust, with a good Grace, and a manly Mien; he eat and drank freely, rarely had to do with Women, extraordinary strict, a great Master of Military Discipline, and very desirous to be drawing the Sword. There were two Aurelians together in the Army, and both of them at the same time Tribunes. The other was taken Prisoner with the Emperor Valerian by the Persians. The Army for di∣stinction gave this Aurelian the Nick-name of Hand to the Sword, because he was so quick at it upon all occasions, and he was known by this Name. He did several great ActionsHis Acti∣ons, whilst a private Man. whilst he was but in a private Quality. He alone defeated and repulsed the Sarmatae, in an Irruption which they made into the Province of Illyricum, when he had with him no more than three hundred Garrison-Men. Theoclius, an Historian, says, that in the Sarmatian War, Aurelian with his own hand killed in one day eight and forty; and at several times in all, above nine hundred and fifty. Songs and Dances were made upon his Exploits, which were sung upon the Festival Days in publick by the Youth, to this purpose: A Thousand, a Thousand, a Thousand have we cut off; one Man hath killed a Thousand, a Thousand, a Thousand; let him live a Thou∣sand, a Thousand, a Thousand Years, that hath killed a Thousand, a Thousand Enemies.
Whilst he was the Tribune of the sixth Le∣gion, which was at Mentz in Germany, he gave the Franks such a blow, as they made their Excursions up and down Gallia, that he killed seven Hundred of them, and took three Hun∣dred others Prisoners, whom he sold for Slaves. Then this Song was made of him. A Thousand Franks, a Thousand Sarmatians, ha faln by our Hand; a Thousand, a Thousand, a Thousand, a Thousand, a Thousand Persians, ext, shall yield to our Command. He made himself to be so feared by the Sol∣diersHis strict Discipline under him, that after he had once with great severity corrected a Fault, none dared o commit it again. He punished the Adul∣ery of a Soldier, that had lain with his Land∣ord's Wife, in this unheard of manner. He caused two Trees to be forcibly bent down∣ward, and to the Heads of them he tied the poor Man's Feet, and then on a sudden he et both the Trees fly up again, which tore him alive in Two, and part of him was left hanging by the one Tree, and part by the o∣ther: this Thing struck a great Terror into all.
A Letter of Aurelian to his Lieute∣nant concerning the Discipline which he would have to be kept among the Soldiers, says thus. AS you ever hope to be your self a Com∣mander. of a Legion; nay, as you de but to preserve your own Life in Safety, bridle the Licentiousness of Soldiers. Let not a Man steal a Chicken, nor touch a Sheep, nor take a∣way a Grape, nor waste the Corn, which is a∣nother's. Let no Man exact either Oyl, or Salt, or Firing, but be content with his allowance, and let him take his Prey upon the Enemy, and not force the Tears of the Subjects of the Roman Empire. Let all their Arms be kept clean and bright, and sharp; and their Shooes and Cloaths in good order, and let them keep Money in their Pockets, and not spend it all at the Sutlers. Let every Man have his Collar, his Bracelet, and his Ring, and look after his own Horse, and not sell his Beast's Provision from him, and let him take care in his turn of the Baggage. Let them all be ready to assist one another. Let the Physi∣cians take nothing of them for their Cure when sick. Let them give nothing to the Soothsayer. Let them live virtuously in their Quarters, and he that creates Disturbances, let him be beaten. Next follows a Letter of the Emperor Va∣lerian concerning Aurelian. This Letter
lately found in the Ulpian Library, amongst the publick Records, and I thought it proper to be taken as it is. The Emperor Valerian to Antoninus Gallus the Consul. YOU blame me in your kind Letter to me, for committing my Son Gallienus, rather to the care of Posthumius, than to Aurelian; be∣cause you think, that both the Boy and the Army would be the best under the latter, as the severer Person. But you will not long be of this mind, f you consider well, how great the Severity of Aurelian is. He hath too much of it. He is xcessive. He is grievous, which does not agree so well with these present times. I protest be∣fore all the Gods, I was afraid, that if my Son had done any thing amiss, as Boys are naturally prone o do, he would have been too severe upon him for it, and no more have spared him than ano∣ther. There is another Letter of the Emperor Valerian, which is full of the Praises of Aure∣lian, and which I have met with amongst the Records of the Governour of the City of Rome. It is written upon the occasion of Aurelian's coming to Rome, to appoint his Salary during his stay there.
The Emperor Valerian to Cejonius Albinus the Governour of the City of Rome. WE should be glad, out of our Love to e∣very individual Person, who is faithf and zealous in the Service of the State, to all them much greater Salaries than what their plac demands; especially, when their Lives render r¦commendable the Honour that they possess. B¦cause there ought to be a Regard, I think, had to Merit, over and above the Profits of a m Commission. But the Necessities of the Public make it so at present, that I can give to n out of the Stores of the Empire more than their Order and their Quality requires. Aurelian  a Man of great Capacity and Bravery, whom I have appointed to inspect and regulate all our Camps and Garrisons. My self, and the whole Empire, by the common Confession of the whole Army, is so much indebted to him, that scarce any Presents can be made worthy of him, or to great for his Merit. For is he not in all respect Illustrious, and to be compared to the Corvini, and the Scipio's of former times? He is the De∣liverer of Illyricum. He is a Restorer of Gal∣lia. He is a Commander deserving the Imita∣tion of all the World. And yet I can add no∣thing to the acknowledgment which is due to the Services of so great a Person; besides, what the
Condition of the publick Affairs, and the well∣government thereof will permit me. You will herefore, dear Sir, take care to appoint for his se, during his abode at Rome, per diem, sixteen Loaves of the best Bread; forty Loaves f the Camp-bread; forty Quarts of Wine for he Table; a couple of Pullets; half a Pig; hirty Pounds of Pork; forty Pounds of Beef; ne Quart of the best Oyl; one Quart of ther Oyl; one Quart of Pickle; Herbs and Roots as much as he wants. And to distinguish im, however, in something extraordinary, you ay supply him with Forage for his Horses, as ng as he stays at Rome. To himself in Mo∣ey towards his Expences, you shall give every ay two Antoninusses in Gold, fifty Philips in ilver, and a hundred Penies in Brass. The rest all be supplied by the Officers of the Treasury. These things may perhaps by some, be hought frivolous, and too light to be taken otice of here; but Curiosity, which neglects othing, will be my excuse. Aurelian, at several times commanded divers Annies; likewise he was Tribune successively o a great many Legions, and he was Lieute∣nant upon several occasions, to almost forty Commanders and Tribunes; that is, to com∣mand their Forces for them in their sickness r absence. He supplied the Command of lpius Crinitus in his sickness, who was one hat derived himself from Trajan, and was eally a very brave Man, and much like that
Prince. Aurelian and Ulpius Crinitus have their Pictures both together, set up in the Temple of the Sun. The Emperor Valerian designed to advance the latter to the degree of a Caesar. In the place therefore of this Person, Aure∣lian headed his Army against the Enemy. He beat the Enemy and re-established the limits of the Empire, and took a great Booty. He enriched the Province of Thrace with the Cat∣tel, Horses, and Slaves that he took. He a∣dorned the Palace of Rome with the Trophies of his Victory. He brought in five hundred Slaves, two thousand Cows, a thousand Horse, ten thousand Sheep, fifteen thousand Goat; into one place in the Country belonging to the Emperor Valerian. Upon which Ulpi Crinitus publickly thank'd Valerian, as he was in the Baths at Byzantium, for the Honour which his Majesty had done him, by giving him Aurelian to be his Lieutenant, and at the same time he resolved to adopt Aurelian to be his Son. The Letter of the Emperor Valerian, where∣in he substituted Aurelian in the place of Ul∣pius Crinitus, was this. My dear Aurelian; WEre there any Person so agreeable to me as you, whom I could substitute to com∣mand in the place of Ulpius Crinitus, I might put his Virtues in competition with yours upon this occasion. But, do you undertake the War on the
side of Nigeboli, that the Sickness of Crinitus may not create us a prejudice. I do not ask you to do great things, but what you can; the Army will be at your Command. You will have three hundred Iturean Archers; six hundred Arme∣nians; one hundred and fifty Arabians; two hun∣dred Saracens; four hundred Mesopotamians, Auxiliaries; together with these, you have the Third Legion, and eight hundred Horse in com∣pleat Armour. You will be joyned by Hartomun∣dus; Haldegastes, Hildemundus, and Cariovi∣stus. The necessary Provisions for you are laid n by the Officers in all our Garrisons. You, in our great Prudence and Knowledge of War, will ake care to Lodge your Men, Winter or Summer n places where they shall want nothing; and also to find out the Camp of the Enemy, and to nform yourself exactly of the Strength and Num∣er of them; and to see that no waste be made f the Wine, Provisions, or Arms, in which con∣sists the Force and Fortune of any War. By the help of God, I hope for as much Assistance from ou, as if Trajan was living, the Publick would from him. Nor are you inferior to him, into whose Place and Trust I have chosen you. You may ex∣pect, that I shall appoint Ulpius Crinitus and you o be Consuls the next Year, from the 11th. of the Ka∣ends of June, in the places of my Son and me. Your Charges shall be born out of the publick Treasury. For it is the fittest thing in the World, to ease the Circumstances of such Persons as you, who wholly spend themselves, not in seeking your own Ad∣vantage, but in the Service of the State.
Hence we see further, how great a Man Aurelian then was; nor indeed does any one ascend the Empire in his Age, but who from his Youth, raises himself gradually towards it by the steps of Virtue. The Letter concerning the Consulship of Aurelian was this. The Emperor Valerian unto Aelius Xifidius, the Keeper of the Trea∣sury. YOU shall give to Aurelian, whom I have made a Consul, towards his exhibition of the Games of the Cirque, because as great and as de∣serving a Man as he is in all Respects, he is poor, three hundred Antoninusses in Gold; three thou∣sand little Philips in Silver, and fifty thousand Sesterces in Brass; ten Vests of fine wrought Stuff; twenty Linen Vests of the Egyptian Work; two Pair of the Cyprian Table Cloths; ten Pie∣ces of African Tapestry; ten Barbary Carpets; a hundred Hogs, and a hundred Sheep. You shal make a publick Entertainment for the Senators, and the Roman Gentry; and offer to the Gods, two greater and four lesser Sacrifices. I have made some mention before of the Design of Ulpius Crinitus to adopt Aurelian to be his Son. I hope it will neither be im∣proper nor tedious to insert, for the greater
Honour of Aurelian, a more particular account of that Matter, according as I find  the Ninth Book of the Acts of Acholius, wh was Master of the Ceremonies to the Emperor Valerian. This Ceremony was performed at the CityParticu∣lar Honor done to him by Valerian. of Byzantium, where the Emperor Valerian being seated upon a Throne in the Baths, and the Troops drawn up by him, and the Offi∣cers of the Court attending him, together with Memmius Fuscus, the Consul for the Year; Baebius Macer, the Captain of the Guards; Quintus Acarius, the President of the East, waiting on the right Hand of him; and on the left, Amulius Saturninus the General of the Frontiers against the Scythians, Murentius the Governour of Egypt; Julius Trypho, the Com∣mander on the Frontiers of the East; Mae∣cius Brundusinus, the General of the Provisions of the East; Ulpius Crinitus, the General of Illyricum and Thrace; and Fulvius Boius, the General in Rhaetia. In this great Appearance the Emperor Valerian expressed himself to Au∣relian thus. The whole Empire gives you thanks, Aure∣lian, for delivering it from the Power of the Goths. Through you, we abound with Booty; we abound in Honour, and all things, by which the Happiness of the Roman Name is increased. I give you therefore for the Noble Actions which you have done, four Mural Crowns, five other Crowns of those that are for entring the Ene∣mies Works; two Naval Crowns, and two
Civick Crowns; ten Javelins; four parti-colour∣ed Standards; four red ducal Vests; two Cloaks, such as are worn by the Proconsuls; one Consular Robe; one triumphal Vest; one triumphal Gown; a Mantle of State, and a Chair of Ivory; which last, is the Mark of the Dignity of a Consul, for so I ap∣point you to be this day; and I shall write to the Se∣nate to send you the Ivory Staff and the Rods, which are the other Ensigns of that Dignity. Aurelian, after his Majesty had thus spoke, approached to him and kissed his Hand, and returned his Thanks to his Majesty in the Words following. I truly, may it please your most excellent Majesty, have therefore done and suffered all that hath been in my Power, and I have taken all the Pains I could to serve the States, on purpose that I might oblige it, and at the same time discharge a good Conscience; the Sense whereof, joyned with the Thanks of the State, is alone a Reward sufficient for me. But your Majesty hath done much more, I give your Majesty thanks for your Goodness, and I accept the Consulship at your Hands. The Gods grant, and particularly, our assured God the Sun, that the Senate may judge as kindly of me. Then all the Company complemented the Emperor, and next Ulpius Crinitus stood up and said: May it please your Majesty, As it was antiently a Custom amongst the best of our Fore-fathers, to adopt Persons of Worth and
Bravery to be their Sons; thereby, either to con∣tinue their decaying Families, or to add a new Honour to them, by the means of such a worthy Alliance; which hath particularly been done often in my Family, in the adoption of Ulpius Trajan, by Cocceius Nerva; the adoption of Hadrian, by Trajan; the adoption of Antoninus by Ha∣drian, and others since; so it is likewise my de∣sire at this time, to adopt Aurelian, to be my Son,He is a∣dopted by Ulpius Crinits. of whom your Majesty in your Wisdom hath so much approved, that you have made him my Lieutenant, and put him in my absence, to com∣mand my Army. Your Majesty may therefore please to order it to pass into a Law, that Au∣relian be the Heir of the Name, Goods, and all the Rights of what kind soever, of me Ulpius Crinitus, according as your Majesty hath been pleased to make him also a Consul with me. The Emperor complemented Crinitus in re∣turn, and the Adoption of Aurelian was ac∣cording to Custom ratified. What a certain Greek Author says, as I remember, that the Emperor commanded Crinitus to adopt Aure∣lian, because he was poor, I must leave to the Reader. I have said, that the Emperor bore the Charge, of the Games, with which Aure∣lian entertain'd the People, at his entrance into his Consulship; and I did it for this rea∣son especially, to mark the Modesty of the Expences of those times, in comparison with the Expences of others since. For we have lately seen the Games presented in the Cirque by Furius Placidus upon his Consulship, in
which the Jockies and the Coachmen have had Estates rather given them, than their pro∣per Wages; Cloaths of Silk, fine Linens, Hor∣ses; at which sober Men have been much trou∣bled, because it looks as if the Riches of a Man, more than his Virtue, had made him a Consul. And perhaps many a one, who for his Virtue deserves to be a Consul, would be ruined by such an Expence. But those chast times are past, and by a popular Ambition which reigns amongst us, we depart from them every day more and more. But this also I leave to the Reader. Aurelian, raised by the Reputation of so many and so great Characters as these, ap∣peared with so much lustre in the Reign of Claudius, that after his Death and the Death of his Brother Quintillus, he succeeded upon the Throne of the Empire. There is a great-dis∣agreement in this place in our Histories con∣cerning the Death of Aurelius, with whom the Emperor Gallienus agreed to a Peace; as whether he was killed by Aureolan, without, or with the Order and Consent of Claudius; and whether he was killed by Aurelian, after or before he came to the Empire? For in all these Questions the Historians, and particu∣cularly the Greek, differ from one another. However it is, we are very sure of this, that the Emperor Claudius committed the War a∣gainst the Scythians, to the Care of none more than Aurelian. I will give you here the Let∣ter of Claudius for that purpose.
The Emperor Flavius Claudius to Valerius Aurelian, wisheth Health. OUR Affairs at this time require your accu∣stomed Bravery. Be quick: Why should you delay? The whole Army is ordered to march under your Conduct. The Goths are to be attacked, and to be expelled the Country of Thrace. They lie a great many of them about the Mountains Haemus and Rulla: They do much Mischief, being returned from the flight, to which you last saw them reduced. All the Forces of Thrace and Illyricum, and all that Frontier I place under your Hands. Now let us have a stroak of your wonted Gallantry. My Brother Quintillus will be one that will join you. I am taken up with other Affairs, so that I entrust this whole Matter to your Valour. I have sent you ten Hor∣ses, two Coats of Mail, and such things as it is fit you should be provided with against your Fight. Aurelian fought, and so prosperously de∣feated the Enemy in several Battles, that he did great Service to the Empire by it; there∣fore after the Death of Claudius, he was byHe is de∣clar'd Em∣peror by the Army. the Legions unanimously advanced to take his place. Under the same Reign, he fought also very bravely with the Suevi, and the Sarmatae, and he gained over those a most flourishing Victory.
Aurelian soon after he was elevated to the Empire, had a War with the Marcomanni, who out of Germany making a sudden Irruption in∣to Italy, in which, by a mistake, he did not take care to front them immediately in the beginning, whilst he was preparing to charge them behind, they laid waste all the Country about Milan. However, the Marcomanni were overcome at last; but in the mean time their Ravages were a matter of great Consterna∣tion to all at Rome, where the People broke out into great Sedition, out of an apprehen∣sion that they should see the Empire torn in∣to pieces again, as it was before in the time of Gallienus. The Books of the Sibyls, so well known for the publick Good done by them, were upon this occasion consulted; and it was found, that at certain places there should be Sacrifices used, to stop the Course of the Bar∣barians; in Virtue whereof, they would not have the Power to pass further up into the Coun∣try. This was done acordingly with all care; the Barbarians stopt upon it, and as afterwards they were roving up and down in disorder, Aurelian came upon them and slew them. IThe Mar∣comanni defeated. will give you the debate of the Senate at this time, concerning the inspecting the Books of the Sybils. Upon the third day of the Ides of January, the Senate being assembled, Fulvius Sabinus the Praetor of the City of Rome spoke thus to them.
Fathers of the Senate, I Am to acquaint you, that it is the suggestion of the Chief Priests, as well as it is the Order, by Letter, of the Emperor Aurelian, that the Books of the Sibyls, in which the Secrets of the Destinies are contained, be now inspected; in hopes thence to discover by the Holy Will of the Gods, a means of putting an end to this War. You know very well, that as often as any extraordina∣ry case arises, it is the Custom always to Inspect those Books; nor have we been delivered from the Publick Evils, which have at any time beset us, but by following their Order, and by performing such Sacrifices, as we find to be appointed us there. Then Ulpius Silanus, whose place it was to give his Opinion the first, stood up and said; Fathers of the Senate, IT is very Late, for us, at this day, to begin to consult about the Safety of the State; It is very late for us, now to Consult the Books of the Sybils, when we know not what else to do; like some sick Persons, who send not for the Phy∣sician, but in the greatest extremity; to which yet it is never good to trust; because all Diseases are the best taken and obviated in the beginning. You may remember, Gentlemen, that I have often from this place told you, even then, when first the news came of an Irruption of the Marcoman∣ni, that the Decrees of the Sibyls ought to be con∣sulted;
and that we should serve our selves of the assistances of Apollo, and keep to the Pre∣cepts of the immortal Gods. But my Motion was rejected, and that too not without a great deal of reproach from some, who in flattery to Aurelian answered, that under the Conduct of so brave a Prince, there was no necessity of consulting the Gods; as if he did not himself revere the Gods, and hope for the success of his Arms from their immortal Powers. In short, you have heard his Letter, wherein he begs the Divine assistance, which it is never unworthy the greatest Man to do: Therefore let the Priests, with all Purity, Clean∣ness, and Sanctity, prepared as well in their Minds as Habits for so sacred a Work, immediately re∣pair to the Temple; and with due Reverence pe∣ruse the Holy Books, and examine what is the eternal will of the Fates; and we, on our parts, shall not be wanting to perform the Sacrifices, and observe the Solemnity, which the Gods require of us. The rest of the Senators in ordor, being askt their Opinions, they all, some one way, some another declared their Consent, that the Books of the Sibyls should be consulted, andThe Books of the Si∣byls Con∣sulted. the Act past for the Purpose. Then to the Capitol they went; the said Books were ex∣amined; some Verses out of them were pitch∣ed upon; then the City of Rome was Purged by Sacrifice; a Procession was made round the City, and the Suburbs; the Verses were Sung, and all the Ceremony whatever that was re∣quired, was accordingly performed.
Now the Letter of Aurelian to the Senate, in which he put them upon the Consulting the same Books, was this. I Admire, my good Fathers, that you have, so long hesitated about opening the Books of the Sibyls; as if it was a matter that was referred rather to a Congregation of Christians, who are the Enemies of our Religion and our Gods, than to Persons Zealous as you are for the Honour of the one and the other. I would desire you to set the Priests immediately and religiously about it; that with the solemn Ceremonies and Rites, which shall there appear to be appointed, you may assist your Prince, now labouring under great difficulties. Let the Books be inspected; and what things are there∣in required to be done, let them be done. For my part, I shall spare for no Costs. The Captives that I have of any Nation, and any of the Ani∣mals of the noblest kind, belonging to me, I freely offer for Sacrifices. It is no lessening to a Victory, to be assisted in it by the Gods. In the times of our Ancestors, divers Wars have been begun and ended in this manner. I have writ to the Keeper of the Exchequer to disburse, whatever the Charge is. You may command thence what Money you think fit; and I am glad to find, that the Coffers are well provided. That which was the occasion of all this con∣cern for inspecting the Books of the Sibyls, was; Aurelian had suffered a great defeat from the Enemy at Piacenza; and had it not been that after the examination of the said Books,
and the performance of the Sacrifices by them required, the Divine Aid interposed to Con∣found and Affright the Barbarians with Visi∣ons, Spectres, and Prodigies, which gave Au∣relian at length the advantage over them, the Victory in this War might have been lost to the Romans, and even the Empire in danger to be so too. For the Barbarians, by the means of the Woods, and the Fastnesses, into which they threw themselves, were otherwise too subtil for us, and did so annoy us upon occa∣sion, that we should not have reduced them, upon the single strength of our Arms. After the Marcommanick War was ended, Au∣relian came to Rome; full of Anger and Re∣venge, as he was naturally Fierce of himself, for the Seditions, which had there been raised in his absence. Though he was otherwise a good Prince, he suffered his Passions to tran∣sport him beyond measure, and to punish some things Cruelly, which might have been treat∣ed with a gentler Hand. He not only put toHis ex∣terme Se∣verity. death the Authors of those Seditions, but also some noble Senators; against whom appeared but one vile and wretched Witness; when the matter of the Crime objected, was of so slight a Nature, that a milder Prince would have contemned it. In fine, the fame of his Reign which had been hitherto great, and had justly gained him many Friends, was obscured and wounded by the marks of his excessive Seve∣rity. He began to be feared, rather than loved. Some said, they hated him; rather than wish'd his Prosperity; others said that he
was indeed a good Physician, but his Medi∣cines were the bitterest in the World. After these things therefore, fearing again the mis∣chiefs might be revived, which happened in the time of Gallienus, he with the Advice of the Senate extended, and new fortified the Walls of the City of Rome. He did not then extend the Territories of the City without the Walls; but he did afterwards; because this was a priviledge allowed to no Prince to do, but who by his Conquests had added to the Roman Empire; as did the Emperors Augustus, Trajan, Nero; under which last particularly the Pontus, Potemoniacus, and the Cottian Alpes were subjected to the Obedience of the Ro∣mans. Having finished what concerned the security and state of the City, and of the Civil Affairs, he set out from thence upon an Expedition a∣gainst the Palmyreni in Syria; where the Lady Zenobia, in the Right of her two Sons, He∣rennianus and Timolaus, being Infants, and in Succession to Odenatus her Husband, Reigned as Queen of the East, and maintained the Revolt of those parts against the Empire. In his way, in the Countries of Thrace and Illyricum, he fought several considerable Bat∣tels with the Reliques of the Goths, and the Barbarians; of whom he slew five thousand on the other side of the Danube, with Canna∣baudes, their Prince. He passed, by the way of Byzantium, over into Bithynia, in the Lesser Asia: which Province upon his arrival voluntarily cast off the Yoak of the Palmyreni,
and yielded it self to him. Many, as well of his Expressions as Actions, are great and fa∣mous. It is not possible, nor would I be wil∣ling to recount them all here, because it would be tedious. But yet some few may be touch∣ed upon, which may serve to beget a better understanding of his Virtues and Manners. Coming to the City of Tyana in Cappadocia, which he found shut against him, he said in a Passion, I will not leave a Dog in this place. This made his Soldiers storm it the more vio∣lently, in hopes of the Booty; till one Hera∣clammon, who was the Governour of it, a∣fraid that he should be killed amongst the rest, and thinking that he had no other way to save himself, betrayed his Trust, and suffered the Town to be taken by Treachery. Now Au∣relian did immediately two things, worthy of a Princely mind; in the one of which he shew'd an example of his Severity, and in theExamples of his Se∣verity and Mercy. other, of Mercy. The first is, he put to death Heraclammon for betraying his Coun∣try. Then, when the Soldiers desired the total destruction of the Town, according to his saying, that he would not leave a Dog in it, by which they understood, that they should have all the Plunder of it; It is true, said he, I have said I would not leave a Dog in this Town, and so kill all the Dogs: but he saved the People, and forbad the Plunder; which was a great Action, and it was followed by as great a one of the Army: because they were as much pleased with the Wit of their Prince, as if he had given them really the Riches of the
City. Concerning Heraclammon, Aurelian writ this Letter. The Emperor Aurelian to Mallius Chilo. I Have taken Tyana, and suffered the Man to be killed, by whose, as it were, good Office I did it. I could not love such a Traitour. I wil∣lingly let the Soldiers kill him: because how could he be faithful to me, who spared not to betray his own Country? He is the only one of all the Be∣sieged, who hath been so used. I cannot deny but he was Rich. But yet I have given his Estate to his Children: that none shall pretend to say, that it was to get his Money I killed him. The City of Tyana was taken in this man∣ner. Heraclammon betrayed to Aurelian a pri∣vate place, where there was a Natural rising of the Ground, by which he might mount the Walls undiscovered. Aurelian did so; and his Purple distinguishing him to be the Emperor to the Army without and the People within, and the People within seeing him upon the Walls, and concluding the Town was taken, as if the whole Army was with him, they were so surprised, that they said no more but yielded. I ought not here to omit a thing, which is to the Honour of the memory of the Vener∣able Apollonius, who was a Native of the City of Tyana. Aurelian, it is said, was seriously
sometime thinking and speaking about destroy∣ing the place entirely by Fire and Sword. But as he was going to his Tent, that wise Man of so known Fame and Authority, an Antient Philosopher, and a true Friend of the Gods, A∣pollonius Tyanaeus, who is himself to be highlyAppariti∣on of Apol∣lonius Ty∣anaeus. Celebrated as a God, appeared suddenly to him, in the Form, in which his Image is in the Temples at this day, and spoke to him these words: Aurelian, Why should you think of Mur∣dering my poor Countrymen? If you would Reign in Glory, abstain, Aurelian, from the blood of the Innocent. Aurelian be merciful, if you would Conquer and live your self. Aurelian knew the Visage of the Venerable Philosopher again, because he had seen it before in several Tem∣ples. He was very much struck at it, and im∣mediately he returned to a better mind about his Treatment of the Town, and promised to erect a Temple to Apollonius, and to set up his Image and Statues. This account is what I have received from grave Men, and I have al∣so often Read the same my self in the Books of the Ulpian Library; to which I give the more Credit; because I have a great respect for the Majesty of Apollonius: than whom, what Man hath there ever been more Holy, Ve∣nerable, Illustrious, and Divine? He raised the Dead to Life again. He wrought ma∣ny things beyond the power of Mankind, and his Discourses were suitable to his Acti∣ons; which if any Person pleases to know more particularly, let him Read the Greek Books, that are written of his Life. My self,
if I live, and if the favour of Apollonius will assist me in it, will give the World some short account at least of the Actions of so great a Person: not that they want the benefit of my Labour, but that things which are really to be admired, may be made universally known and famous. After the taking of Tyana, Aurelian marched towards Antioch; proposing to all that sub∣mitted to him, Indemnity for what was past. At the Village of Daphne, which is near An∣tioch, he gave the Enemy a little Blow, and so came to that City. It is supposed, the Pre∣cepts of the Venerable Apollonius had made an impression upon him; for he used his Vi∣ctory here with great Humanity and Clemen∣cy. The next Battel was a General one, and for no less than the Empire. It was fought at the City of Emissa in Phaenicia, against the Queen Zenobia, and Zabdas her General. Aurelian's Horse were spent, and ready to run, when some Divine Form suddenly appearing to them, and encouraging them on to the Charge, they took the Example of the Foot, who all the while stood firm, till at last they put both Zenobia and Zabdas to flight, and ob∣tainedZenobia's Army de∣feated. a most accomplisht Victory. Emissa rea∣dily yielded to the Conqueror; who no sooner entred into it, but he repaired to the Temple of Heliogabalus, or the Sun, to acquit himself of his Vows and Devotions, according to his Duty. But as he was there, the same Divine Form appeared again to him which he had seen assisting him in the Battel. Wherefore he there
founded Temples, and made great Oblations. He Founded also a Temple to the Sun at Rome, of extraordinary Magnificence, where∣of we shall have an occasion to speak here∣after. Then he bent his Course against the City of Palmyra, the Capitol of the Country of the People of the same name, where Zenobia re∣sided; that with the taking of it, he might put an end to his Labours in this part of the World. The Syrian Robbers annoyed his Ar∣my often in his March, and did him much mischief. But in the Siege of Palmyra, his Person was so far in danger, that he received a slight Shot of an Arrow. And the hot Work that he met with, is very plainly confessed by himself, in a Letter to Mucapor, thus. THose at Rome deride my Expedition, and cry I make War against a Woman; as if I had to do with none but Zenobia, and that she opposed me upon her own Strength. But the case is the same, as if the War was with a Man; and Feminine Fear, and sense of her Demerits makes her besides so desperate, that she is by far the worst of Enemies. It canot be expressed what Showers of Arrows, Darts, and Stones, she sends us; and how prepared she is for her defence here? There is no part of the Wall, that is not planted with two or three Batterers. She throws Fire at us out of her Engines. In fine, she Fights not like a Woman, but with the Audacity of a Man in Despair. However I trust, that the Gods, who
never have been wanting to our Endeavours, will still assist the Roman Empire. At length Aurelian, fatigued and weary of so troublesome a Siege, sent a Letter into the Town to Zenobia to require her to surrender, and he promised her her life. The Letter was this. Aurelian, the Emperor of the Roman World, and the Protector of the East, to Zenobia, and those in Arms with her. THAT which I require you now to do by my Letter, you ought assuredly to have done of your own Motion. I order you to Surrender, and I promise you your Lives, with impunity: You Zenobia, and your Children, shall only be o∣bliged to lead your Lives there, where I, with the advice of the most Noble Senate, shall place you. Your Jewels, Silver, Gold, Silks, Horses, and Camels, must be disposed of to the Exche∣quer at Rome. The People of this Country of Palmyra shall be preserved in their Rights. Zenobia receiving this Letter, wrote himHaughty mind of Zenobia. back an Answer, which was more Haughty, and more Proud indeed than the Condition of her Fortune required: But I suppose it might e to amuse him. Her Letter was this.
Zenobia the Queen of the East, to the Emperor Aurelian. NO Man ever, before you, desired what you do, by a Letter. Bravery is the way to effect whatever is to be done in War. You pro∣pose my Surrender; as if you can be ignorant, that the Queen Cleopatra chose her Death, ra∣ther than to live in whatever Quality under Au∣gustus. The Succours of the Persians are on their March to us. We expect them daily. The Sa∣racens are for us. The Armenians are for us. The Syrian Robbers have beaten your Army, Aurelian, already. What then will become of you, when that Force arrives, which is expected by us, from all parts? Doubtless you will change your Countenance, and lay aside that Pride, with which you now so absolutely Command me to Surrender, as of you were the Conqueror of the Universe. Zenobia Dictated this Letter herself in the Syriack Language; Nicomachus says, that he Translated it out of that Language into the Greek; the other Letter of Aurelian was sent in the Greek. Aurelian did not Blush when he read Zeno∣bia's Letter; but he was Angry, and imme∣diately ordered his Army and his Officers upon a General Assault. He left nothing undone to reduce her, that could be thought upon by
a brave Man. He Intercepted the Succours, which were sent to her from the Persians. The Saracen and the Armenian Troops he Beat, and partly by his Address, and partly by the force of his Arms, he brought them over to his own side. After many Fights, with great difficulty, he overcame this most Potent Lady at last; who was making her escape upon Dromedaries into Persia, when Aurelian sent a Party of Horse after her, and took her Pri∣soner. This Victory gave Aurelian the Possession of all the East. He had at once Zenobia, the Per∣sians, the Armenians, and the Saracens, his Prisoners; in which he did not a little Pride himself. And then it was, that all those fineThe Spoils of Zeno∣bia. Vestments beset with Jewels, which we see in the Temple of the Sun at Rome, those Persian Banners with Dragons, those Persian Tiara's, and a sort of Purple so fine, that the like hath never been since seen in the Roman Empire, were all taken by Aurelian. You may remember, that there was in the Temple of the most excellent and most high Jupiter, in the Capitol, a little Cloak of so very fine a Purple, that when the Matrons and Aurelian himself in Person compared with it the Pur∣ples which he and they wore, it lookt with so Divine a Light, that theirs were but like Ashes to it. Aurelian, and afterwards the Emperors Probus and Dioclesian, especially the latter, with great care sent into Persia Dyers, on purpose to find out how this Purple was made. But they could not do it. It is an Indian Vermi∣lion
they say, that Dyes it, when it is well pre∣pared. But to the Purpose. Zenobia being taken, all the Army called for Justice upon her: Aurelian thought it unhandsome to kill a Woman. He put to death several that had been her Abettors in beginning, making, and con∣tinuing the War; but for her, he reserved her to adorn his Triumph, and to make her a Spe∣ctacle to the Eyes of the People of Rome. A∣mongst the rest, whom he killed, the Philo∣sopher Cassius Longinus was much to be la∣mented. He had been Zenobia's Master, to teach her Greek: that which provoked Aure∣lian to cut him off, was, because he knew, that it was by his Counsel that Zenobia had di∣ctated that haughty Letter in the Syriack, which hath been mentioned here above. The Peace of the East being Established, Aurelian returned a Conqueror to Europe. He gained a Victory in his passage over the Carpi: for which the Senate in his absence would have given him the Title of Carpicus: but it being a word of an ill, and a diminutive sound, in comparison with those other of Gothicus, Sarmaticus, Armeniacus, Parthicus, and Adiabenicus; which denoted him Con∣queror of the Goths, Sarmatians, Armenians, Parthians, and part of the Assyrians; he re∣jected the Title of Carpicus; and immediately sent the Senate word, that they might as well call him Carpisculus, as Carpicus; for he liked the one no better than the other: Carpisculus is Latin for a ssort of a Slipper.
It is rare, and a hard thing for the Syrians to keep their Faith. No sooner was Aurelian imployed about the Affairs of Europe, but the Palmyreni, who were so very lately, and soThe Pal∣myreni rebel, and are se∣verely handled. well Beaten, broke out into another Rebelli∣on. They killed Sandarion, whom he had left Governour of Palmyra, and six hundred Ar∣chers, that were in Garrison with him; de∣signing to set up one Achilleus, a Kinsman of Zenobia, for the Empire anew. But Aurelian was not so engaged, but immediately upon the news he quitted Europe, and returned to Palmyra again; where he punished them, shall I say, as they deserved; or rather to an ex∣cess: How severely he used them, he confes∣ses himself in this Letter. The Emperor Aurelian to Cer∣ronius Bassus. WE have had enough of the Blood of the Palmyreni: you shall forbid the Soldiers to draw their Swords upon them more. We have not spared Women, nor Infants, nor the Aged, nor the Peasants. So few, as are left, will, I be∣lieve, take warning by such a general Correction. We must spare those, or to whom shall we leave the Town and Country to be Cultivated? The Temple of the Sun, which is in that Town, and which the Officers and others of the third Legion plundered, I would have to be restored to the same condition in which it was. You will have three
hundred pound of Gold out of the Coffers of Ze∣nobia, and the weight of 1800 pound of Silver, and amongst the Booty, the Jewels and Precious Stones of the Queen. Out of all these, therefore let the Temple be well adorned; in which you will do a most grateful service both to the Immortal Gods, and me; and my self will write to the Senate, to desire them to send a Priest, to Dedi∣cate the said Temple. This Letter shews how fully he had satiated his Cruelty upon them. Securer now therefore of the State of the East, than ever, he returned the second time back to Europe; and with his accustomed Bra∣very he defeated all the Parties of his European Enemies, that came in his way. He was very active about the Affairs of Thrace, and the Pub∣lick Good, when one Firmus arose in Egypt;Firmus quell'd. who, not setting himself up as an Emperor, pretended to make that Province rather a Free-State. Aurelian made no delay to oppose this evil. Nor did his wonted Success abandon him. For he presently recovered Egypt a∣gain. Gallia continued as yet in its Revolt from the Empire, and in the Hands of Tetricus: which Aurelian, as he was naturally Fierce, and full of Designs, not being able with Patience to bear, he turned his Head to the side of the West: where Tetricus weary of CommandingTetricus yields. a Vitious and an Insolent Army, yielded both himself, and his Army frankly to him.
The Peace of the West did conclude Aure∣relian the entire Master of all the Roman World. Every part of it now was reduced to him; and so he took his way to the City of Rome, to Celebrate a Solemn Triumph, at once over Zenobia and Tetricus, that is, the East and the West. It will not be amiss to know the manner of the Triumph of Aurelian; for it was a very Noble one. There were three Chariots ofManner of Aure∣lians Tri∣umph. State, worthy of the Magnificence of the greatest Kings. The first was the Chariot of Odenatus, curiously wrought and distinguish∣ed with Silver, Gold, and Jewels. The next was a Chariot of the King of Persia which was equally Fine. The third was Zenobia's Cha∣riot, which she had made for herself, in hopes to make her Entrance into the City of Rome with: nor was she mistaken. For she did so; but it was in the Quality of a Captive, and both her Chariot and she were led in Triumph. There was a fourth Chariot drawn by four Stags, supposed to be the Chariot of the King of the Goths. In this Chariot, Aurelian Rode to the Capitol, to Sacrifice there those Stags, which together with the Chariot, when he took them, he had vowed to the most excel∣lent and most mighty Jupiter. These Chari∣ots were preceded by twenty Elephants, and two hundred tamed Wild Beasts of several kinds, out of the Countries of Libya and Pa∣lestine; all which Aurelian gave afterwards a∣way amongst particular Persons. There were four Tygers. The Chamoises, Elks, and o∣ther
such Beasts followed in order. There were eight hundred couple of Gladiators. Then followed the Captives of the Barbarian Nations; as Ethiopians, Arabians, Indians, Ba∣ctrians, Georgians, Saracens, Persians; every one with their several Offerings: there were also Goths, Alans, Roxolans, Sarmatians, Franks Sueves, Vandals, and Germans; all which Ca∣ptives were chained by the Hand to one ano∣ther: together with whom were the chief, that were left alive, of the City of Palmyra; and also a parcel of Egyptians, because of the late Rebellion in Egypt. There were ten Women Captives, led in the like manner, in this Pro∣cession: they were taken fighting in Men's Habit amongst the Goths; when many others of them, at the same time were killed. The Inscription over them, as all these Nations had their several Names and Inscriptions put up, spoke them to be of the Race of the Amazons. Then came Tetricus, well dressed in a Scarlet Robe, and a sort of a Pale-gold-coloured Tunick, and his Breeches of the Mode of the Gauls. By him marched his Son, whom he had declared Joynt-Emperor with him in Gallia. And next marched Zenobia. She was adorned with Jewels, and her Chains were of Gold, with Persons to bear them up. The Crowns of the Vanquished Nati∣ons in Gold, were displayed and carried in the Procession. Then marched the People of Rome, with all the Standards of the Colleges and the Camps, the Cuirassiers, the Train of the Court, all the Army, and likewise the Se∣nate;
but the Senate was a little concerned to see one of their own Body, which Tetricus was, led in Triumph. However it is, all to∣gether added much to the magnificence of the Pomp. It was almost three of the Clock be∣fore the Procession to the Capitol was over; and late before they went from thence to the Court. The next, and the other days follow∣ing were spent in the pleasures of the Plays of the Stage, the Races of the Cirque, the Chases of Wild Beasts, the Fights of the Gladiators, and the Encounters or Fights of Gallies, in the Amphitheatre, represented sailing there as upon a Sea. It is not, I think, to be omitted, what our Histories do often take notice of, and every one remembers, that when Aurelian set out upon the Oriental War against Zenobia, he promised to give the People, if he returned a Conqueror, Crowns of two pound weight. The People willingly understood him of Crowns of Gold. But Aurelian neither could, nor would be so liberal. He gave them every one Loaves of the whitest Bread of that weight, made in the form of Crowns; which he continued all his life, to them and their Children daily. He distributed also Portions of Pork amongst them, and this is done to this day. Aurelian made several Laws, which were all Good and Wholesome. He augmented the Revenues of the Priests: he founded a Temple to the Sun; and set out Salaries for the sup∣port of the Priests that should serve it and for the Repairs of it, and for its other inferior Mi∣nisters.
After these things he went into Gallia, and raised the Siege of the City of Ausburgh, which the Barbarians had formed. From thence he returned, and came into Illyricum; where having provided himself with rather a Valiant, than a Numerous Army, he declared War a∣gainst the Persians; over whom he had re∣ceived a very notable Victory, at the same time that he overcame Zenobia, who was their Ally. But as he was upon his march to ad∣vance his Enterprise, at a Castle called Caen∣phrurium, which is in Romania, betwixt the Ci∣ties of Heraclia and Byzantium, through the Treachery of his Secretary, and by the HandDeath of Aurelian. of Mucapour, he was killed. The occasion of his Murder, and in what manner it was brought about, that a matter of that Moment may not be concealed, I will tell you in short. It cannot be denyed, but that Aurelian was a Severe, Truculent, and a Sanguinary Prince. His Severity had tran∣sported him so far, as to kill his own Sisters Daughter, for no great nor sufficient cause neither; which was the first thing that brought an odium upon him amongst his Friends. As Fate would have it, it happened, that he had one Mnestheus, to be his Secretary; who, someThe Plot upon him how laid. say, was his late Slave, made Free. Aurelian, upon I know not what suspicion of some∣thing, had threatned this Man, which made him his Mortal Enemy. For knowing that his Master neither used to threaten to no pur∣pose, nor to forgive very easily, where he once threatned, he writ down a List of the Names
of such Persons, as he knew Aurelian had a real distate against; and at the same time he intermixt it with the Names of others, of whom Aurelian never had the least suspicion, which should make him hate them, and a∣mongst the rest, he added his own, to give the greater Credit to his concern for the common safety, in which himself was involved. When he had done this, he went and read the List to all those, whose names were there, and told them, that it was what he had privately found upon Aurelian, and it shews, that Aurelian was resolved to kill them all, and therefore, if they were Men, they ought to look to their Lives. The one party, who knew themselves to have contracted Aurelian's anger by what they had done, were spurred on by their fears to believe the matter and to prevent Aurelian if they could. The other, who had ever been kind and serviceable to him, and had deserved no such usage from him, were incensed at his supposed Ingratitude. So mingling their Com∣plaints and Sorrows together, the one with the other, they fell upon him suddenly at the place before-mentioned upon the Road, and killed him. This was the end of the Emperor Aurelian. A Prince, not properly so good, as his Reign was of use, and necessary to retrieve the Re∣pose of the Empire. When the matter after∣wards came to be discovered, how fraudulent∣ly the Conspiracy was procured to kill him, the Persons themselves that had agreed to it, built him a great Sepulchre, and Dedicated a
Temple to him, and set up his Statues, at the place of his Death: And Mnestheus was tied to a stake, and given to be devoured by Wild Beasts; which is signified upon the place by Marble Statues of Mnestheus, done in the Ha∣bit in which he was executed, and set up on each side of the Sepulchre of Aurelian. The Senate regretted his Death very much, and the People of Rome more; who commonly said, that Aurelian was the Tutor of the Se∣nate. He reigned six Years, wanting a few Days; and for his great Actions was dei∣fied. Not to omit any thing, that I meet within History that relates to him; many say, that Quintillus the Brother of Claudius, who whenDeath of Quintil∣lus. the News came to him of the Death of Clau∣dius, was in a Garrison in Italy, assumed the Empire, upon that News, to succeed his Bro∣ther. But when afterwards he found, that Aurelian was chosen Emperor by all the Army, and that when he harangued against the pre∣tences of Aurelian to his own Soldiers, they did not much care to hear him, he cut his Veins himself, and died the Twentieth day of his Reign. Aurelian did this Service to the whole Em∣pire; that he purged away all professed Lewd∣ness, Irreligion and wicked Arts. He cleared it of Factions. His Justice pursued the false Moniers or Coiners, who to defend themselves, joyned together in a Body, and made a sort of a War, under the encouragement of Felicissi∣mus a Receiver, within the Walls of Rome. But
Aurelian reduced them with a high hand; it cost him the Lives of seven Thousand of his Soldiers to do it; upon which occasion he writ this Letter to his Father (by Adoption) Ul∣pius Crinitus, who was then the third time Consul. The Emperor Aurelian to his Father, Ulpius Crinitus. AS if it is in a manner my Fate, to meet with aggravations of difficulties in every thing that I enterprise, a Sedition  the Walls of Rome hath risen to a very sad   Mo∣niers, or false Coiners, at the suggestion of li∣cissimus, the last of Slaves, whom I made a Receiver of the Exchequer, pretended to rebel. They are suppressed, but with the loss of Seven Thousand of my Men killed by them; so that I may see, I have no Victory given me by the im∣mortal Gods, which does not cost me dear. Aurelian, tho' he had made Tetricus a subject of his Triumph, bestowed upon him afterwards the Government of the Province of Lucania in Italy, and continued his Son in the Senate. The Temple which he built to his particular Deity, the Sun, was most magnificent. HeHis pub∣lick Ma∣nage∣ments. extended the Walls of the City of Rome so, that that they were almost fifty Miles in compass. He was a severe Enemy to Delators and false Accusers of the Innocent. The publick Regi∣sters
of Proscriptions and Forseitures to the Exchequer, he ordered for the common Se∣curity, to be burnt in the Forum of Trajan; and he granted an Act of Amnesty, for the past Offences committed against the State, the Example whereof was taken from that of the Athenians, which Cicero mentions in his Philip∣picks. The Magistrates of the Provinces who appeared to be guilty of Bribery and Extor∣tion, he severely prosecuted, not with regard to them, or himself as Soldiers, but he laid upon them greater and more tormenting Pu∣nishments. He bestowed much Gold and Je∣wels upon the Temple of the Sun. Seeing the Provinces  Illyricum and Moesia laid waste by th sions of the Barbarians, he with∣d the Roman Forces and Subjects out of Dacia, which Trajan had added to the Empire on the other side of the Danube; and relinquish∣ing a Country that he despaired to keep, he planted the said Forces and People, in Moesia; and he gave the Name of the Aurelian Dacia, to that Province that now divides betwixt the Upper and Lower Moesia. It is said, that he was so cruel, as to charge several Senators with pretended Treasons and Conspiracies falsly, only to have an occasion to cut them off. Some add, that it was a Sister's Son, and not a Daughter, which he killed. Others, that he killed his Sister's Son and Daughter both. The Senate and the Army, what with the Gravity of the one, and the prudent Submission of the other, made a great Difficulty of choosing a new Emperor to fill the Throne, vacant by
the Death of Aurelian. The Army referred the choice to the Senate, because they thought, that they ought to avoid those, who had been concerned in the Murder of so worthy a Prince. The Senate on the other hand referred the Choice to the Army, knowing that the Sol∣diers do not always take very well those Em∣perors, that the Senate puts upon them. This was disputed betwixt them three times, so that for six Months the Roman World was with∣out an Emperor, and all Persons in the inte∣rim continued in their Governments and Of∣fices, as they were before, excepting that the Senate made Falconius Probus the Proconsul of Asia, in the place of Aurelius Fuscus. It will not be unpleasant to see the Letter which the Army wrote to the Senate upon this sub∣ject; it was this. The Valiant and Victorious Army, to the Senate and People of Rome. AUrelian our Emperor through the Fraud of one Man, and the surprizing Mistake of a mixture of others, good and bad that were drawn in by him, is killed. You will please, our good Lords and Fathers, to make Aurelian a God; and to send us a Person out of your own Body, to be our Prince; whom in your Judg∣ments you shall think deserves to be so. For we,
as concerning those that have either wilfully or ig∣norantly been led to commit this Fact, will not suffer any of them to reign over us. The Senate met upon the third Day of the Nones of February, and being sat, Aurelius Gordianus the Consul motion'd them to con∣sider this Letter, which was arrived from the Army. The Letter was read. The eldest Se∣nator, who was to deliver his Opinion the first, was Tacitus, who spoke thus. The same who was afterwards by the Consent of all made the Successour to Aurelian. Fathers of the Senate, WELL had the immortal Gods consulted the Happiness of the World, had they made the Persons of good Men invulnerable; that such as meditate base Murder in their wicked Hearts, could have had no Power to hurt them. Then had we enjoyed our Emperor Au∣relian longer, who was one of the greatest use to our State; which after the misfortunes of Va∣lerina, and the Luxury of Gallienus, began to take breath again indeed under the Reign of Claudius; but it had been perfectly restored to its pristine form by Aurelian, had he lived, be∣cause Victory every where waited upon his Arms. He re-possessed us of Gallia; he delivered Italy from the Invasion of the Marcomanni; he re∣scued Ausburgh from the Barbarian Yoke; he recovered Illyricum and Thrace to the obedi∣ence of the Romans; he recovered the East to
our obedience, which was shamefully before oppres∣sed and held against us by a Woman. The Per∣sians, while yet insulting in the Death of Vale∣rian, he vanquished, put them to flight, and in∣slaved them. The Saracens, the Blemmies, and Auxumitae, the Bactrians, the Seres, the Geor∣gians, the Albanians, the Armenians, and even the Indians adored him almost as a God upon Earth. The Capitol is enrich'd with his Pre∣sents, and the things which he gained from the Barbarian Nations. Fifteen Thousand Pound weight of Gold, of his Liberality, lies all in one Temple. All the Fanes in Rome shine by his Gifts. Wherefore, Gentlemen, may I not justly expostulate with the Gods, why they have per∣mitted the Massacre of such a Prince; unless it is perhaps, that they would rather have him in their own Number? I for my part vote him a God, and I presume, that all you will do the same. But as for the Election of another Em∣peror, it is a Matter in my Opinion, to be re∣ferred back to the Army again. For unless it were certain that the Person elected by us will be by them accepted, it will both be dangerous to the elected, and bring an envy upon his Friends. The Senate approved the Opinion of Ta∣citus. But when the Army did persist to send to them again and again upon the same sub∣ject, they came at last to an Act, which you will see in the Life of Tacitus, whereby they made Tacitus Emperor. Aurelian left only a Daughter, of whose Posterity there are some surviving at Rome at
this Day. The late Proconsul of Cilicia, who is of the Name of Aurelian, and now lives sweetly in the Island of Sicily, a Senator of great worth, of an excellent Life, and the entire Master of himself, is her Grandson. What shall I say now to observe, that out of so many Persons, that have sat upon the Throne of Rome from Augustus down to Dio∣clesian and Maximian, there hath hitherto been so few, that have been good Princes? TheThe few good Em∣perors of Rome. good Princes were these; Augustus, Flavius Vespasian, Titus, Cocceius Nerva, Trajan, Hadrian, Antoninus the Pious, Marcus Antoninus, Severus the African, Alexander. Severus the Son of Mammae, Claudius and Aurelian. It is true, Valerian was another good Prince, but he was in all respects so unfortunate, that he ought to be reckoned apart You see, Sir then, how short the Number of the good Princes is; so that it was well said by a Jester in the time of Claudius, that they might all be easily drawn within the Circle of a Ring. On the con∣trary, what a Series have we had of ill Prin∣ces! For not to mention the Vitellii, the Ca∣ligula's, and the Nero's of former Ages, What do you say to the Maximins, the Philips, and that unsavory multitude, that dross, that came up afterwards? excepting only the Decii, whose Lives and Manners were comparable with those of the Antients. It may be asked, what it is that debauches Princes, and makes them become so ill? And truly, my dear Friend, I will tell you. Licen∣tiousness, in the first place; then the Plenty
that surrounds them; then evil Counsellors, evil Guards, greedy Eunuchs, lewd or foolish Courtiers; nor can this last be denied, Igno∣rance in the Affairs of the Publick. I assure you, I have heard it from my Father, that the Emperor Dioclesian hath said, when he li∣ved privately at Salona, after his resignation of the Empire, That there is nothing more dif∣ficult than to Reign well. For four or five Per∣sons shall cabal together, to put upon the Prince, and tell him what is to be done; in the mean time, he who is shut up at home, penetrates not into the Truth, and is forced to know no more than they tell him; and so he makes Persons Magistrates and Officers, whom he ought to avoid, and turns others out, whom he ought to keep. In fine, as Dioclesian said, for these are also his words, The Good, the Cautious, the Best Prince that is, is bought and sold. Which I therefore remark, that you may please, Sir, to observe, that there is there∣fore not any thing more difficult than the Art of Reigning well. Aurelian is many times accounted neither a∣mongst the ill, nor yet amongst the good Prin∣ces, because Clemency, which is the first Ho∣nour of a Prince was wanting to him. His excessive Fierceness was a thing which dimi∣nish'd his Character with the Emperor Dio∣clesian; who, as he blamed the asperity of Maximinian, so he often said of Aurelian in the hearing of Verconius Herennianus, who was Cap∣tain of the Guards to him, that Aurelian ought rather to have been continued a General, than
to have been made a Prince. He said also, according to Asclepiodotus, that Aurelian once consulted with the Druids of Gallia, whether the Empire was to descend after him upon his Posterity. Their Answer was, that the Poste∣rity of Claudius should carry the greatest Name of any in the Empire. And certainly the Em∣peror Constantius is one of the Blood of Clau∣dius, whose Line will one day attain, I doubt not, to that Glory, which was fore-told by the Druids. But I only mention this in the Life of Aurelian, because the Consultation and the Answer was made by, and to him. It may seem perhaps wonderful; as it is, I leave it to the Judgment of Posterity. Aurelian fixed the Tribute to be paid forFarther Character of Aure∣lian. ever by Egyp to the City of Rome, in Glass, Paper, Flax, Tow, Corn, Oyntments, and o∣ther Merchandizes. He had begun to make a Winter-Bath in the Quarter of the City, which is on the other side of the Tyber, be∣cause of their want of Water there. He had begun a great Work to bear his Name at the City of Ostia, to the Sea; which was after∣wards perfected and made into a publick Hall of Justice. He enriched his Friends with mo∣deration; setting them above the miseries of Poverty, and yet below Envy. A Garment of Velvet he never either wore himself, or allowed, in the way of their Salaries to any of his Officers. When his own Lady desired to have one only Gown of Cloth of Gold and Purple, he denied it, and said, Far be it that we should weigh Gold against Thread; be∣cause
a Pound of silken Thred purple dyed, was worth at that time a Pound of Gold. He had intended to forbid the Gilding of Rooms, and the working of Gold into Cloaths, and the Gilding of Leather, and the Gilding of Silver. He said, There is a greater Stock of Gold in Nature, than there is of Silver; but the quan∣tity of the Gold in passing into the several uses which it does, in Leaves and Thred, and Melt∣ings, perishes more than the Silver, and is more lavished. As for Vessels and Cups of all Gold, he gave leave that any might use them, who pleased. Gentlemen, he gave leave to have their Coaches silvered over, which before were only adorned with Brass and Ivory. He al∣lowed the Gentlewomen to wear fine Purples, whereas before they went in flowered and mixt coloured Silks, or at the most, something that was only a little near to Purple. He was the first that suffered the Cōmmon Soldiers to have their Buttons gilt. He was the first that gave them Linens. For before they had only Russet Coats, which were adorned with some one, or two, or three, or some five Trim∣mings. He added the weight of an Ounce, upon the Fond of the Tribute Egypt, to the Dole at Rome; in which Charity, in the fol∣lowing Letter he is pleased to glory thus.
The Emperor Aurelian to Flavius Arabianus, the Commissioner of the Stores for the Publick Re∣lief. AMongst other things, in which by the help of the Gods we have done good to the Roman State, nothing is to me a greater Pleasure and Honour, than that I have increased by the addition of an Ounce, the publick Dole of the City of Rome. To make which perpetual, I have accordingly appointed Officers in Egypt up∣on the Nile, and others at Rome, to see to the Importation of the Corn from Egypt. I have built up the Banks of the Tyber. I have digged the Channel deeper. I have offered my Vows to the Gods, and to Eternity. I have consecrated these things to the blessed Ceres. It is your Duty now, my good Arabianus, to take great care that my Orders be not issued in vain. For nothing to me can be more pleasant, than to see the People of Rome with their Bellies full, and their wants satisfied. Together with the Oyl, Bread and Pork, which these People received by the Donations already established, Aurelian was for giving them Wine, for which he would have made a perpetual Fund by this means. The Country of Hetruria in Italy on the side of Aurelia, as far as to the Maritim Alps, hath large Grounds
which are covered with Woods, but otherwise fruitful enough. Aurelian would have bought these incultivated Grounds of the Proprietors, as many as were willing to sell; and he would have employed upon them Numbers of Per∣sons, that were Captives, who should plant the Mountains with Vines, and the Product, with∣out paying any thing to the Exchequer, should go entirely to the use of the People of Rome. An Account was taken of the Expence that this Work would cost, and what quantity of Wine it would bring in. But either Aurelian was prevented by Death, before he could go on further with it; or, as some say, he was diver∣ted again from it by the Captain of the Guards, who was against it, and said, If we find the People of Rome Wine, it only remains next that we give them Geese and Chickens. Aurelian inMunifi∣cence of Aurelian. the time that he reigned, thrice caressed that Po∣pulace with Largesses. He gave them Tunicks of several sorts, according to the Fashions of the Provinces from whence he had them. He gave them of the Linens of Egypt, and o∣ther parts of Africa. He was the first that gave them Handkerchiefs, which at the Pub∣lick Shews of the Cirque they express their Applauses and their Acclamations by, that is, shaking and tossing them over their Heads. When he was at Rome, he did not love to live always in the Palace; he diverted him∣self much in the Gardens of Salust, or those of Domitia. The great Gallery which is in the Gardens of Salust, consisting of a Thousand Pillars, he adorned; and every day fatigued
himself and his Horses there, for his Health, which was but indifferent. He caused his Slaves and Servants, when they had done ill, to be killed or beaten in his sight; either because it kept up Discipline, and made the Punish∣ment the more exemplary; or, because he lo∣ved to feed his Eyes with the Cruelty. His Maid committing Adultery with one of his Slaves, he punished her with Death. Othe of his Slaves, that committed things against the Laws, be delivered over to the Authority of the Laws, and the Publick Justice. He was for setting up a sort of a Senate of the Wo∣men, or rather for reviving a Privilege, which the Matrons antiently had of assembling them∣selves upon certain occasions. In which As∣sembly, the Priestesses, that is, such as were by the Law devoted to the Services of the Gods, had the preheminence. He forbad all Men, the wearing of Red, or Wax coloured, or White, or Green Shooes; leaving it only to the Women to have such. He allowed the Senators their run∣ning Foot-men, and the same Livery as him∣self gave. Concubines of Women Free born, he forbad. He limited the Number of the Eu∣nuchs, which the Senators bought, because they were risen to a great Price. He had no Ves∣sel of Silver in his Houshold of above Thirty Pound weight. His Eating was generally of roasted Meat, and red Wine his Drink. When he was sick, he never made use of a Physician, but cured himself chiefly by abstinence▪ He gave his Wife and his Daughter no better Rings than if he had been a private Person. He
gave his Slaves the same Cloaths, after he was Emperor, as he did before; excepting two old Men, Antisthius and Gallio, whom he treated as Gentlemen, and who after his Death were made Free by the Authority of the Senate. He was seldom present at the Pleasure of the Cirque but he was wonderfully delighted with Mimicks and Jesters. In fine, Aurelian, ex∣cepting in some domestick Seditions, had a very fortunate time. The People of Rome loved him. The Senate both loved him, and feared him.
THEA. Christi CCLxxviii. Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR TACITUS. BY FLAVIUS VOPISCUS. AFter Aurelian, there followed an Inter∣regnumAn Inter∣regnum of six Months. for six whole Months. Not occasioned by any Breach betwixt the Senate of Rome and the Army; but on the con∣trary, the Senate deferred the Election of the new Emperor to the Army, and the Army de∣ferred it again to the Senate, and the dispute betwixt them was grateful and very handsome. There was, as our Eldest Annals inform us, formerly an Interregnum after the death of Ro∣mulus, in the Infant-State of the Empire of
Rome. But the differences betwixt that Inter∣regnum and this, are many. For in the for∣mer, till such time as a fit Person was pitch'd upon to succeed the good Romulus, an Interrex was expresly from time to time appointed to Govern out of the Senate: which then con∣sisting of one hundred Members, each Mem∣ber, whose Health did not disable him, took it in his course to be the Interrex for three or four, or five days: So the whole Year and more, that the Interregnum lasted, passed under the Government of the Senators; who reign∣ed one after another, all of them, from the first to the last, without distinction, because as they were all of equal Dignity, so they should all have an equal Taste of the Empire. Like∣wise during the Government of the Consuls and the Tribunes of the Soldiers, which last had the Authority, but only not the Name of Consuls, whenever it happened that the Go∣vernment was vacant, an Interrex was appoin∣ted to Act, till such time as the Government was filled again. And though it may be ob∣jected to this, That once, at that time, for the space of four Years, we had no Persons in the Chairs of the Consuls, nor any Magistrates presiding in the Nature of them; yet I answer, that there were then Tribunes of the People, endowed with such a Power, that the Empe∣rors who have enjoy'd the same Power since, have thought it one of the brightest Jewels in their Crown. Nor is it any where averred, that then there was no Interrex neither who acted besides these Tribunes. Because our most
Authentick Histories say, that when after∣wards the Consuls were re-continued, it was the Interrex, who by his Authority summoned the Assemblies of the People to do it; and therefore there was an Interrex then in the State. So that in this respect the State of Rome was never so vacant, as it was after the death of Aurelian: For here there was a perfect In∣terregnum without any Interrex for six Months; whereas before the State was never without an Interrex, so much as for two or three days. This was a rare and a difficult Conjuncture. It was no less remarkable, if we observe the per∣fect Concord of the Army, the profound Peace of the People, and the venerable Authority of the Senate in all that time. No Usurper start∣ed any where up. The whole World wated the Orders and the Judgment of the Senate, the Soldiers and the People of Rome: There were no Fears nor Jealousies of one Person or other. Every one kept to his Devoir, and which is one of the best Principles in the Con∣duct of humane Life, in reverence to himself. The Temperament of Men was admirable, and made the Delay it self happy and worthy to be for ever remembred; That those who seek after Crowns, may learn, that Empires ought not to be ravished, but to be deserved. The occasion and manner of the Delay that was made, was thus. Aurelian, as the last written Life shews, was killed by the Trea∣son of a wicked Secretary, who, as Fictions and Falsities go a great way with Soldiers, if they are told them either in their anger, or
many times in their drink (though it is always next to a madness to believe them) drew in a Party of the Great Men of the Army, by an Incredulity on their sides, into a Plot with him, to kill him. But all these Persons being re∣turn'd to a better Sentiment, and severely con∣suted of their Error by the Army, it was be∣gun to be consider'd, whom next to make Em∣peror. The Army, who had used to set up an Emperor in a trice, hated those who had had a hand in the Murder of Aurelian, and who at the same time were of the Top of their Body. So they sent to the Senate the Letter which you have in the Life preceding, where∣in they desired that the Senate would, out of their House, make choice  Person to be their Prince. But the Senate kn that the Princes chosen by them, do not always please the Army, and they remitted the Choice to the Army again. This was repeated so often in reciprocal Complements from one to ano∣ther, that it was six Months before the Senate came to the Election of Tacitus, which was in the manner as follows. Upon the 7th. day of the Calends of October, the Senate being met in the Curia Pompiliana, Velius Cornificius Gordianus the Consul, spoke thus to them: Fathers of the Senate, What we have often re∣ferred to you already, we must now do it again, to choose an Emperor; without whom, the Army cannot well subsist longer, and there is a Necessity which obliges us to it besides. For the Germans
have broken into the Quarter on the side of the Rhine, and have possessed themselves there of Strong, Noble, Rich, and Powerful Cities. And though there is nothing mentioned of any Motions of the Persians, yet you may easily imagine, how light the Minds of the Syrians are, when rather than suffer our Government, which is so Just, they have desired Women to Reign over them. What shall I say to you of Africa, of Illyricum, of Aegypt, and the Armies in all those Parts? How long do you think can they subsist without an Emperor? Wherefore, Gentlemen, go now about it, and Name one: Either the Army will Accept him whom you shall choose, or themselves will choose some other, if they refuse him. Tacit as the Chief and Prince of the Se∣nate, and to give his Opinion the first. But as he was going to speak, all the Senate pre∣vented him, and cryed; We Salute Tacitus, our Emperor. The Gods save you. We Choose you. We make you our Prince; We commit the Care of the State and of the World to you. Take the Empire, given you by the Authority of the Senate. Your Place, your Life, your good Intentions deserve it. The Prince of the Senate is very justly to be created the So∣veraign. The Senator of the First Voice is deser∣vedly preferred to be Emperor. And who is better to Reign, than a Person of Gravity as you are? Who is better to Govern, than one that is so knowing as you? We think it is an Happiness and an Excellency in you to be Congratulated, That you have been long a Private Person. You,
who have gone through the Reigns of other Princes, know how to Reign your self. You know very well how to Command, who have observed and judged of the Government of others before you. Tacitus Answered: I am astonished, Fathers of the Senate, That in the Place of the most Valiant Aurelian, you are willing to make such an Old Man Emperor. How am I fit, with these Limbs which you behold, to manage the Dart and the Spear, and to rattle it in Armour, and to be often riding in exact Form for an Example to the Soldiers. Scarce can I fulfil the Duties of the Senate; I am hardly able to do that, to which my particular Place confines me. Consider then more carefully, what an advanced Age you take out of the Chamber and the Shade, to send it into Frosts and Heats? Can you believe, that the Army will approve of an Old Man to be at the Head of them? Think upon some other, who will better answer the Expectations which you have of him, and let me be contented in a Private Life with this, That you have unanimously Loved me. The Senate return'd him these Acclamations. Trajan came pretty Old to the Empire. This was repeated ten times. And Hadrian came Old to the Empire. This was repeated ten times. Antoninus the Pious, came an Old Man to the Empire. Repeated ten times.
You remember that of Virgil, Aen. 6. ——Incanaque menta Regis Romani: Or, The Hoary Head of a King of the Romans. This was repeated ten times. Who Governs better than a Man of Years? This was repeated ten times. We make you an Emperor, not a Soldier. This was repeated twenty times. Give the Word only, and the Soldiers will Fight it out. This was repeated thirty times. You are Prudent, and you have a good Brother living with you. This was repeated ten times. It is the Head that Governs, and not the Feet, said the Emperor Septimius Severus. This was repeated thirty times. We choose you for your Parts of Mind, and not of Body. This was repeated twenty times. The Gods save you, our Emperor Tacitus. Then they went to take the Suffrages of each Senator in particular. The next to Tacitus was Moecius Falconius Nicomachus, who was of the degree of a Consul. He being ask'd his Opinion, discoursed the Senate in these words. Fathers of the Senate, This most Noble House hath ever rightly and prudently consulted the Good of the State: Nor is there any Nation upon the Earth, from whom one ought to expect a greater share of solid Wisdom, than from you. But yet I must say, That of, all the Instances of your Wisdom, there never was a Determination pass'd by you, more Grave and more Judicious, than what hath
been done in this present Assembly. We have chosen a Person of an advanced Age to be our Prince, and one who may consult the Good of us all as a Father. Nothing from him that is im∣mature, that is unadvised, that is ill, is to be feared. We may promise our selves a Reign of all Sobriety, all Gravity, and as the State would in a manner have it. For he knows, what a Prince he hath always wished to himself to have; and he cannot give us a different one in his own Person, from what he hath desired to find in ano∣ther. Certainly if we will reflect upon those Pro∣digies of ill Princes of the Antient Times, I mean the Nero's, the Heliogabalus's, and the Com∣modus's, it will appear, that their Crimes were not more the Vices of the Men, than the Vices of their Age. The Gods defend us from having Boys to be our Sovereigns, and Children to be called the Fathers of our Country; who must have Masters to hold their Hands when they Sign their Orders, and will be invited to make Persons Consuls, by the Sugar-plumbs and the Cakes, and every Chil∣dish Pleasure that is given them. What Reason, I pray, is there to have an Emperor, who does not know how to take the care of his Reputation? who does not understand what a State is; that fears his Educator, is Commanded by his Nurse, and lies under the Magisterial Lash and Terror of the Hands of his Master? What Consuls, what Com∣manders, what Magistrates is he like to give us, when as to the Lives, Merits, Ages, Families and Actions of the Persons whom he prefers, truly be understands nothing at all of them? But why am I here drawn to bestow, Gentlemen, so many
words upon this subject? Let us rather Congratu∣late the choice, which we have made of a Prince, who is a Man of Years, than to iterate those things that have been beyond measure deplorable to the Persons that have suffered under them. I give there∣fore my repeated Thanks to the Immortal Gods for this Choice. I offer the same likewise in the Name of the whole State. And to you, Tacitus, our Em∣peror, I turn my self to beg of you, to beseech you, to intreat you, generously in the behalf of our Com∣mon Country, that if it shall be the Will of the Fates that you die whilst your own Sons are yet but young, you would not make those Children Heirs, after you, of the Roman Empire; nor in such a nature leave this State, this Senate, and the People of Rome, as if the first was no more than your Villa, and we all your Tenants and your Slaves. Consider very well, and imitate the Examples of Nerva, Trajan, and Hadrian. It is a great honour in a dying Prince, to love his Country more than his Issue. Tacitus was extreamly moved, and the whole Senate struck with this Speech; and presently they cryed, We All, All, say the same; and so the House rose. They went from thence unto the Field of Mars: where Tacitus having placed himself upon the Tribunal, Aelius Cesetianus the Governour of the City, spoke thus to a General Assembly, there met, of all the People: Gentlemen-Soldiers, and you the good Citizens and Commons of Rome; You have here the Prince, whom by the consent of all the Roman Armies,
the Senate hath made choice of to fill the Throne. The most Noble Tacitus, I say; who, as he hath hitherto assisted by his Suffrages to the good of the Senate, so he is now chosen to do the same by his Command and Consultations. The People cryed, All Happiness to the Em∣peror Tacitus. The Gods save your Majesty, and the like, as usual. It is not here to be omitted, what several have writ, That Tacitus was in his absence, and whilst he was in the Campagna, nam'd to be Emperor; which I cannot deny to be in someHis un∣willing∣ness to as∣sume the Empire. measure true. For as soon as the Rumour had broken out, that he was the Person intended to be Elected, he retired from the Town, and went and kept himself two Months at Bajae. But they fetched him from thence again, and he was present at this Act of the Senate, as altogether a private Person, and really did de∣cline his Elevation. For that no body may think, that I have rashly given Credit to the Testimony of any either Greek or Latin Wri∣ter as to this Matter, there is in the Ulpian Li∣brary in the Sixth Apartment, a Book in Tables of Ivory, in which this Act of the Senate is registred at large, subscribed by Tacitus him∣self in his own hand. It was a long time; a Custom to Register such Acts, as concerned the Crown, upon Tables of Ivory. From the Assembly of the People, Tacitus next went to the Camp of the Guards; where having taken his Place upon a High Tribunal, Maesius Gallicanus the Captain of the Guards, directed himself to the Soldiers in these words:
My very good Fellow-Soldiers, The Senate hath given you the Prince whom you desired. That most Noble House hath readily comply'd with the Will of the Camp. It is not for me to say more to you, in the presence of the Emperor himself. Therefore hear him, who is our Master, attentive∣ly, whilst he speaks to you. Then Tacitus spoke thus: When Trajan came to the Empire, it is true, he was pretty well in Years, and he was appointed by only one Person neither. But as for my self, in the first place, you my excellent Fellow Soldiers, who know what Princes you do approve of, and in the next, the most Honourable the Senate hath adjudged me to this Place. It shall be my care, I will make it my endeavour and my business, to furnish you, if not with great Atchievements, yet at least with Counsels worthy of you and your Emperor. He promised them a Bounty and their Pay, according to Custom; and the first Harangue which he made afterwards to the Senate, was this: Fathers of the Senate, So let me ever in such a manner Govern the Empire, as that I may ap∣pear to owe my Election to you, by whose Advice and Authority I have resolved to do all things. You will therefore please to Command and to Enjoyn me, what you think to be for the Common good of
your selves, the Army, and the People of Rome. He proceeded in the same Speech to tell them, That he resolved to set up a Statue of Aurelian in Gold in the Capitol, with others of Silver, in the House of the Senate, in the Temple of the Sun, and in the Forum of Trajan. These latter were accordingly Dedicated; but that of Gold was not. In the same Speech he provided, That if any Person publickly or privately adulterated Silver with Brass, or Gold with Silver, or Brass with Lead, it should be Capital, and loss of Estate. Also, that Slaves should not be Wit∣nesses against the Lives of their Masters; no, not in Cases of Treason. He obliged all Per∣sons to have Pictures of Aurelian. He order'd a Temple to be built, where they should set up the Statues of such of the Deified Emperors as Reigned well; and offer Sacrifices to them, upon their several Anniversaries, the Birth-day of the City of Rome, and the Calends of Ja∣nuary. In the same Speech, he desired the Consuship for his Brother Florianus; but the Senate could not grant it; because all the Con∣suls, Ordinary and Extraordinary, that is, the Consuls for the whole Year and the Consuls for every two Months had been already ap∣pointed by the Senate. Tacitus was much pleased with the liberty which the Senate took to de∣ny his Brother the Consulship, though himself had asked it; and said, The Senate knows whom they have made their Prince. He turn'd his Estate, which was worth se∣ven Millions of Crowns, over into the Ex∣chequer; and the ready Money that he had
by him, he applied to the Pay of the Soldiers. He wore the same Cloaths as he did when heHis pub∣lic Acts and Or∣ders. was a Private Man. He put down the Publick Bawdy-houses within the City of Rome; but this could not hold long. He order'd all the Baths to be shut up before Candle-light, for fear of Disturbances being committed in them in the Night. He acknowledg'd Corn. Tacitus, the Roman Historian, as his Relation, and commanded his Book to be set up in all the Libraries; and for the more careful preserva∣tion of it to Posterity, he order'd it every Year to be Copied over Ten times, and the Copies to be reposed in the Libraries and in the Cabi∣nets of the Ingenious. He forbad all Men the wearing of Velvet. He pulled down his late Dwelling-House, and order'd a Publick Bath to be built in its place, at his proper ex∣pence. He gave a hundred Columns of the Numidian Marble, of three and twenty foot each, to the City of Ostia. The Possession which he had in Mauritania, he Assigned to the Repairs of the Capitol. His Table Plate of Silver, which he had used in his private Life, he dedicated to the services of the Feasts, made in the Temples. He granted an En∣franchisement to all his Slaves that he had at Rome, of both Sexes, under the Number of a Hundred; but no more, because he would not exceed the stint of the Caninian Law. He lived a very sober Life; never in a whole dayHis mode∣rate Diet. drank a Quart of Wine, and many times not a Pint. One Pullet, a Swine's Cheek, and Eggs, sufficed for his Dinner, with an abundance of
Herbs, and especially Lettuces, in which he passionately indulged himself; because he said, that that was a profuseness which purchased him Sleep. He loved the bitterer Herbs; seldom Bathed, which I believe made him the stronger in his Old Age: Delighted extraordinarily in the curious-wrought Glasses, and the several sorts thereof, that are made in Aegypt. His Breakfast was never any thing, but a piece of dry Bread seasoned with Salt, and the like. He was a great Master in Architecture. He loved fine Marble, and stately Buildings, and Hunting. In fine, his Table was Coarse, and presented you with no Rarities: Not with a Pheasant, unless it was upon the Birth-day of himself or some of his Relations, and upon extraordinary Holidays. The Sacrifices, which he had offered in the Temples, he always re∣demanded home, and order'd them to be eaten by his Family. He suffered his Wife to wear no Jewels: He forbad all the wearing of any Em∣broidery in Gold: For it was he, who had ad∣vised Aurelian to forbid the same, and to for∣bid the Gilding of Rooms, and the Gilding of Leather. It would be tedious to particularize in every thing concerning him, especially af∣ter Suetonius Optatianus, who hath written his Life at large. If any Person be so curious to know more, I refer him thither. As Old as he was, he read the least-written Hand to a Won∣der; and he never intermitted a Night, but he either read or writ something, excepting the day after the Kalends of a Month, which he look'd upon as Unfortunate.
The great Joy of the Senate, to be re-possessed again of the Right of the Choice of the Empe∣ror, was such as I cannot forbear to mention, nor is it scarce ever to be forgotten. They order'd Publick Processions to be made upon it, and every one promised to offer a Hecatomb: They writ of it to their Friends, and not only to their Friends, but to Strangers abroad; and into the Provinces, for all their Allies and all Nations to know, that Rome had now recovered its An∣tient State, and now the Senate chose the Em∣peror, and Reigned in a manner with him; and made the Laws; and the Kings of the Bar∣barians were to supplicate to the Senate, and War and Peace was to be Treated by the Au∣thority of the Senate. Some of these sort of Letters, for the greater satisfaction, I will give you here, as follows: The most Noble Senate of Rome to the Magistracy of Carthage, sendeth Greeting. THE Right of Conferring the Empire, and of Nominating and appointing our Prince, which we pray, that it may ever be Good, Happy, For∣tunate and Wholesome to the Senate and the whole Dominion of Rome, is again returned to us. To us therefore direct the Reports, which you make of things of great moment. All Appeals arising from the Proconsuls, and other the ordinary Magi∣strates, are to be made to the Governour of the City
of Rome. Herein we believe, that also your Ho∣nourable Body hath regained its Antient Dignity: For this is the prime Order of things, which by being observed in its proper force, will preserve all the rest in their Rights. The most Noble Senate of Rome to the Council of the City of Trier. AS you are and always have been a Free Peo∣ple, we do not doubt, but you are Happy. The Authority of Creating the Emperor is returned to the Senate: Together with which it is Decreed, that all Appeals shall be made to the Governour of the City of Rome. In the same manner, they writ to the Cities of Antioch, Aquileia, Milan, Alexandria, Thes∣salonica, Corinth, and Athens: These were the Publick Letters. The following are Private ones, from particular Senators to their Friends. Autronius Tiberianus to Autronius Justus, his Father, wisheth Health. My Good Father, NOW it is for you to come to be present, and give your Suffrage in the Senate; its Authority being encreased to the degree, of which it was in the former Times. We now make our Princes, Name and Constitute our Emperors. Therefore
pray be careful to recover your Health and come, and bear a part with the Senate in its Antient Glory. The Right of Creating the Proconsuls, and ordering the Proconsular Provinces, is remitted to us; and the Appeals of all Magistrates and Offi∣cers are returned into the hands of the Governour of the City of Rome. Claudius Capellianus to Cereius Maecianus, his Uncle, wisheth Health. WHAT we have always so much wished for, we have now gained, good Sir. The Senate is returned to its Antient State. We make our Princes, and dispose of the Governments of the Proconsular Provinces. Thanks to the Roman Army. They have shewn themselves truly Ro∣mans, and have restored to us the Power, which hath been ever our due. Leave Baja, and Poz∣zuoli, and your Retreat there. Come to the Town, come to the Senate; Rome Flourishes, and so does the whole State. We now appoint our Emperors. We make our Princes. We, who have begun to make them, can disallow them too. A word to the Wise is enough. It would be too long to adjoyn all the Let∣ters of this kind, which I have seen and read. I only say this, that all the Senators were so elated with Joy for the return of their Antient Power, that in their Houses they all slew their Sacrifices, and exposed their Images, and cloathed themselves in White, and Feasted, as
if they thought, that the days of their happy Forefathers were revived upon them. All the Murderers of Aurelian, as well the better, as the worse, after Tacitus was settled in the Empire, he made it his business to put to death; notwithstanding the baseness of that Murder had been already revenged in the Exe∣cution of Mnestheus, the chief contriver of it. The Barbarians on the side of the Lake Maeotis, in great numbers made an Eruption. But Ta∣citus partly by force, and other means, obliged them to retire. In fine, the chief Glory of the Reign of Tacitus was in the manner of his Elevation. For the time that he lived afterwards being so short, what liberty had he for any thing that is Great? So that what Cicero says, That it is more for our Honour, to have it told, how a Man hath managed a Consulship, than how he came by it, it takes no place here. Tacitus dyed in the sixth Month of his Reign, some say of a Sick∣ness; some, that he was killed by the Soldiers. It is certain, that he was oppressed with Facti∣ons, and this work'd much upon his Mind and Spirits. He was both Born, and made Emperor in the Month of September: For which reason, he had a fancy to change the Name of that Month to his own. His Brother Florianus suc∣ceeded him. He scarce gave the People of Rome a Largess in all his six Months. His Picture is drawn in five several Dresses, upon a Table in the House of the Quintilii; in a Gown, in a Vest, in Armour,
in a Cloak, and in a Hunting Habit. The Pre∣sages of his Reign were these. In the Temple of Sylvanus, one in a Fit of Frenzy, in which the Priests delivered their Oracles, stretching out his Arms, cryed with all his force, The Purple of Tacitus! The Purple of Tacitus! sevenOmens of his Reign and Death times. A Vine, which used to bring forth white Grapes, the Year that he came to the Empire, began to bring forth Purple colour'd Grapes: several other such things changed to that Colour. The Presages of his Death were, That his Father's Sepulchre flew open of it self; his Mother's Ghost appeared in the day∣time, both to him and to Florianus, just as if she was Living. All the Gods in the Oratory of his House, whether by an Earthquake or some other accident, fell down: An Image of Apollo, which he and Florianus Worshipped, was found laid upon the Bed, without any hand to put it there known. These are things that a great many mention: But I conclude this Life.
THEA. Christi CCLxxviii. EMPEROR FLORIANƲS. By FLAVIUS VOPIUS. THere is but little to be said of this Prince more, than that being the Brother of the Emperor Tacitus, he after his death seized upon the Empire, not by the Authority of the Senate, but of his own Motion, as if the Empire was to go to him by Inheritance: though at the same time he knew, that his Brother was Con∣jured in the Senate, that when he dyed, he should not bequeath the Empire, no, not to his own Children. Florianus had scarce held it two Months, butFlorianus slain. he was killed at the City of Tarsus in Cilicia, by his Soldiers; hearing that Probus was set up, and that all the Army had declared for him. Indeed Probus was so great a Man in the mat∣ter
of War, that as the Army had chose him, so the Senate wished for him, and the People of Rome made open Acclamations to have him. Florianus, though he had otherwise much in him of the Temper of his Brother, was very different from him in this Ambition, and this Thirst for the Empire. He was profuse be∣sides, which his Thrifty Brother blamed in him. They both together reigned so short a time, that they look almost like two Interrexes, acting betwixt the Reigns of Aurelian and Probus. Their Statues were set up at Terni, in Ombria, in Marble, thirty Foot high; and likewise their Sepulchres did sometime stand there pon their own Grounds; but they were afterwards struck down with Thunder and Lightning, and shattered to pieces. I come in the next place to Probus: a Prince, Conspicuous at home and abroad; andCommen∣dation of Probus. in whom are united all those great Excellen∣cies, which Aurelian, Trajan, Hadrian, the Antonini, Alexander Severus, and Claudius, di∣vided amongst them. He came to the Em∣pire with the concurrent Judgment of all Men of goodness. He governed it most happily. He extinguished the Barbarian Nations in their Incursions, together with divers Usur∣pers who would have set themselves up in his time. He was worthy of his Name: which the People would have imposed upon him, if it had not been his own by his Birth. Several say he was promised to the World in the Books of the Sibyls. Had he longer lived, he had left
no Barbarians on the Earth. This Tast of so great a Prince I give you here, lest as we are dayly, hourly, and every moment subject to the stroak of Fate, I may dye, before I can present you with his whole life: which I shall the less care now, if I do; because I have sa∣tisfied my Ambition, and my great Desire, thus far, to honour his Memory.
THEA. Christi CCLXXiX. Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR PROBUS. By FLAVIUS VOPISCUS. IT is very true, what the Historians Sa∣lust, Cato, and Gellius have sometime said; that the Praises of all Men are altogether such, and so raised, as those please, who describe their Actions to the World▪ Therefore Alexander the Great of Maced when he came one day, and saw the Sepulchre of Achilles, complained and said, Happy Youth who hadst such a Herald to Proclaim thee! Mean∣ing Homer, who hath set out his Virtues▪
IMP. . PROBVS AVG. portrait of Probus DIVO CARO PIO portrait of Carus CARINVS NOBIL. CAES. portrait of Carinus IMP. C. NVMERIANVS AVG. portrait of Numerianus IMP. DIOCLETIANVS P. AVG. P. 272. Vol. 11 portrait of Diocletian
and formed his Character, with the utmost force of his Will. And who, at this time had ever known of the glory of Pompey the Great, and his three Triumphs for the War of the Pyrates, the War of Sertorius, and the War of Mithridates, and many other Actions which he did, that ennobled him, if Tully and Livy had not been his Historians to Record his Fame? The Scipio's, Africanus, Nasica, and all of that Noble Name, had been laid under a perpe∣tual darkness, and for ever covered with ob∣livion, but for the Historians that have arisen to commend them. It would be tedious, nei∣ther need I mention all the Examples, that might be brought of this Nature, which every ones own observation will furnish him with. You will rather ask me perhaps, my dear Celsus, why do I take notice of this here? It is truly, because I see here a Prince, who though the East, West, North and South o∣beyed his Empire, and all the parts of the World were reduced into an entire repose by him; and though neither the Punick Wars, nor Gallia, nor Pontus, nor Spain have pro∣duced his equal, yet his History being unfor∣tunately perished, he is in a manner unknown for want of Writers to perpetuate him. This however I am not willing to see, without con∣tributing my Service to redress it; and there∣fore having to my power, as I was desired, fi∣nished the Life of Aurelian, and to that ad∣ded those others of Tacitus and Florianus, I shall not be silent upon the Actions of so great a Prince as Probus; and if my life serves me, I
will also carry on the History, as far as to Dio∣clesian and Maximian: not that I pretend to Eloquence, but only matter of Fact, which I cannot suffer to perish. The Books that I make use of to this purpose, that I may not in any thing appear to impose upon a friendship which is so dear to me, Sir, as yours, are those especi∣ally in the Library of Trajan, which is lodged at present in the Baths of Dioclesian, and the Tibe∣rian Library. Together with which, I have consulted the Registers of the Scribes of the Porphyry Gallery, and the Acts of the People and the Senate. And because in the Colle∣cting the History of so great a Prince, the Journal of Turdulus Gallicanus hath very much assisted me, I ought not to be silent of the obligation which I have to the friendship of that very good and worthy Person. All there∣fore that I would declare upon the whole, is this; that it is the matter of Fact only which I write; which if any one pleases to set out in a Higher, and a more Eloquent Style afterwards, he is welcome. For it hath not been my de∣sign to imitate Salust, Livy, Tacitus, Trogu Pompeius, or any of those most Eloquent Hi∣storians; but Marius Maximus, Suetonius Tran∣quillus, Fabius Marcellinus, Gargilius Martial, Julius Capitolinus, Aelius Lampridius, and o∣thers who have written upon these sort of things, not to say, so Eloquently, as with a great deal of Truth. For it is my Curiosity to bring to light the Truth of many unknown and hidden matters concerning our Emperors; incited by your example, who the more you
know, the more still you desire to know of them. Without further Preface then, this great and famous Prince Probus, who hath scarce his equal, in the Roman History, was born at the City of Sirmish in Sclavonia, or the Lower Pan∣nonia.Probus's Birth∣place and Paren∣tage. His Father was not of so good Quality as his Mother was. His Estate was indiffe∣rent; Affinity not great; however as well in his private Life, as after he was Emperor, he made his Noble Actions speak for him. Some say, his Father's name was Maximus; who af∣ter he had served very well in the Office of a Centurion; rise to be a Tribune, and died in Egypt, leaving a Wife, a Daughter, and this Son. There is one Greek Author, who says, that Probus was a Relation of the Emperor Claudius, who was a most Excellent and most Noble Prince: which may perhaps be the more Credited, because I find in the Journal of Tur∣dulus Gallicanus, that after his death he was buried by Claudia, who was the Daughter of Crispus, who was the Brother of Claudius. But I leave this to the Reader. Probus signalized himself so in his Youth, and was so agreeable in his Person and Man∣ners,How e∣steem'd by Valerian▪ that the Emperor Valerian early confer∣red upon him a Legion, when he was in a manner Beardless. The same Emperor in a Letter to Gallienus, proposes him to the imita∣tion of all the Youth: by which, by the way, one may take notice, that no Man becomes very great in his Age, but who lays down a good Foundation for it in his first years; and
then gathers within himself those Seeds, which afterwards produce the Fruit of Great Actions. The Emperor Valerian the Father, to the Emperor Gallienus, the Son. HAving always had a good Opinion of Pro∣bus, as young as he is I have made him a Tri∣bune, following therein both my own Judgement, and that of all others; who say he is worthy of his Name; that is, as Probus is his Name, so Pro∣bity is his Nature and Character. I have given him the Command of Six Cohorts of the Saracens, together with the Troops of the Auxiliary Gauls, and that Body of Persians which Artabasse; th Syrian hath submitted to us. I desire you, my dearest Son, that as I would have this Youth t be the Example for all Young Persons to imi∣tate, you would take that care of him, and re∣ceive him with that respect which his Virtues, his Merits and the Splendour of his Natural Part do deserve.
The Emperor Valerian, to Mulvius Gallicanus the Captain of the Guards. YOU may wonder perhaps, That I have made a Beardless Youth a Tribune, contrary to the Constitution of the Emperor Hadrian. But you will soon Cease to do so, if you consider what a truly deserving Youth Probus is. I never think of him, but I compare together his Name and his Qualities; they do so justifie one another. If it had not been his name, he might have been en∣titled Probus, because of the Probity of his Tem∣per and Actions. You will therefore order that there be given him, being but of an indifferent Fortune, to make up the Occasions of his Station, two Russet Tunicks, two French Robes with Clasps, two Linen Jerkins, one Vessel of Silver of ten pound weight Ingraved; one hundred An∣tonine's in Gold, one thousand Aurelian's in Sil∣ver, and ten thousand Philips in Brass. And for his ordinary Pension, ten Pound of Beef, ten Pound of Pork, ten Pound of the Flesh of the Goat, a Pullet every two days, one Quart of Oil every two days, ten Quarts of Old Wine every day, with Salt, Herbs, and Wood, as much as he wants. You shall withal order him the same Quarters, as to the Tribunes of the Standing Le∣gions.
In the War against the Sarmatae, in which he was a Tribune, he passed the Danube, and acted with so much bravery so many things, that he was publickly in a Council of War presented with four Spears; two Crowns, in the form of a Trench; (being of that sortPraemi∣ums given him. which are given to such as first enter the E∣nemies Camp;) one Civick Crown, four Standards, two Bracelets of Gold,  n of Gold, and one Piece of Plate of  weight of five Pound. The Civick Crown was given him because he retook out of the Hands of the Quadi, a Noble Youth, called Valerius Flaccinus, who was a Relation of the Emperor Valerian. These Praemiums were all delivered to him by Valerian hims, who at the same time raised him to the Command of the Third Legion, with this Elogium. My well beloved Probus, THough it may seem Early, in respect of your Age, that I prefer you to a Command in the Standing Forces of the Empire, yet in respect of the Actions done by you, I may rather be thought to have made it later, than I ought. Receive therefore into your Trust, the Third Noble Legi∣on, which I have never given before but to a Per∣son of more years, and my self was in Gray Hairs, when I first was preferred to it. But Age is a thing I have no reason to wait for in you, whose Bravery is so shining, and your Manners so Charm∣ing. I have ordered three Suits of Cloaths to be given you; doubled your Pay, and appointed your Standard-Bearer.
It would be too long a Work, to run through the several Actions of this Great Man in the Reigns of Valerian, Gallienus, Aurelian, and Claudius, whilst he was yet in a private Capacity. How often he Scaled the Walls, entred the Enemies Trenches; how many of them he hath killed Hand to Hand, what Pre∣sents he received from the Princes, his Ma∣sters, and how he laboured by his Service to promote the good of the State. A Letter of Gallienus speaks thus of him. The Emperor Gallienus to the Tri∣bunes of the Forces, of the Pro∣vince of Illyricum. ALthough the Fatal Necessity of the Persian War hath concluded my Father a Prisoner in the Hands of the Enemy, yet I have a Kins∣man, Aurelius Probus, in whose Services I can confide with security: That never to be named Tyrant, had never usurped upon the Empire, if Probus had been Present. Wherefore I desire you all to obey the Counsels of a Man, who is ap∣proved by the Judgement of both my Father, and the Senate. Now though Gallienus was a soft Prince, which may seem to lessen the Authority of what he says; yet it cannot be denied, but let a Prince be never so soft, he will not how∣ever
trust himself, but to one, whom he knows to be very well qualified to serve him. But though we should set aside the Testimony of Gallienus, what is to be said to that of Aurelian, who delivered over his own, which was the Tenth, and of all the bravest Legion in the Army, with whom he had done such great things himself unto Probus, with this Elogium of him. The Emperor Aurelian to Probus, wisheth Health. THAT you may know, how great an ac∣count I make of you, I give into your Hands my Tenth Legion, which was given to me by the Emperor Claudius. They are Men, who by a certain Prerogative of Happiness are not ac∣customed to have other Commanders, than what afterwards are Emperors. By this one would conclude, that it was in the mind of Aurelian, if he had died his own death, and had not been killed as he was by surprize, to have made choice of Probus for his Successour in the Empire too, as well as in his Legion. Now it would be tedious to adjoyn to this the judgments of the Emperors Claudius and Tacitus. The latter, it is said, in the Senate when the Empire was offered to him, de∣clared, that it ought rather to be given to
Probus: and the first Letter, which after he was Emperor, he sent to Probus, was this. The Emperor Tacitus to Probus. THE Senate hath indeed, with the good will and consent of the Army, made me the Em∣peror. But however you are to think, that as we all know, and the Senate knows your Worth and Abilities, the Burden of the Publick Affairs would have been better reposed upon your Shoulders than mine. Assist me in my Necessities, and continue as you do to Assert the Interest of the State. All the East is by our order reposed under your Govern∣ment: wherefore we have encreased your Salary to five times as much as it was; we have doubled your Military Ornaments; and appointed you to be the Consul the next year in Conjunction with my self. Your Merits call for no less at my Hands. The love of the Soldiers towards Probus was always very great; he again loved them, and kept them in their Duty, purely by his kindness to them. He oftentimes had rescued them from the great Cruelty of Aurelian: he visited the several Maniples, and examined their Cloaths and their Shooes; and what∣ever Booty was at any time taken, he divided it all amongst them, and reserved nothing to himsel, but the Darts and the Arms. Amongst other things, whether taken from the Alans, or some other of those Barbarians I know not;
but there was a Horse, which was neither Handsome nor Large, but the Prisoners said, that he was so good a Runner, that he would go a hundred Miles a day, and continue it for eight or ten days together. Every one thought that Probus would have kept this Beast to him∣self: but Probus said, that such a Horse was fitter for one that was for running away, than a brave Man. He ordered the Soldiers to draw Lots for Him. They writ their Names and put them all into an Urn. Four that were in the Army; were of the same Name with himself. But he, for his part, put in no Name. They drew, and the first Name that came up was, Probus. The four Soldiers of the Name of Probus not agreeing to which of them the Horse should go, because each Challenged the Lot, he ordered all the Army to draw a∣gain: the Lot that came up the second time was Probus again, and so it was a third time, and a fourth time. Which was so strange, that all the Army, together with those of that Name who had drawn the Lots, Dedicated the Horse to their Commander Probus. Probus did great things in Africa. He brave∣lyHis Va∣tour. engaged and overcame the Marmori∣cans. He came to the City of Carthage, and cleared that of the Rebels. He fought a sin∣gle Combat with one Aradion in Africa, and slew him; and when he had done, because Aradion was an extraordinary Stout and Re∣solute Man, he honoured him with a great Sepulchre, which is extant yet, two hundred Foot high from the Ground, built by the Sol∣diers;
for those he never suffered to be idle. There are of his Works in several Cities of Egypt, which he built by his Soldiers. He did so many things upon the River of Nile, that he much promoted the Affairs of the Corn, which is Imported into Italy in Tribute yearly from Egypt. He built Bridges, Temples, Por∣tico's, Basilica's, by the Hands of his Soldiers. He opened the Mouths of Rivers in many places, and drained several Fens, which he fitted for Tillage and Pasture. He Fought the Palmyreni, who in the behalf of Odenatus and Zenobia defended Egypt against the Em∣pire. The first time he came off with Suc∣cess. The second time, he was a little Rash, and was near being taken. But afterwards reco∣vering his Strength, he reduced Egypt and the greatest part of the East, unto the Obedience of Aurelian. Since therefore upon the ac∣count of so many and so great Virtues, he shined in the Eyes of the Empire, at the time of the death of Tacitus, though Florianus im∣mediately pretended to succeed his Brother, yet all the Oriental Army declared Probus Em∣peror. The manner of his Elevation may be some∣thingHis Ele∣vation to the Em∣pire. pleasant, which was thus. When the News came of the death of Tacitus, the Forces in the East were for preventing those in Italy, and also for preventing the Senate's making the Emperor a second time. The Question was, whom they should pitch upon. The Tribunes went about the Camp, and discoursed the Soldiers, Maniple by Maniple, and Bat∣talion
by Battalion; Saying, we must have one, who is a Man of Courage, Goodness, Mo∣desty, Clemency, and Probity. Probity to be sure, brought up the Rear of all the Vir∣tues, which they desired to find in him; till repeating the same so often, the whole Army took the Hint, and unanimously, as if they were Inspired to it, cryed a Probus. We Salute Probus our Soveraign; the Gods save your Ma∣jesty. Then they ran and erected a Tribunal of Turf, and took Probus and proclaimed him Emperor, and put upon him a Cloth of Pur∣ple, which was taken for the purpose from off a Statue in the Temple, and from thence they carried him to the Palace; he all the while moving against his will, and drawing back, and often saying to them. Gentlemen, ThisƲnwil∣ling to take it up∣on him. is not Convenient for your selves. You will not do well under me. I cannot flatter with you. The first Letter, which he afterwards sent to Capito, the Captain of the Guards, was this. I have never Coveted the Empire, so I have taken it upon me against my will. It is a most Invidious thing; and yet it is not free for me to help my self. I must Act the Person, that the Army hath imposed upon me. I beseech you, Capito, enjoy, as you do, with me the share, and the Command that you have, in the Interests of the State; and provide Convoys and Provi∣sions, and whatever is necessary every where for the Soldiers. I, for my part, if you take the care, that all things be done well, shall be
glad to have no other Captain of the Guards, than you. The Guards therefore, and the Army in Italy, hearing of the Elevation of Probus, than whom they knew, that no Person was more deserving, they killed Florianus, who had pre∣tendedFlorianus slain. to take upon him the Crown, as it were by Inheritance; and without more Disturbance the whole Empire was deferred to him, by the consent of both the Soldiery and the Senate. For to the latter Probus sent the following Ha∣rangue, which they answered with all the marks possible of Joy and Approbation. Fathers of the Senate, IT was very well, and very regularly done the last Year, that the Roman Emperor was created by your Excellencies, and out of your own Body, who both are, and always have been, and will in your Posterity ever be the Soveraigns of the World. I wish that Florianus had waited for the same again from you; and that he had not Challenged to himself the Empire, as if it was his Inheritance; or, that he or any other Person had been exalted to it by you. But he having seized it on his own Head, and the Army having deferred it to us, and punished upon him an at∣tempt in which he did Usurp, I refer my self wholly to the Commands of your Excellencies to judge of my Deservings, and to do with me as you please.
The Senate being met upon the third day of the Nones of February, in the Temple of Concord, passed the Act in the favour of Probus, in this manner. The Consul Aelius Scorpianus, said to them. Gentlemen, You have heard the Letter of Au∣relius Valerius Probus. What say you to it. They cried, The Gods save the Emperor Pro∣bus. We welcome his Majesty to the Crown. You have been long a worthy, Brave, Just, and Good Commander and General. As you are an Ex∣ample to the Army, be an Example to the Empire. The Gods save you. Reign in Happiness; an As∣sertor of the State, and a Master of War, Reign in Happiness. The Gods preserve you and your The Senate had already Chosen you in their minds. You come after Tacitus in respect to the Age which you are of; but you are before all in all things else. We thank you, that you have under∣taken the Empire. Defend us, defend it. We may well commit our selves to you, who have already preserved us. A Conqueror of the Franks, Goths, Sarmathins, Parthians: you are all things, and always have been worthy of the Empire, wor∣thy of Triumphs. Proceed and Reign in all Hap∣piness.
Then Manlius Statianus, who was the eldest Senator, spoke thus. Fathers of the Senate, THanks to the Immortal Gods, and above the rest to the most excellent Jupiter, who hath given us such a Prince, as we have ever wisht to enjoy. If we consider it well, we have no want now of either Aurelian, or Alexander Severus, or the Antoninusses or Trajan, or Claudius. We have all things, and all their Vir∣tues in this one Prince. The knowledge of War, Clemency, a good Life, an exemplar of a Patriot, and Bravery to the highest Perfection. What part of the World is there, to which he hath not made known his Victorious Arms? witness the Marmoricans in Africk, vanquished by him; witness the Franks, whom he hath overthrown in their own unpassable Fens; witness the Ger∣mans and the Almains; whom how far hath he repulsed from the Banks of the Rhine? What shall I say more of the Sarmatians, the Goths, the Parthians, and all the Country upon the Euxine? Every where do the Trophies of the Va∣lour of Probus flourish. It would be too long to tell how many Kings of great Nations hath he put to flight? What Captains hath he killed with his own hand? What numbers of Arms hath he taken in his time? The Letters of our Emperors which are upon the Records, shew what Publick thanks, he hath received from all those for his signal Ser∣vices. My good Gods! How many times hath be been crowned with the Military rewards? What Elogiums hath he had from the Soldiers?
Whilst he was but a Youth, he was a Tribune of the Auxiliaries; and not long after, he was made the same in the Roman Legions. Wherefore, thou most excellent and most powerful Jupiter, and Juno the Queen, and thou Minerva the President of Arts, and thou the Goddess Concord, and the Goddess Victory, grant ye this Favour to the Se∣nate and People of Rome, to our Allies, and to Foreign Nations, that Probus may Reign as Hap∣pily, as he hath served. I, Gentlemen, with all your Consents, do Decree to him the Style and Title of our Caesar and our Emperor; and I add thereto the Proconsular Power, the Honour of the Title of Father of our Country, the Soveraign Pon∣tificate, the right of a third Reference, and the Tribunitian Power. They cried, We all, all, say the same; and so the House rise. Probus having received this Act of the Se∣nate, sent a second Letter to them; by which he permitted them to Judge of Appeals; to Create the Proconsuls; to Create Lieutenants with Consular Power, over Legatorian Pro∣vinces; and Presidents with the Power of Prae∣tors; to Confirm and Consecrate by their De∣crees, the Acts which he thought fit to make himself. Then he by several ways punished as many as were yet alive, of the Murderers of Au∣relian; and yet he did it with more Tenderness, and more Moderation, than either the Army, or Tacitus had done before. He punished also those who had been the Murderers of Tacitus. He pardoned the Accomplices of Florianus; because he thought, because he thought that
they followed him not as an Usurper, but as their last Princes Brother. He accepted the Obedience of all the European Forces, that had made Florianus Emperor, and killed him when they had done. In the next place he set out with a Puissant Army for Gallia; which first fell into Confusion upon the Death of Post humius; but was over-run with the Germans since the death of Aurelian. He fought thereProbus his Successes against the Barba∣rians. several great and happy Battels; insomuch that he recovered sixty Noble Cities which were fallen into the Hands of the Barbarians: He retook all the Prey beside, and all the Riches which they had sucked out of the People, and vaunted themselves insolently in: he slew of them, whilst they were roaring up and down the Country in security, as far as to the Bor∣ders of Italy, nigh four hundred thousand, and the remainder he drove beyond the Rivers of Elbe and Necker. He took as much Booty from them, as they had before taken from the Romans; besides which he planted Roman Colonies and Garrisons on the Barbarian Soil, and placed his Soldiers upon them. He assigned Fields, Barns, Houses and Maga∣zines for all the Forces, which he fixt on the other side of the Rhine: Heads of the Barba∣rians were daily brought to him at the Price of a Crown of Gold a Head: nor did he forbear his Pursuit of them, till Nine of their Petty Kings of several Nations came, and threw themselves at his Feet: from whom he first de∣manded Hostages, which were presently given: hen Corn: Cattel and Sheep: some say, he
commanded them, not to use a Sword again, but to expect the defence of the Roman Arms, in case they were attack'd by any Enemy. But this is so hard, that I think it cannot be; unless the Conquests of the Romans had been more extended, and all Germany had been re∣duced into a Province. However he severely punished such with the consent of those Roy∣telets themselves, as continued to keep back any of the Spoil, which they had taken upon the Roman Provinces, and did not faithfully re∣turn it. He accepted of a Draught of sixteen thousand Young and Fresh Men out of the Forces of these Barbarians; which he dispersed into several Provinces of the Empire, and in∣serted them into the Legions, and into the Garrisons upon the Frontiers, by about fifty or sixty in a Legion; saying, That though it is good for the Romans to serve themselves of the assistances of the Barbarians, yet that assistance ought rather to be felt, than seen. So having settled the State of Gallia, he sent the following Let∣ter to the Senate. Fathers of the Senate, I Give thanks to the Immortal Gods, that they have approved and justified your Judgements, in your Choice of me: all that broad and extended Country of Germany is subjugated. Nine Kings of the several Nations have in the humblest man∣ner cast themselves at my Feet. Nay rather, I should say, it is at your Feet. They all now Plow, and Sow for you; and they fight for you against the rest of your Enemies. You will therefore ap∣point
the Processions and Thanksgivings to the Gods as usual. Four hundred thousand of the Enemy are slain; and sixteen thousand others, with their Arms, are come into our Service. Sixty Noble Cities are recovered out of the Slavery of the Enemy, and all Gallia is entirely set at Liber∣ty. The Crowns of Gold, which all the Cities of Gallia have presented me with upon this occa∣sion, I have remitted to you, my Fathers, to be by your Hands Consecrated to the most Excellent, and most mighty Jupiter, and the rest of the Im∣mortal Gods and Goddesses. All the Spoil, which they had taken from us, is retaken, and a great deal more and better to it. The Fields of Gallia are plowed with the Cattle of the Barbarians, and the German Beasts yield their Captive Necks to our Yoaks. All their Sheep graze now upon our Pasture, and their Horse are with our Horse, and our Barns are full with their Corn. What shall I say more? If we have left the bare Soil perhaps, it is all: their Goods are all in our Pos∣session. We have been sometime thinking, my Fa∣thers, to appoint a new President of Germany. But we have deferred it, as yet to another op∣portunity, when the Divine Providence shall still further have prospered our Arms. From Gallia, he went into Illyricum, In his way to which he so secured and established the Peace of Rhaetia, as not to leave the least suspi∣ion of any Danger from thence. In Illyri∣um,His Con∣quest of the Sar∣matians. he so severely beat the Sarmatians, and others who had thrust themselves in there, that e easily recovered all the Places and Spoil,
which they possessed, without almost making more War. He carried his Arms into Thrace and Dacia where all that Gothick People, af∣frighted with only the Fame of his Actions, and seeing the antient Power of the Empire revived in him, submitted to him, and became his Friends. Then he went into the East, he took and slew, in his way, a Robber, of great Power, called Palfrurius; which was a means of the recovery of all the Province of Isauris in the Lesser Asia, to the Obedience of the Laws of the Romans. He entred either by force or friendship into the Places possessed by the Barbarians in that Province; and when he had done, he said, it was a Country in which, it was easier to drive the Robbers that infe∣sted it, from one place to another, than to extirpate them, and to rid the Country of them. All the Avenues and Straights he gave to be enjoyed and inhabited by Veterans, and Super∣annuated Soldiers, under a Law, that they should send their Sons to the War at the Age of Eighteen, lest they take to be Robbers, be∣fore they come to be Soldiers. He reduced unto a peaceable subjection allHis Ea∣stern Ex∣pedition. the parts of Pamphylia, and the other Pro∣vinces adjoyning to Isauria, and so followed his Journey into the East. He Conquered the Blemmyae, of whom he sent some Prisoners to Rome, who were a wonderful Spectacle and an Admiration there to all the People. The Cities of Coptos and Ptolemais in Egypt he took, and delivered them from the Barbarian Yoak, and adjoyned them to the Empire. The Fame
whereof wrought so upon the Persians, that they sent Embassadours to him, confes∣sing the fears which they conceived of his Arms, and desiring a Peace. He received those Embassadours very proudly, and sent them home with worse thoughts than they came. He refused the Presents, which they brought him from the King their Master, and writ thereupon this Letter to Narseus, the Go∣vernor of Armenia, for the King of Persia. ALL that you have, will be mine; I won∣der therefore, that you should think to gra∣tifie me with such a Handful of things. You may please to take to your self again, what you so much delight in: when we would have them, we know how we ought to possess our selves of them. This Letter was a matter of great Conster∣nation to Narseus, especially as it was accom∣panied with the News of the taking of the Cities of Coptos and Ptolemais from the Blem∣myae, and the putting those People to the Slaughter; who before had made themselves a Terror to all their Neighbours. After the Peace of Persia, Probus returned again into Thrace; where, upon the Lands of the Roman Empire he planted one hundred thousand of the Bastarnae, who all kept their Faith with him: but others of the Barbarian Nations, of whom he transplanted great num∣bers in like manner, that is, of the Gepidi, the Grothungi, and the Vandals, all these broke their
Faith, and whilst Probus was imployed in the Wars with Saturninus, and those who pre∣tended to Usurp the Empire from him, they rose, and found a means to over-run almost all parts, by Sea or Land, to the trouble and the dishonour of the Roman Name; till Pro∣bus at length by several turns set upon them, overcame them, and oppressed them, and left to few of them the happiness of getting home in safety. These were his Actions with the Barba∣rians. His other Troubles were such, as he suffered from the attempts of particular am∣bitious Subjects, who were for setting them∣selvesHis inte∣stine Troubles. up for the Empire: one of whom was Saturninus, who usurped the Empire of the East, and who engaged Probus in several Bat∣tels; till Probus by his known Gallantry over∣came him, and with the same Conquest esta∣blished such a firm Peace in the East, that not a Mouse dared to stir more there. The others who pretended to the Empire in like manner, were Proculus and Bonosus at the City of Co∣logne; who challenged to themselves all the Provinces of Britain, Spain, and Gallia. But the Germans refused to assist them in their En∣terprize. The Arms of Probus prevailed over both these, of whom, as also of Saturninus and Firmus, a more particular account will follow afterwards by themselves. After this, Probus permitted to all Gallia, Spain, and Pannonia, the liberty of Planting Vines, and making Wine: he set his own Soldiers upon digging the Mountain Almus, which is by the City
Sirmium in the Lower Pannonia, and he planted it himself with an excellent Grape. Coming to Rome, he entertained the PeopleHis Re∣turn to Rome. there with the Publick Games and Pastimes in a manner which was very magnificent; be∣sides the Largesses, which he gave amongst them. He Celebrated a Triumph for his Con∣quest of the Blemmyae, and the Germans in which he had Troops, to the number of fifty in a Troop, of Men of all Nations that marched before him. He gave an Entertain∣ment of a Chase of Beasts in the Cirque, which was very Generous. The People first Hunted, and then shared the Beasts amongst them. The manner of it was thus; the whole Cirque was turned into the nature of a Forest. Great Trees pulled up by the Roots by the Soldiers, were Planted up and down, on Beams co∣vered with Earth, the Trees green and fresh: and then by the several Passages which opened into the Cirque, entred a thousand Ostriches, a thousand Stags, a thousand Boars, a thou∣sand Deer, Evecks, wild Sheep, and other Her∣batick Animals of as many kinds as could be had; all which the Populace being let in upon them, encountred, and killed, and took every one what they could. Another day he caused a hundred great Lions to enter into the Cirque at once, who raised a sort of Thun∣der with their Roaring. All these were killed upon the place, and in these Encounters many of the Men, that fought with the Beasts, by accident have killed one another. Then came forth a hundred Libyan Leopards, a hundred
other Syrian Leopards, a hundred Lionesses, and three hundred Bears; the sight of all which was not to be said so grateful, as it was great. Next appeared three hundred couple of Gladiators, amongst which were several of the Blemmyae, who had been led in Tri∣umph, several Germans and Sarmatians, and some also of the Robbers that had been taken and brought out of the Province of Isauria. After these things, as Probus was preparing for a War with Persia, and was come, on his way, as far as to the City Sirmium in Sclavoni,His Death and the Occasion. the Soldiers plotted together and killed him. The occasions whereof were these. First be∣cause he never suffered them to lie idle: for he employed them upon many other Works, besides those of the War, which he finished by their Hands; and said, that Soldiers ought not to eat the Bread of the Country for no∣thing. The next thing was, that he said, that he hoped in a short time he would make it so, that the State should have no need of Soldiers. Which is a great saying, and expres∣ses an extraordinary force of Spirit. Have no more need of Soldiers! Why, what is it but to say, that the Romans shall universally Reign and Possess all things in safety? Secure of the whole Earth for their Empire, there shall be no more of making Arms, nor gathering Maga∣zines, nor Convoying Provisions; the Ox shall be kept for the use of the Plow, and the Horse for the Services of Peace; an Univer∣sal Peace! There shall be no more Wars, no
leading into Captivity; the Laws of the Ro∣mans and their Magistrates shall every where prevail in vigour. My Affection to so excel∣len an Emperor would Transport me further, than the Quality of the Style in which I write, does require or permit. But I shall only add a third thing, which above all hastened the Fa∣tal End of this Great Man. When he came to Sirmium, desiring to Fructisie and to Dilate the Borders of the place of his Nativity, he set several thousands of his Soldiers upon the drayning a Fen; which was to be done by making a great Foss to receive the Waters, and exonerate them by an Out-let into the Sea; and so the Ground might become of use to the People of Sirmium. The Fatigue of this Piece of Work so inraged the Soldiers, that they as∣saulted him; and as he fled for safety into an Iron Tower, which himself had built there for a Watch-Tower very high, they killed him in the fifth year of his Reign: however afterwards the Army unanimously built him a lofty Sepulchre, whereon in Marble was In∣graved this Inscription: Here lies the Emperor Probus; who was a Prince of true Probity, ac∣cording to his Name. The Conqueror of all the Barbarian Nations, and the Conqueror of the Pre∣tenders to the Empire in his time. When I compare the Emperor Probus with others of the Roman Princes his Predecessors, and almost with all our Great Captains of the former time, whose Fortitude; whose Cle∣mency; whose Prudence; whose extraordina∣ry Actions have signalized them to Posterity.
I am apt to think that this Person was equal to them, or if I may speak it without envy, he excelled them. In the five years of his Reign, he finished so many Wars, in so many several parts of the World, and all in his own Person, that it is a wonderful thing, which way he rendred himself sufficient for all those occasi∣ons. He did many Valiant Actions in Battle with his own Hand. He formed several fa∣mous Commanders. Carus, Dioclesian, Con∣stantius, Asclepiodotus, Annibalian, Leonides, Ce∣cropius, Pisonianus, Herennian, Gaudiosus, Ur∣sinian, Herculius, Maximian, and others whom our Fathers have admired, and of whom some have since approved themselves good Princes upon the Throne, were All formed by the Discipline of Probus. Now let any one, who pleases, compare with this the twenty years of the Reigns of Trajan and Hadrian: let him compare as many of the Antoninusses; or what shall I say, of the Emperor Augustus, because the years of his Reign are scarce very well de∣termined? Not to mention all such as have been ill Princes! That famous Expression a∣lone of Probus, That in a short time there should be no need of Soldiers, shews his vast design, and what he hoped to have been able to ef∣fect. He feared neither the Barbarians abroad, nor Usurpers at home; he was assured of his own Conscience. And to what a happiness had we all arrived, if he had lived to make good his words? to have seen all the Provinces free from Taxes, no Army to pay, the Roman Treasures abiding Eternal and unexhaustible,
nothing spent by the Prince, nothing taken upon the Subject! Certainly it would have been a golden Age. We had had no more to do with Camps: no more of the noise of Arms, nor of the Hammering them: The Soldiers that now disquiet the State with Civil-War, would have Cultivated the Fields or followed Navigation, or sought their Employs in the Arts, and no more blood shed! Ye good Gods, in what hath the Roman State offended you so, that have taken from us such an Excellent Prince. We now run upon Civil-Wars, and Arm Brother against Brother, and the Son against the Father: but well have our Em∣perors done to Consecrate Probus a God, and set up his Image in the Temples, and to Cele∣brate him in the Procession to the Games of the Cirque. The Posterity of Probus, to avoid Odium orHis Po∣sterity withdraw from Rome. Envy, retired from Rome and Publick Business, and placed themselves about the City Verona, and the Lakes di Garda and Como, and those parts. I cannot omit to observe, that when an Image of Probus at Verona was so struck with Lightning, that the Robe, in which he was done, changed its Colour, the Soothsayers answered thereupon, that those of his Family should be all of them one day of great Note in the Senate, and come to be raised unto the highest Honours: which may perhaps here∣after be; but we see nothing of it as yet. The Senate received the News of the death of Probus with great displeasure, and so did the People. But when they heard of the Succes∣sion
of Carus in his place, who though he was a good Man, was far distant however from the Merits of Probus, and had a Son beside, (Carinus) that had always lived ill; both the Senate and the People were struck with a hor∣rour; because they apprehended the humour of the Father a little; but his wicked Heir much worse. This is what we have met with, and have thought worthy to be committed to future Me∣mory, concerning Probus. It remains, that we give next a short, but a distinct account of Firmus, Saturninus, Bonosus, and Proculus. Be∣cause it was not fit to mix those four Preten∣ders to the Empire, together with the account of this good Prince. Afterwards, if my Life serves me, I may undertake the History of Carus and his Son.
FIRMUS. IT is very seldom I know, that we find, that any particular Account is given of such Petit Emperors, as Usurping that Name, have set up themselves in vain against the Received Prince, in some parts or other of the Roman Empire. The most that is done is to touch lightly upon them in a word, en Passant, after the manner with which Suetonius Tran∣quillus contents himself, who is a very Correct and very Candid Writer, in relation to Anto∣nius and Vindex. Nor do I admire at this in such an Historian as Suetonius, to whom it was familiar, to love Brevity. But why Marius Maximus, who is the most Verbose of all Men, and who hath not forborn to embarass himself with tedious Accounts of things, and to de∣scend even to Fictions and Fables, to fill up his History; why he hath not been more par∣ticular than he is, in his Descriptions of Avidius Cassius, Claudius Albinus, and Pescennius Niger, who pretended to the Empire, the first against the Emperor Marcus Antoninus, the others a∣gainst Septimius Severus, I do not understand? On the contrary, Trebellius Pollio hath thought fit to be so diligent and so careful in his Col∣lections
as to those Princes, whether Good or Bad, undertaken by him, that he hath laid to∣gether a separate History of Thirty Pretenders to the Empire, who set up themselves in, or much about the Times of the Emperors Gal∣lienus and Valerian. And in imitation of his Example, since I have already passed through the Trouble of the Reigns of Aurelian, Tacitus, Florianus, and that great and singular Prince Probus, I am very willing before I proceed to those of Carus, Numerian, and Carinus, who succeeded the next to the Empire, not to omit to say something of Firmus, Saturninus, Procu∣lus, and Bonosus, who set up themselves in the time of the Emperors Probus and Aurelian. You know, my dear Bassus, what a Dispute we lately had with one, who is a great lover of History, that is, M. Fonteius; when he said, that Firmus, who possessed himself of Aegypt in the time of Aurelian, was a Robber and not a Prince. Against which, I, together with me Rufus Celsus, Cejonius Julianus, Fabius Sosianus, and Severus Archontius, affirmed, that Firmus did both actually wear the Purple, as a Prince, and had a Coin stamped in his Name, whereof some Pieces were produced, and also by the Grecian and the Aegyptian Writings it appears, that in the Edicts which he published, he is remarked by the Title of Emperor. The only Reason which Fonteius had to offer against this, was; That Aurelian did not say in his Edict, speaking of Firmus, that he had killed a Tyrant or a Pseudo Emperor, but that he had deliver'd the State of a Robber. As if it could
be expected, that so Renowned a Prince as Au∣relian should have given him any better Name. Or, as if all great Princes did not call those Robbers, who Invade their Crowns, and are beaten besides in the Attempt. Not but that, I remember very well, that in the Life of Aurelian, I have represented Firmus, as one, who did not pretend to the Purple, as an Emperor. For I must confess, that when I writ that, it was, be∣cause I had not then the knowledge of all the things concerning him, which I have attained to since. But to be short; Firmus was a Native of the City of Seleucia. Several Grecian Writers do give him to ano∣ther place indeed; but that is a mistake, into which they are led by this, that there are three at the same time of the same Name of Firmus; whereof one was the Governour of Aegypt; the other a Proconsul and a General on the Frontiers of Africa: But this Firmus was a Friend and an Associate of the Lady Zenobia; for whom he, with the assistance of the Ae∣gyptians, took the City of Alexandria, and was at length happily defeated by Aurelian, and the wonted bravery of that Prince. There are many things reported of the Riches of this Firmus. It is said, that he had the WallsVast Wealth of Fir∣mus. of his House Wainscoted with Squares of Glass, fastned by Bitumen, and other Medicaments. He was the Master of so much of the Manu∣facture of Paper, that he often publickly said, he could maintain an entire Army out of only Paper and Glue. He entertained a great Friend∣ship with the Blemmyae and the Saracens. He
sent Ships of Merchandize oftentimes into India. He had two Elephant's Teeth, ten Foot long; with which, and two others added to them, Aurelian who took them, designed to make a Chair, wherein to place a Statue of Jupiter in Gold, covered with Jewels and a Robe of State, and illustrated with Inscriptions: Which Statue was to be set up in the Temple of the Sun, and to be entitled, Jupiter the giver of Good Counsel. But Carinus afterwards posses∣sing himself of those Teeth, made a Present of them to a certain Lady, who used them for the Feet of a Bed. I say no more, because we of this Age know her; and for Posterity, it it signifies nothing. But thus that Indian Rarity, which was Consecrated to the most Excellent and Mighty Jupiter, was by a lewd Prince made at once the Purchase of a Mistress, and the Scene of the Exercise of her too. Firmus was of a large Stature, with greatHis Perso∣nage. and prominent Eyes, frizled Hair, Scars and Wounds on his Face, a blackish Visage, the rest of his Body fair enough, but Hairy and Bristly; so that a great many called him a Cy∣clops. He eat a vast deal of Flesh; some say, a whole Ostrich in a day. He drunk not much Wine, but very much Water; and was a Man of a strong Brain and so robust Nerves, that one might allow him to be stronger than the Gladiator Tritannus in Varro. For he would bear a Smith's Anvil, with Persons with all their force knocking upon it, upon his Breast, as he lay bent in his Body backwards, and only rest∣ing upon his Hands and Feet, without touching
the ground with his Back. There was once a dispute betwixt him and some of the Officers of Aurelian about Drinking. Burburus, a most noted Drinker, and an old Soldier, challenged him to Drink with him. Firmus drank up two large Vessels full of Wine, and remained all the time after sober. Says Burburus to him, Why have you not drank up the very Grounds too? You silly Creature, answer'd Firmus, no body drinks Earth. This Firmus therefore assumed to himself the Quality of an Emperor, in opposition to Au∣relian; and maintained the Parts which as yet were remaining to Zenobia in the East. Aurelian beat him, in his return from Heren in Mesopo∣tamia. Some say, Firmus afterwards HangedHis De∣feat and Death. himself. But this is disproved by the Edict of Aurelian, which he sent to Rome, together with the Notice of his Victory, which was thus. The Emperor Aurelian to his most dearly beloved People of Rome, sendeth Greeting. WE have reduced all the Parts of the Ro∣man World whatever, unto a peaceable subjection to us. Firmus the Aegyptian Robber, who was in motion with a Company of Barbarians, and was gathering up the reliques of the Forces of Zenobia, in short, we have defeated, taken him, and killed him. There is nothing more for you, my Romans, now to be afraid of. The Tri∣bute
of Aegypt, which that wicked Robber had suspended, will now come entire to you. Be you at Concord with the Senate, and in good Amity with the Gentry, and the Soldiers of the Guards. I will take care, that nothing shall hurt you. Enter∣tain your selves at the Pastimes and the Shews of the Cirque. Follow your Pleasures, whilst we are taken up with the Necessities of the State. Where∣fore, my most Excellent Romans, and so he goe on with his Edict. This, Sir, is what you may know, we have collected, that is worthy of Remembrance, concerning Firmus. If you would desire to un∣derstand further all the light and frivolou things which Aurelius Festivus, a Servant of the Emperor Aurelian, hath written of him, I must refer you to read that Author your self. I come next to Saturninus, who set up for the Empire against Probus, in the Parts of the East.
SATURNINUS. SATURNINUS was by Nation a French∣man, who are a most Unquiet sort of People, and always ambitious of setting up for Empire. This Man, being known to Aurelian to be an excellent Commander, was preferred by that Emperor to be the General on the Orien∣tal Frontier. At the same time he wisely commanded him, never to see Aegypt. For reflecting, as it is thought, upon the Nature of the Gauls on the one hand, and of the Aegyp∣tians on the other, he was afraid, that should Saturninus come amongst so troublesome a People as those of the Aegyptians, he might by their Conversation be spurred on to those Attempts, to which his French Genius it self enough inclined him. The Aegyptians, you know very well, are aCharacter of the E∣gyptians. Ventose, Outragious, Proud, Injurious sort of People, Loose, Libertines, lovers of Novelties; they will dare to sing Seditious Songs publickly in the Streets; Versifiers upon the Persons of their Princes and Magistrates; Astrologers, Soothsayers, Empiricks, sometimes Christians, sometimes Jews, always displeased with the
present Times, against which they give them∣selves a strange Liberty. I would not have any Aegyptian to blame me for this Character, nor think that I write it of my own head; for I will insert here a Letter of the Emperor Hadrian, which I have met with in the Books of Phlegon, who was a Servant to him, that fully detects the Lives of the Aegyptians. The Emperor Hadrian unto Servianus the Consul, Greeting. I Have given my self a perfect Understanding of Aegypt; which you, my well beloved Ser∣vianus, did sometime recommend to me. They are a light inconstant People, always in suspenc, and changing at every stroke of Fame. Those, who Worship the God Serapis, are nevertheless Christians; and Men who call themselves the Bi∣shops of Christ, are Votaries to Serapis too. Then is no Ruler of the Synagogues of the Jews, no Sa∣maritan, no Presbyter of the Christians, no Astro∣loger, no Soothsayer, no Physician, but he Worships Serapis. The Patriarch himself of Alexandria when he comes hither, is by some obliged to adore Serapis, by others to adore Christ. A sort of Me they are, extreamly Seditious, Vain and Injurious: Alexandria it self is Splendid, Rich, and Fruit∣ful; no body lives Idle in it. Some make Glass, others Paper; others work on Linen: every on appears to be of one Art or other. Not so much a the Gouty, either in Hand or Foot, but are employ∣ed, and have something that they do. The Blin
are employed. Serapis is a common God to them all. Him the Christians, the Jews, and Persons of all Nations Worship. I wish that it was a bet∣ter govern'd City. It deserves certainly, by its Po∣pulousness and Magnitude, to hold the Reins of all Aegypt. I have granted to this City all things. I have restored it to its antient Privileges, and have added new ones to them; for which they thanked me, whilst I was present with them; but I was no sooner. departed, but they spoke a thou∣sand things against my Son Aelius Verus, and what they have said concerning Antinous, I believe you have heard. So I leave them to their Eggs and Chickens; which how they Hatch, that is in a Dunghil, it is a shame almost to mention. I have sent you three Aegyptian Cups of changeable Co∣lours, which a Priest of the Temple made a Present of to me. I dedicate them particularly to you and my Sister: I would have you to use them upon the Festival Days, and take care that your young Son does not handle them too roughly and break them. So the Emperor Aurelian reflecting upon this various and unsteady Temper of the Aegyptians, commanded Saturninus not to come amongst them, to avoid the consequences which he fore∣saw, might follow upon it, if he did. In which he was in the right. For no sooner did the Ae∣gyptians see him afterwards in Power, in the time of Probus, but they cryed, We make Saturninus Emperor, The Gods save your Majesty. It is true, he prudently retired presently from Alex∣andria again, and went into Palestina. But finding there, that it was not safe for him to
live after this in the Quality of a private Man, he suffered the Soldiers that were about him to put upon him the Purple, and adore him as Emperor. The Purple was a Cloak, taken off for the purpose of a Statue of Venus. My Grand∣father was in the Company when he was Ado∣red: I have often heard him speak of it. Sa∣turninus, he said, wept, and expressed himself thus: If I may speak it without Arrogance, the Go∣vernment hath lost an useful Subject. It is cer∣tain, I have re-established Gallia. I have reci∣vered Africa out of the possession of the Moors. I have appeased Spain. But what's this? It is all lost, and the Merit of it will be abolished by this one Honour, which you unhappily affect to give me. The Company that was about him, anima∣ting him on to the Enterprize, he said; You know not, my Friends, what a troublesome thing it is to be a Prince? Drawn Swords by no∣thing but a Hair hang over our Heads; every where Poniards and Darts threaten us. Our Guards, our Companions themselves are fear'd by us. We eat not our Meat with pleasure, and we are forced to Wars and Arms, many times, con∣trary to our Judgments. Whatever one's Age is, to be sure, it meets with Reproaches upon the Throne. Is a Man Old? he is disabled, and past Service. Is he Young? he is Wild and Rash. What shall I say of Probus, who is so universally Amiable? For whilst you make me Rival to him, to whom I willingly Cede, and whose Officer I desire rather to be, you draw me into a necessity of Destruction. I shall have only this Comfort, that I cannot perish alone.
This, says M. Salvidienus, was truly his Speech. Indeed he was one, who had no small knowledge of Letters. He had studied Rhetorick in Africa, and at Rome he had fre∣quented the publick Academies. To be short, I see some are mistaken about him, to think, that he was the Saturninus who pretended to the Empire in the time of Gallienus, whereas this was altogether another Person. This Satur∣ninus was set up in the time of Probus, and killed against almost the inclinations of that Prince. For Probus writ several kind Letters to him, and promised him his Pardon. But the Soldi∣ers who were about him, would not give him leave to hearken to those Offers. So the Party of Probus, which was sent against him, besiegedSaturninus slain. him in some Castle in which he was, and killed him in the Action. It would be tedious to descend to all the particulars of his Stature, his Person, his Shape, his Eating and Drinking, which others may, that please, trouble them∣selves about, though the Example of them scarce signifies any thing. But I shall proceed to the following Account of Proculus and Bonosus.
PROCULUS. PROCƲLUS was a Native of the City of Albenga, in the Republick of Genoa, amongst the Maritime Alpes; of a Gen∣tleman'sHis Ex∣traction and Wealth. Family: but as well himself, as his Ancestors, were great Robbers; so that what with the Cattel, the Slaves, and such things as he had gotten by that means, he was very Rich. It is said, that at that time that he took upon him the Empire, he Armed two thousand of his own Slaves. He had a Virago to his Wife, who precipi∣tated him into the Madness of putting up for the Empire. Her Name was at first Viturgia; afterwards she was called Sampson. They had a Son called Herennianus; to whom if Proculus could have supported himself in his Enterprize but five Years, he said, he would have secured the Empire after him. It cannot be denied, but that Proculus was an extraordinary and a very brave Man; and had always passed his Life under Arms. He had Commanded in the Quality of a Tribune over several Legions, and had done Actions of great Valour. Not to omit a pleasant Pas∣sage, which he glories in, in the following Letter, which I had rather give you in his own words, than represent it my self.
Proculus to Maetianus his Kinsman, wisheth Health I Have taken Captive out of the Country of Sar∣matia one hundred Virgins. Ten of which I lay with in one Night. To the best of my power, in fifteen days, I have made Women of them all. This is a Ridiculous Action you see, and ex∣tremely Libidinous, and yet he glories in it, and reckons as a fine thing, what was other∣wise his Crime. However, being, notwith∣standing his Wickedness and his Lewdness, a considerable Officer, and one that acquit∣ted himself always with great Courage, the Colony of Lyons in France, who had been se∣verely Treated by the Emperor Aurelian, and were very much afraid again of Probus, so∣liciting him to it, he set himself up to be Emperor. Onesimus says, which I do not re∣member that I have read in any one else, That he was made Emperor in Raillery, as it were, first at a Game of Chess. For being one day at an Entertainment, at Play at Chess, in which he went out King ten times, one of the Com∣pany who wanted not Wit, saluted him upon it as Emperor, and said, The Gods save your Majesty. And setching him a piece of Purple, put it upon him, and then Adored him. This gave occasion to the Company that was privy to it, to joyn with him, and they went next to gain the Army, and so set up for the Empire.
Proculus was not a little serviceable to the Gauls. For though he never fought, but in the way of the Brigundages, which he conti∣nually committed, he gained himself and them some glory over the Germans. Probus coming against him, and ready to drive him almost out of the World, he desired to take Refuge in the assistance of the Frank; from whom he pretended to derive his Origi∣nal. But as it is familiar with the Franks to break their Faith, and make no more than a Jest of it, they betrayed him, and so ProbusHe is slain. overcame him and slew him. His Posterity are at this time living at Albenga, who in raillery will often say, that they neither like being Robbers, nor Princes. So much concerning Proculus. BONOSUS. BONOSUS was of a House of Spain,His Ex∣traction. but Born in Britain. His Mother a Gaulese or a French Woman. His Fa∣ther either a Professor in Rhetorick, as he (the Son) said, or as I have found from others, a Grammarian; who dying when this his Son was very young, his Mother, who was a Wo∣man of Wit, educated him and taught him something of Letters.
He served as a Soldier first in the Foot, and afterwards in the Horse. He rose to be a Cen∣turion, then to be a Tribune, and at last to be the General on the Frontier of Rhaetia. No Man ever drank like Bonosus. The Emperor Aurelian said often of him. ThatHis Abili∣ty at Drinking. certainly he was born, not to say to Live, but particularly to live to Drink. That Emperor however long had him in esteem, because of his experience in the matter of War. And when any Embassadors arrived from the Barbarian Nations of what Parts soever, it was the busi∣ness of Bonosus to drink with them, till in their drink he discover'd out of them many times their secrets. For Bonosus, let him drink to what excess he would, was never concerned: But on the contrary, as Onesimus says in his Life of Probus, he was even the more prudent and more discreet for drinking. Withal he had this particular Quality with him, that as much as he drank, it passed from him again. It never was any burden to his Stomach, or his Belly, or his Bladder. It happening one time, that the Germans had burnt the Shipping which the Romans used upon the River Rhine, Bonosus, to avoid the punishment which he feared for his Neglect in that matter, set up himself Emperor. He supported himself with that Quality longer than it was well to be expected. He engagedHis De∣feat and Death. the Emperor Probus in a severe Battel: but being overcome, he Hanged himself; and they Jested upon him, and said, It is a Hogshead, and not a Man, that hangs here.
He left two Sons, and a Wife. The Sons, Probus forgave. The Wife he was very obliging to, and allowed her a Pension to her death. For besides, that she was a Woman, as my Grandfather hath said, of Wit and of singular Merit; she was a Princess of the Royal Blood of the Goths, and one whom the Emperor Au∣relian had purposely married to Bonosus, that through her and him he might the better pe∣netrate into all the Affairs of the Goths. I will give you here a Letter of Aurelian written to the Lieutenant of Thrace, concerning that Marriage, and the Presents which Aurelian gave upon this occasion. The Emperor Aurelian to Gallio Avitus, Greeting. I Writ to you in my last, to Assemble the Persons of Quality of the Goths, at the City of Heracla, for whom I have order'd an Entertainment. For I have a mind that Hunila shall be Married to Bonosus. You shall present the Bride with all things, according to the underwritten Order, and you shall Celebrate the Nuptials out of the Publick Money. The Presents were, Fine Gowns of a Violet Colour, of Silk: one of Silk, embroider'd with Gold. Two fine Smocks, and all such other things as are proper for a Lady of Quality. You shall give her one hundred Philips in Gold, One thousand Antonines in Silver, and Ten thousand Sesterces in Brass.
This is what I remember, that I have read as to Bonosus. I might have omitted all these four last Persons, and perhaps no body would have missed them. But because I would not be wanting in any thing to my Trust, I have taken the care of intimating as much as I have been able to learn, concerning these also. The remaining Princes, are Carus, Nume∣rianus and Carinus: For as for Dioclesian and those that follow, it is fit, that they should be Represented by a better Pen than mine.
THEA. Christi Cclxxxiii. Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR CARUS. BY FLAVIUS VOPISCUS. HOW the Power of Fate reigns over the Commonwealth of Rome, and sometimes raises it to the greatest heighth, and then humbles it again, and throws it down as much the other way; the Death of the Emperor Probus is a suffici∣cient demonstration. Probus had succeeded to the Empire after Aurelian, by the joynt Voice of the Senate and the People; and
whilst the Laws and the Government were lodged in so just a Hand, we seemed secure, considering that we had now enjoyed a few good Reigns together of a continued Series of Happiness to relieve the State, after all the dif∣ferent Calamities, and after so many changes of Fortune with which it had been tossed and varied in the course of time, in that manner, that it hath suffered almost all the Events which are incident to any Man, by the Mor∣tality of his Nature. But by a fatal Passion of the Soldiers, this so acceptable Emperor, Probus, was cut off; whose loss was so great, that we were no less struck at it, than a Man in a Fire or in a Shipwrack; and the Publick was reduced to that despair, as that every one feared the Succession of some Domitian, Vitellius or Nero in his place. It is natural at any time rather to have Fears than Hopes from the manners of an uncertain Prince: But especially well might a People do so, whose Wounds were yet green, and who not long since had had one of their Emperors (Valerian) carried into Captivity; another (Gal∣lienus) given up to Luxury, and about Thirty pretended Princes, in the mean time starting up, and rending the Empire in Pieces by a Ci∣vil War, according as every one challenged the Sovereignty to himself. If we take a view of the Changes which the Commonwealth of Rome hath suffered from the Foundation of the City, we shall find, that never any People hath flourished more by good Fortune, nor yet laboured under worse. Ro∣mulus
to begin with him, our true Father,Various Fortune of Rome un∣der diffe∣rent Prin∣ces. who as I may say, begat, founded, constitu∣ted, and confirmed this State, had the singu∣lar Happiness above all other Founders to leave a perfect City. Numa afterwards added Tri∣umphs to this City by his victorious Arms, and at the same time strengthened it with Laws of Religion. So we flourished to the time of Tarquin the proud; and then a Storm fell up∣on us, occasioned by the arbitrary Vices of that King, which we revenged; but it was not without much hazarding our own Ruine. From thence we passed and increased to the War of the Gauls, when we were over-run with a Flood of the Enemy, the City of Rome, excepting only the Capitol taken; and we suffered well nigh more hurt now, than we ever enjoyed good, since our very Foundation. However, our Commonwealth recovered itself from this Blow; but yet it was so plagued with the Car∣thaginian Wars, and the Terror of King Pyrrhus, that it could not be at any rest for its miserable Fears. At length, we conquered Carthage, and extended our Empire far beyond the Seas; the Sense of which Felicity was extenuated to us, by our Social Discords, and our Civil Wars, under which we spent our time, unto Augustus Caesar, who repaired the State for us anew, if we may call that yet a Reparation, which was wrought at the Expence of our Liberty. How∣ever it is, although we were sometime troubled at home, amongst foreign Nations our Name flourished; and after several ill Emperors that afflicted us, the State lifted up its Head again
under Vespasian. The Happiness of Titus was no sooner enjoyed than lost; to whom suc∣ceeded the cruel Domitian, whose Wounds went deep. Under Nerva and Trajan, and so to Marcus Antoninus, our Condition was better than ordinary; but then came the mad and cruel Commodus, and excepting in the Reign of Septimius Severus, the State received no good from all its Princes, from thence unto Severus the Son of Mammaea. It would be tedious to recount all the following History: Valerian was cast out of a Capacity of being enjoyed. Gallienus afflicted us fifteen Years. Fortune, who loves variety, and is almost always an E∣nemy to Virtue; envied Claudius a long Reign; nd thus Aurelian, thus Tacitus, thus Probus were ut off and destroyed; that we may see, there s nothing so grateful to Fortune, as to turn hings of the most publick Nature and Con∣sequence variously upside down. But why do I complain of these Matters ere, and delay my self upon such inconstan∣ies of the times? I come to the Empror Carus, who was a Prince, as I may say, of a middle Character; but rather to be placed mong the Good, than the ill ones; and he ould have been much better, if he had not eft such an Heir as Carinus. The Country of the Nativity of Carus isBirth∣place of Carus un∣certain,  ambiguously reported by a great many, that  cannot be precise to determine, on whose de the Truth lies. Onesimus, who hath writ∣en the Life of Probus very carefully, says, at he was both born, and brought up to Let∣ters
at Rome; but that his Parents were of the Province of Illyricum. Fabius Cyrillianus, who hath taken no less Pains about the History of the times of Carus, Numerianus, and Carinus says, that he was not born at Rome, but in Illy∣ricum; and not there of Illyrian, but of Car∣thaginian Parents. Now I remember I have seen in some Journal, that he was a Milanese born; but by his Grandfather incorporated into the City of Aquileia. Himself, it cannot be denied, pretended as if he was of Roman Blood, as the following Letter shews, which when he was a Proconsul, he writ to his Lieu∣tenant, re-minding him of his Duty. Marcus Aurelius Carus the Proconsul of Cilicia, to Junius his Lieute∣nant. OUR Ancestors, the great Men amongst the Romans, have observed a Custom in the creating their Lieutenants, to give the World a Specimen of their own Manners by those of whom they make Choice to act under them in the Ser∣vice of the Government. But yet if this Custom had not been, I had done no otherwise than I have in my Choice of you. At the same time, I have observed this Custom too, unless you deceive me. You will please to take care, that you do not make us different from our Roman Ancestors.
His Speech which he first sent to the Se∣nate, after he was created Emperor, signi∣fies the same thing. A part if it was thus. IT may be a Matter of some Joy to you, Fa∣thers of the Senate, that one out of your own Order, and also of your own Original is preferred to be Emperor. It shall not be by my means, that Strangers and Foreigners shall make better Princes, than those who are chosen out of you. Through the several degrees of Offices in the Army and the Civil List; this Person came (as the Titles upon his Statues shew) to be the Captain of the Guards to the Emperor Probus; in which Post, he gained himself so much the Hearts of the Soldiers, that after Probus was killed, they thought him the Man the most worthy of the Succession. Not that I am in∣sensible, that several have suspected, that Pro∣bus was killed by an Intrigue of Carus. But, as Carus did constantly and severely revenge he Death of that Prince, so neither the Man∣ners of Carus, nor the Obligations which were aid upon him by his Master, will suffer me to give Credit to such a Suspicion. The Ho∣nours which Probus did him, and the Opinion which he had of him, you may read in this Letter to the Senate.
The Emperor Probus to his entirely beloved Senate wisheth Health. AMongst other things, he says, happy would it be for our Empire, if we had many more such Persons to execute the publick Offices, as Carus is, or as a great many also of you. I desire that his Statue, if you please, may be set up on Horse∣back, to the Honour of a Man who is compa∣rable to the Antients; and also that a House may be built for him at the publick Charge; the Mar∣ble whereof shall be provided by me. It is fit, that we should so reward the Integrity of such a Person. And so he goes on. In short, not to multiply things of lesser mo∣ment, and such as are to be found elsewhere, as soon as Carus had entred upon the Empire, he with the Consent of all the Army prosecu∣ted the Design of the Persian War, which had been enterprised by Probus. To his two Sons Numerianus and Carinus, he gave the Title and Power of Caesars; the latter of which, he sent with chosen Persons to the Government of Gallia. The former, who was a very sweet and ingenious Youth, he took along with himself. He often afterwards repented of sending Carinus into Gallia; and he would much rather have sent Numerianus, only he was not of an Age sufficient, because it is a place which especially requires a steady Gover∣nour;
for he was displeased with the Manners of Carinus, and complains of him in a Letter to the Captain of the Guards, insomuch that he really had it sometimes in his mind, what Onesimus says, to depose him for his ill deserts, from his Caesarean Dignity again. Carus served himself of the great Preparati∣ons and all the Force of Probus for the Wars, which he had before him. He dispatched first in great part, that with the Sarmatians; and then marching against the Persians, without any op∣position, he took the Country of Mesopotamia, and came as far as to the City of Ctesiphon; whilst the Persians were engaged at home with their do∣mestick Seditions. This gave him the Title of Conquerour of the Persians. He was in himself greedy of Glory, but his Captain of the Guards spurred him further on to it, seeking the De∣struction both of him and his Son, because he coveted to succeed in the Empire after them. So being for extending the progress of his Arms even beyond Ctesiphon, he marched and died presently after; some say of Sickness, o∣thers,Death of Carus. that he was struck dead with Thunder and Lightning. It is true, that at that time, there arose on a sudden such a vast Tempest with dreadful Lightning and more dreadful Thunder, that several were almost killed with only the Fright. But as for the real manner of the Death of Carus, the Letter following of Junius Calphurnius, one of his Secretaries, writ∣ten to the Governour of the City of Rome, gives this Account of it.
AS Carus, says he, our truly dear Prince lay sick in his Tent, on a sudden there arose such a Hurricane and a Strom, that all things darkened, and we could not discern one another. Then follow∣ed Thunder and Lightning, like the continued falling of fiery Meteors from Heaven, which astonished us so, that we did not know what we did, nor where we were. However, on a sudden, it was cryed, the Emperor was dead, which happened just after the greatest clap of Thunder, that had fright∣ned all. The Servants of the Emperor's Bed-Chamber, in grief for his Death, set Fire to his Tent. The Flame whereof joyned with the Light∣ning, occasioned a Discourse, that he was killed with the Lightning. But as much as I know of the matter, I think it is certain, that it was of his illness, that he died. I have the rather inserted this Letter, because it is often said, that by a certain Power of Fate, the Roman Emperors are restrained from pas∣sing beyond the City of Ctesiphon; and that Carus was for that Reason destroyed by Light∣ning, because he offered to transgress that li∣mit. But let timidity cover it self under what Arts it pleases, the Brave will despise them. The most excellent Caesar, Maximian, does not, nor will ever think it unpermitted to him to conquer the Persians, and to penetrate beyond them too; which I am of Opinion, he will ef∣fect, if we be not wanting ourselves to the pro∣mised Favour of the Gods.
There are many things which speak Carus a good Prince, and amongst the rest this; that presently after he was possessed of the Empire, the Sarmatians who were grown so insolent up∣on the Death of Probus, as to menace not only Illyricum, but Thrace and Italy with an Inva∣sion, these Men he so dereated; and broke chiefly by his Policy, that in a few days he set∣tled the Security of Pannonia, killed sixteen Thousand of the Enemy, and took twenty Thousand more of both Sexes Prisoners. This I presume, may be enough to say as to Carus. Let us pass on next to Numerianus: For tho' Carinus was both the elder Brother, and the el∣der Caesar, yet it is necessary to discourse of Numerianus the first, in asmuch as he was the nearest at that time to his Father, and followed his Death; and his Story also is something the more admirable, because of his Father-in-Law Aper. After him will follow that of Carinus, with whom the Emperor Dioclesian fought se∣veral Battels, and had the Fortune at last to kill him.
NUMERIANUS, CAESAR. BY FLAVIUS VOPISCUS. NUMERIANUS, the Son of Carus, was a Person extremely well dispo∣sed, as to his Manners, and truly worthy of the Empire. He had a singular Genius for Eloquence,His Parts and Learning. both in Prose and in Verse. He declaimed in Publick, and was the Author of several things extant, which are Noble in that kind. In Verse he exceeded all the Poets of his Age. He disputed the Bays with the famous Olym∣pius Nemesianus; and he as far outdid the Iam∣bicks of Aurelius Apollinaris, as the Sun out∣shines every thing else. A Speech which he once sent unto the Senate, was filled with so much Eloquence, that they Voted him a Sta∣tue, to be set up in the Ulpian Library, not as to a Caesar, but as an Orator. The Inscription
was, To Numerianus Caesar, the most Powerful Orator of his Time. Accompanying his Father to the Persian War, he created himself a Sickness with the ex∣cessive grief, which he took at his Death; which gave an opportunity to Arrius Aper, his Father-in-Law, to kill him as he was in a Lit∣ter,He is murdered. by which Aper designed to mount the Throne himself in his stead. He kept the Murder private for several days; telling the Soldiers, when they enquired about his Health, that Numerianus was not to be seen, because he was obliged to keep out of the Wind and the Sun for his sore Eyes, which he had; till at last the Body stinking, and the Treachery of Aper not being possible to be longer con∣cealed, they took him and brought him to the Head of the Army; where after a great Ha∣rangue upon the occasion, and a Tribunal raised, it was proposed, who should be the just Avenger of the Death of Numerianus, and who the Prince to succeed to the Throne. All with a Divine Consent cryed, Dioclesian, who then Commanded the Forces of the Houshold, and had received before already many Presages of his future Reign. Dioclesian was a Personage of great Note, politick, well affected to the State, a lover of his Friends, prepared for all Events as occasion required; his Counsels always raised, yet never Extravagant nor Impudent, because he stifled within him the Motions of his unquiet Breast, with an extraordinary Obstinacy. He mount∣ing the Tribunal, and being proclaimed Em∣peror,
the Question next was, How Numeri∣anus was Killed? Aper, who had been the Captain of the Guards, stood by. Dioclesian drew his Sword, and striking it through the Body of Aper upon the place, said, This is theHis Death revenged. Author of the Death of Numerianus. So Aper was served but as his Actions deserved. My Grandfather hath told me, that he was in the Company, when Dioclesian killed him with his own Hand; and he said, as Dioclesian made the Blow, he cryed to Aper, Be proud, that you fall by so great a Hand as mine. It is Matter of Curiosity, and not common∣ly known, I mean the Story, which is proper to be told in this place, of a Presage that happen∣ed to Dioclesian, of his Elevation to the Empire. My Grandfather hath told me, that he recei∣ved it from Dioclesian himself. When Dioclesi∣an served at the City of Tongres in the Nether∣lands, where he was then a young Soldier, and in an inferior Post, talking with a Woman who was a Druid, about his daily Expences at the Inn in which he lodged, says she to him, Dioclesian, you are too Covetous, you are too good a Manager: Dioclesian in jest answered, But I will be Generous when I am an Emperor. Says she, Dioclesian, you need make no Jest of it: Yes, yes, you will be an Emperor, but you must first kill a Boar. From that time Dioclesian al∣ways had thoughts in his mind of the Empire, as both Maximian and my Grandfather knew; to whom he himself told this Story; and laughed at it, but not a word to any body else. Therefore in Hunting, wherever he could, he
always killed the Boars with his own hand: so when Aurelian, Tacitus, Probus, and Carus, were all made Emperors before him, says he, I al∣ways kill the Boars, but another runs away with the Dish and the sweet Bit. But when he had killed Aper, which is a Latin Name for a Boar, Now, says he, at last I have killed the Fatal Boar. And my Grandfather hath said, that Dioclesian declared, that he had no other rea∣son for killing Aper with his own hand, but to fulfil the Saying of the Druid, and strength∣en himself in the Empire: for otherwise, especially upon the first day of his Reign, he did not desire to appear so Cruel, if such a Necessity had not thereunto compell'd him. Now I come to Carinus.
THEA Christi Cclxxxiii. Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR CARINUS. BY FLAVIUS VOPISCUS. CARINUS was one of the impurest of Men. I am ashamed to repeat, what Onesimus hath written of him. An Adulterer, vicious with Boys whom he frequently debauched, and passive in an Act which is it self contrary to the Nature of his Sex. His Father, going to the Persian War, left him to be the Governour over Gallia, Italy,
Illyricum, Spain, Britain, and Africa, under the Title of a Caesar, but with the full Power of an Emperor. In this Government he strange∣ly dishonoured himself with enormous Vices and Actions. All the best Persons about him,His filthy Vices and Luxuries. he banished; and took and kept others in their room, who were of the worst of Mankind. He made one of his Porters the Governour of the City of Rome, than which nothing can be thought nor mentioned, more shameful. The Captain of the Guards, which he had, he kil∣led, and into his place he put Matronianus, an old Pimp. His Secretary, another of his Pimps, who was always privy to his Lusts, and assisted him in them, he made a Consul against the express Orders of the Emperor his Father. He writ haughty Letters to the Senate; threatned to give away their Estates amongst the Mob of the City. He married Nine Wives, taking one and putting away another; several of which he put away big with Child. He filled the Court with Mimicks, Courtezans, Actresses, Singers and Pimps. He disdained the signing of Dispatches himself; so that he kept a wretch who was his Jester, always at Noons, to sign them for him; and many times he played up∣on him agreeably for imitating his hand well. He wore Jewels upon his Shooes; never wore a Button, but what was of a Jewel. His Belt was often set with Jewels. He never did the Consuls or the great Officers of the State, the Honour to step to meet them coming. The Lewd were much in his Favour, and always invited to his Table. He had ordinarily a
hundred Pound of Birds, the same of Fish, and a thousand of Flesh of several sorts at a Meal. He spent a great deal of Wine. He swam (as I may say) amongst Fruits and Melons. He strew'd his Chambers and his Beds with Roses. His hot water Baths, when he bathed, were no more than Lukewarm. His cold Baths were of Snow-water. Coming in the Winter to a place where there was a Spring of very warm Water, as it naturally uses to be the war∣mer in the Winter, and the Bath being sup∣plied with the same, says he to the Waiters, You give me here Woman's Water; which (they say) was one of best things he ever said. It would be tedious to tell at large the rest of his Luxuries. Fulvius Asprianus hath also already done it: Let the Reader who desires to know every thing so particularly go to him. The Emperor Carus his Father, when he heard how he behaved himself, disowned him, and cried, He is none of mine. And had he lived, he would have deprived him of his Caesarean Dignity and Power again. Onesimus says, he would have put him to Death, and advanced Constantius to his place, who was then the Pre∣sident of Dalmatia, and was afterwards made Caesar, than whom no Man was fitter for that Honour. Carinus, after both his Father and his Bro∣ther were dead, and Dioclesian was set up to be Emperor, gave himself more than ever to Vice and Extravagance, as if he was now more free, and eased of the Tyes of the Examples and domestick Admonitions of his Family.
However, he wanted not the Vigour of mind to challenge the Empire. He fought for it against Dioclesian several Battels. In the lastHe is de∣feated and slain. of which, a Town in Maesia, he was conquer∣ed and killed. This was the end of these Three Princes, Carus, Numerian, and Carinus. The Gods have given to us, since them, the Emperors Diocle∣sian and Maximian, to whom they have wor∣thily joyned Galerius and Constantius, whereof the former was born, to deface the ignominy of the Captivity of Valerian, and the other to restore Gallia to the Obedience of the Romans. These are the four great Princes of the World, Valiant, Wise, Benign, Generous, of one Sen∣timent for the Good and Interests of the State, always reverencing the Senate, Moderate, Friends of the People, Grave, Good, Religious, and such in fine, as we have ever prayed to have; whose Lives are severaliy written by Claudius Eusthenius, sometime Secretary to Dioclesian, which I therefore mention, because I would not that so great a Work should be expected from me, considering the Difficulty of speak∣ing upon living Princes, blameless. One thing yet is very memorable in the Go∣vernment of the Emperor Carus, and of his two Sons, Numerian, and Carinus. They adorned the Publick Games, with which they enter∣tained the People before they went to the Per∣sian War, with Shews altogether new and strange, which we see are painted upon a Gal∣lery in a part of the Palace, to continue the memory of them to Posterity. There was a
Rope-Dancer, who seemed, as if he moved orStrange Shows made to the People. flew in the Air; the Cord on which he danced was so very small, you could scarce see it. A∣nother Man ran upon the edge of a Wall with Dancing Bears at his Heels. There was a Symphony of a hundred Trumpets, a hundred Haut-Boys, a hundred Pipes, a hundred Flutes, with Voices to them; a thousand Pantomimes, who danced all sorts of Anticks; others, that were Wrestlers, Runners, Leapers. There was an Engine which represented the Burning of Towns, the Flames whereof taking hold on a part of the Amphitheatre, Dioclesion after∣wards repaired it, and made it more Magni∣ficent. Mimicks from all Countries, were pro∣vided to be here. Then there was a sport per∣formed by the Sarmatian Captives of Vaulting upon Horses, which is as pleasant as any thing in the World. Then there were those that a∣cted the Cyclopaean Postures; and all these Mu∣sicians, Players, Sports men, and the Graecian Artists had Gold and Silver given them, and Garments of Silk. I cannot tell how much the People are ingratiated by such kind of things. But sure I am, that several other good Emperors have made no great Account of them. Dioclesian, when an Officer commen∣ded to him these very Theatrical and Circen∣sian Games of Carus, replied only, Then Carus had laughing enough in his time. And when Dioclesian himself exhibited his Games accor∣ding to the Custom, he was much more spa∣ring in the Liberty which he took, and in the Expence which he was at; he said, those
Diversions ought to be Chast and Modest, considering the presence at least of the Censor. Now I leave this last Passage to be read by Junius Messala, whom I dare be free to blame upon this occasion. Because he hath spent all his Estate upon Players, and denied it to his own Heirs. A Gown of his Mother's he gave away to one, a Coat of his Father's to ano∣ther; a Garment of his Wife's, of Purple, em∣broidered in Gold, on which her Name was wrought, he gave to a Piper, who triumphs in it, as in a Spoil of the Nobility of the Donor. What shall I say of the Linens from Egypt? The bright Tyrian and Sydonian Purples, em∣broidered with admirable Art and Pains? The fine Stuffs from Arras, the Russets of Canosa, and other Cloaths from Africa? Riches which were never seen upon the Stage before! I am willing to speak all this to the World, purposely, that the Gentlemen who give those Publick Sports for the future, may be a little ashamed to spend their Estates, in prejudice to their lawful Heirs, upon such a Company of Poltrons. Thus, my honoured Friend, you have now the little Present, which I presume to offer to you, of this History. I have often said, that I pretend not to shew any thing of Eloquence in the writing, but only a Curio∣sity to preserve and to relate Matter of Fact. And therefore if any eloquent Hand shall here∣after please to go over, and better illustrate
the Lives of these Princes, and shall supply him∣self with Materials for the purpose, out of what I have said, I shall be very well satisfied. In the mean time, I desire you to be contented with my Services, and to believe that it was my Choice to write in this manner, without Disputing whether or no, I was able to have done it better.
THEA. Christi CCLxxxiv Lives and Reigns OF THE EMPERORS DIOCLESIAN AND MAXIMIAN. By J. BERNARD. DIOCLESIAN was born at an ob∣scureHis Birth∣place and Extracti∣on. Village called Dioclea in Dal∣matia, and his Mother was of the same Name with the Village. Wherefore be∣fore his Elevation he was called Diocles; but being once set at the Head of the Roman Em∣pire, he gave his Name a turn to the Form of a Roman Name and called himself Dioclesian.
He was for some time in the beginning of his Youth, a Servant under Anullinus, a Sena∣tor. Then he went into the Army; where by his Diligence, his Bravery, and his Conduct, he raised himself so, from one Post to another, by degrees, that after the death of Numerianus, of which he protested he was altogether Inno∣cent, and after the Revenge, as hath been said, which he took upon Aper for that Mur∣der,He is pro∣claim'd Emperor. the Army Proclaimed him Emperor. He accepted the Empire, and the Tribuni∣tian Power was conferred upon him, on the 11th. of the Kalends of May in the Year of Rome 1036, and of Christ, 284. Which Year he ordered, by his Soveraign Power, to be made a Publick Aera, or Date, from whence to Account the following Times. The Chri∣stians used it as far as to the Reign of Justinian. But upon their score, the same Aera is like∣wise called the Aera of the Martyrs, and with great Reason. For from the first Year of the Reign of Dioclesian, the Persecution which theHe Perse∣cutes the Christi∣ans. Christians suffer'd under him, may very well be dated. It is true, his Reign was not so Unhappy to them, at the first, as it was after∣wards. But yet no Year scarce passed, but what was defiled with Christian Blood: which was as the droppings of Rain before a violent Tempest, and as a Prologue to the dismal Tragedy that followed after. Sabinus Julianus, who had set up for the Empire in Italy, after the death of Carus, was beaten to Dioclesian's hand by Carmus, and slain in the Plains of Verona. In the next place, Dio∣clesian
having entirely defeated Carinus also, in Moesia, he then remained the sole Lord of all, and was left to enjoy the whole Empire to him∣self, without the least Competitor. One thing is very New and Unexpected, which is to be observed in the beginning of this Prince's Reign; which is, That he Par∣doned all Persons that had been engaged on the side of either Carinus, or Julianus. He deprived none of them of their Fortunes, Fame, or Honours. A Clemency, that after a Civil War, had not in the Memory of Man been known to have been shewn before. He created Maximian Caesar, and sent himMaximian pacifies Gaul. with an Army into Gallia, to suppress the Dis∣orders, that were there occasioned by Aman∣dus and Helianus, being at the head of a Party of Rusticks and Robbers. Maximian discharged himself well of this Commission. By slight Skirmishes, which he took his opportunity to make with them, he quieted all things in Gallia, without any damage to his Army. The Re∣volters were frightned with the bare report of his march to them. At the same time, the Franks and the Saxons annoyed the Quarters of Belgium and Armorica: against whom Carausius was employed, who repulsed them, and took from them a great deal of Riches and good Booty; the profit whereof he ingrossed to himself, without laying it out for the good of the Provinces, or returning it, as he ought, into the Publick Treasury. Therefore Carau∣sius was ordered to be seized and put to death. But he escaped immediately into Great Britain,
and gathering together there an Army, he re∣volted, and was declared Emperor. There were now many Wars growing to∣gether upon the hands of Dioclesian, which he knew not, whether he might be able to sustain alone. The Sarmatians made great impressi∣ons upon Pannonia, the Persians Usurped upon the Provinces of the East, the Allemans and the Burgundians were preparing to break vio∣lently into Gallia, Carausius continued to main∣tain the Quality of Emperor in Great Britain. So Dioclesian advanced Maximian from a Caesar, to be Emperor in conjunction with him: and against the Sarmatians he repaired in Person himself, to whom having made appear the Power and Glory of his Arms, he passed on from thence into Armenia, where he brke the Force of the Persians, and obliged them to sue for a Peace. Maximian in the mean time op∣posed the Motions of the Barbarians in Gallia, till they even mouldered away of themselves, and were destroyed by Famine and Pestilence. But yet others of them renewing their Incursi∣ons the next Year, and passing over the Rhine upon the Ice into Gallia, Maximian had the ho∣nour of driving them back to whence they came; and not that only, but he followed them over the Rhine by a Bridge which he erected, and laid Germany waste as far as to the Fountains of the Danube. With the like success Dioclesian being returned out of Armenia, expelled the Goths from Thrace, and secured the Passage of the River against them by three Forts, which he built.
Whilst these things passed, Achilleus assumed the Purple upon him, at Alexandria in Aegypt; and likewise a People called the Quinquegenti∣ans, or a Confederacy of five Cities in Africa, were upon the Revolt, and other Wars threat∣ned from other Parts the Roman Empire. Here∣upon Dioclesian and Maximian gave a Meeting to each other at the City of Milan; where they agreed upon two Persons, whom to cre∣ate Caesars for their assistance; who were Con∣stantiusConstanti∣us and Galerius made Ce∣sars. Chlorus, and Galerius Maximianus. The first was appointed for the direction of Gallia and the recovery of Great Britain, the other for the defence of the Banks of the Isther; whilst Dioclesian charged himself with the Affairs of Aegypt and the East, and Maximian had the care of Italy and of the War of Africa. All three reverencing Dioclesian as their common Father. Pursuant to this Distribution, Dioclesian re∣paired to Aegypt, and there levelled the Cities of the Thebais to the ground. Constantius expelled Carausius out of Gallia, whither he was then advanced; but as Carausius by flight, arrived again in Great Britain, he was killed by one of his own Friends and chief Offi∣cers, Alectus, after he had held the Govern∣ment of that Province almost seven Years; and Alectus set up himself in his stead, Against whom Constantius prepared a Fleet in order to attack him at once by Sea and Land; assisted by Asclepiodotus the Captain of the Guards; who overcoming Alectus, after he had reign'd about three Years, that Victory finished the
Reduction of the Island of Great Britain. Maximian, passing with his Forces into Afri∣ca, easily drove before him the Quinquegentiani. They fled for shelter into their inaccessible Fast∣nesses: but being forced to come to a Battel in the next Season, he Vanquish'd them, took them Prisoners, and disposed of them at his discretion. Likewise Galerius obtained a signal Victory, in his Division, over the Bastarnae and the Sar∣matians; in which Constantine, the Son of Con∣stantius Chlorus by Helena, so Nobly signalized his Youth, as to take the Sarmatian General Prisoner, and bring him alive to Galerius. After this Dioclesian Commanded Galerius out of Pannonia into Aegypt, and sent him to Encounter the Tyrant Achilleus, who was not as yet oppressed there. Galerius Engaging and overcoming him about Pelusium, or Belvais, A∣chilleus fled for refuge into Alexandria; but Gale∣rius followed him and besieged him in Alexan∣dria; and obliging that City to surrender to him upon discretion in eight days, by the order of Dioclesian it was demolished, and exposed to free Plunder, and Achilleus was cast to the Wild Beasts. The War of Aegypt having detained Dio∣clesianEgypt re∣duc'd. in those Parts no less than six Years, Narses the King of Persia was encouraged in the mean time to commence a new War in the East, and to make his Incursions into Me∣sopotamia and Armenia. Wherefore Dioclesian sent Galerius away into the East; who came to Antioch with a good Army, and had the
better of Narses in two Battels. But rashly venturing the fortune of a third, on a time when his Force was become much reduced, he was so well beaten, that he lost almost entire∣ly all his Men, and with difficulty escaped with his own Life. He came to Dioclesian; who received him in a manner, which was to let him know, that he highly resented his Conduct, and he was scarce willing to trust him with another Army to give him an opportunity to repair his disgrace. However Galerius ob∣tained the leave to try his Fortune once more against Narses; and this time he gave the Per∣sians such a rout, that he took the Wife, Si∣sters,The Persi∣ans totally routed; and Children of Narses Prisoners, and obliged him to a Peace upon the Conditions, of returning back to the Romans all the Pro∣vinces that he had Usurped from them, and to take the Tygris for the Boundary of the Roman Empire. Altogether the same Fortune did Constantius meet with in the East, of being first overcome by, and then of overcoming the Germans. They passed the Rhine upon the Ice, and gave him such a blow on a sudden, that he fled wounded to the next Garrison in that precipi∣tancy and that danger, that the Gates being shut, he was forced to be haled upon the Walls by a Rope: but yet Rallying again presently, and engaging the Enemy with some fresh Menand like∣wise the Germans. and a fresh Courage, he killed to the number of Sixty thousand of them upon the place. These great and repeated Victories elevated the Pride of Dioclesian to a heighth, that not
contented, neither with the Habit which had been usually worn by the Roman Emperors, nor with the accustomed Reverences that were paid them, he decorated his Person with Jewels and Cloth of Gold; he caused his Enamell'd Shoes to be kissed, and himself to be Adored, and to be called a God and Lord; which none of his Predecessors had done, since Caligula and Do∣mitian. When he triumph'd in great Pomp at Rome, in conjunction with Maximian, he entitled himself Jovius; and Maximian, Herculius: As if him∣self was a second Jupiter, and Maximian a se∣cond Hercules. He Triumph'd over the Goths, Bastarnae, Quadi, Sarmatians, Aegyptians and Persians: Maximian over the Franks, Allemans, Britains and Mauritanians. And their Triumphal Chariot was preceded by the Captive Sisters and Children of the King of Persia. This is what hath occurred to me, as to the Military part of the Life of Dioclesian. For by the loss of the Commentaries of Claudius Eu∣sthenius, his Secretary, before mention'd by Vo∣piscus; and by the deplorable loss of other the like Originals, it is very visible, that a great many Particulars of both Dioclesian, Maximian, Constantius and Galerius, are wholly buried in Oblivion. To proceed therefore, to what remains. These two Emperors published an Edict, which bears date from Alexandria, the day before the Kalends of April, and which is directed to Ju∣lianus the Proconsul of Africa, against the base and infamous Sect, as it calls them, of the
Manichees. They order them to be entirely ex∣tirpated; the Heads and Chieftains of them, together with their abominable Writings, to be burnt; their Followers to be sent to the Mines, or otherwise punished with Death; and all their Estates to be confiscated into the Treasury. As to the Christians, they published an Edict in the Year 286. whereby they forbad any Person to be allowed to Buy, or Sell, or Grind, or draw Water, who refused to burn Incense before the Statues of the Gods. But this EdictThe Edict against the Chri∣stians. touched only, for the present, the Christians who lived at Rome. It is not understood to have been enjoyned to be observed over all the Empire. The Fire was kindled by degrees: till being continually blown up from the mouths of the Gentile Priests and the Philosophers and others, who could not perswade themselves to forego the Trade of the gainful Sacrifices and Idols of the Gentile Religion; and there never wanting more and more Fuel to feed the Flame, it came at last to an Universal Conflagration. The Particulars, it is not for this place to re∣count. It is sufficient to say, That it was the most Unmerciful, Inhumane, Dire, Outragi∣ous Scene of Barbarity, that ever the Sun be∣held; and spilt more blood, in a manner, that was to the last degree base and dishonourable to the Actors, but glorious to the Sufferers, than had been spilt before in a thousand Wars. A Legion of Thebaean Soldiers, who had been employed in Syria against the Persians and Par∣thians, and by having been used to Winter in Palaestine, had been brought to embrace the
Christian Religion, was in the Year 297, Com∣manded out of the East to serve under Maxi∣mian in Gallia. The Tribune was Mauricius, the Standard-bearer Exuperius, and among the rest there was one Candidus, a Senator. They were a compleat Legion of 6666 Stout Men, well appointed. So Maximian, going to meet the Enemy, commanded the usual Sacrifices to be offered to the Gods, the whole Army to be purged, and all the Soldiers to burn Incense; which this Legion, being Christians, refusing, they were decimated once: that is, every tenth Man drawn out and put to death. But this could not alter their Principles. They were decimated a second time: but neither so, were they to be removed from their Religion. Then they were surrounded by the Army, and all slain in their own Camp, at a Place called Agaunum in Gallia, whither they were retired, the distance of eight Miles from the Camp of Maximian; but assuring him, that excusing them their Religion, they were always ready to return unto his Camp again, and to Act as bravely as any against the Enemy. It was by the Hands and Labours of the Chri∣stian Soldiers, that Maximian raised those im∣mense Structures of the Baths of Dioclesian at Rome, the Baths of his own Name at Carthage, the Palace at Aquileia, and the Amphitheatre at Verona. For he condemned them to any the most servile Offices. As he assisted, upon the fifteenth of the Kalends of May in the Year 301. at the Games
of the Cirque, the Populace, who knew very well that they could not do any thing to oblige him more, cryed, Let the Christians be cut off: and repeated it twelve times. May it please your Majesty, let there be no Christians. They repeated this ten times. Therefore Eugenius Hermogenianus, the Captain of the Guards, pro∣posed the Matter to the Senate; who resolving it in the Affirmative, Maximian issued out his Rescript for their Excision, directed to Venusti∣anus, the day before the Kalends of May. In the next place, came out the General Edict of Dioclesian, to Abolish the Assemblies of the Christians in all places wheresoever they were; to raze their Churches to the ground, to burn their Scriptures, to secure their Ecclesiasticks, to deprive them of all Honours, Offices and Liberties, and by all the means imaginable to force them to com∣ply to the Worship of the Gods. Infinite Num∣bers upon this, in all Parts, perished. In Ae∣gypt alone 140000 were Martyred, and 700000 Banished. Columns were set up over all the Roman Empire in the Names of Dioclesian and Maximian, and sometimes Dioclesian and Gale∣rius, vainly boasting, that they had extinguish∣ed the Christian Name. Whereas, on the con∣trary, they had propagated it, and confirmed it. For the Blood of the Martyrs was the Seed of the Church; and the Christians sur∣mounted all this with a Virtue, never to be for∣gotten, never to be expressed. Dioclesian himself lived to know, that his Enterprize was impracticable. He fell into a
Melancholy, quitted the Purple which others have so dearly bought, Created Galerius at Ni∣comedia Emperor in his stead, and retired for his own part to the City of Salona in Dal∣matia: where after a Private Life of 9 Years,Death of Dioclesian he died, some say he Poisoned himself, and the Romans consecrated him a God. He had reigned 20 Years, and lived to the Age of 68. Maximian, at the perswasion of Dioclesian, concurred with him in this his last unprece∣dented Action. They both Abdicated the Em∣pire in a day. Maximian created in his stead Constantius Emperor at Milan, and went and lived a Private Life in the Province of Luca∣nia:Maximian and re∣sumes. till the Romans perswaded him to resume his Dignity again, in order to determine a great Quarrel that was arisen betwixt Maxentius his Son, and Severus the Kinsman of Galerius Maximian endeavour'd in like manner to have perswaded Dioclesian to have resumed his for∣mer Dignity again also. But Dioclesian detested it, and said, I wish you could see my Gardens, that I have Planted with my own hand at Salona: you would never have thought this a thing to be proposed to me. However Maximian put him∣self at the Head of an Army, and went to the Siege of Ravenna; and getting Severus, by Treachery, within his Power, he slew him; whose Body was interred afterwards in the Sepulchre of Gallienus upon the Appian Way, 9 Miles from Rome. Quitting the Army, when this Work was done, because he was not over∣welcome to Command it longer, he visited Dioclesian at Salona, and then went into Gallia,
where he matched his Daughter Fausta unto the Emperor Constantine, the Son of Constantius by Helena, who had succeeded to the Powers of his Father. But yet as he was at Treves, it was found, that he practised his Arts upon the Soldiers, with a design, if he could, to expel Constantine and possess himself of the Empire a-new. Constantine was advertised of it by Fausta; and pursuing him as far as to Marseilles, he besieged him, took him, and ordered him to be Strangled, and his Body was interred atHis Death Milan. He had reigned 18 Years, and lived to the Age of 60. He was born at Sirmish in Sclavonia, of mean Parents. His Wife was Eutropia, a Syrian Woman, by whom he had Issue Maxentius and Fausta. He was a very Rough, Stern, and Bar∣barian-like Man: but a great Soldier, and a faithful Friend to Dioclesian, and one that had been his old Companion in Arms. And he was Incontinent, and Treacherous.
THEA. Christi CCCIV. Lives and Reigns OF THE EMPERORS Flavius Constantius Chlorus, AND Galerius Maximianus Armentarius. BY J. BERNARD. THERE is the less to be spoken of these two Princes in this place, be∣cause a great part of their Actions hath been represented already in the Account of the Emperors fore-going, under whom they served, and who advanced them successively
to the Dignity first of Caesars, and then of Emperors. Therefore I shall only here take notice, that at the same time that they were created Caesars, they were obliged to put away their Wives, to whom they were already married; and to re∣marry, for a Tye of Affinity, into the Fami∣lies of Dioclesian and Maximian. Constantius dismissed himself from Helena, by whom he had had Constantine, who was afterwards the Emperor Constantine the Great; and he re∣married to Theodora, who was Daughter-in-Law to Maximian. In like manner Galerius re-married to Valeria, who was the Daughter of Dioclesian, but she did not live long with him; and to consecrate her Memory to futu∣rity after her Death, her Father imposed her Name on a part of Pannonia, which he called the Province of Valeria; and also he gave her Name to a City situated upon the Banks of the Danube. Constantius was the Son of a Daughter of Crispus, who was the Brother of the Emperor Claudius. He was created the Caesar, proper∣ly to Maximian, to whom he succeeded in the Government of the West; and Galerius was the Caesar properly to Dioclesian, to whom he succeeded in the Empire of the East. But as Constantius was a Prince endowed with all the fine and good Qualities in the World, it is certain that he neither when he was a Caesar, not when Emperor, dipped his Hands in the Blood of the Christians, which all the other Three laboured to spill with so much greedi∣ness.
He could not indeed contradict the E∣dicts of those about them, but yet he mode∣rated the matter in their Favour as much as possible, and the Destruction was always the less where he came. Galerius, one day, urging him on to be as violent upon it as his Brethren, he published an Order for all Persons to de∣part his Court, who would not sacrifice. But such Christians, as for fear, and the advan∣tage of staying in his Court, complied, he blamed and turned out of it; and such as had chosen rather to depart, than Sacrifice, he re-called and retained them, saying; He could not doubt of their Fidelity to him, who were so True to God. There is this other Passage, that shews the Goodness of Constantius, not to be omitted. Dio∣clesian had blamed very much his Negligence, and reproached him with being a poor Prince, because he had no Money in his Treasury. Con∣stantius desired the Envoys, who had brought him that Message, only to stay a little, and they should see more of this matter. In the mean time, he signified his desire to all his States, to furnish him with Money. They fil∣led his Coffers immediately, and with a Zeal, in which every one had an emulation to excel. Then shewing to the Envoy of Dioclesian his Riches, he said, His Subjects Money was all at his Devotion; but he never thought it safer, than when they were the Keepers of his Treasury. Galerius was by his Birth a Dacian of mean Parentage. He was called Armentarius, be∣cause
at the first in his Youth, he was but a Keeper of Cattel. His Mother's Name was Romula, from which he took an occasion to call the place of his Birth Romulianus, and he pretended to say, that his Mother when she conceived of him, was impregnated by a Dra∣gon. He was of a tyrannical Disposition, and much addicted to the Magicks. He was particularly bloody upon the Christians of Ni∣comedia. But coming to die by a Disease which consumed his Secret Parts, and rotted out his Eyes, and parted his Flesh from his Bones, he was so sensible of the Hand of God in it, that he countermanded the Persecution, and begged the Prayers of the Christians unto God for him. Whilst the moderate Constantius contented himself with the Administration of no more than Gallia, Spain and Great Britain, Galerius thought fit to create two Caesars, the one to preside over Italy, the other to go into the East, who were his two Sister's Sons, Flavius Valerius Severus, and Galerius Maximin. In which Promotion, pretermitting Constantine the Son of Constantius by Helena, who had all along served under him; and Constantine together with his Resentments of that, suspecting a Design against his Person, he made his escape from him, and fled into Great Britain to his Father, who was arrived there out of Gallia, in order to make War upon the Caledonians and the Picts. His Father with Joy embraced him, and by the Consent of all the Forces appoin∣ted and declared him his Successor; and pre∣sently
after that, his Father dying at the City of York the Eighth of the Kalends of August in the Year Three Hundred and Six; then commenced the Reign of the Emperor Con∣stantine the Great. Constantius was Emperor not much above one Year, Galerius reigned about six; and both had been before thirteen years Caesars. They finished the vast Structure of the Baths of Dio∣clesian, which was a Work from the beginning, of seven years. Galerius did a great deal of good to the Province of Pannonia, by cutting down the Woods, and converting them into Fields, and by opening a Mouth for the Lake Pelso, to fall into the Danube. He created Licinius Emperor in Conjunction with him, towards the end of his Reign, and set him o∣ver Illyricum and Thrace; being one who was his Country-man, a Dacian, and who had sig∣nalized himself well under him in the Wars of Persia. And then Gallerius died in the man∣ner which hath been said, in the Year three hundred and eleven. FINIS.
A CHRONOLOGY TO BOTH VOLUMES.
A CHRONOLOGY TO THE First Volume. Ann. Christi,   96 DOmitian kill'd, Sept. 18. NERVA. 97 COnspiracy of Calphurnius Crassus a∣gainst him.   Adopteth Trajan. 98 Dies, Jan. 27. TRAJAN. Ann. Christi,   100 THE Dacian War of five Years. 103 His Bridge over the Danube. 104 Arabia reduced by Palmas. 105 Decebalus the King of Dacia kills himself.
107 Death of Licinius Suras. 108 The Parthian Expedition. 111 Deposition of Parthamasyris from the Crown of Armenia. 112 Armenia, Mesopotamia, Assyria conquered. 114 Rebellion of the Jews.   The Forum and Column of Trajan finished. 115 Earthquake at Antioch. 116 Trajan's Voyage on the Red-Sea.   Revolt of his Conquests. 117 Adopteth Hadrian.   Dies, Aug 10. HADRIAN. Ann. Christi,   118 PAlmas, Celsus, and others killed. 119 He relinquishes the Conquests of Trajan. 122 Adrianople built. 123 Expedition into Great Britain. 125 At Athens initiated in the Eleusinian My∣steries. 126 Passeth into Africa. 127 Again visiteth Athens. 129 Erects a Tomb to his Horse. 131 Death of Antinous. 134 Sepulchrum Hadriani built. 136 Adopteth Aelius Verus. 137 Aelius Verus dies. 138 Hadrian adopteth Antoninus Pius.   Dies, July 10.
ANTONINUS PIUS. Ann. Christi,   A. C.   139 ADopteth Marcus Antoninus, Feb. 25. 141 Repairs the Pons Sublicius at Rome.   Death of his Wife Faustina. 144 The Britains reduced by Lollius Urbicus. 145 The Moors, Germans, Dacians, and Alans reduced. 147 Matches his Daughter to Marcus Antoninus.   Apollonius the Philosopher of Chalcis invi∣ted to Rome. 152 An Inundation of the Tyber. 156 Attilius Titianus proscribed. 161 Death, March 6. Marcus Antoninus the Philosopher. Ann. Christi,   161 ASsociates Verus to him in the Empire.   The Parthian War of five Years. 162 Agricola sent into Great Britain. 166 Commodus declared Caesar, Octob. 12. 168 A great Pestilence. 169 The Marcomannick War.   Death of Verus. 174 Victory over the Quadi and Marcomanni. 175 The Revolt of Cassius. 176 M. Anton. passeth to Athens. 177 Triumphs.   Commodus declared his Associate in the Em∣pire, November 27. 178 Matches Commodus to Crispina. 180 Death, March 16.
COMMODUS. Ann. Christi,   180 TRriumphs. 181 The Ministry of Perennis. 183 The Britains reduced by Ulpius Marcellus. 184 Attempt of Pompeianus against the Life of Commodus.   Lucilla, Sister to Commodus put to death. 185 The Baths of Commodus built. 186 Perennis killed. 187 The Ministry of Cleander. 190 Cleander killed.   Commodus putteth his own Head upon the Coloss of the Sun. 192 Acteth Hercules.   Death. PERTINAX. Ann. Christi,   126 BORN. 167 Defeateth the Germans under the Reign of M. Antoninus. 193 His Death, March 28. DIDIUS JULIANUS. Ann. Christi,   193 DEposed and killed, June— SEVERUS. Ann. Christi,   194 DEfeats and slays Pescennius Niger. 196 Victories in the East.   Declares Caracalla Caesar, June 1.
198 Overcomes and kills Albinus.   Declares Caracalla Emperor with him, and Geta Caesar. 200 His Expedition against Parthia. 202 Edict as to the Christians and Jews. 203 Marrieth Caracalla to Plautilla.   Triumphs. 205 Plautianus killed. 208 Expedition into Great Britain. 210 His Wall there built. 211 Death, Febr. 4. CARACALLA. Ann. Christi,   212 GETA killed, Febr: 5. And Papinian. 213 His Journey into Gallia. 214 Banishes the Senate from Rome. 215 Marries his Mother-in-Law. 216 Commits a vast Slaughter in Alexandria. 217 His Death, April 8. OPILIUS MACRINUS. Ann. Christi,   218 COncludeth a Peace with the Parthians.   Overcome, and killed. HELIOGABALUS. Ann. Christi,   219 ARrives at Rome. 221 Adopteth Alexander Severus. 222 Death, March 6.
ALEXANDER SEVERUS. Ann. Christi,   225 MInistry of Ulpian under him. Finishes the Baths of Commodus and Caracalla: 226 Ulpian, killed. 230 Expedition against Artaxerxes. 232 Taurinus executed. 233 Cashiers a Legion. 234 Triumphs, Sept. 25. 235 His Death, March 18.
A CHRONOLOGY TO THE Second Volume. Ann. Christi,   235 MAximin lays waste Germany. 236 The Gordiani set up in Africa. 237 Maximus and Balbinus set up by the Senate.   Siege of Aquileia.   Death of the Maximins. 238 The Death of Maximus and Balbinus. 240 Revolt of Sabinianus against Gordianus the Third. 241 The Marriage of Gordianus the Third. 242 His Expedition into the East. 243 Death of Mysitheus. 244 Gordianus the Third, Deposed and Killed. 250 The Philips Overcome and Slain. 251 Valerian Elected Censor, Octob. 27.
Death of the Decii.   252 —of Gallus and Volusianus. 253 —of Aemilian. 254 Valerian Associates Gallienus with him in the Empire. 259 Valerian taken Prisoner by the Persians. 260 The Revolts of Macrianus, Ingenuus, Balista, Valens, Piso, and others of the Thirty Tyrants. 261   262   263   263 Odenatus Absolute in the East. 264 Expedition of Gallienus against Posthu∣mius. 265 Death of Odenatus. 268 —of Gallienus, March 21. The Goths, and other Barbarians lay wast the Roman Empire.   269 Expedition of Claudius against them. 270 Death of Claudius, Feb. 5.   —of his Brother. 271 The Libri Sybillini Consulted by the order of Aurelian. 273 Zenobia taken Prisoner by Aurelian.   Tetricus surrenders to him. 274 Aurelian Triumphs. 275 His Death, Jan 29. Tacitus Elected by the Senate, after an In∣ter-regnum of six Months, Sept. 25.   276 His Death, Apr. 13.   Death of Florianus. 277 Expedition of Probus into Gallia. 278 —against the Almains. 281 Revolt of Saturninus.
282 Revolts of Proculus and Bonosus.   Death of Probus, Nov. 3. 284 Death of Carus and Numerianus:   Succession of Dioclesian. 285 Carinus Defeated and Slain.   Maximian Created Caesar, and sent into Gallia. 286 Revolt of Carausius.   Maximian Created Emperor.   Edict against the Christians. 287 Expedition of Dioclesian into Armenia.   Edict against the Manichees. 288 Germany laid wast by Maximian.   The Goths Repulsed by Dioclesian.   Revolts of Achilleus and the Quinquegen∣tiani. 290 Dioclesian and Maximian meet at Milan. 291 Constantius and Galerius Created Caesars. 292 Dioclesian in Egypt.   Carausius Killed.   Revolt of Alectus. 293 Victory of Galerius in Pannonia. 294 Defeat of Achilleus. 295 Great Britain recovered to the Empire.   The Quinquegentiani reduced. 296 Galerius defeated by the Persians. 297 Regains his Honour.   As likewise Constantius.   The Thebaean Legion Massacred. 298 Dioclesian Adored.   —His Baths begun upon. 301 Dioclesian and Maximian Triumph.   Rescript of Maximian against the Christians.
302 Edict of Dioclesian against the Christians. 304 Dioclesian and Maximian Abdicate the Empire. 306 Death of Constantius in Great Britain.   Severus and Maximin Created Caesars. 307 Maximian takes and slays Severus.   The Marriage of Constantine and Fausta. 309 Death of Maximian. 310 Licinius Created Emperor. 311 Death of Galerius. 313 Death of Dioclesian.
INDEX TO THE Second Volume. A. AChilleus, 343, 344. Acholius, 209. Aegyptians, 158, 186, 307. Aelius Cordus, 7. Aelius Lampridius, 274. Aelius Sabinus, 35. Aemilian, 97, 112, 158. Aera of the Martyrs, 340. African Revolt, 15. Agaunum, 348. Alans, 5. Alectus, 343. Alexander Severus, 8, 29. Alexandria, 308, 344. Almus, 294. Amandus, 341. Annius Severus, 41. Apollo, 23. Apollonius Tyanaeus, 221. Aquiloia 23, 35, 348. Aradion, 282. Argunthis, 69. Arrius Aper, 329. Asclepiodotus, 341.
Aurelian; his Extraction, 197. Personage, 200. Exploits being a private Man, ibid. Disci∣pline, 201. Honour done to him, 209. A∣doption, 211. Declared Emperor, 213. His Marcomannick War, 214. Extreme Seve∣rity, 218. Severity and Mercy, 220. Con∣quests, 221, 223, 229, 230. Triumph, 231. Death, 234. Publick Managements, 233, 237. Character, 235, 244. Munificence, 247. Aurelius Apollinaris, 328. Aureolus, 110, 113, 145, 180. Ausburgh, 234. B. BAlbinus; his Character, 81. Declared Em∣peror, ibid. Jealousie, 88. Death, 89. Balbus Cornelius Theophanes, 81. Balista, 111, 154. Bastarnae, 293. Blemmyae, 292. Bologna, 173. Bonosus; his Extraction, 312. Ability at Drink∣ing, 313. Death, ibid. Britain, 344. C. CAllicrates Tyrius, 198. Calphurnia, 172. Candidus, 348. Capellianus, 20, 51. Caracallus, 34. Carausius, 341, 343. Carinus; his Enormous Vices and Luxury, 332, 333. Death 335. Carpi, 228. Carus; his Birth, 321. Esteem with Probus, 324. Persian Expedition, 325. Death, ibid. Vi∣ctories, 327. Games, 335.
Carthage, 348. Cassius Longinus, 228. Cecropius, 125. Celsus, 165. Censorinus, 173. Christians, 308. Christian Bishops and Presbyters, 308. Cicero, 38. Circessum, 72. Claudius; his Elevation to the Empire, 124, 125. Elogium, 176. Honours done to him, 178, 179, 194. Victories, over Aureolus, 180. The Barbarians, 181, 182, 184. His Death, 187. Family, 188. The Opinion of several Em∣perors of him, 189. Claudius Eusthenius, 335. Constantine, 344, 351. Constantinople, 115, 116. Constantius; his Descent, 124. Presidentship of Dalmatia, 334. Created Caesar, 334, 343. Reduces Great Britain, 343. Exploits with the Germans, 345. Created Emperor, 350. Coptos, 292. Cornelius Tacitus, 262. Coyners, 236. Crispinus, 23. Crispus, 188. Ctesiphon, 119, 326. Curius Fortunatianus, 79. Cyriades, 132. D. DAcia, 238. Decii, 96. Dexippus, 124. Diana, 114. Dioclesian; his Character by Vopiscus, 329. Kills Aper, 330. Reign fore-told, ibid. Great Ex∣pressions, 243, 336. Name and mean Ori∣ginal, 339. Proclaimed Emperor, 329, 340. Clemency, 341. Creates Maximian Caesar and Emperor, 342. Pride, 346. Triumph,
346. Baths, 348. Edict against the Chri∣stians, 349. Abdication, ibid. Death, 350. Dioclesian Persecution, 340, 347, 349. Drinking, 305, 313. E. EArthquake, 63, 113, Eclipse, 59. Edict against the Manichs, 346. Edict against the Christians, 347, 349. Emissa, 111, 223. Ennius, 183. Eunuchs, 61. Exuperius, 348. F. FAbilius, 30. Fabius Ciryllianus, 322. Fabius Marcellinus, 274. Fausta, 351. Firmus; his Revolt, 230, 302, 303. Birth, 303. Vast Wealth, ibid. Personage, 304. Bodily Strength, ibid. Death, 305. Florianus, 261, 29. French, 307. Furius Placidus, 211. G. GAlerius; created Caesar, 343. His Military Atchievments, 335, 344. Created Empe∣ror, 350. Gallienus I. The Revolts under him, 109, 114. His Dissoluteness, 111. Peace with Aure∣lus, 113. The Misfortunes of his times, 114 War with Posthumius, 112, 116. Profound Negligence, 115. Decennial Games, 116. Epithalamius made by him, 121. His Wit, 122. Death, 125. Character, ibid. Horrid Luxu∣ry, 126. Cruelty, 141.
Gallienus II. 129. Gallus Antipater, 180. Games, 335. Gargilius Martial, 274. Gordianus I. His Extraction, 37. Studies and Munificence, 38. Proconsul of Africa, 40. Forced to accept the Empire, 16, 44. Death, 52. Person and Character, 57. Gordianus II. His Death, 52. Character when young, 54. And in his advanced Age, 55. Personage, 57. Gordianus III. Declar'd Emperor, 59. Marriage, 60. Persian Expedition, 63. Deposed and Slain, 68, 69. Character, 69. Buildings, 70. Epi∣taph, 72. Goths, 5, 114, 292. H. HAdrian, 308. Hecatomb, 85. Helianus, 341. Heliogabalus, 5. Hemona, 22, 35. Heraclammon, 220, 221. Heraclianus, 123. Herennian, 164. Herod, 123, 153. Herodian, 14. Hostilianus, Perpenna, 97. I. JEWS, 308. Ingenuus, 140. Interregnum, 239, 250. Jotapiana, 95. Isauria, 163. Julius Capitolinus, 274. Junius, Cordus, 79. Junius Messala, 337. Junius Tiberianus, 195. L. LEtters of Alexander Severus, 32, 40. Of Au∣relian, 167, 202, 217, 221, 224, 225, 229, 237, 246. Of Maximin I. 33, 49. Of Mysi∣theus, 60, 65. Of Gordianus III. 62, 64. Of
Claudius Julianus, 91. Of Belsotus, 102. Of Balerus, 103. Of Artabasdes, 104. Of Valerian, 134, 149, 155, 189, 191, 203, 204, 206, 208, 276, 277. Of Gallienus I. 141, 193, 279. Of Claudius, 143, 182, 183, 213. Of Decius, 192. Of Zenobia, 226. Of the Army to the Senate, 239. Of the Senate, 17, 264. Of Antoninus Tiberianus, 265. Of Claudius Capellianus, 266. Of Tacitus, 281. Of Probus, 284, 285, 290, 293. Of Hadrian, 308. Licinius, 73. Lollianus, 135. Lots, 185. Lucius Priscus, 96. M. MAcedon, 12. Macrianus, 109, 110, 146, 147, 149. Magnus, 11. Maeonius, 153. Manichees, 346. Marcia Otacilia Severa, 95. Marcus, 95. Marinus, 96. Marius, 138. Marius Maximus, 274, 301. Martianus, 125. Mauricius, 43. Maxentius, 351. Maximian. His Character, 335, 351. Cre∣ated Caesar, 341. Emperor, 342. His Suc∣cesses in Gallia, 341, 342. And Africa, 344. Triumph, 346. Massacres the Thebaean Le∣gion, 347. Works, 348. Edict against the Christians, 349. Abdication, 350. Trea∣chery, 351. Death, ibid. Maximin I. His Extraction, 1. Rise, 2. Pre∣ferment, 4. Reception from Heliogabalus, 5. And Alexander Severus, 6. Strength of Body, 7. Proclaimed Emperor, 9. Cru∣elty,
9. Expedition against the Germans, 13. Rage upon the News of the African Re∣volt, 19, 49. Besieges Aquileia, 23. Death, 24. Measure of his Foot, 32. Maximin II. His Beauty, 29, 31, 35. Learning, 30. Pride and Conditions, 31. Death, 24, 35. Maximus. Declared Emperor, 77. His Ex∣traction, 79. Person and Manners, 80. Re∣ception at Rome, 87. Death, 89. Memphis, 159. Menophilus, 23. Mnestheus, 234. Moses, 177. Mutiny, 83. Mysitheus, 60, 65. N. NNarses, 345. Nemesis, 83. Nicomachus, 226, 256. Numerianus. His Poetry and Oratory, 328. Death, 329. O. ODenatus, 110, 119, 122, 123, 151. Olympius Nemesianus, 328. Omens, 33, 34, 199, 268. Onesimus, 321. P. PAlfrurius, 292. Palfurius Suras, 128. Palmyra, 224, 229. Piso, 109, 157. Philip I. His Rise, 66. Declared Emperor, 67. Deposes and Kills Gordianus III. 68. Fa∣vourable to the Christians, 95. Philip II. 95. Pompey M. 39, 51. Posthumius, 112, 116, 133, 135.
Probus. His Birth and Parentage, 275. E∣steem with several Emperors, 275, 276, 277, 278, 279, 280, 281. The Praemiums given him, 278. Valour, 282. Elevation to the Empire, 283. Unwillingness to take it, 284. Successes against the Barbarians, 289, 290. 291. Easter Expedition, 292. Intestine Troubles, 294. Triumph, 295. Death, 296. Elogium, 297, 270. Proculus. His Extraction and Wealth, 312. Death, 312. Created Emperor, 313. Ptolemais, 292. Q. QUietus, 109, 150. Quinquegentiani, 343, 344. Quintillus, 187, 236. R. RAvenna 26. Regillianus, 142. Roman Emperors few good, 242. Romania, 1. Rome, in its Thousandth Year, 72. Various Fortune under different Princes, 320. S. SAbinianus, 60. Sabinus, 49. Sabinus Julianus, 340. Salona, 350. Sapores, 64, 102. Saturninus, Tyr. in the time of Gallienus, 160. Saturninus Declared Emperor, 309, His Sense of the Pels of that Station, 308. Death, 294, 309.
Senate. Their Act for Constituting the Gor∣diani Emperors; and denouncing Maximin an Enemy, 17, 46. Their Act for Consti∣tuing Maximus and Balbinus Emperos, 77. Their Choice of Valerian to be Censor, 99. Their Acclamations upon Claudius, 179. Their Debate about the Books of the Sibyls, 214, 215, 216. Their Act for the Consti∣tuting Tacitus Emperor, 253, 254, 255, 256. Their Act in the favour of Probus, 286. They Vote the Excision of the Chirstians, 349. Senate of Women, 248. v. Vol. I. Serapis, Serenus Sammonicus, 54. Severus, Caes. 350. Severus Hostilianus, 95. Sibyls, 63, 114, 214, 215. Sicca, 166. Sirmish, 197. Speeches of Maximin I. 20, 50. Mauricius, 43. Senator of the first Voice, 75. Vectius Sa∣binus, 76. Decius, 100. Valerian, 100, 209, 278. Marius, 139. Balists, 146. Macria∣nus, 147, 148. Aurelian, 210. Ulpius Cri∣nitus, 210. Tacitus, 240, 255, 260. Velius Cornificius Gordianus, 253. Maecius Falconius Nicomachus, 256. Aelius Cesetianus, 258. Maesius Gallicanus, 259. Manlius Statianus, 287. Saturninus, 308. Suetonius Optatianus, 263. Suetonius Tranquillus, 79, 274, 301. Syrians, 229.
T. TAcit Decree, 48. Tacitus. His Election to the Empire, 254, Unwilling to assume it, 259. Managements, 261. Moderation and Diet, 262. Death, 267. Terni, 274. Tetricus, 161, 162, 230, 232, 237. Thebais, 343. Thebaean Legion, 347. Theodotus, 112. Thysdrus, 16, 43: Tiberian Library, 274. Timolaus, 165. Titianus, 30. Titus Quartinus, 12, 175. Toxotius, 30. Trebellian, 163. Trebellius Pollio, 197. Trebonianus Gallus, 96. Troy, 183. Tyana, 220. V. VAlens Hostilianus, 96. Valens Licinianus, 96. Valens, Tyr. 109, 156, 157. Valerian I. His great Esteem with the Senate, 98. Censor, 99. Captivity, 102. Death, 105. Valerian II. 106. Valerius Marcellinus, 79. Vectius Sabinus, 76, 78. Verona, 348. Vibius Volusianus, 97. Victorina, 170. Victorinus, 137, 138. Vitalianus, 16, 45. Ulpian Library, 196, 222, 259, 274, 328. Ulpius Crinitus, 205. Vulcatius Terentianus, 57. W. WOmen's Bravery, 36, 166, 171. Z. ZEnobia, 123, 166, 223, 224, 226, 227, 232. FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Charles Harper at the Flower-de-luce, over-against St. Dunstan's-Church in Fleet-street. THE Life of our Blessed Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. An Heroic Poem: Dedica∣ted to Her most Sacred Majesty, in Ten Books. Attempted by Samuel Wesley, M. A. each Book illustrated by necessary Notes, explaining all the more difficult Matters in the whole Hi∣story: Also a Prefaratory Discourse concer∣ning Heroic Poetry. The Second Edition re∣vised by the Author, and improved with the Addition of a large Map of the Holy-Land; and a Table of the Principal Matters; with Sixty Copper-Plates, by the celebrated Hand of W. Faithorne. Folio. The Second and Third Parts of the Works of Mr. Abraham Cowley. The Second con∣taining what was written and published by himself in his younger Years, re-printed toge∣ther: The Sixth Edition. The Third Part con∣taining his Six Books of Plants, viz. the First and Second of Herbs, the Third and Fourth of Flowers, the Fifth and Sixth of Trees; now made English by several Hands, with necessary Tables to both Parts, and divers Poems in praise of the Author. Folio. Resolves: Divine, Moral, Political. With several New Additions in Prose and Verse In
this Eleventh Edition, References are made to the Poetical Citations heretofore much wanted. By Owen Felltham Esq; Folio. Price 12 s. The Works of the Famous Nicholas Machival, Citizen and Secretary of Florence. Newly and faithfully Translated into English. Fol. Price 15 s. The Whole Duty of Man, according to the Law of Nature, by that Famous Civilian Sa∣muel Puffendorf; now made English. Octavo. Price 3 s. 6 d. Dr. Willis's Practice of Physick, being the whole Works of that Famous Physician; ren∣dred into English; second Edition, with Forty Copper-Plates. Folio. The Historical and Miscellaneous Tracts of the Reverend and Learned Peter Heylin, D. D. now collected into one Volume. And an Ac∣count of the Life of the Author, never before published. Folio. The Religion of Protestants, a Safe way to Salvation; with a Discourse of the Apostolical Institution of Episcopacy. By W. Chilling∣worth, M. A. To which in this Edition, is ad∣ded his Letter, shewing the Reason why he left Popery. Folio. The History of Q. Elizabeth, by W. Cambden, King at Arms. Fourth Edition. Folio. An Impartial Collection of the great Affairs of State, from the beginning of the Scotch Re∣bellion in the Year 1639. to the Murder of King Charles the First. Folio. In two Vol. By Dr. Nalson. Dugdale's Monasticon Anglicanum. Folio. In three Volumes.
The History of King Edward II. King of England, and Lord of Ireland. Folio. Dr. Willis's Practice of Physick. Octavo. With his Treatise of the Plague. Price 7 s. Bishop Usher's Power of the Prince, and the Obedience requir'd of the Subject, with a large Preface, by Bishop Sanderson. Octavo. Animadvers on a Book Entitled, The Theory of the Earth. By Herbert Lord Bishop of Hereford. A Treatise of Moral and Intellectual Virtues, wherein their Nature is fully explained, and their Usefulness proved. By J. Hartcliff, B. D. Price 4 s. Contemplations Moral and Divine, in two Parts. By Sir Matthew Hale, Knight, late Chief Justice of the King's-Bench. Octav. Price 5 s. A Voyage to Suratt, in the Year 1689. giving a large Account of that City, and its Inhabitants, and of the English Factory there: Likewise a Description of Madera, St. Jago, Annobon, Ca∣benda, and Malemba (on the Coast of Africa) St. Helena, Johanna, Bombay, the City of Mu∣scatt, and its Inhabitants in Arabia Felix, Mocha, and other Maritim Towns on the Red-Sea, the Cape of good Hope, and the Island of A∣scension. By J. Ovington, M. A. Chaplain to His Majesty. Octav. Price 6 s. A plain Method of Christian Devotion; laid down in Discourses, Meditations, and Prayers, fitted to the various Occasions of a Religious Life: Translated and Revised from the French of Monsieur Jurieu, the two and twentieth E∣dition, with a Preface. By W. Fleetwood, Chap∣lain in ordinary to his Majesty. Price 2 s. 6 d.
LAW-BOOKS. THE Reports of Sir Peyton Ventris, Knight, late one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas, in Two Parts. The first, containing se∣lect Cases adjudged in the King's-Bench, in the Reing of K. Charles II. The Second Part, containing Choice Cases, adjudged in the Com∣mon-Pleas, in the Reign of K. Charles II. and K. James II. and in the three first Years of his now Majesty K. William and the late Q. Mary, while he was a Judge in the said Court, with the Pleadings to the same: with the Allow∣ance and Approbation of the Lord-Keeper and all the Judges. 2 Vol. in Fol. Price 1 l. 10 s. The Second Part of Modern Reports, be∣ing a Collection of several special Cases, most of them adjudged in the Court of Common-Pleas in the 26, 27, 28, 29, and 30. Years of the Reign of King Charles II. when Sir Francis North was Chief Justice of the said Court: to which are added several select Cases in the Courts of Chancery, Kings-Bench, and Exche∣quer; Carefully Collected by a learned Hand. Printed 1698. Price 12 s. The Lord Coke's Reports in English. Folio. Judge Crook's Reports in 3 Vol. the Third Edition, with References to all the late Re∣ports. Folio. The Lord Coke's Commentary on Littleton. Folio. —His Commentary on Magna Charta. Folio. —His Pleas of the Crown, or the Third Part of the Institutes. Folio. —His Jurisdiction of Courts, or Fourth Part of the Institutes.
—His Eleven Reports in French. Folio. Bulstrode's Reports, with New Referen. Folio. Leonard's Reports in Four Parts, with New References. Folio. The Year-Books in 10 Vol. the last Edit. with New Not. and Tables to them all. Folio. The Reports of the Lord-Keeper Littleton, in the time of King Charles I. Folio. The Reports of the Learned Judge, Sir Henry Hobart, the Fourth Edition corrected and a∣mended. Folio. Reports in the Court of King's-Bench at West∣minster, from the 12th. to the 30th. Year of King Charles II. by Jos. Keble of Grays-Inn, Esq; in Three Vol. Folio. Kelway's Reports with New References to all the late Reports. Folio. Reports of several especial Cases in the Court of Common-Pleas, by S. Carter of the Inner Temple, Esq; Folio. An Assistance to Justices of the Peace, for the easier Performance of their Duty, the First Part containing the particular Clauses of all such Statutes from Magna Charta, until the first of King James II. that do any ways concern a Ju∣stice of Peace; in the other Part, the whole Office of a Justice of Peace is methodically di∣gested, with the most approved Presidents un∣der proper Heads, to which is now added a Table for the ready finding out the Presidents, with a large Table of the matters never before Printed: By Jos. Keble of Grays-Inn, Esq. An exact Abridgment of the Records in the Tower of London, being of great Use for all that are concerned in Parliamentary Affairs,
and Professors of the Laws of this Realm, Col∣lected by Sir Rob. Cotton, Kt and Baronet. Folio. An exact Abridgment of the Statutes of K. William and Q. Mary, and of K William III. in Force and Use. Begun by Jo. Washington of the Middle Temple, Esq; and since his Death Revised and continued to the End of the last Session of Parl. Ap. 27. 1696. Oct. Price 4 s. The Scrivener's Guide, Being choice and ap∣proved Forms of Precedents, of all sorts of Business now in Use and Practice, in a much better method than any yet printed; being use∣ful for all Gentlemen, but chiefly for those who practice the Law. Octavo. Price 5 s. Styles's Practical Register, begun in the Reign of K. Charles I. consisting of Rules, Orders, and principal Observations concerning the Practice of the Common-Law in the Courts of Westmin. particularly the Kings-Bench, as well in matters Criminal as Civil; carefully continued down to this time. The Third Edition. Oct. Price 6 s. An exact Abridgment of all the Statutes in Form and Use from the beinning of Magna Charta; begun by Edm. Wingate, and since con∣tinued by J. Washington to the Year 1689. In this Impression many hundred of false Refe∣rences are corrected. Price 7 s. Two Dialogues in English between a Doctor of Divinity, and a Student of the Laws of England, of the Grounds of the said Laws, &c. Price 2 s. 6 d. The new Natura Brevium of the most Re∣verend Judge Mr. Anthony Fitz-Herbert, Cor∣rected and Revised. Price 6 s.
THE LIVES OF AELIUS SPARTIANUS, And the other AUTHORS, Composers of the Body Of the following HISTORY, Extracted from the Second BOOK of Latin Historians of GERARD VOSSIUS: AELIUS SPARTIANUS, THIS Author flourish'd in the time of the Emperor Dioclesian, to whom he dedi∣cates the Life of Adrian, as also those of Aelius Verus, of Didius Julianus, of Severus, and of Pescennius Niger. He has likewise left us the Life
of Antoninus Caracalla, but without any Dedi∣cation. As for that of Antoninus Geta, we find it addressed to Constantinus Augustus. It seems also from the beginning of the Life of Aelius Verus, as if he had written the Lives of those Emperors, who reigned before Adrian. And about the latter end of the Life of that Emperor, he gives us a view of what he had designed, in these words; Having proposed to my self to write the Hi∣story of all those, who since the time of Julius, have b  called Caesars, or Augustus, or that have  rinces adopted, or Natural Sons of the ors, or This re∣lates to their Apo∣theosis. Consecrated as Caesar's Kind But we have no Reason to believe that he ever finished that Design, since Vopiscus, who lived after him, affirms in the Life of Aurelian, that the Life of that Prince had never been writ∣ten by any one before himself. As to the rest, the Learned Salmasius tells us, that in the Collection of Spartian's Works, which he found in the Pala∣tine Library, there were further attributed to him the Life of Antoninus Pius, and those of An∣toninus the Philosopher, of Verus, of Pertinax, of Clodius Albinus, and of Macrinus, which are published under the Name of Julius Capitoli∣nus, and also that of Avidus Cassius, commonly supposed to be written by Vulcatius Gallicanus; and moreover, the Lives of Commodus, of An∣toninus Diadumenus, of Heliogabalus, and of Alexander Severus, which are attributed to Lam∣pridius. But I shall have occasion to speak here∣after of those which are supposed to be written by Vulcatius and Lampridius. As for the other that go under the Name of Julius Capitolinus, Vossius
had this Opinion of them, viz. that the par∣ticular Collection of Lives, above mentioned, in the Palatine Library, is no sufficient Reason for us to recede from the commonly received Opinion that Capitolinus was the Author of them; nor ought we to be at all surprised that we find here as many Books as there are Lives, nor yet at what Capitoli∣nus himself somewhere tells us, that he would if he saw it convenient, include the Lives of two or more Emperors together in one Volume; for in fine, he was not always of the sa ind, ha∣ving in the beginning designed a lar Book for each Life, and afterwards id several Lives in one, as is evident from  ginning of the Lives of the Gordiani, whereof we will treat more largely in the Life of Capitolinus. As for the Stile of Spartianus, and the other Composers of the following History, which we find commonly joyn'd together. Erasmus has this of them in his Ciceronian. One can find nothing, besides the Truth of the History, in those Authors that is useful or entertaining; for, to speak the Truth of them, they retain very little of the Purity of the Latin Tongue. But here Erasmus is a little too severe, and what Reputation soever he may have acquired for Learning, and particularly for his Knowledge in the Latin Tongue, yet in this case, we ought no more to rely on what he says, than on Horace in the Case of Plautus, or on Quintilian in that of Seneca and some others, who, notwithstanding their Reflections, have con∣tinued to preserve an inviolable Reputation.
Vulcatius Gallicanus THE SNATOR. TO understand how far Vulcatius Galli∣canus had engag'd himself to give us the History of the times wherein he lived, we need only have recourse to those words of his, in the Life of Avidius Cassius, which is the only one he has left us, viz. I design, says he, to Dioclesian Augustus, to write the Lives of all those, who, either justly or unjustly, have been stiled Emperor, to the end, to represent as it were at once to your view, all that have ar∣rived to the Imperial Dignity, or been ho∣noured by the Title of Augustus. But it is cer∣tain that he never accomplished that Design, since Vopiscus (as I before mentioned) tells us, speak∣ing of himself, that he was the first that ever writ the Life of Aurelian; and we may safely conclude that Vopiscus lived some time after Vul∣catius, since he makes mention of Trebellius Pollio, at the beginning of the Life of Aurelian, and of Julius Capitolinus, and Aelius Lampri∣dius,
at the beginning of the Life of Probus. But those were all contemporary with Vulcatius. But it may not be unworthy our observation, that among the antient Collections of the Works of Spartian, in the Palatine Library, we find that of Avidius Cassius, attributed there to him, as the Learned Salmasius has remarked, who seems inclinable to think that they are one and the same Author, both by reason of the time wherein he lived, and of the Stile, and same Design of the History; because, as Lampridius relates, he had proposed o himself to write an History of all the Emper ho lived since Julius Caesar, who had been fied by the Title of Caesar's or Augustus, and to make there∣of as many Books, as he should write Lives. Which you may also read in the third Chapter of the Life of Avidius Cassius; The Lives of all those who had either justly or unjustly been stiled Em∣perors, as we have already remarked. We may add to this, that as it is certain that Lampri∣dius never accomplish'd his Design, so the Author of the Life of Cassius has also left his imperfect. For as I have already said, Vopiscus maintains that no one before him had written the Life of Aure∣lian, and he has made no mention at all of Vul∣catius, when he had a very fair Opportunity of doing it, where he tells us; That in his Me∣moirs, he would content himself to imitate Gargilius Martialis, Julius Capitolinus, Aelius Lampridius, and others, who, in what they had transmitted to Posterity, had been more ob∣servant of the Truth of the History, than of elegance of Style. But it may be said, that he also comprehended Vulcatius in these words, and
others, &c. and that he would not express the Name of this Author, because though he might pro∣pose to himself to write of all the Emperors, yet that might only be perhaps out of some sort of Emulation of Spartianus, and that there is great probability, he contented himself with only the Life of Avidius, or perhaps some one more that may be since lost. To this also may be added, that if this Life of Cassius had not been written by Vul∣catius, how comes it about that it never went under th ame of Spartianus, of Lampridius, or of Canus? Or if there had been any Error in the Manuscripts, it is probable some would have gone under one Name, and some un∣der another, and yet we find in all the Copies, and all the Editions, the Name of Vulcatius Gal∣licanus prefixt to them, which we find no where else; and in that it is evident, the Copiers were not mistaken.
Julius Capitolinus. HE has written the Life of Antoninus Pius, and addressed it to the Emperor Diocle∣sian; whose Name he makes use of for the Life of Marcus Antoninus the Philosopher, tho' none of the Editions have any Dedication prefix'd to them. He ddicates also to Dioclesian the Life of the Emperor Verus; to which, if that be not rather to be attributed to Spartianus, we may further joyn the Life of Pertinax. For the Life which we have under the Name of Claudius Al∣binus, is dedicated to the Emperor Constantinus, and not to Dioclesian, as Casaubon thinks in the beginning of his Notes on Spartian. We have also by him the Life of Macrinus, and those of the two Maximim, and of the three Gordiani, dedicated to the same Constantinus. As for those of Maximus and Balbinus, which we have also under his Name, they are without any Dedication, and as for the rest which he writ of other Emperors, they are lost. It is evident that he has not car∣ried on the same Design throughout his Work, of making a particular Book for each Life, as he pro∣posed at the beginning, but has faln into ano∣ther Method, as he acquaint us himself at the beginning of the Lives of the Gordiani, where
he tells us expresly, that he had changed his mind as to that, and afterwards gives us his reason for so doing. Aelius Lampridius. THIS Author is one of those whom Vo∣piscus pretends to imitate in his Life of Probus. We have Four Lives done by him, viz. those of Commodus Antoninus, of Antoninus Diadumenus, of Antoninus Helio∣gabalus, and of Alexander Severus; the Two latter whereof are dedicated to Constantinus Au∣gustus. But we have some reason, to doubt whe∣ther Lampridius was the Author of the Life of Alexander Severus. It is true, it is attributed to him in the Edition of Milan, which is the first that was ever extant, but that excellent Manu∣script of the Palatine Library, ascribes it to Spar∣tianus, as does also Robertus à Porta of Bolo∣nia. But that Collection of Spartianus's Works in the Palatinate, whereof Salmasius speaks, does not only, ascribe this Life to him, but also those of the Three Antonini, which I have just now mentioned; which if it be true, there will not one remain for Lampridius. But, be is as it will, we have no Reason to give more Credit to the Palatine Collection, than to so many
other Manuscrips of Spartianus which have been published. Which notwithstanding if it seem to bear too much upon those of the contrary Opinion, I shall be willing to persuade my self that Aelius Spartianus, and Aelius Lampridius were the same Person, it being easte to apply that of Auso∣nius to the present Case. Three names are commonly affected by Persons of Quality. Moreover, besides those three or four Lives, Spartianus writ some other between them and that of Marcus Antoninus, whereof he makes mention in the beginning of the Life of Commo∣dus: and yet notwithstanding did not Compose the Lives of all the Emperors down to Constantinus, or to Dioclesian, as one may easily guess from the Life of Aurelian written by Vopiscus. Thus, as far as I see, we may without much difficulty Concede that Aelius Spartianus, and Aelius Lampridius were the same Person, under three names, as I have said before. And if this, or both, were of the Family of the Aeliani, from which the Emperor Adrian also was descended, their Original was illustrious enough: but this is all very uncertain, and we can draw no satisfa∣ctory Conclusions from it.
Trebellius Pollio. IN the first Edition of this Author which was at Milan, we find him called Tre∣vellius, and not Trebellius, according to A∣ventinus's Correction, in the second Book of his Annals, where he speaks of Ancient Writers: But that, in the Opinion of Vossius, was not at all necessary, For among Ancient Inscripti∣ons, says he, you may find, Trebellius Peli∣dianus, Trebellius Marinus, Proconsul, Trebel∣lia Tyche, and such like. We may add that Tre∣bellius is formed from Trebius, which is very frequently found among the said Inscriptions, as Trebius Germanus, Trebius Longus, Trebia C. F. Filumena. Nay, as Salmasius remarks, there are some Ancient Manuscripts to be seen, wherein this very Author is called Trebius Pol∣lio. Be it as it will, This Pollio, says Flavius Vopiscus in the Life of Aurelian, Has Composed an History of the Emperors both those that have render'd themselves famous, and those that have led obscure Lives, down from the two Philips to Claudius, and his Brother Quintilius. But there remains of this Authors, neither the Lives of the Philips, nor the Life of Decius, who suc∣ceeded the Philips; neither those of Gallus and
Volusianus, who came after Decius. Also we have only one part left of the Life of Vale∣rianus the Father, towards the end: but we have that which follows, and also the Life of Vale∣rianus the Son, the Lives of the two Gallieni, and of the thirty Tyrants who usurped the Em∣pire in the time of Gallienus. As to his Book, which he Entitles of the thirty Tyrants, it seems to have a respect to the thirty Tyrants which Commanded in Athens after Ly∣sander; and without doubt this Author had a fansie to parallel the Roman Empire with that State, in having also thirty Tyrants in the time of Valerianus and Gallienus, because there were several. But he reckons no more than twenty nine, wherefore to make up the number of thirty he adds Valens to them, who liv'd before, and indeed he himself owns that he revolted in the time of Decius. But if we may exceed the time of Valerianus, and Gallienus, we may add a great many more besides Valens. Howsoever so small a fault as this scarce deserves Criti∣cising upon the Judgment of this Historian: and there is yet less reason to reflect on him for his admitting two Women into his List of Ty∣rants, viz. Zenobia and Victoria: for it is common to denominate things from the Nobler Gender; thus you see Women admitted into the number of Illustrius Poets, as Sappho and Co∣rinna; but for this Trebellius excuses himself at the latter end of his Work. He liv'd in the time of Constantius Chlorus, Father of Con∣stantinus,
as we may easily Conjecture, since he mentions him in the beginning of the Life of the Emperor Claudius, Brother of Quintilius. Which agrees very well with what he says of his Uncles being a Familiar Friend of the young Tetricus one of the thirty Tyrants. Vopiscus commends the diligence of this Hi∣storian at the beginning of the Life of Firmus. Furthermore, if we consider the time wherein he lived, his Language and Stile are not unworthy of praise, whereof Gesner in the first Tome of his Bibliotheca, gives this Encomium, that they are not without both Politeness and Nicety; but that in some places his Stile rises a little too high for History: and Vossius is of the same Opinion.
Flavius Vopiscus. THIS Author, a Sicilian Born at Syra∣cuse, has writ the Life of the Emperor Aurelian, and also of Tacitus, and his Brother Florianus; to which he likewise adds that of Probus, which he Dedicates to Rufus Celsus, as he calls him in the Life of Firmus. Afterwards he Composed those of the four Ty∣rants, Firmus, Saturninus, Proculus and Bo∣nosus, and lastly those of the three Emperors Carus, Numerianus, and Carinus at once, which is all remains of his; for we have no Author that attributes any thing else to him. As for the time wherein he liv'd we have sufficient Authorities to ascertain it. He tells us himself that his Uncle was present at that Harangue made when Aper was killed by Dioclesian. In the Life of Carinus he Celebrates the praises of Di∣oclesian and Maximinian, of Galerius and Con∣stantius, and says that each of their Lives was written in so many particular Books by Claudius Eusthenius, Secretary to Dioclesian: And says on that very Subject, it must not be Expected that he should do the same, because it is very dan∣gerous to Write the Histories of Princes while they are alive. Whence it is Evident that he
lived after the time Constantius Chlorus, Father of Constantinus. And he says in the Life of Aurelian, We have at present Constantius for our Emperor. But I am apt to think that that was the first Life he Writ, and that he Composed that of Carinus after the death of Constantius: for if it be not so, in the room of Constantius we must read the Emperor Constantinus, or else understand Constantius, Son of the said Con∣stantinus. But the first of these two Opinions is far the most probable; and certainly, by those words which we find in the Life of Probus, it is Evident that he Writ long before that the life of Aurelian, viz. But since no other undertakes it, I cannot suffer, after having been the only Person that has Writ the Life of Aurelian (which I did as exactly as I could) and having also Composed the Lives of Tacitus and Florie∣nus, that that of Probus, and the memory of his glorious Actions should lye buried in silence. If I live I design also to write all the Lives of the Princes since his time down to Maximia and Dioclesian. Methinks we have reason to praise, in Vopiscus, besides his Learning, the or∣der which he always observes, in the recital of what he Writes; which Spartianus, Capitoli∣nus, and the other Authors of the Imperial History have not took so much care of, since in the Judg∣ment of several, Affairs therein are far more Con∣fused. He had likewise proposed to himself to Write the Life of Apollonius Tyanaeus, whose Sorceries the Gentiles made use of to oppose, and set up against the true Miracles of Jesus Christ, and in the Life of Aurelian he calls that Impo∣stor,
A Person who had acquir'd a vast Reputa∣tion by his Wisdom, in the ancient Opinions of the Philosophers, a real Friend of Truth, and worthy of Divine Honours. And a lit∣tle after. What Person was ever seen more ho∣ly, more venerable, more possessed of the Opi∣nions of the Ancients, and more Divine a∣mong Men? He restored Life to the Dead, and both spoke, and did many things above the reach of human Power. But if any one would know more as to the particulars, let him read those Grecian Authors who have written his Life. From these words it is easie to guess, what a Rhapsody of Lies we might have expected from Vopiscus concerning this Person, whom he so much admired, if he had writ his Life, which he pre∣sently after promises in Language which suffici∣ently testifies the Veneration he paid to his me∣mory.
