D2747 17018474 105804
THE Maiden-WARRIER: OR, The Damsels Resolution to Fight in Field, by the side of Iockey her entire Love. To an Excellent New Tune. Licensed according to Order. VAliant Jockey's march'd away, To fight the Foe, with Great Mackay; Leaving me poor Soul, alas! forlorn, To curse the hour I e'er was born: But Ise swear Ise follow too, And dearest Jockey's Fate pursue, Near him be to Guard his precious Life, Never Scot had sike a Loyal UUife: Swor'd Ise wear, Ise cut my Hair, Tann my Cheeks that once were thought so fair, In Soldiers Weed to him Ise speed, Never sike a Trooper crost the Tweed. Trumpet sound a Uictory, Ise kill my self the next Dundee; Love and Rage, and Fate do's all agree, To do some Glorious thing by me: Great Bellona take my part, Fame and Glory steel my Heart, That for our bonny Scotland's geud, Some brave Action may deserve my Bloud: Nought shall appear of Female fear, Fighting by his side I love so dear; All the UUorld shall own, that ne'er was known Sike a pretty Lass this thousand Year,
Now in Noble Armour bright, Ise with Couragious Heart will fight; Fear of Death shall ne'er my Courage stain, King William's Rights Ise will-Maintain: For the Glory of our Sex, Ise aw the Rebles will perplex, And let them find that UUomen-kind, Sometimes venture with a UUarlike mind: Age of Old, our Fame has told, Therefore Ise will never be controul'd; By Friend or Foe, Ise freely goe, Never was a Trooper armed so. Ise a Helmet will put on, Like a right Ualiant UUarlike Man, Plates of Steel shall guard my Back and Breast, Carbines and Pistols Ise protest, In my hand Ise cock and prime, Now and for ever is the time: UUhile I thus am mounted Cap-a-pae, UUarlike Thunder shall my Musick be, Let smoke arise and dim the Skies, UUhile we do pursue the UUarlike prize; Lawrels shall Crown with true Renown, The Uictory in City, Court and Town. Mars the God of UUar shall lead The Army, that will fight and bleed, E'er our Foe shall hope to win the day, Therefore let us march with speed away; Hark! Ise hear the Trumpets sound, UUe shall be aw with Conquest Crown'd; Let the High-land Rebels brag and boast, Death in Triumph shall ride through their Hoast: Glory and Fame shall then Proclaim Th' Actions of a valiant UUarlike Dame; If Foes draw nigh, I scorn to flye, UUith my dearest Love Ise live and dye. Jockey's Answer. HAst thou such a valiant heart, To fight and take the Nations part, By the side of Jockey thy delight, For to put the Enemy to flight? I thy Courage must commend, Yet like a true entire Friend, I would have thee stay at home, said he, For the Wars are most unfit for thee; Moggy you are youthfull and fair, Therefore can thy tender Nature hear The Shrieks and Cries which fills the Skies, As the Enemy we do surprize? Love, said he, the loud Alarms In midst of night to Arms to Arms, Will it not affrighten thee, my dear, Should you such a sudden 'larum hear, And before the break of day, Many a valiant Souldier may, Lie in streams of reeking purple Gore; Therefore Moggy whom I do adore, Should'st thou be slain and I remain, It would fill my Heart with muckle pain. She did reply, happy am I If I in the Bed of Honour die. Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden-Ball, in Pye-corner.
