f288 11209145 46778
A Faithful Souldier; OR THE SPEECH OF A Private Souldier Concerning his ARREARS. And putting the CAPTAIN to Death. Dedicated to Parson PETERS'S Seconds, Smith, Care, Harris, Curtis, and to all the Crew. Fellow Souldiers, HEar me a word or two; I have somewhat to say which con∣cerns every man of us: We hear they intend to put the King to Death: They know (Fellow Souldiers) it is in our Pow∣er to save his Life; for if we think fit to have him live, nei∣ther Council nor Commissioners will dare to touch him; and as our Case yet stands, I think we are stark mad if we suffer him to die: For as yet they have not paid us our Arrears, and perhaps never will when the King is once dead: They promised to pay us this day and that day; but now they confess, that indeed they dare not give us our Arrears: For they say, If we Souldiers once had all our Money, we would soon disband and go home to our Friends. Is this fair Deal∣ing? By this Rule we must never have it: For they can always say they dare not trust us. This makes them give us now and then a Pit∣tance, which scarce keeps Life and Soul together; but for our Arrears, (which are as truly ours as the Cloaths upon our Backs) we may wait long enough: For if the King be put to Death, there will be such
Weeping, such Cursing and Raging; All England will cry out, and say, O ye Bloody Souldiers, have ye Murther'd our King? Ye took Oaths and Cove∣nants to defend his Person, and now have you cut his Throat? Truly (Fellow Souldiers) we are arrant Fools, to make the World hate us for Killing the King, and yet we not be one penny the better for it: If we see cause, we can any time hereafter take away his Life, when we have our Arrears, and things are better setled; but if now we shed his Blood, we can never make him alive again; therefore, before we do that which can never be undone, let us Souldiers make our best use of it: Let us declare, That until they pay us all our Arrears, they shall not put the King to Death; let us do this, and (on my Life) it will bring in every penny of our Money: You shall see, they will strive who shall first pay us; those that are so hot to have the King's Blood, will pay us rather than let him live; and those who are his Friends, will give us any thing, rather than let him die. My Land∣lord told me, that if we Souldiers would save the King's Life (which we can easily do) the King's Friends would pay us all our Arrears, and give us 200000 l. as a Gratuity; besides, he bid us name our Sum, and it should be paid us down upon the Nail: And why (Fellow Soul∣diers) should we refuse this? Now is the time; for when the King is dead, they will not give us two-pence. We know the Scots would not part with the King until they had their 200000 l. and are not our Arrears as due as theirs? Nay, when the Parliament got the King, they would have kept him, had not we resolutely fetch'd him from Holdenby; yet while they had him, they grew so high, that they offer'd to disband us without paying all Ar∣rears. Then we got the King, and while we used him civilly, all England was for us: Who then but the Army, the King and the Army were in every Man's Mouth? But as soon as we clapt him in Carisbrook Castle, and suffered none to make Addresses to him, then all the King∣dom cried out upon the Army; each County began to rise upon us: You know what Work we had in Wales, Kent, Essex, Twenty Thou∣sand Scots pouring in upon us; who, if they had but the Twentieth part of our English Courage, we had found a hard Task of it; So still you see the King is All in All: Whoever got the King, had the Hearts of the People; in all our Quarters, and wherever we March'd, ye heard the People still calling for their King: If they hate us, and fought with us for keeping him in Prison, how will they rage when they see us cut his Throat? Think ye that then they will pay us our Arrears? I say (Fellow Souldiers) we are all stark mad if we let the King die till we have our Money. But perhaps some will say, That the Council of War does not hin∣der our Arrears, That they are Officers, and would be as glad of their Money as we would. I confess indeed, some Officers would, for some are in the same Case with us; but the Chief Commanders, and the Grandees are of another Mind; they have all at Command, Sequestra∣tions, Offices, Parliament and All: Lieutenant-General Cromwell hath many Thousand Pounds a Year of the Earl of Worcester's Estate. They can pay themselves; but when will they pay us; They make the
Parliament Vote what they please: Nay, (Fellow Souldiers) when we took the Money from Weavers Hall, the Council of War refused to let us have it; but voted, forsooth, to send it to the Navy: He that writes the Occurrences says so in Print; and the other day, they and the House voted 200000 l. more for the Navy: They know the Seamen can pay themselves; they have Ships in their Power, as we now have the King in our Power; and should we serve them as the Seamen served them, perhaps then we might have our Arrears; but if at any time we ask for Money, Mr. Peters is hired to stop our Mouths, that Fellow hath cozened us I know not how often; and by my Con∣sent, when next he comes, let us clap him Neck and Heels: He said they would pay us as soon as we came to London; but here we have waited two Months longer, yet no Arrears: Then they told us, that the Parliament was full of rotten Members, and the House must be purged e're we could be paid. I think we gave it a sufficient Purge; we imprisoned, and drove away so many Members, that we have not left above Fifty or Threescore; not a Member sits now, but such as our Council of War approved of; and both they, and our Council have sate Seven Weeks, yet no Arrears: Alas (Fellow Souldiers) these are all Tricks, meer Tricks, they can never want such Excuses as these; and if now we let them take the King, and put him to Death, we may go whistle for our Arrears. But suppose now we had our Arrears, which we are not like if we lose this Opportunity, are we the better for this King's Death? When he is gone, either we must have another King, or a new kind of Go∣vernment; and this new Government will be either a Parliament or a Committee, or many Kings at once: For Parliaments and Committees, we know how they have used us; they voted and gathered up Wealth for themselves, but let us bleed and starve, sink or Swim, all was one to them; and for many Kings at once, they say, that heretofore Eng∣land had six or seven Kings at a time; but these petty Kings were little better than one of our Colonels, and they never left cutting one ano∣thers Throats, till all again came under one King: If then we must have but one King still, why should we kill this King? We know, when he dies, his Son, the Prince of Wales is King: What, must we cut his Throat also? We cannot if we would; and this King's Blood will stick so upon us, and make us so abominable to all the People, we shall have small Heart to kill any more Kings; but were it in our Pow∣er to destroy this King and all his Posterity, and all the Kings in Chri∣stendom, who are his Allies, who then shall be our King? The Coun∣cil says in our Remonstrance, we must have an Elective King; but whom shall we elect? If we chuse our General, alas, he will be sedu∣ced by wicked Council: We know he is a gallant Man in the Field; but at Councils of War, he does little, and speaks less; he is fitter to be our General than our King; or shall Lieutenant-General Cromwell be the Man? The truth is, they talk most of him, and I believe he looks to be a King; and therefore I should think him unfittest of all. Six Years since he was but Captain Cromwell; and if now he be such a great Man, it is our Swords have made him so. Should any man have
said to us six Years ago, Ye Souldiers shall fight, and never leave fighting till ye have cut King Charles his Throat, and made Captain Cromwell King of England? I think we all should have thought that Man mad; and yet (Fellow Souldiers) this is our Case: Have we not spun a fine Thread? Let who will be King, we shall be but Private Souldiers still. I remem∣ber a Tale of a Knight and a Carrier; the Knight coming from London, met the Carrier, and told him News, how King Edward was Murder∣ed, and Crook-Back'd Richard was Crowned King of England. Alas, Sir, said the Carrier, what is that to me? I shall be but a Carrier still: So whether it be King Charles, or King Cromwell, we shall be but Pri∣vate Souldiers still. What are Crowns and Scepters to us? When the King was at Carisbrook and Hampton Court, he offer'd to pay us all our Arrears, and to grant us the Militia as long as he lived: Could any King say more? For my part, I like him as well as Lieutenant-General Cromwell. King Charles is as liberal as Lieutenant-General Cromwell. King Charles is as chaste as Lieutenant-General Cromwell. King Charles is as merciful as Lieutenant-General Cromwell. King Charles is as wise as Lieutenant-General Cromwell. King Charles is as tem∣perate as Lieutenant-General Cromwell. King Charles is as patient as Lieutenant-General Cromwell. King Charles is as handsome a Man as Lieutenant-General Cromwell. King Charles hath as sweet Children as Lieutenant-General Cromwell. King Charles is as well descended as Lieutenant-General Cromwell. Remember when first we refused to Disband, it was for our Arrears and Indempnity, confirm'd by the Roy∣al Assent. We had an Ordinance of both Houses, but we wanted his Majesties Royal Assent. What, can we have his Assent after we have cut his Throat? Sure we are all mad: Alas (Fellow Souldiers) What good can the King's Blood do us? We now can save his Life with a wet Finger: Let us do it, we shall get all our Arrears, Indemnity, and e∣very thing; all the Kingdom, City and Country will love us and pray for us. Now or never (Fellow Souldiers) Let us save our Credit, save our Arrears, save our King's Life, One and All, God's Blessing go a∣long with us. FINIS. London, Printed in the Year 1680/1.
