J497 11931138 51125
DANIEL IN THE DEN: OR, THE LORD PRESIDENT'S Imprisonment, AND MIRACULOUS DELIVERANCE. REPRESENTED In a DISCOURSE from HEB. XI. v. 33. By S. J. Rector of Chinner in the County of Oxon. DAN. 6.23. Innocency was found in me, and also before thee, O King, have I done no hurt. LONDON, Printed by J. A. for John Dunton, at the Sign of the Black Raven in the Poultrey, 1682.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE ANTHONY EARL of SHAFTSBƲRY, Late Lord PRESIDENT of his Majesties most Honourable Privy Council. My Lord, HOly Writ acquaints us with many cursed Conspiracies against the Innocent and the Good. But I find none more sottish and cruel, than that we read of, John 12. v. 10.11. Where the High-prists con∣sult to put (not Jesus only, but) Lazarus also to Death; because by reason of him many of the Jews believed on Jesus. Lazarus wasguilty of no Crime, but because [he was.] It seems his
very Being and Life was fault enough, which though redeem'd by a Miracle, must now be destroy∣ed by Malice: For his bare Presence and Motion Drew Disciples; his very Looks preached the Go∣spel; he opened his Eyes and Taught. And while thus doing, he would never make an end of doing mischief to them. Therefore they consult to dispatch him out of sight, and to silence this Teacher, by muf∣fling him up in a Napkin again, and laying him under a Stone. It is certain (My Lord) that every Turn of your Head, Glance of your Eye, Motion of your Hand, Step of your Foot is a vexation and a Plague to your Enemies the Papists, who believe your very Shadow so fatal to all their Contri∣vances and Aims, that whilst You live, they Shrivel and Wither. Your Breath strikes con∣fusion to all their Plots, and therefore no wonder they have variously consulted your Death, as well as your Great Masters: Lazarus must dye too. But then to promote it by projecting a Design of
setting Jesus against Lazarus, and imposing a be∣lief that He [Innocent He] should conspire the ruine of his Masters Honour and Kingdom, is a Plot like to prosper into the same Glory of the Proje∣ctors, as this your Lordship will hear of in the fol∣lowing Discourse. One would swear such Men were Planet-struck, their Counsels confounded from Heaven (as the Languages at Babel) and the Witnesses stammering out an improbable E∣vidence. Praised be God, who hath frustrated (hitherto) all their Hellish attempts both against your Sove∣raign and Self. May his Majesty live for ever, a sure Defender of our Faith and Church: And may your Lordship live too, the Dread and Eye-sore of the Enemies of its peace. And may You ne∣ver be Imagin'd to be lessened in the Affections of your Prince, nor in your own to the Interests of his Royal Person and Kingdom; but may Realize in your Devotion to Majesty, those Hyperbolical expressions of Allegiance and Duty wherewith Furre and
Velvet, have even tired the Court all this Year. And let that idle imputation and reproach of a Re∣publican Design be equally the Subject of your Diversion and scorn. When all wise Men know you too Prudent and Politick to endeavour the un∣hinging those firm Establishments of Church and State, to whose fixation and Glory you lent so Great an hand, and (I doubt not) bear so true an Heart, however enviously the contrary be insinuated by your Inveterate Enemies. And no wonder, when Jesus himself (who dar'd the World and Devil to convince him of sin against God) was yet In∣dicted of Treason against Caesar, (Joh. 19.22.) and bawl'd to death by the Exclamations of those, whose Hypocritical pretences to Loyalty, serv'd only to mask very fitly the Face of their Cruelty. From which God ever defend your Lordship and all Good Men. I am (My Lord) Your Lordships Most humble Servant, S. J.
HEB. XI. 33. Who through Faith— stopped the Mouths of Lyons. THis Chapter, (as a Cabinet enrich'd with Variety of costly Jewels) is all throughout Enamell'd with the Glo∣ries of Faith. Some very Antique, even from the first World, the Lustre of Abel, Enoch, and Noah shine here. The rest not Modern, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Mo∣ses, Samuel, and the Prophets (as Stars of the first Magnitude) dart down their several Rayes and In∣fluences upon the Church in all Ages; and here altogether make up a glorious Constellation. And thou Daniel the Prophet, art not the least among all the Princes and Prophets of Judah, for out of thee proceeded this Eximious Faith (in the Text) That stopped the Mouths of Lyons, so as they could do thee no harm, because Innocency was found in thee, &c. The Text being Historical will necessarily enforce me to give you a Cursory and Paraphrastical account of this Prophets Story, and the several Remarques of his Life and Honours; but especially of his Suf∣ferings and Imprisonment, and the Faith that pro∣cured
him the Miraculous Deliverance from the Lyons. Please you therefore to take a Transient view of him, (as the Holy Ghost has drest him up, and dis∣play'd him before us, in his own Book:) 1. In his Lineage and Descent; Daniel's high Birth. he is (if not of the Blood Royal) at least of the Seed of the Princes, and Noble, Chap. 1.3. And the Great Soul that managed all his Actions with that Bravery and Cou∣rage, confirms the highness of his Extract; E forti∣bus creantur fortes. Our Prophet was Born Honoura∣ble, and the whole Series of his Life, was no whit de∣rogatory from, but Ornamental to the Glory of his Birth. 2. In the Beauty of his Personage; Perfect Beauty. the Gracefulness of his Body vying perfection with the Graces of his Mind, each striving in him for Superiority; and both rendring him very amiable and lovely, Chap. 1.4. 3. In his excellent Breeding and Education; Good Breeding. He is a choise Spirit, cull'd out to be trained up and in∣structed by Royal Mandate, in all the Learning of the Chaldees, and taught the Mysteries and Policies of State, that he might stand before the King, verse 5. And is therefore wrought up to be a polished Pillar for the support of the Government. 4. In the admirable Abstinence of his Youth; Admirable Abstinence. he Re∣ligiously declines from the Luxuries of the Court, and the Delicacies of the Kings Table, and abstemiously satisfies himself with Pulse and Water, v. 12. A Rare Example. 5. In his Sublime Wisdom and Knowledge; Sublime Wisdom. God also
overlaying his humane Acquisitions with the Gold of Divine Grace, Sanctifying him into a knotty and puzling Prophet, hard to be understood; and giving him a particular Skill and Understanding in Unridling Dreams and Visions of the Night, v. 17. And dissolving hard Questions, Cap. 5.12. As also the Spirit of Go∣vernment, and fitness for publick Affairs. 6. In his Merited Promotion: Merited Promotion. for his Wisdom he is preferred and made a Great Man by the King: Lord Lieutenant over the whole Province of Babylon; to inspect the Kings Treasures, &c. Cap. 2.48. And Chief Governour and Master of all the Magicians and Wise Men, cap. 2.28. & 4.49.—And is fixed at Court, Cap. 2.49. 7. In his exemplary Piety; Exemplary Piety. for through the whole croud of those distractions, his Offices and Honours involve him in, yet he passes to Heaven Thrice a day, and commands Cares to stand below, while himself climbs the Mount, and dispatches Business with his God, cap. 6.10. 8. In his Religious Care; Religious Care for good Mens Advance. for being himself now promoted to Honour, he improves his whole Interest for the advancement of his Friends, (Men of the same excellent Spirit with himself) to a share in the ad∣ministration of the Government. An act of great Pie∣ty to God, good Policy to the King, Great Favour to his Friends, and great Comfort to the Church in her Affliction and Exile. Daniel requested of the King, and he set Shadrach, Meshech and Abednego over the Affairs of the Province of Babylon, Cap. 2.49. Lastly, In the good Effect of his Care; The good-Effect of that Care. for these brave Men being now made publick Officers in the
State, and summon'd to obey the Idolatrous Decree of Nebuchadnezzar (to which all his Princes, Gover∣nours and other Officers had rendred a ready and un∣disputed Obedience;) These alone find a Faith and a Courage, singly to oppose themselves, and dare give check to the yet uncontrolled Torrent of his impious Law and Command, owning the true God and professing the fulness of a generous confidence in his Power, even to the very Face of the incensed Mo∣narch: Whose angry Commands therefore of aggra∣vating their Torments in the Fire, did but still in∣crease the glorious Miracle of their Deliverance in and out of it, and at last produce a Decree of Honour to the God and Religion they confessed, and a greater Augmentation of Office and Power to themselves, Cap. 3. So little do faithful Men disad∣vantage themselves by a fixed adherence to the Truth and Principles they believe, and so greatly do they Honour their Profession and their God; when in the Face of his Enemies and of Death it self, they dare own him with constancy and courage. And what assurance do such Men give to their Prince of all ima∣ginable Truth and Fidelity, in the Loyal discharge of their Duties, and faithful answering to all the Con∣fidence and Trust reposed in them, with all security and peace? What a service then did Daniel to the Crown in lifting Men of such Heroick temper into places of Authority and Power? How happy is that Prince whose Affairs are so securely lodg'd in the mini∣stration of those who had rather die than betray their Soveraign by an ill Act; no not by an Easie
humouring him in his Sin; and sooner resign them∣selves into the hazard of his utmost displeasure, than to flatter him in Designs so dishonourable to God, perni∣cious to himself, and opposite to their Principles and Conscience? Daniel thus richly clad with all the Graces of a good Prophet, Beloved of God, and Ne∣chadnezzar. no wonder he is so oft proclaimed the Favourite of Heaven, A man greatly beloved of God, Cap. 9.29. & 10. v. 11.19. So, being enriched with all the properties of a Prudent States-man, no won∣der he is so greatly beloved of the King, as one re∣plenished with the Spirit of the Holy Gods, Chap. 4.8, 9. In the full lustre of whose favour (we may be sure) he continued shining through the whole Series of this Monarch's Reign without Eclipse. There are, Love God then, who can they but wrap themselves in the warm embraces of Earthly Majesty, very fanatically hold the Bosom of Divine Love but for a cold Lodging. 'Tis pity such should pass from the Meridian of Royal favour into the obscurities of Divine Vengeance; but they may. I will get as close to my King as I can, but it is good for me to draw near to God too, least my Prince die (as Daniel's did) and leave me miserable. Nor is Piety it self a Protection, that can justi∣fie or secure me from the least affront to Royalty, And the King too. since if good Men must be loved as the Images of God's Holiness, certainly good Princes, as the more Express ones, both of his Holiness and his Power. Now whether (upon his death) our Prophet retired from Court, A Stranger at Court in Bel∣shazzar's Reign. and betook himself to a pri∣vate and more Sedate course of life, to attend the
immediate Service of his God: Or whether Bellshaz∣zar being a dissolute Prince gave no encourage∣ment to so good a Man to continue about him: Or whether He, (being but the Grandchild of Nebuchad∣nezzar his Daughters Son) might be too young to hear of the Memorable passages of Daniel's Wisdom and Service in the Life of his Grandfather, and perhaps bred elsewhere at a distance from the Court: Or, whether times had worn off the Memory and Novelty of these Transactions: Or what else, I know not: But he seems a perfect Stranger (now) in the Palace: Till Letters by a strange hand (with∣out an Arm) occasion his Summons to Court again. Where (it seems) Belshazzar and his Lords were acting the Religion of the Quakers, but un∣derstand not their own Institution (it puzled the whole Council of the Wise Men to understand it too) till the Q. But sent for in a fright. And promo∣ted by him. Mother thinks that One Daniel might, whom she therefore recommends to the King: There is a Man in thy Kingdom, of an excellent Spirit and Knowledge, &c. Let Daniel be call'd, Chap. 5.12. Who is therefore sent for, and highly caress'd with proffers of Dignity and Honour; which he (brave Man) as nobly slights (and knows that Princes in a Fright use not to bid low for their ease:) Let thy gifts be to thy self, and give thy rewards to ano∣ther, yet I will read the Writing, v. 17. And gene∣rously gives his Majesty a cast of his Office, to set∣tle again his trembling Heart. But Oh! in the Mystical Characters was lapped up the Tragical Prophesie of his doom. It seems he wanted some Grains of that Weight and worth,
which should have rendred him Currant in the Ballance. Too vain and light a Prince to support the Massiness of Empire. For as Esau ravenously eat up his Birth-right, so he as prophanely drinks away his Kingdom; and no Cups please him to tipple in but the poor Captive Ones of the Sanctuary (up∣braiding Heaven, that could not redeem them from his gods;) He so little remembred his Grandfathers gra∣zing in the Fields as a Beast, that himself was be∣come a greater Brute in his Palace; and forgets that the very Breath of his Nostrils is a Tenant at will to his Maker. No wonder then that Hea∣ven rings his passing Bell. And though he calls for a Priest, yet he cannot revoke the immutable Decree, which seals him up to destruction. How∣ever e'er he go, has this Policy left, that he hopes to bribe Heaven to a Reprieve, by exalting so God-like a Man as Daniel (a Friend of the gods) to Honour, and Proclaims him The Third Ruler in the Kingdom, Chap. 5.29. But alas! this Glory was very short-liv'd, Belshazzer slain. for the Fountain of it lyes (that very Night) bleed∣ing in the Dust. The Prophesie was fulfill'd, and the King call'd for to Judgment, v. 30. However, upon the Change, our Prophet is no loser, for the Kingdom being translated to Darius the Mede, Darius suc∣ceeds, who makes him. (to whose Ears the Report and Fame of the great Daniel's Parts and Excellency quickly arrives, and himself being Old) for the Ease of his Government, 1. He Constitutes under him an Hundred and twenty Deputies, Chap. 6.1.
2. Over all these, Three Presidents, to whom they were to make their Accounts. 3. And of these three was our Daniel chief in Com∣mission: Lord chief President. The very first Minister of State. Thus you have him in the Zenith of his Honours, Lord high President over all the Kings Councils and Treasures, next and immediately under himself Supreme Gover∣nour, together with the Reason which justifies the Kings great Prudence and Policy in promoting him to so high Degree, And where∣fore. (viz.) Because an Excel∣lent Spirit was found in him.— He was every way qualified for his Station. But this Mighty Preferment soon contracts an universal Envy upon him from those whose Dim Eyes could not see, The Princes Envy. or whose Cankered Spirits would not weigh his Merits in a Righteous Scale. The Hill of Honour is dangerously trod, though by ne∣ver so fair and meritorious Feet. Envious Men hate to acknowledge a worth beyond their own, and look with a squint Eye on all above themselves. The Promotion that falls not on their own Heads, grieves their Hearts, and is plotted against. Indeed Daniel was an Alien and a Captive; and for such a One to top them in their own Countrey, was (they thought) insufferable: For this Stranger to Monopolize their Princes affections, and bear away the greatest share of his Heart and Prefer∣ments, (while themselves must truckle under him, dance his attendance, and strike Top-sail to him;) This they could with no patience endure. There∣fore the Presidents and Princes sought to find occa∣sion against Daniel.
Yet Safely may the Heavenly Aspirer fix his steps while he has no Competitor to contend with him; Note. and few are Emulous of the Caelestial Crown. The Four and twenty Elders may pass an Eternity, e're any below disturb their Honours, while weak Eyes wax sore at the sight but of a Coronet, though the King him∣self has stuck it on. They sought to find occasion, &c. And Consult against him. And methinks I fancy them sitting in close Consult against him, and ransacking every Inch of his Life and Man∣ners. Not an under-Officer, but is brought in and strict∣ly examin'd upon Oath, if possibly the least defect might be found in his Managements or Accounts: And perhaps the very Attendants of his Family Brib'd or Menac'd into an unreserved confession and disclosure of the daily Customs of his House, nay and those of his very Oratory and Bed-cham∣ber. Nor must the freedom of his Table be al∣lowed him unpurged, if probably even There but a Syllable might escape him, which may be Artificially interpreted into Treason, or wrench'd (but) into the misprision of it; Or but any thing which might bear the least shadow or Reflexion of dishonour or damage to the great Person, Dignity or Inte∣rest of his Royal Master. But when now after all this, Nothing is squeez∣ed out that can (though but) colourably charge him; How do they fret and vex, and are ready to Indict even his Care and his Caution? And are vext that they want Eyes to penetrate into the very Recesses of his Soul. For it may be, There, might Sculk some Trayterous and
Disloyal Thought, which gladly would they tear out from his Heart, and produce in Evidence against him. But if, even That be White and In∣nocent too, they again wax Mad, and Curse his very Lovalty and Truth, and could wish that his Snowy Innocence would take a Crimson Dye, But find no∣thing to charge him with. and be (though but Superficially) Criminal. They sought occasion but could find none, for as much as he was faith∣ful— Neither was there any Errour or Fault found in him, Chap. 6.4. Prying Inquisition is the Jackall to Malice, which fetches in the Stores it feeds on; And if it chance to light on a full Prey, how greatly does it gratifie the Beast it's Master; but if it make but a lean Hunt, what a Deal of groaning and grumbling Discontent is there? What a plague is it to envy Innocence, and to make anothers Health Ones own Disease? Is thine Eye Evil because mine is Good? And 'tis madness to forget, Note. into how many Snares and fatal Dangers the loose and unguarded Life betrayes Men in the World, when the greatest Circumspection and most accurate Vigilance, shall not secure the Wary and Provident Daniel from the Gripes of his malicious and conspiring Ene∣mies. Yet for ever be it Remarqu'd, ☞ to the Honour of these eager Conspirators, That the height of this Feavourish Rage did not distemper them into the Distraction of perjurious Revenges, nor the Detesta∣ble Contrivances of Subornation against him they hate. They will not Damn Souls to destroy Bodies. Their very Heathen Consciences boggled at that
Hellish practice.— 'Tis enough for Rome and Hell to boast such impious Customs, and pro∣duce such frightful Monsters, where they are dis∣pens'd with and encourag'd with due rewards, (unless perhaps they have of late Landed among us, in hopes to serve a Great Turn, but in Vain,) and O God may these Vermine return again to their own home, and no longer infest our Air with their infectious Breath. And now very despair make these Plotters Wit∣ty, they alter the Measures of their Counsels. They alter Counsels, And since nothing can be discovered Defective in his Allegiance to his Prince, they will weave a Net that shall ensnare him in the exactness of his Obe∣dience to his God. His very Devotions shall be twisted into a Cord that shall strangle him. And if he dare pay service to his Maker, And Plot against Reli∣gion. even That shall be High Treason against his King. And (to save them the Labour) he shall Pray himself into the Grave. For, said these men, we shall find no occasion against this Daniel, except we find it against him con∣cerning the Law of his God, verse 5. But I would wish no greater Judgment upon Plotters than to find them bending their Wits against Heaven, which is ever engaged to destroy Them, for its own Se∣curity and Honour. Nor can an Arrow be shot against Piety without hitting God himself directly in the Face. Since all that is in the World is but his Reflexion up∣on the Soul, and He is as much in one Beam or Ray of his Holiness that shines in the Creature below, is in the whole Sun of it that makes Glory above. The Malice that wounds a Saint, would destroy the Deity if it could.
How do I see them Chuckle, Which, they are sure will take. and bless their Wits in this New Contrivance. A Plot so exquisitely woven, that there is no room for so much as the least fear or Jealousie of its Miscarriage and failure. They question not the success in the least. He must turn Atheist to prevent the danger; and for∣sake his God, or his Life. Projecting Heads may plod together, and jumble out a Decree of Death. Yet to as little Reputation or Issue as a Club of Physicians that Vote that Disease to be Mortal, which Heaven cures by a Figg. Take Coun∣sel together, and it shall come to nought. Speak the word and it shall not stand, for God is with us, Isa. 8.10. The Decree is universally agreed on by the Peers. They bar Prayer by De∣cree. And the Monrach address'd for his Royal Assent. They Enact him a God (by Law) upon Earth, and make it Death to acknowledge another in Heaven. They put a Trouble upon him, to receive all the Addresses of Men, and Create Thirty Holy-dayes for all his fellow-Deities to rest in; Whosoever shall ask a Pe∣tition of any God or Man for Thirty Dayes, save of thee, O King, &c. vers. 7. Let him dye, for me, that withholds the just Tri∣butes of Honour due unto Caesar, (as the Visible Idea of the Invisible God, and his Great Lieutenant upon Earth:) But whoever shall idly presume to invest an Earthly Majesty with Worship proper only to the King of Hea∣ven, is so far from being Caesar's Friend, that he be∣trayes his Lord to Herod's Fate, and shouts him into his Grave. Dominum denm nostrum Papam. Extr. Johan. 22. Tit. 14. c. 4. Thus his Blasphemous Parasites have Dei∣fied (their Lord God) the Pope into infinite scorn and contempt.
Darius consults not his Cabal to unriddle this Flattery in his Nobles, Which Darius too ha stily Signs. much less does he apprehend any treacherous Design in the bottom, but is wil∣ling to interpret it pure Loyalty, and a Politick advance of his Glory, and greater security in his Empire, now at his first approaches unto it; and therefore easily inclines to the proffered Honour; and (since they will have it so) is content to justle out his Maker from his Throne for a Month. There∣fore God punish'd his rash and unadvised Folly and Pride, whose hand Signs the Decree which after∣wards makes his Soul to Ake, and because he did not sleep on't, a-non cannot; and endanger'd the break∣ing his Heart, as well as his sleep. Ʋndigested Counsels issue from us with as little bene∣fit or comfort to our lives, Note. as crude and unconcocted Meats from our Stomacks, which because too greedily taken in and swallowed, are the more speedily cast up again, leaving us empty and dissatified, if not very sick and diseased. Whereas timely deliberation hatches our Conceptions into life and perfection; and yields us the Honour as well the Interest of our Patience. 'Tis an unpardonable Crime in a Politician, to cry afterwards, Ʋtinam non fecissem, Would I had not done it; and he was no Fool who demurr'd, with a Cras tibi Respondebo, To morrow I will give you an Answer. The Sagacious Daniel quickly penetrates through this shallow Design. Daniel disco∣vers the Plot. He easily sees the Warrant for his own Execution written on the back-side of this plausible Decree, yet will not prevent it. His Great Soul bids defiance to it, and them that fram'd
it. He scorns to live when he cannot serve his God, yet will serve him; though he die for it. He will not neglect his Duty for Thirty Days toge∣ther, no not to save his Blood. But resolves ra∣ther to pass into Immortality to serve him there. In vain (sayes Solomon) is the Net spread in the sight of any Bird, Note. (for then he will fly from it) but here is One that discovers the Snare, yet has courage enough to fly into it. Nor is it worth living where we cannot enjoy the true ends of Life, and when Death it self is but an opening into the joyful Li∣berties of Eternity. The King having pass'd the Law—The Tre∣panners begin to sneak about the Lord Presidents Lodgings. Malice degenerates them into Eves∣droppers, they creep up and down under his very Windows. If the Casement chance to flye open, the project thrives, their hopes swell, and the Blood capers in their Veins. Yet scorns to dissemble his Religion. And he (brave Spi∣rit) opens it on purpose, to let them see and know that he dreaded not their impious Law, nor would slack an Ace of his Daily Zeal and Devotion to his God; and this he did, When he knew, that the Wri∣ting was sign'd, v. 10. 'Twas below his Great Per∣son and Spirit to deny or dissemble his Religion. Faith and Love makes him trusty to it, against all Conspiracies of Men or Devils. And what know we, Some are set to watch him. but some so were impudent as to steal up Stairs and peep through the very Key∣hole to discover (but) the first Motion towards a Genuflection. But when those Sacred joynts incline to bend to the resolved Worship, how▪ greedily
do they suck in the very first Spiration, and prepa∣ratory Sighs? they draw in that Incense which Perfumes the Chamber, but (they resolve) shall Poy∣son the Priest; They hearken not for Zeal, but Itch∣ing, they lift not up Hands but Ears, and thô they hear him Confess so tenderly, as Heaven it self is Melted with his Pathetick Expressions, yet they Con∣geal and are Petrified. But (brave Belteshazzar!) He is acted by Contests of how little do we know what various Passions agitate thy Sacred Breast at this time? what contests between Nature and Grace, Flesh and Spirit? Or wer't thou all Soul, and trans∣ported beyond the Cares and remembrance of thy Mortal and Suffering part, that I hear thee break in∣to such Raptures as these? What! and must I forsake my God now, or not Live? 1 Spirits and forsake him too upon such unhappy Terms as these, to gratifie the Wishes of these Malicious Confederating Heathens? Is Devotion become fatal, and must Prayer it self Kill? Cannot I go to my God, but the next Step must be to the Grave? 'Tis worse than Death to live but one Day without him who is the Life of my Soul; how then shall I live Thirty? Must I wear these Fetters upon mine Affections and Lips, which these Mens Envy and Cunning have clapt on me, with design to Enslave me for ever? Rather let the Beasts tear open a Passage for this Captive within me to pass into the Liberties of Ever∣lastingness, than thus to be Cag'd up in so insufferable a Vassalage! Do they think to immure up my Soul? Let them rend me from the Court of Darius, my Heaven is not there, as is theirs; My Body is the Kings to his
Pleasure and Service, but my Soul is Gods unto his. I'le venture an Ingorgement into the Bowels of the Lions, e're they shall glory over mine Apostacy from my Religion and my God. But hold! 2 Flesh. whither does this Noble but Temerarious Zeal Transport thee, Daniel? Is this thy Kindness to thy dearest Self? and hast thou no Regard to the Glories and Sweets of Life? Is that Holy Fire, that Devours its own Altar? and Callest thou that Zeal that hurls thee into nothing, and tempts thee to an Annihilation? Is Death so desirable? and such a Death as will gratifie thine Enemies too? Whose Malice will Feast it self on thy Ru∣ines, with greater Luxury than the Lions Banquet on thy Flesh? What is this but to Execute the Plot against thine own Life, which they cannot perfect without thee? and will thy God thank thee for Destroying thy Self, and throwing away thy Life for a Nicety, the Ceremony and Carkass of Devotion, which his Grace is so ready to dispense with, and for so little a time as a Month too? Is he not the Father of Spirits, and regards more the Oratory of a Sigh than all the luscious Expressions of the Lips? Ʋnderstands he not the Language of the Soul, and hearkens to the very desires of the Humble? Maist thou not Offer up the purer Sacrifice from the Secret Altar of a Flaming Heart, and be safe? What an advantage hast thou to baffle the Conspiracy by a Mental Devotion, and to Countermine the Villanies of their Cursed Policy by locking up thy Soul in its self? Ah no! Spirit prevails. The brave Votary scorns to compound with his God for his Life, nor will save himself by
so much as Latching the Door of his Lips; He will not Stifle the Vent of his Soul, thô it self were sure to fly through it: He will glorifie God with his Speech, thô he speak himself into Air; He will not Disfi∣gure the Body of his Duty, to save his own from Man∣gling; and would rather the Lions should open their Mouths to Swallow him, than he by shutting up his, to Imprison his Zeal and Affections. He resolves that his Mouth shall Confess unto God (and the World) that his Heart believeth unto Salvation; and (while his Enemies were Watching) Imagine this devout Sup∣plicant thus pouring out his Soul unto God. The PRAYER. GOD of my Soul and of my Being, the Glorious Je∣hovah that Inhabitest inaccessible Light and Ever∣lastingness, and humblest thy Self to behold the things that are in Heaven and Earth—Hear and have Mercy. Thou art God alone, and besides thee there is none else: What is this Darius, whom these Men have blasphemously Ex∣alted to Rob thee of thy Glory and Worship, and made a God of him that cannot help, that cannot Save him∣self or others— O Pardon their Sin. And this they have done with design to Rob me too, of this Glorious Liberty of Access to thee my God, who art the very Life of my Soul, and whose loving Kindness is better than Life, and without whom Life is none at all. They would Shut me from thy Presence, but do not thou; Open the Door of thy Grace and my Soul, that I may fly unto thee; And thô [these] these mine Enemies lye in wait for my Blood; Yet let me Praise thee with joyful Lips, and Serve
thee without Fear. What, though they have Decreed to take away my Life, are not my Times in thy hand? and without thee shall not fall an hair from my Head. O give me a Faith beyond my Fear, and a Courage beyond their Malice, that I may Dye rather than disown thee; and by Devoting my Self a Sacrifice to thy Glory, may let all the World know that thou Lord, art the only God that Savest the Souls of thy Servants who put their trust in thee. Redeem thy Church and People— But here a Noise Interrupts him: They find him Praying. v. 11. The Confederates cry out amain, Treason, Treason, A Traitor against our King and his Law, away with him to the Lions, Darius himself cannot Save him. (These, we may suppose, were the Evidence rea∣dy to Swear against him, who could safely take their Oaths (without fear of Perjury) that they heard him making his Petitions to the God of Heaven, and so breaking the Decree.) And now has the Plot taken effect, The Plot takes. the Innocent man falls by the Councils of the Wicked; Righteous art thou O Lord, yet let me talk with thee of thy Judg∣ments; Wherefore doth the way of the wicked Prosper? wherefore are they happy that deal very Treacherously? Jer. 12.1. So foolish was I and Ignorant—Surely thou didst set them in slippery places, thou Castest them down into Destruction; how are they brought into Deso∣lation as in a moment, they are utterly Consumed with Terrours, Psal. 73.18, 19, 22. Now may you see them troop together with Joy and speed to the Court, They go to Court where they subtilly repeat the Contents of the Law to the King, with a Cur∣sed Policy of designing to oblige him to a Sacred and
Inviolable observance of his own Edict, e're ever they discover the Transgressor, who (they knew) was so dear to him, that (for his Sake) he might have strain'd his Prerogative unto the length of a Pardon, (if possible.) But having once oblig'd him by the honour of his Royal word to confirm the Decree, then they presume to produce the Indict∣ment, and thus Address: O King Live for Ever. THat Daniel who pretends so much Love and Loyalty to thy Royal Person, And Indict him. so much Venera∣tion and respect to all thy Laws, He, He is the first Rebell. Ungrateful man that he is, whom of a Captive of the Children of Judah thou hast load∣ed with such Honours, whose very weight has unfor∣tunately caus'd him to Stagger in his Loyalty; and 'tis visible (Dread Sir) that the Sublimity of his State has giddied him into Fanaticism too; he Trants after other Gods, as if thou O King wert not God enough for him, who hast been so kind and Royal to him. Never has the Largesse of Princely Bounty so unluckily miscarried by Ingra∣titude and Treachery, which dares be so Insolent to give so pernicious an Example of first Violating that Law, which he should have valued infinite∣ly dearer than his Life, and rather than have pro∣stituted it to vulgar Contempt, should have Sacri∣fic'd the warmest Blood of his Heart to its Glory. WE Pray therefore that he may (Suffer the Pains and Penalties of the Irrevocable Decree He
has so Prophanely Despised, may receive the just Re∣compense of his haughty Rebellion and Pride)— Be thrown to the Lions. Now is the King almost Dead with Sorrow, The King re∣pents Signing the Decree. the fatal News more wounds his Royal Heart than the Prisoners; he hath not a better Subject in the King∣dom, who must now be rent from his Bosom by a Stratagem; the malicious Imputations of Disloyalty and Rebellion (he well knew) were but the Proofs of his Innocency and their Malice; This is so far from being a Service to his Majesty, as 'tis his Torment. Have they Decreed him a God to this end, to make him a miserable Prince? The King himself Suffers in the Plot, and is Persecuted in the Captive; basely Betrayed to Sign the Decree, which Seals his own Vexation and Trouble: 'Tis they, and not Daniel, were guilty of the Treason against his Royal Tran∣quility and Peace. Ill-condition'd Men! Is this your Loyalty to your King? must the Object of your Princes Favour be∣come presently the Subject of your Hate? must he not live, because the King Loves and has Honour'd him? Then is Royal Affection become miserably Ominous, its Embraces are avoided as a Disease, the Eye of its Favour become Mortal as a Basilisk's. Unhappy Daniel! to be so Lov'd and so Hated! so passionately Lov'd by the King, so universally Ma∣lign'd by his Nobles. Here's not one of all the Peers has a pity for thee, The Princes Address for Execution. But the King Demurrs. they jointly Address for thy speedy Execution; (Nemine Contradicente.) The King singly demurrs, and while he does so, they impati∣ently
Address a second time, (and had not so prospe∣rously succeeded hitherto, now to suffer their Plot to Perish in Embryo.) Malice makes them forget good Manners, they incroach on Majesty, grow Rude and Uncourtly: Know, O King, that the Law of the Medes and Persians is, that no Decree nor Statute which the King Establisheth may be changed, v. 15. q. d. We have thee now at a Bay, this Rebel may not be Pardoned, the Laws of thy Kingdom will not bear it, thô thou wouldest; therefore in vain dost thou labour to deliver him, for Dye he must and shall. Fetter'd Majesty! that canst not deliver thy Dar∣ling from the Lions! that canst not Pardon him nor thy Self for Betraying him to his Enemies! Now reap (Darius) the disquiet Fruits of thine own un∣advisedness and haste! 'tis Death to thee to Suffer him to die, yet he must; here dies a Prisoner without whom the King himself lives not, yet must dye. God is bound up by his Decrees, At length deli∣vers him up. and so is this Mo∣narch; He could (almost) himself have Suffered to save his Favourite alive, yet must now Sacrifice him to the honour of his Laws: How Sacred are those Obligations that manacle the hands of Soveraignty? these call for the Offenders blood, and shall have it. Even Laws are Canibals too: Then the King Commanded, and they brought Daniel, &c. v. 16. But how do I see the great Darius hugging him in his Arms; whilst he beholding him (as he fears) with his last eyes, breaths out his very Heart to him in such dear Expressions as these?
And takes his last leave as lie fears.DAniel, my dearest Daniel, the brightest Star that ever Illustrated a Princes Court! the faithfullest Servant that ever bless'd a Master! the very Glory and Flower of my Kingdom and Pa∣lace, who art passing up into those more glorious Mansions, where only dwell such Spirits as thine. Thou wilt no more envy the Toys of Regality, nor need the aiery Honours of an earthly Palace; I am distressed for thee my dearest Daniel; How willingly could I uncloath my self from these vain Badges of Majesty to pass into Spirit with thee? were it not that I stay behind to Sacrifice Heca∣tombs of thine Enemies to thy Ghost, who shall dearly pay the recompenses of their Envy and my loss— But stay, may not thy God meet thee in the Den, as (I have heard) Shadrak's did him in the Furnace; and methinks I have Faith to be∣lieve he will; and least thine Enemies should think so too, and send in Ruffians more cruel than the Beasts to destroy thee, My care shall obviate that danger, while I Seal thee up under the Protecti∣on of Heaven and thy God. How stately passes the Captive to the Den, He passes to the Den. rich∣ly Laden with the Trophies of his Princes affecti∣ons, and the Graces of his God! He leaves nothing behind him, that he should take to Heaven with him, but the Thoughts of Revenge; (which he there∣fore leaves, because there is no room for them there.) Nay he could have even wish'd their Company with him, whose causeless Malice had too subtilly contriv'd
his (designed) dispatch from the World: The Innocent Victim is now (as Isaac) upon the Altar, but wants a Priest to Sacrifice him. The Lions hurt him nor. Is asto∣nish'd at the Miracle of his own Deliverance, and wonders to find better Friends in the Den, than at Court. A Spirit of Glory rests upon him, which put the very Lyons in a fright. They had no stomach to him, who had no stomach against him; and though his Enemies could have eaten him up, they were more merciful and would not. He had a Sur∣plice of Innocence upon him which was Lyon∣proof. It made him look Sacred, and struck such a Reverence and Aw, that they rather fawn and crouch, then grin or wax surley. He stands armed with the Shield of that Faith which wrought Mi∣racles, (even) this of Stopping the Mouths of Lyons: Who were so Civil as not to fall out with him, against whom God and the King had no Quarrel. Daniel has done what he could, He has done his Duty. and God himself expects no more. He has yielded his Life (in Testi∣mony of his Faith) and now he will give it him back. Because he was ready to lose it, therefore shall he surely keep it. Let Heaven dispose of us as it please, 'tis enough for us to resign our selves and be will∣ing. While Daniel is in Danger, No Feasting at Court. there's no Feasting at Court, the King himself Fasts for him, that the Beasts may not Feast upon him. Surfeits and Mirth speak little Sympathy with the Churches Sorrowes. 'Twas unnaturally done once of the Patriarch's to sit them down to Eat and to Drink, while their poor Brother was Fasting in the Pit, Gen. 37.24, 25. A
piece of Cruelty acted over again by their obdu∣rate and ungracious Posterity: Who fed on the Lambs of the Flock and the fat Calves of the Stall, and Drank their Wine in Bowles, but were not grieved for the Affliction of Joseph, Amos 6.5, 6. Nor could Musick be in season, Nor Musick. when the King himself was out of tune. The Air of a Viol could not drive out of his mind the sad scrieches of his Friend, while the Beasts (as he fear'd) were champing him in their Teeth. Yet was there a brave Consort in the Den: For the Snorings of the sleeping Lyons kept so Even an Accent, that Daniel was ready to dance for Joy. Yet could not the King close his Eyes, The King can∣not sleep. while he is jealous his Favourite has none to close. He had slept so soundly hitherto, while this care∣ful Superintendent had a Vigilant Eye over all his Affairs, that he might well awake (one Night) to condole his loss, and learn himself to watch, when now his Watchman (for ought he knew) might be fallen asleep in Death. Yet is Daniel awake too, and while the Lyons Couch, he gently lies by in peace, and is here be∣come the Guard of his (intended) Executioners. God had shut their Eyes as well as their Mouths, and while theirs were closed down in Rest, his were lifted up in Faith and Prayer, that They might sleep on securely, who might have chanced else to have made a Meal upon him at Midnight. No sooner had the Night began to draw it's Curtains, And Rises early. but Darius draws his. Neither Bed nor Palace can hold him while Daniel was missing.
The first Light leads him to pay his visit to him either Dead or Alive; He is resolved to have an end of his Fears or his Hopes; (Delays in great Expecta∣tions are Killing, 'tis perfect Hell that puts off for ever.) He hastens his Body thither to meet his Heart, which he had left lock'd up with Daniel in the Den all the night. Then the King arose very early in the Mor∣ning, and went in hast to the Den, &c. How nimbly do I see his Royal Feet pace the Streets, while yet his affections Lacquey before him, And hasts to the Den. and are impatient after the first Tidings? See, how love fascinates Majesty into a forgetfulness of its Gran∣deur. He values not the Complements of State, so he find Daniel alive 'tis Great enough. Why may not Darius measure Faith with Abra∣ham, who against hope believed in hope too? And being not weak in faith, considered not the natural fierce∣ness of these voracious Beasts, nor the biting rage of their hungry Bellies, nor the Luscious sweetness of Daniel's Blood; but against all these, expected life to start out from the very Womb of Death? For, When he came to the Den, And cries la∣mentably to Daniel. he cryed with a Lamentable voyce unto Daniel, &c. v. 20. Object. But does not his kindness run him into folly here, and Daniel into hazard; since by so loud an Exclamation at his coming to the Den, he might chance to rouze up the sleepy Lyons to an early execution, which all the Night long they had fasted from, with purpose to reserve him for a Break-fast in the Morning, and now comes the King and halloo's them to it? Answ. Brutes (like some Men as bad) consult not
the Morrow, but love to make sure of the present Prey. Sense knows no Life of Faith, and seldom trusts out of hand; grapples at every thing coming in its way, and so its Panch be presently stuff'd, has confidence enough to trust till hereafter.— The King knew that if he were yet alive, 'twas Providence, not Project, that kept him so. He cried with a lamentable Voyce unto Daniel, &c. What surer Indication couldst thou have given thy Daniel of the fixed unalterableness of thy Prince∣ly Affections to him, An assurance of his Love. even beyond the Grave? While thus thou sendest thy very Soul to him (wrapt up in a Sigh) that pierces through the very Stone which yet seperates thee from him, and safely ar∣rives into his joyful Ears? For now assuredly he was not dead at Court, who was still alive in the Prison. To me (Darius) art Thou a fair Prece∣dent of entire and absolute Freindship, and the Illu∣strious Copy of him, who will never leave, nor forsake. And I thank thee (O King) for minding me of my Saviour, who (methinks) with the same Accent, is ever crying unto me in the midst of my dangers, Is Joseph yet alive? How good is God, Note. to those that trust him! Daniel has the Heart of his Prince as sure as God hath his own. Wolseys heavy Groan upbraided his Masters Inconstancy to him in his Age, but was (confessed∣ly) grounded on his own to God. There is all Gain in Godliness, (that universal Trader,) which hath a Patent from Heaven, to Traffick for it self in the very Bosom of Kings, which Themselves cannot prevent though they would.
For what an Honour was this to the Imprison'd Daniel, to have Majesty waiting on him at the Door? The King had sent no less Person than Him∣self, to enquire of his Welfare, and to return the Lions his thanks for their Civility that night to his Friend. And now may you hear him thus Passionate∣ly Crying O Daniel! Servant of the Living God, is thy God able to deliver thee, &c? Daniel had entred the Den inthe Faith of Gods Word and the Kings Affidavit, Thy God will deliver thee, v. 16. and does he now abate of his Confidence? Is he able? Great dangers try the Mettle of our Faith, and swelling Fears sink our Courage: He is more than a Peter that can tread the Waters and not cry out; there is a Fear hangs on our very Faith. The King might averr that God would (for he had heard that he had, in as great dangers) yet might he doubt, lest he now had not: Historical Faith made him Promise, but Passionate Love made him fear and be jealous. But Daniel is yet alive, The King finds Daniel alive. and Blesses God and the King: He imployes his Breath to the ends it was given him; O King Live for ever! Thy Servant (yet Alive) darts up that Sacred Option from his very Soul for thee: 'Tis Stinking Breath that Curses any, but Infectious 'tis that Curses the King. Thô the Tongue be a Fire, 'tis Insolence in it to make havock of the Palace. From Prayer the Prophet proceeds to Preaching, and (the Chappel not yet open) Darius is content to be his Auditor in the Porch: He divides his Sermon into two parts, and treats, First, Of Gods goodness to him
in shutting the Lyons Mouths, (or else his own had not been open this Morning:) Who pleads his Innocency and Loyalty. Secondly, His own Innocency, where he justifies his most entire Duty and Veneration both to God and the King; (and he handles these both together, because they are inseparable.) The Life of the Preacher was the vi∣sible proof of the whole Sermon. The King ne∣ver heard one that better pleas'd him, and the ve∣ry Lions themselves seem to understand it, while they stand Mute and Demure, and are more Mannerly than to disturb him; nay, they are his very Con∣verts, and the proof of his Ministry, who from his first coming among them, by the Reverence of his Person (his very Silence) had transformed them from their natural Ferity, into a wonderful Humanity! How much more his Eloquence! And Experience now makes him confident of their Love and his own Safety. And therefore is fearless. Deliverances (like some Friends) are Security each for the other, and the more the stronger still, especially where Faith stands Prin∣cipal, and a good Life as Witness. David Slings the Bear and the Lyon with the Stone that Stunn'd the Philistine; and the Israelites on the Shore, stood as Sureties to the rest in the midst of the Channel. The same Faith that hung the Padlock on the Mouths of these Lions over night, was strong enough to keep it on till such time as it Self pleas'd to unlock it next day, to make room for the Conspirators. The Sermon (now finish'd) has the Effects of Thunder, The Den is open'd, and Daniel deliver∣ed. the Seals are rent away, and the Stony Door of the Chappel flies open, the Preacher is hurl'd (he hardly knows how) into the Royal Presence,
where he finds the King Heaven-strucken too; an Ex∣tasie of Joy had Ravish'd away his Senses, and he talks (like a Fanatick indeed) Distractedly; Ah Dani∣el, art thou indeed my very Daniel? May mine Heart believe what mine Eyes see? Then stands like a Statue: (his rolling eye the only Index of his Life:) Is asto∣nish'd and admires what he cannot express; at length recovering himself into Majesty again, he thunders out his dreadful Mandates, And his Ene∣mies cast in. and orders the Execution of his own and the Lord Presidents Enemies. This is a Day of Memorable Deliverance, and the King dubs it into a Festival; the Commons are doubled at Court, but the first Course shall be serv'd up to the Lyons: Good reason they who so Superstitiously Fast∣ed all the night, should now Feast the next day: There∣fore the King orders them Messes of all sorts and Sex∣es, Young and Old. They stay not laying the cloth, (and Daniel had given thanks before,) but they ha∣stily fall too; nay, they meet the Waiters in the En∣try, and catch away their Meat e're it come to the Table, and make no Bones of these Trepanners; (the Crackling of whose Joynts make Musick, while they are Scranch'd by the Teeth of the Beasts,) and all to∣gether they Tip off the King's Health and Daniel's in the very Heart Blood of their Enemies, they leave not a drop behind; and should any chance to drivel down their Beards, they lick them clean again, make a clear Riddance and quick dispatch. But if his Majesty has any more such Presents to make them, they have reserved a Corner of their Stomachs, and would be glad of another Draught next day. 'Twas but natural that the Flesh of these Monsters
should be Incorporate into the Bodies of these bloody Beasts, whose very Souls were degenerated into their Nature before; neither needed there the Cremo∣ny of Process and Tryal, where God himself had Sate as Judge, and Condemned them by a Mi∣racle. So let all thine Enemies [and thy Peoples] Perish, O Lord! 'Tis the first Lesson of Court-Policy, to secure it self. Where a Conspiracy had the Impudence to dare at the first Minister of State, 'twas time for Majesty to Consult its own Safety; those who would adven∣ture to its Bosom, will next tear out its very Heart if they can. Darius is Decreeing again, A Decree of Honour to God. but not against Hea∣ven: He is Sick of his Godship, the Robe of Divine Honour sate too uneasie upon him: Besides, its spark∣ling Brightness struck him Blind, that he could not see through the Treacheries of Designing Men; He re∣solves therefore to resign it up to him that had a better Title to it than he. ('Twas Happiness enough for himself to enjoy his Daniel below.) And now all Nations, People and Languages have free Liberty of Conscience to own the God of Heaven: They should not need fear to Pray to that God that had been so kind to him to spare his Daniels Life: Yea, (upon their Allegiance) he Commands them to fear before him; He is a God working Wonders, they might chance need his Deliverance too. Thus Daniel stands a Figure of Christ, whose Imprisonment and Redemption (as Jesus his Death and Resurrection) is the means of Salvation to the World.
APPLICATION. NOW folding up Daniel's Robe, let us not be asham'd to present him to you in his naked Vest, and give you a short Revise, (as it were in little) both in the Character of his Piety; The Cause of his Sufferings; The Quality of his Enemies; And the End of all. 1. He was Heavens visible Representative upon Earth; a Beam of the Divine Nature; the Church in Epitome; a mighty Man of Prayer; One who would give Heaven no rest, and therefore the better belov'd; One that kept up the Reputation of Piety, and its sinking Interest in the World; One who was Valiant for God and Truth upon Earth; that valued his Soul and Salvation above all the concerns of Life; who spent much ime in his Closet, conferring with God and his He notwithstanding the Noise and Avo∣cations of a perplexing World; One whose Eye was directly fix'd upon God, but an utter Enemy to all the Selfish, Hypocritical, Squint-ey'd Designs of Men; One in whose Thoughts God was alwayes upper∣most, and Scorn'd to let his Maker stand by, while he Embrac'd an : When but a Youth, he was even so Wonderfully Temperate, that he fasted him∣self into Beauty, and would rather have eaten nothing than have Swallowed down Sin. When rais'd to Degrees of Preferment and Honour, the Air of a Title did but blow him nearer to Heaven, and was as humble as Jonah when he Rode Leviathan towards Ninève. The Cringes of his Flatterers made him
Bow the more humbly to God: and no wonder, while he Harbours so lowly Apprehensions of Honours va∣nity and Nothingness. Is so far from Impaling him∣self within the Grandeurs of State, that he is Proud only of a Free Condescention, and Opens himself to universal Service: But when his Prince Commands him to Court, he is (there) the whole Cabal himself; and that mighty Empire stands steddy on the safe Basis of his Councils, which made the Kingdom have an Ague all the time he was in the Den; and while he Improves his profound Parts for the King, has yet Policy enough to be wise for his Soul. In short, an excellent Pattern and glorious Exemplar of all Piety and Policy to those great Ones of his Station. 2. Admire not then that he is sent to the Prison, and you find him among the Lions; is maliciously Conspir'd against, as the Burden and Plague of the Generation he Liv'd in. He that will be so Impu∣dent as to Court Heaven more heartily than others, (when Righteousness and Goodness is out of Fashi∣on) shall not need Complain of too much Ease in the World. And this Great Man was resolv'd to be Devout, on purpose to dare their Malice, thô sure to be thrust out of (not Commission only, but) Life. Let them Plot their Hearts out, (as they did) his Resolutions were Set for Heaven: He kept God in his Eye, whose Faith scattered his Carnal Fears as the Clouds flye before the Sun, or his Enemies be∣fore the Lions; He knew all the Motions of the In∣feriour World, to be guided by that Great Agent, whose very Faithful Servant he was. Besides, the King was his Friend, whose Favour and Protection
he worthily Merited, does therefore heartily trust to both, and is no Loser by his Considence. 3. For his Enemies, who were they, but the Cur∣sed Enemies of God? The Heathen that knew him not, and the Families that Call not on his Name? Jer. 10.25. Men of the World, whose Portion was in this Life, and were without God, and without Hope for the next? Men that had no Prospect beyond the Grave, and who Hated the poor Remains of Piety that still sur∣vive the Fall, and upbraided all their Actions. Who because themselves never Kneel'd, (but to an Idol) Fret that another should to the True God they knew not. No wonder then, their Consults took no faster Hold together, than the Extenterated Bowels of the Spider so weakly pinn'd to the Wall: God Swept them away with the easie Hand of his Pro∣vidence, but afterwards twisted them into a Cable that hales them into the Bowels of the Beasts, where I am very willing to leave them. (Unless perhaps Na∣ture having cast them out at the back Door, they are become as Dung to the Earth.) O Daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed; hap∣py shall he be that rewardeth thee, as thou hast served us. Psal. 137.8. FINIS.
