L1387 13111155 97643
A LETTER FROM A Gentleman in the City, TO A CLERGY-MAN IN THE COUNTRY LONDON, Printed for D. C. and are to be sold by Booksellers of London and Westminster. MDCLXXXVIII.
A LETTER, &c. SIR, IT has pleas'd that Almighty Power which Rules the Hearts of Princes, to enlighten and adorn His Present Gracious Majesty, with such peculiar Beams of Mercy and Clemency, those truly Royal Virtues, that render Him the nearest Pourtraict of that Deity whose Vicegerent He is. To win therefore the Universal Love of his People, a Conquest worthy of, and indeed reserved for His Great Self, He has set up the Standard of Compassion, resolving to recover the alienated Affections of those of His Subjects, whom the Administration of His Predecessors may have any ways rendred uneasie. There are but Two things in the World dear to all Man∣kind, Religion and Property. The last of these, I confess, in the most moderate Distribution of Common Right, has all along had its free course in the true Channels of Equi∣ty, only the first has been a little restrain'd; for Conscience has sometimes been shackled. The Sighs therefore and Groans that have lately breathed from that Restraint, have moved him to that Sacred Com∣miseration, that He is resolved to break the Fetters that extort them, The Penal Laws. Which to effect, He has al∣ready
declared His Determination for that choice of Magi∣strates in Authority under Him, that in His Princely Judg∣ment He thinks will be most Hearty in contributing their best and ablest Endeavours for that Great End. To carry on this Pious Work, 'tis not at all to be doubt∣ed but the Suffering Party on all sides, who are aggrieved by those Laws, by the meer dictates of Self-preservation, will be no ways wanting to throw off a Yoke they have so long so unquietly born. And if all their Helps, His Maje∣sty (as in Reason may be expected) is so well secure of, there remain only the Concurrence of the Church of Eng∣land; which, if obtain'd, His Kingdom would reap the Fruit, and Himself the Honour of being the Founder of those lasting Blessings, so much in themselves the more Glorious, as that all Hands, and all Hearts, are assistant to their Creation. But since the late Refusal of Reading His Majesties most Gracious Declaration seems to intimate the Church of Eng∣lands Aversion (or at least their Leading Endeavours to cre∣ate that Aversion) to the Repeal of the Penal Laws and Tests; the Design of this Address to your self, a Party so much concern'd, and indeed to the whole Clergy, is o examine the stress and tendency of those Laws, and truly to Reason and Argue with our Pious Mother the Church of England, why the Preservation of those Laws, either is, or ought to be, any part of her Care; and indeed, how far those Statutes, her sometimes Darlings, are in themselves either Just, Equitable, or consistent with Christianity it self; and how far she is equally, if not more, than the Dissen∣ters obliged▪ to abolish them. Nor shall I endeavour to urge her Consent from any Resignation or Compliance (those fainter motives of meer Generosity) to the Pleasure and Will of the King, that desires to have it so; but enforce the Argument from the Bonds and Tyes of Conscience and
Justice that require her Assistance to their Dissolution; and hereby illustrate the Equity and Reasonableness of His Ma∣jesties Proposal, and prove the Work it self no more than the incumbent Duty of every Christian Subject to labour to perfect. For inquiry therefore first into the Penal Laws, I shall make bold to trace the Grounds of their Rise and Original. After the Death of Queen Mary, her Protestant Sister Elizabeth, being seated on the Throne, under so fair a Pros∣pect of establishing her Religion, as having the Half, if not the Majority of the Nation of Her Perswasion, all Hands were set at Work for so glorious an Enterprize. But the main Engine was, That the Reformers having before their Eyes the late severity of her Sisters Reign, the Protestant Church either truly, or rather seemingly ashamed (as time will shew) of the Romish Cruelty, the Popular out-crys against Smithfield Fires, was conscious that she had no means so proper to recommend her self to the Peoples Esteem as the avoiding all those occasions of Odium, which had render'd the Romish Church so much the Object of their Aversion; and therefore the Change must be wrought and Affections won, by the opposite Extremes of Mercy and Moderation. These Measures for a while seem'd terrible; but, alas! in few years Indulgence appeared a too slow-pac'd Progress of Reformation; for still notwithstanding the Encourage∣ment of a Protestant Queen, and the Establishment of our Church, the Ecclesiastick Advances went on too leisurely, and Conversions not fast enough, to satisfie either the Churches Itch of Power, or Warmth of Zeal, under the looser Reins of Toleration. For whilst the Popish party were connived at, and permitted any Liberty of their Wor∣ship, their Church, though falling, could not want some few unshaken Members at least that would still follow even
its very Ruines; and perhaps the Romish Priests, though thrown out of Church Preferment, could not, or would not forbear, to confirm and encourage their thin and scatter'd Party, and possibly through an indispensable (as they thought) Duty to that Communion, in which invinci∣bly perswaded, they only expected Salvation, they might not omit either Arguments or Industry (as Opinion wants neither) to render their Religion nevertheless lovely for the Cloud it wore; which indeed, is but natural to all Religions, whilst they think their own either the only, or at least the nearest way to Heaven. These Remora's, how small stops soever to her advancing Glory, the Church of England beholdiug with Impatience, and repining even at her smallest Favours to the Romish Party, whilst but the least Impediments to her yet unsa∣tisfied Ambition, (for to be Ʋppermost was not enough, unless she could be All too) began to think of some more expeditious way for the weeding out of Popery, and to look out for a sharper Pruning Hook than meer Teaching and Preaching to do the Work of Reformation; set agog therefore upon Dispatch and Execution, she felt the Itch of her Forefathers, and if Honour and Reputation could be safe, she should not scruple at a little of the old-fashion'd Shamble-work to gain her Point. But considering that to punish Dissent in Religion, and barefac'd too with Death, would carry too much the looks of Old Smithfield, and so bestain her own long boasted Gentleness and Innocence; she is therefore put to no little Study and Invention to over-leap this Difficulty, and accomplish her Projection; till at last she lights upon this incomparable Stratagem to Mask her Designs, and smooth All, viz. to punish Recu∣sancy with DEATH, under the black and dismal Brand of HIGH-TREASON. The Measures and Gradations used and made towards raising this Artful Superstructure, take in short as follows.
In the first year of Q. Elizabeth, she asserts her Spiritual and Ecclesiastick Supremacy in all Things and Causes whatever; and creates an Oath to be tendered her Subjects for confir∣mation of that Power. In the fifth of her Reign, grown warmer in that Supre∣macy, she imposes the Oath upon all her Ministers and Officers of the Government, even to Lawyers, Atturneys, &c. and parti∣cularly to be taken by ever Member of Parliament: And the second Refusal of taking it, after a first tender of it three Months before, is made High Treason. In the 13th of Her Reign. All persons taking upon them by Colour of any Bull, Writing, or Authority whatever to ab∣solve or reconcile any persons, or grant or promise to any person or persons within Her Majesties Dominions any such Absoluti∣on or Reconciliation by any Speech, Preaching, Teaching, Writing, or any other open deed; and if any person or persons shall willingly take or receive such Absolution or Reconciliation shall suffer pains of Death; And also lose and forefeit all their Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels, as in Cases of High Treason. [A very soure sort of Grape to set their Childrens Teeth an Edge with.] In the 23d of Elizabeth, This Act is explain'd and con∣firmed, and in fine the Person reconciling or reconciled to the Church of Rome, Priest or Lay-man, are Equally declared Tray∣tors; and so onwards till the very taking of Orders from Rome is High Treason and doomed to suffer as such. Ay, God knows a very just sentence if the Indictment be but true. But I desire to know by what Legerdemain is this Reconciliation made High Treason! Is either the Life or Dignity of the King or the Government, struck at by my being a Member of This or That Communion! by my believing This or That the Way to Heaven? Can Faith in God be Treason against Man! For that's the Result of the point. Can a Christians best Endeavour to save his own or
his Brothers Soul be a Machination to destroy his Prince or his Country; or can my praying or not praying to a Saint, my adoring or not adoring the Eucharist render me a true or not true Leige-man. If Errours in Faith can amount to High Treason, and the Government is in Conscience ob∣liged to treat 'em as such, Lord have mercy upon us, how came the Jews to live with that Impunity in the Common∣wealth, that instead of misbelieving in points of Doctrine, believe not so much as in the Gospel or Christ himself. No, no, the Sophistry of the matter lyes not there; 'tis not the Doctrine of a Romanist as to Godwards makes him a Traytor, but his belief of the Popes being Head of the Church in Derogation to the Ecclesiastick Supremacy inherent to, and Lodg'd in the Crown, and so religiously asserted and maintained by the Protestant Laws of the Kingdom. Hinc Illae Lacrymae? There lyes the Apostacy, the hideous yawning Gulph that swallows all, Faith, Duty, Honour, Loyalty, and consequently calls for Axes, Halters, Gibbets, and what not. Is this the Treason then; 'tis well we have fixt it there; tho' upon true Inspection, the Impeachment will be found full as feeble here as before. For this is but meer matter of Faith still all this while, nor carries in it the least shadow of a Breach of the Subjects Duty to the Soveraign. For Instance, when this Law was made, suppose a poor Roman Catholick of those Days by an Invincible power of perswa∣sion rooted and grounded in him by an Article of Faith (how rightfully is not the matter) received from Age to Age, and Generation to Generation in favour of the Pope, cou'd not possibly believe her then She Majesty by her Ac∣cession to the Crown to be instantly the Spiritual Head of the Church in all matters and Causes whatever, that otherwise before was utterly incapable even of so much as a Subdea∣conship in a Country Parish, and if St. Paul may be be∣lieved,
not so much as qualified for speaking in a Religious Assembly; yet nevertheless this Roman Catholick lived under her Government with all the Allegiance and Fealty, in all Respects of Obedience, and believed himself in conscience so obliged to do, as much as any other of her more belie∣ving Protestant Subjects, would it not be a little severe to adjudge him a Traytor. And that the Romish Opinion that the Spiritual Supre∣macy lyes not in the Temporal Prince, is meer matter of Faith, is demonstrable from the very Soveraign Power it self, when so many successive Kings never believed they had that Supremacy themselves. For Prerogative is of its nature so jealous that tho' never so considerable a Jewel in a Crown had they had Faith to have challenged it theirs, they would have had wit enough to have worne it too. What if our Protestant Kings and their Parliments for them believe that Supremacy wholy lodged in the Crown; must their Roman Catholick Subjects be Traytors, because they cannot be of their Belief? If the Princes Belief must be the standart of the peoples Loyalty, by the same Equity the Catholick Kings might have made it High-Treason in their Reign to assert that Supremacy in the Crown Then; as the Protestant Kings do to deny it there now; and consequently the Protestants then, (if such there had been) might by Equal Justice have been Traytors too. If Crown'd Heads must necessarily be believed the Spiritual Heads of the Churches under their Obedience, I wonder what strange stretch of Faith those Thousands of Christians must have that are born and bred Subjects to the Mahometan Grand Signior. But that the Members of the Church of Rome may not look altogether so black for this unhappy Part of their Belief;
and that their asserting of that Spiritual Supremacy in their Pope does not any ways threaten either the Crown or the publick peace; That wise and prudent Monarch King James the First shall be their Compurgator. For as many Laws as that Prince made for the Defence of the Establisht Church of England, and as great Industry as he used for the extirpation of the Romish Religion, he was neverthe∣less pleased to allow the Pope, tho' not Ʋniversal Head of the Church, yet Patriarch of the West (in which pre∣cinct of consequence must England be included.) And if so zealous a Protestant King thought it no Diminution to his own or his Churches Dignity to be of that Opinion, and to grant the Pope that Prerogative; what mortal High Treason against the Crown of England do the Members of the Popes own Church commit in throwing him in the East too (a part of the World not much relating to us) into the Bargain; and so making him Ʋniversal Patriarch. Jacob. Contr. Perron. But some People will tell you, 'Tis almost an Impossibility to fancy any such things as Principles of Loyalty in a Romish Subject to a Protestant King. I shall not endeavour to confute this uncharitable Cen∣sure, by the Ʋniversal Heroick Examples, of that Parties Loyalty in the Battels of Charles the First; so truly may I call it Ʋniversal, that upon Petitions made to Cromwell for his Clemency to the Roman Catholicks, he was observed to challenge them to prove so much as one Man of that Religion that had ever fought for him or served him. But to wave that Plea, How are we sure that the Romanists are guilty of Traytorous Principles! Do's any man of them own any such Principles! No, sure they have more Wit than to talk Treason, and be Hang'd for it. If they are so hardy as to do that, we have other Laws to noose 'em without the help of Penal Statutes.
Do they then commit any open Act of Treason! Let 'em do that if they dare. If we once catch them 'em at that Game the Government has 'em fast enough by the Heels and the Necks too. Nor is that the Treason, that these Statutes pretend to arraign. Who ever heard of any Overt act of Trea∣son indicted by the 13th or 23d of Elizabeth. Then, if neither Speaking nor Acting of Treason be the Capital Guilt these Statutes are levell'd at; then Thinking of Treason must be the Crime. A Roman Catholick then be∣like is such an offender, that by the very Affections of his Soul cannot be Loyal to the Crown; and to prove all this mortal Accusation infallibly true, the Protestant Wisdom has by Divine Inspiration form'd a Law to arraign and con∣demn the very Thoughts of the Heart, of which God only can be Judge. In fine, if the Government can make matter of Faith, nay even thoughts Themselves High Treason, when their Hand was in they might e'ne as Lawfully have made it High Trea∣on to eat too. For if the firm Belief in God, and the zealous Worship of him by the Best Light of a Christian Conscience, be either the Bread of Life, or at least the means to get it, as we are so taught, the same Legality that can condemn the one may exclude the other too. To this they'll say, 'Tis true indeed a Lay Romanist is a more excusable, and that part of the Statute that affects him is a little hard; however 'tis very strong, and nothing but High Justice, against the Romish Priest; for here are visible Overt∣acts of Treason: As taking of Orders from Rome, in them∣selves little less than Damnable and Diabolical, and undoubt∣edly Antichristian, as received from the Papal See, the very seat of Antichrist; and then returning home again expresly a∣gainst
the Commands of the Law; All which outragious Trans∣gressions are but reasonably declared High Treason, and justly exposed to the severest of punishments under the Legality of that Denomination. To this Thundering Charge, as big as it sounds, I shall only make this short Reply. If the Church of England has and always does admit a Convert Romish Priest into the Protestant Clergy, without any Reordination to capacitate him for that Admission, as we need look no further than to the constant practice of the Church, (without so much as one example to the contrary) from the very beginning of the Reformation, how unjustly are taking Orders from Rome charged with High-Treason! If the Orders from Rome be in themselves Holy and Sacred, how are they Damnable, or Anti-christi∣an? And how the taking of them High-Treason? If not Holy nor Sacred (as if High Treason in the very receiving of them they cannot be) does the Church of England en∣tertain Pastors into her Ministerial Function unconsecrated for the Divine Service of God? God forbid! No, the very Practice and Concession of the Church in this Case does so confront the palpable Injustice of this Statute, as nothing can be plainer. And how Black, how Capital, or Trayte∣rous soever the Popular Calumny, or the Protestant Law-ma∣kers had occasion to make these Romish Orders, under all their loads of Guilt, they stood upright enough not to want the Crutch of an Act of Parliament, as some others have done (as much more Sacred as they are) for their Sup∣port and Confirmation. And if such are the Romish Orders, and the free choice of our Belief in God, and the Church we hope to be saved in, be in our own Election (for our own Souls are answerable for it) by the same Liberty of
choice why may not a man be either a Member or Pastor of the Flock he chooses, as his Abilities to serve God in ei∣ther station shall dictate to him. And if no such Holy Orders be to be had and received at home, why is it Death to seek for them abroad? And why are men banisht and excluded from their Native Right in the Kingdom in which they are born, for only endeavouring to secure themselves, their no less Native Right in that of Heaven? One observation in the Statute of the Fifth of her Reign I had almost forgotten, not a little worthy Remark. In this Statute where the Incapacity of taking the Oath of the Queens Spiritual Supremacy (for a Refusal of an Oath in that Case is only a Conscientious Incapacity of taking it) is made High-Treason, in one Clause of it the Queen is plea∣sed to tell us, she is so sufficiently assured of the Faith and Loy∣alty of her Temporal Lords, that this Act, nor any thing con∣tain'd in it, shall not extend to her Barons, nor the Oath to be imposed upon them▪ &c. What Contradictions and Cobweb Laws are here! A Commoner, belike, for his Incapacity of taking that Oath, is guilty of Hgh-Treason: But a Baron so incapacitated is a very faithful and Loyal Gentleman; as if they were not both of them equally Subjects to the Crown, and equally Criminal in any Transgression against it. 'Tis true, had the particular Favour and Indulgence of the Government resolved to exempt a Peer from the Penalty of this Law, it had been something; but to discharge him eo nomine from the Guilt too, makes the whole Statute such an Arbitrary Declaration of Treason, that both the Compilers of such Laws, and the Defenders of them, ought to blush at. But as whole as the Barons kept their Scutcheons in this Statute, they came in for a snack in the 13th of her Reign, being in that Statute Indictable for Delinquency against it.
What Rubbish is here put together to build the great Fence of a Church with! But our Church has at least this Apology, that it does not pretend to Infallibility. And who knows but the Jargon of these, and the rest of her Penal Laws might be wilful Oversights on purpose to make out her Assertion to the World, and prove her Fallibility true. But to come to the full Result of all: Here's the Church of England so poorly prevaricating, as to follow those very steps, which with all her highest Noise and Exclamations she pretends, are her greatest Detestation and Abhorrence. And whilst the more frank and generous Romanist Enacts and Executes his Capital Laws against Heresy from his Church, under the downright Name of Heresy; our poor∣er spirited Protestant Law-makers, are for punishing Heresy from their Church under Masque and Disguise, obtruding their Penal Laws upon the World under the meanest of Hypocrisy and Imposture. And to be plain with our later Protestant Law-makers, the Shamm past so current then, that it has been practised ever since. Is there any one Law made against our later Nonconformists whose preamble does not run upon this Topick, the Breach of the Peace, and the undermining the very Foundations of the Government; and all for deserting the Church of England, and meeting in their own Religi∣ous Assemblies, to offer up their Prayers and Devotions to God according to their Consciences. Was there ever a late Conventicle disturb'd with any other Warrant than as Riotously and Routously assembled, and thereupon punisht with Fines, Imprisonments, and Sequestrations; sometimes even to the Ruines of whole Families. Does not the same Masquerade run through all the Penal Laws? And the very
meer meeting to Worship God charged with no less than Sedition and Tumult. But wherein lyes the Sedition and Tumult? Was it in their so meeting? No, sure. For as the Intention makes the Guilt, the Intention was only a Religious Worship, and not a State-disturbance. Was the Sedition then in the Doctrines they Preach'd? If so, why was it not proved against them? Their Meet∣ing-House Doors stood open, and their Enemies were both potent and numerous enough to hear and detect any Sedi∣tious Design or Doctrines against the Crown or State. And the Law was furnisht both with Rods and Axes, to punish any Crime of that kind according to its Demerit, before the Penal Laws were so much as thought on. No, tho' that was the Pretence, it pincht not there The Dissenters grew too numerous, and the Church of England began to see her Grandeur shrink, and her Do∣minion lessen, and therefore her Old Arts must once more be her Refuge. The Nonconformists must be crusht and supprest, and to avoid all imputations of Oppression and Cruelty, Sedition and Riots must be the charge against them, and the Law gilded over with that fair Title to make it swallowable. 'Tis true, indeed, the Law here did not reach to Death, however it took care to make their Purses, if not their Veins, bleed for it, and that too some∣times with so total a Drein, that whole Families have been reduced to the condition of starving, which is the very next door to it. And all things consider'd, Liberty next to Life is so dear, that whole years of noysome Impri∣sonment have been very little the easier punishment.
Having given you this true Pourtraict of our Penal Laws, I shall only add some few Lineaments more, and so finish the piece. And to make a farther Ballance betwixt our selves and Rome in that point, how unchristian or unwar∣rantable soever all such Penal Inflictions for meer Conscience may be, the Church of Rome has, or at least fancies she has some little Pretext for such Laws. For under her fa∣mous Tenent of Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus, and her Con∣finement of Salvation only within her own Boundaries, she may have sometimes consented to the Practice of now and then cutting off a stray Sheep, to terrifie the rest of the Flock from leaping the Fold, as imagining to her self in so doing, and in now and then Sacrificing one or two lost Sons of Perdition (for such she accounts them) and thereby lopping off some corrupt Member already past hope of Redemption, she only secures possibly the whole Body, as she thinks, from Apostacy and Damnation. And consequently such exemplary Acts, though of the great∣est Rigour, are only intended as absolutely necessary for that Great End, Ʋniversal Salvation. But, alas! our more Charitable Church that pretends not to bound the Grace of God, but by a larger latitude and more extended Operati∣on of the Blood of Christ, Equally allows Salvation to true Zeal and Piety in both Churches, and indeed in all Christi∣an Professions: Under all this Concession, I say, our Pro∣testant Church utterly wants this Loop-hole, and upon true Examination will be found wholly inexcusable, if not im∣pardonable. For in executing of her Sanguinary Laws in punishment of meer matter of Conscience, she cuts off, not like Rome, the supposed Members of Perdition; but even those Professors of Christianity, which by her own Con∣fession may be equally with her self the Sons of Grace, and Coheirs of Salvation.
Nay, I'le venture to add one bold Word more, because a true one. The Church of England in her once executing of her sanguinary Laws, is undoubtedly guilty of more Bar∣barity than the ten Primitive Heathen Persecutions. For in all cases of Suffering for Religion, 'tis an undeniable Maxim, That He that makes the Martyr least thinks he makes him. The bloodiest Pagan Tyrants in all their studied Arts of Blood and Christian Massacre, did not believe that they butchered the then only Professors of Truth and Heirs of Heaven: But on the contrary, in Devotion to their own sup∣posed true Deities, they thought they only executed Apo∣states, Blasphemers and Infidels; for such they accounted the Christians as profest Deserters of their Heathen Gods and Sacrifices: Nor is the forementioned Romish Case much different, as lying under the unhappy Belief of Hereticks ir∣reparable State of Damnation. But all this while our Church of England (I am sorry to her Shame it must be spoken) out-do's the very Heathens themselves, in enacting and execut∣ing those Penal Laws, by which she cuts off those very Mem∣bers of Christianity, who (if true Zealots in their Profession) she owns are in the number of the Elect of God: And if any true Zealots amongst them, those certainly that have Cou∣rage and Constancy to DIE for their Religion, are not the least of them; and consequently she cannot deny, but in executing those Laws, she both makes the Martyr, and knows she makes him too. And if she's so blameable in her Severity against the Romanists, much more criminal must her Rigour against the Dissenters be, whom she owns to differ from her self in little more than Ceremonies and Punctilio's.
Nay, the Ferment has sometimes boyl'd so high, that our Protestant Church has put her Zeal upon the stretch to find means to vent her Indignation, when some of those very Laws against Recusancy have been extended against the Pro∣testant Dissenters, and the greatest part of their Sufferings received from the Lash of those Laws. I shall not pretend to dive so far, as to ascertain whether that Comprehension was originally design'd by those Laws, or otherwise an arti∣ficial Superstructure to serve a State turn; but either way the severity of those Laws is not a little notorious, where so trivial Matters of Dissent in Religion, as has been said before, have been so cruelly treated. But if our Protestant Church cannot possibly be recon∣ciled to Liberty of Conscience, and therefore these Laws were her Weapons against it, her more generous way, at least more agreeable to a Christian Profession, had been first fairly to have overthrown it by Dint of Argument, be∣fore she had made use of Dint of Steel to do it by: And for that purpose, I wonder how that famous Bishop Tay∣lor has past for so great a Doctor of the Church all this while, and his Treatise upon that subject call'd Liberty of Prophecying not yet answer'd; or at least the Author under no small Ecclesiastick Fulminations (if no other way to answer it) for so terrible a Blow against the Churches long main Favourite Bulwark, her Penal Laws. 'Tis true, some People will object, What are all these Laws to the CHURCH, when enacted only by the Civil Power as an Expedient for its own Security and Defence, and therefore warrantable and lawful; nor in any respect are chargeable upon the Ecclesiasticks.
Alas! this is such a feeble Objection, that 'tis scarce to be named without Blushing: As if the Clergy did not act in Parliament by their Representatives; nay, the ve∣ry Bishops sitting there in Person, assenting to, and un∣doubtedly little less than Original Founders of those Laws. But grant it, as they say, the meer Establishment of the Civil Power: The Clergy by owning the Justice, and as∣serting the Necessity of such Laws for Defence of their Church, the Lay-Power in this Case is little more than the Cats Paw to rake out the Chesnut. Nor are the Ci∣vil Rulers and Temporal Power of a Christian Government any ways more authorised to outgo the Gospel Moderation and Clemency for any Politick Consideration whatever, than the more immediate Oracles of Truth the Preachers themselves. And this the great Legislators of those Penal Statutes ve∣ry well knew, and therefore as I told you before, they cunningly converted Recusancy into High Treason, and Non∣conformity into Riots and Routs; to find something, tho but seemingly justifiable for he Fangs of their Laws to lay hold of; and so boulster'd up their Penal Statutes to make them able to walk upright. I'le only put this one Question to all the Doctors of our Church: With what Conscience can a Church that owns it self Fallible, establish Laws to punish Dissenters in Reli∣gion, when by her own Concession of Fallibility, she neither has nor CAN have any Certainty or Assurance (how strong soever she thinks or hopes her own Foundation) but that she punishes those that possibly may be more in the Right than her self; more especially, in those Professions that found their Dissenting Doctrins on her own Basis the Scripture?
I cannot tell what Equity wiser Heads may find out for the Ordination of Penal Laws; but truly in my Opinion, the Great Prince of Peace that reprimanded the Drawing of that Sword that cut off but the Ear of the High Priests Ser∣vant, tho in his own immediate Cause, very little intended the raising his Church, or the propagation of his Gospel, by either Axes or Gibbets, or Gaols or Dungeons. And He that left us the Standard of Christianity in the Innocence of Doves, never commission'd us the Rapine of Vultures; and though we are conceded the Subtilty of Serpents, I know no warrant that he gave us either for the Stings or the Poyson of them. And tho my Zeal for Truth makes me thus plain in de∣tecting the only Shame and Frailty of the Reform'd Church, I hope she has Goodness enough to forgive the Boldness of a Blushing Son, who is no otherwise solicitous than for her covering her own Nakedness. And that I may truly term it such, the Reformation that otherwise may boast her Purity and Principles only founded on Holy Writ, and all the rest of her Doctrins and Practices derived from those sacred Oracles, will be only found tripping here; and in all her support of Scriptural Records in all other Points, I am afraid must have recourse even to the exploded Authority of TRADITION only for her Penal Laws. For I shrewd∣ly suspect that Lollards Towers and Inquisition Houses (let her mince it as she will) will be found the only Precedents for the Estates she has confiscated, the Families she has beg∣gar'd the Gaols she has fill'd, besides her sometimes load∣ing of Gibbets, and ripping up the Bowels even of her own Co-Disciples, because Dissenting Professors of Christ, and all by her Penal Laws. Nor will it suffice for an Excuse to insinuate that the Establishment of Religion and Conformity of Worship on one side, and the Preservation of Peace and Tranquillity of
the State on the other side, exact the necessity of such rigid Laws. [Though by the by, the Peace of States is rather destroy'd then upheld by such Laws; for what Civil War in almost all the Christian World, that directly or indirectly has not had the Oppression of some Religious Party, its great∣est, if not only Incendiary?] No; to gain the first of these great Ends, let the Teach∣ers and Professors of our Establish'd Church live up to the heighth of their Profession, and re-call the Wanderers, and reduce the Strays into the Fold by their own convincing Examples of Christian Piety; a much more commendable way of making Proselytes than the foremention'd rigid Arts of Conversion. And for the second great End, the Govern∣ments Security, if her Temporal Fences are not strong enough, let her make stronger; and if any of her Dissenters are the disturbers of her Peace, let her single out the Guilty from the Innocent, and wreak her just Vengeance where 'tis de∣served; and not punish the Dissent it self (which as being meer matter of Religion, is wholly uncapable of such Crime) for the sake of any corrupted Members, that either are of, or Herd under the Covert of such or such a Congregation of Christians. For to do that work by the undistinguishing merciless Hand of her Penal Statutes, is so little conforma∣ble to the Evangelical Precepts, that I am afraid the doing such notorious Ills that Good may come of it, whatever Re∣ligious Security, or Gospel Propagation may be intended by them; these Penal Laws, I say, that can swallow the E∣states, Fortunes, Liberties and Lives, of their weaker Bre∣thren and fellow Christians, instead of being either Christi∣an or Just, or any ways related to 'em, will at last appear much nearer of kin to that famous Rover that wanders round the World to seek whom he may devour, insomuch that their Ordination will be found little less than borrow∣ing Engines from Hell to help to set up Heaven!
Now to the Case of the Church of England, if these are her Penal Laws (for I shall not trouble my self with a tedi∣ous recital of the several Statutes of that nature, as being all but Scions from the same Root) I should gladly know what Beauties or rather invisible Charms the Church of England can find in these Statutes to be in the least solicitous for their preservation. For, alas! maugre all her Volumes written upon the Unreasonableness of Separation from her Commu∣nion, and her Justification of her zealous Indeavours for Con∣formity, unless the Means and Methods used to obtain it (as these Laws were intended for such) be equally Justifia∣ble, her whole Pretensions fall to the Ground. Nor will it excuse her to say, that they were chiesly en∣acted in Terrorem, as being but seldom put in execution; as if a studied ill Deed were therefore more excusable be∣cause committed, suppose but once in an Age; when a foul Act for that very Cause, should rather appear the more de∣form'd, as 'tis the Rarity that makes the Monster.—Be∣sides, Queen Mary had that Plea to make; for what were 206 Protestants even by Foxes Muster-Roll, burnt for Reli∣gion in her five years Reign, to the some millions of Pro∣testants in those days, when half the Kingdom was of that Persuasion? an infinite larger number to cull out so many Sufferers from, than all the Popish Priests that Rome has sent over these 130 Years past, or shall do in as many more to come. To return therefore to His Majesties Proposal of Abro∣gating these Laws, 'tis a greater Duty upon the Church of England to abolish 'em than in the Dissenters themselves; for as 'tis a Yoke imposed upon their weaker Brethren, in it self wholly unjust, the Sufferer under that Yoke in endea∣vouring
to break it, only acts by the Motives of Self-defence, the common Principle of Nature: But the Imposer of that Yoke is tyed by the Obligations of Religion it self, to repeal and repent his own Act of Injustice. Besides, if all Arguments of Conscience cannot prevail; and Policy, not Equity (though Heaven forbid so unchari∣table a Thought) is our Churches Guide; yet, even then too, What do's she yield up in abolishing those Laws? Why, truly nothing. For whilst the Government continues in the Hands of a Prince of the Romish Religion, those Statutes will utterly lye dead; for the Royal Indulgence, a Preroga∣tive in the Crown, will never put them in execution: And if abolisht, however the next Protestant Prince has the power of Resumption, if his Conscience shall think fit to give them a Resurrection. What reason therefore has the Church of England for her Nonconcurrence to a Proposal so equitable, when she has not so much as the least Pretext even of meer Interest it self for her Refusal? But this I am sure, as the Church of England can have no solid Reasons to oppose their Repeal, the State has very substantial ones to inforce it. For as TRADE is the great∣est support and strength of a Kingdom, I know no Politicks so conducing to the Commerce and Wealth of a Nation as Liberty of Conscience. What greater Encouragement to Naturalization? And England that is not overloaded with People, can have no fairer Inlet to bring in whole Families and Estates, and indeed the Wealth of the World (besides the opening that Current of Commerce even amongst our present Natives, which the late Restraint of Worship had so much shut up) than Liberty of Religion. Nor can I bet∣ter instance the Effects of this Policy than in the growth of
the Dutch Greatness, and the decay of the Spaniard from their different Extreams of National Conduct in that Point. I am certain His Majesty resolves to eternize his Glory, by being the truest Pater Patriae of all the Crown'd Heads since the Conquest; nor has He a fairer Prospect of making His Kingdom a true Paradise of PEACE and PLENTY, but by taking this Pattern at least from the first Paradise, that is, by making the Lyon and Lamb lye down in Peace together; our long Disunions being no otherways to be reconciled, and our Enmities husht but by this only Ʋni∣versal Pacification. I shall only add this last Consideration. The execution of our Penal Laws and the restraint of Conscience, has been the greatest Blow that ever was given to the Hereditary Right of the Subjects of England, their natural Properties and Immunities given and sealed to them by Magna Charta it self. For who can call his Liberty or Estate his own, whilst a Superiour Opinion in POWER shall seize our Persons and confiscate our Estates, for no other cause but difference of Worship and Faith; and neither Person, Estate or Liberty, redeemable under a less Composition than renouncing of God; for Conformity of Worship absolutely against Con∣science is little else. And all this Capital Offence so un∣fixt and so undeterminable a sort of Transgression, that a Man has only a meer Lottery to be in the Right or the Wrong: For the blackest Criminal in one Reign has been the whitest Saint in the next, and so vice versâ over again, witness the Reigns of Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary and Queen Eliza∣beth, where the Protestants were the Devils one while and the Papists another: Nay, in the Reign of Henry the Eighth, both Papist and Protestant were at one time in the wrong:
For 'twas remarkable in his Reign, that in the same day have Papists been hanged for Traytors, for disowning his Church Supremacy; and Protestants burnt for Hereticks for denying of Transubstantiation. Thus in their turns have all Religions and Opinions lain under the Scourge of the se∣verest of Laws, and all for want of that Obedience to a Law, which Humanity it self is utterly unable to pay. For though our Breach or not Breach of all other Laws, either Humane or Divine, lyes in our own free will and choice: To conform or not conform to this or that Belief, is wholly above the power of Man; Faith only being Irresistible. And if our worldly Well-being, and all we enjoy in this Life, depends upon such caprichious Decrees of Law, certainly the Great Charter of our Liberties and Estates that confirm'd 'em both under no such Condition or Restriction, is not a little in∣vaded by the Penalties of such Laws: And I cannot tell what greater or more glorious Design His Gracious Ma∣jesty can undertake, than by repairing so deep a Breach wrought through the very Fundamentals of his Peoples ori∣ginal Freedom and Birthrights: Nor is there, or has been a greater Friend or Patron of the Church of England than His present Majesty, who himself alone tenders Her the Means and Opportunity to wash off those long Stains and Blots, which either the petulance or remissness of Her Prote∣stant Defenders of Her Faith, through these Penal Statutes have cast or left upon Her, and so to restore Her to Whiteness and Innocence. Having made this fair Inquest into the Penal Laws, I shall take a little Search too into the TEST, and lay down those Reasons that equally oblige us to concur with His Majesty in a Repeal of that too.
In order to which, it behoves us first to sum up all the great and popular Arguments (if I may so call 'em, tho in reality rather the Language of Fears and Jealousies than the Voice of right Reason) daily urged for the Preservation of the Test, viz. That the whole Defence of the Protestant Reli∣gion relyes on that Basis. If the Test were once abrogated, the Church of England would soon be blown up, when all Offi∣ces both Ecclesiastical and Civil, and all Power and Autho∣rity both in Church and State shall be lodged in Roman Ca∣tholick Hands; and what not? To answer which hideous and formidable Outcry, we'll begin first with the pretended Dangers threaten'd the Church of England by Repeal of the Test. Not to insist up∣on His Majesties reiterated WORD and HONOƲR, His inviolable Engagements to maintain the Church of Eng∣land as now by Law establisht, in her uninterrupted Rights and Priviledges, all her Churches and Church-livings what∣ever thereunto belonging, &c. in it self alone no little Se∣curity. But waving that Plea, the Ecclesiastical Govern∣ment and the Church of England neither are, nor can be shaken or toucht by the Abrogation of the Test, the Test be∣ing indeed no part of her Defence. For first, the very taking of the Test, is no part of the Qualification of any of the Cler∣gy of England, nor was ever so much as mention'd or thought upon to be imposed or tender'd to the Clergy: No; as jea∣lous as the Founders of that Test were (or pretended to be) of the Danger of Popery, and as zealous as they could be for the Security of the Protestant Religion, they very well knew the Church of England had two impregnable Bul∣warks, the two great Acts of ƲNIFORMITY that them∣selves alone sufficiently establisht, guarded, and preserved the Church of England in all Points without any Fortifica∣tion
from the Test; nor indeed was the Test wanted in the Ecclesiastick Administration, those very Statutes being a greater and stronger Test before: For by those Statutes is the whole Liturgy, the Administration of the Sacraments, and indeed all the Canons and Articles of the Church sup∣ported: For by the Fence of those Laws, first, no Romanist can possibly be admitted into the Clergy unless under the most damnable Hypocrisie (which no Human Test can disco∣ver) an Hypocrisie too no ways beneficial to the Romish Cause whilst tyed up to the Divine Service as now by Law establisht. Secondly, No other Divine Service, as the Mass, or the like, can be introduced into our Churches already constituted or assigned for the Divine Service of the Church of England. The strength of these two Laws His Majesty very well knows, and is so far even from the Thought of hurting or infringing the least Particle of either of those Laws, or the Security our Church has, do's, or can receive from them, by abrogating any Penal Laws or Tests whatever, that on the contrary there is not undoubtedly that farther Confir∣mation of those Laws, and the Religious Observance of them, or any thing conducing thereunto, that may or shall be of∣fer'd to His Majesty in Parliament, that His Majesty shall not readily assent to, and as inviolably maintain. If then the Church of England, Her Administration and Government (as 'tis plain) stand of themselves alone secure and firm, without any borrow'd Prop or Support from the Test whatever; the Test therefore is only a Buttrice (or at least so intended) to the Civil Magistracy; as first, Excluding all Roman Catholicks from all Offices of Trust in the State. Secondly, From all Domestick Services near the Person of the King. And Thirdly, From all Right to Session in Parliament.
These three Incapacities are by the Test thrown upon the Romanists. And for confuting all Suspicions and Jealousies, let us examine how the loosening of all these three Restricti∣ons can end to the Subversion of the Protestant Religi∣on as now by Law establisht. In the first place, as to the Civil Government: What Of∣fice in the State can a Roman Catholick hold, any ways em∣powering him to prejudice the Church of England? Sup∣pose even in the Courts of Judicature (for if any Apparition of any such Power, 'tis there;) Were Romanists (imagine) in all those Offices? Why may not a Sir Thomas Moor be as honest as a Lord Chief Justice Hales, and execute his Of∣fice with as great Integrity and Justice? Why not Men of equal Abilities be of equal Uprightness in all Religions? Besides, the Distribution of Meum and Tuum (more especially when Liberty of Conscience shall be past into a perpetual Law, and all Penal Inflictions for matter of Religion thrown out of their Jurisdictions) will then be the whole Business that lyes before them; and wherein is a Roman Catholick Judge any more incapacitated for the administring of Justice than another Man? Moreover, in a Kingdom where their num∣ber is so truly inconsiderable, as scarce the Two hundredth Man in the Nation, if they have hopes of making any Con∣verts or any Indeavours that way, it can only be done by holding the Scale of Justice upright, and in all Posts of Trust by keeping up the steddiest Standard of Right and Equity, as the only means thereby to recommend and en∣dear themselves to the World, and wipe off those Blemishes that the mistaken Jealousies and Popular Misapprehensions have so long so unkindly cast upon them. And This, and This only they are very sensible is their Chart to steer by; and their Great Pilot, their Royal Master, the best read Stu∣dent
in the Arts of Empire that possibly ever graced a Throne, equally knows to be His only Course, and un∣doubtedly as sacredly resolves to make it so. And if the Judges of the Land suppose of the Romish Religion (besides their Oaths that bind 'em, and His Majesties Honour that shall influence them to it) have these Obligations more and above even of INTEREST to their very Religion it self, to move in so regular a Sphear of Justice, where lyes our Danger? And if this higher Station will be so In∣offensive, what can the poorer Justices of the Peace, or the inferiour Subministration of the Government signifie, in Popish or not Popish Hands? But in this Case I have heard some People say: Alas! What stretch of the Laws will not such Judges make? Perhaps for instance, pick a hole in the Abby-Lands, and start some dormient Title or other to revert them to the Church of Rome; a Patrimony that will not a little enrich the Romanists and advance their Cause. This idle Objection was scarce worth naming; as if the stretching of our Laws in that Point was not as notorious and Arbitrary as a total Violation of the Subjects Right, and rending the whole Frame of the Laws in sunder. But to check this idle Surmize; If a Romish Parliament it self in the Reign of Queen Mary, with the very Restoration of the Romish Religion and Papal Supremacy into the Saddle, never so much as attempted to revert those Lands: Nay, on the contrary, their whole Title was confirm'd to the present Possessours by a Decretal from Rome it self, as was then so solemnly done by Cardinal Pool, the then Popes Legate: How groundless must the Fear be of any Thought or At∣tempt of reverting them now? Or why must the Romish
Judges in any kind subvert or undermine the Laws, contrary to all their best Politiques in the present State of England, to no true advantage either to themselves or their Church, and possibly to be answerable for it with their Heads, if they live to the next Protestant Prince. To come next to the Officers of his Majesties Houshold, &c. To have those Posts too barricado'd with Tests, and the Im∣perial Dignity so shackled, as to be debarr'd the Choice of its own Menials; nay, even of its Conversation it self, is an In∣solence put upon Majesty, as had been scarce tolerable from an Ordinance of Forty eight, much less an Act of Parliament. But for our less Wonder at it, we are to consider 'twas Hatch'd in the same Republick Nest: for no less than the great old Patriot of Three Names sate for the brooding of it. I think I need not raise Arguments to prove how little those Gentlemen of Honour, the Courtiers I mean, of any Religion whatsoever, in that innocent Station are, or can be concerned in shaking either Church or State. It is enough to say that greater Indignity under the Sanction of a Law, was never impos'd upon a Crown'd Head. The meanest Gentleman in England, whilst this Test keeps Footing, has a Prerogative above the King. For the choice of his Stew∣ard, Bayliff, Attorney, or Solicitor, &c. are in his own free Election: But these were Priviledges thought too large for a King; and therefore he is Stinted and Bounded to such Elections, as the more Imperial Wisdom of His Great Masters in Parliament judge fittest for him. Monarchical Rule is said to be like that of Heaven, where the Primum Mobile acts altogether by inferior Sphears, and second Causes. And so Majesty by its Officers and Mi∣nisters, as so many Vehicles, by which the Influences of the Royal Power are Convey'd, to set the Great Machine a moving: But truly this Ascendancy the late Law-makers,
judged too great for the King of England; and therefore they found an Expedient to render the Monarchy little more than precarious, making the whole Ministers of the State the Creatures of the Test, and not of the King. Now I desire to know how in Reason we can imagine, that a King, in himself the Fountain of Honour, and Origi∣nal of Power; though in his Nature, the Mildest and best Temper'd of Princes; though without the least Thought of Unhinging the Frame of the Government, or Disturbing the Settled Church of his Kingdom; to blast his own Glory, and lose his Subjects Hearts; (for that would be all the Crop 'twould yield him;) I wonder I say how we can imagine, that the Best and most Gracious of Princes, tho without the foremention'd Designs, could nevertheless brook so Ʋnprincely a Yoke as the Test.—And truly to justifie his Majesties heartiest Endeavours against both Penal Laws and Test, in not labouring to abrogate the first, as they stand in Force against the Lives and Liberties, (and how un∣justly has been proved before) of the Members of his own Communion, he would be the most unnatural of Men; and in not labouring to repeal the last, as standing so egregiously in force against the Right and Prerogative of His Crown, and indeed originally forged in Affront to himself, he should be the most Dishonourable of Princes: Nor will it serve to object, that His late Majesty (whatever diminution to the Prerogative it might be) by passing it into a Law, has a∣lienated that Power from the Crown. For to answer that Argument, we are assured, that whatever Alienations of that kind the Easiness of the present Possessour of the Crown, or any other Reasons may induce him to make, are no ways truly binding to the Successor. Now to come to the last Point, the Qualification of Mem∣bers in Parliament by the Test: And first, I shall not so much
insist upon the notorious Invasion of the Birthright of the Peers by this Exclusion from Parliament, as being a Point al∣ready so well handled by better Pens, and never yet answer∣ed; nor shall I so much insist upon the Illegality and Ʋnrea∣sonableness of Tests in general of any kind, as was once argu∣ed in Parliament by the Lord Delamere in opposition to a Test proposed by the Earl of Lindsey, a Test, which (though not thought legal to be imposed as such) contain'd no other than the highest Obligations of Loyalty that every Subject owes to his Prince. But if the making of Tests in Parliament, which with the Sovereign Consent (as Kings are but Men, and sometimes the Exigence of Affairs, may extort the Roy∣al Fiat) lyes in the Majority so to do: Suppose the Forgers of this Test (for by the by they were none of the best Friends of the Church as now by Law establisht) had follow'd their Blow, and form'd a second Test to deny Episcopacy to be Jure divino; a Dispute much bandyed in those days: Here had the Bishops been thrown out of the Parliament, if not the whole Hierarchy out of the Kingdom. And so by Tests ad Infinitum, how might the Basis of the whole Government been overturned, and the very Houses of Parliament dwin∣dled at last, to the scandalous Dimensions of the old fashion'd Rump. For if one Test to exclude a Score, why not another to lop off a hundred? And indeed, how are our present Par∣liaments the comprehensive Body of the Nation, when so ma∣ny of the Peers, not there by Representatives, are shut out? Nay, how much is the Dignity of the Laws they make, and the very Constitution of our later Parliaments themselves impair'd and lessen'd by such an Exclusion? But to come to the main Business, viz. to obviate the great∣est and terriblest Clamour of Fear and Jealousie against the Repeal of the Test, viz. If the Test were destroy'd, who knows but Parliaments may be so managed as to turn out the Church of England, and set up Popery even by Law it self?
This indeed is the Gorgon, that frights half Man-kind out of their little Senses. But where, or how is this Popish Parliament to be gotten, (for a Protestant one will hardly be so Complaisant:) But to search out every Cranny that this imaginary Danger is supposed to creep in at, Let us examine the House of Lords, and try their Inclinations that way. If the Test were laid aside, and the excluded Lords re∣stored; what would their Number signifie! At out last Parliament, the Protestant Peers amounted to 160, and the excluded Romish Barons (nor are they much increased since) were not a Tenth of their Number. So that here's an absolute want of a Prodigious Creation of Ro∣mish Barons to rise to a Majority; Nay, and of so many Estates too, to support the Grandure, as possibly would stagger imagination it self to find a Treasure, enough to purchase: for so many New Dignifications, especially of Gentry, or Landed Men to start up Lords, among so thin sown a Party, would put 'em damnable hard to it. But for once, grant such an Extravagant Donation of Ho∣nour, and such Goldeu Mines to maintain it, might form a House of Lords capable of over-ballancing on the Popish side; where shall the House of Commons be had? for with∣out both they do nothing! They would go nigh to find such a Dead Weight in the Lower House, as all the Tuggs of Rome would never be able to stirr; and this stupendi∣ous Parliamentary Subversion of the Church of England a Phoenomenon only in Nubibus. A Popish House of Commons too! Alas, they'll tell you, very easily. Has not the King for instance, got a new way of Regulating Corporations, Nay, has he not (or will do be∣fore next Sessions) already Modell'd all their Charters, and undoubtedly left few or none, either Citizens, Burghers or Free-men, in whom the Election lies, but such as are his Friends and Creatures.
Very Well: Suppose he has, or will take Care, to the best of his Endeavour or Power, to Establish Corporation to his own Hearts liking: After all, where shall there be One Roman Catholique in all the next Election; and what shall these Creatures, (if you'll have 'em so) do more than Choose every Numerical Member a Protestant: For till the Test be Legally dissolved, they must all be so. And truly what if this next, tho' Protestant Parliament, out of an Abhorrence of the Ʋnchristian Barbarity of the Penall Laws, shall do themselves, their Posterity, their Country, and His Majestie Justice in dissolving them? And what if likewise their true Sense of the most servile Imposition that Imperial Dignity ever bore, their Tender∣ness for His Majesties Honour and Prerogative, together with their Gratitude, for the Plenty and Peace His Reign has Bless'd them with, shall incline them also, to break those Fetters of the Crown, the Test; and all no more than High-Justice and Right Reason shall oblige them to; Must it therefore follow, that they shall do themselves, their Families, their yet unborn Heirs, and their no less Concern their Country that Wrong, as to give up their tenderest and nearest Care, their Religion; or any thing tending to it! Well, but say they, if this next Parliament will not do the Work; when the Test is once gon; 'tis but calling new Popish ones that will. I, but who shall choose them? The Electors are all the same: For the Corporations are, or will be settled to his own Model: and Test or no Test in Being, their Incli∣nations will be all the same; and upon any New Choice, beyond all Dispute, the Majoritie of the Old Members E∣lected again; and if any New Ones amongst them, those too as far from leaning towards Rome, as the Popular Frantick Jealousies are from Common Sense.
Upon the upshot, I defie all Mankind to form one Rea∣sonable Projection, or indeed, imaginary possibility of such a Popish Parliament. For instance we must run into endless Labyrinths and Chimaeras, for the meer Shadow of such a Danger. For first the King must dissolve all his late Charters again; no matter whether forfeited or not; and so throw Dirt in the Face of his own yesterdays Royal Acts and Grants: For all the Free-men, Burggers, or Aldermen, and whatever the present Electors, and consequently all the Trading Part of the Nation, must be displaced and cashierd, (a very Violent Reform, and an ingratitude, which His Majesties Nature abhors, to those very Men, that by rescinding the Penall Laws and Test shall have Duty fully given him all he could ask:) And a new set of Romans planted in their Rooms; or otherwise, if the present Electors continue in their Posts, a Majority of Papists must be crowded in to over Vote them: But where to be had, let Machiavil himself inform us. For alas, where are these Popish Ʋpstarts to be found. Not amongst the present Inhabitants of the Corporations: For how many Corporations are there in England, that have not so much as one Man amongst them of that Religi∣on. Nay, take some parts of England, as the West for Example, where Corporations stand Thickest, and Papists grow Thinnest, and you shall not find in whole Counties the Hundredth (Nay, if I trebled it, I should not mi∣stake.) Part of Papists, of all Degrees whatever, to sup∣ply such a Corporation Majority of Electors, or any thing like it. And indeed, take the whole Nation round, and make every Romanist that Writes the Age of Man an Al∣derman, they shall fall so short still of the Account, that they must be forced to send over for Jago Pilgrims, (a good jolly Troop too) or some other, as Extravagant
Helps to make out the Number, or otherwise our Out∣cry will be but Noise, and our Fears but Fantoms. But suppose any such wondrous Electors, such Alien or Forreign supplies of Romanists could be found, and so ir∣regularly thrust into Corporations, as to carry a Popish Majority of Corporation Members: Nor will such a bare Majority do the Work. One additional Hundred of Po∣pish Members extraordinary must be had, to over-power the Knights of the Shire, who in Spight of all pretended Corporation Feats, will be firm Protestant Members; the Over-byassing of whole Counties, being an Apprehen∣sion that Lunacy it self can never Forge. Nevertheless, suppose all these Alien Supplies so obtruded upon us, enough to carry the Cause. Alas, what Palliation, Nay, what Eloquence of Angels is enough to vindicate such Ir∣regular and such Arbitrary Foundation of a Parliament; and instead of a Legal Assembly, and truely National Senate, or Popery so Establisht the Sacred Sanction of a LAW, Even half an Eye would see through the Fraud, and the whole World explode and condemn so visible a Deceipt and Illusion: Insomuch, that His Majesty with as much Justice, and twice as much Honour; (Pardon the Pro∣fanation even of such a Supposition) might as well set up, Sic volo sic Jubeo for Law, and save himself the trouble of calling of Parliaments, for dissolving Penall Laws or Tests, or any other such tedious, and indeed, of the two more Ʋnprincely Toil and Labour. What Mountain Height, are Fears raised to; but how shallow a Basis are they Built upon? Alas, we are not in any kind to take Comparisons from Queen Marys, or Queen Elizabeths Reign. The turning the Scale of Par∣liaments in those Days, was the least part of any Reaso∣nable Mans Wonder. What an easie Matter for the Influence and Ascendancy of Imperial Power to sway Laws,
and Establish Churches, as the Sovereign Inclination lea∣ned; when the Church of Rome was not so low in its Wane, or the Young Reformation so high in its Increase, but either Party were in a manner the Moiety of the Na∣tion, and consequently the Favour of the Crown might go far, and a Majority on the Royal Side, be more easily obtained. But in the present, even Despicably Diminitive Num∣ber of Romanists, and so almost a Total Bent of the whole Nation to the other side, the Project is so impra∣cticable, and the Turn so impossible, as only Delirium can shape a Fear of it. But now to Sum up all, and draw towards a Period: between such Penall Laws, and such Tests, and the won∣drous Episcopal Tenderness for their Beloved Preserva∣tion, Our Church, though a good Mother, is but a Course Nurse, when such Ʋnlickt Brats as these, are her Hug'd and Dandled Bantlings. And Our Consciencious Mute Prelates, were certainly under the Fascination of no ordinary Hot Zeal, or something else as Warm, to be warpt into Disobedience in so poor a Cause, viz. The Reading so inoffensive a Paper as His Majesties Declarati∣on. —But perhaps, after all, there may be more in it than we are aware of. For who can Fadom the Depth of such a Disobedience? Who knows but this very Mask of Conscience might be one of the subtlest Stratagems of Interest. Who, I say, knows but the Loss of so considera∣ble a Church Regalia, so dear an Ensign of Ecclesiastick Sovereignty as their Tormenta and Flagella, their Tests and Penall Laws; and so sensible a Diminution of their GRANDEƲR, their Diana GRANDEƲR, threat∣en'd by the Relaxation of those Laws, might be so near a Concern to them, that seing the Royal Indulgence to Re∣ligious Liberty, daily more and more gaining upon the
Hearts of the People, and to stop the Carreer of so Ge∣neral a Compassion, the Fatal Effects of so growing a Contagion; their Denial of Reading so Pacifick a Decla∣ration might possibly be one of the most exquisite Artifi∣ces to stiffle the generous Product of it into Abortion; Their very Refusal being really no more than purposely to Court Sufferings, to gain Proselytes, as well fore knowing, upon the least Punishment for it, tho' ever so much their Due, to have their Condoled and Pittyed Cause, seen through those Popular False Opticks, as should turn even Justice it self in Persecution: And so by Alaruming the Old Igno∣rance into New Jealousies, they might so harden that pre∣sent (too Universal) popular Lenity towards Tender Con∣sciences, and more than probably so affect the Frightned Populace, and thereby so far influence the next Election as to defeat the whole Royal purposed Clemencie, and gain their own Point. I should be sorry to be mistaken in this Suspicion; but truly the shallowness of so Weak-reason'd an Obstinacie against so Innocent a Command of the King, looks so very like some such sort of Ecclesiastical Polity, that I am affraid the Consciencious stumble at so Diminitive a Gnat, will at last be found a meer artful Piece of Priest craft, to keep their Dagon from falling: And what that Dagon is, let the World judge; for excepting the Engines of their Tyranny, and the supporters of their Pride, I know no strength the Penal Laws or Tests, either have or can yield them. But above all things that the Illegality of the King's Dispensing Power, should be a Specter that appeared so dreadful to their Lordships, yet walks invisible to every Mortal Eye-Sight else, is not a little surprising, The very Straitest-laced Prerogative Men, never denied the King his Dispencing Power in Cases of Offence only a∣gainst
himself, Absq. Damno alterius; and wherein the bare Exercise of Religious Worship is, or can be alterius Damno, their Wisdoms would have been kind to inform us: Or wherein any Minister or Officer, qualified or not qualified by the Test, in any Civil or Military Station, (for His Majestie pretends to no other Dispensation) can be Damno Ecclesiae would be another piece of Discovery, as kind as the other. Wherein, & what has our Church, or our Nondispensing Church-men suffered by all this To∣leration. Have they lost the least Particle of their Govern∣ment, Discipline, Rights, Priviledges, or Possessions what∣ever. Is there any of our Nontested Magistrates, or our Ʋnpinion'd Dissenters in all this Freedom, has wrongd our Church of so much as a Sprig of Mint, or a Corn of Cum∣minseed that she can challenge Hers. Is she denyed either Law or Justice, for so much as the claim of a Tythe Egg? And that this Dispensing Power, may not look altoge∣ther so hidious, What is the King's Dispensing Power in Penal Laws, really any more than his pardoning Power. The Transgression of those Laws, incurrs such a Penalty or Punishment, and the Royal Clemencie, is Graciously pleased to remit the Forfeiture. And indeed, what does his Declaration amount to more than a Noli prosequi, (only a more universal one) the Common and daily Plea of the Crown. His Majesty, by his unquestion'd Right can par∣don; and what's his Declaration truly more than that he will do it. Our Great Crown-sticklers, have to a very fair purpose, so long Preach'd up our King's, the Vizege∣rents of GOD, to come at last to the denying them any part of the brightest Prerogative of the Divinity MERCY. And as to the backing the Credit, of their Assertion, by their Parliamentary Authority of 72, &c. I am sorry to hear our Divine Gamalels lay hold of so Weak a Handle, as to set np a Transient Vote against a Fun∣damental
Prerogative. And as to their Insinuation, that upon our conceding a Dispensing Power, in the Case of the Penal Laws and Tests; it must therefore follow, that we should open an Inlet to lay aside All Laws, both Eccle∣siastick and Civil; 'tis an Ergo sequitur, so strangely far stretch'd, that they might e'ne as well have said, (and the Consequence have hung as well together too) that be∣cause some of our Severe Fathers of our Church, have Reasons of Conscience and Policy, to support Laws for the depopulating of Kingdoms, therefore the Gentler FATHER of our Country, ought to have the same Reasons too. I hope, their Lordships, if for nothing but the Reputa∣tion of their Wisdom and Learning, did not tender these Petitioning Reasons to His Majesty, as intended for Con∣vincing ones. For truly by the strength, both of their Al∣ledging and inferencing, this part of their Petition, if not all of it, I am affraid looks more like Written for the Rea∣ding of the Rabble, than of the King But to conclude. As the fore-mentioned are all our Dangers from their Repeal, wherein are His Majesties Demands unreasonable, in asking the Repeal of the Penal Laws, in which almost the whole Vox populi, Witness the late Numerous Adresses, joyns with him, and the Princi∣ples of Nature, Humanity and Conscience plead for him. Or in asking the Repeale of the Test, for the asserting of his own Honour, and the Recovering the Birth-Right of a King, by endeavouring to shake off the most shameful Vassalage that Monarch ever truckled under. And why must his Endeavours of doing his People so much Right in the first; and Himself so much Right in the last, be so poorly mis-interpreted, by the unnatural Surmises of his Ʋngrateful People. But let us Blush and mend, and by gi∣ving up these Laws, do Equity in Return of Clemenoie and MERCY. FINIS.
