L1563a 27393206 110099
A LETTER, Of a JESUIT OF LIEGE, Concerning the Method of Establishing the CATHOLIK RELIGION, In the Kingdom of ENGLAND. IT is to be admired with what affection the King prosecutes the affair of our Society; greeting the whole College by the Reverend Father Provincial and earnestly recommending himself to our prayers, most gratiously admitted to him Provincial Father Jo: Regnes returned again into England (the Dukes and Earles being commanded to wait som hours for accession) whom he asked in the pre∣sence of the Queen in a familiar manner, how many novices and how many scholars he had, the Provincial answered of the later about 20 of the former above 50 he repled that he should have need of double or treble the number to performe that whith he designed for the Society
and commanded that they should be wel exercised in preaching for he said that England did at this time want such. I doubt not but you have heard of the Kings sending letters to Father de la Chaise Confessor to the French King concerning the affair of the house of wattenens in whith he affirmed that whatsoever was don by the English Fathers of the So∣ciety might be imputed to him, Father Clare Rector of the same house, acting in the same business at London found easy access to the King, and in like manner easily obteyned his desire; The King for∣bade him to kneell and kiss his hand as the manner is, saying indeed your Reverence once kissed my hand, but if I had then known as now I do that you were a Priest I would have rather kneelled and kiss'd your Reverence. After the busniess was over, the King in a familiar discourse told this Father he would either Convert England or dye a Martyr and had rather dye to morrow with the conversion of it than Reigne happily and piously 50 years with out it; Then he calls himself a son of the Society, in whose progress he said he rejoyced in as his own, and tis hard to express how thankfull he shew'd himself when he was told by the most Reverend. N. that he was made a partaker of all the merits of the Society, out of whith he declared his Confessor should be (who it is as yet is not known) som report it to be the Reverend Father Provincial, whereof as yet there is no certainty. Many think that an Archbishopprick, most a Cardinals Cap will be given Father Edmond Petere who stands fairest in the Kings favor, to whome for a month or two since, that part of the Royall Pallace is given, together with the Royall Chappell lately built, in whith the King whilest he was Duke of York did usually reside; where you may every day see I know not how many Courtiers waiting to speak with his Eminence, for tis said so they call him. The King doth very much make use of this mans Councel and many of the Catholik Nobility, who possess the Chief Offices in the Kingdom, to find out a way of promoting the Faith without violence. Not long since certain of the Catholick No∣bility objected to the King that they thought he made too much hast to establish the Faith, to which he answered, I growing old must go forward speedily, otherwise if I should fortune to dye perhaps I should leave you in a worse condition than I found you, they replyed why then was he so unconcern'd in the Conversion of the daughters and heirs of the Kingdom he answered God will provide an heir, leave my daughters tome to be converted, you bring your owne slaves and others to the faith by your exemple. In many Countys he hath made the Catho∣likes
chief and in a short time we shall have Justices of the peace as they call them in almost all places we hope the affair at Oxford will succeed well, one of our Divines alwaye remains therein a publik Catholik Chap∣pell of the Vice chancellor, who hath converted som students. The Bishop of Oxford himself seems to favor the Catholik cause very much, he proposed in Councell whether it was not expedient, that one College in Oxford at the least should be granted to the Catholiks, that they may not be compell'd to study beyond the seas at such vast expences, but what answere was given is yet unknowne. Two of our party together with other nobles being invited to a Feast the same Bishop drank the Kings health to a certain hereticall Baron there present, wishing him a happy successe in all his affairs, and added that the protestant Religion in England seem'd to him to be in little better condition than Buda was before was attack'd, and those who defended it were in a manner meer Atheists. Many do embrace the faith, and lately five of the chief Earles have publikly profess'd it. The Reverend Father Alex. Regnes or Provincial, to whome is committed the care of the Chappel of the most serene Ele∣ctor Palatines Embassador, employs his whole time in resolving and satisfying the questions of hereticks doubting in their Religion, who you may see walking before the door of the Chappel, by two's and threes, controverting amongst themselves some thing concerning the Faith. We are uncertain that Prince George, professeth the Faith, our aboad in England having been so short. We teach the best sort of morallity at Lincolne, Norwich and York; at Warwick we have a publick Chappel defended from all Injury by the Kings Souldiers. We have also bought a house in the City of Worchester. In the Country of Lancaster the Catholick cause flourisheth much, in some of the new Catholick Churches on Sundays above 1500 are numbered to be present at Sermon; at London the cause doth not go forward worse, many Chappels are so frequented by the people on Sundays, for Divine Worship, that many of them are not big enough two of ours Darmes and Berfal constantly say Mass in the pre∣sence of the King and Queen, Father Edmond Newil before the Queen Dowager, Father Alex. Regnes in the Embassadors Chappel above mentioned others in other places; for the Chieff London Col∣ledge there are several Houses bought in the Savoy, as they call it, near Somerset-house the Queen Dowagers Palace for about eighteen thousand livers; in reducing of which into the forme of a Colledge
théy labour very hard, that the Schooles may be opened before Easter. In a short time a Catholick Viceroy is to go into Ireland, no other will satisfy the Kings will, to establish the Catholick cause there; for certain the Parliament will meet at London in the Month of February, from whom the King is resolved to require three things, 1. that by a general vote the Catholick Lords shall be admitted into the Upper-house. 2. That the Oath or Test be annull'd. 3. Which is the chief, that all penal Laws, madé against the Catholicks be re∣péaled, which, that he might the more securely obtain', he desires it to be signifyed to all, that he is certainly resolved to put all those out of their employments, who will not act strenuousely for those things, besides a dissolution of the Parliament. At which reso∣lution some Heretiks being affrighted, came to a certain Earle to be advised what to do, to whom, said he, the Kings will is sufficiently known to us, what he once says, he will certainly do, if you love your selves, you ought to submit to his will. There are great prepa∣rations for a War at London, and a great Navy is to be ready against whom is uncertain. The Dutch are jealous, wherefore they begin to arme. Time will shew more. Liege 2. Febr. 1687.
