L402A 12210089 56270
TWO LETTERS SENT To the Honoble William Lenthal Esq Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons. The one, concerning the great VICTORY Obtained at Cardiffe by the Parlia∣ments Forces under the Command of Major General LAUGHORN: Wherein were slain about Two hundred and fifty, Eight hundred taken Prisoners, whereof two Lieut: Colonels, two Majors, ten Captains, ten Lieutenants, divers Ensigns, with other inferior Officers. Ther, concerning Sir Tho: Fairfax's march into Cornwal. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That these Letters be forthwith printed and pub∣lished: H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for Edw. Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons, and are to be sold at his Shop at the signe of the Golden Dragon in Fleetstreet, neer the Inner-Temple. March 2. 1645.
To the Honourable William Len∣thalEsq Speaker to the Honorable House of Commons. Mr. Speaker, TO satisfie the Country, and hoping good effect, I drew my Guns before Aberist∣with Castle, and spent Two hundred shot to assay a Battery; but finding the place so impregnable, and the Governor so obstinate, no indifferent conditions would satisfie him: during my engagement there, I received several invitations from the chief Gentry of Glamorganshire, to desire my assistance against the Ragland Forces, who (as they pretended) daily threatned the invasion of their Country; but perceiving their fear greater then the danger, (if they were unanimously resolved to defend themselves) I delayed my motion, expecting further Intelligence, and what the issue would be: within few days after I had News brought me of the revolt of the High Sheriff, and many other Gentry that formerly invited me into these parts (as you shall finde by their Letter inclosed) calling a general Muster of the Country under colour of putting themselves in a posture of Defence, and thereby endeavoured the sur∣prisal of the Governour of Cardiffe, and the rest of the Gentry who would not comply with their Malig∣nancy. The Colonel General and some of the Gentry were taken, the rest made their escape by the swiftnesse
of their horses to the Town; whereupon they present∣ly laid Siege to it, publishing a Declaration which so fooled the people, that they were resolved to venture their Ruine in the prosecution thereof. Resenting the dangerous consequence this Faction might grow too, if not crop'd in the bud, the welfare or ruine of all South-wales depending thereon. I presently drew off my Guns from Aberistwith, leaving Colonel Powel to block it up, who since my departure surpriz'd their boat, a Captain, and fifteen Souldiers; marching directly a∣way for the Relief of Cardiffe, where before I could possibly come, the forces of Ragland were joyned with Carn and the rest, the Town taken, and the Go∣vernour betaken himself to the Castle; whereupon I made my approach towards the Castle, least want of vi∣ctual or some other necessary might enforce Surrender; & coming within a mile thereof, I found the enemy up∣on a heath prepared for fight: drawing up my men I pre∣sently charged them; so God blessing our endeavors, Routed and dispersed them all, pursuing the Rout to∣wards Ragland six miles beyond Cardiffe, their Foot were all killed and taken, and about forty of then Horse. My men eager of the Victory, after their re∣ceipt into the Castle, made a sally too soon, before my Horse could be brought about (by reason of the passa∣ges) to second them; so that being over-power'd with a body of Horse that was in the Town, there was ta∣ken my Brother which was my Lieutenant Colonel, and some few of the Souldiers, the rest making their Retreat good to the Castle; drawing off my wearied Forces for that night to their Quarters within a mile of the Town, thereby to cut off all accesse of Provi∣sion. I was next day plyed with continual Alarms of
the gathering a Malignant party to a head in the coun∣try, and that they had made good a passage within two miles of the Town, resolving to relieve their distressed Friends. While I was busied with this Alarm, the next day and night strengthning my Guards, and having a special eye to the issue, the Governor of the Castle, and the Committee in the interim fell to a Parley with those in the Town, and Articles of Agreement were drawn between them, which when brought to me to desire my Subscribal, I condescended to as much as concerned my self and my Souldiers, as not privy to the draught till the conclusion. But Carn and his com∣pliants making breach of the Agreement, gave us oc∣casion to do that which we much desired, considering the ill consequence if they had come to joyn with the other party. Being demanded their reason of the breach of Articles, answered, They would justifie it with their lives; and thereupon fell to fire on our men, which was quickly answered; for as soon as they re∣ceived orders to fall upon them, they did it with that cheerfulnesse that they totally Routed them, follow∣ing the chase for seven miles. There were killed of the Enemy in both Actions, about Two hundred and fifty, and Eight hundred taken Prisoners, whereof two Lieut. Colonels, two Majors, ten Captains, ten Lieu∣tenants, and divers Ensigns, and other inferior Offi∣cers. By the next Expresse I shall humbly present a a more full Relation of each particular. I have sent co∣pies of the Declaration and Propositions, and their answers; as also of the Occurrences, as they ensue in order to the Service of the State, you shall not fail to be certified of by him who is, Cardiffe, Feb. 21. 1645. Your most obliged humble Servant ROWLAND LAUGHORN.
To the Honourable William Lenthal Esq Speaker to the Honourable House of Commons. SIR, THe marching with the Army into Cornwal, be∣ing a matter of great importance, much be∣ing to be said against it, as well as for it, and notwithstanding great inclination was to march to Cornwal; yet yesterday the Gene∣ral had a full Councel of war, of all the field Officers that could well be dispensed with from their charge, where the businesse was throughly debated; and after some time spent came to this resolution, That in their judgements it was advisable to march into Cornwal before any attempt be made on Barnstable or Exeter: To this Vote there was not one negative voice, so that I hope in the Lord as there is unity in our Councels, so we shall finde the fruit of it in our actions, and by the blessing of God settle that County of Corn∣wal in a posture to serve you, and to oppose the landing of any forraign Nation, and also break the remaining field force of the enemies: To morrow part of the Army marches towards Cornwal, the rest comes up on Tuesday, there being a thou∣sand horse, and five Companies of foot left to block up Barnsta∣ble: And Major Harris who is made Liev. Colonel to Col. Trevilian, is raising a Regiment in these parts of Devonshire to assist in the more close blocking up of that place. Exeter this while is drawing its last breath, and I hope when we return neither place shall have that to stick with them, which hither∣to has done (point of honour) upon this ground, that there was a probable signe of relief, otherwise their inclinations are much to save themselves. This day (as indeed every day) there came some from the enemy, who inform they are about to draw off from Stratton,
and all the passes upon the River, having burnt down and bro∣ken the Bridges: That they were drawing off from Salt-ash; That most of their horse were neer twenty miles in Cornwal; That Hopton cannot get his foot together, neither will the Trainedbands rise, that their fear is great the Army will pur∣sue them. The other day being the Market day, Master Peters preacht unto the Country people and souldiers in Torrington, (the Church being blown up) he was forced to preach out of a Belcony, where the audience was great; he made a great impres∣sion upon the hearts of the people: He is sent to Plymouth to offer things to consideration there in order to our marching in∣to Cornwal, and to get all the Cornish Gentlemen to meet the General in Cornwal, to give their assistance in the better setling of that County: And I beseech you hasten such of po∣wer and interest in those parts that are above at London: And likewise for Devonshire, for I doubt the want of active Gen∣tlemen to appear to settle the Militia of this County, will make the work to be done, when the Army is drawn back, which will not be for your and their service. It is certain the Lord Hopton received a wound in the side of his head with a pike, some say he is wounded elsewhere; we took one of their spies coming into our quarters for intelligence, and that he might be the better credited by the person to whom he was sent; he was to produce a silver Meddal with the Kings Picture, which we took from him, and having committed him to custody, sent one of our spies to the partee (with that Meddal) who gave credit to the bearer, and informed the good condition of our Army, the desperate condition of theirs, by the defeat given them at Torrington; and that they had no way left but to flye to the furthest part of Cornwal: all the Country hereabouts are spread with their horse and foot, that ran away in the dark that night, and are lurking hereabouts; there are very many both horse and foot come in unto us, and take up Arms, and divers others desire passes to go into their own Countries, which they have granted accordingly: All the Cornish that were common souldiers are set at liberty, and had two shil∣ling a peece given them to carry them home, which we hope will work the same effect, that an action of the like nature did
at the taking of Dartmouth, for, as Major Hooper who was ta∣ken prisoner at Dartmonth, and sent upon his parole to Corn∣wal, reported at his return, that the overthrow given to Hopton at Torrington, did not so much move the Cornish with the fear of this Army, as their carriage in the sending home of those Cornish in that civil manner did prevail with them; who when they came into the Country, being required to take up Arms, refused the same, and were committed to Goal, and now lie in prison for the same; the Country being much affe∣cted at their hard usage, and our gentle carriage; for indeed the Cornish were made to believe, and some by reason of their cruel carriage to our forces, when they were in Cornwal out of guilt did believe, that nothing but destruction was intended to them: There was directions given by the General to all the field. Officers at the Councel of war, that they should give a command to the several Regiments of horse and foot, that they do in no kinde offer any violence to the Cornish nor do any prejudice unto them in their persons or goods: I make no doubt the Officers will be very careful to do their duties, though (truly) I doubt the souldier (especially those that were there formerly stript) will hardly overcome a passionate remembrace of the same: The Commissioners of Parliament are sent into the several Counties to pay the recruits, and to hasten them to the Army; but the four thousand pound sent down hither for that purpose, we are inforced to take into Cornwal with us, and have assigned them to take up monies in ready cash at Bri∣stol and Taunton; We march with a very fine Army both of horse and foot into Cornwal, and great care is taken for an orderly and souldierlike march, and carriage of our affairs in this expedition. The General and Lieutenant General being much intent upon it: I rest Torrington, Feb. 22. 1645. 10 at night. Your most humble Servant. JOH. RUSHWORTH. FINIS.
