l818 l819 12147009 54967
THE TRUE EFFIGIES of ARMAND JOHN du PLESSIS CARD: & DUKE of RICHLIEU.
THE LIFE Of the Famous Cardinal-Duke De RICHLIEU, Principal Minister of State TO LEWIS XIII. King of France and Navarr. VOL. II. LONDON, Printed for Matth. Gillyflower, Will. Freeman, J. Walthoe, and R. Parker, 1695.
THE HISTORY Of the FAMOUS Cardinal de RICHLIEƲ. VOL. II. BOOK IV. Containing the most Remarkable Occurrences of his Life, from the flight of the Queen Mother in 1631, to the Year 1634. BEFORE the Queen-Mother went out of France, as I have already observ'd in the pre∣ceding Book, the King sent to the Parlia∣ment of Paris the same Declaration which he had caus'd to be Confirm'd in that of Dijon, wherein he Declar'd all the Adherents of the Duke of Orleans to be guilty of High-Treason. But the Parlia∣ment of Paris made some difficulty to confirm it without any foregoing Deliberation, as the King desir'd them; and this they grounded upon the following Reasons.
First, This Declaration against all usual Forms had been laid before another Parliament besides that of Paris, which alone is the Court of Peers, and the first Parliament of the Kingdom. Secondly, It, by Name, declared a Presi∣dent to be guilty, who, by this means, would be con∣demned by the Court without being heard. Thirdly, This Declaration might reach even the Person of the Duke of Orleans, whose Interest had been always dear to the Parliament. They cameThe 25 of Ap. Aubery's Life of the Card. Lib. iv. c. 17. Siri Mem. Rec. T. 7. P. 358. therefore to a Deli∣beration, and the Company divided, instead of Voting the Confirmation which the King demanded. Our Minister not able to endure that they should show the least consideration for his Enemies, perswaded the King to go quickly toThe 12th of May. Paris, to have his Declaration Con∣firmed, and to give some Mortification to the Parlia∣ment. The King being arriv'd at the Louvre, sent Or∣ders to the Parliament to come thither in a Body on foot. The Parliament obeyed, and were conducted to the Gallery which joyns the Tuilleries with the Louvre, where they found the King under a Canopy raised up for that purpose. The Lord Keeper Spoke first; and after the first Ceremonies were over, told the Parliament, That their Power extended onely to the Affairs of pri∣vate Men, and not to matters of State, the cognisance of which belonged to the Supreme Governour: That where a Prince, or Duke, or any Officer of the Crown, receives his Trial for any Misdemeanour in the Admini∣stration of the Treasury, or of State-Affairs, his Maje∣sty is obliged, either to direct a particular Commission to the Parliament, to enable them to Act in such a case; or else to be present himself Personally, to Authorize these extraordinary Proceedings: That it is true indeed, that to Judge by a Commission required a previous know∣ledge of the Cause, but that in the case of Ratifying a Declaration, which always allows a certain time to those that are Guilty to return to their Duty, there was no need of farther Deliberation. This was as much as to say, That the King was willing to make use of the Parliamentary Authority, to destroy with more formali∣ty those who favoured his Brother; but would not al∣low the Parliament the Power of Clearing them if they were innocent.
Chateaunouf's Discourse being ended, the King Com∣manded the Register of the Parliament to be brought to him, and the Leafe to be shewed where the Vote of Se∣paration was Written, and so tore it himself to pieces, to have the Decree of the Council inserted in its place, which Prohibited the Court of Parliament to Delibe∣rate any more upon the Declarations, concerning State-Affairs, upon pain of Interdiction to the Counsellors, and of something worse, as the King should think fit. 'Twas likewise Ordered, That for a Punishment of the Fault committed by the Parliament, the Declaration sent to them should be drawn back, and they Prohibited to take any knowledge of the Contents thereof. For a To∣ken of his Indignation, the King Suspended from their Office, and Exiled two Presidents of the Court of In∣quest, and a Counsellor, who were nevertheless im∣mediately after re-established. The same day the Council pass'd another Sentence against the Duke of Or∣leans's Attorney, who Presented the before-mentioned Petition; and the King upon that issued outThe 26th of May. another Declaration upon the same Subject, a few days af∣ter. These Proceedings against the Duke of Orleans's Pe∣tition were the cause that the Queen's Request, which was sent to the same Parliament, Packed up with some other Papers, was not onely broke open, but the Pac∣quet it self was carried to the King. So that the Com∣plaints which this Princess, and Monsieur made against the Cardinal, onely ended in a few Printed Pamphlets, which they took care to have thrown about the Streets, or under-hand distributed; but there was no Tribunal where they might make their Address; for as to the King's Council, which depended more upon the Mini∣ster than himself, it was to no purpose to make their Application to it. The King himself was beset with People devoted to the Cardinal, whose continual busi∣ness it was to entertain him in an Ill Humour against his nearest Friends and Relations; and as he beheld nothing but by the Eyes of other People, both his Mother and Brother appeared as Guilty before him, as it plea∣sed the Cardinal to represent them.
SometimeThe 12th of August, See Aubery's Life of the Card. Lib. 4. c. 18. after the withdrawing of the Queen-Mother, the King issued out another Declaration, in which he Defamed this Princess and the Duke of Or∣leans; and, on the contrary, bestowed large Commen∣dations on the Cardinal. He said, amongst other things, That the Evil Counsellours of his Brother had moved him, contrary to the Duty of his Birth, and to that Re∣spect he owed him to Write him Letters full of Ca∣lumnies, and Seditious Lyes against the Government; That against all Truth and Reason he had Accused his most Dear and Well-beloved Cousin the Cardinal of Rich∣lieu, of Infidelity, and of harbouring Ill Designs a∣gainst his Sacred Person, that of the Queen, and his own, and against the State; That the Queen-Mother had been wrought upon long ago by Ill Counsels, and took more part in the Duke of Orleans's Designs than she ought, being, in all probability, induced to it by the Ill Reports which some Persons professing Curious and E∣vil Sciences had spread abroad, to give them some hopes of a sudden Revolution: That having desired the Queen-Mother to assist him with her Advice, as she had done before; she had Answered him, She was weary of meddling with Affairs, and would have no more to do with them; whereby she gave him sufficiently to understand, that she was deeply ingag'd in the Duke's De∣signs: That thereupon he had taken a Resolution to Separate himself from her for some time (After this manner did the Cardinal speak of the Imprisonment of the Queen-Mother, which he called a Separation,) and so desired her to go to Moulins, which she refused to do; and that she onely offered to go to Nevers, while Mon∣sieur was at Orleans, to be nearer to his Person, but had refused to do it, when she heard that he was gone from thence: That after her departure from Com∣peigne, she had sent a Request to the Parliament of Pa∣ris, full of false and injurious Invectives against Car∣dinal Richlieu, and Written a Letter to His Majesty, containing several Studied Pretences to Colour her with∣drawing, and many Complaints against the Cardinal, which had no other foundation, but those Calumnies and Falshoods which were suggested by the Ill-Coun∣sellours of Monsieur: That both the one and the other
aimed, by the same means, to endeavour the Subversi∣on of the Royal Authority, and of the Kingdom; That not being yet satisfied with the first Calumnies she had Written to His Majesty, she wasSee these Letters in the Collection of Aubery's Memoirs, T. 1. P. 374. besides wrought upon to Write to the Parliament, and to the Provost of the Merchants of Paris, to perswade them to Revolt, and to give an Ill Example to others. That as he Confirm∣ed all the preceding Declarations, so he declared all those to be guilty of High-Treason, and Disturbers of the Publick Peace, who should be found to have any share in such Pernicious and Damnable Designs, as to withdraw the Queen-Mother and the Duke of Orleans from their Allegiance, and to induce them to go out of the Kingdom, and likewise all those who had followed them, and were with them: That his Royal Pleasure and Will was, that they should be proceeded against, and that he strictly prohibited all Persons to keep any Correspondence either with the Queen-Mother, or the Duke, upon any pretence whatsoever; and if any of their Letters should fall into the hands of his Subjects, they should send them immediately to the Royal Judges of the Provinces, or to the Keeper of the Seals; That all the Mannors which they held of the Crown should be seized upon, and re-united to the King's Demesne; themselves deprived of their Digni∣ties and Offices, and all their Estates forfeited to the King. This last Article involved the Queen-Mother and Monsieur, as well as those that followed them, the Queen's Dowry, and all the Revenues of the Duke be∣ing stopt and seized. While the King dishonoured both his Mother and Brother, with so rigorous a procedure, and took from them all manner of Subsistance, because they had been so daring as to desire that the Cardinal of Richlieu might be turned out, he heaped new Honours and Favours upon this happy Minister. HisBy Letters given at Mon∣ceaux, in the Month of Au∣gust. Land of Richlieu was erected into a Dukedom and Peerdom, and there was afterwards a Contention amongst the Courts of Parliament, which of them should receive this Prelate in the Quality of a Duke and Peer. But at last it was agreed, That the Great Chamber, that of the Edict, and that of the Tournelle, being Assembled to∣gether,
should receive him,The 4th of September. and he went to take the usual Oath, and to sit in the Parliament, attended by the Prince of Conde, by the Dukes of Montmorency, of Chevreuse, of Montbazon, of Rets, of Ventadour and of Crequi; by the Mareschals, Vitry, Etrees, and Effiat, and by many other Persons of Quality. From that time he was call'd The Cardinal-Duke, as Olivarez, Chief Minister to the King of Spain, was stiled the Count-Duke. The King gave him besides the Government of Britany, lately va∣cant by the death of the Mareschal de Themines. This Government could not fall to any one more advantage∣ously than to the Cardinal, who being Superintendant both of Navigation and Trade, could scarce exercise his Office without being Master of the Ports of Brita∣ny. This was at the same time an assured Refuge, in case the King should ever change his Affection towards him. Thus, what was a Capital Crime in the Huguenots, who made a considerable part of the State, and what would have driven out of the Kingdom the most con∣siderable Persons next to the King (unless they had cho∣sen rather to be confined to a Prison) was esteemed a just recompence for the great Services of Cardinal Rich∣lieu. The Prince of Conde, who was sent from one Pro∣vince to another, to pacifie the Spirits of those who might be surprised at the excessive greatness of a Mini∣ster, who caused him formerly to be put in Prison, went basely publishing his Praises all over the Kingdom, and yet was not able to get into the Favour of this Man, who could bear with nothing that gave him any Jealou∣sie.See Aube∣ry, Lib. 11. Cap. 17. He had made already, in the Year 1628, a Pane∣gyrick upon this Minister before the States of Languedoc, with Expressions onely fit to come from a wretch that wanted Bread, and had no other ways to subsist: but this was nothing in comparison of what he said in the Assembly of the States of Britany. I shall relate his ve∣ry words, that thereby the Reader may judge both of the mean Condescensions of the Prince, or of the Minister's great Authority. See Aube∣ry, Ibid. Lib. . Cap. 19.Amongst those infinite Obligations you have to the King (saith he) either for having preserved your Privileges, or for the great Advantages favourably granted to your Province of Britany, even almost
to an impossibility in regard of the other Provinces of his Realm, you have contracted a new one, which is the greatest of all; for His Majesty has given to you Monsieur the Cardinal of Richlieu for your Gover∣nour, whose Learning and Piety preferr'd him in his younger years to a Bishoprick, his Deserts to a Cardi∣nal's Cap, his Services and Capacity to the Ministry of State Affairs, his Valour to the Generalship of seve∣ral Armies; his Fidelity and Love for the King's Per∣son to the Cordial Affection of His Majesty; and as a Token thereof, and of his Trust to the High Places and Governments, which he possesseth and holds from him. All which things, though very considerable and great, yet we may say nevertheless of them, that they onely make up the least part of those recompences which he justly deserves; for having in his first Dig∣nity confounded Heresie, in the second maintained the Church, in his Employments strengthened the State by his Counsels, by his Valour pull'd down and de∣feated Rebellion, and extended the Limits of France in∣to Italy, Lorraine, and Germany, and by his Fidelity, with a continual care, watched for the King's Preser∣vation; under whose Command he hath always acted as a second Cause, in those great Affairs, which His Majesty had, and hath yet, to restore the Kingdom to its first Splendour. The Prince had better have said, As a first cause; since the King did nothing else but blind∣ly follow the Motions of his Minister, and then he had said at least one true thing in his Speech, which was wor∣thy of none but some Poor Hungry Priest, and not of a Prince who aspired formerly to the Crown. For indeed, What could the King have done more in favour of this Cardinal, but to Associate him to the Crown by a Pub∣lick Declaration, or rather to yield it wholly to him, con∣sidering he had received but the least part of that Recom∣pence which he deserved? After this, there is no reason to wonder, that private persons flattered the Cardinal, since the Princes of the Blood offered him their Incense in so shameful a manner. Therefore from this time may we almost date the universal Extinction of that generous love for Truth, which formerly, if we may so express our selves, made Martyrs amongst the very Pagans. No∣thing
having been fashionable in France, ever since the excessive Authority of the Cardinal, but fulsome extra∣vagant Flatteries, and Stories made on purpose to ad∣vance ones Fortune at the Expence of Truth and Sin∣cerity. The same PrinceSiri Mem. Rec. T. 7. P. 360. whose Words I have related, was sent by the King into Provence, under pretence to assem∣ble the States; but in effect to sound their Inclinations, to observe the Conduct of the Duke of Guise, whom the Cardinal hated, and to lessen the Authority of the Gover∣nour of that Province, both by the Dignity of his Person, and the Power he had received from the King. The Cardinal had caused the Marquis of Saint Chamond to be made Lieutenant for the King in Provence, with a Design to cross the Duke of Guise in any thing which he might undertake against the Authority of the Ministry. The Prince of Conde wrote to the Duke of Guise, to desire him to come to Avignon, and confer together concerning some Affairs relating to the Crown, not telling him what they were. The Duke being offended at this Proceed∣ing, sent word back again, he could not go to wait up∣on the Prince beyond the Confines of Provence, and com∣plained to the Cardinal of the haughty manner he had been dealt with. The King had been informed that he kept a secret Intelligence with the Spaniards, and had In∣tentions to invite some of their Troops into Provence. Nay, it was reported, that the Duke of Feria had recei∣ved Orders to send two thousand Italians, and five hun∣dred Spaniards to Barcelona, to embark 'em there for Provence. Whether it was really so, that the Duke of Guise had invited a foreign Power to his Assistance against the Minister, or it was only an Artifice of his Enemies, to render him suspicious to the King, the Cardinal advi∣sed his Majesty to send an Order to the Duke of Guise to come to Court. He refused at first to obey, fearing, with reason, to be sent to the Bsle, or to Bois de Vin∣cennes; and he obtained, at last, the King's Leave to make a Journey to our Lady of Loretto; from whence he re∣tir'd to Florence, under the Protection of the Great Duke of Tuscany. This Prince became suspected to the Cardinal,Siri ibid. P. 444. be∣cause it was thought that he sent Money secretly to the
Queen-Mother, and that he favoured the Spaniards. It was for this Reason that Gondi, who had been at Florence for some time about his own private Affairs; at his Re∣turn to France, in the Month of November, received Or∣ders immediately to be gone, and had much ado to ob∣tain Permission to stay. Once as he had Audience of the Cardinal, this Minister gave him a long Narrative of the Discontents of the Queen-Mother, and of all that had pass'd between them ever since the Beginning. He assured him, that he had never given her any Occasion to be angry with him, but that she had fallen into a Passion upon Trifles; and that by suffering her self to be too much influenced by some People who desired nothing so much as to cause Disturbances at Court, in or∣der to cultivate their own particular Interest, she had forsaken the King to embrace the Party of the youngest of her Sons; that he (the Cardinal) was willing to withdraw himself, to take away all occasion of Divi∣sion in the Royal Family; but that the King would not permit him to do it, not believing himself to be safe without him, and not thinking fit he should have so much Condescension for those who had dealt with him so unworthily: so that having been thus forc'd to re∣main at Court, he was willing, both as a Christian, and as one that had infinite Obligations to Their Maje∣sties, to reconcile them together, that he might avoid thereby the Necessity of serving the King against his Mother; that not being conscious to himself of having ever offended this Princess, he had desired of her, that she would be pleased to tell him what Reasons she had to complain of him, and even to suppose, if she would, any Wrong, which he had never done her, to support what she had said against him, because he would not contradict her, and if condemned, he was ready to make her any publick Satisfaction for it; but that she answered nothing before the King, but only that she would never be reconciled to him; that the Wrong which she complained to have been done to her, was that which she said the Cardinal had done both to the King and State: That he had served her, during four∣teen Years, with all possible Fidelity and Zeal; but that being fallen out with him, she would not hearken to
any Accommodation, and sought every day an Oppor∣tunity to have him murther'd; which obliged him to take care for the Preservation both of his Life and For∣tune; and therefore he had not rejected the King's most gracious Offers made to him to change those Ministers who did not please him: That the Queen was never a Prisoner, and that to satisfie her that she was free, they had removed the Soldiers that were about her: That she was to be blamed for retiring into Spain, and that Animosities were now grown to such a degree, that the King could not be reconciled with safety. This Discourse made Gondi believe the same thing, which several Persons had already suspected; viz. that the Cardinal knew that the Queen had a mind to retire, and therefore was glad to leave her the means to effect it, that so he might have an Occasion to accuse her of keep∣ing an Intelligence with the Spaniards, and to hinder the People from being offended at her Banishment. The Par∣ty of this Princess, which was linked with that of Mon∣sieur, was extremely weak, as wanting both Friends and Money. The Severities used against their Followers kept back a great many others who would have otherwise joyned with them; nor cou'd the Queen-Mother borrow any Money upon her Jewels, because People feared that the King wou'd demand them again, as belonging to the Crown. The King on his side was so incensed against his Mother, that there was no likelihood he would trust her again, as well by reason of her Correspondence with the Spaniards, as because she had declared her self for the Duke of Orleans, who she believed would infallibly suc∣ceed to the Throne after the King's Death, which, accor∣ding to the Predictions, was to happen very soon. To confirm the King in this ill Humour against his Mother, an exact Enquiry was made after those Persons whom the Queen had consulted to Calculate his Majesty's Nativity, and Senel, Physician to the King, and Du Val, were con∣demned to the Galleys, for having examined it, and made sinister Predictions against the Life of his Majesty. The Duke of Orleans, who had always entertained a great Correspondence with the Duke of Lorrain, endea∣voured to engage him into his Party; and this Prince raised some Troops, with an Intention either to take some
Advantage of the present Disturbances, or to put himself in a Condition of Defence against the Swedes, who threatned to invade his Dominions. The Cardinal, who was no Friend to the House of Lorrain, and who feared it would support the Party of Monsieur, took this Occa∣sion to cause a Declaration of War to be published against it. The King sent the Mareschals La Force and Schomberg into Lorrain, with an Army, and order'd them to take divers Places depending upon the Bishopricks of Mets, Toul, and of Verdun, which they said had been usurped by the Duke of Lorrain; but above all, to attack Moy∣envic, which the Emperour had possessed himself of by the Counsel, Advice, and Assistance of this Prince. Both the King and the Cardinal designed to go perso∣nally thither, but before they went, they resolved to see the Declarations against those that espoused the Party of the Queen-Mother, put in Execution. The Court fear∣ed that if they should remit it to the Parliament, this Exe∣cution would go but heavily on, because the Parliament acted only against their Wills, and the usual Formalities ought to be observed. Besides the Injustice of proceeding otherwise, it was dangerous too violently to countenance the Passions of the Minister against Monsieur, who because the King was then without Issue, was look'd upon as the next Heir to the Crown. So the Cardinal, who never loved the ancient Proceedings but when they were fa∣vourable to him, so managed matters, that the King re∣solved to constitute a Chamber of Justice to proceed with Rigour against those who favoured his Mother and Bro∣ther, and especially against such as had retired with them out of the Kingdom. The Parliament refused to own the Declaration con∣cerning the establishing of this new Chamber, unless the Members that should compose it were all taken out of their Body. The King sent to them thereupon a special Command, to oblige them to let fall this Opposition; and the Parliament were contented to ask that the Substitute and the Register of that Chamber should be taken out of their Company. But the Minister, being not willing that any one should be enabled either to clear or to delay the Condemnation of those whom he had a mind to destroy, engaged the King to establish, by his Letters Patent, this
Chamber in the ArsenalThe 23th of September 1631., and to admit none into it that were of the Parliament, but only two Counsellors of State, six Masters of the Requests, and as many Coun∣sellors of the Grand Council. The King afterwards esta∣blished another Chamber of Demesne, to follow the Court, and to put his Orders in execution. In the mean time the Parliament seeing their Authority would fall at last to nothing, and that no body's Inno∣cence would be secure from the excessive Power of the Minister, if once it was grown a Custom to act by ex∣traordinary Proceedings; summon'd an Assembly of all the ChambersThe 28th of Novemb., in which it was concluded, that a Re∣monstrance should be made to the King concerning extra∣ordinary Commissions; and in the mean while a Prohi∣bition directed to the Commissioners to act by vertue of these Commissions, and an Order should be sent to the Chevalier Du Guet, to put the Judgment of the Parlia∣ment in execution. They assembled themselves again on the 10th and 12th of December, and publish'd a Decree pursuant to this Resolution. The King being informed of it, caused this Decree to be disannull'd by his Council the 16th of December, and commanded the Presidents Believre and Seguier, who were present at this Delibera∣tion, and the Counsellors who signed the Decree, and likewise the oldest Presidents of the second, third, fourth, and fifth Chambers of Inquests, with the most ancient Counsellors of each of these Chambers, to appear a Fort∣night after, and attend the Court. The King's Army had in the mean while seized all the Places in Lorrain to which he had any Pretensions, Moy∣envic only excepted, which was invested in the name of the Bishop of Mets, the King being not willing to declare openly against the Emperour. This Place being ill pro∣vided, surrender'd on the 27th of December; and the Duke of Lorrain, who was not in a Condition to oppose the Royal Army, thought only how to put a stop to its Progress, and make the best Bargain he could. There∣fore he came to Mets, where the King and the Cardi∣nal were arrived, who received him very kindly in out∣ward Appearance. Though the Count of Soissons had reconciled himself to the Cardinal some time before, yet this Minister gave
him no marks of his Confidence, till after the Countess of Soissons had proposed the MarriageAubery's Life of the Card. Book 4 Cap. 23. of her Son with Madam de Combalet; which gave an Occasion to the Queen-Mother to tell the King that the Cardinal had a Mind to advance this Prince to the Crown. The King, to shew how little regard he had for the Advice of his Mother, and what an entire confidence he reposed in the Cardinal, at his going into Lorrain, left the Count of Soissons, to be in his Absence, his Lieutenant General at Paris, and in the neighbouring Provinces. To return now to the Affairs of Italy, upon which the Cardinal had likewise a watchful eye, the Duke of Man∣tua came to an Agreement with the Duke of Guastalla, by the Interposition of the Pope's Nuncio Pancirolo, and of the Embassadors of the Emperour and of the French King. The most difficult Treaty was that of Querasque, which was manag'd by Matthias Galas for the Emperour, and by the Mareschal de Thoiras and Servien for the King of France. The Nuncio interposed as Mediator, and the Duke of Savoy was there present in person. After a long Negotiation, several Things were agreed upon; the chief of which I shall only relate. The Duke of MantuaThe 6th of April. See Siri Mem. Rec. T. 7. Pag. 363. and the Hist. of the Ma∣reschal de Thoiras, Lib. 3. Cap. 2. and seq. did agree with the Emperour and the Duke of Savoy upon these Conditions, whereby both Spain and Savoy were likewise reconciled to the French: I. That the Revenue of ten thousand Crowns which the Duke of Savoy was to have in Montferrat, to∣gether with the Town of Trin, should be reduced to fif∣teen thousand, each Crown to be valued at two and twen∣ty Florins: II. That the Duke of Savoy should suffer ten thousand Sacks of Corn, and other Provisions to be year∣ly bought in Piedmont for the use of Casal, without pay∣ing any Duty or Imposition: III. That all the Goods they had possessed themselves of on all sides, should be re∣stored in the Condition they were in: IV. That the Duke of Mantua should be put in possession of the Dukedoms of Mantua and of Montferrat, immediately after the Con∣clusion of the Treaty; excepting what Places were to be resigned to the Duke of Savoy, who should have possessi∣on of them assoon as the Emperour's Investiture for the Duke of Mantua was received: V. That the Baron Galas should begin to conduct back again, in good order, to∣wards
Germany, the Imperial Troops, out of the States of Mantua and of Montferrat. VI. That the Troops which were in the Venetian Territories should return likewise. VII. That on the 8th of April they should be∣gin to withdraw, and continue so to do, without delay and disorder, till the whole Army was retired, except the Garrisons of Mantua, of Porto, and of Canetto: VIII. That on the same day Thoiras and Servien should begin to cause the Troops of his Gallick Majesty to march out of Italy, through Savoy, without causing any Damage or Disturbance; but that they should leave Garrisons at Pignerol, Briqueras, Susa, and Avilliana, the Ways however remaining free, without any quartering of Soldiers: IX. That on the same day the Duke of Savoy should evacuate Montecalvo, and the other Places which he possessed in Montferrat, except those which were consigned to him by this Treaty; so that on the 20th of April all the Places taken by the Arms of the Em∣perour, the King of France, and the Duke of Savoy in the Dutchy of Mantua, the State of the Venetians, Montfer∣rat, Piedmont, and Savoy, should be restored to their own respective Masters, except Mantua, Porto, Canetto, Pig∣nerol, Briqueras, Susa, and Avilliana; and on the 8th of May, at the farthest, the whole Imperial Army should be actually in Germany: X. That Galas should with all speed, by an Express, acquaint the Emperour with this Treaty; which being received, his Imperial Majesty should give the Duke of Mantua the Investiture of the two Dukedoms of Mantua, and of Montferrat, with all Ter∣ritories belonging to them, except those which were as∣signed to the Duke of Savoy, and those that might apper∣tain to the Duke of Guastalla; and that this Investiture should be brought into Italy in a Fortnight after the Date of this Treaty: XI. That after this, they should begin to demolish the Fortifications for the space of fifteen days; and that in case it was not over by that time, the Places notwithstanding should be surrender'd: XII. That the Fortnight being expired on the 23d of May, the Baron Galas should draw off the Garrison of Mantua; and on the same Day the Mareschal de Thoiras should restore to the Duke of Savoy, Pignerol, Briqueras Susa, and Avil∣liana: XIII. That at the same time the Baron Galas
should retire with all his Troops, out of the States, Forts, and Passes, which he kept in the Country of the Swisses, and in the Valteline; all which Places should remain in the free Disposal of the Grisons as before: XIV. That for a Security of the Restitution of the Places, Hostages should be given on both sides in the time of the Fortnight granted for demolishing; to wit, on the Emperour's part, the Colonels Chiesa, Picolomini, and Visleben, and on the side of the French King, the Marquis of Tabanes, Nerestan, and Aiguebone; and that these Hostages should be consigned into the hands of his Holiness, who should promise to keep them safely, and oblige himself to restore them to that Party which had observed the Treaty, and to deliver up to them those of the other side which had not kept it. These are the principal Articles of the Treaty of Que∣rasque; for I don't mention those which are not material to this History. But besides this Treaty which was publish'd, there was a secret Article, by which it was pro∣vided, that for a greater Security than that of the Hosta∣ges, the Cittadels of Susa and Avilliana should be put in∣to the hands of the Swissers, equally Friends to the King of France and to the Duke of Savoy; and that they should take an Oath to restore them to the Duke of Savoy assoon as they were certain of the Evacuation of the Forts by the Grisons; but in case this Restitution should not be made at the prefixed time, they should put again these Places into the hands of the Mareschal de Thoiras, or of any other whom the King would be pleased to appoint. There were yet two other Treaties for the Duke of Savoy, in one of which wereSee it in Siri. Mem. Rec. T. 7. Pag. 374. specified the Lands which the Duke of Savoy was to possess in Montferrat; and the otherSigned the 30th of May, Ibid. Pag. 383. was concerning the Restitution of Savoy, and of the Places in Piedmont. Some Difficulties arose after∣wards in the Execution of the general Treaty, but were accommodatedThe 19th of June, Ibid. Pag. 387. some time after; so that at last the Peace of Italy was concluded, and the Treaty put in Execution in the Month of September; at least in out∣ward appearance. The SwissersSiri Mem. Rec. T. 7. Pag. 413. entred the Places remitted to them, and the Pope received the Hostages, who were kept under a strong Guard in the Cittadel of Ferrara. The 'Empe∣rour's
Investiture for the Duke of Nevers was remitted to the Bishop of Mantua, and the Duke of Guastalla sent to the Emperour an Act, by which he desisted from the opposition he had made against it. The time specified in the last Treaty being at hand, Savoy and Briqueras were restored to the Duke of Savoy, and the Passes of the Valte∣line quitted by the Imperialists. All the State of Mantua, except Porto and Canetto, was surrendred to the Duke of Mantua, and the French withdrew from Piedmont, from Montferrat, and from Savoy, while the Spaniards left the State of Venice, of Mantua, and of Montferrat. On the 15th of September Susa and Avilliana were restored to the Duke of Savoy, Porto and Canetto to the Duke of Mantua. On the 23d the Germans departed out of Man∣tua, and the French out of Pignerol, at least it was thought so. After which the Pope released the Hostages. All things were seemingly in a perfect Peace, when it appeared that on all sides they onely thought how to deceive one another. Victor Amadeo had a long while a∣go design'd to make his Peace with France, which had got already a considerable part of his State; and Maza∣rine, who was aware of it, gave him to understand, that if he desired to engage wholly this Crown in his Interest, and to remove all Suspicions on his part, he ought to give to His Majesty an assured Pledge of his Good Will, such as Pignerol, and that the King would not be wanting to Recompence him another way. The Cardinal of Richlieu was so strongly of opinion, that this Place was necessary to the Crown, that he could not resolve to have it restored to the Duke of Savoy, what∣soever inconveniences might arise from the contrary. Most part of the Italian Princes confirmed him in these Senti∣ments, by the secret Sollicitations of their Ministers to that purpose. They were glad that France should have a Door open to enter Italy, when occasion should require, to have a Foreign Army to Counter-ballance the exces∣sive Power of the Spaniards. By complying thus with their desires, France would recover their Friendship, lost by the Peace of Lions (in 1601.) by which they quitted to the Duke of Savoy the Marquisate of Saluces, and con∣sequently gave up the Passes of the Alpes; and the French King's Authority grew so much the greater, as
the Power of the Spaniards was more lessen'd. Besides, the Cardinal could not leave behind him a more Illu∣strious Monument of his good Conduct, than a place of this Importance, which was formerly quitted by Henry the III. to the Dukes of Savoy. The Difficulty was how to find a way to keep it, without breaking the Peace of Italy, but it could not be done against the Duke of Savoy's Consent. Therefore the Cardinal, who had already a great Esteem for Maza∣rine, and knew that he was likewise well-accepted by the Duke of Savoy, charged him with this Negotiation, which he perform'd to his Satisfaction. The Duke of Savoy having consented to leave Pignerol in the hands of France, they got him (besides what was promised to him) the Possession of Canaves, which was dismembred from Montferrat, by the Treaty of Querasque, to the pre∣judice of the Duke of Mantua. Both the Spaniards and the Imperialists, who knew nothing of the Negotiation concerning Pignerol, which was kept secret, were surprised, that France should spoil the Duke of Mantua their Ally, to serve the Duke of Savoy, who had taken Arms against them; but time dis∣covered the Mystery. No noise was to be made about it, before Mantua was Restored; the Passages of the Country of the Grisons remitted to their Ancient Ma∣sters, and the Hostages released; for the Spaniards who had a visible Interest in keeping the French on the other side of the Mountains, would certainly have broken the Treaty, rather than permitted Pignerol to remain in their hands. It was therefore necessary so to order Affairs, that if the French quitted the Place, in Compliance to the Trea∣ty, they should be secure of returning into it again. The Duke of Savoy promised to do it after the Execution of the Treaty; and, for a Pledge of his Word, sent the Car∣dinal of Savoy, and Prince Thomas, his Brothers, into France, under pretence that they were to pass into Flan∣ders. But the Cardinal feared, least this Prince, to whom this Place was, at least, as Important as it was to France, would not be as good as his Word, since the Spaniards would infallibly be ready to assist him, in this occasion, with all their Forces. Therefore they labour'd to find
out some Stratagem or other to secure themselves of con∣tinuing still in the Possession of Pignerol, though at the same time they made a shew of quitting it, so that no body should perceive it: This difficult business was com∣mitted to the Marquess of Villeroy, who carried it on in such a manner, that he deceived not onely the Spani∣ards, and the Piedmontois, but the French themselves. He pick'd out Three hundred Men, whom he pre∣tended to trust with a Secret Order he had lately recei∣ved from the King, which was, to send them with all speed to the Cittadel of Casal, and commanded them to send away their Baggage with the rest of the Garrison, who were disposing themselves to clear the Place at the time prefixt, being about Three thousand Men in num∣ber, and to take their way to Dauphine. In the mean time he caused them to hide themselves in several secret holes of the Castle, and particularly in an old Garret, where was a long time ago a Door Wall'd up, adjoyning to the Dungeon. Villeroy caused this Garret to be divi∣ded by a Partition of Boards, and at one side Corn to be laid up; and, on the other side, where the Wall'd-door was, lay part of his Men. But because this would have met with very much difficulty in the Execution, if many Piedmontois had been in the Place; he caused a Report to be spread abroad, That the Plague was at Pignerol, and particularly in the Cittadel; which put a stop to the curiosity of the People from flocking thither, and also to the speedy Levies which the Duke of Savoy intended to make there for the Garrison. The Count of Verrue, sent by the Duke to Receive the Place, was ac∣quainted with the Secret, but the Imperial and Spanish Commissioners had not the least suspicion of it. As soon as they were arriv'd, they saw the French Troops go out in a File towards Dauphine, and Villeroy took care himself to Conduct them to all the Magazines, affecting in this an extraordinary Punctuality, to tire them, and get time, which succeeded so much the easier, because the Com∣missioners were unwilling to enter any place that had not been before purifi'd with Fire and Sweet Odours, for fear of catching the Plague. Being entred the Citta∣del, where the Three hundred Souldiers were hid, the Marquess deliver'd up the Gate to the Count of Verrue,
who committed it to Fifty or Threescore Souldiers, un∣der the Command of an Officer; after which he drew the Garrison out, and led the Commissioners to every part of it. The Count had with him a Colonel of the Duke of Savoy, named Porporati, who knowing no∣thing of the Secret, looked into every Corner with a great deal of Care; so that Villeroy, fearing least he should discover the place where most part of his Men were hid, gave a Jog to the Count, and turning himself to the Commissioners, told them, That it being already pretty late, they would do well to send some body to visit the Fort of St. Bridget, and this Commission was given to Porporati. The Cardinal was so entirely resolv'd not to abandon the Cittadel of Pignerol, that Villeroy had Orders to Imprison the Commissioners, in case they should discover the Cheat; and, for this effect, he had along with him Ten or Twelve of the most strong and resolute Fellows, to put his Orders in Execution at the first sign. This Resolution which could not be put in execution, without a Scandalous Violation of the Treaty of Que∣rasque, and even of the Law of Nations, sufficiently shew∣ed how willing the Cardinal was to keep this Place. By good hap the Commissioners were not aware of the Cheat, and Villeroy got the very same day an Attestation from them, by which they acknowledg'd., That Pignerol was faithfully deliver'd again into the hands of the Sa∣voyards. He sent it Post to Ferrara to have the Hosta∣ges released. Not above four or five Persons were in the Cittadel to look after the Magazines, and the Piedmontois, who were at the Gate, had an Order to let no body in, except one Page of the Count of Verrue, to entertain them in the opinion that there was no body in the Cittadel: This business lasted Two and thirty days, during which the hidden Souldiers did not want Provisions, for they were abundantly provided before. Now it was necessary to draw these Souldiers out of their holes, and to perswade the World, That they were got in again in spight of the Duke of Savoy. Therefore they onely look'd for a Pretence, which would not have been so easie a thing to find, if the Duke
of Feria, Governour of Milan, had been more quick in executing the Treaty of Querasque, who, fearing least the French would not answer his honest and fair Deal∣ing, retained Two German Regiments in the State of Mi∣lan, and some Neapolitan Cavalry, whom he had Pro∣mised to dismiss. The French being informed of it, be∣gun immediately to complain highly of it, and to say, That Count Merode threatned again to invade the Pas∣ses of the Valteline. The Great Sums of Money which Spain was accused to furnish the Queen-Mother with, did not help a little to heighten these Complaints, and they were carried to the Duke of Feria by Cardinal Mazarine, in very high words, purposely to exasperate the Spaniards to some In∣fraction or other, which might give occasion to the French to say, That they were constrained by the Duke's Contraventions, to Possess themselves again of Pig∣nerol. On his side Feria begun likewise to complain of the French, because the Garrisons of Mantua and of Casal were full of Souldiers of their Nation, and the Grisons Fortified the Passage of Steich, against the Treaty of Monzon. He Publish'd a Writing, in which he expos'd at length the Infractions which he thought the French had made against that of Querasque, and said, That they might be followed with greater Inconveniencies. The Ministers of France who sought after a Quarrel, took up these words, as if the Duke of Feria had meant, That as soon as the French Troops were gone out of Italy, he would Revenge himself of those Infractions he imputed to them. Furthermore, they had notice, that the Emperour, at the Instance of Spain, had decla∣red void the Investiture sent to the Duke of Mantua, un∣less the Treaty of Ratisbon should be exactly observed; and thereupon the French gave out, That the Spani∣ards had a Design to Invade a-new the States of the Duke of Mantua. Upon this they dispersed a Manifesto, with the Con∣sent of the Duke of Savoy, though they complained of him in publick, in which, after great Complaints against the Unfair Dealings of the Spaniards and their Allies, and especially of the Duke of Savoy, to carry on their Trick
more secretly, they declared, that the King was resolved to secure the Peace of Italy, and to protect his Allies there. For this purpose, Servien ask'd the Duke of Sa∣voy, to deliver back several Places in Piedmont, and, a∣mongst others, Pignerol, for the Reception of the French Army which was to pass thither again. The Ministers of France protested before God and Men, that it was not out of any Ambitious Motive, or to disturb the Peace of Italy, that the King their Master demanded these Places; but on the contrary, to make it more firm, and to give the Allies that Peace, which they desired so ear∣nestly to enjoy. The Duke of Savoy so carried himself, as if he thought this Demand very strange, and told Servien the Rea∣sons he had to deny it; but Servien replied, That if he would not grant, of his own free accord, what the King desired, the Army which was in Dauphine, and in Provence, should repass the Mountains by force, for the Security of his Allies. He allowed the Duke Three Days to consider of it, after which he threatned him, in case of Denial, with the Invasion both of Piedmont and Savoy. In the mean while this Prince sent to ac∣quaint the Duke of Feria with the Pretensions of the French, and to Ask Succours of him to oppose this In∣tended Invasion. The Governour of Milan offered him all the Assistance which was in his Power. When they came to the Particulars, this Prince Ask'd for the De∣fence of Savoy Ten thousand Foot, and a Thousand Horse, and half that number for Piedmont, besides his own Troops. He thought this would suffice for the pre∣sent, since Winter was so near. He desired also that Spain should immediately Pay him off all the Arrears due to him, which His Catholick Majesty had Promised him, after which, they might at leasure Discourse of what was Necessary to be done for the future. The Duke of Savoy knew that it was impossible for the Governour of Milan to satisfie his Demands, and he made them on purpose, that they should not think it strange if he delivered Pig∣nerol to the French, seeing they were not in a condition to Protect him against them. The Governour of Milan Answered, That he would immediately supply him with what Help he could, and that as soon as the New
Levies were made in the State of Milan, he would send them with all speed to him. In the mean while the Spaniards offered to enter into Negotiation with the French upon this matter, but Servien would not hearken to it before the Duke of Savoy had Answered his De∣mands. Lastly, To deceive the Spaniards effectually, the Duke AssembledThe 19th of October. his Council, in which it was Con∣cluded, That since he could not hope to receive from them the Succours he wanted, to defend himself against the French, it was better to come to an Agreement, and, of two Evils, to choose the least. The Dutchess of Savoy feigned likewise to interpose with her Brother for the Moderation of the Demands which Servien had made. They agreed afterwards upon these Articles; That the Duke of Savoy should neither directly nor indirectly help those who would endeavour to cause any Disturbance in France during the Absence of the Queen-Mother, and of the Duke of Orleans: That he should grant free Pas∣sage to the French Troops, in case there should be a ne∣cessity to send them again into Montferrat, or the Peace came to be disturbed on the side of the Grisons, or of Mantua: That to give a Pledge to the French King that he would keep his Word, he should deposite the Town and Cittadel of Pignerol, with the Three Forts of Peru∣sa, in the hands of the Swisses, who were intrusted be∣fore with Susa: That the same Swisses should take an Oath, That they would faithfully keep these Three Places during Six Months; at the end of which they should restore them to the Duke of Savoy; unless the Prince should think fit, in case the same Conjunctures happened, to have their Trust further prolonged: Ne∣vertheless, that His Majesty might put a Governour in∣to the Place, who should take the same Oath. After∣wards, with the consent of the Duke, a French Garrison was exchang'd with that of the Swisses, and the Three hundred Souldiers came out of the places where they had hid themselves. The Duke of Savoy gave notice to Duke Feria of the Articles he had Agreed upon with the French. The Governour of Milan durst not disapprove wholly the Duke of Savoy's Conduct, though he thought it would
be highly prejudicial to Italy. Thus the French appear∣ed to re-enter into the Possession of Pignerol, which they had not quitted; and they afterwards engag'd the Duke of Savoy to yield it up wholly to them, the Spaniards not perceiving (at first) the Trick which was put up∣on them. As the Spanish Ministers in Italy were blamed for their want of Conduct, so it was thought very strange, that the Duke of Savoy, for some Lands in Mont∣ferrat, which France caused to be given him, by the Trea∣ty of Querasque, should voluntarily tie up his own hands by parting with Pignerol. The Duke of Mantua was reduc'd by this War to such Extremities, that he depended wholly upon France, and durst not contradict them in the least. So that at the same time that the French were busie to secure Pignerol for themselves, he was oblig'd to permit them to send a strong Garrison to the Cittadel of Casal, for fear the Spaniards, seeing the French in Pignerol, should endea∣vour to make themselves Masters of it. This business was likewise carried on with so much secrecy, that they knew nothing of it in Italy, till after Two French Regi∣ments had got into Casal. As soon as the Italian Princes, who were jealous of the Power of Spain, knew that the French were in Possession of these two Places, notwith∣standing the Treaty of Querasque, they shewed in all parts how well they were pleased with it, and especially the Venetians, who were not in favour with the House of Austria, and feared its Resentments. The onely thing which remained for France to do, for the perfect secu∣rity of that Republick on that side, was to seize on the Passes of the Valteline, and indeed they made it their business to effect it soon after. Towards the end of the same year, theThe 27th of Novemb. 1631. See Siri Mem. Rec. T. 7. P. 438. Duke of Savoy reconciled himself wholly with the Republick of Genoua; by Restoring reciprocally what was taken from one side and the other during the Truce. Zuccarello, which was the occasion, or the pretence of the War, as I observed in another place, remained to the Genouese, upon condition that they should give One hundred and three∣score Crowns of Gold to the Duke of Savoy, who was to renounce all his Pretensions to this Marquisate.
The King being at Metz, the Duke of Lorrain came there, and after some Negotiations he concluded his Treaty with France,See Aube∣ry's Life of the Card. Lib. . Cap. 23. which was Sign'd at Vic on the 6th of January. The Duke Promised to disengage himself from any Intelligence, League and Association, which he had made with any Prince or State whatsoever, to the Prejudice of the King, his Dominions, and Countries under his Obedience, or Protection; and to the Detriment of the Alliance made by His Majesty with the King of Sweden, and the Duke of Bavaria, for the Defence of the Ger∣man-Liberty, and of the Catholick-League. He ob∣lig'd himself likewise, to turn out of his Dominions all the King's Enemies, and all his Subjects, who had left the Kingdom without his Leave, and to deny them for the future any Passage or Retreat. A little while after, the Deputies of the Parlia∣ment of Paris came to Metz, where the King was.Siri Mem. Rec. Tom. 7. Pag. 359. After they had stay'd there a Fortnight, he gave them Audience, and told them, That for this time he forgave them, but they ought to take care least they fell into the same Faults again, for a Relapse would prove fatal to them: That he loved his People better than they did; that he took more care for the Glory and Greatness of the State, and would maintain it better than they: That he forbad them to busie themselves about any thing else but the Administration of Justice. They Answered, They had been brought up in a very good School, where they had learned O∣bedience and Fidelity to His Majesty; and the King Re∣ply'd, They had then soon forgot what they were Taught. The Keeper of the Seals made them after∣wards a long Remonstrance, in which he Reproached them that they design'd to divide the Royal Authority with the King. He told them nevertheless that His Majesty sent them back to the Exercise of their Offi∣ces, except Five who were Suspended from their Pla∣ces, and ordered to follow the Court, to serve for an Example. Nevertheless as soon as the King was retur∣ned to St. Germain, they were restor'd to their Employ∣ments.
Monsieur, who was then at Nancy, was oblig'd to withdraw, and to retire to the Low-Countries; and the French Army advanc'd to the Frontiers of Germany, as if they would have favour'd Gustavus Adolphus; though at the bottom, France began to grow jealous of his Victo∣ries, and to fear least the Emperour and the Catholick League should wholly sink under the power of his Arms.Siri Mem. Rec, T. 7. Pag. 475. The King of Sweden desired extreamly to have a Con∣ference with Lewis XIII. being used to manage his Ne∣gotiations himself; and the King of France shew'd on his side a great Inclination to see Gustavus, for fear of offending him. But this Prince had quite other things in his Thoughts, and durst not expose himself to an In∣terview, which had turned wholly to the Honour of the King of Sweden, to whom he was not to be compar'd for the Qualities either of Body or Mind. So a little time after, the King of Sweden was acquaint∣ed that the French King being indisposed, was not in a condition to come to an Interview; therefore it was pro∣pos'd to him, that he would be pleased to meet Cardinal Richlieu, who was more fit to treat with Gustavus than Lewis XIII, who referr'd every thing to his Minister. Gustavus, who was of a hasty Temper, answered, he would send one of his Servants to confer with the Cardi∣nal; that he esteemed himself not inferiour to the French King, and did not understand why he should decline to meet him; that the Swedish Kings never truckled to those of France; and that all Crowns were equal. These Expressions of Gustavus, besides that he was suspected of aspiring to no less than an Universal Monar∣chy, cooled very much the Design which the French had to assist him, and hinder'd the King, at that time, from declaring openly against the House of Austria. Besides, the Cardinal had some particular Reasons which kept him back from engaging himself in great Enterprises, in which France might perhaps not always get the better. The ex∣treme Aversion of the Queen-Mother, and of Monsieur to∣wards him; the hatred even of almost the whole Kingdom, not to mention the Foreign Powers whom he had mighti∣ly offended, and the little Certainty he had that the King, upon whose Affection his Fortune was built, would live long; all this made him very often think of his own Se∣curity,
in case any sinister Accident should befall him. To shelter himself against all Misfortunes, he design'd at this time to marry his Niece Combalet with the Count of Soissons, to whom he made very advantageous Offers. He pretended to put him in a Condition not only of be∣ing able to be a Support to the Relations of his Lady, but also almost of giving Laws to the King himself. The Count consented to it, but was desirous that the King should declare in Writing, that he promoted this Marriage as being advantageous both for his Service and the Good of the State; and that for this Reason he commanded him to marry the Cardinal's Niece. The Minister, whom the King humoured in all things, thought he might easily obtain this Favour, and demanded it, though without the return of any positive Answer. He continued then to treat of this Business himself, and had his Propositions carried to the Count of Soissons by his Creatures; but at last he perceived that this Marriage displeased the King, because he had very good reason to believe that it would make the Count of Soissons too powerful; that the Prince of Conde, who was an Enemy to the Count, would joyn with the Disaffected; and that consequently the King would find himself alone with the Count, and draw upon him all the Enemies of the Cardinal. This Prelate coming to understand the Sentiments of his Majesty upon this Affair, shewed an entire Submission to his Will, and gave out that his Niece was going to retire into a Nunnery, though nothing was so far from her Thoughts. It was secretly whisper'd to the King, that this Marriage would render the Count of Soissons too greats and that it would utterly disoblige the Queen-Mother and the Duke of Orleans, whom, neither in Con∣science, nor even in good Politicks, he could always keep out of the Kingdom. In the mean while the Cardinal, who was used to Refusals, feared lest the King's Affecti∣on towards him should change, and he was observed to be very sad for some days. The Prince of Conde, weary of publishing his Praises without any Advantage to himself, and angry at the Marriage which was proposed, instead of going to assem∣ble the Estates of Burgundy, retired to Bruges. In order to hinder him from having any Communication with the Go∣vernours
of Burgundy and Berry, it was thought necessary to cause some Forces to advance to the River Loire to guard the Passes. But there was no Necessity for this Precaution, as a little time made it appear. The DukeAubery's Life of the Card. Lib. 4. Cap. 24. of Lorrain offered his Mediation to recon∣cile the King with Monsieur, and received this Answer, that if that Prince would return into France, a general Pardon should be granted to all those who had followed his Party; and that they should be re-establish'd in their Estates and Dignities, except only in the Governments which they possessed before. But these, who far from be∣ing willing to come and surrender themselves to the Cardi∣nal, intended not to go home, unless they could be consi∣derable Gainers by the Bargain, perswaded Monsieur to re∣ject these Offers; and the D. of Lorrain who saw very well that their Return upon these Conditions would only en∣crease the Authority of the Cardinal, a professed Enemy to his House, was the first who advised Monsieur to re∣cover his Right by force of Arms, and begun himself to make new Levies again, for fear of being surprised as he was before; and soon after, Monsieur, who was retired to Flanders, returned into Lorrain with some Forces, which he joyned with those of the Duke. Both the King and the Cardinal were gone into Picar∣dy to oppose the Enterprises of the disaffected Persons, who kept private Correspondences there. The Gover∣nour of Calais, one of those who declared for Monsieur, was reduced to his Duty by the King's Arrival, who re∣turned afterwards to Saint Germain. The Cardinal in this Journey was seized with a small Fit of an Ague, which detained him two days at Corbie, though it never hinder'd him from taking care of the Publick Affairs, and soon after he follow'd the King. As soon as his Majesty received the News of Monsieur's Return into Lorrain, he sent the Mareschal d' Effiat thither to Command the Ar∣my with Mareschal La Force, and gave him Orders to enter again into the Duke of Lorrain's Territories, and to oppose the March of Monsieur, in case they could not oblige the Duke of Lorrain by way of Negotiation, to observe the Treaty of Vic. All the Promises and Threatnings made use of to win that Prince, were ineffectual, till he saw an Army, and
the King present in Person. They tookIn the Month of June, Aub. ibid. Cap. 25. immediately Pont a Mousson, and entirely defeated a Regiment of Lorrain Horse, which they surprised. The Duke not being in a condition to make farther Resistance, was glad to come to an Accommodation, and the Treaty was concluded on the 26th of June by his Deputies and Cardinal Richlieu, who was desirous to return into France with all speed, to oppose and frustrate Monsieur's Designs. The Duke of Lorrain engag'd him∣self to deliver up the Towns of Stenay, Tamets, and Clermont, to the King, and even to sell him the latter, to which the Crown of France had some Pretensions. While the Cardinal was in Lorrain and in Picardy, he took care that an end should be made of the Tryal of the Mareschal de Marillac,A true Re∣lation of the Trial of Ma∣reschal Ma∣rillae in the Journal of Richlieu, Tom. 2. Pag. 1. and Siri Mem. Rec. T. 7. P. 495. and foll. who having been arrested in Piedmont, as we said before, was brought Prisoner to the Castle of Saint Menehoud, and from thence to the Citta∣del of Verdun, as soon as Biscaras had surrender'd it. After∣wards, according to the Cardinal's custom, the King ap∣pointed a Chamber of Justice at Verdun to judge of this Affair. It was composed of four Masters of Requests, of two Presidents, and twelve Counsellors of the Parliament of Burgundy, and their Commission was dispatch'd on the 13th of May 1631. The Mareschal de Marillac was ac∣cused of embezzling the King's Treasury; and some Witnesses who were brought against him since his Deten∣sion, accus'd him of having converted to his own use part of the Moneys which the King had sent him to for∣tifie Verdun. He was examined before the Court, and the Witnesses confronted him, with several other Pro∣ceedings at his Sollicitation, and at the Instance of the King's Attorney; but at last they agreed in a Decree, whereby he was allowed to make his Defence. The Cardinal, who was in good hopes that the Court would have sentenced him to death, caused the Commission to be recalled, and the Judges to be discharged. The Mareschal was some time after removed from Verdun to the Castle of Pontoise, and from thence to the Village of Ruel. The King established there a Chamber of Justice by another Commission of the 11th of March 1632. They were in part the same Judges, and some others who were put in the room of those that were rejected, and they were four and twenty in number.
The Mareschal excepted against the whole Chamber in general, and against several Judges in particular, for very strong Reasons; but the Council judged his Prote∣station void, and for all his Endeavours he could except but against one. In order to oblige the Judges to con∣demn him to death, the King's Attorney cited a Statute which condemned those who were found guilty of de∣frauding the Publick Treasury, to have both their Estates and Bodies confiscated: but the rest maintained, that in this case, those Expressions imported no more than the For∣feiture of their Estates, and Imprisonment. Finally,The 8th of May. the Chamber, without any Examination of most part of the Heads of Accusation which were produced against him, came to pass Sentence. Ten of his Judges voted for Life, and thirteen for Death: so that according to the form of Criminal Judgments, he was condemned but by one Vote. Most part of them were excepted against, for very weighty Reasons; as particularly, for publick and long professed Enmity. Whereas in Criminal Matters, it is usual to gather the Votes three times one after another, to give them time in case they should hap∣pen to change Opinion, hardly were they once collected, but their Chateauneuf, President of the Chamber, pro∣nounced the Sentence of Death, and sent to give notice of it to the King. No sooner were the Mareschal's Relations informed that Sentence had passed upon him, but they went Post to Saint Germain, to beg his Life of the-King. They thought they must address themselves first to the Cardi∣nal, to try if he would not have the Generosity to inter∣cede for him after he had sollicited his Condemnation. Having made their Complements to him, the Cardinal, as if he had been wholly surprized at it, assured them that they told him of a thing which he knew nothing of; that he was heartily sorry that the Mareschal de Marillac had brought himself to that condition by his own Fault; to which he added, See the King, he is merciful. The Relations of the Mareschal having ask'd him again, if he would not do them the Favour to speak of it to the King, and to intercede for him, the Cardiral reply'd, I told ye that ye should see the King. When they threw themselves at his Majesty's feet, and sollicited for his
Pardon, the King answered he would consider of it, and order'd them to withdraw. They immediately retired, and went again the next day to wait upon the Cardinal, and were scarcely got into the Anti-Chamber, when the Prelate going by, while they were bowing to him, asked them, Well Gentlemen, have you seen the King? one of them reported to him the King's Answer; to which the Cardinal replied, I would advise you to obey the King. Up∣on this another began to supplicate him, that he would be pleased to intercede for them, during their Absence, with the King: but the Minister, not being able to contain his Passion any longer, returned them this bitter and sharp Answer; I did advise you to withdraw, since the King charged you to do so: but now I command you, in the King's name, to depart. This Answer made them understand that the Death of the Mareschal was fully resolved upon, and he was accordingly executed at the Greve the 10th of March, protesting his Innocence. 'Twas not usual in France to punish Publick Embezzling with Death: and indeed, this was not the Crime for which he was brought to the Scaffold. He had the BoldnessSiri Mem. Rec. T. 7. Pag. 499. to advise the Queen-Mother at Lions, when the King was sick, to have the Cardinal apprehended in case his Majesty had dy'd. Which Crime, this good Prelate could never forgive him. As for his Brother, the Keeper of the Seals, he was conducted to Pontoise, where he dyed soon after: And so the Cardinal saw himself delivered from two Enemies, whom he might have feared if they had been alive. They say that the Cardinal went himself to sollicit all the Judges, one after another, the day before they con∣demned the Mareschal to die: and yet 'tis also reported, that when they went to visit him, in hopes of receiving Thanks for it, the Cardinal told them, in a jeering way, I must confess that God does inspire Judges after ano∣ther manner than he does the other Men, since they could find sufficient Matter to condemn Mareschal Marillac. It was however publish'd after his Death, that the Queen-Mother had corrupted him to favour the Spa∣niards in Italy and in Germany; but that no mention was made of it at his Tryal in respect to her.
For a total humiliation of the Grandees of the King∣dom, the Cardinal not being satisfi'd with having ob∣lig'd the Duke of Guise to leave France, caused his Go∣vernment of Provence to be given to the Mareschal de Vitry, and appropriated to himself his Office of Admiral of the Levant Seas. It was pretended, that the Spani∣ards had a Design to make a Descent into the Islands of Hieres, and to Fortifie themselves there, at the Instiga∣tion of the Duke of Guise. This Prince made all his endeavours to justifie himself, and to obtain the per∣mission to return into France; but as he desired some security, he had for an Answer, That nothing but his In∣nocence would be a safety to him; so that he durst not expose himself to the King's Justice, who look'd upon all such to be guilty who had the misfortune to dis∣please the Cardinal. During the same time, the French endeavoured to maintain themselves in the Possession of Pignerol, and the Duke of Savoy, who saw that he could not refuse them the Place, was onely thinking how to make the best Bargain that he could for it. He made use in this occasion of the Ministry of Cardinal Mazarine, who went to Paris, under a pretence to Treat with the King in the Pope's Name, about the Extirpation of Here∣sie in the City of Geneva, and of the Agreement of the Duke of Savoy with the Republick of Genoua, which was not yet Ratified by France. He offered to the King to quit Pignerol wholly to him, if he would take the City of Geneva, and put him in Possession of it. Mazarine countenanced this Demand in the Pope's Name; but because Geneva had been a long time un∣der the King's Protection, and in an Alliance with the Swisses, besides, that it was not the Interest of the Crown, that this Place should fall into the hands of the Duke of Savoy, it was entirely deny'd, and he was ob∣lig'd to content himself with a Sum of Money, which the King Promised to pay for him to the Duke of Man∣tua, to whom he owed the same by an Article of the Treaty of Querasque: Thus Pignerol, which from the Month of October, 1631, was onely deposited in the hands of the French, was quitted to them by a Treaty Signed the 5th of May, 1632.
To return to the Duke of Orleans,Siri Mem. Rec. T. 7. Pag. 551. Ambery, Lib. 4. cap. 27. who was the most dangerous Enemy the Cardinal had, as soon as it was known that he intended to enter into France, with some Troops that he had gathered fr several parts; the Cardinal signifi'd to the Spaniards, That if they gave Assistance to Monsieur in any thing, it would be taken for an Infraction of the Peace of Vervins. Nevertheless least they should take this business in hand, not caring to break openly, the Cardinal Promised to the States-General of the Ʋnited-Provinces, what they Ask'd of him, upon condition that they should make neither Peace nor Truce with Spain, to keep them employ'd on that side. MonsieurThe 8th of June, Siri Mem. Rec. Tom. 7. p. 551 Aubery, Lib. 4. cap. 27. entred into France by the way of Bassigny, with two Thousand, or Fifteen hundred Horse, and fell upon Burgundy. He Published at the same time a Declaration, wherein he call'd the Cardinal a Tyrant, an Usurper, an Enemy to the King and to the Royal Fami∣ly; saying, He had taken up Arms for no other intent but to open the eyes of His Majesty, and to shew him plain∣ly how his Minister deceiv'd him. Monsieur took upon himself the Title of Lieutenant-General for the King, to Redress the Abuses, and to Repress the Violences of the Cardinal. He pass'd with his Troops hard by Di∣jon, which Place having refused to Furnish his Army with Provisions, saw, for this Reason, one of their Sub∣urbs reduc'd into Ashes. From thence he pass'd to Au∣vergne, where he Raised Three thousand Foot, not making there any Devastation, because Noailles, Lieu∣tenant for the King in that Province, was there in Person. In the mean while the King thought it convenient to go to Paris, in order to be Present at the Parliament, and make them Confirm his Declaration against the Male-contents.The 11th of August. He went thither with the Cardinal, and the Keeper of the Seals made an Apology for this Minister, which he concluded with saying, That Sedi∣tious Men never ceased to Discredit those Persons that were concerned in the Government. Afterwards a De∣clarationSee it in Aubery, Ʋbi supra. of the King was Registred, wherein His Majesty gave a Compendious Account of what the Duke of Orleans had done, tending to the Destruction of the State. Although by his Libel of the 13th of June,
(as 'twas said in the Declaration) he Declares, That what he did was for the safety and wellfare of France, which he represented in a Deplorable Condition, in Terms extreamly prejudicial to the honour of his Majesty, laying the fault of all upon the Cardinal Richlicu; though it might be justly said, that the Kingdom was never so powerful nor in so great repu∣tation before, and that the Cardinal's Fidelity and Zeal and the Merits of his Services were so well known to all the World, that none but those who were envious both of the Glory of his Majesty and of his Prosperity, would offer to say any thing to the contrary. Lastly, the King declared afresh, those who should joyn with Monsieur, or abert him in any manner whatsoever, Rebels, and guilty of High Treason; and commanded they should be proceed∣ed against with all the Severity of the Laws. As for the Duke of Orleans himself, he gave him six Weeks time to return to his Allegiance. In the mean while an Army was sent against Monsieur, in two Bodies; one of which was commanded by the Mareschal de la Force, and the other by Mareschal Schom∣berg. They advanced two different ways, to endeavour to get between them the Troops of Monsieur, who were not in a condition to make any great resistance.Siri Mem. Rec. T. 7. Pag. 553. Though they had obeyed the King, yet it was with very much reluctance that they accepted the Command upon this Occasion; and especially the Mareschal de la Force did what lay in his power to be excused. It seemed to him, that it was too great a Boldness in a Subject to go and attack the King's only Brother, and presumptive Heir to the Crown, his Majesty being not present. It might happen that in the heat of Battel the Duke of Orleans might be kill'd, and the Fault then would be laid on the Mareschal, which would be enough to ruin him under another Administration. And therefore that he might act with greater Safety, he desired that the King would give him precise Orders what he was to do; and the King declared that as to his Brother's Person, he would not have him come by any harm, and that they ought to treat him with respect. Upon this the Mareschal obser∣ved that in a Fight it would not be possible perhaps to distinguish him; and since this Inconvenience could not well be avoided, and would cause the Armies to act but
weakly against Monsieur in the King's Absence, his Ma∣jesty resolved at last to go personally with them. Monsieur found none of the Provinces in his March disposed to declare for him, because the Governour who knew his Temper, knew likewise that he had neither Conduct, nor Experience, nor Constancy enough to pro∣tect those that should declare for him. Only the Duke of Montmorency promised to favour him, to revenge the Wrong which he thought the Cardinal had done him. He had formerly surrender'd his Office of Admiral, at his Sollicitation, who instead of suppressing it, as he had pretended before, appropriated it to himself, under ano∣ther Title. 'Twas said that he gave the Duke of Mont∣morency great hope of having the Office of High Consta∣ble, which was more considerable, and had been possessed by his Father and Grandfather; but he caused both the Title and the Donations of that great Post to be abolish'd, so that the Duke having ask'd for the Office of Mareschal General of the King's Armies, which was the same Thing under another Name, he met with an absolute Denial. Yet notwithstanding these and other Occasions of Dissa∣tisfaction, he still remained in the Interests of the Cardi∣nal till the time of the King's Sickness at Lions. But whether he grew weary to live under the Authority of a Minister who would not have Friends but Slaves; or that Marie Felice des Ʋrsins, his Lady, who was related to the Queen-Mother, had drawn him to the Party of this Princess, he engaged his Word to Monsieur, since this Prince's Departure from Court. Ar first he looked for some Pretence or other to make Levies, without giving suspicion to the Court; but at last havingPontis Mem. T. 2. P. 34. declared himself, he brought things to that pass, that the States of Languedoc, by their Delibera∣tion on the 22d of July, called in the Duke of Orleans to protect them, promising him Money for his Troops, and protesting they would stand by him with their Lives and Fortunes.Siri Mem. Rec. T. 7. P. 552. The Duke of Montmorency was to have six thousand Men and a Supply of Money from Spain; but the Sum which he received from them did not amount to above fifty thousand Crowns, and it was late enough before it was remitted to him. As for their Succours of Men, they came not at all. So that when
Monsieur entred into Languedoc, he was not in a con∣dition to oppose the King's Forces. Nevertheless there was a necessity to receive him, and he entred into Lunel on the 13th of July, after having secured some few Pla∣ces to himself. He had a considerable sum of Money at his Palace in Paris, which he expected to receive in a short time; but the Court having had notice of his De∣signs, stopped it, so that Monsieur's Party was in a man∣ner destitute of every thing; and when the King be∣gun his March, to go and joyn Mareschal Schomberg, who followed the Duke of Orleans, he was not in a condition to make a long resistance, if the Royal Armies had been once joyned together. Monsieur had then Two thousand Foot, and Three thousand Horse, with a∣bundance of Voluntiers, and Three Pieces of Canon. And Mareschal Schomberg had not yet above a Thou∣sand Foot, and Twelve hundred Horse, without Artille∣ry. The Mareschal being advanced near to Castelnau∣darry, drew up his Troops in Battel on the First of Sep∣tember, the Enemy being not far from him. Whether the Duke of Montmorency was desirous to open the Campagne with some Action that might give reputation to his Party, or whether he judged it expedient to fight the Royal Army, while they were inferiour to him in number; he took upon himself the Command of the Van of the Army, and Monsieur that of the Main Bo∣dy.Siri Mem. Rec. Tom. 7. p. 555. Aubery, Lib. 4. c. 31. Pon∣tis Memcirs, p. 2. p. 26. Having put himself at the head of the Counts of Moret, of Rieux, and of Feuillade, he resolved to go and support the first Files, who were ordered to pos∣sess themselves of an Advantageous Post. The Count de Moret was the first who fell upon the King's Horse, and put them into disorder; and Mont∣morency perceiving it, pour'd in full speed with very few Men, and forgetting to discharge the part of a Ge∣neral, he exposed himself to all the dangers of a Private Souldier, and fought with extraordinary bravery. Up∣on this, some Foot, who were laid in an Ambush in the Ditches, suddenly got up, and made their Discharge so fortunately, that the Counts of Moret, of Rieux, of Feu∣illade, and several Officers were killed, and the Duke of Montmorency wounded in several parts of his Body. He might have withdrawn himself, if at the same time,
his Horse being wounded, had not dropt down under him, so that a little while after he was made Prisoner, and carried to Lectoure. The rest of Monsieur's Army seeing themselves deprived of a considerable number of the Principal Officers, in stead of being animated to a revenge of their death, or going to free them from the hands of their Enemies, retired without fighting. Not long after the Foot were wholly dispersed, and Mon∣sieur retired with his Horse to Beziers, while some Towns that had declared for him, returned to their former Allegiance and Duty. The Duke of Orleans now begun to give great marks of Repentance for having engaged himself so far in an affair, out of which he could not disengage himself with Honour; and Bullion, who, after some Negotiations, to no purpose, went to see him from the King, obliged him, in a few days, to Sign an Accommodation, against the Mind of the greatest part of his Domesticks. The chiefest difficulty which lay in the way, was, concern∣ing the Duke of Montmorency, whom Monsieur would absolutely have restored to the enjoyment of his Liber∣ty, Honours and Estate.Se Ga∣ston's Letter to the King, dated from Montereau the 13th of Nov. 1632. in the Hist. of Lewis XIII. by Ch. Bernard, Lib. 16. Bullion told this Prince, That the best and onely way he had to obtain what he requested, was to submit himself wholly to the King's Will; that to desire an assurance of it, would be a Pro∣vocation to him, and an offence to that Trust he ought to have in his Clemency; That this being a Pardon which was wholly to redound to the King's Glory, he wrong'd the Duke of Montmonency, in not leaving it at His Majesty's Disposition; that the blind obedience he show'd the King upon this occasion, ought to put him out of fear, and give him hopes as certain as he could desire. These Discourses of Bullion perswaded the Duke, That he had Orders from the King, to speak to him in this manner, and hindred Gaston from drawing any positive word for the liberty of the Duke of Montmorency. Whether Puilaurens, and the rest, whose Advice Monsieur required in every thing, were not sorry to see the Duke of Montmorency sacrificed, or whether they did not perceive the Artifice of Bullion; certain it is, that they committed in this occasion a pro∣digious fault, which discredited their Party for good
and all. Thus did it appear evidently by Monsieur's Conduct, that those who Govern'd him, were not a∣ble to deceive any body but himself. They could easi∣ly bring him to shew his Dissatisfaction against the Court, but knew not to re-establish his Affairs upon a solid foundation, nor to put themselves into a condition, to improve, to their advantage, that exceeding power they had over his Inclinations. The Treaty of AccommodationHist. of Lewis XIII. by Ch. Bernard, Lib. 16. was to this effect, That Monsieur should acknowledge his Fault in Wri∣ting, and desire the King to Pardon him: That he should give all reasonable and possible assurances not to commit any such transgression for the future: That in order to this, he should Promise to leave all sorts of Ca∣bals, in, and out of the Kingdom; and, under no pre∣tence, and in no manner whatsoever to Maintain any In∣telligence with the Spaniards, Lorrainers, or other Prin∣ces; nor with the Queen-Mother, while she continued in her present Circumstances; nor with any body in the Kingdom, against His Majesty's good pleasure; and to remain where His Majesty should be pleased to appoint him, and to live there as a true Brother and Subject: That he should not concern himself for those who had joyned with him in these occasions, to promote their own Affairs at his Cost, and the prejudice of the Nation, and should not pretend to have occasion of complaint given him, if the King at any time should punish them as they deserved; out of which number were excepted his Do∣mesticks, who were then with him: That he should not demand any particular Pardon for those Strangers who Accompanied him; but that the King, out of his meer bounty and goodness, should grant them six days to withdraw into Rousillon: That he should fill the va∣cant Offices of his House, and, among the rest, name∣ly that of Chancellour, with Persons nominated by the King, and if His Majesty was displeased with any of them, he should remove them immediately of His own accord: That the King being not ignorant how those bad Counsels which Monsieur had followed, were sug∣gested to him by Puilaurens, this latter should sincerely give notice of all secret transactions that might be preju∣dicial to the State, to the King's Interest, and of those
who had the honour to serve him faithfully; and should declare, that he would be held as guilty, as he was be∣fore he received the King's most Gracious Pardon, if he acted contrary to his Promise. In a particular Article, the Duke promised to cherish all those who ser∣ved His Majesty, and particularly Cardinal Richelieu, whom he ever had esteemed, as was said in this Act, for his fidelity to His Person, and to the Interest both of King and State. The King, on his side, granted His Pardon to Mon∣sieur, and to his Domesticks, and moreover to the Duke of Elbeuf, whom he restored to his Estate, and permit∣ted to reside in one of his Houses, that should be appoint∣ed by His Majesty. Monsieur signed this Agreement at Besiers, on the 29th of September, and the King rati∣fi'd it by Letters Patents dated at Montpellier on the first of October. After this, Monsieur's Troops retir'd into Rousillon, and heSiri Mem. Rec. T. 7. p. 519. Wrote a Letter to the King, and another to the Cardinal, full of Complements, wherein he dis∣approved the Declaration publish'd at his coming into the Kingdom against this Prelate, as having been pub∣lish'd without his knowledge, and having never seen it. Lastly, he desired the Cardinal to forget what was past, and promis'd him his Friendship. Puilaurens sent also an Act to the King, written with his own hand, in which he promis'd to perform whatever was desired of him.On the 4th of Octob. After this Monsieur and his Domesticks took their way to Tours, where the King thought fit he should retire. He wrote another Letter to the King, wherein he earnestly desired him to forgive the Duke of Montmo∣rency, but to no purpose. As soon as he was taken, it was debated in a secret Council what to do with him, and 'tis confidently reported, that care was taken already to incense the King against him, by telling him, That they had found about his Arm a Locket of Gold, to which was tied the Picture of a certain Lady in Miniature, for whom His Majesty had a great Kind∣ness. Pompone de Bilievre Intendant in Mareschal Schom∣berg's Army took it dexterously from him at his Exa∣mination, and took the Picture from it; but as this was done in presence of several persons, notice was given
to the Cardinal of it, to exasperate the King against him. So when the question was put, If the King should use the Duke of Montmorency severely, or forgive him, it was no hard matter to incline him to a rigorous u∣sage. Nevertheless, the Cardinal being willing to affect an appearance at least of Equity towards a Man, to whom he was very much oblig'd, he begun to deliver his O∣pinion,Siri Mem. Ree. Tom. 7. p. 561. by saying, That His Majesty might be moved for several Reasons, to Pardon the Duke of Montmoren∣cy: That Monsieur had offered to leave off all Cor∣respondences that were displeasing to His Majesty, and to return to his Duty, upon condition that this Noble Lord should receive his Pardon, otherwise the Duke of Orleans could never with Honour renew His Obedi∣ence to His Majesty: for all his Domesticks advised him to hazard all things to save the Duke of Montmo∣rency: That if Monsieur retired into Spain, he would induce the Spaniards to be very mischievous to France: That if Monsieur was brought into Despair, those who serv'd the King would not be in safety, because those of the contrary Party would not think themselves safe till they had brought them to ruine; That if Monsieur came once to leave off all Cabals and Practises con∣trary to the good of the State, any thing might be after∣wards undertaken against the Spaniards, whereas while he was discontented, they could not make use of any occasion, though never so favourable. After he had thus produc'd his Reasons in favour of the Duke of Montmorency, the Cardinal turned the Ta∣bles, and said, That on the other side, if they consi∣der'd that the King was without Children, and Mon∣sieur look'd upon as Presumptive Heir to the Crown, they would find, that if those who followed his Party, were not rigorously punish'd; the first time the King fell Sick, how inconsiderable soever his Sick∣ness should be, so many People would declare for the Duke of Orleans, that the King would not be able to Master them: That on the contrary, if the Duke of Montmorency was brought to Deserved Punishment, no body would dare to engage in such Attempts any more; That not a sew Kings, whom he named, had
maintained themselves in the declension of their Age, only by Severity; he cited some Examples, and conti∣nued, saying, That if the Nobility and Commons should once know, that the consideration which the King had for Monsieur was capable to hinder Seditious Persons from being punished with Death, there would be still great Numbers of Persons, who, thinking their Lives in safety, would venture their Estates and Fortunes for him, in hopes of being gainers at the Ex∣pence of the Kingdom: That turning Men out of their Offices in such an occasion, signified nothing, without taking their Lives away, because Monsieur be∣ing consider'd as next Heir to the Crown, those who should lose their Offices for taking up Arms for him, would hope to recover them with usury, as soon as this Prince ascended the Throne: That Montmoren∣cy's Crime was not a Simple Rebellion, in which Monsieur had engaged him, but that he had Incited the Duke of Orleans to enter into France with Arms, and raised up the Province, by Summoning an Assem∣bly of the States, a thing that was never practised be∣fore: That it would be very difficult and dangerous to keep him in Prison: That in stead of extinguish∣ing that Party, it would be revived, and gather more strength than before. That Monsieur submitted him∣self to the King out of Necessity, and not out of In∣clination: That the Spaniards would prove always the same, and the Queen-Mother would still persist in her Anger: That Puilaurens would have no less credit with Monsieur than before, and that his Ambi∣tion, and Intreaguing with the Lorrainers, would al∣ways continue: So that the danger being over, the Duke of Orleans would hearken to bad Counsels a∣gain: That if they thought fit to forsake the Hollan∣ders, and the Swedes, the Rage of the Spaniards might per∣haps cease; and if they would Sacrifice to the Queen-Mother all those whom she hated, and put the King in a total Dependance upon her, her Animosity might likewise be at an end; but if none of these things cou'd be done, as really the King could do neither of them without undoing himself, 'twas certain that the more Monsieur's Party subsisted in the Heads of
it, the greater the danger wou'd be, by reason of their continual Cabals, and because the danger, when it was once over, was reckon'd for nothing: That the Duke of Montmorency being Punished, his Party would fall in Languedoc, and that of Monsieur all o∣ver France; whereas if he was kept a Prisoner, though never so many besides were Executed, he would have always secret Friends, and so much the more true to him, that they should have no other hopes but in his re-stablishment, which consequently they would en∣deavour to procure by all ways whatsoever. Afterwards the Cardinal begun to Confute the Rea∣sons he had at first proposed, to favour the Pardon which Mensieur demanded for the Duke of Montmo∣rency. He said, That the Promises which Monsieur made to obtain what he desired, wou'd be indeed considerable, had he not broken his word three times, though he had been very kindly used by the King, and seen all his Houshold rewarded with extraordinary Favours; but after this it would be imprudently done to trust him: That if Monsieur could not save the Duke of Montmorency's Life, he would find fewer People ready to serve him than if he saved him; and that this Reason alone was sufficient for to have him Punished: That Monsieur being not able to procure his Pardon, would not ruine himself, because of his Death, and that the necessity of leaving him to the Severity of his Sentence, wou'd secure his Reputati∣on, since it is better at last to have an Arm cut off, than to lose ones Life: That suppose Monsieur should pass into Spain, uppon the Duke of Montmorency's be∣ing Punished, yet his Power would be so much Clipp'd, that he would never be able to set up another Party: That indeed, the Ministers who declar'd for Severity in this occasion, expos'd themselves very much; but when the Service of King and State were called in question, they ought not to have any regard to their particular Interest. Lastly, The Cardinal concluded, That to grant the Duke of Montmorency's Life to Mon∣sieur's Request, would strengthen his Party, and wea∣ken that of the King: nevertheless, the King might Grant it out of His meer Bounty, and not being ob∣lig'd
to it by a Treaty; but there was more danger in the doing, than in not doing of it. The whole Council yielded to the Cardinal's Advice, which no body ever contradicted Unpunished, in Affairs of any moment. The King, who naturally was inclined to Severity, and to whom Generosity was almost an unknown Vertue, embraced, in this occasion, as in all others, the most Rigorous Party.Aubery's Life of Cardi∣nal Rich. Lib. 4. Cap. 34. After this Council, the King presided Personally at the States of Languedoc, whom he Assembled at Besiers, and the Cardinal was there present. It was onely done with a design to lay a Censure upon the States, for suffering themselves to be seduced by the Duke of Montmorency, and to give or∣der for the punishing of some Bishops and Gentlemen, who had declared for him. From thence the Court repaired to Toulouse, where the Parliament took in hand the Trial of the Duke of Montmorency, though it belonged, by Right, to that of Paris. The Cardinal, who did not love delays, especi∣ally when the Ruine of his Enemies was to be effected, moved the King to nominate this Parliament to be the Judges in this Cause. Chateauneuf, formerly Page to Constable Montmorency, Father to the Prisoner, and Six Masters of the Requests came thither to Preside at this Judgment; and forasmuch as the Duke of Montmoren∣cy was taken in Arms against His Majesty, and declared Guilty of High-Treason, after Examination, and a free Confession on his part, he was Condemned toThe 30th of Octob. Death. During these Proceedings, and even after Sentence gi∣ven, all the Duke's Friends, who were very numerous, Interceeded for him in vain.Pontis Mem. T. 2. P. 36. Francis of Tussac, Lord of Saint Breuil, Captain of the Guards, who took him Prisoner, went to Beg his Life of the King in pre∣sence of the Cardinal, which was thought very absurd, there being so many other Persons of greater Quality that could have interceeded for him, without his Inter∣posing; therefore the King Laughed at him for it, and the Cardinal Reprimanded him after his manner; Saint Breuil, if the King would do you Justice, he would put your head where your feet are: As if it had been a Crime for such a Man as he was to Intercede for a Criminal of State.
Siri Mem. Rec. T. 7. p. 565.Nevertheless the Cardinal would sometimes feign himself Afflicted in Publick, and wou'd desire several Persons of the First Rank to apply themselves to the King for Mercy. He sent Biche the Nuncio, and Car∣dinal de la Valette upon this Message, but the King was too much prepossessed to hearken to them. S. Simon a Relation of the Duke's, endeavouring to move the King to Mercy, the Cardinal made as if he took part in his Affliction, and, in appearance, joyned with him, to in∣cline the King to Compassion, by excusing the Crimi∣nal. But, at the same time, he own'd, that His Maje∣sty, after he had overcome the Huguenots, and extin∣guish'd a Dangerous Faction in His Dominions, found himself oblig'd to make an Example of the Duke of Montmorency, to keep the Grandees in their Duty and Allegiance. The Princess of Conde, Sister to this Lord, went, and cast her self, all in Tears, at the Cardinal's feet, Conju∣ring him to Intercede for her Brother; but the Artifici∣ous Prelate, in stead of lifting her up, fell himself up∣on his knees before her, and begun to Act the Afflicted Man, for not being able to Appease the King. The Duke of Espernon, Governour of Guienna,Hist. of the Duke of E∣spernon in the year 1632. p. 473. who had been suspected of favouring Monsieur's Party, but had always kept firm to his Duty, though he was a particu∣lar Friend to the Duke of Montmorency, went immedi∣ately to Toulouse, and took upon himself to go and speak to the King, in the Name of all the Relations and Friends of the Duke of Montmorency. He kneeled down before him, and the King having bid him rise up, the Duke of Espernon, after having Acknowledg'd the Cri∣minal's Fault, told him, amongst other things, That he was so much the more embolden'd to beg His Ma∣jesty's most Gracious Pardon, that himself having recei∣ved the like Favour from his Bounty, in an occasion al∣most like this, he esteemed himself very happy, that he had given no occasion to His Majesty to Repent of it: That he was not the onely Man amongst His Sub∣jects that lay under the same obligations: That Car∣dinal Richlieu had as great a share in it as himself, that both of them had sided with the Queen-Mother, at a time when the King's Name was contrary to them,
though they had no other intention than to serve him; and that if he had then abandoned them to the severity of the Laws, and of Justice, he would have deprived himself, both of the most profitable Services of the one, and of the grateful Acknowledgments of the other: That the Duke of Montmorency's youth ought to be no less an excuse to him, than their honest Intentions had been to them: That his Person being in the hands of His Majesty, he was not able to do him the least Inju∣ry, but his Conservation wou'd be an eternal Monu∣ment to His Glory. He desired the King to consider, that in this young Duke's Person alone remained the Great and Illustrious Name of Montmorency: That the high Merits of his Ancestours, whose long Scries spread as far as the beginning of the French Monarchy, did call more loudly for His Grace, than his rashness did for the Severity of the King's Justice: That if he was so happy as to obtain a Second Life for his Friend, he would be his Security, that it should be wholly em∣ployed in the Service of His Majesty; and that his blood should onely serve to blot out both the Blackness and the Memory of his Crime. The King heard the Duke of Espernon without in∣terrupting him; and having cast his looks towards the ground, from the very beginning of his Speech, he con∣tinued in the same posture, and answered him not one word. The Duke perceived very well by this obsti∣state Silence, that the Cardinal had so deeply perswa∣ded the King that Montmorency ought to die, that it was impossible to save him. However he reassumed his Speech again, and told the King, That since there was no Pardon to hope for the Duke, he desired him to give him leave to retire. The King answered, He might do it, and that himself would not make a long stay at Toulouse. The Duke of Montmorency was so universally beloved by every body, and the Cardinal so universally hated, that a General appearance of SorrowPontis, Mem. T. 2. P. 37. was to be seen at Court, and in the Faces of the People. One day the People of Toulouse fell a Crying about the House where the King odged, and once when he was in the Hall, in Company of many Persons, Cried aloud, Mercy,
Mercy; Pardon, Pardon. The King asked what it was? and they told him, That if His Majesty would look out of the Window, he would pity that poor People: but the King answered fiercely, That if he followed the Inclinations of the People, he should not act as a King. As soon as his Sentence was Read to him, the King sent to him to deliver back the Order of the Holy Ghost, and his Mareschal's Staff, which the Duke sent him back by De LaunaiPuisegur, Mem. P. 105. Lieutenant of the Life-Guards, who guarded him. He charged him to assure the King, That he Repented extreamly for having of∣fended him, and that he would die His very humble Subject and Servant. Launai found the King in His Closet Playing at Chess with Liancourt; and after he had deliver'd the Duke's Compliment to the King, he fell at His feet all in Tears, and begged His Royal Pardon. All those who were in the Closet did the same; and the King had the displeasure to see every body weep about Him; no body but the Cardinal and his Creatures be∣ing able to digest the inflexibility he shewed upon this occasion. He answered, That there was no Pardon, and that he must die; that no body ought to be sorry to see a Man put to death, who had so much deserved it; and that he onely ought to be lamented for falling into so great a misfortune. The onely Favour which the King granted him, was, That the Hangman should not Tie him; that his Estate should not be Confiscated; and that he should be Executed in the Court of the Town-Hall. His Head was Cut off the same day that his Sentence was pronounced to him; after which the King prepared to take his Journey to Paris. 'Twas wondred at, that this Prince, who always yielded to the first Accusation which the Cardinal made against any whom he desired to ruine, had they done never so great Servi∣ces to the State, should remain inflexible to all the Sollicitations of the whole Court, and of all France, in an occasion, when by saving the last off-spring of the most Illustrious Race of His Kingdom, this single act of Clemency would have infinitely more turned to His Honour, than Severity. But, besides that, the Cardinal had put it into His Head, that Monsieur and his Fol∣lowers
had no other design but to Invade the Throne, though they feigned onely to be offended at the Mini∣ster: the fatal Miniature that was found about the Duke of Montmorency, did Incense the King so much a∣gainst him, that nothing was able to save him. While the King was at Toulouse, they begun to pro∣ceed likewise against the Bishops of Alby, of Ʋzes, of Nismes, of Lodeve, of S. Pons, and Alers; all of them Fa∣vourers of Montmorency. The Pope nominated some Prelates that were upon the place to manage the Trial against them: The Bishops of Alby and Nismes were deprived of the Temporalities, not onely of their Bisho∣pricks, but their other Benefices; and the Bishop of Ʋzes had suffered the same Punishment, if he had not died before his Trial. As for the rest, they were sent back to their respective Diocesses. Those of the Nobi∣lity who had declared for Monsieur, had their Houses and Woods beaten down; and thus the whole Province was intirely restored to its former Tranquility. The Mareschal d' Effiat, Superintendant of the Finan∣ces, dying soon after in Germany, Bullion succeeded him in that place, and the Marquiss de Breze, Brother-in-Law to the Cardinal, was made a Mareschal of France, after the Battel of Castelnaudarry. The Mareschal de Schomberg was rewarded with the Government of Lan∣guedot, which the Duke of Montmorency had before him, but he enjoy'd it not long, dying soon after. The Cardinal proposed to the Duke of Espernon at Toulouse, that if he would, in Complaisance to him, lay down the Government of Metz, the Survivership of which Place belonged to his Son, and resign it up to him, he wou'd obtain of His Majesty the Survivership of that of Guienne: But the Duke of Espernon, who had no kindness for the Cardinal, and besides, was not a Man to be manag'd after such a rate, refused the Motion. 'Twas believed that this Prelate had a design to possess himself of the Bishoprick of Metz, and of some rich Ab∣beys in that City, and to set off this with the Title of the Governour of the City and Country about Metz, as well as the Cities and Citadels of Thoul and Verdun, in order to secure himself of a secure retreat on that side, in case of necessity.
After the Death of the Duke of Montmorency, the King returned to Paris, and came to his Castle of Versails in a few days.Siri Mem. Rec. T. 7. Pag. 570. The Cardinal was desirous to carry him with the whole Court to his Government of Brouage, and to Rochel, designing to bring him back to Paris by the way of Richlieu, where he intended to regale him; but though the King would not go thither himself, yet he gave his Consent that all the Court should follow the Cardinal. Some People were of opinion, that this Prelate, since he could not prevail with his Majesty to go along with him, was resolved so to manage Affairs that no body should talk with him in his Absence, the Queen herself not ex∣cepted. Thus this Princess was forced upon this Journey contrary to her Inclinations, as all the World imagined, because she had no reason to be a Friend of the Cardinal, who not long before had proposed to the King to repu∣diate her for being barren, besides that she was too much concerned for the House of Austria, not to hate the Man that was a professed Enemy to it. For this reason she was sad and melancholy all this Journey, notwithstanding the great Honour and Respect which the Cardinal caus'd to be paid her wherever she went. She had a mind toLife of the D. of Esper∣non. go and see the House of the Duke of Espernon at Cadillac; in order to which she must pass the Garonne. The Duke got his Coaches ready to receive her as she came out of the Boat, and gave Orders for one to stay behind to take up the Cardinal if he happened to come after her. As soon as her Majesty arrived, the Duke received her, and waited on her to her Apartment, thinking there was a Coach left for the Cardinal; but it seems his Orders were ill executed, and indeed there were but Coaches just enough for the Queen's Retinue. In the mean time the Cardinal passed the River, and finding ne'er a Coach there to receive him, walk'd a foot towards the Duke's House, and was got half the way thither, when the Duke, after he paid his first Devoirs to the Queen at his own House, ran to meet him. He made him a thousand Excuses, assuring him he had given Orders for a Coach to be left for him at the River-side, but that his Commands had not been observed. The Cardinal pretended to be well satisfied with this Excuse, but 'tis certain he was inwardly displeased with the Duke,
since he refused to go into a Coach that was offer'd him, and walked the rest of the way on foot, although it in∣commoded him. The Queen, after she had stayed two days at Cadillac, returned to Bourdeaux, and the Cardinal came thither like∣wise. Here he fell sick of a Stoppage of Urine, which put him in danger of his Life. 'Twas generally believed he would never recover, and all People were glad at the News, hoping now shortly to see Peace in the Royal Fa∣mily, Justice administred according to the Laws, and the King's Favours distributed with more equality to those that deserved them.Siri Mem. Rec. Tom. 7. Pag. 594. While his Sickness continued, there were several Balls at Bourdeaux, and other Rejoy∣cings, which sufficiently discovered the Peoples Htred of this Minister, who favour'd none but such as were wl∣ling to live and die his Slaves. Chateauneuf, who other∣wise seemed to be very submissive to him, danced in one of these Balls, at a time when the Cardinal pretended all the World should be at their Prayers for his Recovery: and this, in the opinion of some Persons, did not a little contribute to his Ruine. The Queen not thinking her self obliged to make a longer stay at Bourdeaux, although the Cardinal was in a desperate Condition, took the Road to Rochel, with a design to return from thence to Paris.Life of the D. of Esper∣non, p. 478. All the while her Majesty continued at Bourdeaux, the Duke of Espernon ordered his Guards, whom he kept in Quality of Go∣vernour of the Province, to leave off their Liveries and Musquets, and laid aside all the Functions and Marks of his Office; but as soon as the Queen was gone, he thought there lay no Obligation upon him to shew the Cardinal that respect which was only due to a Soveraign. Thus going to make this Minister a Visit, who was now on the mending hand, he came, accompanied as far as the Gate of his Lodgings by his Guards, with their Coats and Musquets. The Cardinal's People, who were used to make others tremble, run to their Arms, while the Duke enter'd, and without taking the least notice of the Disorder he saw, was got to his Anti-Chamber, where he enquired after his Health. The Cardinal sent him Word that he was still so indisposed, that he begg'd his Excuse if he could not see him. After this the Duke still
observed this Custom; and when the Cardinal parted for Brouage, he went to accompany him to his Boat, attend∣ed by his Guards, and several of the Nobility of that Province, as it were to shew him the greater Honour. However, the Cardinal was afterwards made to believe, that the Duke had some Design upon his Person, and 'tis credibly reported, that ever since that time, this Minister was not thought to be safe enough at Bourdeaux. But if the Duke had design'd any thing of that nature, he might easily have accomplish'd it, being much stronger, and in∣finitely better beloved at Bourdeaux than the Cardinal was; and besides, the Cardinal de la Valette, who was the Duke's Son, never quitted this Minister, during the whole time of his Illness. While the Cardinal was in the height of his Distem∣per, he ordered the Commandeur de la Porte his Unkle, and the Marquiss de la Meilleraye his Cousin to accompa∣ny the Queen; who gave her a Magnificent Entertain∣ment at the Castle of Richlieu in Poictou, which the Car∣dinal had lately built, and had made a very pleasant place. He was not fully recovered, when he caused himself to be carried to Blaye, and from thence to Brou∣age, where he was intirely restored to his health. After this, he returned without farther delay to Paris, and the King went as far as Rochefort to meet him, which stands within Ten Leagues of that City. While the Court was in Languedoc,Siri Mem. Rec. T. 7. p. 175. Ten Men were apprehended at Paris, who were accused to have come thither by the Queen-Mother's Order, to steal away Ma∣dam de Combalet, who stay'd all the time at Paris, and to carry her into Flanders. One of these Ten Men was a Nephew of Father Chanteloube, a Favourite of the Queen, and one of her Valets de Chambre: It was dis∣cours'd that this Princess was desirous to get the Cardi∣nal's Niece into her hands, either to facilitate her own Return into France, or else to hinder this Lady from Marrying the Count de Soissons, or Monsieur, as the Re∣port ran. The King being informed that they were in Prison, sent Orders to have them immediately Tryed. and Writ a very obliging Letter to Madam de Combalet, wherein he told her, That he cou'd never have believ∣ed, that since he had given Peace to His Kingdom, by
the Force of his Arms, and brought the Rebels to due Punishment, there had been any so bold and adventurous as to attempt such an Enterprize; But that since some disaffected Persons still sought new occasions to embroil the Nation, he wou'd immediately come to Paris to set all things in order. He also Congratulated her good Fortune, that she had so happily escaped the Snare that was laid for her; and added, That if she had been ta∣ken, he wou'd have gone in Person with an Army of Fifty thousand Men into Flanders, to set her at Liber∣ty again. This Lady had lived, till the above-mention'd Affair came to be discover'd, in an Hôtel which joyned to Lux∣emburg-House, and which the Queen-Mother had be∣stowed upon the Cardinal when he was in her Favour, upon condition that she might take it into her own hands again whenever she pleas'd, paying down the Sum of Thirty thousand Livres. When she came to fall out with this Prelate, she demanded to have this Hôtel sur∣render'd to her; and having sent for the Contract, she found, that instead of so many Livres, it was Crowns; and that instead of whenever she pleased, it was, when the King commanded it. The Queen protested, That she never meant to make any such Articles as these, and charged the Cardinal with Forgery. She Addressed her self to the King, to oblige him to deliver it up; but His Majesty, the more to Mortifie her, wou'd have the Cardinal still keep in Possession. This ill usage vexed this Princess extreamly: but she had farther occasion to complain, when being out of France she was inform'd, that Combalet lived there, and daily receiv'd Visits from Persons of the First Quality, who made their Court to her Unkle by going to see her. Besides this, she made several new alterations in the House for her own Con∣venience; and, for this purpose, without any more adoe, caused part of the Wall belonging to the Palace of Lux∣emburg to be beaten down. 'Tis believ'd that it was partly occasion'd by this, that the Queen fell upon the design, to have Combalet stollen away, although there is no question, but that she made these Alterations by her Unkle's Orders, not being naturally of so haughty a humour, as to disoblige the Queen-Mother in so high
a point as this was, of her own head. However, when this Design was discover'd, she thought her self no lon∣ger safe in this House, and went to live at her Unkle's Palace, where she seldom stirr'd out of doors. Monsieur having receiv'd the News of the Duke of Montmorency's Death, whose Life he perswaded himself they wou'd have sav'd, thought that he should be ever∣lastingly Disgrac'd, and that no body for the future wou'd expose themselves to the Minister's Indignation for his sake, if he did not express some resentment for so notorious an Affront. It was confidently reported, that part of his Domesticks wou'd be removed, and that some of them should be declar'd not to be of that num∣ber, in order to punish them, as being excluded out of the Treaty which had been concluded with him. This made him interpret the Beheading of the Duke of Mont∣morency to be an Infraction of this Treaty, which he said, He Sign'd onely out of a supposition that they wou'd give that Nobleman his Life. So he parted secretly from Tours on the 6th of November, and on the 12th Writ aSee it in the Hist. of Lewis XIII by Ch. Bernard, Lib. 16. Letter to the King from Montereau Faut-Yonne, wherein he vehemently complains of this Violation; and tells him, That to obtain the Life of that Illustrious Lord, his Cousin, he had Sacrificed all his own Interests, and those of his Followers; stifled the justest Resent∣ments, dissembled his dearest Affections, and even re∣nounced, for a time, that very duty to which Nature oblig'd him. He farther added, That he had been gi∣ven to understand from the Part of the King, That if he made the least movement towards Rousillon, it should cost the Duke of Montmorency his Life; and that he had inferr'd from this Discourse, that he might hope for a quite contrary Treatment, if he obey'd His Majesty: but that after he had made the most Humble Submissi∣ons to the King, which he cou'd expect from the mean∣est Subject he had, no regard was made of his Honour. Towards the close, he begg'd His Majesty not to be dis∣pleas'd at the Resolution he had taken, of endea∣vouring to find a safe Retreat for his Person among Fo∣reigners, since he had just reason to apprehend the con∣sequences of that extraordinary contempt which they had shewn to all his Submissions. The King answer'd
this Letter on the 25th of the same Month, by accu∣sing the Duke of Montmorency, whom no body excused, and by saying, That down-right necessity had con∣strain'd Monsieur to submit himself; however, 'tis certain, that nothing cou'd have hindred him from making the best of his way to Rousillon, if he had had the courage to attempt it. Thus, by the way ofSiri Mem. Rec. T. 7. P. 580. Champagne, he retired into the Low-Countries, and was extreamly well received by the Infanta at Brussels, although the Ministers of Spain did not build much upon his Discontent, being per∣swaded that the Cardinal cou'd make him return into France when he pleased, by offering him some Advanta∣geous Terms. As for the Queen-Mother, under a pre∣tence of changing the Air, she went to Malines the day before his arrival, being displeased with him, because in the Treaty of Besiers he was so far from supporting her interest, that he did not so much as make any mention of her. The Duke of Orleans followed her, but cou'd not prevail with her to return to Brussels, nor disswade her from the Design she had taken up to go and reside an Ghent. He strove to justifie himself by the necessity he lay under, to give way to the time, that so he might find a way to escape out of the Cardinal's hands, till he cou'd do it with more security, and come to re-joyn her in the Low-Countries. 'Tis indeed certain that Gaston, who was of a timorous disposition, and besides was none of the most able Men in the World, cou'd not have done otherwise; and the Queen, without doubt, had pardon'd him this Omission, if Father Chanteloube had not inspired her with a coldness for her Son. The reason of which was, that this good Father cou'd not endure that Puilau∣rens, who had an absolute Ascendant over Monsieur, shou'd equal him, and he, for his part, was not of an hu∣mour to truckle to any one, and had, in his time, refused to be over-ruled by some People that were infinitely more considerable than Father Chanteloube. This inflexible temper on both sides brought them to an open defiance of one another, and this caused them to sow that disaf∣fection between the Mother and the Son, which gave the Cardinal an opportunity to ruine all their Designs with much more ease, than if they had been better uni∣ted.
Monsieur sent advice of his departure out of France to the Emperour, and to the Kings of England and Spain, and desired their Assistance to enable him to make his way into France again. The King had, before this, sent Bautru into Spain, to complain of theSiri, Ibid. P. 582. Succours which the Infanta and the Ministers of the Catholick King had given Monsieur; and, at the same time, to justifie those which France gave the King of Sweden, against the House of Austria. Soon after the News arrived of the death of Gustavus Adolphus, who was slain on the 6th of No∣vember, in the Battel of Lutzen, where his Army got the Victory after he was kill'd. From that time it was conclu∣ded in France, That if they did not more vigorously Assist the Swedes in Germany, the House of Austria would soon Triumph over their Party: so several Persons were dispatched thither to support it, and to engage the Prote∣stants to favour it more than ever. On the first day of the year 1633, the King held a Council upon the Affairs of Germany, where the Cardi∣nal represented to them, That the first thing they were to do, was, to raise a good Sum of Money, at what price soever, and to manage matters so, that the War might continue in Germany and the Low-Coun∣tries, and yet not declare formally against the House of Austria; upon condition that those whom they furnished with Money, shou'd neither make a Peace or Truce without the Consent of France: That howe∣ver, in case they found they were not able to carry on the War, then they must come to such an Accommoda∣tion as they cou'd obtain: That they ought to consi∣der, whether the King was not obliged, in point of Interest, rather to break openly with the House of Austria, and to joyn himself with the Protestants of Germany, and the States-General of the Ʋnited-Provin∣ces, than to run the hazard of seeing a Truce conclu∣ded, which wou'd put a stop to the War, in which he was not Included: That if a Peace were made in Germany, and a Truce in the Low-Countries, or one of these onely, then France wou'd be left alone by it self to support a Defensive War, which might be carried into the Bowels of it, and in which the Party of Monsieur and of the Queen-Mother, wou'd become as powerful
as they were now contemptible. That on the other side, if they began the War, all the World wou'd be∣lieve, they did it voluntarily, and of their own mo∣tion, although they were really drawn into it by mere necessity: That the zealous, who are generally very indiscreet, wou'd cry out, That this War was de∣sign'd for the Destruction of the Catholick Religion; that His Majesty therefore ought maturely to delibe∣rate what Measures He was to take in this juncture, before he engaged Himself too far. The Cardinal continued his Discourse, and observed, That if they design'd to Unite with the Protestants of Germany, and to declare for them, they cou'd not do it but upon the following Conditions; That they should maintain the Catholick Religion in those places where it was already setled, that they should deliver up to the King all that they held on this side the Rhine, the Prin∣cipal Towns of the Palatinate, with what they posses∣sed in Alsatia, and in the Bishoprick of Strasburg; that they should help him to take Philipsburg and Bri∣sac, and that they should be obliged to enter into no Peace or Truce without the King's Consent; that they must obtain a Promise of the States-General of the Ʋ∣nited Provinces to preserve the Catholick Religion in those Conquests they shou'd happen to make; that they must likewise, in conjunction, attack the Mari∣time Towns, upon condition, that whatever they took shou'd belong to the King; that the Protestants shou'd demand nothing more of France than onely to break with the House of Austria, either in Germany or Flan∣ders, or in Italy, and to keep an Army in Alsatia, ready to assist them in time of need; that this being supposed, the Advantages that wou'd arise from this War, wou'd be very considerable, and the danger but small, since the King might extend the limits of His Dominions as far as the Rhine, without drawing his Sword; that having such considerable Pledges in his hands, he wou'd be the Arbitrator of War and Peace, neither of which cou'd be concluded without him; that this Surrendry wou'd give him an open entrance into the Territories of Strasburg, the Franche Comte, the Dutchy of Luxem∣burg, and that it wou'd bridle the Duke of Lorrain so
effectually, that he cou'd attempt nothing of any con∣sequence; that they shou'd run no manner of hazard, since as they made War in Conjunction with the Ger∣mans and the Hollanders, it wou'd be impossible for the House of Austria to carry it into France; that they needed but a few more Troops to effect all this; and that the Queen-Mother's Dowry, and the Appanage of the Duke of Orleans, wou'd bear the Expence; that otherwise France wou'd find it self alone to deal with the House of Austria; that in all probability a Peace might be concluded in Germany, and a Truce in Holland, by the Intervention of His Majesty, which wou'd con∣tribute mightily to the setling of a General Peace, which perhaps wou'd be the effect onely of the Uni∣on between France and the Protestant-Princes of Ger∣many. After he had reason'd a long while upon these Heads, the Cardinal concluded, and the Council after him, to set all Wheels a-going to continue the War in Germany, and the Low-Countries, against the House of Austria, al∣though the King was not to declare Himself openly; and for this end it was resolved to send at the same time Ambassadours Extraordinary to the Emperour, to all the Electors Catholick and Protestant, and to the States of the Ʋnited Provinces, to exhort the one to con∣tinue the War with vigour, and to Promise them Assist∣ance against their enemies, while they assured the latter, that they wou'd live in Peace with them. This Resolution was accordingly put in execution, and all endeavours were used to oblige the Generals Baudissen and Horn to deliver up into the hands of France all the Places which they possessed in the Electorates of Colen and Mentz, and in Alsatia. Above all they desired to have Mentz, that they might more easily make themselves Masters of Strasburg, and all the Country which lies on this side the Rhine; By that means the King wou'd be in a ca∣pacity, either to enlarge the Frontiers of his State, or else wou'd have enough in his hands to make an Ad∣vantageous Treaty; or lastly, if he must sit down con∣tent with the bare Honour of the thing, he might dis∣possess the Protestants of those Places which they had taken from the Catholicks, and pretend, that he had ne∣ver
any other Design, and that this was the end of that Alliance which he had made with the late King of Sweden. The Cardinal being arrived at Paris,Siri Mem. Rec. Tom. 7. p. 588. sent one day forThe 23d of Jan. Gondi the Resident of Florence, and after he had en∣tertain'd him about several other matters, began at last to discourse about the Queen-Mother's Affairs. He enquired of Gondi what he thought of the Queen-Mother's Design (for so it was reported) of going into Italy; and when Gondi had assured him, That he never heard the least word that the Queen had any inclinations to quit the Low-Countries, the Cardinal continuing the Discourse, told him, That the Impru∣dence and fury of Father Chanteloube having oblig'd the King to demand him of the Infanta, this Man was in so great a Consternation, that he had perswaded the Queen to leave the Low-Countries, where he did not think himself safe enough; that upon this suggestion the Queen-Mother had sent to the King of England, to know if he wou'd be pleased to receive her, but that he had refused to do it at the instance of the King her Son; that afterwards she had desired the above-mention'd King, that he wou'd give her leave to come to Plimouth, and lend her some Ships to Transport her to Spain: That this Prince, who be∣lieved, that if ever she set foot in England, she wou'd never be brought to leave it, had made Answer, That he wou'd willingly provide her with Ships, if he was assured of her Reception in Spain, and that France wou'd not take it ill: That Spain had de∣clar'd she was ready to receive her, but that the King cou'd not tell what to resolve upon, by reason of the great compassion he had for her; and that England wou'd not receive her but upon condition, that she wou'd not make any long stay there: That this poor Woman (for so the Cardinal thought fit to call her) had drawn these Misfortunes upon her self, by follow∣ing the Ill Advice of other People, and by her own obstinacy, which was so incurable, that she still pro∣tested, That she did not now, and never wou'd, repent of what she had done.
At last, after he had pretended to have a mighty Com∣miseration for her, he added, That England per∣haps might be induced to furnish her with Ships, in case she wou'd retire to some place, where His Ma∣jesties Clemency, and Filial Amity, might grant her some acts of Favour, without prejudicing the welfare of the State, and where the Cardinal might be able to procure them for her, as he passionately desired: That he cou'd scarce believe she design'd to tarry in Spain; and since she was deny'd Admission into Eng∣land, he cou'd not tell but that she might have some thoughts to pass into Florence, in case the Grand-Duke wou'd give her a Kind Reception. Upon this he Asked Gondi, Whether he cou'd give him any Light as to this Affair? And the Resident Answer'd, That he was wholly ignorant what the Queen's Intentions were, but that he durst venture to Assure him, that the Grand-Duke was wholly unacquainted with them: and that as there was not the least reason to doubt, but that the King Lov'd His Mother, no body had any occasion to be in any pain about her. The Cardinal Reply'd, That if the Queen was minded to return to her Na∣tive Country for a short time, till she had fully recon∣cil'd her Self to the King, it wou'd not be taken amiss of the Grand-Duke to receive her; and that the Queen's Conduct wou'd not be disapproved, since she wou'd be in a place where she then cou'd not abuse the kindnesses His Majesty show'd Her. The Cardinal added, That nevertheless, if the Queen once set foot in England, she wou'd not easily leave it. He wou'd not explain himself any farther, thinking it sufficient, that he had made an Overture which the Grand-Duke might make the best use of in time of necessity. He was resolved to come to no man∣ner of Accommodation with her, till he had effectually humbled her, and constrain'd her to do what he pleas'd. At present the onely trial of Skill was, to oblige her to depart out of the Dominions of Spain, and to endea∣vour to make her go to Florence, that so she might not prove an obstacle to any Treaty that they might make with Spain, according as an occasion should present it self. While she and Monsieur were in their Territo∣ries,
it wou'd be impossible to make a Treaty without comprehending them in it; and the Cardinal pretended that they should leave all to His Majesty's good plea∣sure, and give their consent for him to Punish those that had followed them. Thus all endeavours were used to make them quit the Spanish Territories. In the mean time the Prince of Conde was come back from Bruges, and the King sent him into Burgundy, to oblige the Parliament of Dijon to hasten the Trials of the Duke of Elbeuf, Puilaurens, Coudray Montpensier, and the other Domesticks of the Duke. They were Con∣demned to Die as Rebels, they were Executed in Effigie, and their Goods were Confiscated. Not long after,The 25th of Febr. Siri Mm. Rec. T. 7. p. 594. the King being at St. Germans, took away the Seals from Chateauneuf, who nevertheless had been a faithful drudge to the Cardinal, and had ex∣ercised several Arbitrary Acts of Violence to please him. As the causes of his Disgrace were not positively known, people fell upon several things which might contribute to ruine him. Some said, That he was in Love with the Dutchess of Chevreuse, and that he was Loved by her; that this made the Cardinal jealous, who was ex∣ceedingly offended at Chateauneuf, when he saw some Letters of his to that Dutchess, whereinL Morde∣vano, says Si∣ri, di cuto fra∣ido, à causa delle sue ma∣lattie hemor∣rhoidale. he Ridicul'd the Cardinal in very outrageous terms. They add far∣ther, That the Cardinal came to know, that he had Danced in a Ball at Bourdeaux, when he lay so dange∣rously ill there. 'Tis also pretended, that this Pre∣late being told, That he flatter'd himself with the hopes of arriving to be Chief Minister in a short time, and that he had formed certain Cabals for that end, he wou'd never pardon him this Ambition.Aubery's Life of the Cardinal, lib. 4. c. 36. However it was, the Seals were given to Peter Seguier, President of the Parliament, with a certain Promise to be made Chancellour, so soon as d' Aligre was dead. Chateau∣neuf was sent to the Castle of Angouleme, being accused of a Design to raise Disorders at Court. At the sameSiri, Ibid. p. 595. time they sent some of his Friends to the Bastile, and; among others, the Chevalier du Jars, who, as it was alledged against him, perswaded Monsieur and the Queen-Mother to retire into England. As they had no Proof of it, the Cardinal bethought himself of
an extraordinary stratagem, to discover, whether he was concern'd in this Affair or no. He not onely caused him to be put into Prison, but he engaged the Judges to ma∣nage his Trial, and Sentence him to have his head cut off, by giving them his word, that this Sentence shou'd not be put in Execution, but that the King shou'd Par∣don him, in case there were no Positive Proofs brought against him at his Trial. In pursuance of this he was Condemned, his Sentence was Read to him, and being upon the Scaffold, after he had said his Prayers, without making any Confession, and he had put himself in a po∣sture to receive the Stroke, they cryed out, A Pardon. As he was ready to come down, one of the Judges per∣swaded him, Since he had now tryed the King's Cle∣mency, to discover the Intrigues of Chateauneuf; but he courageously answer'd, That he very well saw, that some People were willing to take hold of his present circumstances, to make him say something disadvantage∣ous to his Friend; but that he ought to know, That since the terrible Image of Death had not made him speak, nothing was capable to extort from him the Se∣crets of his Friends, or any thing that might do them the least Injury. He was almost the onely Person, of all those whom the Cardinal brought to the Scaffold, that showed Resolution and Courage, the greatest part of the rest making him, as it were, an Honourable amends be∣fore they were Executed, under a pretence of dying like Christians. Christianity indeed obliged them to for∣give him, but by no means to approve of his Arbitra∣ry and Unjust Conduct, which was full as contrary to the Gospel, as a Spirit of Vengeance which they were afraid to betray. But the truth is, that after they had vainly endeavour'd to live like Freemen, they lost their Sentiments with their Liberty, and rather died like vile Slaves, than good Christians. When Chateauneuf was sent to Prison, the Mareschal d' Estrees, who was one of his best Friends, having re∣ceived the news of it at Treves, where he Commanded the King's Army, it so strangely astrighed him, that heThe 15th of March▪ Siri Mm. R. T. 7. p. 95. quitted the Army without saying a word, and re∣tired to Vaudervange. The example of the Mareschal de Marillac came into his Mind, when he heard of the Dis∣grace
of his Friend, and saw a Courier bring Letters to the other Officers, and never a one to himself. He imagin'd that Saludie and Busse-Lamet, to whom the Pacquet was directed, had Orders to Apprehend him. But discovering at last that his fear had been in vain, he sent a Gentleman four days after to the King and Cardi∣nal, to beg their Pardon for going away so abruptly, and ingenuously to confess, how he had been imposed upon by his Fear. This set the whole Court a Laughing, and he received Orders to return to Treves. At the same time the Dutchess of Chevreuse left the Court, by the King's Order, which made the World believe, that the Cardi∣nal's Jealousie was in great measure the cause of the disgrace of Chateauneuf. The King came to Paris on the 11th of April, and went next morning to the Parliament, to suppress the Office of President which Coigneux had, and that of Counsellour, enjoy'd by Payen, Chief: Secreta∣ry to the Queen-Mother, whom he afterwards restor'd in Compliment to the Two Masters of Accounts, whom the Cardinal favour'd exceedingly. Nevertheless the Law concerning Five years, which are allowed to those that were Condemned for Contumacy, was suffer'd to stay in full force, in respect of others, because it wou'd have given them too much trouble to make any Alterati∣ons in it. The King Censur'd the Company very se∣verely for presuming to send their Deputies a few days before to S. Germans, to desire him to re-call the President de Memes, whom the Cardinal had Banished. The King told them, That he wou'd take care to Chastise those that refused to obey him, and that if the Parliament wou'd not suffer the Magistrates that were subordinate to it to be remiss in the execution of its Orders, it was not just that a Soveraign should bear the disobedience of His Subjects: He added, That he wou'd be obey'd that very instant; and that for the future when he came to the Parliament, he ex∣pected the Four Presidents should come and receive him upon their knees without the door of the Chamber, as the Custom had been formerly. As for the President de Memes, instead of being set at liberty, and called home, he was Imprison'd in the Cittadel of Angers.
Thus the King hindred them from making any Remon∣strances to him, upon any occasion whatever, and stri∣ving to Reign more Absolutely than any of His Pedeces∣sors, he resigned himself entirely to all the Passions of his Minister, though they were never so unjust; so that it was not possible to open his eyes, and undeceive him. Soon after, the KingThe 14th of May, Aube∣ry's Life of the Card. Lib. 4.0.36. held a General Chapter of the Knights of the Holy Ghost, and gave the Ribbon to the Cardinals of Richlieu, and La Valette. They re∣ceived the Blew Ribbon standing, whereas the other Commandeurs, even Bishops, used to receive it kneeling. The King id the Cardinal a particular Favour, and asked him, Whether he desired to be Promoted before or after Vespers? and the next day when His Majesty made the New Knights, he sent him two or three Dishes from his own Table at every Service; and, to∣wards the end a Rock of Sweet-meats, out of which sprung an Artificial Fountain of Water. While these things happened within the Kingdom, the Cardinal used his endeavours to keep the House of Austria so well employ'd without, that it cou'd make no advantage of the Broils of the Queen-Mother, and Monsieur. The Marquiss de Feuquiers renew'd with ChancellourBy a Trea∣ty sign'd the 9th of April. Siri Mem. Rec. Tom. 7. p. 67. Oxenstiern at Hailbron the League which the Crown of France had made with the King of Swe∣den, and promis'd that his Daughter Christina should re∣ceive the yearly sum of a Million of Livres, to continue the War in Germany. The two Crowns oblig'd them∣selves to make no Treaty but with Common Consent, and to support all their Allies. I shall not stop at the particulars of this League, nor at the other Negotiations which the Ministers of France managed in Germany to Embarass the Emperour, and at the same time to lay hold of any fair opportunity to extend the Frontiers of France on that side. At the same time the Cardinal set his Engines at work to break off theSiri, Ibid. p. 655. Negotiation that was on foot at the Hague, between the States-General of the Ʋnited-Provinces, and the Envoys of the Spanish-Netherlands, concerning a second Truce between the King of Spain and the States-General. As there were abundance of great difficulties in the thing it self, it seem'd an easie
matter so to order Affairs, that the War might con∣tinue. Besides this, some of the Nobility of the Spa∣nish Low-Countries, who were discontented at the Go∣vernment, offer'd to deliver up to the King, Bouchain, Quesnoi, Avenes, and Landreci, places of great impor∣tance upon the Frontiers of Artois, and to make a gene∣ral Insurrection in the Country. The Malecontents re∣presented to the King, that if he lost so fair an opportu∣nity, he might perhaps be never able to recover it; and that those persons that were now disposed to throw themselves under his Protection, cou'd not be supposed to be able to live in a perpetual inquietue, and danger of being discover'd. The Cardinal told the King in Council, That Hen∣ry the 4th wou'd never have let slip such an occasion, but that regard must be had to the time: That the King was without Children, and that Monsieur the Presumptive Heir of the Crown, was in Flanders with the Queen-Mother: That the King's Constitution was not strong enough to engage him in a War, which wou'd exceedingly fatigue both his Body and Mind: That, upon this occasion, the Court must of necessity be at a great distance from Paris: That the King's Exchequer was exhausted: That the zealous Catho∣licks wou'd exclaim more than ever, that this War was carried on to favour the Hereticks: That they wou'd be obliged at the same time to keep up Considerable Armies in Champagne and Italy, because there was good reason to distrust the Dukes of Savoy and Lorrain: That it was the Genius of the French Nation to be e∣qually weary of War and Peace: That if the King was once engaged in a War, the Governours of the Provinces wou'd more easily declare for the Duke of Orleans: That the least ill success, as the loss of a Town, or a Battel, wou'd be enough to cause terrible Convulsions in the State: That in case His Majesty happen'd to fall sick, his Servants wou'd be lost to all intents; and therefore though it was probable that some Advantages were to be got by a Rupture with Spain, yet it wou'd be better to live in Peace, and be content with assisting their Enemies, that so they might not have them upon their hands: That the
Money which the Hollanders demanded, to continue the War against the Spaniards, was ready, so that now nothing remain'd to doe, but onely to take care to execute the Project they had propos'd, which was, that if the King wou'd send Six thousand Foot, and Six hundred Horse before Dunkirk, they wou'd send their Army and Fleet to Attack that place, as also to take Graveline, which they offered to deliver up to France: That nevertheless great care was to be taken least these Troops should occasion an open Rupture, and for that Reason it wou'd be better to send them by Sea, than by Land. The Baron de Charnace, Ambassadour to the States-General, offer'd them the Troops above-mention'd, and the Continuation of a Million of Livres for a year. The States made some difficulty at first to accept of these of∣fers; but not being able to adjust Affairs with the Spa∣niards, they grew weary of so tedious and tiresome a Negotiation. They gave certain Articles in Writing, to which they demanded to have an Answer in Fifteen days; and if this were not done, they declared they wou'd hear no mention of a Truce. Upon this the A∣gents of Spain desiring a longer time, the States rather chose to receive two thirds of a Million in ready Mo∣ney, which Charnace offer'd them, than to wait any lon∣ger for the uncertain Resolutions of the Spaniards. Thus the Dutch Army took the Field, and began the War afresh by the taking of Rimberg, which Surren∣dred on the 4th of June. In the mean time the Spa∣niards discover'd the Conspiracy that had been agitated by some of the Nobility in Flanders, who kept a secret Correspondence with the French, and by making Exam∣ples of some, kept the rest in their Duty. And now France (properly speaking) was neither in Peace, nor Open War with the House of Austria, and the Two Crowns were inclin'd to follow that side which carried the greatest Advantages with it. All this while the Spaniards and French crossed one anothers Designs by turns, as far as was possible; But the Count-Duke who Govern'd Spain, being nothing comparable in dexterity to the Cardinal-Duke, who was, as it were, the Soul of all the Counsels of France; the Affairs of
Spain went every day worse and worse. To prevent a Communication between the States of the House of Austria, the Duke of Rohan, who had Resided at Venice, e∣ver since the Peace was concluded with the Huguenots, had Orders sent him to repair to the Country of the Gri∣sons, in quality of the King's Ambassadour with those People, and of Lieutenant-General of the Troops that were design'd to be raised there, in order to secure himself of all the Passes of the Valteline. The Spani∣ards immediately complained of this Infraction, as well as of several others, and made a Proposal to France to enter into a Negotiation to prevent the dangerous consequences which a Misunderstanding might pro∣duce. The Cardinal openly declar'd to the Spanish Ambassadour, That France desired to see a General Peace establish'd upon sure foundations, and to preserve that which they had at present with Spain. He added, That the King was extreamly glad to hear that the Ambassadour had full Power to Treat; but the Am∣bassadour Answer'd, That he had no Commission to Propose any thing, but upon the Foot of the Treaties of Querasque and Ratisbone. The Nuncio's vainly Inter∣pos'd to Accommodate the Differences between the Two Crowns, and soon perceiv'd, that all these General Dis∣courses of a Peace, and a Good Understanding, which they pretended on both sides, were onely so many Dis∣courses in the Air, which were purposely Trum∣ped-up to gain Time, till they saw what Resolutions were to be taken. The Spaniards pretended, that the French, in case they design'd to observe the Treatics of Querasque and Ratisbone, ought to deliver up Pigne∣rol, to abandon Casal, and the Passes of the Valteline; to draw their Garrisons out of Treves, and other places, which they held in that Archbishoprick; to restore those which they had taken from the Duke of Lorrain, and to meddle no more with the Affairs of the Empire. To this the French Answer'd, That they were ready to recall the Troops they had in Montferrat, and in the Country of the Grisons, so soon as they were secured that the Governour of Milan wou'd not think any more either of seizing Cazal, or the Passes of the Valte∣line: That as for Pignerol, they had immediately put
the Treaty of Querasque into execution; and that if the Duke of Savoy had since sold it to the Crown of France, they cou'd not see what exceptions cou'd fairly be made against it, since the Spaniards were allow'd to buy Final and Monaco, and several other places, which depended neither upon the Kingdom of Naples, nor the Dutchy of Milan: That Pignerol was one of the De∣pendencies of Dauphine; and that since it was now re∣united to the Crown, the King wou'd never suffer it to be dismembred from it: That some of the places in Lorrain likewise were sold to the King, and others, by way of caution, intrusted in his hands for a certain time: That the Duke had been an enemy to himself, by de∣sgning a mischief to France, which cou'd not otherwise preserve her self from him: That as for what respect∣ed Triers, and some other places in that Arch-bishop∣rick, if they had not fallen into His Majesty's hands, they must of necessity have fallen into those of the Swedes; and that it was much better both for the Ca∣tholick Religion, as for several other Reasons, that they shou'd be in the hands of France: That the Elector had implored his Protection, when he saw his States upon the point of being lost, and the House of Austria cou'd not hinder it: That the King was very much grieved to see Germany in the condition it was in at pre∣sent, but that it was the consequence of the Invasion which the Spaniards design'd to make in Italy; and that nevertheless the King had interposed, as a Mediator, be∣tween the Swedes and the House of Austria, if he had seen that House in a disposition to have kept the Peace elsewhere, and not to make any Attempts against France. These were the Reasons which the Ministers of France made use of to justifie the King's Conduct in this con∣juncture; and, in the mean time, they forgot nothing which might irritate the Enemies of the House of Au∣stria against her. They promised the States-General of the Ʋnited-Provinces to carry on the War; and they sent Money to the Duke of Rohan to distribute among the Grisons who complained they were not paid, and to make new I evies, in order to secure the Passes. They complain'd in France, that the Duke of Lorrain made every day new Infractions of the Treaty of Liver∣dun.
It was said, That he raised Troops, and then disbanded them upon the Frontiers, that so they might pass into the Imperial or Spanish service; nay, that he gave them leave to make Levies in his Dominions. He had surprized Molseim, and ravag'd the Territory about Strasburg, Deuxponts, and Sarbruck. He had obtained Sa∣verne and Dachstein, for Payment (as 'twas pretended) of an old Debt of Two hundred thousand Crowns; but what offended the Cardinal the most, was, that it came to be known that ever since the preceding year, Monsieur had consummated his Marriage with the Princess Mar∣garet, second Sister to the Duke; which had been ma∣nag'd so secretly, that not so much as his Domesticks knew any thing of the matter.The 10th of June. The Count de Vaude∣mont, and the Princess of Phaltsburg had made up this Match; and it was a long while before it came to be discover'd. Although the Duke of Lorrain had wholly left all Correspondences that displeased the King, and especially that which he had formerly kept with the D. of Orleans, yet he had all along maintain'd it in pri∣vate; and the Cardinal who was resolv'd to bring Mon∣sieur to such a pass, that he must intirely depend upon him, and who looked upon him as the principal support of the Queen-Mother, cou'd not pardon those that assist∣ed him in any manner whatsoever. Things were in this condition, when the King sentAubery's Life of the Card Lib. 4. Cap. 37. Guron to the Duke of Lorrain, to reproach him with his Violations of the Treaty of Liverdun, and to de∣mand Satisfaction of him for it. The Duke being in∣form'd of his coming, conceal'd himself so well in Nan∣cy, where he made his Residence, that no body cou'd tell Guron where he was: So that this Envoy was obli∣ged to return to Metz, without delivering his Message. But soon after repenting of this unpolitick Trick, he sent Guron word, That he might find him such a day at Luxeville: however, when the Envoy of France came thither, he cou'd not bring him to any reasonable Terms. This made the King resolve to Treat him like a Re∣bellious Vassal, and to Confiscate his Dutchy of Bar, be∣cause he had not done Homage to the Crown for it. The Attorney-General, after he had Assign'd this matter
to the Parliament of Paris, pursu'd this Confiscati∣on, which he obtain'd by a Decree on the 30th of July. At this time the Neighbourhood of the Swedes fur∣nished the Duke with a pretence, to give out Commis∣sions to raise Eight thousand Foot, and Fifteen hundred Horse, hoping to be powerfully assisted by an Army of the Duke of Feria; who, crossing the Country of Lux∣emburg, had now joyn'd the Imperial Troops in Alsatia. Soon after, the Swedes intirely defeated the Lorrain Troops near d'Haguenau; and the Duke affrighted at this Accident, and the King's preparations, who March∣ed towards Lorrain at the Head of His Army, sent the Cardinal, his Brother, to meet His Majesty on the way, and appease Him. This Prince went as far asThe 19th of August Mem. Rec. T. 7. p. 66. Chateau-Thierry; where, on the very Night of his arrival he waited upon the King and Queen. Next day the Cardinal-Duke made him a Visit, and gave him abundance of civil words, but very small hopes as to the Affairs of the Duke his Bro∣ther. It was to no purpose that the Cardinal of Lor∣rain represented to him, That this Prince had an in∣tention to keep the Treaty of Liverdun, and as little did it signifie to excuse the Infractions they reproached him with. The Minister of Lewis the XIII. answer'd, That they were heartily sorry to find that the Effects did not agree with his Promises, and that the King being now upon a Journey, was not in a condition to hear any Talk of Business: That in a few days His Majesty wou'd arrive at Bar, and that the Duke of Lorrain might inform him nearer at hand, which of the two ways, either that of Gentleness, or that of Force he wou'd have employ'd against him, that they might be secure of him for the future. The Cardinal of Lorrain protested, that the Duke was ready to sur∣render all the Places he held in Alsatia to the King; but this was not sufficient: and, to satisfie them that he wou'd break his Word no more with them, it was propos'd, That a French Garrison shou'd be left in Nancy, the most considerable Place in all his Domini∣ons. Nay, the Cardinal his Brother offer'd to consent to the dissolution of the Marriage between his Sister
and the Duke of Orleans, and begg'd pardon for it. But the Cardinal-Duke told him, That this Repara∣tion did not equal the Injury that had been done to the King, and that His Majesty found himself oblig'd to put the Duke of Lorrain out of a condition of be∣ing worse than his Word for the future; that for this end it was necessary the King shou'd have Nan∣cy by way of Caution, which the Duke should forfeit for ever, that very moment he attempted any thing against France. The Cardinal of Lorrain reply'd; That this was all one as to propose to his Brother to lose the remainder of his Dominions, because such sort of Pawns are very rarely Deliver'd: That it wou'd be too mean-spirited a condescension in a Prince to stoop so low as voluntarily to strip himself of his Territories in the way of Negotiation; that it was too severe a Mortification to lose ones Honour and ones Country at the same time; and that let the War succeed never so ill, it was impossible for him to be a greater Suffer∣er: That Lorrain was the Half-way-House between France and the States of the House of Austria, and that the Dukes of Lorrain were consequently obliged in point of Interest, to preserve an Amity both with one and the other: That this caution which they pro∣posed, wou'd so highly provoke the Emperour, upon whom the Dukedom of Lorrain depended, that he wou'd confiscate it, and put it under the Imperial Ban, which might happen at a juncture, when the King of France being employ'd elsewhere, wou'd not be in a condition to support him. These Reasons, however specious they were, made no Impression upon the Cardinal-Duke, who was re∣solved to ruine the House of Lorrain. And so the Cardinal of Lorrain went, in all hast, the very same day, to carry this ill News to his Brother, and the King advanced with his Forces as he had given this Prince to understand. In the mean time the Cardinal-Duke advised the King not to lose this Opportunity of Conquering Lorrain, in case the Duke made the least difficulty to deliver up those places which they demand∣ed. The Cardinal arrived with the King at St. Dizier the 23d of August, upon the Frontiers of Champagne,
where the Cardinal of Lorrain sent him word, That if he wou'd give him his Niece Combalet in Marriage, his Brother and he wou'd consent to leave Nancy in the King's hand, because they should be then secure of its Restitution. Whether the Cardinal of Richlieu thought that this was onely a pretence, or that he had some o∣ther reason not to give his Assent to this Proposal; he thanked the Cardinal of Lorrain for the great honour he did him; and made Answer, That he should be sorry to have the World believe, that he had made the King go into Lorrain for his particular interest, as it wou'd be apt to believe, if he accepted the Honour which they did his Neice: That the Duke of Lor∣rain ought, before all things, to give the King satis∣faction; and, after that, His Majesty wou'd see whe∣ther this Marriage wou'd be advantageous for His Service, and take his Measures accordingly. In this juncture, the Cardinal-Duke represented to the King, That if he did not suddenly surprize the Duke of Lorrain, there wou'd be no likelihood of re∣ducing him in a long time: That Nancy was a con∣siderable place, regularly Fortifi'd, and not to be taken by force this Campagne: That it wou'd take up se∣ven or eight Months to reduce it by a Blockade, and that abundance of things might happen in that inter∣val: That a Peace might be made in Germany, and a Truce in Flanders, and that if it were so, the Spani∣ards wou'd be in a condition to make a powerful di∣version: That, to Block up Nancy, it wou'd require Twenty thousand Foot, and Three thousand Horse; besides that there must be a small Army to attend the King's Person, which wou'd demand a prodigious ex∣pence: That, on the other hand, to suffer tamely an Affront in State-matters, was the ready way to occa∣sion a greater: That Money was of no use to His Majesty, if he did not employ it for his Necessities; that is to say, to support his Reputation, or to enlarge his Dominions: That a Million of Gold was suffici∣ent to bear the extraordinary Expences of this Enter∣prise: That he cou'd never expect a fairer opportu∣nity; and that the War, which raged in all prs of Germany, made it impossible for her to prevent the
total ruine of the Duke of Lorrain, especially since in all appearance it seemed to be long-lived: That the Affairs of the Low-Countries were not any more incli∣ned to a Truce: That all great Enterprises have their Difficulties; but that this was attended with very few, the Duke not being able to make head with his Forces against those of His Majesty; and the Allies were so much busied for themselves, that they cou'd not come to his Relief: That the Duke wou'd be always in the same mind he was then, that is, devoted to the House of Austria, from which no considerations cou'd disen∣gage him, and that he onely wanted an opportunity to joyn with it to the detriment of France: That if the Duke was not ruin'd, the Marriage of the Duke of Or∣leans wou'd infallibly hold good, which wou'd be the occasion of an everlasting War. That a Man ought al∣ways to be upon his Guard, to protect himself not onely from open violence, but from the secret practi∣ses of others: That on the other hand, if the Duke was once ruin'd, the Marriage of Monsieur wou'd break of course; and that Puilaurens had told the Abbot of Elbene, That he should not be sorry to see him reduced to such a pass: That Puilaurens was too much an hum∣ble Servant to his Interest, and Monsieur had too little Resolution to stick to a Woman, by whom he should gain no advantage, and who besides wou'd be a charge to him: That by this means Monsieur wou'd be brought to a necessity to find out a way to get himself reconci∣led to the King, by offering to take another Wife; whereas so long as the Duke of Lorrain subsisted, Mon∣sieur wou'd never think of an Accommodation. That Nancy was the best Rampart which France cou'd oppose on that side to the Attempts of the House of Austria, and that she wou'd be deliver'd from all that she had rea∣son to apprehend from the Implacable hatred of the Duke of Lorrain, by taking this place. The King relishing the Cardinal's Reasons for the Con∣quest of Lorrain, advanced as far as Bar, where he left the Queen, and the other Ladies of the Court. From thence he Marched to Pont-a-Mousson, where he arrived on the 28th of August. In this Interval the Lorrain Re∣giment of Florenville, which wou'd have thrown it self in∣to
to Nancy, was defeated by the Marquiss de S. Chamond, whom the King sent before, with part of the Army, to Block up that place. The Cardinal of Lorrain also came to Pont-a-Mousson, where he offer'd the King to put into his hands for Security, Saverne, Dachstein, and la Mothe, with the Person of the Princess Margaret. The King accepted the latter; but, instead of the Places that were offer'd him, he still demanded Nancy, which was infinitely of greater importance. At last the Cardinal of Lorrain told Richlieu, That the Duke of Lorrain was so unfortunate, that he cou'd not engage His Majesty to repose any confidence in him, he was resolv'd to Resign his Dominions to him the Car∣dinal of Lorrain, in case the King approved of it. Rich∣lieu Answer'd, That he did not believe the King wou'd oppose this Resignation, if the Duke was fully resolved to put it in Execution; and, that he, for his part, had reason to wish it might be so, his past-con∣duct giving them hopes that he wou'd be better affect∣ed towards France; but, the Mischief on't was, that this remedy was uneffectual, because as the Duke was of a wavering and fickle temper, he might take a Fan∣cy to reasume his Dominions, which wou'd be an easie matter for him to effect by recovering Nancy, at a jun∣cture when the King happened to be employ'd else∣where. The Cardinal of Lorrain found by this, that it was not possible to save Nancy. It was some time ago since he had demanded a Passport of the King to come and go, and fetch his Domesticks and Equipage out of the City: The King had granted it him, and the Duke his Bro∣ther, and he having consider'd, that the Princess Mar∣garet being the principal occasion of the War, might be in danger, if Nancy was taken while he was there; they resolved to contrive her escape out of the City, and afterwards out of Lerrain, to send her into Flanders to her Husband. The Cardinal of Lorrain got her disguis'd in Man's Apparel, and carried her in his Coach out of the Town. At last an old Gentleman, and two Soldiers drest up like Lacqueys, conducted her through several Quarters of the Royal Army, without meeting any stop by the
way; and after they had Travell'd a Dozen Leagues in the Night, they arriv'd by break of day at Thionville, a place belonging to the King of Spain. From thence she Writ to the Infanta, to the Queen-Mother, and to Monsieur, to demand a Guard, and an Equipage she had occasion for, to come to Brussels. The Duke of Orleans received this News with wonderful joy, and the Queen-Mother was no less pleas'd, although she lived in no very good understanding with him, because she imagin'd that having a Daughter-in-Law wholly opposite to the Cardinal's Party, she should, at last, Triumph over all his Artifices. They sent to this Princess all she de∣manded, and Monsieur went to meet her as far as Na∣mur. The King being at S. Nicholas, where he arrived tho 24th of that Month, received Advice, That the Princess Margaret had made her escape into Flanders, in the manner as I have already related it. This News ex∣ceedingly displeased him as well as the Cardinal, whe∣ther for the consequences which might attend the flight of this Princess, or because it vexed them to be Tricked by the Cardinal of Lorrain, in whose Integrity they had reposed a Confidence. 'Tis true, S. Chamond had been ordered to examine all the Cardinal's Coaches, but that, wherein the Princess was, passed by one Morning before he was up, and was not at all Examin'd. The King being angry at this Trick that was play'd him, sent Word to the Cardinal of Lorrain, That since the Negotiation was broke, he design'd that the Passports he had given him shou'd be Revoked; and that if he tarried in the City, he must expect to be made a Pri∣soner of War. However, the King gave him leave to come to Neufville; where the Cardinal of Lorrain con∣fessed to him, That he had contributed to his Sister's Escape; but then he assured him, That she was still in the Dominions of the Duke his Brother, and that he might dispose of her Person. Next day they learnt the quite contrary News, and Nancy being Invested on all sides, they began to Work on the Lines of Circumvallation and Contravallation, because they were afraid the Siege wou'd last a long while, and that the Duke of Feria and Aldringuen wou'd
come to releve the place. But the Duke of Lorrain, who was of a light and changeable disposition, had not pro∣vided for the Defence of this City, though the preser∣vation or loss of his Dominions absolutely depended up∣on it. Thus, after some Proposals, to no purpose, the Cardinal his Brother was obliged to Sign a Treaty on the 6th of September, by which he promis'd to deliver Nancy with∣in three days into the King's hands, to keep such a Gar∣rison there as he shou'd think fitting, till such time as his own good Behaviour, or the Peace of Germany should convince His Majesty, that he had nothing to apprehend on that side. He consented besides, That the Marri∣age age of the Princess Margaret should be declared null, in all the Forms, and that within Fifteen days she should be put into His Majesty's hands, who had agreed, that she shou'd tarry at Nancy, that he might inform himself upon the place, of all the Circumstances of her Mar∣riage. The Cardinal of Lorrain desir'd permission of the King, to goe and find out the Duke his Brother, that he might Ratifie this Treaty. In the mean time the King took Charmes, and the Duke retired to Remire∣mont, from which place he sent his Brother back again to the King, to endeavour to gain as much time as he cou'd. But the Succours he expected not coming, he had a mind to go and Treat in Person with the King, an Indiscretion scarce to be parallel'd in History. To this end having demanded a Passport, which was imme∣diately granted him, he arrived at Charmes on the 18th of September with 800 Horse. There he Negotiated for the space of Three days with the Cardinals of Rich∣lieu and Bich, who manag'd him so dexterously, that on the Third he Ratifi'd the Treaty in the form they desi∣red. It was agreed that Nancy should continue in the King's hands for Four years; however, with this pro∣viso, That if the Duke deliver'd up the Princess Mar∣garet to the King in Three Months, and consented that her Marriage was Null from that very moment; and besides, if he observed the rest of the Treaty, which confirmed that of Vic, the King should then surrender Nancy, without farther delay, after he had demolish'd
the Fortifications of the place, if he should so think fit. The Duke promis'd that he wou'd do all that lay in his power to get his Sister out of Monsieur's hands, and deliver her to the King. In the mean time this short-sightedPotis Mem. T. 2. p. 38. Prince imagin'd, That after he had paid the Cardinal thus with fine words, he might retire without putting Nancy actually into the hands of the King. He had forbidden the Marquiss de Mauy, who Commanded in that place for him, to o∣pen the Gates; whatever Letters he might Write to him, unless he saw a certain Mark, which they had a∣greed upon. Thus although he Writ to have the Gates open'd to the King's People, yet since the Mark was not in the Letter, the Governour refus'd to obey. The Car∣dinal who was more cunning than he, had, at first, some Suspicion of him, that he design'd to withdraw; and, under a pretence of Treating him like a Great Prince, the King set his own Guards upon the House where he Lodg'd. The Duke was sensible of it; and they made no difficulty to tell him the Reason of it; so that having no hopes to escape, he Writ to Nancy, and sent the Mark in the Letter. The King's Garrison enter'd the Town on the 24th of September, seized all the considerable Posts, built a sort of a Fort upon the Bastions of the old City, and disarm'd the Inhabitants, who were too well-affected to the Duke. It was of the highest impor∣tance for the King to have Nancy in his hands, as to the Affairs of Germany; and the Duke of Lorrain was for∣ced by this Surrendry to comply for the future with whatever France Proposed. While the Cardinal-Duke stay'd at Charmes, he was desirous to see, whether the offer which the Cardinal of Lorrain had made him about Marrying his Neice, was sincere. For this end he show'd extraordinary Civili∣ties to Chamvallon, who had appear'd very zealous to have the Match concluded, that so he might engage him to reassume this Negotiation. As the Prince of Lorrain, when he threw up his Cardinal's-Cap, wou'd be like∣wise oblig'd to resign all the Ecclesiastical Benefices he possess'd; so it was convenient on the other side, that he should have an Estate sufficient to support his Dignity.
The Cardinal-Duke promis'd to give his Neice a vast Portion, and to make her his Heir of the greatest part of his Wealth; and therefore he expected that the Duke of Lorrain shou'd settle upon his Brother Land, to the value of a Hundred thousand Crowns a year, that so he might be enabled to bear the Title of Duke, which, together with the above-mention'd Revenue, shou'd descend to the Issue of the Cardinal of Lorrain, even though the Duke shou'd happen to have Children. If the Duke wou'd consent to this, the Cardinal of Richlieu oblig'd himself to employ all his Interest with the King, to get the Dutchy of Bar surrendred to him, for which he shou'd do homage, not in the Name of his Wife, as it had been pretended, but as Rightful Heir; however, with this proviso, that he shou'd immediately after sur∣render up this Dutchy to his Brother; that he shou'd as∣sign him the Hundred thousand Crowns upon its De∣pendancies; and that in case it was not enough to make up that Sum, he shou'd annex some Neighbouring-Lands: as on the other hand, if it was more than e∣nough, the over-plus shou'd belong to him. The Car∣dinal wou'd not speak to the King about this Affair himself, but he got it to be proposed by the other Mini∣sters of State, and its probable it had succeeded, if the Duke of Lorrain cou'd have been prevail'd upon to cut off so considerable a part of his Dominions, as that was, which they demanded of him. But so soon as the King had made himself Master of Nancy, and re-ta∣ken the way to Paris, this Negotiation was interrup∣ted. It seems that ever since the Spring,Siri Mem. Rec. T. 7. p. 679, &c. the Cardinal had some thoughts of sending the Queen-Mother into Italy, and that the Duke of Florence had exprest himself, that he was ready to invite her to come and live with him, if the King thought it convenient: But the Cardinal ob∣serving, that the War was begun afresh in the Low-Coun∣tries, with as much fury as ever, changed his Mind, be∣cause from that moment he ceased to fear the Spaniards, and believ'd that this Princess wou'd onely perplex their Affairs, by tarrying in their Country. She continued Indisposed all the Summer, and the King sent frequently to visit her, as well to discover their designs, as to pay
that respect to her in appearance, which he cou'd not in honour omit. This gave occasion to the Queen-Mo∣ther to Write to the King, and speak of a Reconciliati∣on; but as she was so far from adjusting matters with the Cardinal, that she hardly ever mention'd him with∣out Injurious Language, there were small hopes that she should see her Son again. Puilaurens also made some Proposals of an Accommo∣dation, to obtain the Return of Monsieur? He procu∣red the Abbot of Elbene to demandSiri Mem. Rec. T. 7. p. 633 of the Cardinal the meanest of his Relations, and promised to do all that lay in his Power to engage Monsieur to return to his Du∣ty. But the Marriage of this Prince with the Princess Margaret, put a stop to these Negotiations, and the King solemnly declared this Alliance to be null, as having been contracted without his consent. The King, at his return from Lorrain, made someIn the Mnth of October. stay at Metz, and during this time the new Parliament of that City condemned one Alfeston to be broke on the Wheel alive. He had confess'd, it seems, that he had a Design to kill Cardinal Richlieu, if he passed through such a place. It was not long since he came from Brus∣sels, with two more in his Company, who had belonged to the Queen-Mother's Guards; nay, the Horse he rode upon came out of her Stables. 'Tis said, That as he was going to the place of Punishment, he accused Fa∣ther Chanteloube, and the Parliament summon'd him with some more. At the same time, under pretence of Respect to the Queen-Mother, but in effect to defame her, they sent her the Horse back again, and desired her, in His Majesties Name, not to suffer any such wicked designs to be laid in her House for the future; because that be∣sides the Person of the Cardinal was insinitely dear to him; such profligate wretches, as this was, were capable of making several attempts of the like nature. This was an effectual course to improve that Animosity which was already too great, because Father Chanteloube was the Principal Confident of the Queen-Mother. However, to secure the Cardinal'sAubery's Life of the Cardinal, lib. 4. c. 47. Life from any such Attempts, the King gave him, besides the Guards he had already assign'd him, a Company of an Hundred Musqueteers, whom he chose out of a great number of Persons that came to offer him their Service.
It was belev'd that the Cardinal did not in the least desire the Queen-Mother's return to Court, since after what had pass'd between them he cou'd not expect to sand over-secure, if that Princess came there again. On the other hand, Father Chanteloube, who had a mind to make his advantage of that Favour she showed him, ad∣vised her to stay in Flanders, or at least somewhere out of France, till they offer'd her honourable conditions, such as they had done some years before, by the Treaty of Angouleme. It was no difficult matter for him to, per∣swade the Queen, who passionately desir'd it, that the King wou'd at last be constrain'd to come to her Terms. The Cardinal, on the contrary, who was inform'd of eve∣ry thing that pass'd, counsell'd the King to stick inflexi∣bly to his Resolutions, since His own Authority was so nearly concern'd, which wou'd sensibly diminish, if he once permitted the Queen His Mother to Capitulate with Him, or gave her leave to return on any other con∣ditions than as she entirely rely'd upon his Generosity. But as it was Scandalous to keep this Princess so long out of the Kingdom, and the King sometimes selt a Re∣morse upon that score, the Cardinal told him, That he ought not onely to remember, that he was a Son, but also that he was a King, and that he lay under greater obligations to procure the repose and tranquility of his Kingdom, than to satisfie the Passions of the Queen His Mother. By this Maxim which took it for granted, that the Wellfare of the State was incompatible with satisfy∣ing the demands of Maria de Medicis, he hindred the King from suffering himself to be touched by those Sen∣timents which Nature implants in all Children towards their Parents. FatherSiri, Ibid. p. 698. Joseph discoursing one day with Gondi, told him, much about this time, That if the Queen-Mother wou'd return, the must give Security to the King before∣hand, that she wou'd not attempt any thing in the Kingdom against His Majesty's Service, which necessa∣rily demanded, that the Cardinal shou'd continue in the Ministry. When once this Security was given, Father Joseph did not question but the King wou'd pay her all manner of Respect, and that he wou'd show her the same Acknowledgments as he had ever done when he
was most in her favour. Father Joseph made this secu∣rity to consist in the Queen's wholly abandoning her Servants, but especially Father Chanteloube, to the King's Justice, after which she was to leave her self to his dis∣cretion. He fansied, that His Majesty, so soon as he saw her discard those People, who had all along sug∣gested ill Counsel to her, wou'd treat her with all the Kindness that she cou'd desire from a Respectful Son. Now it was so Infamous for a Princess, as the Queen-Mother was, to Sacrifice her most Ancient Servants after this blind manner, to the Cardinal's Revenge, and of so dangerous an example to all those that might hereafter attempt to serve her, that 'twas believ'd she wou'd ne∣ver be induc'd to consent to it, and that they propos'd it to her with no other prospect, but to make her de∣spair of a Reconciliation. Towards the beginning ofThe 3 Si∣ri, Ibid. p. 699. November, she sent Vil∣liers S. Genet to the King, in appearance to Congratulate him upon His happy return from Lorrain, but, in effect, to see if there was any way left to induce His Majesty to consent to Her return upon tolerable conditions, be∣cause she was weary of that disrespectful Treatment, which she received from Monsieur and Puilaurens. The Gentleman whom she sent upon this Message, had Audi∣ence of the KingThe 6th of Novemb. immediately, and told him, He was ordered by the Queen to complain to His Ma∣jesty of Monsieur's disrespectful behaviour to Her, since he daily put some affront or other upon Her: That she was certainly perswaded that he did not do this of his own proper Inclination, but onely by the Advice of Pui∣laurens: That she beseeched the King to take care of His health, not onely for the Love of the Queen, but likewise for the Love of Her; since she wou'd rather choose to die, than fall under the Tyranny of Puilau∣rens. That she desired His Majesty to believe, that she had no share in the Enterprizes of Monsieur, and that his last Expedition into Languedoc was without Her knowledge. The King Answer'd, That he was extreamly sorry at the Ill Treatment the Queen His Mother received from the Duke of Orleans; but that she had never fallen into these Inconveniences if she had followed his good
Advice, and that of her most faithful Servants: That he formerly believed that she had a Kindness for him, but that since she had discover'd so much Ill-will to∣wards him, he cou'd hardly perswade himself that she had really that Affection for him as she pretended: That he knew well enough how far she was concern'd in the Affair of Languedoc, since she had Pawn'd her Jewels to furnish the Rebels with Arms: That it af∣flicted him to see there was no Security for Him in France, if his Mother returned thither, since those dis∣affected Persons, that were about her, began to Cabal more than ever. At last he enquired of Villiers, If he had any Orders to see the Cardinal? Villiers answer'd, No: but said, That if he met him, he wou'd not fail to pay his Re∣spects to him, although the Queen was still incens'd a∣gainst him. The King reply'd, That if it was true that this Princess loved her Eldest Son, as she said she did, she wou'd likewise love the Cardinal for the signal Services he had done the Crown since the Reduction of Rochelle; but that so long as she kept such People as Chanteloube, and Madam du Fargis about her, it was to no purpose to expect any Reconciliation. Upon this Villiers said, That the Queen knew du Targis for what she was va∣luable: and the King answer'd, That she was one of those Vipers of Lyons, who, together with the Duke of Bellegarde, Marillac the Keeper of the Seals, and such like blessed Instruments, had seduced the Queen-Mother into all these Inconveniences. It was discover'd by Villiers's Discourse, that the Q. Mother was really provok'd against Puilaurens, from which 'twas thought this advantage might be drawn as to oblige him to return to his duty, and to make more modest demands for his Master; and, at the same time, it was no less plain that she was enraged against the Cardinal.Siri Mem. Rec. T. 7. p. 699. However she sent to acquaint the King, in Answer to some Proposals she had receiv'd from France, That to let him see how well she loved him, and to faci∣litate an access for those persons whom she wou'd send to him, she was willing to forget all the ill Offices the Cardinal had done her, nay, even to have an Affection for him, in consideration of His Majesty: That neverthe∣less
she wou'd not be forced to part with the meanest Servant she had, and much less with Father Chanteloube, who had faithfully served her in things of the greatest Importance, but that he wou'd quit her Service of his own accord, as soon as ever the King commanded him to do so: That if she might be so happy as to procure an Accommodation, she wou'd manage it by her self, without appearing in the Affairs of Monsieur; and that Puilaurens had told her, That she might do so if she pleas'd. The King, before he dismiss'd Villiers, told him, That he was heartily sorry at the Vexations which the Queen his Mother had met in Flanders; but that if she imparti∣ally examin'd her self, she wou'd soon find, that she a∣lone was the occasion of them: That if she wou'd de∣liver her Evil Counsellors up to him, in order to their Punishment, as they deserv'd, and love the true Servants of the Crown, as she was in duty oblig'd, then there wou'd be no room to suspect that she continued longer in the evil disposition that possessed her when she left France: That Chanteloube had Written, That she wou'd never be reconcil'd; and, in one of his Letters (which had been sent to the King) had made Merry with the Visit which he (meaning Villiers) had made him; and that while the Queen encourag'd such a notorious Hy∣pocrite as he was, it cou'd not be imagin'd that her in∣tentions were sincere. All the King's Discourses, as also those of the Cardinal's Creatures, tended to the same purpose; which was, That the Queen-Mother shou'd abandon all her Domesticks to the Indignation of the Minister, and receive others of his Nomination, before any thing was concluded: But they did not believe that this Princess, who was full as haughty and obstinate as the Cardinal, wou'd ever make such low condescensions. If the King spoke ill of Father Chanteloube, the Queen was not behind-hand with him in railing at the Car∣dinal; and by the means of the Abbot of S. Germain her Secretary, she publish'd every day bitter Satyrs a∣gainst him, several Volumes of which are still ex∣tant.
Towards the end of the year, * the Cardinal of Lor∣rain came to Paris about his Brother's Affairs, and to Treat of his own Marriage with the Neice of Cardinal Richlieu.Siri, Ibid. P. 103. The Prince of Lorrain show'd a mighty de∣sire to come to a speedy conclusion, because the Interest of his Family requir'd it. He obtain'd permission of the Unkle to visit his Neice, whom he found to be extreamly agreeable; So that now nothing more was left to doe than to come to Conditions on both sides. Richlieu positively stuck to it; That the Cardinal of Lorrain shou'd have a Hundred thousand Crowns per Annum settled upon him; and the Cardinal of Lorrain Articled, That in consideration of this Marriage, they shou'd restore all the Places that had been taken from his Brother, and leave every thing in the same condition as they found it. The House of Lorrain hoped by this Match to be able to engage the King to own the Mar∣riage of Monsieur with the Princess Margaret as good and valid. But upon these Matters great difficulties arose on both sides. The Duke of Lorrain had an inexpressible aversion to France, and to the Cardinal, which was the reason why they treated him so severely; and was not of a temper to embrace any Party, merely upon the account of its being the safest. He had likewise great Disputes about the Confines of his Country with France, which did her self Justice by force of Arms. The Cardinal of Lorrain had been Promis'd long before to a Princess of his own Family, and Sister to the Durchess; who, if the other March went forward, must be sent to a Monastery. On the other side, it was not very reputable for the King, after he had been at so prodigious an Expence, and had made so great a bustle, to surrender all back again to the Duke of Lorrain, only in consideration of making an Advantageous Marriage for the Neice of his Chief Mi∣nister. Besides, the Cardinal had reason to fear, that the World wou'd surmise that he concluded his own Affairs at the King's Expence; and that His Majesty wou'd entertain some jealous thoughts at his designing the Grandeur of his Family. The Marriage too of the Duke of Orleans was no small obstacle, since it was not probable, that they wou'd wholly reconcile themselves
to the House of Lorrain, and, at the same time continue to carry on the total destruction of it. However, this Alliance seemed so advantageous to the Cardinal, that 'twas generally believ'd he desir'd it, al∣though he answer'd the Prince of Lorrain coldly enough, That his Neice was obstinately resolv'd to embrace a Re∣ligious Life; and that it was not possible for him to al∣ter her Inclinations. But this was only an Artifice to secure himself the more of the Princes of Lorrain, whom he looked upon not to be so cordial in this Affair as he desired, to endeavour, if he cou'd obtain of them, more Advantageous Conditions; but, above all, to see whether the House of Lorrain wou'd yield to deposite their best Places in the King's hands. The Cardinal of Lorrain perceiving Richlieu's design, resolved to use the same Policy, and seem'd to be indifferent on his side, by pre∣tending to go to Lorrain, to know his final Resolution there; though at the same time he did not discontinue to sollicit this Affair privately at Court. If they came to a conclusion, he hoped, by that means, to procure bet∣ter Conditions; and if the Negotiation happen'd to be wholly broke off, the Cardinal cou'd not complain of the House of Lorrain, which had done him the honour to ask his Neice in Marriage. As he was ready to de∣part, the Cardinal-Duke sent him word, That in a Months time he shou'd receive a Positive Answer, whe∣ther Madam de Combalet resolved to Marry the second time or no. All the World was sensible, that if her Un∣kle had thought it expedient for her to Marry again, and especially one that was a Prince, she wou'd never have wanted much entreaty; but the Reasons above-men∣tion'd stood in the way, and hindred this Marriage from being concluded so hastily. The Cardinal of Lor∣rainThe 20th of December. parted at last without coming to any determinati∣on as to the Marriage: he onely carried to the Duke his Brother the Restitution of the Revenues of the Dutchy of Bar, and a Prorogation of Two Months for him to do Homage to the King for them. All this while the Queen-Mother lived in no great amity with the Duke of Orleans, through the indiscreet management of Father Chanteloube and Puilaurens, who, in stead of reconciling them, made the breach wider, and
set them at a greater distance. Thus the Mother and the Son, who were incapable of finding out of themselves what was their true Interest, became the sport of their Favourites, who engaged them in all their quarrels and caprices. But it happen'd unfortunately for the Queen-Mother and Gaston, that the Persons that manag'd them, fell infinitely short of Lewis's Minister in Politicks, although perhaps they were not inferiour to him in Malice. The Queen-Mother who had consent∣ed to the Match of the Princess Margaret, prevail'd with her to perswade her Husband to Discard Puilaurens, whom this Lady, for her part, did not love, because he had talked of getting her Marriage dissolved. But the Duke of Orleans wou'd not hear any mention of it, al∣though they represented to him, That the Cardinal had half-gained him over to his Party. 'Tis certain, that Minister had promised him one of his Relations to se∣cure him against all dangers he might apprehend, upon condition he wou'd influence Monsieur absolutely to throw himself upon the King's Bounty, of which they promis'd he should find very surprising effects. But they chiefly desired that he wou'd submit to His Majesty's good Pleasure, in relation to his Marriage, either by deli∣vering his Spouse into his hands, conformable to what her Brothers had Promised, or by leaving her in Flan∣ders, if she wou'd not follow him into France. It was likewise insisted upon, That Puilaurens shou'd wholly disengage him from the Interests of the Queen-Mo∣ther, as well as of the Spaniards. Puilaurens had, in a great measure, brought over the Duke of Orleans to what was demanded of him; but, as this Prince was not able to conceal it from his Wife and his Mother, the Queen reproached him with so scanda∣lous a Treaty, wherein Puilaurens onely consider'd how to obtain the Cardinal's Favour, to the great prejudice of his Master. Puilaurens perceiving that the Duke had changed his opinion, attributed this Alteration to Father Chanteloube, and the Queen-Mother, with whom he talked about it with that Insolence which was pe∣culiar to him, but they requited his Language as he deserved.
The Spaniards openly espoused the Party of the Prin∣cess Margaret, whom they received as the Wife of the Duke of Orleans, and for whom they had been at a great expence, as well as for him: But the Infanta happen∣ing to die at thisTe 1st of cem. time, obliged them to think of other things. However it was perceived plainly enough, that Monsieur was weary of Flanders, and the Queen-Mo∣ther and Madam were afraid that this inconstant Prince wou'd abandon them at the first opportunity. The Cardinal who was fully inform'd of all,Siri Mem. . T. 7.  70.  1th of Dcm. Sum∣mon'd a Council before the King, to Advise what Mea∣sures were to be taken in this conjuncture, and whether the King ought to be reconcil'd to the Queen his Mo∣ther, or to the Duke of Orleans. This Minister, ac∣cording to his custom, made a long Harangue to per∣swade His Majesty, That it was his Interest to grant no satisfaction either to one, or the other. He told him, That the Queen-Mother had appeared long ago ill-af∣fected to the State: That before she left France the King had offer'd her very reasonable Terms of Recon∣ciliation, as Places, Governments, and so forth, by which she might easily perceive, that he had no inten∣tion to use her with any Rigour: That nevertheless she had fled to the declared Enemies of the Crown, which she had never done, but out of a Principle of Revenge, and because she never design'd to come to a∣ny sort of Accommodation: That she cou'd not be ignorant that her joyning with the Duke of Orleans wou'd displease the King, and that all good Frenchmen must blame her for having recourse to the Spaniards: That since she had broke through all these considerati∣ons, it was a sure Indication, that she had an implaca∣ble hatred to France: That her Actions notoriously contradicted her words, in which she protested that she had no design against the State, but that she was full of Dissimulation, as visibly appear'd in the whole Conduct of her Life: That it wou'd be no advan∣tage to the King to be Reconciled with her, and call her home; but that on the contrary, several great Incon∣veniences might happen upon it, because it wou'd be then a harder matter to perswade Monsieur to return: That her falling out with him and his Domesticks,
was the most forcible Reason that induced Puilaurens to advise his Master to avoid those places, where he might find the ill effects of the Mortal hatred of that Princess, and therefore if she came into France, Puilau∣rens wou'd have the less inclination to carry the Duke of Orleans thither: That, supposing Monsieur wou'd not, upon this, be unwilling to return, yet they were likely to gain nothing by his coming home, since it might easily so happen, that the Queen and he wou'd joyn afresh together for the better execution of their wicked designs: That the King wou'd find it a har∣der matter to Marry Monsieur again to whom he pleas'd, and principally to the Princess Mary of Conzaga, for whom the Queen-Mother had an invincible aversion: That the Tranquillity of the Kingdom wou'd be more endanger'd, since those that had harbour'd any ill de∣signs wou'd certainly go and communicate them to the Queen-Mother, whom they knew to be of a resolute and revengeful temper, whereas they durst not repose any confidence in the Duke of Orleans, who was known to be inconstant: That the King wou'd not have the same Peace of Mind, nor be in the same security as to his Person: That he wou'd not be obey'd so punctu∣ally, since the ill-affected wou'd hope to be supported by the Queen-Mother: That the Lives of His Ma∣jesty's Servants wou'd be in greater danger, because it wou'd be an easier matter to destroy them near at hand, than afar off: That though the Queen-Mother and Monsieur were both of them to morrow in France, per∣fectly satisfy'd by the King, as to both their particu∣lars, and a Misunderstanding still continu'd between them, it was certain that in three Months time they would be discontented, and wou'd as certainly reunite in their discontents; whereas if Monsieur was in the Kingdom, and the Queen out of it, it wou'd be difficult for them to maintain any great correspondence together. In this Advice we find the Cardinal's Interest con∣founded, with that of the King and Kingdom; but we must do him the Justice to allow his Reasonings to be solid enough, if we set down the word Cardinal all ∣long where he makes mention of France, or of the King. The design of it manifestly tended to keep the Queen-Mother
at least out of the Kingdom: but as it wou'd have been too odious to publish to all the World, that her Son wou'd never be reconciled to her. The Council, in appearance, concluded the contrary; but, at the bot∣tom, 'twas the same thing, because they knew well e∣nough, that this Princess wou'd not stoop so low as to do what they resolved to demand of her. It was there∣fore pretended, That if the Queen-Mother wou'd con∣vince all People, that she had no hand in the Assassinates, which some of her Servants had projected, by deliver∣ing the Authors of these Pernicious Counsels to Justice, the King wou'd give her leave to return into France, put her in full possession of her Jointure, and permit her to live in any of her Houses that were at a distance from the Court. As for what related to Monsieur, the Cardinal observ'd, That this Prince's Absence was at present Advantage∣ous to His Majesty; but that the longer he tarried a∣mong the Spaniards, with whom he daily contracted a greater Friendship, the more it was to be feared, that he wou'd, one day, destroy in a moment, what had been doing for several years, with no little difficulty, for the welfare of the State: That however these ills were at a distance, whereas the Mischief which he might occasion, if he lived in France, and was ill-af∣fected to it, as he certainly was, wou'd be felt present∣ly; That if Monsieur came back into France, upon those Conditions the King had offer'd him, which, as they were honourable to himself, so they were not pre∣judicial to France, his return wou'd be advantageous to the Kingdom; but that there was a great deal to fear, and but little to hope, if he came back upon those Terms, which Puilaurens had insisted upon the last Summer, viz. the Government of Auvergne, and Macon, to be the Residence of Monsieur and his Hou∣shold; because that then this Prince wou'd be in a con∣dition to give the Spaniards an entrance at any time in∣to the Kingdom, who wou'd be glad of such an oppor∣tunity; That, if matters were so, they must lay aside all thoughts of attacking any of their Neighbours, ei∣ther to enlarge the Kingdom, or to assist the Confede∣rates of the Crown, because it was always to be fear'd,
that the Spaniards wou'd make some Irruption on that side; and, that though they did not break in upon them, yet they wou'd cause so many alarms there, that their hands wou'd be effectually tied up, without ha∣ving any just pretence to complain of them; That the disaffected wou'd take fresh courage, and fall upon new designs. In fine, the Cardinal concluded, that it wou'd be better to leave Monsieur where he was, than to receive him upon those conditions which he de∣manded. However, he at last proposed, Whether one might not, in Justice and Equity, nay, with honour and advan∣tage to the State, Promise Puilaurens, that Monsieur and he should reside at Macon, in order to draw him into France, and afterwards send this latter to Prison, in stead of keeping their word with him. As for the equity of the thing, the Cardinal was of opinion it cou'd never be question'd, since Puilaurens had been engag'd in such Mischievous Designs against the State; but then he said, His Majesty's Honour wou'd receive an irreparable loss, if he broke his Word upon this occasion. He ad∣ded, That such a procedure wou'd be so far from do∣ing them any service, or helping to counter-balance the detriment which the King's Reputation must neces∣sarily suffer by breaking his Word, that it wou'd draw after it several fatal consequences, since if Puilaurens was Imprison'd, they wou'd be oblig'd to apprehend Monsieur, which was not practicable: That if this Prince came to leave the Kingdom afresh, he wou'd ne∣ver return, whatever Promises were made him, after he had been once deceiv'd: That then he wou'd reu∣nite himself more firmly than ever with the Queen-Mother, from whom Puilaurens kept him at as great a distance as he cou'd; and that by her Inducements and Perswasions he wou'd become of an Irreconcilea∣ble temper: That if it was alledg'd, That upon the Imprisonment of Puilaurens, Monsieur must be desi∣red to keep within a certain place which shou'd be As∣sign'd him, and from which they should take care that it wou'd not be possible for him to stir; besides, that this was infinitely easier to be said than done, they wou'd gain no advantage by it for the present, but run
the risque of losing all for the future: That at present the King desir'd Monsieur to break off his Marriage with the Princess Margaret of Lorrain, and Marry the Princess of Mantua; yet if this Prince were apprehend∣ed, neither one nor the other cou'd be done, since the World wou'd say with reason, That he was not free: That thus his Marriage with the former wou'd be con∣firmed by it, in stead of being dissolved: That for the future, those that served His Majesty cou'd never hope to reconcile themselves to Monsieur, from which no manner of good cou'd arrive to the Kingdom: That His Majesty, to the great Misfortune of France, having been Married Eighteen years without any Children, those Persons that believed he would never have any Issue, would publickly exclaim, That the King's Ser∣vants had a mind to destroy the Presumptive Heir of the Crown, which might occasion several vexatious ac∣cidents. The Cardinal concluded to leave the Duke of Orleans where he was, if he would not return upon the Conditions the King had lately offered him, which were, to give him a considerable sum of Money to pay his Debts, to re-establish him in all his Appanages and Good, to give great Gratifications to Puilaurens, and be∣stow the Government of Auvergne upon him, with per∣mission to reside there with his Guards. If Monsieur re∣fused to come back upon these Conditions, the Cardi∣nal thought it would be the best way to let him tarry in Flanders, since any other means of bringing him home were neither honourable nor advantageous. These Conditions having been proposed to the Queen-Mother, and to Monsieur, they equally rejected them: The Queen-Mother could never consent to see her ser∣vants treated after a worse manner than those of her Son; and the Duke of Orleans imagined that they would grant him more, if he refused these first offers. But the event shewed, that both of them were mistaken, and that they had better have adjusted matters in time, than stand out against a Party which was infinitely stronger than their own. And the Cardinal, by this means, arrived to the design he proposed to himself, which was, to keep the Queen-Mother and Monsieur, but especially the former, out of France, as long as he was able.
The space of three Months was now expired since the Treaty of Charmes, and yet the Duke of Lorrain had not delivered the Princess Margaret, his Sister, to the King: So that now the Court of France talked of no∣thing but of having the Marriage of Monsieur declared void by the Parliament of Paris; and they founded it upon this reason, that the Princes of Lorrain had stole the Duke of Orleans. Thus they resolved to cite the Duke of Lorrain to appear before the Parliament of Paris, to produce his Reasons for this pretended Rape. His Bro∣ther, the Cardinal, endeavour'd to excuse him, by say∣ing, He had done all that lay in his Power to get the Princess Margaret out of the hands of the Duke of Or∣leans, but that this Prince would not part with her. He desired the Cardinal-Duke to Intercede for him with the King, that his Citation might be Suspended; and declared, That if they proceeded farther, his Brother would not make his Appearance, as being prejudicial to the Rights of a Soveraign Prince. Richlieu maintained, That as he was a Vassal of the Crown of France for the Dukedom of Bar, he was obliged to come in Person thither, which, if he neglected to doe, or was declared to be an Accomplice in the Rape, they should be forced to proceed against him, by the ways of Fact. At the same time Orders were sent to the Parliament of Metz, to Prohibit the Inhabitants of those Places that had been lately taken from the Duke of Lorrain, as Dependencies upon the Bishopricks of Metz, Thoul and Verdun, to own the Duke for their Lord, but onely the Bishops of these Cities, and the King, to be as it were their Protector. They treated him after this manner, to constrain him to be sincerely devoted to the Interests of France, and to come himself to Paris to adjust these Differencies, or to reduce him to such a condition that he could do them no Injury. Thus they Mortified the Duke of Lorrain, and now began to give New Vexations to the Queen-Mother, by stopping, and narrowly examining upon the Frontiers all the Carriages that came to her from France for her own use, and that of her Servants, though a Passport was allowed her. This Princess sent Complaints of this U∣sage to the King, and represented to him, That it was
to no purpose that the Cardinal employed these Rigours to bring her to his own Terms, and that she would never humble her self before him. Not long after, the Attorney-General, following the Instructions of the Court, presented a Request to the Parliament, to declare, That the Duke of Orleans had been Stollen out of France by the Princes of Lorrain, and consequently, that his Marriage was null and void. The Parliament demanded time to inform and deliberate up∣on an Affair of so great a Consequence, but a very short space was allowed them; and the King came thither in Person on the 18th of January with the Cardinal, to get a Declaration confirmed, by which he restored the Duke of Orleans to his Estate and Honour, provided, that in Three Months he acknowledged his Fault, and came to Reside in France. He extended the same Favours to all his Domesticks, except Coigneux, Monsigot, Vieville, and some others. The King also declar'd, that he could not approve of the Marriage of Mensieur for the Reasons specified in His Declaration; and ordered the Parlia∣ment to Judge of the Informations which had been ta∣ken against the Duke of Lorrain, to Justifie, that he had caused Monsiuer to be stollen, and consequently to show that his Marriage was null. The Cardinal likewise made a long Harangue in the Parliament, full of Rhetorical strains, which was after∣wardsIn the Jour∣ral of Rich∣lieu, Part II. p. 148. Printed. In it he praised the King, and exag∣gerated the Victories which he had obtained in his Mini∣stry, rather in the Style of a Declaimer, than that of a Minister of State. He described, in a very Hyperbolical manner, His Majesty's kindness to the Queen-Mother, and to Monsieur, and particularly the Favours he design∣ed to show that Prince. He promised great ease to the People, if these Perplexities, which they gave the King, were once over; and added, that for the present, besides a Reduction of the Duties, and a Revocation of a Hun∣dred thousand Officers of new Creation, the exemption of whom was a Vexation to those that bore the Bur∣den of the Taxes, he Remitted one Fourth of the Impost.Siri Mem. . T. 7. P. 0. But this Fourth was of New Imposition, and it had been Raised for the Enterprize of Lorrain, besides Nine Millions of Livres extraordinary. The People.
did not rejoyce much at this small Satisfaction, because they expected the quite contrary. The Parliament was not a little perplexed about Mon∣sieur's Marriage, by reason of the ill Consequences which the Judgment they gave might draw after it; since it concern'd the Heirs of a Prince who might one day sit upon the Throne. The Duke of Lorrain was generally blamed for giving his Consent to this Match, which, as it displeased the Court, so it had plunged him in very mortifying Circumstances. Otherwise this Marriage was neither too unequal, nor was it disadvantageous to the State; and indeed, nothing could be found fault in it, but that it was done without the King's Approbation, who might at last approve of it, after he had testified his Dislike of it, as in the Upshot he was obliged to do. To revenge himself for this Affront, he demanded Zore of the Duke of Lorrain, which is a Place between Metz and Thionville, to Fortifie it. The Duke immediately granted it, because he durst not do otherwise. How∣ever, the King promised to surrender it to him, not by Letters Patent, but by a private Letter of the Privy Seal, to denote the King's Superiority: He likewise de∣manded of the Duke, the original Contract of the Mar∣riage of the Duke of Orleans, and all the Papers he had in his hands relating to that Affair. He desired to know who were the Witnesses that had assisted at the Ceremo∣ny of the Espousals, and to have the Priest, who had officiated, deliver'd up to him. On the other hand, to make the Duke sensible that in case he would submit himself he might expect a gentler Treatment, Orders were sent to the Parliament of Metz to deferr the Prohi∣bition which they had been commanded to issue out to the Inhabitants of the Lands depending upon the Bi∣shopricks of Metz, Thoul, and Verdun, not to own the Duke of Lorrain any longer for their Prince; and they suffer'd him to gather his Revenues in the Dukedom of Bar, without pressing him to come and do Homage for it. Siri, Ibid. p. 742.Altho' this Prince was in a manner divested of his Territories, yet he was so deeply provoked against France, which had opprest him, that he searched all Opportunities to retaliate the Injuries he received. And
therefore, that he might be able to declare openly against her, without Danger of being deprived of the Remain∣der of his Dominions, he made on the 19th of January a Donation of his Seats to his Brother Nicholas Francis, Cardinal of Lorrain, under a pretence that the Person of this latter was more agreeable to the King than his own. However, the World was sensible that this Do∣nation was only a Pretence, because he performed several Acts of a Sovereign Prince after he had made it. When this was over, he retired with eight hundred Horse and two thousand Foot, and joyn'd the Imperial Army. The new Duke dispatched Contrisson immediately to the Court of France, to acquaint the King and Cardinal with what had passed between his Brother and him, and to promise that he wou'd observe the Treaty of Charmes. As for his Brother, he assur'd them that he did not know whither he was gone: but this did not hinder the Par∣liament from carrying on the Process they had begun against him. The Cardinal of Richlieu told Contrisson when he shew'd him the Surrendry which the Duke had made in favour of him, That they had just Occasion to complain of the Duke for two Reasons: the first was, his Violation of the three several Treaties which he himself had concluded with the Duke; and the other was the Rape of the Duke, of Orleans, whom he had forced to marry his Sister. For the first, the Duke's Dominions, in the Opinion of this Minister, were en∣gaged to France, and could not be restored to the Car∣dinal of Lorrain but upon the same Conditions by which his Brother held them: And as for the second, the Duke was not excused from the Guilt of it by ab∣senting himself. Besides this, the Cardinal of Lorrain was his Accomplice in the Matter, for he, as Bishop of Thoul, had granted a Dispensation not publishing the Banns, as otherwise they ought to have done for the Marriage of Monsieur and the Princess Margaret, and had authorized a Monk to say Mass upon this Occa∣sion, to the prejudice of the Curate, that this Affair might be kept the more secret. The Cardinal Duke reproached him of Lorrain, with having abused the King's Passport to further his Sister's Escape out of Nan∣cy, and to send her to Brussels.
Thus the Princes of Lorrain found themselves engaged in very great Perplexities, and were at a Loss how to appease France, or how to defend themselves against her. Nothing, in all appearance, but the Match propo∣sed to the Cardinal's Neice, could accommodate these Differences: but several great Difficulties arose in that Affair, as I have already observed. On the other hand, it was to be feared, that if the Cardinal-Duke suspected that they had asked his Neice in Marriage only to amuse him, he would revenge the Affront in a cruel manner. Contrisson was sent back to the Cardinal of Lorrain, with Orders to tell him, that it was in his power to fol∣low his Brother's Steps or not; but that if he desired to live in peace, he must take different measures. He was demanded to explain himself upon this Head, and that he would discover by his manner of acting what were his true Sentiments. But above all, it was desired of him that he wou'd disapprove the Marriage of his Sister, and deliver the Original Papers of the Contract, and the Dispensation for the Banns. They gave Contrisson in Writing all that they required of his Master, and told him that they expected an Answer to each Article in Writing also. As the King neither liked nor disliked the Duke of Lorrain's Surrendry of his Dominions to his Brother, the latter took upon him the Title of Duke, and put himself in possession of the State belonging to his Family, with the usual Solemnities, that so he might convince the World there was no Collusion in this Matter between his Brother and him. He had not as yet resign'd his Cardi∣nal's Cap, and therefore stiled himself the Cardinal-Duke of Lorrain. Soon after, he sent back Contrisson to the Court of France, with an Answer to every Article in par∣ticular; as also to demand Saverne, which the Mareschal de la Force, without alledging any Reason for so doing, had taken from the Duke his Brother, when there was no War between his Majesty and him; and to complain that the King's Officers who commanded in those Places which his Majesty held in Trust, hinder'd the Duke's Commissaries from levying upon the Inhabitants of those Cities the ordinary Taxes, and to demand farther time in regard of the Homage he was to do for the Dutchy of Bar.
Contrisson being arrivedThe 14th of February. at Paris, acquitted himself the next Day of his Orders, and went to carry his Letters of Credence to the Cardinal. When he saw in the Sub∣scription of the Letter, Cardinal-Duke of Lorrain, he said that this was a pleasant sort of a Quality, by way of Contempt, as if the Title of Cardinal-Duke had only be∣longed to Armand John du Plessis, exclusively of all others. After this he fell into an extraordinary Passion against the House of Lorrain, and spoke of it in very de∣spicable Terms, as he was used to speak of all those that used the same Artifices against him which he employ'd against others. Contrisson was so daunted, that he scarce knew what to answer; but at last he told him, that af∣ter they had examined the Houses of all the Notaries of Nancy, as the Count de Brassac, Governour in that City for the King, knew, they could not find any Minutes of the Contract of Monsieur's Marriage; and that in all probability there never were any, having perhaps been written by the hand of the Duke of Orleans himself: nei∣ther could they find the Dispensation for the Banns, but that the Cardinal Duke of Lorrain offer'd to sign one, in the same manner as the other had been: That they cou'd not tell the Names of the Witnesses to the Marri∣age; and that the Monk who had perform'd the Cere∣mony of the Espousals, had left Lorrain. To this the Cardinal of Richlieu replied, in a great passion, That now it plainly appeared that the Cardinal of Lorrain (for he never vouchsafed to call him Duke) would follow the Footsteps of his Brother: That these An∣swers, full of Dissimulation, and very different from what he had promis'd by word of mouth, did suffici∣ently discover his Design, as they formerly found by what Spirit he acted, when after he had denyed that he knew any thing of his Sister's Marriage, it was now discovered that he had granted a Dispensation for the Banns: That till then they had believed the Cardinal of Lorrain was a Prince of Honour and Sincerity, whereas they found him at present to be the quite con∣trary: That if he refused to send the Contract, it was a Matter of no great Importance, since they cou'd ea∣sily discover after what manner it was done: That if they stisled the Original Papers, it would be so much
the easier to get the Marriage annull'd: That they ve∣ry well knew who were the Witnesses, and that as for them and the Monk, who had disappeared, the King would let them see, to their Cost, that he had long Hands. At last he concluded, That whereas he had been formerly a Friend to the Cardinal of Lorrain, he wou'd be his greatest Enemy if he continued to follow the Maxims of his Brother. As for what concerned the Taking of Saverne, the King, according to the Cardinal, was not obliged to make any Excuses for what had been done upon very just Grounds: And he added, That if the Cardinal of Lorrain had defended it, they wou'd have taken it away from him by force: That they wou'd consider what was to be done to the Governours of those Pla∣ces which his Majesty held in trust, who had hinder'd the Duke of Lorrain from raising his Duties: That in∣stead of allowing farther time for him to do Homage for the Dutchy of Bar, he must expect every moment to see it declared lapsed to the King, by the Duke's Fe∣lony, and incorporated to the Crown, and that the Principal might well follow the Accessary. His mean∣ing was, that they might justly enough seize upon all Lorrain by vertue of a Decree of Parliament which wou'd be inflicted upon the Duke by way of Punishment for his stealing away Monsieur, and for the Charges of War. After this manner it was that the Cardinal-Duke pre∣tended to oblige those, that were weaker than himself, to submit to his imperious Will, under a Pretence of doing Justice to the King's Reputation. All his Ministry was supported by the same Arrogance, because he had to do with Persons of very ordinary Discretion; and having full Power to oppose them with the Forces of the King∣dom, and all the King's Authority, he crushed and over∣whelm'd them, before they were in a condition to ward his Blows. While the Discourse at Paris ran upon the Duke of Lorrain, and every one imagined that he wou'd at last marry Madam de Combalet, to appease her Unkle, heAt Lune∣ville, the 16th of Fb. Siri Mem. Rec. T. 7. p. 750. married Claude de Lorrain, his Cousin, and Sister to his Brother's Wife, in the Presence of the Dutchess, some
Ladies, and a Gentleman. The Reason why he took this Resolution, and put it so speedily in Execution, was because he feared that the Mareschal de la Force, who was at the Head of the King's Army not far from thence, came with a Design to take these two Princesses, and to send them into France, which might furnish that Court with a plausible Occasion to justifie the Rights which they pretended to have upon Lorrain, to the prejudice of the Princes of that House. In Effect the Mareschal de la Force having received Advice of this Marriage, cau∣sed Luneville to beSiri Mem. Rec. Tom. 7. p. 740. invested, and conducted the new∣married Couple, with the Dutchess of Lorrain and the Princess of Phaltsburg to Nancy, where they were kept in Confinement, although they were otherwise treated with a great deal of Respect. He likewise placed a French Garrison in the Town, after he had turned out the Lor∣rain Soldiers that the Prince had left there for the Secu∣rity of the Place. This New Married Prince, whom we shall hereafter call Duke Nicholas Francis, sent a Gentleman to the Court of France, to acquaint the King with his Marriage, and to desire him to order Luneville to be restored, and him∣self and the Princess to be set at liberty, since he was ready to observe all the Treaties that had been made with His Majesty. As for what related to his Marri∣age, they told his Envoy, That the King did not con∣cern himself about it; but they denied he was a Priso∣ner, since he had liberty to walk all over the City of Nancy. But so far were they from delivering up any thing which they had taken, that under pretence that the Cardinal was of the same Humour with his Brother, they said, The King was obliged, for his Security, to seize upon the remainder of Lorrain. In the mean time Duke Charles offer'd to deliver up la Mothe and Biche, two strong Places, which he still kept in his possession, into the King's hands, if he would set his Brother and the Princesses at Liberty. But the Court of France thought it better to take them by main Force, and not to part with the Prince and Princesses, whose Rights they designed to make use of: So the Mareschal de la Force was ordered to Block up la Mothe, till such time as he could formally Be∣siege it.
The Princess of Phaltsburg was kept more closely con∣fin'd at Nancy than any of the rest, because she was of a Spirit much more difficult to manage, and had been the principal cause of her Sister's Marriage. But as she was the Person who found out means for that Princess to make her escape, she contrived a way to escape her self, notwithstanding the Guards, by hiding her self in the Seat of a Coach that was to carry one of her Gentlemen who was Sick, and Maimed in one of his Legs, out of the City, by vertue of a Passport he had procured. The Coach was examined at the City Gate, but they saw no∣thing but a Gentleman lying upon a Quilt, which they did not search. Within nine Miles of Nancy she and her Cripple got on Horseback, and took the way to Besan∣son. It was known she had made her Escape two Hours after she was gone, and a world of People were sent to retake her, but they did not know what Road she took. The Cardinal was exceedingly vexed at this new Trick which the Princess had play'd him, and was afraid that she wou'd go directly to Monsieur, to conclude her Mar∣riage with Puilaurens, which had been talked of some Years before. Duke Charles, who was in Alsatia in the Imperial Ar∣my, design'd in the mean time to surprize the French Camp before La Mothe, and having obtain'd some Troops of the Imperial Generals, he joyn'd them with his own, and marched on that side. But the Rhingrave Otho, who commanded the Swedish ArmyThe 12th of March., prevented him, and cut his Men in pieces, so that he was hardly able to make his Escape with a few Men into the Franche Comte, there to pick up the Remainders of his Army. Cardinal Richlicu, who was highly provoked because Duke Nicholas Francis did not marry his Neice, though upon disadvantageous Conditions, prepared to carry on his Tryal, since he was now no longer a Cardinal, up∣on the pretended Rape of Monsieur. The Parliament of Paris appointed a day for him and his Brother to answer to the Charge laid against them, as well as the Princess Margaret, and order'd the Priest that had married them to be apprehended. These Formalities made it evident∣ly appear, that in case these Princes did not appear, they wou'd be condemn'd for Obstinacy, and afterwards de∣prived of their Dominions.
But neither did Duke Nicholas Francis, nor the Dutchess his Wife, think themselves obliged to expect the end of this Tryal in Lorrain; so having found an opportunity to escape out of Nancy in a Disguise, they retired to Be∣sancon, and from thence to Florence; only the Dutchess Nicole, the Wife of Charles, still tarried in Nancy, in the Hands of the French. Some People were of Opinion that this new-married Couple were purposely suffer'd to escape, because their Marriage having been approved of by the Pope, no Exceptions could be made against it. But the Court talked of re-uniting all Lorrain to the Crown, under a Pretence that it was formerly a Feif of the Counts of Champagne; and that this County having long ago fallen into the Hands of the Kings of France, all that depended upon it ought to belong to them. While this passed in Lorrain, the Cardinal made great Promises to Monsieur and Puilaurens to draw them into France, for fear least Gaston should reconcile himself to the Queen-Mother. It was generally expected that they wou'd now shortly return, since almost every thing they asked was granted them, except a place of Security. The Queen-Mother, who still fell out more and more with the D. of Orleans, and found there was no proba∣bility of adjusting Differences with him, so long as Pui∣laurens continued near his Person, was at the same time inclined to make her Peace with the King, whatever it cost her; and she was so much the more disposed to use this Conduct, because she perceived that the Marquiss d' Aytone, Governour of the Low-Countries, shew'd a greater Respect to Gaston than her self. She caused F. Chanteloube to write to Bouthillier, that she was resol∣ved to come and throw her self upon his Majesty's Gene∣rosity, and to be reconciled to the Cardinal of Richlieu, if the King commanded her to do it. Bouthillier carried this Letter to the King, seal'd as it was, and at the same time caused the Main that brought it, and came without a Passport, to be secured at his own House. The King open'd it in the Cardinal's Presence, where, besides what is related above, he found that the Queen demanded a Passport to send one la Roche, who might come and go as Business required. F. Chanteloube said that the Queen demanded nothing more for him, but that he might
peaceably end his Days in some Convent of his Order. Upon this the King assembled a Council, who as they were surprised to see the Queen-Mother pass from one Extremity to another, so they imagin'd that there was some Artifice in this unaccountable Conduct. What help'd to confirm them in this Belief, was, that this la Roche had been the Accomplice of Alfeston, and that another Man, who had been lately sent to the Bastile, accused F. Chanteloube afresh. So they answered the Bearer of this Letter by word of mouth, That so soon as the Queen removed F. Chanteloube, and writ with her own hand, they wou'd give more Credit to it, than to such blind Instructions as these were, which they had now received. Upon the Arrival of this Messenger to FlandersThe 16th of Febt. Se Aubery's Mem. T. 1. P. 422. and Siri Mem. Rec. T. 7. P. 761., the Queen-Mother dispatch'd de Laleu with three Letters, of her own Writing, one to the King, and the other two to the Cardinal and Bouthillier; the Contents of which were, That she was ready to do whatever His Majesty desir'd of her, and particularly to be reconciled to the Cardinal, that so she might obtain Permission to return to Court. De Laleu had Orders to tell them the same Thing by word of mouth; and the Letter which this Princess writ to the King, serv'd him instead of a Letter of Credence. I will set down the Words of that which was addrest to the Cardinal, and which wou'd certainly have inclined him to Compassion, if it had been pos∣sible for him to pardon an Injury. Dear Cousin, THE Sieur Bouthillier having given me to understand from your Part, that my Misfortunes sensibly affect you, and that being concerned to behold me so long depriv'd of the Honour of seeing the King, it wou'd be a great Sa∣tisfaction to you to procure me that Happiness; I thought my self obliged to assure you by the Sieur de Laleu, with what Pleasure I receive your kind Inclinations. Repose Con∣fidence in him, and believe that I shall be with all Since∣rity. Your, &c.
The Instructions of de Laleu ran to this Effect, That he shou'd wait upon the Cardinal, and tell him that the Queen-Mother had not the least Resentment for what was past: That she desired to make no other Advantage of those Professions of Friendship which he made her, than to fix her self again, by his Interest, in the King's good Graces, and obtain leave to send some of her Ser∣vants to him to negotiate her Return: That as for him∣self, he had no reason to be apprehensive of the Queen-Mother, since he was infinitely the more powerful of the two, and she wou'd always be commanded by him. De Laleu was order'd to observe whether the Cardinal ex∣prest any Diffidence or no, because if he did, it was an infallible sign that it wou'd be in vain to think of an Accommodation. As for Father Chanteloube, the Queen wou'd not remove him of her own proper Motion; but if the Cardinal excluded him out of the Treaty, as he himself desired, he promis'd to withdraw of his own Accord. This Gentleman having thus deliver'd the Queen-Mother's Letters, and executed his Commission,Siri. Ibid. p. 761. the Cardinal found himself extreamly embarrass'd, because that since this Princess had humbled her self to such a degree, as it was never expected she wou'd condescend to, all the World wou'd be of opinion, that the King cou'd not refuse to give her Leave to come back to Court, without the Imputation of an unnatural Severity. However, he did not find himself disposed either to be∣lieve that his old Benefactress cou'd heartily forgive him the Vexations he had caused her, or to pardon this Prin∣cess for her manner of treating him before she left France, and for the Writings she had caused to be published against him after her Departure. Besides, he pretended to have received Advice from several hands, that Father Chanteloube design'd him a Mischief, and that he had written to some of his Friends, that the Queen wou'd ne∣ver abandon him, altho' he had desired her to leave him in Flanders. At the bottom this was but an inconside∣rable Matter, and which he might easily have prevent∣ed afterwards, if the King had preserv'd any Tenderness for the Queen his Mother, and if the Cardinal cou'd have resolved to forgive a Princess who in her time had
done him incomparably much more Good than Harm. But the King, instead of being influenc'd by those Considerations that naturally presented themselves to his Mind, was easily perswaded by the Cardinal to persist in his Demands, that she shou'd deliver up to him some of her Domesticks, in order to receive farther Punish∣ment; which she cou'd not do without renouncing the Principles of Humanity, and frighting all those Persons from her Service that shou'd have any Inclinations to serve her. So de Laleu being ordered to come to Ruel,The 19th of Febr. where the King was to meet him with the Cardinal, he accordingly went thither, but was surprized to find only the latter there. However, he was received with extraordinary Civility, and the Cardinal told him, that the profound Respect he had for the Person that sent him, obliged him to shew him more if it were possible. But his Answer made it sufficiently appear with what Since∣rity he delivered this Complement. He told him, That the Queen-Mother had always been welcome, but that his Majesty was willing to be satisfied that she wou'd never be disswaded from that Desire she then exprest wholly to submit her self to his Pleasure, by those malicious Spirits that had deceived her hitherto, and of which he could never be fully assured, so long as they were in the World: (for now it seems they were not content to have the Queen discard them, when they saw she was inclined to do it:) That for this end the King demanded of her to deliver into his hands Father Chanteloube, the Abbot of St. Germain, and the Fellow that calculated Nativities, (he meant Fabbroni whom he afterwards named,) because they had not only inju∣red the Queen, but likewise offended the King to that degree, that they must never hope to be pardoned: The first by his ill Counsels, the second by his sediti∣ous and wicked Libels, and the third by his Predicti∣ons, wherein he had given out that the King had but a short time to live, which had made the Queen-Mother listen to pernicious Counsels, disorder'd the Royal Family, and done a mighty Disservice to the State: That therefore the Queen-Mother ought, with∣out farther delay, to surrender up the Man that had put the King's Life in question, as Fabbroni had done;
the Man that by his defamatory Libels had endea∣vour'd to take away his Reputation, as the Abbot of St. Germain had notoriously done; and lastly, the Man that by attacking the Life of His Majesty's most faith∣ful Servants, gave him all the just reason in the World to be apprehensive of his own. The Cardinal added, That this would be an effectu∣al way to convince all Mankind that she disapproved of their wicked Designs, and seem'd to testifie abundance of Joy that his Enemies had not been able to alienate the Queen-Mother's good Affections from him. He concluded with saying, That he cou'd not forbear to inform the Queen with the same Freedom he had spo∣ken to her heretofore, that considering what had past, it was impossible but that the King must still have some Distrust: and that she must resolve to dissipate it en∣tirely, in order to build her Reconciliation upon a sure and lasting Foundation: after which she wou'd receive all imaginable Marks of natural Tenderness and Affe∣ction from the best Son in the World, and she wou'd see the Effects of the sincere Inclinations of one of her Creatures, who in this Juncture cou'd not dissent from the King's Intentions, without offending him sensibly. Before de Laleu return'd to Brussels, he received fresh Letters for the King and Cardinal, in which the Queen-Mother confirm'd the same things, in terms still more humble and condescending, particularly in regard to the Cardinal. She likewise demanded a Passport for Father Suffren, her Confessor, whom she desired to send to Court. But Answer was made, that they wou'd hearken to no one, unless he brought them word from the Queen, that she was ready to deliver into his Majesty's hands the three Persons he demanded of her. De Laleu re∣turn'd to the Low-Countries with this sad Message, which made the Queen lose all hopes of ever seeing the King her Son again. While these Negotiations were managed by the Queen-Mother, Monsieur consulted the University of Louvain about his Marriage, which they judged to be valid, and he got it to be solemnly confirmed by the Archbishop of Malines, in the presence of seven Witnesses. The Queen-Mother was desired to be present at this
Ceremony, but refused it, whether she had resolved to concern her self no more with the Affairs of Monsieur, as she had told him, or was not willing to disoblige the King, at a time when she endeavour'd to appease him. However, when she received the abovementioned News, she was so far from complying with those dishonourable Submissions they expected from her, that she bestowed upon the Abbot of St. Germain the Place of her chief Almoner, which happen'd then to be vacant. At the same time the Court employ'd the Mareschal de Crequi at Rome, to engage the Pope to declare the Marriage of Monsieur null, by representing to him all the Reasons they could think of. But as these Reasons only served to cover their Desire to hinder Monsieur from Marrying, the Pope, who was not prejudiced that way, formed great Difficulties upon all the Proposals they made him. The surest Expedient was to get the Duke of Orleans into France, because there they cou'd make him do what∣ever they had a mind to; for which reason they laboured in private to effect it, although this Prince pretended to be as far from entring into any Reconciliation as ever he had been. At this timeSee Aube∣ty's Life of the Card. Lib. 4. Cap. 49. Puilaurens was extreamly out with the Duke of Elbeuf, and the latter complained of him, because in the Treaty which was secretly making with the Cardinal, he had demanded nothing in favour of him, save only that he should not be excluded out of the Amnesty. While these Quarrels were on foot,The 3d of May, Aub. Ibid. Siri Mem. Rec. Tom. 8. p. 73. it happen'd that some unknown Bravo's attempted to mur∣der Puilaurens, and discharged a Carabine loaden with se∣veral Bullets at him, as he was going up the Stairs at the Palace of Brussels. He was only wounded slightly in the Cheek, and the Assassines made their Escape so speedily, that no News cou'd be heard of them, what∣ever search was made. Monsieur made a mighty Noise about this barbarous Attempt, and laid it to the charge of the Duke of Elbeuf, or some of the Queen-Mother's Servants; which served to compleat the Breach between them, and afterwards occasion'd several Differences, the Particulars of which 'tis needless to relate here. Whoever it was that design'd to kill him, 'tis certain it did a great Injury to the Queen-Mother, who was now suspected of designing to assassinate the Favourites of her two Sons,
that so she might manage them as she saw convenient. However, others were of opinion, that the Spaniards be∣ing informed that Puilaurens was negotiating the Return of Monsieur, were resolved to break off this Negotiation, by causing him that was the chief Promoter of it to be taken off. But as this Blow happened to miscarry, it only retarded Monsieur's Return for a short time, and made Puilaurens desire it more than ever, who did not think himself any longer safe at Brussels. But as it was highly necessary to conceal this Design from the Spaniards, for fear they might stop Monsieur and his Servants, besides that the Treaty with the Cardinal was not yet concluded, this Prince enter'd into a new Treaty with the SpaniardsThe 12th of May, Aub. Mem. T. 1. p. 425. a few days after the Assassi∣nation, that so they might not suspect he designed to accommodate himself with the King his Brother. The principal Articles of this Treaty are as follow; by which it will appear that Gaston who signed them, did not trou∣ble himself much to keep his Word: That he engaged himself to enter into no sort of Agreement with the King his Brother, whatever Advantages were offer'd him, and whatever Alterations might happen in France upon the Cardinal's ruine, for the space of two years and a half, without the Consent of his Catholick Majesty: That ne∣vertheless if he came to treat before that time was expi∣red, tho' it were by the Consent of his Catholick Majesty, he should be obliged to break it when it pleased his Ca∣tholick Majesty: That in case any Rupture happen'd between the two Crowns, his Highness promis'd to take the part of the House of Austria, and to support its In∣terests till a General Peace was concluded: That if the Arms of the Duke happen'd to make any progress in France, by the Taking of any Places, his Highness shou'd deliver up some of them to his Catholick Majesty, part∣ly to re-imburse him for the great Expences he had alrea∣dy been at, and partly for an Assurance that he would be grateful to them one day, if his Highness came to the Crown; in which case, his Highness engaged fully to recompense them for all their Charges: That upon this Supposition, his Catholick Majesty wou'd furnish his Highness with 12000 Foot and 3000 Horse, one half of which were to be French, and the other Spaniards: That
these Troops shou'd be ready to act towards the End of next September, and that then his Catholick Majesty, if the state of his Affairs wou'd permit him, shou'd draw his Troops towards the Frontiers of France, to alarm the King's Forces on that side, while his Highness enter'd the Kingdom at another: That his Catholick Majesty wou'd give 70000 Crowns towards the raising of the French Troops, and 45000 each Month for their Subsistence, which however was to lessen according as the Army ad∣vanced; so that when they were once in France, his Catholick Majesty should not be obliged to be at any Charge for their Maintenance, since they might live up∣on Contributions from the Country, as 'tis the way in Germany: That his Catholick Majesty shou'd allow 15000 Crowns a Month for the Support of his Highness and Madam, as soon as Monsieur shou'd leave Brussels to march towards France, but that when he was arrived there, he and his Army were to live at the Expence of the Country where he resided. This Treaty was signed by the Duke of Orleans, and the Marquiss d' Aytone, and the Duke of Lerma and Philaurens sign'd it as Wit∣nesses. The Marquiss d' Aytone and PrinceSiri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 88. Thomas of Savoy, who had lately put himself in the Service of Spain, were very urgent with the Queen-Mother to sign this Treaty, and used her ill upon that Account: but she had too much Resolution and Prudence to engage her self in a Treaty so directly opposite to the Interests of the King her Son: The Marquiss d' Aytone having sent this Treaty into Spain to have it ratified, the King of Spain signed it, and sent back the Ratification of it by Sea.Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 84, &c. But the Vessel which carried it happening to run a-ground upon the Coast of Calais, this Ratification was taken by the French, and sent to Court, where perhaps it help'd to hasten the Cardinal to conclude the Treaty which he had begun with the Duke of Orleans. The Abbot of Elbene made several Journeys for this purpose from Paris to Brussels, and the principal Diffi∣culty which retarded the Conclusion of it, respected the Person of Madam, whom the King wou'd have his Brother deliver up to him. It was likewise proposed, That he should consent that those Judges whom the Pope should nominate out of the Bishops of France, should de∣termine
the Validity of his Marriage; but he wou'd give his Consent neither to the one nor the other. The Trea∣ty which Monsieur had made with the Marquiss d' Aytone was not perhaps kept so secret but they had some Intelli∣gence of it in France before they happen'd to light upon the abovementioned Ratification, and the Abbot of El∣bene reproached Monsieur with it. It was also known that he had written to Rome, that he wou'd never agree that the French Ecclesiasticks should judge of this Marri∣age, and that he had complain'd that Cardinal Richlieu design'd to call in question his Right of Succession to the Crown, and for that end had made an Alliance with se∣veral Heretick Princes, at the time when Gaston had married a Princess of a most Catholick Family. The Abbot of Elbene, at his Return to Paris, gave an Account of his Negotiation, and told them he was clear∣ly of opinion, that if they let alone the business of the Princess Margaret, Monsieur would readily accept the Conditions that were offer'd him. But whether the King was possest with is ancient Jealousie against his Brother, or whether the Cardinal was not willing that this Prince should have a Lady that was obliged to the Queen-Mother for her Marriage, the Court obstinately persisted to make him declare it null, under a Pretence that the King had not consented to it.Siri, ibid. p. 41. A Council was held just after the Abbot of Elbene's Return, wherein the Cardinal was pleas'd to say, That there were but two ways to preserve the King from the ill Designs of Mon∣sieur; the first of which wholly depended upon the Blessing of Heaven, and the other upon his Majesty's Prudence. The first was, if the King had a Son who might take away all hopes from the Duke of Orleans of ever finding the Throne vacant for himself. The se∣cond, according to the Cardinal's Notion of Things, was, a firm Association between those of whose Fidelity his Majesty was assured; which might make Monsieur's Adherents sensible, that if they hasten'd that Prince's Succession by any indirect means, they wou'd find per∣sons enough ready to chastise their Wickedness, and that even if the Throne happen'd to be vacant natu∣rally, he shou'd not take possession of it without some Dispute. The Reason of this was, that if Monsieur
believed that after the King's Decease his Succession might be vigorously contested, he would never desire his Brother's Death. This Expedient, in the Cardinal's Opinion, was the only means to secure the King, and to preserve the State from those Dangers into which the Designs of the Spaniards might throw it, as well as the Cabals of the disaffected French; because, whenever the King happen'd to die, neither one nor the other could then constrain Monsieur to act as they pleased; their Power being counterbalanc'd by that of the contrary Party; and that thus his Majesty's Servants, being supported by the undoubted Right of Monsieur, might be in a condition to defend him against the Spaniards, and wou'd find their Security in endeavouring the Peace and Welfare of the Kingdom. History no where informs us what Reflections were made upon this strange Advice, but 'tis certain it fairly tended to give the Cardinal power to chuse whom of the Princes of the Blood he should pitch upon, to succeed to the Crown. This Minister who reproached Monsieur with having violated the fundamental Laws of the State, would have perswaded his Majesty, against all manner of Justice, and all received Precedents, to invest him with an Authority, to which the whole Body of the Peo∣ple has no right to pretend, in an hereditary Monarchy. Some time after,Towards the beginning of June. Monsieur reconciled himself to the Queen his Mother upon the occasion of a Difference that happen'd in his Family, in the heat of which the Queen sent to offer him all her Servants, and to dispose of them as he should think fit. The Duke of Elbeuf likewise made up matters with Monsieur and Puilaurens; but the Duke of Orleans was so uncapable to regulate his Affairs at home, and to make himself beloved by his Domesticks, that the greatest part of them abandon'd him, without taking their leave of him, and withdrew into France, al∣though Passports were refused them. Thus the Cardinal was in no great pain for any thing the Duke of Orleans might do, because in gaining his Fa∣vourite, he was assured to bring him to what Terms he pleas'd. The unshaken and firm Resolution of the Queen-Mother gave him a great deal more trouble; and as he carried Matters to the highest Extremities, he
was afraid that this Princess, provoked to the greatest degree, wou'd cause him at last to be assassinated if she still continued in the Low-Countries, which are but a few days Journey from Paris. Therefore he now thought a∣fresh of sending her to Florence, whither the Grand Duke offer'd to invite her, if the King thought it convenient. For this purposeSiri Mem. Rec. Tom. 8. p. 93. he obliged Gondi to take a Journey in∣to Flanders, and make this Offer to the Queen, to see what Answer she wou'd return to it. He was of opini∣on, that though she absolutely rejected it, yet it was good to let her know that the King wou'd not be dis∣pleased at her going to Florence. Gondi undertook this Journey, and presented to her a Letter from the Grand Duke, wherein he invited her to come and live with him, till such time as she was reconciled to the King. The Queen received this Complement very kindly, and told him, that the Grand Duke had a greater Considera∣tion for her than either her own Sons or her Sons-in∣law, of which the former used her ill, and the other re∣fused her all manner of Assistance, or else were weary of giving it any longer. She seem'd to be very sensible of the Grand Duke's Kindness, and desired time to con∣sider of an Answer till Gondi who was going into Holland came back again. She gave him to understand, that she was dissatisfied with her Domesticks, that Father Chanteloube wanted Integrity, and the Abbot of St. Ger∣main was a Man of no Judgment; but she cou'd not re∣solve to turn them away, least the World should say that this was an open Acknowledgment that she had been ill advised. The King of Spain, as she told him, did not furnish her with what she wanted, but slowly and with great Difficulty, and she wanted several things that were necessary even for her own Person. Puilaurens, she said, was the Man that had begun to ruin her, and then had compleated her Destruction; because after he had enga∣ged her against the Cardinal, by swearing to her, that he wou'd never abandon her, he had, to regain this Pre∣late's Favour, acquainted him with what had passed be∣tween them, before Monsieur parted from Paris the first time. And afterwards this Man, fearing least she shou'd resent this Injury, had done all that lay in his power to ruine her.
At Gondi's Return from Holland, the Queen told him she was obliged to the Grand Duke for the great Kind∣ness he express'd towards her; but though she did not absolutely refuse the Treat which he offer'd her, she said that Florence was too far from Paris, and that if she went thither, her Affairs would go on with too much Slowness. Upon this Consideration, she reserved that place to retire to, when she was destitute of all Hopes to make an Accommodation. She once more intimated to Gondi, how little she was satisfied with Father Chan∣teloube, the Abbot of St. Germain, and Fabbroni, and own'd, that if the King gave her to understand that he was pleased she should dismiss them, she would not fail to do it, but that she would not after this run the risk of a Refusal, as it had happen'd to her at the beginning of the Year, when they despised all her Submissions. She open'd her self very frankly to Gondi, because he was the Grand Duke's Resident, whom she believed to be well-affected to her Interests, and received his Advice very courteously. In all these Conversations, she shed abun∣dance of Tears, and shew'd all imaginable signs of a great Inclination to be reconciled to her Son, by throwing her self wholly upon his Generosity, and demanding nothing of him. Nay, she said that she desired to owe her Re∣turn to the Cardinal, and that she was very well satisfied that none but he could serve her. Gondi saw that she was really in a Condition that deserved Commiseration, and her Discourses were enough to have affected any one but those she had to deal with. At his Arrival at Paris, he gave the Cardinal and the other Ministers an Account of his Journey, and endea∣vour'd to represent to them the hearty Inclinations of the Queen-Mother in so feeling a manner, that it might touch them with pity. The CardinalThe 17th of October. hearken'd to him with a great deal of Indifference, although he seem'd to be satisfied with his Negotiation. At last he told him, that so long as Father Chanteloube, who was convicted of a Design to kill him more than once, continued about the Queen, it was impossible to repose any Confidence in her, and that she always said the same things. Gondi hadSiri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 126. another Audience of the Cardinal, where∣in he tryed to move him to Compassion, by laying be∣fore
him the sad Condition of this Princess, and the Re∣solution she had taken up to forget all that had pass'd: this Minister answer'd him, that he did not know her so well as he did, and that the day she had broke off with him, notwithstanding all his Submissions, and all the King's Entreaties, she had said, That she was, and wou'd be always implacable; which made his Majesty tell her, That she was of a very cruel Disposition. At last he fell into an outrageous Passion against Father Chanteloube, St. Germain, and Fabbroni, whom he called Murderers, Poisoners, and execrable Persons. After he had com∣plain'd that Father Chanteloube had thrice endeavoured to get him assassinated, as three Men who had been ex∣ecuted for it, had accused him; that S. Germain had as∣saulted his Reputation in several villainous Libels; and that Fabbroni had lodged Money at Antwerp to recom∣pense the Murderers that had been sent into France; he said that this was the least Fault they had committed, and that they were guilty of High Treason. Neverthe∣less he testified, That if the Queen-Mother wou'd deli∣ver them, perhaps they might not be treated so rigorously as they deserv'd. At the Conclusion he said, That if she wou'd acknowledge by doing this, that she had till then believed and protected those that were Enemies to the King, he was ready to subscribe her Return with his own Blood; and that he wou'd leave no means unat∣tempted to obtain it of his Majesty. D' Elbene met with better Success in his Negotiation for the Return of the Duke of Orleans, because having gain'd Puilaurens by fair Promises, this Prince consented to whatever they wou'd have of him, at the perswasion of his Favourite, who had no regard to his Master's Honour. The Treaty was concluded, and sign'd by the King, and theSee it in Aubery's Memoirs, T. 1. P. 427. Substance of it was, that the King and Monsieur agreed to be determined, as for what related to the Marriage of the latter, by those Laws which the other Subjects of the King are used to be judged by in the like Cases; the King allowing full liberty to Mon∣sieur to satisfie his Conscience in this point by the usual Methods; that if this Marriage happen'd to be dissolved, Monsieur promis'd the King not to marry again without his Majesty's Consent, as on his side the King gave his
Word not to constrain him to act against his Inclinati∣ons; that in whatever place Monsieur resided by the King's permission, that is to say, whether in Auvergne, Bourbonnois, or at Dombes, he promised to behave himself there like a true Brother, and a good Subject, without maintaining any private Correspondence which might of∣fend the King: that his Majesty granted an Amnesty for him and all his Domesticks, except three or four: That Monsieur shou'd be re-establish'd in all his Goods, Appa∣nages, and Pensions: and That the King shou'd give him immediately upon his Arrival into France four hundred thousand Livres, to pay off his Debts at Brussels and else∣where, and a hundred thousand Crowns fifteen days after to set up his Equipage: That the King shou'd give him the Government of Auvergne instead of that of the Pro∣vince about Orleans and Blois: That he shou'd keep for him a Company of the Gen d' Armes, and another of Light Horse, consisting of a hundred Men each, for six Months, and afterwards of fifty, till such time as Monsieur re∣turned to Court. The King granted these Articles, on∣ly upon Condition that Monsieur accepted them in fifteen days, and perform'd them by coming back to France within three Weeks, reckoning from the day of the Date, which was the first of October. Puilaurens, for his part, had the * Government of Bour∣bonnois, and the Dutchy of Eguillon,Siri Me Rec. T. 8. P. 102. with a Promise to marry one of the Cardinal's Relations eight days after his Arrival into France. This Marriage, and the great Fa∣vour he was in with Monsieur, made him imagine that the Cardinal wou'd share his Authority with him, and take him for his Partner in the Management of Affairs. But the Event made it sufficiently appear that he was as little acquainted with the Cardinal, as he was incapable to serve his Master faithfully. In the mean time Monsieur and He, full of Joy and Satisfaction for having obtained these Advantages of the Court, were contriving how to make their Escape with all speed, for fear least the Spaniards shou'd detain them if they came to suspect their Design. They took their Opportunity when the Marquiss d' Aytone was gone to confer with the Duke of Newburg, and parted out ofOn a Sun∣day, the 8th of October. Brus∣sels, under a pretence of going to Hunt, with the Duke
of Fargis and six more, and some led Horses. Instead of looking after Foxes, as they pretended when they went out, they rode strait to Capelle, which is about twenty five Leagues from Brussels, and is the first Town belong∣ing to France on that side. Monsieur took his Leave of no body, nay not of Madam her self, whom he after∣wards recommended by a Letter to the Queen-Mother. From thence he marched directly to S. Germain, where the King was,The 21st of October, Siri, ibid. p. 103. to whom he made abundance of Com∣plements to beg his Pardon, and promis'd to be more obedient for the time to come. Those that were with him did the same, and the King received them all into Favour. The Cardinal came thither from Ruel, to visit the Duke in his Majesty's Presence. He assured him that he had been extreamly concerned that his Absence did not per∣mit him to do him those Services which otherwise he had been ready to have done, and expressed a great deal of Joy that he was now able to serve him after his Re∣turn, which had been so long desired. The Duke told him that he was heartily sorry that he had not been un∣deceived sooner, and that for the time to come he wou'd follow his Advice, and then embraced him. The next day the Duke went to Ruel to repay the Cardinal the Visit he had made him, and entertain'd him in private, where 'tis supposed he told him all that he knew. The Cardinal afterwards treated him very splen∣didly, and with extraordinary Honour. After this, Monsieur went to his Estare at Limours, within five Leagues of Paris. The first Complements being now over, they began to discourse of Affairs, and laboured to perswade Mon∣sieur to give his Consent that his Marriage shou'd be de∣clared void. The Duke rejected this Proposal, as he had reason good, and alledged that his Conscience wou'd not permit him to disannul a Marriage, which after all cou'd not be justly condemned, although the King had not con∣sented to it. Upon this the Cardinal sent several Divines to him, to cure him of these troublesome Scruples, for he was seldom unprovided of dexterous Casuists that knew how to accommodate his Passions to Religion. At first Puilaurens joyn'd with them; but because Monsieur
cou'd not be brought to relish the Cardinal's Gospel, it was supposed that this Favourite did not cordially repre∣sent the Matter to the Prince, although he told them that for his part, he was very well satisfied with their Rea∣sons, but since they had not wrought any Conviction up∣on Monsieur, he would not pretend to force him. How∣ever, the Cardinal still kept to his Resolution to bestow his Cousin Mademoiselle de Pont Chateau upon him, al∣though he was not willing that the Marriage should be yet consummated, which made some People suspect, that Puilaurens was not so much in the Cardinal's Fa∣vour as he believed. The King, after he had paid to Monsieur the money which he had promis'd him, and expedited the Patents for Puilaurens, sent F. Joseph and Bouthillier to the Duke of Orleans, to tell him from him, that he wou'd never approve of his Marriage, though at the same time he wou'd never force him to marry again. Some more Di∣vines were afterwards sent to him upon the same Errand, three of which were Jesuits, three Secular Priests, be∣sides the General of the Fathers of the Oratory; but, in spite of all their Reasons deduced from Politicks, which were founded upon the Jealousie of the King and of his Minister, Gaston, contrary to his custom, still maintain'd that his Marriage was valid. He told them, that since the Parliament were able to find out no other Reason for the Nullity of this Marriage, but the pretended Con∣straint of the Princes of Lorrain, it was unquestionably lawful, since of his own proper motion he had demand∣ed their Sister of them, and that they durst not refuse him: That as for himself, he cou'd be content to live separated from his Wife to shew his Obedience to the King, but that he wou'd never consent to marry another. Thus these seven Divines, after they had harangued him three full Hours to perswade him to write to the King that he was convinced of the Nullity of his Marriage by their Reasons, returned without doing any thing. Puilaurens began to be somewhat distrustful that the Cardinal intended to deceive him, when this Minister sent the Abbot of Elbene to Monsieur, who was then at Blois, to tell him, that the King was not displeas'd with his Conduct, and that the Cardinal desired Puilaurens to
come to Paris to marry the youngest Daughter of the Ba∣ron de Pont-Chateau. This News was exceeding wel∣come to Puilaurens, who before had some Thoughts of retiring into England. Upon this they return'd to Court, and the Duke of Orleans was againThe 19th of Novemb. Regaled by the Cardinal at Ruel, and from thence went to S. Germain. Afterwards the King put out a Declaration, by which he restor'd Monsieur to his former Possessions, pardoned him for all that was past, and order'd it to beThe 27th of November. registred in the Parliament of Paris. At the same time the Duke de la Valette married the eldest Daughter of the Baron de Pont-Chateau, and Puilaurens the youngest. The Count de Guicke also married a Relation of the Cardinal of the House of Plessis Chivrai, and their Marriages were kept the same day at the Arsenal with an extraordinary Mag∣nificence. Puilaurens bought the Dutchy of Eguillon of the Princess Mary for six hundred thousand Livres, and had very considerable Gratifications from the King; so that besides his Quality of Duke and Peer, in which he was received in the Parliament on the 16th of December, he had an Estate of above six hundred thousand Crowns a year. After having thus related the Disorders of the Royal Family, and of Monsieur's Reconciliation, in which the Cardinal had no less a share than the King; 'twill be now necessary to pass to Foreign Affairs, which took up this Minister at the same time. The Dutchess ofSiri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 87. Lorrain, Wife to Duke Charles, who had resided at Nancy, came by Order of the Court to Paris, where she arrived the last day of April, and was received with great Respect, and conducted to the Palace of Lorrain. From thence she went afterwards to Fontainbleau, where the King entertained her very cour∣teously. However, as she apprehended that when she was at Paris they wou'd engage her in some Treaty, which might be contrary to the real Interests of her House, she had made a Declaration before she left Nancy, in the presence of a Notary, wherein she signified, that being obliged by the King's Command to go to Paris, she there protested, That whatever she might do prejudi∣cial to the House of Lorrain, was to be reckon'd null, as being extorted by force.
There was no longer any Discourse now in France to make use of this Princess's Name to keep Lorrain, nor of the Guardianship of the Places deliver'd up by Prince Charles. The King's Commissioners govern'd that Dutchy as if it had been a Conquer'd Province, and ga∣thered the Revenues of it without any Disturbance from the Duke's Officers. They augmented the Imposts and Taxes, which exceedingly oppressed the poor People, who still continued well affected to their ancient Princes. About this time an Edict of the Duke of Lorrain was stuck up in several places, wherein he prohibited his Subjects to obey the French, whom he called Usurpers and Tyrants. This Edict gave such Offence at Court, because they imagined the Lorrainers knew the Contents of it to be true, that they immediately order'd the Par∣liament to re-assume the Process which had for some time been discontinued against the Duke, as a Vassal of the Crown, as well for the pretended Rape of Monsieur, as for several other notorious Misdemeanours. For this end the Parliament sent to Duke Charles to make his personal Appearance on a day appointed at the Palace of Lorrain, without having any regard to the Dutch∣ess that lived there, and complain'd of it to the Cardinal to no purpose. While the Dutchess was at Paris, the Mareschal de la Force took the Castle of Biche, and afterwards La Mothe, which surrender'd by Composition on the 28th of July, after which there remained no other places in Lorrain that durst hold out for the ancient Lords of this Country.Siri Mem. Rec. Tom. 8. p. 108. So the Parliament having confiscated the Dutchy of Bar, the Cardinal caused the Decree to be executed with all imaginable Vigour. He erected a Court of Justice at Nancy, which adjudged to the King abundance of Pla∣ces in Lorrain, as having been alienated from the three Bishopricks of Metz, Thoul, and Verdun. He likewise got the Remainder of Lorrain to be solemnly seized up∣on, towards the Expences of the War, and obliged the Clergy, the Nobility, and the People, to take an Oath of Fidelity to the King. This Country was now look'd upon to be part of the Kingdom, which had formerly been taken from it by Usurpation and Violence; so that now they said it was but just to re-unite it to the
Crown; and to hinder the Lorrainers from making any Insurrections for the future, they caused several places to be dismantled, where they might have lodged themselves, unless the King would have kept Garrisons there, which wou'd have required a prodigious Expence. The Cardinal had all along kept a mighty correspon∣dence with the Swedes, till such time as he thought he might be able to effect by Wallestein's means a great part of what he did by the help of the Swedish Army. This man had got it into his Head to make himself be crown'd King of Bohemia, and to employ the Emperours Army against himself. He maintain'd a private Commerce with the Marquiss de Feuquieres, the King's Ambassador in Germany, and the King promis'd to assist him. As Wallestein passed for one of the chief Captains of his time, and was extreamly beloved by the Soldiery, it was pro∣bable that he wou'd at least give the Emperour a great deal of Trouble. It appears that upon this Expectation the Cardinal did not manage the Swedish Generals and Chancellour Oxenstern with that Address as he had for∣merly done.Siri Mem. Rec. T. . P. 32. There was likewise a sort of a Difference between them, because they had refused to surrender Philipsburg to the King, of which place they had made themselves Masters by composition. The King already was in possession of several Towns in Alsatia, the Bi∣shoprick of Triers, and in the Neighbourhood; but Philipsburg was necessary to him to secure and cover part of them. While this Coldness between the Cardinal and the Swedes lasted, the Emperour having discover'd part of Wallestein's Designs,The 15th of February. Sui▪ Hd. p 53. caused him to be killed at Egra, a City of Silesia, to which place he had retired; and so those Projects which the Cardinal had formed, in hopes that Wallestein wou'd in a short time begin to act in con∣cert with France, vanished in smoak. This News arri∣ving to the King's Ears, he publickly said, That all those that betrayed their Prince deserved the same fate. As for the Cardinal, he was so concern'd at his Death, that he cou'd not forbear saying, That the King might very well have spared to explain his Sentiments in publick. From this time it was necessary to shew a greater Regard to the Swedes, who did not so much propose to themselves to
free Germany from the Yoke of the House of Austria, as to gain some Advantage by the War. Upon the Occasion of Wallestein's Death, the King, considering the great Danger the Cardinal was in, by reason of the frequent Attempts that had been made upon his Life, thought it convenient to augment the Number of his Guards. Besides those he had before, he gave him 300 Musqueteers on Horseback; so that the Cardinal had now a compleat Sett of Guards, while the Queen-Mother was obliged to dismiss those of her Domesticks that were not of absolute necessity to her, because she had not wherewith to maintain them. The French accused ChancellourSui Mem. Rec. T. 7. p. 67. Oxenstern of De∣signing to possess himself of the Electorate of Mentz; and 'tis reported that Cardinal Richlieu had the like Am∣bition to make himself Elector of Triers.Sim Mem. T. . p. 113 To compass his Ends, he obtained of the Elector, by a good round Sum of Money, the Coadjutorship of the Bishoprick of Spire, and engaged him to send one of the Canons of the Church to Rome, to get his Bulls expedited for that place, as of his own proper motion, so that he might not be ob∣liged to appear himself in this Affair. He only caus'd a Letter to be writ to the Count de Noailles, who had been lately sent Ambassadour to Rome, to support the Demand of the Canon whom the Elector of Triers sent thither, and to talk with the Pope and the Barberini's about it. The first time that theIn Septem∣ber. Ambassadour men∣tion'd it to the Pope, his Holiness answered, that it was not a thing to be done, as being opposite to the Concor∣dats of Germany. Noailles, at his second Andience upon this Affair, represented to the Pope, That since the Swed were Masters of Spire, there was no other way to pre∣serve the Catholick Religion in that City, but by grant∣ing the Cardinal his Bulls to make him Coadjutor there. He maintain'd besides, that there was nothing in the Concordats of Germany which made a Foreigner unca∣pable to be Bishop of Spire. The Pope sent back the Am∣bassadour to the Cardinal of the Datary; and as the Court of Rome is seldom guilty of acting with Precipi∣tation, the Emperour had time enough to be informed of Cardinal Richlieu's Design, and laid such powersal Impe∣diments in the way, that this Affair came to nothing.
At the same time the Duke of Weimar, and Mareschal Horn, the Swedish Generals,The 6th of Septemb. lost the famous Battel of Norlingue, which put their Affairs in a bad condition, and gave terrible Apprehensions to the Cardinal as soon as he received the News. He was afraid that the Im∣perialists wou'd utterly ruine the other Party in a short time, because they only subsisted by their Victories. If that once happen'd, it was justly to be feared that the Emperour's Forces wou'd pour into Lorrain, while the Spaniards enrer'd France by the way of Picardy or Cham∣pagne. Besides, the latter threatned to make a Descent upon Provence, and attack Languedoc by Sea. Besides, they had just reason to suspect that the Duke of Savoy wou'd joyn them, because they had not kept their Pro∣mise with him as to the Sum they had agreed to pay him for Pignerol. He caused Turin and Montmelian to be fortified, and had given some other signs of his being discontented. All this gave a great deal of Inquietude to the Cardinal,The 13th of September. Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. P. 163. who had a long Conversation with Fa∣ther Joseph about it; and they concluded that the Prote∣stant League was in very great danger, because they were not in a condition to bring an Army into the Field presently: so that t w bsolutely necessary to relieve them with all speed, as they desired. Oxenstern and the Confederates who had formerly refused to deliver up Philipsburg to France, were now willing to surrender it, and consented to have a Bridge built there, and a Fort on the other ide the Rhine, to defend it. Thus the Affairs of Germany coming to be debated in the Council, the Cardinal was of opinion, That no∣thing could so much prejudice his Majesty's Affairs as to express any consternation at the Defeat of Norlingue: That if the Protestant Party was entirely ruined in Ger∣many, all the Forces of the House of Austriae wou'd pour down like a Torrent upon France: That the con∣dition of the Protestants demanded a speedy and vigo∣rous Relief, and a Name capable of giving courage to the Imperial Cities, who would otherwise disengage themselves from the League, and make a separate Peace, as well as the other Members of which it was composed: That although France should refuse to in∣terpose in the Affairs of Germany, yet the House of
Austria would be no less provoked against her, and only believe that this proceeded from her Weakness and Fear: That his Majesty cou'd not possibly act worse than so to manage Matters as to let France alone sustain the shock of Austria, which wou'd most infallibly hap∣pen if they did not take care to maintain the Party which had given that House so much trouble for so many years: That in resolving to support them, the worst that cou'd fall out was to keep up the War in Germany by the Assistance of the Confederate Protestant Princes; whereas otherwise they must soon expect to behold the same War in the heart of France, without having any Friends to help them: That therefore the best way wou'd be to encourage these Princes, to find out Money, and raise sufficient Forces to strengthen the Army of the Mareschals de la Force and de Brezé, who were appointed to command in Germany. This Advice was follow'd, and Orders were sent in the mean time to the Mareschal de la Force, who was in Lorrain, to advance towards the Rhine to oppose the progress of the Imperialists, that already threaten'd to joyn the Army of the Marquiss d'Aytone and of Prince Thomas, and with them to enter Lorrain. Several places of Alsatia and the Palatinate, which the Swedes were forced to abandon to form an Army out of the Forces of these Garrisons, put themselves under the protection of France, that they might not fall into the hands of the Im∣perialists. The Mareschal de la Force marched with 25000 Foot, and 4000 Horse towards the Rhine between Cob∣lentz and Brisac, and in the interim a new Treaty was concluded with the Protestant Confederates, who were promis'd great Supplies of Men and Money. In conse∣quence of this Treaty, the Swedes deliveredThe 7th of October. Philipsburg to the French, and the Prince of Wirtemberg, who was to be Governour of the place, took the Oaths of Fide∣lity to the King. The Cardinal was extreamly glad to see so important a City in the hands of his Majesty, it being capable to stop the Imperialists, in case they de∣signed to pass the Rhine, to make their way into Lorrain; and the Mareschal de la Force was order'd not to stir ar from it, least the Enemies shou'd attempt to carry it by force.
The Marquis de Rôny, who was Grand Master of the Artillery of France, being dead, the Cardinal procured this place to be given to the Marquiss de la Meilleroys,Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. P. 180, &c. his Cousin, who had exercised it by Commission ever since the Marquiss de Rôny was obliged to leave the Court. Not long after a Report was spread abroad, that the King was disgusted with the Cardinal, because this Prelate perswaded him to go in person upon the Frontiers of Germany, to encourage the Protestant Party. The King was better pleas'd to live at one of his Hou∣ses of Pleasure near Paris, than to engage himself in so tedious a Journey. 'Tis pretended by some, that his Confessor put some Scruples into his Head, for assisting the Hereticks, for the Banishment of the Queen-Mother, and his Invasion of Lorrain. It was some time before he wou'd see the Cardinal; but the latter having consulted eight Divines of the Sorbone upon his Majesty's Scruples, four of them made Answer, that in the present conjuncture of Affairs, his Majesty was obliged to continue to act upon the same foot, to preserve Tranquillity in his Kingdom, and that this sufficiently justified his Con∣duct. Soon after, the King began a-fresh to visit the Cardinal, and did him the honour to come to the Castle of Chilly, where this Minister then was, to consult with him as formerly about the most important Affairs of the Crown. The End of the Fourth Book.
THE HISTORY Of the FAMOUS Cardinal de RICHLIEƲ. VOL. II. BOOK V. Containing the most material Passages of his Life, from the Year 1635 to the Year 1638. THE Duke of Orleans being now taken in∣to Favour, and Puilaurens his Consident see∣ing himself a Duke and Peer of France, they imagined that they had nothing more to fear, and that they might manage the Cardinal as they had formerly done.Siri Me Rec. T. 8. P. 107. So this Minister having sent word to Puilaurens that if he cou'd per∣swade Monsieur to consent to have his Marriage annull'd, they wou'd reward him with the Command of an Ar∣my, and make him a Mareschal of France; Puilaurens laughed at this proposal, and thought he might railly the Cardinal safely enough. Coudrai Montpensier, who
had the greatest credit with the Duke of Orleans next to Puilaurens, was of the same humour, and had as little Inclination to comply with the Minister's pleasure as the other. The Cardinal fansied he was the Man that pos∣sessed Philaurens with these ambitious Thoughts; so that he resolved to remove him. Upon this he tells Puilau∣rens, that since he had contracted so near an Alliance with him, he was desirous to be united still more close∣ly to him, but that he cou'd not do it, so long as he kept Company with Coudrai Montpensier, and reckoned him one of his best Friends. Whether Philaurens distrust∣ed that the Cardinal had some Design upon him, or else was resolved to pay no farther regard to this Minister, instead of discarding him, as he was desired, he gave him the next Apartment to his own; which procedure began to incense the Cardinal, whom all the other Mi∣nisters obeyed at the first word, and who cou'd not di∣gest this Opposition from the Favourite of the Duke of Orleans, whom he had so far honour'd, as to give him one of his Relations in Marriage. Monsieur generally resided at Blois, andSiri Mem. Rec. T. 8. P. 199, &c. it happen'd while he was there, that several Spaniards of Quality who travell'd from Flanders to Spain by Land, came to Blois to pay their Respects to him, who received them very courteously. He frequently mention'd the Gentle∣men of that Country with great esteem, as if he intended to shew his Gratitude for the kind Reception he found among them, and engage them to use Madam well, who still continued in their Territories. This made Don Cristoval Benavides, the Spanish Ambassadour, say, That although Monsieur left the Low-Countries without taking his leave; yet if he went thither a hundred times, and came back as often after the same manner, he should still find a hearty Welcome there. This Conduct of Mon∣sieur, and the Discourses of the Spaniards, gave the Mi∣nisters occasion to suspect, that he still kept some private Intelligence with them, or at least preserv'd an Affection to that Nation, which might be prejudicial to France in the present posture of Affairs. On the other hand, the Duke of Orleans continually protested, that if the King cou'd find any way to dissolve his Marriage legally, he wou'd not oppose it; but that he wou'd never go to tell
the Parliament a Sham-story that he was forced to this Match by the Princes of Lorrain, since he cou'd neither do it in Conscience nor in Honour. He praised the Princess Margaret exceedingly, and preferr'd her infi∣nitely, for her good Qualities, to his first Wife. He frequently writ to her, and sent her Money, Cloaths, Liveries for her Servants, two Coaches, and five thou∣sand Crowns a Month towards her Expence. The Cardinal was of opinion, that this inflexible steadiness of Monsieur cou'd only proceed from the Ad∣vice of Puilaurens: nay, he pretended that this shew'd him to be ill affected to the King's Person, and that he desired to behold the Duke of Orleans upon the Throne, that he might become chief Minister of State; as if the Marriage of Monsieur had any relation to the King's Death. Puilaurens was accused of being familiarly ac∣quainted with one Vieux-Pont, a Domestick of Monsieur, who had spoken scandalously of His Majesty. He was likewise charged with keeping a correspondence with the House of Lorrian; and that the reason why he ap∣proved this Marriage was, that this House might sup∣port the Prince, in case the King happen'd to die. Thus it was interpreted a Crime in the Duke of Orleans, be∣cause he wou'd not depend upon the Discretion of the Minister for his Succession to the Crown; and yet this Minister must be allow'd to take what Securities he pleas'd against the whole Royal Family, and all the Princes of the Blood. The Cardinal, who had always taken great care to keep up that Jealousie which the King ever since his In∣fancy had entertain'd against his Brother, easily perswa∣ded him that all these Practices of Monsieur only tend∣ed to dethrone him, and that there was no other way to prevent the Designs of his Domesticks, but to destroy them. So the King was resolved to apprehend Puilau∣rens; and that he might exute it with more facility, they were contiving of means to draw him from Blois to Paris. To effect this, a Ball was proposed at the Carnaval, where Monsieur and Puilaurens were invited to dance, as well as the King. They came to Paris upon this Occasion, and Monsieur was mightily caress'd on all hands, though they cou'd not prevail with him to
make the least step towards the Dissolution of his Mar∣riage. The 14th of February was the Day agreed upon to ap∣prehend Puilaurens; and the Guards at the Louvre were order'd to be doubled. This had like to have discover∣ed their Plot; for a Footman belonging to the Duke of Orleans having observed it, went to his Master to bid him have a care of himself, because the Court had some extraordinary Design on foot. This Prince came to the Louvre about Two a clock in the Afternoon, to practise the Ball before-hand, when he received this Advice; but as foresight was none of his Talents, he neglected it, and went to the King's Chamber, where he stayed till the Cardinal came there. They had sent to find him out at the Keeper of the Seals, where he dined, and carried the Marquiss Du Fargis and Coudrai Montpensier with him. When he went away he took du Fargis to the Louvre along with him, and gave Orders for the other to be apprehended when he offer'd to be gone; which was accordingly executed. Every thing was ready at the Louvre to begin the Ball, and none of the Company were wanting but only Puilaurens, who made the rest wait above half an hour after the time appointed; which made the King and the Cardinal suspect that he was in∣formed of the Design against him. At last he came, and after he had discoursed some time with the King, the Duke of Orleans, the Cardinal, and other Noblemen of the Court that were present, the King took Monsieur by the hand, and led him to his Closet. This was the Sig∣nal they agreed upon with the Marquiss de Gordes, and the Count de Charot, Captains of the Life-Guards, when they were to arrest Puilaurens and du Fargis. They immediately executed the King's Orders, and these two Domesticks of the Monsieur were taken up without any noise. The King, as soon as he had recei∣ved notice of it, told this Prince what he had done, and at the same time embraced him, and assured him that he was perfectly well satisfied with him. He added that Puilaurens was an ungrateful Wretch, and that Monsieur coud never expect to be well serv'd by him, after his horrid Ingratitude to the Crown which had been so kind to him. The Duke seem'd to be somewhat concerned
at it; but fearing to be served after the same manner himself, he said he would abandon Puilaurens for ever, if he had made any unhandsome Returns to His Maje∣sty's Favours. The Cardinal came afterwards into the King's Closet, whose Presence hearten'd Monsieur a lit∣tle, for he concluded that if there had been any Design to apprehend him, the Cardinal durst not appear in that place. This Minister complimented him afresh, and as∣sured him it was his Majesty's Pleasure, that for the fu∣ture he shou'd assist at the Council. Monsieur asked him whether the King gave him leave to stir out of the Louvre, and go the Palace of Guise, where he lodg∣ed. The Cardinal told him he might go when he plea∣sed; so this Prince, after he had waited upon the Queen at her Apartment, where the King then was, retired. Ne∣vertheless he returned to the Louvre towards the Even∣ing, although several of his Domesticks had been seized. Puilaurens and du Fargis lay at the Louvre, and were conducted the next day to the Castle of Vincennes; but Coudrai Montpensier was carried to the Bastile. Upon this the King publish'd a circular Letter, which was sent to the Parliaments, and to the Governours of Provinces, to acquaint them, that he had been obliged, for several weighty Reasons, to apprehend some of Mon∣sieur's Domesticks. It was penn'd in an obscure style, because the Prisoners were not as yet convicted of any crime; but most People concluded, that the chief Mi∣nister had caused Puilaurens to be confin'd, because he cou'd not trust him any longer, and that he wou'd per∣haps carry his Revenge farther. Richlieu sent the Cardi∣nal de la Valette and Bouthillier to Monsieur, to give him fresh Assurances, that he was wholly at his Service, and to tell him, he was heartily sorry that Puilaurens had forced the King, by committing fresh crimes, to take so rigorous a course with him. It was observed that the Cardinal did not go himself to the Palace of Guise, fearing perhaps least a fancy should take the Duke of Orleans to revenge this ill Usage. This Prince told them, that he had promis'd to be a faithful Servant to the King, and a Friend of the Cardinal, and that he wou'd keep his Word: That if he found Puilaurens was really guilty, let his fault be what it wou'd, he wou'd
be so far from making any Intercession for him, that he wou'd be the first man that shou'd demand Justice upon him: That he did not believe he had committed any new crimes: and, That if he kept any commerce with Vieux-Pont, it was about some matters of Gallantry in Flauders, and not Affairs of State: That if they thought it proceeded from the Advice of Puilaurens, that he stuck to his Marriage, they were mightily deceived: and, That neither Puilaurens, nor any other man in the World, shou'd make him give his consent to a Thing which he believ'd to be against his conscience. This unalterable Resolution of Gaston strangely perplex'd the Cardinal, who cou'd not endure to see him married to a Princess whose family he had so lately ruin'd. It was likewise no small Mortification to the Minister, that People laugh'd at the Arrest which he had sent to the Parliament, by which they were to declare, that Monsieur cou'd not contract a Marriage in Lorrain. After this, the Duke of Orleans return'd to Blou; from which place, merely for his Diversion, he took a Journey as far as Nantes, which made the Court believe that he went thither to ship himself for England; but his Return dissipated the Fears they began to entertain that he wou'd go out of the Kingdom again. In the mean time Puilaurens died at VincennesThe first of July., after a few days sickness, which his Vexation, as well as his close Imprisonment, threw him into. The Duke of Orleans was extreamly concern'd at the News; and this was the second of his Favourites whom the Cardinal had caus'd to die in Prison, without convicting them of any other crime than that unpardonable one of not being over∣devoted to his Pleasure. Few people regretted the death of Puilaurens, whose Pride and Arrogance had render'd him insupportable to all Mankind. Ever since his Con∣finement the Court had given Monsieur a Council, com∣posed of such persons as had an entire Dependence upon the Cardinal. Bouthillier was the chief of it, with the Title of Chancellour; and the others were the Abbot of Elbene, Goulas his Secretary, and the Abbot of La Ri∣viere his Chaplain. Not long after, the Cardinal summon'd the Clergy of France to meet at Paris, and the King sent to the As∣sembly
to know of them what were their Sentiments concerning the Marriages of the Princes of the Blood, who might pretend to the Succession of the Crown, and particularly of those that stood nearest to it, when they were made not only without his Majesty's consent, but even against his express Prohibition. Upon this the As∣sembly deputed certain Bishops to consult about this Affair, with several Divines, both Regulars and Secu∣lars. These Bishops havingThe 6th of July. made their Report to the Assembly, they return'd their Answer the next day, just as the Cardinal desired, That Marriages might be ren∣der'd null, by ancient Customs granted upon Reason, and authorized by the Church: That the Custom of France did not allow the Princes of the Blood, but espe∣cially the Presumptive Heirs of the Crown, to marry without the King's Consent, and much less against his positive Commands: That Marriages of this nature were illegitimate and void, for want of an essential Condition, without which Princes cou'd not marry law∣fully: That this Custom of France was reasonable, an∣cient, established by a legal Prescription, and authorized by the Church. The Queen-Mother having received Advice of this Declaration, writ to Rome to desire his Holiness to forbid the Clergy of France to interpose in this Affair; because it was notorious to all the World, that this Convocation was almost wholly composed of Court-Bishops, who to advance their own Fortunes, were ready to say every thing the King and his Minister wou'd have them; and that if it was the King's Pleasure, nay if one of his Ministers was of a different Opinion, they wou'd find no Difficulty to frame another Declara∣tion directly opposite to the former. Lest the Spaniards might obtain of the Pope a Decla∣ration contrary to that of the Clergy of France, or lest his Holiness might express his Dislike of it,The 12th of October. the King sent the Bishop of Montpelier to Rome, to instruct him for what Reasons they had declared the Marriage of his Brother to be null. But he was expresly ordered, not to let fall the least Word by which it might be gather'd that the King had sent him thither, as having any occa∣sion for the Papal Authority to support his Right, or as if the Nullity of Monsieur's Marriage was doubtful. He
was only commanded to inform the Pope what dangerous consequences an Alliance with the House of Lorrain might derive upon the Crown, and to represent to him the seve∣ral just Reasons his Majesty had to complain of the Prin∣ces of that Family. The Queen-Mother had sent the Viscount Fabbroni,In May. Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 272. some months before, to Rome, to be her Resident at that Court, and endeavour to perswade the Pope to em∣ploy his Interest to reconcile her to the King, since she cou'd not prevail upon the Cardinal, who was resolved to let her die out of the Kingdom.The 25th of May. Siri, ibid. At the same time she writ to the Pope, to prevent the two Crowns from coming to an open Rupture, and to procure a general Peace to Europe. In another Letter, which almost con∣tains the same Things,The 1st of June. Aubery's Life of the Card. Lib. 4. Cap. 53. she nominated for her Resident not the Viscount, but the Abbot Fabbroni, her Almoner. The Queen-Mother owns in this Letter, that she had dispatched a Gentleman to the Emperour to incline him to a Peace; perhaps out of this consideration, That when it came to be concluded, she might be comprehended in it, and so might once more see France in spight of the Cardinal. She had likewise sent to the King of Spain, for the same Reason, as it appear'd by another of her Letters toSee it in Aubery's Life of the Cardinal, lib. 4..5. Mazarine, Nuncio extraordinary in France. As the Cardinal was the chief man that had voted for de∣claring a War against Spain, to render himself more ne∣cessary to the King than he wou'd have been in time of Peace, she thought it wou'd be no small Mortification to him to see her take the contrary Party, which besides was more suitable for her self, who was Mother to the King of France, and to the Queen of Spain, than that which this Minister had perswaded the King to take. Some time after, she writ a longDated the Last of Aug. Aubery, ibid. Letter to the King, which she address'd to Mazarine, as not knowing how to have it brought any other way to his Majesty. But she was mightily mistaken in her man; for Mazarine was entirely devoted to the Minister, without troubling himself whether this was conformable to his Character of Nuncio. Thus he deliver'd it into the Cardinal's hands,Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. P. 33. who cou'd have been content to suppress it, but durst not do it, because he understood that the Queen had sent other Copies of the Letter to be carried to the
King. The Expedient he made use of, to hinder this Letter from producing any effect, was, to accuse the Queen-Mother for having endeavour'd to corrupt the Duke of Rohan, in favour of the Spaniards, by the means of one Clausel, who was hanged for that reason. The Contents of this Letter principally related to the War, from which the Queen endeavour'd to disswade her Son by all manner of Arguments. She told him, among other Things, That War is never just but when it is neces∣sary, and that the Justice and Necessity of it are only found∣ed upon Preservation and Defence, which are not lawful but when all other means are insufficient; that War is an Evil which is not tolerated but to avoid a greater: And what Evil, continued she, are you constrain'd to avoid? and what Advantage can you expect equal to the Loss you expose your self to? Hitherto you have been the Arbitrator of Peace and War, but so soon as you quit the Quality of a Judge for that of a Party, neither of the two will any longer depend upon you. The Forces, the Conduct, and the Interests of your Enemies will be balanced with yours. The disproportion between them not being extraordinary, consequently the Suc∣cess cannot be infallible; and if they are uncertain, how can you be assured that the ill, which must of necessity hap∣pen to one of the two Parties, will not fall upon yours. She afterwards represented to him the Mischiefs which France might suffer by this War, and told him, that his Father had always recommended to her to keep the Kingdom in Peace with her Neighbours; and that if ever she saw the King her Son ready to declare War against them, She was to conjure him by his ashes, and by his memory, not to come to those Extremities; or if he happen'd to be engaged in them, she shou'd perswade him to bring a speedy remedy to them, and listen to a Peace, as being the properest means to preserve what he had left him, having purchased it with his own blood, and by the perils and fatigues of twenty years. Mazarine, to acquit himself outwardly of his Duty as Nuncio Extraordinary, who was sent on purpose for the Peace, desired the King to answer this Letter; but the King refus'd to do it. He alledg'd, for the reason of his silence, that if he answer'd a Letter so seditious, so much inclining to the Spanish Interest, and so full of pretended
Affection, while the Queen-Mother endeavour'd to cor∣rupt the Duke of Rohan, he shou'd be forced to lay be∣fore him the great Injury she did to France: That she made a great Bustle about the Advice of the late King, to maintain a Peace with Spain; but that the design of it was, to decry the present Government, to render the Cardinal odious, and to cause an Insurrection of the Peo∣ple: That when the Queen-Mother wou'd carry her self truly like a Mother, he wou'd honour her as such; and that it was purely out of respect to her, that he wou'd not answer her Letter; but that the Nuncio might return her such an Answer as he shou'd think convenient. All this whileSiri, Ibid. p. 360. Monsieur continued firm in his Reso∣lution not to agree to have his Marriage declared null. All that they cou'd draw from him was, That if the Pope declared he might marry again in Conscience, he wou'd do whatever the King desired of him: probably because he knew the Court of Rome wou'd never consent to it. He only expressed himself in this manner when he was at Court; for when he was at home, he did not speak a word, not daring to open his mind to any of those that were about him, whom he knew to be the Cardinal's Creatures. He often appeared extreamly thoughtful and melancholy, so that nothing cou'd divert him. People remark'd another thing at Court, which was, That the Cardinal had so ordered Affairs that the Privy-Council met at his Palace at Ruel, whither the King him∣self was used to come from S. Germain or Versailles. It is true indeed, he excused it upon the score of his Illness, but as his Indisposition was not so great but he cou'd walk out in his Garden, several persons were of opinion that he was afraid of being in a place where he was not the strongest. If he went at any time to S. Germain, it was at such times as no body cou'd tell whether he wou'd go thither or no, as if he did it purposely to break any measures that might be taken against him. But after all, if the King was resolved to destroy him, all these precautions were useless; for he had found in a moment, all the Court and Kingdom upon his hands. The Princes of the Blood whom he treated so disrespectfully, and the People whom he daily oppressed with new Imposts and Taxes, equally hated him, and nothing was capable to
save him. Thus this mighty Authority, founded whol∣ly upon the King's Weakness, and a perpertual series of Acts of Violence, was attended with no little Inquietude. In the mean time the Cardinal, being resolved to pre∣serve his post by the same ways as he had hitherto used, continued to act with the same heat against the Queen-Mother. As soon as he knew that Abbot Fabbroni was at Rome in Quality of Resident from the Queen-Mother, he complain'd of it to the Pope by the Count de Noailles, who told him, That the Queen-Mother not being a Soveraign, but a Subject of the King, had no right to keep a Resident at Rome, and that she ought to have re∣course to the Ambassadour of France. The Pope an∣swered, that simple Bishops had their Agents there, and that there were several Examples of the like nature. But whether he sent to inform Fabbroni of it, or whether the latter was afraid of having some Affront put upon him, he retired immediately to Florence, and thus eas'd the Cardinal of the trouble to get him removed from that place. The Queen-Mother provoked to the highest degree to find her Design of keeping a Resident at Rome thus oppo∣sed, writ a longDated Dec. 7. See Aubery, l. 4. c. 54. Letter to the Pope, wherein she de∣scribed the Cardinal's Conduct in very severe terms. She told him that this Minister, who set the Ambassadour up∣on such an impertinent Harangue, very foolishly urged that she was to make use of the King's Ambassadour, a thing against common sense, it being certain that these Ambassadours wou'd concern themselves in nothing she desired them to do, without an express Order from the King: That it was impossible for her to get any thing deliver'd to His Majesty, since Cardinal Richlieu had de∣prived her of all means of acquainting him with her Cir∣cumstances, by Letters, or otherwise: That the Ambas∣sadours who absolutely depended upon the good Will of the Cardinal, were obliged to act according to the Passi∣ons of this Minister, to avoid the loss of their Lives, their Estates, and Honours. That thus they treated, with no other Dgn but to foment the Divisions that were be∣tween the Christian Princes, to carry Subjects to Rebel∣lion against their Soveraigns, and to set all Christendom in a Flame: That they continually talked of a Peace
without ever designing to effect it: That they made no Scruple to overturn all Laws, both Divine and Humane, to fly directly in the face of the Apostolick Authority, and to violate the Sacraments of the Church, by their endeavouring to break off the Marriage of the Duke of Orleans: That she desir'd the Pope to allow her the Fa∣vour to keep a Resident, to give him an Account of all that she knew, which might facilitate a General Peace: That the Cardinal abundantly discovered his Hatred and Malice against her by seeking to rob her of an Honour which belonged to her: That the King had no hand in these Violences, and that he durst not open his mind to those that were about him, who were all gained over to the Cardinal by Bribes, or else aw'd out of their Duty by the fear of punishment: That he attempted by his Threats to gain an Absolute power over his Holiness; but that she cou'd assure the Pope, that although the Cardinal was capable of all sorts of Wickedness, yet he was of so fearful a Temper, that he durst never under∣take so horrible and so impious an Attempt as that was with which he had threaten'd him, She means his design perhaps to make himself Patriarch of France:) That the Emperour and Catholick King had not condemn'd the Affection she express'd towards France, nor disapproved of her Desires of a Peace, but on the contrary, had esteem'd her the more for it: That the Cardinal wou'd rather consent to have all France embroil'd, than suffer her to concern her self about a Peace. In the whole course of this Letter, she represents the King as more depending upon his Minister than the Minister upon him, although she seems desirous to excuse the King all along. However, this Letter produced no effect, since, as it has been already said, Fabbroni was forced to withdraw to Florence; and the Efforts the Queen-Mother used to incline France to a Peace, had no better Success. This same Year the Cardinal gave several Mortifica∣tions to the Count de Soissons,Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 207. who having occasion to complain of the Marquiss de Seneterre, was obliged to dis∣semble his Resentments in consideration of the Minister, who gave the Countess of Soissons, his Mother, to under∣stand, that he had taken Seneterre into his protection. The Count afterwards made the Cardinal a Visit, which
was a thing he had never done before, because he cou'd not suffer this Prelate to take the Right-hand of him at his House, according to the custom of Rome. In the midst of these Disorders and Quarrels in the Royal Family, which I have related together, that I might not interrupt the series of Foreign Affairs, the Car∣dinal employ'd his Majesty's Forces against the House of Austria with that unwearied Application and Vigour as if nothing else had taken up his Thoughts. After several Proposals, to no purpose, concerning the means of accommodating the Differences of the Crowns by the way of Negotiation, they began on both sides to make preparations for an open War.The 24th of January. About the be∣ginning of this Year Philipsburg was surprized by the Imperialists, under the conduct of Braumberger, who had been Governour of the place before it fell into the hands of the Swedes. Some Soldiers, apparell'd like Peasants, and driving some Waggons laden with Wine, cut the Throats of the Corps de Garde, while Braumberger scaled the place on another side; and this was done so sudden∣ly, that the French Garrison were made Prisoners, toge∣ther with the Governour, before they were in a condi∣tion to defend themselves, or make their Escape. The Cardinal received this unwelcome News with extraordi∣nary concern, by reason of the Importance of the place, and the great Booty which the Enemies found there. The Magazines were full of all sorts of Ammunition and Provision, and there was above two hundred thousand Crowns in ready money, to supply the Necessities of the Army, which was in Winter-Quarters in Bergstraat. Be∣sides this, this place had cost four hundred thousand Crowns, which they gave the Swedes, to oblige them to deliver it up to France; and the Cardinal's Flatterers had published, that his Eminence had found a way to make the strongest place in Germany fall into the King's hands without so much as drawing a Sword for it, which served to bridle the Palatinate and several other Territo∣ries, which was a secure Pass upon the Rhine, and where an Arsenal and Magazine might be made, by the means of which, they might, whenever they pleased, car∣ry the War into the very heart of Germany. The greater Value the Cardinal had set upon this Acquisition, the
more did the Loss of it mortifie him. The King likewise was so concerned at this Disgrace, that whereas he was wholly employ'd about the Cloaths for the Ball above∣mentioned, he retired the next day to Versailles, which wonderfully displeased the Cardinal, who wou'd have fain dissembl'd this Loss. Nevertheless, not finding him∣self fit to attend State-Affairs in the present Agitation of his Mind, he went to Ruel, under a pretence that his Health required it; and 'tis reported, that the King went to Versailles before, to give him an opportunity to leave Paris. Father Joseph who was related to Arnaud the Governour, and who had procured him that Employ∣ment, was under no less a Confusion, while the Ene∣mies of the Cardinal and his Confident rejoyced to see their Vanity punished. To prevent the dangerous Consequences which the Loss of Philipsburg might occasion, Orders were dis∣patched to the Mareschals de la Force and de Brezé, not to stir from Bergstraat, till Manheim and Heidelburg were fortified as well as their Situation would permit. After this, it was judged expedient that the Duke of Weimar should joyn his Army with that of his Majesty, to beat the Imperialists out of the Country of Wirtemburg, and to deliver Ʋlm, Norimberg, and Ausburg. Feuquieres al∣so was sent back into Germany to be present at the Meet∣ing of the sour Circles, which was to be at Wormes, and to encourage all the Confederates to act with greater Vi∣gour and Resolution. In the mean time greatSiri Mem▪ Rec. T. 8. p. 218. prepara∣tions were made in France to raise and keep on foot a hundred and fifty thousand Men the next Campaign, in several places, where France was obliged to keep Ar∣mies. The Result of the Diet of Wormes was, That the King of France should be forthwith acquainted that they wou'd act with all imaginable Vigour for the Common Cause; and that they desired him at the same time to pay the Ar∣my of the Circles commanded by the Duke of Weimar, consisting of seven thousand Foot, and four thousand Horse. This was a small Army, but they had none but brave experienc'd Men in it, and the Officers were all Soldiers of Fortune, who expected to raise their Fortune no other way but by the Sword. But the Swedish Army
commanded by Jean Banier, had near fifty thousand men, with some Troops of the Allies. Thus notwith∣standing the Loss of Philipsburg, they took fresh Courage, and flatter'd themselves, that if France assisted them, they shou'd be able to beat the Imperialists back into Austria. On the other side the Imperial Generals, Charles Duke of Lorrain, Galas, the Counts of Mansfeld and Piccolomini, and Jean de Werth, being assembled at Aschaffemburg, did not question but they shou'd be in a capacity to break their way into Lorrain, and from thence into France, to hinder the King from succouring the Protestant League in Germany. The French Generals open'd the Campaign by attack∣ing Spire, which had received an Imperial Garrison. They took it by Capitulation on the 21st of March, and dismantled it, in spight of Galas, who was on the other side the Rhine. Their Joy for the Taking of this place was not of long continuance, for they received Advice that Treves had been surprized on the 26th of the same Month, and that the Archbishop, who inclined too much to the French Interest, was made a Prisoner in his own Palace. Bussy-lamet the Son commanded there in the Absence of his Father, who was gone to Coblentz a little before: and the Count d' Emden, Governour of Luxem∣burg, surprized the place by the Stratagem of a Native of the Diocese of Liege, whose Name was Cerfontaine, who in the night-time came up to the Walls with Barks full of Soldiers, which he pretended were laden with Salt. At last he blew up one of the Gates with a Pe∣tard, thro' which he enter'd with 2000 Foot, and attacked the French that were got together in the Market-place. Soon after another Gate was broke open after the same manner, and gave the Count d' Emden an opportunity to enter into the City with 500 Horse. Bussy-lamet was taken Prisoner with 4 or 500 men, and the Archbishop, after he had seen his own Palace rifled, was carried to Luxemburg, and from thence to the Castle of Antwerp. As soon as this News arriv'd at the Court of France, they express'd a mighty Indignation against the Spaniards, as if it had not been as lawful for them to assist the Em∣perour, as it was for the French to support the Swedes. They talked of carrying the War into the Low-Countries,
and Orders were given to send the King's Equipages to Compiegne, that so he might take the Road directly to S. Quintin. But as an open Rupture with Spain required them to march with more circumspection, 'twas thought fit to retard the King's Journey eight days longer, and to call a grand Council of War, where all the Princes of the Blood, and several other Lords, were to assist. I will relate the Consequences of this Affair, after I have fi∣nished the Narration of what happen'd in Germany this Campaign, between the French and the Imperialists. The terrible Cold which theSiri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 227. French had suffer'd in the Bergstraat, and in the Expedition of Spire which was somewhat of the earliest, occasion'd great sickness in the Army. Out of 28 Royal Regiments that had passed the Rhine, there were scarce left 10000 men that were in a condition to bear the Fatigues of a War, when they re∣passed that River. The Army of the Duke of Weimar was not in much better circumstances; so that it was not safe to rely either upon one or the other. In the mean time the Cardinal thought fit to draw off some of the German Regiments to join them with the Army of Cham∣pagne, which was to act in Flanders; and on the side of Cermany he resolved to be upon the Defensive, only to hinder the Imperialists from entring Lorrain. Orders were sent to Feuquieres to raise 12000 Germans to re∣inforce the Army of the Duke of Weimar, and to com∣mand them under him. This Army resolved to stay up∣on the Rhine, while the Mareschal de la Force command∣ed a Body of 15000 men, upon the Frontiers of Lorrain. It was hoped that the Swedes, and the Confederate Prin∣ces of the Houses of Lunenburg and Hesse, wou'd em∣ploy one part of the Imperial Forces on the other side the Rhine, and that by this means the Duke of Weimar and the Mareschal de la Force would be able to oppose the rest. Oxenstiern theSiri. Ibid. p. 235. Chancellour of Sweden came to Paris in April, to renew the former Treaties, and see how they must act in Germany against the common Enemy. Bouthillier and he sign'd a new Treaty on the 28th of October, by which the former were confirmed, and the two Crowns obliged themselves reciprocally to assist their Allies, and not to enter into a Peace or Truce one with∣out
another. He was received with uncommon honours at Paris; for they not only Treated him, as they do Am∣bassadours of Crown'd Heads, but bore all his Expence: Nay, the Cardinal made him some Visits, an Honour which he vouchsafed to very few persons, but he wou'd not give him the Right-hand at his Palace, nor feign him∣self sick, as he sometimes did in favour of the Ambassa∣dours of England, who wou'd by no means allow the Prerogatives that those of the Purple assume. Oxenstiern did not regard these Formalities, in consideration, as he said, of the extraordinary Merits of the Minister with whom he had to do. He parted from Paris on the 3d of May for Holland, from whence he was to go into the Lower Saxony to oblige the House of Lunenburg to joyn their Troops with those of the Landgrave of Hesse, and Banier, to beat Galas out of the Country of Wirtemburg, and oblige Piccolomini to retire from the Main. The SwedesSiri Mem. Rec. Tom. 8. p. 330. not being able to prevail with the Prin∣ces their Allies to joyn with them in this Design, Galas pass'd the Rhine, took Wormes, and having joyn'd Mans∣feld, they made together an Army of 12000 Horse, and 15000 Foot. The Duke of Lorrain and Jean de Werth ap∣proached likewise on the same side, so that now it was to be feared that they wou'd enter into France with an Army of 25000 Horse, and as many Foot, since there were not Forces sufficient to oppose their March: The Armies of Germany were not in a condition to make Head against them, and the rest were employ'd either in the Low-Countries or in Italy. The Levies that had been rais'd to enlarge and compleat the Troops commanded by the Mareschal de la Force, and Feuquieres, were in a manner come to nothing, partly by Desertions, and partly by the Treachery of the Colonels and Captains, who received Pay for compleat Companies, although they had not half the effective Soldiers they were obliged to have. Those that knew the present state of Affairs, were sur∣prized to behold a flourishing Kingdom, full of Men and Money, which paid above a hundred and fifty thousand Men, out of a Design to humble the House of Austria, shou'd have no more than six thousand Horse and twenty thousand Foot to oppose an Army of fifty thousand Men; so that it might justly fear to see the Imperial Colours in
a short time all about Paris. This sufficiently discovered how slightly the Cardinal had engag'd himself in a War, which was not to be managed like a Court-Intrigue, by Tricks, and putting Chimera's into the King's Head. But the Imperialists, instead of speedily executing the Design which had been proposed to enter into Lorrain, and from thence into Champagne, lost a great deal of time unprofitably. Galas retired to Sarbruck till the rest came up to him, where he in a manner block'd up Mentz, Creutsnack, and other Places belonging to the Swedes; but this was nothing in comparison of what the Impe∣rial Army might have done, if they had gone immediate∣ly into Champagne. In the mean time the Duke of Wei∣mar marched to cover Lorrain, and hinder'd Galas from making any Attempts on that side: nay, he offer'd to force this General to re-pass the Rhine, if they would speedily send him 3000 Horse and 15000 Foot. The Cardinal, who was afraid that the Imperialists wou'd take those Advantages which their Numbers as well as the Opportunity it self had put into their hands, told his trusty Confident Father Joseph, That he saw the Kingdom was in a very dangerous condition, and that he knew not what Remedies to apply to it; that the Levies that had been raised, dwindled to nothing in a short time; and, that there was no Fidelity or Truth in the Officers: That there were not Forces enough to oppose the Imperial Armies if they joyn'd to make their way into France; and that the 12000 Switzers, and the same number of French which he gave Orders to be raised, could not be got ready before the Month of September: That if the Duke of Weimar had not stop'd the Progress of Galas, Lorrain had been already lost, with the three Bishopricks of Metz, Thoul, and Verdun. This Capuchin, whom a little matter could not astonish, told the Cardinal, that he must take Courage, and particularly apply himself to beat Galas back: That he must place another General over the Army in Germa∣ny, re-inforce it as well as he cou'd, and hinder the Cheats of the Officers: That lastly, he must keep up and cultivate the Alliance with the Switzers, that so he might be furnished with Men from thence, and that this wou'd be so much the easier done, because their Pensions were not paid them by the Spaniards.
In pursuance of this Advice the CardinalThe 26th of July. paid Poni∣ea, the Duke of Weimar's Agent at Paris, three hundred thousand Livres for the payment of his Army, and sixty five thousand for himself, the better to encourage him to fight Galas; however, he wou'd not make any Treaty for the future. The Mareschal de la Force, and the Duke of Angoulême, had Orders to have an eye upon the Fron∣tiers of Lorrain, and upon Duke Charles, to hinder him from invading it, as 'twas believed he had a Design. Orders were likewise dispatched to the Cardinal de la Valette, who desired to command an Army, and whose Inclinations were by no means suitable to his Dignity, to go and place himself at the Head of a small Body of Men, whom he was to joyn with the Forces of the Duke of Weimar. Galas had besieged Kaiserslauter, and block∣ed up Mentz, and the Duke was not strong enough to raise the Siege, or break the Blockade. He was so much the more concerned to preserve that place, because he had laid up there the most considerable part of the Booty which he had got since the Entrance of Gustavus into Germany. For this reason he had put some of his best Troops into the Town; and among the rest, the Yellow Regiment of the late King of Sweden. This Place made a very brave Resistance; and this Regiment refusing to capitulate, sustain'd several Assaults, and perished upon the Breach. But at last the Town was taken by force, and all of them put to the Sword. It cost the Imperi∣alists very dear; but the Duke of Weimar sustained an irrepairable Loss by it. The Cardinal de la Valette joyn'd the Duke of Weimar after this. This latter, although he was a Lutheran,The 27th of July. gave him the Right-hand, because he rather considered the great credit he was in with the Minister of Lewis XIII. than his Dignity of Cardinal. All the World wonder'd that the King, who did not want Generals, and kept a Mareschal in Prison, wou'd have recourse to an Arch∣bishop, to command one of his Armies, at so dangerous a Juncture; for in short, whatever Inclinations the Car∣dinal de la Valette had to the profession of War, 'tis cer∣tain, that he came infinitely short of several Commanders whom his Majesty might have employ'd. But it was one of the Minister's Maxims, To employ Bishops and
Abbots in things that had no relation to their Function, whether he had a greater esteem for Ecclesiasticks than he had for the Laity, or whether he thought they wou'd serve him with more punctuality. In the mean time Galas had besieged Deuxponts, which place he had brought to surrender the next day, when he received Advice, that the Cardinal de la Valette, and the Duke of Weimar, were marching towards him to re∣lieve it. Upon this News he drew off; but notwith∣standing all the haste the French made, with the Duke of Weimar, they cou'd not overtake him so as to give him Battel. However, they advanced by the side of Mentz, and obliged 14000 Imperialists to raise the Siege of that City,The 5th of August. which the Enemy had reduced to such Extremities that they must have been forced to surrender in four or five days for want of Provisions. A few days after, Galas having re-united all the Im∣perial Forces that were about the Rhine into one Body, he formed an Army of them consisting of 30000 Men; and finding himself superiour in numbers to the Cardi∣nal and the Duke, obliged them to retire in their turn. But it was impossible for them to subsist longer in the place where they were, by reason that Francford had de∣clared for the Emperour, and Sicknesses having got into the Army, had lessen'd it considerably. Now the diffi∣culty was, how to make a safe Retreat, before an Army much stronger than their own: They made an account to march straight to Sarbruck, and to St. Avaud, where there was plenty of Provisions; but Galas having cut off that way from them, they must resolve to take that of the Mountains, although un-peopled and without Refresh∣ments, and endeavour to reach Vaudervange, where there was a French Garrison. They took this Road, labouring under all these Inconveniences, without daring to make a Halt at any place, either by reason of the great want of Victuals, or out of fear of having Galas upon their hands, this General following them very closely. At last they arrived, on the 26th of September, at Vaudervange, without any other loss than that of their Artillery, which the bad Weather, and the swiftness of their March, obliged them to leave behind. The same day they passed the Save, and this Precaution was not unserviceable to
them; for Galas appeared on the other side, four hours after. He likewise passed it on the 28th, and found that the French had abandoned their Baggage, to retire under the Cannon of Metz. He advanc'd within a League and half of this City; but finding the Enemy secure, he con∣ducted his Army back again into the Country of Luxem∣burg, within some Leagues of that place. He had fifteen thousand Foot, eight thousand Horse, and six thousand Croats. The Cardinal and the Duke of Weimar had no more than eight thousand Foot, and six thousand Horse. In the mean time Charles Duke of Lorrain had at∣tempted, with a Body of Men under his Command, to re-possess himself of his Dominions, where some of his Subjects received him with great joy: But as all the strong Places were in the King's hands, it was impossi∣ble for him to make any progress, by reason of the great Opposition he found from the Mareschal de la Force and the Duke of Angoulême. And thus after some Incursions, and a few Skirmishes, he retired to joyn himself to Galas. The King being informed of the Retreat of his Troops that were followed by the Imperial Army, sent imme∣diately to Oxenstiern, to oblige him to make some Diver∣sion, in order to hinder all the Imperial Forces from fall∣ing into Lorrain. ButSiri Mem. Rec. Tom. . p. 347. the Duke of Lunenburg, the Landgrave of Hesse, and all the other Allies of Sweden, had made their Peace with the Emperour, after the Ex∣ample of the Elector of Saxony. Banier was abandon'd by the Army; so he was obliged to think of retiring with the Forces that remained, towards Pomerania, to treat afterwards with the Emperour, and obtain the easi∣est Conditions he cou'd get of him. Oxenstiern was thinking of nothing but how to return into Sweden, when he received the News that Banier had got a signal Vi∣ctory over the Saxons, that pursued him. Although this Advantage inspired Banier with fresh Courage, and oc∣casion'd him to stay in Pomerania, yet he was not in a condition to make any considerable Diversion for the rest of that Campaign. But the Marquiss de St. Chamond managed Affairs so dexterously, that he hinder'd several Princes of Germany from declaring for the Emperour, and others he prevail'd with to espouse the Swedish Party afresh. He likewise obliged several Colonels, who had
left Banier for want of Pay, to rejoyn themselves in Westphalia under Kniphausen Mareschal de Camp, by giving them some money in hand, and promising them a farther Supply. General Arnheim gave his word not to take any Party, without the consent of the King of France. Thus, if France did not obtain any great Matters by the Swedish Troops this Year, yet she hinder'd them from wholly dispersing, and put this Party in a posture to act with more Vigour the following Campaign. TheSiri Mem. Rec. T. 8. P. 334. King had a Design to come in Person to his Ar∣my in July, though he said, that if he went thither, he shou'd certainly fall sick: But as the Army in Germa∣ny was not numerous enough to pass for a Royal Army, and as there was an appearance of Danger to expose His Majesty's Person there, he was disswaded from it: and indeed the Event shew'd that it was not without good reason. However, when he heard of the Retreat of his Army,The 24th of August. he cou'd not be hinder'd from † going to S. Di∣sier, upon the Frontiers of Champagne, although the Cardinal tarried at Paris, expecting that he would not travel far. But instead of stopping at S. Disier, he en∣ter'd into Lorrain, and with a few Troops gathered up and down in Champagne, of whom the Count de Soissons had been declared General, he went to besiege S. Mihel a small place, of no Defence, which some Lorrain Sol∣diers had Taken and Defended four days against him; after which they were constrained to surrender at dis∣cretion. It was observ'd,Siri, Ibid. p. 339. that after the Taking of this Place, the King having held a Council of War, would not suffer the Count de Soissons to assist at it: though no one knew the true Reason of it, it was not doubted but that some Advice from the Cardinal occasion'd it. In the mean time the Cardinal was extreamlyAubery's Life of the Card. Lib. 5. Cap. 16. incommoded with the Hemorrhoids; but after the Application of Causticks, he was soon freed from his pain. During his Majesty's Expedition, the Army of Ger∣many arriv'd at Metz, and to re-inforce it, Orders were sent to the Mareschal de la Force, and to the Duke of Angoulême, to send their Troops to the Cardinal de la Va∣lette. They encreas'd it still from all Parts with all the Troops they cou'd get together; so that now the Car∣dinal found himself stronger than Galas, although the
Duke of Lorrain had joyned him. Thus the Duke of Weimar and the Cardinal were ordered to bring him to a Battle if possible, or to cut off his Provisions, but a∣bove all to hinder him from making any Excursions in Champagne. But this General being advantageously in∣camped and intrench'd, so that there was no way to force him, was not willing to run any hazard. He hop'd to be soon joyn'd by a Body which the Duke of Lorrain commanded, but more that the Cardinal de la Valette's Army would lessen by frequent desertions, so soon as the cold Rains of the Autumn began to fall. This King's Person being unnecessary in these Places, and indeed not out of imminent dangers, since the Enemy was not above fifteen Leagues off, he was advised to return home, sooner than the Cardinal wou'd have had him there.Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. P. 339. See also the Q. Mother's Let∣ter to the Pope, dated the 7th. of December in Aubery's Life of the Card. Lib. 4. c. 54. 'Tis reported that the Count de Carmail, Maréschal de Camp, in the Army of Cardinal de la Valette, told the King, who asked him his Advice what was best for him to do in this Conjuncture, That his Majesty expos'd himself too much, that he might be ta∣ken Prisoner by the Duke of Lorrain, if he did not speedily return to St. Disier, and that Jean de Werth, who had lately come to observe his Quarters, mar∣ched with Six Thousand Horse, to put this Enter∣prize in Execution. For this good Council, the Count de Carmail was made a Prisoner at the King's Return, and sent to the Bastile. Upon this and other Informati∣ons, the King resolved to go back into France; but to cover his Retreat with some specious pretence, he gave out that he wou'd go to Langres, to cut off the Duke of Lorrain's Provisions, that came to him from the Franche-Comte. But as soon as he was in Champagne, he took the Road directly to St. Germain, where he arrived on the 22d of October. The Cardinal, who was at Ruel, went to meet him as far as Nully, which is within a League of that Place, and was extreamly well receiv'd. The King stopt at Ruel to hold a Council there, and the Cardinal went the next day to St. Germain, where he had another long Conference with him. At his Return to Ruel, he caus'd the Count de Carmail to be apprehen∣ded there by his Guards, and sent him to the Bastile, un∣der a pretence of not having perform'd his Duty so well
as he ought. The same Day, the Cardinal told the Count de Soissons, that his Majesty was very much dis∣pleased with him, and that it would be his best way to absent himself from the Court for some time; which the Count immediately did, and retired to a Country House near Fontainbleau. They took away from him at the same time his Title of General, which had been conferr'd upon him, and this the Cardinal did by way of revenge upon the Count, because he had dexterously excused himself from marrying his Niece; but soon af∣ter, the Cardinal, to show what an absolute ascendant he had over the King, gets the Count to be recalled, and procures him the Command of the Army of Champagne. Some days after the King's Return, the Duke of Wei∣mar'sThe 27th of October. Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 340. Agent at Paris, made a new Treaty for his Master, and for the rest whose Troops he commanded. By this Treaty, the King oblig'd himself not to make any Treaty without the Allies of Germany; and the Duke promised the same thing, in Relation to the King. Weimar like∣wise engaged to have Twelve Thousand Foot, and Six Thousand Horse in Germany, with Artillery necessary, upon Condition that the King wou'd cause to be paid to him Four Millions of Livres a Year; that if in fighting, he happen'd to lose this Army, the King shou'd raise him another, and that if he was taken Prisoner, he shou'd take the same Care of him, as of one of his own Gene∣rals. By a secret Article, the King promised him the Title of Landgrave of Alsatia, and Fifty Thousand Crowns Pension for ever. In the mean time all the Troops being got together, under the Command of the Cardinal de la Valette, which formed together an Army of Forty Thousand Men, ad∣vanced towards Vic, to oblige Galas and the Duke of Lorrain, that were intrench'd at Dieuse, to abandon that Post, or cut off their Provisions and Forage, on the side of the Moselle. These two Generals already felt an ex∣tream scarcity of Hay and Oats, as well as Victuals, but their Army being accustomed to suffer, did not dis∣perse for that. On the Contrary, the Army of France that wanted nothing, was sensibly lessen'd by desertions, and that only for the cold Weather. But this excessive scarcity causing Distempers in the Imperial Army, Galas
was obliged to go out of his Camp with his Horse, and over-run Alsatia and the Country of Triers, no one be∣ing able to hinder him, from whence he sent store of Victuals to the Camp, after which his Troops that had stay'd there all this while to make Head against the French, retired in good Order into Alsatia, without lea∣ving any thing behind them but their Sick. The French did not pursue them, whether because they were not soon enough aware of their Retreat, or because they contented themselves with having obliged them to quit Lorrain. They drew off in their Turn on this side the Moselle, while the Duke of Lorrain took his Winter Quarters in the Franche-Comte, and Galas repass'd the Rhine, after he had plunder'd Alsatia. To come now to the Affairs of Flanders, ever since the beginning of the Year the Cardinal was sensible, that the Maxim which he had observ'd till then, of not break∣ing openly with Spain, wou'd be for the future disadvan∣tageous to France, since she was not at a much less ex∣pence to support her Allies, than if she had been in an open War, and yet made no advances against the Spa∣niards. On the Contrary, she had given them an Op∣portunity by this means to joyn their Forces with those of the Emperour in 1634, which made them gain the Battle of Norlingue, and had like to have entirely ruin'd the affairs of the Swedes in Germany; several Cities and Princes that furnished the Sweedes with considerable Supplies, had thought of nothing ever since, but of ma∣king their Peace with the Emperour, least they should be in a short time irreparably overthrown, if they continu∣ed to oppose him with so much disadvantage. The States General of the United Provinces, weary of the War with Spain, which had lasted so many years, and fearing to be abandon'd by France, that wou'd never be brought to declare it self, express'd a great inclination to reassume the Negotiation of a Truce, which had been broken off, out of an Apprehension, that the Emperour after he had given Peace to Germany, wou'd do the Spaniards the same kindness they had done him, that is to say, come with a formidable Army into the Low-Countries, to help them to re-conquer the Seven Provin∣ces which had with-drawn themselves from their Obedi∣ence.
If it so happen'd that a Peace was concluded in Germany, and a Truce in the Low-Countries, or that the United Provinces were subdu'd, then France, which was not in an open Rupture, either with the Emperour or the King of Spain, might see these Treaties concluded, with∣out being comprehended in them, because the House of Austria would be in so advantageous a posture at that time, what she thought fit to command, must not be dis∣puted; and Matters being so, France, which had so long assisted the Enemies of the House of Austria, had no reason to doubt that all her Forces wou'd pour down up∣on her. The Ministers of the Emperour and of the King of Spain said aloud in all Places, that the French vainly flattered themselves, that they should continue in the possession of what they had taken since the Treaties of Querasque and Ratisbone, and that they shou'd be forced at last to surrender all. For these Reasons, the Cardinal thought it the best way to prevent the House of Austria, in declaring open∣ly against Spain, to hinder her from assisting the Empe∣rour, and to give new Life and Vigour to the Hollanders and Swedes. To this end, he took great pains to form a League against Spain, both in Flanders and Italy, in or∣der to give her so much Business at home, that she shou'd not have leisuro to look abroad and interpose in the Af∣fairs of Germany. Siri. Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 24.To begin with the League Offensive and Defensive, which the King concluded with the States General, it was Signed at Paris the 8th of February. They obliged themselves to enter upon the Spanish Provinces on two Sides, with Twenty Five Thousand Foot, and Five Thousand Horse each, next May. However the French had inserted this Condition into the Treaty, If the Spa∣niards don't agree to reasonable Terms of Accommodation; but it was not doubted but what they christened by the Name of reasonable in France, wou'd pass for very unrea∣sonable in Spain, so that this Condition was imperti∣nent enough. The Conquests were to be parted be∣tween them, so that the King was to have the Country of Luxemburgh, Namur, Hainault, Artois, and Flanders; and the Estates, the Marquisate of the sacred Empire, where Antwerp is, the Lordship of Malines, the Dutchy
of Brabant, Hulst, and the Country of Dam. To per∣swade the Inhabitants of the Low Countries to an insur∣rection, it was resolv'd to invite them to joyn with the Confederates in turning out the Spaniards, with a pro∣mise to restore them to their Liberty, which being per∣formed within the three first Months, the Spanish Provinces were to remain united in one Body as a free State, with all the Rights of Sovereignty. It was agreed that they shou'd act conjointly, and that Frederick Henry Prince of Orange, shou'd command the two Armies United, in quality of Generalissimo, and shou'd give the Word, unless the Duke of Orleans, or the Cardinal should be there in Person. So the King sent Orders to the Mare∣schal de Chatillon and de Brezé, who had the command of the Army that was designed for the Low-Countries, to meet at Mesieres the 28th of April, to go and joyn the Dutch Army near Maestricht, the 12th of May. Charnace had long Conferences with the Prince of Orange, upon what measures they were to take. The French were desirous to find out the Enemy and fight him, fearing to lose too much time in besieging of places; and the Hollanders chose rather to undertake the Siege of some Town, without hazarding a Battel. At this time the Dutch understood the manner of besieging of Places bet∣ter than the French, and the French were fitter to give Battle. After a long debate, they only came to this Conclusion, to enter the Low-Countries to Luxemburg, and for the rest to leave it to the discretion of the Gene∣rals, to regulate what was fit to be undertaken so soon as the Armies were joyn'd. This Treaty was to be kept secret till the very time of execution, when France shou'd declare War against Spain, upon occasion of the several infractions which the Spaniards had made of the peace of Vervins, although the French had done no less on their Side. In the Inte∣rim, the Spaniards happen'd to surprise Triers, and car∣ried away the Arch-bishop Prisoner, as has been already observed. The Cardinal thought he cou'd never find a more plausible Pretence to declare War against the Spaniards, than the forcible detaining of a Prince, who had put himself under the protection of France. He therefore ordered d' AmontotThe 21st of April. Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8 p. 230., the Resident at Brussels,
to demand the liberty of the Elector of Triers of the Cardinal-Infanta, who was come thither the last year from Germany, and of the Marquiss d' Aylone. They both answered they could do nothing in this Matter, till they knew what was the Emperour's Pleasure about it. They took this answer in France for a down right Shift, because they had had time enough to send to the Court of Vienna, and receive an Answer, since the ta∣king of the Elector of Triers; upon this, the King sent a Herald of Arms to Brussels, to declare War a∣gainst the Crown of Spain, upon this Refusal. The Prince of Orange delay'd to march to the Ran∣dezvouz, till he received advice that the French Army was entred upon the Territories of Spain; fearing least an opposite Order should stop them on the Frontiers of France. This retarded the motion of the French Army for some days, which expected the same thing of the Prince of Orange; but at last it marched, and arrived the 16th of May at Rochefort. As it advanced towards Maestricht, divided into two Brigades, one of them com∣manded by the Mareschal de Chatillon, and the other by Brezé, they were informed that Prince Thomas, who had about Twelve Thousand Foot, and Four Thousand Horse, was intrench'd at Avein, designing to dispute the Pass with them, or charge them in the Rear. The Armies were so near, when this News came, and the ways through which they must pass to avoid a Battle, were so disadvantageous, that the French General immediately resolv'd to attack the Spanish Army. This they per∣form'd soThe 20th of May. See Siri. Ibid. p. 318. and the Memeirs of p. 1. p. 127. successfully, that without sustaining any great loss, they kill'd them Fifteen Hundred Men, took Three Thousand Prisoners, and put the rest to Flight. Prince Thomas lest behind him all his Baggage and Ar∣tillery, and retired to Namur, with the Cavalry which had abandon'd the Foot. The Prince of Orange did not joyn the French Forces till towards the end of May, which began to give occa∣sion of complaint to the French, who pretended that if he had been at Maestricht on the day appointed, they might have drawn great Advantages from their Victory, and that this Delay had given time to Prince Thomas to pick up the straggling Remainders of his Army. There was
likewise some difficulty about the Command: The Mareschal de Chatillon, although a Relation of the Prince of Orange, wou'd not receive his Orders from him, but only communicate to him his Designs, and act in con∣cert with him. But the Mareschal de Brezé oppos'd the Intentions of his Collegue, as well as the Marquiss de la Meilleraye; and so the Command was yielded, accor∣ding to the Treaty concluded at Paris, to Frederick Henry. At this time, the KingThe 6th of June. Aubery's Life of the Card. Lib. 5. Cap. 3. publish'd his Declaration of War, with a Manifesto, wherein he recounts at length the several Infractions which the Spaniards had made of the Treaty of Vervins. The Spaniards were not wanting on their side to put out a Declaration and Manifesto quite contrary, in which they defended their Conduct, and made the like Reproaches to France. They said, in this Writing, that it was not so much the King of France that had declared War against them, as Cardinal Riceu, because every thing was done at the instigation of that Minister. The two Armies being joyned, went to besiege Tirle∣mont, which they attacked, each on their respective side. The Governour, Don Francisco de Burgos, defended him∣self so ill, that the SoldiersThe 8th of June. took the Town with their Swords in their hands, and plunder'd it. At last, with∣out any Order from the Generals, the Soldiers set it on sire, and so vast quantities of Provisions, which wou'd have been very serviceable to the French Army, were by this means consumed. Several Disorders were commit∣ted here, which the Hollanders imputed to the French, and the French threw back again upon the Hollanders. Some persons were of opinion, that Frederick Henry was not sorry to render the French odious by this, and to de∣stroy the Provisions for which they had occasion. Having at last form'd a Resolution to attack Louvain they took Diest and Arschot in their way, and marched directly towards Brussels, as if their Design had been up∣on that City, purposely to draw the Cardinal Infanta thither, who was at Louvain with his Army. So the Confederates laid Siege to this Place on the 26th of June. They sat down ten days before it, when Provisions grow∣ing very scarce, they thought of leaving it, to be more conveniently supplied with Victuals in some other place.
Besides they received Advice that Piccolomini, who was coming to the relief of the Cardinal Infanta, with five or six thousand Horse, was already arrived at Namur, which made them fear that he wou'd stop their Provisi∣ons, with which they were only furnished from Liege. Thus after they had received their Convoy, they raised the Siege on the 4th of July, and the French went to re∣fresh themselves about Ruremonde and Venlo, while the Army of the States took the way of Boisleduc. This Scarcity had considerably lessen'd the French Army, be∣sides that the Generals not keeping a good Understanding between one another, it was impossible for their Enter∣prises to be well regulated. The Mareschal de Brezé, naturally warm and haughty upon the score of his Bro∣ther-in-law's great favour, proceeded so far as to give the Mareschal de Chatillon ill Language, but the Prince of Orange reconciled them; and Chatillon being afraid of displeasing the Minister, dissembled his Anger more than he wou'd have done, upon another occasion. The French accused the Prince of Orange to have been the Cause of all this Mischief, by his Slowness and want of Resolution, which had made them lose an op∣portunity of acting with Success, and mightily impaired the Army. The Dutch on the other hand reproached the French Generals with disagreeing among themselves, and observing no order in their Troops. Abundance of peo∣ple imagined that Frederick-Henry, who was never sus∣pected to want Resolution in his Life, feared that the French made too great a progress in the Low-Countries, and that the States thought it more advisable to have the Spaniards for their Neighbours than the French. And in truth it was much better for them, that the Spaniards shou'd keep what they had in the Low-Countries, because the great distance of their different Dominions wou'd hin∣der them from acting with the same Vigour against the Ʋnited Provinces, as the French, if they became their Neighbours, and afterwards their Enemies, might em∣ploy against them. 'Tis likewise said, that the Dutch Army never wanted Provisions all the while, and that the Prince of Orange, if he had been so pleased, might have easily furnished the French; but that having no other Design than merely to engage France in a War
with Spain, he did not care what Success they found in the course of it; and that for this reason he always suf∣fer'd their Army to perish. However it was, there happen'd to him, much about the same time, an Accident of a much more dangerous consequence, and that was the Surprizal of the Fort of Schenk, which is one of the Keys of the Ʋnited Provinces. It was surpriz'd by Colonel Eenholt, in the night, on the 27th or 28th of July: for it seems no care was taken to make necessary Reparation there, and then the Garrison was very inconsiderable; so that after they had vigo∣rously opposed two Assaults of the Spaniards, they were cut off at the third. The Prince of Orange wou'd have fain got thither before the Enemy had thrown any more Men into the place, and begg'd the French Mareschals to assist him; but the Spaniards made such haste to sup∣ply it with Men and Provisions, that he arrived too late, and he judg'd it was impossible to reduce it by force. So he undertook to make himself Master of the Fort by Famine, and block'd it up almost a whole Year before it surrender'd. Several Rencounters happen'd between the two Armies near this Fort; but there was no decisive Action. Afterwards the Cardinal-Infanta went to fortifie Genap, by the means of which place he greatly incom∣moded the Garrisons of Venlo, Ruremonde, and Maestricht. All the World was surprized, that an Army of forty thousand Men, as was that of the Prince of Orange and the Mareschals of France, durst not attack that of the Cardinal-Infanta, which had but half the number, and was still disheartned by the Defeat of Avein.Siri Mem Rec. T. 8. P. 329. * Some ascribe it to Jealousie of State, but others pretend that the Prince of Orange, who was skilful at forming a Siege, was afraid to run the risque of a Battel. Nay some people add, That if he had only lodged himself upon the Banks of the Rhine between Cleves and the Fort of Schenk, he might have reduced it in ten days: but he was so much afraid that the Spaniards wou'd oblige him to fight them, that he came into the Betawe with his Army to co∣ver them from any such Attempt. 'Tis true indeed, he hinder'd the Spaniards at the same time from piercing too far into the Territories of the States, which wou'd have caused a prodigious Disorder.
Cardinal Richlieu was now sensible that the Design of entring the Low-Countries by the way of Luxemburg, which was the opinion of the two Mareschals, was ill grounded, by reason of the great distance of the Frontiers of France, and that it had been much better to attack Dunkirk, as the Prince of Orange had advised. But now it was too late to remedy this fault. The King, who was made at first to expect Miracles from this great En∣terprize, was mightily concerned that it succeeded so ill, although care was taken to conceal a great part of their Losses from him. It so fell out, that a Gentleman whom the Prince of Orange sent to him, having informed him of the particulars, he fell into an excessive passion against Bouthillier, called him a Lyer, and forbid him to open any Packet but in his presence. This sate so hard upon him, that his Minister fell sick upon it, and the Cardinal himself appear'd very pensive about it. At last they were ordered to save the rest of the Army as well as they cou'd, but especially the Horse. Charnacé who came from the Army to Paris, was ordered to return into Hol∣land, to endeavour to conduct it from thence. While the Cardinal thus treated with the States-Gene∣ral about the manner of attacking the Spaniards in the Low-Countries, the President de Bellievre, Ambassadour Extraordinary to the Princes of Italy, formed a League with some of them to fall on the Milaneze, and to defend the Liberty of Italy against the Spaniards. The Dukes of Savoy, of Mantua, and Parma, engaged themselves in this League for three years; but the other Princes of Italy wou'd not be concerned in it. Besides the Troops which the King kept on foot in the Valteline, as we shall see in the series of the HistorySee the whle Treaty in Siri Mem. Rec. T. . . 252. It was signed the 11th of July., he obliged himself to send twelve thousand Foot, and five thousand five hun∣dred Horse against the Spaniards. The Duke of Savoy promised six thousand Foot, and two thousand two hun∣dred Horse: the Duke of Mantua three thousand Foot, and three hundred Horse: and the Duke of Parma four thousand Foot, and five hundred Horse. Every one was to maintain his own Troops till the End of the War; and in case the Spaniards augmented the number of their For∣ces, the Confederates were to raise a fourth part more than they had before. It was concluded, that the Duke
of Savoy shou'd command the Army, and in his Absence the General of the French Forces; which Station was to be possessed by the Mareschal de Crequi. They had like∣wise agreed about the Division of the Milaneze, if it shou'd be conquered. After this League was signed,Siri, ibid. p. 292. the Mareschal entred into the Territories of Spain on the 29th of August, with the French Troops; and having taken some inconsidera∣ble Places, he went to invest Valence, upon the Po, with∣out any Orders from the King, or the Duke of Savoy. Edward Duke of Parma took the Field the next day, assisted by an experienc'd French Captain, whose name was de la Marne, whom Mareschal de Crequi had sent to direct him. He joyned him soon after, after he had routed a small Body of Spaniards, that pretended to op∣pose his March. The Duke of Savoy made a longer stay before he came to the Rendezvouz; and as the Siege of Valence was not as yet perfectly formed, the Spaniards had an opportunity to throw four thousand Men into the Town, commanded by the Marquiss de Celada, to re∣inforce the Garrison. Francis del Cardine was Governour of this place, assisted by Captain Spadini, a Man of great Courage and Conduct. After this, the Duke of Savoy sent his Troops to the Camp, and the Mareschal began to carry on the Siege. he imagined that he shou'd be able to carry the Place in a few days, although the Besieged sallied out continually, and added some new Works to the ancient Fortifications. In the mean time the Duke of Parma's Men, who had never been in any War before, daily diminished; and as for the Duke of Savoy, he made some difficulty of going in Person to this Siege, as being undertaken against his Advice, and begun by another. The Mareschal de Thoi∣ras, out of Envy to Crequi, disswaded him from going thither; but at last, at the Instances of Emery, Ambassa∣dour of France at Turin, he arrived at the Camp on the 13th of October; and after he had visited the Works, he was of opinion that the Siege wou'd come to nothing; and in truth this unhappy Misunderstanding between them ruined all their Designs. The Mareschal having received Advice that the Spa∣nish Army, commanded by Don Carlo Colonna, was on
their March to endeavour to raise the Siege, sent to de∣sire the Duke to order his Men to pass the Po, that so they might fight the Enemy before they were intrenched at Frescarolo. But the Troops of the Duke passed so slow∣ly, that they were forced to send them back the next day. It was still believed, that it wou'd be their best way to go and attack the Spaniards; so the Army march∣ed forward, the Mareschal being in the Vanguard, the Duke of Savoy in the Body of the Battel, and the Duke of Parma in the Rear. The Enemy had taken no care to entrench themselves, thinking that the French durst not stir out of their Lines to meet an Army stronger than their own, and they began already to retire when they were attacked. Crequi had the Right, and the Duke of Savoy commanded on the Left: The Attack began on the Duke's side with a great deal of Vigour, although they had not sent to observe the ground where the Enemy lay. They were beaten back into the Vineyards, where their Infantry was posted, and they disputed the ground very weakly, when Crequi, upon a false Information, sent word to the Duke of Savoy, that the Spaniards were entrenched on the other side, and superiour to them in number, upon which he did not think it safe to push it on any farther. This occasioned Victor-Amadeo, who had already dislodged the Spanish Infantry out of the Vineyards, to sound a Retreat, and lose a fair opportu∣nity of beating the Enemy. It is reported, that Crequi suspected that the Duke of Savoy only designed to engage him, to suffer him afterwards to be cut in pieces, and that for this reason he did not attack them. He retired likewise at the same time, and the Spaniards, who look∣ed upon themselves as good as beaten, were surprized to see the Enemy abandon, of their own accord, an En∣terprize which had begun so well. This News they learn'd of the Prisoners, but then it was too late; for after this the Spaniards entrenched themselves, and were always upon their Guard. Nor was this all; for they threw fresh Succours into the City through a place where the Lines of Circumvallation were not compleated, and where the Savoyards did not make any manner of re∣sistance. Another Supply enter'd the Town by the Po, after which the Rains that usually fall in the Autumn,
incommoded the Besiegers. The Army which was o∣therwise exceedingly weakned, by Weaknesses and De∣sertions, and the mutual jealousies between the Duke of Savoy, and the Mareschal de Crequi still increasing, they began to talk of raising the Siege, as they did the next day, leaving their Canon, and part of their Baggage be∣hind them. The Generals drew off, complaining one of another, and that the Milaneze, which they had wisely shared between themselves before-hand, still continued in the Hands of the Spaniards. The Cardinal who had believed the Conquest of it to be a matter of small Difficulty, was exceedingly con∣cerned at the ill success of this enterprize, and the re∣ciprocal Accusations of the Duke and the Mareschal, which afterwards came to him, gave him but little Con∣solation. Crequi accused the Duke with holding private Intelligence with the Spaniards, and the Duke made it appear that the Mareschal had undertaken this Siege with too small an Army, and show'd no Conduct in the whole Affair, whatever Bravery he might otherwise have. He that was the most in Danger, was the Duke of Parma, whose Territories lay exposed to the revenge of the Spaniards. He complain'd that he was the only Per∣son that had observed the Treaty, both in regard to the number of his Troops, the time appointed, and to his Zeal in executing with Vigour the projects that had been concerted in the Council of War. To prevent the ruine of the Duke of Parma, and frustrate the other de∣signs of the Spaniards, the Troops of France took their Winter Quarters in Italy, and were distributed into se∣veral Garrisons. Thus the Cardinal's great Expectations of conquering the Dutchy of Milan, vanish'd on the sudden, although 'tis certain that he cou'd not have chosen a fitter time for this enterprize, if it had been well executed, for the King had made himself Master of the Passes of the Val∣teline beforchand, to hinder any Troops from coming to the assistance of the Spaniards out of Germany.Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 216. The Duke of Rohan, who was in Alsatia, had Orders in the Spring to go into Switzerland, there to take Six Thou∣sand Men, and four Troops of Horse, and conduct them
into the Valteline, in order to possess himself of that Country, and to defend it with the Forces, which were there already. Being ready to march cross the Country of the Protestant Cantons, he writ to Du Landé, who commanded three Regiments of French there, and as many of the Grisons, to make himself Master of all the Passes of the Valteline, which he very happily executed on the 13th of April, so that neither the Spaniards nor the little Cantons cou'd possibly hinder it. Soon after, the Duke of Rohan arrived there, and began to work upon the Fortifications of those Posts which they had seized. The King of Spain being informed of this Invasion, sent to demand assistance of the Emperour, who dispatched Orders to Galas, to send a Detachment of his Army into Tirol, and from thence into the Valteline, to joyn the Troops of Spain, that were to force their Way there, on the side of the Milaneze. Galas detach'd Eight Thousand Men, under the Baron de Fernamond, Serjeant de Bataille, who being arrived in Tirol, attack'd the Pass of the Valteline on that Side, in the Month of No∣vember. The Duke of Rohan received him with Four Thousand Men, and the French Infantry charged the German Horse with that Fury, that they routed them, and put the Army to Flight. Fernamond lost Two Thousand Men upon the Spot, besides Prisoners, and re∣tired towards Tirol. Soon after he received a Reinforce∣ment of Three Thousand Men, and Serbellon entred the Valteline on the side of Milan, and advanced to∣wards Sondrio. The Duke of Rohan thought it advisea∣ble to march against the latter, before the Recruits of Fernamond were in a Condition to Act. To this end he marched all Night, from the 13th to the 14th of Novem∣ber, and having met Serbellon at Morbegno, where he had intrench'd himself, he attack'd him, kill'd him Fif∣teen Hundred Men, and took all his Baggage. The next Day he returned to Bormio, lest Fernamond shou'd take any advantage of his Absence. By this Action, he hin∣dered a considerable Relief from entring into the Mila∣neze, and falling upon the Allies of France. This was the only advantage that turned to any account with France, obtain'd against Spain, this first Year of the War.
While France was thus employed by Land in Italy; in Germany, and the Low-Countries, the Spaniards had a de∣sign to attack her by Sea, and to make a descent upon Provence. But their Fleet being severely shattered by Tempests, they only seized upon the Isles of St. Marga∣ret, and St. Honorat, where they left a Garrison, and some Men to build two Forts. This Acquisition might serve to incommode the Trade of Provence, and to faci∣litate a descent upon the Continent; but it was a diffi∣cult matter to keep these Islands; so that the Spani∣ards were no great gainers by this Exploit. Chancellor d' Aligre being Dead, the King conferr'd this Dignity upon Pierce Leguier, as he had formerly promised him, when he gave him the Seals. His Let∣ters were presented to the Parliament, on the 10th of January, and registred. The famous Antoine le Maitre employed his Rhetorick upon this occasion, and made a Panegyric upon the Chancellor and his Ancestors, who had been Members of the Parliament of Paris, as he was, before his Majesty made him Keeper of the Seals. He was received with great Applause, but soon after he served to mortifie that very Body, to which he so lately belonged.See Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 433. The Life of the Duke of Espernon, p. 536. To support the expences of the War, the King was obliged to create abundance of new Officers, and every Parliament according to the extent of its jurisdiction, was constrained to receive a certain number of Presidents and Counsellors, who bought these places of the King. Upon this, the Parliament of Paris had a meeting, and resolved to make a Remon∣strance to His Majesty upon this augmentation, but in∣stead of hearkening to them, the King banished some of the Councellors to Angers and Ambois, for talking too boldly. The New Chancellor fell into a great Rage at the Parliament, telling them, That it did not belong to them to censure the King's Conduct, and that their Authority reach'd no higher than to see the Laws duly observed, and to administer justice to the People. The King likewise sent La Ville aux-Clercs to forbid the Chambers to assemble, and to tell them that no Notice wou'd be taken of their Remonstrances, till they had received the new Counsellors. They accordingly obey'd,
and on the 17th of March, they obtain'd the return of those that had been banished, upon this Condition, that they would behave themselves more dutiful for the fu∣ture. At the same time, the King shut up his Treasury as to all sorts of expences, but those for carrying on the War, so that the Governors of Provinces, and the Of∣ficers of the Crown, had been obliged to throw up their Places and Pensions, if there had not been a way found out to get them paid by the Kingdom; which for that reason, they burthen'd with new Impositions. Some of them rather chose to remit them, than to ruine the poor People; but the greatest part of them made use of this Expedient, to satisfie themselves for what was owing to them, which excited great Clamours and Discontents. The Minister did not much trouble himself what the World thought of these exactions, so long as they brought in Money. He was infinitely more concerned to hear that the Pope had a design to call Mazarine home, whom he had sent in quality of Nuncio extraor∣dinary, to procure a general Peace, and particularly to obtain the re-establishment of the House of Lorrain. Mazarine instead of acquitting himself faithfully of this Commission, thought of nothing else, but how to gain the good Graces of the Cardinal Duke; and ever since the Affair of Cazal, he had all along appeared so partial for France, that the Spaniards cou'd not endure him. So by Virtue of their constant importunities,At the be∣ginning of the Year 1636. Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 375. the Pope was prevail'd upon to recall him from the Court of France, and order'd him to discharge the Office of his Vice-Legate at Avignon. The Cardinal did all that lay in his Power to obtain of his Holiness, that Mazarine might still continue in France, or in case he wou'd not suffer him to stay longer there, to send him into Spain, to incline that Crown to a Peace as he pretended, but as the Spaniards believ'd, to serve as his Spy or Agent in that Court. The King too freely gave his consent, that the Pope shou'd nominate him as Collegue to Cardinal Gi∣netti, whom they discoursed of sending to Colen to treat of a Peace.Id. Ibid. p. 386. But the Pope wou'd not listen to any of these Proposals, and so Mazarine prepared himself to go to Avignon, where he designed to make as short a stay as he cou'd.
The Court of Rome gave another Mortification to the Cardinal this Year, for the Cistercian Monks and the Premonstratenses having elected him to be their Abbot General, the Pope refused to grant him the Bulls. He was already Abbot of Cluny, who is chief of the Order, and consequently Abbot General of the Benedictines, so that if he had procur'd this, he had been the Head of the three richest Orders of the Kingdom. It was alledged in his Favour, that these Orders standing in need of a Reformation, for this end they ought to have a person of great Authority set over them, as the Cardinal was. But they were well satisfied at Rome, that it was his desire to Rule and not to Reform, that induced him to demand this Benefice. Had he succeeded in this affair, besides a vast Revenue, he had found a great Number of Monks depending wholly upon him, ready to concur with him in all his inclinations, either to obtain Benefi∣ces which are in the Collation of the General of these Orders, or to testifie their acknowledgments to him after they had once obtained them. It was likewise feared, that he wou'd endeavour to get himself declared Patri∣arch in France, or at least Legate à Latere for all his Life, after the example of Cardinal d' Amboise, and that ha∣ving this Prospect, he wou'd use his Interest to exempt the Monks and Secular Priests, from any farther depen∣dance upon the Court, by the means of his Bene∣fices, which the King always disposed of upon his Re∣commendation. If the Court of Rome did not show him that Com∣plaisance which he desired, it was not to be imagined that he wou'd give them any Satisfaction, as to what they demanded of him. Ever since the last year, it had been resolved upon to send the Mareschal d' Estrées, Ambassadour Extraordinary to Rome, although the Pope shew'd a mighty unwillingness to receive him, and had testified so much to the Court of France. Notwith∣standing this opposition, the Mareschal parted towards theThe 24th of January. beginning of this Year, to perswade the Pope to treat the Duke of Parm with more Moderation and Gentleness. He had written two Briefs to this Prince, by which he disapproved his uniting with France, to attack the Milaneze, because by that Conduct he expo∣sed
a Fief of the Church to the Resentments of the Spa∣niards. He had likewise given that Duke to understand, that if the Holy See was obliged to arm, for the De∣fence of his Dominions, he expected to be satisfied for the Charges of the War. This was the principal reason of the Mareschal d' Estree's Embassy, with whom the Pope refused a long while to treat, because he seem'd to have despised his Authority when he seized upon the Valteline, as has been observed elsewhere. It was like∣wise pretended, that by his rough Behaviour he had been the death of Paul V. However, the Cardinal, who was not used to start back from what he had once engaged in, did espouse him so vigorously, that the Pope was forced at last to lay down his Pretensions, and treat with him. He had OrdersSiri Mem. Rec. T. 8. P. 426. to recommend Father Joseph as from the King to his Holiness, for a Cardinal's Cap. But be∣sides that the person of this Capuchin was not very ac∣ceptable at the Court of Rome, the Pope made a Difficul∣ty to confer the Purple upon a Capuchin, because that the Cardinal of St. Honorio his Brother, who had been a Capuchin, pretended that he was the only person of his Order that enjoyed that Honour. The Pope insisted upon this, That after he had given a Cap to one Capu∣chin, it wou'd be demanded for others of the same Or∣der, as was already done; and so that Body, which at present was so well regulated, wou'd be corrupted by ambitious Thoughts, with which abundance of Capu∣chins wou'd be possess'd, that wou'd begin to pretend to the chief Dignities of the Church. The Mareschal was very liberal in his Commendations of Father Joseph, but was not able to procure any thing in his favour; for the Pope still persisted in the same Reasons, whatever Arguments were brought to perswade him to the contrary. Before the Armies cou'd take the field, the Duke of Parma resolved to come to Paris, to recommend himself to the King and Cardinal. He wasThe 16th of February. Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 389. received with all Demonstrations of Kindness, and was lodged in the Louvre, in the Queen-Mother's ApartmentIbid. p. 394.. The Duke of Weimar came thither at the same time, and lay at the Arsenal; and though he was entertain'd with a great deal of Respect, yet they did not treat him like the Duke of Parma, who was received in the Quality of a
Sovereign Prince. This caused a little Discontent at first, but it was soon over, the Duke of Weimar having otherwise sufficient Reason to be well satisfied with the Cardinal. The Duke of Parma obtained leave of the King to command a small Army, which the Duke of Savoy was to furnish him with, in Quality of his Majesty's Lieute∣nant. In his Absence, the Spaniards and the Duke of Modena made some Incursions into his Territories, and made themselves Masters of some small places: those Troops which the Duke of Parma had on foot, assisted by some of the French, and the Duke of Savoy, not being able to defend them.The 18th of March. Siri, ibid. P. 396. For this reason he parted in all haste from Paris, to give necessary Orders for their Defence; and at his Arrival into Italy, he desired the Duke of Savoy to send him instantly a strong Detach∣ment to beat the Enemy out of his Country, and to re∣venge himself upon the Duke of Modena: but the Troops which they expected out of France, having not passed the Mountains as yet, it was impossible to satisfie him. And now all the World began to condemn the Duke of Savoy, for having so rashly declared against Spain, upon the Chimerical hopes which the Cardinal had given him, to put him in possession of part of the Milaneze, so soon as it was conquered. He found it to be true upon this occasion, That a neighbouring Enemy is infinitely more prejudicial than a Friend afar off can be serviceable to us, although his power is in no respect inferiour to that of the Enemy. Nevertheless the King, at the earnest Instances of the Duke of Parma,The 16th of April. sent to the Duke of Savoy to take the Field with all Expedition, to go and relieve him, since none of the Princes of Italy wou'd favour the League, if they saw the Members of it abandon one another. The Duke of Savoy resolved to satisfie the King, and wou'd needs carry the Mareschal de Thoiras with him, for whom he had a particular Friendship, although the Cardinal kept him as it were banish'd at Casal, without giving him any Employment. Upon this there happen'd some Dis∣putes between Crequi and him, which his Majesty soon ended by giving the Preference to Crequi, who was the King's Lieutenant; whereas Thoiras served in the same Post under the Duke of Savoy.
In the mean time the Spaniards and the Duke of Mo∣dena fortified themselves in the places which they had taken in the Duke of Parma's Country. The Marquiss de Leganez, to whom the King of Spain had lately gi∣ven the Government of Milan, placed the principal Troops of Spain at Novara, at Pavia, at Alexandria, and in the Neighbourhood, and threw a Bridge over the Po at Girola, by which the three Bodies, into which their Army was divided, might have free Communication one with another, in order to hinder the Duke of Savoy from coming into the Duke of Parma's Country. On the other side, after several hot Contests between the Lea∣ders, who agreed no better this Campaign than they did the former, it was concluded to accompany the Duke of Parma to the Frontiers of his Dominions with the whole Army, and to lend him six thousand Foot, and eight hun∣dred Horse, to beat his Enemies out of it; and at the same time to fortifie themselves upon the Tesin, and get Oleggio into their hands, that they might be in a conditi∣on to have a Communication with the Forces of the Val∣teline. Several Difficulties arose in the execution of this Design, occasion'd by the Misunderstanding of the Lea∣ders, and by the Duke of Savoy's Neglect to furnish the Army with a sufficient number of Boats to pass the Ri∣vers; so that if the Spaniards had understood Military Affairs, they had more than once found an opportunity to ruin the Army of the Confederates: but they took the Irresolutions and false Steps of the French, for so many Stratagems. At last they came before Oleggio the 14th of June, and the next day Crequi made himself Master of this place, which surrendred in an instant. Three hundred Horse, that were sent towards the Tesin to seize the Boats upon which they were to pass, found that they were on the other side; but the French Commandant, who had or∣dered the Carabineers of Montferrat to wear red Scarfs, made the Boatmen believe they were Troops in the Ser∣vice of Spain that were pursued by the French: and ha∣ving by this Artifice perswaded them to bring their Boats on his side, they soon made themselves Masters of them. By this Trick, and by the means of some other Boats, which the Duke of Savoy had commanded to be brought
thither, they passed the River, and the Mareschal de Crequi being come up to them, they began to make a Retrenchment to cover the Bridge, which they designed to make in this place. The Duke of Savoy marched at the same time to Fon∣tanct, which upon his Arrival he found to be stronger than he believed. Thoiras invested it, and ordered a Bat∣tery of four Pieces of Cannon to play upon the Town; but as he stood too near this Battery,Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 411. History of Mareschal Thoiras. Lib. 3. towards the end. a Musquet-ball hit him full in the breast, and kill'd him on the spot. He was exceedingly lamented by all people for his good Qualities, and for the eminent Services he had done the Kingdom. The Cardinal never loved him, because the King had expressed an Inclination to make him his Fa∣vourite; and after he had sent him into Italy, made the King jealous of him, because two of his Brothers had been in Monsieur's Army at the Battel of Castelnaudarry. Nor was this all; for he got his Governments and Pen∣sions to be taken from him, and gave the King such a Character of him as he pleased, and the Mareschal had not the means to defend himself. Fontanct surrendred soon after, and the Mareschal de Crequi joyn'd the Duke of Savoy without any opposition, because the Spaniards had entirely abandoned all the pla∣ces about the Tesin, thinking that the French had a Design to pass the Tanare, and afterwards the Po. The Duke and the Mareschal continued together upon the Banks of the Tesin, one on one side, and the other on the other, till the 20th of this Month, in consulting whether they should send the Duke of Parma back again to his Coun∣try. The latter knew not himself what Measures to take; but at last, for fear an Army of his Friends shou'd ruine him, as well as that of his Enemies; he resolved to part incognito, and in that manner, to get into his own Dukedom, through the Territories of Genoa. As he had no Experience in Military Affairs, he hop'd at first, that within a few Months, and without any great Expence, the Confederate Army would over-run all the Milaneze; but having seen the quite contrary happen, and his own state in Danger to become the Theatre of the War, he wholly alter'd his Opinion, and became
fearful very unseasonably, as he had formerly suffered himself to be led away with ill grounded expectations. At last the Confederate Army marched on the two Banks of the Tesin, to fortifie some Post there, which they should judge most advantageous to command that River, and to make a Bridge over it. In their march they received Advice that the Marquiss de Leganez was coming towards them, on that side where Crequi was, so that the Duke of Savoy set his Men to work all Night upon a Bridge, which wasThe 23d of June. ready by the next Morning, that he might joyn the Mareschal. The Spaniards had Fourteen Thousand Foot, Four Thousand Horse, and Four Canon. They charged the French in the Morning, who sustained the Shock till the Duke of Savoy had passed the River. The Fight was so resolutely maintain'd on both sides, that it lasted till Night; the Victory be∣ing uncertain all the Day, and the two Armies return'd several times to the Charge, and wou'd not give way. But the Spaniards retir'd in the Night, and the Duke of Savoy and the Mareschal endeavoured in Vain to begin the Fight afresh the next Day. All the Advan∣tage they got, was the Field of Battle, and the number of the Dead and Wounded on their Side was somewhat less. In the mean time, the Duke of Rohan forced seve∣ral Passes above the Lake of Como, but when he was at Lech, he sent word to the Duke of Savoy, that he cou'd not advance further than Gravedonne, because the ways were impracticable. Thus he was obliged to re∣turn to the Valteline, and the Duke of Savoy abandon'd the Tesin andThe 23d of July. went back to Turin. From that time the French Army began to diminish considerably by per∣petual desertions; and on the Contrary, the new Levies of the Milaneze, and of the Kingdom of Naples, daily augmented that of the Spaniards. The Duke of Parma was no sooner returned to his Dominions, but he saw a considerable Body of Spanish Troops under Duke Martin of Arragon, who ravaged and plundered the greatest part of them. He then re∣pented that he had not accepted the Forces that were of∣fer'd him for the preservation of his Country, which he was afraid of burthening too much by receiving them, and he sent to demand them again with great earnestness.
But the Spaniards being at that time Masters of the Field, it was not an easie matter to relieve him. To compleat his Misfortunes, the Pope published a Monito∣ry against the Duke, by which he cited him to Rome, and commanded him to recall the Troops which he had in the Territories of any other State. Besides this, the Pope pretended to have Security in Writing, that he wou'd obey him in the space of Thirty Days, other∣wise he threatned to excommunicate him, and give his Lands to the first Possessor, People were so much the more surprized at these rigorous Proceedings, because at that time, the Duke had Soldiers no where but at Rome, and the Spaniards ravaged his Country at Pleasure, and kept Placentia blocked up. The World was not then acquainted with the Mystery, that there was a secret Treaty between the Spaniards and the Barberini's, who desired to make themselves Masters of this Prince's Do∣minions, under any pretence whatever, and to put D. Taddeo Barberini, prefect of Rome, in possession of them. The King sent orders to the Mareschal d' Estrees, to complain highly of the Pope's Proceedings, and hinder'd him from pushing on this Design any longer in publick. He likewise ordered the Mareschal de Crequi, to succour the Duke of Parma with all Expedition, but the Passes being all shut up, as well through the State of Genoa, as through the Milaneze, partly by the Troops that were posted there, and partly by the Rains and badness of the Weather; the Mareschal was not able to execute this Order, so that the best course the Duke of Parma cou'd now take, was to make his Peace with the Spani∣ards, who being satisfied to see him humbled, did offer very reasonable Conditions, of which the Pope, and the Grand Duke of Tuscany were to be the Guarrantees. But the Vexation to be so soon reduced to beg Pardon of the Crown of Spain, and the great promises of France, oc∣casion'd this Prince not to listen to those that advised him to accommodate matters with Spain, although he was blocked up in Placentia, and 'twas now discoursed to besiege that Place in the usual Forms. Thus this Champaign ended in Italy not so advanta∣geously for France as it had begun, and their Victories were scarce able to preserve their Allies. The King
was resolv'd to succour those places which he still held in Alsatia, to secure them against the Imperialists, who endeavour'd to retake them, and hop'd to reduce them in a short time, by reason of the great distance of the French. The Cardinal de la Valette, who had served his Apprenticeship the Year before in Germany,The 2d of January. Aubery's Life of the Cardinal, lib. 5. c. 24. Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 457. under∣took this Expedition. They gave him Three Thousand Horse, and the same number of Foot, all choice Men; and with this Body, he very successfully re-victuall'd Slech-stadt, Colmar and Haguenaw. After this, he and the Duke of WeimarIn the Month of May. opposed the Enterprizes of the Imperialists in Alsatia, to hinder them from coming in∣to that Country, and passing any farther. At the same time, the Cardinal procured an Army for the Prince of Conde, whose Lieutenant the Marquiss de la Meilleraye was to enter into the Franche-Comté, and en∣deavour to conquer it. The Court complained of the Compeois, that though they were obliged to preserve a Neutrality in any Wars that might happen between France and the Crown of Spain, yet for all that, they had supplied the Enemy with Provisions, and harboured them in their Country, as well as several French Male∣contents. They accused them of several other infracti∣ons besides, which they took care to aggravate in the highest manner in the Diet of the Swisses, for fear, least they should undertake the protection of the Franche-Comté, as being Guarrantees of the Treaty between the Crown and that Province. The Prince of Conde having enter'd the Country, and laidThe 28th of May. Siege to Dole, the Swisses sent a Deputy to the King, to desire him to discontinue the Siege, but they put him off with the same pretences that had been insisted upon in the Diet, and he was told that if he came from the Deputies of every Canton, they wou'd consider what was to be done. However a little sprinkling of Money among them, appeased those that cryed out the loudest, and so this Deputation went away in Smoke. But the Inhabitants of Dole, although they were attack'd with a great deal of Bravery, defended themselves beyond Expectation, and the place was in a Condition to hold out till the Imperialists and Spaniards could come to relieve it. The Prince after he had got the outworks Foot by Foot, and with a world of diffi∣culty,
ordered a general assault to be made the 14th of June, commanded by the Marquiss de Villeroy, Mareschal de Camp, but the French were repulsed with loss. In the mean time the Duke of Lorrain and Lamboi entered the Franche-Comté with Eight Thousand Foor; and as many Horse, and encamped within a League of the French ines, designing to attack them the next day. But the Prince did not stay for their coming up, but rais'dThe 15th of August. the Siege immediately, and retired into the Dutchy of Bur∣gundy. The Imperialists followed him, and committed great ravages in Burgundy and Bress. The Duke of Lorrain went afterwards to besiege St. Jean de Lône, while Galas who had joyn'd him, ravaged the Province at Pleasure, and neither the Prince of Con∣de, nor the Duke of Weimar, nor the Cardinal de la Va∣lette were able to hinder him. But this place having at first made a Vigorous resistance, and afterwards receiving a considerable relief, commanded by Colonel Ranzau, * the Duke was obliged to raise the Siege,The 2d of November. Aubery's Life of the Card∣nal. and Galas withdrew into the Franche-Comté, and from thence into Germany. His Army consisted at first of Thirty thousand Men, nd now was reduced to Eighteen Thousand, having done nothing but pillaged a few Castles, and some Vil∣lages. The little Order they observed in their Designs, the irresolution of their Generals, and their greediness of Plunder, made the Imperialists lose the fairest op∣portunity in the World of ruining France, which had been otherways extreamly embarrass'd, and now had the good luck to escape a terrible danger, meerly through indiscretion, and want of Conduct in her Enemies. The Spaniards formed a design upon Bayonne, which met with no better success. There were scarce any Troops on the Frontiers, and they October. See the Duke of Espernon's Life, and Siri T. 8. p. 460. entred the Country of La∣bourt so unexpectedly, that a general Fear having spread it self among the People, every thing fled before them, notwithstanding, all that the Duke de la Valette cou'd doe, who arrived there in great haste, to assist his Fa∣ther that was fallen sick at Bayomic. The Admiral of Castile, who commanded a Body of Six Thousand Foot, and Two Thousand Horse, made himself Master of the Field, and at the same time of St. Jean de Luz, and the Fort of Socoa, within three Leagues of Bayonne. But
instead of advancing speedily to attack that City, which was destitute of all manner of Provisions, and cou'd not have held out above a few days, he stopt short in the way, contenting himself to keep what he had taken at first. This over-sight gave the Duke de la Valette, time enough to fortifie Bayonne, to provide it with Victuals, and to put the rest of the Province in a condition to de∣fend it self. The French on their side,Siri, Ibid. p. 432. endeavour'd in Vain this Year to beat the Spaniards out of the Isles of Hieres, by a Fleet of Thirty Eight Vessels that came from the Ocean, under the command of the Count d' Harcourt, the Arch-bishop of Bourdeaux, and the Bishop of Nantes. This Fleet happily arrived the 12th of August, upon the Coasts of Provence, but instead of falling upon Action immediately, the Mareschal de Vitry Governour of the Province, made this Army lose a Month, being it seems incensed, because the Court had not employ'd him in this Affair. In the mean time, the Fleet ill equipped, and sorrily provided by the Bishop of Nantes, who had been trusted with that Commission, were able to keep the Sea no longer; and that of the Spaniards con∣sisting of Fifty Gallies, came in Sight, and threw a thou∣sand Men with Victuals and Ammunition into these Islands, which wholly broke the Design. Ever sinceSiri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 434. the beginning of the Year, the States General of the United-Provinces, weary of the War which they had for so many Years sustained against the Spaniards, began to renew the Negotiation with them, which had been interrupted. France was no sooner aware of it, but Orders were sent to the Mareschal de Brezé, and to the Baron de Charnacé to endeavour to break off the Confe∣rences, which were begun in Brabant, concerning this Af∣fair, who acquitted themselves so happily in this Affair, that the States declared to the Spanish Agents, that they would conclude nothing without the conent of France. They assured the Mareschal de Brezé of this their Resolution in writing, and made vast Preparati∣ons to continue the War: They offered to France, in case they resolved to attack the Spaniards by Sea, to maintain one Third of the Fleet, and to lend the King Thirty Men of War, if he would give them. Two Thou∣sand
and Livres a Month for each. The Prince of Orange demanded Ten Thousand Foot and Twelve Companies of Horse for this Champaign; but instead of listening to these Offers, the other Designs which the Cardinal had on Foot, and the good and bad success of which I I have related, made him in all probability neglect the necessary Preparations on that Side to oppose the Spani∣ards. And thus the States-General not being assisted by France as they ought to have been, the Cardinal Infanta was not apprehensive of any great harm they could do him, and therefore directed his Thoughts to retaliate to France, what France had done to him the Year before. Besides, seeing the principal Forces of France taken up in Italy, and in Burgundy, he thought it sufficient to send the Count de Feria against the Prince of Orange, with a small Army. He designed to make himself Master of theAubety's Life of the Card. Lib. 5. Cap. 35. City of Liege, which had stood neuter ever since the Declaration of the War, and Jean de Werth went to besiege it, but the Inhabitants having made their peace with a Summ of Money, the Cardinal Infanta order'd that General to joyn Prince Thomas and Piccolomini,Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 436. and make a descent upon ‡ Picardy together. The first place they besieged was Cappille, which only held outIt surren∣dered on the 10th of July. seven Days, and then the Baron du Bec surrendered it by Capitulation. After they had taken some other small Places, they went to attack Catelet, which St. Leger who was the Gover∣nour of it, surrendered likewise, without staying till they had made a Breach. All People were surpri∣zed at the small resistance which the Governours of these Places made, and the Cardinal fell into an excessive rage against them, although it was purely his Fault; for the Frontiers of Picardy, even after the Declaration of the War, were left naked and unprovided, as if it had been in the midst of a Peace. To turn the Eyes of the World from himself, he composed a Council of the Officers of the Crown that were at Paris, and of some Councellors of State, which condemned the Governors of the Places surrender'd, to be quartered like Traytors. NaySee the Life of the Duke of Es∣pernon. p. 548. he fell foul upon the Duke de la Valette, because he wou'd not give his Vote to have the Baron du Bec condemned to die, as the Interests of the Minister demanded.
All they cou'd do at that juncture was, to oppose the Progress of the Spaniards by a small Body of Men com∣manded by the Count de Soissons, and composed of the Troops of the Mareschal de Brezé which he had brought out of Holland, and of those of the Mareschal de Chaunes, who had acted the Summer before upon the Frontiers of Artois. But this Army being in no respect capable to make head against the Spaniards, and being also lessen'd by the Detachments that were made out of it to defend those Places which were in danger to be attack'd, they contented themselves to dispute the Passage of the River Somme with them, and to incommode their March. On the first of August the Spanish Army appeared upon the Banks of that River, and pretending to pass over at a certain place by the favour of twelve Pieces of Cannon placed in Battery upon the Banks of the Somme, they passed it at another place where the French did not expect them. The Count was resolved to attack their Infantry, who had with great haste cover'd themselves with Gabi∣ons; but he sustained so great a Loss, without being able to dislodge them, that he was obliged to yield the field to the Spaniards, and to retire to Compeigne. This alarmed the whole Country, which was surprized to see that the Count shou'd fly before 8 or 10000 Horse, which Piccolomini and Jean de Werth commanded. Thus Roye the next day open'd their Gates to the Spanish Army, and the French Troops every where began to be possess'd with a great Consternation. It was feared, that as they fled towards Paris, the Spanish Army wou'd pursue them, whereas had they taken any Post that lay nearer to the Frontiers, the Enemies durst not have advanced too far into the Kingdom. Within a few days after, Corbie, which pass'd for a strong place, was taken, after a Siege of 8 days, although there were 1800 Men in Garrison there. Soyccourt, Lieutenant-General of the Province, surrendred it, without staying till it was assaulted, or fearing the Punishment to which the other Governours were condemned. At this time the Parisians were in an extraordinary fear, notwithstanding the King's presence among them, and the perpetual Arrival of new Troops, which daily encreased the Army. Cardinal Richlieu was cursed in all
places, who had engaged the Kingdom in this War be∣fore he had provided for the Security of the Frontiers, and especially those of Picardy, which are at so small a di∣stance from Paris. As he was beloved by none but his own Creatures, they now took occasion to say all the Ill of him they knew.Aubery's Life of the Card. Lib. 5. Cap. 38. It was not only said, that War was not his Profession, but they added, that he had a Design to deliver up Paris to the Spaniards; and that for that reason he had caused the Walls of the Fauxbourg of St. Honore to be broken down, under a Pretence to en∣large the City on that side. However,Aubery Ibid. c. 40. Siri, Ibid. p. 438. notwithstand∣ing all these Murmurs against him, the Cardinal being come to Paris, went into the City, without his ordinary Guards, as it were to hearten the People, and to let them see how secure he thought himself upon the score of his Innocence. All the Companies of Paris went to offer their Service to the King upon this occasion; and they assessed them∣selves to raise new Levies with all Expedition. All the young Fellows about the City that were capable of bear∣ing Arms, were sent for. Those that had several Lackeys were obliged to send one, as well as the Tradesmen that had Apprentices to spare; and several Buildings at Paris were laid aside for the present, to list the Carpenters and Masons. The King likewise put out an Order, that all those that had above one pair of Coach-Horses should give one, to serve for the Artillery or Troopers; and that all Gentlemen, and all those that were exempt from Taxes, and all the Officers of his Houshold, should repair in their Arms to St. Denys within six days. In the mean time the Siege of Dole was raised, as has been already observed, and the King, on the first of September, found himself at the Head of forty thousand Foot, and twelve thousand Horse, and with a Train of forty Pieces of Cannon. The Army being met together, His Majesty came thi∣ther, accompanied by Monsieur, the Cardinal-Duke, the Duke of Angoulême, and the Mareschals de la Force, and Chatillon, besides abundance of other Officers. Monsieur was declared Generalissimo of that Army, and the Count de Soissons Lieutenant-General; which was rather done for fear of discontenting those Princes, than obliging
them. The Cardinal desired to be Generalissimo, and that the Count de Soissons might Command under him; but the Count-refused it; and so he was obliged to be∣stow that Post upon Monsieur, which he desired for him∣self. Although they were now in a condition to beat the Enemies out of Picardy so soon as they pleased, yet the Danger they had been in, and the Affairs of Italy and Burgundy, threw the King into so deep a Melancho∣ly, that he was displeased at every thing. He was con∣cerned that his Brother had the Command of the Army, and that he lived in a good Understanding with the Count de Soissons. He express'd a great Coldness towards the Cardinal, for daring to censure his ill Humour, and his want of Resolution. He wou'd scarce be brought to see him, and he contradicted him whenever he spake of any thing; so that the Cardinal lost in a manner all his Courage, and neglected to give the necessary Orders. It was observed, that contrary to his custom, he shew'd a great deal of Civility to those people whom he had for∣merly slighted. One day he publickly askedSiri Mem. Rec. Tom. . p. 441. St. Yval, whom he hated extreamly because he was deeply enga∣ged in the Party of the Count de Soissons, what his Opi∣nion was about an Affair of great consequence. He in∣vited him besides to sup with him: and St. Yval was ra∣vished with joy to see this haughty Spirit so humbled by his fear that the progress of the Enemy wou'd be the cause of his ruine.Siri Mem. Rec. Tom. 8. p. 439. At last he found himself so weak∣ned in Body and Mind, that if Father Joseph, to whom he discovered his most secret Infirmities, had not encou∣raged him, he was ready to throw up the Ministry, and by that means to hasten his own Destruction, which his Enemies had so long desired. But this Capuchin having inspired him with fresh Resolution by his Discourses, he determined to apply himself more than ever to Publick Affairs. The first Thing he advised His Majesty in this Con∣juncture was, to perswade the States-General to make some Attempts upon the Territories of Spain. The Prince of Orange was willing enough, but those that promoted the Treaty hinder'd him from acting with necessary vi∣gour. However, he gain'd his point of them at last, and forbad the State's Agent at Vienna to talk any more of a
Truce. He took the field with a considerable Army, and was ready to make a Diversion in the Spanish Ne∣therlands, in case the Count de Feria approached the Fron∣tiers of France. 'Twas at this time that Frederick-Henry received the Title of Highness, which the Cardinal gave him instead of that of Excellence, which he had till then enjoy'd. The King concluded a new Treaty with the States, by which he promised them a Million and half of Livers, to be paid at Three several Payments in a year; upon condition that all this Money should be em∣ployed in carrying on the War against Spain. To encourage the Army by his Presence, the King ar∣rived there, as I have already said, at the beginning of September, and having advanced as far as Senlis, from whence he beheld one night the Flame of some Villages, which the Croatians had set on fire before they left them, he fell a Weeping at the Losses and Calamities of his People. But the Spanish Army being utterly unable to oppose the progress of the Royal Forces, thought of no∣thing now but retiring into the Low-Countries, because they had not time enough to secure their Conquests. Thus the Army of France came before Roye, and after this Place had been Batter'd for a few days, by Twelve Pieces of Canon, they surrendred to Monsieur by Com∣position. Afterwards it Marched to Block up Corbie, for there was no hopes of taking it by force. To effect this, they undertook to environ it with Forts, and Re∣trenchments, for fear least the Spaniards should Relieve it; but they were informed soon after, that the Besieg∣ed wanted Corn, and other Provisions. This made the Cardinal resolve to propose the Attacking of the place, hoping that the Garrison, weakned by want and scarci∣ty, would be obliged to Capitulate. The Mareschal de Chatillon was the first that proposed it in a Council; and this Advice, supported by the Authority of the Cardi∣nal, carried it from that of the Count de Soissons, who believed, it would be impossible to reduce this place by force, at that time of the year. They made Three Attacks, and the Garrison finding themselves destitute of Victuals, and no hopes of a Relief, Capitulated on the 19th of November.
This good success made the Cardinal as courageous as ever, and retrieved his Reputation, which had suffer'd mightily by the progress the Spaniards made in Picardy. However,Siri Mem. Rc. T. 8. P. 442. People censured his Conduct, for uniting the Duke of Orleans, and the Count de Soissons in the Command of the same Army; because, as they were both his sworn Enemies, so they might lay their heads together to destroy him. The Minister was of opinion, that the Count de Soissons, who was of an imperious haughty temper, would fall out with Monsieur, and that their Domesticks, whose Interests were different, would take care to incense them one against another. But it fell out quite contrary, for these two Princes, who had been Enemies of a long standing to his Emi∣nence, re-united more than ever to ruine him. They were made to believe, that if they still continued in their designs against the Minister, they would draw to their party the Houses of Guise, of Vendome, of Bouillon, of E∣spernon, and of Rets, whom he had scurvily used, and who appeared to be very much dissatisfy'd with him. So Monsieur and the Count being at Peronne, they ad∣vised together about the properest ways to destroy the Cardinal. Some were of opinion, That His Majesty should be made acquainted with the Ill-conduct of this Minister, who was the cause of all the Calamities the Nation groaned under; and that he had engaged him in a War, which he vainly imagined he was able to manage of himself, though he was much fitter to raise a Cruel War in the State, than to repel Foreigners. O∣thers advised to dispatch him out of the way, for that would soon put an end to all these disorders: This last expedient seemed the best, and the two Princes being resolved to put it in execution, trusted the Secret with four persons, one of whom was a Domestick of Mon∣sieur, and the other three belonged to the Count de Soissons. During the Siege of Corbie, the King Lodged in a Castle near Amiens, and never came to the City, where the Cardinal lay, but when he held a Council there, af∣ter which he returned to this Castle. So Monsieur and the Count resolved, one day when they came to Coun∣cil, to carry a great number of the Officers of the Army
along with them, and that so soon as the King was re∣turned to his Quarters, to find some pretence or other to stop the Cardinal, and cause him to be Murder'd by the Four Men, who knew of the Affair. With this design they came to the City, and the Council being over, the King retired according to his Custom. One of the Four Conspirators coming up to the Duke and the Count, as if he had something to say to them, asked in their Ear, Whether they still continued in this Resolu∣tion? They answer'd, Yes: So this Man made a Sign for the others to approach, at the time when the two Princes were discoursing with the Cardinal at the bottom of the Stair-case of the Council-Chamber. No∣thing now remained for the Duke to doe, but onely to give these Fellows the Signal, and then the Cardinal had been certainly kill'd, without any possibility of escaping. But at this moment the Duke leaving the Cardinal with the Count, began to go up the Stairs to∣wards the Hall in a great confusion: One of the Con∣spirators immediately followed him, and would have pulled him back, but the Duke never stopt till he was got up to the top. It was to no purpose for this Man to represent to him, That he had lost the fairest opportunity in the World, and that nothing had been so easie as to accomplish it: The Duke was so strangely disorder'd, that he could make him no positive Answer, but expressed himself in confused and doubtful Terms. The Count still enter∣tained the Cardinal in Conversation; one of the Con∣spirators being behind him, and the other two at a lit∣tle distance off; but Monsieur not returning, the Car∣dinal began to fear there was some design against his Person; and taking his leave of the Count, got into his Coach, and went home. He did not know till some time after, the circumstances of the danger he had been in; but from that moment he would never trust him∣self more in the hands of his Enemies. These Princes afterwards pretended, That when they were upon the point of having him Assassinated, they were hinder'd from doing it, by considering, that the Cardinal was a Priest: a weak Reason to put by the Execution of a Lawful Design, if this was one, and which did not ren∣der
the Crime much more heinous, if they looked up∣on this action to be a crime, as really it was. Besides, it was not at that very Moment when they design'd to kill the Cardinal, that they first learnt he was a Priest: no, they knew that long before; and if that reason was good, it ought to have disswaded them at the begin∣ning, from falling upon such a Design. But those peo∣ple that had engaged these Princes in this Affair, attri∣buted this sudden change to the natural weakness of Monsieur, which rendred him equally uncapable of good and bad actions, when they required any force of Mind or Resolution. Having failed of this blow, the Duke and the Count took the other way which had been proposed, to ruin the Cardinal in the King's good opinion of him. To effect this more easily, they endeavour'd to engage the Dukes of Espernon, la Valette, Bouillon and Rets in their Design, and they sent Messengers to them for that pur∣pose; but they onely discover'd their thoughts by this means, without strengthening their party. The Cardinal who was inform'd of it, judged that the best way to support himself against them, and to be revenged of 'em, was to remove them from the Court, by making false Advice be given them, That the King design'd to Ap∣prehend them. Thus being gone to Paris by the King's Order, on the 18th of November, while the Cardinal was still in Picardy, he Alarm'd them so dexterously with this false news, that on the 20th, or 21st of November at Night, both of them made their Escapes. Monsieur re∣tired to Blois, without seeing the King, and the Count de Soissons to Sedan, without taking his leave of him. As soon as they had left the Court, it was no diffi∣cult matter for the Cardinal to perswade the King what he pleased; but when His Majesty came to be in∣formed, that these Princes gave it out publickly, That the reason of their going away, was, because there was a design to apprehend them, he was extreamly offended at it; and, in reality, he had never thought of any such thing. Monsieur sent a very submissive.See T. 11 of Aubery's Mem. p. 13, &c. Letter next day to the King, which His Majesty was pleased to An∣swer in very obliging Terms. The Cardinal Writ to him likewise, and made him great offers of his Servi∣ces;
but, at the same time, blamed him for his over∣great credulity, in believing good and false News a∣like. As for the Count de Soissons, who was of a more haugh∣ty spirit, he sent the King a Letter full of Reproaches; wherein he complained, That, in stead of a Reward for the services he had done him, he found himself con∣strain'd to fly for Sanctuary to one of his Friends, to a∣void Imprisonment. However, the King was not much offended at his complaints, and sent him word, That he had not the least intentions to have him apprehended; and that if he had left the Kingdom merely out of fear, he would consent that he should tarry where he was, and that he should enjoy all his Revenues and Pensions, pro∣vided he would behave himself like an obedient Subject. The Duke of Orleans seemed to be well enough satis∣fied with their usage of the Count, for whom he pre∣tended to have a particular concern, and the great kind∣ness they expressed towards himself, had, in appearance, stifled all his Resentments. At last, after they had sent several persons to him, to know what occasions he had to complain, and to see what might be done in his be∣half, to cure him of all his jealousies,Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. P. 451. † Chavigny ob∣tain'd a promise of him, That he would suffer himself no more to be influenced by the Counsels of the Count de Soissons, and aDated the 11th of De∣cember, 1636. Writing sign'd by his own hand, wherein he desired the King to favour him so far, as to put an end to every thing, that might give him any subject of suspicion, or distrust. This might easily be done, if the King would consent to his Marriage, or if he made him the Judge of it himself. If the King a∣greed to the latter, he demanded a place of security, where he might declare himself, without running any danger. The Duke added, That he hoped they would treat the Count de Soissons with the same lenity and in∣dulgence. Chavigny returned to Court, and wasThe 16th of December. soon after sent back to Blois, with a Writing from the King, wherein he approved the Marriage of Monsieur, if he absolutely desired it; upon condition, that he would not at the same time espouse the Interests of the Duke of Lorrain, or en∣tertain any Correspondences that might be prejudicial to
the welfare of the Kingdom. The King desired, that Monsieur would oblige himself to the performance of this, by signing a Promise that was drawn up, and sent to him. As for what concerned the Count de Soissons, Chavigny inform'd him what Message His Majesty had sent to him. The Duke of Orleans appear'd to be well enough pleas'd, and told him, He was ready to sign the Promise that was proposed to him; but, he would not wholly conclude it, till he had Written to the Count de Soissons, if it were onely for form sake. He like∣wise desired, that Du Fargis, Coudrai-Montpensier, and the Abbot of la Riviere, who had lately been sent to Pri∣son, should be set at liberty. This, though it was not wholly refused, yet they intimated to him, that it would be much more proper to ask these Favours of the King, after he had entirely adjusted all differences with him. The Abbot of la Riviere indeed was soon after released from his Confinement, because he promised to joyn with Goulas, the Duke's Secretary, who was of the Cardinal's Party, to perswade Monsieur to doe what the Minister desired of him. As for a place of Secu∣rity, they thought it by no means fitting to grant him one; and, unless they granted that, the Duke was a∣fraid they would not keep their words with him. Some of his Domesticks put that into his head, as also to stick firm to the Count de Soissons, from whose Interests the Court endeavoured to disengage him. As he was naturally inconstant and irresolute, he sometimes seem∣ed inclin'd to make his own Agreement by himself; yet Writ at the same time to the Count, who had invited him to Sedan, that he design'd to come and joyn him. But at last the Offers of the Court, and the Advice of those about him that favour'd it, determined him, for some time, to make his Reconciliation without the Count, and to feign himself sick of the Gout, that he might not go to Sedan. In the mean time several of those persons who had been in the party of Puilaurens, came to Blois, and Monsieur's Court increased every day. The Dukes of Vendome and Beaufort came thither in private to offer their Services to him, and the D. of Beaufort engaged to conduct him secure∣ly, where-ever he would be pleased to go. The Cardinal
fearing lest this Prince might be prevailed upon to al∣ter his Mind, by the suggestions of those that were a∣bout him, advised His Majesty to dispatch Orders to all the Governours of the Provinces and Towns about Blois, to have an eye upon all the Passes, and stop him, in case he attempted to go farther, till they had fresh Instructions. Troops were posted in several places for the same reason, and people were set at Blois to look after all Monsieur's Motions, and send advice of all that happen'd. Ever since the beginning of this year, the Court was informed by Chavigny, and the Count de Guiche, who were sent expresly to Blois, that the Duke of Orleans continued to demand a place of Security, such as Blaye, Blavet, or Nantes. The Count de Soissons demanded the same for himself, before he would return to Court, and named Verdun, or Stenay. The Duke supported this demand of the Count, whom he seem'd willing enough to abandon before; and sent Chaudebonne to Paris, to demand farther for himself, and enlargement of all his Domesticks: that after a General Peace they should pay all his Debts; that, for the present, they should pay him down all those Sums they had promised him, and allow him a Hundred thousand Crowns towards some Buildings he was then about; that they should not question any of his servants, or of the Count de Soissons; that he might reside where he pleased; and that they would assign him out of the Treasury a Pension for the Maintenance of Madam, so soon as she should come into France. The King and Cardinal looked upon these Pretensions of Monsieur to be extravagant, especially what related to the Places of Security, which they thought these Princes demanded for no other reason, but to be in a con∣dition, upon the first occasion of Discontent they pre∣tended to receive, to introduce the Enemies of the Crown into the Bowels of France. So they were reject∣ed, and the King enlarged the Chevalier de Grignan out of the Bastile, who had a great Ascendant over Mon∣sieur, hoping that when he was near his Person, he might counter-balance the Credit of those who perswaded him to demand a place of security. They were per∣swaded
at Court, that Monsieur was so effectually led by the instigation of others, that they did not question but that if those that were about him would advise him to put himself into the King's hands, without making a∣ny Stipulations, he would immediately come and do it. About the middle of January they sent him word, That His Majesty would grant him all the Securities he could desire, but that he was willing to see an end of this Affair. Upon this Monsieur dispatched F. Gondran, his Confessor, to Court, with demands like those he had made before. They discover'd plainly by this, that he onely endeavour'd to gain time to make his escape to Se∣dan, to which place the Count de Soissons sought all manner of ways to draw him, and that perhaps they waited till the Spaniards and Imperialists were in a con∣dition to act in their favour. So the Cardinal advised the King to go to Orleans in Person with His Guards, to put an end to this business, but he thought in the best way to send before-hand to Sedan, to the Count de Soissons, aSee it in Aubery's Mem. Tom. 2. p. 17. Writing to Sign, by which he should de∣clare, That if His Majesty gave him leave to reside at Monzon, a small Town in Champagne, he would live there like a dutiful Subject; and that if the Duke of Orleans endeavoured to debauch him from the Obedi∣ence he owed the King, he would not assist him in any manner. The Count answered, That he would leave that matter to the Duke of Orleans to act in it as he pleased; but refused to sign the Writing, by which he should engage himself to live in one of the worst Towns in the Kingdom. 'Tis probable the Cardinal made him the offer of that City, purposely to make him refuse it, that so he might not make his peace with the King so soon, for he hated him as much as he despised the Duke of Orleans, when he had no body to advise him. The Minister who put the same Sentiments into the King's Head, about both the Princes, perswaded him, upon the receipt of this Answer, to employ his Authority to make an end speedily with Monsieur, and to leave the Count, for some time, out of the Kingdom. So the King's departure for Orleans was fixed on the 25th of January, and he was to carry along with him the French
and Swiss Regiments of Guards, with Twelve hun∣dred Horse. After some Negotiations, Monsieur obtain'd a promise of the King, that he wou'd not pass beyond Orleans; but upon the Cardinal'sThe 31st of January. Arrival thither, the Duke was so terribly affrighted, that all that he insisted upon amount∣ed only to this, that they wou'd not apprehend him when he came to Orleans. The KingAubery's Mem. T. 2. p. 19. writ to him, to invite him to come and see him there, and gave him his Royal Word that he wou'd be so far from using him in that manner, That if after he had been with him he still persist∣ed in his Inclinations to leave the Kingdom, he wou'd give him free leave to do it, with all the security he cou'd desire. The Cardinal joyn'd a Billet to it, where he assured him, That he wou'd engage his life and his honour for the perfor∣mance of what the King was pleas'd to write to him. The Duke on his side sign'd a new Oath of Fidelity at Blois, wherein he begged a Pardon for the Count de Soissons, and promised to renounce all manner of Friendship with him, if he behaved himself unworthy of the great favour his Majesty had shewn him in giving him leave to enjoy his Estate, his Pensions, and his Offices, if he continued to act like an obedient Subject. Upon this the King made a sort of a Declaration, wherein he promised to leave the Duke and the Count in the possession of the above-mention'd Things, upon condition they did no∣thing prejudicial to his Service. After this, the DukeThe 8th of February. Siri. Mem. Rec. T.  p. 474. came to Orleans, accompanied by the Cardinal de la Valette; supp'd with the King, vi∣sited the Cardinal-Duke, and was received extreamly well, altho' all the World despised him for his Weakness. Even the Cardinal-Duke cou'd not forbear to rally him, though he made him abundance of Compliments. This Prince sent to acquaint the Count de Soissons with what had passed between the King and him, and to let him know, that if he had a mind to be comprehended in this Treaty, he had a Months time allow'd him to consider of it; and that in case he accepted it, he might either stay in his Government of Champagne with all safety, or come back to Court. The same day that the Duke of Orleans saw the King, HisSee the Col∣lection of the Mem. of Aub. T. 2. p. 18. Majesty sent Orders to the Countess of Soissons,
who was at Paris, to retire to Creil, a small Town in the Isle of France, for fear lest she shou'd form any Cabals at Paris, in favour of her son. In the mean time this Prince received the Advice which Monsieur sent him; and after he had complain'd of his Inconstancy, heAubety's Mem. T. 2. p. 20. an∣swered, that he was very glad that the Duke of Orleans had given content to the King; but as for himself, who had left the Court for no other Reasons but for the In∣terests of the Duke, and his own proper Security, all that he desired was, to live in quiet at Sedan, as his Ma∣jesty had promised he might do; That if it were lawful for him to complain, he might complain, that in the Declaration which was published in favour of Monsieur, the King pardons him a fault which he had never com∣mitted, since the King had not disapproved his retiring to Sedan; that he might add to this, the ill Treatment they had shewn the Countess his Mother, and that they pre∣tended to take away from him his Estate, his Pensions, and his Governments. Although this Answer shew'd much more Resolution than the Duke of Orleans had expressed, yet the Count de Soissons was not the worse used for that. On the other hand, the Cardinal, fearing lest if the Enemy hap∣pen'd to make such a Campaign this Year as they did the Year before, and cou'd bring the Count over to their Party, they wou'd occasion infinite Disorders in the State, prevailed with the King to send the Count de Bri∣on to Sedan, to hinder the Prince from bending his Thoughts that way. The King and the Cardinal writ to him some time afterThe 27th of March., in very obliging terms, and in his Answers, the Count exprest a great deal ofThe 6th of April. Mem. d' Aub. T. 2. c. 21. Submis∣sion to the King, and Civility to the Minister, but wou'd not own that he had committed any fault. In the mean time the Cardinal came to be informed, that this Prince, who was mightily beloved by the Sol∣diers, had sent severalAubery's Life of the Card. Lib. 5. Cap. 49. Emissaries to the King's Armies, to endeavour to debauch several Officers there, and bring them over to his own Party. Besides this, it wasSiri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 474. discovered by the means of Father Hilarion a Capu∣chin, whom the Court sent to him to induce him to re∣concile himself with the King, or to know his last Reso∣lution, that he was upon the point of concluding a Trea∣ty
with the Emperour, and the Cardinal-Infanta, by the Intervention of the Queen-Mother. The Cardinal-Infanta offer'd to furnish him with Money to raise a new Body of an Army, and the Emperour granted him the Title of General, to command the Troops of Piccolomini, to which the Duke of Bouillon was to joyn some others. The Cardinal had notice of this; and fearing the fatal consequences of this Treaty, sent la Croisette, a Gentle∣man of the Duke of Longueville, to Sedan, as in the name of the Countess of Soissons, not believing that the King cou'd in honour send any one in his own name, after he knew how far the Court had advanced. La Croisette knew so well how to manage the Count, that he delay'd to sign the Treaty which St. Yval brought him out of the Low-Countries, and gave his Word that he wou'd not engage himself, till he knew whether his Majesty wou'd grant what he demanded of him. La Croisette returning with all speed to the Court, ob∣tain'd in a manner all that the Count pretended to, and went immediately toThe 14th of July. carry him this News to Sedan. The King gave him leave toSee the Mem. of Aub. T. 2. p. 21. reside at Sedan, or any other City he shou'd pitch upon in his Government of Champagne, in case he wou'd not come to Court, or in any Foreign City that was not suspected, for four Years, unless his Majesty sent for him to serve him in any important Affairs; that then he shou'd be obliged to come, and that till then they wou'd not interpret his Absence to be a Crime against the State, or a Dis∣obedience. The same Articles specified, That during the space of four Years, the King shou'd furnish him with 25000 Crowns a year, to be employ'd in the Pay∣ment of the Garrison of Sedan: That the Duke of Bou∣illon should be paid all that was due to him; and that the King shou'd testifie to him, that he was well pleased with him for assisting the Count; and that he should augment his Revenue with 15000 Crowns, by reason of his Alliance: That the Count shou'd enjoy his Estates, Functions, Offices, Benefice, and Emoluments: That the King shou'd publish a Declaration in favour of all those that had follow'd him, that they shou'd not be ta∣ken again for this fault: That the Count shou'd gn these Articles, and swear Fidelity to the King, between
the hands of one of his Almoners; and that the Coun∣tess of Soissons shou'd return to Paris. The Count sign'd these Articles, and took the Oath of Fidelity to the King, as was expresly provided by the Treaty; after which he excused himself as well as he cou'd to the Queen-Mother and Prince Thomas, for not concluding that Affair which he had begun with the Cardinal-Infanta. His Constancy and Resolution made him obtain better. Terms than the Duke of Orleans, without stooping to make any of those condeseensions as he had done. The Cardinal, who shew'd himself impe∣rious to the highest degree against those whom he did not fear, complied with those that knew how to make themselves be feared. He did not behave himself so in relation to the Queen-Mother,Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 539. for whom the King and Queen of England in∣terceded in vain with her Son, towards the end of this Year. She sent Monsigot to London with anDated the 11th of September. Instructi∣on, by which she demanded to be re-established as before, and the same favour for her Domesticks, and all those that had followed her Departure. But as they did not in the least fear Charles I. in France, and much less Mary de Medicis, they cou'd obtain nothing. To come now to Foreign Affairs;Siri, ibid. p. 476. The Duke of Parma being besieged by the Spaniards in Placentia, and in great danger of being taken there, had long ago im∣plored the Assistance of France, which they were now re∣solved to send him by the Fleet that was arrived at Pro∣vence, to recover the Isles of Honorat, and St. Margaret. But when this Succour was ready to part, the Duke of Parma fearing that it wou'd not come soon enough, made an Accommodation with the Spaniards, by the means of Pandolfini, Minister to the Grand Duke, who performed all the Offices of a Mediator. He excused himself to the King of France upon the invincible neces∣sity he lay under; and the Court did not seem to be much displeased with him, because they knew not which way to get into his Country, nor how to find Subsistence for their Troops there, which they design'd to send him. The Duke of Parma order'd the few French Forces he had in his Dominions to depart, and after that was obli∣ged to surrender Sabioneta to the Spaniards, under a pre∣tence
of restoring that little Principality to the Neice of the Princess de Stigliano lately deceased. He likewise adjusted Matters soon after with the Duke of Modena: And thus the League of Italy, and the great Hopes that were built upon it, fell to the ground. The Marquiss de Leganez enter'd afterwards into Montferrat, where he took Castel Ponzone and Nice de la Paille; but advancing towards Final, with a Design to cover it, because the Mareschal de Crequi made as if he had a mind to attack that place, he was obliged to retire in Disorder, after the loss of five or six hundred of his Men. In the mean time the French Fleet,Siri, Ibid. p. 499. that they shou'd not be said to do nothing, went to attack the Isle of Sardinia, although they had scarce one Pilot aboard the Fleet that knew the Harbours and the Roads. However, they arrived very happily there, and made a Descent in the Bay of Oristan, without any one to oppose them. The French afterwards took a City of that name, which they found full of Provisions. The Officers had resolved at first to spare private Houses, and only carry off the Victuals, and send them to the Fleet; but this Order being ill executed, and the Country Houses plundered, all the Island took the Alarm, and the Inhabitants per∣ceiving the small Numbers of the French, who were wholly destitute of Horse, resolved to beat them out by force. The French, who did not make above four thou∣sand Foot with some Field-pieces, fearing to be over-run by the Cavalry of the Island which were as many as they were, and besides were followed by a considerable Body of Foot, thought of making a Retreat, which they per∣formed luckily enough, by reason of the great Inexperi∣ence of their Enemies Militia. In this Precipitation they scarce carried away any thing but the Glory of having shewn the Nobility and People of the Island that they un∣derstood the Affairs of War better than they did. So soon as these Naval Forces wereSee Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 502. returned to Provence, they had Orders to attack the Isles, possessed by the Spaniards. This they executed with so much Vigour, that in a few Days, theThe 12th of May. See Charles Br∣nard upon the Year. King was Master of the Isle of St. Margarets, notwithstanding the brave Re∣sistance of the Spaniards, after which they forced the
Garrison of St. Honorar to Capitulate to have the Liber∣ty to retire without Cannon, without Ammunition, and without Colours. The Count d'Harcourt, who com∣manded the Fleet, acquir'd a great deal of Reputation upon this occasion, as well as Castelan, who commanded the Troops in Quality of Mareschal de Camp. The Archbishop of Bourdeaux, who was likewise there, at∣tributed to himself part of the Honour of this Action, although others wou'd have been apt to say, that he nei∣ther understood the office of a Bishop, nor that of a Ge∣neral, of which he was so Ambitious. Thus the Spaniards were beaten out of the Isles of St. Honorat and St. Margaret, which had cost them a great deal, though they scarce made any advantage of them, while they kept them in their Hands. The Duke de la Valette found it an easie matter toThe Life of the Duke of Espernon. turn them out of Guienne, without doing any thing else than cutting off their Provisions. They were reduced to such great ex∣tremities, that without staying till they were attacked, they embark'd their Artillery and the Sick at Socoa of their own accord, after which the rest of the Army marched. All this while the Duke de la Valette had been but sorrily assisted by the Court, where he was not much respected, because neither he, nor his Father had ever submitted to the Cardinal's Authority, although the Son was allied to the Minister. The Attempt which the Spaniards made upon Lan∣guedoc, towards the end of the same Summer,Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 513. See also Ch. Bernard, Lib. 18. S. 10. met with no better Success, although the French were not in a very good Condition to receive them. Count Serbellon at the Head of Fourteen Thousand Foot, and Fifteen Hundred Horse, went to besiege Leucate, on the last day of August. He attack'd it with a great deal of Vi∣gour, but the place being sufficiently strong, what by its Fortifications, and what by its natural Situation, Du Barry the Governour defended it so well, that the Duke of Hallain Governour of the Province, had time enough to come to the relief of it. Having presently got toge∣ther Ten Thousand Men of the Militia of Languedoc, brave fighting Fellows, and well season'd in the Civil Wars, with Seven or Eight Hundred Horse, of which he made a review at Narbonne the 22d of September, he
marched four Days after in order of Battle, towards the Enemy's Camp. After he had taken a view of them, he resolved to attack them on the 28th of the same Month, at the beginning of the Night. The Spa∣niards surprized to meet the Enemy without seeing them, and not knowing where to run, fell into a great Disor∣der, after they had made a feeble Opposition for a few Hours. At last they found there was no other way to save themselves, but by abandoning their Camp, with all their Ammunition and Baggage, and the Night which furnished the Enemy with an opportunity to vanquish them, favoured their Flight. In Recompence of this brave Action and several other Services, the Duke of Hallain received a Mareschal's Staff of France on the 27th of October, and was ever after, called the Mares∣chal de Schomberg, as his Father was. The same Day, the Mareschal de Vitry Governour of Provence, with whom the Court was highly dissatisfied, because he had ruined their first enterprize upon the Isles St. Honorat, and St. Margaret, was arrested by the Mar∣quis de Gêores, and carried to the Bastile. His Govern∣ment of Provence 'was given at the same time to Count d' Alets. The French did not only defend themselves with a great deal of Success in Guienne and Languedoc, and turn the Spaniards out of all those Places they had ta∣ken, but they attack'd them in the Low-Countries with sufficient Advantages on their Side. The Cardinal de la Valette, and the Duke of Candalle his Brother, who had commanded a long while in the Service of the Venetians, and was now returned into France; besieged Landreci, a City of Henault, whichThe 23d. of July. Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 511. and Bernard. Lib. 18. S. 6. capitulated soon after. From hence they marched to attack Capelle, and took it, through the Cowardice of the Governour, who did not give the Cardinal Infanta time to relieve him, although he advanced by great Marches, with Fifteen Thousand Men. He was not far off, when he heard that the Place was in the Hands of the French. TheAubery's Life of the Cardinal. Lib. 6. Cap. 53. King had desired ever since the last Year to lay Siege to this Place, to get from the Spaniards all that they had taken, but the Season was too far advanced, after the taking of Corbie, to engage in a new Siege. He there∣fore
was resolved to have it done this Year, and to be there himself in Person, but there appeared some difficul∣ty in the attempt, which made the Cardinal disswade him from it, and propose the design of besieging Avesnes. In the mean time, as they were pre∣paring all things to put it in Execution, twas believed their attempt upon that Place wou'd miscarry, and for that reason they bethought themselves to attack Capelle. The King was extreamly incensed at their besieging it, after they had disswaded him from it as being a dan∣gerous Enterprize, as if they had envied him the Ho∣nour of reducing that Place. Nay, he was angry with the Cardinal, as if this Minister had designed to deceive him: But the Minister appeased him, by procuring an Attestation signed by the Officers of the Army; wherein they affirmed, that they had resolved upon this Enter∣prize in the ordinary Forms, finding the opportunity to be favourable to them, and not at all by the Cardinal's Order. At this time, the Minister found out the Correspon∣dence which the Queen had kept with the Dutchess de Chevrouse, a discarded Mistress of the Cardinal, as 'tis reported, and ordered the Man to be apprehended, by whose means she managed this Commerce, as if the Queen had been obliged to give him an account of all those, with whom she had any manner of Concern. The Superiour of Val du Grace, who was accused to be in the intrigue, was likewise removed to another Con∣vent. Every thing that touched the Minister never so little, was a Crime against the State, and was punished more severely than what regarded the King's Person; but to return to the Affairs of War. On the other side, the Mareschal de Châtellon attack'd Yvoix, in the Country of Luxemburg, and although it was defended with great Gallantry by Colonel Bronz, it was forced to surrender towards the end of August. But the French did not enjoy this Conquest long, for at the beginning of September, this place fell again into the Hands of the Spa∣niards, who made themselves Masters of it by surprize. This Loss troubled the King exceedingly, and to make a∣mends for it, the Mareschal de Châtillon, whom the Cardinal de la Valette, and the Marquiss de la Meilleraye had joyned,
with the Body which they commanded, went to besiege Damvilliers, while the Duke of Candalle, who was with another Body at Maubeuge, kept the Cardinal Infanta in Breath. This Prince, after he had failed in his design'd relief of Capelle, endeavour'd with as little success to oblige the Prince of Orange to raise the Siege of Breda, but was not able so much as to fall upon his Quarters. Fre∣derick-Henry enter'd this place the 9th of October, and all that the Cardinal Infanta cou'd do, was to make him∣self Master of Bento and Ruremond in Guelderland. A few days after, he received the uncomfortable News, that Damvilliers, one of the best places in the Country of Luxemburg,The 23d of October. had surrendred to the Mareschal de Chà∣tillon. The French took several other small places this Campaign, in the Low-Countries, and the Franche-Comté, where their Army was commanded by the Duke of Longueville. If the Spaniards had met with no better success in Italy than they had either in France or the Low-Countries, the Cardinalhad found just Reason for having caused the War to be declared against them. But the Loss which France sustained of the Valteline, which had given them so much Trouble and Expence, very much diminished that joy, which their great Advantages in other places gave them. As this Minister was wholly taken up in Intrigues at home, by which means he made a shift to preserve him∣self in his Post, he was frequently obliged to neglect Foreign Affairs, and he was the readier sometimes to do it, because the Persons whom the King employ'd, were not in the favour of the Ministry. He discharged a great part of his Affairs upon Father Joseph, who was fitter to contrive any little Plots, than to manage great Affairs with Discretion. This gave the Grisons an op∣portunity to make an insurrection in favour of the Spa∣niards. They had never been satisfied with the manner of adjusting matters between them and the Inhabitants of the Valteline; and besides,Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. p. 497. no care was taken to pay their Troops, as they were promised. At this time in∣deed it was impossible to do it, by reason of the vast Ex∣pences in other Places, some of which were as good as thrown away, as particularly the great Charges they were at for equipping the Fleet, in the Year 1636,
occasion'd by the differences between the Officers, and the Mareschal de Vitry. Thus they were indebted upwards of a Million to the Troops of the Grisons, who saw there was no probability of their being satisfied, which disposed them to hearken to the Sollicitations of the House of Austria. It unhappily fell out too, that the Duke of Rohan, who had a great Authority among them, fell dangerously ill. During his indisposition, the Grisons resolved to break with France, and they obliged one another by an Oath, to take up Arms to beat the French out of their Territories. The Three Leagues made a Treaty at Inspruck, with the Marquiss de Leganez, and the Arch-Duke Leopold, for the execution of this Design. On the day appointed for it, the Grisons abandon'd the Posts, which the Duke of Rohan had given them to keep. One part of them entred into Coire, to secure that City against the French, and the rest positively re∣fused to obey any other Officers, but those that were nominated by the Leagues. The Duke of Rohan finding himself somewhat better, went to all places to appease them, and by his repeated instances at last obtain'd of them to stay two Months, to give the King time to satisfie them. In the mean time, the Spaniards put themselves in a posture to assist the Grisons; if they shou'd have occasion for them; and these two Months passed and two Months more, and yet through the Cardinal's Negli∣gence, no Money came from France, though the Duke of Rohan represented to him the great Danger he was in, if some course was not taken to pay the Grisons what was due to them. It seems the Cardinal had a Design to ruine the Duke of Rohan, by suffering him to lose the Valteline, and to throw the fault at last wholly upon him, in case he did not perish there. At last, all the Country took up Arms on the 18th of March, and some of them run to the place where the Duke was, to apprehend him; but he immediately retir'd to the Fort du Rhine, not that it was in a Condition to defend it self, but to a∣void the fury of the People; who were provoked to the highest Degree, to see themselves paid with nothing but fair Words. Nay, though the Fort had been in a case of Defence, yet the Duke of Rohan was not able to
do any thing, because it was kept by the Switzers, who were fully resolved to deliver him up. The Grisons insisted, That the Duke should immediately give Orders for the French Troops to goe out of their Country; but, as he had no Commission from the Court to doe it, he was a∣fraid lest he should ruine himself if he consented to it. However, he was obliged speedily to come to some reso∣lution, or else to see the French, that were dispersed in several places up and down the Country, Murther∣ed. In this extremity he bethought himself of an Expedi∣ent, which, at the same time, saved his own honour, and the lives of his Souldiers. And that was to pro∣mise, That within Twenty days, reckoning from that on which the Treaty was Signed, he would Command them to quit the Valteline. But the Grisons not being content with that proposal, he offer'd to goe to Coire, and there to stay as an Hostage, till the entire accom∣plishmment of the Treaty. By hazarding his Person thus, the Duke saved his Army, and gave the▪ King time to send another General to the Valteline, through the States of Venice, if he thought it convenient, or if the Court was minded to abandon this Country, they might do it then with more honour, than if the Duke had given Orders for his Troops to remove, when the Grisons would have had him doe it. In this conjuncture the Spaniards endeavour'd to per∣swade the Grisons to deliver up the Duke to them, for fear he should make his escape; but the Grisons would by no means consent to that, but rather chose to keep him, as a Prisoner of War, but would not give him leave to converse with any body. The term of Twenty days was expired, and yet no Order came from Court, the Cardinal being resolved to take no notice of the matter. However the French TroopsThe 5th of May. departed, the Forts were consigned to the Grisons, and the Duke set at liberty. The principal Persons of the Country ac∣companied him as far as the Frontiers, as it were to ex∣cuse themselves for the Violence that had been used to∣wards him. After he had crossed Switzerland, and car∣ried his Troops to the Province of Gex, he left them in the hands of the Count de Guebriant Mareschal de
Camp, and retired to Geneva, there to expect His Ma∣jesty's farther Orders. This Conduct of the Duke of Rohan was extreamly censured at Court, as if he had not been sensible that the Country would be infallibly lost, if they did not speedily supply him with Money, and as if he had not acquainted them with all that happen'd. The Cardinal caused Two hundred thou∣sand Livres to be sent to the Count de Guebriant, with Orders not to obey the Duke, but endeavour to re-en∣ter into the Country, out of which he came, with his Troops, in case the Venetians were willing to assist him. But now it was too late, and the Passes were two well Guarded; so that these Troops, consisting in all of a∣bout Six thousand Foot, and Seven hundred Horse, were ordered, part to go into Italy, and the rest for Burgundy, to joyn the Duke of Longueville there. From that time the War which France made in Italy, was onely a slight diversion for the Forces of the House of Austria; and it appeared, by what followed, that the Cardinal had no other design than that. This year Three Princes of Europe died, whose death, it was to be feared, would occasion great Disorders. The first was the Emperour Ferdinand the II, who died on the 14th of February. His Son, Ferdi∣nand the III, who had been already Elected King of the Romans succeeded him. The Cardinal, for what rea∣son I don't know, would not suffer France to own him, either for the King of the Romans, or for Emperour, al∣though every thing had been done in the accustomed forms, and all the Catholick Princes, and the greatest part of the Protestants had own'd him without any dif∣ficulty. And therefore France, which otherwise would have disobliged the Electors extreamly, and several o∣ther Princes, without any Necessity, or the least pro∣spect of an Advantage to be made by it, soon after ac∣knowledged Ferdinand the III, as every one had done before them. The Affairs of the Swedes went ill enough this year in Germany; and Banier was content to put himself in possession of Pomerania, after the Death of Duke Bogislaus the XIV, since he was not in a condition to molest the Imperialists.
The second Prince that died this year, was Charles Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua. While he lived in France, as aThe 25th of September. Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 478. Subject, he had a great Reputation, and passed for a Prince of equal bravery and prudence. After he became a Soveraign, he seemed to bend under the weight of Affairs, and could not find any expedient to hinder the desolation of his Countrey, either by the way of Arms, or that of Negotiation. He left his Dominions to Charles his Grandson, born of the Duke of Rethel, and Mary of Mantua, who was his Guardian. She was the Daughter of Vincent Duke of Mantua, and Margaret of Savoy, Daughter to Charles Emanuel. The Third was Butos-Amadeo, Duke of Savoy, who died the 7th of October. He was as much esteem'd as any Prince of his time, for his Conduct both in Peace and War. The onely thing he is blamed for, was his weakness in suffering Mazarine to perswade him to deliver up Pignerol to France; by which Surrendry he left his Territories on the other side the Mountains to their discretion and Mercy. 'Tis true, he deceived Spain in doing so, but at the same time he deceived himself infinitely more, and onely kept the bare Title of a Soveraign Prince, unless he had a mind to show the marks of his Soveraignty, by causing his Country to be ruined by the French, whose will he was otherwise obliged to follow. Francis Hyacinth, his Son, succeed∣ed him, who dying soon after, Charles Emanuel took his place, an Infant Four years old. The Duke his Fa∣ther left Christina of France his Guardian and Regent, who was owned in this quality by the Senates of Turin and Chambery, and by all the Orders of Piedmont and Savoy. The Death of thisSiri, Ibid. p. 481. Prince was fatal to his Estates, because he was engaged in an open War with Spain, who now had a fair opportunity to invade them, and would so much the sooner embrace it, because the Re∣gent being Sister to the King of France, she would, in all probability, depend wholly upon him. On the other side, Maurice, Cardinal of Savoy, and Prince Thomas, fa∣voured Spain openly, who might have a plausible pre∣tence to come into Piedmont, to put them in possession of the Guardianship and Regency, to which they might pre∣tend
whenever they thought fit. These considerations inclined Madam of Savoy, and her Council, to endeavour to make a Peace with Spain as soon as might be, to hinder the ruine of her Country. Besides, she disco∣ver'd, soon after the Death of the Duke her Husband, how little she was to rely upon the Ministers of the King her Brother. L'Emery, Ambassador of France at Turin, design'd, with the assistance of the French Troops that were quarter'd about Verceil, where the Duke died, to seize upon the Person of the Dutchess, and of the Princes her Sons, under a pretence to prevent the designs of the Spa∣niards, who would endeavour to engage this Princess in their Party, or at least to observe a Neutrality. The Ambassador proposed this enterprize to the Mareschal de Crequi, but the Mareschal would not consent to be the Instrument of a violence of this nature, against a Daughter of France, and against Princes that were un∣der the King's Protection. However, the Ambassador, who was perfectly well acquainted with the Cardinal-Duke's Temper; and knew, that in matters of State, abundance of things are approved of when done, which would not be allowed to be done, if leave was asked before-hand, did not, for all this, desist from his Design. But the Dutchess happening to be informed of it, or∣der'd the Marquiss de Ville with the Troops of Piedmont, to enter into Verceil by night, and caused the Gates to be shut to several French Officers that came thither, under a pretence of Buying Victuals for their Souldiers. By this means she frustrated this Design, and the Troops of France had Orders to remove from Verceil. The Marquiss de S. Maurice, Ambassador of Savoy in France, having received the News of the Death of the Duke his Master, went to carry it to the King and Car∣dinal, who promised to protect the young Duke, and the Durchess, with all the Forces of the Kingdom. The Cardinal gave the Ambassador to understand, who com∣plain'd of Emery's design, that the King had no hand in it, and that he would go to assist his Sister in Person, if it were necessary. At the same time he advised the Dutchess to two things; one of them was, to put such Subjects of the Duke, as she was well assured of, into all the Strong Places of Piedmont and Savoy: the other
was, To treat her Brother-in-Law with all the Civili∣ty imaginable, but not to suffer them to come into the Dominions of the Duke her Son. Upon this the Am∣bassador told him, That the best way the Dutchess could take to live at peace with all the World, would be to clap up a Peace with Spain: To which the Cardinal answer'd, That she might expect from the King her Brother every thing that was for the advantage of the House of Savoy, even though it should be against the Interest of the Crown, but that he did not see any secu∣rity in a particular Peace. The Cardinal afterwards made a Solemn Visit to the Ambassador; where, after the first Compliments were over, he told him, That he was surprized that Ma∣dam of Savoy had any suspicion of the French Troops, since the Mareschal de Crequi had immediately drawn them off from about Verceil, and conducted them to Casal: that he had discover'd, upon this occasion, the inclination of some of her Counsellors, that had advi∣sed her to send with all expedition into Spain, which apparently tended to disengage her from France; that he hoped a General Peace would be soon concluded, but that if the Dutchess and her Council were too impatient, the King would not hinder her from ma∣king a particular accommodation by her self, but that his honour would not permit him to abandon his o∣ther Allies. The Cardinal ofSiri Mem. Rec. T. 8. P. 485. Savoy was desirous at the same time to come into Piedmont, to offer his Services to the young Duke and the Regent by word of Mouth: but she desired him to let it alone, for fear of giving any suspicion to France, with whom he very well knew she was obliged to manage her self cautiously, since neither her Brother, nor her Husband, could have drawn the Indignation of that Court down upon them, without being considerable losers by the bargain. She likewise received Compliments from Prince Thomas, by the Mar∣quiss Palavicini. This Prince represented to her, That the French, under a show of protecting her, might take the opportunity to seize upon Piedmont and Savoy, and that if Spain was induced to bring the War thither for that reason, the States of the House of Savoy would
be inevitably ruin'd: that therefore she ought to hinder the French from making themselves Masters of the Strong Places, that she might not bring these inconveniences upon her Self; and that he was ready to come there, where his Presence would be necessary, to hinder the French from possessing themselves of all: That the more she was interessed in the Preservation of the Princes her Children, so much the greater hast she should make to take the necessary measures for such a Design; and so much the rather, because it was visible that this War was not carried on for the Grandeur of the King her Brother, nor of his Kingdom, but to preserve the Cardi∣nal in his present Dignity. Towards the end of this year, the Cardinal percei∣ving that the King was extreamly Melancholy, did all that he could to penetrate into the reason of it. As the King was able to conceal nothing from him, and all those that approached His Majesty, were his own Crea∣tures, except the Confessor, he came to know, that he was troubled with remorse of Conscience for suffering the Queen his Mother to be out of the Kingdom so long, after all the Submissions she had made him. This Prince, who had neither good nor bad inclinations of himself, but as they were put into him by others, was not capable of receiving such a Scruple as that, all on the sudden; and the Cardinal soon discover'd, that the Confessor had possessed him with it.Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 573. This Jesuit had the vanity to imagine, that he should make himself sole Master, and be able to destroy the Minister in a short time, against whom he had spoken several things, as it were en passant. This was a dangerous enterprise, as well in respect of the implacable humour of the Car∣dinal, if he did not succeed, as of the King's weak∣ness, who told him again of every thing he heard. How∣ever, Father Caussin, who had long deliberated upon the matter, and waited a favourable opportunity to open himself frankly to the King, against the Conduct of his Minister, thought he had now found it, and be∣gan to represent to him all his Miscarriages, in the most violent Expressions he could think of. He con∣cluded, that His Majesty ought to Discard him for Four principal Reasons. The first was the Banishment
of the Queen-Mother, who was left in so great an In∣digence, that she wanted even the Necessaries of Life: and this Reason seemed to make some impression upon the King. The second was, that the Cardinal usurped all the Royal Authority, so that nothing remain'd to His Majesty but the bare Name of King; and that the whole Nation had recourse to him, as the supreme Dis∣poser of all Favours. The third was, the Oppression of the People who were reduced to the last misery by the exorbitant Taxes. The fourth was, the Interest of Re∣ligion, which the Cardinal-Duke designed to annihilate, by supporting the Swedes and the Protestants of Germany, who through his means were become more formidable than ever. As soon as Father Caussin had done talking, the King seemed to be moved by his Discourse, which in reality contain'd nothing but notorious Truths, and such as eve∣ry one in the Kingdom, to their cost, were convinced of, but only himself. He appeared to be somewhat inclined to remove the Cardinal from the Ministry, if his Confes∣sor cou'd have named any one to him, that was capable of succeeding him; but that was a point he never thought of, so unfit he was to manage an Affair of this consequence. The King afterwards asked him, whether he wou'd justifie before the Cardinal's face what he had then advanced against him. This Question put the Je∣suit to a stand; however he recover'd himself, and told him he wou'd make the Cardinal subscribe to the truth of it, since he had said nothing but what all the World knew to be so. The King replied, that he shou'd see him then, and appointed a day; which was the 8th of December. Father Caussin waited for this critical day, but found himself under strange Anxieties, especially when he re∣flected that there was no Dependance upon the King's Resolution, and that he must expect terrible Things from the Minister's Indignation. After he had consider∣ed with himself a long while what he was to do in this juncture, he resolved to communicate the whole Affair to the Duke of Angoulême, and to propose to him to fill the place of first Minister. The Duke going to visit him at the House of St. Lewis, he made this Proposal to
him, which made him more astonished at the Boldness of Father Caussin, than desirous to accept the Station he of∣fer'd him. However, pretending to be overcome by his Reasons, he filled him with mighty hopes, and promis'd to support him as far as he was able. The Jesuit was now impatient till the day appointed came, that he might in the Cardinal's presence make good the Accusations he had laid against him. He expected to see the Cardinal fall into an outrageous Passion, but was resolved to push the Business home, whatever it cost him. But scarce had the Duke of Angoulême parted from him, but chusing the surest way, he posted directly to Ruel to acquaint the Cardinal with what he had so late∣ly learn'd. Most People condemn'd this Fearfulness in him; but the Duke excused himself upon this, that not being able to repose any assurance upon the King's Con∣stancy, and seeing that this Affair cou'd not possibly suc∣ceed if the Cardinal came to have the least knowledge of it by any other way, he wou'd never forgive him for that Confidence which Father Caussin had lodged in him. The Cardinal thanked him for his Information, and as∣sured him he wou'd always remember this Kindness: af∣ter which, he went to St. Germains, to discourse the King. There he recounted to him all that had passed, and proved the four Heads of the Accusation to be false by such sort of Reasonings as used to impose upon His Majesty's Understanding. He remonstrated to him, how dangerous it was to lend an Ear to such turbulent Spirits, and concluded that the Father Confessor ought to be discarded. As for himself, he protested that he passionate∣ly desired to go to some place of Retirement, and that he wou'd do it, if it wou'd not be disadvantageous to His Majesty's Affairs. The Confessor repaired to St. Germains on the day ap∣pointed, and came into the Anti-Chamber, as his usual custom was; where he was inform'd, that the King had shut himself up in his Closet with the Cardinal. The Conference being very long, was but a bad Omen for Father Caussin; and when it was over, De Noyers told him from the King, that as for that day his Majesty wou'd not perform his Devotions, and so he might return to Paris. By this he understood that he was undone;
and the very same Evening an Exempt of the Guards seized his Papers and Person. He was afterwards car∣ried to Quimpercorentin in Britany, where he lived in Confinement till the King's Death. Although the Cardinal-Duke gave out that he hoped a General Peace wou'd be soon concluded, yet in order to it there was no prospect of a Treaty set a-foot; and the Court of Rome, whose Proceedings are always very slow, did not leave its usual pace to perswade the Crowns to a Peace. The Fancy which had possessed the Cardinal-Duke not to acknowledge Ferdinand III. for Emperour, hinder'd them from entring into any Ne∣gotiation. Therefore among several Orders that were sent to the Mareschal d' Estrees,The 1st of Jnury. Siri Mem. Rec. Tom. 8. p. 542. relating to the manner he was to treat of a Peace, or a Cessation of Arms at Rome, he was ordered to find out a way to acquaint the Empe∣rour's Ambassadour, without letting him know that this Advice came from him, that if a Negotiation was begun, the Crown of France wou'd own Ferdinand III. Above all, the Ambassadour was so to manage Matters, that the Ministers of the House of Austria shou'd by no means perceive, that the King had the least desire either for a Peace or a Truce, lest any Advantage shou'd be made of such a Confession. They seem'd to be mightily dis∣pleased with Count Ludovico, Ambassadour of Savoy at Rome, for that having proposed a Cessation of Arms in Italy, he shou'd affirm that he knew it from very good hands, that France wou'd not oppose it. The Dutchess of SavoyAubery's Life of the Card. Lib. 6. Cap. 17. Siri Mem. Rec. Tom. 8. p. 574. had one Father Monod a Je∣suit for her Confessor, who had a great Ascendant over the Mind of that Princess. He seem'd to be mighty zea∣lous for the House of Savoy, and had been so far consi∣dered by Victor Amadeo, that he concerned himself as much in Affairs of State, as he did in those that regard∣ed the Conscience. It came into this Man's Head, whe∣ther of his own proper Motion, or by the Orders of Madam of Savoy, to procure the Queen-Mother's Re∣turn into France. For this end he took a Journey to Pa∣ris, where he contracted an Acquaintance with Father Claussin the Jesuit; and as he was a Man of extraordinary Address, he engaged him easily in this Design. They looked upon the Queen-Mother's Return to be as good
as impossible, so long as the Cardinal-Duke continued in favour; and therefore they concerted Matters together to ruin his Reputation with the King. To effect this, Father Caussin, as has been already observed, began to insinuate into his Majesty, that he cou'd not with a good Conscience suffer his Mother to be any longer out of the Kingdom. The Cardinal coming to know that it was by Father Monod's Instigation that Father Caussin had embarked in this Affair, after he had caused the former to be turned away, endeavoured to remove Father Monod from the Dutchess of Savoy, under a pretence that he se∣cretly favoured the Spaniards. The Cardinal caused d' Emery, the Ambassadour, to tell Madam of Savoy, as from his Majesty, that having several just Occasions to suspect Father Monod, he desired her to dismiss him from Court. The Dutchess having no reason to part with her Confessor, whatever Stories were told against him, wou'd by no means give her Consent to it, and endea∣vour'd to disabuse the Cardinal. But the latter, who never hated any man by halves, press'd her to turn him away with more Obstinacy than ever; as if it had been impossible for the King to live peaceably with his Sister, and to protect her, so long as she kept this Jesuit about her Person. He was so incens'd against him, that he cou'd not for∣bear talking of him to the Ambassadour of Savoy, though this Subject had no relation to the Discourse then in hand.Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 575. * As the latter was one day telling the Minister how zealous Madam of Savoy was for the Interests of the Crown, and what care she took that the Spaniards might not be able to attempt any considerable Enterprize which carried the least probability of Success, he afterwards added, that if any thing had happen'd disadvantageous to the Crown, as for instance the Taking of Ponzone, it was through the fault of his Majesty's Ministers in Italy. The Cardinal answer'd, That the Negligence of the Mareschal de Crequi and d' Emery was not to be excu∣sed, but that as long as the Dutchess kept Father Mo∣nod near her, they must expect the like Disorders, since the King distrusted him, and consequently his Ministers cou'd speak of nothing to Her Royal Highness with any Confidence. The Ambassadour replied, That Father
Monod's living at Turin had not hinder'd the King's Mi∣nisters from executing his Orders. The Cardinal per∣sisted, That he told him nothing but the truth, and that his Majesty cou'd communicate none of his Designs to Madam of Savoy, for fear lest she should tell him of them again. At last, under a pretence that Father Mo∣nod favour'd Cardinal Maurice and Prince Thomas, al∣though the Dutchess had evident proofs of the contrary, she was forc'd to give her consent to have himAbout the End of the Year. appre∣hended. The Jesuit being inform'd of it, endeavour'd to prevent this blow, but was taken upon the Frontiers, and put in Prison at Montmelian. In the mean time the Spaniards and the Princes of Sa∣voy sent word to the Dutchess, that if she observed the Neutrality, they wou'd not make the least Attempt up∣on Piedmont. On the other hand, France sollicited her to renew the Treaty of a League offensive and defensive, made with Victor Amadco in 1635, and which was to ex∣pire in the Month of July 1638. Most People were of opinion, that this Treaty was actually broke by the Death of the Duke who concluded it, as well as that of the Duke of Mantua, and by the Agreement which the Duke of Parma had lately made with Spain. The Dutchess was willing enough to make a defensive League, as the Treaty of Pignerol had been, by which France was obliged to defend Piedmont, in case it was invaded by the Spaniards. Upon this several tedious Contests hap∣pen'd; and all that the Dutchess said she cou'd consent to, concerning the War they wou'd have her continue against the Spaniards, came to this, That she wou'd at∣tack the Places that had been taken in Montferrat. As for the rest, the Council of Savoy was clearly of opinion, that she ought to keep the Neutrality, to preserve her own Country, without disengaging her self however from France, or making any new Treaty with other Princes. But it was insisted upon in France, that she should renew the Treaty of Rivoli, without having any regard to the Welfare of her State, or the Power of a Regent, which does not go so far as to declare a War, unless there be urgent necessity for it. Although she represented all this by her Ambassadour, yet it signified nothing; and they daily talked of sending a considerable Army into Pied∣mont,
to attack the Milaneze, and to defend Piedmont against the Designs of the Cardinal of Savoy and Prince Thomas. It was to be feared, that under a pretence of Defending it, the Cardinal wou'd make himself absolute Master of all Piedmont; and the Dutchess's Council, who foresaw this Inconvenience, did not know how to reme∣dy it. Not to look back so far as ancient Examples, they had before their eyes that of Casal, which the French had never quitted since the time they first got footing in∣to it. Whenever they were asked to restore it to the Duke of Mantua, they still demanded to be reimbursed for the Expences they had been at to keep it, which amounted to so great a Sum, that the Duke of Mantua was not in a condition to pay it. In the mean time, the Marquiss de LeganezThe 11th of March. Siri. T. 8. P. 575. laid Siege to the Fort of Breme upon the Po, and on the other side the River, Sesia, to free the Milaneze from the In∣cursions of that Garrison. Due care had not been taken to fortifie that Post as it deserved, and Montgaillard, the Governour of the place, did not acquit himself in that Trust as he ought to have done; so that it was conclu∣ded, the Town would be infallibly lost, if it was not relieved. The Mareschal de Crequi went thither in per∣son, and as he approached the Spanish Camp, with two or three hundred Horse, to observe them nearer at hand, he alighted, with his prospective Glass in his hand; and leaning on a large Tree to view the Lines of the Spaniards, a Cannoneer belonging to the Spanish Camp seeing some Horsemen on that side, and a Man in Red Cloaths come forward, he imagined him to be some Of∣ficer of Note; and pointing a small Piece directly to the Tree where the Mareschal was, gave fire; and the Bul∣let carried off the Mareschal's Left-arm, which held the prospective Glass, wounded him in the Belly, and pier∣ced the Tree. The French carried him off immediately, and his Body being embalmed, was sent to Lesdeguieres. Thus diedThe 17th of March. Charles de Crequi, after he had given great proofs of his Bravery for several Years. Breme Surren∣der'd after a Siege of 15 Days, and after it had suffer'd an Assault. The Governour was apprehended at Casal, because it was discovered that he had but 600 Men in Garrison, although but 8 Days before the Siege he had
been paid for 1700. Afterwards Orders being arrived from Court to bring him to his Tryal, he was beheaded. After the Death of the Mareschal de Crequi, France found it self so unprovided of Generals, upon whom the Cardinal durst rely, that they were forced to send the Cardinal de la Valette into Italy, and so to order matters, that the Pope should not take it ill that they had given him that Employ. In the mean time the Dutchess of Savoy, finding her∣self incapable of opposing the Forces of France, if she offended them by refusing to sign the League Offensive and Defensive,The 9th of June. See the Treaty in Aubery's Mem. T. 2. P. 147. was at last resolved to comply with them; and by that means drew the Spanish Army upon her hands. His Majesty's Troops and her own, when the Cardinal de la Valette arrived there, made up no more than 10000 Foot, and 3000 Horse, and that of Leganez consisted of 5 or 6000 Men more. So before the French had augmented their Army, the latter went to Besiege Verceil, and made their Lines of Circumvalla∣tion, that they might not be obliged to raise the Siege. There were about 1500 French and Savoyards in the place, commanded by the Marquiss Dogliani, Governour of the Town. The People of Piedmont seeing a Spanish Army in their Country, exclaimed every where against the Regent, who since she was not in a condition to ded them, ought to have kept the Neutrality; and 'twas highly probable, that if her two Brothers-in-law came into the Country, they wou'd rise up and declare for them. For this reason the Spaniard resolved to engage them to go thither, under a pretence of taking part in the Govern∣ment of the State, but in reality to make themselves Ma∣sters of it. The Cardinal de la Valette vex'd to see so considerable a place ready to be taken, at his Arrival in∣to Piedmont, used all possible diligence to throw Relief into the Town; and he luckily accomplished it on the 20th of June at night, putting into it, without loss, about two thousand Men, commanded by S. Andre Ma∣ster de Camp of the Troops of Savoy. However, in spight of the obstinate Resistance of the Garrison, and of the Relief, the Spaniards carried on the Siege; and the Be∣sieged wanting powder, they were reduced to the last
Extremity in a few days. Thus having repulsed one Assault with Swords in their hands, Pikes, and Stones, they surrender'd upon composition, towards the begin∣ning of July. The Cardinal de la Valette, who was not posted far from the Spanish Army, was of opinion to attack the Enemy in their Retrenchments; but the Ge∣nerals of the Dutchess wou'd by no means consent to it, for fear lest if the Enterprize shou'd not succeed, Pied∣mont wou'd be too much exposed to the Insults of the Spaniards. After the Taking of this place, the Dutchess complain'd exceedingly of the Cardinal de la Valette, and the people spoke ill of the French in all places. But that which threatned to hurt them, turn'd to their Advan∣tage; for after this Loss, the Dutchess saw her self ob∣liged to put French Garrisons into all the Towns of Pied∣mont, notwithstanding the Murmurings of her Subjects. At the same time the Spaniards failed in their Design up∣on Casal, which was favoured by the Dutchess of Man∣tua, who was entirely of their Party, and was angry to see her self a Dependant upon France by the means of that place. The Marquiss de Leganez, to render the French more odious to the People, publish'd a Manifesto, where∣in he declared that the true Intent of his coming into Piedmont and Montferrat was only to turn out the French from thence, and not to make War against the Dukes of Savoy and Mantua, that were oppress'd by this Foreign Power. This War being on the side of France nothing but a politick War, to humble, as Cardinal Richlieu pre∣tended, the House of Austria, and as others said, to ren∣der himself more necessary to the King; and the Subjects of Savoy and Mantua not being engaged in it by Incli∣nation or Necessity, but by force, this Manifesto of Le∣ganez produced strange Effects in a short time. But his Army being fatigued, was scarce able to attempt any thing in Montferrat, whither they came after the Taking of Verceil, and both sides thought of withdrawing into their Winter-Quarters. The young Duke of Savoy, Francis Hyacinth, happen'd toThe 4th of October. die at this time, being Seven Years old, and his Bro∣ther, Charles Emanuel, succeeded him. This afflicted the Regent excessively, who now beheld all her Hopes for the future, founded upon the Life of her second Son;
for the Dominions belonging to the House of Savoy, were to fall into the Cardinal's Hands, in case this young Prince should die. This obliged her to unite her Self more closely to France than ever, and in spight of her own Inclinations, to resign her Self wholly to the Cardinal's Ad∣vices, without whose good Affections, it was of no Service to her, that she was the Daughter of Henry the Fourth, and Mary de Medicis, as well as Sister of Lewis the XIII. The Cardinal of Savoy parting secretly from Rome, came incognito to Tortone, where he made some attempts upon Turin and Carmagnole, but miscarried in them; several Persons that had a Hand in this Affair, were sent to Prison, and the Cardinal interceeded for them in aThe 10th of December. See it in T. 2. of Aubery's Mem. p. 230. Letter, which he writ to the Regent; wherein he tells her, that no Authority could hinder him from coming to his Father's House. In the mean time, he narrowly escaped being taken, which had he not done, they had certainly sent him into France. In this Conjuncture, the Cardinal Duke writ frequent∣ly into Piedmont to the Dutchess, or to the Ministers of France to assist her with their Counsels. He represented to her in a long Letter, That at last, she ought to a∣wake her out of that Lethargy, which had so long possessed her, since if she did not do it suddenly,The 10th of November. Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 613. her Condition wou'd be helpless. (His meaning was, that she must turn Father Monod away, otherwise the King wou'd support her no longer.) That perhaps God Almigh∣ty had permitted by an extraordinary Providence, that her Enemies shou'd force her to do what her natural inclination to Peace, wou'd have disswaded her from (to sign the offensive League, and to put French Troops into her Garrisons,) against which Reason and her In∣terests seemed to advise her, that God wou'd not al∣ways work such Miracles as he had done upon this oc∣casion to preserve her. That in humane Affairs, he wou'd have every one make the best use of that understanding he had given them, and that her High∣ness for that reason, ought to examine her Mind, and see what it advised her to. That Nature in∣vited her to it, since otherwise she was unable to pre∣serve her Son, as well as secure her own Preser∣vation and Honour: That he wou'd not conceal from
her, that the Calumnies of her Enemies, from which she might easily defend herself as long as she lived, would pass for so many Truths, when she came to die. That to be plain with her, her Subjects did not love her, as they were obliged to do, whether because the Govern∣ment of Women, is never so well liked as that of Men, or for some other particular malignity; that her Highness very well knew what it was to pretend to a Sovereignty in Italy, and that the weakness of the Car∣dinal of Savoy might be perswaded to Evil as well as to good. That in suffering Father Monod, to continue in his present Post, and Passer that savoured the Cardi∣nal of Savoy to be let out of Prison, she kept the worst Councellors that she cou'd have against her. That since 'twas to no purpose, to represent to her the Evil that press'd her, without giving her the due Remedy, he assu∣red her, she might soon put her self in a condition to de∣spise all the World, if she wou'd follow his Majesty's ad∣vice, which wou'd never be different from what Nature and Reason inspired: That she ought therefore, without any farther difficulty, to secure her self of Father Monod's Person, and severely to chastise all such as had conspired in favour of Prince Maurice: That such Governours ought to be put into places, as depended absolutely up∣on her: That her Army was to be reinforced with Troops that she cou'd rely upon; and that for the guard of her Person, and that of her Son, she should choose none but her own Creatures, and endeavour to encrease the number of them by her Kindnesses: That if she took this Conduct, he durst with the assistance of Heaven, be answerable to her for the happy success of it, towards which, he would freely contribute his own Life; but that if on the other Hand, her easiness and indulgence led her the contrary way, she would fall into inevitable Calamities: That he beseech'd her to dispense with him, from concerning himself any longer with her Affairs, because if any misfortunes happen'd to her, they might not be laid to his Door, by his seeming to Countenance her Irresolutions. The plain English of all these Lessons was, to make her turn away Father Monod, and to become the Oracle of the Dutchess of Savoy himself, as he was of her Brother. Thus he seemed to be born
to be the Pedagogue, or the scourge of the whole Fami∣ly of Henry IV. To come now to the most remarkable Occurrences in other places, the Cardinal ordered the Duke of Rohan, who was at Geneva, to retire to Venice, least out of re∣venge for his base usage, he might carry on some De∣signs against him. But the Duke pretending it was im∣possible for him to go to Venice, the ways being all stopp'd, he went to confer with the Duke of Weimar in Switzer∣land, and afterwards came to him at his Army. They had frequent Conferences together, which made the Car∣dinal very uneasie, and it was reported, that the Duke of Weimar, was to marry the Daughter of the Duke of Rohan. The former, after he had taken some few pla∣ces, went to besiege Rhinfeld, the Capital of the four Forrest Cities. Jean de Werth, Duke of Savelli, and the other Generals of the Emperour, marched to the relief of it with Ten Thousand Men. The Duke of Weimar being informed of their March, went to meet them by the Duke of Rohan's Advice, and the latter who refused to have any share in the command of the Army, putting himself at the head of the Left Wing,The 28th of Febr. was one of the first that began the onset and fought like a common Soldier. The Imperialists were beaten, after the dispute had lasted a long while, but the Duke of Rohan was wounded by two Musquet-shots, of which he died on the 23d of April: although the King sent him an obli∣ging Letter, to thank him for the great Services he had done the Crown, yet he was not sorry for his Death, for his great qualities, and the past Wars had long drawn upon him the displeasure of the Court, which was ne∣ver heartily reconciled to him, but only in outward Ap∣pearance. The Cardinal who by his good Will, em∣ploy'd none in his Majesty's Service, but such as were ready to do every thing he commanded them, and who had used him ill more than once, looked upon himself to be now delivered from a dangerous Enemy. Rhinfeld afterwards fellThe 23d of March. into the hands of the Duke of Weimar, after which, Friburg and the Country of Brisgow submitted to him, as well as several Towns of Swabia. His design was to block up Brisac, which Place he had a great desire to get into his own Hands. He
performed it at last, but beat the Imperialists twice be∣fore he cou'd lock up this place at a convenient distance. After this, the Enemy endeavour'd to throw Succours into the Town, and were repulsed with Loss. At last, Weimar forced Brisac to surrender, for want of Provisi∣ons, on the 19th of December. This Place wou'd have been of mighty importance to France, but the great Services which the Duke of Wei∣mar had done, those he might still do, and the promise which his Majesty had given him to make him Landt∣grave of Alsatia, were the Reasons why they suffered him to enjoy this Conquest. In short, he put himself in possession of it, and the Court connived at it, that they might not disoblige him at a time when he might do them as much Mischief as Good, till they found an occasion to get it into their own Hands, as we shall find in the Series of the History. This was the greatest Advantage which France obtain'd this Year against the House of Austria. TheSee the Champaign of Prince Tho∣mas in Ema∣nuel Tesau∣ro's, St. O∣mero Asse∣diato. Mareschal de Châtillon at the first opening of the Campaign enter'd Artois, and after he had ravaged the Country all about, for what design no Body knew, he went at last to be∣siege St. Omers on the 26th of May, and as the place was not in an extraordinary good Condition, he did not question but he shou'd carry it in a very short time. But Prince Thomas having put some Succours into the Place, this retarded his Hopes somewhat, but he still fansied he should accomplish his Design. But at last, the afore∣said Prince Thomas and Piccolomini obliged him toThe 16th of July. raise the Siege, after they had reliev'd the Town the second time, although the Mareschal de la Force had joyn'd him with a Body of Men. This ill Success was partly attri∣buted to the over-sight of the Mareschal de Châtillon, who had not made his Lines of Circumvallation strong e∣nough, and had carried on the Siege too slowly, and partly to the mis-understanding between the Generals. However they drew off in very good Order, and Prince Thomas not following them, took the way to Ter∣win, to cover the Country, and throw some Forces into Hedin, which was threatned. The Cardinal was ex∣treamly concerned at the raising of this Siege, not only for the Interest of the Crown, but because he had flat∣ter'd
himself with the taking of ir, upon the score of a pretended Revelation of a certain Nun, in the Convent of Mount-Calvary in le Maréts.Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 668. Father Joseph who had consulted her, it seems, told him that this Nun had continued three Days in Prayer, that God would be plea∣sed to reveal to her the Success of the next Campaign, and that at last she fell into an Extasie, wherein she had seen two Armies fighting near St. Omers, and the Victo∣ry remain'd on the King's Side. Upon this impertinent Vision, which either might be wholly invented, or else was the effect of a disordered imagination in the Nun, the Cardinal consented to the Siege of St. Omer, rather than of any other place, because he was in hopes that the King's Army wou'd obtain a Victory near that City. The Cardinal Infanta had the good Fortune that very Champaign toSiri, ibid. p. 476. The 21st of June. defeat Seven Thousand Men belonging to the States-General, who had made themselves Masters of the Fort of Kalloo, upon the Dyke of Antwerp, un∣der the Command of Count William of Nassau. He like∣wise forced the Prince of OrangeThe 25th of August. See Relation of Em. Tesauro. to raise the Siege of Gueldre, so that he might justly boast that he had made a very glorious Champaign. However he sustained some Losses, since the French took from him the Fort of Renty, whichThe 9th of August. See the Descripti∣on of this sieg by Em. Te∣sauro. surrendred after a Siege of eight Days, and retookThe 14th of September. See the De∣scription in the same Author. Catelet the only place remain∣ing in the Hands of the Spaniards, since their Invasion in the Year 1636. The Mareschals de Châtillon and de la Force, took Renty and rased it to the Ground. Du Hallier, Mareschal de Camp, took Catelet by assault, with a small Body of Men, who had been commanded by the Mareschal de Brezé, who being indisposed, ob∣tained permission of the King to go to the Waters. These were all the Advantages which the French obtained in the Low-Countries, who at the beginning of the Cham∣paign, had put the Cardinal Infanta into a great Con∣sternation, by the great Preparations they had made. The King, provoked at the Mareschal de Châtillon's want of fore-sight, who had writ word to Court several times that it was impossible for St. Omers to miss him,By a Letter the 4th of Sept. See Au∣bery's Life of the Cardinal. sent word to him, to leave the Command of the Army to the Mareschal de la Force, and to retire to his House of Châtillon, without coming to Court. However he went
to wait upon the Cardinal as St. Quintin, and was not ill received by him; the Minister judging that it wou'd be by no means adviseable to drive this General to de∣spair, who might be useful to them upon another occasion. He had a fresh Subject to employ the sameSiri Mem. Rc. T. 8. p. 632. modera∣tion towards the Prince of Conde, who met with worse success at the Siege of Fontarabia, than the Mareschal de Châtillon had done before St. Omers. The Count-Duke having in the Year 1637, carried one Invasion into Guienne, and another into Languedoc, the Cardinal-Duke who was jealous of every thing that Olivarez did, re∣solved to quit Scores with him whatever it cost him. He propos'd to go and attack Fontarabia,The Life of the Duke of Espornon. to carry the War into Spain. It was a long while since he had cau∣sed that place to be observed by the Duke de la Valette, who disswaded him from this Attempt, by reason of the insuperable Difficulties that attended it. However the Cardinal took it into hand again, and offered to trust the management of it with the Duke of Espernon and la Valette, upon Condition that they wou'd advance one part of the expences of the War, and find a way to make the Province of Guienne bear it. If they refused to accept this Employ, they were to be told that the Prince of Conde wou'd be sent down to command in the Province, and all the neighbourhood. Being afraid the Cardinal put them upon this enterprise, to carry on their Destruction, they rather chose that the Prince of Conde shou'd take it. The Prince accepted it, and arrived in Guienne in May, to get every thing in readiness that was necessary to this Design. As for the Duke of Espernon, he had orders to retire to his House of Plassac, lest he shou'd hinder, or cross the Preparations of the Prince of Conde, but the Duke de la Valette follow'd him, as his Lieutenant: The Prince, after he had made a review of his Army at St. John de Luz, on the 30th of June, mar∣ched directly to Fontarabia. While he invested this place, d' Espernon took Passage, where he found Six Galleons, and Five Spanish Men of War, furnished with all manner of Provisions, which he seized upon. Five more of their Galleons fell into the Hands of the French, and the Admiral of this Fleet was sunk. Nothing cou'd begin more happily than
this Affair, and there was very good reason to expect it wou'd succeed, because the Spaniards never imagined that the French wou'd attack them on the side of Guipus∣coa. Don Christoforo Messia, who had lately been made Governour of Fontarabia, was not as yet come to his Government. The Garrison which generally consisted of Five Hundred Men, cou'd scarce make Three Hun∣dred, and the inhabitants joyning with them, cou'd not amount to above Seven Hundred fit to bear Arms. But they had a famous Engineer in the Town, named Mi∣chael Perez, a Native of Biscay, and D. Dominique E∣quia Destur, another Biscainer, a Man of Courage, Lieu∣tenant to the Commandant. The Prince open'd the Trenches on the 10th of July; and on the 2d of August the French Fleet, consisting of Forty Two Vessels, full Mann'd with Soldiers that were to be set on Shore, com∣manded by the Arch-bishop of Bourdeaux, appeared be∣fore the Port of Fontarabia. They took immediately or put to Flight several Spanish Pinnaces that came there, and gave chase to a Fleet of Fifty Sail, that brought Succours and Refreshments to the Besieged. The Arch-bishop receiving Information, that in the Road of Gatari, there lay Forty Men of War, and several other smaller Vessels, bore up to them, and some he Burnt, and others he forced to run ashore, although they were defended with some Batteries, that were raised on purpose by the Sea-side. Abundance of Spaniards were lost in this A∣ction, that were burnt in the Ships or Drowned, and a∣mong others, the two old Regiments of Castile, that made up about Three Thousand Men. The French, on the other hand, lost in this Acti∣on not above Two hundred Men, with some Officers, and onely Nine or Ten of their Vessels sustained any damage. Thus Fontarabia lost all hopes of being relieved by Sea; and as for what Succours could come to it by Land, the Prince flatter'd himself that he might take it, before the Spaniards could be in a condition to take the Field. The Arch-bishop, at his return from his Expedi∣tion, offer'd to Guard the Port of Passage, and the Mouth of the River Orio, by which way the Spaniards might throw Succours into the Town. This Affair was pro∣posed
in a Council of War, but as it could not be ef∣fected without dividing the Army, and they hoped to carry the place in a short time, the Prince was of opini∣on, that it was the best way to abandon Passage, not considering what advantage the Spaniards might make of this Post, if the Siege held much longer. In the mean time, the Spanish Army, Commanded by the Ad∣miral of Castile, came in sight, and their Provisions arri∣ved principally to them by the means of the Port of Pas∣sage, which made them, now it was too late, see, the great over-sight they had committed. But the chief fault was, that the Prince, who was not much expe∣rienced in Sieges, had not prest the Works with that vigour as was requisite. The Spaniards having posses∣sed the Tops of the Neighbouring Mountains, were within Musquet-shot of the Advanced-Guards of the French, so that daily Skirmishes happened between the two Armies. Altho' the Garrison was inconsiderable, as to its num∣ber, the Commandant made several Sallies, to retard the Works of the French, and to give time for relief to ar∣rive to them. Ar first he had good success in them, but making one more considerable than the rest, at which time the French happen'd to be better upon their Guard than they used to be, they lost a Hundred Men, among whom was Michael Perez, who died of his Wounds in the place. At last the Garrison was so much diminished, that it held out onely in hopes, that the Cardinal of Castile would come speedily to relieve it; and, they sent to in∣form him, That if he did not make hast, they should be obliged to Surrender, as not being in a condition to sustain an Assault. In the mean time the Attacks were still carried on, and several Mines were played, one of which, on the side of the Duke de la Valette's Attack, proved fatal to the BesiegersIn the Mneth of Sept. Blowing up Two hundred of their Men, who had Orders to make an Assault, as soon as it was play'd. Some that were not wounded, made a shift however to Mount the Breach, at which time the Spa∣niards were retired, being terrify'd by the Mine; but as they were not follow'd, they were forced to return
back again. Upon the Reports they brought, it was hotly debated in a Council of War, whether they should give a General Assault or no; but, in the inte∣rim, the Garrison Sallying out at the Breach, made a Retrenchment upon the Top of the Bastion, which had been ruined by the Mine.Ch. Per∣rd, Vie de Louis XIII. Lib. 19. Nevertheless, the Prince gave his Advice, That they should endeavour to lodge themselves there; and, as the Duke de la Valette made some difficulty at it, he told him, He would give the Execution of it to the Arch-bishop of Bourdeaux. The Duke would rather attempt it himself, although he came not to this conclusion till after a great deal of he∣sitation, since he alter'd his opinion two or three times. Having at last got his Men to Mount the Breach, he found that the Enemy had made a Retrenchment there, and a Pallisado; and as those that were there demand∣ed a Re-inforcement, and Instruments to make a Lodg∣ment in that place, he sent them Orders to come back, not thinking them able to maintain this Post, or as others believe, out of Jealousie to the Prince of Conde, to make him miscarry before this place. Upon this the Prince being provoked, gave the Duke de la Valette's Attack to the Arch-bishop of Bourdeaux, who offer'd to finish the Lodgment, and make himself Master of the Place in three days, if the Duke would quit his quarter. As the Arch-bishop was putting himself in a readiness to give a new Assault at this place, and had order'd the Troops which he commanded to disembark, they receiv'd advice, that the Spanish Forces advanced nearer than they used to doe, which made them deferr the Attack. The Admiral of Castile had onely Fifteen thousand Foot, and a Thousand Horse, the greatest part of which were the Militia-Troops, that had no experience in War; and the Prince of Conde had above Twenty thousand well-disciplin'd Men. However, the Spaniards seeing the place reduced to the last extremity, were resolved to attempt the Relief of it.The 7th of Spt. Sir Mem. Rec. T. 8 p. 636. Accordingly they Marched by broad-day-light to Attack the Lines of the French. The advanced-Guards were beaten back at the first On∣set; and as they retired within the nearest Redoubts, by leaping over the Ditch, the Spanish Troop, follow'd
them the same way. The Quarter belonging to the Marquiss de la Force, which they attack'd the first, was immediately carried; and the Spaniards that first entred it turning the Canon against the French, who fled in so great a disorder, that the Marquiss was not able, by all the Arguments he could use, to make them rally. In the mean time the Officers, who still kept their ground, sent for the Prince's Order, to know whether they should re∣tire, or Charge the Enemy; but he beholding the Con∣fusion, despaired of being able to retrieve it; so he Em∣barked in a good time in a Vessel, which carried him to St. John de Luz. They sent to find the Duke de la Va∣lette in his Quarter, but, before this happen'd, he had re∣sign'd his Post to the Arch-bishop, by the Prince's Or∣der, and was a League from thence. As for the Arch∣bishop of Bourdeaux, he Shipt his Men, and likewise retired. In the mean time the Duke de la Valette being informed by some Fugitives, That the Enemy had for∣ced the Lines, and that all was in disorder; ran to his Quarter to endeavour to rally as many of his Men as he was able, or at least to give them Orders to make their Retreat in the most advantageous manner they could. But the General having disappear'd, as well as the Naval Forces, the rest retired in confusion, leaving all their Baggage, Artillery, and Ammunition behind them. The Spaniards, chiefly employ'd in Pillaging the Camp, did not pursue them; so that the French lost but very few Men in the retreat. Thus the Prince of Conde, who, in these matters, could neither give nor follow good Advice, was defeated by an Army, which was, in all Re∣spects, inferiour to his own. To excuse himself, he laid the fault upon the Duke de la Valette, as if he had been the occasion why this Place was not taken in the space of Two months, which before another General could not have held out Fifteen days, considering the condition it was in. The Cardinal, who durst not fall out with the Prince, but was incens'd, to the utmost degree, to see a design, of his own projecting, mis-carry, like those of the Count-Duke against France, resolved to ruine the Duke de la Valette, notwithstanding the great Friendship that was between him and the Cardinal his Brother, who durst not undertake to desend him, unless he was found
innocent. As for the Accusation of Cowardice, which some laid to his charge, he boldly maintain'd, that it was false; but he durst not wholly excuse him from jealousie. In the mean time the D. de la Valette retired into England, altho' he was sent for to Court. The Cardinal his Brother had a meanness of Soul so directly opposite to the Match∣less bravery of the D. of Espernon their Father, that this Gallant Old Man was us'd to call him, not the Cardinal de la Valette; but, the Valet of a Cardinal. But the Car∣dinal-Duke would entertain none for his Friends, but such as were blindly devoted to all his Passions. A little before this Miscarriage,Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 660. the Cardinal-Duke receiv'd advice, That Fifteen Spanish Gallies, Command∣ed by Don Rodrigo de Velasco, were beaten by the Mar∣quiss de Pont-Courlas, General of the French Gallies, who had with him the same number. After an obstinate dis∣pute, which lasted some hours, in the sight of Genoua, the Spaniards lost Six Gallies, and the French Three, and then they retired in sufficient disorder on both sides. At the Spring of this year Queen Ann of Austria per∣ceived, that she was big with Child, after she had been now Married Two and twenty years, which occasioned extraordinary Rejoycing at Court. In the mean time the Cardinal having discover'd, that this Princess main∣tain'd a Correspondence, by way of Letters, with the Cardinal-Infanta her Brother, treated her, after a manner, that was enough to doe her a great deal of Mischief; so little did he regard what the World said of him. This correspondence was onely concerning a Peace, which the Queen had reason to consider as a Work extrealy plea∣sing to God, and very advantageous to the People, who were drained and oppressed on all sides. Great Provin∣ces were wholly depopulated, without any considerable advantages obtained, either on this, or t'other part, mere∣ly to satisfie the ambitious pretensions of the Swedes, or of the Cardinal, against the House of Austria. The manner of their keeping this private Commerce, was as follows. The Cardinal Infanta's Letters were deliver∣ed to a certain Nun of Val de Grace, who hid them in the Closet of an Oratory which the Queen had in that Convent, and whither she frequently went. The Queen likewise left her own in the same place, and this Nun
took care to fetch, and give them to one la Porte, who sent them to Brussels. The Cardinal, who had more per∣sons to spy, even the least Actions of the King and Queen, than those were to watch his own, came to be acquaint∣ed with it; and, as he looked upon a Peace, as a thing that would prove fatal to his Grandeur, he resolved to break off this Correspondence, whatever it cost him. He had effectually possessed the King with deep prejudices against the Queen, ever since she engaged her Self in Cabals opposite to his Authority, as I have elsewhere ob∣served. So it was no difficult matter for him to make His Majesty believe, how dangerous it was to suffer the Queen to Write to a Declared Enemy of the State. Ha∣ving therefore order'd la Porte to be apprehended, he was minded to Interrogate him himself, to effect which, he re∣pair'd to Chavigny's Apartment, and threw himself upon his Bed; after he had order'd the Curtains to be drawn, that so he might discourse him without being seen. Then la Porte was order'd to come into the Room, and the Cardi∣nal began to question him in a Counterfeit-Voice. But this new manner of examining a Prisoner did not succeed as he imagin'd, for la Porte knew his Voice immediately, and stood upon his Guard. Upon this he order'd the Chancellor to go to Val de Grace to the Queen's Ora∣tory, and there to seize the Letters of Her Majesty, and the Cardinal-Infanta. The Chancellor, however he was intirely devoted to him, yet, apprehensive of what might hereafter happen to him from the Queen's part, was for finding out a way to obey the Cardinal, without of∣fending the Queen too much, and therefore gave her private Intimation of the Command he had received. This Princess having no body about her to Consult in this strange Conjuncture, sent the Marchioness de Sennecey to the Marquiss de Puysieux, who, ever since his Disgrace, had lived at his Country-House, to demand his Advice upon this occasion. He was somewhat troubled that the Queen should Consult him upon so nice an affair as this was, knowing the implacable humour of this Minister; but, at last, he could not refuse to tell Her his Senti∣ments of the Matter. One day, when the Queen was at Val de Grace, the Chancellor came there, and acquainted Her with the
Commission which the King had given him. He after∣wards asked Her some Questions, but so, as to Insinuate to Her Majesty, what Answers she was to make him. And the Queen pointed with her Finger to the place where she used to keep the Cardinal-Infanta's Letters, and gave him the Keys of it. She told him, That as for what related to the Prince her Brother, she could ne∣ver stifle the affection which Nature obliged her to show him, but that she knew how to love her Brother, with∣out prejudicing the State; a Maxim directly contrary to that of the Cardinal-Duke, who had possessed the King, That it was impossible for him to love His Sub∣jects, and his Mother, with his other nearest Relations, at the same time. The Queen had taken the Precaution to trust all her Papers with the Marchioness de Sourdis, Daughter to the Count de Carmail; So that the Chan∣cellor found nothing in the Closet but a few Disciplines. From hence he return'd to carry this News to the Cardinal, who was enraged to miss his Blow, after he had put an Affront of this nature upon the Queen. It fell out very luckily for this Princess that she was big with Child, otherwise he had too cruelly offended her, not to use all his Efforts to ruin her; and he had formerly spo∣ken to the King more than once, to be divorced from her. At the same time another Accident happen'd at Court, which was not indeed of the same consequence, but serves as well to discover the prodigious Authority of the Minister. The King had fallen in love with Made∣moiselle de la Fayette, and had for some time entertain'd a Commerce with her, which was by no means pleasing to the Cardinal, who cou'd not endure to see any one in favour with the King that did not wholly depend upon him. It happen'd without the King's knowing the occa∣sion of it, that this Lady retired to a Convent call'd La Visitation, to put her self in the Service, as she pretend∣ed, of a greater Lord than he was. The King was ex∣treamly inquisitive to know the reason of so sudden a Re∣tirement; and not contenting himself with what the Car∣dinal's Creatures had been instructed to tell him, he re∣solved to discover the whole Mystery himself: so pretend∣ing to hunt in the Forests which lye between Gresbois and this Monastery, he came to this last place, where he had
a long Conversation with Mademoiselle de la Fayette: and thus they came to be satisfied that they had been both cheated by Boizenval, Valet de Chambre to his Majesty, who nevertheless ow'd his preferment to this Lady. Whenever the King sent him to Mademoiselle de la Fay∣ette, to deliver any Message to her, or carry her a Billet, and whenever this Lady sent him back to the King, or writ to him, he went directly to the Cardinal, who cau∣sed the Billets to be chang'd, as he saw convenient, by counterfeiting the Hand, or else order'd him what Answers to make. This imperious Minister had engaged him thus to sacrifice the King and his Benefactress, by send∣ing him word, that since he was made Valet de Cham∣bre without a Recommendation from him, he must not expect to enjoy that Post long. Boizenval affrighted at this Menace, which he did not question but the Cardinal wou'd soon put in execution, went to acquaint him, that if he wou'd be pleased to take him into his Protection, he wou'd blindly obey him in whatever he shou'd think fit to order. The Cardinal promis'd it, upon condition he wou'd inform him of every thing he saw: And thus Boizenval communicated to him the King's Billets, and those of his Mistress, which he alter'd in such a manner as was most proper to inspire them with a disgust each for the other. At the same time the Cardinal threaten'd the Marchioness de Sennecey, and the Bishop of Limoges, who were related to Mademoiselle de la Fayette, to ba∣nish them the Court, unless they prevailed with this Lady to betake her self to a Retirement. Their Advice, and the Letters she received from the King, obliged her at last to think of a Recluse Life; and she accordingly put this Design in execution, as it has been already said. The King being inform'd that she had received some Billets which were wholly different from those which he had writ to her, was sensible that Boizenval had betray'd him, and resolv'd to turn him out of his place. While he was in the Parler with Mademoiselle de la Fayette, Boizenval, who had follow'd him, was at the Gate, and came to understand, as soon as ever the King was gone, that His Majesty and She had been talking of the Cheat he had put upon them. By this be concluded himself to be undone, and next morning he was discarded; yet
the Cardinal did not condescend to speak one word in favour of him to the King, lest he should thereby disco∣ver from what Quarter the Cheat proceeded. The King had spent four hours in entertaining himself with Mademoiselle de la Fayette; so that it being too late for him to go back and lie at Gresbois, he went to Paris, and the QueenThe 5th of September. that very night was deliver'd of a Son, afterwards Louis XIV, who was born on the same day that the Cardinal-Duke was, and has to their cost convinced all Europe, how terrible a figure a Monarch makes that can govern by himself. This Birth ruin'd in a manner all the Cabals of the Grandees, which were in a good measure founded upon the Expectations they had that the Duke of Orleans wou'd succeed to the Crown. In all probability too, it seem'd to threaten the Cardi∣nal's Authority, who had for a considerable time drawn the Queen's Hatred upon himself; but he was so strong∣ly possessed of the entire Management of the King's Will, that this did not cause the least Alteration in his Power. TheSiri Mem. Rec. T. 8. P. 639. same Year the Queen-Mother passed over into Holland, where she was received with all imaginable re∣spect; and from thence into England, to engage King Charles I. her Son-in-law, and the Queen her Daughter, to make new Efforts in her behalf, that she might be suffer'd to return to France. Belliévre was at that time Ambassadour in England, and the Queen-Mother having found an opportunity to converse with him, although he studiously endeavour'd to avoid it, she acquainted him, that she had for some time employed all the means ima∣ginable to signifie to Cardinal Richlieu the extraordinary desire she had to return into France through his means; but that she had received no manner of Answer from him, and that no Promises had been ever made her, but upon such hard Conditions that she could not comply with them. The Ambassadour interrupted her, and desired her Majesty to remember, that the King had sent him in the Character of Ambassadour to the King of England, but that he had not the Honour to be sent to her. He added, that if her Discourse tended to command him to write about her to France, he desired her not to charge him with that Commission, because he had no Order to meddle with any thing, whatever it was, that concerned
her Majesty. The Queen replied, that then they had not forbidden him to do it; and the Ambassadour made Answer, That he had no Orders. To this the Queen rejoyn'd, That it signified nothing at all; and, that she requested him to listen to her; That the Afflictions she had sustained since her Departure out of France had in∣spired her with quite different Sentiments from what she had when she quitted that Kingdom; That she should think her self infinitely obliged if he would acquaint the Cardinal, that she conjur'd him to deliver her out of this Misery, and the necessity of begging her Bread; That she long'd exceedingly to be near the King, not to con∣cern her self in the least with any Affairs, but to pass the Remainder of her Life in Repose and Tranquillity, and employ it in serving of God, and thinking how to die well; That if the Cardinal cou'd not obtain leave of the King for her to return to Court, he wou'd at least get permission for her to live in some part of France, where His Majesty thought convenient, and there to provide for her Maintenance; That she wou'd turn away all such out of her Service that were either hated or suspected by him; and, That she was ready to do all that the King order'd and the Cardinal counsell'd her to do; That this was all she desir'd him to communicate to the Cardinal, because she believed that some Persons who had under∣taken to do it, had not acquitted themselves faithfully in this Affair. The Ambassadour answer'd, that he wou'd never give her the same occasion to complain of him, be∣cause he would not concern himself in her Business. Up∣on this the Queen told him, that this was the Stile of all Ambassadours, who nevertheless were obliged to write all that was said to them; and that she wou'd not fail to expect his Answer. The Queen of England af∣terwards gave Belliévre to understand, that they had pitch'd upon this way, because the King had declared that he wou'd not have any Strangers interpose to accom∣modate Matters between him and his Mother. The Am∣bassadour still continued to say as before, that he had no Authority to concern himself in this Affair; but for all that,By a Letter dated the 25. of December. writ to the Cardinal, to inform him what the Queen-Mother had said to him. The End of the Fifth Book.
THE HISTORY Of the FAMOUS Cardinal de RICHLIEƲ. VOL. II. BOOK VI. Containing the most Remarkable Passages of his Life, from the Year 1639. till his Death. THE Cardinal having received Belliévre's Letters, was no more mov'd with pity to∣wards his old Benefactress, than by the other Steps she had formerly made to recon∣cile her self to him.Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 640. The natural Inclina∣tion that Women have to Revenge, the Humour of the Queen-Mother in particular, who dissembled her Indig∣nation
so much the more as she appeared to humble her∣self before the Minister, and who if she were in France, wou'd not fail to discover to the King all that he con∣ceal'd from him; and lastly, the implacable Malice of the Cardinal himself, who seldom quitted what had once fully possess'd him, determin'd him to reject all Offers which this afflicted Princess caused to be made to him; and as for the King, he had not of a long while thought fit to deliberate upon any thing which he saw was not approved by this Minister. Thus the Cardinal having dictated a Letter, in the King's Name, to Cheré his Se∣cretary, his Majesty signed it. He pretended that before he had read an Extract of Belliévre's Dispatches, con∣cerning the Propositions which the Queen-Mother had made to him, he had told the Council of his own proper motion, that he believed there was no longer room to rely upon the fair Words of the Queen his Mother, who had always been accustomed to dissemble; that her un∣quiet Temper hinder'd her from being able to live peace∣ably in any place, since she cou'd never bear her Prospe∣rity when she was in France, nor agree in Flanders with the Duke of Orleans, after she had obliged him to leave the Kingdom to go thither, no more than with the Prin∣cess to whom she had married him; that it was not with∣out some Design that she went to Holland, and that she was already disgusted with England; that if she was not able to content her self with the extraordinary Authority which she enjoyed before her Departure out of France, much less wou'd she rest satisfied with what they cou'd give her at present, and which wou'd be nothing near so great as what she formerly had; that considering her aspiring Humour, she wou'd be no sooner in France, but she wou'd oblige the Malecontents to occasion new Disor∣ders, and that the more easily, because the greatest part of them had been formerly engaged in her Interests; that the Spaniards, who had despised her in their own Coun∣try, wou'd not fail to influence her to excite Commoti∣ons in France as soon as she was arrived there, and that merely for this Consideration they desired her Return; that within 7 or 8 Months she had endeavour'd to form a new Party at Sedan, with the Duke of Bouillon and the
Count de Soissons, though she cou'd draw nothing but bare Words from them; that the King of England ha∣ving in vain interceded for her, design'd to send her else∣where; that all these Reasons obliged him to stick firm to the Proposal he had made to the Queen his Mother that she shou'd retire to Florence, where she should receive what was sufficient to maintain her according to her Quality; that lastly, his Conscience was satisfied, and that he shou'd be justified before God and before Men, since he had done all that in him lay, to satisfie the Queen, without exposing his Kingdom to new Broils and Troubles. Upon this Answer, which was wholly founded upon this Supposition, That the Queen-Mother wou'd embroil the Kingdom, in case she came back, as if they had been certainly assur'd of it, and that there was no way to hin∣der it, but by sending her home to Florence; the Queen of England, touched for her Mothers Affliction, writ se∣veral Letters to the King and Cardinal with her own Hand, and sent them by my Lord Jermyn to confirm them by Word of Mouth. The King answered these Letters by others, which Chavigny composed and were corrected by the Cardinal, wherein he commends the good intentions of his Sister, but desired her not to in∣terpose in this Affair; that he intended on his Side to give his Mother all reasonable Satisfaction, but that she had ingag'd her Self in so many Cabals against him, that he cou'd come to no other Resolution about her, till a Peace was concluded; that as for the Maintenance they de∣manded for her, he was afraid she was abused by her own Evil Councellors, as if there was no Medium be∣tween granting her all, and refusing his Mother a Dowry, which lawfully belonged to her, and yet Lewis the Just refus'd it her. Thus my Lord Jermyn's Negotiation came to no∣thing, and though he offer'd in the Name of the King and Queen of England, to ingage for the good Conduct of the Queen-Mother, and promised every thing which cou'd in reason be expected, yet they would talk of no∣thing less than sending this unfortunate Princess to Flo∣rence, where they promised to settle an Appointment up∣on
her, which perhaps they wou'd have stopt after∣wards. No one durst speak a word to the King upon this occasion, and the good Prince could not bethink himself of any middle Expedient, between treating his Mother with this excessive Rigour, only to please the Cardinal, and restoring her to her first Authority. He cou'd without jealousie, behold his chief Minister assume a Power infinitely greater than the Queen-Mother had e∣ver pretended to, and abuse it in a more notorious man∣ner, and yet it never disturbed him; but the Cardinal had gain'd that absolute Ascendant over him, and had so far possessed him, that without him, both he and his Kingdom wou'd be intirely ruin'd, and that none but he had honest intentions towards him, that he perceived no∣thing of the Cardinal's Designs. However to secure himself in some measure from the Inhumanity which the World wou'd be apt to charge him with, in refusing to let the Queen-Mother return, since she desir'd it with so much Submission, he wou'd not declare his own Opinion in the Council upon this Affair: But he ingag'd the other Ministers to give their Sentiments in Writing, which he drew up for them him∣self, and they afterwards sign'd. They are still to be seen in the Memoirs ofPage 340. Montresor, and they take two things for granted; first that it was impossible for the Queen-Mother to come back without embroiling the Kingdom, and that there was no other way to preserve it in Tranquility, but by suffering her to want even Ne∣cessaries out of France, unless she wou'd go to Tuscany. Secondly, that as Princes are design'd more for their State than for themselves, so they are also more nearly related to that, than to their Father or Mother, and are not ob∣liged to show them any marks of the respect they owe them, but as far as they agree with a more publick and noble Duty. According to these Slaves of the Cardinal, France wou'd be undone, if the King made any Provisi∣on for his Mother, and this Action of the King resem∣bled the Separation of Jesus Christ from the Virgin-Mary. They gave this Advice to his Majesty, in the Month of March, and their Names that sign'd are as follow, Le∣guier. Bullion, Bouthillier, Chavigny and Sablet.
At the same time, the Cardinal-Duke order'd a Process against the Duke de la Valette, who had been received very honourably in England.Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 781. According to the usual Forms, it belonged to the Parliament of Paris to judge of it, but according to a custom establish'd by this Mini∣ster, the King nominated some Commissioners of Par∣liament and of the Privy-Council, although the Parlia∣ment had remonstrated to him, that it was an Infraction of their Privileges, and that these Causes belonged to them. The Duke de la Valette was accused of Cowar∣dice and Treason; besides that, he had left France with∣out Permission, which he cou'd not do, as being Colo∣nel-General of the French Infantry, Governour of Guien∣ne, and Duke and Peer of France. The King order'd the Judges to come before him at St. Germains, and com∣manding them to give their Opinions, the chief Presi∣dent humbly begg'd of his Majesty to dispense with him from giving his Opinion in that place, being obli∣ged to give it in Parliament if the King wou'd be plea∣sed to send back the Cause to be there tried, conforma∣ble to the Laws, as he was going to prove. But the King took him up short, and told him, That the Coun∣cellors of Parliament started difficulties of their own making, and had a mind to keep him in Tutelage; but he wou'd have them know that he was their Master. He addd That it was a great mistake to say, that he cou'd not order a process against a Peer of France after what Manner he saw most convenient, and forbad them to speak of it. TheSo they call those Judges in France, that make a Re∣port of the Case to the Parliament. Rapporteurs de la Posterie, and Machaut concluded after a long reasoning, that his Body was to be apprehended, and then the King spoke to the rest to give their Opinion. Pinon began his Harangue with ob∣serving that in all the Fifty Years he had been a Coun∣cellour of Parliament, he never remembred a thing of so vast an importance to have come before them; that he consider'd the Duke de la Valette, as a Person that had the Honour to be married to the King's Natural Si∣ster, and as a Duke and a Peer, and that therefore his Judgment was, That this Cause ought to be brought be∣fore the Parliament. The King told him that this was not giving his Opinion, and that he did not take it as
such. But Pinon answer'd, That in the Order of Ju∣stice, a Reference was a lawful Vote. The King re∣ply'd in great Anger, That he wou'd have them give their opinion of the Merits of the Cause; and Pinon made ans∣wer, That since his Majesty commanded him, he was of the same Opinion with the former. The Presidents Nes∣mond and Leguier said the same thing, seeing the King positively bent to have it so. The President de Bailleal, who had heard at his coming into the Hall, that the Cardinal shou'd say, That the King wou'd make the Duke de la Valette taste of his Mercy once more, said that he approved of the Overture which the Cardinal had made; but the latter reply'd, That he needed only to cover him∣self with his Robe to give his Opinion: so he was con∣strain'd by the King's Command, to do as those before him had done. The President de Meme; thought of his Bonnet without saying a Word. The President de Novi∣on, after a long Discourse, wherein he remark'd that no mention was made, neither of the Name, nor Age of the Witnesses that swore against the Duke, and that the process was against the usual Forms, as the King him∣self confess'd, declar'd, that he thought the Duke ought personally to appear: and besides that, he cou'd not in Conscience give his Opinion in the place where he was. He added, that if the King constrain'd him, he wou'd be of the most favourable Side, because he wou'd not load his Conscience. The President de Belliévre ri∣sing up, said, That in his Judgment, this cause ought to be sent back to the Parliament, but as the King obliged him to pass his Judgment upon the equity of the matter, he made a short but handsom Discourse, the substance of which was, That he thought it was extremely strange, that his Majesty shou'd interpose in the Trial of one of his Subjects; that his Ancestors were accustomed to re∣serve their Graces to themselves, and to remit Condem∣nations to the Tribunals of Justice; that he did not be∣lieve that his Majesty had rigour enough in him to see a Man upon a Sledge to be dragg'd the next Hour after to a Gibbet; that the sight of a King carried Acts of Clemency along with it; that it took off Ecclesiastical In∣terdicts, and that no one ought to depart from his Pre∣sence
dissatisfied. He afterwards took notice how incon∣venient it was for them to deliver their Opinions before the King, since they were not at liberty to speak their Thoughts freely. The King, after he had heard him with a great deal of Patience, commanded him to speak positively to the matter in Hand. Belliévre made ans∣wer, That these were his Sentiments: but the Chancel∣lour still pressing him to give his Opinion; he said, That it was time lost to speak, if he must say nothing but what the Chancellor approv'd of, and so stuck still to his first Judgment. The Premier President continued to insist upon a Reference, but at last gave his Opinion, that the Duke's Body was to be seized. After the Presidents had done, the Councellors declared their Sentiments; and it was remarkable enough, that le Bret alledged the Custom of the Persians and Turks, and Leon Bralart the most violent Proceedings of Ger∣many, to serve as a Rule upon this Occasion. After this, the Dukes and Peers spoke, and were follow'd by the Chancellour, by the Cardinal, and by the King. At last the Court rose, and the King calling the Presidents to him, told them in a great Passion, that they always made it their Business to disobey his Orders, that he was extreamly ill satisfied with their Conduct, and that he hated all those that were against his Trying a Duke and Peer out of Parliament; that they were sorry, ignorant Wretches, unworthy of Places, and that for all he knew, he might put others in their room; that he was resolv'd to be obey'd, and that he wou'd make them see, that all their Privileges were only founded upon an illegal Usage; and lastly, that he wou'd hear them argue no more about the Matter. Thus the blindest of all Kings, with whom the Arbitrary Courses of his Minister pass'd for Law and Policy, violated all the Ordinances, as if there had been no such thing as Justice in France before the Cardinal-Duke sate at the Helm, and that all the an∣cient Customs ow'd their Original to Madmen and Fools. It was too dangerous a point to endeavour to make him sensible of his Error, not only by reason of the vast Authority of the Minister, but his own natural Opinia∣trete, which was as great, as his Knowledge and Insight
into Things was small. Thus he cou'd never have been brought to comprehend what might have been said to him concerning the beginning of Laws, and the great Advantage which Princes as well as their Subjects find in seeing them carefully observ'd. In consequence of the Result of this Assembly, the Duke de la Valette was condemn'd by an Arrest of the 4th of  uary. Council of State to be sent to the Bastile to answer the Crimes he was accused of; or to be adjourned to appear at Sound of Trumpet, at a certain time, and his Goods in the interim to be sequestred. Afterwards they exami∣ned the Testimony of fifty, as well Officers as Soldiers, whom they thought most proper to make him seem guil∣ty. Their Depositions were read in full Council, and thee 24th ay. Attorney-General concluded that the Duke de la Valette was condemn'd to have his Head cut off, and his Goods confiscated for the Crimes of Cowardice and Treason. The Presidents, who saw it was to no purpose to make any Opposition, approved of all these Conclusions, ex∣cept Belliévre, who said it was a hundred Years ago since Francis I. had made an Order, by which he ordain'd, that in Civil Matters, the Plaintiff shou'd not come to a conclusion, under a pretence of Contumacy, unless he cou'd justifie his Demand; and that it was much more just to follow this method in Criminal Matters, where the Honour and Life of the King's Subjects lay at stake: That those that were attainted of Contumacy, were not always guilty at bottom: That the Duke de la Valette was accused of Treason, and Disobedience to his Gene∣ral: That in relation to the Treason, it was hard to ima∣gine that a French Gentleman, and one that had so many Obligations to the King, cou'd be guilty of so base a Thought: That he had remark'd no proof of it in the Process, and that the Attorney-General seem'd to be of the same Opinion, since he had not pronounced the usual Sentence of Traitors, which was, to demolish their Hou∣ses, to cut down their Woods, and to declare their Po∣sterity degraded from their Nobility: That if the Duke de la Valette had en ertain'd any private Intelligences with the Enemy, he wou'd never have discover'd it to a parcel of Scoundrls, since this was the most effectual way
to ruin his Designs: That none of these Witnesses had deposed, that he sent any Letters to the Enemy, or re∣ceived any from them, or kept any Correspondence with them, or their Adherents: That consequently he judged him innocent in respect of this Allegation: That as for his Disobedience to his General, this was a point purely military, the Cognizance whereof belonged to Gentle∣men of that Profession; and that if the Duke were pre∣sent, he might perhaps demonstrate the contrary: That as to this Article, the Witnesses deposed no more than that the Breach was reasonable; and that if an Assault had been made immediately, in all appearance the Place had been taken: That it was a Matter of dangerous conse∣quence to submit the Honour and Life of a General to the Judgment of thirty Soldiers: That nevertheless tho' there was not any direct proof of these two Capital Points, of which the Duke de la Valette was accused, to condemn him to die; yet he thought him to be so great a Criminal for leaving the Kingdom, and not appearing to justifie himself, even though he were in person, that he was of opinion that he deserved to be banished for nine Years, to be turn'd out of his Places, and to pay a Fine of a hundred thousand Crowns. Upon this the Chancellour replied, That from what∣ever Principle it was that the Duke de la Valette had made the King lose the Opportunity of Taking Fon∣tarabia, and disobey'd his General, this Action was of such mighty prejudice to the State, that he was sa∣tisfied the Attorney-General's Sentence was just. The King throwing his Hat upon the Table, began to tell them, that having not been bred up in the Parliament, he cou'd not deliver his Opinion so well as they cou'd: That however, to express himself after his own manner, the Debate was not here of the Cowardice or Ill-suffici∣ency of the Duke de la Valette, since he was satisfied he wanted neither Bravery nor Courage, but that he had purposely and designedly lost Fontarabia. After he had added a few Words of his ill Designs, which he had discover'd upon other Occasions as well as this, he con∣cluded after the same rate as the Attorney-General had done. At last the Court broke up, without any other
Formality, and the Duke de la Valette was condemn'd by the whole Assembly, except Belliévre.The Duke de la Valette was re-esta∣blished in his Estate and Henour by the Parliament of Paris, after the Death of the Cardinal-Duke. The Coun∣cil of State pronounced the Arrest, which declared the Duke to be found guilty of High Treason, for having basely and perfidiously abandon'd the King's Service at the Siege of Fontarabia; and of Felony, for departing out of the Kingdom contrary to his Majesty's Orders, and for this condemn'd to have his Head struck off at the Greve if he were taken, or in Effigie if they cou'd not Apprehend him; to lose all his Offices, and to have his Goods confiscated. This was a thing without president till now, that a King of France should, as a Judge, Condemn a Gen∣tleman, sitting at the upper end of a Table, about which the Judges were placed. What does still deserve to be re∣marked, is that in the Choice of these Judges, no new Commission was dispatched, that some of them were just∣ly to be excepted against, that most of them had never served as Judges before; that they observed no Formali∣ties; that they violated the Privileges of Dukes and Peers; that an Arrest was issued out by the Counsel of State, who had no Cognisance of the matter of Fact, and who don't use to concern themselves in such Affairs. Thus the King, who never did a good thing, but with the great∣est difficulty imaginable; nay, who often suffer'd the Car∣dinal to undoe it, when he had passed his Promise to re∣ward any one, suffer'd himself, without the least reluct∣ance, to doe a Crying, Illegal, Unpresidented Piece of In∣justice, to destroy a poor Nobleman, who had behaved himself extreamly well upon several occasions, and whose Father had served the Crown above 60 years. The Car∣dinal de la Valette, like a true trusty Slave as he was to the Cardinal-Duke, Writ a Letter to him in the very In∣terval, when he was employing all his Power to ruine his Brother; wherein he assured him,See a Letter of the Car∣dinal de la Valette, da∣ted the 17th of January, in the Co∣ction which, s at the end of the Mise of the Card That since Monsieur de la Valette continued to live after such a manner, as could by no means be agreeable to him, he was obliged to tell him, that for his failure in his Duty, he (the Cardinal de la Valette) would be the first against him. For, 'tis certain, adds he, that I should be the most ungrateful Man in the Would, if I should not prefer your service, not onely to his In∣terests,
but even to my own. These mighty Obligations were, that he had not ruin'd him as well as his Brother, and that he had given him a Command in the Army, tho' he was as unfit to make a General, as he was to Govern his Bishoprick in good order. In the mean time the D. of Espernon had Orders, to retire to his House at Pras∣sac, and was deprived of his Government, and all his Pen∣sions. This good old Man had yet another Misfortune, which befel him at the beginning of this year, and that was the death of the D. of Candalle, his eldest Son, who died at Casal. The Cardinal-Duke had sustain'd a very considera∣ble Loss some time before, in the death of FatherSee a Letter of Condoleance from the Car∣dinal de la Valette, da∣ted the 11th of January. Jo∣seph du Tremblay his Confident, who died at the begin∣ning of this Year. This Capuchin, whose Character I have drawn in another place, was a mighty Assistant to the Cardinal, whose Designs and Maxims he so per∣fectly well understood, that he acted upon them with∣out Order, as if he had been the Minister himself. For this reason he discharg'd the greatest part of the Foreign Affairs upon his Shoulders. Father Monod having ever since the beginning of the Year been sent to Montmelian, as I have already obser∣ved, the Dutchess of Savoy, in Answer to some Advice which the Cardinal had given her a few Weeks before, writ aDated the 4th of January, in the Collection added to the Ministry of the Card  7. Letter to him, wherein she tells him, that she had never been in so profound a Lethargy, as not to know what she owed to his Merits, and to the great desire she had of finding any occasion to oblige him: She there speaks of the Marks she had always given of her unwearied Zeal for the Service of the King her Brother, and adds how severe a Mortification it was to her, that the bare Consideration of Father Monod shou'd hinder the good Correspondence which she promis'd her self to find from his Majesty. In the Close she demands timely Assistance, that so she might be in a posture to defend her self against her Enemies the next Campaign, promising her Friendship to the Cardinal-Duke, and desiring his for her self. The Cardinal of Savoy, and Prince Thomas who was arrived out of Flanders in Italy, prepared to ener
Piedmont with a powerful Army with all imaginable speed, and the Piedmontois expected them with great im∣patience; the People much rather loving to be Com∣manded by those that were related to their own Princes, than by Foreigners. Nevertheless they endeavour'd at first to enter into some Accommodation with their Sister-in-Law, and to obtain of her, that they might come in safety to Piedmont: but as she had all the reason in the World, on her side, to suspect that their design of com∣ing to Turin, was, in order to make themselves Masters of the Place, she would never consent to it; and impor∣tun'd the Cardinal, by frequent Letters, to send her a timely and powerful relief. She Writ likewise to the King, but apply'd her self to the Minister in such a strain, that it plainly appear'd, she reposed little confi∣dence in the languishing Friendship of her Brother, if theSee the abovementi∣on'd Collecti∣on, p. 31, &c. Cardinal did not recommend her condition to him with all his address. She presses him all along after such a manner, as supposes he had a greater hand in disposing the Forces of the Kingdom, than the King himself. In the mean time Don Martin of Arragon parted from Alexandria with Seven or Eight thousand Men, and went to Attack the Fort of Cengio, where there was a French Garrison, which defended it self bravely. The Spanish General being killed before the place, Don An∣tonio Sotello succeeded him, and after he had repulsed the Succours which the Marquiss de Ville wou'd have thrown into it, obliged it to surrender. On the other side, Prince Thomas marched in theThe 26th of March. Siri Mem. P T. 8. P. 697. Night to Chivas, a place Situate upon the Po, between Turin and Cres∣centin, and took it, which gave a Terrible alarm to the Dutchess, and to the French who were not as yet strong enough to take the Field. Quiers, Montcalier and Jore declared at the same time for Prince Thomas. After this he marched toThe 9th of April. Verrue, where the Governour did not acquit himself of his Duty; and the Castle being un∣provided of several Necessaries, surrendred to the Prince, as well as the Town. Crescentin submitted soon after; and thus the Spaniards hinder'd the French from being able to send any Relief to Casal by the Po.
Cardinal de la Valette not being in a condition to oppose the progress of the Enemy, contented himself with preserving of Turin, hoping it wou'd be no difficult matter for them to regain the rest, provided they cou'd but keep that City in their possession. Thus either the Cardinal, or the Dutchess of Savoy, to de∣stroy or preserve Father Monod, put the young Duke of Savoy in danger of being stript of his Territories. At the bottom, the true motive which engag'd Victor Amadeus and his Widow in this War against the Spa∣niard, was only to give their forces some diversion in Italy, for fear they shou'd grow too strong in the Low Countries: and it must be acknowledg'd, that the Cardinal assisted them after a feeble manner. But in all probability he was not much concernd to see the Daughters of Mary de Medicis out of a condition to make themselves be feared. He affected to morti∣fy them upon every occasion, and had order'd d Eme∣ry to reside as Ambassador at Turin, altho he was ex∣tremely disagreeable to the Dutchess, whom he some∣times treated with a great deal of pride and arro∣gance. The Dutchess fearing to be besieged in Turin, thought of sending the Duke her Son, and her Daugh∣ters to some place of security, tho the Cardinal made some proposals to her to send them into France. But as she already depended but too much upon him, she concluded it would be her best way to send them to Montmelian, under the guard of Don Felix of Sa∣voy, who was Governor of that place. Now to en∣gage the Dutchess in some Treaty, Prince Thomas, and the Marquis de LeganezThe 18. of April▪ advanced within sight of Turin, and made themselves Masters of the Bourg du Pau, which thse within were not able to main∣tain. The people of Piedmont, generally speaing, were so little affected to the Dutchess, that thee had been a just occasion to be apprehensive for her, if the French Garrison had not been stronger than the Burg∣hers of Turin. There were quartered in that City five thousand Foot, and two thousand orse, by whose means the Cardinal de la Valette so bridled them, that they were not able to attempt any thing; and at the
same time kept the Dutchess, who was affrighted to see her Enemies so near her, from making any Trea∣ty, contrary to the interests of France. And thus af∣ter some few propositions, the design of which was to sngage this Princess from assisting the French, Pn Thomas and Leganez retired. The Prince took Villnve d Ati, and Leganez Monicalvo, and af∣ter wa Pontslure, which occasion'd a suspicion, that the Spniards ad a design upon Casal, but the Cardinal de la Valette recruited it in good time with all manner of necessary provisions. In the mean time, the King resolv'd to send Cha∣igny into Piedmont, in quality of Ambassador extra∣ordinary, to assure the Dutchss of her Brother's as∣sistnce, and withal to prevail with her to oppose the dg o te Princes of Savoy. D' Emery was but lately  t Fance, and 'twas designd to send him  Pdmont, as indeed they did: but as the Dus ad en an incurable dislike to his person, it was ad tha all his endeavours wou'd fall to the gd. Chaviy hadSe Hi Instructi in the Mm o ,  p. 272. orders dexterously to insi∣e to the Princess, that there was only one way left to save herself, and that, in the Cardinal's opini∣on, was  her Children into France, and to se∣cur herself so effectually of all the principal places of her Country, that she might lye under no farther apprehensions of osing them. Now to secure these places for herself, she needed only to put Frenchmen into them, which she might do both with honour and safety, because the Spaniards had made a power∣ful Invan in Piedmont; and the King promis'd to restore thee places to her, whenever she pleased. Chavigny had instructions to support this advice with several other reasons, and to tell the Dutchess that if she follow'd it, the King her Brother would redouble his efforts to deliver her out of her present difficul∣ties; but if she neglected it, his Majesty discharged himself before God and Man of the protection he o∣therwise design'd to give her, since it would be unser∣viceable. The places which the King demanded to have in Piedmont, were the Castles that secure the entrance or the Vallies, as Caours, Revel, Coni, and some o∣thers like them.
D' Emery was likewise order'd to return from Ly∣ons to Piedmont, to fortifie Pignerol, and make the same propositions to the Dutchess. Besides this, in case the Dutchess made a Treaty of Neutrality, or a Cessation of Arms with the Spaniard, he was com∣manded to confer with the Cardinal de la Valette, to see how one might seize those places which lay upon the road from Pignerol to Casal; and to effect this design in case it were feasible. The Cardinal in the mean time, in all his Letters to the Dutchess, and to the Cardinal de la Valette, gave them to understand, that this Princess cou'd never truly reckon herself mistress of any place, where she had Piedmontese Governours, even tho the Garrison was French, because those Governors wou'd make the people rise up against the Garrisons. In this conjuncture the Dutchess sent to acquaint Prince Thomas, that if he did not surrender the places he had taken, she was resolved to throw up all which she had into the hands of the French, who already possessed Carmagnole and Querasque, and who wou'd soon be masters of Turin, if they had once the Citta∣del. Soon after she began a Treaty with her Bro∣thers-in-law, by which she agreed to divide the Guardianship with them, and to receive them into Turin; which had it gone on, would have infallibly subjected her to their power, and made her entirely depend upon them. The Ambassadors of France took a great deal of pains to make her comprehend, that she wou'd absolutely ruin herself, if she concluded this Treaty; But when they came to talk to her of putting the rest of her Towns into the hands of the King, who was only to keep them for her, till such time as she cou'd maintain them safely herself; then she cry'd out, that instead of assisting her, they de∣sign'd to plunder her of all she had, and wou'd not hear them mention the least syllable of it for several days. She was afraid that if these places were once out of her power and surrendred to them, they wou'd afterwards pay her just so much respect as they shou'd see convenient, and thus she might come to lose all her authority. But the Ministers of France having
found means to gain her Councellors over to their party, by pensions which they promis'd them in the Kings name; and in particular, the Cardinal having corrupted the Abbot de la Monta, by resigning the Abby of Nantes to him; the Dutchess began to soften a little, and as she wanted ready money for her pre∣sent support, there was a necessity for her at last, e∣ven of her self to come to the Cardinal's Lure. The Treaty was signed the 1st of June, 1639. and theSiri Mem. Rec. T. 8 p. 710. King promis'd to restore her these places which she put into his hands, as also those which he happen'd to retake from the Enemy, assoon as she was in a condi∣tion to keep them for her self. During this Negotiation, the Marquis de Leganez made himself Master ofThe 24 of May. Trino, and ofThe 14 of June. Santia in Montferrat; the Army of the Cardinal de la Valette not daring to quit Turin, while they doubted of the good affections of the Dutchess. To make some a∣mends for these losses, and the better to preserve Tu∣rin, the Cardinal de la Valette besieged Chivas, which he began to attack on the 17 of June. The Marquis de Leganez thought himself obliged to relieve it, and for that end advanced with his Forces, but he found the Lines of the French so strong, that he durst not attempt them. However he posted himself between Chivas and Turin, hoping to cut off all Provisions from the French Army; but the Duke of Longueville being arrived in Piedmont with a fresh Army, guard∣ed a great Convoy to the Cardinal de la Valette's Camp, which obliged the Marquis de Leganez to alter his measures. The place surrendred on the 29 of June, and the taking of it began somewhat to re-esta∣blish the Reputation of the French in Italy. But shortly after the Emperor publish'd an Ordi∣nance, by which he declared the Dutchess to have forfeited the Guardianship of her Children, absolved the Subjects of the House of Savoy from the Oaths of Fidelity they had taken to her, and commands them to own the young Duke's two Unkles for his lawful Guardians; upon which all Piedmont rose up against the Dutchess, except Turin, and those places where the French were strongest. The Cardinal having
received this ill news,The 6 of July. sent a long Memorial to D'E∣mery and the Generals of the Army, wherein he told them, That this insurrection of all the places in Piedmont ought to convince the Dutchess, that the people were deeply prejudiced against her, and that she could not rely upon them any longer: That if the French Troops that were in Turin, and the Neighbourhood of the King's Army did not awe the Inhabitants of that City, they would do the same as the rest have done, since in spight of her prohibiti∣ons they continued to form Assemblies, and resolu∣tions contrary to her Authority: That the only Bond that ties people to their Soveraign is Fidelity, and that it is not to be expected from those persons, that think themselves absolved from their Oaths by the Emperor's Declaration, and who are confirm'd in this opinion by the Ecclesiastics: That this ought to be represented in a vigorous manner to Madame of Savoy, who was to be told, that the King would be in extraordinary pain till he heard she had given necessary orders for her own security: That for this end she must disarm the Citizens of Turin, and ma∣nage her self with a great deal of prudence, for fear she should hasten their Rebellion: that a report might easily be spread about, that the Enemy ap∣proached near the City, while the Duke of Longue∣ville should be employed elsewhere, and so she take that opportunity to bring the Cardinal de la Valette's Forces into the Town, seize the most advantageous posts, and disarm the Burghers: That Madame de Savoy might turn out the Piedmontese Captains that kept the Gates, and place some French in their room, who were in her pay: That she might place a faithful experienced Governor there, to turn out the factious Spirits, and oblige the Superiors of Con∣vents to send their turbulent Religious elsewhere: that besides this, she might buy up all the Arms, and all the Powder that was made in Turin, and bestow it in the Arsenal, or Cittadel: That since the Dutchess possest no more than Turin, Avelliane, and Susa, she ought to take all imaginable care to keep them in her hands: That it was necessary to
put a trusty Garrison into the Castle of Nice, and not to trust the people of Nice, nor those of Villa Franca: That no suspected person should be suffered to be about the Duke, and even there to place Sa∣voyards in the room of Piedmonteses: That assoon as the season would permit, care should be taken to make the Naval Army, commanded by the Count d'Harcour, come before Nice; That they should make all convenient haste to disarm the inhabitants of those places that were to be kept in trust for the Dutchess. Orders were dispatched to the Duke of Longue∣ville to go and raise the Siege of Coni; and to the Cardinal de la Valette, to march to Carmagnole; but as they were putting themselves in a readiness to exe∣cute these orders, they were oblig'd to change their design. Prince Thomas entred Turin at night on the 26th of July, by secret intelligence with some in the Town, and constrain'd the Dutchess and French that were there, to retire in disorder into the Cittadel. 'Twas to no purpose, that the Cannon of the Cittadel began to play upon the Town, for the Prince had thrown up good retrenchments on that side, and fill'd those Houses that lay most expos'd with Earth. How∣ever, he cou'd not hinder the French from conduct∣ing the Dutchess to Susa, and putting a strong Gar∣rison into the Cittadel of Turin, with all necessary provisions to hold out a long time. In the mean time, Caffarelle the Nuncio obtain'd a Cessation of Arms for two months, which was to begin from the 14th of August, and in the interim the King recall'd the Duke of Longueville to go and command in Ger∣many, and left the conduct of all his Troops in Italy to the Cardinal de la Valette, who had excellent Offi∣cers under him to supply the defects of his own inca∣pacity. The Dutchess writ to the Cardinal Duke with the greatest submission imaginable, because she saw he had foretold, what since happen'd to her; and the Car∣dinal de la Valette excus'd the Cessation of Arms which he had lately made, by alledging that the Cittadel of Turin was utterly unprovided of every thing, and
that all the other places which the King held in Pied∣mont, except Chivas, were in so bad a cont, that it would be a difficult matter to keep them. Never∣theless if the Cardinal Duke disapproved of it, the Cardinal de la Valette consented that he shoud dswn it, provided he still preservd for him the honour of his good graces. Upon the news of this last insurrection of Pied∣mont, Chavigny who was upon his return to Parts, was sent back to the Dutchess of Savoy, to paswade her to put Nice and Villa Franca into his Majsty's hands. Some of the instructions he receiv'd were none of the most honourable for that Princess, whose conduct was extreamly blamed, because she seemd to distrust the King's Ministers. In the mean time they receiv'd advice, that the Generals had concluded a Cessation of Arms with Prince Thomas, which made them change the Orders they had given to Chavigny. He was only commanded to inform the Dutchess, how much the King was concern'd tos her affairs in so bad a posture, and to tell her that his Majesty would come as far as Lyons, that so he might be near¦er at hand to give necessary Orders for the defence of those places which still remain'd in her possession. She was likewise given to understand, that she ought to place a French Garrison and French Commanders in Susa, and in Avelliane, and to provide those places with every thing that was necessary, otherwise she would run the hazard of losing all the rest. In this Interval the French and Spanish Generals had an inter∣view at Piedmont, where the Marquis de Leganez spok of a general Peace, and Prince Thomas of reconciling himself in particular with France, being weary to continue longer in the service of the Spaniards, of whom he imagined he had just occasion to compl. But this conference produced no effect at this time. The Dutchess being desirous to discourse the King her Brother about her affairs, dispatch'd the Marqu de St. Germain to him, to know where he would  pleased she should meet him. Grenoble was the plac appointed, and the Marquis had Orders to represent to the Dutchess how extreamly she prejudicd her slf.
by expressing a distrust of the King her Brother's Ministers, and taking no care for the preservation of her State, and that there was no other expedient for her to defend herself against the enterprizes of her Brothers-in-law, but by throwing herself intirely upon his Majesty. The Cardinal principally desired, that the Dutchess would put the Castle of Montme∣melian into the King's hands, where Father Monod was; for which end it was propos'd to this Jesuit to leave it if he pleas'd, but he could not be prevail'd with to agree to it, fearing that he should be still in greater danger if he departed out of it, than if he continued there. In the mean time Cardinal Maurice found means to gain the Governors of Nice and Villa Franca; and the fear of losing all influenced the Dutchess to put Susa, Avelliane, Gelasse, and Taillon into the King's power, but she would not hear the least mention of surrendring Montmelian. The King arrived with the Cardinal at Grenoble, whither the Dutchess likewise came, but before they enter'd into any Negotiation, the Cardinal told her what he thought would be most advangeous for herself, and the Duke her Son, and had some conversation with the principal Ministers of the Dutchess. He endeavour'd to perswade her to trust the King, at least in appearance, with the admi∣nistration of Savoy, and to put the Duke her Son into his hands. The Dutchess could not bring herself to give her consent to it, for fear lest this apparent trust, as the Cardinal call'd it, should become but too real, if the King gained the Governor of Montmelian, or made himself Master of it any other way. It came to be discover'd that Count Philip d' Aglie advised the Dutchess to continue firm to this resolution, but what∣ever artifices they used, it was not possible for them to draw any thing more from the Princess, but that she would deliver two or three small places more to the King. And in truth, it was a strange thing that the King wou'd not vigorously assist his Sister upon cheaper terms, than by being absolute master of all her domi∣nions, and of the person of her Son. But this was the Cardinal's Maxim, who did not pretend to be a
Counsellor or Friend to the Dutchess, but to be su∣pream Arbitrator of her Will. To effect which, the Duke of Savoy and all his Country must be put into his hands, and then his advices would not be proper∣ly Counsels, but Commands. Besides, tho the Duke of Savoy was Nephew to the King, yet it was not safe to repose too much confidence in the Cardinal, whose ambition had no bounds, and whose dark de∣signs 'twas impossible for any one to foresee. 'Twas to no purpose to talk of the great affection which Lewis XIII. had for his Sister, and of the obligations both of conscience and honour to protect her as well as his Nephew: All this served for nothing without the Cardinal's concurrence, of which 'twas impossible to be secure. The Cardinal upon the point of his parting from Grenoble with the King, went to take his leave of the Dutchess, andSiri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p 749. told her, That he left her involved in greater dangers than those he had found her in, be∣cause her Enemies seeing that she was uncapable to employ the only remedies which could preserve her from all the difficulties that threatned her, would be sure to push on their designs with greater vigour, at a juncture, when they saw her abandon'd by her Sub∣jects, and not able to procure the assistance of the King her Brother: That she imitated those persons that obey God's Commandments but in part, which however would be ineffectual to their Salvation: That those that wanted prudence to give her good advice, wanted courage also to defend her, and that those that disswaded her from following the King's Counsel, found it was their interest to ma∣nage her after this rate, and intended to redeem their own losses by hers. The Cardinal preached a great deal of this cajoling doctrine to her, and left it with her in writing, that she might make more re∣flexions upon it at leisure. But the Dutchess held fast to her resolutions not to divest herself of Savoy; and as this did not hinder the King from acting vigorously in Piedmont, if he were so minded, which was sufficient to preserve his Sister and his Nephew, 'twas impossi∣ble to comprehend what should incline him to desire
Savoy, unless his Minister had some such design upon that Country, as he has abundantly convinced the world he had upon Lorrain. Count Philip d' Aglie, who had confirmed the Dutchess in her opinion to keep Montmelian, incur∣red no little danger upon this occasion. The Dutchess was already got into her Coach to return to Savoy, and her Attendants were on Horseback to follow her, when the Cardinal took the Count by the hand, and led him into a Chamber to discourse him there in pri∣vate. Here squeezing his hand, and pressing it hard against his breast, he frown'd upon him, and told him, That now he might return in glory to Savoy, since he had engag'd the Dutchess by his Advice, to put the greatest affront upon the King her Brother, and the greatest disappointment he could receive in the world, since people would now believe, that he came on purpose to talk with her, with a design to rob his Nephew of those places, which he desired with no other prospect than only to keep them against his Enemies, and to force them to surrender the rest they had taken from him. The Count made answer, That he had no power over the Dutchess's inclinations; and the Cardinal replyed, that it were to be wished that all the world did believe the same; after which he turned his back upon him. The Count took Horse immediately, and without stopping at any place, never thought himself secure till he ar∣rived to Montmelian. Nevertheless the Cardinal pre∣vailed so far, that none of the Piedmonteses were to tarry there, except the Marquis de St. Germain, and Count Cagnol his Lieutenant, and that the Garrison should be wholly composed of French, that were in the Service of the House of Savoy. Towards the end of October, de la Cour was sent Ambassador in Ordinary to be near the Dutchess, in the place of D'Emery, with positive Orders not to treat her with the Title of her Royal Highness, as she had for some time desired, in imitation of the Car∣dinal Infanta, to whom the Title was given. The Cardinal Duke was resolved never to grant her this satisfaction, because she had too much oppos'd his advice.
In the mean time the Cardinal de la Valette died, and the Pope refused to say Mass for his Soul, as 'tis the custom, under a pretence that he had header an Army, which was composed in part of Lutheran Troops, against Catholicks. He likewise denied to show him some other honours, that are accustomed to be paid to Cardinals. The Count d' Harcourt, who commanded the Kings Fleet in the Mediterranean, had orders to go and take his place. He march'd im∣mediately, because the Truce was ready to expire; and as soon as it was ended, he attacqu'd Quiers, in sight of the Enemy's Army, who in vain endeavour'd to get thither before them. There were four hundred Germans in Garrison, and three Hundred Horse, who were reduced to capitulate the 28th of October, after some Vollies of Cannon had past between them. Next day the Spaniards advanced, as if they design'd to attacque the French Lines, but the latter marched out to meet them, and defeated five Squadrons of Horse, who retreated in some disorder under the Cannon of Villeneuve d' Asti. The Count d' Harcourl being desi∣rous to preserve Quiers, during the Winter, tarried there so long to put it in a capacity of defending it self, that provisions began to fail him. In the mean time the Marquis de Legamez, and Prince Thomas, who had foreseen this, posted themselves so advanta∣geously, that nothing could come to him from Car∣magnole, and so reduc'd him to a necessity to pass be∣tween their two Bodies, if he were minded to stay there no longer. But their precaution was in vain, for the Count slipt by them one night with so much order and speed, that he had made the best part of his way, before the Enemy perceived it. Prince Tho∣mas, who was first aware of them, design'd to at∣tacque the French in the Front, while the Spaniards, as he imagined, would fall upon their Rear. But he was repulsed with loss, and the Spanish Cavalry, who came afterwards with full speed, were constrain'd to return to the place from whence they came, without doing any thing. Thus the Count arrived at Car∣magnole without loss, after this double Victory, but the Marquis de Leganez was extremely blamed for lo∣sing
so fair an opportunity. The Princes of Savoy, who had complain'd of him before, now had a fresh occasion to complain of him, as of one that was un∣capable to act with that promptitude and vigour which is requisite in War. The Spaniards sustain'd another loss near Casal, the Garrison of which place, on the 29th of November, carry'd off five of their best Companies of Horse; and so with this action the Campaign ended. Cardinal Maurice and Prince Thomas, finding there was no way to accommodate matters with their Sister-in-law, published a Declaration, wherein they maintained themselves to be the lawful Guardians of the Duke of Savoy their Nephew, and acknowledged as such by the Emperor, and by the Inhabitants of Pi∣edmont; so that they declared all those persons to be guilty of High Treason, that adhered to the Dutchess's party. But the Senate of Chambery cancell'd this De∣claration, and the Dutchess publish'd another quite opposite to it. In the mean time France was engag'd in aSee Au∣bery's life of the Car∣dinal, l. 6. ch. 37. quar∣rel with the Court of Rome, as being very ill satisfied with its conduct for several reasons. One was, the death of Rouvray, Master of the Horse to the Mares∣chal d' Estrees, who was assassinated by the Sbirri, be∣cause he had rescued his Valet out of their hands, who was condemned to the Gallies. The other was, the little notice the Pope took of the nomination his Majesty had made in favour of Mazarine, for a Car∣dinal's Cap. Besides this, the Minister had not been able as yet to obtain his Bulls for his Dignity of Ab∣bot-General of the Orders of the Cistercians and Prae∣monstratenses; and he had reason to complain of the manner the Pope had treated his Friend the Cardinal de la Valette. The first of these reasons was the occa∣sion, why Scoti, the Popes Nuncio, who succeeded Bologuetti, was forbidden to have audience of the King. He had a Conference upon this affair with Chavigny, who particularly complain'd of the Assasi∣nate of the Mareschal d' Estrees Gentleman of the Horse, and that the Pope had not permitted the ac∣custom'd service to be celebrated for the Cardinal de
la Valette, as was usual for the other Cardinals. The Nuncio denyed both one and the other, and began to complain that four or five Bishops being assembled in Paris, had proposed to have a National Council summon'd. He added, that if they came to these ex∣tremities, he knew very well how to maintain the Interests of the Papal Chair, and that he did not doubt but the greatest part of the Bishops wou'd de∣clare for him. Chavigny deny'd the matter of fact, and wou'd have put a writing into Scoti's hands, by which he was forbidden to come to the King's Audi∣ence, till his Majesty had receiv'd satisfaction from him; but the Nuncio refusing to receive it, Chavig∣ny deliver'd it to him by word of mouth. After some discourse concerning a Peace, to which the Nuncio accused France to have an aversion, he told Chavigny that the menaces which the Cardinal de Richlieu made, no longer to acknowledge the Pope in France, but only as he was ad of the Church, and a Spiri∣tual Prince, unless Mazarine was immediately pro∣moted to the dignity of a Cardinal; and the disgust he took because he had not obtain'd his Bulls to be Abbot General of the Cistercians, were the true cause of the misunderstanding between his Holiness and the King. That Cardinal Richlieu had first made use of violent ways, in stopping the Pope's Curriers, and hindering him (Scoti) to perform the functions of his Nunciature Ordinary and Extraordinary: That he had assembled some Bishops at his Palace, to talk of convening a National Council, under pretence of Annates, and other pretended Grievances; that this was not the way to procure Mazarine a Cap; and that as for a National Council, the Prelates of France had too much zeal for the Holy See, of which they had given so many public testimonies, to engage in an affair of that nature. The Nuncio likewise com∣plain'd, that Chavigny had order'd Father Valerio, a Discalceated Carmelite, to tell him, nay, to send word of it to Rome, that the King might with Ju∣stice, if he pleas'd, revenge the death of Routray up∣on the Nuncio, by sending the Mobb to insult him in his house, or bastinado him in the streets; but that
his Majesty wou'd not make use of his power; and that he expected satisfaction from Cardinal Antonio Barberin. Chavigny denyed he ever said any thing like it, but the Nuncio offering to send for Father Antonio, he told him there was no necessity for it, and began to make a Panegyric upon the CardinalSee the Relation of this Confe∣rence on the 9th of Dec. in l. 2. of Aub. Mem. p. 409.. Af∣ter some other discourse they parted. As the Nuncio refused to receive from Chavigny the above-mentioned order in writing, which he tendred to him, Berlise the Introductor of the Ambassadors, accompanied by an Usher of the Privy Council, was sent to give it him. The Nuncio refus'd it a second time, nay, not only so, but wou'd not hear it read, and withdrew into another Chamber. Berlise left it upon the Table, and charg'd the Nuncio's Officers to give it him, but as soon as the Introductor of Am∣bassadors was gone, they threw it back to him into his Coach. In the mean time, the King forbad all the Bishops of France to have any manner of com∣munication with Scoti, and every night a Guard was placed about his house, to hinder any one from go∣ing to him. The Nuncio writ a complainingIbid. p. 414. & 415. Letter to the King, that he never spoke the least disrespectful word in regard of his Majesty, and that he had done no∣thing, which he was not indespensibly obliged by his character to do. But the Cardinal complain'd highly of his conduct to Cardinal Bagno, as being inconside∣rate and too violent; for he did not value it seems their threatning to Bastinado him, which the Grand Seig∣nior, said Scoti, durst not do at Constantinople to a Bayly of Venice. The Cardinal writ likewise to the Pope, to complain of him for refusing to take infor∣matiens about the life and manners of him whom the King had nominated to the Bishoprick of Cominge, altho they had been taken before a Diocesan Bishop, pretending that it was to be done before the Nuncio. To this he jyn'd several other Grievances, which some Prelates, assembled several times at St. Genevieve, had presented to him. All this only tended to obtain more speedily for him the Bulls for his being Gene∣ral of the Cistercians and Praemonstratenses; and he on
his side granted to the Court of Rome a great part of what they demanded. After having thus recounted the most remarkable passages in Italy, that have a relation to our Cardinal's History, we must now relate in a few words the at∣tempts of France in the Low Countries, in Languedoc, and in Germany, against the House of Austria. Ever since the preceding year the French had a design to attack Hedin, but the relief which Prince Thomas of Savoy had thrown into the place, diverted that de∣sign. This year they took it in hand again, and the Marquis de Meilleraye had orders to open the Cam∣paign, on the side of Artois, with the Siege of this place. At the same time a small body of men was given to the Marquis de Feuquieres, to enter into the Country of Luxemburgh, and attack Thionville.Siri Mem Rec. T. 8. p. 773: Some persons are of opinion, that Feuquieres received this order from the Cardinal against his will, and that he was only sent thither to facilitate the taking of He∣din, and do honour to the Marquis de Meilleraye. OthersAub. Vie. du Gard. l. 6. c. 30. deny it, and pretend that Feuquieres was left at liberty to attempt the reduction of this place, or barely to oppose Picolomini. However it was, whileThe 22. of May. Meilleraye attacqu'd He∣din, the Army commanded by Feuquieres, which consisted of eight thousand Foot, and four thousand Horse, advanced before Thionville. Altho the place was strong enough, yet it was so ill provided, that in all appearance Feuquieres would carry it in a few days, if Picolomini did not march to the relief of it. He made so much haste, and marched with so little noise, that heThe 7th of June. appear'd before the French thought he could have reach'd them, so that Feuquieres could not imagine who he was, when he saw his Colours. As he marched between the Woods, they could not judge what quarter he would attack, and all that the French General could do was to put his Army in Battel, in the different posts where they stood, to be in a condi∣tion to march, if there should be occasion. All this while Feuquieres was in an extraordinary perplexity, which made several Officers laugh who did not love him, and call'd him the Pedant, because he was fitter
for Negotiation, than the Military profession. In the mean time Picolomini gave the first onset on that quarter which was posted on the other side the Mo∣selle, which he carried after a vigorous opposition made by the Foot, for the Horse run away. By this means Picolomini threw what succors he pleas'd into Thionville, and then placed his Army in Battel Array, between the Counterscarp of the place, and the Quar∣ter of Feuquieres, without advancing further, till a∣bout five a clock in the Afternoon. The French Ge∣neral, who had sent his Artillery Horses to Mets, was of the opinion to stay for them to carry him off, or at least to defer the Retreat till night. But the Ene∣my having approached a Ravelin, which parted the two Armies, with their Artillery, began to canno∣nade the French, who likewise advanced on their side; tho for want of Horses, they were not in a condition to bring up their Artillery. This gave the Enemy an opportunity to pass the Ravelin, notwith∣standing the resistance of the French Infantry, who were, once more, in this extremity abandon'd by the Horse. Feuquieres, as he perform'd all the Offices of a General, received two shots from a Musquet, one of which broke his arm, so he was obliged to retire the distance of a Cannon shot from the place, where the action was. There he was taken Prisoner, and con∣ducted to Thionville, where he died in a few days af∣ter, partly of his wounds, and partly of grief. The French lost few of their Horse, because they had the discretion to run away betimes, but their Infantry were half kill'd upon the spot, and half taken Pri∣soners. The Mareschal de Chatillon, to whom the Cardinal had given a small Army, which he commanded upon the Frontiers of Champagne, was blamed for not ad∣vancing to the relief of Feuquieres, since he had notice of Picolomini's March. 'Tis reported that he was not sorry for the defeat of Feuquieres, whom out of deri∣sion he called the New General; because it would make the raising of the Siege of St. Omers be for∣gotten.
After this advantage, Picolomini judging that the French, dispirited and terrified with this overthrow, would not be in a condition to oppose his designs, marched directly toThe Relation of the Ma∣reschal de Chatillon in the Mem. of Aub. T. 2. p. 312. Verdun: but the Mareschal ha∣ving thrown three Regiments into the place, he went to attack Monzon, which however he could not so speedily do, but that seven or eight hundred men were put into it. Nevertheless he carry'd all the Outworks of the place easily enough, and had made himself Master of the Town, if the Mareschal, who had gathered the stragling remainders of Fenquieres's Army, had not marched thither with extraordinary haste, whichThe 21 of June. obliged Picolomini to retire to Yvoix, as being not in a condition to resist an Army com∣pos'd of 12000 Foot, and 4000 Horse. In the mean time, the Marquis de la Meilleraye prest the Siege of Hedin with great vigour; and it was fear'd that Picolomini would pass the Meuse, to joyn the Cardinal Infanta, in order to make him raise it. Upon this consideration the Mareschal was ordered to follow him, and observe his motions. But the place was forced to surrender on the 29th of June, for fear lest the Enemy should enter it through the Breach. The King, who was then at Abbeville, to come and behold the Siege, made his entry into the Town through it; and the same day bestow'd a Ma∣reschals Staff upon the Marquis de la Melleraye. A∣bout a month after, the Mareschal de ChatillonOn the 2d of Aug. Se the Capitula∣tion in the Mem. of Abri. T. 2. p. 337. re∣took Yvoix, and order'd the Fortifications to be razed to the ground. After this, no considerable Action happen'd on the side of the Low Countries. During the same Campaign, theSiri Mm. Rc. T. 8. p. 7. Prince of Conde entred into Rousillon, and besieged the Fort of Sals, which is not far from Leucate; and altho Don Mchl Lornza Bravo defended it with a great deal of vi∣gour, yet he oblig'd it to capitulate on the 19th of July. He took Cannot some time after, and then with∣drew to Narbonne, leaving the charge of the Army to the Mareschal de Schomberg. In the mean time, the Spanish Forces advanced under the command of the Marquis de Spinola, and came to re-besi de, on the 20th of September. Not to lse time, he order'd
a general assault to be made upon the Outworks, and carried them, but with the less of abundance of his men. This made him not so violently attack the bo∣dy of the place, and D' Espenan who commanded in chief there, made frequent Sallies to beat him off. While things were in this posture on both sides, the Prince of Conde summoned the Arriere-ban, and ga∣thered as many Troops as he could find, with all ima∣ginable speed, to preserve this new Conquest, and force the Spaniards to raise the Siege. He marched on the 22d of October, and caused the Spanish Lines to be observed by the Mareschal de Schomberg, and the Duke de St. Simon, who advanced in a Boat towards that side, upon the Lake of Leucate, and discover'd there were great spaces void, by which they judged entire Squadrons and Batallions might enter in a front. This confirm'd the Prince in his design to at∣tack the Spaniards; and the better to surprize them, he pass'd his Army over the Mountains, instead of marching along by the Sea side. On the 24th he ar∣rived in sight of the Enemys Camp, with twenty two thousand Foot, the greatest part of whom were the Country Militia, and four thousand Horse, be∣sides two thousand Volunteers. The Spaniards were in a great consternation when they saw from afar so powerful an Army marching towards them, through ways which were always held to be impracticable; and if the Prince had fallen upon them at that in∣stant, in all probability they had been destroyed. But he was of opinion to defer the Onset till next morn∣ing, thinking the Spaniards durst not stay to expect him; but about midnight there arose so prodigious a tempest of wind, rain, and thunder, that the Army, extremely incommoded by this unfavourable night, deserted in great numbers, as soon as day-light ap∣pear'd. They that tarried were obliged to draw back, because the space between them and the Enemys Camp was by the rain converted into a perfect Lake; and the Prince of Conde, who was but indifferently beloved by the Troops and the Militia, could not oblige them to come back again. The Spaniards also aind no small detriment by it; however this did
not constrain them to discontinue their Attacks, but they compleated their Lines. Nevertheless the Prince, who had still fourteen thousand men with himThe 31 of Oct., re∣solved to attack them; but he was repulsed after he had lost three thousand of his men, and left as many prisoners to the Enemy. Salces was obliged to surren∣der to the Spaniard, which ill news extremely discom∣posed the Cardinal, who had been accused more than once for his ill choice of Generals. The Sieges of Dole and Fontarabia came afresh into mens memories, and 'twas believed now more than ever that the Duke de la Valette was innocent. Thus it cannot be said, that this Campaign was fortunate to the French, altho they took a few places in the Low CountriesSiri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 763. The Duke of Weymar made war against the Imperialists, rather for himself than France, altho she reaped this advantage by his Con∣quests, that the Troops which the Emperor employ'd against him, could not act against her. He had pas∣sed the winter with his Troops in the Mountain de Vauge and in the Franche-Con, where he had redu∣ced abundance of small places, which were not in a condition to make any resistance; and where his Ar∣my, fatigued and diminish'd one ha at lst, by the preceding Campaign, rerd, and increasd consi∣derably. Altho his Troops were but indifferently paid, the great indulgence he showd them, and the frequent ravages they made, gaind him so ftually the hearts of the Souldies, that he ais'd what Re∣cruits he had occasion for, wi reat  y. At this time his thoughts were chy employ'd in preserving o Brisc, innding to crt a Pnc paty with what he could conquer about that City; for he began to  weary of being as it were a bare General of the French, and to depend upon the Cps of a haughty inconstant Minister, from wh  could expect nothing but an everlasting Save fr the Re∣ward of his Service. After , the Cardinal nt him word,  would be  ay for him to come to Pari,  the nxt Campaign, but the  was, to engage to deliver up the  to the
French. As he exprest some difficulty of going thi∣ther, they took care not to pay him the Arrears they had promised him, altho he demanded them with great importunity. However he kept to his resolu∣tion not to go to France, but contented himself to send Colonel d' Erlach, the Governor of Brisac thi∣ther, who only talked of the designs of the ensuing Campaign, and pretended that the great preparation that the Emperor made to regain Brisgow, hindered the Duke from coming to Paris. The Count de Guebriant having orders to feel his Pulse about Brisac, the Duke bluntly answer'd him, that to demand a chaste Woman's Virginity, and a brave Man's Honour, was the same thing. Nevertheless the Cardinal extorted a promise from d' Erlach, that if the Duke happen'd to dye, he would resign Brisac to France, and or∣dered him to acquaint that Prince, that if he would quit it, they would supply him with Men and Mo∣ney to make himself Master of the Franche Comte, and see him confirm'd in it by a Treaty of Peace. But he was too wise to fall into such a snare as this, and thought it much better to be in possession of Brisac, and part of Alsatia, than of the Franche Comte, be∣cause it lay nearer to his friends in Germany, and that he could more easily preserve this Principality, even against France it self, in case she should ever pretend to dispute it with him. On the other hand, the Car∣dinal, who was sensible of the Duke's designs, began to be afraid of him, and knew not whether he should wish that he should make any new advances, or be beaten by the Imperialists. The report runs, that he secretly treated of a Marriage with the Landgrave of Hesse's Daughter, which would have put him at the head of twenty thousand men kept in constant pay by that House, besides his own Troops, and thus have made himself formidable to all Germany. The Cardinal and he were taken up with these dif∣ferent thoughts, when the Duke came from Burgun∣dy to Suntgow, to pass the Rhine at Newbourg, and from thence to march to the Black Forrest. Being ar∣rived at Newbourg, he there fell sick on the 4th of Ju∣ly, and died on the 18th, in the thirty sixth year of
his Age. The Cardinal was suspected to have got him poison'd, in order to make himself master of his Conquests; and indeed people talk'd of indications strong enough * See Sam Pusendors. Rer. saci. l. 11. to prove that he was dispatched by poison. But after all, perhaps the only foundation to charge the Cardinal with this crime, was because immediately after his Death France took possession of those places he had conquer'd. The Duke of Weymar had order'd by hisSee it in the Mem. of Abr. T. 2. p. 49. Will, that they should be consign'd into the hands of one of his Brothers, who was willing to take possession of them; and who, to preserve them more easily, would endeavour to gain the favour of the Crowns of France and Sweden; and that in case none of his Brothers should think fit to take possession of them, France should be preferr'd; upon condition that the strong places should receive a garrison of part French, and part Germans, and that they should be restor'd to the Empire by a general Peace. In regard of the Army he order'd that after his decease, it should be com∣manded by Major General d' Erlach, Collonel Olem, Count Nassau, and Collonel Roze, and after them by other Collonels. He gave several Legacies to the Of∣ficers of the Army, and to his Domesticks, amount∣ing to the summ of three hundred thousand Crowns, and gave his Charging Horse to the Count de Gue∣briant. The Directors of the Army, which were in a man∣ner wholly composed of old Souldiers, sent immedi∣ately into France to demand the protection of that Crown, and endeavour to make some advantage for themselves in this conjuncture. An Agent of Sueden, then residing at Benfeld, took pains to perswade the Army to joyn that of Banier, by remonstrating to them that 'twas what they ow'd to the memory of Gustavus Adolphus. But the Money which the Count de Guebriant liberally distributed among the Officers, made a greater impression upon them, than all the discourses of the Suedish Minister. 'Twas unanimously agreed by them, to compose a body apart by them∣selves, nay, some discoursed of putting the Elector Palatine in the room of the Duke of Weymar; but
this Prince coming from England, was stopt in Frances through which he design'd to pass incognito. The Cardinal having receiv'd advice that the Duke of Weymar was dead, was not overmuch troubled at the news, for he had long ago entertain'd a jealousy, that this Prince rather designed to make his own for∣tune, than either to aggrandize France, or humble the House of Austria. The first thing they took care of was to preserve his Army for the King, and get possession of the places he had taken. In pursuance of this,Aubery's Life of the Cardinal, l. 6. c. 5. See his Instru∣ctions in T. 2. of the Mem. d' Aub. 421. dated the 27 of July. Baron de Oisonville was immediately dis∣patch'd to the Count de Guebriant, to bring him those Orders he was to follow upon this occasion. He was commission'd to tell the Officers, that they should not only have the same pay continued to them, which they had under the Duke of Weymar, but likewise considerable Pensions, if they would take the Oaths of Fidelity to the King. Above all, he was particu∣larly charged to remember Major General d' Erlach of the promise he had made, in case the Duke happen'd to dye, concerning Brisac; and to offer him two hundred thousand Livres in ready money, if he would surrender it to the King, or if he was minded to continue Governor of it for the King, a pension of six thousand Crowns, besides what he had under the Duke of Weymar; provided he would consent to have a French Lieutenant, and one half of the Garrison French. The like orders were also sent, concerning the Governors of the other places on t' other side the Rhine; but as for those on this side, in regard of France, the King pretended they belonged to him of right. Besides this, the Count de Guebriant was to propose the Duke of Longneville to the Army to be their General, and to back this proposition, by be∣stowing sums of Money, as he should see convenient. The King was afterwards inform'd, that General d' Erlach was very well inclined to France, andSee the Letter of the 31 of July to Noyers. Mem. d' Aub. T. 2. P. 423. that he had taken great care to prevent the Army from disbanding, and to engage the Officers to continue in the Service of the Crown. The Court also received a Copy of the Duke of Weymar's Will, and contrivances were set on foot to hinder it from being executed.
To effect this, De Choisy was sent to confer with the Count de Guebriant, and Baron d' Oisonville upon this affair, with the following instructions; that they should endeavour to secure themselves of the Army, without any relation to the Brothers of the late Duke, nay tho they should have a mind to enter in∣to the Kings service; that it was not reasonable that the expences his Majesty had been at to re-establish the Duke of Weymar's Army after the Battel of Nort∣lingac, and support it ever since, and to make him conquer Brisac and other places. should be lost in an instant, by changing of parties, which the Brothers of the late Duke might be easily perswaded to do, since they had already once abandoned that side, which they now embraced; that the Duke might have very well left all his Money to his Brothers, but that he could not leave them the command of the Ar∣my, nor the places of Alsatia, for several reasons that are mentioned in this Instruction; that therefore they ought to employ all manner of means to secure both the Troops and the Places directly for the King, and not tarry to know whether his Brothers had a mind to accept what the late Duke offer'd them in his Will; That if they could gain all the Leaders, there needed no more to do, but if any of them made a difficulty to engage in his Majesty's service, they should not fail to receive the Oaths of the rest, and sign a Treaty with them, to assure them that they should be gratified by the King. In the mean time Count Flerschein, who was sent to the Court by the Directors of the Army, arrived thither, and presented their proposals, upon which the King dispatch'd newDated the 20 of Aug. Instructions to the Count de Guebriant, and to two other Deputies that acted in his name, for the affairs of the Army, and the places possess'd by the Duke of Weymar. At last, af∣ter several Conferences and difficulties, too tedious to be recounted here, aSee the whole Trea∣y in Aub. l. 2. p. 450. Treaty was concluded at Bri∣sac, on the 9th of October; the principal Articles whereof are as follow: That the King agreed that the Troops, commanded by the Duke of Weymar, should continue in a Body, as he expressly desired in
his last Will and Testament, and under the direction of the Officers whom he nominated: That the Ar∣tillery should be commanded by the same Officers, that commanded it when the late Duke of Weymar was alive, and for the most part be joyn'd to the German Body, with power to the Mareschals of the French Camp, and to the Directors of the German Troops, to give them from time to time the necessa∣ry orders: That if it so happen'd that the Army came to be destroy'd, in whole or in part, by any misfortune of War, or some other inevitable acci∣dent, the King should be oblig'd to give the Officers extraordinary Allowances to re-establish their Troops; That the King should take care to pay them the Ar∣rears due at May, which amounted to two hundred thousand Crowns, and were to be employed in pay∣ing a months pay to all the Army, and should give them good Bills for six hundred thousand Livres more, for the third payment of that year, due the last of September, of which the Directors and Officers of the Army should employ three hundred thousand to remount and recruit the Troops: That the King should pay the Army three payments and a half year∣ly, according to the agreement made with the Duke of Weymar; with this proviso, that the half payment should be employ'd by the Officers, in recruits and re-establishing their Troops, and the other three in paying off the Officers and Souldiers, according to the reviews that should be made of them by the Kings Commissaries: That besides this, his Majesty should pay as well to the General Officers, as to those of the Artillery, eight payments per annum, according to the Appointments assign'd to them by the Duke of Weymar: That his Majesty should still supply them with all necessary provisions of War; besides all ex∣traordinary expences, as well as Ammunition-bread, without deducting any thing out of their pay for it: That if any of the Officers, Soldiers, or other private persons of the Army should demand of his Majesty the Donation of some Lands or Houses scituate in the conquer'd Countries, the King shall promise to give them such gratifications as shall content them, and
ratifie all the Donations which the Duke of Weymar had granted to them: That the Orders should be given to the Soldiers by the Directors, or by one of them as they should agree amongst themselves, and that they should first receive them from the Duke of Longueville, as the French Officers used to receive them from the Duke of Weymar; that the Directors should be called to all the Counsels which shall be kept for the common cause: That the conquer'd places should be deliver'd into the King's hands, that so he might give Brisac and Friburg to such Gover∣nors as he should see fit, and place in them Garrisons half French, and half German, as well as in the other places, whose Governors he should chuse out of the Body of the Army. Upon these conditions the Directors and Officers promis'd the King, in the name of the whole Army, to serve him upon all occasions, and were to confirm it by Oath, assoon as the Treaty was ratified, which the King's Deputies were obliged to procure in the term of two months, to commence from the day this Treaty was dated. By a secret Article it was provi∣ded, that the King should continue the Governments of Brisac and Friburg, in those hands that then com∣manded them; that if he should remove those of other places, he should choose others out of the Ar∣my to put in their room: That lastly, he would per∣mit in all these places, a free exercise of the Prote∣stant Religion. After the Ratification of this Treaty, the Duke of Longueville having staid a month at Creutsnach, and not able to subsist there any longer, by reason of the great scarcity of Forrage, ordered his men to pass theSee the Relaion of it in the Mem. d' Aub. T. 2. p. 454. Rhine about the end of the year, and the begin∣ning of the following, upon a small number of Boats, and the Horses swam over, in which several days were spent. This Army which was quartered in high Hesse, about Marburg, might easily have been cut in pieces, if the Imperial and Bavarian Troops could have stir'd out of their Winter Quarters. D' A∣montot, and de la Bodiere, Envoys from the King to Amelia Elisabeth, Landgrave of Hesse, had concluded
a Treaty with her, to engage her to declare against the Imperialists, on the 22d of August.See it in the same Collection. T. 2. p. 432. It was in a manner the same with that which the King had made with the Swedes, and the Landgrave was to have two hundred thousand Crowns a year, for declaring a∣gainst the Catholick League. The Duke of Longue∣ville being now in her Territories made a new Treaty with her, concerning the quartering of his Army, and some other difficulties that arose in the preceding Treaty. Banier, who all this year kept himself not far from the Elb and the Baltick Sea, in the preceding year carried the War into Saxony,See Sam. Pufend. Rer. sacc. l. 11. Silesia, and into Bohemia; where his Army subsisted conveniently e∣nough, and the Imperialists could not hinder him. It was a pretty while since people began to talk of a general Peace, but so many great difficulties started up, that it came to nothing. Before we pass to the Affairs of State, and the e∣vents of War for the ensuing year, we must here take notice of some intrigues of Court, wherein the Car∣dinal had a much greater share, than in the conduct of the Army. I have already spoken of theSiri Mer. T. 2. l. 2. p. 555. Marchi∣oness de Senecey, first Lady of Honour to the Queen, and of the great confidence that Princess repos'd in her. It was thirteen years since the Marchioness had enjoy'd that Post, and she had always serv'd the Queen with an unshaken fidelity, without purchasing the Cardinals favour by betraying her Mistress, as the greatest part of the Courtiers us'd to do. The Cardinal, who was jealous lest this Lady, who possest a great share of vivacity and wit, would one day or other in∣sinuate into the Queen some designs contrary to his Ministry, resolv'd to ruine her; and as the King impli∣citly believ'd every thing he told him, he prevail'd with him to write a Letter to the Queen, wherein he sent her word that for some important reasons he found it convenient for her to dismiss the Marchio∣ness de Senecey. ChavignyIn Sept. 1639. brought this Letter to the Queen as she was ready to sit down to dinner, and was just come from Notre Dame to acquit herself of a vow she had made for the birth of the Dauphin.
The Queen was exceedingly surpriz'd at this Order of the King, since it concern'd a Lady with whom she had so much reason to be well satisfied, and cou'd not forbear to shew a great deal of concern for it: But at last she said she was born to obey the King, and that she would execute his Orders. She perceiv'd well enough from what quarter this storm attackt her, and hoping that she might perhaps bring the Cardinal to a better temper if she addrest herself to him, she writ to him to interpose in this affair, and prevent the execution of what would give her so much disturbance. But the Minister, who was not a man that would suffer himself to be wrought upon by pure civilities, sent her word that he was much oblig'd to her Majesty for the confidence she seem'd to repose in him, but that he could not give her bet∣ter advice than to obey the King. The Queen was extremely offended at this answer, and could not forbear to say, that it was not the King, but the Car∣dinal, she was forc'd to obey. So without taking the least notice of her complaints, or so much as ac∣quainting her with it, Madam de Senecey's place was given to Madam de Brassac, whom the Queen could not endure, because she was entirely in the interests of the Cardinal. For the same reasons the Cardinal got the Baron de St. Ange, who was Comptroller of the Queens Houshold, to be discarded. It seems he was afraid lest the Queen, who was now become a Mother, might insensibly gain the good affections of the King, and at last prevail with his Majesty to turn him off. To prevent which, he gave the King to un∣derstand, that the Queen was excessively partial to the House of Austria; and engag'd him as much as he could, to mortifie that Princess; following his an∣cient Maxim, That a man ought not to have any confidence or friendship for those whom▪ he has often treated ill. However, to give the Queen some time to vent her passion, he order'd matters so, that under a pretence of hunting, the King came not nigh her for a long time. A little before this happen'd, the King seem'd to have an extraordinary kindness for Madam de Haute∣fort,
after the retreat of Mademoiselle de la Fayette; but the Cardinal did not think it worth his while then to cross this new amour, because she was a Lady of a soft easie temper, and incapable of caballing. It was some years ago since the King had a respect for her, but he had discontinued for a long time to give her any marks of it. The Court was mightily surpriz'd at the Kings fondness, and knew not well what name to give it, for as on one side he seem'd to have a won∣derful passion for those of the fair Sex, so he was the coldest of all men living. Instead of seeking an op∣portunity to entertain them in private, he never spoke to them but in the face of the whole Court, and in the Queens Apartment: and this Princess was so far from entertaining any jealousie at it, that she was extremely pleas'd that these Ladies drew the King to her Apartment, nay, what is more, she made them her friends and confidents. 'Tis probable the King design'd no more than barely to amuse himself with their conversation, to unbend himself from his o∣ther affairs. The Cardinal had at first without any distrust beheld the esteem which the King seem'd to have for Madam de Hautefort, but he began to look with an ill eye upon it, when he found this Lady to be an intimate friend of Mademoiselle de Chemeraut, who had infinitly more wit than she, and was the fittest person in the world to suggest to her, what she was to say to the King. To disengage his Majesty from these corresponden∣ces, which he suspected, the Cardinal carried him to the frontiers of Artois and Champagne, and afterwards of Dauphine, to efface all these impressions. The Duke de S. Simon, who had been for some time a Favorite of the King, being remov'd from him, for some other reasons, the Cardinal endeavor'd to in∣troduce into his place, Henri d' Effiat, Lord of Cinq∣mars, Son to the Mareschal d' Effiat, a young Gentle∣man full of wit, and handsomely made as to his per∣son. He was Master of the Wardrobe, and after he was in favour, the Duke de Bellegarde surrender'd his place of Master of the Horse to him. At first the King had an aversion to him, because he behav'd
himself very negligently in his Office of Master of the Wardrobe, and had inclinations wholly different from those of his Majesty. However the Cardinal knew so well how to manage the King in favour of him, that the antipathy he seem'd to have for him, turn'd into an extraordinary friendship and confi∣dence; so that he could not tarry a day without see∣ing him. It was during the Siege of Hedin, that the King first began to shew him any marks of his favour; when he gave him a pension of fifteen hundred Crowns, and ever since that time, he could not di∣vert himself without him. And now the King whol∣ly forgot Madam de Hautefort, in whose entertain∣ment he only sought to meet the same amusement, as he found in that of his Favourite. After he was in bed, and all the company withdrawn out of the room, he caused him to sit down by him, and would thus pass two or three hours alone with him. Thus the Cardinal, by the means of this Favourite, knew all the Kings thoughts, and in the assurance that no∣thing came into his mind, which was disadvantage∣ous to the Ministry, he govern'd the State with ease and tranquillity enough. As he had influenced the King to take a fancy to young d' Effiat, so he had also instructed the latter how to make himself be beloved, knowing perfectly what was most proper to gain the Kings friendship. However, lest the sight of Madam de Hautefort should diminish this growing favour, the Cardinal still found out one way or another to keep the King from Paris, as indeed he did the better part of this year. But at last the Kings Physicians did in private disapprove of these long Journeys, and his Majesty expressing a mighty desire to return to Paris, that he might there divert himself in his Royal Houses, it was not possible to detain him from it any longer. So he took the Road to Paris, while the Court was in great expectation to see who would carry it in the Kings favour. The Queen, according to his order, was at Fountainbleau, when heIn No∣vember. arrived thither, and he saluted her with a coldness, which might have been expected from him, if he had parted from her
but a few hours before. As for Madam de Hautefort, who expected to be so mightily carest by him, he scarce vouchsafed to look at her, and publickly pro∣tested he would no longer have any consideration for her. Nay, he told her in private, that he knew she spoke ill of Cinq-Mars, but that she had better for∣bear it, for he had infinitely a greater kindness for him than ever he had for her, or for any one in the world; and that he would find out a way to ru∣ine all those that should Cabal against him. This was a sufficient indication with a witness how small an esteem the King had for this Lady; however lest his affection should break out afresh, the Cardi∣nal so order'd matters, that he commanded her, as well as Mademoiselle de Chemeraut, to leave the Court. They went both to Paris, where they tar∣ried for some time in a Monastery of Nuns; but as they receiv'd too many visits in that place, the second had orders to retire into Poitou, and the other to be at least forty leagues distance from Paris. The Queen was wonderfully concern'd at their harsh usage, be∣cause she had an extraordinary confidence in them, who for their part were thus cruelly treated for no other reason, but because they were not dependents upon the Cardinal. After this manner, all those per∣sons were removed from the Queen, in whom she could repose any trust, lest she should attempt any thing against the grandeur of the Minister; and this new Favourite serv'd to possess the King with a thou∣sand stories disadvantageous to that Princess. To return now to events of greater importance; TheSiri. Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 809. & Pufend. Rer. Sac∣cic. l. 12. Swedes were not well pleas'd, that the French had past the Rhine with so considerable an Army, and taken their winter-quarters in Hesse; because they pretended that they were not to enter into Germany but in the nature of Auxiliaries. The French were going to acquire a mighty reputation, by obliging the Houses of Hesse and Lunenburg to break the Neu∣trality, and to act in conjunction with them against the Imperialists; and they would soon advance too far in directing the affairs of Germany, if the Swedes did not take some care to prevent it. For this end
Banier marched into Thuringia, and desir'd the Duke of Longueville to come and joyn him, with a design to debauch the Army of the late Duke of Weymar, and to engage them rather to serve the Crown of Swe∣den. After several marches, Picolomini, who was come from the Low Countries, and had joyn'd the Imperial and Bavarian Troops, oblig'd the Confede∣rate forces to joyn, as they did at the beginning of May, in order to attack them. Picolomini was en∣camp'd upon the River Saal with fifteen thousand men, and within a days march of him were ten thou∣sand Bavarians, who secured to him the provisions that came from Franconia. The Duke of Longueville and Banier had thirty two thousand men, and re∣solv'd to attack Picolomini: but they found him so well intrenched, that they durst not attempt it. Se∣veral marches and counter-marches there were on both sides, without coming to a decisive Battel, al∣tho they had frequent Skirmishes. Towards the end of the Campaign, the Duke of Longueville falling sick, left the Command of the Duke of Longueville falling sick, left the Command of the Army to the Count de Gue∣briant. The French mightily suspected that the Swedes had a mind to debauch their Army, and the Swedes on their side were jealous, that the French designs had no other end but the grandeur of their own Country. Thus these reciprocal suspicions, joyn'd to their dif∣ferent sentiments concerning the marching of the Army, hinder'd them from performing any conside∣rable action. On the side of the Low Countries, the Mareschal de la Meilleraye had orders to go and besiege Charlemont upon the Meuse, and he marcht thither at the begin∣ning of May, but the rains were so excessive that he durst not continue his march, in a Country, where he could expect neither Victuals nor Forage. How∣ever the Orders of the Court were precise, and the Cardinal would never suffer any difficulties to be started, after he had once projected a thing. Upon this the Council of War resolved to send him a Me∣morial of the insuperable difficulties that attended this design, and so it was laid aside. But soon after another design was laid against Arras, a place of far
greater importance, where they thought to succeed much easier than in the former. The principal diffi∣culty that offer'd it self was, to hinder the Spaniards from discovering their design, and throwing succors into the place. For this reason they came to a reso∣lution, that the Mareschal de Chatillon should march strait to Bethune, as if he design'd to besiege that place, and that the Mareschal de Meilleraye should follow him by small Journeys, as it were to support him, but that so soon as the latter was arrived at Bapaume, he should turn directly to Arras, and the Mareschal de Chatillon should do the same on his side. This was so happily executed, that the two Armies appear'd before Arras on the 12th of June, before the Spaniards were able to penetrate into their design. A few days after the Army received the great Con∣voys and Artillery, for which they had occasion, and the Spaniards were not in a condition to hinder it. The Count d' Isemburg, Governor of the place, who happen'd to be absent, endeavour'd in vain to get into it, when the Siege was once form'd, and he was obliged to leave the care of his defence to Eugenius Buel, an Irish Colonel, who commanded in his ab∣sence. General Lambos, who was incamp'd within a league and half of the place, in a very advantageous post, did likewise vainly attempt to throw some re∣lief into the Town, being defeated by the Mareschal de la Meilleraye. In the mean time, notwithstanding the vigorous defence of the Garrison, the place was every day more and more strained, so that the Car∣dinal Infanta was forced to march in person to relieve it, and form'd a Camp at Mount de S. Eloi, in a place easy to be defended, and which was separated from the Mareschal de Chatillon's quarter by a plain of about a league over. The French could not receive their provisions but from a great way off, and part of their Troops must of necessity leave their Lines to go and meet them. Altho they did not stand in want of them as yet, yet fearing the Siege would employ them some time, and that the Spaniards would for∣tify themselves with new Troops, the Mareschals prest the Court to sen them a Convoy without de∣lay,
lay, and concerted their measures for this with the Cardinal. The Convoy being ready to depart, the Cardinal gave orders to Du Hallier to guard it, but at the same time the King forbid him to advance, without saying a word to the Minister. This Prohi∣bition was founded upon a fear of his Majesty, that in case Du Hallier and the Mareschal de la Meilleraye, who was to meet him, happen'd to be defeated, the Spaniards would break into the bowels of the King∣dom, and occasion great disorders there. But than he ran a great hazard too, to leave the Army which besieged Arras, in imminent destruction, to save the Body which Du Hallier commanded. When Choupes brought him an order from the Cardinal, he made a thousand difficulties, that he might not march. But at last, when Choupes assured him that he would an∣swer to the Cardinal for his conduct, and that he must expect to take upon himself the ill success of the Siege, in case it miscarry'd, Du Hallier resolved to obey the Cardinal rather than the King, and so the Convoy arrived happily to the Camp. This opposi∣tion of Du Hallier, who had presum'd for some time, to ballance the Cardinal's Orders with those of the King, was the reason why he could not obtain a Mareschal's Staff till long after. In the mean time the Spaniards having receiv'd advice, that the Mareschal de la Meilleraye was gone out of the Camp with three thousand Horse, and three thousand Foot, attacked the French Lines, which were double, and forced the first, notwith∣standing all the resistance the Mareschal de Chatillon could make. After this they went on to force the second, so that being supported by a vigorous Sally from the Garrison, they had infallibly reliev'd the place, if the French going out of their second Line, had not fallen upon them in the Flank, and made them think of a Retreat. In the heat of the Fight the Maresehal de la Meilleraye arrived, and about half an hour after du Hallier; so that the Spani∣ards seeing so great a number of Troops march a∣gainst them, were obliged to retire, leaving twelve hundred of their men dead in the French Lines. The
French lost about half the number, but for their satis∣faction, after they had made considerable breaches in the place, they forced it to surrender on the 10th of August. St. Preuil Captain of the Guards, who had signalized his bravery in the Siege, was made Gover∣nor of the Town. By this Conquest, Picardy, which before was exposed on all sides to the inroads of the Spaniards, was sufficiently cover'd on that side; and on the contrary, Flanders lay open to the French Armies, which has since caused infinite losses to the Spaniards. However, the French Army was so ex∣tremely fatigu'd by this Siege, that they were not in a condition to make any farther attempts in the Low Countries this Campaign. On the side of Catalonia, a fair opportunity pre∣sented it self to France, to make a much larger breach in the Spanish Monarchy.See Siri Mec. T. 1. p. 45. and the Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 814. and Aubery's Life of the Cardinal, l. 6. c. 49. &c. The Inhabitants of that Country, who are naturally but ill affected to the Castilians, had long before complained, that the Court of Spain did violate their Priviledges; and the Count-Duke in particular had taken no care to oblige them. As the Catalonians did not love him, so he for his part hated them, and having found an occa∣sion to mortify them, he embraced it with joy, and assign'd the Army, which had taken Salces, their Winter Quarters in Catalonia: for as they receiv'd no pay, there was no manner of insolence which they did not commit upon the poor Catalonians; who be∣ing in their temper none of the most patient, sub∣missive people in the world, had frequent quarrels with the Soldiers, and at last came to a general in∣surrection, which obliged the Spanish Soldiers to retire to Ampourdan, and into Rousillon. The Count de St. Colome, the Viceroy, altho he was a Native of that Country, was slain by the Harvest People near Barcelona, as he was ready to embark to avoid the fury of the Populace. This Assault, tho it was com∣mitted without premeditation, made the Magistrates of the City conclude, that the Count-Duke would not fail to make his best advantage of so plausible a preence to satisfy his great hatred of the Catalonians, and to declare them fallen from all their Privileges;
so that they thought their best way in this exigence would be to have recourse to France. They had for∣merly sent Seminat to d' Espenan Governor of Leucate, to know what assistance the Catalonians might expect from France, in case they declared against Spain. D' Espenan writ to the Cardinal concerning it,In the Month of August. who was then at Amiens, and immediately dispatched Du Plessis Bezancon with full power to negotiate in his Majesty's name with the Catalonians. He arrived at Leucate, and afterwards at Barcelona, where after he had offer'd the King's Protection to them, and had many conferences with several Members of the Deputation of Catalonia, who are the Magistrates of that Country, it was concluded, that to engage the King to send an Army into Catalonia, they should deliver him nine Hostages, three out of each Order; six of whom were to tarry at Toulouse, and three at Court, as Deputies of the Principality of Catalonia; that they should surrender up to the King two Gates of Barcelona, one on the side of Tarragone, and the other on the side of Rousillon: That the King should send a certain number of Troops both by Sea and Land. Thus they made a sort of a Treaty, which however was not signed, by reason of some difficul∣ties which arose about it. The Hostages departed shortly after with Villaplena, a Catalonian, and Du Plessis, and the first having left them with the Prince of Conde, and conferr'd with him, return'd to Barcelona, while the other pursued his way to the Court, to instruct the Car∣dinal in what condition the Catalonians were. In the mean time it being reported, that the Spaniards were preparing a powerful Army, Orders were sent to the Archbishop of Bourdeaux, to repair incessantly to Provence, to get the Fleet in readiness to sail assoon as possible; and to the Prince of Conde, to cause the Body which he commanded, to advance under D' Es∣penan Mareschal de Camp, towards Catalonia. This last putting himself at the head of these Troops, en∣tred into this Principality by le Col de Pertuis, even before the Treaty was signed, being urgently pressed by the Catalonians, by reason of the advice they re∣ceiv'd,
that the Spanish Army was not far from their Frontiers. To prevail with him not to lose more time, they assured him that their Militia Forces were both numerous, and well disciplin'd, that they only wanted a General to head them, and that the Spa∣niards were extreamly weak. So he marched directly towards Barcelona with three thousand Foot, and a thousand Horse, where he was received with extra∣ordinary Acclamations. Bezancon arrived thither shortly after him, with orders from the Cardinal, in quality of Serjeant General de Bataille. In the mean time the Spanish Army having passed the Ebre at Tortose, drew near to Tarragone, where d' Espenan lay with seven or eight hundred Horse, and a Cata∣lonian Regiment of the new Levies, waiting for the coming up of his own Regiment and that of d' En∣guien. He afterwards repented for having advanced so far without the French Foot, when he was inform∣ed that the Spaniards had an Army of twenty five thousand men, and when he saw the Catalonian Mi∣litia fly before them. This Army was commanded by the Marquis de los Velez, nominated the Viceroy, and Captain General of Catalonia; and by the Mar∣quis de Torrecusa, who was Mestre de Camp General, while the Duke de St. George, his Son, commanded the Cavalry. Bezancon, who tarried all this while at Barcelona, at last concluded the Treaty with the Catalonians, and sent it to the Cardinal, who could scarce believe it was true, of so prodigious an importance did he look upon this Revolution to be. He afterwards be∣stowed the Title of Lieutenant General upon Bezan∣con, who being now arrived at Tarragone, proposed to d' Espenan to march out with his Horse, and come to joyn his Infantry, which was incamp'd within seven or eight leagues of him, and there to stay in some advantageous post for the arrival of the Catalonian Train-bands, that were gathering together in all parts, while the Catalonian Regiment of St. Olaric, with two Companies of Light Horse defended Tarra∣gone, as very well they might. He represented to him how dangerous it was for a General of an Army
to be locked up in so bad a place as that was: But d' Espenan would not listen to this wholsome advice, but sent to him to order the French Foot to advance immediately, and to press the Catalonians to put themselves in a condition to make a vigorous resist∣ance. He imagin'd he should be able to defend Tarragone, as he had done Salces, but finding no∣thing in a manner ready, when he attack'd the Spa∣niards, he was obliged to capitulate, and promise to return into France, with all the French Forces that were in Catalonia, to save Rosseil Commandant of the Catalonian Regiment, and the Standard of St. Olaric, which is the Standard General of the Country. He writ to Bezancon to come and confer with him upon the road, and told him he design'd to enter the Fron∣tiers of France, to be as good as his word, and then immediately to come back to Barcelona. In spight of all that could be said to him, it was impossible to perswade him to stay longer in Catalonia, tho his retreat had like to have put the Catalonians in despair, and no less displeas'd the Cardinal, who had assuredly punish'd him for his Cowardice, had not the Prince of Conde interceeded powerfully for him. The De∣putation of Catalonia took all imaginable care to put Barcelona in a capacity of defending itself, lest they should see all they had most remarkable in this Prin∣cipality, sacrificed on the sudden to the indignation of the Castilians. Bezancon, who was return'd to this City, and understood the Language of the Country, assisted them very much with his advice. We shall see the consequence of this affair, in the history of the events of the following year. At the same time theSee Mere. l. 1. T. 1. p. 115. Portugueses gave another blow to the Crown of Spain, by throwing off their Yoak, and placing the Duke of Braganza, under the name of D. Juan IV. upon the Throne. These people were so weary of the Spanish Government, that not one person took the party of the Catholick King; so that in the space of eight days, the Castilians were obliged to quit Portugal, and yet not the least effusion of blood happen'd upon this occasion. 'Tis confi∣dently reported that CardinalAoe y's Life of the Card al. l. 6. c 64. Richlieu had some share
in this great Revolution, and that finding the Portu∣gueses were extremely disgusted at the insolence of the Spaniards, he dispatched one, whose name was de Saint-Pe, in the year 1638. with the Chancellor, Captain George d' Azevedo, and some others, to offer them the protection and assistance of France, in case they were minded to turn out the Spaniards. He was further to add, that if the Duke of Braganza would take the Crown upon him, the King would not be displeased at it, but otherwise he would send to them an Heir of the last Kings into Portugal. Whether these offers inspir'd the Portugueses with courage or no, 'tis certain that after their insurrection, the afore∣said St. Pe resided at Lisbon in quality of Consul of France, with instructions containing two advices, which he was ordered to present to the new King from the part of the Cardinal. The first was, that the Ambassador who was to be sent into France, to communicate this Revolution to the King, should have full power to treat about the assistance which should be demanded of his Majesty, that so it might be sent without delay. The second, That D. Juan was not to sleep upon this happy success which he met with at first, but make all necessary preparations out of hand to offer War to the Spaniards both by Sea and by Land, and to support himself by Alliances with those that were inclin'd to favour his cause. Ever since the beginning of the same year, theSiri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 833. Princes of Savoy had made several Proposals of agree∣ment with the Dutchess, tho for all that the Hostili∣ties ceased on neither side in Piedmont, or even be∣tween the Cittadel and Town of Turin. Feragelli the Pope's Secretary, who was come to Turin to assist the Nuncio in perswading the different parties to a Peace, did likewise propose a Truce for some years between France and the Milanese; and altho the Marquis de Leganez seem'd disposed to accept of it, yet he made great preparations to take the Field, before the French recruits could pass the Mountains. The French too on their side used all imaginable diligence, and were not behind the Spaniards in talking of a Peace or a Truce.
All these discourses only tended to render them∣selves odious to one another, and to lull one another asleep if it were possible. The Cardinal was of opi∣nion, that Prince Thomas in particular only talked of an accommodation to ingratiate himself with the People of Piedmont, who had this long while lan∣guished for a Peace, and to make his Sister-in-law odious to them. He sent therefore to acquaint her, that this Prince kept a private correspondence with some Officers of her Houshold. The Prince pro∣posed to make a Treaty with her by herself, without having regard to the Interests of France; but she scornfully rejected this Proposal, as she herself related the story to de la Cour, adding that she was resolved to follow the Cardinal's advice, altho he had treated her with a great deal of rigour at Grenoble, and that she would not cease to love him, as much as the King did, and as much as so great, and so excellent a Minister deserved. Thus she communicated to him all the Proposals of Agreement made to her by Prince Thomas. Assoon as he saw them he rejected them as impertinent, and immediately dispatched the AbbotIn April. See his In∣structions lated the 20 of that Month, in the Collecti∣on of Aube∣ry. T. 2. p. 313 Mondin to ac∣quaint the Dutchess with his sentiments. He had Orders to tell her, that the King did not understand how any people durst be so bold as to engage her to sign such a Treaty as this was, without consulting his Majesty who was her only Protector, and wondered that she did not perceive that they aimed at nothing but her destruction; That she ought to break off all these Negotiations, and declare that she would not enter into any Treaty, which was not equally secure and honourable to the Duke her Son, and to herself; That otherwise she would only destroy herself, and ruine her State; That in the Declaration she was to publish upon this occasion, she must take care to in∣cert all the most advantageous circumstances for herself, which were to be found in any of her Nege∣tiations with Prince Thomas, and that whoever should mention this affair to her any more, should be ob∣liged to retire. Besides this, he was ordered to press the Dutchess to turn Father Monod out of Mon∣lian.
TheIbid. p. 812. Cardinal writ to her much to the same purpose, and remonstrated to her that her Brothers-in-law did only design to trepan her, as she herself had observed. In the beginning of his Letter he assured her, that the King desired nothing more ear∣nestly than to see her well re-established in her Domi∣nions, and maintain a good intelligence with her Brothers-in-law; that his Majesty would be always ready to restore back the places which he held in Pied∣mont, assoon as the Spaniards would fairly part with what they had in their possession, so that the Dutchess might for the future remain absolute Mistress of them; That nevertheless the security of her person, and that of the Duke her Son, being the principal cause which ought to be considered, the King would never consent, that either one or the other, should fall into the hands of those persons, whose interest obliged them to destroy both. While the French were thus negotiating with the Dutchess of Savoy, the Spaniards held a close corre∣spondence with the Dutchess of Mantua, and it was with her consent, that the Marquis de Leganez at∣tempted the Siege of Casal. He began to invest this place on the 8th of April, with fourteen thousand Foot, and five thousand Horse, at a juncture when the French were scarce able to defend the Cittadel of Turin, against Prince Thomas, who attack'd it on the side of the Town. The Princes of Savoy did earnest∣ly wish that he would have helped them to take this Cittadel, because by the reducing of it they had ef∣fectually establish'd their authority in Piedmont, which must needs be in a tottering condition, so long as the Cittadel of the Capital City held out for the Duke their Nephew. Besides this, they could not behold Casal in the hands of the Spaniards without extreme regret. But the very same reasons perswaded Leganez to undertake this Siege, and push it on with all imaginable vigour, because it was of the highest im∣portance to Spain that these Princes should be still dependent upon that Crown, and Casal was very pro∣per to retain the people of Piedmont in their duty. Nor was this all, for he began to suspect these Princes,
for the frequent proposals of Accommodation they made to their Sister-in-law; and was of opinion that the only reason why they so much desired to have the Cittadel of Turin in their hands, was that they might compound more advantageously for themselves, with∣out having any consideration to the Interests of Spain. These were the motives which engaged Leganez to undertake the Siege of Casal, against the sentiments of the greatest part of the Officers of his Army, who did not look upon him to be strong enough for such an attempt. He mightily depended upon a secret intelligence he held in the place, but it fell out un∣luckily for him, that de la Tour the Governor of that City, discovered it, and put every thing in such good order betimes, that he must expect to reduce it no other way but by main force. At the same time the Governor having given the Count d' Harcourt advice of this design, that General used all his endeavours to bring his Troops together assoon as he was able, in order to raise the Siege, and at the same time sent word to the Court, that he was resolved to put this enterprize in execution, or else to dye before the place. He likewise demanded, that the Troops which were design'd for Piedmont, should instantly advance, and that they would take care to furnish him with all things necessary for a Campaign. The Cardinal was at a Play when this news came to him, and was sur∣prized at the boldness of the undertaking, however he did not think fit to disswade him from it; on the other hand he told Correro, the Venetian Ambassador who sate near him, that he would not trouble him∣self to give the Count any farther advice about it; that the thing was already done, and that he had great reason to hope good success from it, by reason of the good conduct and bravery of the General. Thus the Count having received a promise at Pignerol to be immediately relieved, marched with seven thousand Foot, three thousand Horse, and ten pieces of Cannon directly to Casal, altho the Spaniards were almost double the number. The Marquis de Leganez had not as yet compleated his Lines of Circumvalla∣tion,
when he receiv'd advice that the Count d' Harcourt was coming towards him. Upon this he orders some Pioneers out of the Milaneze with all speed to labour on the Works, and in the mean time embarks his heavy Baggage and Artillery, to be carried by the Po to Breme, in case he should not be able to oblige the French to retire. He likewise attack'd the Castle of Rossignan, within some leagues of Casal, but his men were repulsed with loss. The Count's Army appear∣ed on the 28th of April, and skirmished with the Advance Guards of the Spaniards, as they were go∣ing to take a view of the Spanish Lines on the side of Frassinet. He attack'd them the next day, after he had beaten off some Troops that would have hinder'd his passage over the Gattola, which falls into the Po near Frassinet. He made three attacks, one of which was commanded by the Viscount de Turenne, the other by the Count du Plessy-Pralain, and the third by la Mothe Houdancourt. Du Plessy-Pralain thrice attack'd the Lines of the Enemy on his side, but he was as often repulsed, by reason of the great depth of the Ditch. But the Count d' Harcourt finding it easier to effect it upon the left, where he was, pushed his Horse forward with that vigour, that he was the first that leapt into the Enemy's Lines; but those that were to have followed him, being not so well mount∣ed, could not enter along with him, so that for some time he found himself all alone exposed to the firing of the Enemy. In the mean time L Mothe found a more easie place to pass over, within some paces of it, and entred with his Cavalry, to which the Count went and joyn'd himself. At the head of this Body he charged the Spanish Horse with so much impetuo∣sity that they immediately gave way. He had his Horse kill'd under him in this occasion, but was soon re-mounted upon one belonging to a Captain of the Light Horse, whom he took Prisoner with his own hand. Not long after, as he pursued the Enemy down their Line, his Horse stuck fast in a miry ditch, so that he was not able to disengage himself from this embarras, but by leaving one of his Boots, his Hat, and one of his Pistols behind him. Being once more
re-mounted, he continued to beat back the Spani∣ards, that they might not have time to recover their disorder. Turenne and Pralain on their side return'd with their Foot to give the fourth Charge, and forced the Lines, after which they bore down all they met, notwithstanding all the fire which the Enemy made upon them. The Cavalry of the Besieged did like∣wise joyn that of the Count, and then the Marquis de Leganez thought of nothing but how to make a re∣treat to Frassinet; which he performed with a body of four thousand Horse, and by that means gave his Foot an opportunity to draw off; and as part of them had not been concerned in the battel, they might have made a Body sufficient to repel the French, in case they had had time to range themselves in Battel, but they pursu'd them so near, that they put them in dis∣order. Several of the Spaniards out of fear threw themselves into the Po, where great numbers of them were drown'd, and the night saved the rest. Others withdrew in the same confusion to Poutesture, and had no better luck. The Spaniards lost five thousand men in this rencounter, eight pieces of Cannon, six Mortars, all their Ammunition, which themselves set on fire, and a great part of their Baggage. Leganez had not so much precaution as to save his Papers, so that there was found in his Tent the secret Treaty he had made with the Dutchess of Mantua, concerning Casal, and some Lands which the House of Savoy held in Montferrat, and he thought to have taken from them. The Count d' Harcourt in this occasion ac∣quir'd the reputation of one of the bravest and most resolute Generals which France had sent out of a long time, altho in reality this was a very rash action. The importance of the place which he saved, made the world willing to excuse a boldness which would have been blamed in any other occasion. On the contrary, the Marquis de Leganez was accused to have equally wanted bravery and courage. It was certainly a grossSee the Siege of Ca∣sal and u∣rin by E∣manuel Tsaro. Solecism, to stay within his Lines, which were of a prodigious length, and enclosed a very uneven ground, and there to wait for an Ene∣my, which he might have defeated in a plain field;
and in the heat of the Action he was so strangely discomposed, that he abandoned his quarter, which the Count d' Harcourt attackt, and in half an hours time sent seven different orders to his men. After so considerable anSiri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 885. See Aubery's Mem. T. 2. p. 816. advantage, the King dis∣swaded his Sister more than ever from listning to the proposals of accommodation which Prince Thomas made her; and sent word to Count Philip d' Aglie, who was supposed to incline the Dutchess to a Trea∣ty, that as he might hope every thing from his libe∣rality, if he served his Sister well, so he might expect to feel his resentments in a heavy manner, if he be∣haved himself otherwise. The King likewise promi∣sed the Dutchess to beat her Enemies without inter∣mission in Piedmont, till such time as he had entirely turn'd them out of that Country; and to send her with all convenient speed such forces as should be necessary to do it. At the same time the CardinalThe 21st of May. writ a very earnest Letter to her, wherein he shew'd her the great pre∣judice she would do the Duke her Son, and herself, if she engag'd in any negotiation with the Princes her Brothers-in-law, while they were masters of Tu∣rin; and the great danger she run if she went into Piedmont for that end, as they desired her, at a time when they were too strong for her there. The best advice he could give her at this juncture, was to make the most of the Troops she could, and to send them with all speed to the Count d' Har∣court, who laboured with so much ardour to effect the deliverance of Piedmont. The Cardinal did also congratulate the Dutchess, that she had at last pro∣vided for the security of Montmelian, by ordering F. Monod to leave that place. A few days afterThe 28th of May., instructions were sent to the Count d' Harcourt, to let him know that he was to reject all proposals of Peace from Prince Thomas, till such time as Turin was re-taken; that if he could take Turin and Prince Thomas himself, without too much exposing the Kings Army, he should undertake that before any expedition whatever; but if he saw he should run too great a risque, he might enter into
some composition, provided his Majesty's Troops were receiv'd into Turin, and the Authority of his Ministers and Generals was not limited there, any more than that of the Spaniards in the places they had taken. Unless this were granted, he was wholly for∣bidden to hear the least mention of any Agreement, or to retard any of the operations of the War; but if the Prince would espouse the party of France, he was order'd to promise him all sorts of advantages. In the mean time the Dutchess of Savoy was so far from following the Cardinal's advice, in relation to the Troops she was to send to the Count d' Harcourt, that she kept even those that were in his Majesty's pay, near her person, as if she had been afraid that the French Army had made too great a progress. The Cardinal highly complain'd to her of this procedure bySee his Letter on the 9th of June, p. 821. of T. 2. of Au∣bery's Memoirs. de la Tour, and represented to her how great an in∣jury she did to the publick affairs, as well as to her own in particular by this negligence. Chavigny like∣wise sent aIbid. p. 822. Memorial to the same purpose, where a∣mong other things he took occasion to tell her, that it was the opinion of the Court, that there was no necessity to turn F. Monod out of the place where he had been shut up, unless it had been done with a de∣sign to send him to France. This Jesuit it seems had been carried to the Castle of Miolans, where the Am∣bossador was order'd to take care, that he should be well guarded, and that no body should be admitted to speak to him. The Count d' Harcourt, after he had deliver'd Casal in so glorious a manner, now bethought himself of executing the orders he had received to besiege Turin, and he marched thither with so great diligence, that on the 9th of May he came in sight of the place. He had only seven thousand Foot, and three thousand Horse with him, reckoning the recruits which came to him.See the detail of this Siege in Eman. Tesauro in his Torino assediato & non soc∣corso. However after he had seized of the Faux∣bourg of the Po, and some advantageous Posts about Turin, hy marked out the quarters on the 16th of that month, and caus'd his men to work upon the Lines of Circumvallation. When they were finish'd, he push'd on the Siege with as much vigour, as could be expected from so small an Army.
The Marquis de Leganez having received advice at Verceil, whether he retired after his defeat, of the Count's designs, advanced in hopes to retaliate his late beating, and on the 26th encamped on the other side the Po, upon the Hills near Quiers, with eight thou∣sand Foot, and four thousand Horse. After he had at his leisure viewed the French Lines, he believ'd it was not possible to force them, and that it would be better for him to endeavour to cut off their Provisi∣ons, to oblige them to raise the Siege for fear of Fa∣mine, which he hoped would soon make their Camp uneasy to them. Thus on the 9th of July he order'd twelve hundred men to pass the Po near Montcalier, where they retrenched themselves to hinder any Victuals from coming to them that way. But soon after the Vicount de Turenne attacked them, forced them, cut one half of them in pieces, and ob∣liged the rest to swim the Po, into which they threw themselves in great confusion. This Post, as it was of the last consequence to the design of Leganez, he came up thither with his whole Army, and notwith∣standing all the efforts of the French, yet they were not able to make the Spaniards quit it. By this means he shut up the passage for all manner of relief and provisions, that could come by the way of Pignerol. After this he sent D. Charles de la Gatta, to post him∣self at Colegno, to block up the way of Suza, lest the French should be relieved that way. In a short time the Provisions in the Camp were all consumed, and the Army was forced to subsist upon those that were in the Magazines in the Cittadel; so that the French were in danger, if they were not speedily relieved, to perish by Famine, and to abandon Turin. The Sol∣diers had their Victuals distributed among them with great Oeconomy, when they receiv'd advice that succours were arriv'd at Pignerol. This hope made the Souldiers combat with equal bravery against the Sallies of the Besieged, which were often very vigo∣rous, and against the worst of enemies, Famine. It was an inexcusable oversight in the Chief Minister not to have prevented this inconvenience, by making timely Magazines for provisions at Pignerol or Suza.
Leganez being inform'd of the arrival of this re∣lief, was afraid they would force their passage, and so render all his labours ineffectual: For which rea∣son he resolved to give a general Assault to the French Lines, while Prince Thomas should make a vigorous Sally. To effect this, they assign'd the 11th of July, and Leganez was to attack the Count's Quarter, while La Gatta fell upon that of La Mothe. The latter had then four thousand Foot, and two thou∣sand five hundred Horse; and the Marquis had the same number of Horse, and five thousand Foot. The day being come, La Gatta, without staying for the hour appointed, attackt the Quarter of La Mothe, fill'd up his Ditches, and broke in with his Body into the French Lines; but instead of beating them, as he had begun, along the Circumvallation, and hindering La Mothe from rallying, he march'd strait into the City with two hundred Horse and a thousand Foot, without troubling himself whether the Enemy made any opposition against those that followed him. In the mean time, La Mothe having rallied his Troops, cut the rest in pieces, and defeat∣ed those that conducted the Powder and Ammuniti∣on, which La Gatta was to throw into Turin, and which they wanted more than they did men. Those that escaped sav'd themselves in disorder at Colegno; and thus for want of discretion in this General, they lost a fair opportunity of utterly ruining the French Army. As for the Marquis de Leganez, it was too late before he attack'd the Count d' Harcourt's Quar∣ter, and after he had spent four hundred Cannon-shot all the day long against it, he was twice repulsed, nay, and pursued by the French out of their Lines. However, Prince Thomas and La Gatta made a Sally with four hundred Foot, and twelve hundred Horse, and made themselves Masters of Valentin; which news being brought to Leganez, he brought his men back again to the Onset: But the Count, who had seen by the preceding Attacks that there was little danger to apprehend from so harmless an Enemy, sent part of his Souldiers against Prince Thomas, and at the same time sustain'd the attack of Leganez, and forc'd
the Prince to retire into the Town again. He for his part complain'd that Leganez had not given him the Signal that was agreed upon, when he attackt the French, that so he might have made a vigorous Sally against them at the same time, as was projected: But the Spaniards said that the discharge of the Ar∣tillery and Musquet shot might easily have made Prince Thomas to comprehend when their attack be∣gan. Next day the Vicount de Turenne and the Count de Tonnero arriv'd from Pignerol, with six thousand Foot, and eight hundred Horse, and provisions for the Ar∣my. The Marquis de Leganez return'd to his ancient Post, and Don Charles della Gatta wanting forrage in Turin, thought of nothing else but how to get out of the Town as soon as it was possible. This he vainly endeavour'd to do on the 23d and 31st of July, being constrain'd to return back again into the place. In the mean time the French lock'd up Turin closer and closer still, and Prince Thomas was at a loss how to inform Leganez of what he wanted, or what mea∣sures to take with him, when an Engineer of Berga∣mo, whose name was Zignon according to some, or according to others Francis Gallo, Valet de Chambre to Prince Thomas, furnished him with an expedient to render a correspondence between the Town and Spanish Camp very easieSee Siri's Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 69. V. Te∣sauro's Torin. Assed. p. 125.. As Leganez was within Cannon shot of him, he was advised to make hollow Cannon Bullets, in which he was to close up the Let∣ters which he had a mind to send from the City to the Camp of Leganez, or from the Camp to the City, and to stop up the hole with Lead. Before he shot it, he gave him a signal by some lighted powder, to let him know that he must take care of the Bullet. 'Tis said they used the same Stratagem in the Spanish Camp, and threw into the Town Bombs full of Pow∣der, which those of the Town took up in the Ditch, to take out the Powder that they had occasion for. The Citizens of Turin made use of the same expedi∣ent to acquaint their Friends in the Spanish Camp with what they had a desire to communicate to them; and this was the reason why they call'd these Billets the fly∣ing Couriers.
By the same way Prince Thomas agreed with the Marquis de Leganez, to make a vigorous Sally on the 14th of September, with four thousand Foot and a thousand Horse, while at the same time the Spaniards attackt them on their side. The Prince did not fail to Sally at the time appointed, and made himself ma∣ster of some Redoubts of the Frenc and a Bridge which they had thrown over the Po: But the Count d' Harcourt regain'd these Posts, because the Spaniards did not appear, and forc'd the Prince to enter Turin again, after the loss of three hundred men. Leganez, who being deceiv'd by the narrow Valleys through which he was to march, did not think the way was so far as it really was, arrived too late, the Prince, who despair'd of seeing him, having already made his retreat. Thus he return'd without doing any thing, and thought no more of relieving the place, as those within the Town, ever since this defeat, thought of nothing more, than how to make the most honourable Capitulation for themselves that they could. The King and the Cardinal had design'd to send Mazarine thither, to negotiate with the Princes of Savoy; but the Count d' Harcourt being inform'd of it, was not willing that another should take that honour out of his hands, after he had taken so much pains to regulate the Capitulation of that place. It was therefore agreed on the 22d of September, that Prince Thomas should either surrender the City of Turin to him, or re-establish the Regence of the Dutchess, and the Soveraignty of the Duke her Son; that all hostilities should cease, and that Hostages should be given on both sides, till Prince Thomas had retir'd with his Troops, and all his Baggage, where he should see convenient. He withdrew to Yvrees, nd the Count d' Harcourt entred Turin, before Ma∣arine could arrive there. Thus in the compass of wo years he acquir'd the reputation of the bravest nd most happy General, that had for a long time ommanded the French Army, altho he was far from aving all the experience requisite for War. But his ashness and good fortune, joyn'd to the cowardice and want of conduct in the Enemy, supplied the place
of capacity and experience. The Count du Plessy Pra∣lain was made Governour of Turin, where he put a French Garrison of four thousand men; after which the Dutchess came to this City with the Duke her Son. The Princes of Savoy didSee the Mem. of Aub. l. 11. p. 833, &c. accommodate their matters soon after with France and with their Sister∣in-law. But the particular Articles of their Agree∣ment having no relation to the life of our Cardinal, I shall pass them over in silence. Before theThe 30 of Lec. Si∣ri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 877. year was expired, the Cardinal made the Dutchess of Savoy, and Count Philip d' Aglie sen∣sible, that he had not forgot the opposition they made him atSee the former, p. 380. Grenoble, when he was so earnest to have the Dutchess surrender up Montmelian to his Majesty. He sent a secret Commission to Mazarine, who was at Turin, so to manage affairs as without the least noise to get the Count apprehended; with orders not to communicate it to the Count d' Harcourt nor to Du Plessy Pralain, till just upon the point of executi∣on, when they were to give necessary orders to effect it. Mazarine, that he might perform this with the greater ease, engag'd the principal persons belonging to the Court of Turin, and the French that were there, to regale one another by turns, every evening. Count Philip was one of the number, and when it came to the Count Du Plessy Pralain's turn, whose lodgings were not far from the Castle, some Souldiers were order'd to be in readiness to execute something that was to be done. Count Philip, who did not in the least dream of such an entertainment, went to Du Plessy's house, where he was put in a Coach and hur∣ried into the Cittadel, and from thence to Pignerol, without any permission or order from the Dutchess, who complain'd in vain of the affront done to the Soveraignty of the Duke her Son. Towards the end of this year, theSiri Mem. Rec. l. 8. p. 883. Cardinal, wea∣ry of the differences he had with the Court of Rome, upon the account of the Mareschal d' Estrees, whose violent and fiery temper was not at all suited to this slow deliberate way of proceeding, got this affair at last to be accommodated, designing soon after to call the Mareschal home.Ib. 884. 'Tis reported that the Cardi∣nal
had it then in his thoughts to destroy the Calvinist Religion entirely, and that he had explain'd himself upon this Chapter more than once to Chancellor Se∣guier. He propos'd to have a Conference with the Ministers, wherein he hoped to carry them whither he pleased. But lest it should have the same success with the famous Conference of Poissy, he was resolved to secure himself before-hand of fourscore Ministers, who, joyn'd to those that perhaps might suffer them∣selves to be reduced by his arguments, would bring over, as he imagined, the greatest part of the Hugo∣nots. As for the rest, he pretended to employ the Royal Authority, and so either make Proselytes of them by dint of ill usage, or if he could not other∣wise accomplish his end, to turn them out of the Kingdom. He believed that very few Families would rather chuse to abandon their native Country, and see their admission into it for ever lock'd up against them, than to embrace the Catholick Religion; That it would be a difficult matter for them to resolve to wander like fugitives through the World, to find out a sanctuary to receive them: That they would find insuperable hardships in selling off their goods, either because there would not be buyers enough to take them off their hands, or because they must be forced to part with them at too low a price; That altho there might be some reason to suspect the sincerity of the New Converts, yet their Children, sucking the Catholic Religion with their Milk, would be really perswaded of the truth of it. The better to effect this design, he was of opinion that this Assembly was to be prevail'd upon in the first place to declare, that a man might be saved in both Churches. Because if the Hugonots were once satisfied of that, they would sooner chuse to turn Catholics, so to avoid the mise∣ries they were to suffer, if they still continued in their Calvinism, than blindly to adhere to the latter, by rejecting a Religion, wherein nevertheless they belie∣ved that a man might be saved. After this manner did this Minister reason, who imagin'd that other people had no more Religion than himself. Part of this project has been since followed in France, and
we find by experience, that contrary to what the Cardinal expected, a prodigious number of Families thought it better to leave the Kingdom than to turn. Those persons that have studied these matters a little, know that the generality of mankind are strangely wedded to the opinions they learnt in their infancy, especially when they appear to be more consonant to reason, and more agreeable to truth, than the oppo∣site doctrines which some people would have them embrace. But this was the Cardinals blind side, and his Talent did not lye in these sort of speculations. He likewise fell upon anotherIbid. project, no less difficult to be effected than the former, and that was to make himself Patriarch of France. He thought himself already secur'd of the greatest part of the Bi∣shops, and to bring the Monks over to his side he de∣sign'd to be Abbot General of the three most power∣ful Orders, that so he might have wherewithal to gain the suffrages of the Religious. But the Court of Rome being throughly satisfied of his ambitious designs, he could never procure his Bulls, notwith∣standing all his instances and sollicitations to obtain them; so that wholly despairing to compass his in∣tentions, this fancy left him, or at least he carried it with him to the grave. Thus he never thought any more of this project, for in truth it requir'd another sort of a man than himself; who, as he was gene∣rally hated, so he had most infallibly perish'd under the weight of this attempt; which, tho he had been possessed of the love and esteem of the whole King∣dom, he would have found a most difficult matter to have ever accomplish'd. On the 21st of September the King had another Son, who was call'd at first the Duke of Anjou, but af∣the death of Gaston, had the Title of the Duke of Or∣leans. The Queen had not a jot the more authority for this; Nay, 'tis confidently said, that theSiri Mer. T. 2. l. 2. P. 56 Cardi∣nal had extorted a promise from the King, that in case he came to dye, and declared the Queen to be Regent, he would make him Chief of the Council of the Re∣gence, with orders to the Queen to follow his ad∣vice.
This year the Master of the Horse had like to have fallen into disgrace with the King, and tho the Mini∣ster had some reasons to be dissatisfied with his con∣duct, which afterwards revived, as we shall see in the series of the History, yet he did not forbear to use all his interest to reconcile him to the King. TheSiri Mer∣cr. T. 2. l 2. p. 558. Master of the Horse had a Mistress at Paris, whose name was Marie de l' Orme, whom he went in all haste to visit, as soon as the King was gone to bed; so that when the King got up, which he frequently did very early in the morning, and enquir'd after him, they told him he was not stirring yet: This made the King frequently blame him for his idleness, but he was not able to cure him of it. Afterwards arriving to the knowledge of this private amour, the King forbid him to see that Lady, to whom, as the report ran, he was secretly married. As she was not of a Quality equal to that of the Master of the Horse, and besides had but an inconsiderable fortune, his Relations were extremely averse to this Match, and his Majesty in favour of them oppos'd it likewise, be∣sides that he did not care that his Favourites should be married. Whether it was, that Cinq-Mars was naturally of a rough uncomplaisant humour, or whe∣ther he fancied himself to have so great an ascendant over the Kings inclinations, that it was not possible for his affection to alter, whenever his Majesty repri∣manded him for his faults, he answer'd him with ve∣ry little respect. Upon this account the King forbid him to appear before him, so that he shut himself up in his Chamber for some days, under pretence of a Feavor. The Cardinal did all he could upon this occasion to accommodate matters between his Majesty and the Master of his Horse; and as he was at Ruel, and the King at St. Germain, he writ a Letter to the King, and gave the Pacquet toMem. of Auberi . 2. p. 83. Where is to be sound a tter of the King to the Cardinal where he recounts this Conver∣sation to him. Tis dated Jn. 5. 1641. Cinq-Mars, to deliver it to his Majesty. The King having read the Cardinals Letter, thus directed himself to the Master of the Horse, The Cardinal has here sent me word, says he, that you have testified a great desire to comply with me in every thing, and yet you don't amend as to one particular,
which I desired him to re-mind you of, and that is your idleness. Instead of promising the King that he would amend that fault for the future, Cinq-Mars answer'd that he could not reform as to that point. Upon this the King replyed, A man of your condition, who ought to render himself worthy to command an Army, and who has assured me that he design'd such a thing, must above all things avoid Idleness, as altogether destructive to his reputation. Cinq-Mars bluntly answer'd, that he ne∣ver had any pretensions that way, and the King main∣tain'd the contrary; after which he proceeded in his discourse, telling him that Idleness made a man un∣capable of every thing that was commendable; that it was only good for the people of Mavais, among whom he was bred up, who entirely abandon'd them∣selves to their pleasures; and that if he design'd to continue that sort of life, he must return to them a∣gain. The Master of the Horse replied in a great heat, that he was ready to return thither. Well, says the King, if I were not wiser than you, I know what answer I should return to what you have said. He ad∣ded, that Cinq-Mars having those great obligations to him which he had, ought not to treat him after such a fashion; when the Master of the Horse, with his usual good address and civility answer'd, that as he was always ready to serve the King, so he was as ready to leave him; and that he should be full as content to be Cinq-Mars, as Monsieur le Grand, and that he could not change his way of living. The King and he continu'd to pique at one another all the way to the Castle, till they arriv'd in the very Court, where the King told him, that considering the hu∣mour he was in at present, he would mightily oblige him not to come near him. So the Master of the Horse withdrew, and did not appear before the King for some days. One may see by this boysterous and insolent beha∣viour, that Cinq-Mars was not born to continue long in this advantageous Post to which the Cardinal got him advanced; and that Lewis XIII. was not a Prince extremely impatient, since he could suffer a young fellow to talk to him after such a manner. In the
mean time theAub. ib. Cardinal took care to appease the Kings anger, at the repeated instances of Cinq-Mars; and the King and his Favourite liv'd together as for∣merly. The Minister was extremely glad to make the Favourite every day more and more dependant upon himself, in becoming wholly necessary to him to maintain him in the Kings favour. By this means he continued to know all his Majesty's secret thoughts, who, reserved and close as he was in relation to all others, yet frequently open'd the most hidden incli∣nations of his Soul to his Favourites. Nay, tho he was never so much minded to conceal what lay with∣in him, yet his Favourites, by putting him upon cer∣tain subjects, were able to sound his true sentiments, notwithstanding all the dissimulation he was master of; so that the Cardinal being perfectly inform'd of all occurrences, knew how to regulate his conduct ac∣cordingly. Altho the King intrusted him with the administration of all his affairs, yet he was desirous to be made acquainted with every thing, and could not forbear to express his displeasure, if he knew that any thing was kept hid from him; or at least he shew'd his dissatisfaction, when he entertain'd himself in pri∣vate with his Favourites; and the Cardinal took care to appease him by some flatteries, which he mingled, as he saw convenient, in his discourse. Siri Mer. T. 2. p. 563.Cinq-Mars being thus reconciled to the King, imagined now that he had nothing more to fear, tho his Majesty expressly told him, that if the Cardinal once came to be against him, he would abandom him for ever. The King having taken care that those that were about him should acquaint the Cardinal with all that he said, was sometimes displeas'd to find him∣self encompass'd by Spies: but the great occasion he had for his Ministry, and the high esteem he had for his capacity, hindered him from removing these peo∣ple from him, altho he did by no means affect them. However, that he might have one near his person, to whom he might freely open his sentiments, he made the Master of the Horse swear to him, that he would never acquaint the Cardinal with what he should tell him. This Minister was soon sensible that
Master of the Horse did not come, as he had been ac∣customed, to inform him of what past near the King, so he began at first to suspect him, and at last form'd a design to ruine him, on the very first occasion that presented it self. The Cardinal's Enemies having observed the coldness between them, did not fail to insinuate into the Master of the Horse, that the Mini∣ster was ill affected to him, and only wanted a fair opportunity to destroy him. Cinq-Mars, who on his side did not naturally love his Benefactor, look'd upon his Grandeur as an obstacle to his own, and did him no more good offices to his Majesty. This Prince being now satisfied, that Cinq-Mars carried no more tales to the Cardinal, had a greater affection for him than ever, and resolved to have him admitted into the Privy Council. One day when he was at Rethel, the Councellors entred the Council Chamber with the Cardinal, to hold a Council there, and as the Cour∣tiers withdrew to leave them their places, and Cinq-Mars follow'd them, the King stopt him, and turn∣ing himself towards the Cardinal, That my dear friend here, says he, meaning the Master of the Horse, may be able to serve me one day, I think it convenient that he should without further delay instruct himself in the affairs of my Council. The Cardinal, who knew well enough that it was to no purpose for him directly to oppose the Kings pleasure, did not show the least resentment at that time, and so held a Council, but took care that nothing of importance should be there proposed. But the day following, he represented to the King, the ill effects such an innovation as this might pro∣duce, and the great injury he did his own reputation, as well as that of the Council, if it should be said that nothing of any consequence could be debated there, unless such a young man as the Master of the Horse, was one of the number. This remonstrance of the Cardinal made so deep an impression upon the King, that he did not permit Cinq-Mars to come in∣to the Council Chamber any more. From that time the secret hatred which the Master of the Horse bore the Cardinal, broke out in public, and those occasions of discontent which this Minister
lately gave him, wrought a greater force upon the mind of an ambitious young man, than all the services he had formerly done him. However, the King labour'd to reconcile them, and outwardly they seem'd to be as hearty friends as ever. But soon after they fell out, and the occasion arose from the Favourite's desiring the King to make him a Duke and a Peer, that he might marry the Princess Mary of Mantua, who would not accept of him but upon that condition. Having open'd this affair to the Cardinal, who he foolishly imagin'd would comply with his desires, this Minister tax'd him with imprudence and pre∣sumption, setting before his eyes what he had done to raise his Father and himself from the simple rank of Gentlemen, to the present degree of honour they enjoy'd. Cinq-Mars, who was of no less haughty a Spirit than the Cardinal, could not hear him talk thus but with the greatest indignation, and began to cabal with all his power, to ruine his Patron and Be∣nefactor. He engag'd in his Interests Francis de Thou, Son to the famous James Augustin de Thou.Siri Mer: T. 2. p. 567. He was a most accomplish'd man in respect of all those qua∣lities that are requir'd in a Gentleman of the Long Robe, and being either a relation or a friend to seve∣ral of those that resented the effects of the Cardinals hatred, besides that this Minister had hinder'd him from being made one of the Councellors of State; af∣ter he had for some time consider'd of the matter, at last espoused the party of the Master of the Horse, and engaged the Dukes of Orleans and Bouillon to counte∣nance his designs. There was the greater probability of succeeding, because rhe King had expressed himself to be particularly desirous of a Peace, to put an end to all those calamities and disorders, which the pri∣vate interests of his Minister had stirr'd up in the Kingdom. The King had likewise frown'd upon se∣veral of the Cardinals creatures, whom he did indeed esteem and fear, but did not really love at the bottom: As for Cinq-Mars, he was now perfectly in the Kings favour, and this brought abundance of persons over to his party.
In the mean time the Cardinal strengthen'd himseif by an alliance with the House of Conde, by marrying Claire-Clemence de Maille Breze; daughter to the Ma∣reschal de Breze, to the Duke of Enguien. 'Tis re∣ported that the Prince of Conde, who had at first re∣jected this match when it came to be propos'd to him, suffered himself to be gain'd, partly by the great for∣tune which the Cardinal bestow'd upon his Niece, and partly out of fear, lest the Cardinal should ruine him, if he persisted any longer to despise an alliance with him.Siri Mer. T. 1. lib. 2. p. 231. The Marriage was celebrated on the 7th of February, and a magnificent Ball was kept upon this occasion at the Cardinals Palace. This Ballet re∣presented the prosperity of the Arms of France, and the Decorations of the Halls were changed five times, as well as the habits of the Actors. The first repre∣sented the Earth embellished with Forrests, and Har∣mony supported upon a Cloud, with abundance of Birds singing: The second discover'd the Alps cloath∣ed with Snow, with Italy upon a Mountain, and at a great distance Arras and Casal: The third shew'd the Sea environed with Rocks, and cover'd with Ships and Gallies, with three Sirens: The fourth an open Sky, from whence the Nine Muses descended; and the fifth the Earth adorn'd with Flowers, with Con∣cord upon a gilded Chariot. The Theatre being chang∣ed into a magnificent Hall, the Queen, attended by all the Court, went to place herself at the upper end of it, and the Duke of Enguien taking her out to dance, the Ball began, and ended with a stately Col∣lation of Sweet-meats. The Nuptials were afterwards celebrated on the 11th of the same month, with that magnificence which the Cardinal affected to show up∣on such occasions. During the divertisements of thisIbid. p. 232. Marriage, the Minister contriv'd to mortifie the Parliament of Pa∣ris, which had presumed more than once to make some opposition to his demands. Some weeks after the King assembled all the several Chambers, and came thither accompanied by the Princes of the Blood, several Dukes and Peers, and many eminent Lords of the Court. He there caused a Declaration to be
read, which prohibited the Parliament to concern themselves with any affairs of State, and commanded them to receive his Edicts, not to disapprove, but confirm them. The King farther declared, that he intended to take the absolute power into his hands of disposing of all the Offices of Parliament, and to re∣ward with them such as pleased him; and at the same time deposed the President Barillon, and the Coun∣cellors Scarron, Salo, and some others that had been banisht before. He likewise ordained, that the Par∣liament every three months should give the Chancel∣lor an account of what they did, and every year take out a permission from his Majesty to continue in their respective functions. By this the King absolutely de∣stroyed the authority of the Parliament of Paris, as if they had abused their power, by opposing the arbi∣trary proceedings of the Cardinal. This Prince it seems imagined, that only himself and his Minister were interested in the preservation of the Kingdom, and thought nothing was just, but what this imperious Prelate pretended to be so. Those that had the Courage to defend the Rights of Parliament, urged in vain, that the persons that composed it, had never pretended to be their Kings Tutors, nor to arrogate a power superior, or equal to theirs; nor to set up for Tribunes of the People, as their enemies injuriously accused them. They own'd them∣selves to be the Kings Subjects, and to derive their power from his Authority; but then they said, that a Secret of Policy lay concealed in the exercise of their Offices, which the Flatterers at Court were not ac∣quainted with: That the ancient Kings of France be∣ing sensible that a pure Monarchy, where all the Laws depend upon the Will of one single person, were but of a short continuance, had wisely temper'd the form of Government, by mixing some appearance of an Aristocracy with it, and by establishing Laws, which they themselves were not allowed to violate, that so the People might with greater chearfulness submit to their soveraign authority: That for this end they had voluntarily submitted their own Edicts to the exami∣nation of the Parliament, that so they might fully be
inform'd, whether they contain'd any thing contrary to the known Laws, and Rules of Equity: That their Conscience and true Interest engaged them to observe these Laws impartially, and not to violate Justice; That nevertheless, in case they were of opi∣nion, that the Parliaments did not give them good counsel, they were still at liberty to have recourse to their absolute power, as it appeared by these terms in their Edicts, For such is our good pleasure: That Declarations are not addressed to the Parliaments out of pure formality, which was wholly unnecessary, but that the people might afterwards obey them with∣out any repugnance: That it had been the antient policy of the Kings of France, to make all sorts of Graces depend upon themselves, but to see Justice administred in the Soveraign Courts: That this dis∣charged the Kings from the Odium that might ensue upon the exercise of any severe act of Justice, and be∣sides disengaged them, from the importunity of their Courtiers, who without this might lead them to com∣mit several injust things, highly prejudicial to the Welfare of their States. To return now to foreign affairs; ever since the beginning of the foregoing year, the Duke of Lorrain had demanded a Passport of the King to come to Court, out of hopes he might obtain the possession of his Dominions, by giving some satisfaction to his Majesty; and it was at lastThe 24 of Jan. 1639. Mem. of Aub. T. 2 p. 947. granted him in very ad∣vantageous terms. Another was dispatched to him someThe 24 of August. months after, and yet he did not come to Court as was expected.Siri Mer. T. 1. lib. 2. p. 289. The Cardinal, who by his natural inclination to invade the Rights of others, without considering the ill consequences that might follow, had seized upon the Dukedom of Lorrain, some years before, found by experience, that this conduct had extremely sunk his Reputation, but es∣pecially in Italy, where there was not a Prince who did not with great Jealousy and Concern look upon this aggrandizing of France, as fearing to be treated after the same manner as the Duke of Lorrain had been. Upon this consideration he judged, that after he sufficiently humbled him, it would be the best way
to re-establish him, since he was not now in a condi∣tion to give any umbrage to France; and that this would gain him the esteem of several Princes, who might very eminently contribute in their respective stations, towards the depressing of the House of Austria. About this time the Duke of Lorrain, falling passionately in Love with the Countess of Cantecroix, had a mind to be divorced from his Dutchess Nicole, but this is a point upon which we need enlarge no more. 'Tis sufficient to observe, that theSiri Ib. p. 291. Countess was very serviceable to the Cardinal, to incline the Duke to make fresh Sollicitations for the favour of France, which promised to procure a Divorce for him from Rome. The ill condition of his own affairs did likewise oblige him to it, since having no money to pay off the small Army he kept on foot, he was con∣strain'd to allow the Soldiers to do what they pleased, which set him in ill circumstances with the House of Austria, upon whose Lands they had been quarter'd for a long time. At last, being entred into France, he saw the Car∣dinal, and arrived on the 10th of March at St. Ger∣main, where he was received with all imaginable respect. Assoon as he appear'd before the King, he immediately set one Knee upon the ground, and told him, that he came to humble himself before him, and submit his fortune to his Majesty's Clemency. The King offer'd thrice to raise him up, but he protested that he would not quit that posture, till his Majesty had forgiven him for all his past faults. The King was then pleased to assure him, that he had not the least remembrance of what was past, and that he would assist him for the future. The Duke got up, and covered himself, after which he went to see the Queen, and the Duke of Orleans. The Duke of Lorrain undertook this voyage, to endeavour to regain at least one part of his Country, to procure some money for the subsistence of his Troops, and to engage the King to act at Rome in the favour of his Marriage with the Countess of Cante∣croix. If he obtain'd the two first Articles, he would be able to make better conditions of agreement with
the House of Austria, in case he designed to embrace their party afresh, or if he found it advantageous to him, he might still continue linked to the Interests of France. But what he most earnestly desired was the Confirmation of his Marriage; and he had brought the Countess along with him into France, if the King had not sent him word to leave her at Espinal. The Cardinal had given his word to the Nuncio, that he would in no manner support the Duke as to his Di∣vorce from his Dutchess Nicole; and that the Duke of Lorrain might not speak to him about him, he spread a report abroad, that the King was resolv'd to employ all his power with the Duke to prevail with him to be reconciled to his Wife. When the Duke first heard of this pretended design of the King, he was extremely mortified, for he could not endure to hear the least mention of this Accommodation; so that any one might perceive he took it for a great fa∣vour not to talk to him about it, much less to pre∣tend that they would lend him their assistance to break off his Marriage. Thus he contented himself to talk with the Nuncio concerning it, and since he found the King did not countenance his design, he did not importune the Cardinal to favour him, in a pretension so unjust as this really was. Not to descend into the consequences of this pri∣vate affair, 'twill be sufficient to observe, that the King concluded the Treaty, concerning the restituti∣on of Lorrain, on the 29th of May, and swore to the observation of it the same day, as well as the Duke, in the Chappel of St. Germain.See the whole Trea∣ty in Siri Mere. T. 1. lib. 2. p. 296. The King restored Lorrain to him, and the Dutchy of Bar, upon condi∣tion that he would do homage for the latter; and that Clermont, Stenay, Jamets, and Dun, with all their de∣pendencies, should continue re-united to the Crown. Nancy likewise was to continue as a pledge in the Kings hands, till the end of the War. Besides this, the Duke was obliged to renounce all manner of cor∣respondence with the House of Austria, and to resign his Troops to the King, who was to entertain them as his own, and to pay the Dutchess Nicole sixscore thousand Livres by way of pension. The Treaty con∣cluded
with a promise which the Duke made to ob∣serve these Articles so faithfully, that besides what he left to his Majesty to be inseparably re-united to the Crown, he consented that the rest of his Dominions should devolve to the aforesaid Crown of France, if he in the least infringed this Treaty. By this Article the Cardinal put the King in a fair way to invade Lor∣rain afresh with a great appearance of Justice on his side, if ever the Duke should violate the least Clause of this Treaty, which it was not doubted but he would soon do, by reason of his natural inconstancy and im∣prudence. In the mean time France did itself the ho∣nour of this restitution, and the Kings Ministers in all places proclaim'd and boasted of their Masters ge∣nerosity. The Duke of Lorrain was no sooner return'd home but he began to fortifie La Mothe, an important place, which the Mareschal de la Force had not been able to take, till after a tedious Siege of several months, as we have already observed. Altho this was not pro∣hibited by any one Article of the Treaty, yet they immediately suspected that he design'd to make a fresh rupture with France. The principal discontent which made him leave Paris, was because the Court was so far from helping him to break off his Marriage, that they would not consent that the Lorrainers should ac∣knowledge the Countess of Cantecroix for their Dutchess. This was the reason why that Lady dis∣engaged him from the party of France, and prevail'd with him to joyn himself again to the House of Au∣stria, which he had not quitted but by her perswa∣sion, upon the hopes the latter had given her to act in her favour. Thus, never considering whether he should be able to support himself against France, he entered into a new Alliance with the Cardinal In∣fanta, under a pretence that the Treaty he had so lately made, was to his manifest prejudice and disad∣vantage. His Majesty being informed of theseIb. 464. pra∣ctices of the Duke, sent the Count de Graunccy at the head of a small Army into Lorrain, and with Du Hallier, Governor of Nancy, he once more made himself Master of all the places belonging to this un∣fortunate
and indiscreet Prince. As for him, he re∣tired into the Low Countries, where his Troops being ill paid, began after their usual rate to commit a thousand insolences and disorders. Prince Thomas of Savoy was no more exact in ob∣serving the Treaty he had concluded with France, towards the end of the last year. They were fully convinc'd of it at the beginning of this, when they saw that instead of coming to Paris, according to his his promise, he treated anew with Spain; so that now 'twas visible, that the true reason of his reconciling himself to France, was only to make a better market for himself with Spain. Altho he was ill satisfied with the Marquis de Leganez and some others, yet he had no quarrel with his Catholic Majesty; and indeed he durst not trust Cardinal Richlieu, whom he had of∣fended in so many respects, and who had this repu∣tation all Europe over, that he was never guilty of forgiving any one. This Change of the Scene oblig'dSiri Mer. T. 1. lib. 2. p. 249. the Dutchess of Savoy to publish aDated the 14 of March. Manifesto, wherein she forbid all the Subjects of the House of Savoy to pay any obedi∣ence to the Princes her Brothers-in-law. They an∣swer'd it by another of the same nature, published fifteen days after, and there stil'd themselves, The Lawful Guardians of Charles Emanuel their Nephew, Duke of Savoy. Prince Thomas complain'd that his Treaty with France had been made publick too soon, and that they ought to have tarried till his Wife and Children were return'd out of Spain. The French maintain'd that this was a pure pretence of his own inventing; but as this reason was too weak, suppo∣sing it were true, the Prince found out some other infractions of the Treaty on the side of France, which he published soon after. To make him sensible of the fault he had commit∣ted, in re-joyning himself to Spain, whose affairs now began to decline every where, the French Army, un∣der the Vicount de Turenne, took the Field towards the end of February, who possess'd himself of Mont∣calvo and theThe 6 of March. Siri Mer. l. 2. T. 1. p. 337. Castle in a few days, and gave perpe∣tual alarms to the Spanish Forces that were in Piedmont.
Prince Thomas was gone to Milan to concert mea∣sures for the ensuing Campaign, with the Spanish Ministers. The Marquis de Leganez was at that time call'd home from his Government of Milan, because they were dissatisfied with him at Madrid for the con∣tinual losses he sustained, occasion'd merely through his want of capacity, since he was superior in num∣ber to the French.Eman. Tesauro Ivrea Asse∣diata & li∣berata. The Prince mightily prest the Spaniards to take the Field, and rather seek out the Enemy than wait for him; but the languishing Maxims of Leganez continuing at Milan, even after his departure, they only talked of acting upon the defensive. The Prince being inform'd what progress the French had made, who were then at St. George, within eight miles of Yvree, was afraid they would attack that place, which was the only remaining Town where he had a Garrison depending upon him∣self. D. Sylvis Emanuel de Savoye, his Natural Bro∣ther, commanded the Garrison there, which was large enough, considering the greatness of the place, and the Spaniards sent a few of their Troops thither.Siri Mer. T. 1. l. . p. 338. The French stayed some weeks at St. George, and when it was no more suspected, that they had any design upon Yvree, went to besiege it on the 11th of April, before the Count d' Harcourt was return'd from France. Vercellino Maria Visconti, Mestre de Camp, who commanded the Spanish Troops, and had left the place to get himself cured at Milan of an Indis∣position, got into the Town with some other gallant fellows, who put every thing in readiness to make a vigorous resistance. Assoon as the Count d' Harcourt was arrived, he gave an Assault to the place, at three several places, on the 23d of April, but the breaches not being large enough, and those within defending themselves with great courage, he was beaten back with the loss of three hundred men. Prince ThomasTasauro ib. 209. labour'd all he could to engage the Spaniards to attack the French in their Lines, be∣fore they gave a second Assault; but all that he could obtain of the Count de Sirvela, who govern'd Milan with Cardinal Trivalce, was that he would advance as far as Bolengo, which is within two miles of Yvree.
There the Prince, who commanded the Van-guard, receiv'd advice, that the Count d' Harcourt being in∣form'd of his March, resolved to come and meet him; he gave orders to make a diversion on the side of Birolo, in order to embarras the Count d' Harcourt, who dispatched the Marquis de Ville thither, with the Troops of the Dutchess of Savoy, who repelled the Spanish Forces. In the mean time, he, and the Vi∣count de Turenne, advanced at the head of their Ar∣my, as if they design'd to attack Prince Thomas, al∣tho he was stronger than they in all respects. The Spaniards had resolved, neither to receive, nor give battel; and were of opinion, that if after some small skirmish they retired, it would be enough: But Prince Thomas earnestly desired to engage them in a Fight, since he was able to do it with a great advan∣tage on his side. As he was disposing his Army for that purpose, Sirvela was informed, that the Prince was preparing for a general Battel, which so much affrighted this Spaniard, who had not the least expe∣rience in military affairs, that he ordered the Infan∣try in all haste to withdraw to a Hill, which the Prince had just made them quit, to come and sup∣port the Horse. Altho Prince Thomas represented to him, the fatal consequences that might happen upon his leaving the Horse without Foot, yet he could not possibly perswade him to let them advance. The Count d Harcourt judging then from the Countenance of the Spaniards, that they were afraid of coming up to him, thought he had a fair opportunity to charge their Horse, which he perform'd at first with success enough, but at last he was repulsed, so that he sound∣ed a retreat, and the Spaniards did not dare to follow him. The Prince propos'd to go and attack the French, who were at least one half diminished, and fatigu'd with the Siege, and were not able to keep their Lines against an Army which was twice stronger than their own. But Sirvela, and the other Spani∣ards, would not listen to it. All they did was to send some relief to Yvree, part of which onlyOn the 29th of Apil. enter'd the place, through the fault of the Guides. They design'd to have thrown them in on another side,
some days after, but the French receiving notice of it, possess'd themselves of all the Passes, by which they were to enter. At last, to oblige the French to abandon Yvree, the Prince made the Spaniards resolve to attack Chivas, which was not in a condition to make any great re∣sistance, having but a small Garrison there, with some pieces of Cannon, but no Bullets, so that they were forced to cover the Stones with Lead, to make them serve instead of Bullets. The Prince thought he might be able to take the place by a Scalade on the 9th of May, and in all probability he had succeeded in his design, if his Orders had been well executed; but the Spaniards not seconding those that began the attack, they were beaten back, so that now it was resolved to attack the place regularly. The Count d' Harcourt daily continued to press Yvree, but being informed what danger Chivas was in, he resolved to go and relieve it, thinking after that to come before Yvree, and carry on the Siege of that place. He parted by night from the 14th to the 15th of May, but the Spaniards no sooner heard the News of his March, but they concluded to retire on the other side the Po, under a pretence that now the Siege of Yvree was raised, they had fully executed their design. It was not possible for Prince Thomas, with all the Arguments he could use, to stop the fearful Sirvela for never so short a time; so that the French saw the Spaniards on the other side the Po. assoon as they arrived here. The Prince nevertheless threw a thousand Horse into Yvrce, under the con∣duct of D. Vincent de Gonzaga, besides the Infantry which got in, which was the reason that the Count d' Harcourt when he return'd before it, despair'd the taking of it, and wholly raised the Siege on the 17th of May. But tho the French Army retired from before Yvree, yet they did not cease from farther action. After they had refresh'd themselves a little, the Count d' Harcourt led them out to reduce some small places, as Ceva, and Mondovi, and sate down before Coni, on the 29th of July; with six thousand Foot; and two
thousand Horse. While the French streightned this place, which was of great importance to them, for the communication of Provence and Liguria, with what they held in Piedmont; Prince Thomas advanced to the relief of it, with eight thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse, but all the passes being possest by the French, or else shut up by the overflowing of the River; besides that the Marquis Ville, with a bo∣dy of two thousand Horse, and a thousand Foot, op∣posed his March, he only thought of giving them some diversion. He went to attack Queiras, which he vainly endeavord twice to take by Scalade, being repulsed with great loss: But the Spaniards had better success before Montcalvo, which they took by Capi∣tulation, after three days resistance. However Coni was obliged to surrender on the 15th of September to the Count d Harcourt, who put six hundred Foot, and three hundred Horse into the place. Thus the French made themselves Masters of one of the best places in Piedmont, while the Spaniards lost time in doing nothing, or only retook Montcalvo, a place of small consideration. After the taking of Coni, the Count d' Harcourt design'd to relieve Mont∣calvo, and offer'd battel to the Spanish Army within a mile and half of Asti; he there received advice that Montcalvo was taken, and could by no means oblige the Spaniards to fight him; and so, after he had taken a few inconsiderable Castles, put his Army into Winter Quarters at Canaves. This being done, he arrived at Turin, towards the end of September, to surrender the City of Coni, which he had so lately conquer'd, into the hands of the Dutchess. 'Tis probable that the Cardinal by this act of self-denial, design'd to take oft the suspicion he had given, and that he would not extend the Limits of France, at the expence of the young Duke of Savoy, by pre∣tending he had no other design but to assist him. The Spanish arms were not much more successful in the Low Countries, than in Italy, but as their forces there were much better managed, the reputation of the Spanish Monarchy did in some manner support it self by that means.Siri Mer. T. 1. l. 2. p 402. The Cardinal had a design to
open the Campaign on this side by the Siee of Aire, one of the most important places in Artois. After several Marches and Countermarches, the better to conceal this design, the Marquis de la Meillerae went to attack some Forts about Aire, which made but a sorry defence; Bernovitte, the Governor of the place, being desirous to save his Men for the defence of the City. Thus the Mareschal, after he had psessed himself of all the Avenues, began to work upon his Lines of Circumvallation on the 25th of May, and the Enemy did not put themselves in a readiness to hinder them, or to stop the Convoys which arrived soon after. Nevertheless, General Bec coming to St. Venant, which is upon the River Lie, a little be∣low Aire, found means to throw five hundred men of the old Troops into the place, which somewhat retarded the progress of the Besiegers. Bec marched afterwards on the side of St. Omers, and the Cardinal Infanta having joyned him, they marched towards Aire, as if they meant to attack the Lines of the French, in the sight of whom their Army appear'd on the 22d of June, and had some skirmishes with them. The night following the Spaniards got a great quan∣tity of Fascines, to fill up the French Retrenchments, and a boggy place, over which they design'd to enter the City. But having sounded the Morass, and ex∣amin'd this place, they found the Morass was too deep, and the French Guard too strong to make any attack on that side, which made the Cardinal Infanta change his Post; and so he sent a small party into the Bolonois, to make some diversion there. In the mean time the place defended itself with a great deal of vigour, divers works were taken and retaken several times, and the Besiegers bought very dearly every foot of ground they got. The Cardinal Infanta was resolv'd to succour the place, assoon as General Lam∣boi, whom he expected every moment with impati∣ence, had join'd him; but the French being acquainted with his design, prest their works with that bravey and diligence, that they made very great breahes with their Mines, and reduced the Garrison and Burghers toSee the Capiulati∣o  Mer T 1. l. 2. p. 420. capitulate on the 16th of July. Not
to give the Spaniards longer time to relieve this place, the French Generals granted them very honourable conditions. The Garrison marched out the next day, with Drums beating, Colours flying, Match lighted, Ball in Mouth, in short with all the other Marks of Honour which are usually granted to those that have defended themselves well, and yet don't stay till the last extremity before they surrender. The same day that the Garrison of Aire marched out, that of Genap capitulated, after a Siege of about a months continuance. The King had renewed this year, the antient Treaties he had made with the States General, and had promised to send them twelve hundred thousand Livres, upon condition they would attempt some considerable enterprize. In pursuance of this Treaty, Frederic Henry attacqu'd Genap, and after he had made himself Master of the Town, reduced the Castle to capitulate at the time abovementioned. The taking of Aire did so wonderfully provoke the Cardinal Infanta, by reason▪ of the lamentable consequences this Conquest might draw after it, for the rest of Artois and for Flanders, that he resolv'd to dislodge the Army of the Mareschal de la Meille∣raye, and attempt the Siege of this place,Siri lb. p 465. before they could furnish it with necessary provisions. So Lam∣boi having join'd him with four thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse, the day after the reduction of the place, he adventur'd to besiege the victorious Army, and to hinder them from receiving victuals or other relief, he made a Detachment out of his Army, under the command of the Count de Salasar, who took Lillers, and the Fort of Ecluse between Doway and Cambray, and defeated a Convoy which advanced to throw themselves into this latter Fort. The Spaniards made some new Forts between Terwen and St. Omers, to hinder any provisions from coming that way. On the 5th of Angust the Cardinal Infanta marched directly towards the Lines of the French, whom he kept in breath with continual skirmishes, but was not able to bring them to a battel, till at last the Mareschal de la Meilleraye, fearing that if he stay'd in
this Post much longer, scarcity of Provisions and Am∣munition would destroy his Army, as well as the place he had so lately taken, retired by night on the 9th of the same month, and marched in all haste to possess himself of the Pass of Terwin, lest the Enemy should prevent him. Before he parted, he repair'd the Breaches as well as he could, and fill'd up the greatest part of the Lines. He put three thousand men into the place, and gave the Government of it to Aigueberre, with food enough for two or three months, if rightly managed. He could not leave them any more Powder, which was absolutely ne∣cessary for them, but he hoped to throw a Convoy shortly into the place. Assoon as the Mareschal was dislodged, the Car∣dinal Infanta enter'd his Lines, and began the Siege of this place, with a great deal of vigour and dili∣gence, but so as not to expose his men too much to the Enemy's shot. As he knew it was not provided with every thing necessary, he hoped soon to reduce the Garrison by Famine. The Mareschal did what he could to throw some provisions into it, but the Spaniards were so strongly upon their guard, that all those that endeavor'd it were beaten back with loss. By the 20th of August the Spaniards had al∣ready rais'd three Batteries, the besieged not thinking it worth the while to incommode them by their Cannon, because they had not Powder enough, and were oblig'd to reserve the little they had till a time of necessity. Soon after the Garrison disarm'd the Burghers, and turn'd all unprositable Mouths out of the place. However, to oblige the Cardinal Infanta to abandon his design, the Mareschal de Breze attacked Lens, which he took, and Meilleraye took la Bassee likewise, and made inroads into Flanders, where they burnt and ravaged ten or twelve leagues round the Country. But the Spaniards still carried on the Siege which they had begun, hoping the place would shortly fall into their hands, through want of provi∣sions. The Prince of Orange, importun'd by France, enter'd Flanders at another de,Siri Mer. T. 1. l.  p. 514. wi the Army of the
States, and design'd to attack le Sas de Gand, but the Count de Fountains having got thither before him, with seven thousand Foot, and forty Companies of Horse, obliged him to retire to Bergen op Zoom, without doing any thing. The French also did attempt in vain to make themselves Masters of Armentieres, upon the Lis; for some of Lamboi's Troops that were in Garrison there, beat them back with loss. But upon advice, that the Spaniards had weaken'd all their Garrisons, to form a small body of men, in order to hinder the excursions they made into their Country, the Mareschal de la Meilleraye attempted the Siege of Bapaume, a place of great importance, and difficult to be besieged, by reason of the great scarcity of Water. He began to besiege it in Septem∣ber, and took it by Capitulation on the 18th of the same month. The Garrison was to be conducted, according to the Capitulation, as far as Doway; but not being able to compass it in one day, they pass'd the night at Ecluse, and pursued their way the next morning. It was thought sufficient to give them a Trumpet to accompany them, but happening to meet with St. Preuil, the Governor of Arras, altho the Trumpet acquainted him with the matter,Pontis relates this matter o∣therwise in his Mem. s. 2. p. 190, &c. he fell upon them, kill'd part of their men, and pillag'd the whole Baggage. The King being inform'd of this action, lest the world should impute it to the perfidiousness of the Generals, ordered him to be ap∣prehended, in consequence of which, having been accused of several other things, he was beheaded at Amiens. In the mean time the Cardinal Infanta falling sick in the Campt at Aire, caused himself to be carried to Brussels, to recover his health there, but his Indispo∣sition increasing, he died there on the 9th of Novem∣ber. It was believ'd in France that his death would cause the Siege of Aire to be rais'd; but D. Francisco de Melo, who had the management of it, continued it with great resolution; so that at last, after they had consumed all their Provisions, and eaten every thing from whence they could draw the least nou∣rishment, the place surrendred on the 7th of Decem∣ber.
Thus the Campaign concluded in the Low Coun∣tries, in which the Spaniards lost three places, to re∣gain one at an extraordinary expence. However, the French Generals were blamed for taking so little care to preserve this Conquest, which had cost them so much blood, and which they saw retaken before their eyes, without finding a way to hinder it. The Spaniards did notSiri Mer. T. 1. l. 1. p. 11. Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 825. maintain the War with the same vigor in Catalonia, altho they could have done it with much more ease, provided they had given as good orders in that Principality, as in the Low Coun∣tries. Instead of offering an Act of Oblivion to the Catalonians, immediately after the retreat of the French, that so a despair to obtain a pardon for their insurrection might not carry them to make a more obstinate defence, the Marquis de los Velez mark'd the Men and Women with a hot Iron, and this Cru∣elty engaged the people to support their Rebellion with all their force. Those of Barcelona worked night and day upon their Fortifications, to put that place in a condition of defending it self, and no persons were exempted from so necessary a duty. In the mean time Serignan, Mareschal de Camp, who had tarried in Rousillon with his Regiment of Infantry, and three Companies of Horse, enter'd Catalonia with these Forces, and did not a little contribute to repress the first heat of the Spanish Army, and to teach the Cata∣lonians, who were unexperienced in War, after what manner they might defend themselves. Serignan enter'd into Barcelona, and conducted some of the Catalonian Troops thither, altho he was pursued by the Spanish Cavalry. The Marquis de loz Velez, being within a few leagues of this City, dis∣patched a Trumpeter to them, with Letters to the Deputation of Catalonia. The Viceroy promis'd to employ all his interest with the King, to procure them a full Indemnity for their Insurrection, upon condition they would disengage themselves from France; and on the other hand he threatned them with very rigorous punishments, if they persisted longer in their obstinacy. The Catalonians after they had amus'd the Trumpet as long as they could, in
order to gain the more time, made answer, that the Privileges of the Cataloniaus did not permit them to treat with any one, whoever he was, that came in arms into their Country. On the 26th of January the Spanish Army advanced to attack Montjui, which is within half a league of Barcelona; but the French and Catalonian Cavalry, to the number of five hundred, marched out of the City to observe the Countenance of the Enemy. The Spaniards perceiving it, privately retired into a Wood of Olive Trees, to cut off these Horse, and at the same time attack'd them in the Front, to amuse them. Bezancon and Serignan easily sustain'd the shock of the latter, but soon after the Duke de St. George, at the head of the others, came out from behind the Wood, and marched towards them. Altho the Cannon of the City began to incommode them, yet they still advanced forward, even within Musquet shot, and bravely attack'd the French Cavalry with Swords in their hands; but the Duke being mortally wounded, and several Officers of Note killed, those that fol∣lowed him were obliged to retreat, leaving a hundred and fifty dead upon the spot, and a great number of wounded. The French and Catalonians lost in this encounter about a hundred men. Montjui stands upon a Hill, on the top of which is a small Plain, where there was a Light-house, but Bezancon, at the desire of the Inhabitants of Barcelona, had built a small Fort there, encompassed with a Wall of dry Stones, where he lodged sixty French Musqueteers. This Hill being accessible on every side, except by the Sea, the Spanish Army began soon after to mount it, and the Forlorn Hope easily gain'd the advance Posts, which the Catalonians were ordered to keep, who fled almost assoon as the Enemy appear'd. But being now come to the top, where they imagin'd to find no resistance, they were surprized to see them∣selves assail'd by a discharge of Musquet shot, and a shower of Stones, which obliged them to descend, to cover themselves from this storm, till the body of the Army came up. In the mean time five hunered Mus∣queteers came from Barcelona by Sea, and the Catlao∣nians
who had saved themselves behind the Fort, imagin'd that the Spaniards run away from these suc∣cors, and three thousand Musqueteers whom Bezan∣con and Serignan conducted by Land; so that taking courage they went to charge the Forlorn Hope, and beat them back upon their first line, which they puc into disorder. Upon this Bezancon falling in with a thousand Musqueeters, broke it, and altho the second line supported them, yet they could not recover themselves. And now the rest of his men arriving from Barcelona, and being followed by abundance  people, who had beheld this happy beginning, fear possessed the Spaniards, and they retir'd without noise, asson as night came, towards Martorel. The Catalonians gave no quarter to the wounded, that could not follow the precipitate march of their Army; and with those that were kill'd in the Skirmish, there were two thousand dead in the Field of Batted. About this time D. John, King of Portugal, ac∣quainted the Catalonians with his Elevation to the Throne, by the Bishop of Lamego, who was going to Rome, which news mightily animated them. The next day after the Fight, all the Courts being assem∣bled, the Catalonians resolv'd to submit themselves to the King of France, provided he would peserve their Rights and Privileges. This they passed into an Act, which Bezancon dispatched to the Court, with half the Colours that were taken at the Battel of Montjui. Cardinal Richlieu having receiv'd this news, was in doubt whether it would be for the advantage of France, to accept of this Donation of Catalonia or no, by reason of the great obstruction this would bring to the concluding of a Peace, and the mighty Expence the King would be oblig'd to be at for the preserving of this Country. He could rather have wished, that this Principality would erect an independent Repub∣lic, under the Protection of France, because the King would have then drawn the same advantage from i, without engaging too far in its defence. But being convinc'd at last, that the Catalonians would never be able to govern themselves long in the form of a
Commonwealth, but would infallibly fall again un∣der the Spanish Government; and lastly considering, that it would be scandalous for the King to refuse so important a Donation, only for fear of engaging himself in some expence, he believed he was obliged to accept of it. Bezancon was surprized at this irre∣solution in the Cardinal, being fully of opinion, that if they had not neglected matters so at first, but im∣mediately imployed sufficient Forces in that Province, the Kingdoms of Arragon and Valentia, the Inhabi∣tants of both which places had a mighty kindness for the Catalonians, would have fallen after the same manner, into the hands of France. The Spaniards, after the defeat of Montjui, retreated to their first Camp of Tarragone, and the Catalonians, encouraged by this Victory, put themselves in a po∣sture to preserve the advantage they had gain'd. The King gave Orders to the Marquis de Breze, who commanded a small Fleet in the Ocean, to sail to∣wards the Coasts of Spain, to hinder them from send∣ing any Fleet upon the Coasts of Catalonia. He met, near Cales, with a Fleet bound for America, of which he sunk or burnt five Gallions, whereof the Admiral was one, and the rest he put to flight. The Bi∣shop of Bourdeaux likewise gave chace to the Spanish Gallies in the Mediterranean, commanded by the Duke de Ferrandine, and cruised upon the Coasts of Naples, where he burnt a Gallion under the Cannon of some Forts by the Sea side. Not long after the King sent a dispatch to la Mothe Houdancourt,Siri Mer. T. 1. l. 2. p. 287. who was in Italy, to set himself at the head of three or four thousand men that were march∣ing to Catalonia. He arrived at Barcelona with his Troops, and as he saw that Montjui was a more im∣portant post than was at first believ'd, la Mothe caus'd a more regular Fort to be built there; which was no sooner in a condition of defence, but he marched to the Enemy, who besieged Aytone, and having obliged them to abandon this attempt, he threw five hundred men into the place. He likewise increased the Garrison of Lerida, and kept the Spaniards in a perpetual inquietude. Their Troops, which had
abundance of Portugueses in them, diminished daily by desertions, so that they were constrained to retire to Constantin, a small City within a league of Tarragone. La MotheThe 1st of May. Siri ib. 344. advanced towards that side, after he had put a Catalonian Garrison into Valz, with a design to favour the Descent of the Archbp. of Bourdeaux, who was lately arrived at Barcelona, and had brought some Troops by Sea. The French Army, being divided into two bodies, for the greater convenience of their March, met several scattered bodies of Spaniards, which they fought and put to flight; after which the Spaniards having abandoned their Camp, the Archbishop landed eight hundred men without difficulty, and made himself Master of the Fort of Salo.The 12 of May A few days af∣ter, the French besieged Constantin, in view of the Spaniards, who were under the Cannon of Tarragone, and carried it in three days. At last la Mothe ap∣proached nearer to the Camp of the Spaniards, and a hot skirmish past between the two Armies in the sight of Tarragone. The Spaniards found themselves ex∣tremely incommoded for want of Forrage, and this still served to augment the desertions, so that the French and Catalonians found themselves much strong∣er than the Spaniards. La Mothe then attempted the Blockade of Tarragone, both by Sea and Land, with a design to reduce it by Famine, or lay a regular Siege to it, assoon as more Troops were come up to his relief. In the mean time, as the Forces that were sent by Land into Catalonia run great dangers, so long as the Spaniards were Masters of Rousillon, and it would be a difficult matter to preserve Catalonia, unless they were possest of that County,Siri Mer: T. 1. l. 2. p. 434. the Court of France now began to think of seizing it, if it were possible this year. The Marquis de Mortare was Governour of it, and had a small Body of five thousand Foot, and thirteen hundred Horse. The Prince of Conde enter'd this County with about seven thousand Men, about the beginning of June, and sent the Vicount d Arpa∣jou to take a view of Perpignan, who had much ado to avoid an Ambuscade of the Spaniards. The Prince being advanc'd before Canet, carried that place and
the Castle in a few days. The inhabitants of Ar∣geles, a place of great importance, because it could cut off from Rousillon all manner of communication with the port of Roses, turn'd out the Spanish Garrison, and open'd their Gates to the French. Soon after the Catalonian Peasants, who extremly incommoded the Spaniards with their excursions, carried off a consi∣derable Convoy, which was going from Collioure to Perpignan; and the Prince of Conde took Elne, which lyes between Perpignan and Collioure, on the 27th of June, altho it was very well defended by some Italian Troops that were in the place. After this the Prince divided his Army into two Bodies, one of which was sent to La Mothe near Tar∣ragone, and the other design'd to overrun Rousillon. La Mothe prest the Spaniards so near, that he kept them as it were beseg'd under the Cannon of Tarra∣gone, where they continued; without endeavouring to get out, for they hoped by this means to amuse the French Armies by Sea and Land, without doing any thing, all the rest of the Campain. He on the o∣ther hand flattered himself, that he should be able to starve them in this post, and reduce them to capitu∣late upon what conditions he pleas'd. On the 9th of July the Spaniards having form'd a design to seize a post near the Sea, from whence they expected relief, and at the same time to favour a Convoy of sorrage which was to come to them, put two or three thousand men out of their Lines, to put his project in execution. But la Mothe having receved advice of it before-hand by a Walloon deser∣ter, went to meet this detachment, and defeated it. The rest of the Spanish Army which had advanced out of their Lines, to favour the retreat of those who first went out, was in like manner defeated, after a sharp resistance. 'Tis said that in this rancounter the Spaniards lost six hundred men, and the French an hundred. The Spanish Army having got into their Lines a∣gain, or into the City, began now to feel the terrible effects of a violent Famine, and the Prince de Bottero who commanded it, caus'd to be distributed daily to
each Soldier two ounces of Rice, and three of Horse∣flesh; for they made no difficulty to kill their Horses, because they wanted forrage for them. In the mean time care was taken at Madrid to raise a small body of men, to go and deliver the Army that was be∣sieged at Tarragone, and assoon as they had got toge∣ther six thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse, the Marquis de Leganez receiv'd orders to place himself at the head of them, and endeavour to force the French Lines. The Marquis set forward with this design, but as he was not become more dexterous in military matters in Spain than he was in Italy, he thought that the Passes were so well guarded, that it would be la∣bour lost to attack him. Thus he retreated peaceably within some leagues of the place, without adventu∣ring to do any thing for its relief. The Prince de Bottero's Army being now reduced to the last extremity, were exceeding joyful to see aOn the 4 h of July; Fleet of forty Gallies appear, but the difficulty was, how to make their way into the Harbour thro the French Vessels. However the Prince of Ferrandine, who commanded this Fleet, was fully resolved to attempt it, since it was not possible to save the Town and Army otherwise. Having therefore observ'd, that the Squadron of the Admiral and Vice Admiral lay at some distance from one another, he determin'd to pass through their two firings; but there were only ten Gallies that durst follow him through all the Cannon and Musquet shot of the Enemy. They lost abundance of men, and were extremely shattered before they could reach the Mole; and as they were unloading the Provisions they brought upon the Key, the Squadron of the Admiral coming near, began to cannonade them so furiously, that they must of ne∣cessity return the same way they came to avoid being sunk. However they performed it, and the French out of one and forty Gallies only took one; they un∣loaded but a small quantity of provisions, and landed some men on Shore; in a few weeks both the Army and Town were in a worse condition than before, and began to feed upon Dogs, Rats, and Cats. Thus this Attempt of the Fleet only serv'd to destroy four or
five hundred men in passing through, and to put a great number of Gallies out of a condition to appear for a long time at Sea. But not to abandon a Town and an Army, which combated with much more resolution against Famine than against the Enemy, Spain made its last effort, and set to Sea a Fleet of sixty Sail, followed by seve∣ral Brigandines laden with provisions. ItThe 10 of August. Siri Merc. T. 1. l. 2. p. 461. appear'd six weeks after the other, and while the men of War and Gallies attack't the French Fleet, which was in a manner surprized, as not imagining the Spaniards could be able to put to Sea in so short a time, Bri∣gandines entered the Harbour without great difficul∣ty. The Archbishop of Bourdeaux, who had some∣times succeeded by meer hazard, was in such a con∣sternation that he was uncapable of making head a∣gainst the Enemy, so that after the lost of three Ves∣sels, he escaped with the rest of his Fleet very much damaged, to Provence. Notwithstanding this defeat, La Mothe staid some days longer in his Lines, but fearing the succours which continually arrived at Tarragone, he retook the posts, where he was lodg'd before, between Constantin and Valz, and aban∣doned this design. They were much dissatisfied with the Archbishops conduct at Court, because he had sent them word that he was strong enough to beat any Spanish Fleet that should come before him, and then after he had abandoned the Sea to the Enemy, would have made them believe that he had got the Victory. 'Tis reported that this man had gain'd the Cardinal's favour, by applying himself intirely to him, without making his Court to any of his Relations, or Creatures. He had been Steward of the Cardinal's House, and made the Servants and Tenants give an account of every thing, with so much rigour, that the Cardinal won∣dered at his exactness, besides that the Archbishop put in frequently something of his own, which considera∣bly increased the Cardinal's revenues. But as all the World hated him, and especially De Noyers the Se∣cretary, no means were left unattempted to destroy him. 'Tis said that it was with this prospect he was
sent into Catalonia, with a Fleet which they knew was not in a condition to oppose that of the Spaniards, and that it was against his advice that La Mothe en∣deavoured to starve Tarragone. As soon as he was arriv'd at Toulon, the Officers mutinied against him, and refused to own him for their Admiral. They likewise sent relations to Court quite different from his, and accused him of being positive and humour∣som, and that he never regarded the advice of those persons, who had the greatest experience in Sea af∣fairs. As all the Court in general joyn'd with his ac∣cusers, the King and Cardinal immediately concurr'd in an ill opinion of him, and at last resolved to or∣der the informations against this Prelate to be taken. In the mean time they took from him the command the Fleet; which was none of the fittest posts for a Bishop, and banished him to Carpentras. At the bot∣tom, altho he was certainly in the wrong to take up a profession which he did not understand, and his conduct was far from being regular, yet the Cardinal, who pretended to know the men whom he employ'd, was more to be blamed, for giving to a Bishop, and to a person so uncapable as he was, a Fleet to com∣mand. Towards the end of the CampaignThe 4 of Novemb; the Spaniards surprized the City of Almenas, but the inhabitants escaping into the Castle, they began to lay siege to it. La Mothe marched thither with all speed, with two thousand Horse, and two thousand eight hundred Foot, but the Spaniards being at least thrice stronger than himself, he durst not attack them. However he saved the place by a stratagem after this manner; he sent three hundred Horse to the top of the neigh∣bouring mountains, with all the Drums and Trum∣pets belonging to the Army, and ordered them to Alarm the Enemy on that side, with the greatest noise they could make, that so they might believe the whole Army was there, while he on the other side, threw himself into the Town with five hundred Horse. This project succeeded very happily, and so the Spaniards quitted their design.
After the King had accepted the donation of Cata∣lonia, he appointed the Mareschal de Breze to go thi∣ther, to command in quality of Viceroy, and to swear at Bcelna, in his Majesty's name, to preserve the priviledges of the Catalonians. He was already arriv'd at ousillon, when he received orders to block up Pe, o hinder any relief or Ammunition from coming into it, because the King proposed to attack this place, the following Campaign. He seized upon al passes, and made retrenchments where he saw convenient; however he could not hinder the Spani∣ard om forcing the passage of the mountains, the 2 i of December, so that he was reduced to defend himself against the insults of the Spaniards, by posting his men Angeles. What most of all favour'd the French on this side, was the happy success that attended the insurrection of the Porses, who not only bear the Castili∣a out of their own Country, but made frequent ex∣cursions in the neighbourhood with mighty advan∣tage, Castil not eing prepared to oppose them, and several Grandees, as the Duke de Medina Sedonia, be∣ing discoenred at the Government, and favour∣ing the Porgueses under-hand. Their King Don John was own'd by France, and all the Enemies of Spia who encoutaged him to keep the Crown on his head which he had s lately gain'd. The particulars of this Revolution having no relation to the life of our C, I shall therefore omit them. In Gmany, sdeer the Swedish General, and the Count de Gbrian performed no considerable en∣terprize, and as theOn the to o a, e Pusender lib. 13. former happened to dye, Leo∣nard Toerson took his place. The Princes of Italy had new for a long ne been only spectators of what passed in Piedont, and might have continued stll in the same tranquillity, if the Barberini had not made an atcropt upon the Dutchy of Castro and some other , benging to the Duke of Parma, near Rome.See Siri Merc. T. 1. lib. 3. at the beginning. der a pretence of I know not what Rights, which 'tis not necessary here to set down, the Papal Army entered this Dutchy in September, and in October forced Castro to capitulate, and on the
13th of that Month took possession of it. The Duke of Parma complained of this hard usage to all the Princes of Italy, but especially to the Republic of Venice, and to the great Duke of Tuscany, who promised to act in his behalf, but had done much better if they had hindered the Barberini from stripping him of part of his territory, by sending sufficient forces to this Prince, when he first demanded them; since 'tis infinitely easier to prevent a mischief of this nature, than to apply Remedies to it when 'tis once done. The best support which the Duke of Savoy found upon this occasion, was the Mareschal d' Estrees, a great Enemy to the Barberini, who being recalled from his embassy at Rome, stopt at Parma, and offered his service to the Duke, as we shall ind in the series of this History. And this he did not engage in without the consent of the Cardinal-Duke, who was no bet∣ter affected to the House of Ʋrban VIII. than the Mareschal. The Marquis de Fonteny succeeded the latter in this embassy at Rome, and as he had as much Plegm in his constitution as the Mareschal had Fire, it was hoped that he might be able to act with more success in a Court, where their negotiations are very long, and require a world of patience. After the Duke of Parma had received this hard Treatment, the Pope fulminated an Admonition a∣gainst him, by which he ordered him to appear at Rome, under pain of Excommunication. The King of France and all Italy interceded for the Duke, but the Barberini were not men to be wrought upon by perswasions, so when any foreign Prince came to in∣terpose in this affair, they only paid him with fair promises. In the mean time Don Thaddeo Barberini, whom the Pope, who doated upon his Nephews, thought to be a mighty Captain, made great levies of men, which he sent into Lombardy, and caused Forts to be built in several places of Polozin, for the preservation of his new Conquests. The Duke of Parma raised forces on his side, to oppose one pow∣er by another, and at the same time published aSee this Affair in Siri Merc T. 1. lib. 3. p. 379. re, Manifesto, wherein he shewed the injustice the Bar∣berini had done him, and the latter were not backward to return an answer to it.
To return now to the Affairs of the Cardinal: The Queen Mother, who had resided for some time at London, was obliged to depart out of England, at the private instances he made to King Charles the First. This Prince being unluckily embroil'd with his own people, was not in a condition to refuse any thing to Lewis XIII. lest he should foment these disorders, more than he had already done; so that he gave his Mother-in-law to understand, that she would extremely oblige him, if she would leave England. She desir'd to return into the Low Coun∣tries, but whatever sollicitations his Majesty of Great Britain could make in her behalf, the Spani∣ards, who were dissatisfied with her former conduct, would not so much as give her leave to pass through their Country, Nor durst the States of the Ʋnited Pro∣vinces fuller her to tarry in theirs, for fear of of∣fending the Cardinal. So that she was forced to go to Colon, where she lived in extreme indigence till her death. The Cardinal, who was pleased at these mortifica∣tions which this unhappy Princess received, was not sorry to see her intirely abandon'd by her Daugh∣ters, and her Sons-in law. Towards the end of this year he had the pleasure to understand, that the Pope had made aThe 6 of December. promotion of a dozen Cardinals, among whom was his dear Friend and Confident Julius Mazarine, for whom France had demanded a Cap. In the course of this very year, wherein so many things, as we have already seen contributed to strengthen and support the fortune of this Minister, the new Conspiracy of the Count de Soissons, against him, which at first seemed powerful enough to o∣verturn it, ended as advantageously for him as he could have wished, since he was delivered from one of the most formidable enemies he had. 'Tis what I am now going to relate, in order to con∣clude with it the History of the Occurrences of the Year 1641. I have elsewhere observ'd, that the Cardinal would haveSee Siri Merc T. 1. l. 2. p 34, &c. married his Neice de Combalet, to the Count
de Soissons, and that this Prince refused an Alliance so much below him. The Minister did not drop his pretensions for all that, but flatter'd himself that by ill using and disregarding the Count, he should at last break his haughty Spirit: As he believed that the King would never have any Children, he imagined that the Heirs of the Count and his Neice, might one day sit upon the Throne: And he thought that by pretending to serve the Count, who was a high spirit∣ed, but imprudent Prince, he should humble the D. of Orleans, and the Prince of Conde; but the inflexi∣ble constancy of the Count defeated all his projects, which appeared to be so much the more Chimerical, after the King had Sons to succeed him. Whatever he pretended in public, 'tis certain that the Cardinal had an unconquerable aversion to the Count, for be∣sides that twas impossible to commit small faults a∣gainst him, contempt was the thing in the world that most disgusted him, and which he took care to re∣venge in the severest manner. To this we may add, that the Cabals of the Count, which opposed the grandeur of the Minister, rais'd his hatred to the highest extremity, and it received no diminution by the retirement of the Count to Sedan, who had engaged the King to pay the Garrison of that City, pursuant to the Treaty, against the opinion of the Cardinal, who had advised that this Money should be paid to the Duke of Bouillon. 'Tis reported, that his design was to oblige that Prince to sell that place to him, for which he had offer'd him in vain great summs of Money, and Lands in another place. Nay, some persons confidently affirm, that the Minister had a mind to erect a small Soveraignty for himself upon the Meuse, to retreat thither in case of necessity. How∣ever it was, 'tis certain he loved the Duke of Bouillon at the bottom no more than he did the Count of Sois∣sons. Besides, he was disgusted with theSee Siri Me. T. 1. l. 2. p. 352. Archbishop of Rheims, Son to the Duke of Guise, who had like∣wise retir'd to Sedan some years before, because the Cardinal would not give him leave to resign good part of his Benefices to his Brothers, as designing to marry Ann de Gonzaga, Daughter to the late Duteness
of Mantua. The Cardinal would have had him re∣nounce all his Benefices, and surrender them into the Kings hands, after which his Majesty was to grant him a Brevet, by which he should be enabled to dispose of part of them in favour of his Brothers. But the Arch∣bishop searing they would laugh at him as soon as he had n this renunciation, withdrew to Sedan. Up∣on this the King, under pretence of repairing some buildi, which the Archbishop ought to have done, sequeserd his whole revenue, and nominated an Am trator, in his absence. This Prince did all he cod, to be reconciled to the Cardinal, but some difficulties arose, which hindered them from coming to any conclusion. But in the mean time the Prince de Joinville his eldest Brother, and the Duke of Guise his Father, happened to dye, which made him take upon him the title of the Duke of Guise. About thisTowards the end of the year 1641. Siri ib. p. 359. time a Gentleman was apprehended in Poiton, belonging to the Duke of Soubise, his name La Richerie, just come from England, who as they reported, brought Letters from the Dukes of Soubise, and la Valette, to the Duke of Espernon, and the Marquis de la Force, wherein they perswaded them to raise the Hugonots in Guienne. It was pretended th e Quen Mother, and Madam la Chevreuse had a hand in the design. The Marquis de la Force had received his Letters, and sent them to the Cardi∣nal; but it was alledged, that he had kept them by hi  this rendered him suspected. Whe∣ther ese etters were real or no, and whether la Richerie deps'd what he knew, or said what they would have him, in the Bastile where he was im∣prison'd, the report ran that the Count de Soissons was concerned in this conspiracy, and that he was to enter Campagne with an Army, while the Duke of Espernon, and his Son acted in Brittany. During the whole Ministry of the Cardinal there were so many true Plots, and so many lies published, that often 'tis impossible to distinguish truth from falshood. For as his Creatures took the depositions of the Priso∣ners, and thse at were acus'd, were not allow∣ed to defend themselves, according to the ordina∣ry
forms, one cannot certainly know whether these prisoners deposed the truth, or whether they did not swear as they were commanded. However it  the Count de Soissons, positively denyed that he had any concern in this affair, and  Campion to Court, to make protestations of his innocence. The Cardinal, without troubling himself to prove that he was guilty, pretended to be partly satisfied with these assurances, and answered  ololy enough. This Prince, notwithstanding his abse from Court, still kept his place of Grand Master of his Majesty's house, and sent sme orders, which the King would not suffer to be executed. As this near∣ly concern'd him, he tryed to confirm his orders, but he was obliged to give way, and ever since out time, as 'tis said, meditated a revenge The F, would not allow him to nominate to the  Offices of his house, which were in his dispod, nor that any one should go to Sedam to beg them of him, as till now they were accustomed to do. He likewise stopt his pensions and revenues, my he forbid any provisions to be brought to Sedan, un∣der a pretence that they were carried from thence, into the Country of Luxemburg. The Duke of Guise had not as yet quitted his Archbishoprick of Rheims, and yet he enjoyed none of the revenues belonging to it, altho he engaged Corraro, the Ve∣netian Ambassador, to speak in his behalf. All the answer that the Cardinal made was, that he should deliver all his Benefices into the King's hands, and after that they knew how to deal with him. About theSiri Mer. Vt. T. 1. l. 1. p. 3. same time it was discovered, that certain persons in the habits of Pilgrims, had con∣spir'd against the Minister, who being apprehended and sent to Prison, accused the Duke of Vendome, who was enlarged out of confinement, after they had turn'd him out of all his places, and who liv∣ed at a distance from Court, with having engaged them in this enterprize. As soon as the Duke was informed of it, he sent the Duke of Beaufort his se∣cond Son in all hae to Parts, to demand of his Ma∣jesty, that he would be pleased to permit his Father
to come to Court, to justify himself. The Duke ar∣rived almost at the same time at Paris, where he was Incognito, and sent to desire of the King, that he might confront these Witnesses. His demand was granted, but instead of making his appearance, he retired into England with the Duke of Beaufort, preending that it was scandalous for a person of his Quality, to be confronted with profligate mercena∣ry scoundrels. He was generally blamed for demand∣ing an appearance, and going off after he had ob∣tained it; and whether he was guilty or innocent, there was without doubt great indiscretion in this management. However it was, the Dukes of Ven∣dome and Beaufort, served by this means to aug∣ment the number of the professed Enemies of the Cardinal. Several persons were ofIbid. l. 2. p. 371. Opinion, that this Mi∣nister being assured of the weakness of Spain, and of the Malecontents, treated the Princes of Sedan in this insupportable manner, that he might oblige them to have recourse to the Spaniards, and thus furnish himself with an occasion to destroy them. He hoped by this conduct intirely to ruin the Count de Soissons, with whom he supposed he should never be able to live in peace, by reason of the mutual disgusts and animosities that were between them. The Duke of Bouillon he could not endure, because he refused to sell him Sedan, or to exchange it for o∣ther Lands; and he looked upon the Benefices of the Duke of Guise, which amounted to four hun∣dred thousand livres a year, to be too rich and va∣luable a spoil to be neglected. It was reported up and down, that they had con∣cluded a Treaty with Spain, altho they had made not the least step to it as yet, but to oblige them to do it, he was reslv'd to attack Sedan; because as these Princes were by no means in a condition to defend themselves with their own Forces, so they would be most infallibly constrained to have imme∣diate recourse unto Spain. He knew the Count was too much obliged to the Duke of Bouillon, to quit his party, my that these two had signed a writing,
whereby they promis'd never to separate their Inte∣rests; so that he hop'd to ruin them both at one blow, by attacking Sedan. He sent word to the D. of Guise, that the King having received advice that the Count and the D. of Bouillon had entered into a Treaty with Spain, it would be his best way to disen∣gage himself from that faction, and come and beg par∣don for his fault; that if the Duke fell into this snare, his confession might serve to condemn the other two. Not long after, the Cardinal said publickly, that the King had certain proofs that the Princes had con∣cluded a Treaty with the Spaniards, by the means of the Abbot de Mercy, and lastly by Don Michael de Salamanca, Secretary to the Cardinal Infanta, with whom the Duke of Bouillon had personally conferr'd near Sedan. The Countess of Soissons being inform'd of what the Minister had thus affirm'd, went to see him with the Duke of Longueville, to endeavour to justifie her Son, and to obtain for him a prolongation of the permission he had to reside at Sedan. The Cardi∣nal return'd no positive answer to the Countess's com∣plaints, under a pretence of consulting his Majesty before-hand, but some days after, sending for the Duke and Dutchess, he told them, That the King and he were willing to believe that the Count was not guilty, altho they knew that the Duke of Bouil∣lon had treated with Don Michael de Salamanca, upon the frontiers of the Principality of Sedan; and that it was hardly to be imagined that the Count, who had so particular a friendship for the Duke of Bouillon, knew nothing of the matter: That if it were true, that he was wholly ignorant of it, he ought to leave Sedan, and disengage him∣self from the Duke's Interests: That he might go to Venice or to Neufchatel, or to any of his Country houses: That it was extremely scandalous for a Prince of his Birth, to live united with the enemies of the Kingdom, where his descendants might one day sit upon the Throne; that, in fine, it was not suffi∣cient for him to be innocent, but that he ought to be exempt from all suspicion. The Countess excused her Son as far as she might, and complain'd that up∣on
bare suspicions they had suspended him from the exercise of his Office of Grand Master of the Kings House, and stopt his Pensions: But all she could draw from the Cardinal was, That if the Count was inno∣cent, he ought to quit Sedan; and if he was guilty, both he and the Duke of Bouillon ought to confess their fault, and they should be pardoned: That he would do well to resolve with all speed to do one of these two things, because his Majesty would no longer be uncertain of his fidelity. Some of the Count's friends advised him to retire from Sedan, and give way to the Ministers indignati∣on, who would otherwise destroy him; but he could not endure to hear any talk of it, and continued firm in his resolution to run the same fortune with the Dukes of Bouillon and Guise. As none of these three were in the humour to rely upon the Cardinals good nature, they at last concluded their Treaty with Spain to furnish them with sufficient Forces. They like∣wise raised others in the Country of Leige, and hosti∣lities began on both sides, by plundering and carry∣ing away every thing that enter'd the Principality of Sedan or Champagne, ever since the beginning of April. The Cardinal ordered some Troops to advance on that side, under the Marquis de Sourdis, till the Mareschal de Chatillon could put himself at the head of an Ar∣my, which was designed to act against them. At this time the Princess Ann de Gonzaga, whom the King had forbidden to remove out of Burgundy, pass'd into Champagne, with a design to reside in Se∣dan near her Lover: But the Vicount de Tavanes, who commanded some Troops in that Province, be∣ing informed of it, caused her to be stopt till such time as he receiv'd an Order from Court what to do. The Courier whom he sent, brought him word, that he was not only to suffer this Princess to pass on in her journey, but likewise to furnish her with as many Coaches and Horses as she might have occasion for. It was believed that she would only help to perplex the Duke of Guise's affairs; but the principal reason why they suffer'd her to pass on, was because the Cardinal desir'd that the Duke might marry her out
of hand, that so his Benefices might come to be va∣cant. In the mean time, these Princes order'd their men to work night and day upon the Forifications of Se∣dan, and made Magazines of all things necessary to make a vigorous resistance, in case they were attackt. The Cardinal, who had really reduced them to these extremities, by accusing them before thy had done any thing, and by ill using them, began new to fear in his turn, that he had embarked in a very dange∣rous affair. If they besieg'd Sedan, they might hap∣pen to come off with the worst, this place ing de∣fended by desperate people; and if it was not atackt, it was to be feared, that as soon as these Princes had an Army, they would make excursions into the heart of the Kingdom. In case they gain'd any advantages at first, it was reasonable to apprehend that vast num∣bers of people would flock to them, and so their par∣ty become very formidable. These considerations made the Cardinal appear ex∣tremely irresolute and full of distrust. Sometimes he talked of giving no quarter to the Kings Enemies, but entirely destroying them; at other times he seem'd not unwilling to enter into some composition, and seem'd to repent that he had provok'd so many people to despair, who were really in a better case to make themselves be fear'd, than he at first ima∣gin'd. Thus when the Ambassador of the States Ge∣neral spoke to the Cardinal of the Mediation of his Masters to accommodate this affair, by reason of the interest which the Prince of Orange had in the Duke of Bouillon's preservation, he was at first listned to by the Minister with great attention. Another thing happen'd at this time, which gave him a great deal of disturbance. He learnt of the King, that Bullion, the Superintendant of the Fi∣nances, had told him that all the Money for the Ma∣rine and the Artillery was spent: (The Cardinal was Intendant of the Marine, and his Cousin, the Mares∣chal de la Meilleraye, Grand Master of the Artillery) That the Cardinal was the Author of this War, and only kept it up for his private ends: That he knew
not where to find any more Money to support it; but that if he would be pleased to grant a few years Peace to his Kingdom, he would take care to lay up such considerable summs, that they should be suffici∣ent to carry on any design whatever, in which his Majesty had a mind to engage himself. At last, Bul∣lion begg'd of his Majesty not to speak a syllable of this to his Eminence, because if he came to know of it, he would never suffer him to dye in his Bed. The King gave him his promise, and believing what he told him was true, kept his word with him, and said nothing of it to the Cardinal till the Superintendant was dead. The haughty Minister answer'd the King, That he was sorry his Majesty cited a dead Witness; and the King replyed, That he had forborn to speak of it while Bullion was alive, because the latter told him, that if the Cardinal knew of it he should certainly be destroy'd. The Negotiation of the Ambassador of the States came to nothing, not from the Cardinal's being in∣flexible, but because the Duke of Bouillon rejected the propositions which the Ambassador made. Whether he was of opinion, that it was to no purpose to recon∣cile himself to a man, whose hatred was never ex∣tinguish'd but only in appearance, or whether his va∣nity kept him from making any submissions to his E∣nemy, as it was proposed to him, he resolved to see whether he might not gain some advantage by force of arms, before he made an Accommodation.See an Abridgm. of the Gam∣pagne of 1641. in Aubery's Mem. T 2. p. 135. The Mareschal de Chatillon, went to put himself at the head of the Army of Champagne in May, and the King ad∣vanced as far as Abbeville, to be nearer Artois, where he design'd to besiege Aire, as we have already taken notice. Here the King published a Declaration bear∣ing date on the 8th of June,See it in the Mem. of Montresor p. 365. wherein, after he had observ'd that the Princes who were at Sedan, had committed several hostilities and joyned themselves to Spain, he order'd all his Subjects to take them for de∣clared Enemies, if they did not within a month ac∣knowledge their fault, and submit themselves to his Majesty's Clemency.
In answer to this Declaration, the Princes made a long Manifesto dated the 2d of July, but it did not ap∣pear in public till after the Battel of Sedan, which put an end to this Affair. However, as it was purposely contriv'd to serve as a Foundation for a longer War, I will give the Reader an Abridgment of it, before I proceed to the relation of that Battel. It was entitu∣ledIb. 373. a Manifesto for the satisfaction of the Princes of the Peace, tho the Count of Soissons only speaks. Af∣ter he had said that his Conscience obliged him to pub∣lish the ill designs of the Cardinal, which he had so long forborn to do, that his Majesty might have the entire Glory of chastising this imperious Minister, who had assumed upon him the Royal authority, he conti∣nues, That it was four years since he had been obli∣ged to retire to Sedan, to live there in security, and that he had refused to go any where else, that he might not give the Cardinal an opportunity to accuse him of being an Enemy to France: That nevertheless the Cardinal had sought all imaginable means to destroy him, and to make himself master of Sedan, altho the D. of Bouillon had not done any thing which ought to deprive him of his Majesty's protection: That no ways had been left unattempted to acquaint the King with the ill conduct of his Minister, but that this had produced no other effect, but the im∣prisonment and ruin of those persons who had done it: That consequently there was a necessity to em∣ploy the noise of arms, that equity and reason might be heard: That after several deliberations, in concert with the Dukes of Guise and of Bouillon, and seve∣ral other Princes, and Officers of the Crown, he declared the Cardinal to be the greatest and most dangerous Enemy of the King and State: That he had made himself master of the strongest places of the Kingdom, and seized the Mouths of the princi∣pal Rivers, Ports, and Islands in the Ocean, and in general all the securities of France: That to main∣tain himself in this Usurpation, he ruin'd the rest of the Kingdom by War, to put the people out of a condition to recover what he had usurped: That he designed to deliver the King into the hands of
those to whom he was allied (he means the Duke of Enguien, who had lately married one of his Nieces) and that he endeavour'd to approach the Crown, altho it was the interest of France to keep him at a distance from it: That if he could not accomplish this design, he was in a condition to give his Rela∣tions the Keys of the Realm, to open and shut the gates of Traffick, and starve the great Cities when they pleased: That the King and Monsieur perceiv∣ed it well enough, but durst not speak of it, and that the Count of Soissons affirmed it in the name of the whole Royal Family: That this design of his e∣vidently appear'd, in that he had made the best years of the Duke and Dutchess of Orleans barren: That there was reason to fear that he design'd to secure himself from the power of his Majesty's Justice, that so he might not give an account of his unjust misap∣plication of the Finances, and the suppression of so many innocent people: That he had rashly engaged the reputation of the King, dissipated his Treasures, prodigally thrown away the Blood of the Nobility and Souldiers, and reduced the people to the last misery, to satisfy his passions, and carry on his own particular quarrels: That the only reason why he had declar'd the War, was to support his own au∣thority, which he thought he should never be able to preserve but in times of trouble: That he had rendred all those whom he design'd to destroy, sus∣pected of High Treason, in order to turn them out of their places, which he either took into his own hands, or conferr'd upon those that promised to maintain him in his Tyranny: That he had ruin'd the best Families in the Kingdom, to raise his own, and had reduced several good Houses to misery to inrich persons of no merit, birth, and fortune: That he drained France of its Money, to send it in specie to foreign Countries, and fill'd the Kingdom with Money of a base allay: That he had bought at too excessive rates, both of the Swedes and others, places which he was not able to keep, as Philipsburg; or must, when a Peace comes, surrender without reimbursement, as Brisac and others: That he had
indiscreetly squander'd away the Finances in Italy to acquire himself friends, whom he afterwards ruin'd; and thus render'd the protection which his Majesty had given to the Dukes of Mantua, Parma, and Sa∣voy contemptible, and of no effect: That he had made some attempts in Spain, which only tended to the dishonour of France, and gain'd some Con∣quests in the Low Countries, which were a charge to the State, and only proper to render the War everlasting: That he had burthen'd the Kingdom with an infinite number of Officers, and dryed up the ordinary sources of the Finances, by selling, or engaging the Demeans and Aids to so high a price, that a man could not make up his Money again, without committing a great deal of injustice: That he had forced several Orders to elect him for their General, as the Cistercians, the Clarevallenses, and the Praemonstratenses; by imprisoning abundance of the Religious, who would not give him their Votes: That as for the other Orders, he had engag'd them by a thousand artifices to elect Vicar Generals in France, that they might have no more communi∣cation with Rome, and that he might make himself Head of the Gallican Church for Spirituals as well as Temporals: That the King had no Allies that could assist him, as being all a charge to his Ma∣jesty, and only able to make feeble diversions at the expence of France: That those whom the Cardinal thought capable to oppose his arbritary proceeding, had been delivered into the hands of the Executio∣ner, after they had been condemned by wicked, cor∣rupt Commissioners of his own nomination, or rot∣ted in Prison, or were banish'd the Court: That he with inhuman ingratitude had turn'd out the Queen Mother, and treated all the Princes and Noblemen of the Kingdom in a most arrogant manner: That he had violated or annihilated all the Laws, and all the Ordinances of the Kingdom, under the specious pretence of the absolute will and authority of the King: That he had robbed the Provinces, and com∣munities of their ancient Franchises, and vacated the contracts they had made with former Kings:
That he had grosly abused the Princes, Dukes, Peers, Mareschals of France, and other Officers of the Crown: That he had caused several innocent Noblemen to be Condemned by Commissioners de∣pendant upon himself, and imprison'd them without any form of process: That some Bishops had been judg'd contrary to the known Laws of the Land, o∣ther Ecclesiasties depriv'd of their Benefices, and all of them obliged, besides the ordinary tenths, to pay prodigious sums, and more than one third of their revenue, to maintain a company of Pyrates at Sea that were commanded by an Archbishop; and by Land, an Army of sacrilegious Ruffians that pillag'd Churches, and were set on by a Cardinal: That he had treated in a most extreme ill manner the two Archbishops, Presidents of the last Assembly of the Clergy, for representing to him the miserable con∣dition of the Ecclesiastics of France, who had gi∣ven five millions and a half, above the ordinary Tenths. That several Noblemen had been severely fined, forced to the Arriere-ban, and deprived of their employments, meerly because they were not of his Faction. That the Presidents and Counsellors of the Soveraign Courts had been suspended, turn'd out, and imprison'd, when they spoke for the real advan∣tage of the King and People, or opposed his inno∣vations, which tended to the disgrace and ruin of the Kingdom: That several Officers of Justice, and the Finances, had been undone by researches and new regulations: That the City of Paris, after all the extraordinary Aids they had given his Majesty, had been severely taxed like other Towns, and that its Burghers had been taxed at discretion, under the pretty name of Benevolences: That all the rest that had been exempt from such burthens, were to pay so long as Cardinal Richlieu continued in the Mi∣nistry: That great imposts were laid upon merchan∣dise, and that they levied the twentieth penny up∣on the most necessary things belonging to humane life: That the Country was desolated by Soldiers, and the keepers of Salt, which reduced the poor
Peasants to the od and hard ldgings of Basts, or forced them to dye of Famine, or to take Arms, or to g; that agriculture was stopt, which infinitely incommoded in Ecclesiastics, the Nobility and the Burghers. These were the complaints brought against Cardi∣nal Richlieu, the greatest part of which were without question very wll grounded. The mischief was, that the world believd, that if thse who surd his conduct with so much reson had been to take his place, they would have  the same viol∣ces, and yet had  capable to carry it oft, with a quarter of that od management which the ∣dinal discoverd. Lest these discountd Princes and Lods should be branded for being  to the  they said that they had , that the Emperour and King of Spain should lay down their Arms along with them, so soon as they could coontly obing sure and honour  they believed  had power to break it, as he had  of Ratisbone, and  every one  joy what of right  to him.  up Arms with no other  peace, which the Cardinal  to deie, but did not so in  natural they should defend themselves  as they were able, against the violent and  pro∣ceedings of the Minis. In  the three Etates of the Kingdom to  satisfaction, for  had done them,  such as The Pa
the Mareschal de Chatillon enter'd into the Principali∣ty of Sedan, before the Enemies were in a condition to take the Field, without doing any thing remark∣able there. But Lamboi having joyn'd these Princes at the beginning of July, they marched together on the 5th of that month, with eight thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse, to fight the Mareschal, who had a thousand Horse and a thousand Foot more than they had.Siri Mer. T. 1. l. 2. p. 418. The Relation of the Battel of Sedan in the Mem. of Montresor p. 398. The Mareschal had positive Orders not to hazard a Battel, and he only propos'd to himself to hinder them from passing the Meuse, and entering the Kingdom, according to the instructions he had received. But the Enemies having passed the River, within a quarter of a league of his Camp, before the Mareschal's Guards perceiv'd it; as he marched the next day towards the River, expecting the Enemy might attempt to pass it, he found to his surpize that their Army marched towards him, near the Wood of Marfee. He immediately put himself in Battel array in very good order, while the Enemy did the same, in a place too narrow, and much less advantageous, so that in all probability they would be beaten. The Mareschal's Right Wing began the Battel with some advantage, but the Cavalry of the Left Wing, possest by I know not what sort of a pannic fear, turn'd back upon their own Foot, whom they put into disorder; so that the Royal Infantry being attackt by the Princes, was broken after some resistance, and fled with the Horse, which it was impossible to perswade to rally again. This movement carried away the Right Wing, and the Mareschal was oblig'd to retreat as the rest had done. Whilst the other part of the Army fled in this manner, the Regiment of Rousillon, and two Companies of Horse of the Queen Mother, with that of Monsieur, who were in a manner the on∣ly Troops that did any service, pierced to the very place where the Count de Soissons was. This Prince seeing his men give way, marched directly to the Ene∣my, to sustain the shock; and as he expos'd himself like a common Souldier, he was wounded with a Pistol-shot in his Face, which penetrated his Head, so he fell down dead at his Horse's feet. Some say it
was a Souldier belonging to the Company of Mon∣sieur, who shot him without knowing him; others, that it was one of the Count's own Guards. How∣ever it was, these three Companies of Horse, that had the bravery to combat a victorious Enemy, were intirely cut in pieces. The Royal Army lost five hundred men, the rest escaping with that haste into the neighbouring Woods, that the Enemy could not follow them. Nevertheless there were two thousand taken Prisoners, and among them several Officers of note. The Malecontents did also gain the Cannon, all the Baggage, and lost but very few men. But the death of the Count de Soissons, which dispirited the whole party, was infinitely more fatal to them, than the victory was advantageous. The Mareschal de Chatillon retir'd to Rethel, where he stayed to pick up the remainder of his Army, and the Mareschal de Bre∣ze, to whom he was by no means well affected, wasThe 15 of July. sent to command with him, in order to mortify him, because he had transgressed his Orders. In the mean time Lamboi took Dunchery, which made a gallant re∣sistance, but being not fortified, was obliged to sur∣render. The Royal Army being reinforced by several Bodies, was on the march, when the King ar∣rived thither, to retake this place, which heThe 31 of July. redu∣ced in two days, Lamboi not daring to oppose him. At last, as they put all things in readiness to go and attack Sedan, unless the Duke made an accommoda∣tion suddenly, he thought it not convenient to wait the consequences of a Siege. The King granted to the Duke and to all those of his party,See it in the Mem. of Aubery. T. 2. l. 36. and the ∣ticle  Sa M. I. 2. l. 1. p. 15. Letters of Par∣don, and a neutrality to the principality of Sedan, that it might not be exposed to the excursions of the Spani∣ards. However Lamboi went to joyn the Imperial Army near Aire, as I have already observed. The Duke came in person to Dunchery, to make his Obei∣sance to his Majesty there, and 'tis reported that the Cardinal so highly esteem'd his conduct in this whole affair, that he said, That if it had not been a Re∣bellion, he would have preferr'd it to all the under∣takings of the famous Spinola. Thus our fortunate Minister faw a terrible storm, which threatned his
head, and which broke out at first in a signal victory, to scatter of it self by the death of one of his greatest Enemies. But notwithstanding this the Duke of Bou∣illon did not become his friend, as we shall see in the history of the following year. The Bishop of NiceSir Mer. T. 2. l. 1. p. 362. and the other Agents of the Cardinal of Savoy, and Prince Thomas his Brother, obtained, after a long negotiation, at Madrid, that bet∣ter care should be taken to assist these Princes than had been done the last Campaign. They granted to the Cardinal provisions of all sorts, as much as should last a year, for the County of Nice, together with the pensions they had promis'd him and his Brother. Par∣ticular Orders were dispatched to the Count de Sir∣vela, Governour of Milan, to furnish these Princes exactly with what they had promis'd them. But as Prince Thomas was to be General in Chief of the Spa∣nish Army, and to share authority with Sirvela, the latter, who envied the great advantages of this Prince, forgot nothing which might render him suspected to the Court of Madrid, not remembring the Interests of the Crown, which required that this Prince should be well used, who was able to do a great deal of mischief to France, and was the only person capable to com∣mand the Spanish Army in Italy. The Governor of Milan sent his accounts to Madrid, by which it ap∣peared that the Princes of Savoy were much in debt to the Treasury of Milan, so far was he from putting the Court in mind of the arrears of their pensions. Al∣tho Count Masserati, Agent to Prince Thomas, very plainly discover'd the gross falsity of these accounts, yet the Count-Duke prepossest in Sirvela's behalf, would not listen to him. The Princes of Savoy hav∣ing received this news from Madrid, thought now of accommodating themselves in good earnest with France, and to do it the more handsomely, they sent to acquaint the Count de Sirvela, that the King of France was ready to surrender all the places he held in Piedmont to the Duke of Savoy, provided the Spa∣niards would do the same on their side. The Count made answer, that he had no power to treat about an affair of that consequence; which gave the Princes a
plausible occasion to renew all the complaints they had made against the Ministers of Spain, and to say particularly, that the Spaniards had a design to strip the House of Savoy, and not to assist it against France, as they had pretended. Several Negotiations passed upon this, and some o∣ther difficulties between the Princes of Savoy and the Count, but at last the Spaniards not giving them that satisfaction they demanded, they made their ac∣commodation with France, and with the Dutchess of Savoy, which was concluded at TurinIb. 615. on the 14th of June. To effect it with more security, they caus'd a report to be spread before hand, that the French went to besiege Trino in Montferrat, and pray'd Sir∣vela to send some men thither with all possible speed. The Count suffering himself to be intrapt, drew out the Spaniards that were in Yvrce, to march that way, but afterwards Prince Thomas would not let them come in again. The Cardinal of Savoy likewise turn'd Tuttavilla, who commanded the Spanish Troops, out of Nice, making him embark by himself, without suffering him to speak to any one, in a Brigandine, under pre∣tence that they had received advice that he design'd to surprize the Castle of Villa Franca. After this it was no difficult matter to turn out the Troops that were destitute of their Leader, so that the Cardinal found himself in a condition to conclude with France and his Sister-in-Law, without running any hazard. He afterwards married his own Neice, daughter to the Dutchess of Savoy, altho there was a great dispa∣rity between their ages. The Duke of Longueville was ordered to command the Army in Italy, and Prince Thomas concerted mea∣sures with him, to regain the places which the Spani∣ards still held in Piedmont, and to attack the Milanese. This they began to perform with great success, while Italy was embroil'd in the War of the Barberines against the Duke of Parma, as I shall hereafter observe. The States General of theIb. 310. Ʋnited Provinces having resolved to act only upon the defensive this year, the Spaniards had no occasion to oppose them with a con∣siderable Body of men. So they turned the whole
forces of the Low Countries against France, and attackt Lens on the 17th of April, with an Army of twenty five thousand men, commanded by D. Francisco de Mello, Governor of the Low Countries. D' Anisy, who was Governor of the place, acquitted himself so ill in his duty, that the Enemy took part of the Out∣works without any resistance, and enter'd into it by composition on the 19th. The Count d' Harcourt, who commanded ten thousand men in Picardy, being inform'd of his Cowardice, condemn'd him by a Council of War to have his Head struck off, if he could be taken, or to be executed in Essigies in the Market-place at Peronne, in case they could not ap∣prehend him. Upon the news of Lens being besieg'd,Antoine de Gram∣mont who was made Mareschal of France. the 22 of Sep. 1641. the Mareschal de Guiche, with a small Army which he had to cover Champagne, marcht to the relief of the place; but when he heard it was surrender'd he went to Peronne, which was the rendezvous of the Count d' Harcourt's Army, whom he was to joyn. A few days after the taking of Lens, D. Francisco de Mello went to lay Siege to Bassee, a small place, well fortified by the French since it was in their hands. The Spanish General needed not many Pioneers to work on the Circumvallation, because it was cover'd by the River Lis, and several Canals into which the Country is cut, except on one side for the compass of a league, where he made his Retrenchments so strong, that it was impossible to force them. The French sent fifteen thousand men to observe them, but durst not attack them; and altho the Siege went on slowly, by reason of the brave resistance of the Garri∣son, nevertheless the Spaniards carried the Outworks by little and little; so that Bourdonne, Governor of the place, having no hopes to be relieved, surrendred it on the 13th of May, upon very honourable condi∣tions. The Garrison, which had been at the beginning three thousand strong, had not then above two thou∣sand four hundred, several of which were sick or wounded. The Spanish Army stay'd within their Lines till the 24th of May, [after] which they separated in two bodies, to oblige the French, who were weaker than
they, to do the same. The Count d' Harcourt went to encamp near Hedin, at the Abbey of Cercamp; and the Mareschal de Guiche near Catelet, at that of Honnecourt. The latter had intrench'd himself slight∣ly enough near a Wood, which he thought to be im∣penetrable by an Army, and therefore had not made any Retrenchments on that side. Whether D. Fran∣cisco de Mello was inform'd of it or no, he march'd directly to him with the greatest part of his Forces.The 26 of May. While they attackt the Retrenchments on one side, on the other they entred the Wood, by dislodging some of the French that were there, and put them∣selves in Battel between the Wood and the Camp. Altho the French fought with a great deal of Brave∣ry, and return'd several times to the Charge, yet be∣ing much inferiour in number, they were at last obli∣ged to give way and fly. They lost fifteen hundred men, and left above two thousand Prisoners in the hands of the Spaniards, who likewise gain'd the great∣est part of the Colours, and an hundred thousand Crowns in Money, which was design'd for the payment of the Army. They on their side lost but very few men, and might almost have taken the whole French Army Prisoners, if they had pursued them with more vigour. The Mareschal, grown desperate to see him∣self defeated, stay'd a long time in the Abbey on pur∣pose to be made a Prisoner, and it was not without a great deal of difficulty, that he was perswaded to leave it. After the loss of this Battel, Picardy, which was destitute of forces sufficient to defend it, expected to be pillaged in a few days, because the King was then in Rousillon, as I shall observe anon, and could not put things in order there. But the Spanish General, in∣stead of making the best advantage of his Victory, stay'd a long time to deliberate whether he should march into Germany to fall upon theThe King made him Mareschal a Naibon, as well as la Mo he Hauan∣court. Mareschal de Guebriant, or else enter France to oblige the Armies which attackt Rousillon and Catalonia, to come and defend their own Kingdom. It was believed that D. Francisco de Mello would not fail to do the latter, at least after he had reposed himself a few days; but
he did not resolve what measures to take, pretending that he had receiv'd Orders from Madrid, not to en∣gage the Army in any considerable enterprize, be∣cause cause the Court of Spain had thoughts to employ them upon another occasion, which I shall mention anon, but was already past, and the Governor of the Low Countries knew nothing of it. The Cardinal was at Frontignan when he receiv'd the news of the Mareschal's defeat (who had married one of his Relations) and how much he took it to heart: So he writ him this Letter, which I thought it not amiss to set down. Men may do all that prudence, and the present occasions suggest to them, but the event is in the hand of God. The best Captain in the world may lose a Battel; and when such a misfortune befalls him, he ought to comfort himself, if he did all that he could and ought to do. Take heart therefore, my poor Count, and omit nothing that lies in your power, to hinder this acci∣dent, which has happen'd to you, from being attended with any ill consequences. If I had a strong Arm, I would of∣fer it to you, but in whatever condition I am, be assured that I am entirely yours. The 6th of June, 1642. The irresolute proceedings of D. Francisco de Mello deli∣ver'd the Mareschal out of his apprehensions; and this blow, which rightly manag'd, might have destroy'd the Cardinal himself, did not shake his authority in the least. At last, the designs of theSiri Mer. T. 2. l. 2. p. 880. Master of the Horse, of which I shall speak immediately, being discover'd, and the Duke of Bouillon apprehended, the Spaniards imagin'd that if they advanced towards Sedan, the Dutchesses of Bouillon, Mother and Wife to the Duke who was now a Prisoner, would, to revenge his quar∣rel, open the Gates of this important place to them, or at least grant them a free passage into Champagne. But the Dutchesses considering that the Dukes life depended upon their good conduct, absolutely refus'd it, so that he retir'd to Mons, where General Bec lay. In the meanIn the month of August. time, D. Andre Cantelmo made an ir∣ruption with six thousand Foot and twelve hundred Horse, into the Bolonnois, where he seiz'd upon seve∣ral Forts and important Posts between the Cities of
Graveline, Calais, and Ardres. But the Count d' Har∣court having immediately sent the Marquis de Seneterre, with two thousand Foot and six hundred Horse, he follow'd soon after himself, and so they presently put a stop to the progress of Cantelmo. The Count regain'd in the space of four and twenty hours, and that with the greatest ease imaginable, all that Cantelmo had been gaining with difficulty in six days. The Country suffer'd exceedingly by this invasion of the Spamards; however they did not divert the forces that were em∣ploy'd against them in Rousillon and Catalonia, and attempted nothing more considerable in the Low Coun∣tries for the rest of the year. Thus the ill conduct of the Count-Duke, and of the other Ministers of Spain, made that Crown lose the best opportunity they could have desired, to humble France, by carrying the War into the heart of the Kingdom, as the French endea∣vour'd to do in relation to Spain. One may remark upon this occasion, as upon several more, that the great incapacity of the Count-Duke made the conduct of the Cardinal-Duke to be so much admired; which had frequently appear'd but very indifferent, had he been to deal with people that had been Masters but of common prudence and discretion. To come now to the affairs of Rousillon and Catalo∣nia; ever since the beginning of this year, it had been resolved to undertake the Conquest of Rousillon, which was absolutely necessary, either to cover the Frontiers of France on that side, or to support the Rebellion of the Catalonians, to whom it would be a difficult mat∣ter to send relief, if they were not in possession of Rou∣sillon. Besides, France pretended to have a right to that Country, which is the reason why she has not surren∣dred it since. Over and aboveSiri Mer. T. 2. l. 2. p. 566. these reasons of State, the Cardinal, who perceiv'd that the King was grown somewhat cold towards him, was willing to engage him in some considerable enterprize, which as long as it lay upon his hands, he should not be in a condition to part with him. This Prince, who had began to fall into a languishing distemper, of which he died someThe 14 of May 1643. months after the Cardinal, was unwilling at first to make this Voyage, as contrary to his health. The
Chief Physician was of the same opinion, and the Master of the Horse seconded him in private before the King. But the Cardinal so order'd matters that the Chief Physician soon after chang'd his discourse, and his Majesty resolv'd to go thither. It seems the Cardinal only design'd that the King should go to LanguedocSee the Kings Let∣ter to the Chancellor, in Aube∣ry's Mem. T. 2. p. 842. without coming in person to the Siege of Perpignan, at least he testified as much after∣wards. This resolution being taken, the King order'd twenty two thousand effective men, of the best Troops in the Kingdom, to march on the side of Nar∣bonne, and these were to be joyn'd by the other forces that were already in Languedoc and Dauphine, besides abundance of Volunteers. In the mean time the Ma∣reschal de Breze, Vice-roy of Catalonia, and La Mothe Houdancourt had orders to observe the Spaniards upon the Frontiers of Arragon, to hinder them from send∣ing any relief into Rousillon through Catalonia. Before the King parted for Languedoc, all possible care was taken for the security of the other Frontiers of the Kingdom, during his Majesty's absence. Or∣ders were given to the Count de Guebriant, who still commanded the remainder of the Duke of Weymar's Army, not to stir from the Rhine, near which he was posted, in the Electorate of Colen, lest the Armies of the House of Austria should attempt any thing against France on that side. The P. of Orange sent him one party of his Horse, at the earnest instances of the Cardinal, who threaten'd the States to take away the Regiments from them which the King entertain'd in their Army, if they would not assist the Count in this occasion, where the Spaniards had sent fourscore Troops of Horse to act upon the Rhine. Care was also taken to send three thousand men to Count d' Erlach in Alsa∣tia, for the defence of those places which he there held for France. Du Hallier commanded in Lorrain, and the Count de Grancey in Burgundy. The Duke of Bouillon was to go and joyn the Army in Italy, to command it with the Duke of Longueville: and pro∣vision was made for Picardy, Artois, and Champagne, as I have already observ'd.
All things being disposed after this manner, the Cardinal advised the King to carry the Queen and Duke of Orleans along with him, lest there should be any caballing against his Ministry in his absence. He was of opinion too that the Children of France should be left at Bois de Vincennes, under a good Guard, where they could run no manner of danger. These strange counsels, which suppos'd that the State was in danger, unless the persons that were most concern'd in its pre∣servation were under the eyes or guard of the Mini∣ster, gave his enemies an occasion to say that he en∣deavour'd to destroy the King, and make himself Re∣gent of the Kingdom. Perhaps he had no such design in his head, but his austere and haughty way of treat∣ing the most eminent persons at Court, did every day increase the number of his Enemies, and made them say some things, which otherwise they had never spo∣ken. The Queen broke this design which the King had form'd to carry her with him, by telling him all in tears, that she could never endure to be separated from her Children; and, as it was not thought ad∣visable to expose them to so tedious a Journey, the King gave her leave to stay with him at St. Germains. The Prince of Conde was left at Paris with the Title of Regent, during his Majesty's absence, and two hundred men assign'd him for his Guard. Towards the beginning of the year, the Troops march'd on the side of Lyons, and were follow'd by the Mareschal de la Meilleraye, who was to command them, and by the Vicount de Turenne, who had the quality of Lieutenant General. The Duke of Bouil∣lon likewise arrived at Paris on the 22d of January, there to receive the command of the Armies in Italy. He went afterwards to see the King at St. Germains, and the Cardinal at Ruel, where he was extremely well received. However, 'tis reported that the Car∣dinal advis'd him to take care, never to engage him∣self in any design for the future, which tended to em∣broil the Kingdom; telling him that a relapse would be mortal. The Duke did not much regard this ad∣vice, as what follows will discover; and the Cardi∣nal's prediction was accomplish'd.
Before the Generals parted from Paris, the Cardi∣nal regaled them magnificently at his Palace, with Monsieur, and several of the Nobility. In the same Hall there was a second Table for the Ladies, which was serv'd with the same magnificence. The Repast was follow'd with a Comedy, which was expressly acted for this occasion. After Candlemas the King began his Journey, ac∣companied by the Cardinal, and both of them flat∣ter'd themselves that they should be able to carry the War into the bowels of Spain, and overthrow that Monarchy, by causing a general insurrection of its Subjects, after the conquest of Rousillon; but neither of them knew that Death would soon put an end to all the unjust projects which the Master and his Disciple (for what fitter name can we give them) had said for so many years; the one through weakness, the other through ambition. The King being at Lyons, made a review of his Troops that were quarter'd about that City, and amounted to fifteen thousand Foot, and four thousand Horse. The Spaniards receiving advice of the great prepa∣rations made by the King of France, his Catholic Ma∣jesty issued outThe 4 of January. Siri Mec. T. 2. l. 1. p. 50. Letters of Pardon to the Catalonians, if they would return to their duty, promising to give them all manner of satisfaction as to their complaints, and to maintain them in all their Rights and Privileges. But this remedy, which might have been effectual at first, did not produce the effect intended, because the Catalonians durst not rely upon it.Ib. l. 2. p. 133. The Ministers of Spain were likewise inform'd, about the beginning of the Year, that there was so great a scarcity of victuals at Perpignan, that it would be a difficult matter for them to hold out a few weeks longer. So they sent provisions to Collioure, which were to be guarded by six thousand men as for as Perpignan. The Mareschal de Breze being posted upon a small River called Ba∣ranco, with seven thousand Foot, and eight hundred Horse, put himself in a posture to hinder them from entring the Town. However, the Marquis de Tor∣recuse, who commanded the Spanish Troops, found means in the night time to send forty Mules laden with
provisions into Perpignan, and the French knew no∣thing of the matter. A few days after,Towards the end of January. Torrecuse conducted more relief and victuals into the place, notwithstanding all the efforts of the Mareschal to prevent it, but this was not done without coming to blows. The French had almost always the worst in three or four rancounters; and the Marquis, after he had placed some Regiments in Perpignan, carried the rest of his Troops back to Collioure, without loss, altho the French pursued him. From thence, leaving the Marquis de Mortare Governor of the place, he went to Castile, where his conduct was extremely commended. In the mean time, La Mothe Houdan∣court surpriz'd a Quarter of the Spanish Troops, com∣manded by the Marquis d' Inoyosa, within a few leagues of Valz, and oblig'd him to retire to Tarragone. Not long after, the Mareschal de Breze made a solemn entry into Barcelona, and onSee the Act of it in Siri Merc. T. 2. l. 1. p. 137. the 23d of February swore, in his Majesty's name, to pre∣serve the Privileges and Franchises of the Catalo∣nians. The King parted the same day from Lyons, andIb. 313. took the way to Narbonne. Being at Valence, he gave with his own hands a Cardinals Cap to Mazarine; who from that time wholly devoted himself to the service of the Crown. The King, altho he was some∣what indisposed, yet he pursued his Journey to Nar∣bonne, through all the inconveniences of Frost and Snow; and there on the 23d of March created two Mareschals of France, the Count de Guebriant, and La Mothe Houdancourt. Nor did the rigour of the season retard the motion of the Army, which on the 17th of March went to besiege Collioure, a place of great consequence, defended by the Marquis de Mor∣tare, with three thousand men in garrison. This Port was necessary to the French, both to hinder the Spa∣niards from relieving Rousillon, as also to make use of it themselves. The Count-Duke knowing the impor∣tance of it, sent orders to D. Pedro de Arragon, Mar∣quis de Povar, who commanded the Army in Cata∣lonia, to advance with all his Cavalry to Collioure, and to hazard all in the relief of the place. The Mar∣quis
represented to him how difficult it was to march through Catalonia, a mountainous uneven Country and full of defiles, in spight of la Mothe Houdancourt, who guarded all the passes with extraordinary care. Besides this, it was the highest indiscretion imagina∣ble to hazard the only Horse which Spain had on that side for its defence. But the Count, who was positive and inflexible, and naturally affected to have senti∣ments particular to himself, did not change his opi∣nion, but dispatched Orders afresh to the Marquis, who now prepar'd to see them executed, whatever they cost him. After he had made some movements, the better to conceal his march from the Enemies, he took the road from Ville-Franche to Martorel, with three thousand five hundred Horse. But on the 26th of March he could not hinder the Mareschal de la Mothe, who suspected his design, from cutting part of his Rear in pieces at the pass of the River Her∣bergue. Two days after, la Mothe gave another at∣tack to the Spaniards at the pass of another River, pass'd it after them and oblig'd them to retire into a Wood, after he had killed abundance of their men; so that D. Pedro d' Arragon resolv'd at last, in spite of the reiterated Orders from Madrid, to return to Tar∣ragone. As he took but small store of Victuals along with him, thinking he should be able to cross Cata∣lonia in a few days, they now began to fail him, and the French on the other side keeping his Army per∣petually in breath, his Troops were extremly fati∣gued without being able to perform any thing. At last on the 31st of March, being surrounded on all sides by the French and the Catalonians, without any possibility of making his escape, D. Pedro d' Arra∣gon surrendred himself prisoner of War to la Mothe Houdancourt with about two thousand Horse. Thus the principal Troops which Spain had for its own preser∣vation, were destroyed by the ill advice of the Count-Duke, who engaged them in an enterprize which any one else would have found extremely difficult, but was absolutely impossible for the Marquis de Po∣var to effect. The French Generals immediately set the Portugueses at liberty, because they were in war with
Spain, and all the rest were sent to Languedoc and Pro∣vence. The Marquis de Leganez was accused to have advis'd the Count-Duke to send D. Pedro d' Arragon into Rousillon, and perhaps he did it with a design to let the Spaniards see, that he was not the only bad General that commanded their Armies, and how dif∣ficult a matter it was to surprize the French. In the mean time the Mareschal de la Meilleraye had made himself Master of the Town of Collioure, and nothing now remain'd but the Castle, situated upon a Rock, which they despair'd to reduce by force. But a Mine, from which they expected scarce any effect, because the Rock hindred them from carrying it far enough, as it play'd fill'd up the pits of the Castle, which was supplied with no other Water, and ob∣liged the Garrison to surrender, when they the least thought of any such thing. It capitulated on the 10th of April, and the Castle of St. Elme, which stands up∣on an inaccessible Rock above the Port, was likewise comprehended in the capitulation, altho it might have held out several days longer. At last the Army march'd to Perpignan, and his Majesty having receiv'd information that the place was but slenderly stored with provisions, designed to reduce it by Famine rather than by Force. Besides the scarcity of provisions, which was confirm'd by all the Prisoners that were taken, there was a powerful Garrison within, and the Cittadel especially was so strong by its natural situation and by art, that it was not possible to take it by force, without losing a world of men. D. Flores d' Avila was Governor of it, and had for his Lieutenant D. Diego Cavalliero, and they seem'd inclin'd to defend it to the last extremity. However the King came thither in person, and order∣ed the Lines of Circumvallation and Countervallation to be made, which he marked out himself. At this conjuncture Spain found it self in a great perplexity, without Money, the Sinews of War, with∣out a disciplin'd Army, and without Generals to command it, while on one side the Portugueses with∣drew themselves from its Obedience, and kept all the neighbourhood in perpetual alarms, and on the other
side, France made continual inroads into Rousillon, and Catalonia. The Ministers of the Catholic King met every day, but were not able to come to any conclusion; some of them were of opinion that the King should go in person to the Kingdoms of Arra∣gon and Valentia, to assemble the States there, that so he might at a nearer distance provide for the pressing neessities of Catalonia. The Count-Duke opposed this motion under-hand, lest the King who saw no∣thing but by his Eyes, should now of himself perceive what little care his Favorite had taken in all places, to remedy the present disorders. The Nobility and People did every where loudly complain, that the Count-Duke made the King fruitlessly lose time in deliberations, at the best season of the year, altho the King of France had open'd the Campaign in person, before the Winter was over. The Count-Duke was by no means qualified to take any vigorous resoluti∣ons, and much less to put them in execution with that speed which the present face of affairs required, and thus the King began to be sensible somewhat of the latest for the Interest of Spain. At last, he resolved to go into Arragon, notwithstanding all the artifices of his Favourite; but he ought to have made this Journey the last year, before so great a number of French Troops came into Catalonia and Rousillon. The Mareschal de la Mothe having at the same time received a new reinforcement of men, thought to prevent the King of Spain, and with that design en∣ter'd the Kingdom of Valentia. But after he had be∣sieg'd Tortose for several days, and lost a great many of his Souldiers before the place, he was constrain'd to raise the siege. Soon after he took Tamarith, and having broke into the Kingdom of Valentia, he be∣sieged Monzon, andThe 5 of June. Siri Mer. T. 2. l. 2. p. 683. forced the place to surrender by Capitulation. In the mean time their provisions daily diminish'd at Perpignan, and each Souldier receiv'd only a few ounces of Bread every day, with a small quantity of Horse-flesh. The Spanish Nation, which is naturally sober and patient, bore this way of living quietly enough; and the Mareschal de la Meilleraye, who
was of advice that force should be employ'd against the besieged, began to grow impatient, and weary of this long blockade. He maintain'd, that by attack∣ing the place, the Governour would be oblig'd to di∣stribute the victuals more liberally among the Souldi∣ers, to give them strength and courage: But the King still continued in his first sentiments, to spare the blood of his Subjects. The Spaniards had got to∣gether the greatest body of men they were able, and had already near Tarragone ten thousand men under the Marquis de Leganez; and six thousand Foot and two thousand Horse under the Marquis de Torrecuse. The last of these was to come by Sea to Roses, and relieve Perpignan; and the other was to fight the Mareschal de la Mothe. The French being inform'd of these projects, took all imaginable care to fortifie and guard all the posts, by which Rousillon might be enter'd; either by Sea or by Land: and the Mareschal de la Mothe, after he had put eight hundred men into Monzon, that so he might always have an open pas∣sage to the Kingdom of Arragon, return'd to Lerida, to observe the Spaniards in Catalonia, and to oppose their designs. At last, the Catholic King parted, on the 24 of April, with a very small train of Coaches, and without any Troops. The Count-Duke, who ought to have taken care that some of the most experiencd Officers in the Army should have attended on his Majesty, and en∣tertain'd him about the affairs of the Campaign, pro∣vided him with a Company of Players, in order to retard his Journey as much as was possible; and, in effect, he spent the months of May and June, to reach so far as the Frontiers of Valentia, altho the Marquis de Leganez pressed him to draw near, be∣cause his Army was unprovided of every thing, and the people of this Kingdom would not contribute to the maintenance of it. At last he advanced to Moli∣na, upon the Frontiers of Arragon. Several Councils of War were held there, and it was concluded that the Marquis de Torrecuse should be sent by Land to Rousillon, through Catalonia, while the Marquis de Leganez and de Tavara amused the French and Catalo∣nians.
About the beginning of July, an engagement hap∣pen'd on the Coasts of Catalonia, between the Fleets of France and Spain, which lasted two days, without any great loss on either side; however it proved ex∣tremely prejudicial to the Spaniards, who could never hope to save Rousillon without beating the French Fleet. The latter retir'd to Barcelona, and the other to Majorca. The fight had scarce begun, when a man, pretending himself to be sent by the Duke de Cindad-Real, Admiral of the Spanish Fleet, took post to carry the news to the King, that the Duke had gain'd an entire Victory, and taken from the French sixty Ships, and ten Gallies. In his way thither he happen'd to communicate his design to one Perazza, a Captain in the Regiment of Mortare: This last, to get the Royal Present, which the carrier of so good news would undoubtedly receive from the King, cunningly got there before him, and filled the Court with joy before the other arrived. Soon after he arrived, and past for a new Courrier, who con∣firm'd what the former had said. The King and the Favourite, transported with joy, without condescend∣ing to examine the bearers of this news, dispatch'd Dominic d' Herrera to the Queen, to give her advice of this Victory, and she presented him with three hun∣dred Crowns, and a Golden Chain. At the same time orders were sent to the Marquis de Torrecuse, who was upon his march, to stay where he was, till he re∣ceiv'd fresh orders, because the Victory which the Fleet had gain'd, open'd a passage by Sea to the Spa∣nish forces; and thus they made him lose the oppor∣tunity of relieving Perpignan. Not long after a Bark arrived at Veneros, which brought a true relation of the engagement; and they no sooner heard the news at Court, but they were in a strange confusion, for having so slightly believ'd a thing of that importance, and dispersing wrong in∣formations all over the Kingdom. From extremity of joy the King past to extremity of sorrow, and sent a second order to the Marquis de Torrecuse, wherein he expressly forbid him to hazard a Battel upon any terms, till he had received a fresh reinforcement.
He afterwards joyn'd the Marquis de Mortare, who me from Saragossa, and they marched together to rragone, to the number of four thousand Horse, d twelve thousand Foot. The King still tarried me time at Molina, and afterwards went to Sara∣ssa, where he stay'd till September; and as nothing  as resolv'd upon in relation to the War, the Army  Rousillon continued undisturb'd in their posts about erpignan, til such time as the place surrendred. It may with reason enough be affirm'd, that part f the losses which the Crown of Spain sustain'd, and e greatest part of the advantages which France ain'd over her, were the effects of the prudence and ast abilities of the Cardinal-Duke. However, he narrowly escap'd being assassinated, or at least to sur∣vive his Prince's favour, in the midst of so many e∣vents that were so extremely advantageous to the Crown. The Master of the Horse, being as we have alrea∣dy said, become an Enemy to the Cardinal, thought of nothing else but how to destroy him. To compass this design, he believed there was a necessity of having the assistance of Monsieur, who as he never had any real kindness for this Minister, still hated him, not∣withstanding all the seeming reconciliations that had been made between them. It was no difficult mat∣ter for Cinq-Mars to gain him,Se Siri Mer. T 2. l. 2. p. 571. by representing to him that the Cardinal, finding the King was indispo∣sed, endeavour'd to get himself nominated Regent of the Kingdom in his Will, exclusively of all others that might better pretend to it. The Duke, who de∣sired nothing so earnestly as he did this, and knew the great ambition of the Minister, was easily induced to believe it, and had several secret conferences with the Master of the Horse, to contrive means to ruine him. But as the Duke of Orleans was none of the fittest men at finding out expedients, the Master of the Horse thought it would be his wisest course to get the Duke of Bouillon, who was engaged in the same affair, to come and meet him at Paris. He sent a Messenger to desire him to come thither, at the same time that the Cardinal dispatched a Courier to him
to oblige him to come before the King's departure, on purpose to receive his Orders to go and command the Army of Italy. Accordingly he came and saw the Master of the Horse at Paris and St. Germains,Se the Raon of  a  in the or's of oneor. where they concluded that it was absolutely necessa∣ry to treat with Spain, that they might have an Ar∣my sufficient to cover Sedan, and to give battle, as the year before, without which it was impossible to defend Sedan against the Armies of France that were in Champagne, in Picardy, and Artois. It was also a∣greed between them that they should treat with the King of Spain in the name of Monsieur, who gave Letters, and necessary instructions to Fontrailles, to address himself in his name to the Count-Duke. This Messenger arrived safely at Madrid, andSigned h  of Ma . See  id. p. 572. concluded a Treaty with the Count-Duke, whereby the King of Spain promis'd to give Monsieur twelve thousand Foot, and five thousand Horse of old Troops, besides four hundred thousand Crowns in ready Money, to raise more. Monsieur promised to be ready at a place of security, which was Sedan, to put himself at the head of this Army, and enter France, with a design to oblige the Cardinal to consent to a Peace between the two Crown, which was pretended to be the end of this Treaty: But at the bottom 'twas only to turn out the Cardinal, by raising a Civil War in France; the Duke of Orleans no more troubling himself about the welfare of the people, than the Minister of the King his Brother. The Cardinal easily perceived that the Master of the Horse was contriving some mischief against him, but he knew none of the particulars of his designs. A report was spread about that the affection which the King had for his Minister, was sensibly diminish∣ed, and that Cinq-Mars had much the greater share of his Majesty's favour. The Cardinal fearing lest this report, which his enemies industriously spread about in all places, might become true, if it was not so already, resolved not to lose the King out of his sight, in his Journey to Rousillon. They lodged all the way in the same places, altho they were very much straitned for want of room, and that heretofore they
were always accustomed to lodge in different places. Besides this, the Cardinal never fail'd to see the King every morning and evening, to dissipate by his pre∣sence all the contrivances that might have been used to prepossess his Majesty against him; and as the Master of the Horse fell infinitely short of the dexte∣rity of the Minister, in the art of managing a Prince so difficult as he was, the Cardinal easily broke and frustrated all the measures of that Favorite. 'Tis reported that the latter had more than onceon∣tr s in  e a∣t design'd to kill the Cardinal, but that neither the Duke of Orleans, nor De Thou, to whom he had spoke about it, would give their approbation or cont to that attempt.Si lb. 377. Others say that the Macer of the Horse had agreed with Monsieur to execute this pre∣ject in their journey to Languedoc, but that having found an opportunity to do it at Briare, he durst nt put it in execution in the absence of Monsieur, wh in the Gout hinder'd from following the King. He had the same design at Lyons, when a great number of the Nobility of Auvergne came to see him, and he. proposed it to the King, who rejected it with de∣testation, altho on the other hand he sometimes seem'd to be displeas'd with the Cardinal, and would suffer Cinq-Mars to speak ill of him. In the mean time the Duke of Orleans endeavour'd to bring the Duke of Beaufort over to his party, who was lately come back from England, and then resided to Vendome. But the Duke, who knew that the Abbot of la Riire, Chaplain to Monsieur, never endeavoured to engage his Master and his Friends in any dangerous affair, but only to make his own advantage by betraying them, would not listen to it. In the mean time the Master of the Horse, who ought dextrously to have managed and kept up te good inclinations which the King had for him, by complying with all his desires, and applauding every thing he said, took a pleasure to contradict him, and kept away from the King's person, at these s when his Majesty did most desire to have him er him; when his Friends represented to him that  would infallibly ruine himself by this ill codue, as
told them that he was not able to endure the unsavo∣ry smell of the King's breath After so prodigious a stupidity as this was, what wonder is it if the Car∣dinal was able to destroy a young man so insupporta∣ble arrogant and indiscreet? And therefore it was vi∣sible at Narbonne that the affection which the King had for him was considerably lessen'd. At this time the Cardinal fell extremely ill in this City, of a distemper in his arm, which he formerly had been troubled with, and two imposthumes that were form'd in his breast, as I shall observe when I come to his last sickness. His Relations took him to be dead, and he made his Will, which he was notSee to∣wards the end of the Carinals Life by Au∣bery. able to sign, on the 23d of May. 'Tis commonly said, that the Master of the Horse, fearing lest the coldness he discovered in the King, should prove the fore∣runner of his disgrace, had absolutely resolved to dispatch the Cardinal out of the way; but that being informed by his Physicians, that he could only linger a few weeks more, he thought it better to let him dye of his distemper, than to hasten his death by a violence, which in all probability would be fatal to the person that committed it. In the Camp at Perpignan the whole Army was divided into two Factions, one of them named Royalists, the other Cardinalists, but it seems the bravest men in the Army declared for the former. The King being in the Army fell dangerously ill there, but his illness did not last long. In the mean time, the Master of the Horse assured himself of the Guards and Swisses, and made the Officers promise to serve the Duke of Orleans in the dispute that would arise between him and the Cardinal, concerning the Megence. The Mareschals de Schomberg, and de la Meilleraye, were Heads of the contrary party; but if the King had died, in all probability they would have tack'd about. In the mean time, the favour of the Master of the Horse daily diminished, and now there remain'd little more than a feeble appearance of it, which he preserved as long as he was able: The King had no more any of those long Conferences which he used to have with him when he was in Bed. This
great alteration occasioned Cinq-Mars to press Mon∣sieur incessantly to retire to Sedan, while the King importun'd him to come to Perpignan. But the Duke neither moved for the one nor the other: He did not obey the King, under pretence of his Gout, for which reason he was advised to go to the Waters of Bourbon; and he did not go to Sedan, because he could not do it without an order in writing from the Duke of Bouillon, to the Governor of that place, which he had forgot to ask him for, before he past the Mountains. He was therefore obliged to send for it, and he in∣trusted Montmor with this Commission, to whom the Duke of Bouillon refused to give the order he de∣manded, because he did not know him. So after him was sent the Count d' Aubijouv, one of Mon∣sieur's Domestics, who departed in the habit of a Capuchin. In this interim, the Cardinal being still sick at Narbonne, and the King before Perpignan, the Mini∣ster received advice from Spain, that a certain French∣man was seen in the Count-Duke's Anti-chamber; and it was every where discoursed, that the Cardinal's enemies had made a Treaty with Spain, but at that time the Minister was not able to procure a Copy of the Treaty. This kept him in a perpetual inquie∣tude, and he desir'd the King to come to Narbonne, under a pretence of entertaining him about some mat∣ters of the greatest consequence. But he desir'd it to no purpose, the King being obstinately resolved not to quit the Blockade of Perpignan. The Cardinal likewise observed, that the King enquired very neg∣ligently after his health, which made him apprehend, that his Enemies had gain'd an entire ascendant over the King's inclinations. He did not imagine himself safe at Narbonne, so pretending that the Air of that City did not agree with him, and that his Physitians advised to go to the Waters of Tarescon, he departed from thence, and when he took any road he caused a report to be spread before, that he went another way; he often changed the road, and embarked at Ayde to go part of the way by water, that so in case of neces∣sity he might retire into Italy. Nay, 'tis said that he
had got all his Money ready, to be carry'd away with the first order, as well as his Jewels. At this time a report ran that he would infallibly fall into asgrace; but we find aAuber Mem. T. 2. p. 841. Billet of the King, dated the; of June, wherein he assures him, That what∣ever reports were scattered abroad to his disadvantage, he loved him more than ever; and that they had been now too long together, to think of parting, which he de∣sired all the world should know. This Billet was suffi∣cient to remove all his suspicions, but the indiscreet conduct of the Master of the Horse, who neither knew how to conceal his design, nor to preserve himself in the Kings favour, gave him a greater security. Thus while Monsieur and the Master of the Horse were deliberating upon what they had to do, with∣out coming to any resolution, the Cardinal receiv'd a Pacquet, wherein he found a Copy of the Treaty of Ma∣drid. Some people say it was the Nuncio in Spain that sent it to him: Others name other persons. If the Spaniards were so unwise as to let a Copy be taken of it, they committed an unpardonable Solecism; and if this Copy came from the Conspirators, the fault was still the greater. However it came about, the Cardinal no sooner procured it, but he sent Chavigny to the King to show it him, and to desire him to cause Cinq-Mars to be apprehended. Chavigny had all the trouble in the world to make his Majesty re∣solve to deliver this Criminal into the hands of Ju∣stice. He fell down upon his knees, and pray'd to God to inspire him with the best resolution, and sent for F. Sirmond a Jesuite, and his Confessor, to ask his advice. The Father Confessor was not backward to tell him, that after so enormous a crime as this was, the King need not scruple to order his Favourite to be apprehended. According to the custom of Lewis XIII, to apprehend any one for a crime against the State, and to put him to death, was in a manner the same thing; as if it had been unlawful, once in his life, to have shown mercy to some of the Cardinals Enemies. As it was a nice and difficult matter to apprehend the Master of the Horse in the Army, where he was extremely beloved, the King was resolved to go to
Narbonne, under a pretence that he had an Ague, al∣tho he could never be perswaded to go to that City, while the Cardinal was there. At that time he de∣sired to confer with him about the affairs of Picardy, which seem'd to be in danger, after the defeat of the Mareschal de Guiche. Being therefore arrived at Nar∣bonne, while the Cardinal was at Tarascon, the Ma∣ster, of the Horse, whose place would not give him leave to be from the King, follow'd him thither, al∣tho he was before-hand inform'd that his designs were discovered. Thus he was apprehended on the 14th of June, altho he hid himself, and the houses were once search'd to no purpose, the King having given orders before that the City gates should be shut. De Thou was likewise apprehended the night before, with one Chavignac a Hugonot, and some of their Servants. These two last were afterwards carried under a strong Guard to Tarascon, and the other to the Cittadel of Montpellier. In the mean time, Ossonville, Lieutenant of the Guards to the Duke of Bouillon, who sent him to at∣tend upon the Master of the Horse, being inform'd that he was apprehended, took post to carry this news to the Duke, that so he might take his mea∣sures accordingly. He past through Monfrin, a Town of Languedoc, over against Tarascon, on the other side of the Rhine, where the Vicount de Turenne was, to whom he thought he was oblig'd to tell this news. The Vicount, who knew nothing of the whole in∣trigue, and who thought the Cardinal knew no more of it than himself, believ'd he would take it kindly to be inform'd of it; so he sent to acquaint him, at the same time that he receiv'd this news from Osson∣ville, who was going into Italy. The Cardinal no sooner understood it, but he immediately dispatch'd a man with necessary orders to stop Ossonville, whom he apprehended at Valence, and there imprison'd him.Dated from the Camp before Perpignan. the 12 of June. Aub. Mem. T. 2. p. 759. Orders had been sent before to Aigucbonne, Du Ples∣sis Pralain, and Castelan, Mareschals de Camp of the Armies in Italy, to apprehend the Duke of Bouillon.Tve 23 of June. This order was executed at Casal, altho the Duke upon the first notice conceal'd himself, at the time when Conoonges, Governour of the place; was gone
to fetch the Kings order to shew it him. Thus the Duke and the Master of the Horse were taken, with∣out any prospect of escaping, partly through their own imprudence, and partly through that peculiar good fortune of the Minister, from whom very few of his Enemies escaped, while he luckily withdrew himself from the most eminent dangers. The Duke was for some time kept under a Guard in the Citta∣del of Casal, but was removed in August to Lyons, and lodged in the Prison of Pierre-Ancise. The Duke of Orleans receiving advice that the Ma∣ster of the Horse was apprehended, instead of finding out means to save and retrieve his friends, relapsed into his usual weakness, and thinking himself disco∣ver'd, sent the Abbot of la Riviere from Moulins, where he then was, to the King, to confess his fault, and beg his pardon. He writ at the same time Let∣ters,See them in the Mem. of Montr. p. 162. dated the 25th of June, to the King, to the Cardinals of Richlieu and Mazarine, and to De Noyers and Chavigny, Secretaries of Estate, full of mean submissions and lyes, either to beg mercy, or to desire Cardinal Mazarine and the two Secretaries to assist him to obtain it. However, the Duke burnt the Original of the Treaty, which Fontrailles had brought him from Spain, and only kept one Copy of it, which he might likewise have burnt had he so pleased; so that if he had been master of any resolu∣tion, it had been impossible to have convicted him of any thing. The King pardoned him, after this indiscreet discovery, upon condition that he would go to Nisy in Savoy, a House of the Duke of Nemours, where he was to reside, with a pension of 200000 Li∣vres; the rest of his Revenues being stopt to satisfie his Creditors. Monsieur desir'd to see the King before he went thither, but the King refused him that fa∣vour, and the Marquis de Villeroy had orders to ac∣company him.Ib. 171, 175, 195. At first they had some designs to send him to Venice, as it appears by several Letters, but at last they changed their resolution. Neither did he go to Nisy, so that 'tis probable the true reason why they pretended to make him leave the Kingdom, was only to oblige him to discover all he knew.
In the mean time the Secretaries of State were not wanting to incense his Majesty against the Prisoners; and the Abbots d' Effiat and de Thou expressing a de∣sign to intercede for their Brothers, he sent them word that he would not see them. The King still con∣tinuing to be indispos'd, and being now resolved to re∣turn to Paris, the Cardinal prevail'd with him to or∣der himself to be carried to Monfrin, within a league of Tarascon, that he might there see him. To this end, in the Chamber where the Cardinal lay, ano∣ther Bed was prepared for the King, which was set up at his arrival. None but de Noyers and Chavigny were present at this visit. 'Tis reported, that the Cardinal, after he had with great vehemence ennu∣merated the services he had done the Crown, re∣proached the King for countenancing the Conspira∣cies against his person, by suffering the Master of the Horse to be with him, after his Majesty knew what designs he had formed against him. This discourse drew tears from the King, who recounted to the Car∣dinal all that had past in his disadvantage, which he knew of, and promised to leave the Conspirators to Justice. At last, the King took the way to Lyons, and the Cardinal still continued at Tarascon, got theIb. 161. Secretaries to ask him, Whether in important and pressing affairs he might give orders as he should judge ex∣pedient, for his Majesty's Service, as he had frequently commanded him to do. In case the King consented to this proposal he desired he would write to him, as from his own proper motion. The King was soon prevailed upon to do what he desired, and writ to him aAubery Mem. T. 2. p. 841. Letter on the last day of June, wherein he tells him, that being constrain'd by the considera∣tion of his own affairs, as well as the Cardinal's pre∣sent indisposition to leave him in Languedoc, his in∣tention was, that he should manage all matters there which concerned the State, with the same authority as if the King himself was there in person, and that he should provide for all urgent affairs, without send∣ing to him for directions. The Cardinal return'd thisThe 2 of July, Montres. 181. answer to the King, that as he had never abused the honours he had been pleased to do him, so he would
use that power, with which his Majesty had entrust∣ed him, with all due moderation. The Duke of Orleans had indeed confest at first, in general Terms, that he had kept a very particular correspondence with the Master of the Horse, and the Duke of Bouillon, and promis'd to inform the Cardinal of all the particulars, but they desired that he would give them the detail in writing: There was some difficulty to obtain it, but at last he made aIb. 211. Declaration on the 7th of July, wherein he discover'd all that he knew. It is daced from Aigueperce in Au∣vergne, where he had leave given him to stay, instead of going to Savoy. In fine, he engaged himself to do every thing they would have him, to convict his friends of this conspiracy, provided they would suffer him to live in the Kingdom, privately, and without any retinue but such as the King would be pleased to allow him. The Duke of Bouillon being informed that the Duke of Orleans had confessed all, was induced to own all his engagements with the Master of the Horse, and their designs against the Cardinal, only he denied that he gave his consent to the Treaty of Madrid. To carry on this process and pronounce sentence against the Criminals, the Cardinal, according to his custom, nominated some Commissioners who appeared at the places assign'd, and performed all the necessary for∣malities. The Chancellor was the Chief of them, and the rest were Laubardemont, Marca, Miraumes, Nil, De Paris, Champigny, Counsellors of the Coun∣cils of his Majesty; De Chaze, and De Leve, likewise Counsellors of the King, and Masters of the ordinary Requests of his Houshold. While this Process was preparing, the Cardinal, who continued still at Tarascon, received advice that the Q. Mother, his ancient Benefactress, and for seve∣veral years one of the principal objects of his hatred, died at Colen on the third of July. He caused a Mag∣nificent service to be celebrated for her in the Colle∣giat Church, as if he design'd to make her some repa∣ration after her death, for all the evil he had done her while she was alive. 'Tis said his Majesty was
extremely grieved at this News, and that his natural affection began but too late to revive, when he came to consider that through his onw want of tenderness, and to satisfy a rigorous inflexible Minister he had suffer'd his Mother to dye in banishment and indi∣gence, and never would hearken to a reconciliation with her, altho she so earnestly desired it. The Cardinal still tarried at Tarascon, when finding himself somewhat better, he began to think of return∣ing to Paris. As he was not entirely restored to his health, and apprehended lest he should renew his distemper by being jolted in a Coach, he caused a sort of a Litter to be contrived wherein was his Bed, with a little Table and a Chair for one person to dis∣course and confer with him. It was cover'd with Damask, with a Wax covering over that, to serve in time of rain. This Litter was to be carried by eighteen men, and the Cardinal had resolved to choose Peasants for that Employment, but his Guards offer'd their service to him, and relieved one another by turns, as heretofore Alexander's Souldiers did upon a like occasion. When they were upon this duty, those that carried the Litter walked with their heads uncovered. As this Litter was too large to enter the Gates of some Towns, they were forced to beat down the walls of all those places through which the Car∣dinal was minded to pass, as well as the walls of the Houses where he lodged, and brought his portable Chamber. Nay, the Roads must be enlarged when e∣ver they happen'd to be too narrow, and levelled where they were too uneven. Thus our ambitious Minister travell'd about two hundred Leagues in this Triumphant Bed, and if I may be allowed the expres∣sion, enter'd every where through a breach, after he had equally ruin'd his private enemies, and destroy'd all the priviledges of France. To return to the Conspirators, Cinq-Mars having beenSiri Mer. T. 2. l. 3. p. 1182, &c. carried to Lyons and examined, resolutely maintain'd at first that what Monsieur deposed against him was false. He showed the same constancy when he was confronted with the Duke of Bouillon, tho he was extremely surprized at it. What perplexed the
Judges upon this occasion, was that having only one Copy of the Treaty, it was a difficult matter to con∣demn the Master of the Horse without his confession. They used all imaginable means to extort the truth out of de Thou, whom both Monsieur and the Duke of Bouillon affirmed to know the whole affair, except only the League with Spain, but he protested that he knew nothing of what they asked him, and that the only reason why he had endeavoured to cement a friendship between the Duke of Bouillon and Cinq-Mars, was upon some particular considerations which were not in the least criminal. It was discoursed, that the Duke of Orleans was to confront the Priso∣ners, but he so earnestly begged of the King to ex∣empt him from it, and so positively declared that he would rather fly to the end of the world, than be brought to so scandalous a pass, that contrary to all equity and justice, his bare testimony was to go for valid without any personal appearance, provided he would answer to the interrogatories of the Chancel∣lor in the presence of seven Commissioners. In the mean time Cinq-Mars having declared he would con∣fess all, if they would promise him his life, the Car∣dinal sent Laubardemont the Register of this Tryal to him, who promised it him upon condition, he would speak the truth against De Thou, who had, as he pre∣tended, deposed against him. He fell into this Snare, and being interrogated on the 12th of September by the Chancellor and the other Commissioners, he con∣fessed all, and as for what related to De Thou, depo∣sed that the Treaty with Spain had been communica∣ted to him by Fontrailles at Carcassonne, but that he protested against this design, and heartily-condemn'd it: Nay, that he had said more than once, that if he were not afraid of the great credit of the Criminals, he would go to discover all to the King, and that he had endeavour'd to disswade the Duke of Bouillon from this attempt, which he thought would miscarry for several reasons. Not long after, De Thou was brought to his examination, who at first denied all, but being confronted by Cinq-Mars confessed all, on∣ly he added, that he had done all that lay in his
power to make the Master of the Horse quit this en∣terprize; that he had frequently quarrelled with him for coming to these extremities, without consi∣dering what might be the consequence of them; and lastly, that being but very imperfectly instructed in this affair, and having no proofs of it in his hands, to convince the Criminals before the King, he there∣fore did not look upon himself obliged to reveal all he knew of the matter, especially since the Conspira∣tors were not in a condition to make it succeed. De Thou thought it the best way to confess all, without suffering himself to be farther prest, for fear of be∣ing put to the Rack, which he extremely dreaded, but could have avoided it by no means, if he had continued to deny the fact. The Kings Attorney General was of opinion, that both of them ought to suffer for their crime. All the Judges agreed that the Master of the Horse ought to dye, for making a Treaty with the Enemies of the Crown. De Thou was likewise found guilty of High Treason, because he did not discover this Treaty as soon as he was made acquainted with it; and for some violent presumptions that he had made it his business to engage the Conspirators in this union, a∣gainst the welfare of the State. There were only two of the Judges that voted against their being put to death; but Laubardemont urged an Edict of Lewis XI. upon this occasion, by which those that knew of any design levell'd against the Government, and don't reveal it, are declared to be guilty of High Treason. Thus they were condemned to have their Heads struck off in the Market place at Terreaux, and theSee their Trial in the 2d Tome of the Merc. of Siri l. 3. and an Ac∣count of their Death. same day Sentence was executed; lest the King, who had a great kindness for the Master of the Horse, and might be induced to have some compassion for De Thou, who was no farther a Criminal than as he had declined to accuse his Friend, should pardon them. The Cardinal still kept to his beloved Maxim, never to destroy and one by halves, and therefore pre∣vented the Clemency of Lewis XIII. by a speedy exe∣cution. After all, there is no question to be made, but that the Accused were really guilty of designing
to get the management of affairs into their own hands without the Kings consent; and if they had accom∣plished their intentions, the people had not been hap∣pier than they were under the Cardinal, and in all probability the Enemies of France had only become more formidable by it. Neither the King, nor they, according to the common opinion, were in a condi∣tion to sustain the weight of affairs with such a reso∣lution and conduct, as the Cardinal had all along shown. They were influenced by a principle of am∣bition and envy, and did not act for the real good of the people; and it was better for France, that an Ambition, supported by so little Conduct, should prove fatal to the accused, than to behold the greatest Minister she ever had, perish by their intrigues; and the King made a Slave to some persons, who were more unfit to govern than himself. However, if the King had had the Courage to have pardon'd De Thou, who was the least guilty among them, he had won the applauses of the whole Kingdom, and had not in the least sinned against the rules of good policy. Chavignac, a Hugonot Gentleman, who had served under the Duke of Rohan, and whom the Master of the Horse had got to be recalled to the Court, to em∣ploy him in his designs, was freed and acquitted, be∣cause he refused to be concerned in this matter, altho he openly profest himself to be an humble servant of Cinq-Mars. 'Tis certain his innocence appeared ve∣ry clear, since he so fortunately escap'd those Judges, who, as the world reported of them, were ready to find all people guilty, that the Cardinal had a mind to destroy. The Duke of Beaufort was accused for having re∣ceiv'd a visit from De Thou; who would have fain perswaded him to embark in this affair; and the Cardinal, who desired to discover all the Accomplices, sent for him to Court, and got the King to write to him upon that score. The Duke made answer that he knew nothing of the matter; but altho his Maje∣sty writ to him thrice to come to him, he judg'd it more advisable to pretend an indisposition, and at last withdrew into England.
As for what concerned the Duke of Bouillon, the King pardon'd him, upon condition he would deli∣ver up the City and Castle of Sedan, to be annexed to the Crown, without insisting on any other terms but his Life and Liberty; and that he should intirely trust the Kings generosity, as for what he might be pleased to give him by way of exchange.Siri Mer. T. 2. l. 3. &c Aubery Mem. T. 2. p. 766, &c. He ob∣tain'd Letters of abolition, dated the 15th of Sep∣tember, at the end of which month Cardinal Maza∣rine went to take possession of Sedan, with eleven Companies of the Guards. As soon as he was set at liberty, he took post to Montargis, where the Car∣dinal then was, to whom he made a visit; after which, without seeing the King, he retir'd into Champagne, to the Count de Roussi, his Brother-in-law, where the Dutchess of Bouillon was; and from thence to a Castle which he had in Perigord. This Prince was generally condoled for the loss he sustain∣ed; but every body was surpriz'd, that he should so easily be drawn into this design, immediately after he had fortunately got out of another. Thus the Cardinal defeated this Conspiracy, with great glory to himself, and very advantageously for the Interest of France. Altho those that envied his authority were not, properly speaking, enemies of the State, yet as they could not destroy this Minister but by embroiling the Kingdom, by the help of its real enemies, they furnished the other party with a plausible pretence to accuse them with designing to betray their King and Country. The Cardinal recei∣ving the news of the death of Cinq-Mars and De Thou, almost at the same time that advice was sent him of the reduction of Perpignan, writ a Letter to the King, which began after this manner: Sir, your arms are in Perpignan, and your Enemies are dead. In the compass of one month, France got possession of two Places, that were of the last importance to her, particularly so long as she was engaged in a War with Spain. Perpignan secured Rousillon, and put her in a condition to preserve Catalonia, in case she persisted in that resolution, and Sedan hindred the Spaniards from entring France on that side, whereas before if
they gain'd the Duke of Bouillon over to their party, which was no difficult matter, they might easily en∣ter it, when ever they pleased. On the other hand the affairs of Spain went every day worse and worse. John IV. having been proclaimed King of Portu∣gal, not only resolved to preserve the Crown, which was so lately put upon his head, but likewise to re∣gain all that it formerly possest in Afric, America, and the Indies. The Government of the Castilians was become so odious every where, where the Por∣tugueses had formerly been, that this design succeed∣ed no less happily, at a great distance from Spain that it had about the Tagus. The Portugueses receiv∣ed with extraordinary Joy the News of the re-esta∣blishment of the Flouse of Braganze, to which they generally submitted in spight of the Spaniards. In the mean time, the new King finding that the Castili∣ans were unable to preserve their usurpations, not on∣ly beat them out of the ancient bounds of Portugal, but likewise enter'd into the dominions of the Ca∣tholick King, and advanced as far as Salamanca. He besieged several Towns in Gallicia, Estramadura, and Andalusia, nay he had certainly made these Pro∣vinces the Theatre of the War, by causing his Army to subsist there, if there had been any strong places, or such as were in a condition to be fortified, to re∣tire into in case of necessity. Thus Spain was reduced to an extreme weakness thro the great indiscretion of the Count-Duke, and the discontents of some Princes, and several great Lords. The Kingdoms of Valentia and Arragon, that possest great privileges, could not without a sen∣sible regret see them daily infringed. Catalonia, which had so lately call'd in the French for that very reason, furnished them with a very bad example, and might perhaps influence them to do something of the like nature, if things were not regulated in good time. The Intrigues of the Duke de Medina Sidonia, and of the Marquis d' Alamont put Andalusia into a tottering condition; which Province was be∣sides incensed at the change which had lately been made in the Money, which after it had been made to
go at an excessive high rate, was at last cried down. Those of Biscay had assassinated a Farmer who had been sent thither to introduce marked Paper against the Franchises of that Country, and were exceeding∣ly concern'd at the punishment of the principal Male-contents, who had been wheedled to Madrid by the Count-Duke under a promise of being pardoned there, and altho this had happen'd many years before, yet they still deeply resented that perfidious usage. In short, the excessive poverty of Gallicia, which be∣sides was inviron'd almost on all sides by Portugal, made it incapable to contribute much to the expence of the War. Add to this, that the Catholick King had sustain'd great losses in Catalonia, without mak∣ing any advances there, thro the ill conduct of his Generals, and that his America Fleet was destroy∣ed, so that he was forced to borrow Silver Plate of private persons, to Coin it into Money. The greatest Governments and Offices had for a long while bee only bestow'd upon the Creatures of the Favorite, without any regard to their capacity and merits, and those that were best able to serve the State were turned out of Court, because they could not submit to his imperious haughty temper. In the mean time he caused forces to march from all parts, at an incredible expence, to endeavour the relief of Perpignan, and 'tis very observable, that in six months time, after he had used his greatest ef∣forts, he could bring no more than thirty thousand men into the field. To compleat his misfortunes, they arrived too late; for the place which had long suffer'd the utmost extremities of Famine, and which no one took any care to relieve, was obliged to surrender, on the 7th of September, Don Flores d' A∣vela delivered it up to the Mareschal de la Meilleraye, wholly destitute of Victuals, but extremely well stored with Ammunition: It had an Arsenal suffi∣cient to arm twenty thousand Foot and Horse, six∣score pieces of Cannon, and three thousand pounds of Powder, with all other things necessary for its defence. The Mareschal gave the government of it to Varennes, Mareschal de Camp, till such time as
the King should provide otherwise for the place. This Conquest gave no little joy to the Court of France, by reason of the mighty importance of the place, which covered their Frontiers on that side, and made them Masters of Rousillon. On the con∣trary, the King of Spain was exceedingly concern'd at it, and could not dissemble his resentments, while the Count-Duke affected a certain Gayety, which surprized all the World. He imagined by so doing to keep the King in heart, who seemed to be strange∣ly dejected, and to put courage into the Army and People, who were alarm'd at the progress of the E∣nemy. He used all diligence to get together as great an Army as he could, and the Grandees of Spain strove who should contribute the most towards the raising, and maintenance of it, in these urgent he cessiies of the State. But instead of placing a Ge∣neral at the head of them, who was able to raise the hopes of Spain, he caused the Marquis de Leganez to be nominated to command them, against the general expectation; because this Marquis had not been able to obtain leave to come to Court, but was as it were banished into Valentia, by reason of the great com∣plaints of the Allies and the Subjects of Spain against him; but alth he was thus ill used in outward ap∣pearance, the Count-Duke had given him private hopes that he should be suddenly advanced. While he was putting himself in a posture to march, Don Benito Henriquiz de Quirega, surrendred Salse the Mareschals de Schamberg and Meilleraye, on the 30th of September, for want of provisions. Part of the French Army, which had been employ'd in the blockade of Perpigaan and Salse, marched afterwards into Catalonia to reinforce that of the Mareschal de la Mothe, who put himself in readiness to oppose the Spanish forces, which were now upon the confine and hoped to repair the loss of Rousillon, by for considerable advantage. Lerida was particular threatned, and while Laganez marched thither on one side, the Marquis de Torrecuse, an Italian, advanced on the other, so that the Mareschal that followed the latter, was not able to recard his march. He was
opinion to attack the place immediately, without staying for the coming up of Leganez, but the Spaniards that commanded under him opposed this motion. This so mightily provoked him that he threw up his Command to the Marques d' Amposte, who was one of them that had contradicted it the most. This Spaniard, that had not conduct enough to make his best advantage of the present conjuncture, quitd the post where he was, for fear lest the French should cut off his provisions, and so led his Troops to joyn Leganez. The latter, instead of following the advice of Torracuse, who was insmily more capable to command than himself, constrained him to leave the Cam, and go to meet the King at Sara∣gossa; nay, he publickly own'd, that tho he could conquer France, if he follow'd the counsl of this Italian, yet he would refuse to do it. The Spanish Army consisted of seventeen thousand Foot, fifteen hundred Dragoons, and six thousand Horse, and had forty pieces of Cannon. Almost all the Robility of Spain was there, and particularly a great number of persons that had formerly served in the Armies be∣longing to that Crown; so that they had reason to promise themselves good success. The Army of the Mareschal de la Mothe consisted of no more than about eight thousand Foot, and four thousand Horse, but the experience of the General made amends for the small number of his Troops. There was also this difference between the Spanish forces and those of France, that the latter intirely relyed upon their Ge∣neral, whereas a great part of the Spanish Army lost their courage, when they saw the Marquis de Torrecuse leave them, who was generally esteemed by all those that knew him. The Armies being in this condition, Leganez thought it his best way to attack La Mathe, and marched towards him in order of Battel, on the first of October. On the seventh the Armes came in sight of one another, and the French being sensible of the great inequality of their Troops, endeavour'd to get the advantage of the ground, by posting, them∣selves upon imminent places, where they had placed their Cannon; so that there was no coming to them
without sustaining the whole shock of their great Guns. In the mean time the Spaniards advanced with extraordinary bravery, and having given a vigorous onset, immediately disordered the Cavalry of the Right Wing, and put them to flight, but they were beaten back on the Left, where the Mareschal com∣manded in person. The French Horse on the Right Wing abandon'd three pieces of Cannon to the Spani∣ards, and Laganez fearing to lose them again, gave orders to his men to carry them off from the place to joyn the Spanish Artillery. In this interval his Van-guard which had gained them, instead of con∣tinuing to charge the French, stopt short till the three pieces of Cannon were carried off, so that the Ma∣reschal had time to rally his Cavalry, and lead them on again to the Charge. In a short time they return'd the like to the Spaniards, and pursued them in dis∣order towards the body of their Army, which they put into confusion. The inequality of the Troops and the coming on of the night, hindred the Mares∣chal from making his advantage of it, and having sounded a retreat, he retired to his Camp; but be∣ing soon after informed that the Spaniards had with∣drawn, he came back to the Field of Battle, where he passed the night to let the Enemy see that the ad∣vantage of the day belonged to him. Leganez on his side writ to the Court that he had obtain'd a signal Victory over the French, and that he had taken their Cannon. However the loss was in a manner e∣qual, and it was computed that about five hundred men fell on both sides, but the small number of the French rendred their advantages the more considera∣ble, besides that they had done what they at first proposed, since by this means they hinderd the Spani∣ards from forming the siege of Lerida. The Court of Spain made great rejoycing for this pretended Victory, and 'tis an ancient custom in that Country to feed the people with Chimerical News, by dissembling or extenuating their losses, and representing their Victories to be infinitely greater than in reality they are. The Spaniards, who seldom travel out of their own Coun∣try, and scarce keep any correspondence with For∣reigners,
cannot inform themselves of the truth but by Officers of their own Nation, who serve in the King's Armies, and as they are not unacquainted with the Maxims of the Court, take care not to pub∣lish their losses. Thus it is generally believed in Spain, that the King's Forces are victorious in all places, and that the remote Provinces in his possessi∣on still continue intire, till the Treaties of Peace make them discover the contrary. After all, the particulars arrive to the knowledge but of a few persons, and the Commonalty are still lulled asleep in their ancient errors. Leganez ended the Campaign by the taking of some small Castles in the neighbourhood of Amposte, and took so little care of provisions, that his Army was obliged for the space of three days to feed up n Asses Flesh and mouldy Bisket, which occasioned a great sickness among the men, and forced them all to disperse in November. This secured the French in the possession of Catalonia, and encouraged the Cata∣lonians in their Rebellion. At last the King's Eyes were opened, and he perceived that they had impo∣sed upon him, when they excused the conduct of Leganez. The management of this Campaign suffi∣ciently perswaded him that the complaints which the Italians had made against him so long ago, were but too true. The Artifices of the Count-Duke, who began to sink very much in his credit with the King, availed nothing: So Leganez was deposed from his place of being General, sent at first to Prison, and afterwards as it were banished to his House in Ma∣drid, being forbid to stir out of it, as well as to re∣ceive any visits. Don Philip de Silva who had served a long while in the Armies of Spain, without ob∣taining any honour there, was put into his place, after he had been disgraced for not relieving of Ar∣ras. All Europe was surprized at so strange a choice, but the scarcity of persons sir to command, was  that juncture so great in this Country, that they d not tell upon whom to pitch. While France obtained these advantages ever the Spaniards, the House of Austria was full as unsuful
in Germany.See the 14 Book of Pufendorf. Hist. Rer. Suec. Leonard Torstenson, General of the Swedes, defeated them twice in the course of this Campaign. In Silesia, he cut to pieces the Emperors Army, commanded by Francis Albert, Duke of Saxe-Lawenburg, and took him Prisoner; and he de∣feated the Arch-Duke Leopold near Leipsic. He took several considerable places, and got several other ad∣vantages ver the Imperialists. The Count de Guebriant, with some French Troops, and the remainder of the Duke of Weymar's Army, which he commanded ever since the departure of the Duke of Longueville, contributed mightily to these Victories, altho he was at a great distance from the Swedes, because he obliged a considerable Body of the Imperial Troops to be upon the Rhine. Towards the beginning of the year heSiri Mer. T. 2. l. 1. p. 4, &c. entered into the Arch∣bishoprick of Colen, with seven thousand Men, and five pieces of Cannon. The Count de Herbestein joyn'd him with four thousand men of the Troops of the Landgrave of Hesse, and nine Field pieces. They be∣sieged Ordinguen together, and took it by Capitulati∣on, altho Lamboi was within three Leagues of the Place with twelve thousand men. But whether he believed the Town would hold out longer, or that he was minded to stay till General Hazfeldt joyned him, he made no movement. The Count de Guebri∣ant receiving advice that these two Generals designed to joyn one another, resolved to attack Lamboi, al∣tho he was entrenched in a very advantageous place, and was full as strong as himself, that he might not have them both upon his hands at a time. He divi∣ded his Arm & into three Bodies, one of which was composed of French commanded by himself, the o∣ther of Hessians commanded by their own General, and the third of the Troops of the Duke of Weymar, under General Tubadel. In this order, he attacked the intrenchments of the Imperialists, and after a long resistance beat them on three sides, and put Lamboi to the rout, notwithstanding all the efforts he made to rally his men. This General, grown desperate at the defeat of his Army, return'd to the Charge with a small reserve, and after he had given
great proofs of his bravery, was oblig'd to surrender himself Prisoner. He lost three thousand men upon the spot, besides fourteen hundred Prisoners, among whom were the principal Officers, as well as the G∣neral. After this the Count de GbriantThe 26 of January. took the Town of Nuys, and several other small places in the Electorate of Colen, where he committed great ravages. There was a hot discourse this year of a place of Congress, to treat of a general Peace, and Passports for the Ambassadors that were to meet there. TheSiri M. T. 2. l. 2. p. 1064. Spaniards, for their particular, desired to conclude a Truce for two years with France, hoping in that time to make new preparations for carrying on the War; but France was in too formidable a posture to consent to it, and the Cardinal declared he would listen to nothing but a Peace, by which he pretended to keep some places, to make a descent upon Germany or Flanders, whenever the King pleased. The unnatural disorders in England still continued, and the King being necessitated to declare War a∣gainst his two Houses of Parliament, engaged him∣self in those unfortunate Broils, which he was ne∣ver able to master, and in the end proved fatal to him. He was suspected in France to be inclined to Spain, and in England to have a leaning towards France. The Ambassador of this last Crown having addressed himself to the Parliament, after the King had broke with them, this Prince was extremely offended at it, and sent great complaints of this pro∣cedure to the Court of France. Lewis XIII. answer∣ed that it was without his orders, and to convince the English Envoy that it was so, he promised to call this Ambassador home, which was accordingly perform∣ed soon after. However several persons were of opi∣nion, that he durst never have appeared in a matter of this consequence, at least without an order from the Chief Minister, who for his part was not sorry to have these disturbances last longer; it being to be feared that England, jealous of the Grandeur of France, would declare for Spain as soon as their troubles were over. The French Ambassador nevertheless pro∣tested to the King of England, that he had done no∣thing
but with a design to induce the Parliament to a Peace; and it was said in France that it was not the Interest of that Crown to suffer the authority of the Parliament to encrease too much, because that Cal∣vinism would be then more strongly estabished in En∣gland, and that this Religion might be of ill example. to the Calvinists of France. But after all, nothing was done in favour of the King, to support him against the Parliament, and in the sequel France openly de∣clared for Oliver Cromwel, Protector of England, for fear lest he should joyn with the Spaniards. Italy, which perhaps would have concerned it self one way or t'other, and declared for the weakest side, was still strangely disordered. Notwithstanding theIb. l. 1. p. 178. intervention of most of the powers of Italy, to ac∣commodate the Duke of Parma with the Barberines, the latter not only pretended to keep wh they had gotten into their hands, but that the Duke should go to beg pardon of the Pope. They caused him to be cited at Rome, to make his appearance there at a certain time under pain of excommunication, and as the Duke was better advised than to venture himself there, the Pope brandished the Ecclesiastical Thunder against him on the 13th of January. Nay, they talked of putting his dominions under an In∣terdict, but as they were sensible that all the Pow∣ers, which had interceeded for that Prince, would declare for him, if things were carried to those ex∣tremities, they laid aside that design. In the mean time the Duke took all possible measures to secure himself of the fidelity of his Subjects as well of the Laity as the Church-men, and continued to make preparations of War necessary for his defence. The Pope did the same on his side, and it was feared that he would soon swallow up the rest of the Duke of Parma's dominions. At last,Ib. l. 2. & 3. after several negotiati∣ons to no purpose, the Republic of Venice, the great Duke of Florence and the Duke of Modena, made a defensive League with the Duke of Parma, to op∣pose the progress of the Pope's Army, in case he at∣tempted any new conquests, and to oblige him to surrender Castro to the Duke of Parma. The Troops
of Venice and Florence were ordered to advance to∣wards the Dutchy of Parma, the Modenois to move as the Popes Army should do, and the Duke of Par∣ma was ready to make an irruption into the Ecclesi∣astical State. This was the face of affairs in Italy at the beginning of the Campaign in the year 1642. The Barberines being informed of the resolution of the Confederate Princes, ceased to threaten, as at first they had done, those that opposed their designs, and pretended that they were desirous to end this affair by the way of negotiation. France employ'd it self to pacify these commotions, at least in apparance; but the Duke of Parma perceiving that the Barberines only endeavour'd to gain time, took the Field on the 10th of September, with about four thousand Horse, which the Mareschal d Estrees commanded under him, in quality of Lieutenant General. His design was to go and attack the Pope's Army, com∣manded by Don Tadeo Barberini, and in case he de∣feated him to march strait to the walls of Rome, but if he was repulsed to retire into his own Territories, covered by the forces of Modna, and the Troops of the Confederate Princes: That if it so happen'd that the Army of the Barberines kept within their Camp, it would be easy for him to go up to Rome without any opposition, because being inferiour to him in Horse, it would not be possible for them to follow him. The Pope's General being acquainted with the Duke's design, ordered the greatest part of his Troops to encamp near the Castle of St. John, to be in a condition to oppose the Enemy's mach. However neither he, nor those that commaned under him, could imagine that the Duke of Para durst strike so hardy a blow, as to enter the Territory of Bologne, by leaving Fort Ʋrban behind him, and venturing himself between that City, and the Popes Army. Be∣ing thus lull'd asleep, they were extremely surpriz'd at the Duke's boldness, when they were not in a condi∣tion to oppose him. Their Troops were seized h terror, and as soon as those of Parma appeared, they fled on all sides. Thus this Army, which had given
the Alarm to all Italy, was in a short time made un∣able to oppose a small body of Horse, without Artil∣lery, and supported by no Foot. On the other hand, the Duke of Parma's Army advanced as far as Casti∣glione del Lago in Romagnia, and struck a terror into Rome. At this time theIb. T. 2. l. 3. Negotiations were set on foot afresh, the Duke offering to withdraw, provi∣ded that Castro was put into the hands of the Confe∣derates, with a promise to deliver it up to him in a short time. The Barberines being in a great fright, had recourse to the Ministers of France, and desired them to interpose the authority of the King, to bring this affair to some accommodation: Altho they were not sorry in France to see these disorders and broils in Italy, yet they were afraid lest the Confederate Princes, seeing the happy success of the Duke of Par∣ma's enterprize, might form some designs disadvan∣tageous to the rest of Italy. For this reason they were glad of any opportunity to stop the progress of the League, and they did it effectually, by beginning to negotiate afresh. The Ministers of several Princes, and those of the Pope, met at Castel Georgio for this purpose; but after abundance of proposals on both sides, nothing was concluded upon, and yet the Duke of Parma withdrew his Troops out of the Ecclesiastic State. This was the only thing which the Barberines desired, and perhaps the other Powers helped them to deceive the Confederate Princes. However, 'tis certain, that during these divisions, Prince Thomas of Savoy, General of the French Troops in Italy, took Nice de la Paille from the King of Spain by composition, dated the 3d of September. On the 20th of the following month, the Marquis de Pianez∣za re-took Verrue; the taking of which places was of consequence for the time to come; and Prince Tho∣mas made himself master of the City of Tortone at the beginning of October, and of the Castle on the 25th of November. The King, to recompence the services or this Prince, made him a present of this Town, and the Territory belonging to it; and after this manner the Campaign ended. The Spaniards had in vain at∣tempted to relieve it, but could not hinder the taking
of it  and the succours which they threw into the Caste, did not defend it with more success. Thus the projects of France were almost every where for∣tunate under the Conduct of the Cardinal-Duke, while the Count-Duke saw the King of Spain come by the worst in all places, through his want of dexte∣rity. Another misfortune happen'd to him about the end of the year, as he endeavour'd to make some at∣tempt before he return'd to Castile. The Catholic King sent some Troops to reduce the City of Monzon, which the French possessed upon the frontiers of Ar∣ragon, and from whence they made frequent excursi∣ons into the most fertile part of that Kingdom; but a furious tempest happend, which broke down the Bridge of Fragues, over which they must pass, and entirely dissipated that small remainder of men which the Spaniards had. And soon after, the King, who was provoked to see that nothing but ill success at∣tended all his undertakings, disgraced the Count-Duke, after he had been fully convinced that this Favourite was in no respect to be compared with the Chief Minister of Lewis XIII. To return now to the Cardinal, and represent the last Scene of so busie a life; altho he had taken all imaginable care to recover his health, yet he continu∣ed in a languishing condition, ever since his return from Rousillon. The King being at FontainblauThe 17. Siri Mere. T. 2. l. 3. in October, the Minister went to visit him there, altho he had still a pain in his Arm, and felt some approaches of an Ague. From thence he went to Pari, where having summon'd the Privy Councel∣lors to wait upon him at his house, he fell upon se∣veral projects for the ensuing Campaign. Some were of advice to make a vigorous irruption into the King∣dom of Arragon, which might easily be effected, since the dissipation of the Army commanded by the Mar∣quis de Leganez. But to this others objected, that it was to no purpose to advance so far, because the first Treaty of Peace would oblige them to surrender up all that they had conquer'd on that side; and besides, that this Country being at too great a distance from the heart of France, and the presence of the King,
which is so necessary to animate and give lif to all great undertakings, it would be impossible to perorm any considerable action there. Others gave their opini∣on to make the chief effort on the side of the Low Coun∣tries; but then it was objected, that there were too ma∣ny strong places on that quarter; and that experience had made them see, that they must spend a whole Campaign to take one Town; so that the advantage they got by any Conquest, did by no means ballance the expence they were at to obtain it. Some propo∣sed Italy; but before it would be safe for them to ad∣vance thither, they must destroy the League, and principally disengage the Venetians from it, who seem'd to be the most zealous for the repose of their Neighbours, and would infallibly take the alarm, if they once saw a powerful Army on the other side the Mountains. At last, they talked of making an at∣tempt upon the Franche-Comte, which was much more feazible than any of the rest. The Cardinal listen'd to these proposals, as a man that had several years to live, and flatter'd himself that he should make great Conquests in a few Campaigns. However, to unbend himself from so many serious occupations, which insensibly impair'd his health, he caused a strange sort of aThe 15 of Novemb. Comedy to be represented at his Palace, which contained part of these thoughts that employed his mind. It was intituled Europe, and the principal person in it was a Lady of that name, who had several Lovers, that endeavoured to gain her good esteem and affection. The two chief Gallants were called Iberus and Francion; but in the conclusion the merit of the latter carried the fair prize away from his Rival. All the remarkable oc∣currences that happen'd ever since the opening of the War, to the conspiracy of Cinq-Mars, were recited in this composition. However the King tarrying still at S. Germains, the Council came to no resolution in their Conferences a∣bout the War, so that the Cardinal judged it expedi∣ent to hold it before the King, but he would not go to S. Germains, which as he pretended was too open a place, and not secure enough for him, by reason
that the King's Guards were infected with the de∣signs of the Master of the Horse. He therefore pro∣posed to his Majesty to come in person to Paris, or to go to S. Maur, or to Bois de Bologne, much after the same manner as one Soveraign Prince would treat with another. After he had seen that Prince tamely abandon his Favourite, and not dare to pardon any one for fear of offending him, he found nothing now that was above him, or that the King was not obliged to do in his favour. He demanded of this weak Prince, that he would cashier Tilladet, la Sale, des Effardi, and Treville, Captains in the Guards, against whom he could alledge nothing, but only that they were not enemies to Cinq-Mars. But above all, he would have the last of these turn'd out, whom he knew Cinq-Mars had sollicited against him, and that he had answered, he would do every thing that the King commanded him. Being a man of an undaunted, open Spirit, he look'd upon him to be capable to attempt any thing so soon as the King should mention it to him; and he was jealous of him, because he never apply'd himself o any one but his Majesty. As the Cardinal shar'd authority with the Prince, and had infinitely more resolution, conduct, and capacity, he imagin'd that all France owed no less to him, than they did to Lewis XIII. But tho the French have naturally a profound veneration for the person of their Kings, yet they hate their Mini∣sters when they abase their power; so that if the Cardinal knew how to make himself be feared, yet he could never make himself be loved. At this time he made another request to the King, which had it been made to any other King, he would certainly have punished the unpardonable insolence of it; and it was as follows, that whenever he should go to see the King for the future, his own Guards might be introduced, and appear in an equal number to those of his Majesty. This Prince, who believed that all the good success of his Armies and Negotiati∣ons was fasten'd to the person of his Minister, and who had been long accustom'd to have an extraordi∣nary kindness for him, receiv'd the Cardinal's pro∣posal
very mildly, which would have been High Treason in any one else. This dexterous Minister knowing perfectly well the Genius of his Master, and being resolved still to inhance his own value with him, at this time gave out that he would no longer concern himself with public affairs. He no longer gave access to the Ministers of foreign Princes at his own House, with a design, as he pretended, to dis∣engage himself in a short time wholly from the Mi∣nistry. The King being inform'd of these discourses, was mightily alarm'd at the News, and was afraid that the Cardinal thought in earnest to quit that post, for the conservation of which he had levell'd so many considerable Heads, and committed so ma∣ny acts of injustice, that I don't believe there had the like been done in several reigns, as during the 18 years of his Ministry. At this time a certain business happen'd, whether by accident, or by address of the Minister, which served not a little to encrease the King's inquietude upon this occasion. D' Estrade who resided at Court, from the part of Frederic-Hen∣ri Prince of Orang said that his Master had ingenu∣ously own'd that he had listen'd to Propositions of a Peace or Truce with Spain, so soon as he heard that the Cardinal was gone from Marbonne, and that the favour of the Master of the Horse encreased, because he thought that if that Minister were once excluded from the public affairs, there could be no dependance for the future upon the steadiness of the conduct of France. The King was extremely sur∣prized at this discourse, when it was related to him, and the Cardinal thought himself so much obliged to the Prince of Orange, that he writ to him, a∣bout six weeks before he dyed, by the abovementi∣on'd D' Estrade, who returned into Holland, in these terms.Aubery Mem. T. 2. p. 844. He (meaning D' Estrade) can inform you how gratefully I acknowledge the advantageous opinion you had of me, both upon the score of my Sickness, and the impediments which some ill-desposed men would give his Majesty's affairs. I want words to thank you sufficient∣ly for the great favour you have done me on these occasions, but I beseech you to believe that I will
lose no opportunity to let you see with what sincerity am, &c. However the King could not resolve at first to part with these Captains, of whose fidelity he had no oc∣casion to doubt, but the Cardinal to extort it from him, dispatched Chavigni one of the Secretaries of State to him, with a writing wherein he desired his Majesty to grant him a discharge. Upon this the King, contrary to his custom, could not forbear to testify his resentments against Chavigni, forbidding him to come in his presence. Nay he added, that as he suspected several of those that were about the Car∣dinal, it was but just that the Minister should satis∣fy him likewise, and named Chavigni himself and De Noyers. He treated the latter very coursly, and did not soften till after the repeated instances of Car∣dinal Mazerine. But after he had vexed himself for some time, as one private man would do with his equal, he was appeased at last, and sacrificed the most zealous of his Servants to the Cardinal. Ne∣verthess he gave them permission to sell their Em∣ploys, and ordered that their Lieutenants should ex∣ercise them in the mean time, and that their pensions should be paid them, where-ever they thought fit to retire. He sent a Gentleman to Travelle to assure him that the King loved him as well as ever, and that his favour should never diminish by his ab∣sence. The Court being thus purged from the rest of the Factious, as the Cardinals Creatures express'd them∣selves, his authority appear'd in its full extent: But at the same time not only the King's health, who was extremely alter'd ever since the death of Cinq-Mars, but also that of the Cardinal began to lessen sensibly, and towards the end of November he found himself seized with an exceeding pain in his side, which was accompanied with a Feaver. He had been troubled for several years with the Hemorr∣hoids, and that distemper had frequently made him suffer a great deal of pain, till a Physician stopt them. But ever since that time, as if this too acid blood had thrown it self upon the upper parts, he had a defluxi∣on
upon his arm, to cure which he was forced to employ Causties. However he past the year 1641 without any considerable inconvenience, but the year following having stopped the Ulcer in his Arm, in seems the humour, which had an Issue there, made two imposthumes above his Lungs, which shortned his days. 'Tis commonly the fate of great persons to be the worse served, as for what relates to the cure of their Distempers, than ordinary men, for as none but Courtiers can have access to them, who under∣stand no profession but that of Flattery, 'tis almost impossible for them to have good Physicians. As it usually happens, in such distempers as the Cardinal was troubled with, that the Patients are sometimes better and sometimes worse, the hopes of the Relations and Creatures of this Minister increas∣ed and diminish'd by turns, and sometimes joy, and sometimes sadness was to be read in their counte∣nances. 'Tis credibly reported that the King's rough manner of receiving his last pretensions, altho at last he complied with them, did discompose him, as if the King had been obliged wholly to submit himself to his desires. However 'tis certain, that on the 29th of November the pain in his side increased extremely, so that he was blooded twice. It was likewise ordered that the Holy Sacrament should beThe 30 which fell on a Sun∣day. exposed in all the Churches of Paris, to endeavour to obtain his health of God; but these Prayers and Ceremonies were no more efficacious, than the interessed vows of his Relations. The following day he seem'd to be better, and those who desired his preservation began to say that God himself had appeared for it, but to∣wards the end of the same day they were forced to alter their tone; for the pain in his side still encreas∣ed, as well as his Feaver, which was accompanied with great difficulty of breathing, which made his Relations leave him neither by day nor by night. On the 2d of December a consult of Physicians was held, the result of which was, that the Cardinal had but a short time to live. The King being inform'd of the extremity he was in, made him a visit, and spoke to him with a great deal of tenderness and concern.
The Cardinal told him among other thing, That he took his leave of his Majesty, knowing that he was condemned to pay in a short time the common Tribute which all men owe to Nature: That he said this last adien to his Majesty with the entire satisfaction he felt, that he had never done any thing in his whole life contrary to his service: That he left France in the highest reputation it e∣ver had injoy'd in the world, and her Enemies on the other hand humbled; that he asked no other recompence of his Majesty for all his toils and la∣bours, than the continuance of his Royal protecti∣on to his Relations, to whom he would not give his Benediction, but upon the condition they would always preserve an inviolable fidelity to the King; that lastly, he requested his Majesty not to change the Ministry, since those that were then concerned in the administration of publick affairs, were extremely fit and capable to serve the Crown. To these he added some important instructions, con∣ducing to the Grandeur of the Kingdom, which were never published, but 'tis said they have been since followed. The King by his answers testified how much he was concern'd at the Cardinals condition, and promised him to protect his Relations, with whom as he said he had other reasons to be well satisfied. Af∣terwards two yolks of Eggs being brought to him, the King took them and gave them to him with his own hand. After this, he confest himself to M. de Lescot, Bishop of Chartres elect, from whom he re∣ceived absolution. At last, he asked the Physicians how long they thought he might live? who told him, that since they saw him so unconcern'd to dye, they would not dissemble with him, that they did not be∣lieve his distemper as yet was desperate, and that he must wait till the seventh day. However, finding himself much worse towards the evening, he demand∣ed the Viaticum, and the Curate of S. Enstachias brought it to him. As he entred, he cry'd out: Be∣hold my Judge, who will soon pronounce my Sentence: I desire him with all my heart to condemn me, if in my Ministry I have proposed any other end to my self than
the good of Religion and of the State. Next morning,The 3 of Decem. at break of day, he would receive the Extreme Unction, and the Curate having told him that it was not ne∣cessary for a person of his rank to pass through all the ordinary forms which others are oblig'd to do, he would not suffer himself to be treated otherwise than as a common man. Thus after he had recited to him the principal Articles of Belief, he said, That he em∣braced them with a perfect Faith, and that he desired to have a thousand lives, to sacrifice them all for the Faith, and for the Church. As he demanded of him, whe∣ther he forgave his enemies? he answer'd, That he did it with all his heart, and after the same manner as he be∣sought the divine justice to use him. And being asked, that in case God would be pleas'd to grant him a longer life, whether he would employ it better in his sevice than the time past? he reply'd, May God ra∣ther send me a thousand Deaths, if he foresees that I shall consent to one mortal sin. He likewise recommend∣ed himself to the Prayers of the standers by, in a manner that sensibly affected them; and a man that had lived all along conformable to the precepts of the Gospel, could not have testified a greater confi∣dence in God. Altho he was given over by his Physicians, and there was no likelihood for him to recover, an Emperic of Troyes, named le Fevre, being presented to him, and having boasted extraordinary matters of I don't know what sort of a Water and Pills he had, the Cardinal was willing to try the experiment, whether he knew more than the rest of his profession. The same day he took some of his Water and Pills before dinner, and seem'd to be somewhat the better for them; however he continu'd to take his leave of those that were about him, with a strong hearty voice, and a serence countenance, and appear'd not to have the least concern upon his mind. The King came to see him again after dinner, and exprest all imaginable marks of a real affection. About five a clock, having taken a new Pill, he fancied himself to be much better; and on the 4th of December in the morning, after he had taken some Physick, his
Fever seem'd to be abated, and his Friends thought him out of danger. But in a few hours he sell into so great a weakness, that they easily perceiv'd him to be now in his last agonies. Then a certain Religi∣ous, whose name was Pere Leon, kneeling before his Bed, asked him, if, being now in the last momnts of his life, when he was going to render an account to God of all his actions, and was upon the brink of Eternity, he would not receive the last Absolution. The Cardinal giving a sign that he desired it, the Religious replyed, that while the delluxion took away the free use of his Tongue, he ought to joyn in Spirit to what was said; and for a sign of his sin∣cere repentance, he desir'd him to squeeze his hand, which he did. After this, the usual Prayers for dy∣ing persons were said, and they gave him every mo∣ment spoonfuls of Wine to support him. In the mean time a cold sweat seized him, and about noon, as he repeated In manus tuas Domine, he gave up the Ghost, without any struggling or violence. Thus died this great Minister, in the fifty eighth year of his life, the eighteenth of his Ministry, and the ninth month of his sickness, after a Fever of six days conti∣nuance. He had made his Will at Narbonne on the 23d of May, the severalSe i in Shir Mer. T. 2. l. 3. and at the end of his Life by Au∣bery. Articles of which I shall not give my self the trouble to set down here: I shalt only take notice, that besides the Palais Cardinal, and some other things, which he had given the King by way of Contract, he bequeathed to hm eight suits of Tapistry, and three Beds, to serve as part of the Fur∣niture for the principal Apartments of that Palace; the Hotel before it, which he design'd to have turn'd into a Square; and, what was more considerable, the summ of fifteen hundred thousand Livres, which he said had done him very good servive in the greatest affairs of State; so that if he had not had that Money at his disposal, some designs which succeeded happi∣ly, would in all probability have miscarried; for which reason he begg'd of his Majesty to keep such a summ always ready by him, to employ it upon pres∣sing occasions, when he had no other Money in his
Coffers. He likewise desired that his Library might be kept entire, and that the Sorbonne might name three persons, out of which number the Dukes of Richlieu might choose one, to be Bibliothecaire, with a pension of a thousand Livres per annum. Besides this, he rewarded all those that had served him, and with whom he was satisfied, unless he had otherwise recompenced them when he was alive. When a man compares his Legacies and his other Donations with those that abundance of Princes reward their Ser∣vants with, he fancies he reads the Testament of a King when he reads his, and that he sees the Wills of private persons when he reads those of some Princes. Tho he left a prodigious wealth to Armand de Maille, his Nephew, and his other Heirs, yet it may with justice be affirm'd, that he did not drain the Royal Exchequer to enrich them; that he scarce ever suf∣fer'd the Kings Armies to want, and that he neglect∣ed no favourable opportunity, for want of being at some expence, which are the ordinary faults that most Ministers of State may be charged with. His Body being open'd, the Doctors found two Imposthumes, one of them had broke some time be∣fore, and the other kill'd him in the breaking. His Lungs were tainted, but the rest of his Entrails were found. Those that have writ the History of his Life, have observed that theAubery Siri. Organs of the Ʋnderstanding were found double or treble in him; but don't tell us what parts of the Brain they take to be the Organs of the Understanding: after which they add, that people attributed the vivacity of his mind, and the force of his Judgment to this. I leave it to the Ana∣tomists and Philosophers to pass their judgment upon this remark. His Body lay exposed to publick view three or four days in his Cardinal's habit upon a Bro∣card Bed. A Duke's Coronet lay at his feet on one side, and on the other a Ducal Mantle. At the Beds feet stood a Cross, and several Silver Flambeaux adorn'd with lighted Tapers. On the 13th of De∣cember his Body was carried to the Church of the Sorbonne, upon a Chariot cover'd with a Pall of black Velvet, crossed with white Sattin, on which were
his Arms. This Chariot was drawn by six Horses, with coverings trailing on the ground of the same Stuff. His Pages marched on his side with Tapers of white Wax in their hands. An infinite number of people followed the Herse, some in Coaches, others on Horseback, and on foot. On the 28th of January a solemn service was celebrated for him at Notre-Dame, to which the Soveraign Courts were invited. The terms of the invitation were as follow: Noble and devont persons, pray for the Soul of the most high, most powerful and most virtuous, the most illustrious and eminent Lord ARMAND JOHN DU PLESSIS, Cardinal of Richlieu, Duke, Peer, Grand Master, and Intendant of the Navigation, and Commerce of France; one of the Prelates, and Com∣manders of the Order of the Holy Ghost; Chief of the Council, and Principal Minister of State to the King; for whose Soul, Services and Prayers shall be kept in the Church of Paris; in which place next Monday after noon will be said the Vespers and Vigils of the Dead; and on Tuesday the day following his solemn service will be celebrated, at ten in the morning. Pray to God that he would be merciful to his Soul. On the fourteenth of February another grand Service was kept for him in the Church of the Sorbonne, where Isaac Hubert, a Divine of Notre-Dame, and afterwards Bishop of Vabres, made his Funeral Harangue. Such was the Death, and such was the Funeral of the Cardinal of Richlieu, whoseSiri. Aub. description, both as to his body and mind, is after this manner. He had an agreeable air tho he was lean, he was of a delicate stature, and tall enough. He was of a tender con∣stitution, and his unwearied application to business still made it weaker. As for his Wit, it was quick and lively, and at the same time piercing and vast, and capable of all affairs of State. His Judgment was profound and solid in these sorts of things. He could not bear an injury, and nothing was more agreeable and pleasing to him than Revenge. He was proud and choleric, yet at the same time affable and full of sweetness and civility. He discoursed easily and with eloquence enough, a talent which he had
acquired and cultivated by study, as well as by practice. He was not destitute of Learning, which he had carried to a much higher pitch, if he had con∣tinued his studies with the same warmth and in∣dustry as he began them. He was courageous and undaunted in time of danger where the State was concerned, and un great hazards, altho he is ac∣cused of fearfulness in his own private affairs. When they did not succeed he was cast down and dejected, but when Fortun smil'd upon him, and he had compass'd what he esired, nothing could be more haughty, more imperious, and insulting. He loved Flattery in a most excessive manner, and comple∣ments never pleased him heartily, but when they were gigantick and extremely Hyperbolical. Besides a world of Political Maxims observed by this Minister, which may easily be found out in the perusal of this History, and consequently need not to be repeated in this place,Siri Mem. Rec. T. 8. p. 670. 'tis said he had three beloved ones, which are worthy of observation, and were principally learnt from himself. I. He said, that in matters of great importance, he had fre∣quently experimented it, that persons of the least wisdom oftentimes gave the best expedients. For this reason he concluded that a man ought always to take advice. II. He said, that those resolutions which he had taken up in a heat and passion, had al∣ways succeeded ill with him, and that he had hear∣tily repented of them. III. He has been heard to say, that men of Quality ought to take great care that the Servants they keep in their Cham∣ber, or about their persons, be not too pene∣trating, because it may so happen, that by the least word, nay, even by the least sign, they may in spite of themselves discover their most secret sentiments, and their most hidden designs. Those who were Favourites of the King, after theSiri Merc. T. 2. l. 8. Constable de Luines, as for example, Baradas and S. Simon were content to enjoy his Majesty's fa∣vour, without concerning themselves with State af∣fairs; but the Cardinal was no sooner taken into favour, but he undertook the administration of eve∣ry
thing. He was arbitrator of all the deliberations in respect of Peace and of War, Master of the Finances, and dispenser of all the King's favours. He dispo∣sed of the strongest places belonging to the State, and of all Offices that depended upon the Court; so that the greatest persons strove for his favour with no less zeal and application than even the meanest. The King had an extraordinary affection for him at first, but this friendship was mightily lessen'd in his latter years, through the too as∣suming behaviour of the Cardinal, who often treated him as his equal. Nevertheless the natu∣ral fearfulness of Lewis XIII, and the great ser∣vices of this Minister hindered him from find∣ing any ill effects of this coldness. The King had more than once shown himself somewhat in∣clined to discard him from all publick business, especially when he sent him word by the Duke of Angouleme, as some report, that he thought it proper for him to dismiss his Guards, which had been granted him for his security: To which the Cardinal made answer, that he was ready to obey his Majesty in that and every thing besides, but that while the King made use of his person, he would pretend to live in safety, and to preserve himself from those Conspiracies which some factious persons might form against him. For fear of being overwhelmed under the weight of public affairs, which the weakness of his constitu∣tion would not suffer him to attend perpetually, he assigned certain hours for recreation, where he would not hear the least mention made of any thing that demanded too much application. For this reason he kept Boisrobert about him, who diverted him with a thousand agreeable stories, and told him all the news of the Court and City, proper to make him laugh. Among his other amusements, we may reckon the great pleasure he took to speak of the French Language and Poetry. The Author of the History of the Academy has related several considera∣ble
stories to this purpose, which I shall not set down here, because I have proposed to my self to write the History of the Cardinal's Ministry, and not of his private diversions. The Reader may consult the above-mentioned Author, as for what he says of our Minister, upon the occasion of his establishing the French Academy. Nay, he gave orders that no dif∣ficult affairs should be proposed to him but one after another; and he employ'd both for his own in par∣ticular, and for those of the State, de Noyers, Bou∣thillier, and Chavigni, altho there were some which he only communicated to the King. After he had taken such measures as he judged ne∣cessary for the preservation of his own person, he thought of nothing with more application, than how to maintain himself in this eminent post; which it was no easie matter for him to do, by rea∣son of the great numbers of envious and disaffected people whom he had made. Daily endeavours were used to possess the King with suspicions to the dis∣advantage of our Minister; and 'tis certain, that this inconstant, distrustful Prince, whose dark Genius was so hard to be found out, gave him no small trouble. And therefore, to hinder his Majesty from being prejudic'd against him, before he could be able to justifie himself, he took care to remove all those persons from about him whom he in the least suspect∣ed, and only left such near him as depended abso∣lutely upon himself. As he saw that the King was scrupulous, and that the fear of doing something against his Conscience, held him sometimes in a long deliberation, prejudicial to the affairs of the State, he would be the director of his Conscience, and ease him of those scruples which embarass'd him. He pretended that the Kings Confessor ought to follow his Maxims, and got Father Gaussin the Jesuit to be dismissed, because he would not be obedient to him. The greatest ambition of this Minister was to reign, and make a noise in the world; to which end it behoved him to preserve himself in his post, and to render himself absolutely necessary to
the King. This he effected, by engaging him ever∣lastingly in some new enterprize or other, because it was an infallible Maxim with this Prince, never to part with any Minister, till he had concluded the af∣fairs which he had begun; and besides, he did not look upon himself to be able to govern the State of himself. He saw that the King on one side was but indifferently affected to the House of Austria, and on the other very much inclined to a Peace. To satisfie these two inclinations, he promis'd to humble that Crown so effectually, that this should produce a last∣ing and secure Peace to France. The King, altho of a soft and peaceable disposition, yet he was no enemy to what might obtain him a reputation in the world, provided the undertaking would not give him too much trouble; and the Cardinal took care to pro∣pose such projects to him as were proper to make a noise, and engaged for the success of them. Thus he made himself Master of the King's mind, and did what he pleased under his name. For his own glory, he voluntarily engaged in mighty designs, and as he was fortunate enough in his Wars, so he lost no opportunity to make new Conquests, and employ'd all sort of artifiees to ac∣complish them. He laid the foundation of an Uni∣versal Monarchy, and did not despair of compleating it by the ruin of Spain, to which he gave two dan∣gerous blows, by supporting the Rebellion of the Ca∣talonians and Portugueses. To facilitate the execution of these vast projects, it was necessary before all things to secure France from the invasions of her Neighbours, and to put her in a condition to pour down her Forces where-ever she should see convenient. This he began to perform with a great deal of success. Paris lying too near the Frontiers of the Low Countries, and having been ter∣rified more than once by the incursions of the Enemy, ever since the time of John de Worth, the Cardinal endeavour'd to enlarge the Frontiers of the Kingdom on that side, which he did by the Conquest of Artois, and which he had continued by the reduction of seve∣ral places, which would have served as a Rampart
to France, if he had lived. He colour'd these designs with a pretence of recovering what had formerly be∣longed to the Crown. The same reason made him undertake the Conquest of Rousillon, which if once in her hands, would secure France on the side of the Pyrenees. For the same consideration likewise, he ad∣vised the King to get some place or other upon the Rhine, whatever it cost him; and this made France, after the Death of the Duke of Weymar, seize Brisac with that greediness. And it was for this prospect also, that the King could never be brought to surrender Pignerol, that so he might be in a condition to act in Italy, whenever he pleased; for at that time he only made War there for the Reputation of his Crown, and for the Support of his Sister and his Nephew, a∣gainst the Spaniards. After he had employ'd Bellievre in vain, to engage the Princes of Italy in a League against Spain, he no longer thought of making any Conquests there, for it was his opinion, that such an enterprize could not succeed, without the assistance of at least one half of those powers, between whom Italy is divided. A midst these projects, relating to the Grandeur of the Crown, and to satisfye his own Ambition, he took care to provide himself a secure retreat, in case any misfortune should oblige him to retire. For this end he always kept a considerable summ at Havre de Grace to serve him in time of necessity; nay, he had purchased a Soveraignty upon the Meuse, by buying Chateau-Renaud in the King's name, and making himself Master of Charleville. He likewise caused a Royal Fort to be built at some distance from Sedan, upon a Mountain, with a design to make himself Master of that City, when time should serve, and not incorporate it to the Crown. For this reason he forbore to attack it with all the Forces of the King∣dom, in the beginning of the troubles, raised by the Duke of Bouillon, as otherwise he might have done. His design being to buy it for himself, so soon as he found a favourable opportunity. Setting this aside, 'tis certain that he made the King absolute Master of his dominions, by changing
the Governments, which generally lasted for life be∣fore; that so the respective Governours might not come to be too powerful; and by punishing Rebel∣lions severely; whereas the method formerly was to grant the Malecontents some rewards, in order to oblige them to lay down their arms. Under his Mi∣nistry he made no Treaty, by which any more was granted to those that had raised any commotions, than a bare impunity; but he never permitted them to have the least share in public affairs after∣wards. By a strong, a steady and equal conduct, he knew how to make the best advantage of all the occur∣rences of that time, and turn'd the greatest tempests into calms, where he peaceably enjoy'd the frits of his labours. In short, after he had triumphed over his own private Enemies as well as those of the State, he died in the highest pitch of glory, and in an ex∣traordinary esteem with his own Prince.
An INDEX of the princi∣pal matters contain'd in the Life of Cardinal Richlieu. a. denotes the First Tome, b. the Second. A. DAglie (Count Philip of) offends the Cardinal. b. 234. Put into Prison. b. 274. Aire besieged and taken by the Marquis de la Meilleraye. b. 293, &c. Besieged afresh, and re∣taken by the Spaniards, Ib. 294, 296. Albert. See Luines. D'Aligre (Chancellor) loses the Seals. a. 182. Almenas surprized by the Spaniards, and regain'd by the French. b. 305. Anire (Mareschal) his great favour under the Regence of Marie de Medicis. a. 5. His House pillaged at Paris. a. 13. His faults and his death. a. 15. S. Andre Montbrun defends Privas in vain. a. 313. S. Ange (Baron of) banish'd from Court. b. 251. Angouleme. A Treaty concluded with Marie de Medicis in that City. a. 23. Angouleme (the Duke of) betrays Father Caussin. b. 198. Ann of Austria ill used by the King her husband. a. 192. Forced to take a tedious Journey with the Cardinal against her will. b. 47. Coursely treated by the Cardinal. b. 215. Ib. 251, &c. Argeles taken by the French. b. 302. Arragon (Don Pedro of) beaten and taken Prisoner by the Mareschal de la Mothe. b. 334, &c. Arras besieged and taken by the French. b. 256, and 258. Astrology (Judicial) how those that are besotted with it use to defend it. a. 292.
Aubeterre (Count of) made Mareschal of France. a. 50. Avein, a Battel gain'd by the French near that place. b. 148. B. BAgni (Nicholas Guy (Marquis of) his Cowardice in the defence of the Valteline. a. 98. Banier (John) the Swedish General reduced to extre∣mity. b. 141. Gains a victory. ibid. Dies. 306. Bapaume taken by the French. b. 296. Bar (the Dutchy of) confiscated to the Crown of France. b. 66. Baradas, a Favourite of the King disgraced, a. 195. Barberin (Francis the Cardinal) his Embassy into France. a. 133, &c. Ibid. 147, 149. He retires, Ibid. 151. He goes Legate into Spain. ibid. 156, 172. Barberines, the violences they committed against the Duke of Parma, to spoil him of Castro, b. 306, &c. Their Army runs away. b. 364. They de∣ceive the Princes of Italy. b. 306, 365. Bassee taken by the French. b. 295. And re-taken by the Spaniards. b. 326. Bassompierre (Francis of) commands the Army of Campagne. a. 36. Is made a Mareschal de Camp in the Army of Anjou. Ib. 42. Made a Mareschal of France. Ib. 67. His Embassy into Swisserland. a. 162. His Embassy into England. Ib. 195. Lieu∣tenant General before Rochel. a. 218. Of the Ar∣my of Susa. Ib. 309. Refuses the Cardinal to se∣cure the Swisses for him. a. 356. Sent to the Ba∣stile. Ib. 373. Bearn. The re-establishment of the Catholic Religi∣on in that Country. a. 50. Makes an insurrection and is reduced. Ib. 55. Beaufort (Duke of) flies into England. b. 352. Bellegarde (Duke of) sent to Angers to the Queen Mo∣ther. a. 41. Ruins the affairs of that Princess by his delay. Ib. 43. Comes back to Court to negoti∣ate in the name of Monsieur. a. 325.
Belliévre, Ambassadour of France in England, b. 219. His Sentiments upon the Trial of the Duke de la Va∣lette, b. 225 Berule (Peter of) sent to Rome for the Marriage of Hen∣rietta Maria, a. 84. His Death, a. 324. The Judg∣ment the Cardinal pass'd upon it, ibid. Biscay displeased at their Ʋsage from the Court of Ma∣drid, b. 355 Blainville sent to negotiate with the Queen-Mother, a. 33, 34, Ambassadour in England, ibid. 162, &c. Boizeaval Valet de Chambre to the King, b. 218 Bologne (the Country about) destroy'd and ravag'd by Can∣telmo, b. 328 Bottero (Prince of) blocked up in Tarragon, b. 303 Bouillon (Mareschal of) the Broils he was concerned in, a. 5, 6, 8, 12, 13 Bouillon (Duke of) an Enemy to the Cardinal, b. 309. Is reconciled to the King, b. 323. Goes into Italy, b. 340. Apprehended at Casal, b. 345. Carried to Lions, b. 346. Confesses, b. 348. Loses the City of Sedan to save his Life, b. 353 Bourdeaux (Archbishop of) Commands the French Fleet, b. 168. Gains a Victory at Sea over the Spaniards, b. 211. Chases their Fleet, b. 300. Beats them before Tarragon, b. 303. Is beaten and disgraced, b. 304. Braganza (Duke of) made King of Portugal, b. 261 Breme besieged and taken by Leganez, b. 202 Breves, Governour of the Duke of Anjou, turned away, a. 88 Brezé (Marquis of) made Mareschal of France, b. 46. Commands the Army in the Low-Countries, b. 147. The Mareschal de Brezé takes Sens, b. 295. Is made Viceroy of Catalonia, b. 306. Goes to Barcelona, ibid. Brezé (Marquis of) attacks the Spanish Fleet, b. 300 Brisac taken by the Duke of Weymar, b. 208. Falls into the hands of France, b. 249 Brulard: See Puysieux. Buckingham (Duke of) why he wou'd make a War upon France, a. 210. Makes a Descent upon the Isle of Rhée, a. 212. His Manifesto, ib. 213. The Fault
he committed, ib. 215. Beaten out of the Island, ib. 219. Kill'd at Plimouth, a. 235 Buel (Eugenius) defends Arras, b. 256 Bullion Ambassadour in Piedmont, a. 197. Made Su∣perintendant of the Finances, b. 46. At his Death accuses the Cardinal with being the cause of the War, b. 315 C. Caen, the Citadel of that Town attack'd and taken, a. 38 Campanella (Thomas) his Prediction that Gaston should never be King, a. 292 Cantelmo (d'André) ravages the Country about Bologne, b. 328 Capelle taken by the Spaniards, b. 169. Retaken by the French, b. 188 Caracciolo, Mestre de Camp to the Spaniards, beaten by the Duke of Savoy, a. 117 Cardinal Infanta his Irruption into Picardy, b. 169. Defeats Seven thousand Men belonging to the States, b. 209. Raises the Siege of Gueldres, ib. Tries in vain to relieve Arras, b. 256. And to relieve Aire, b. 293. Besieges it again, b. 294. Dies, b. 296 Carmail (Count of) sent to Prison, b. 143 Casal vainly attack'd by Duke Gonzales de Cordova, a. 295. By Spinola, a. 343. Delivered, a. 352 Casal receives a French Garrison that did not stir out of it, b. 23, 202 Castres, a Hugonot City, ill used by the Parliament of Toulouse, a. 142 Catalonia rebels, b. 258. Calls in the French, b. 259 Yields it self up to France, b. 299 Catelet taken by the Spaniards, b. 169. Retaken by the French, b. 209 Caussin (a Jesuit) Confessor to Lewis XIII. in disgrace, b. 196, &c. Cengio taken by the Spaniards, b. 224 Caesar de Gonzaga, Duke of Guastalla, pretends to the Dukedom of Mantua, a. 225. Accommodates his Af∣fairs, b. 13 Chalais (Henry de Tallerand, Marquis of) the History
his Designs, and of his Death, a. 185, &c. 189 S. Chamond (Marquis of) the King's Lieutenant in Pro∣vence, b. 8 Chambers of Justice establish'd by the Cardinal, a. 189. b. 11, 28. For the trial of Cinq-mars, b. 348 Chanteloube (Father) raises a Difference between the Queen-Mother and the Duke of Orleans, b. 52. In∣jures the Queen's Affairs, ibid. 56, 76, &c. 110 Charles I. King of England; the ill Conduct of this King in relation to his Marriage, a. 87, 162. Begins to quar∣rel, ibid. 165, 210. And makes a Peace with France, ibid. 312. Complains of France, b. 361 Charles de Gonzaga, Duke of Nevers, comes to be Duke of Mantua, a. 225. How he took possession of it, ibid. &c. 289. France favours him, a. 293. The Spa∣niards and the Emperour endeavour to turn him out of it, a. 294, 297, 300, 305. Weakly assisted by France and the Venetians, a. 297, 299, 301. Not able to support himself, a. 304, 343. Beaten out of his Domi∣nions, a. 343. Accommodates his Affairs, b. 13. Dies, b. 193 Charles Emanuel his Design upon Genoua, a. 106. His Preparations for that end, a. 110. Difference of Opi∣nion between him and the Constable de Lesdeguieres, about the attack of the Genouese, ibid. 111. His Faults, a. 112. Misunderstanding between him and the Constable, ib. 118. A Fault he commits, ib. 120. Projects against the Spaniards, ibid. 130. Complains of the Treaty of Monzon, ibid. 176. They endeavour to appease him, ibid. 197. Enters into Montferrat, a. 294, 295 Charles Emanuel designs to amuse France, a. 307. Is reconciled to her, ib. 310. The Proposals he makes to the Cardinal, a. 334. Escapes from Rivoli to Turin, ibid. 336. Dies, a. 345. His good and bad Qualities, ib. Charles Emanuel, Son to Victor Amadeo, Duke of Savoy, b. 224 Châteauneuf, Ambassador at Venice, and in the Valteline, and in Switzerland, a. 198. &c. Made Keeper of the Seals, 361. They are taken from him, b. 58 Châtillon (Count of) made a Mareschal of France, a. 66. Sent to command the Army in the Low-Countries,
b. 148. Takes Yvoix, b. 188. Besieges St. Omers in vain, ibid. 208. Is disgraced, ibid. 209. Commands in Champaigne, and observes the Motions of Piccolo∣mini, b. 240. Retakes Yvoix, ibid. 241. Goes to besiege Arras, b. 256. Commands the Army in Cham∣paigne, b. 316. Defeated by Lamboi, b. 322, &c. Chavigny, the Conference he had with the Nuncio Scoti, b. 237 Chevreuse (Dutchess of) beloved and ill used by the Cardi∣nal, a. 192 Christina of France, Tutoress of the Children she had by Victor Amadeo, b. 193 Christina; the perplexity she was in upon the proposal of a new League, b. 201. Concludes it, b. 203. Ill assisted by the Cardinal, b. 225. Sends her Children to Mont∣melian, ibid. Distrustful of France, b. 227. Flies to Susa, b. 230. Surrenders to the King all the Places she held in Piedmont, b. 232. But refuses to deliver up Montmelian to him, ibid. &c. Returns to Turin, 274 Cinq-mars: See Effiat. Cindad-Real (Duke of) beaten by the French, b. 338 Clergy of France consulted upon the Marriages of the Princes of the Blood, b. 127. Of what Persons it is composed, ibid. Coeuvres (Marquis of) Ambassador at Rome, presses the Promotion of the Bishop of Luçon, without knowing whether the Court desired it, a. 47, 52, 53. Ambassa∣dor in Switzerland, a. 94. Seizes the Valteline by force, a. 97. The great progress he still makes there, ibid. 138. Is beaten by the Spaniards, a. 139. Demands in vain a Mareschal's Staff, ibid. 139. He gains a Victory over the Spaniards, a. 158. See also Estrées. Coigneux (then President) succeeds Ornano, a. 188. What Promises were made him to gain him, a. 364. Excepted out of the Act of Indempnity, b. 90 Collalte (Rambold Count of) threatens the Duke of Man∣tua, a. 327. Enters his Dominions, a. 328. The pro∣gress he made there, ibid. 329, &c. Collioure, and the Castles belonging to it, taken by the French, b. 335 Combalet (Marquis of) marries the Daughter of the
Sieur de Pont-Courlay, a. 55 Combalet (Marchioness of) turned out of the Service of the Queen-Mother, a. 358. A discourse of marrying her to the Count de Soissons, b. 13, 26. A design to steal her, discovered, b. 82. A discourse of marrying her to the Cardinal of Lorrain, b. 74 Concini (Arrigo) a good Office the Cardinal of Richlieu does him, a. 71 Concino Concini: See Ancre. Condé (Lewis I. Prince of) the Commotions he causes under the Regency of Mary de Medicis, a. 5, 6, 7, 8. Is reconciled to the Court, ibid. 11. His Imprisonment, ibid. 13. His Deliverance, ibid. 27. A Declaration of the King in his favour, ibid. 28. The good Advice he gives the King to put an end to all Commotions, a. 36. Suspected to have exposed the King's Person, ibid. 38. Advises the War against the Hugonots, ibid. 60. Hopes to be King, ibid. 61. His fury against the Hugo∣nots, ibid. 67. Asks leave to go into Italy, ib. 67. Mor∣tified by the Cardinal, a. 316 Condé (Prince of) a Panegyrick he made of the Cardinal, b. 6. Retires to Bruges, b▪ 26. Comes back, ibid. 58. Besieges Dole in vain, ibid. 166. Besieges Fon∣tarabia in vain, b. 210. Takes Salce, 238. And Cannet, ibid. Tries in vain to relieve Salce, b. 242. Goes into Roussillon, b. 301 Coni taken by the Count d'Harcourt, b. 292. Delivered to the Dutchess of Savoy, ibid. Corbie taken by the Spaniards, b. 170. Retaken by the French, b. 173 Cordova (D. Gonzales of) his Qualities, a. 128. At∣tacks Asti in vain, ibid. And Veruë, ibid. 129. En∣ters Montferrat, a. 294. Besieges Casal in vain, a. 295, 305 Coudrai Montpensier draws upon himself the Anger of the Cardinal, b. 122. Apprehended, ibid. 124 Couriers flying, invented at Turin, b. 272 Crequi (Mareschal of) goes into Piedmont with his Fa∣ther-in-Law, a. 109. Defends Veruë against the Spa∣niards, a. 129. Refuses to pass the Mountains to re∣lieve the Duke of Mantua, a. 229. Maliciously ruines the Army of the Marquis d'Uxelles, a. 300. Invests
Pignerol, a. 337 Crequi (Mareschal of) besieges Valence in Italy in vain, b. 153, &c. Disagrees with the Duke of Savoy, ibid. A fault of this General, b. 154. Takes the Field, b. 162. Takes Oleggio, ibid. Passes the Tesin, ib. Beats the Marquis of Leganez, b. 164. Is killed near Brême, b. 202 St. Croix (Marquis of) succeeds Spinola, a. 348. Treats with the French before Casal, a. 352 D. Damvilliers taken by the French, b. 189 Despreaux Governour of Monsieur, a. 89 Destur (Dominic Eguia) defends Fontarabia, b. 211 Dispensation of the Pope, if it is necessary for the Marriage of a Catholick Princess with a Protestant Prince, a. 83 Dole besieged in vain by the Prince of Condé, b. 166 Doria (John Jerome) beaten by the Savoyards, a. 114 Doria (Nicholas) beaten by the Spaniards, a. 115 Dunchery taken by Lamboi, b. 323 E. Ecclesiasticks, whether they may meddle with State-Af∣fairs, a. 7 Effiat (Marquis of) Ambassador in England, a. 90. Su∣perintendant of the Finances, and his Memorial in the Year 1627. ibid. 205. Conducts the Troops into Pied∣mont, a. 344. Mareschal of France, a. 355 Effiat (Henry of) advanced by the Cardinal, b. 252. Favourite of the King, b. 252. Makes the King angry with him, and is reconciled  him by the Cardinal, 277. Falls out with the Cardinal, b. 281, &c. His Cabals against him, b. 339. His want of conduct, b. 341. Apprehended at Narbonne, b. 345. His Examina∣tion and Trial, b. 349, 351 Elme taken by the French, b. 302 d'Emery (Ambassador of France in Savoy) his violent Designs, b. 194. His Instructions to return into Pied∣mont, b. 227
Eminent (Most) when the Cardinals received this Title, a. 343 English, discontented at King Charles I. a. 163 English endeavour in vain to relieve Rochelle, a. 234, 235 Enguien (Duke of) marries a Neice of the Cardinal, b. 282 l'Escalangue (Urban of) surrenders Pignerol out of Cow∣ardice, a. 338 d'Espenan goes into Catalonia, b. 259. Gets into Tarra∣gon, b. 260. Surrenders it by Capitulation, b. 261 Espernon (John Lewis de la Valette, Duke of) undertakes to free Mary de Medicis out of Blois, and accomplishes it, a. 21. &c. His Counsel to the Queen-Mother, ibid. 40. The Offers made him to reconcile himself to the Court, ibid. 46. Reduces Bearn, ibid. 56 Espernon (Duke of) interceeds for the Duke of Montmo∣rency, b. 44. How the Cardinal mortified him, b. 46, 47. He quarrels with him, b. 48. Banished to his House of Plassac, b. 223 Estrées (Mareschal of) his Panick fear, after the Disgrace of Châteauneuf, b. 59. Goes Ambassador to Rome in spight of the Pope, b. 159. Being call'd home, stops at Parma, b. 307. Is that Duke's Lieutenant-General, b. 362 Europe, a Comedy caused to be acted by the Cardinal 366 F. Fabbroni (Duke) deceives the Queen-Mother with his Chi∣merical Predictions, a. 221, 292 Fabbroni, Resident of the Queen-Mother at Rome, obli∣ged to leave it, b. 131 Fargis (Marquis of) the Treaties he makes in Spain, con∣cerning the Valteline, a. 173, 174. Sent to Bois de Vin∣cennes, b. 125 Fagette (Madamoiselle of) belov'd by the King, retires to a recluse Life, b. 217 Ferdinand II. Emperour, writes to the Princes of Italy, about the Affair of Mantua, a. 326. dies, 192 Ferdinand III. Emperour: The Cardinal refuses to own him, b. 192
Feria (Duke of) Governour of Milan. A Fault he com∣mitted in respect of the Valteline, a. 99. Relieves Ge∣noua, ibid. 117, 122. Pursues the French, and takes Aigues, ibid. 125. Attacks Asti in vain, 128. And Verrac, a. 129 Feria (Duke of) deceiv'd by the French, and the Savoy∣ards, b. 17, 21, &c. Fernamond, beaten by the Duke of Rohan, b. 156 Ferrandine, (Duke of) beaten by the Archbishop of Bour∣deaux, b. 300, 303 Feuquiéres (Marquis of) attacks Thionville, and is defeated by Piccolomini, b. 239, 240 Fleet (Spanish) beaten by the French, b. 338 Frederic Henry, Prince of Orange, joyns the French Army, b. 148. The Progress he made that Campagne, b. 149, &c. Does not agree with the French Generals, Ib. 149, 151. Will not hazard a Battel, b. 150. Re∣ceives the Title of Highness, b. 173. Takes Breda, b. 189. Raises the Siege of Gueldre, b. 209. Takes Gennep, b. 294. Does a considerable Service to the Cardinal, b. 368 Fontanet, taken by the Duke of Savoy, b. 163 Fontarabia besieg'd in vain by the French, b. 210 Fontrailles his Negotiation in Spain, b. 340 Force (James Nompar de Caumon Marquis of) Go∣vernour of Bearn, a. 46. Defends Montauban, ibid. 59. Is made Mareschal of France, a. 65. Commands in Italy, a. 344, &c. Force (Mareschal of) in Lorrain, b. 11. The difficulty he made of going against Monsieur, b. 33. Goes into Lorrain, ibid. 96. Into Germany, b. 119, 134, &c. Into Lorrain, b. 139 France, The State of that Kingdom in 1627. a. 204, &c. Franche-Comté attack'd by France, b. 166 French submissive to the Arbitrary Authority of their Kings and Ministers, a. 202, &c. Francis Hyacinth, Duke of Savoy, b. 193 G. Gatas (Matthias) commands an Imperial Army in Ger∣many, b. 135. Takes Wormes, ibid. 137. And
Keyserslauter, ibid. 139. Abandons the Siege of Deuxponts, ibid. 140. Flies before the Duke of Wey∣mar, ibid. Afterwards pursues him b. 141. Ravages the Electorate of Triers, and plunders Alsatia, b. 145. Ravages Burgundy, and retires, ibid. 167 Gaston de Bourbon Duke of Anjou, his Education, a. 88. Is admitted into the Council, ibid. 181. His en∣deavours in favour of the Mareschal d'Ornano, ibid. 182, 183, &c. The mean Spirit of this Prince, a. 184. Cabals against the Minister, ibid. 185. Ano∣ther instance of his mean Spirit, a. 190. Marries Madamoiselle de Montpensier, a. 192. Has a Daughter by her, and loses her, a. 211. Intriguing a∣bout his Second Marriage, ibid. 212. His desire to command the Army of Rochelle, a. 213, 221. Falls passionately in love with Marie de Gonzaga, a. 222. This Marriage is oppos'd, a. 290, &c. Goes for Dau∣phiné, and returns to Paris, a. 306, 318. Retires to Joinville, and from thence to Nancy, a. 321. Com∣plains highly of the Cardinal, a. 322, &c. Is recon∣ciled, and embroils himself a-fresh, a. 365. Retires to Orleans, a. 366. Goes out of the Kingdom, ibid. 374. Complains to the Parliament of Paris, 374 Gaston de Bourbon Duke of Orleans, obliged to leave Nancy, b. 25. Returns thither, b. 27. Invades France in an hostile manner, b. 32. The King issues out a De∣claration against him, b. 32, 33. Intercedes in vain for the Duke of Montmorency, b. 36, 38. Makes his Peace, b. 37. Complains that they had deceived him, b. 51. Retires into the Low Countries, b. 52. His Marriage with the Princess Margaret of Lorrain, b. 66. The Queen-Mother and he do not agree, b. 82. A Declaration concerning him, b. 90. The Parliament perplexed about his Marriage, b. 91. His Marriage judged valid by the Ʋniversity of Louvain, b. 102. Makes a Treaty with the King of Spain, b. 104. Refuses to accept any Arbitrators about his Marriage, b. 106. Reconciles himself to the Queen-Mother, b. 107. Treats with the King his Brother about his return, b. 110. Comes into France, b. 112. Will not hearken to the dissolution of his Marriage, ibid. 112, 113. The King puts out a Declaration in favour of him, b. 114. His
Civilities to the Spaniards, b. 122. His Dome∣sticks apprehended, b. 124. Receives a new Council, b. 126. Is made Generalissimo of the Army in Picar∣dy, b. 171. Combines with the Count de Soissons, to ruine the Cardinal, b. 174. Retires to Blois, b. 176. What happened between the Court and him after this retreat, ibid, &c. His reconciliation, b. 181. Espouses the Party of the Master of the Horse, b. 339. Confesses all they would have him, b. 348 Gatta (Charles of) enters into Turin, b. 271 Gave besieged and taken from the Genoueses, a. 114, 115, 118 Genoua, the Quarrels between the Duke of Savoy and that City, a. 106. An Attempt made upon that City, a. 110, &c. 112, &c. Relieved by the Spaniards, a. 121. The Princes of Italy stickle for her, a. 122. She takes Courage, a. 124, 127. And is wholly delivered from her fear, a. 132 Gennep taken by the Hollanders, b. 294 St. George (Duke of) mortally wounded under the Walls of Barcelona, b. 298 St. Geran (Mareschal of) when raised to that Dignity, a. 24 Gondi, his Journey to the Low Countries, and his Conver∣sation with the Queen-Mother, b. 108, &c. Gregory XV, Pope, a. 55 Grisons abandoned by France, a. 178 Grisons discontented at France, a. 197, 199 Grisons enter into a League with the House of Austria, b. 189, 190 Guiche (Count of) marries a Relation of the Cardinal, b. 114. Beaten by the Spaniards, b. 327. Comforted by the Cardinal, b. 328 Guise (Duke of) the Broils he was concerned in under the Regency of Marie de Medicis, a. 8, 15. Makes War against the Rochellers, a. 68. Being made Admiral of the Levant, refuses to throw up that place to the Cardinal, a. 362 Guise (Duke of) ill used, and constrained to retire into I∣taly, b. 8. Loses his Government of Provence, b. 31. Is denied leave to come back into France, b. 31
Guiton (John of) Mayor of Rochelle, his Bravery, a. 236. His remarkable Answers, a. 250 Guebriant (Count of) commands part of the Troops of the Duke of Rohan, b. 192. Is in the Duke of Wey∣mar's Army, b. 246. Commands it, b. 255. Is made Mareschal of France, b. 333. Defeats Lamboi, b. 360. Takes several places in the Electorate of Co∣logne, b. 361 Gustavus Adolphus enters Germany, and makes an Al∣liance with France, a. 344. Desires in vain to see the King of France, b. 25. His Answer to a Proposal made him to confer with the Cardinal, ibid. 25 Gustavus Adolphus slain, b. 53 H. Hallier takes Carolet, b. 209. Guards a Convoy to Ar∣ras, b. 257 Halluyn (Duke of) raises the Siege of Leucate, b. 186. Obtains a Mareschal's Staff, b. 187 Harcourt (Count of) regains the Isles of St. Honorat and St. Margaret, b. 186. Takes Quiers, and beats the Spaniards, b. 235. Returns to Carmagnole, and beats Prince Thomas, ibid. Raises the Siege of Ca∣sal, b. 267. Besieges Turin, b. 269. Takes it, b. 273. Besieges Yvreé in vain, b. 291. Takes several places, ibid. 292. Regains what Cantelmo had taken in the Bolonnois, b. 329 Hautefort (Madam of) loved by the King, b. 251. Re∣moved from Court, b. 354 Hêdin attack'd and taken by the Marquis de la Mille∣raye, b. 239, 241 Henrietta Maria, the Negotiations about her Marriage with the Prince of Wales, a. 76, &c. 86 Hugonots ill us'd in France, a. 56. Make an Insurre∣ction, ibid. 57. War is made against them, ibid. Designs against them, ibid. 63. Are in an ill con∣dition, ibid. Begin the War afresh, ibid. 141. If in policy that person ought to have been let alone, ibid. 142. A Treaty made with them, ibid. 143. Laid asleep by the Cardinal, a. 160. They obtain a Declaration in favour of them, a. 169, 170. They be∣gin
the War again, a. 214, An Act of Oblivion grant∣ed to them, ibid. 306. Attack'd and ruin'd in Viva∣rets, a. 313. And in Sevines, 314. They profess Obedience, a. 315. Why they were not totally extir∣pated b. 317 J. James I. King of England, His ill Conduct on the Mar∣riage of his Son, a. 87, 163 Jars (Chevalier of) His Constancy upon the Scaffold, b. 59 St. John de Angely besieged and taken, a. 58 St. John de Lône besieged in vain by the Duke of Lor∣rain, b. 167 St. John de Luz taken by the Spaniards, b. 167 Imperialists formidable to France in the Year 1635, b. 137. An oversight they committed, ibid. 138 Joseph (Father) a Capuchin: What a sort of Man he was, a. 105, 349. Deceives the Mareschal d'Ornano, ibid. 79. Goes to Ratisbonne, a. 349. A Cardinal's Cap is demanded for him, b. 160. His Death, ibid. 223: Isles of St. Margaret and St. Honorat seized by the Spaniards, b. 157. Regained, b. 186 John IV. Elevated to the Crown of Portugal, b. 261 K. Kaiserslauter taken, notwithstanding the resistance of the Swedes, b. 139 Kings, whether it be advantageous for them and the People that they be absolute, a. 202 L. Lamboi enters the Franche-Comté, b. 167. Beats the Mareschal de Châtillon, b. 322. Takes Dunchery, b. 323 Lamboi endeavours in vain to relieve Arras, b. 256. At∣tack'd in his Retrenchments, and defeated by the Count de Guebriant, b. 360 Landtgrave of Hesse, Her Treaties with France, b. 249, 250 Landrecy taken by the French, b. 187
Leganez (Marquist of) takes some places in Montferrat, b. 185, 226. Beaten by the Mareschal de Crequi, ibid. 164. His Manifesto's, b. 204. Besieges Casal, b. 264. Raises the Siege, ibid. 267. Endeavours in vain to relieve Turin, b. 270, &c. Call'd home from his Government of Milan, b. 289. Commands in Cata∣lonia, b. 303. Gives Battel to la Mothe Houdan∣court, b. 357. Ends the Campagne, b. 259. Is dis∣grac'd, ibid. Lens taken by the French, b. 295. Retaken by the Spa∣niards, b. 326 Leon Bralart his Negotiation at Ratisbonne, a. 349 Lesdeguieres (Francis de Bonne, Sieur de) made a Duke and Peer, a. 28. Created Mestre de Camp General of the King's Armies, ibid. 55. Changes his Religion to be made Constable, ibid. 66. Goes to Susa to confer with the Duke of Savoy, a. 106: Goes to Turin with an Ar∣my to march against Genou, a. 110. The Duke of Savoy and he differ in their Opinions, ibid. 111. What Progress he makes a. 113: A misunderstanding between him and the Duke of Savoy, ibid. 118, 19. His Retreat in the sight of the Spanish Army, ibid. 126. Falls sick and retires, a. 127, 128. His Death, a. 195 Leucate besieged in vain by the Spaniards, b. 186 League between France and Spain against England, a. 225 League between France, the Republick of Venice, and the Duke of Savoy, a. 94 League between France and the Duke of Savoy against the Genoueses, a. 106 League in Italy 1635, between Savoy, Mantua, and Parma, b. 152. The progress of that League, 153, 154, &. Longueville (Duke of) his Broils with the Court, a. 12. Abandons Roan, Ibid. 38. Writes a submissive Let∣ter from Diepe, ibid. 39 Longueville (Dutchess of) sent to Vincennes, a. 319 Set at Liberty, ibid. 320 Longueville (Duke of, and Son of the former) in Pied∣mont, b. 228. Commands the Duke of Weymar's Army in Germany, b. 249. Joins Banier, b. 255. Quits
the Army, ibid. Ordered to go and command in Italy, 325 Lorrain seized by the King, b. 115. Restored, b. 286. Retaken, b. 287 Lorrain (Duke of) draws a War upon himself, by taking the part of Monsieur, b. 10. Loses Moyenvic and several places, ibid. 12. Is reconciled, b. 24. Embroils himself afresh, Ibid. 27. Makes his Peace, ibid. 28. Breaks the Treaty afresh, b. 65, 66. Goes to Charmes, and concludes a treaty there, b. 73. Summoned to appear before the Parliament of Paris, b. 86. Is trea∣ted with more gentleness, b: 91. Makes a pretended Donation of his Dukedom to his Brother, ibid. 92. Bea∣ten by the Swedes, b. 97. Strives in vain to recover Lorrain, b: 141. Joyns Galas, ibid. 142: Goes into Franche-Comté. ibid. 167. Besieges St. John de Lône in vain, ibid. 167. Is reconciled to the King, b. 285. Would be divorced from his Wife, b. 285. Joins himself to the House of Austria, ibid. 287 Lorrain (Dutchess of) carried to Paris, and the Vexation she there receives, b. 114: And ill used by the Duke her Husband, b. 285, &c. Lorrain, (Nicholas-Francis Cardinal of) endeavours to reconcile the King to his Brother, b. 67, 68. Offers to marry Combalet, b. 69: Provokes the King, b. 72. His Marriage with Combalet talked of afresh, b. 74, 81, 82. Goes to Paris, ibid. 81: Takes the Ti∣tle of Duke, ibid. 93. Marries his Cousin, ibid. 95. Confined at Nancy, ibid. 96: Makes his escape with his Wife, 98 Loudun, A Treaty concluded in that Village, a. 9 Lewis XIII. His Marriage the cause of Commotions, a. 6. He reduces Normandy, ibid. 37, &c. Goes into Anjou, ibid. 39. Is reconciled to his Mother, ibid: 44. Makes War against the Hugonots, ibid. 49, &c. Goes into Poitou, ibid. 64. His jealousie and hatred of his Brother, a. 190, 191, 212, 30. An ill Husband, ibid. 194. Goes to the Army before Rochelle, a. 218. Returns to Paris, ibid. 229. Goes again to the Army before Rochelle, a. 233. Demands Three Millions of the clergy, a. 293. Chuses to go into Italy rather than give the Command of the Army to his Brother, a. 306. Returns into France, a. 311. And to Paris,
a. 315. Goes to Lyons; and from thence into Savoy, a: 341. Falls sick at Lyons, a. 355. Recovers, and goes to Paris, a. 356. Takes the Cardinal's part against his Mother, ibid. 358, 359, &c. LEWIS XIII. declares all those that were with his Brother guilty of High Treason, b. 1. Issues out a Decla∣ration against his Mother, b. 4. Some Persons that calcu∣lated his Nativity punished, b. 10. Goes into Lorrain, b. 24. Returns thither, ibid. 27. Goes the third time thither, a. 67. Expresses some coldness towards the Cardi∣nal, b. 120. His harsh usage of his Mother, b. 129. Goes into Champaigne, and from thence into Lorrain, b. 142. Returns to Paris, b. 143. Declares War against Spain, ibid. 148. Raises an Army to recover what the Spaniards had taken from him in Picardy, b. 171. Weeps to see the Devastations in Picardy, b. 173 Has some remorse for obliging his Mother to be so long out of the Kingdom, b. 196. Ʋses her ill, b. 222, &c. Consults the Ministers about it, b. 224. Orders the Duke de la Valette's Tryal against all Forms of Justice, b. 225. Is in love with Madam de Hautefort, b. 251. Takes H. d'Effiat for his Favourite, ibid. 252. Loves him exceedingly one while, b. 253. Falls out with him, b. 277. Being sick, is at a stand whether he should go into Roussillon, b. 329. He departs, b. 332. Falls sick in the Camp, b. 342. Goes to Narbonne, and causes his Favourite to be apprehended there, b. 345. Sees the Cardinal, b. 347 Lewis XIII. inclin'd to believe ill of others, a. 69. Was cruel, a. 65, 313. Of a dissembling Humour, a. 15, 188. And melancholy, b. 172. Could not part with a Minister that once governed under him, a. 34. Fearful and distrustful, a. 31 Lewis XIV. his Birth, b. 219 Louvain besieg'd in vain by the Hollanders and French, b. 149, 150 Luines (Charles d' Albert Sieur de) the beginning of his coming into Favour, a 12. His great Power over the King, ibid. 19. How much he was at a loss in State-Affairs, ibid. 19, 21. Made a Duke and Peer, ib. 24. The Queen-Mother and he distrust one another, ib. 32. Opposes the Promotion of the Bishop of Luçon, ib. 47, 49.
Presses this Promotion, ib. 51. Made Constable of France, ib. 55. His death, ibid. 60 Lude (Count of) Governour of the Duke of Anjou, a. 89. Lunel, a Capitulation for the surrendry of that Town, which was but weakly defended, a. 66 M. Maillé (Urban of) Brother-in-Law to the Cardinal, a. 2. See Brezé. Mansfeld (Count of) his Projects, a. 99 Mangot (Claude) added as Partner to the Secretary of State, a. 10. Has the Seals conferred upon him, a. 14 Mantua: See Charles de Gonzaga. Mantua attack'd by the Imperialists, a. 329. Attack'd a second time, and taken, ibid. 343 Margaret of Lorrain escapes out of Nancy in Man's Ap∣parel, b. 71 Marie de Gonzaga beloved by Gaston de Bourbon, a. 222. Intrigues carried on for and against her marrying with him, a. 290, &c. 318. Is imprisoned, a. ibid. Set at liberty, ibid. 320 Marie de Medicis, a short History of her Regency, a. 4, 5, &c. Is deprived of it, and imprisoned, ibid. 16. Makes her escape, ibid. 21. The difficulties she makes to return to Court, ibid. 23, &c. Sees the King near Tours, ib. 26. Goes to Angers, and will not stir from thence, ib. 27. Makes her Party formidable, a. 35. Deliberates whether she shall leave Angers, ib. 40. Her Reconciliation with the King, ib. 44. Is deceived by the Bishop of Luçon ib. A Declaration in her behalf, a. 49. Is readmitted into the Council, ib. 61. Presses to make Cardinal Richlieu a Privy-Councellor, a. 69. Is desirous to give one of the Duke of Nonnie's Daugh∣ters in Marriage to Gaston, ib. 221. Suffers herself to be led away with Predictions, ib. Is countermined by the King and Cardinal, a. 222 She begins to com∣plain of the Cardinal, a. 291. Her too violent carriage towards Mary of Gonzaga, disapproved, a. 320. Her vexation at the Duke of Orleans's retreat into Lorrain, a. 321. Receives the Cardinal ill, and breaks off with him, a. 322, &c. Takes too much Authority over her
Son, ib. 325. Falls out a-fresh with the Cardinal, ib. 358, &c. Vainly believes she had ruin'd him, ib. 360. Is reconcil'd to him in appearance, ibid. 263. Goes no more to the Council, ib. 364. Goes to Compeigne with∣out making up these differences, a. 372. Apprehended at Compeigne, ib. 374. Complains to the Parliament of Paris, a. 374. Retires into the Low Countries, ib. 375 Marie de Medicis. The Declaration of the King her Son against her, b. 4. Her vexation about her Palace, b. 50. Complains of Gaston, ib. 52. Is desirous to re∣tire into England, ib. 56. Willing to make her Peace, ib. 76. Accused of a design to get the Cardinal assassina∣ted, b. 76. She is in vain desired to abandon her Ser∣vants, b▪ 78, 80, 88. Complains of Monsieur, and would fain be reconciled to the King, ibid. and 98. Writes to the Cardinal, b. 99. She is asked to deliver Chanteloube, St. German, and Fabbroni, ib. 101. 'Tis propos'd to send her to Florence, ib. 108. But she refuses, ib. 109. Dissatisfied with her Domesticks, ibid. Writes to Rome to confirm the Marriage of Monsieur, b. 128. Complains to the Pope, ibid. Writes to the King to persuade him to a Peace, b. 129. Complains that they won't suffer her to have a Resident at Rome, b. 131. Demands in vain to be restor'd, b. 184. Goes into Eng∣land, and endeavours to be reconcil'd to her Son, b. 219, &c. The King answers her roughly, and would send her to Florence, b. 222, 223. The Opinions of the Mini∣sters of Lewis XIII. about her return, b. 224. Goes to Cologne, b. 308. Where she dies, b. 348 Marillac, Keeper of the Seals, a. 182. Imprison'd, a. 362 Marillac (Lewis) made Mareschal of France, a. 314. Apprehended in Italy, ib. 262. His Tryal, 28, &c. Mayenne (Duke of) the Commotions he was concerned in, a. 9, 30, 33. Killed before Montauban, ib. 60 Mazarine (Julius) negotiates a Cessation of Arms between the Garrison of Casal and the Besiegers, a. 348. His Negotiations in favour of the French, a. 352, &c. Mazarine, for too much endeavouring to gain the Cardi∣nal's Favour, is call'd home by the Pope, b. 158. Crea∣ted Cardinal, 308 Mailleraye (Marquiss of) discarded out of the Queen-Mo∣ther's Service, a. 358
Mailleraye (Marquiss of) Grand Master of the Artillery, b. 120. Attacks Hedin, and takes it, b. 239, 241. Besieges Arras, b. 256. Takes Aire, b. 293. Obliged by the Cardinal Infanta to dislodge from before Aire, b. 294. Takes Bassée, b. 295. And Bapaume, b. 296 Mello (Duke Francisco of) takes Lens, b. 326. La Bassée, ibid. Beats the Mareschal de Guiche, b. 327. An o∣versight of this General, b. 328 Merode (Count of) enters into the Country of the Grisons with an Imperial Army, a. 326 Mirabel (Marquiss of) Ambassador of Spain in France, a. 100 Monod (the Jesuit) his Intrigues against the Cardinal, b. 199, 200. The Cardinal angry with him, b. 200, &c. Montague (Lord) willing to treat with the Cordinal, a. 239, 240 Montauban, the Siege of that City, a. 58. Raised, 59. At last reduced by the Cardinal, a. 315, 316 Montbazon (Duke of) employ'd to negotiate with the Queen-Mother, a. 23, &c. 31 Montcálvo taken by the Viscount de Turenne, b. 288. Re∣taken by the Spaniards, b. 292 Montjoy. A Battle fought near this Mountain, b. 298. Fortified, b. 300 Montmorency (Henry Duke of) Admiral of France beats the Fleet of the Rochellers, a. 146. Heads the Forces in Piedmont, a. 344. Made Mareschal of France, a. 355. Ʋndertakes to protect the Cardinal, a. 356 Montmorency (Henry Duke of) what occasions the Car∣dinal gives him to be angry with him, b. 34. Takes up Arms for Monsieur, and receives him in his Government, ibid. Is wounded and taken, b. 35, 36. His Tryal, b. 42. A general Intercession made in vain for him, b. 43, 44. Beheaded, 45 Monzon. A design of the Spaniards upon this place comes to nothing, b. 365. A Treaty concluded in this City, a. 175 La Mothe Houdancourt, goes to command in Catalonia, b. 300. What Progress he makes there, b. 301. Blocks up Tarragon, ib. &c. Beats the Spaniards, 302. Re∣lieves Almenas, b. 305. Is made a Mareschal of France, b. 333. Beats D. Pedro d' Arragon, and takes him
Prisoner, b. 334. Besieges Tortose in vain, b. 336. And takes Monzon, ib. Gives Battel to Leganez, b. 357, &c. Moyenvic taken from the Duke of Lorrain, b. 12 N. Nancy surrendred to the King, b. 74 Nari (Bernardon) sent by Urban VIII. into France, a. 102. His Negotiation about the Valteline, ibid. Negropelisse put to the Sword, a. 68 Nobility ruin'd under Lewis XIII. a. 202, 208 Norlingue, a Battel lost near this City by the Swedes, b. 118 Notables. An Assembly of Notables at Fountainbleau, a. 153. Another at Paris, ib. 201 Novi taken by the Genoueses, a. 114 O. Oleggio taken by the Mareschal de Crequi, b. 162 Olivarez (Count-Duke) his ill Conduct, 354, 355. Disgra∣ced, 365 Orleans (Duke of) See Gaston. Ornano (Colonel) Governour of Monsieur, a. 89. Imprison∣ed and set at Liberty, ib. 90. Made a Mareschal of France, ib. 179. The cause of his disgrace, ib. Impri∣soned, a. 181. His death at Bois de Vincennes, ib. 193 Orval (Count of) defends Montauban, a 59 Ossonville, an over-sight of this Man, b. 345 Ottagio: The Spaniards and Genoueses defeated near that place, a. 117 Oxenstiern Chancellour of Sweden comes to Paris, b. 136 P. Papenheim beats the French in the Valteline, a. 157 Parliament of Paris, how far it concerned it self in the Government under the Regence of Mary de Medi∣cis, a. 8. Advises the King to make up matters with his Mother, ib. 36. Is forced to enroll several Edicts, ib. 64 Parliament of Paris refuses to enter a Declaration against Monsieur, b. 1, 2. Censur'd by the King, ib. Refuses to confirm a Declaration for the setting up a Chamber of Justice, b. 11. Mortified by the King, b. 11, 24, 60, 157, 282, &c. A Defence of the Rights of Parliament, b. 283, 284
Parma (Edward Duke of) enters into a League with France, b. 152. Goes to Paris, b. 160. Punished by the Spaniards for making a League against them, ib. 161, 164. Is reconciled to the Spaniards, b. 184. Plun∣dered of Castro by the Barbarians, b. 306. Excommu∣nicated, b. 362. A League to defend him, b. 363. Makes an Irruption into the Ecclesiastick State, ibid. Passage taken by the French, b. 210 Perez (Michael) defends Fontarabia, b. 211. Perpignan besieged and taken by the French, b. 335. Fa∣ctions in the French Camp, b. 342 Phaltsburg (Princess of) cunningly retires from Nancy, b. 97 Philip IV. departs for Arragon, b. 336. Deceived by false News, b. 338 Philipsburg surprized by the Imperialists, b. 133 Picardy over-run by the Spaniards, b. 169, 170, &c. Piccolomini defeats Feuquieres, b. 240. Attacks Monzon in vain, ib. 241 Pignerol attacked and taken by the Cardinal, a. 337, 338 Pignerol, the vast importance of this place in the Hands of France, b. 16. A Stratagem to keep it, by pretend∣ing to surrender it, b. 18. Given up by agreement to the King of France, b. 22, 23 Du Plessis Besançon negotiates with the Catalonians, b. 259. Beats the Spaniards near Barcelona, b. 298, 299, &c. Du Plessis-Prâlain Governour of Turin, b. 274 Plessis (Alphonsus of) Brother of the Cardinal, is made Bishop of Luçon, a. 2. Quits it to turn Carthusian, ibid. 3. Archbishop of Lyons and Cardinal, a. 330 Plessis (Francis of) Father to the Cardinal, a. 2. His Chil∣dren, ibid. Plessis (Armand John of) his Birth and Education, a. 2, 3. Goes into Orders, and is nominated to the Bishoprick of Luçon, ibid. Sollicites his own Bulls himself, and ob∣tains them, ib. 4. Betakes himself to preaching, ib. And to the Mareschal d'Ancre, ib. and 11. His Harangue before the States, ib. 7. Is made Grand Almoner to the Queen, ib. 11. Privy-Counsellor, ib. Advises the Imprisonment of the Prince of Conde, ib. 12. Made Secretary of State, ib. 14. Obtains the Precedence before the other Secreta∣ries,
ib. Disgraced after the death of the Marquiss d'Ancre, ib. 16. Goes to Blois, ib. 17. is ordered to re∣tire into Anjou; from whence he writes to the King, ib. Banished to Avignon, ib. 18. Writes Religious Trea∣tises there, ib. Is recalled, ib. 22. His Conduct towards Marie de Medicis, ib. 22, &c. 29. The ill Counsel he gives that Princess, ib. 41. Ruines her, and yet by her means gets the King to demand a Cardinal's Cap for him, ib. 44. The Enemies he had at Court, ib. 47. Who secretly oppose his Promotion, ib. 48. At last 'tis asked heartily, and then he obtains it, 62, 63 Plessis (Armand John of) Cardinal of Richlieu, decla∣red Privy-Counsellor, a. 78. Receives the Ambassadours of England in his Bed, a. 79. His opinion about the Marriage of Henrietta Maria, ib. 83. The Discour∣ses he had with Spada the Nuncio about it, a. 84. And about the Valteline, 95, 102, 103, 134, 136, 140, 148, 150. With the Legate, ib. 134, &c. 149. His Discourse in the Assembly of Notables at Fontainbleau, ib. 155, 156. Thinks of making War against Spain, a. 100. His Conversation with the Marquis de Mirabel, ib. 100. Designs to destroy the Hugonots, a. 167. False∣ly accused to favour them, ib. 171. Pretends to quit the Ministry, a. 177. Endeavours to ruin the Mareschal d'Ornano, ib. 179, &c. Called The King of the King, ib. 182. Feigns an inclination to retire, a. 184. A Conspiracy against him, ib. 185. Tricks the Messieurs de Vendôme, a. 187. Obtains Guards for his security, 195. Is made Admiral under another Name, a. 209. His Government of Oleron and Broüage, a. 213. Cheats the Hollanders and Spaniards, a. 217. Sticks fast to the Blockade of Rochelle, a. 219, 221. Has the Title of Lieutenant-General, ib. 220. What Orders he makes in the Army, a. 239. Treats with the Rochellers, ib. 241. Grants them such Capitulation as he pleases, a. 248. Enters that City, ib. 250, &c. Plessis (Armand John of) superstitiously fond of Judicial Astrology, a. 292. Advises the King to assist the Duke of Mantua, and brings him over to it, a. 302. Goes to Grenoble, and from thence to Susa, a. 307. Negotiates with the Prince of Piedmont, ib. 308, 310. Comes back into France, and ruins the Hugonots, to whom he
gives a Peace at] last, a. 313, &c. Reduces Mon∣tauban, a. 316. Refuses to have any share in the Be∣nefices of the Grand Prior, a. 319. Will no longer de∣pend upon the Queen-Mother, a. 320. Ill received by that Princess, a. 322. A Rupture between them, a. 323, &c. Declared Principal Minister of State, a. 325. Lieutenant-General of the Army of Piedmont, ib. 330. Departs for Dauphiné, ib. Refuses to go to Pont de Beauvoisin to treat with the Prince of Piedmont, a. 331. Treats with him near Susa, a. 334. The Habits the Cardinal wore in Piedmont, a. 336. His march to go to Rivoli, ib. Goes to attack Pignerol, and takes it, a. 337, &c. They try in vain to engage him to surrender it, a. 340. Goes to Grenoble, to Lyons, and into Sa∣voy, ib. 341, &c. Makes a Treaty with Gu∣stavus Adolphus, a. 344. Cabals against him during the King's sickness at Lyons, a. 355. Measures taken to save him, a. 356. The Queen-Mother breaks off with him a-fresh, a. 358. Is protected by the King, a. 359, &c. Is reconciled in outward appearance with his Be∣factress, a. 363. His Opinion concerning the design to apprehend the Queen-Mother, a. 367, 371, &c. Plessis (Armand John of) Cardinal of Richlieu, made a Duke and Peer, b. 5, 6. Governour of Bretany, ibid. His Discourse about the Queen-Mother, b. 9.56. Goes into Lorrain, b. 24. Tries in vain to marry his Niece to the Count de Soissons, b. 26. Gives his Opinion a∣gainst the Duke of Montmorency, b. 39. His Con∣duct in this occasion, b. 42, 43, &c. Falls sick in Guienne, b. 48. Quarrels with the Duke of Espernon, b. 48, 49. His Sentiments upon the Affairs of Ger∣many after the death of Gustavus, ib. 53, &c. He would send the Queen-Mother to Florence, b. 57, &c. 75. Received Knight of the Holy Ghost, b. 61. His opinion concerning a War with Spain in 1633. ib. 62. Goes into Lorrain, and treats with the Cardinal of Lor∣rain, b. 67. His Sentiments about Lorrain, b. 69, 70. Assassines sent to kill him, b. 76. His opinion about a Reconciliation between this King, his Mother and his Brother, b. 84, 85, 87. His Speech in Parliament 1634, b. 90. Complains of the Cardinal of Lorrain, b. 92. Cruel to the Queen-Mother, 100. His advice to prevent the
evil Designs of Monsieur, ib. 106. He complains of the Q. Mother's Domesticks, ib. 110. Augments the number of his Guards, ib. 117. Obtains the Coadjutorship of Spiers, ib. 117. They refuse to grant it him at Rome, b. 117. His Sentiments about the Affairs of Germany after the Bat∣tel of Norlingue, b. 118. Makes the Privy-Council meet at his House, a. 130. The great Inquietudes that attend∣ed his Grandeur, b. 130. The Q. Mother complains of him to the Pope, b. 131. He gives ill Orders to resist the Im∣perialists, b. 137. Consternation of the Cardinal. ib. 138. Judges it would be better to declare War against Spain, than barely to cross its Designs, b. 145. The Court of Rome refuses him the Bulls to be General of the Cister∣cians and Premonstratenses, b. 159. Fears lest he should set up for a Patriarch, b. 159. The People an∣gry with him at Paris, b. 171. His Courage upon that occasion, ib. 171. The Fear he then expressed, b. 172. What sort of Danger he ran at Amiens, b. 174, 175. His Advice to the Dutchess of Savoy, b. 195, 200, 205.206, 227, 229, 233, 263, 264, 268. Accused by the King's Confessor, b. 196, &c. Occasions the Queen to be ill used, b. 215, &c. 250. His Discourse with Count Philip d' Aglié, b. 234. His fallings out with the Court of Rome, b. 236. The Complaints he makes at the Court of Rome, b. 238. His Advice to the new King of Portugal, b. 262. His designs concerning the Hugonots, b. 275. Concerning the erection of a Patriarchship, b. 276. Aspires to be Regent of the Kingdom, b. 276. His Quarrels with the Count de Soissons, and the Duke of Bouillon, b. 308, &c. With the Archbishop of Rheims, afterwards Duke of Guise, b. 309. A Con∣spiracy against him, b. 311. He repents of having pro∣vok'd the Count de Soissons, b. 315. The Sentiments of Bullion about the War caused by the Cardinal, b. 315. Complaints of his Administration, b. 317, &c. Perswades the King to an Attempt upon Roussillon, b. 329. His Advice to carry Monsieur and the Queen thi∣ther, b. 331. Departs for Languedoc, b. 332, 333. Falls sick at Narbonne, b. 342. Does not think him∣self in a place of security, b. 343. Discovers the Con∣spiracy of Cinq-Mars, b. 344. His interest with the King of Tarascon, b. 347. His Voyage to Paris, b.
349. Holds a Council about the Designs of the ensuing Campagne, b. 365. A mysterious Comedy which he cau∣ses to be acted, b. 366. Some insolent Proposals which he made to the King to see him, b. 367. Turns se∣veral Captains out of their Places, ib. Would have his own Guards mingle with those of the King, b. 368. Pre∣tends to quit the Ministry, ib. His last Sickness. b. 3. &c. His last Words, b. 3. &c. His Death, b. 3. His Will, b. 3. The Disposition of his Brain, b. 3. His Funeral, b. 3 Plessis (Armand John of, Cardinal) The Portraicture of his Person, b. 3. His general Maxims and Projects, b. 3. His ambitious Humour, a. 17, 18. Changes his Conduct, and lays the Fault on the other Ministers, a. 349. Abandons his principal Designs to lay hold of any favourable incident, a. 342. draws the Hatred of all People upon himself, a. 195. Believes Visions, b. 209. What use he made of the King's Favourites, 279. His Maxim never to pardon Crimes of State, a. 207. b. 351. His Maxims to engage the King to use all those that were most nearly related to him ill, a. 193. His cunning to set the King and Queen-Mother at variance, a. 357. b. 10. And to continue him in an ill Humour against her, ib. 77. Concerning those whom he took in∣to his Service, a. 253. His dexterity to make People be suspected, a. 179, 180. His Sentiments about the Dis∣course of Ministers of State, a. 3 Pont du Cé. A Victory obtained by the King over the Queen-Mother near this City, a. 42. Taken by the Roy∣alists, a. 43 Pont-Courlay (Marquis of) beats the Spaniards, b. 215 Porte, Agent of the Cardinal Infanta at Paris, b. 216 Portugueses rebell, b. 261 Portugueses throw off the Spanish Yoak in all places, 354 Pozzevera: The Courage of the Inhabitants of that City, a. 124 Prâlain (Mareschal of) when elevated to that Dignity, a. 24 Privas besieged and taken by the Royal Army, a. 313 Puilaurens, Favourite of Monsieur; the Presents and Pro∣mises made him to gain him over, a. 264 Puilaurens. 'Tis endeavour'd in vain to remove him from Monsieur, b. 83. He treats with the Cardinal, ib. 98.110:
They try to assassinate him, b. 103. What great Offers the Cardinal makes him, b. 111. Marries a Relation of the Cardinal, ib. 114. Buys the Dutchy of Eguillon, b. ib: Draws the Minister's Anger upon himself, b. 121, 122: Sent to Bois de Vincennes, b. 125. where he dies, 126 Puisieux (Peter Bralard Marquis of) has the Survivorship of the Secretary of State's Place, a. 14. Disgraced, ib. 24, &c. Q. Querasque, a Treaty concluded in that City, b. 13 Quiers taken by the Count d'Harcourt, b. 235 R. Ratisbonne, a Treaty concluded in that City, a. 349 Rhée, an Island, attack'd by the English; whether it was to be reliev'd, a. 216. Relieved, a. 218 Renty taken by the French, b. 209 Retz (Duke of) blamed for Cowardize, a. 43 The Revenues Royal, under Henry IV. a. 204, 205 Rheims, the Archbishop of that City his Quarrel with the Cardinal, b. 309, 310, 311 Richlieu: See Plessis. la Richerie apprehended; accuses several Persons, b. 310 Riviere (Abbot of) an unfaithful Servant of Monsieur, a. 184. Imprisoned, and set at liberty, b. 178 Rochelle Forts built about that City, a. 68. Makes War against the King, a. 101. Burns some French and Dutch Ships, ib. 143. Their Fleet is beaten, ib. 147. They obtain a Peace, a. 158. The English promise to relieve them, ib. 165, &c. Treat afresh with the King, ib. 168. Of what importance this Place is to England, ib. 210. Block'd up by a Royal Army, a. 219. Demands Assistance of England, ib. 210, 220, &c. A Digue that shut up the Harbour, ib. 227. Continuation of its Siege, a. 230, &c. Extreme scarcity in that City, a. 232. En∣deavours in vain to shut out the unprofitable Mouths, a: 232, 236. The English endeavour in vain to relieve it, a. 234, 238, &c. The City parlies, a. 241. Capitu∣lates,
and surrenders, a. 248 Rohan (Henry Duke of) Chief of the Hugonots, a. 57. Throws Relief into Montauban, a. 59. Causes Mont∣pellier to surrender, a. 67. He begins the War afresh, ib. 141. Rises a third time, ib. 214, 293. Treats with the King, 314 Rohan (Henry Duke of) goes to the Grisons, b. 64. His Progress and Victories in the Valteline, b. 156. Tries in vain to join the Duke of Savoy, b. 164. Oblig'd to a∣bandon the Valteline, b. 189, 191. Goes to the Duke of Weymar, b. 207. Dies, ibid. Rome, the manner of treating with that Court, a. 106 Rossiglione, a Defeat of the Genoueses near that Place, a. 115 Roussillon, a Design to conquer it, b. 329 Roye taken by the Spaniards, b. 170. Retaken by the French, b. 173 S. Salces taken by the Prince of Condé, b. 241. Retaken by the Marquis of Spinola, b. 242, &c. Surrenders to the French, b. 256 Sardinia, a Descent made by the French Fleet upon that Island, b. 185 Savoy conquer'd by Lewis XIII. a. 342 Savoy; the Broils of the House of Savoy, after the death of Victor Amadeo, b. 193, &c. 224, &c. 228, 236, 288 Savoy (Cardinal of) his Designs upon Piedmont, b. 326, &c. Siezes upon Nice and Villa Franca, b. 232. Adjusts his Differences with France, and with his Sister-in-Law, b. 325. Turns the Spanish Garrisons out of Nice and Villa Franca. ibid. Schenck, a Fort taken by the Spaniards, b. 151 Schomberg (Count of) loses his Office of Superintendant of the Finances, a. 69. Made a Mareschal of France, a. 139. Relieves the Isle of Rhée, ib. 218. Commands a Body of Men by himself in Italy, a. 348. Goes to re∣lieve Casal, 351 Scoti, the Nuncio, his Conference with Chavigny, b. 236. Ill us'd by the Court of France, ib. 238 Seguier (Peter) made Chancellor of France, b. 157. Goes to interrogate the Queen, b. 216, 217 Senecey (Marchioness of) remov'd from Court, b. 250
Serbellon (John) trick'd by the Duke of Rethel, a. 226. Beaten by the Duke of Rohan, b. 156. Besieges Leu∣cate, and raises the Siege, b. 186, 187 Serignan enters into Catalonia, b. 297 Serravalle, an Overthrow of the Spaniards near that Place, a. 115 Sillery (Commandeur of) recall'd from his Embassie at Rome, a. 74 Sillery (Chancellor) depriv'd of the Seals, a. 72 Silvio Emanuel de Savoy defends Yvrée, b. 289 S. Simon, a Favourite of the King, a: 195 Sirvela (Count of) Governour of Milan, his Incapacity in War, b. 290. Displeases Prince Thomas of Savoy, b. 324 Socoa taken by the Spaniards, b. 167. Abandon'd, b. 296 Soissons (Count of) retires into Italy, a. 193. Complains of the Cardinal, ib. 223. Received by the Count de Be∣thune, in spight of the Cardinal, ib. 224 Soissons (Count of) a discourse of marrying him to Com∣balet, b. 13, 26. Mortified by the Cardinal, ib. 132, 144. Commands the Army in Picardy, b. 170. Is Lieutenant-General of the Army of Picardy, b. 171. Joins with Monsieur against the Cardinal, b. 174. Flies away, and retires to Sedan, b. 176. Negotiations on foot to bring him back, b. 177. His Reconciliation, b. 179, 183. His new Quarrels with the Cardinal, b. 308, &c. 312. His Manifesto against the Cardinal, b. 317. Declar'd guilty of High-Treason by the Parlia∣ment, b. 321. Is kill'd in the Battel of Sedan, 322, &c. Sondrio taken by the Marquis de Coeuvres, a. 98 Soubise beaten out of the Isle of Rhée, a. 64. Takes Six of the King's Vessels at Blavet, ib. 102. He makes a Descent in several places, ib. 141. Goes into England. a. 146. How he was receiv'd there, a. 164 Sourdis (Cardinal of) his Opinion in the Assembly of the Notables at Fontainbleau, a. 155 Spada, the Nuncio, his Negotiations in the Court of France, a. 81, 84. concerning the Valteline, a. 95, 136. Of∣fends the Cardinal, ib. 153 Spain, the Weakness of that Crown in 1642. b. 335, 354 Spain, over-sighted in the Conduct of the Spaniards, a. 128 Spaniards complain in the Year 1633. of the French, b.
64. The Answer of the latter, b. 64, 65. Spaniards, a great Errour they committed in assisting the King to take Rochelle, a. 217, 228 Spaniards, A Pretence of Religion that they cunningly made use of, a. 148 Spinola (Ambrose) his Advice upon the Siege of Rochelle, a. 228. Condemns the Conduct of the Spaniards, ib. Besieges Casal, a. 343. Falls out with the Emperor's Generals, and with the Duke of Savoy, a. 347. Falls sick, ib. and dies, a. 348 Spinola (D. Philip) takes Pontesture, a. 343 States of the Kingdom assembled under Lewis XIII. a. 7 The States abolish'd in France, a. 202 States-General of the United Provinces assist the King against the Rochellers, a. 143. Their Treaty with the King in 1627, a. 217. Another Treaty with the King in 1633, b. 61. Weary of the War with Spain, b. 145. Nevertheless make a League with France, b. 146. Make some Offers to the Cardinal, which he does not accept, b. 168. Make a new Treaty with France, b. 172 Strigio (Count) firmly espouses the Interest of the Duke of Nevers, a. 225, 227 Spire attack'd and taken by the French, b. 135 Sweden, their League with France renew'd, b. 61 Swisses, their ill Politicks, a. 121 Sully (Duke of) banish'd the Court, a. 5 Susa, the Pass of that City forc'd, a. 309, Surrenders to the French, ibid. T. Targon (Pompey) Engenier, endeavours in vain to shut up the Harbour of Rochelle, a. 227 Tarragon block'd up by the French, b. 302, &c. Tellieres (Count of) Ambassador in England, a. 80. Call'd home, ib. 90. Themines (Marquis of) made a Mareschal of France, a. 13. Has the Government of Bretaigne, ib. 194. Thoiras (John de S. Bonet of) makes a Descent upon the Isle of Rhée, a. 145. Fortifies himself there, ibid. 210. Goes to Casal, a. 311. Takes some Places by force, a. 327. Press'd hard in Casal, a. 342, 346. Made a Mareschal of France, a. 354
Thoiras (Mareschal of) Commands the Army of the Duke of Savoy, in Quality of his Lieutenant, b. 161. Is kill'd, b. 163 Thomas of Savoy (Prince) enters into the Service of Spain, b. 105. Beaten at Avien, b. 148. Raises the Siege of St. Omer, b. 208. Makes himself Master of several Places in Piedmont, b. 223, 226. Takes Tu∣rin by surprize, b. 230. Talks of treating with his Sister-in-Law, b. 263. Defends Turin; surrenders it, b. 273. Breaks his Word with France, b. 288. Desirous to relieve Yvrée in spight of the Spaniards, b. 290. At∣tacks Chivas in vain, b. 291. Makes his Peace with France, b. 324. Tricks Sirvela, ib. Takes several Places from the Spaniards, b. 364, &c. Thou (Francis of) espouses the Party of Cinq-mars, and engages Monsieur and the Duke of Bouillon to come into it, b. 281. Apprehended at Narbonne, b. 345. His Examination, and Trial, b. 350, 351 Tirlemont taken by the Hollanders and French, b. 149 Torreuse (Marquis of) throws Relief into Perpignan, b. 332. Is order'd to return thither, b. 337. Is coun∣termanded, b. 338. Advances forward to besiege Le∣rida, b. 357. Quits the Army because the Spaniards still contradicted him, ib. &c. Torstenson (Leonard) gains Two Battels against the Im∣perialists, b. 359, 460 Triers surprized by the Spaniards, b. 135. The Arch∣bishop of that City taken Prisoner, b. ibid. Turenne (Viscount of) Lieutenant of the Count d'Har∣court, b. 266. Takes Montcalvo, b. 288 Turin surpriz'd by Prince Thomas, b. 230. Retaken by the Count d'Harcourt, b. 273 V. Vair (President of) has the Seals, a. 10 Val de Grace, the Superiour of that Convent removed to another Place, b. 188 Valence upon the Po, vainly attack'd by the League, b. Valette (Lewis de la) Archbishop of Bourdeaux, advanc'd to the Dignity of a Cardinal, a. 54. Does a signal Ser∣vice to the Cardinal of Richlieu, a. 360. Goes to Com∣mand
an Army in Germany, b. 139. Throws Pro∣visions into some Towns of Alsatia, b. 166. Goes to Command in Italy, b. 203. Call'd by way of Contempt le Valette du Cardinal, b. 215. The mean abject Be∣haviour of this Prelate, b. 222, 231: Takes Chivas, b. 228. His death, b. 235 Valette (Duke of) marries a Relation of the Cardinal, b. 114. Defends Biscay, ib. 168. His Conduct at the Siege of Fontarabia, b. 212, 214. His Trial order'd, ib. 225, &c. Valteline, the Original of the Difference between France and Spain, in this Country, a. 93. Invasion of the Spaniards to secure themselves of it, ib. They surrender their Forts up to the Pope, a▪ 94. Negotiations of the Legate in France about this Affair, a. 133, &c. 160, &c. An end of this Dispute, 196, 199, &c. Valteline becomes afresh the Theatre of War, b. 155. lost by the French, b. 189, &c. Vautier, Chief Physician to the Queen-Mother, sent to the Bastile, a. 373 Velez (Marquis de los) his ill Conduct, b. 297 Vendôme (Duke of) deceived by Lewis XIII. a. 188. Ob∣tains Letters of Abolition, a. 223. Accused of a Design to get the Cardinal assassinated, b. 311 Vendôme (Grand Prior of) deceived by the Cardinal, a. 187. Is closely shut up in Prison, ib. 223. His death, ib. 319 Venetiáns complain of the Treaty of Monzon, a. 176. Conclude a new Treaty with the King, a. 198 Verceil besieg'd and taken by the Spaniards, b. 203, 204 Verruë in vain besieg'd by the Spaniards, a. 129, &c. Retaken, b. Verruë (Count de) negotiates with the Cardinal, a. 308 Victor Amadeo, Prince of Piedmont, his Progress against the Genouses, a. 120. Complains of the French, a. 176. Goes to Pont de Beauvoisin, to expect the Car∣dinal there, a. 331. Succeeds his Father, a. 345. Con∣tinues the War against France, ib. Beaten by the French at Carignan, a. 346 Victor Amadeo, Duke of Savoy, reconcil'd to France, b. 13, 15. Enters into an Agreement with her to deceive
the Spaniards, b. 17, 19. Makes a League with France, b. 152. Disagrees with Crequi, b. 153. Takes the Field, b. 161. Beats the Marquis de Lega∣nez, b. 164. Dies, b. 193 Vieville (Marquis de la) Superintendant of the Finances, a. 70. Is admitted into the Privy Council, ib. His Disgrace, ib. 89, &c. 91 Villeroy (Marquis of) receives a Partnor in the Office of Secretary of State, a. 10. Mortified at Court, ib. 14 Villeroy (Marquis of) keeps Pignerol by pretending to sur∣render it, b. 18, &c. Vincent de Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua, dies, a: 225 Vitri kills the Mareschal d'Ancre, a. 15 Vitri (Mareschal of) made Governour of Provence, b. 31. Frustrates the Design to recover the Isles of St. Honorat and St. Margaret, b. 168. Sent to the Bastile, b. 187 Uxelles (Marquis of) Mareschal de Camp, goes to Turin, a. 110. Defeats the Spaniards, a. 115. Endeavours in vain to pass the Mountains, ib. 299, &c. W. Wallestein his Designs, and the Intrigues of the Cardinal with him, b. 116. Kill'd by the Emperor's Order, ib. Wignerod (René de) Brother-in-Law to the Cardinal, a. 2: See Pont de Courlay. Weymar (Bernard Duke of) assisted by France, b. 134, 139. Pursues Galas, ib. 140. Flies from him, ibid. Makes a new Treaty with the King, b. 144. Goes to Paris, b. 160. Besieges Rhinfeld, and beats the Im∣perialists, b. 207. Takes Rhinfeld, Friburg, and Bri∣sac, b. 208. Will not surrender the latter to France, b. 244. His Designs, ib. His Death, b. 224. His Te∣stament, ib. &c. The Treaty which France makes with his Army, b. 247, &c. Y. Yvoix taken by the Mareschal de Châtillon, b. 188. Re∣taken, b. 241
Yvrée attack'd by the French, b. 289: They abandon'd it, b. 291 Z. Zuccharello, a Marquisate, contested between the Duke of Savoy, and the Genoueses, a. 106. An Agreement between them about this matter, b. 23 FINIS.
