M1148 W479489 99826102 30494
A Scriptural Catechism. The Heads of the CHRISTIAN RELIGION Plainly, briefly, and fully delivered in a CATECHISM, Which endeavours a sufficient Answer to every Question, barely with a pertinent Sentence of Sacred. Scripture, and Enables the Learner at once with ease to confirm as well as assert the great Articles of the Faith once delivered unt the SAINTS. By Cotton Mather. John XXI. XV. Feed my Lambs. Boston, Printed by R. Pierce, for Nicholas Buttolph at the corner Shop, next to Guttridg's Coffee-House. 1691.
X. COMMANDMENTS. Worship thou shalt no God but Me. No graven Image make to thee. The Lords Name take not thou in vain. The Sabbath do not thou profane. Yield to thy Parents Honour due. And see that thou no Murder do. Commit thou no Adultery. Moreover from all Stealing fly. No false thing of thy Neighbour say. And Covet not in any way.
LAMBS Led unto Green Pastures and still Waters, By a SCRIPTURAL CATECHISM. Quest. WHat should young▪ people count the most necessary or com∣mendable thing that can be spoken of them? * A. 2 Tim. 3. 15. From a Child thou hast known the holy Scriptures which are able to make thee wise unto Salvation. Q. Who is the Author of the Holy Scriptures con∣tained in the thirty nine Books of the Old, and the twenty seven Books of the New Testament? A. 2 Tim. 3. 16. All Scripture is given by in∣siration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness.
Q Is there but One God, the first cause and the la end of all things? * A. 1 Cor. 8. 15, 16. There is none other God, bu one; for though there be that are cal∣led Gods, yet unto us there is but one God, of whom are all things, and we for him. Q. How many Persons, or ways of Subsisting, are there in the one God? * A. Mat. 28. 19. The Father, and Son, and the Holy Spirit. Q. What has God said about his Allsufficiency, or his having enough in himself to satisfie himself and all other Beings? A. Gen. 17. 1. The Lord said, I am the All∣sufficient God. Q. What hath God said about his Unchangeable∣ness, or his being always the same? A. Sam. 1. 17. With him is no Variableness, nor shadow of Turning. Q. What has God said about his Immensity, or his being incomprehensibly every-where? A. Jer. 23. 24. Can any hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see him? saith the Lord; do not I fill Heaven and Earth? saith the Lord. Q. What has God said about his Eternity, or his being without any beginning or ending for-ever? A. Psal. 90. 2. From everlasting to everlast∣ing thou art God. Q Is God such Infinite Knowledge and Wisdom, as most exactly to understand Himself and all other things?
A. Psal. 1. 7. 5. Great is our Lord, his Un∣derstanding is infinite. Q. Is God such Infinite Goodness, as to be in Himself most fully amiable and desirabl, and bounti∣ul unto all his Creatures? A. Zech. 9. 17. How great is his goodness, & how great is his beauty! Q. Is God such Infinite Mercy, as readily to suc∣cour his poor Creatues in all their misetes? A. Eph. 2. 4. God is rich in mercy. Q. Is God such Infinite Patience, as to forbear long, and abate much the punishments due unto sinful Creatures? A. Nah. 1. 3. The Lord is slow to Anger. Q. Is God such Infinite Holiness, as to Advan Himself alone, and to agree with none but those tha concur with him in doing so? A. Isa. 6. 3. Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of Hosts, the whole Earth is full of his glory. Q. Is God such Infinite Power, as can do all things which imply not contradiction and imperfection? A. Mat. 19. 26. With God all things are pos∣sible. Q. Is there with God such infinite Soveraignty as manages all things in the world, according to the counsel of his own Royal Will? A. Dan. 4. 35. He doth according to His Will, and none can stay his Hand, or say unto Him, what doest thou? Q. Hath God with an everlasting Decree and Purpose fore-ordained whatsoever comes to pass▪
A. Eph. 1. 11. He works all things after th Counsel of his own Will. Q. Has God with an everlasting Election chosen a certain nuber of men, to be Vssels for the glory of his grace for-ever, with an everlasting Reproba∣tion passing over others? A. Rom. 8. 29, 30. Whom he did fore-know, them he also did predestinate, to be conformed unto the Image of his Son; moreover, whom h did predestinate them he also called. Q. Who made the World, and when and how? * A. Gen. 1. 1, 31. In the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth; and God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good; and the evening and the morning ere the Sixth day. Q. Who preserves and governs the world, and ules all the Motion in it? * A. Psal. 103. 19▪ The Lord has prepared is Throne in the Heavens, and his Kingdom ruleth over all. Q. What are those Heavenly Spirits which God made in the beginning of Time, for his own peculia ervice and Honour? A. Heb. 1. 14. Are not the Angels all Mini∣string Spirits, sent forth to Minister for them who shall be Heirs of Salvation. Q. Are not many of the Angels become Devils or wicked Spirits, full of Enmity against God and Man? A. Jude 6. The Angels which kept not their first Estate, but left their own Habitation, H
hath reserved in everlasting Chains under Dark∣ness unto the Judgment of the Great Day. Q. What was the condition in which man was Created? * A. Gen. 1. 27. God created man in his own Image, in the Image of God created he him, male and female created he them. Q. What was that Covenant of works which God made with man at the first Creation? A. Gal. 3. 10. Cursed is every one that con∣tinueth not in all things which are written in th book of the Law to do them. Q. When God made a Trial of mans obedience t Him, in forbidding him one Tree of Paradise, what was the issue of it? * A. Gen. 3. 6. When the Woman saw that the Tree was good for Food, and that it was pleasant to the Eyes, and a Tree to be desired to make one wife, she took of the fruit thereof and did eat, and gave also unto her husband with her, and he did eat. Q. What is now the state which the Fall of  rst Parents has brought us all into? * A. Rom 5 12. By one man Sin entred in∣to the world, and death b sin, and so death pas∣sed upon all men for that all have sinned. Q. What is th Nature or Temper which by our Descent from sinful Parents we all come to be born withal? A. Psal. 51. 5. Behold I was shapen in Iniqui∣ity, and in sin did my mother conceive me.
Q. What are now all the Actions of all unre∣newed men? A. Gen. 6. 5. God saw that the wickedness of man was great on the earth, and that every ima∣gination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. Q. Is there not one sin that becomes utterly un∣pardonable? A. Mat. 12. 31. All manner of sin and blas∣phemy shall be forgiven to men, but the blasphe∣my against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven nto men. Q. What is the Misery which by our sins we are ow most justly plung'd into? A. Rom. 6. 23. The wages of sin is Death. Q. What are the external calamities laid on us for our sins? A. Gen. 3. 17, 18. Cursed is the ground for thy sake, in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life; Thorns also and Thistles shall it bring forth to thee; in the sweat of thy face alt thou eat thy bread, until thou return unto the ground. Q. What are the internal calamities come on us for our sins? A. Eph. 2. 1, 2, 3. And you who were dead in Trespasses & sins, wherein in time past ye walked according to the course of this world, according to the Prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now works in the Children of Disobedience, among whom also we all had our Conversation
in times past in the lust of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the mind, and were by nature the Children of wrath. Q. What are the Eternal plagues due to us for our sins? A. Mark 9. 44. Their worm dieth not, and their fire is not quenched. Q. What way has God found out for the Reco∣very of man from his lost estate? A. Joh. 3. 16. God so loved the world as to give his only begotten Son, that whosoever be∣lieveth in him should not perish but have ever∣lasting life. Q. What was the Covenant, or Agreement which God the Father made with his ever-blessed Son, about the Redemption of his people? A. Psal. 89. 2, 3. I have made a Covenant with my Chosen, I have sworn unto David my servant, Thy seed will I establish for-ever, and build up thy Throne to all generations. Q. What is the Covenant, or Engagement which God through his blessed Son has made with his people, about the Grace to be bestowed upon them? A. Heb. 8. 10. This is the Covenant that  will make with the House of Israel, saith the Lord; I will put my Laws into their minds, and write them in their hearts, and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people. Q. Of what quality are the Promises of the New Covenant? A. 2 Pet. 1. 4. There are given to us exceed∣ing
great and precious Promises. Q. What sort of Person is He that has underta∣ken for the Salvation of lost man? * A. Rom. 9. 5. Christ, who is over all, God blessed for-ever; Amen. Q. Has not our Divine Saviour taken a Man to subsist in the same person with himself? A. Heb. 2. 14. Forasmuch as the Children are partakers of flesh and blood; He also Himself likewise took part of the same, that thro' Death he might destroy him that had the Power of death, that is, the Devil. Q. After what manner was the Incarnation of our Lord accomplished? * A. Luk. 1. 35. The Angel said unto [Ma∣ry] The holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall over-shadow thee; therefore also that Holy Thing that shall be born of thee, shall be called, the Son of God. Q. What was the first State, or the State of Hu∣miliation wherein our Saviour has been concerned for us? A. Phil. 2. 7, 8. He made Himself of no Re∣putation, and took on Him the form of a Ser∣vant, and was made in the likeness of men; and being sound in fashion as a man, He humbled Himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross. Q. What is the second State, or the State of Exaltation, wherein our Saviour is concerned for us? A. Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11. Wherefore also God hath
highly exalted him, & given him a name which is above every name, that in the name of Jesus e∣very Knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under the earth, and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. Q. What provision has been made for the shine of all the Divine Attributes in the methods of our Sal∣vation? A. Psal. 8. 10, 11. Mercy & Truth are met together, Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other, Truth shall spring out of the Earth, and Righteousness shall look down from Heaven. Q. What is it that our Saviour does for us as he is the Prophet of our Souls? A. Luk. 1. 78, 79. The day-spring from on High has visited us, to give light unto them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death; to guide our feet into the way of Peace. Q What is the First thing that our Saviour does for us as He is our Priest? A. Heb. 9. 26. Now once in the end of the world, has he appeared to put away sin by the Sacrifice of Himself. Q. What is the Second thing that our Saviour does for us as He is our Priest? A. Heb. 7. 25. He is able to save them unto the uttermost, that come unto God by Him, see∣ing He ever liveth to make Intercession for them. Q. What is the First thing that our Saviour does for us as He is our King?
A. 2. Cor. 10 5. Casting down imaginations and every high thing, that exalteth it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into Capti∣vity every thought unto the obedience of Christ. Q. What is the Second thing that our Saviour does for us as He is our King? A. Eph. 1. 22. God has put all things under his feet, & given Him to be Head over all things unto the Church. Q. What is the Third and Last thing wherein our Lord will appear a most glorious King? A. Acts 17. 31. God hath appointed a day in the which He will judge the world in Righteous∣ness by that man whom he hath ordained. Q. Who is it that Applies all the salvation of our Lord unto the Souls of his Chosen Ones? A. Tit. 3. 5. According to his mercy he saved us by the washing of Regeneration, and Renew∣ing of the Holy Spirit. Q. Of what necessiy is Regeneration for us all? * A. Joh. 3. 3. Except a man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Q. Wha is it that the Holy Spirit in Vocation, effectually calls us to the doing of? A. Acts 16. 31. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved. Q. His any Natural man, a Free-will of his own by which he is able to obey the Calls of God in the Gospel? A. Eph. 2. 8. By grace are ye saved, through Faith, and that not of your selves, 'tis the gift of God.
Q. How does true Faith express it self, in the Soul of a Believer? * A. 2 Tim. 1. 12. I know whom I have be∣lieved, and I am perswaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed him unto a∣gainst that day. Q. What is the usual proceeding of the Holy Spirit in bringing me home to the Lord Jesus Christ A. Luk. 1. 17. To make ready a people pre∣pared for the Lord Q. What is that Repentance which true Faith i always attended wiih? * A. Prov. 28. 13. He that covereth his sins shall not prosper, but whoso confesseth and for∣saketh them shall have mercy. Q What is that Obedience which true Faith is always followed with? * A. Acts 24. 16. I exercise my self to have always a Conscience void of offence towards God and towards men. Q What is the immediate effect of a saving Faith? A. 1 Cor. 6. 17. He that is joyned unto the Lord is one Spirit. Q What is the first benefit that flows from our union to the Lord Jesus Christ by Faith in Him? A. John 1. 12. As many as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name. Q. What is a second benefit which flows from our Ʋnion to the Lord Jesus Christ by Faith in Him
A. Rom. 3. 22 Even the Righteousness of God which is by Faith of Jesus Christ, unto all and up∣on all that believe. Q What is a third benefit which flows from our Ʋnion to the Lord Jesus Christ by Faith in Him? A. 1 Thes. 5. 23. The very God of peace sanctifie you wholly, and your whole Spirit and Soul and Body, he preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Q. What are the Benefits which here do flow from our Adoption, Justification, and Sanctification? A. Rom. 5. 1, 2, 3. We have peace with God thro' our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom also we have access by Faith into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoyce in hope of the glory of God; and not only so, but we glory in Tribulations also. Q. What benefit shall believers at the end of their life be made partakers of? A. Phil. 1. 23. To depart and to be with Christ, which is by far the best of all. Q. What benefit shall believers a the end of the world be made partakers of? A. Col. 3. 4. When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory. Q. What benefit, and blessedness will believers en∣joy with and from the Lord Jesus Christ, in the Hea∣vens for-ever? A 1 John 3. 2. We shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is.
Q What will be the condition of Children dying in their Infancy, and belonging to such Parents as have carried them unto the Lord Jesus Christ. A. Mat. 19. 14. Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. Q. Does our Faith in Christ set us at liberty from the Law as a Rule of Life? A Rom. 3. 31. Do we make void the Law thro▪ faith God forbid. Yea, we establish the Law. Q. What is the duty which all men are now by Commandment obliged, and believers are over and above by Principle inclined unto? A Mic. 6. 8. He hath shewed thee O man what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do Justice, and to love Mercy, & to walk humbly with thy God. Q What is the summe of the four Commandments in the First Table of the moral Law? A Mat. 22. 37, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy Soul, & with all thy mind. Q What is the First Commandment? or the Commandment which respects the Natural Worship of God, and enjoins us to worship the only true God, and him only? * A Exod. 20. 3. Thou shalt have no other Gods before me. Q What is one special duty to be done in exerci∣sing the graces required in the first commandment? A. Psal. 84. 8. I will hear what God the Lord will speak.
Q. What is a second special duty, to be done in exercising the graces required in the first commandment? A. Eph. 5. 19. Speaking to your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, singing and making melody in your hearts unto the Lord. Q▪ What is a Third special duty which we are by the First Commandment put upon? A. Phil. 4. 6. In every thing, by Prayer and Supplication, with Thanksgiving, let your Re∣quests be made known unto God. Q What special Direction has our Lord given us, about the Things and Frames to be expressed in our Prayers? A. Mt. 6. 9, 13. After this manner pray ye, Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come, thy Will be done, on Earth as it is in Heaven; give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our Debts, as we for∣give our Debtors; and lead us not into temptati∣on, but deliver us from evil; for thine is the Kingdom, the power and the glory for ever, A∣men. Q What is the Second Commandment? or the Commandment which respects the Appointed Wor∣ship of God, and enjoyns us to worship God, in such ways as he hath ordained, and not such as man hath invented? * A. Exod. 20 45. Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing, thou shalt not bow down thy self to them.
Q. What is the first Institution of our Lord, which the Second Commandment would have us to ob∣serve, in order to our attendance upon all the rest? A. Acts 2. 47. The Lord added unto the Church daily such as should be saved. Q. What are the Officers which the Command∣ment has now established in the Churches of the Lord Jesus Christ? A. 1 Tim. 5. 17. and 3. 10. Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double ho∣nour, especially they who labour in the Word and Doctrine. Likewise the Deacons, let these first be proved; then let them use the Office of a Dea∣con, being found blameless. Q. What are the Disciplines which the Command∣ment orders us to maintain in the Churches of the Lord Jesus Christ? A Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17. If thy Brother Tres∣pass against thee, go and tell him his fault be∣tween thee and him alone; if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy Brother: But if he will not hear, then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word may be established; and if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the Church; but if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee, as an heathen man and a publican. Q. Which is the First of the two Sacraments to be used in the Churches of the New Testament? or the Sacrament that is to Seal our Ingrafting into Christ, and partaking of his grace, and our engage∣ment
that we will be te Lords? A Acts 2. 38, 39. Repent and be Baptised E∣very one of you, in the name of Jesus▪ Christ, for the Remission of sins; for the promise is unto you, and unto your Children, and unto all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. Q What is the Second of the two Sacraments be∣longing to the New estament? or the Sacrament that is to seal unto us our Interest in the Sacrifice of our Lords body and blood, and our Spiritual nourish∣ment in our communion with him? A 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24, 25, 26. The Lord Jesus the same night in which he▪ was betrayed, he took bread, and when he had given Thanks▪ He brake it and said; Take, eat, this is my body which is broken for you, This do in remembrance of Me; after the same manner also he took the Cup, when he had supped, saying, this Cup is the new Testament in my blood. This do ye, as oft as ye drink it; in Remembrance of me; for as oft as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye shew the Lords death, till he come. Q What must a man do that he may be a worthy Rceiver of the Lords Supper? A 1 Cor. 11. 28. Let a man Examine himself, & so let him eat of that bread, & drink of that cup▪ Q What is the Third Commandment? or the Commandment that respects the Manner of Divine Worship; and enjoyns us that we neither irreve∣rently nor unprofitably treat any of those things where∣by
* A 1 Joh. 1. 8. If we say we have no sin, e deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us▪ Q Since we cannot perfectly keep the Command∣ments, how shall we get wisdom that yet we may sin∣cerely do it. * A Jam. 1. 5. If any of you lack wisdom let him ask of God that giveth to all men libe∣rally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him. Q What rule has God given us for our Thoughts? A Jer. 4. 14. Wash thine heart from wicked∣ness, that thou mayst be saved; how long shall vain Thoughts lodge within thee? Q What rule hath God▪ given us for our Words? A Eph. 4. 29. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good unto the use of edifying, that it may Mini∣ster grace unto the hearers. Q What rule hath God given about our Actions? A Psal. 53. 23. To him that ordereth his Conversation aright, will I shew the Salvation o God. FINIS.
