M1357 12075609 53563
ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT Betweene his EXCELLENCY PRINCE MAURICE, And the EARLE of STAMFORD, Vpon the delivery of the CITY of EXCESTER, The fifth of September, 1643. Together with a Letter relating the Earle of STAMFORDS proceedings in the West. Sept. 20. 1643. Imprimatur Iohn White. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Walkley, and are to be sold at his shop at the signe of the flying Horse neere York House. 1643.
Articles of Agreement, &c. MAURICE, 1. IT is concluded and agreed on, that the City and Castle of Exon be surrendred into the hands of his Highnesse Prince Maurice, with all Armes, Ensignes, Ordnance, Ammunition, and all other warlike provisions whatsoever within the said City and Castle. 2. That the right honourable Henry Earle of Stanford together with all Officers above the degree of Lievetenants, both of horse and foote, now within and about this City and Castle, do march out of this City and Castle, on Thursday the 7. of this moneth, by nine of the clock in the morning, with their troops of horse, full Armes, bagg and baggage, provided it be their owne goods, and that the Lievetenants and En∣signes march out with their swords at the East Gate, and that the foot souldiers march out at the same time leaving their Armes at the Guild hall, all having a safe Convoy to Winsor or to goe elsewere if they please, and such as will stay shall have pay in the Kings Army. 3. That there be carriages allowed and provided to carry away their bagg and baggage, and sick and hurt souldiers, and that an espe∣ciall care be taken of such Officers and souldiers as (being sick and wounded) shalbe by the Earl of Stanford left behind in the said City, and that upon their recovery they shall have passes to depart to their owne homes respectively. 4. That the Kings forces march not into the City till the Parlia∣ments force are march'd out, except 100. Musketteeres at the East part through which they passe. 5. That his Hignesse shall forthwith procure a free and generall par∣don unto Henry Earle of Stanford Sir George Chudleigh, Sir Iohn Bamp∣field, Sir Iohn Northcot Baronets, Sir Samuel Roberts, and Sir Nicholas Martin, Knights, and unto the Major, Bailifs and Cominalty of the City of Exon, and to all other persons of what degree, condition, or quality soever, now being within the said City of Exon, for all Treasons and other offences whatsoever committed by them or any of
them since the beginning of this present Parliament relating to these unhappy differences between His Majesty and the two Houses of Par∣liament, and that all or any of them shall have his particular pardon for the foresaid offences or treasons if he shall sue forth the same. 6. That the true Protestant Religion now established by Law shall be preserved and exercised in the City. 7. That all persons, Citizens and Inhabitants may at any time de∣part with their families, goods and estates, unto any part of this King∣dome, and that they and every of them shall have power to dispose, sell or alien either by themselves or others, whatsoever goods or parts of their estates, they shall not convey or carry with them. 8. That all persons now in this City may have free liberty to re∣paire to their houses in the Countrey or elsewhere, and there to re∣maine in safety, and enjoy their estates, lands, rents, and goods, with∣out plundering, fine or imprisonment, or any other molestation, and may travell to and fro without any interruption, hindrance or deniall. 9. That all Ministers and Preachers of Gods word now within this City shall have free liberty either to stay here or go to their own hou∣ses, cures or charges, or elsewhere within his Majesties Dominions, with their wives, children, families and goods, there to abide peace∣ably, and to exercise their ministeriall functions, and to enjoy their e∣states according to the Laws of the Land. 10. That all the Charters, Liberties, Priviledges and Franchises, Lands, Estates, Goods and Debts of the said City shall be preserved and confirmed, and that the ancient government thereof, the present Governours and Officers may remaine and continue in their former condition. 11. That no new oath or protestation be enforced upon any, nor any compelled to take up Arms against the Parliament. 12. That for avoiding inconveniences and distractions, the quarte∣ring of souldiers be referred to the Major and Governour of the City for the time being. 13. That all these Articles which are now agreed upon shall be rati∣fied and confirmed by His Majesty under the great Seal of England. 14. That the Officers and Souldiers in their marching out shall not be reproached, or have any disgracefull speeches or affronts offered or given unto them by any Officer or Souldier of the Kings, and that the convoy appointed to march with them may goe and returne safely without any violence or wrong offered unto them by any force of the adverse party. Stanford. Chr. Clarke Major. Rich. Cave. Jos. Bamfield.
The Letter. SIR, I Send you the Articles of agreement for the delivery up of Exeter, partly to satisfie the world, as well as you of the causes of the losse of it, and some of the precedent passages of the Earle of Stamford, which I pray communicate. I heare there be some will hereafter en∣large the story; accept of these in the meane time. It is not unknown to those that have lookt into the passages of this late and present War, that the Earle of Stamford was alwaies as forward for the Parliaments Cause as any Peere or Member of the House of Commons whatsoever. That his freenesse of spirit was the occasion why he was continually put on upon the forlorn hope of his excellencies Army, and that when the King was at Shrewsbury, it being uncertaine which way the King would take, the Earle was sent before to Hereford a malignant County, and frontier to a malignanter Wales, all which he gallantly curbed with only 800. Foot, and two Troopes of Horse for above ten weeks space, till he was constrained to come to Gloster upon Colonel Essex his leaving of it naked, and then there came to him a Commission from his Excellencie, and the Parliament upon the request of the Pem∣brokeshire Gentry, and others that he might be Generall of all Wales, and the foure Counties adjoyning, which he no sooner had received, but he presently raised three new Regiments at the charge of the wel-affected County of Gloster, visited Sommersetshire and Wiltshire, and had proceeded on in the other Counties for the raising of a farre greater force, without charging the Parliament or the City of London, but he was suddenly commanded away to Exeter with Mericks Re∣giment only, leaving his former Horse and Foot under his Lieutenant Colonell Massy in Gloster, and the new raised Regiments uncomplea∣ted, and there being no certaine Commander left in chiefe by reason of the difference between Colonell Fines and Essex. His Excellencie intimated to the Committee for the safety of the Kingdome by Colo∣nell Hampden that the Earle of Stamford might be called backe into Glostershire; but that not being thought fit, and the Earle being be∣traied
or unobeyed (chuse you whether) as he hath ever been since he went into those parts by his then Lieutenant Generall, and the Coun∣try Colonells at Liscard to secure Plimoth, was besieged there, during which time Cirencester was lost, and all that wel-affected County but ▪ which was then also besieged, defended by Massy, and relie∣ved by Sir William Waller. The Earle had no sooner freed himself of the siege of Plimoth, and cut off the Enemy at Modbury, but the Country people usually wilful to their humors will have a Treaty, having forgot∣ten the fresh plundering of their houses and cattell, and the barbarous destroying of their fruit trees by the Cornish. The Earle must fight with the hands that would treat, and pay his Army with their money, which before he had a discretive power to doe, but now because hee could not make them doe what they would not, his Lordships power of disposing of money was taken away which gave great discontent to the Officers and Souldiers: Mr. Buller was displaced, a man of fortune and honesty to the Parliament, and young Chidleigh put in his place of Major Generall, without the nomination of the Earle, which made him knowing Chidleighs fire and heat, to make his father Sir George Chidleigh Lieutenant Generall for his more temper. The new Major to make good the vogue of the people doth a stratagem in a dark night with 108. Horse to all mens amazement, but his enemies, that hee might betray them with more confidence as he did afterwards. Now these great orderers of the Earles Army, full in popularity, and presu∣med by all men to know the Country well led the Army and Earle to such a way, that had he not rid out himselfe with some few Gentle∣men to take the aire and view the Country, all his Foot had beene brought unawares upon the enemies whole Body, at the same time when the father Chidleigh had carried away halfe the Horse into Cornwall first, presently Mr. Anthony Nichols by warrant under the sonnes hand took all the rest Horse and Dragoons, with the Lifeguard from the Earle without his knowledge. The time now comes to be∣tray the Foot in the Horses absence: The Earle having viewed the ground that it was morasse but in two passages at a bridge and a mill, and a third to a house adjoyning, commands a good guard of Musque∣tiers to every of them, Chidleigh disappoints those places, and the Enemy straight possesseth them (and it is since confirmed by two Cen∣tinells whom Chidleigh cudgelled that night for shooting at him that he was absent in the Enemies quarters above an houre) and alarmes him by breake of day, where himselfe was taken, and the Van of a brave Army killed, taken, and rooted with him. After all this the
Earle had 3000. men left, store of Amunition and Ordnance, which himselfe stood to, and intreated them to stand also, but no intreaty could perswade above thirty of them to stay. The Earle made his re∣treat by Barnstable, for the securing of that and Bidford for their con∣sequence on the Irish Seas, and so to Exeter, where he was besieged by young Chidleigh, and the same popularity that ran away from him before, and continued besieged three monthes and nineteene dayes; during which time, we heare it was laboured in the City of London on the behalfe of the Earle that there might be 2000. of their new Auxi∣liaries sent thither by Sea, with the Earle of Warwick who otherwise attempted the raising of the siege, but either for want of that strength, or else by the treachery of Sir Alexander Cary (who since hath beene surprised in designe of delivering up St. George his Island to the Fal∣mouth Forces) could not effect it, though he lost three Ships in attem∣pting it, or else by land to joyne with Sir Walter Earle, and by that meanes Dorchester, Weymouth, and all that Country might have been saved. When the Earle of Stamford being so relieved, might have had a sufficient force to have come upon the back of Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir William Waller being in his Front with so great a force of Horse and Dragoons, whereof 1200. had been sent from the Earle: but no supply comming from the City of London or elsewhere, nor intelli∣gence passing, the siege was so streight, and the Citizens of Exon not well stomaching their Souldiers, nor paying them, nor quartering them like men, suffering hundreds of them to lye upon stalls, whereby above a thousand of them ran away, and most probably to the Enemy: they urged the Earle to their conditions, although the Enemy himselfe had but two dayes before offered fifteen dayes time to send to the Parlia∣ment for aid, or else to render upon honourable conditions, which was then refused, but these are plausible enough to those that hope on∣ly to be quiet in this world, and wish for peace and pardon at any rate, which I beleeve they shall as well enjoy as their Apple-trees. Sir, I shall adde one thing more, to tell you the generosity of the City of Exeter, and their affections to the Parliament Armes, that although the 500. men left in the Town had indured so many assaults, watcht constantly every second night, and sometimes foure or five to∣gether, and in one of many sallyes had slaine and taken 200. men, and brought away three pieces of Ordnance, and withall they had not lost one inch of ground, would not pay the Souldiers nor Commanders in the Towne, nor give them one farthing at their going out of it. FINIS.
