M1965 11164882 46480
AN ACCOUNT OF THE TRANSACTIONS IN THE North of Ireland, Anno Domini, 1691. AND Of many other Remarkable Passages, du∣ring our last Years Successful Campaign in that Kingdom. With a Particular Relation Of the Manner of Besieging and Taking the Town of Sligoe by Storm, by the Honourable Collonel JOHN MICHELBƲRNE, Governor of London-Derry; and sometimes Governour of the Town and Fort of Sligoe, then Commander in Chief of Their MAJESTIES Forces in the Province of Ʋlster. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1692.
To His Excellency GODART Earl of Athlone, Viscount Aghrim, Baron of Barronasloe, and Bar de Ginkell, Com∣mander in Chief of Their Majesties Forces in the Kingdom of IRELAND. My Lord,
THIS following Treatise, is a Subject that lies so wholly whithin Your own Province of Honour, that it pretends a kind of Right to lay it self at Your Excellencies Feet For though in general it relates the happy Manageryof the last Years Successes in the North of Ireland, yet since that cannot be done without publishing some just Testimonials of the Courage, Fidelity, and Services of my Worthy Friend Collonel John Michelburn, methinks it is a piece of Duty (as the Pendant always attends the Flag) to usher his Bannoret under Your Standard. And truly there's some farther Plea for my presumption, in this Dedication, viz. That I may justly avow, that Collonel's Early Endeavours in the Kingdom of Ireland, were at least the Phosphore to Your Excellencies brighter Sun. His forward Hand gave the first fair Earnest for the Irish Successes, when in his Exemplary Northern Services, his Preservation of London-derry, I may properly say, like a true Forlorn Hope, he held the Ene∣my in play, till Your Excellencies heavier Mass of Glory could come up to sweep the intire Victory. A Victory indeed, in which the World must do You this publick Justice, that the whole last Years Renown was entirely Your own. For whilst in all the other Scenes of War, as Germany, Flanders, Savoy, &c. Fortune in a manner kept whollyneuter, and the rest of the Neighbouring Heroes only stood at a Bay, Your Excellencies more Active Arme held the most prevailing Sword, and only play'd the Conquering Game, whilst an entire Vi∣ctory follow'd no Chariot but Your own. And as long as the Compleat Reduction of Ireland fills so large a Page in the English An∣nals, Your Excellencies never dying Merit must stand Chronicled with so fair a Character, that they must give You this peculiar Renown, That you made not War a Trade: You felt the Cause You fought; and in the Service of England, consulted the Interest of Christendom, whilst the Expedition of Your Triumph is possibly the brightest of Your Lawrels. But alas! 'Tis not my Province to be Your Ex∣cellencies Herauld or Historian; there's no occasion for my poor Pen to attempt what all Tongues are already full of. 'Tis enough that with the Fame You have all the Vertues of a Conquerour, and as such, this Gentleman's Cause can not come before
an Abler, or Properer Judge; the Assurance of which Justice, is the occasion of this Confidence from, My Honoured Lord, Your Excellencies most Obedient (tho' Unkown) Humble Servant and Admirer, J. H.
TO THE READER.
THough this following Discourse (as it contains a perfect Series of the most important Affairs that were transacted in the North of Ireland the last Campaigne; and consequently relates the Success of our English Arms in that Kingdom; so much conduce∣ing to the happiness of our own) cannot but be an en∣tertaining Subject to every honest Reader; yet the pub∣lishing this ensuing Narrative is not altogether on that design. The Vindication of a private Cause of the Honourable Coll. John Michelburne, a Person so emi∣nently Instrumental in the Recovery of Ireland, has in some measure been the Motive that engag'd this present Pen to be drawn in his Defence. Vertue does not al∣ways meet with Justice from the Mouth of ill tongu'd Fame; Her Enemies are often so successful (Detracti∣on and Envy still striking at the noblest Merit) that in the false Game they play, the Honest side is com∣monly on the Loosing hand, and the Innocent re∣ceives its fall from the Treacherous stab of envious Ma∣lice, and successful Villany. Now it being the Misfor∣tune of the Honourable Person I have mention'd, tobe unworthily a Sufferer in this kind, you will find that whilst this Treatise I am writing, gives you an exact Relation from day to day, of the manner and means he us'd to reduce Sligoe, which was taken by him, com∣manding there in chief; it will not only satisfie the cu∣riosity of those that are pleased to look nicely into those Affairs in general, but will do a particular Justice to his Honour, (whose Services have deserv'd a much Kinder Treatment, than hitherto they have met with) by unloading him of those notorious Injuries that most unjustly ill-minded Men had thrown upon him.
Coll. Michelburne being impower'd by the Lords Justi∣ces, and the General, to command all the Forces of the Province of Ʋlster; after he had made his second Attack against the Garrison he lay before, without that Success he expected, which was occasioned by some of the Mi∣litia's cowardly deserting him, a very hard and un∣true Character of his Management in that Affair, (by what means transmitted we know not) was sent over to Her Majesty, which represented him so faulty, that the Queen immediately sent particular Orders to the L. Justices of Ireland, to take the matter into their Judici∣ary Cognizance and Examination. I having the good fortune to be an Intimate Acquaintance of his, was much surpriz'd and troubled to hear the rumour of those un∣welcome Untruths (as I conceiv'd 'em) that seem'd to blacken so my Friends unspotted Honour; My respect therefore for a Person who was so early a Defender of His Majesty's Interest in the Kingdom of Ireland, towhose Vigilancy, Courage, Conduct, and Fidelity the most happy Success we met with at London-derry, next under God, ought chiefly to be attributed, woud not suffer me to joyn with the unthinking Populace in that Cry against him. But on the contrary, I was resolved to continue the same Honourable Opinion of him, that his former actions had establish'd in me, believing it im∣possible for a Person that had so lately signalized him∣self, cou'd ever deviate from the Paths of his innate Vertue, and unshaken Loyalty; being firm in this Be∣lief, and zealous for my Friends' Honour, I could not forbear enquiring by a Letter from him, what effects this Calumny might have on his Affairs in Ireland, and whither, as yet he had healed his wounded Reputation-before the Lords Justices. I soon received a very sa∣tisfactory Answer, with a Copy of a Letter from Gene∣ral Ginkell to him (which you will find inserted hereafter in its proper place) so much applauding the Collonel's signal Services, that it rejoyc'd me to know, that the malice of his ill-minded Enemies, cou'd not divert his Excellency from conceiving the same fair Character of him, that all just Men ought. But what pleas'd me most was to understand, that the Lords Justices (after he had three publick hearings before their Lordships) where he was fully acquitted, had sent a Lerter to my Lord Nottingham in his Vindication, which was in An∣swer to Her Majesty's, that commanded them to in∣spect into the Collonel's Miscariages. This indeed was a great satisfaction to me, but notwithstandingall this, considering how hard it is when vulgar Tongues are set a barking, to lay the cry, and that this Letter to the Queen in his Favour, might not be generally known; for want of which, the publick Clamours are not yet wholly silenc'd, and his Enemies through that advantage may still carry on their private Intrigues to his dishonour; I have therefore prevailed with him to deliver into my Hands what Papers he had relating to the Transactions, where he commanded in Chief, as well all Orders and Letters that were sent him from the Lords Justices, and the General, with his Answer to 'em, and those which pass'd betwixt him and Sir Teague O Regan, and others relating to the Military Affairs; as also the Journal of his own Procedings, which I have here with his leave taken the boldness to print, with his Tryal in the Close, thereby not only to satisfie the World of the just measures he took in reducing so important a place as Sligoe, the Key of Connaught; but likewise to make his Reparation as publick as his Injuries.
When the Impartial Reader shall have perused this following Narration, he will easily perceive on what a weak Foundation they had built their hopes of ruining this much injur'd Gentleman, when the height of their despised malice durst but aim at forging so poor a Scan∣dal on him, as Plundering. Why did they not asperse him for want of Conduct or Courage? Oh! no, in both those Capacities they thought he stood too visibly above their feeble Batteries, and even this mean Chagre they Iay'd against him, how did they aim in vain to makeit out? Why even thus. The Grand Intriguers of this pitiful Design, were Forward and Vaughan, two Mili∣tia Captains under the Collonel's Command against Sligo, Men of so Renowned a Character, that they were both notoriously famous for quitting their Posts (which is vulgarly call'd running away) when in all probability he was just on the point of reducing Sligoe, of which Notorious Cowardice, being Accused by Coll. Michel∣burne, these worthy Malecontents, to be reveng'd for the just Disgrace he had thrown upon them, enter'd into a Conspiracy against him, with one George Rob, an Inconsiderable Varlet, that the Collonel had threa∣ten'd with Hanging, for privately Conversing with the Enemy, and selling them Tobacco.
But whilst these three wretched Confederates were hatching their Villanies, they were in a great strait how to have 'em brought to light, for the whole Coun∣try was so well satisfied of Coll. Michelburne's Worth and Honour, that no Justice of Peace wou'd take any Affidavits against him, insomuch that Vaughan himself was forc't to act that part, and after he had taken such weak Informations as were then new coin'd against him by this wretched Triumviri, the Diminitive Tobacco Merchant was immediately dispatcht away, on this Mighty Embassy to Dublin. As to what happened thereupon, and how fully his impertinent Evidence was answer'd, I refer you to the reading of the Collonel's Tryal before the Lords Justices. And now because I have hinted in the preceding part of this Preface, whatFame is owing to that Exemplary Service, was done by this Honourable Person in the Memorable Siege of Lon∣donderry, I will give the Reader to understand what Part he acted in that Memorable Siege. Tho' lowd Tongu'd Fame so highly has blown up the great Re∣nown of Dr. Walker in England, as truly much Praise was due to him for having been so great an Animator of the Protestant Cause in those worst of Times, which was his proper Trade to do; yet after the Death of Coll. Baker, which happened in the heighth of the Towns Distress, and deepest Calamities, Coll. Michelburne was in joynt Command with the Doctor, whose Conduct appear'd more conspicuous in the Eating part than the Fighting, and reason good, the Charge of the Stores, and Provision being committed to him alone, whilst his Brother Governour was only the Martial Colleague, and the intire management of the Towns Defence lodged wholly in Coll. Michelburne's Breast; during which time, as his Principles were too Honourable to listen to any Allurements of the Enemy without the Walls, so his Hardships within
'em were not able to shake his Loyalty, nor lessen his Undaunted Courage, which appear'd par∣ticularly in his planting the Bloody Flag on the Royal Bastion, and afterwards mounting it on the top of a Steeple, to shew the Besieged, as well as the Besiegers, the heighth of Resolution, as they found in the Sequel, for when the Enemies Poltick Barbarity had drove the Protestant part of all the Country around without re∣spect of Persons, Age, or Sex, to starve under DerryWalls; to return the great Civility with no less Policy than Bravery, he erected a Lofty Gallows in sight of 'em, to hang 21 Lords, Knights, and other Commanders, which were taken before, as Trophies of a Victory late∣ly Obtained; which Stratagem obliged the Foe to let the Affrighted People Retreat from Danger. Nor had he the Happiness, only to save the Town through that Miserable Siege, a Service of so high Importance, that the King's then Tottering Interest in Ireland was kept in AEquilibrio by him, till Lieutenant General Kirke ap∣proaching turn'd the Scales; But he had the unhappiness likewise of feeling, in a great measure, the smart of War, as well as reaping the Glory of it, hav∣ing had the irreparable Misfortune of loosing his dear Lady, and Children, with all his Family, by the rage of Pestilence, and deadly Famine in this terrible Siege. Yet tho' he had so dismal an Occasion of exer∣cising his Passive, as well as active Courage; my much honour'd Friend, constant to both sorts of Magnanimi∣ty, with the same equal Temper bore the Fortune that drest his Brows with Cipress Garlands, as that which Crown'd them with Victorions Lawrels; well knowing, that Fortior est qui se quam qui fortissima vincit Maenia— Reader Farewel, but e're we part, that you may certainly be informed the Eulogium I have given Coll. Michelburne may pass for Current Coin, behold the Stamp a Copy of the King's own Letter has put upon it.
VVilliam R. To Our Trusty and Wellbeloved George Walker, and John Michelburne, Esq Go∣vernors of Londonderry. TRusty and Wellbeloved We Greet you well,
The Eminent and Extraordinary Service that you have performed unto us and our Kingdoms in General by your late Resolute and unparallel'd Defence of that our City of Londonderry, as it does Oblige us in the first place to an Humble Acknowledgment to Almighty God for his Signal Mercy in Supporting the Hearts and Courages of our good Subjects, amidst their great and Various Difficulties and Distresses, arising from a furious Opposition without, and yet a more pressing Necessity within those Walls, and send∣ing them at last Deliverance, and bringing them by your Conduct to Triumph over their Enemies, which we cannot but Attribute, to an immediate Divine Assistance, inspi∣ring them with a Zeal for the true Religion, a Love for their Countrey, and an Ʋnshaken Fidelity towards Ʋs; and must ever own it as a Continuation of that Miraculous Providence which hath hitherto conducted Ʋs throughout our Endeavours to resettle these Nations in all their Civil and Religious Rights and Liberties: So in the next place taking into our Serious Consideretion, as well the Impor∣tance of this Success, as that Constancy and Bravery, bywhich it hath been brought to pass, We would not omit signifying unto you the just sense We have of this whole Action, in which having the greatest Opportunity that can be put into the hands of any Subjects of Obliging their Prince; you have in all points acquitted your selves to Our Satisfaction, even beyond what could have been ex∣pected; insomuch that it now lies on Our part to make such Retributions, as well to you the Commanders in Chief, who have been the happy Instruments, under God, of this Deliverance; as others who have Signalized their Loy∣alty, Courage, and Patience in this time of Tryal, that all Our Subjects being Encouraged by this Example, may be stirred up to the Imitation of it, in the like hazardous, but Honourable Enterprizes. We Will therefore that you Rely on Our Royal Favour towards you; and also, that in Our Name you assure the Officers, Soldiers, and Inha∣bitants of that Our City, that we will take fitting Occasi∣ons to recompence their Services and Sufferings in Our Cause, so that they nor any other of Our Loving Subjects shall ever have reason to repent them of a Faithful Dis∣charge of their Duty; and so we bid you Farewel. Given at our Court at Hampton-Court, this 16th. Day of August, 1689. In the First Year of Our Reign. By His Majesties Command, Shrewsbury.
A TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE TRANSACTIONS IN THE North of Ireland, In the YEAR, 1691. AT the Opening of the Campaign, when the Army drew into the Field,
'twas thought reasonable, that when that part of the Army that was Quartered in Ʋlster, under the Command of Lieut. Gen. Douglas, joyned the other parts of the Army at Mullingar, that a Regiment of the standing Army, as also a considerable Body of the Militia, should be posted at several Passes on Lough, Hearne; as that of Belturbet, Cavan, Eneskillin, as likewise at Belleick, and Bally∣shanan, called by the Name of the Earne Water, to defend those several Passes against the Incursions of the Enemy from their se∣veral Frontiers, as that of Jamestown, and Boyle; and particu∣larly the Town and Forts of Sligoe, Commanded by Sir Teague O Regan, being the main Entrance into Ʋlster from Connaught, and the most convenient and ready Access into the North, by way of Ballyshanan: 'Twas therefore concluded by the General,and the Right Honourable the Lords Justices, that Coll. Mitchel∣burne, with his Regiment, should be posted at the places above mentioned, a Person capable of Command, being so well known by his Indefatigable Pains in managing the Government of Derry, and especially the Souldiery of the Garrison, during the whole time of that Memorable Siege, where he baffled General Hamilton, and his whole Irish Army. The Forces under his Command, were as followeth. Standing Army. Coll. Mitchelburne's whole Regiment. 1 Companys of Coll. Venner's Regiment. 1 Troop of Dragoons, Sir Albert Conningham's. 1 Troop of Dragoons, Coll. Win's. These following, were under the Command of Sir Francis. Hamilton Bannoret, Lieutenant of the County of Donegal. Capt. Forward Capt. Vaughan Capt. Wray Capt. John Hamilton Capt. Sampson Capt. Charles Hamilton Capt. William Stewart Foot Companies. Capt. Tho. Ash. Capt. Pa. Hamilton. Capt. Oliver Maccashlin.
The Rivers at this time were very low, which required very strict Guards on all the Fords, and the Patrols from Post to Post continually moving in the Night: About the middle of June by the heedlesness of a small Party of our Dragoons, who Patroll'd Morning and Evening 4 or 5 Miles in an open Countrey to Burndervise, on a suddain were surprized by one Capt. Mac Sherry, and about Ten of them taken Prisoners: Mac Sherry himself con∣fessed he took them when they were Fishing for Salmon: These Men were soon released, for one Lieutenant Scott, Brother to Coll. Scott, Deputy Governour of Sligoe; but lost all their Horses and Arms. Whilst the said Collonel was posting his Men to thebest Advantage for the Defence of these most Important Places, being the Inlet of the whole North; for could the Enemy but get advantage, all Ʋlster would be in great danger, the Ge∣neral, as also the Lords Justices being by several good hands in∣formed, that Jamestown on the Shanon, Boyle, and Sligoe were Deserted by the Enemy, sends these following Orders to Col∣lonel Mitchelburne. Dublin-Castle, the 4th. of July 1691. SIR, THE Lords Justices being informed, that the Enemy have Deserted Sligoe and Jamestown, in Connaught, do think it of very great importance that they be forthwith possess'd by their Majesties Forces, and therefore have sent you the enclosed Order, which you are desired to peruse with all the speed that possible may be, if you find the Information true, and that it be feaseable to be done, otherwise you are not to undertake it: And of your Proceedings from time to time, you are to give their Lordships an Account. Which, by their Lordships Com∣mand, is Signified to you by Sir, Your very humble Servant, J. Davis. I am Commanded to let you know that the Bisket now at Belleik, is de∣sign'd for Galway; so that unless you find the design upon Sligoe and James∣town, like to succeed, you are not to take any of it. J. Davis. To Collonel Mitchelburne, for Their Majesties Special Service. The General's Letter on the same Occasion.
YOU are hereby Directed, and Required in case the Enemy shall have left and quitted Sligoe, to send such part of the Standing Army under your Command in the North thither, as may be sufficient to take possession of, and secure the said Garri∣son; and your Proceedings herein, the Condition of theplace, and of what elsewhere you may think now or from time to time proper for me to know, you are to give me a particu∣lar Account of. Given at the Camp by Athlone this 5th. of July, 1691. Bar de Ginkell. To Coll. Mitchelburne, and in his Ab∣sence to the Officer in Chief with the Standing Forces in the North. It is the General's Directions, that the Officers take care their Men behave themselves Orderly, and not Abuse and Plunder the Countrey, and for what they do of that nature, the Offi∣cers to be answerable. George Clarke. Coll. Mithelburne receiving these two Expresses, one from the Lords Justices, and the other from the General, immediately sends away a Drummer to Sligoe to Sir Teague O Regan, with some Letters that were sent from Londonderry by some Prisoners that were taken by the said Coll. at Derry, in the time of the Siege; in particular one Lieut. Scott, Brother to Coll. Scott, joynt Governor with Sir Teague, and Coll. of one of the Regi∣ments Garrison'd in Sligoe. Collonel Mitchelburne's Letter to Sir Teague. SIR, 'TIS no small Satisfaction to me, to know that my, Old Ac∣quaintance Sir Teague O Regan, the happiness of whose Company I have so often enjoy'd in the French Campaign, should be in a Garrison so near me: As also Coll. Scott. I have sent you a Pacquet of Letters by my Drum, from the Prisoners in Londonderry, one whereof is to Coll. Scott from his Brother, to whom I have been Civil upon the Collonel's Account, which he does kindly acknowledge. My Service to Collonel Scott. I am. SIR, Your most Humble Servant, John Mitchelburne.
The Drum was dispatch'd away immediately, with Orders not to spare Horse-flesh, but to return with all speed; but in∣stead of coming that night, or the next day, there being no News of the Drummer, the Collonel could not conjecture what was become of him; he thought either he was knock'd in the Head by the Rapperees, or that Sir Teague O Regan was remov∣ing, and would not let him return, least he should give an Ac∣count of the postnre they were in, which might be the cause of our falling on their Rear. He resolves therefore to know the truth of the matter; and the 3 d. day, having no News of his Drummer, calls a Court Martial, and march'd that Night. The Court Martial. A General Court Martial held at Ballyshanan this 13th of July, 1691. WHereas by two Letters received, one from the General, and the other from the Lords Justices, giving an Ac∣count of the Enemies quitting Sligoe and Jamestown, We having sent a Drummer to Sligoe to observe their motion, and the truth thereof; and finding no return of the Message sent, do think it highly necessary for Their Majesties Service, to march as ma∣ny of the standing Army and Militia as can be spared towards Sligoe, at Nine a Clock this Night, that we may be able to give an Account of the Affairs of Sligoe, and full Answer to each Letter. John Forward. Charles Hamilton. George Vaughan. William Hewart. William Wray. John Hamilton. John Mitchelburne. William Staughton. William Mead. Capt. Caldwell. Capt. Nesbitt. George Gregory. Stephen Miller. Richard Bickerstaffe. Mich. Coningham. The Court Martial being over, and every one sworn to Se∣cresie, they march their Troops and Companies over the River
with as much Expedition as they could. We set forward to∣wards Sligoe about 9 that Night, the Strengths of what we march'd, leaving the Forts and Passes indifferently well guarded, were as followeth. About 80 Dragoons, standing Army 080 The Collonel's Foot 200 Collonel Venner's Foot 100 The Militia 200   580 By break of day we came to Mulloughmore mid-way, between Ballyshanan and Sligoe, and about five came to the Grange, where the Collonel posted all the Foot in the old Walls of the Grange in Ambush, commanded by Lieut. Coll. Staughton. When we halted and drew up, by reason of some difficulty whilst we were at Muloughore, some Disputes were started by Capt. Forward, and some of the Militia, of what ill consequence it would be if the Enemy should give us a Defeat, that most part of the North say open to the Incussions of the Enemy, the substance of which was discours'd with to the Collonel, by Captain Henry Hart; the Collonel made answer, it was a shame to turn back, since they were half way: As also, why did not they object this at the Court-Martial; but said, he would go if he had no more than the standing Army, and those of the Militia as would not follow him, they might turn back; but if they would trust to his Management, they need not in the least doubt; for his business was not to fight the Enemy, but to know if Sligoe were deserted. And accordingly, as soon as the Foot were posted, by way of Ambush, the Collonel takes all the Horse and Dragoons with him, and mounts about Forty of his Granadeers on the Officers Horses; he having about seven short Miles to Sligo, he march'd with that Precipitation, that it was impossible to be surprized by the Enemy, leaving Seouts on every Hill, till he arrived within a Mile of Sligoe; where observing no Horse appear, he advanc'd nearer, and obser'vd about 3 or 400 Foot drawn out, by which means he discover'd, that Sligoe was
not deserted, as was reported: the Collonel continued before the Town above an hour, and then march'd back; 'twas very re∣markable, to march 20 Miles, and especially when we march'd so private, not so much as to meet with one Person to give us Intelligence. The Collonel's Letter to Sir Teague, concerning the Drummer, which was detained by him in the Town, July 13th. 1691. SIR, I Think strange that you detain my Drummer these four days, which was never yet practicable by the Law of Arms, and must needs be a great Reflection upon you by this unjust dealing. IsI have him not speedily, I'll revenge his wrong on the Prison∣ers in Derry, which is all from Your humble Servant, John Mitchelburne. To the Honourable Sir Teague O Regan, Governour of Sligoe. This now he sent by a Girl into the Town to Sir Teagne, least he should detain the Messenger, and then drew off his Men, and at Drumcleife strand the Enemy advanced withsome Horse, where was some skirmishing on both sides, but at the appearance of our Granadeers, the Enemy retreated, and we march'd back to the Grange, and joyn'd our Foot, and march'd that Night to Ballyshanan. The next Morning the Drummer returned and brought this following answer. Sligoe, July 14th. 1691. I Received yours, and as to my Detaining the Drummer, I rather took him for a Spye than a Drummer, for he was not satisfied to be in the Town, but must go up into the Fort, and make his Observations; besides, his Considence, and giving his Tongue that Liberty, that I could by no means suffer it; and I am sure you would have don no less had any of Ours been guilty of half the Impertinence in your Garrison; and for the future I
desire that any other Drummer may be sent, rather than that Fellow: I am very glad you are my Neighbour, and will treat you with all the Civilities our Cause will allow. Collonel Scott gives you his Humble Service. I am Your most Humble Servant Teague O Regan. Collonel Mitchelburne's Letter to the Lords Justices, giving them Account of this his first Journey to Sligoe. My Lords, I Received two Expresses, one from Your Lordships, the o∣ther from the General, to take Possession of Sligoe, if it was quitted by the Enemy; but the Difficulty was such, that it is al∣most impossible to get Intelligence, for there is not a Dweller between this and Sligoe. On Tuesday last I posted away a Drummer with Letters from the Prisonars of Londonderry, to the Governor of Sligoe, thinking by that means to know the certainty, but they detain'd the Drum, and do still, which was a suspition that they had, or were about to Desert it. On Tuesday I call'd a General Council, as is herein Inclosed, and about Eight that Night we Rendezvouzed three hundred Foot, and two hundred Horse; and about Six next Morning We came to a small Village call'd the Grange, within Six Miles of Sligoe, where I posted my Foot by way of Ambush, Commanded by Lieut. Coll. Staughton. I march'd the Horse within a Mile of Sligoe, where we perceived the Garrison that was in that Fort to draw out, but not any Horse to be seen, which gave me so much confidence, as to march and draw up nearer: My Granadeers and some Dragoons advanced to some Ditches, and some Shot was exchanged. We continued about an Hour, and then march'd back and joyn'd the Foot, and about Eight that Night we came to Ballyshanon. I have no further to acquaint your Lordships at present, but am My Lords, Your Lordships most Faithful and Obedient Servant, John Mitchelburne. The like Letter was sent to General Ginkell. This is the Account of our first Journey to Sligoe.
Coll. Mitchelburne having taken a View of Sligoe, as also the Forts, was resolved the second time to visit Sir Teague, and to stay some two or three days before the place, to know if any Advantages might be gained towards Reducing the Town, and therefore thus acquaints the Lords Justices in the following Letter of it. My Lords, I Think it not amiss to give your Lordships an Account of what Militia I have here, which is only six Troops of Dra∣goons out of Dunigal, and out of the County of Londonderry only part of a Company commanded by Capt. Patrick Hamilton. Since my last Advance to Sligoe, I am informed of the Ill con∣dition of the place, the Soldiers are a Rabble, all Ragged, and have no Allowance but one pound of Bread a Day; 'tis likewise told me, that most part of their Craights would come in on pro∣tection, so that if your Lordships would but allow me some more force, and others to advance thither, I do not question but in a short time to give your Lordships a very good Account of my Proceedings. Sir Teague O Regan has been these two or three days very busie in repairing all his Works about the Fort. Your Lordships most Faithful and Obedient Servant, John Michelburne. About this time Coll. Michelburne writ to Eniskillen to Lieut. Coll. Ramsey, to joyn him with an hundred Men at Manner Ha∣mllton, and to bring with him as many of the Militia as he could, with an intent to Summons Sligoe, and to bring them, if possible, to Surrender: but the same time came a Potent to him to march back to Drogheda, and withal a Letter to Coll. Michel∣burne from the General, to send a Detatchment to Convey the Ships loaded with Biskets to Gallway, (viz.) By the General Ginkell, Commander in Chief of Their Majesties Forces. THE Masters of the two Ships loaded with Bisker, at present in the Bay of Ballyshannon, now are hereby required to
set sall instantly for Gullway, if the Frigat sent for their Con∣voy be come to them, which I hereby order immediately with∣out loss of time to guard them thither; if not, they are to go to the Governor of Ballishannon, who, in that case, is required to give twenty five Soldiers to each Ship to secure them to Gall∣way, as aforesaid forthwith; and this shall be to him and them a sufficient Warrant Respectively. Given at the Campal Loughrea this 16th. of July, 1691. Bar de Ginkell. Geo. Clarke. To Coll. John Michelburne Commander at Ballishannon. This with the Potent that came to Lieut. Coll. Ramsey, hindred our design against Sligoe, so that it was put off till some other time. The day after C. Michelburne received this following Potent. YOU are hereby directed, as soon as you shall be releived by the Regiment of Coll. Samuel Vennor, to march with the Regiment under your Command from your Respective Quar∣ters to Athlone, and remain there till further Orders; and you are to acquaint the Officers that they are to be answerable for the Behaviour of their Souldiers, and to see that they plunder not, nor abuse the Country in their said March, and especially those to whom I shall think sit to grant my protection. Given at the Camp by Aghtim, this 14th. of July, 1691. Bar de Ginkell. Geo. Clarke. To Coll. Michelburne Commanding one of Their Majesties Regiments of Foot, or the Officer in Chief with that Regiment. The next Day he received this following Express.
NOtwithstanding any former Orders for your march with the Regiment under your Command, so soon as you are Releived by that of Coll. Vennor, to Athlone; you are now di∣rected to remain in your present Quarters until you are other.wise disposed of by the Right Honourable the Lords Justices, whose Orders you are from time to time to follow, and march as they shall direct. Given at the Camp by Loghrea, this 16th. of July, 1691. Bar de Ginkell, Geo. Clarke. To Coll. John Michelburne, or the Officer in Chief of the Regiment of Foot under his Command. Mr. Davis's Letter to Coll. Michelburne, giving a Relation of that Victory against the Enemy. Dublin-Castle, the 15th. of July, 1691. SIR, THis Morning by an Express we have an Account of a very great Victory gained over the Enemy, the particulars whereof, are as followeth. About six of the Clock on Sunday in the Evening, the Battel began at a place call'd Aghrim in the County of Gallway, about three Miles beyond Bellenaslow, the Enemy were advantagiously posted, incompassed almost round with Boggs, by which means many were saved, who otherwise had gone with the rest, if our Horse could have come in time enough to second our Foot. The Battel was chiofly (by reason of the Bogs) between the Foot on both sidee, whereof its believed the Enemy have lost 5 or 6000: on our side the loss is between 500 and 1000. The Battel lasted about 3 hours, and had not the Night over∣taken us, in all probability the Slaughter had been much greater, we persued the Enemy 5 Miles; on their side, it's said, their Ge∣neral St. Ruth is killed, who Speech't them greatly in the Morn∣ing. Animating them to Fight, as did the Priests the Common Soldiers, who also gave them Absolution; We took all their Baggage, and 9 pieces of Cannon, Lord Gallway, the Lord of Clanrickerds Brother to Coll. Bourke, and several others of Qua∣lity killed.
Maj. Gen. Hamilton, Maj. Gen. Darrington, Lord Bellew, Coll. Bourke, Coll. Gorden O Neale, Coll. Butler, taken Pri∣soners. On our side Maj. Gen. Holstaple, Coll Harbert, Coll. Mongath of the Danes, Maj. Deanish, Maj. Coll, Maj. Cornwel, and Maj. Fox, Kill'd. Sir George Hamilton, the Prince Hesse, Lord Cutts, Coll. Earle, and Lieut. Coll. Brundal Wounded I sent you this by Command of the Lords Justices, who doubt not you will improve every Opportunity for Their Majesties Ser∣vice. I am SIR, Your very Humble Servant, John Davis. In short, it is a Total Defeat of the Enemy. Here followeth a Letter from the Lords Justices to Coll. Michel∣burne, in Answer of one to their Lordships, (viz.) Dublin-Castle, the 21th. of July, 1691. SIR, WE have this day received your of the 13th. with the In∣closed, from Sir Teague O Regan, and Coll. Scott. For An∣swer, we leave it to you to make the Exchange proposed of the Lieutenant who is Prisoner at Londonderry, by them desired for the ten Dragoons, and you may direct your Order as you see cause, to the Officer Commanding at Londonderry, and the Ma∣gistrate of that place to send the Lieutenant to you accor∣dingly. If you find any who are willing to come into protection, and will bring in Stocks of Cattle with them, I do hereby Impower you to receive them, and to assure them of the protection of the Government, they taking the Oath of Fidelity and Allegi∣ance, and behaving themselves as becometh good Subjects.
We are glad to find Sir Teague O Regan sowell inclin'd as to send away the Protestants in safety out of the Enemies Quarters, and doubt not your Care in all things that may conduce to Their Majesties Service, desiring to hear constantly from you, as there is any the least occasion. We are Your very Humble Servants, Charles Porter, Tho. Coningsby. For Coll. John Michelburne at Ballyshannon, in the County of Duingal. To be sent by the Post-Master by Express of Eneskil∣len, from Eneskillen. John Davis. I had almost ommited a material Passage which was, when Coll. Michelburne sent to give Orders for Lieut. Coll. Ramsey, Governour of Eneskillen, to joyn him with a 100 Firelocks; on their March to Manner-Hamilton, an Express met them from the Coll. acquainting them that he could not possible joyn them, and so ordered them to return back; but those of Coll. Ramsey's being a good Party, and with them a considerable num∣ber of Militla, which were never wanting on such an occasion to hunt for Prey, prosecuted their Journey to Killkenny, and en∣tring into Terrerah, a Barony joyning to Killkenny, they brought off a confiderable Booty of Gattle, Horses, and Sheep; in the mean time the Garrison of Sligoe was alarm'd, Sir Teague and Coll. Scot being advertised of the number of the Soldiers, as al∣so the Militia that was with them, laid wait for them with 500 Foot: Coll. Michelbourne being fearful, least the Garrison of Sligoe should sally out, and fall on them at unawares, sends a De∣tachment of about 200 Horse and Dragoons, under the Com∣mand of Sir Francis Hamilton, to joyn the former Party; by whose vigilant Travelling all Night, they luckily fell in when the Eniskillen Party, and Sir Ieague O Regan were engag'd; at the appearance of Sir Francis Hamilton, both Parties desisted, and stood in a maze; and that at the same time, when the Eniskilieners were in a likelihood to have been totally lost; for that Coll. Scot was just come up with his Regiment to joyn Sir Teague;
but it was not long, till one might judge on whose fide the Vi∣ctory wou'd fall, for the whole Party of the Irish fled, and out Militia after them for above four Miles; but Sir Teague was the foremost Man, and just at the Entrance of the Town of Sligoe, a Serjeant of the Dragoons seized on one matholland, the Store-Keeper of Sligoe, who was with Sir Teague, and not half a Pistol shot from him; but the Honourable Sir Teagne O Regan, Gover∣nour of the Town and County of Sligoe, won the Race: This Matholland that was taken Prisoner by the Serjeant, told him, Who do you think that Crook'd-back Fellow was who rid before? The Serjeant reply'd, he believed him to be his Servant: The Devil take me, quoth Matholland, but he was Sir Teague O Regan; By my Soul, quoth the Serjeant, 'tis 20 Guineas out of my way; for I am sure the General would have rewarded me very well. Sir Teague swore, that if they ever carch'd Sir Teague so far again, he would agree to be crack'd as a Hog oracks a Pottato. At this time, by the earnest pursuit after the Enemy, one Lieut. Patrick Macre, formerly a Lieut. in Dorry, during the time of the Siege, pursuing the Enemy into the Town, apprehending still he was among his own Men, cry'd out for King William's Boys, and the Honour of London-Derry; the poor Man was mistaken, and knook'd down by the Enemy; but accidentally one of the Towns Men knew him, and had him before Sir Teague. Sir Teague ask'd him his Name; quoth the Lieut my Name is Patrick Moore: Then Sir Teague enquired what he was: He told him he was a Servant in Derry; and enquiring after all things, he ask'd him who was Governour in Derry: Hotold him Coll. Michelburne; to whom he express'd great kindness, and allow'd him good Quar∣ter; which civility afterwards was Requited by Coll. Mi∣chelburne. But to pursue our Discourse, from the Enemy we took 16 Prisoners, which were brought by Guard to Ballyshan∣nou. Sir Teague was not long before he heard who had his Pri∣soners, and sent this following Letter to Sir Francis Hamilion.
Sligoe, the 24th of July. SIR, UPon the last Exchange between us and Coll. Michelburne, that now Commands at Ballyshannon, we writ to have cer∣tain Persons, that we thought they had Prisoners there, sent us, they being as we computed in Arrear to us upon the Exchanges. Whereupon we had a civil Letter from Coll. Michelburne, im∣porting that he would send them if he had them: This Letter I cannot find to send you, but upon my Honour it was to this purpose; which shews that there is a fair Corespondence be∣tween us and our Enemy on this side, as may be in such Cases ex∣pected, other than which I never saw practised, nor am ac∣quainted with between Persons of Honour though of different sides; you have now one Ensign Rourke, Prisoner, together with some Inhabitants of this Town and Country I command∣ed, and partly forced, and particularly one French, that is an Inhabitant of this Town, and his Wife, and ten Chil∣dren: We have one Lieutenant Patrick Moore, of that Par∣ty, Prisoner here; if you will return the said Ensign Rourke, and the said other Prisoners of this Town and County, that were no way concern'd in our Army, I will send you thither, or to any Frontier Garrison, any of them that you will name, and will compleat the Exchange in what shall be found wanting, as occasion will offer; the said Moore had a Letter of Credit about him from one Alexander Lecky, an Alder∣man in Derry, for Twenty or Thirty pounds, which names this Person, a Lieutenant; whither he be so or not, the Ex∣change shall be performed upon your Complyance with SIR, Your Humble Servant, Teague O Regan. To Sir Francis Hamilton, Barron. Capt. Montgomery, or any other Person, com∣manding in Chief a Party of the Enemy in this Country.
A Copy of a Letter of Sir Teague O Regan's, to some of the Gen∣tlemen in the County of Sligoe, Intercepted. Sligoe, July 15th. 1691. Gentlemen, THO' we have Provisions coming by Water from Gallway, the uncertainty that way makes our General Order me, without loss of time, to send Horses for some, wherein, on your Allegiance to K. James, I require your speedy Compliance; and Gentlemen, I pray let no Self-interest, Base Consternation, or other Imbecility, make you neglect your Diligence and Care herein; if you do, I shall not only Represent you accordingly, but in spite of Fate will make you the first Sufferers, of so Fatal a Neglect: An Officer and Guard will expect 60 Horses, and Sacks, and Leaders, at Temple-House on Sunday next at Eight of the Clock in the Morning, from the Barrony of Lyney. I remain, Gentlemen, Your Humble Servant, Teague O Regan. I desire the Cattle of your Barrony out of hand. To Kean O Harra, Esq Mr. Ecgeboy O Harra. Mr. Om. O Harra. Mitchel O Harra; and the rest of the Gentlemen of the Barrony of Leyney. Hast. Coll. Mitchelburne is again contriving to make a second Jour∣ney to Sligoe, and since Coll. Venner's Regiment was Marcht a∣way, and he seven Garrisons to keep, did not know well how to bring it about, but sends to Lieut. Coll. Stanght. his then Lieut. Col. to send Maj. Hamilton to joyn him with 100 Fire∣locks on a certain day at Manner Hamilton, and in the mean time sends the following Letter to Sir Teague O Regan by his Drummer, with a Present of some good Snuff, and two Bottles of Ʋsquebaugh.
Ballyshannon, the 26th. of July, 1691. SIR, YOU must needs be very sensible of your own Weakness, by the News you have of your Army being totally beaten, how that they are not able to stand before us; so pray seriously consider it; I presume you have not as yet seen the Lords Justi∣ces Proclamation, which I inclosed send you: you have an op∣portunity to do your self and your Friends a kindness if you do but lay hold of this Opportunity in Treating with me as to the Surrender of Sligoe. I am SIR, Your Humble Servant, John Michelburne. I thank you for your Present of the Cask of Claret you sent me; be plea∣sed to accept of a Bottle of Usquebaugh, and some good London Snuff. Sir Teagues O Regan's Answer, to Collonel Michelburne's First Summons. Sligoe 28. July, 1691. SIR,
I Had yours by the Drummer the last Night, and do render you Thanks for all your Civilities to me; yet I am sorry you would harbour so Ill and Weak an Opinion of me, to think that I should be so great a Villain, as to betray my Frust to my King and Countrey, and that in a time when I am very sensible, that the Party I took is in the most likelihood of doing well, as ever they were since this War began: As to the Proclamation it may take with such as want Wit and Honesty, but never with me; neither do I know any particvlar thing wherein the Weakness of your Cause appears more than by the Proclamation, which you will find, if you do without partiality read it. If you will be pleased to send me Mr. Mattholland, and the rest of the Prisoners which were lately taken by some of your People; I will upon any such Occasion do the like, where I have Prisoners from you: If you think it much that all should come, I hope youwill send John Duaney of Coll. Scott's Regiment, and the two Sol∣diers of Coll. Ternon O Rourks Regiment. I am SIR, Your most Humble Servant, Teague O Regan. Coll. Scott, and his Brother, give their Humble Service. The same Day the Coll. received an Express from General Ginkell, much to the same effect as he had sent to Sir Teague O Regan the Day before, so that he had no more in Answer to the General, than to send the above Letter of Sir Teague's, which he immediately dispatch'd away by the same Express. The General's Letter. Camp before Gallway, 25th. July, 1691. SIR, I Am to own the Receipt of three of your Letters, and am O∣bliged to you for the Diligence, I find by yours of the 20th. you used in dispatching the Provision Ships; they are not yet come hither; as for the Dispute about the Command of Enes∣killin, now the Lieut. Coll. is removed, it is at an end; but if he had not I should have been very willing to have Gratified you in what you desired. I inclosed, send, you one of the Proclamations of Pardon, to those that do the Service mention'd in it; you may from me as∣sure Sir Teague O Regan, that though the time may be expired, that is there limited, yet if he Surrenders Sligoe I'le make it good to him and the Garrison; and if he will submit and take Service, either an Imploy equal to what he has, or such recom∣pence, as in reason he can desire. I am SIR, Your most Humble Servant, Bar de Ginkell. To Coll. Michelburne.
The Coll. The same Day received a Letter from Counsellor Da∣vir, Secretary to the Right Honourable the Lords Justices, (viz.) Dublin-Castle, 25th, July, 1691. SIR, I Herewith send you a particular Account of the late great Vi∣ctory obtained against the Irish, and have this only to add, That the General being set down before Gallway, sends word the 22 d. that the Fort being Stormed, and Taken on the 20th. in the Moruing, the Town sent out in the Afternoon to treat. and have agreed to Surrender on Sunday Morning next at Six of the Clock, and that immediately the Out-works were delivered into our Possession, and all their Cannon drawn from their Walls, and 5 Hostages delivered: The General designs next to Lymerick, and we have some reason to believe that place will soon Capitu∣late likewise. Of this I thought it convenient to give you an Ac∣count, and to assure you that I am SIR, Your very Humble Servant, John Davis. For Coll. John Michelburne, Governor of Ballishannon. To be sent him by the Post-Master of Eniskillen from Eni∣skillen. John Davis. Since we are Concerned with the Militia of the Northern Parts,
'tis not amiss to give you an Account, that for the better ordering of the Militia, there were three Superiors ordered to inspect them, Coll. Murray, Maj Touchburne, and Cornet Mead. Coll. Murray had undertaken with the Lords Justices to enter in∣to Connaught with a considerable Body of Men, and not to lessen the Militia to incommode the Rebels, and 'twas generally dis∣cours'd, that the Body of his Men were to consist of 5000 Horse and Foot, but how that could have been accomplisht cannot well be understood; for when all the Militia of the Countrey was summon'd by the Lords Justices Orders to joyn Coll. Michel∣burneat Ballyshannon, and then to joyn the Lord Granard like∣wise, they could not make 500; but we had two sorts of Services, that of defending the Frontiers, and that of getting Prey; for wherever a design was for Plunder there you had twenty for one. It was theresors thought not convenient for Coll. Murray to en∣ter into Connaught, but to joyn his Militia on the Frontiers, as by a Letter from Coll. Murray to the Governour of Bally∣shannon. Collonel Murray's Order front the General. The General's Orders to me. IT being now found convenient for their Majesties Service, that I enter not with the Militia under my Command into the Pro∣vince of Connaught; notwithstanding any former Resolution; I am thereby directed to post them on the Borders of the Province, which Instructions I will pursue with all Expedition. I think it sit to give you an Account of this my Instructions. We have raised all the Militia of the North, except the County of Ardmagh and Mannoghan, which Maj. Touchburne, and Corner Mead are now viewing. Upon an Express from the General, we are returned out of the County of Down, and with all Expedition will march what of the Militia is Armed. What is not Armed we have written to the Government about, and expect they will furnish them. Cumber, July 11th, 1691. Your Humble Servant, Adam-Murray. For Their Majesties Special Service. To Coll. John Michelburne, at Ballyshannon. Coll. Michelburne writes to Coll. Murray, to hasten his Mili∣tia; giving him an Account of his Design against Sligoe, and that if Coll. Murray March't to the Frontier, he could Advance with a greater Force against Sligoe.
Collonel Michelburne expected Day after Day to hear of Coll. Murray's Militia, but never heard from them or him: After he calls a Court-Martial the 17th. of July, 1691. At a General Court-Martial, held at Ballyshannon, this 17th. of July, 1691. WE the under-named Persons, do think it necessary for Their Majesties Service (considering how the Juncture of Affairs stands, and the late Victory, (by the Blessing of God Almighty gained over the Enemy) to Assemle a convenient number of Troops and Companies to meet on the 21th. Instant, to make an Infalon Connaught, particularly the County of Sligoe, by which means we may discover the further design; of the Ene∣my in those parts, as also to Summons the Garrison of Sligoe to a Surrender; and this we all agree to be most necessary for Their Majesties Service. John Michelburne Patrick Hamilton William Vaughan Benjamin Touchburne Josias Campbell. Tristram Swetnam Alexander Knox Dalway Clemens Thomas Ash William Wray Francis Hamilton Hugh Caldwell Edward Nesbit Francis Boyd Stephen Miller Richard Bickerstaffe William Stewart William Sampson John Hamilton.
This was the Result of the Court-Marital; and though all were sworn to Secrecy, yet by the Indiseretion, or Treachery of some of the Members of it, it was in two hours time publick throughout the Countrey, which made the Coll. resolve to call no more Court-Martials, but gave Orders that all should beready at an hours warning; but he was in the mean time migh∣tily solicited by Captain Forward, and Captain Vaughan, and Nicholson (whose Expectations and Desires were more filled with Prey, than any thing else;) to disclose the time, we should march. He had ordered Lieut. Coll. Ramsey from Eniskillin, to joyn him with one Hundred Firelocks at Manner Hamilton; also two Companies of Collonel Venner's Regiment, which lay at the Barr Mouth of Ballyshannon: but they as well as Lieutenant-Collonel Ramsey, receiving Orders to march to their own Regiments at Droghede, he was forced to defer it a day or two, till he could send to Eniskillin and Belturbit for a Detachment of his own Regiment, to meet them. On Thursday the 28th. of July, about three in the Afternnon he began his March to Belleike, 3 Miles from Ballyshannon; from whence having viewed all the Men, about five he march'd towards Manner Hamilton, where we arrived by two in the Morning, being 11 Miles of bad Road; from hence, about six on Fryday we march'd towards Killowny, where we Encamp'd; where on the Road our Militia perceiv∣ing some Cows and Horses, to the number of sixty, several of them broke confusedly out of their ranks, but were soon forc'd back to their Post by Coll. Michelburne's Order. It was here first their Robbing and Stripping began, they consider'd his Business not as it was, but as if he had only design'd for a Prey. This Evening, as soon as we had encamped, Coll. Michelburne rid out, accompanied with Sir Francis Hamilton, &c. to Balli∣sadare-Bridge, two Miles from the Camp, to discover the Enemy with 100 Horse; and after our Guards were set in the most ad∣vantageous places, our Men being so well stored with Mutton, that they neglected Beef, we march'd the next Morning early towards Sligoe, being 6 Miles; about 11 we came thither. At our first approach, the Enemy having discharged above 15 shot, about 17 Pounders; the Coll. beat a Parly, and sent a Drum with a Letter to Sir Teague O Regan, Governour.
The Forces under the Command of Collonel Michelburne, that march'd against Sligoe the second time. Of his own Regiment 300. Two Troops of Dragoons of the standing Army. Militia, commanded by Sir Fran∣cis Hamilton, Horse. Capt. Charles Hamilton of Cavan. Capt. William Stewart. Capt. John Forward. Capt. Vaughan. Capt. William Wray. Capt William Sampson. Capt. John Hamilton. Capt. Henry Hillwell. Capt. Nicholson, High Sheriff of Sligoe. Capt. Henderson. Capt. Henry Hart. Of Militia Foot. Capt. Patrick Hamilton. Capt. Thomas Ash. Collonel Michelburn's Letter, sent in by the Drummer, the Con∣tents of which is as followeth. From the Camp before Sligoe, Aug. 19th. 1691. SIR,
I Wrote to you last Week concerning the Surrender of Sligoe, but since I receiv'd an Express from the General, which I have sent you to peruse; you may see what fair Terms are proposed both to Officers and Soldiers. I presume you are not ignorant of the Surrender of Gallway, and the great advantage they have re∣ceived by an early Complying with Their Majesties Proclama∣mation, and what further they in Reason desired. I come now with Authority from Their Majesties and the General, to offer you what reasonable Conditions you desire, as well for Officers as Soldiers, hoping you will Commiserate the sad and deplora∣ble Condition the Country lyes under, which must conse∣quently sink into Ruin without your speedy Complyance; I have taken all possible care to preserve the poor Inhabitants, by giving Protections, or otherways; and my Business is not to plunder and prey, to the ruin of the Country, as some from Eniskillin and Bellurbit, have not long ago done; but for thePreservation and Safeguard of it; we allow you may keep your Fort, till such time as some Cannon and Mortars may be brought against it, and then it may be for Two or Three days, and no more; for if Gallway and Athlone could not hold out, we may judge by your Resistance, that you design the Desolation of your Country; your own Force cannot de∣fend you long, and your Army is entirely defeated: There∣fore seriously consider, if you abuse not the Grace that is offered to you, what advantages may accrue, as well to your self, your Officers and Soldiers, as to the Country, and Inhabitants there∣of? In this I have done my duty, and desire to know your Resolution, that I may make a report of it to the General, which is all at present from, SIR, Your Humble Servant, John Michelburne. To Sir Teague O'Regan, Govern. of Sligoe Fort. The Coll. received an Answer in these words. Sligoe, August 1st. 1691.
I Have received yours of this days date, and whether Gallway be surrendred or not, my Complyance to your desire would be a Breach of the Trust reposed in me; but this I offer, which is as much as can be reasonably expected of me, and more than which I will not do; if you will allow a free passage to one from me with an Authentick Pass backward and forward; I will dispatch him to his Grace the Duke Tyrconnell, and on his return I will finally resolve you, or your General. You may see my Letters to his Grace: This hath been allowed the People of Gallway, whose Surrendering you would so fain have a President for me; but you must give me leave at this time of day to look about me before I take such Examples, whichinduces me to make this reasonable Offer: I am as much for the Preservation of the Country, of which you write to me as you are; so tender as any Man. I am SIR, Your Humble Servant, Teague O Regan. To Collonel Michelburne. At the same time Collonel received the following Letter from Coll. Scott. SIR, I Had yours by the Drummer, and do render you thanks for your good will, though the Prisoners are not come. Your Army did not make one shot of Cannon against Gallway, till Sunday last; and have fired at it on Thursday last, so that I am satisfied it was not surrendred, then I have as much reason to be for the preservation of this poor Countrey, as most Men have; yet I hope you will allow us to have your good Esteem, by not complying with your Demands, being a thing much against our Honour and Interest; but as to my complying with what Sir Teague desires in his Letter, an Absolute Answer may be expected at the return of such a Letter: I am very willing to wait on you, with two Officers along with me, on the top of Nocknagany. I suppose I shall meet with the same number, when you send me word by the same Drummer. I am SIR, Your most humble Servant, Edward Scott.
These Letters passing between the Coll. and Garrison, and the aforesaid meeting agreed to, of Coll. Scott, Coll. Ternon O Rourke, and Lieut. Coll. O Rourke of their side; of ours Coll. Michelburne, Sir Francis Hamilton, Lieut. of the County of Dunigall, and Capt. Hugh Caldwell, where we had a Consultati∣on for near an hour, it being concluded to, that Sir Teague's de∣sire should be granted to send away a Messenger with Letters to the Duke of Tyrconnel, whose Approbation was to be taken therein, but conditionally to be first viewed by the General, About 6 that Evening we drew off from the Town, at which time the Coll. was told, that some Troops of the Militia had de∣serted their Posts, and were gone a plundering: On inquiry, he was further inform'd, they were those Commanded by Capt. Henderson, and that Capt. Forward and Vaughan were missing: Now considering the number of Men the Coll. had with him, and that he should soon want Provisions, being wholly unpro∣vided, when we came out, he Detached Eight Men out of each Troop, under the Command of Capt. Anthony Shamborge, Capt. of Granadeers, to follow the Troops which had left their Posts without Orders, and to bring in some Cattle for subsistance to the Men, but instead of these half the Militia stole away, so that that Night when we were marcht back to Killowny, and incampt there, it was as much as the two Troops of the standing Army could do to keep the few that were left of the Militia together: Next Morning they continuing to break off at all sides, the Collonel soon found that it was in vain for him longer to depend on any but his own Foot, and those two Troops of Dragoons, if any thing should happen, we being already in a manner left alone. About two hours after, the Collonel had an Account of two Troops, one Commanded by Capt. Vaughan, and another by Henderson; that with a Prey of about 100 Cows, and 2 or
300 Sheep, with some Horses, were marching intire with the Prey to their own home; on which, he sent about 30 Foot, who o∣ver took them about 3 Miles from Killowny, but they would not be stopt till the Coll. was forc'd to send a stronger Party, who brought the Prey into our Camp: Our Men were well stored with Provisions, by whieh means the Coll. secur'd two Troops ofthe Militia, which you see had quite left him. Captain Sham∣borge with his Party, returned this day with about 7 or 800 Cows; but the day being Sunday, proving very wet, we con∣tinued there that Night. He resolved to give the General an Ac∣count in what manner he prosecuted his Design in going to Sligoe the second time, Major Hamilton, as I told you before, having Orders from Coll. Michelburne to detach 100 Firelocks from the Garrison of Bellurbitt, Eniskillin, Cavan, &c. out of his own Regiment to Re-inforce the 200 he brought with him from Ballyshannon; and Two Troops of Dragoons: These 300 Men, with the Militia, appearing before Sligoe the 1st. of August, 1691. was an extraordinary Incouragement to the Coll. to Attack them the second time; it was agreed upon the Night before, that a Lieut, from Coll. Michelburne, and one from the Garrison should depart immediately to the General with these Letters from Sir Teague, the Coll. sending this following Letter to the General. SIR, IN my last to your Excellency, I gave you an Account, that on Fryday I intended to march towards Sligoe; but the more to Expedite your Commands, I march'd on Thursday Night, and next day came before the Town by Eleven a Clock, being up∣wards of 30 Miles, and the way we march'd at my first Approach, I sent to Sir Teague your Excellencies Proposals, but I find they still continue their unbelief of the Surrender of Gallway, and tell me of a possibility of their Army going to Dublin, of Five Regiments, sent to Re-enforce Gallway from Lymerick by Sea, and of a signal Victory, gained by the French over the Confede∣rates in Flanders. However Sir Teague has made it his Request to have free passage to send to Lymerick, there to understand the certainty of their Condition, and to give your Excellency a final Answer. I humbly desire that a Dispatch may be made with all Expedition, lest they make an Advantage of the com∣ing Harvest, for I understand they begin already to want Bread,
and that they have but a small quantity of Powder; I resolve to go back to morrow Morning, and will refresh my Men for Three or Four days, in which time I will furnish my self with Spades and Pick-Axes, and block them up until they comply with what is expected, if this may be done with your Excel∣lency's Approbation. I am, SIR, Your Excellency's most Faithful and Obedient Servant. John Michelburne.
The Major, as I told you before, joyned the Coll, with a Hundred Firelocks, so that they were now about Three Hun∣dred Foot who marched back to Sligoe together with the Militia, bringing all the Prey along with them; for he concluded, no Prey, no Militia; we having arrived there about 10, the Coll. divided his whole Party in two Bodies, about Four Hundred Men in each, the one he Ranged on the top of a Hill, with which he designed to pass the River at Ebb-water: In the mean time he block'd up the West part of the Town, with the other Four Hundred Men; and having viewed well the Ground, he posted them on such places as he thought most proper. He could at the same time have entred the Town, but apprehend∣ing the ill Consequences that might have happen'd, if the Sol∣diers had taken to plunder, which undoubtedly they would, he gave Orders on pain of Death, not one to enter the Town. As soon as he saw his Men thus posted, he lest the Command of that side of the Town with Major John Hamilton, and then hasted to that Party that was to take the River, which they easily passed, without any great Resistance, though several Shoes were made at them from the Fort; every Horse-mantook a Foot-man behind him; the Coll gave Orders immediate∣ly to draw up the Men, and march'd towards the Town, where on the East side we perceived the Enemy to form in∣to a Body; we drew up our Men within Cannon shot of the Town, on the left of a strong Danish Fort, where we en∣camped that Night. The Coll. considering the great want of Ammunition; for at this time we had left but six Charges, immediately dispatch'd an Officer with six Dragoons to Bally∣shannon, Twenty Miles from Sligoe, forbearing to Fire on both sides the Town as little as we could that Night; and having block'd them up closely on both sides the Town, we expected to hear from them, for we were not in a Condition to At∣tack them on either side, they being two Regiments of Foot, and we in all but 800; but this Order was given, that if the Ene∣my should Attack us from the East side, those of the other side to fall on; and if they of the other side were Attack'd, we were to do the same. The Coll. the same time being the 4th. of this Instant received this following Letter from Mr. Davis, the Secretary, by Order of the Lords Justices, as followeth. Dublin-Castle, August the 1st. 1691. SIR, THE Lords Justices command me to acquaint you, that they receiv'd Yours of the 13th. and another from Major Ram∣sey of the 28th, and are very well satisfied with the Account you both have given of the Business of Sligoe, and glad of the good Success you had there; but the General having now taken other Methods concerning that place, you are not to make any further Attempt upon it without his Excellency, or the Lords Justices particular Order, which is by their Lordships Command, signified to you by, SIR, Your Humble Servant, John Davis. To Coll. John Michelburne at Ballyshannon, to be sent by the Post-Master of Eniskillin. John Davis.
By the foregoing Letter, you see Coll. Michelburne, notwith∣standing some Instructions from the Lords Justices to do what he thought necessary for Their Majesties Service; yet here is a positive Order both from them and the General, to make no further attempt on Sligoe, without their positive Orders, and the truth of it is, both he on this side, and those on Connaught side, were in no extraordinary secure post, but they might have been beaten off by the Garrison, had they been brisk, and as they ought to have been, and then considering the unruliness of the Militia, who were all their own Masters; for no sooner were they posted on any post, either on advance Guard near the Town, or Guards on far distance, in an hours time they were all gone; it cannot be thought but the Militia must be very dissa∣tisfied with Coll. Michelburne, who as they apprehend, came out for no other design than to get a Prey; for when he would find fault, and tell them he expected otherwise, and that what great concern the gaining of that place was; they made Answer, they came not to Besiege Towns, but to get Prey to stock their Lands. It was impossible to make the Militia do any thing, but the whole burthen lay on the poor Foot, and the two Troops of Dragoons standing Army, for it was not two Days, but the Militia Deserted their Posts on Connaught side. The Day following, Collonel Scott sends out a Drummer to beat a Parly, with the following Letter. Sligoe, August 4th. 1691. SIR,
I Find by your Letter to Sir Teague and me the 1st. Instant that you were much concern'd for the sad Condition of the poor People of this Countrey, which is likely to be ruin'd by both Parties, if not speedily prevented; you have here a parcel ofpoor Men, whom we keep here against their Wills, to be ser∣viceable to our Garrison; if you will give them your Protecti∣on for themselves and their Cattle, they are willing to go with them to your Quarters, according to the desire of your Govern∣ment, we giving them leave: I sent you such another Letter to the other side, but could not be answered, you being on this: Pray let me have your Answer by this Drummer. I am SIR, Your most Humble Servant, Edward Scott. To the Honourable Coll. John Michelburne. Perusing which Letter, I sent him this following Answer. Camp, August the 4th. 1691. SIR, I Received yours, and would willingly serve you, if Sir Teague would agree to what Proposals I made, and truly protecting your People would be a kindness; and if on your part you would let them enjoy their Harvest, would be another; both which your surrendring may compleat, by which means our Charity will extend to all. I am SIR, Your Humble Servant, John Michelburne.
I presently after received an Answer from Sir Teague, in these words. Sligoe, August 4th. 1691. SIR, I Have seen your Letter to Collonel Scott, and having consi∣dered it, I intend to call my Officers together, to resolve what proposals to take from, or make to you, in order to which I will after return of this Drummer, and your Compli∣ance, send you Collonel Scott, and one other Field Officer, to know your proposals, and time to consider of them with the rest of my Officers, as you and Coll. Scott, and the other Officers shall agree. Mean time I am SIR, Your most Humble Servant, Teague O Regan. To the Honourable Coll. John Michelburne. To which I sent this following Auswer.
SIR, HAving perused yours brought hither by your Drum for proposals, the Proclamation and Generals Letter must be my Guide, I am willing to meet Collonel Scott and the other Officers where you please, and am ready to Comply with what shall be Honourable on both sides. I am Sir, Your Most Humble Servant, John Michelburne. To Sir Teige O Regan. About this time, one Captain Forward, a leading Card to the rest of the Militia, quits his Post at midd time of day, with his whole Troop, and most presumtuously marches away: forces our out Guards, and while we were drawing Articles with the Garrison, Preys, Strips, and Plunders the Country without re∣guard to any Protection. In the mean time the whole Militia quits their Posts on Connaught side on their own accord, and their whole practice was to Raperee and Scamper Cows and Horses as they call it. As well the Prey that was lately got, as also from the protected People: we cannot altogether excuse the Souldiers, for some of them had their hands in as well as the Militia, but only they were under some better Command: but so it was that notwithstanding the Enemies Guards, and our Guards lay within half Musquet-shot one of another, yet no sooner was the Collonels back turn'd, but he found them Roguing amongst the Militia; and that which vext the Militia most, was that as fast as the Garrison of Sligoe forc'd their Cattle on our Ground, Collonel Michelburn forc'd them as fast back, knowing that for no other reason they came to Capitulate, but for the inconvenience they were put to, by the great num∣ber of Cattle that was about the Fort. Here follows a Let∣ter from the Lords Justices, which he received about the same time.
Dublin the 3d Aug. 1691. SIR, BY a Letter, which we received Yesterday from the Gene∣ral, we are told, that the Garison of Sligoe are upon some Treaty, for his Surrendring Sligoe into their Majesties hands; we having heard nothing of it from your self, cannot tell what Terms he Demands, or what you have Offred, but you may assure him of the intire benefit of the Proclamation, and if it be necessary you may also propose a reasonable reward: had we sooner known of it, you should have had earlyer Orders, for you cannot do the King greater Service, than to get that place into your possession: Therefore conclude with him as soon as possible you can. We are Your faithful Friend and Servant, Cha. Porter Tho. Coningsby. About noon, this day being the 4th. of Aug. the Governours beat a Parly, and this following was brought to Collonel Mie∣helburne. August 4th 1691. SIR, I Had yours, and shewed it to Sir Teige, who saith that he answer'd it, wherein you made some proposals for the Sur∣rendring this place, and so have I answered you to that pur∣pose, which was then put off till an Answer was had from our General, untill which time he can do nothing; and though I Pitty to see the poor people suffer by these Terms, yet to mend it I would not loose the least oppertunity of my serving my King, Therefore if you think their being preserved, may be of any use to the Publick good, it lies on you to preserve them,
it being for your profit if this Country be yours, and for your Credit if it be done in Charity. If this be approved of, Acts of Hostility ought to Cease till it be done, which requires but till to morrow Morning. I am SIR, Your Most Humble Servant, Edward Scot. To the Honourable Collonel John Mi∣chelburne. Which in these words I Answer'd. August 4th 1691. SIR, I Can say no more than I did before, and do not find that giving you leave to send an Officer to Limerick, was any restraint in persuing my design to block up this place, and for any Acts of Hostility that are between us, I think they are so small that they are hardly worth taking notice of. I am SIR, Your Most Humble Servant, John Michelburne. To Collonel Edward Scott. Thus we continued this night. Next day I received the fol∣lowing from Sir Tiege. Aug. 5th. SIR, WE are upon reduceing the Articles to four, therefore shall desire that you Command your Forces on both sides to retire to the several Posts they were in, when we began to Treate of a Capitulation. Yours Regan. To Collonel John Michelburne.
Now comes up to the Camp whole droves of idle People, especially the Lagganeers; and for one honest Man twenty Thieves, and not a man of the Militia but had two or three attenders, to run away with what Horses or Cattle they could Raparee or Scamper, as they call'd it. Esteeming all their own they laid their hands on, the Militia was now out of patience to have the prey divided, but the Collonel would not do it, for two Reasons, first, was that if they divided, every one of them would go home, by which means the Enemy would take advantage; the next was that as many of the Protected as could shew their Protections, he caused their Goods to be returned. One of the Certificats I think not amiss to men∣tion. WE the under named persons, being Protestants, and Inha∣bitants of the Barroney of Terreragh in the County of Sligoe, do Acknowledge to have received by the Order of Collonel Michelburne, one Hundred and Twenty Cows in full satisfaction of all the Horses and Sheep taken from us, and the rest of the Pro∣testants of the said Barrony and County (lately taken from us) by men under the Command of the said Collonel. The 6th of August 1691. At the Camp before Sligoe Witness present Pa∣trick Hamilton. Matthew Ormsby. Ja. Boyd. Dugall Boyd. John Shennan. Kath. Brown. John Ormsby. Matthew Ratleidge. Ann Griffeth. This was drawn by Mr. Patrick Hamilten. Attorney of Killetre. One hundred and Sixty was delivered to some of the Irish Gen∣demen that were protected, by an account given in by Captain Caldwell, and Captain Boyd, they producing Certisicates, from the said persons.
To go on with our former Discourse in the Letter from the Lords Justices to the Collonel, who as they tell him that he cannot do the King greater Service than to get that place into his possession, and so orders him to conclude with them as soon as possible. This Letter, with those of Sir Teigs and Col∣lonel Scotts, considering the Confusion, Distraction and Disor∣ders that were in the Camp by ungovernable people, such as has to deal with the Laggan Militia, must needs give just cause to conclude with the Besieged. And the next day being the 6th of August, the following Articles were Signed and Sealed between Sir Teige O Regan of one Part, and Collonel John Mi∣chelburne of the other Part. Articles of War agreed to by the Honourable Sir Teige O Regan Knight, and the rest of the Officers of the Garrison of Sligoe, of the one Part, and the Honou∣rable Collonel John Michelburne, in the behalf of himself, his General and the rest of his Army, of the other Part. 1st. THAT all the said Garrison, viz. Governours, Officers, Souldiers, Ingineers, Gunners, Gunsmiths, Bakers, Chaplains and all others that have a mind to go Craights or other, shall have their lives secured, and March out with their Arms, Baggs and Baggage; Drums beating, Collours stying, Match lighted, Bullets in their Mouths, each Officer and Souldier twelve Charges of Powder, with Match and Ball proportionable, and their Horses and Cowes as well belonging to them respectively, as the Garrison in general, without any Molestation; and at their several and respective Elections their Wives, Friends and Cattle to be protected in any part of the Country, as well as any other person whatsoever.
2dly. That the said Garrison may march the Nearest and best way, at their own Elections into the Citty or Town of Lim∣rick, and from thence to what place they please, and not to be compelled to march above Eight miles a Day or Nine, or to march from hence to what other place they please, at their own Elections. 3dly. That all Sick and Wounded Officers, Souldiers and other persons that are not able to march at present may remain in the Town of Sligoe, till able to march, then to have a Pass for to go where they have a mind to, and in the mean time to be sub∣sisted by the Garrison for the time being. 4thly. That none of our Army shall enter into any of the two Forts of Sligoe, Except such as shall be appointed by the said Collonel John Michelburne to take Possession of the same un∣till the Garrison be Marched clear out of the Gates. 5thly. That the said Forts shall be put into the possession of such Forces as the said Collonel John Michelburne shall thing fit, at Eight of the Clock, the Fifteenth day of this Instant August, at which hour the said Garrison shall march out; the Hour before the outward Gates shall be delivered to such Forces as the said Collonel John Michelburne shall appoint, in case relief do not come by that time to the said Garrison: and in case Galway be surrendred, and not otherwise. 6thly. That the said Governour and his said Garrison shall be allowed to Cary with them two Pieces of Cannon, with Hor∣ses and other Conveniencies of Carrying them, together with two Luggage for each Company, and three for the Governour, with one Truckle Car for each Company, all this to be supplied by the said Collonel John Michelburne.
7thly. That all such Persons, Parties, or Companies, of the re∣spective Regiments of the said Garison, not now here, shall be allow∣ed to come hither, or join the said Regiments, in their said March, after the surrender of the said Garison. 8thly. That all Persons taken Prisoners by any of our Army, or Voluntiers, that any way belonged to any of the said Regiments of the said Garison, or any other Person, or Persons, belonging to the said Garison, now in restraint with us, shall be forth-with set at Liberty, before the surrender of the said Garison, and safely con∣veyed thereunto. 9thly. That such of the Inhabitants of the said Town of Sligoe, as have a mind to continue there, shall be protected in their Bodies, Liberties, and Goods; and shall have sree liberty to exercise, or use their several Trades and Occupations, as formerly, and the People of the Country in like manner. 10thly. That all the Clergy of the said Town, that have a mind to stay, shall be also protected in their Bodies, Liberties, and Goods, and shall have free liberty to exercise their Function; and the Cler∣gy of the County accordingly. 11thly. That there shall be a sufficient Effort appointed and sent with the said Garison, to convey them to the place above-men∣tioned. 12thly. That one Officer from the said Collonel John Michel∣burne, and another from the said Garison shall be sent to General Ginkel, who in the presence of the said two Officers, shall confirm all the things in these Presents mentioned, and the Confirmation be∣fore the said surrender.
13thly. That all, and singular, the above mentioned Articles, shall be inviolable performed on both sides, without any Equivocation,mental Reservation, or Fraud whatsoever, according to the true in∣tent and meaning thereof. 14thly. That all Acts of Hostility shall cease betwixt the said Garison; and our Army, assoon as notice may be given on both sides. 15thly. That the said Governour and Garison, shall use the Town Posture, and all other Privileges and Advantages, in the same, or thereabouts, in as ample and free a manner as hitherto, and that un∣til the surrender aforesaid. 16thly. That the said Governour, Officers, and Soldiers, Gari∣son, Town, and Country of Sligoe, shall have the benefit of all, and singular other advantagious Articles, that Gallway, or any other got, in case it was surrendred; in true performance of all and singular the Premisses, forth-with they do respectively pawn their Honours, both Parties having hereunto interchangeably put their Hands and Seals, at the Castle near Sligoe, this sixth day of August, One Thou∣sand Six Hundred Ninety and One. Teige O Regan. John Michelburne. Camp at Nenah, Aug. 10. 1691. I do approve of the fore-going Articles, agreed upon by Collonel Michilburne, and Sir Teige O Regan, for the surrender of Sligoe, except the last, which I confine to those who are actually now in the said Town and Garison, it not being my In∣tention to extend Their Majesties Grace and Favour to such who have done them no Service, nor made no Application to me for it. Bar. de Ginkell.
The Articles were now signed and sealed, and sent away with Major Hamilton: and Lieutenant Scot, Coll. Scot's Brother, was commanded by the Garison, to see the General sign, and seal: Likewise, now began a Discourse of O Donnel's Men, commonly called Ballderrog, coming to relieve — which made Collonel Michelburne give strict Orders for securing Balli∣sadeare-Bridge, three Miles from the Camp, the Enemy having no other way to come to the Town: The Militia began now to be very weary of the Campaigne, and were very pressing to have the Prey divided, thinking now there was no more to do, but to go home, since Articles were signed and sealed. The Collonel told them, that he expected more to join, for that the Expresses that went to the General, would soon be back; and that it would be but eight Days, and the Town would be sur∣rendred. The Camp was now like a Fair, Buying and Selling, Robbing and Stealing the Sheep in the Night, and killing them for their Skins. The Collonel was advised to divide the Prey, or else he would have none left; the very Officers and Soldiers that was Guard of the Cattle, selling them in the Night. The Collonel was for selling some of them, and sending for Meal to make Bread, and those that would not stay, should have none: but the Officers were against it, as well as the Soldiers: The Collonel ordered Capt. William Stewart, to make a Dividend, the whole being counted, were 585. To each of the 7 Troops Militia 25. 175. Capt. Caldwel's Troop of Dragoons 34. Capt. Nesbitt's Troop 25. To the Detachment of 13 Companies Foot, 25 each C. 325. Capt. Ash's Militia Foot Company 13. Capt. Henderson 12.   585.
It be'ng late that Night when the Cattle were divided, Capt. Coningham, and Capt. Bickerstaffe, were ordered on the Guard, with 20 Men, being all that could be spared, considering the several Guards, and the Main Guard, kept in the Fort called Rabaceane: For although there was a Truce, 'till a return from the General, yet the Collonel kept almost as strict Guards then, as before, not suffering any of the Enemy to come into the Camp: About an Hour or two in the Night, about two Hun∣dred of the Militia forces the Guard that was on the Cows, and drives all away; strips, plunders, and robs all before them, as well those the Collonel had protected, as those that belonged to the Town: In this distracted confusion, the Collonel was forced to double his Guards; and had his Men at their Arms all Night. This following Certificate is signed by the Officers that were on Guard with the Cattle. WE do Certifie, That being Commanded by our Collonel, with 20 Men, to Guard the Cattle, the Militia, being in num∣ber about 2 Hundred, did force our Guards, and drove away all the Prey of Cows, that was then under our Charge. Given under our Hand, this 9th. Day of Aug. 1691. Michael Coningham. Richard Bickerstaffe. Here follows a Complaint by many, of Outrages committed by Capt. Forward, and others of the Militia, who, we told you before, deserted Coll. Michelburne, and with his whole Troop, and others joining him, to the number of 80 Horse, plundered the whole Country. SIR,
I Make bold to acquaint you of several Outrages committed by some of those under your command, in this County, e∣specially by Capt. Forward, who without pity of the Poor, or respect to Their Majesties Proclamation, took a Party with him, who plundered, stripp'd, and preyed all the protectedPersons they met with, either in this County, or towards Boyle, and took a black, cropt, pacing Gelding of mine, mark'd I. C. from an Officer, who at Major Hamilton's request, I sent as well to secure him from the Raparees, as to guide him the way to Boyle, the Officer having much ado to escape himself, leaving him my Horse. This is left to your serious consideration, by SIR, Your humble Servant, James O Conner. To Coll. John Michelburne, Governour at Ballyshanan. SIR, I Had your Honour's Protection and Certificate, of claiming the benefit of the Lords Justices Proclamation, and a Cer∣tificate from Gilbert Ormsby, my Land-lord, in being included in his Protection from the General, and lived within the Line of Boyle; yet Captain Forward, and his Troop, has took our Beasts, only restoring a few Head; and therefore I humbly pro∣strate my felf for Justice, and pray the Cattle may be delivered us. I am Your Humble Servant Jasper Brett. I received another from Sir Teige, to the same purpose. SIR, I Need not reccommend to you, to send a safe Convoy along with Mr. Brett, to secure any Cattle you return him, or a∣ny thing else of the poor Peoples, preyed by Captain Forward, 'till they come on this side of the Grange; they are satisfied, that what is restored, be given to Mr. Brett. This is all from Your very humble Servant Tiege O Regan. To Coll. John Michelburne.
We continued three days after the Militia left us, and thought when they were gone, we should remain quiet and peaceably within the Town; but then, as well as before, we were conti∣nually disturb'd in the Night, by Murthers and Out-crys, com∣mitted by some of the Militia, that probably had not got their proportions, or at least had sent them home, and was hunting for more: The Garison of Sligoe was also continually disturb'd, as appears by the following Letters. Collonel Ternon O Rourk's Letter. SIR, I Was unwilling to be often importuning you for my Horses; I will only desire you will imploy some one to make search for them; the marks are three bob tail'd Geldings, of 14 hand∣fuls heighth, a black Gelding of 15 handfulls. I protest I would not take 30 l. for them; though I am certain they were of no advantantage to your self. I am, SIR, Your most humble Servant Ternon O Rourke. Sligoe, Aug. the 7th. 1691. SIR, I Am weary of troubling you with so many Complaints; the Bearer hereof, Cavell O Dollane, Owen Mac Laughlin, and Torlogh Cullaine, have lost all their Cows, Horses, and Baggages they tell me that Captain Caldwel was there present. I send them to you, that you may be pleas'd to surrender their things to them, being taken in time of a Parley. I am, SIR, Your humble Servant Edward Scot.
Sligoe, Aug. 10. 1691. SIR, ACcording to the Incouragement you sent me, by Laughlin Githaly, I have sent a great number of my Followers, in order to take Protections, but it unluckily happened to them, contrary to my expectation, they were all preyed, their Pro∣tections not regarded, but it seems rather worse for them to be Protected, than otherwise: Forty of my Followers are not left worth a Groat, the same Night they were Protected: Yet I am extream sensible, that all these disorders were committed un∣known to you; this Day I have sent one of my Nurses, in or∣der that she should be returned of what she, and my other Forsterers lost, whom I hope you will receive into considerati∣on, and grant her Satisfaction, in her insupportable loss; otherways we may have just reason to deem your Protection su∣perficial; both my Forsterers lost 70 Cows together, with some Horses and Mares. I am Your Friend and Servant Ternon O Rourke. To the Hon. Coll. John Michel∣burne, Gov. of Ballyshanan. These Letters, with many more, the Collonel has to pro∣duce, intimating the sad Disorders and Abuses committed by those of the Militia, and others, their Associates; and to satis∣fie Collonel Scott, who was very importuning for his Horses, he sends him this following Letter. Camp before Sligoe, Aug. 10. 1691. SIR,
I Received yours, and have used all my Endeavours to find your Horses; and whosoever stole them, I suppose knew how to convey them away, without keeping them in the Camp, and you, and the other Gentlemen, must rest satisfied: but this I will promise you, when the Fort is surrendred, which is now but six Days to come, they shall have satisfaction in Money, so far as they in reason can expect: But as for you, and CollonelRourke, I brought out of England five Geldings, two of which shall be at your Service, and I do promise you shall be sa∣tisfied for the rest, which I suppose is satisfaction enough. Believe me Gentlemen, notwithstanding I have sent my Troops of the Militia 4 or 5 Miles off to Grase, I can soon send for them back. I am, Your humble Servant, John Michelburne. Pray do me the kindness that the Drum may bring me some Paper. Collonel Scott sends imediately this Answer. Sligoe the 10th of Aug. 1691. SIR, I Had yours just now, and am sorry that you should think me so mean that for my Horses, I should break off of what I gave my Honour, for I meant the continual oppression of your Army, on the poor near out Guards, whereby both Parties might fall fowl one of another, but now the occasion is removed by your Removal, and then you shall see that I am not the man you Mention, had I been, I know very well where I might break my Faith with advantage to my Party, but I am no such man. What made me make mention of my Horses so often, was, because I thought 'twas easier for you to get the Horses returned to me, than to pay the value of them you never saw. So from this hour I will say no more of them, but leave all to your self, only to Morrow I will send you their number and colour: if there be any Paper in this Town, that I can come to, you shall have it. I am SIR, Your most humble Servant, Edward Scott. Lieutenant Dunbar, who was sent by the Collonel; as also an Officer from the Garrison, with Letters to the Lord Tyr∣conuel and Earl of Lucan, but to be perused first by the Gene∣ral; Returned back this day with a Letter from the General (viz).
The Generals Letter from the Camp at Birr, Aug. 4th, 1691. SIR, I Send you back the Letters you inclosed, from the Gover∣nour of Sligoe, and can by no means Agree to the Messen∣gers going to Limrick to ask my Lord Tyrconnel's consent whether he shall deliver up the place; this is more than I granted to Galway, for they absolutely agreed to Surrender in four days, and only were permitted to let them know it. We are not now in a Condition to court people to do them∣selves a Service, for Limrick and Sligoe are the only places that are not under their Majesties Obedience; if the place be forth-with deliver'd up into your hands I will still make good the Condi∣tions I promised to Sir Teige, if not he must take what follows, for it will be too late to expect favour. I am, SIR, Your most humble Servant, Bar de Ginkel. To Collonel Michelburne at LBallyshanan. Collonel Michelburns Letter to Sir Teige, on the Receipt of the Generals Letter. SIR, BY the Inclosed Letter from the General you may see his po∣sitive Demand of the Fort, and his performing the Con∣ditions he promised you formerly, which was the same Imploy∣ment confer'd on you, you now have; as also what other sa∣tisfaction you would in reason desire. Your Original Letter I will send you to peruse if you desire it, but I do not question but you took a Copy of it, on your first Treaty. Your An∣swer to this. I am, SIR, Your humble Servant John Michelburne.
Sir Teige's Answer. Sligoe Aug. the 10. 1691. SIR, I Had yours of the 9th Instant, together with the Generals Letter inclosed for his positive demand and promise to per∣form the condition he offered: I know of none he offered other than in General tearms, since which time you and I came to particulars. Whereof you have a part and I another, which was transmitted to him to be confirmed, of which we expect soon a return, so that what you have under my Hand and Seal already is answer enough from, SIR, Your Most Humble Servant, Teige O Regan. Collonel Scotts Letter. Sligoe the 10th of Aug. 1691. SIR, I Had yours, and that I might dispatch your Drum the sooner I writ on the back of your Letter, and do therein send the Generals Letter. I am sorry you should think me or any of us here so Madd or Cowardly, as to surrender such a place as this with such precipitation. I will always do what an honest man ought to do, no persuasion will make me do otherways, when your Major and my Brother comes back I will willing∣ly meet you half way, in the mean time pray be pleased to Order the Releasement of the Priests at Ballyshanan. I send you the Number Colour and Marks of my Horses; I will as∣sure you that I had rather have them than sixty Pounds, if you find that I ought to get them. I leave them to your self, who am, SIR, Your most humble Servant, Edward Scott.
In this Affair you may see how the Militia behaved themselves, for of Twelve Troops of Dragoons and two Companies of Foot, all forsook us but Sir Francis Hamilton, Charles Hamil∣ton, Captain William Stuart, and Capt. John Hamilton; and all of the private Men, unless as many as served for a Guard for those Gentlemen. And if Sir Francis Hamilton and the other Gentlemen could not influence them to stay, it was impossible Collonel Michelburne should, that was a stranger amongst them. This Discourse has been the more tedious, by reason some malicious people of the Militia, to cover their own guilt, have endeavoured to Asperse and Villifie the Collonel, by seve∣ral false Informations given in against him to the Government. This day being the 10th of August, Col. Michelburne drew off his Detachment on Connaught side of Sligoe: (Occasion'd by Ballderrog O Donnel's Advance to relieve the Town) and joyn'd them with those of Ballyshanan side, and call'd his Of∣ficers together where was considred, The strength of O Donnel's Party, which was computed to be 3000 well Armed men, as also the Garrison consisting of near 1000. Of our side, considering the 12 Troops of Dragoons and two Foot Companys of the Militia that left us, we were in no way able to make a defence, meeting with so much disincou∣ragement; and that we were but a handful in comparison of the Enemy. The strength we had then not exceeding four Hun∣dred: 'twas agreed the next morning to march back to Bally∣shanan, and return with a stronger Body than formerly, for the Malitia would no question, but be very ambitious to see the Surrender of the Town and Fort of Sligoe. So on the 10th Instant, the Collonel broke up Bamp, and that Night march to Ballyshanan. This is the end of the second Expediton made against Sligoe.
Collonel Michelburne arrives at Ballyshanan the 10th of Aug. at night, and sends a way Expresses to all the Militia near him, to be ready on the 14th instant to joyn him, and got all things in a readiness, as was agreed on by the Articles signed and Sealed between Sir Teige and him; he also sends Expresses for 300 more of his own Foot, and this following Order to Major Tieburne and Cornt Mead Supervizors of the Militia in Ʋlster. By vertue of an Order to me Directed by the Right Hono∣rable the Lords Justices, for commanding the Militia of the Province of Ʋlster, I will and require that you march with as many Horse and Foot as you can get together, by Friday the 14th of this Instant, and joyn me with the rest of the Militia commanded by Sir Francis Hamilton, together with the rest of the standing Army, in order to receive the Garrison and Forts of Sligoe, and to march farther into the Country as it shall be necessary for their Majesties service. They are to bring with them six days Provision of Bread, and for other Provisions there will be care taken. Given at Ballyshanan the 11th of August 1691. John Michelburne. To Major Tichburne Com∣manding the Militia of Ga∣van, and Coronet Joseline Mead Commanding at Eni∣skillin.
Collonel Michelburne was very desirous to know if Ballder∣reg O Donnell was arrived at Sligoe with his Brigade as was re∣ported, and therefore sends away a Drum with some Letters from the Prisons of Londonderry, and a Letter to Collonel Scott, giving him an account that as soon as Forward returned from Preving the Country. Those that belonged to him should have satisfaction; that is, they should have either their Goods return∣ed, or else be satisfied in Money so far as it lay in his power; but as yet he was not returned. But however he could not for∣bear telling him how unkindly he took it in endevouring to bring O Donnell to raise his Camp, and that in a few days he would return with such a strength that it should not lye in O Donnells power to releive them: andthat it was not Gentiel to send a Lieutenant with a Major to General Ginkel, when it was agreed on when the Articles were signed, that a Major should go with a Major, to see the General Sign and Seal. He gave the Drummer Likewise half a Guinea to be delivered to Capt. M. Sherry, who was a noted Robber and a Captain in Collonel Terron O Rourke's Regiment in Sligoe. Collonel Michelburne had a correspondence with the said Capt. M. Sherry, who had ingaged to come off with his whole Com∣pany, as soon as he met with a conveniency. Here follows Lieutenant Collonel M. Donnaghs Letter. Sliegoe Aug. 11th. SIR, IN my Collonels absence I open'd yours to him, and have sent to those whose Cattle were made a prey by Captain For∣ward, some of whom will wait on you; as for our sending to O Donnell to fall upon your Camp while before Sligoe, nothing is more false: Neither would we wish that you or yours were touched here during our League, but you will give us leave to wish your Retireing; after which we sent rather to prevent O Donnells comming hither, than to invite him; and that chief∣ly for fear he should destroy our Cows and Provision. How∣ever he is a Brigadeer of our Army, and he may do in that what he pleases. You have our Governours answer as to your Ge∣nerals demand, and for sending a Lieutenant for a Major, Ma∣jor Hamilton is our Witness that our Major intended for the journey, but being taken ill, we put the matter to Major Ha∣milton, and it was by his consent that Lieutenant Scott went with him, for the Major that was not able to go, This is no matter of Substance I hope to take exceptions at. My Collo∣nel when he comes home will satisfie you farther, in the mean time I am, SIR, Your most humble Servant, Ternon M. Donnagh. To Collonel John Michelburne Governour at Ballyshanan.
The Drumer returned with the above mentioned Letter, and withal was assured that Ballderrog was incamped within three miles of Sligoe: a Spie the Collonel had abroad brought this fol∣lowing account. A true Account of the Forces under the Command of Ballderrog O Donnell, Brigadeer M. K. James's Army. Regiments of Foot. THE Lord Ballderrog O Donnell, new Arms from Limricke. Collonel Donnell Oge O Donnel, some few Arms. Collonel Connell O Donnell, Ballderrogs Brother indfferent well in Order. Collonel Shawn Oge M. Swine, no Arms. Collonel Cannus O Donnel, about a 100 Matchlocks. Collonel Ternon Oge O Roarke, good Arms. Horse. Major D'la More, Captain of Horse, formerly in Lutterells Re∣giment. Dragoons. Captain Shawn O Donnell, 1 Troop 50 Captain Torlough M. Swine, 1 Troop 50 The 13th and 14th the several Detachments from Bellurbit Cavan, Eniskillin, and Killybeggs, of Collonel Michelburns Re∣giment joyned at Ballyshanan, so that he had of his own Regi∣ment about 600, and 2 Troops of the Army.
Here you may see the great difference between Preying and doing the King Service. This was a time if ever they would have their Country cleared they might. But tho Sir Fran Hamilton Governour of the County did all what possiable he could do, it could not oblige the Militia to leave their dwellings, not∣withstanding the Country paid them twelve pence a day. For of twelve Troops, and two Companys of Militia that appeared out of one County, when they understood they were going to get Prey; now the Kings service is to be done, and the Town to be Surrendered, no more than 4 Troops appears, to witt, Captain Charles Hamiltons, Capt. William Stewarts, andCaptain Hamiltons of Murvough, and one Troop commanded by Captain Erwine out of Formannagh. This day the Collonel receives an Express from the Lords Justice. Porter as fol∣loweth. Dublin Castle, the 5th of Aug. 1691. SIR, IN the absence of my Lord Coningsby, who is at the Camp. I received yours of the 6th. Instant, directed to us both, wherein you give us an account that Sligoe hath capitula∣ted, with a Copy of the Articles, which you have done well in, to send the General to be Ratified, where my Lord Conings∣by will be sure to meet them. What you apprehend of Ball∣derrogs coming to relieve Sliego, you need not give your self any further trouble or concern for, he having so Capitulated for himself and his Party, that there is a perfect Cessation of Arms between us and them; however since you desire assistance from the Counties of Mannoghan, and Formannegh, I now dis∣patch away Orders to the Governours of those Counties to march all the Militia, that can possible be spared out of both, towards Sligoe, with eight days Provision of Bread to your as∣sistance, with directions to observe your Orders when there. Collonel Venners Regiment is marched to the Camp, so as the remainder of your Regiment cannot be relieved by any of them as you suppose; but I hope since Ballderrog hath submitted, there will be no occasion. You must press Horses and Cars to carry off the Cannon and Baggage, pursuant to your capitula∣tion; they cannot be expected hence, and my Lord Coningsby who commands the Treasury being in the Camp, I know not how to send you Mony, but if their be occasion you must find a way to take it up from some of the Collectors of their Majesties Revenues nearest to you, or otherwise; and it shall be allowed them upon their Accounts, or otherwise be Re-en∣bursed to you. I am SIR, Your very very humble Servant, Charles Porter.
The day for the Surrender was the 15th. of August. Collonel Michelburne exactly according to the time appointed, marches the 14th. and Incamped at Burindruse, along the River side, 4 Miles from Ballyshanon, and 16 from Sligoe, and begins his march by break of day, the next morning; about 11, he comes before Sligoe, but on his way, he halted at the Grange, and sent Captain Shenbarge to Sir Teige, with this following Let∣ter. From the Grange, Aug. 15. 1691. SIR, I Hope this will find my Major, and Lieutenant Scott, return∣ed with the Ratification of the Articles from General Gin∣kell, which we signed between us: I am now on my March to Sligoe, and hope all things will answer our Expectation. The Bearer hereof, Captain Shenbarge, I have sent to wait on you. I am SIR, Your humble Servant John Michelburne. To the Hon. Sir Teige O Regan Knight, Governour of Sligoe. Sir Teige's Answer. SIR, I Had yours just now, and do answer it on back of your own, that you may not wait for an answer. Your Major, Major Hamilton, is returned, and the Officer I sent with the Articles, not altogether confirmed by the General Ginkell: However, I would agree to the Articles signed, but that my Ld. O Donnel, a Brigadier of our Army, is come with a strong Brigade, who if he stands by us, alters all Affairs, for 'tis a Relief, if he make it so: Therefore I think you and he, were best to appoint a place where to meet, and discourse the Mat∣ter;
for it does not lye in my power to yield a place as this is, if he stick to me. You will find me always fair in my dealing, who am, SIR, Your most humble Servant Teige O Regan. To the Honourable Coll. John Michelburne. About three a Clock, Major Hamilton, and Lieutenant Scott, came to the Camp; Lieutenant Scott excusing, as much as pos∣sible, the Garison, for that Sir Teige, and the rest, had great desire to perform the Articles, had not Ballderrog intermedled. Here follows the General's Letter, sent by Major Hamilton, when he returned with the Articles signed by the General. Camp at Nenagh, Aug. 10. 1691. SIR, I Have sent you back my Confirmation of the Articles of Sli∣goe, as far as I thought fit, it not being reasonable to take those in who are not in a state of doing any Service, as for the rest of that County, if you find they will submit, and desire Protection, you may give them assurance they shall have it, and I will grant it them, upon having their Names sent to me. As for any civility you can show to the Garison, it would be best to use it; and for any Horses that have been taken, during the Capitulation, if they may be had, pray restore them.
I suppose you know that Ballderrog O Donnel has submitted: I directed him to join you, and endeavour the reducement of Sligoe, which your good Fortune has already brought to sub∣mission: I have directed him to hold Correspondence with you; and told him, That you shall pay him from me two hundred Guineys, which the Pay-Master-General will return you for him; if he calls upon you before it comes, and you have so much Money ready by to command, pray let him have it; if not, assure him, that it shall be paid as soon as it comes down: If any of the Garison can be persuaded to come in, I would have you buy their Arms of them; and such of the Officers ashave a mind to serve, let them come to me, and I will imploy them; and in the mean time, for incouraging them, I desire you will give each Captain 5 l. each Lieutenant 3 l. and each En∣sign 2 l. which I will re-pay you; and 'till they are put in Ser∣vice, they shail have half Pay. I am SIR, Your very humble Servant Bar. de Ginkell. To Coll. Michelburne, This Letter from the General gave great Incouragement to the Collonel, doubting nothing now, but that Sligoe would be in our hands; in the mean time comes a Messenger from the Lord O Donnel, desiring the Collonel to appoint a place be∣tween the Town and the Camp: He returned an answer, He would meet his Lordship where he pleas'd to appoint, and that when he was ready, he would attend him. Soon after Ballder∣rog O Donnel appears, with about ten Horse; the Collonel ad∣vanced with about the same number, and with him, Sir Francis Hamilton, Cornet Mead, Captain Charles Hamilton, &c. The Lord O Donnel's Speech tending to this effect. That he did not deny but that there was a Treaty between Gene∣ral Ginkell and himself; but he was not come to any Conclusion as yet, and that he expected very good Terms, as well for his Followers, as for himself; and that as the Garison of Sligoe was in dispute, he thought it would be necessary that a middle Person, meaning him∣self, be put in possession; and that Collonel Michelburne should per∣form Articles with Sir Teige, and conduct him safe to Lymerick; and that in ten, or fifteen days time, he would deliver up the Fort to him, or whoever General Ginkell should appoint.
The Collonel told him, He understood that Sir Teige O Re∣gan was capable, and of Authority sufficient to make good the Articles that was between them; if he could not, Why was there not a clause in the Articles? The Collonel soon per∣ceivedthat the Garison and he were in dispute, for they abso∣lutely deny'd him possession. O Donnel, and Collonel Michel∣burne riding aside, the Collonel told him, That according to the General's Letter, he understood that he was to assist him in re∣ducing the Garison, if in case they prov'd obstinate; so that he presum'd 'twas his business to persuade them to surrender to him, and not to take possession for himself, which did not answer at all the General's Letter, and gave O Donnel the General's Letter to read, and that nothing should be wanting on the General's side, wherein was mentioned the paying him two hundred Gui∣neys, which he should have in a day or two's time. O Donnel made answer, That he would consult Sir Teige, and return an answer the next day in the Morning. So returning to the rest of the Officers; the Collonel treated O Donnel with some Sherry and Usquebath, and parted. The next Day Collonel Michelburne met O Donnel at the place appointed, and after some discourse they rid off. The Collonel delivered him 100 Guineys, and promised him in a day or two's time, to pay him the remainder, according to the General's Orders, and desired to know what he resolved upon, for that Sir Teige was ready to surrender the Fort, if he would agree to it. His answer was, That 'till his People had conditi∣ons as well as himself, he would not at all agree that Sir Teige should deliver up the Fort. Coll. Michhlburne wondred strange, and told him, That he which should assist, if occasion was, to oblige them to Surrender, was the only Man that obstructed it; he desir'd that he would draw his Forces from the Town, and let him, and the Garison, try Titles. He answered, not at all, and if he would agree, his People would not allow it, but take part with the Garison; but withal told the Colonel, That assoon as he he had made an end with Collonel Richards, he would then come and assist him to reduce the place. So they parted, and O Donnel went to his Camp: By the discord that was between Sir Teige O Regan and O Donnel, the Collonel was still in hopes something might be done with Sir Teige; he therefore sends a Drumer into Town, with Letters to this effect.
SIR, BY your Letters, bearing date the 15th. of this Instant, which refers all to the Lord O Donnel, Brigadier of your Army, to act for you; I wonder in all our Treaty, when we signed and sealed Articles, he was not so much as mentioned, and then not far from you: I understand you deny him entrance into the Town, with any of his Men, as also possession of the Fort; so that you will do with him, and me, no farther than to ad∣vantage your unjust dealing: I do not understand how you can make his coming to you a Releif; you are sensible he has made Conditions with General Ginkell, and has taken a hundred Gui∣neys from me, by order of the General, in part of his Pay, due to him in our Service; and if he be in our Service, as it plainly appears, 'tis no — Relief, and the Articles are still in force. SIR, Your humble Servant, John Michelburne. I desire 20 Cows for my Money, for Provision for my Men, which pray order. Sir Teige's second Letter, in Answer to Coll. Michelburnes, second Letter. SIR,
I Had your by the Drummer: As to the leaving all to my Lord O Donnel, I do not design any such thing; but being a Brigadier of our Army, we might expect to be relieved by him. As to the Capitulation agreed upon, we are willing to Surrender this place to you accordingly; but we expect that your part of it shall be performed also, that is, to get us the Horses, and all things mentioned in the Articles towards our Marching; together with the Horses that have been taken from Collonel Scott, and other Officers of the Garison: If you have not a mind to delay, let this be done, and then you will find how we are inclin'd; and without which, we will not Surren∣der;which we will justifie before any General: And the Pri∣soners you promised to Collonel Scott, and mentioned in the Articles, are not yet set at Liberty. I have no Cows, but am willing you should buy so many Cows for your Men, as you think necessary, and may send any Man to buy them. I am Your very humble Servan Tiege O Regan. To Coll. John Michelburne. The Collonel did not much dislike this Letter, and there fore sends his Major into Town, to acquaint them, that all things were in a readiness; and for their Horses that were taken from them in time of our Parley, when the Articles were signed, he would pay for them, according to his promise; and for the Pri∣soners, it is a solly for them to think that he would part with them, 'till they perform Articles with him. The Collonel thought how he was in a fair way of closing up all; but whilst the Ma∣jor and they were discoursing, O Donnel arrives from the Camp, and to satisfie them in their doubts, signs this following Certificate. I Do Certifie upon my Honour, That my sole intent in Marching the Forces under my Command to this place, was intirely to re∣lieve the Garison of Sligoe; and notwithstanding whatsoever Treaty past betwen General Ginkell, and my self, it was purely to delay the Affair in this Juncture, and to forward K. J. Interest: And I do promise and ingage to stick by you, against any Force Ge∣neral Ginkell shall send. Given under my Hand at Sligoe, this 18th. August, 1691. O Donnel. This is the Contents of what was produc'd to me, under the hand of my Lord O Donnel, by Coll. Scott, at Sligoe, when we parted. Given under my Hand, this 18th August, 1691. John Hamilton.
As soon as this was done, all things were broke off, the Ma∣jor returned to the Camp, the Garison began to be very Inso∣lent, and sent word to remove our Camp, or else they would beat us out of it, disdaining the smallness of our number, they having 10 to 1. The Collonel made answer, That he would remove when he pleas'd; and that in few days he would come and beat them out of the Fort. About one a Clock he ordered the Tents to be taken down, and the Baggage to march in the Front, and the Foot to March in the Rear of the Baggage, and about an Hour after, the Collonel brought up the Rear, having with him four Troops of Horse, and two Troops of Dragoons: That Night they Incamped at Mullonghmore, 10 Miles from Sli∣goe; and the next day came to Ballyshanan. This is the end of the third Journey Collonel Michelburne made against Sligoe. That Night he sends away this following Letter, by an Ex∣press to the General, as also one to the same Effect to the Lords Justices. SIR,
MY Major, whom I sent with the Articles to your Excel∣lney to be signed, returned on the 14th. The Town was to be delivered the next Morning: I sent Sir Teige the inclosed, who answered mine on the back; and according to Sir Teige's desire, I diseours'd Ballderrog, called amongst them my Lord O Donnel, who signified by his Discourse, That as the Garison was in dispute, his advice was, That a middle Person, meaning h mself, between both, be placed in the Town and Fort, and withal did acknowledge, that there had been some Treaty be∣tweenhim and General Ginkel in behalf of Himself and Followers; and if I would condescend, he would be put in possession of the Town and Forts, and I to perform Articles to conduct the said Garrison to Limrick; I told him as to any thing else, I was ready to serve his Lord∣ship, but my business there was to performe Articles with the Garrison, and I expected they would do the same with me; after some discourse, I rid off with Ballderrog, and shew'd him your Excellencies Letter, and presented him with one hundred Guineas of the two hundred your Excellency order'd me to pay him, and the other hundred should be at his Lordships Service in a day or two. His discourse was still to be in possession of the Garrison: I told him your Letter mention'd no more than to joyn me in case they were Refra∣ctory. And since there was no occasion, either his saying he would not relieve them or drawing off his men would be suf∣ficient; I put it to him to know if he came there to relieve or not, and to know whether he was our Friend or Enemy; he told me next morning he would give me full satis faction, in every thing. I desired then there might be a Cessation of Arms. My Lord Ballderrog went that night to the Camp; early in the morning I sent the second Letter to Sir Teige, whose An∣swer is inclosed, and finding him so inlinable, I sent my Major to compound all those little Businesses between us, and to satis∣fie them fully in money, but when he came there, unexpected he found the Lord Ballderrog who sent away the Major immediately to me, to meet his Lordship between the two Lines, where we again met, and after some discourses we again rid off: he told me that he was so far ingag'd to K. William, that he could not with Honour break off, but however several of his Officers ex∣pected good Terms, and as much advantage as others; I told him that the Surrender of the Garrison to me, would be no hin∣drance, for that you were easier dealt with by fair means than foul, and that I must acquaint you that he was the only per∣son that did obstruct the Surrender, and appeared our open Enemy, after tasting so largly of your favours. He told me he could not agree to the Surrender till his Officers were satisfiedas well as himself. I have sent inclosed an Instrument of Ballder∣rogs, without which they would have surrendred; when the Major saw his falseness to your Excellency, and taking money and yet acting as an open Enemy, he gave Sir Teige and Col. Scott an account of his ingagement to you, and his receiving money from me. They blest themselves and said he was a Knave on both sides. The Militia of this Line are every one gone of their own accord home, and I have only these two Troops to assiste me, in this forty miles distance. I was forced to take them with me to Sligoe, intending to send them the nearest way to Athlone, in case the Garison of Sligoe had sur∣rendred in pursueance to your Excellencies Potent. If you would be pleased to continue them with me, they are of great service in Scouting, comning Expresses, &c. And if your Excellency please to cause a Bill to be returned for the hundred Guineys, I supplied Ballderrog: Or, considering since my being here I have been at a greater charge, in my Journeys to Sligoe, as also for Entelligence, which if your Excellency would vouchsafe to make it up 15 l. it would do me a great kindness. I am in due Obedience. Your Excellencies most Faithful and Obedient Servant, John Michelburne. The Lords Justices, as also the General receiving this Ac∣count from Collonel Michelburne of the falseness of O Donnell, sent these following Instructions.
Dublin Castle, 22. of August 1691. SIR, WE have this day received your Letter by Express, and are much concern'd at the Treacherous dealing of the Garrison of Sligoe, and Ballderrog O Donnell. Whereupon we have resolved to reinforce you with a considerable Body of the Nor∣then Militia, from the several Companies from Londonderry, Dunigall, Tyrone, Cavan, Mannoghan, Formanagh, Down, and Anfrime, whom we have sent to this night to march with all possible speed under their proper Officers, and to joyne you at Ballyshanan, and we have likewise order'd the Earl of Granard with another Body of the Militia to march with all possible speed from Athlone to joyn you, at such place as shall be con∣serted between you to be most convenient, as well for the sup∣pression of Ballderrogs Party, as the reducing of the Forts of Sligoe to their Majesties Obedience, in order whereunto you are to Obey the commands of the said Earl of Granard, as the Commander in Chief of all the Forces appointed for that Ex∣pedition. We are, Your friend and Servants, Charles Porter Tho. Coningsby. For Collonel John Michelburne at Ballyshanan. The Collonel sent imediately an Express to Sir Francis Ha∣milton, desiring him with all speed to joyn him at Ballyshanan. Major Touchburne, and Cornet Mead Supervizors of the Militia, were very dilligent in forwarding those of Cavan and Forman∣nagh, &c.
Sir Francis Hamiltons Letter, in answer to Collonel Michelburns. Cavan, August the 27th 1691. SIR, I Received your Letter about Nine a clock last night, and I imediately sent to the several Captains of the Militia to Randezvouze upon Sunday next at Eallymafay, from whence I intend according to your Orders to march forthwith to Bally∣shanan. I just now received a Letter from the Lords Justices, with an account of O Donnells Ravaging of Connaught, and Orders for me to be with the Militia at Ballyshanan the 27th instant, which is this day, now it will be impossible for the Militia to be there before Munday next; and part of them that lies most remote I doubt will not be there so soon: I under∣stand that my Lord Granard is to command a Body of men into Connaught: if his Lordship comes to Ballyshanan before I be there, be pleased to do me the favour to acquaint him, that I am doing what I can to have the Militia in a readiness, and the time that I expect to have them at Ballyshanan, where I shall chearfully observe all the Orders from his Lordship and your self, being very sincerely, SIR, Your Affectionate, and most humble Servant, Francis Hamilton. To the Hon. Collonel John Michelburne at Ballyshanan. Collonel Michelburne in the interime whilst the Militia was geting together, sends to Enskillin for some Brass gunns that were taken at Newtownbuttler from the Irish under the Com∣mand of the Lord Mountcastle, and gets them fitted up, as also persuant to the Lords Justices Orders, sends Expresses to Bellurbit for Bread for the Militia; as also provides Boats from Killybeggs for sending away Ammunition, Cannon-ball, Spades, Pitch, Axes, Provisions, &c. to be Transported, that nothing should hinder or delay us in our March to Sligoe, and for draw∣ing
the Guns; the Horses that were brought in for that occa∣sion were so small, that they were of no use; which made the Collonel, for quick expedition, give his own Baggage Horses. The 23th. Augush, the Collonel received the following Letter from the General. Camp at Carick on Lysh, Aug. 19. 1691. SIR, YOU know by this time, whether the Governour of Sligoe acted honestly, or no; but I have very good reason to helieve, he has not, from a Letter that is intercepted from Col∣lonel Scott; for that reason I must desire you will be upon your Guard, and make the Militia advance to the Frontiers, to pre∣vent the Enemies Incursions: If you have not paid O Donnel the 200 Guineys, pray don't, until further Order, or that he has put Sligoe into your hands. I am SIR, Your Most Humble Servant, Bar. de Ginkell. Here follows the Letter that was intercepted, as followeth. Sligoe, Aug. the 13th. 1691. My Lord,
NOT hearing from you this long time, I send this Bearer to acquaint you with our Assairs. Twelve days since one Michelburne, a Collonel of the Enemy's Army came hither, with his own Regiment of Foot, two Troops of Dragoons of the Army, and the rest of their Militia, to the number of about 2000. in all: He sent us a Letter from General Ginkel, with some Proposals, and Money for Surrendring this place, which we re∣sused to do; but three or sour Days after we agreed to Sur∣render,if we were not relieved in ten Days, which was only a project to save about 5000 Cows we had about the Fort, and thereby got an opportunity to send to O Donnel, into the Coun∣ty of Mayo; I went to him, and now he is upon his March to∣wards the Boyle, where he is to remain until we get Provisions in here; then you may be sure it shall never be surrendred without your Orders, or over-powered. I saw your Let∣ter to O Donnel, and I wondred you did not send the least word to me: I hope the Enemy shall see, That Gallway is the only place capable of doing such a thing as they have done: I hear of a great many young Collonels advanced in the Army; I hope my being so remote, will not make your Lordship for∣get me, whilst I shall be as mindfull of my Duty, and as ser∣viceable in my Station, as any of them. I am Your Lordships most assured, Humble Servant Edward Scot. To the Right Honourable, Patrick Earl of Lucan, By this you may see how abominable and deceitsul these Men are, notwithstanding the Articles under Hand and Seal. This Patrick, Earl of Lucan, was him they called Sarsfield, so noted amongst the Irish. This Letter was intercepted by one of our Army, being a Spy, going to Lymerick, which occasioned the General to send this following Letter to Collonel Michel∣burne. About the 27th. of August, Collonel Michelburne received the following Letter, sent to him by the Lord Granard; being a Copy of a Letter from the Lords Justices. Dublin, the 22th. of August, 1691. SIR, BAllderrog O Donnel, contrary to his Agreement with the Ge∣neral, by which he was to assist in reducing Sligoe, has been the only Person has prevented it being delivered up to Collonel Michelburne, pursuant to a Treaty signed by the Governour.
We find by this Treachery of O Donnel, the adjacent Countrys may be greatly damag'd; We have therefore thought it neces∣sary to cause 1000 of the Militia of this Town to begin their March to Morrow, towards your Lordship, and have writ to Collonel Michelburne to observe your Lordships Commands; and to the Governours of the several Counties under-written, to get their Militia at the places and times under-mentioned; of all which we desire, and appoint, your Lordship to take the Command, and with them to march towards O Donnel, and to use your best endeavours to kill and destroy him, and his Followers. We have likewise sent, by Express, to the General, to order some of the Army the Forces now in Gallway, to be sent to join your Lordship, if they can be spared: In the mean time we must needs press your Kordship to take care, that Bal∣lymore be not left without a Guard. We have directed the Store-keeper at Athlone, to furnish your Lordship with all such Ammunition as you shall send for, to supply your self, and the rest who want. We have your Lordships of the 20th. with the inclosed, to which we need give no other answer, than what is before. We know your Lordship will use all imaginable care and di∣ligence, in securing the Country against this false Man, and hope the Forces we design, may get together time enough, to prevent his doing much mischief. We shall send Provisions of Bread, and some Money, to sub∣sist the Men. We are Your Lordships most obedeent Servants, Charles Porter, Tho. Coningsby. We must desire your Lordship to send to Coll. Michelburne, where and when you will have him meet you.
The Militia of the North, for the several Counties following, are appointed to be at Ballyshanan on the several days following. Tyron, Dunigal, and Formannagh, on Thursday the 27th. In∣stant. Mannoghan and Londonderry, the 28th. Instant. Gavan, the 29th. Instant. Down and Antrime, the 31th. Instant. Castle-Forbasse, Aug. 21th. 1691. SIR, BY this inclosed Copy of a Letter from the Lords Justices to me, you will perceive what their Comman is are: I am required to keep a Correspondency with you, and to know from you if it be convenient to join you with 1000 of the Militia of Dublin, which are now upon their March thither: If the quiet of the Country, which I hear is threatned by O Donnel, will ne∣cessitate our Conjunction; I conceive Boyle, or some place thereabouts, will be most convenient for Rendezvousing all the Forces designed for that Service: I hear various Reports of Ballderrog; some saying that he has concluded Conditions with the General, and is upon his March to join him at Lymerick: Others, That the Officers under his Command, will not accept of the Conditions agreed on. Be pleased to let me hear what you know; and withal, to dispatch an Account to me, whe∣ther the Ʋlster Militia be arrived at Ballyshanon. As I was wri∣ting this, a Pacquet from the Army, directed to you, came to my hands, I suppose from the General, which I hear withal send you, and desire in all these particulars, your suddain an∣swer. SIR, Your most Affectionate Humble Servant, Granard. These for Their Majesties special Service. To Coll. John Michel∣burne, at Ballyshanon, or elsewhere, hast, hast, To be send by the Offi∣cer Commanding at Finna, to Belturbet; and by the Officer Commanding there, in hast a∣way to him.
Collonel Michelburns Answer. My Lord, I Can give you as yet but little account of the Militia, only that I received a Letter this Afternoon from Sir Francis Ha∣milton, who tells me that on Sunday next he Randezvouzes his men at Ballymafoy, and on Munday or Tuesday will be with me at Ballyshanan, at which time I shall have the rest of the Troops from other Counties with 500. Choyce Foot of my own Regi∣ment, which as soon as arrived will I march straight to Sligoe, and if they of Sligoe understood your Lordships Motion, it may be a means of their surrendering the sooner: The only thing will be to know where O Don∣nel is, the last news is that but two of his Regiments will follow him, and of the strength of his Forces I can give your Lordship an account, but his going to the General I do not find true, if it were, something would be in the Generals Letter, if I could know of Ballderrog, I could march the near∣est way by Sligoe, I have several Spies abroad, and will not fail to send your Lordship an account how affairs stand. I am My Lord your Lordships Most humble Servant, John Michelburne. To the Right Honoura∣ble, the Earl of Gra∣naro at Castle-Forbus, or elsewhere. With Speed.
From the Camp at Carick on Lysh, Aug, 23. 1691. SIR, I Have yours from Ballyshanan of the 18th, by which I find the Trick which O Donnell has play'd, so that you must be upon your Guard, and keep the two Troops of Dragoons with you, and as much of the Militia as you can. I send upon this account Collonel Stoyd back to Athlone, and then the Mili∣tia that is there shall return to the North, to be posted as you Direct. After the care you us'd in this Affair, I am sorry it did not succeed, however you have done your part very well, and would make a good addition to your Services, if you would yet find any way of Treating with Sir Teige O Regan, and getting the place. I send you the Warrant you desire, and am Your humble Servant, Bar de Ginkel. To Collonel John Michelburne Com∣manding at Bally∣shanan. Soon after Collonel Michelburne received this following Intelligence, and sent it Inclosed to the Lords Justices. SIR, ABout ten days since I left the Camp, and on Friday last I was at Ballyrobe, where My Lord O Donnell was, and was standing by, when he signed Articles to Collonel Richards,
I saw likewise an Express from one of O Donnells Collonels, desiring him not to come to the Camp, for there was a plot laid to take away his Life for signing the Articles to the General and that when I arriv'd at Boyle, he heard that the Lord O Don∣nels own Regiment, his Brothers, and another Regiment went to him, and that they were resolved to come to Ballyshanan to joyn you. I am in great hast in going to the County of Dunigal, otherwise I had waited on your Honour. I am Your humble Servant, J. L. To Coll. John Michelburne, Governour at Ballyshanan. About this time arrived one Mr. Wade formerly an acquain∣tance of Col. Michelburns, and with him a Fryer, who desired some private Discourse with the said Collonel. They told him that they came from the Lord O Donnel, who was incamped with Sir Albert Coningham near to Killowny, and that his Lordship desired him to march against Sligoe as soon as posible he could, and that Sir Albert Coningham was incamped with him, and withall produced the Lord O Donnels Pass, a also a Pass from Sir Teige O Regan. The Lord O Donnels Pass. WHereas Father Petton and Edward Wade, have submitted to King William and Queen Mary, and their Government, and have desired this my Pass to go into the County of Dunigal. These are therefore to require all persons not to Hinder or Mo∣lest them, either in Body or Goods. Given at Killowny the 2d. day of September. O Donnel.
Sir Teige O Regans Pass. PErmit Father James Petton, and Mr. Edward Wade to pass towards the County of Dunigal without Hurt or Molestation, either in Body Goods, or Arms, with their Servants. Given at Sligoe this 3d of Septemb. 1691. Teige O Regan. This put the Collonel to a stand, knowing that Sir Teige O Regan and O Donnel was at variance, and how they should get a Pass from Sligoe to come to Ballyshanan he knew not, he askt them if they had any Letters from O Donnel or Sir Albert, they answered none, but produced a Letter from Captain Mountgomery to Charles Hamilton of Cavan, which made him the more suspitions of them, he askt them how they came to get a Pass from Sir Teige, who made answer that the Priest had a Brother in Sligoe which was Leiutenant Collonel, who procured it from Sir Teige to pass 'm into the County of Dunigal, the Collonel being apprehensive this was a Decoy to draw him into some inconvenience, confin'd them till he heard farther from O Donnel or Sir Albert Coningham: beause the Country lay open between Killwony and Ballyshanan, by way of Mannor Hamilton, and that in few hours they might have inteiligence from one to the other, and not run the hazard of coming by Sligoe: but this suspition he had of Wade and the Priest was soon over, for about Evening came a Dragoon of Sir Alberts party and a Gunner that deserted Sligoe, giving an account of Sir Alberts being Routed, and some of his men being taken, which soon after was confirmed by Letter of O Donnels, who gave this fol∣lowing account.
The Account given by the Gunner, and Dragoon. THey both being sick in Killowny, soon after Day, they heard of a great Out-cry by the Women in the Town, that Ballderrog was taken prisoner, and Sir Albart Coningham's party beaten, which made them with all speed get out of the House, and make their Escape into a Ditch in a Garden that was near hand, they heard some Shoutings afar off, and saw several Wo∣men coming into the Town stript, that belonged to Sir Albert's party; and one of these Men stole into the Town, where he had News, that Sir Albert was killed; they immediately got two Horses, whose they were they knew not, but supposed them to belong to the Dragoons, and rid away to Manner-Hamilton, and so came to Ballyshannon: The Lieutenant belonging to O Donnel, confirm'd what these two said; the ill news of Sir Al∣bert's Death was soon Confirm'd. These following Letters are to the Lord Granard, as also to Collonel Michelburne, to provide Bread for the Northern Forces. Charles Porter, Tho. Coningsby.
YOU are hereby required from time to time to deliver unto such person or persons as the Right Honourable the Earl of Granard, and Coll. Michelburne, or either of them shall ap∣point to receive the same; the usual Allowance of Bread, or Meal, according to the proportion of I pound a day for each, for such a number of the Northern Militia, now Order'd to March to Ballyshannon, as shall be directed by the said Earl of Granard, and Coll. John Michelburne, or either of them, and for so doing, this with a Receipt for the same from the person
or persons so appointed, shall be your sufficient Warrant. Gi∣ven at Their Majesties Castle of Dublin the 24th. Day of August, 1691. To Isaac Pereira Esq; Commissary General of the Stores of Ireland. By the Lords Justices Command, John Davis. Dublin-Castle, the 25th. August. 1691. My Lord, INclosed is a Copy of an Order to Mr. Pereira, to deliver Bread to the Northern Militia, as shall be directed by your Lordship, or Coll. Michelburn, which Mr. Pereira sends by this Post to the Store-keeper of Belturbet, whence the Provisions must be had, if your Lordship, or Coll. Michelburne will please to appoint Persons to receive the same from time to time, and to Certifie the Store-keeper what number of Militia are upon Du∣ty. This by the Lords Justices Command, is signified to you Lordship, by My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble Servant, John Davis Castle Forbass, Septemb. 13th. 1691. SIR,
I Had an Account from the Lord; Justices, that there is a pro∣portion of Meal arrived at Belturbit, designed for the sup∣port of your Northern Militia, you need no Order from me since you have power to call for what you find requisite, God willing, I intend to march the Forces from Dublin, which ar now at Athlone, to Morrow being Friday through Connaughto Boyle, where I intend to be with them the 8th. Day of this Instant without fail. I must desire you to send me notice thi∣ther, where, and with most conveniency I may joyn the Forces under your Gommand, which I desire may be with all the Ex∣pedition imaginable. I am Your Affectionate, and Humble Servant, Granard. I desire you will bring the 980 l. with you, which you received from Jemmitte the Collector, at Londonderry, and which is designed for the support of the Men. Here follows an Account of the last Besieging Sligoe, with the taking of the Town and Out-works, by the Forces under the Command of Coll. John Michelburne, and the Surrender of the two Forts to Right Honourable the Earl of Granard, the 15th. of Septemb. 1691. A List of the Forces that joyn'd Collonel Michelburne as Ballyshannon, the 8th. of Septemb. 1691. County of Dunigall. Dragoons. Capt. Charles Hamilton of Ca∣van, 50 Capt. William Stewart, 50 Capt. Vaughan, 25 Capt. Murvough Hamilton, 50 County of Derry. Capt. Tristrim Berrisford, 50 Capt Hugh Rowly, 50
I Troop of Dragoons of Coll. Winn, 50 County of Formannah, I Troop of Horse Commanded by Capt. Erwin, 50
County of Autrim. A Troop of Horse Command∣ed by Capt. Harrison, 50 County of Mannoghan. Capt. Dawson, 50 Of the Standing Army. Part of Coll. Michelburne's Re∣giment, 600 I Troop of Dragoons of Sir Al∣bert Coningham's, 50
County of Autrim. I Foot Company Commanded by Capt. Adaire, 60 County of Tyron. I Foot Company Commanded by Oliver Mac Cashlin, 60 Capt. Patr. Hamilton, 60 For the better understanding of the following Discourse, 'tis to be understood, that Coll. Michelburne had brought the Garri∣son of Sligoe to Articles, which were approved on by General Ginkell, and Signed and Sealed: The Garrison was to be deli∣vered up to the said Collonel the 15th. of August last past; but for the falseness of O Donnel who was then on Capitulation with General Ginkell, and sent to Coll. Michelburne to joyn him, if the Garrison should prove Obstinate, and so to reduce them by force. The General ordered Coll. Michelburne to pay him 200 Guineas, as a Mark of his Favours, of which accordingly he paid him 100, and the other 100 he promised to pay him in two or three Days; but the said O Donnel, notwithstanding his Ingagement with the General, the payment of the 100 Guineas, he appeared the only person that obstructed the Sur∣render, and took part with the Garrison of Sligoe to defend them apainst Coll. Michelburne, or what other the General should send, Signing an Instrument under his Hand, that not∣withstanding any Contract made between the General Ginkell and himself, his only design was to prolong the time; and what he did, or acted was for King James's Interest; and promised the Garrison of Sligoe, to joyn with them when there was occa∣sion. The Lords Justices understanding the Abuse that was committed by the said O Donnel, issued first their Order to the Militia of most part of the Province of Ʋlster, to joyn Coll. Mi∣chelburne the latter end of August, who, by the General's Or∣ders, and the Lords Justices, Commanded the Summer past
at Ballyshannon, to the intent, that when a considerable body could be got together, he was to Advance teward Sligoe, their Lordships ordered likewise a considerable Body of the Militia from Dublin and other parts of Lemster, to be Commanded by the Right Honourable the Earl of Granard, with a Com∣missioner to Command the whole Forces of Lemster and Ʋlster, to reduce O Donnel, as also the said Forts of Sligoe to Their Majesties Obedience; but the said O Donnel in the mean time makes his Peace with the General, and joyns his Forces with the Earl of Granard: therefore the Lord-Justices gave Or∣ders for a considerable quantity of Provisions to be sent from Dublin to Bellurbit for this occasion, Whilst the Militia was draw∣ing to the Frontiers, Coll. Michelburne drew from Cavan, Bellur∣bit, Eniskillin, and Killybegs as many of his own Regiment as he could spare out of the said Garrisons, to joyn the Militia, whom he expected by the Ist. of September; but it was the 8th. before the Militia could make any considerable Appear∣ance; in the mean time the said Coll. us'd all his Endeavours to get some Field Pieces from Eniskillin; the 9th. he began his March with about 500 Militia Horse, two Troops of Dragoons of the standing Army, three Militia Foot Companies, and 600 Men of his own Regiment. That Night he Encamped at Drum∣cleif, three Miles from Sligoe, and 17 from Ballyshannon, from whence Capt. Vaughan, a Militia Captain, with his own Troop, and a Detachment of ten more to secure him from the Rapparees, was dispatch'd to the Earl of Granard, to acquaint his Lordship of our Advance.
Drumcleif, the 9th. of September, 1691. My Lord, THE backwardness of some of the Militia Troops of this Province was the Oaccsion of my not advancing sooner, I have sent Capt. Vaughan to know your Lordships Commands, who will give you an Account of our Advance, and what Con∣dition we are in. I think it not convenient to quit this side of the Town to joyn, you before you come to Sligoe, by reason of the Inconveniency of drawing our Guns. I am, My Lord, Your Lordships most Hum∣ble Servant, John Michelburne. To the Right Honourable the Earl of Granard at Boyle, or elsewhere. These The next Morning, about Seven we advanced within half a Mile of the Town, and advantagiously posted our selves in an old Danish Fort, called by the name of Rabacan, built in the time of Oliver Cromwell; and as soon as we were encamped, Or∣ders were given to repair the said Fort; the said Coll. Michel∣burne sends a Drum with a Summons to Sir Teague O Regan, Go∣vetnour of the Town and County of Sligoe, as followeth. Collonel Michelburne's First Letter. SIR,
I Do not question, but your Intelligence is such, that you are satisfied and assured of what Preparation is made, which you may see by a considerable Force under my Command, enough to bring you to Submission, but a far greater under the Earl of Granard, and the Lord O Donnel, so that you will be surrounded on every side, and that we are not to quit theplace till reduced. However, I have Orders from his Excellency, General Ginkell once more to treat; if with your Conveniency. You know the Hardships of a close Siege, and the ill Effects that will happen if you continue obstinate: 'Twas very ill resented, and ill taken, that you detained the Articles, Signed by General Ginkell, you neither returned them, nor the Counterpart, but kept both in your Custody. I am, SIR, Your Humble Servant, John Michelburne. I desire your speedy Answer; my Service to Collonel Scot, and Collonel Rourke. To the Honourable Sir Teague O Regan, Governour of Sligoe. Sligoe, September the 11th. 1691. SIR, I Have yours of this days date; my Intelligence is such, that I cannot give a shroad Guess of the Preparations that are making, as you mention, to reduce this place, if they were Ten times greater then you fancy them it is equal to me. Neither am I ignorant, as you mention of the Effects of a close Siege, which I am in this case resolued to try: However I thank you for your offer, and as for not returning the Articles Signed by General Ginkell; no wonder at it, for I have no other to show my own General for my Justification, for the manner of my Capi∣tulation, and of breaking off honestly with you to whom I appeal whither or no I have not behaved my self as I ought; and who is to blame in this matter? I suppose you have the Counterpart of the Article your self; Coll. Seot, and Coll. Rourke defires to be remembred to you, and Sir Francis Hamilton; so do I, who am, SIR, Your most Humble Servant, Teague O Regan. To Coll. John Michelbourne, Governour of London-Derry and Ballyshannon.
This day being 11th. of September, and proving very wet, was Imployed in cutting Fagots, and repairing the Fort, so that we made no Advance, till about Nine next Morning the Coll. viewed every part of the Enemies Outwarks, where he might take 'em at the best Advantage, they were observed about 200 of them hard at work in Levelling an old Ditch, some distance from the Fort; we were informed by some of the Country, that they had taken a reinforcement of two Foot Companies, one commanded by Lieut. Coll. Edward mac Swine, the other by Capt. Conn O Neal; we also observed great numbers of them going into the Town, and could only discover one Company of Granadeers, lodg'd in a Danish Fort, to observe our motion. The Enemy still observing our Men at work, repairing the Da∣nish Fort, were now altogether secure, not apprehending in the least, that we should fall upon them that Morning, and fully assured, that nothing would be done of our side till the Lord Granard arrived; but in less than an hour, they found them∣selves in a great mistake, for about Nine that Morning, the Coll. ordered the Company of the Granadeers, one Troop of Dragoons, and 200 Foot, immediately to draw up under Covert of our Fort; he likewise gave Orders for all the Horse to get ready, and mount with all speed: in the mean time all the Fort was got ready, the Attillery harnish'd, and ready to march, the Coll. advaneed with the Granadeers, and 200 Foot to secure the Ditches, and to beat of the Granadeers that were lodg'd in a Danish Fort near the Enemies Outworks, and at our first firing the Enemy quitted the Danish Fort, and made into their Trenches; the Collonel thought now was the time, pursues hard after them, enters their Trenches, the Ene∣my plays hard on our Horse with their Cannon, which was rangld on the Hill, opposite to the Fort, but with little Dam∣mage. We prosecuted our Advance, beating them from Ditch to Ditch, still gaining Ground; the Foot were all hot engag'd, but the Enemy still giving way; the Militia Troops were ve∣ry forward on all occasions, led on by Sir Francis Hamilton, Maj Touchburne, and Cornet Mead; the first of which is Lieut. of the County of Dunigall, the other two, Supervisors of thethe Militia of Ʋlster: The Enemy at last took to their Heels, our Men pursued them with repeated Huzza's; at last the Enemy took to a strong Sodd Fort, some Hundred Yards from the great one; and that the Enemy should have no time to consider, Coll. Michelburne Advanc'd at the Head of his Gra∣nadeers on Horse-back, and about 100 Foot entred into the Fort, the Enemy on all sides jumping over the Works. Thus in an hours time we became Masters of all their own Works, and intercepted between them and the Town, so that the Town fell into our Hands: Likewise the Coll. sent a Lieut. and Thirty men to guard the Bridges, that no Soldier should enter the Town to plunder, and withal gave Orders that the Gallows should immediately be removed into the Market∣place to hang the first Offender, which was an extraordinary Satisfaction to those in the Fort, who expected no less than to have their Wives and Children put to the Sword. Our reso∣lute Commander, never dismounted his Horse till he had gain∣ed this point, endeavouring to win this most important place by fair means, it being unpossible, considering all Incon∣veniencies to get it otherwise, and to indulge them the more, notwithstanding the great Advantage, Coll. Michelburne sends to them this second Summons declaring it to be the last. The Second Letter to Sir Teague. SIR,
IN my last, I gave you to understand that the Forces under my Command, was sufficient to Reduce you, which you see before your Eyes that ye are not able to withstand us; These are the Men that bid Defyance to Leiutenant General Hamilton, During the four Months Seidge at Derry, where your whole Army was Baffled, therefore, know that I'll be Master of your Counterscarff before the Morrow Morning, but you cannot but acknowledge my kindness in preserving of your Familys in the Town from Ruine and Destruction, which has been pra∣ctised when a place has been taken by Force, but instead of thatI Treate you rather as Friends then Enemies, and if now you will comply with Reasonable Offers, and make a quick Surrender both you and your Families may be preserved, this being the last time you may expect any Favour, for when my Lord Gra∣nard Arrives, the power will be out of my hands, and so pray Consider it, and let me have your speedy Answer. I am SIR, Your Humble Servant, John Michelburne. To the Honourable Sir Teague O Regan Governour of the Fort of Sligoe. Sir Teague O Regan's Answer, to Collonel Michelburn's Last Summons. Fort Sligoe 11th September, 1691. SIR, I Had your Letter by the Drummer, and being a thing of that Importance, I cannot Answer it before I have the Officers of the Garrisons advice, which will be in two hours, I see your Men go on vigerously with their work, if you do not imme∣diately make them leave off Working, I must take what measures ought to be taken in the Case; but I assure you that I had rather deal with you in any thing then with others of your Party, and I desire you to believe that from SIR, Your most Humble Servant, Teague O Regan. Collonel Scott, and Collonel Rourk and the rest of the Officers gives you their Humble Service.
Collonel Michelburne was very well satisfied with Sir Teagues Answer and could not but agree to Sir Teagues Repuest, and the Hundred Pioneers which stood ready in the view of them and some at work, he Ordered them immediately to lay down their Working Tools, and gave Sir Teagne this following An∣swer. Camp at Sligoe this 11th September, 1691. SIR, I Had yours, and according to your desire, I allow the two Hours time you mentioned, and for any work you menti∣on, I shall forbear, and do expect the like from you, and altho your People are not at Work, yet they fetch burthens of Fire∣ing from the Gate, and all the Work that at present I have need of, is to Remove the Gallows into the Market Place, to hinder Plunder, and to punish the first Offender, which I be∣lieve you nor your Officers will not find fault with having given out a Proclamation to that purpose, so that the Gentlemen in Fort shall not be Damnifyed one Farthing, in Case they comply with my Demands, my Service to Collonel Scott, Collonel Rourk, and the rest of the Officers. I am SIR, Your Humble Servant, John Michelburne. Sir Teagues Third Letter. SIR, I Agree to what you Write, and for those Men of the Garri∣son that went out 'twas unknown to me, now I send to recall them into the Fort, I am well pleased that such good Discipline may be kept in Order to prevent Plunder. I am SIR, Your Humble Servant, Teague O Regan. To the Honourable Collonel John Michelburne Governour at Bellyshannen.
Soon after was brought this Fourth Letter by a Drummer. I Am so well assured of your Worth and Honour, that I will send out Three Field Officers, Collonel Rourk Major Conner, and Leintenant Collonel McDonnagh, without Demanding any Hostages, so appoint Three Commissioners from your self, and agree, what place you shall think fit to Treate in. I am SIR, Your most Humble Servant, Teague O Regan. The Commissioners appointed for our side were Sir Francis Ha∣milton, Major John Hamilton, and Major Tichburne. THeir Instructions were to know what proposals the Enemy would make, and to make Objections to what Demands the Irish Commissioners should unreasonably Propose; their De∣mands were these, to have the Articles that were formerly Signed and Sealed by the General Ginkell to be put in force, and what Reinforcements they had taken into the Fort, to be included into the same Articles; and to have nine dayes time for a Surrender, their Demands being brought to the Collonel, he absolutely denyed any more then 24 Hours, during which he would have open Hostility, excepting the time the Commissioners were on a Treaty, and as to the Treaty he Agreed to those of the former Articles only Scratching out the drawing of the two Pieces of Canon, for that he would not promise any thing, but what he would perform it being Impossible to draw Guns that time in the Year. The Commissioners going out told them that the Collonel would not allow of any time a∣bove Twenty four hours, they then Demanded four days and they would put one of the Forts into our hands, Collonel
Michelburne without any delay bid them return and agree to it Admitting they would give up the big Fort; their Answer was the most part of their things was in the Sodd Fort, but they would Surrender the Stone Fort, which he refusing, advis'd them to consider of it till the next Morning, and then to send their final Answer, in the mean time Coll. Michelburne gave Orders to post all the Horse and Foot Guards for the Nights Service, and 100 Pioneers with their implements all in the View of the Ene∣my. As soon as the Commissioners were returned, Order was given to Salute them with our Cannon and Small-shot, which continued most part of the Night; all which time the Fort hung out Lights for fear we should Attack their Counterscarpe: That night the Collonel sends an Express to the General, as also to the Lords Justics as followeth. Sligoe, Septemb. 12th. 1691. My Lords,
I Have once more a Prospect of Sligoe Fort to be under Their Majesties Obedience: In my last I acquainted your Lord∣ships of the backwardness of the Militia; but however on Thursday last, being the 10th. of this Instant, I marcht with a Detatchment of 600 Foot of my own Regiment, about 400 Militia Horse, and 100 Foot, with 2 Troops of Dragoons of the Standing Army, and that Night Incamped at Drumcleefe, 3 Miles from Sligoe, and sent an Express with a Detatchment of 36 Men, under the Command of Capt. Vaughan, with Orders to Acquaint my Lord Granard of my Approach to Sligoe. Next Day he Incamped about half a Mile from the Town, which was imployed in repairing a Danish Fort, but proving wet, we made no Advance on the Enemy till about Nine the next Morn∣ing: The Enemy was now bolder than usual; for besides the two Regiments, they had an Addition of two Foot Companies, one Commanded by Lieut. Coll. Mac Swine, the other by one O Neal. About Eight I began to form my Detatchments both of Foot and Horse, but at last I thought it necessary to imploy the whole Party. At our first approach they quitted all theDitches, and Posted themselves on that side, where stands their Fort, but the Tide being out, I advanced my Granadeers, with about 150 Foot, still gaining upon them; the Enemy At∣tackt us with great Fury, which caused me to order 3 Troops of Horse to Advance, which caused the Enemy to retreat, and Man a Fort about 150 yards from the great Fort, and that at the Advance of our Horse and Foot they quitted that likewise, which after a short Dispute we became Masters of, and all their Out-Works, as also the Town of Sligoe, and now are incamped and lie close under their Forts. By the next I hope to give your Lordships an Account of the Fort being intirely in our hands. In this Action we lost but 1 Ensign, which was killed with a Canon from the Enemy, and some 9 Men Wounded, and 1 Man of the Militia, and 4 Horses wounded. I am My Lords, Your Lordships most Faithful and Obedient Servant, John Michelburne.
About Ten at Night we had an Account from our Out-Guards Commanded by Captain Harrison, that between the Town and Ballisadeare-Bridge, they Discovered a considerable Camp occasioned by their many Fires, but did not know whi∣ther they were Friends or Enemies, it was dubious whether they were the Forces under the Lord Granard or Sarsfield's Par∣ty, which we had an Account was marching towards Sligoe; and to inform our selves of this most urgent Affair, the Coll. Ordered Captain Harrison should send out immediately 20 of his Troop, of which 2 of them to Advance within about half Musket-Shot before the rest of the party, till they were Challenged by the o∣ther, by which means they would soon discover whither they were Friends, or Enemies, which accordingly they did, and found them to be the Forces under the Earl of Granard; theCommander of the party was brought to my Lord, who gave his Lordship an Account according to the former Discourse. Next Morning the Collonel sent to them, that if they did not immedi∣ately come to Conclusion, he must remove all the Papist Fami∣lies out of the Town, and if they pleas'd they might take them into the Fort. To which Sir Teague's Answer. SIR, I Had yours: The Kindness as to our Women and Children I thank you for, you do but what becomes you, and what I expected of you, and what I would have done were I in your Station; I know of no particular Women or Children belong∣ing to us in Town, except Maj. Conners's Lady, Mrs. Reyly, and my Servant Maid, if you please to admit them hither, and the rest, if there be any to guard 'em, where else they please, I will thank you: As for your saying that I came to no Treaty, &c. I do assure you out of the particular desire I had to deal with you, I have strained my self to such Terms, as I would not with any other; if you will not take hold of this Opportunity, all Cir∣cumstances considered, it is your fault, and believe me you will repent it; you may believe I am not ignorant of my Lord Gra∣nard's, and the Lord O Donnel's Motion, but I am really, and so are the rest of the Gentlemen more for you than any else of your Party and Station; and to shew you my further Sincerity, I am willing that the same Commissioners named by you and me ye∣sterday may meet again, and compose the matter if they can be∣fore the coming of those, with some of whom I have no Inclina∣tion to have any Civil Dealings. I am SIR, Your most Humble Servant, Teague O Regan. To the Honourable Coll. John Michelburne.
To which Coll. Michelburne agreed, and Orders the same Com∣missioners, who were on the Treaty the Night before, to go on in the Capitulation, and Conclude with them. About this time the Collonel received the Generals Letter as followeth. Camp before Lymrick, September the 7th. 1691. SIR, I Have your Letters of the 29th of the last, from Ballyshaanon, and hope with O Donnells help, you are by this time in Pos∣session of Sligoe, for since his Agreement with Collonel Richards, I make no Question but he will do the Service to their Maje∣sties which he promised, and therefore, I desire you will use him Civilly when he joyns you. If possible, when you have that de∣livered to you, I would have Sir Teague O Regan, and Collonel Scott. Excluded from Terms, that I may punish those People that have so Treacherously broke their Faith; however I would not have you stand so much upon that as to loose the Town. I am SIR, Your most Humble Servant, Bar de Ginkell.
In the mean time the Lord Granard advanced with his Par∣ty in sight, and sent for Coll. Michelburne, who with some other of his Officers, attended his Lordship, and gave him an account of the progress he had made, as well in pinning them up, who consisted of 28 Companies of Foot, in so small a compass; as also, how all things were in a manner concluded. His Lordship was by the Collonel, and several others, attended into Town, to the House of Sir Arthur Goore: Soon after, Sir Francis Ha∣milton, Major Hamilton, and Major Tichburne, attended his Lordship, giving him account, That all was concluded on, be∣tween the Fort of Sligoe, and Coll. Michelburne, if it might be with his Lordship's Approbation, except some small Additions, which Sir Teige desired the Commissaries might report to his Lordship, who granted it. His Lordship ordered the Collonel, and Major Hamilton, to compleat the Articles, which accord∣ingly was done; Sir Teige desiring a further time, for as they were to Surrender at 12 on Sunday; his Lordship agreed to give them leave till 7 next Morning, being Monday the 14th. which accordingly was done, as followeth: According to Ca∣pitulation, they were furnish'd with 28 Truckle Carrs, and two Horses to each Company, for their Baggage, which took some time to bring out of the Fort, after them marched 28 Compa∣nies, such as they were; which done, Sir Teige delivered up the Keys to Coll. Michelburne, who immediately marched in at the Head of a Battalion of his own Regiment; after which the Lord Granard rode in, with a considerable number of Officers, and Gentlemen of the Countrey. Collonel Michelburne, with the Keys in his hand, complimented his Lordship with them, in the Name of Their Majesties, King William and Queen Mary; who return'd him the Keys, and wish'd him joy of his new Go∣vernment. The Lord O Donnel, about this time, delivered the Collonel a Letter of old date, which should have come to his hands a∣bout the 21th. of August, and it was not delivered till the 14th. of September.
A Letter from Coll. Richards, bearing date from Cushin-Town, the 19 of Aug. 91. SIR, MY Lord O Donnel, and I, have now regulated all Mat∣ters, and will, to the utmost of his power, do what shall most contribute to Their Majesties Service: I do not doubt but that you will supply him, with what necessarys you can; after Sligoe is in your hands, my Lord, I suppose, will March towards the General, or according to what Directions he shall receive from him; I shall take care for his Supplies, of what we have in our Stores, when he comes to Gallway, or any other of our places, where we have Stores. Your wants at Sligoe may be supplied from Ballyshanan, if any there; otherwise, upon your notice, and the General's Order, Collonel Goore, or my self, will send you by Sea, what is to be had from us: I am sa∣tisfied my Lord O Donnel will do his best for reducing Sligoe; and therefore it will not be amiss to consult him in difficulties. I am SIR, Your most humble Servant Ja. Richards. Just now I have advice, That Sarsfield, with the Horse, is come on this side; so that Sir Albert Coningham, has Orders to march his Dragoons to Clare-Gallway: I expect to be this Night at Gall∣way; and if any thing extraordinary happens, shall advise you. Capt. Otway had Orders to take an account of the Stores of Ammunition and Provision, according to the Capitulation, which follows.
A List taken the 15th day of September 1691. of the Guns Am∣munition and Stores of War in the Sodd Fort of Sligoe. Ordinances Brass mounted on Brick and stand Carriages 12 Pounder 1 Chamber Piece 1 Iron Ordinances Mounted on Brick, and stand Carriages Deme Coulver. 1 Minion 3 3 Pounders 10 Power 30 bar. Ball for French Fusies 6½ bar. Ditto for Pistol 1 bar. Match 8 hog. per est Ball proportionable Culvering 109 Bastard Cannon 72 12 Pounders 36 9 Pounders 144 Saker 267 Minion 332 Fallcon 054 Ladles and Spunges for Demy Culvering 1 1 3 Pounders 10 10 12 Pounders 1 1 Menion 3 3 Crows of Iron 2 Syaths 18 Handbarrows 21 Wheel-barrows 30 Pitch 25 Peices 40 Floot barrs of Iron 40½ Old Iron 8 C. Hand Granadas fixt 200 Ditto unfixt 328 Scales 1 Weights 5 Shovels and S pades 38 Received the day and year above mention'd, by the Order of the Right Honourable the Earl of Granard, the Guns Am∣munition and Stores of War above mentioned. As Witness my Hand, John Michelburne.
Sodd Fort Sligoe the 15th September 1691. Provisions for the Mouth. Oate-meal 24 bar. Beef 200 bar. Salt 1 bar. Meal 11 bar. Oates 150 bar. Barrly 60 bar. Received the day and year above mention'd, by Order of the Right Honourable the Earl of Granard the Provision and Stores above mentioned. As Witness my Hand John Michelburne. The account Received of the The Train of Artillery from Captain Richard Swan, as followeth. Powder in Barrels 25 Ball in Barrels 35 Match in Bundels 15 Wheel-barrows 21 Iron Crows 3 Baskets 45 3 Pounder Balls 183 A Small parcel Killkenny Coals in a Case Hammer Hatchits 20 Bill Hooks 24 1 A barral Kit Granadas fixt 100 Shells unfixt 482 Handbarrows 48 Pickaxes 23 Rep-hooks 5 Syaths 2 Whetstones 4 Turn Pikes 18 Horse Harnssing 18 Clouts 12 Shafts 2 Linchpins 12 Tar Tub 1 1 Wheel for the big Gun 1 1 Axil-tree 1 Swingle Trees 4 Hurters and Wassers 13 1 Jack 1 8 Sand Bagg 1 12 Pounder Balls 98 1 Dark Lanthorn 1 Long Spikes in a Box 500 2 Shilling Nais 500 Of mens Harnessing 2 Riges Ropes' 2 Fadams of 2 inch Rope 10 ½ A Goyl of Small Rope ½ 1 Brass 12 Pounder 1 2 brass 3 Pounders 2 And all necessaries belonging to them
An Account of Coll. Michelburne's appearing, Three se∣veral times, before the Lords Justices, to make an∣swer to Mr. Foward's Information, a Militia Captain, November the 19th the 30th. and the 17th. of December, 1691. BY the fore-going Narrative, where all things were acted, to the full Satisfaction, as well of the Lords Justices, as the General, as by their many Letters do appear; 'tis strange what grounds there could be found out for the calling to Account this Faith∣ful, Trusty Person, that the Queen should be acquainted with his great Miscarriage, and after that, the King in Council; the Order from the Queen was answered, in these Words, by the Lords Justices, in a Letter to the Lord Nottingham; as in the Close of the Book. Sometimes since we received Her Majesties Command, by your Lordship, to inquire into the rerson of Coll. Michelburne's withdrawing the Blockade of Sligo, &c. That the General, and Lords Justices, knew of no Miscarriage, and that he should be so vilely represented to Her Majesty; and with that secrecy and privacy, that it cannot be known, who were the Villanous Actors of this scandalous false Aspersion, by which the best deserving Men may, unknown, be prejudic'd, and ruin'd. To go on with the Discourse; after Sligo was reduc'd, and the Coun∣try adjacent in quiet Possession to Their Majesties Government, the Coll. writes to the Lords Justices, for leave to go to Dublin, to vindicate himself, being advertised by several good Friends, what Affidavits, and Examinations, were given in, to ruine him; and that he might be pro∣vided with some of the best Gentry of the Country, before he went, he writes from Ballyshannon, to Sir Francis Hamilton, (who, with the rest of those worthy Gentlemen, had been all along with him, on all Acti∣ons, against Sligo, and had taken Certificates from Coll. Michelburne, for their good Services,) as assured, when he went to Dublin, he would be had much in Esteem, for his good Management; he now makes it his Request, for a Certificate, from them, and the rest of the Gentlemen, to do him that Kindness, which not long before, he did to them.
Here followeth a Certificate, from the Chief Officers of the Militia, viz. Sir Francis Hamilton, Bar. Governour of the County of Donagall. Capt. Charles Hamilton, of Cavan. Capt. William Stewart. Capt. John Hamilton, of Murvaugh. Capt. Henry Colwell, &c. But first, the Letter from Sir Francis Hamilton. SIR, THE Remoteness of these Gentlemens Habitations, who have join'd with me, must plead my Excuse, for detaining your Messenger so long. I make no doubt but the inclosed will answer your Expectation; and the greatest Enemy you have, who was an Eye-witness to your Actions, cannot, in Justice, contradict one Word in it; I gave the Lords Justices an Account, from time to time, of what passed, where we were, and never did so without doing you right; so that, I believe, it will be in vain to make a Repetition, of what I have formerly said, in any thing, that may conduce to your Service, be pleased, freely to lay your Com∣mands upon, SIR, Your most humble Servant, Francis Hamilton. For the Honoured Coll. Michelburne, These Ballyshannon. Here followeth the Certificate. WE do Certifie, that the Honourable Coll. Michelburne, who Com∣manded the Forces of Tyrone Dey Donygall, and Farmonah, marched four several times into the Enemies Country; and that upon every Occasion, he was not only Diligent and Careful, but also shewed great Reso∣lution and Conduct, to the good Example of those under his Command. And whereas, some Men have informed, that Coll. Michelburne minded his pri∣vate Advantage, more than his Majesties Service. We do declare, that he in Person forced back many droves of Cattle, into the Enemies Out-works, which he might have applied to his own private Ʋse; by which means, the Garrison thought it more convenient to Capitulate, than to suffer so many Thousand Cattle to starve; with which, and Coll. Michelburne's Diligence, and good Conduct, the Fort of Sligo was prevailed with to Surrender, at the time it was delivered; All which we Certifie under our Hands, this 20th. Day of October. Fr. Hamilton. Ch. Hamilton. Will. Stewart. John Hamilton. Henry Colwell.
Another of the same Certificates, Signed by the Officers of the Army, viz.   Mich. Cunnington. Rich. Bickerstaffe. Albert Nisbet. Will. Gunter. Sam. Shalcrosse. John Campbell. John Bayly. John Hamilton. And. Nisbet. David Chalmey. Hu. Caldwell. Anth. Sbemberge. John Mansell. Hermles Burleigh. Daniel. It was about the latter end of October, the Coll. began his Journey to Dublin, and waited on the Lords Justices, and acquainted them of the good Condition of the Country, and in what posture he left Sligo, and the Country adjacent; and that, withal, he was informed that some Peo∣ple had informed their Lordships, of several things, that were false, that he knew not any thing he had done, but what was altogether for Their Majesties Service, and that all he desired was to have Justice; and withal, desired that he might have a Copy of those Infermations that were given in against him: Upon which, the Lord Coningsby told him, That he would order Mr. Davis, their Secretary, that he might have a Copy of them. Most of the Examinations were from some of Captain Forward's Troops; alledging, That of the Prey that was taken out of the Enemies Country, they were denied Subsistence, for which Reasons, they Desert∣ed; some, in their Affidavits, swore to 800. some to 1500. One Robb, a Tobacco Seller, swore to 6000. but would not stay to justifie his Oath, but is posted away, by Forward, and Vaughan, to the King, and Coun∣cil, to do the Coll. a farther Prejudice. Of all the Militia, and Army, no Body appears, but one Captain For∣ward, who not long before was sent Prisoner, by the said Coll. to Lieu∣tenant Gen. Ginkel, (the Cause, and Reason, in their due place.) The Coll. prest hard that the Cause might come on, and that he might be dismissed; and on the back of Forward's Petition, was writ as fol∣loweth. Thursday Morning, the 19th. of November, at 9 a Clock, this Busi∣ness is to be heard, before the Lords Justices, and the General. To hinder a long Discourse of this Trial, in Forward's large Petition, and Coll. Michelburne's Answer, (after the Chancery manner,) and the Witnesses examin'd, on both sides, which would take up almost as much as the for going Narrative; we will cut it short, and only mention the Counsels, on both sides, and barely the Names of the Witnesses.
The Counsel for Coll. Michelburn, the first time, were Serj. Osborne, Prin. Sergeant at Law. Counsellor Wingfield, and Counsellor Wright. Capt. Forward's were, Sir John Meade. Counsellor Counsellor And according to the Order of the Lords Justices, both made their Appearance, on the 19th. of November, at 9 a Clock. Present. Sir Charles Porter, Lord Justice, and Chancellor of Ireland. Thomas Coningsby, Esq, Lord Justice. And General Ginkel, Commander in Chief, of the Army. The Petition, and Answer, was read, and some Pleadings, heardon both sides; and Forward, the Militia Captain, failing of any material Evi∣dence, his Counsel Petitioned for a longer time, and had time al∣lowed them, till the last of November. The Collonel pleaded the great Charge he was at, in keeping several Witnesses in Town, and these of no mean Rank, as Capt. Hugh Caldwell, Capt. of Dragoons. Capt. Anthony Shomberge, Capt. Cunnington, Capt. Stephen Miller, &c. Which was 40 or 50 Shillings Charge, each Day, the Lords Justices promising that he should be allowed the Charges of his Witnesses. The last of November, being the second time of Hearing, and Pleading, on both sides; and when it came again to the Test, our Militia Captain, failing of his Witnesses; his Counsel Pleading they had 100 Miles to come up to Dublin; they again got leave, from the Lord Justice Porter, for 15 Days, which was lengthened to 17 Days; but it was ordered that Coll. Michelburn should be allowed Ten Guinneys, towards the Charges he was at; that Day, being the last Days Trial, was on the 17th. Day of December. The Trial came on, the Counsel, on both sides, present.
Counsel for the Collonel. Serj. Osborne, princ. Serj. at Law. Serj. Broderick. Counsellor Wingfield. Counsellor Wright. Forward's Councel were, The Recorder of Dublin. Counsellor Counsellor Hancocke. Counsellor Donnelsley. The Witnesses on Forward's side were, Capt. Vaughan. Capt. Pa. Hamilton. 2 Troopers of Forward's Troops. Forward's Boy, and Vaughan's Boy. This Vaughan was one of Forward's Party, and Deserted the same time that he did, and promised his Men a Barrel of Beere, when they came home. Hamilton was in Prison, on Execution, for about 36 l. the Night be∣fore the first hearing, and the Money was paid, or ingag'd for, to Wil∣liam Groves, Esq; by Forward, for his inlargement. The two Troo∣peas were Parties, and fled with Forward, when he Deferted his Post, and Plunder'd the Country; so that of all the worthy Gentlemen, in the North of Ireland, Forward had none that would concern themselves, knowing his Actions to be so base and villainous. The Witnesses, on the Collonel's side, were as followeth. Major-John Hamilton. Capt. Hugh Colwell. Capt. And. Nisbet. Capt. James Manson. Capt. Anth. Shomberge. Capt. Mich. Cunningham. Capt. Stephen Miller. Lieut. Ferguson. Lieut. Tho. Bennet. Doctor Magee. Besides the Letters of Sir Fr. Hamilton, and the Cer∣tificate, which of it self were sufficient against Forward, or those Emissaries he brought with him.
That which Forward would have endeavour'd to have made out, was, that he, and his Men, wanted Provisions, which was the reason they were forced to draw off from the Siege; when it was sufficiently prov'd, that of the Prey that was brought in for the Subsistence of the Army, the Militia of Forward's Troops kill'd the Sheep; and let the Carcases stink in the Field, and sould the Skins for 2 d. a piece. The Lords Justices made a strict inquiry what became of the 6000 Cat∣tle, as (they were informed) were taken and brought to Sligo. See the Evidence made by Capt. William Stewart, by order of Coll. Michelburne. As also, the Certificate sworn to by Capt. Bickerstaff, and Capt. Cun∣ningham, which is reserr'd to the Narrative. Before half the Witnesses of the Coll. side were sworn, the Lord Chancellor threw the Pen out of his Ear, and spoke thus: Here the Mi∣litia complains that they were starved, and that Coll. Michelburne convert∣ed the Prey to his own use, when we find plainly, that the Militia plunder'd and took all away; and so the Court rose. And all People were fully satisfied what a piece of Roguery, and Villany, was design'd to ruine a worthy honest Gentleman, who all a long, during the War of Ireland, made it his study and care to act and do what was most necessary for Their Majesties Service. Here followeth the Journal that was given in before the Lords Justi∣ces, the last day of Trial. A Journal of Coll. Michelburne's second Expedition against Sligo, from Ju∣ly the 30th. to his return, August the 8th. 1691. THE 30th. of July,Thursday, the Collonel began his March, from Ballyshannon, which was about 3 in the Afternoon, and arrived at Mannor Hamilton, about 12, that Night, and incamped on the South-side of the Town; from whence he dispatched an Express to Major Hamilton, to follow him, with an 100 Fire-locks, to join him, at Collowny: The Van-Guard, commanded by Sir Francis Hamilton, Bar. the Rear-Guard, commanded by Capt. Hugh Caldwell. Friday; The 31st. of July, about 6 that Morning, we decamped from Maunor Hamilton, and about 12, came to Drummaleavie, being 8 miles, where the Coll. formed his Horse, and Foot, in a complear Body, and marched in Battallion, all the Afternoon; about 5, we discovered the out-Scouts, and Centinels of the Enemy; about 7, we arrived at Collow∣ny, and were most advautagiously posted, in a Peninsula, having the Castle, and River, of Collowny, on our lest Wing, and a Bog, on the right.
Saturday, The 1st. of August, we began our March about 6, in the morning, the Van-Guard commanded by Capt. Hugh. Caldwell; and the Rear-Guard by Capt. Andrew Nisbet; Sir Francis Hamilton led the Militia; about 10, the Enemies out-Guards were beaten in by a Detache∣ment from the Van Guard; about 11, we drew up about a Cannon Shot from the Town of Sligo: The Enemy saluted us with 15 Shot, of 18 Pounders, from the great Fort, but did us no damage; about 1, the Col. beat a Parley, which continued till towards evening, where it was con∣cluded, that a Messenger, from the Enemy, should go, with an Officer of ours, to the General, to get leave to go to Limericke, to Tyrconnel, for Terms to Surrender Sligo; about 7, we marched back to Collowney, and incamped on the same Ground, we did the night before; and in out way, 8 Men of a Troop were ordered, under the command of Captain Anthony Shonberge, to match into the Enemies Country to bring in Pro∣visions for his Men, and commanded them to be back that night, or the next morning. Sunday, The 2d. of August, about 3 in the Afternoon, Major Hamil∣ton joined us, with 100 Fire-locks, from Belturbet; and about this time Captain Shomberge returned, with a Prey of about 1000, some Cowes, Sheep, and some Horses, on which we mounted the Company of Grana∣deers. The Collonel ordered the Quartermasters to deliver a fat Sheep between each four of their Men, and to be ready to march early the next morning. Monday, The 3d. Instant, we advanced the second time against Sligo, and the same Orders to be observed, as was on Saturday; Lieut. Fergu∣son, and 20 Men more were lest to guard the Baggage, and Prey, which was order'd to march in the Rear; about 12, we took up our former ground, against Sligo; about 3, Coll. Michelburne divided his Men in∣to two Divisions, leaving the Major, and Sir Francis Hamilton, to com∣mand the Right Division, on that side; and when the Tide served, led the Lest Division, forced the Passage, over the River, and Besieged Sli∣go, on the other side; that night he dispatched away an Express to Bal∣lyshannon, for Ammunition and Bread. Tuesday, The 4th. Instant, the Coll. ordered the Souldiers to build Barrackes, and Provisions of Cowes and Sheep, were given to the Men; as much as they pleased to have. Wednesday, The 5th. Instant, an Express arrived at the Camp, from the Lords Justices, to Coll. Michelburne, not to make any further attempt against Sligo, for that the General had taken other Measures, without his Excellencies, or their particular Order, which commands were signi∣fied to him, from their Lordships; between 11 and 12, the Garrison beat a Parley.
Thursday morning, being the 6th. Instant, Capt. Forward, and his Troop, Capt. Vaughan, and his Troopes, with others of the Militia, de∣serted their Posts; the former forces his Passage at Ballysadeare-Bridge, and plunders the Country, and about 60 miles through the Mountains, makes to his home. This day, about 3 in the afternoon, being the 6th. of this Instant, Articles were concluded with the Garrison, and the Major, and Coll. Scot's Brother, dispatch'd away, with the said Articles, to be sign'd by the General. This evening, Capt. William Stewart was ordered to divide what Prey was left, equal, amongst the Militia, and standing Army; and the same night, the Militia seized on the whole, as well what belonged to the standing Army, as their own, and intirely Deserted the Camp, leaving Coll. Michelburne, and Sir Francis Hamilton (the River being between) in apparent peril of being cut off by the Garrison; the said Coll. and Sir Francis Hamilton, had left them but 150 Men, each, and a Troop of Dragoons; the Garrison of Sligo being this time 2 Regiments, Captain Vaughan prevailed with his Men to Desert, promising them a Barrel of Beer, at Bunccanagh, the place of his Residence. Friday, The 7th. of this Instant, the Detachement, under the Com∣mand of Sir Francis Hamilton, and Capt. Anthony Shomberge, were or∣dered to cross the River, and join the Collonel, on a certain Account of O Donnell's advance, with a Body of Men, to beat up the Camp. Saturday morning, being the 8th. Instant, the Forces were ordered to decamp, and march back to Ballyshannon; the Coll. staying behind, ac∣companied with Sir Francis Hamilton, Capt. Charles Hamilton, Capt. Wil∣liam Steward, and other Officers of the Militia, with the two Troops of Dragoons, of the standing Army, to observe the motion of the Enemy; but finding the Garrison not inclined to Sally out, about 9 that morn∣ing drew off, and marched to Ballyshannon.
In which, fore-going Journal, it is discovered, that one Forward, a Militia Captain, deserted his Post, and not only lost the taking the Town, that time, but he had like to have been the ruine of those few Forces the Coll. had left with him. About the latter end of August, he finds the said Capt. Forward, at Ballyshannon, and gave order for his Confinement; and for an Example, to the rest of the Militia, for his Cowardise and Miscemeanours, (it being the third time he so unworthily gave the E∣nemy Encouragement) sent the said Capt. John Forward Prisoner to Ge∣neral Ginkel, who ordered him to give in Baile, to answer his Misdea∣mour: But, instead of being called to an account, he informes the Lords Justices, by many salse Allegations, and Affidavits, against Coll. Michel∣burne, and had two Months time to act his Villany, whilst the Collonelwas reducing Sligo. And, amongst the rest, one Robb, a Tobacco-Sel∣ler, at our Camp, and Confederate with Forward, swears to 6000 black Cattle, and innumetable Sheep, and Horses: And as soon as the salse Affidavits were made, before the Lords Justices, he is sent away to Lon∣don, to the King and Council; and that all things should have Success, he is sent to a Counsel as unworthy as themselves; to enlarge on Robb's Af∣fidavit, and on the 3d. of December, the Petition of George Robb was read before the King and Council. And in the Prayer of the Petition, desires that it may not be returned back into Ireland, for that it was there alrea∣dy, which shews, that the Villain had no mind it should be there, for that he was so well known. And at a Conspiracy at Londonderry, held by Forward, and Vaughan; Vaughan declared they had laid so deep a Foundation for the ruine of him, meaning Coll. Michelburne, that it was impossible for him to escape. But that extraordinary Action, in taking Sligo, he was fearful would spoil all their measures, this was told Coll. Michelburne, by Capt. Henry Hare. It will not be amiss to give you the Prayer of his Petition in length. The Prayer of Robb's Petition to the King. MAY it therefore please Your Majesty, to take the same into Your Princely Consuleration; and that the said Coll. Michelburne, Capt. Boyd, and all others concerned, may personally appear before Your Majesties, to answer your Petitioner's complaint, and that your Petitioner may not be re∣turned into Ireland, having already made his complaints there; and that Your Majesty will likewise be pleased to grant an Order, to Humphty Booth, Roger Smith, and William Nicholson of Sligo, Esq; and to Andrew Knox, John Hamilton, of the County of Donegall, Esq; and Robert Delapp, of Ballyshannon, Merchant, to examine such Witnesses as the Pe∣titioner shall bring before them; and upon the Return, and Reaning the De∣positions, so taken, Your Majesty will be further pleased to grant such fur∣ther Order, for the Petitioner's Relief, in the Premises, as to Your Majesty shall seem meet. And your Petitioner, will euer Prey, &c. Ch. Mountague.
The Reference. At the Court at White Hall, the 30th. of December, 1691. Present, The King's most Excellent Majesty, UPON Reading the annexed Petition of George Robb, Merchant, and several Inhabitants of the Country of Donnegall, and Sligo, complaining of Coll. Michelburne, Capt. Boyd, and others, under their command, for taking away Goods, black Cattle, Sheep, and Horses, from the Petitioners. It is this day ordered, by his Majesty in Council, That it be, and it is hereby, referred to the Right Honourable, the Lords Justices of Ireland, to examine the Petitioners Allegations, and to give such Orders and Directions therein, as their Lordships shall see Cause. Part of Robb's Affidavit, as followeth, and let the Readet judge the rest. THAT several of the Inhabitants applied themselves to the said Coll. and particularly, Mr. Matthew Ormsby, a Protestant Inhabitant, and shewed him the said Gen: Ginkel's Protection, and that he was a Pro∣testant, never in Arms, and that his Cattle had been taken up by his Party. and were under his Guard.; but the said Coll. did never give him any order nor restore him the said Cattle. Now to prove what George Robb swore is extream false. See the fol∣lowing Certificate from Mr. Matthew Ormsby, whom he instances as a Per∣son prejudic'd. A Certificate from the Protestant Inhabitants, in the County of Sligo.
WE the undernamed Persons, being Protestants, and Inhabitants of the Barrony of Tirrecus, in the County of Sligo, do acknowledge to have received, by order of Coll. Michelburne, one hundred and twenty Cowes, in full satisfaction of all the Cowes, Horses, and Sheep, taken from us, and the rest of the Protestants, of the said Barrony, and County, latelytaken from us, by the men under the command of the said Coll. the 16th. day of August, 1691. Matthew Ormsby. John Shenan. Dugdall Boyd. Matthew John Boyd. Kath. Browne. John Ormsby. Anne Griffith. Robb's CHARACTER. Port of Sligoe, THESE may certifie all Persons concerned, That George Robb was formerly an Inhabitant of this place, and a Shop-keeper here for seve∣ral years together; In which Station, he, the said George Robb, proved so troublesom and litigious, amongst his Neighbours, both in the Town and Coun∣try; That he hath deservedly fallen under a very evil fame and report, with the Inhabitants, his Neighbovrs, of all sorts, having been very often found guilty of as great villany and knavery, in his dealings here, as are practised, and perpetrated, by the most profligate Villaines, under which untoward Cir∣cumstances, and Character, the said George Robb was forced to leave this Place, and Country; and since he did so, we are credibly informed, from o∣thers, that he hath continued his indeavours to render his Character as no∣toriousty Evil, in all places, as it was whilst he lived an Inhabitant amongst us, here; The Collectors of this Port desiring a Character of this George Robb, we have certfied our Knowledg of him, this sixth day of Fe∣bruary, 1691. Phil. Cox. Law. de Butts. George Croston, Provost, William Cranford. Ja. Barret. This from the Sheriff of the County, I Have known George Robb, these several Years, and always knew him to have the Character of a shifting knavish Fellow, in his Dealings, more I cannot say, then that I am satisfied this is Truth. William Nicholson. So much for George Robb, Merchant.
The Charge against John Forward, a Militia Captain, sworn by the several Persons under-written. COllonel Michelburne having received Orders from his Excellency, Lieut. Gen. Ginkel, to Summons Sligo, did on the first of August, last, ap∣pear before the Town, and delivered his message to Sir Teige O Regan, the Governour; but finding his Advantage then appearing so great, did on Mon∣day, following, prosecute his Siege, which had so great Success, that he brought them to Articles; and that the Garrison had been undoubtedly, in the Obedience of Their Majesties, had not Capt. Forward, as an Exampse, to the rest of the Militia, deserted his Post, at the noon time of the day, with his whole Troop. Stephen Miller. And. Nisbet. That at Ballisadoe-Bridge, be forced his passage, against the Out-guards, and went and plundered the protected Persons. Robert Wilson. Robert Robinson. That he willfully, maliciously, and contrary to Order, broke the Articles that were signed, and sealed, by the General's command, in behalf of Their sacred Majesties, in Order to the delivery of the Garrison, and Forts of Sligo; that he violated the General's, and Michelburne's Protections; that he plunder'd, stripp'd, and prey'd, the protected, as well as those not protect∣ed. notwithstanding, the Protections were produc'd, and that without respect of Persons. Samuel Ferguson. That he drove away to the number of 800 black Cattle, besides 100 Horses, and Mares, and loaded 38 Horses of the plunder, of several sufficient mens Houses, with Beds, Blankets, Sheets, Ruggs, Pors, Kettles, and with all sorts of Mens and Womens Cloathes, and a great quantity of woollen and Linnen Yarn, notwithstanding, he was commanded the contrary. Samuel Ferguson.
That when Coll. Michelburne heard of the said Capt. Forward's return, with the Prey, so unjustly gotten, he sent Capt. Manson, with a small par∣ty of men, to stop the said Forward, who (in a Rebellious and Mutinousmanner) drew up his Troop, in defiance of the said Collonel, and said, he cared not one F— for him, the said Coll. or any Authority he had. James Manson. That when the said Officer returned, and gave an account, to the said Coll. Michelburne, of Capt. Forward's mutiny; he, the said Coll. was forced to send two Troops of Dragoons after him, 13 miles, before he could be brought to deliver back part of the Cattle, he had carried away. John Hamilton. Andrew Nisbett. This is the greatest part of what was alledged against him before the Lords Justices. All this considered, Coll. Michelburne had very good reason to send such a man Prisoner to Lieut. Gen. Ginkel. Boyl, December the 9th. 1691. The Lord Kingston's Letter, THere is a Trial to be, the 15th. of this month, betwixt Coll. Michelburne, and Capt. Forward, of the County of Donnygall, concerning a Prey, taken by the latter, near this Town, the 6th. of August, last, my Tenants were for the most part concerned, and all that were, had Protections, and Certificates, of claiming the benefit of the Lords Justi∣ces Proclamation, in July. Forward was most barbarous in the thing, and vallued no good Qualification, the People were under then, which none, in the Kingdom, could be under better; their Submission being as early as it could be, and their Behaviour, since the War, worthy of Justice, at least, my printed Protection from the General, in their Fa∣vour, produced at the taking of the Prey, met equal dis-reguard; some Informations, taken by me, on this occasion, will be found in the hands of Mr. John Brett, now in Dublin; my request to you, is to appear, a∣gainst Forward, at the Trial, and keep him, at least, under such Circum∣stances, as may find the poor oppressed Subjects earliest Justice; you shall not want sufficient Proof, to this purpose, on your reasonable warning, at any time; and your care shall have the Acknowledgement of, SIR, Your Friend, Kingston. To Mr. William Donnelly, in Dublin.
Mr. Brett will be found at Mr. Bradys, at the Black Lyon, Pill Lane. Be sure to retain a good smart Council, and let me find you omit no∣thing, and that you are very active therein. Commissioners, Sligo. The Examination of Jasper Brett, of Brickcliffe, in the said County, taken before the Right Honourable Lord Baron of Kingston. THE said Examinant being duly sworn on the Holy Evangelists, and examined on his Oath, deposeth, That Capt. Forward, high sheriff, of the County of Dunnigall, and his Militia Troops, on, or a∣bout, the Sixteenth of August, last, preffed this Examinant, and leveral other protected Persons, in the said County, who lived either in their dwelling Houses, or other Places, assigned them, by Coll. Wasehearth, from whom they took Protections, and Certificates, of submitting some Weeks before to the Lords Justices Declaration; that this Examinant, being that day (at the time of the taking the Prey) on his return from the Boyl, to his own House, did meet the said Forward, and part of the Prey, near Bellanafad, within three miles of the Boyl, to whom this Examinant complained of the Injustice done him; particularly therein, having Coll. Wisehearth's Protection, and Certificate, of the twentieth of July, his Landlord, Gilbert Ormsby, of Toberraddy, in the County of Roscomen, Esq; his Protection, Licensed thereunto, by his Excellency Lieutenant General Ginkle; and one Collonel Michelburne's Protection, to whom this Examinant applied himself, upon his first Appearance, before Sligo, and who was farther tollerated by him, by way of Prote∣ction, in Writing, to live in his own House, to whom the said Forward replied, That he did not value, not would regard his Protection, but would be civil to him, as a Gentleman; that this Examinant insisted more particularly on his Protection from Coll. Michelburne. under whose command, the said Forward came into the County; the said Forward replied, he would not obey it, that he thought himself as sufficient as Michelburne, that that night he would not suffer this Examinant to stay with him, where the Prey was kept; that this Examinant attended him the next morning, he found him with Capt Francis King, one of the Justices of the Peace, of the said County, and one Mr. Johnson, Ser∣vant to the Right Honourable the Lord Baron of Kingston, pleading in favour of the protected Country, affirming their due Subjection, to
Their Majesties Government, and offering my Lord Kingston's Protection, from his Excellency Lieut. Gen. Ginkel, in favour of his Lordships Te∣nants; all which, met disregard from the said Forward, Consenting on∣ly, at length, to run through the Prey, and leave, as it were, a moiety, but short thereof, as Charity to the infinite number of poor people that followed. This Examinant further saith, that the said Forward took then from him, and his Tenants, forty two Cowes, besides Calves, and Heisers, a riding Nagg, and Twelve Garroons, and Mares. And farther saith, That those that called at his House, when Michel∣burne's Protection was produced them, tore the same, and threw it in the Dirt. And further saith, That no part of the said Prey, was nearer Balli∣more, than this Examinant's House, who was, as aforesaid, tollerated to live in his House, about four miles distance from Ballymore. That the rest of the said Prey, for the most part, was taken within two or three miles of the Boyle. And further saith not, taken before me, December the 1st. 1691. Kingston. The Lords Justices Letter to the Lord Nottingham, Principal Se∣cretary of State. My Lord, SOmetime since we received Her Majestie Commands, by your Lordship, to inquire into the reason of Coll. Michelburne's with∣drawing the Bloccade of Sligo, before the delivery of it, pursuant to the first Capitulation, which we could not do, till the Campaign was over, since then, we have examined the matter, which at first appear∣ed to us, as if the said Coll. had causelesly left his Post, and that the E∣nemy took that Advantage to break their Artieles, and refused to de∣liver up the Town. But upon hearing Witnesses, produced by those, who charged this miscarriage upon him; and also, his Defence, and Witnesses produced to prove the truth thereof; we do not find there was any just cause to Charge the said Coll. Michelburne, with any neg∣lect,
or default. But it appeared to us upon the Proof, and Examina∣tion aforesaid; that his drawing off from thence was unavoidable, and that he could no longer continue there, without the certain ruine of those few Forces remaining with him, which we desire your Lordship to lay before His Majesty, My Lords, Your Lordships most humble Servant. Gha. Porter. Tho. Conningsby. To the Right Honourable, the Earl of Nottingham, Principal Secretary of State. To conclude, Here, you see, is a just and true Account, of Coll Mi∣chelburne's faithful Discharge, of his Duty both to Their Majesties, and his Country, and as we say, He is a good Soldier, that goes no farther than he is commanded; and by the fore-going Discourse, he had no po∣sitive Orders for going against Sligo; yet when they found he had so good Success, they highly applauded him, and incouraged him to pro∣secute that which he had so fortunately begun. For says the Lords Justi∣ces, You cannot do your King a greater Service, then to get that place; says the General, I have directed O Donnel to join you, to endeavour the Re∣ducement of Sligo, which your good Fortune has already brought to Submis∣sion. And in another Letter, from his Excellency, he acquaints the Coll. That he had ordered the Militia, that lay at Athlone, to march to the North, and be posted as he shall direct; and after the care you have used in this Affair, I am sorry it did not succeed: However, you have done your part very well, and would make a good Addition to your Services, if you could yet find any way for treating with Sir Teague O Regan, and getting the place. You see that he so treated with Sir Teague O Regan, with his drawn Sword, as to beat him out of Sligo. Nor in the whole, can there be reasonably the least shadow of complaint, to charge Coll. Michelburne with any Mis-be∣haviour through his whole Service; though, there are not wanting, those malicious people, who not only study to render him little, but if possi∣ble to make him uncapable of serving his King or Country, and to have him turned out of His Majesties Service, and his Regiment broken. Such envious Spirits, us true, are at work, and though perhaps his Martial Education has not so intirely qualified him for a Courtier, to be ready guard, against those secret Machinations against him: However, he thanks Heaven, that he lives in an Age, where Virme and Honour are their own Supporters, Desert and Fidelity stand their own Court-Friends, and their Foundation too strong to be supplanted by Parasites or Flatterers. As some farther Testimonials of the Collonel's Behaviour. I shall only subjoin these two Certificates, one from the City of London∣derry, and the other from Colraine.
WE the Mayor, Aldermen, and Burgesses of the City of Londonderry, do hereby Attest and Certifie, that Col∣lonel John Michelburne, Governour of the said City, in and since the Siege of Derry, having his Regiment, or a great part of them, Quartered here many Months kept the said Garaison in good Order, Discipline, and Temper, whilst his own Regiment were Quartered among us, and paid their Quarters, and was careful of the Preservation of the Place, both from any Insults of the Enemy, and from all Irregularities of his Soldiers, and by all means in his power, made his Government and Interest in this Garrison, on all Occasions easie and pleasing to us, for which Services and Civil Deportment, he was Elected and Sworn Al∣derman of this City. In Testimony whereof, We have hereunto set our Hands and Affixed the Common Seal of this City, the Second day of February, 1690. Ger. Squire, Mayor. Samuel Norman. Alex. Iomkins. Alex. Lecky. Tho. Moncreife Arvice. Hen. Ash Arvice. Wil. Crookshanks, Com. Rob. Shennan. Will. Morisen. John Harvey. Fran. Nevil. Albert Hall. Alex. Coningham. Tho. Moore. Samuel Leeson. John Gilling. John Crookshanks. John Nightingall. Geo. Gravel. John Mogridge. Will. Mackie. Rob. Harvey.
WE the Inhabitants of the Town of Colraine, do Certifie, that during the time the Regiment belonging to the Honourable Collonel John Michelburne, Governour of London∣derry, did Quarter and keep Garrison in this place, both Officers and Soldiers, behaved themselves very Orderly, and Civily, to the Town and Gountrey, paying thankfully for what they cal∣led for, all which we Certisie as Truth, to whom it may Con∣cern. Dated at Colraine, this third day of February, Anno Dom. 1690. William Godfrey, Mayor. Rich. Adams. Edm. Haward. Alex. Mac Phillip. Daniel Browne. Richard Lynam. Thomas Lance. John Twaddel. David Wilson. John Ga' James Oustiane. John Gardner. William Ross. Hugh Bankhead.
WE the Inhabitants of the Town of Antrim, Do hereby Certifie, That during the time the Honourable Collonel John Michelburne, Governour of Londonderry, his Regiment did Quarter, and keep Gar∣rison in this Place; both Officers and Soldiers behaved themselves Civily, without Robbing, or Plundering the Town or Conntrey, but thankfully paying for what they call'd for: All which we Certifie as Truth, to whom it may concern. Given under our Hands this 28th. of Januar. 1690/1. James Shennan. William Stewart. John Mac Master. Tho. Gredell. William Colvill. William Whitby. Alexander Hanna. John Nabb. William Young. Rob. Weire. John Brigson. Thomas Spencer. Robert Coningham. FINIS.
