M3115 31354638 110219
Advertisement or the more Easie and Speedy Collecting of Debts. WHEREAS upon observation of the great trouble, expence of Money, loss of time, and other inconveniences, that divers Cre∣ditors, Merchants, Tradesmen, Landlords, Executors, Admini∣trators, Legatees, Widows, Orphans, and other Persons, are daily put unto n the Soliciting, Collecting, and getting in their respective Debts, Rents, nnuities, Legacies, and other Sums of Money to them due; a method is ontrived for the more speedy and effectual Collecting, and receiving of the ame, for and in the behalf of the said Creditors or other Persons aforesaid, without trouble to themselves or Servants, or loss of time in the Solicitati∣n, which will be of great ease and advantage to all such people in their Negotiations, and of singular benefit to Trade. And whereas for the reducing the said design to practise, the Contrivers nd Managers thereof, have taken an House in Star Court, over against St. Peters Church in Cornhil, where they or their Agents for whom they will be esponsible, do and shall daily attend to treat and agree with any Person or Persons, concerning the premises, or any of them, according to a publick Advertisement already given in that behalf. Now for further satisfaction and encouragement of all such, as shall be willing and desirous to have their Debts or other sums of Money Collected or them by this expedient; it is thought fit to give them this brief account of the Security they shall find, and the small charge they shall be at in ma∣ing use thereof, Viz. First, That the said Managers, or their Agents, will expect no Premium, or recompence, except for Entry; 6 d. for all sums under 10 l. and 1 s. for all above, to be paid unto them by the Original Creditor, for or in conside∣ration of their Negotiation, in and about the premises, but by way of De∣duction, or allowance of what shall be agreed upon in that behalf, out of so much only of the Debt or Sum of Money claimed, as shall be actually re∣ceived and brought in thereby, and no more; and if nothing be received, no Premium will be expected. Secondly, That though the Premium which they shall agree for will be more or less, according to the differing circumstances and nature of the Debt or sum of Money to be Solicited and gotten in; yet it will in all cases be so reasonable, as will come to less than the expence of time and money that most People are now at in getting their Debts by any other way. Thirdly, As to such as shall desire it, and where the Debt or sum to be gotten in is not transient, they will agree to Collect their Debts, Rents, or other sums, either Annually, Quarterly, Monthly, or Weekly, if occasion be, and to give like account thereof. Fourthly, That care will be taken by the said Managers, that as well all
Claims made at the House or Place aforesaid, of any Debts or sums of mo∣ney, as all payments made there, or to any their Agents or Collectors, be duly and exactly entred and Registred there; and that as soon as any such Debt or sum of money shall be received, notice thereof shall be immediate∣ly given to the Party concerned, to the end it may be disposed of as he shall direct. Fifthly, That in the mean time, the Creditor or other person concerned, shall have a due and faithful account sent him of the Debtors answers from time to time upon every demand made, or if he please may resort to the House or Place above mentioned for further satisfaction, where he shall find Memorandums thereof duly entred. Sixthly, That where any difficulty or delay shall arise, in the getting in of any such Debts or sums of money, by reason of the present inability of the Debtor or the like, such new and easie ways of satisfaction are considered of to be propounded and used, as shall be for the better enabling and encou∣raging the Debtors to comply therewith. Seventhly, That where the Executors or Administrators of any Debtor or other Person owing Money in his life time, shall pretend they have not Assets of the Testators or Intestates in their hands, peculiar instructions are prepared by the said Managers, to be given to their Officers in such case, how and by what means to find out and discover, (as far as possibly it may be) the truth of such pretence, and to give an account thereof to the Creditor or other Person concerned, which cannot be well performed by the Persons themselves, or their Servants. Eighthly, That to this end, and for the better management of the whole affair, they imploy in their service none but sober and discreet Persons; who besides the testimony of their good behaviour, have given good security for the faithful discharge of their respective trusts; and therefore the said Mana∣gers will be responsible for them to all Persons concerned, touching all things they shall do in or about the premises. And Lastly, The like Houses or Places the Managers intend speedily to set∣tle in like manner, in other parts of the City and Suburbs, for the more easie and ready resort of all people thereunto; and likewise to have the like in all Counties throughout the Kingdom: And to settle a Correspondency in all places in that behalf, of which timely notice shall be given. Furthermore, Notice is hereby given, that all Persons that are unprovi∣ded of servants, skilled and expert in the telling of money, may be supplied from this house, with Persons fitly qualified in that behalf, to receive and pay any sums of money that shall be desired; and in the paying it out again if any bad money, or short in tale, shall be found, the same shall be made good, in consideration of what shall be agreed upon for so doing.
