P461 13087426 97311
A DISCOURSE Sent to the Late King Iames, To persuade him to Embrace the Protestant Religion, BY Dr. SAMVEL PARKER, Late Lord Bishop of OXFORD. To which are prefixed TWO LETTERS; The FIRST, From Sir Leolyn Ienkins, on the same Subject; The SECOND, From the said Bishop, with the DISCOURSE. Printed from the Original Manuscript Papers, without Observation or Reflection. LONDON: Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Taylor near Stationers-Hall. MDCXC.
To the READER. THese Papers accidentally falling into my hands, 'twere injustice to conceal them from the World, when so much benefit may be reap'd from their Publication; and though there are many Reasons to be alledged for Printing so useful a Discourse, yet none was so prevalent with me as the thoughts of doing our dead Author Justice, at least as to that part of his Accusation wherein he has been adjudg'd, if not professedly, yet a well-wisher at least to the Roman Catholick Religion; that he was so to the Person he sends these following lines, is evident from the Design of them, which was to bring him over to the Communion of the Church of England; a Design, considering the Circumstances of those distracted Times, so very seasonable and honest, that the D— Himself was forc'd to acknowledge as much, and after∣wards thank'd the Dr. for it, and had God given it its due Effect, we might all have thank'd him too: But however the Discourse may have miss'd of its aim where intended; I hope it may not want some Proselytes of the same Persuasion, for whose sake 'tis chiefly publish'd. As to what concerns the Author himself, I shall be wholly silent, the World labouring under too great a Prejudice to hear his Panegyrick with Patience: The following Tract, with his other Learned Writings are his best Ora∣tor; but if any Mans Curiosity should lead him to a far∣ther desire of knowing his Character, if he pleases, he may better take it from himself.
DEPOSITUM SAMUELIS PARKER Nuper Episcopi Oxoniensis: Qui hoc Elogio posteris commendari voluit. SImultates, & privatas inimicitias Non modo non fovi, Sed contempsi. Solâ integritate fretus, Nec vivere Erubesco; Nec mori reformido. Divinam Providentiam Non minùs credo, quam opto. Hanc vitam, utcun{que} sustineo, Meliorem expecto; Fide non infelix, Spe felicior. Multa legi, cogitavi, scripsi Omnia ab ipsis rei cujus{que} Principiis exorsus; Nec tamen ulla scire videar meliùs Quam quae per fidem accepi.
Sir Leolyn Jenkins His Letter to the late King. THIS Discourse (or what else you please to call it) was brought me by the Canterbury Carrier; your R. H. will see in the loose Leaf join'd to this, how it comes to be addressed to my Hands. The Author I have known long since; he was Chaplain to my late Lord Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, his Name is Dr. Samuel Parker, (at present) Arch-Deacon of Canterbury; as I have not had any Communication with him of any kind, these ma∣ny Years, so the coming of this Treatise to my Hands is a perfect Surprise; yet seeing the Subject matter of it is that which we pray and contend for, I durst not but commit it to this present Conveyance, beseeching Almighty God to give a Blessing upon it.
For Sir Leolyn Jenkins. SIR, HAving been lately confin'd with a great Indisposition of Health, and not knowing how the Divine Providence might be pleas∣ed to dispose of me, after I had setled my own private Af∣fairs as well as I could, an Extravagant. Thought thrust it self ve∣hemently upon me to leave a Legacy for His Royal Highness, which in those better Intervals I enjoyed, I composed, and out of that eager Zeal. I have for the true Settlement of the Church of England, can∣not forbear to present it. And in order to it make bold it to your Honor, and if your Curiosity will support your Patience to peruse it, I submit it entirely to your Wisdom to dispose of it as you please. And though I have no reason to expect any success from so weak on Endeavor, yet the very  of the Design in a Priest of the Church of England▪ will at least  it self for I have only addrest my self to His Royal Highnesses Conscience without any re∣gard to his worldly Interest; and that is a thing that any Church-man that has any sincere love for his Religion is not only authorised, but obliged to do; and as for the Event of such unlikely Attempts, they are to be entirely left to the over ruling  god. I request the favor of your Perusal, and if you utterly ridiculous, to convey it to His Highness. If you are temp∣ted to smile at my Folly, I beseech you to impute it to my present Weak∣ness, and when I am in a better Condition of Health, for which I thank God I am now in a very fair way, perhaps I shall be as forward as any to laugh at the oddness of the Attempt. But whatever it is, I am sure it has the warrant of a good meaning from, Sir, Your most Humble Servant, S. PARKER.
SIR, WHat Addresses, or whether any at all, have been made to Your Royal Highness by the Divines of the Church of England, for the Satisfaction of your Conscience, I am altogether ignorant. Tho I cannot suppose that none have been made, because I know great numbers of Learn∣ed Men of our Communion, both Zealous for their Religion, and also for Your Highnesses Service here, and Souls welfare hereafter. But then this I have too much Reason to fear, that some of them may not have taken that Method; nor have proceeded upon those Princi∣ples that they ought. For the Men that have ever since his Majesties Return, been, or at least appeared, most forward, in defiance of the Church of Rome, have been so unhappy in their Zeal and Opposition against it, as together with the Papal Usurpations, to dig up the ve∣ry Foundations of the Christian Church: or, at the same time that they endeavor to pull down the Pope's present high and uncanoni∣cal Pretences, destroy all that Divine Authority that was vested by our Blessed Saviour in the Apostles and their Successors, for the Guidance and Government of Souls; so as to make every private Person the only Judg of his own Faith, without any defence to the Direction of his Spiritual Guides and Governors: which is in effect no less than really to cancel that Promise that our Blessed Saviour made to be assistant to them in the Execution of their Office, to the End of the World; for if he make good his Promise, that alone is more than enough to challenge the regular Submission of private Christians to their Decrees, as they would not Rebel against our Saviour's own Institution. This I know has been the great stum∣bling Block to the Roman Catholicks, that the Church of England neither pretends to, nor owns any such Power, as that of a living Judge; but that it either resolves all its Authority into the State, or leaves all its Members at their own entire liberty, to choose their
Religion as they please, without being accountable to the Church for it. These, I must confess, are very common Opinions among us, but then they are very new too, and as great Strangers to the Church of England, as to the Church of Rome: being at first started about his Majesties Return, when some young Men that had been fanati∣cally Educated, seeing the Church of England Restored, and either having a mind to its Preferments, or to bring themselves off from the Principles of their Education, pretended that there was no such thing as any particular Form of Church-Government, setled by our Saviour or his Apostles; and therefore that it was left entirely to the power of the Civil Magistrate to Establish what Form He Himself liked best. And for that Reason, and for that alone, seeing his Majesty was pleased to restore Episcopacy, they thought it their Duty to submit to that as to all other Civil Laws and Constitutions. But, alas, these are not Church, but State-Divines, and not only Traytors to the Liberties of the Church of England, but profest Enemies to the very Being of a Christian Church; which as such, subsists merely upon our Saviour's own Charter and Institution, by virtue whereof all Christians are bound to associate in a visible Society, and to submit to the Decrees and Ordinances of those Governors that he hath set over it. This, I say, is the first Principle of a Christian Church, and is owned by all Men, that either own any such thing as a Church, or understand what they mean by the word. So that the only true State of the Con∣troversie in this Case between Church and Church, is to discover how the Government of the Catholick Church was at first setled by our Saviour: how it descended to after Ages, and who at this time stick closest to the Primitive Institution. And for Your Highnesses full Satisfaction herein, I will make a faithful Representation of the true State of the Primitive Church, and then compare the present Constitution of the Church of Eng∣land, and the Church of Rome; and thereby shew how enormously the Church of Rome, notwithstanding all its high Pretences, hath de∣parted from it, and how honestly the Church of England endeavors to keep to the original Platform; and when I have done this, I shall, with all Humility, submit it to Your Royal Highnesses Wise and Im∣partial Judgment: For I know that in matters relating to Your Souls welfare, You design nothing but Truth, and the best way to
secure it. This I am assured of, not only from the fam'd Integrity, and Generousness of Your Princely Temper, that scorns to admit of the Alloy of Secular Interest into the great Concerns of Conscience, but by that great Courage and Resolution You have shewn for the Maintenance of Your present Perswasion (whatever that is) to Your great Detriment and Disadvantage of Your Affairs in this World. But though I think it most apparently Your present In∣terest to quit that Church, yet I think it too, a very Ignoble, as well as Irreligious Attempt, to make that an Argument for it. And I am afraid, That is one of the highest Prejudices that Your Royal Highness may have conceived against the Church of England, that some Men in it have insisted upon Your worldly Interest too much in a point of Conscience. And yet if by a true and sincere Account of things, I can bring Your Conscience over to the Church of Eng∣land, though I shall not bring Your Conscience to Your Interest, yet I shall make them meet: for if that were satisfied, it is obvious on which side the Advantage lies. And though upon the Supposi∣tion of Conscience being satisfied, Interest might be admitted as an accessional Motive; yet I shall entirely wave all worldly Conside∣rations, and disdain any Assistance that is Foreign to the cause of Religion, and if I did not, I am sure Your Highness would. And therefore I shall only humbly crave leave to represent the true State of the Christian Church, and from thence remonstrate to Your Princely Wisdom, that Your Highness can have no Rea∣son either as a Christian Man or a Christian Prince, to concern Your Self for the Interest, or join with the Communion of the Church of Rome, and that on the contrary you have all the Reason in the World, upon both Accounts, to love and value the Church of England. First then Christianity supposes the Temporal Power of Princes, Civil Government being setled in the World by the general Provi∣dence of God antecedently to our Saviour's particular Institution. And as he found it, so he left it, with an express declaimor of any Pretence to it, in the first place declaring that the Kingdom that he came to establish was not of this World: that is, that he was not invested with any Temporal Jurisdiction. And the truth is, if he had laid claim to any such Power, his Religion had stood upon no better foundation than Mahumetanism it self, that was at first pro∣pagated, and hath been hitherto maintained merely by the Power
of the Sword. But the Design of our Savior's Institution, was pure and unmix'd Religion, and therefore abetted it Self and its Laws with no other Sanctions than only the Rewards and Punishments of the Life to come. And the same Power that he exercis'd himself, he devolv'd upon his Apostles, from them to descend upon their Successors to the End of the World; so that all their Power, what∣ever it is, is of the same Nature with that which himself claim'd whilst on Earth, that is purely spiritual and void of all temporal Coertion. And for this Reason it is evident, that if any Church pretend to any such Power by Virtue of his Grant or Commission, that it is not only a Contradiction to the Nature of Christianity, but an Atheistical Abuse put upon the whole Design of his Institu∣tion. Now upon this Supposition, there are and must be in all King∣doms and Commonwealths where Christianity is entertained and pro∣tected, two distinct Jurisdictions, so as that if one entrench upon or invade the other, it is an equal Violation of Christianity; for if the temporal Prince assume to himself the Exercise of that Power that is peculiarly invested in the Officers of the Church, instead of govern∣ing the Church he destroys it: when every Church, as a Church, is capable of no other Government but what is purely spiritual, and delegated to it by our Saviour's special Commission, after the full Settlement of the Power of Princes. And the same Violation of Christianity is it, if any of the Governors of the Church should challenge any such Power by Virtue of our Savior's Authority, for that were to turn a spiritual into a temporal Kingdom. Now these two Powers being so plainly distinct both in their Na∣ture and Original, they must continue so notwithstanding the Uni∣on of Church and State into one Society. For if the Prince take upon him the sole Government of the Church as such, he acts not only without but against our Savior's Commission, who hath ap∣propriated that Power to another Order of Men; and if the Priest challenge any temporal Jurisdiction as deriv'd from our Savior, he in effect disclaims him, in that he becomes our Savior purely by Virtue of his spiritual Power, and Supremacy over his Church; and therefore to pretend to any other Power deriv'd from him as Head of it, is another way of turning Christ into Mahomet.
But tho the Civil Magistrate have no share of spiritual Authori∣ty, yet hath he a Sovereign Supremacy over the Ecclesiastical State; otherwise he would abate of his Power by the coming of Christia∣nity into the World; which contradicts the first Principle of a Chri∣stian Church, that it makes no Alteration as to Civil Rights: but then this Power over the Church is purely civil too, and relates only to the Ends of Peace and Government in this Life, and is the same that every Prince would have had, tho our Savior had never come into the World; but as for that which he hath peculiarly granted, as he hath granted no part of it to the Civil Magistrate, so it is plain that he hath designedly setled it upon another Order of Men, and it is they alone that have any Right to exercise it. But notwithstanding this new Power, they are never the less Subjects than they were before; and therefore all Christian Princes have the same Supremacy over all the Powers of the Church, as to the Ends of Civil Government, and as far as concerns the Affairs of this Life, as they could have had if there were no such Powers at all. The grand Difficulty in this Case is the Danger of Competition between these two Powers; for if they happen to contradict each other, as they too often do, Which shall over-rule? If a Man obey his Prince contrary to the Prescription of his spiritual Guide, he may endanger his Soul; if he obey the Bishop, he disobeys his Prince, and so deservedly forfeits his Neck to Justice. But this Difficulty, as big as it may appear, is clearly remov'd by this one Considerati∣on, That the Christian Church, and all the Authority in it, is foun∣ded upon the Cross of Christ, and that not only claims no Power in this World, but obliges to an entire Submission to all the Powers of it; so that no Opposition can lawfully be made, even to the most unlawful Commands of Sovereign Princes, but all Christians are still bound to do as they did in the Primitive Times, to lay down their Lives with all manner of Meekness, if their Governors, whether right or wrong, require it. This is the true and honest State of the Christian Church, That every Christian Man be faithful to the Laws of his Religion, and if he suffer for it he shall be compensated for it with those Rewards that his Religion promises. So that in all Cases of Competition both Powers so prevail, as to attain their respective Ends. The Civil Power over-rules as to all Effects of this Life, and being thus gently submitted to, secures the Peace and Quiet of this
World, and that is the End for which it was instituted. And the spiritual Power attains its Effect as to the World to come, the Sal∣vation of the Souls of Men by their conscientious Loyalty to their Religion; and that is all that it aims at, or pretends to; and every Man that professeth Christianity, takes it up upon this Condition. So that all Resistance to secular Powers upon pretence of Religion, is a direct Contradiction to the nature of the Christian Faith, and ano∣ther open Apostacy from Christianity to Mahumetanism: And that I am afraid will prove a gross Blemish upon the Church of Rome, that it pretends to a Power not only equal, but superior to Princes: so that the Popes, as the Vicars of Christ, may not only contend with them by force of Arms, but may in some Cases depose them from their Thrones; which if truly consider'd, is no less than rank Bla∣sphemy against our blessed Savior, by turning his pure Religion into an Artifice of secular Interest. But beside this, this Point of Competition is to be chiefly deter∣min'd by the Matter about which it is employ'd. If the Contest be about an Article of Faith, or any Fundamental Rule of Religion, and the Prince will interpose his Power, tho no Man is oblig'd to obey him, because it is certain he never was entrusted with any such Power by our Saviour, yet is he to be submitted to with all Meek∣ness, by virtue of the former Principle, that requires peaceable Sub∣mission to Government from Christians in all Cases, for the quiet of the World. But if the Contest be about a Ritual of Worship, or an emergent Rule of Discipline, about which the Governors of the Church have a Power in themselves to make Canons and new Pro∣visions, yet are they indispensibly bound to submit the Exercise of it to their Prince, because that's the first Principle of Christianity, as far as they can without Violence to the Laws of their Religion, to comport with Civil Government; so that tho this Power be seated properly in the Church; yet out of that great Respect and Duty that the Christian Law requires to Princes, they are bound to make use of it with all Deference to Sovereign Authority; especially because the Church is accountable to it for its peaceable Behavior in the Com∣monwealth, and therefore ought to give Security that it will neither disturb the State, nor invade the Sovereign Prerogative upon this Pretence; which because it is possible for them to do, and some have done, they are concern'd both in Duty and Modesty to submit all
their Proceedings to his Judgment. And this, as far as I understand, is the true State of the Church of England, in the Act commonly called the Submission of the Clergy, in which they do not alie∣nate ar grant away their Power of making Canons, but only for preventing all future Jealousies in the State against them, they give all the Assurance they can, that they will not presume to publish their Decrees without their Sovereign Lord's Consent and Approbation. This short Account is the true State of the Bounds of Civil and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and that being setled, the next thing to be considered, is to find out what was the true and original Settlement of the Christian Church; and by that we shall be able to inform our selves of the good or bad state of any present Church, as it agrees, or disagrees with it. First then, there is no one thing more clear and evident in the Christian Religion, than that our Saviour vested the whole Apo∣stolical Order with a Supremacy of Power over his Church, and that they in pursuance of this his Divine Institution ordained Bi∣shops to succeed them in their Supremacy of Power through all following Ages. That the Apostles were superior to all other Officers in the Church, is out of question, and granted on all hands; and that the Bishops succeeded them, is as unquestionable, from all the clearest Records of Antiquity; their Succession, especially in the most famous Churches, being derived by the most ancient Wri∣ters from the Apostles themselves, and was as easily and certain∣ly known to those Men that have transmitted it to us, as any learned Man may know the Succession of the Archbishops of Canterbury, from the Reign of Queen Eliz. to this time. But as this Power was at first given to the Apostles, so was it equally divided among them; so that every one exercis'd su∣preme Power within the Bounds of his own Jurisdicti∣on,Epist. 52. and all together in the Catholick Church; or as S. Cyprian states it, that as there was but one Church founded by Christ throughout all the World, but this Church was made up of several distinct Members, so was there but one Episcopacy, and that consists in the Agreement and unanimous care of all Christian Bishops: So that the whole Body of the
Church was governed by the whole Body of the Apostles and their Successors, but the several parts of it were allotted to the Charge of single Bishops, who governed them with particular Care, but so as to have regard to the Peace and Unity of the Whole. This is the only Notion that this wise and good Man (than whom there is not a more eminent Example for both upon Record) seems in all his Writings to have had of the Catholick Church. And as for the Apostles, who were the first Represen∣tatives of it, I cannot find the least Footsteps in all the holy Go∣spels of any particular Prerogative granted to one above the rest. It is true indeed that our Savior often addresses himself to S. Pe∣ter in particular, but then it is evident, that this is done upon particular Occasions, and as evident too, that all the great things that are occasionally spoken of him, are in the Scripture ascrib'd to all the other Apostles. Thus whereas Matth. xvi. our Savior gives him the Keys of Heaven, upon his confessing him to be the Messias, He vests all the Apostles with the same Power, and that with particular solemnity, Iohn xx. 21. And whereas he stiles S. Peter the Rock, or Foundation, upon which he would build his Church, the same Title is given to all the Apostles in other Scriptures, as Ephes. ii. 20. Built upon the Foundation of the Apo∣stles and Prophets, Iesus Christ himself being the chief Corner Stone. And Revel. xxi. 14. The Wall of the City had twelve Foun∣dations upon which were the Names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb. And in all the Gospels, unless when he applies himself particularly to S. Peter upon the Occasion of his Zeal, and For∣wardness in the Faith, our Savior invests them all with an equal Power, especially when he gave them their grand Commission to convert all Nations, Matth. xxviii. 19, 20. So that the Men of the Church of Rome strein the Scriptures with too forc'd a Violence, when out of such slight and accidental Occasions of our Savior's particular Speeches to S. Peter, they would settle such great and high Privileges upon his Person, so as to make him sovereign Lord of all the other Apostles, and sole Monarch of the Universal Church. This Foundation is too slight for the Weight of so great a Building, and so big a Claim requires some∣what a clearer Evidence of Title; and if our Savior had inten∣ded
any such absolute Sovereignty to S. Peter, and made that the Fundamental Principle of his Church, certainly he would have declared it a little more expresly, and not have left so weigh∣ty a Point to be merely surmis'd out of occasional Discourses, of which there are such easie and obvious Reasons to be given, without his ever intending any such design: So that in truth to make so much Noise as the Romanists do about the personal Privi∣leges of S. Peter, upon such poor and slender Pretences, is at once to impose upon the Wisdom of God, as if he had laid the Foun∣dations of his Church so slightly, and to affront the Understan∣dings of Men, as if they thought them so weak as to be per∣suaded to any thing by such poor and precarious Arguings. But yet however I will grant more than can with any decent modesty be demanded from these Texts, and yield that our Sa∣vior designed some considerable Precedency to S. Peter, above all the other Apostles. Yet what is this to that omnipotent Sovereignty that his Holiness challenges over the whole Christi∣an Church, who takes upon himself not only the supreme, but almost the sole Disposal of it; whereas it is too well known, that S. Peter, after the Privileges granted to him, was commanded by an Order of the other Apostles, Acts viii. 14. which could never have been done, if his Power had been Monarchical over them all. Neither do we find him any where exercising any such Sovereignty over them; for tho by reason of his ready Faculty of Speech he was usually the first Speaker, yet we do no where find, that he either challeng'd or practis'd any other Precedency. So that tho he was the first that delivered his Opinion in the Council of Ierusalem, yet it was S. Iames that determined and pronounced the Decree, in that he was Bishop of the Place, as is undeniably evident from the most undoubted Records of An∣tiquity. Which yet he ought not to have done, if S. Peter had been endued with the same Superiority over all the rest of the Apostles, that the Bishop of Rome challenges over all the other Bishops of the Christian Church. But not to insist upon these remote and obscure Footsteps of S. Peter's Primacy in the Scri∣ptures, I will freely grant him out of the Holy Text it self some considerable Precedency: tho when I have done that too, what
is it to the Bishop of Rome, more than it is to the Bishop of An∣tioch or Alexandria, or the Bishops of several other Places, in which S. Peter first planted the Christian Faith: so that the Bi∣shops of all those Places have as fair a Title to be S. Peter's Successors as the Bishop of Rome. And yet this great point I shall be so civil as to admit, and grant that the peculiar Right of Succession to the Privileges of S. Peter (if any such there were) was appropriated to the See of Rome; but still, What is this to that universal Jurisdiction that is challenged by the Bi∣shops of this to this See, as the supreme and infallible Governors of the Catholick Church? For after all other Disputes, 'tis this that is the only dividing Point between us; 'tis this that is the only Fundamental Article of their Church; 'tis this for which they load us so heavily with their honorable Titles of Hereticks and Schismaticks. And so no doubt are we, if his Holiness be vested by Divine Right, with that universal Supremacy that he chal∣lenges over the whole Christian Church. In a word, if we take this one Controversie away, I, for my part, know no other dif∣ference between the Church of England and the Church of Rome as to Ecclesiastical Constitution. But now if this one Point of the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome were the great Foundati∣on of the Christian Faith, (as it must be, if his pretences to it by divine Right are true) it is a very strange thing that there should not be so much as the shadow of any such Authority in all the Records of the Primitive Church. Is it not very odd, that when so many Controversies were started in the Christian Church, both in the Apostles own time, and in the Ages next and imme∣diately following, and that when Almighty God had appointed S. Peter and his Successors in the See of Rome, the certain and undoubted Judges for ending all Controversies, that yet none of the Apostles or Primitive Doctors of the Christian Church, that labor'd so much against Schisms, Heresies, and Divisions, should ever so much as think of or mention such an effectual nay infallible Remedy against them all? One Appeal to the Bishop of Rome had put an End to all further Trouble, and certainly had God vested him with that Power over the whole Christian Church, they could never have been so stupid, as never to have
taken any notice of it, And yet we find not the least mention of it for many hundred years, after the settlement of Christianity in the World. And perhaps the Bishops of Rome themselves had ne∣ver thought of it, had it not been first put into their Heads by the Bishop of Constantinople, by whom it was (as I shall shew in the sequel of this Discourse) first claimed. Some small glimmerings indeed we meet with of some honorary Preeminence or Dignity allowed to the Church of Rome upon the score of its being the Im∣perial City, and by reason of the great resort to it, of its being one of the most competent Witnesses of the true Tradition of Christianity: But that it should have any Jurisdiction over any other Churches out of its own Province, much more such an universal power over all Churches in the World as is now challeng'd, is a Notion so ut∣terly strange and unknown to all Antiquity, that the bare silence of it alone is an irrefragable demonstration of the Novelty of the Pretence. But for the greater Evidence of this thing (which indeed is the first point of Controversie between us) I shall make bold as briefly as I can, to give Your Royal Highness a true and impartial account of the State of the Christian Church from the beginning: and then of the several and gradual Alterations that were by Ecclesiastical Constitutions made in it in after times: and lastly how, and how late the Popes of Rome climb'd up to that infinite Authority, that they have for some Ages exercised, and still claim over the Christian Church. And when I have done all this, I may safely leave it to Your Royal Highnesses Princely Wisdom to judge, what Obligation You can have in Conscience to leave the Communion of the Britannick Church for that of Rome. And in the first place, there is nothing more evident in all the Records of the Primitive Church, than that the Apostles and first Doctors of the Christian Faith modell'd the first Settlement of Churches according to the then present State and Division of the Roman Empire. For though our blessed Saviour settled the Supreme Government of his Church upon his holy Apostles and their Successors, yet he no where prescribed the bounds and li∣mits of every Man's Jurisdiction, but left it, as indeed the Nature of the thing required, to Humane Prudence ot divide the Provin∣ces among themselves, as they should judge most convenient for
the Advantage of their common Christianity. And accordingly we find from the very beginning, that they formed the Jurisdi∣ction of Churches, according to the Civil Judicatures of the Em∣pire; common Prudence directing them so to do, not only for the more speedy Propagation of Christianity by the resort of all People to the Metropolis of the Province, which they therefore constitu∣ted the Mother Church of it, but that whenever the Powers of the World should come in to own Christianity, the better Correspon∣dence might be maintain'd between the States, Civil and Ecclesiasti∣cal. And beside this by making the Head City of every Province the Metropolis of the Church within that Province, upon which the inferior Cities depended as the Centre of Communion, they there∣by admirably secur'd the Unity of the whole Body, while every Epis∣copal Church exercised ordinary Jurisdiction within it self, but was bound, either in cases of great Difficulty, or such as concerned the common Christianity, to have recourse to the Mother-Church. And this was apparently, the Original of the Privilege and Pre∣eminence of some Churches above others from the beginning; not that they ever pretended to any Sovereignty over them in their particular Jurisdictions, but only as the Centre of Ecclesiastical Unity, so as to decide Controversies, whenever any inferior Church appealed to them for their Advice, or to summon Coun∣cils, and preside over them in all Debates that concerned common Christianity. And that this Distribution of Provinces and Bishop∣ricks was setled by the Apostles, seems evident from their own Writings, who every where describe the bounds of Churches, ac∣cording to the Constitution of the Empire. Thus St. Peter directs his Epistle to the several Churches of the Christian Iews, with re∣spect to so many several Provinces, Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bythinia, which as they were distinct Provinces in the Civil Division of the Empire, so were they from that time forward, so many distinct Provincial Sees, in the Communi∣on of the Church. And nothing is more obvious in the Epi∣stles of St. Paul, than that whenever he makes mention of any Church, he either calls it by the name of the Province it self, or the Metropolis or Head City of it. And as this design of conform∣ing the Ecclesiastical State to the Civil, was first set on foot by the Apostles; so was it carefully prosecuted by their Successors, of
which we have an eminent Instance in the Apostolical Canons, (which though they were not compiled by the Apostles themselves, yet they were by Apostolical Men, and such as immediately suc∣ceeded them) where it is decreed in the 34 Canon, That the Bi∣shops of every Nation should acknowledge their Primate or Me∣tropolitan, and honor him as their Head, and do nothing of mo∣ment in the Christian Church wthout his consent, nor he without theirs. Now that this was prescribed by the Apostles themselves, is evident in that, as this Canon was made a very short time after their Decease, so it is not a new Law, but a Ratification of an old Custom, as indeed most of the Apostolical Canons seem to be. This was apparently the Constitution of the Christian Churches in all places of the Empire for the first three hundred years, or the whole interval of time from our Saviour to Constantine, that as every City was governed by its own Bishop, so was every Pro∣vince by its own Metropolitan in his Synod of Bishops, of which there are many Instances in the Records of the Church, though I shall mention but one, as the most eminent of all, and that is, the several Synods that were called about the Paschal Controversie, not long after the time of the Apostles themselves: which as it was canvassed all the World over, so was it debated in so many Pro∣vincial Synods in each whereof the Metropolitan presided; in Palestin, Theophilus Bishop of Caesarea; in Pontus, Palma Bishop of Armastris; in the Proconsular Asia, Policrates Bishop of Ephe∣sus; in Italy, Victor Bishop of Rome; in France, Irenaeus Bishop of Lyons; where every Synod judged for it self, and made its own Decrees, only Victor would have been meddling with the Church of Asia, though as far as appears from records, not from any Au∣thority he pretended to over it, but out of an intemperate Zeal for his own Opinion. But in this he is quickly check'd by the other Churches especially that of France, though of the same Per∣swasion with himself as to the matter of the Controversie, as he would not break the Unity of the Christian Church, which was to be maintained by no other means, than keeping up the Rights of every part of it. And this they admirably preserved by their communicatory Letters between Church and Church, so as no Member of one Church might be admitted to Communion with another without his Letters Testimonial, whereby it was so or∣dered,
that whosoever was Excommunicate out of a particular Church, was shut out of the Church Catholick. Neither could a Bishop exercise any part of his Office in any other Diocese than his own, much less any other Province; and if he did, his own Me∣tropolitan was obliged to throw him out of Communion, and all other not to take him in. And this was the occasion of that sixth famous Canon of the first Council of Nice under Constantine the Great, that confirms to the three great Churches of Rome, Alex∣andria, and Antioch, their ancient Privileges and Preeminences. For though some learned Men both within and without the Church of Rome have been pleased to dispute that the Power here abetted in this Canon was Patriarchical, and not merely Metropolitical, yet that it was not Patriarchical is notoriously evident, because there is not the least mention of any such Office in all the Records of the Christian Church before the Council of Calcedon, which was above an hundred years after that of Nice, and yet this Nicene Canon on∣ly confirms the old, and accustomed Rights of Churches. And that this power was Metropolitical, is manifest, because it was made purely in pursuance of the fore-mentioned 34th Apostolical Canon, that requires the Subjection of all other inferior Bishops to their National or Provincial Bishops. The occasion of it was this, That Meletius Bishop of Nicapolis, within the Province of Alexandria, being deposed by his Metropolitan in a Synod of Bi∣shops, as for divers other Crimes, so particularly for Sacrificing to Idols, notwithstanding that takes upon him to Ordain new Bi∣shops himself, and so violates all the Preeminences of his Metropo∣litan, both by slighting his Censure, and invading his Power. Now complaint hereof being brought to the Council, they decree that the ancient Prerogatives of the Church of Alexandria over the in∣ferior Churches within its Province, shall be kept as inviolable as those of Rome, and the same for Antiochia, and not only so in those great Sees, but in all other Provinces whatsoever, for so the Ca∣non expresly runs, that not only at Antiochia, but that in all other or Provinces their ancient Privileges should be preserved. So that here is nothing peculiar to these three great Cities deter∣mined, because the Jurisdictions of all other Provinces that were in force at that time, were as much ratified by the same Authority
and that was only this, That whatever Superiority greater Church∣es had by long Custom enjoyed over less, should stand confirmed for the time to come. And accordingly we find it decreed in the second Canon of the second general Council held at Constantinople as a clear Interpretation of the sixth Canon of Nice, that all Bi∣shops should contain themselves within the known Circuit of their Jurisdiction, and not thrust themselves into other Diocesses, espe∣cially that the Bishop of Alexandria should be confin'd within the Diocese of Aegypt, and Antiochia within that of the East, and that the Churches of Asia, Pontus and Thracia, should enjoy the antient Power of Government within themselves, as well as those that had invaded their Right; this being the occasion of the De∣cree of the Council, that Miletius Bishop of Antiochia, had made Gregory Nazienzen Bishop of Constantinople, and Peter Bishop of Alexandria had done the same for Maximus, whereas Constantinople was in Thrace, that was a Diocese by it self in the Civil Division of the Empire, and therefore exempt from the Jurisdiction of those great Prelates, having the same supreme and independent Power within it self, as they had within their Provinces, as had also the lesser Asia and Pontus, which that they might not be encroach'd upon, or swallowed up by their Potent Neighbors, were here guar∣ded and settled by the Decree of the Council in the Possession of their ancient Rights, against all future Invasions. And the same Decree we find in the next general Council held at Ephesus, Ca∣non the eighth, upon the like occasion, the Bishop of Antioch ta∣king upon him to Ordain in the Isle of Cyprus, that was an head Province by it self; This Usurpation therefore the Council severe∣ly censures and forbids, and withal orders that no Metropolitan should challenge any further extent of Jurisdiction that he could not prove by long and immemorial Prescription, lest under the Pretence of their Priestly Office, they should introduce a secular Sovereignty into the Church. Infinite are the Instances in the Records of the Church of the Metropolitical Supremacy of Churches, but these that I have al∣ready alledged are enough to shew the true Primitive and Aposto∣lical Constitution of the Christian Church, which lasted the same even as to the bounds of Jurisdiction till the time of Constantine the
Great. But the casting the Civil Government of the Empire into a new Model, gave occasion to the Church in pursuance of its Pri∣mitive Rule of conforming to the Civil Government, to add to the old Ecclesiastical Hierarchy; for the whole Empire being divided into thirteen Diocesses, each Diocese containing many Provinces, in all to the number of 120, and every Province several inferior Cities. And therefore as every City had its Judge for Civil Go∣vernment, so had it its Bishop for Ecclesiastical, and every Province its President, so its Metropolitan; and every Diocese, which then contained several Provinces, its Lieutenant, so its Primate. Which indeed was nothing else, but raising up a superior Order of Me∣tropolitans in conformity to the new Model of Civil Government; and therefore was at first nothing else but an honorary Title that gave them Precedency to the Metropolitans, but not Jurisdiction over them. For the very first time that we meet with any men∣tion of any such Order in the Church is in the second Canon of the second general Council held at Constantinople under Theodosius the Great, where at the same time that it institutes this new kind of Dignity, it secures the old Jurisdiction of Metropolitans. So that notwithstanding this new Order was brought over their heads in conformity to the Empire, yet was every Metropolitan Church to be governed by it self, and its own Synod, in the same manner as it was accustomed of old, and was confirmed by the decree of the Council of Nice. Which Council positively asserts the Suprema∣cy of Power, to every Metropolitan within his own Province. And therefore all the Preeminence of this new Order of Men above them could consist in nothing but Title and Dignity. And it is sufficiently known to all that know any thing of the ancient Re∣cords of the Church that they had their  their Preeminences of Respect, and , their Preeminen∣ces of Power and Authority. And it was usual upon particular occasions to give the former without conferring the latter, as the great Council of Nice gave to the Church of Ierusalem, Metropo∣litical Honor, because it was the Mother of all Churches, with∣out giving it any Metropolitical Jurisdiction, for that was reser∣ved entirely for the Bishop of Caesarea, which after the Destruction of Ierusalem had been made the Civil Metropolis of Palestin by the
Emperor Vespasian, so this present Council of Constantinople, of which we are speaking in the Canon next following that we last mentioned, gives the , the Preeminencies of Ho∣nor, next to the Bishop of Rome, to the Bishop of Constantinople, because Constantinople was new Rome, and yet gives it nothing of Metropolitical Power, because it expresly confirms the old Rights of the three Metropolitans of Asia, Pontus, and Thrace, to which it belonged, in the Canon immediately foregoing. In short, all the Privileges of the ancient Metropolitans were divided into two sorts, those of Honour and those of Power; the former the Fathers of this Council gave to the Bishop of Constantinople out of Com∣plement to the new Imperial City, but neither could nor would give any thing of the latter; because that was not to be done without violating and alienating the real Rights and Priviledges of other Men. But yet however, when once they had gor an high∣er Title, it easily made way to advance themselves to an higher Power, insomuch that in a short time after he swallow'd up all the three Metropolitans of Thrace, Pontus, and Asia, into his own Jurisdiction. And now this superior Order of Primates to Metropolitans, being thus set up by Ecclesiastical Constitution, it in a little time made way for the Patriarchical Dignity; the Title where∣of was at first borrowed from the wandring Jews of those times, who wherever they settled in any considerable Number, after their dispersion from Ierusalem, chose a supreme Governour, whom they stil'd their Patriarch; but about the fourth Centu∣ry, or somewhat after, this Title and Authority was taken from the Jews, and applyed to the new supra-Metropolitan Bishops, that it seems as yet had obtain'd no peculiar Name in the Chri∣stian Church. Thus Socrates, the Historian of the Church at that time, reckons up Nectarius of Constantinople, Helladius of Pontus, Gregory of Nyssa, Ottreius of Melitina, Amphilochius of Iconium, Optimus of the Pisidian Antioch, Timotheus of Alexan∣dria, Pelagius of Laodicea, Diodorus of Tarsus, and many more. Tho in a little time the Title came to be appropriated to the five most eminent Sees, Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, An∣tioch, and Ierusalem; and they were made superior, not only
in Title, but in Jurisdiction to all Metropolitans within their Diocess, because it seems, those Cities being the five chief Ci∣ties in the World, had their Claims to higher Dignity in the civil Government than all others. Rome, the Seat of the Em∣pire; Alexandria, the head City of Africk, and Seat of the Great Ptolomys; Antiochia, Queen of the East, and Seat of the Great Seleucus and his Successors; Ierusalem, the Mother City of all Christian Churches; and Constantinople, the new Rome of the Empire, that had at that time over-topt old Rome in Greatness and Authority. Now the Rights that were peculiar to these Pa∣triarchs above Metropolitans, were these, First, that wherever they presided, they had many Metropo∣litans under their Jurisdiction. Secondly, that they only had right to ordain the Metropo∣litans within their own Patriarchate, as Metropolitans had Bi∣shops within their own Province. Thirdly, that as Metropolitans had power to call the Bishops of their Province to Synods, so had Patriarchs to call their Me∣tropolitans. Fourthly, that they were the supreme Judicature within their own Patriarchates, no farther appeal being to be made from a Patriarch. And thus was the Church for a long time govern'd, every Patriarch enjoying supreme Power within his own Precincts, and no farther; insomuch that the Rule was adopted into the imperial Law, A Patriarcha non datur Appellatio; No Appeal from a Patriarch; and yet that alone is a plain Bar to the Su∣premacy of the Pope, or any other, over the whole Christian Church. But then, as for the Bounds of Jurisdiction, they still fol∣low'd the Division of the State; and there it so happen'd, that the Bishop of Rome, tho for the sake of the old imperial City, he had Precedency in Honor above all the rest, had one of the narrowest Jurisdictions of all, his Patriarchate extend∣ing, at the farthest, not beyond Italy and the adjacent Islands; tho according to the true account, it was not at first above half so great, Italy being divided into two Parts under two Go∣vernours,
one residing at Rome, who governed the Suburbica∣rian Provinces, so call'd, because of their lying nearest to the City; the other at Milain, who govern'd the more remote Parts. And after the same manner was the Government of the Church divided into the Roman Diocess, that was subject to the Bishops of Rome; and the Italic Diocess, of which Milain was the Head; over which we do not find that the Bishop of Rome, in anti∣ent time, ever pretended any Patriarchical Supremacy; nay, on the contrary, that S. Ambrose was ordained in the Year of our Lord 555. Bishop thereof, by a Synod of Bishops of the Italic Diocess, which he could not have been, had the Bishop of Rome been his Patriarch, the power of Ordination being the chief Branch of Patriarchical Jurisdiction. But how great or little so∣ever was the Circuit of his Patriarchate, it was limited within certain Bounds, as the other Patriarchates were. And as the Patriarchs were Supreme within their own Diocess, so were most of the Metropolitans within their own Province: For tho where Patriarchs were erected, the Metropolitans, within the compass of their Patriarchate, were subject to them, yet all the other Metropolitans of the Christian Church enjoy'd their own antient Supremacy, and continued, as they were before, Head-Churches, exercising Supreme Power within themselves: Of which there were great Numbers in the World, and some of as large Jurisdiction as the Patriarchates, especially in Asia. But as for the Patriarchate of Rome, it never extended its Power beyond Italy, and its adjacent Islands: And therefore it is very observable, that the Writers of the Church of Rome, care not that it should be known to the Christian World: So that here∣after, all their Brags of Universal Pastorship, when they come to make it out, their Manuscripts still fail them. Carolus à Sancto Paulo hath taken most Pains of any in this Argument, and hath done well enough in other Parts; but when he comes to the Church of Rome, there his Manuscript is so worn out and defective, that it was not worth publishing. Now doth not this look oddly, that their Books should fail them thus, only in their own Cause; and doth it not rather give suspicion, that themselves are too well aware, that they
would do them no real kindness. However, it is a very prepo∣sterous thing, for a Man to pretend to a Title to a great Estate by virtue of some antient Writings, and yet when he comes to try his Title, should only plead, that indeed such Writings there once were, but that they are now so impair'd that they are not legible. And yet, this is the very Case of the Church of Rome here. All Christendom, at least the Western Empire, ought to be subject to him as their Patriarch. Why so? Because he ever was so. How doth that appear? By the ancient Notitiae of the Church. Produce them. So we can for all the other Patriar∣chates, but those that concern the Church of Rome are unhap∣pily lost. Are they so? Then you have lost the Evidence of your Title, and for ought you do, or can know, never had any. But instead of this shifting and prevaricating that we meet with in the Writers of the Church of Rome, there is not long since publish'd by a very learned and a very honest Gentleman of our own Church and Nation,Mr. Beveridge. an ac∣curate Description of all the Patriarchates, out of an ancient and authentic Manuscript, which reckons to the Patriarchate of Rome, only Italy and the adjacent Islands; but not a syllable of Spain or Germany, or Gaul, or England, or any other of the large Territories in Europe; which, if they had belonged to this Patriarchate at that time, could never have been omitted in this exact Catalogue, that hath so carefully set down every petty City in Italy. In this posture stood the Government of the Church for ma∣ny Years, without any considerable Alteration: For tho some of the Bishops of Rome would have been usurping upon the Churches of Africa, by pretending to a Right of Appeals from them, they were repulsed with great Shame and Dishonour. And were it not that I am unwilling to trouble Your Highness with any more Disputes, than what concerns our own Church with the Church of Rome, there is nothing more easie than to shew, that this Controversie with the African Churches is a no∣torious Instance of both the Frauds of the Roman Church, and of other Churches abhorring his remotest aim at any Suprema∣cy. But tho he missed his design at that time, his Successors
were ever after watchful of all other Opportunities to compass it: And to that purpose they happen'd to have two very lucky Advantages; the first was the fatal Division of the Empire into East and West, from whence S. Gregory Nazienzen, a Man both wise and pious, foretold a more fatal Division in the Church; and accordingly, in a little time it came to pass, that the whole Body of it was divided into East and West, as well as the Em∣pire; and the Division was quickly heightned by the mutual Jealousies of the Emperors, who would not suffer the Bishops under one Government, to repair to Councils conven'd under the other: And that in a short time grew to alienations of Minds; so that they kept their Councils apart, and if any Bi∣shop of the East repair'd to a Synod of the West, and so for the contrary, He was look'd upon as a Betrayer of his own Church. And this was the occasion of the after-greatness of the Church of Rome in these Western Parts; because that alone of all the five Patriarchates happen'd to go along with the We∣stern Empire. For having no Competitor for the Supremacy, or so much as the equality of Power in the Western Church, it was no hard matter to advance it self to any degree of Power that it pleased to challenge, especially when the Western Churches were forward enough of themselves to advance its Dignity, for the Honor of their own Patriarchate, in opposition to that of Constantinople; which being the Seat of the Empire, and enjoying the Favor of the Emporors, soon over top'd all the other Eastern Patriarchates; so that all the Competition that remain'd was between Rome and Constantinople: Till at last in the Sixth Century, Iohn Bishop of Constantinople first obtained of Mauritius the Emperor, the Title of Universal Bishop, which very Title was quickly and vehemently oppos'd by Gregory Bishop of Rome, as a Piece of Antichristian Pride and Inso∣lence. But Mauritius being murdered by Phocas, and Cyriacus then Bishop of Constantinople, being fallen under the new Tyrant's Disfavor, for declaring against his execrable Murder, the Bi∣shop of Rome seizes that Opportunity to flatter and caress him in all his Wickedness; for which Civility the Usurper takes the Title of Universal Bishop, and settles it upon the See of Rome.
And when once they had obtained the Title, they resolv'd to make it good, by gaining the Power too. Tho by what de∣grees they encroach'd upon other Churches, it is not at all to my purpose here to represent, it is enough to have shewn the late Original of the Title, which was never given them till a∣bove 600 Years after our Saviour. This then being the true and real state of all the Christian Church, the Conclusion plainly makes it self, as to any English Christian's Obligation to communicate with the Church of Eng∣land or the Church of Rome. For as it is the indispensible Du∣ty of every Man to joyn in visible Communion with the Society of the Church, so is the first visible Society of the Church set∣tled in the Communion of the Bishop of the Diocess. And thence evident it is, that the first Duty of every Christian, as to external Communion with the Church, is to joyn in Com∣munion with the Bishop of the Place where he lives. For if our Saviour setled the Government of the Church in the Apo∣stles, and if the Episcopal Order succeeded them in their Office, then hath every Bishop Apostolical Authority. And then is eve∣ry Christian Man bound to submit to his Bishop, as to an Apo∣stle, from whence the Bishop derives the Succession of his Or∣der and Authority. So that the Episcopal Society is the first visible Communion of the Christian Church, and a Man be∣comes a Member of the Church-Catholic, by joyning in visible Communion with the Church-Episcopal; for it is impossible to be a Member of the Universal Church, without being first a Member of some particular Church, both because the Univer∣sal Church is made up of the Combination of particular Churches, and because there is no way of Communicating in the Offices of Religion, but under some limited Societies. The Bishop then in every Diocess is, as Successor in the Apostolical Office, Head of the Communion within his own Diocess, and for that Reason, the ordinary Judge and Guide to all Christians within his Ju∣risdiction. So false is that Calumny, of which the Romanists pretend to make so much Advantage against the Constitution of the Church of England, that She doth not so much as pre∣tend to any living Judge of Faith: For what Judge She owns,
as to the Catholic Church, I may shew in its proper place. But as for every particular Christian, She commits him to the Care of his Bishop, as his ordinary Guide and Governour in the things that concern his Salvation. Now if this be the setled Constitution of the Christian Church, as it was from the beginning, I cannot understand how any Chri∣stian can leave the Communion of his own Bishop, to commu∣nicate with any other, without being guilty of Schism against the Church that he lives in. For tho he may advise with any other Bishop about the Wel∣fare of his Soul, and follow his Advice as a Friend; yet by the original Constitution of the Church, none but his own Bishop can have any authoritative Commission for his Guidance and In∣struction. So easie is the Answer to that solemn Question, Who is the living Judge and Guide of your Faith? For if it be put to a private Christian, it is plain, that from the Constitu∣tion of the Catholic Church, as it was setled by the Apostles, that it is the Bishop under whom he lives, to whom God hath committed the ordinary means of the Salvation of his Flock, and promised to be assistant to him and the Successors in his Office to the end of the World. This is the first visible Society or Communion of a Christian Church, and was evidently laid and design'd by our Blessed Sa∣viour in his Institution of the Episcopal Office. The next is founded upon Apostolical Prescription, and that is the Associa∣tion of the Bishops of a Province with their Metropolitan; for in the Plantation of Churches, as they cut out the Communion of Christians into particular Bishopricks, so they again united the several Bishopricks of every Nation into one Communion under one Head; who as he is superior to every single Bishop within his Resort; so is he is his Synod of Bishops Supreme Judge of all Controversies within the Province. These Provincial As∣semblies, I have shewn, were the highest Power of the Primitive Church in all Places; neither indeed (setting aside the Promise of divine Assistance to them) is there need of any further Ap∣peal upon humane accounts; for the Controversives in Christia∣nity are not so monstrously difficult, but that a competent Num∣ber
of grave and sober Men, may determine well enough, with∣out calling together all the wise Men in the World; and if Twen∣ty are not sufficient to decide any Controversie, I know not what Number is. And as this was the standing ordinary Jurisdi∣ction in the first Ages of the Church, so the Christians of those Times suppos'd the means of Salvation sufficiently secur'd in such Hands, and certainly, that which was sufficient to them, is so to us. And as this was the highest Government in the Church for the first three Hundred Years, so those more diffusive Assem∣blies, that were afterward summon'd, and that we call general Councils, were really of the same nature; for as a Provincial Assembly was national, so were these Imperial, and therefore sub∣ject but to one civil Government. So that as the Empire was indeed but one great Kingdom, so was the Church in it but one great Province, they being both under the same extent of Go∣vernment. And this is the true Use of Councils, whether greater or less, by the Decree of the Representatives of Churches to bind those Churches that they represent. And that is but a reason∣able thing in all Societies, that they should be determin'd by their Governours, especially when they are set over them by the appointment of God himself. Neither is it so very material, how large Councils are, as to their Obligation; for whether they be greater or less, they equally bind all that are involv'd within the compass of their Authority. And tho there may be greater Presumption in the Decrees of the greater Councils, yet are they for the most part meetings rather of Grandeur than Necessity, but especially those that we call General Councils, are now so difficult to be summon'd, that they are become almost impracticable. Whilst indeed the Roman Empire stood entire, it was not so hard to convene them, yet even then was it a Busi∣ness of so much Time and Charges as made it too burthensom to be born, by any thing less than the Roman Greatness, and that too in very rare and extraordinary Cases. But if so, it could never then be intended for the standing and perpetual Government of the Christian Church. But now that Christendom is divided into so many civil Governments, the Dif∣ficulties
are so great and so many, through the various Interests of Princes, either to promote or hinder it, as to render it next to impossible. Tho if it could be fairly had, the Church of En∣gland would not refuse her Concurrence in it, both as being as∣sured of the Goodness of her Cause, in that she owns no other Rule of her Reformation, but the Practice of the Primitive and Apostolick Church, and as well knowing that the greatest part of the Church of Rome, would as willingly rid themselves of those Abuses that have been put upon them by the Court of Rome, as we have done. And this the Spanish and French Bishops had carried through, even in that pack'd Council of Trent, had not the Pope poured in a number of Titular Italian Bishops to over∣vote them. But it is none of my present Business to rake into the Faults of the Church of Rome; 'tis enough to my purpose to vindicate the Communion of the Church of England. Granting therefore the Church of Rome to be a pure and uncorrupted Church, yet because it is a Foreign Church, no Man can be un∣der any Obligation, to leave the Communion of his own to joyn with that. In this one point I fix the State of this whole Address, and say nothing at present to persuade any Person that lives within the Communion of the Church of Rome, to forsake that; my only Concernment is with the Members of the Church of En∣gland, to keep them to their own Church, according to the Rule from the Beginning. If it be objected, That the Church of En∣gland be a narrow Thing in comparison of the Catholick Church; I answer, That the Church of England doth not pretend to be the Church Catholick, but only a Member of it: and in that Station it is as large a Church as any were in the Primitive Times. Neither then did the Communion of the Catholick Church consist in an Union of all Churches, under one Head, but in brotherly Love and Correspondence with one another: and for that the Church of England is ready to offer it to the Church of Rome, or any other, upon the old Condition, that they will give her leave to admonish them of their Faults and Miscarriages, as Churches did one another of old. But this is a Civility that the Church of Rome is too proud to accept of; it must be all Church∣es,
or it will be none at all. It allows no Equals in Communion, and condescends to no Treaty but upon Terms of absolute Sub∣jection: neither is it content to enslave all its Neighbors to its own imperious Decrees, unless they be submitted to as the infal∣lible Dictates of God himself. Now this seems too much for Men to swallow that have any sense or care of their Salvation: for by this means the whole Faith of Christendom shall be left en∣tirely at the Disposal of one single Person, and the Pope alone shall be the whole Catholick Church. This I say seems too much to venture upon one single Security, especially unless it were confirmed by some clearer Commission than those remote and ob∣scure Texts of Scripture that are alledg'd for the Papal Supremacy. But to return from the Pope to the Church; As the first Con∣stitution of Churches was conform'd to the civil Government, so indeed no other is practicable. For upon that Supposition, that Christianity makes no Abatement as to the civil Rights of Men, especially of Princes; provincial Churches cannot be justly extended beyond the Dominion of the State; because in that case if Metropolitans or Patriarchs have power to call their Subject-Bishops to Councils, the King's Subjects may be summoned out of his Dominions without his leave, which is not only to di∣minish, but to destroy his Power over his own Subjects; for when they are out of his Dominions they are none of his. So that the very State of Christianity naturally implies, as it would not be inconsistent with it self, the Conformity of the Church to the State in its bounds of Jurisdiction. And this is the true mean∣ing of that known Saying of one of the Fathers, That the Church is in the Commonwealth, and not the Commonwealth in the Church; for the Civil Government being first constituted, and the Church being afterwards taken into it, it must for that Reason keep it self within it, otherwise it breaks down its old Bounds of Settle∣ment. But beside that the Nature of Government confines every Church within the Prince's Dominions in which it is; so it is highly convenient, if not absolutely necessary, to the due and effectual Exercise of Discipline, that the Society of the Church be confined within some moderate Circuit of Government: for great Governments are slow and unweildy in their Motions; the
very distance of Place makes all Proceedings uneasie, and Deter∣minations difficult; and of this our Nation was sufficiently sen∣sible, when all Ecclesiastical Appeals were carried to Rome; the Journey was tedious and chargable; and by reason of the distance of Witnesses, and other Inconveniences, Proceedings infinitely dilatory, I might say endless, Causes depending there from Age to Age: this is too notorious, from the sad and open Complaints of those Times; and I my self enjoy a small Office in this Church, wherein my Predecessors had a Suit for a Privilege belonging to it, hanging in the Court of Rome for some hundreds of Years, till the very time of the Dissolution of the Pope's Power. These are intolerable Grievances to Mankind, and heavier Bur∣thens than were ever imposed upon them by the most barbarous civil Government. If therefore his Holiness will challenge a Supre∣macy over all Christian Churches, let him not exercise his Juris∣diction in ordinary Causes, that is contrary to all the Canons of the Church and Quiet of the World. We will not contend with him about his Patriarchical Preheminence, if that would give him Satisfaction, tho we know he hath not the least pretence of any claim to it over us. But when under that Pretext he takes to himself the Office of Universal Bishop, that is, to be all the Bi∣shops of Christendom, 'tis that exorbitant Usurpation that is not our Complaint alone, but the universal Complaint of Christen∣dom it self. And therefore if he would keep within his Patri∣archical Bounds and Privileges, which yet he enjoys not by divine Right but humane Institution, we would give him all that Respect and Reverence that is due to the Primacy of his See. But if in∣stead of Brotherly Communion with us, nothing less will serve his Turn than absolute Dominion over us, and if Submission to that must be made our only Title to the Catholick Church, as if we had no Right to Christianity but by Subjection to the Bi∣shop of Rome: these cannot but seem too hard Terms of Com∣munion; or if they are not, it is enough that they are unwar∣rantable; or if they are not so, it is enough that they are not necessary. And that they are not, is evident from the Premi∣ses, where I have demonstrated, that the first Duty of every Christian, as a Member of the Christian Church, is to joyn Com∣munion
with his own Bishop, as the first Political Society of a Church. And that the next is a Combination of all the Bishops within one civil Government under one Metropolitan. That this Polity was set on foot by the Apostles themselves, and every where put in practice in the Primitive Church; that the Ecclesiastical Province cannot extend beyond the Precincts of the Civil without infringing the Authority of Sovereign Princes, and therefore, that no foreign Prelate can have or exercise any Ec∣clesiastical Power over his Majesty's Subjects, because that would give them Power to command them out of his Dominions: So plainly doth the Nature of Civil Government set Bounds to Ec∣clesiastical Societies; which one thing, if duely consider'd, must cut off all Claims of Papal Supremacy over this Church, because, by virtue of it he would have such a kind of Power over His Majesty's Subjects, as the Christian Religion doth by no means al∣low any its Officers. And as this was the Settlement of National Churches from the beginning of Christianity, so is it the present Constitution of the Church of England, that is or would be go∣vern'd by its Metropolitan in his Synod of Bishops subject to one Civil Government. And as this is all the Political Society that a Christian Church is capable of, so all the Communion that it can have with other Churches, consists in brotherly Love and mutual Correspondence. And this way was the Christian Church, in the first Ages of it, preserv'd in competent Peace and Unity. And whatever other Power was afterward erected in the Church, was founded upon humane Institution, and therefore is alterable in it self, at least not necessary to the Being of a Christian Church. Of this na∣ture were the several Patriarchates; so that whatever Power the Bishop of Rome can challenge by virtue of his Patriarchical Dig∣nity, is of an humane Original, and so not necessary to the Con∣stitution of a Christian Church. Nay, tho he once had such a Power, yet upon the Dissoluti∣on of that Civil and Ecclesiastical Government that gave it him, it ceases with it. For it was granted him by the Emperors, and Imperial Councils, and so extended only to the Subjects of the Empire; for they could not give him any Power in other Princes
Dominions. The Empire therefore being broken into many in∣dependent Kingdoms, the Patriarchate dissolves with it, because otherwise a Foreigner would have an Authority in all Princes Do∣minions to the Prejudice of the Sovereign Power, which is the first thing that Christianity disclaims, and therefore is principally in∣consistent with it. But however if the Pope have his old Patriar∣chical Power still, he had it not of old over us, and therefore can∣not have it now, and though he have, yet it is but of Humane Institution. And then we are a true Church without it, and if we are, then can no Man be obliged in Conscience to forsake the Communion of this Church, that is setled as all other Churches were by the Apostles, to join with one another, only for the sake of some alteration made in it by Humane Authority. And thus having truly and impartially laid before Your Royal Highness the State of the Christian Church, especially as to the prime Controversie between the Church of England and the Church of Rome concerning the Guide of Faith, I have so great confidence in the Power of Truth, over an upright and gene∣rous Mind, as to flatter my self with some Hopes of settling Your Royal Highnesses Conscience in the Communion of this truly ancient and Apostolical Church. Nay, I hope not only to see You a Zealous Son, but an eminent Patron of the best, but most abused Church in the Christian World, so as to be the principal Author of rescuing her from those horrid Indignities and Oppressions that she daily suffers from the Barbarity of po∣pular Atheism and Profaneness. But whatever the Success of this small Endeavor may prove, it is not a little Satisfaction that I reap, from having done my Duty to Your Royal Highness and mine own Conscience. For I have no other design than to promote the Salvation of Your Soul and my own. But though I am so fully conscious to my self of mine own Integrity, yet when I reflect upon what I have done, I blush and am confounded in my self at the Presumption of obtruding my crude Thoughts upon the Wisdom of a Mighty Prince, and therefore had utterly stisled them after they were finished, had not the great Fame of Your Highnesses Princely Candor emboldned me to present them, as being at least secure of a gracious Pardon to a well-meant Presumption.
I intended, when I had shewn the No-Necessity of Commi∣nion with the Church of Rome upon his own Terms, because its Pretences are a manifest Usurpation upon the Christian Church▪ in the next place to have represented the gross Abuse that his Ho∣liness puts upon Christianity, by pretending some way or other, directly or indirectly, to a temporal Power over Sovereign Prin∣ces; whereas to pretend to it, by virtue of any Power deriv'd▪ from our Saviour, only over Subjects, is no less than Blasphemy my against him; but over Princes, it adds to that Rebellon. (So that how many Notes soever there may be of a true Church this is an infallible Note of a false one). But then considering with my self that Your Royal Highness is the second Branch of an Imperial Family, and Heir to several Crowns, I thought my self obliged, according to my Resolution declar'd in the begin∣ning, to wave the Advantage of this Argument: because Your Highness is here a Party, and it concerns Your worldly Interest more nearly than Your Conscience, to which alone I have made bold to make this Address, and in it I assure my self, that the Kingdoms in the World would weigh nothing. And there∣fore without giving Your Royal Highness any farther trouble more than once more of craving Pardon for this great Presum∣ption; I shall submit the Consideration of the Premises to Your and impartial Thoughts, and daily pray for Your Happi∣ness both here and hereafter, and while I live shall ever be Your Royal Highnesses Most Humble and Devoted Servant. FINIS.
