P949 12625771 64632
SQVARE-CAPS TURNED INTO ROVND-HEADS OR THE BISHOPS VINDICATION, AND THE BROWNISTS CONVICTION. Being a Dialogue between Time, and Opinion: Shewing the folly of the one, and the worthinesse of the other. By H. P. Time. Opinion. Time doth Opinion call unto accompt, Who turnes the Bishops downe and Round-Heads mount: Vpon Her lofty Wheele their Noddels are; But Her Camelian feedeth on His aire. LONDON, Printed for I. Gyles, and G. Lindsey, 1642.
MVTANT QVADRATA ROTVNDIS. Square Caps are turned into Round-Heads Time. Now tell me Opinion, how long is it since you were at Am∣sterdam, and how long have you beene in England? Opinion. Ick hebbe niet cot Amsterdam ghew Desen three yaren. Time. But you can speak English if you list., Op. Ya vader ick habbeghewont int huys van een English predicant een hyhet Meester But-rush. Ti. Come leave your Dutch and speak plain Egnglish, that Time may well understand you, you were borne at Amster∣dam were you not? Op. No verily and indeed I was born at Swine drecht a Dorpa neere to Dordrecht in Holland bordering upon Zealand, but my Father was an Englishman borne in London, about Cateaten∣streete, but my Mother was a Dutchwoman, borne in Am∣sterdam: of the family of the Fukers. Ti. But what occasion had you to come over into England, and what imployment have you had since your coming? Op. I came (to tell you true) to see what entertainment I could finde among my friends, when walking up and down I was taken for a Vagrant and clap't into Brid-well; for some outlandish Doctrine I taught and maintained. Ti. There I beleive you first learned to turn the Wheele. Op. I did indeed, for among other worke I was forced to spin Pack-thred. Ti. I heard as much, for that reason (it may be) you are con∣tent to folow Your old imployment, by turning about this Wheele, an Embleme of the Revolution and Change of these Present times to see, if they may be brought to a better passe
and State then they are: I am He, who is every where com∣plaind off, as if it were long of me, they are in so bad a case as they are: Alas! I am old, and ending with the world, and de∣sire no Innovation either in Church or Common-Wealth. Op. It may be (Father) one of your years may dote, you may want your sight to see how the world goes round, I am sure you are either blind or willingly winke at a number of abuses. Ti. I want my sight to see how the world goes? had not I my being with the first Moover? am not I Primi Mobilis per successionem numerus. Neither do I winke at any thing, for I would amend all were it in my power. Op. Truly Father it is generally imagined, that it is long of you, that the world is at this stay as it is at, but if it please you to be ruled by me, all abuses shall be reformd and amended. Ti. Opinion, I am compelled so to do against my will, since all the world is led and rul'd by Opinion. Op. Indeed since my coming over from beyond the Seas into England, I have goten so strong a Partie on my side, that I shall not nay I will not be crushed or kept downe by the contrarie Partie. Ti. So it seems: because you uphold your Round-Heads, and keepe them aloft: but the Square Caps of the Reverend Bishops You cast under to the bottome. Op. Reverend Bishops? marry come up, Bishops Sir Reverence; you should say. Ti. Fie Opinion now you speak like your self; distractedly and out of an ignorant malice, as the rest of your Faction do: who knowing themselves guilty of neither wit or learning, fiting so High and Sacred a Calling, Barke at them as Dogs doe at the Moon, who envie her luster and because she being so far above them they cannot come at her Op. I have heard that every five hundred years, there is a ma∣nifest change and alteration as well in Church, as Common-wealth: so that this change of these present Times is not long
of me, but foreseene and determined by the Divine Provi∣dence. Opinion you are (as you were ever) out of the way and be∣side your Byas, because God hath foreseen the wickednes and Factions of these Times, hath he therfore determined them, is this your Amsterdam Teaching? Op. Yes indeed is it, and true Doctrine. Ti. God foresees the most horrible Sins that are or shall be commited to the end of the world, does He therefore deter∣mine and make Himselfe the Authour of them. Op Why not? T. Come about with your Wheel cast your Round-heads be∣low, and give the square-caps leave to take place aloft your Wheele; else as sure as my name is Time, I will shortly have them above do what Opinion and her partners can. Op. Yes  I am weary of my task you may and I beleeve you will in the meane while I must say, as K. Iames wrote up∣on his sumpture Clothes comming after he was proclaimed King out of Scotland into England Ie a pris mon temps I have taken my Time; I was not thought on but despis'd both in Citie and Countrie till of late, now who but I both in the Ci∣tie and Countrie, there is hardly a shop in the Ciie but I can there take upon trust, whatsoever I or my freinds want and they take upon trust, whatsoever they are taught by us in the Pulpit be it trve or false. Ti Why Opinion do you make no conscience amongst you of what you teach (as you call it?) Op. Yes, as much as they do in the slae of their commodi∣ties to the unfaithfull. So I beleeve, hence it is that so many the better to cullour or cover their cheating, follow you to your Coventickles, to woods, Barns, Moore-feild al lies and the like places, and having once gottn the name of Sepa∣ratists they can command beleife, Reverence, Money, Meate Drinke, new suits of apparell, the solace of a Sister and what
Come I pray you leave this vaine and Idle discourse which is ordinarily laid to our charge among the prophane sorte your followers (I meane) whome the world calls Time-servers Windmilles and weather-cocks who with everie puffe of a great mans Breath, or finger of alteration, will incline them, selves to what quarter you will; but I pray you Father Time why are Roundheads become more odious now in the world then Square caps, all heads are round by nature, Square Caps with their Cockscombes on the top, came from Beastly Base and Roguish Rome; and become the head as well as Hornes doe some of my followers: I was once taught these verses, when I lived with a Zealous Teacher. Cum Caput humanum fecit natura rotundum Cur quadrata iuben pilea pontifices. Since Nature hath made mans head round to stand, Why then do Bishops these square caps command? Ti. Square caps upon my knowledge were long before O∣pinion was borne, and tell your round-headed sectaries their corners are an Emleme of the foure parts or quarters of the world, into which Christian Bishops and ministers are com∣manded to breach the Gospell, Ite praedicate ad omnes gentes &c. you know who said, then good Opinion, have a good Opini∣on of square Caps; I beleeve they never did you hurt except in the high Commission, or in the spirituall Court, you know about what. Op. I am not fo much offended with the Caps as with them that weare them, your Lordly Bishops who never did good in Church or common-wealth. Ti. Never did good, Opinion? it is trve if you meane some of your own Clergie, who have cast of their leather doublets and aprons and put themselves into long Cassocks with grave Silke girdles hanging to the knees. Opinion you are but a no∣vice, and are new come from your sliding upon the Ice among
Marriners boyes, and upon Soldiers your frozen Crafts, and Rivers about Amsterdam and Harlem, but since the Parlia∣ment began: but let that passe, our Bishops have done more good then you, and your abbettors will ever do so long as the world standeth. Op. It may be some of them long ago have been good and done good but very few in England. Ti. No? Who have built more Colledges in our Famous Vniversities more Churches, Hospitalls &c. in any part of Europe, then our Bishops have done in England? Op. I have heard some of your Bishops have pulled down Col∣ledges, and Religious Houses, as you call them: but I never heard of any that built them. Ti. I pray you what Bishop pulled down any? yet I think I know more Opinion then you doe, neither is Time ignorant of any thing that hath bine done, I doe but only try you to see what you can say. O. Did not your great Gor-bellied Cardinall Wolsey pull down forty houses of Religion, to found His Colledge in Oxford? which He left unfinished. Ti. He had finished it, if he had liv'd, and made it one of he fairest Colledges of the world. But since you speak of Oxford and him, let me tell you what Bishops have done in Oxferd and Cambridge. William Durham was a Bishp who endowed Vniversitie Colledge with large Possessions, having none before. Anno. Dom. 1217: Walter de Merton was B. of Rochester, Lord Chancelour of England, and Counseller to K. Hn. 3. and Ed. 1. when He founded Merton Colledge. Exeter Coll. was founded by 2 succeeding B. of the same See (viz) Walter Stapleton, and Edmond Stafford, brother to Ralph Earle Stafford in the yeare 1035. W. Wikham B. of Winchester, Principall Secretary to Ed. 3.
L. high Treasurer and Chancellour of England, builded that compleat House New Coll. Rich. Fleming, who died B. of Lincolne, also founded Lincolne Coll. in Oxford. Henry Chichley B. of Cant. and Cardinall of St. Eusebius fonuded All-Soles Coll. Anno Heny 6. 15. And it is worthy to be noted how this Henry Chichleys Fa∣ther being a very poore man dwelling at Higham Ferrers in NORTHAMTON Shire (where this Chichley was borne) had two sonnes whome being not able to keep at home, sent them in∣to the wide world to seek their fortune; one of which proved Arch-Bishop of Canterburie, and the other Lord Maior of London both at one time. William Patten, alias de Wainflet in Lincolnshire, B. of Winchster and Lord Chancelour, and England, founded that absolute Coll: dedicated to Saint Marie Magdalen which like Euxine Sea never ebbes nor flows with more fellows or Schollers then the founder gave and left at the first. Brasen-Nose Col. was also founded by a Bishop one W. Smith B of Ely. Corpus Christi by R Foxe B of Exeter Bath, and Wells, Durham, and Winchester (who was Godfather to King Henrie the eight Anno 1516. And Cardinnll Wolsey, whom you so vilifie and disdaine, had he liv'd, he had perfected one of the most magnificent Colleg∣es in the World, which he called Cardinalles College but King Henrie taking the foundation upon himselfe, called it Christs Church. Princes I must confesse had a greater hand in the foundation of Colledges in Cambridge, then Bishops yet these were not wanting there. Peter House was Grounded by Hugh Balsham Bishop of Elie iTrnity-Hall by William Bateman Bishop of Norwich. Iesus Colledge by Alcock B of Elie, and all these, Opinion wore square Caps, what say you have they beene so bad mem∣bers
of the common wealth as you and your fellowes would make them? Nay I can nor must not smother in silence many pious and cha¦ritable acts of Bishops of our own times; did not that good B. Witgift B of Canturburie found a famous School and hosptall in Croidon Did not B Abbot the like at Gilford in Surrey, where he was born, and was not Saint Iohns in Oxford so repaird and beautified by this now Lord Bishop of Canturburie, that it seemeth to have beene new built by him, and beyond all the rest what magnifi¦cent things hath the now Archbishop of York done late Bishop of Lincolne. Op. I never heard of any thing he did. Ti. No you were beyond Sea, or Opinion unborn, if you have not heard what a bountifull benefactor he hath beene to the Church. Let me tell you he much repaired and beautified the Church of Westminster where he is Deane, he repaired with a great charge the Bishop, Pllace of Lincolns where he intended a good∣ly Library, haveing laid out a great summe of money to buy books, besides provided timber, which but for his troubles hee had finished, as also a school and hospital in Wales where he was bor he builded and gave a goodly librarie to Saint Iohns in Cambridge, and another in VVestminster; he beautified Lincolne Coll. Chap¦pell in Oxford, paveing it with Marble, making the Dskes and Seates of Cedar whersoever he was Parson in the Countrie, hee gave annuities to the poore, he gave Schollerships to Wstminster, and I beleeve Schollerships and Fellowships to Saint Iohns in Cambridge, but the Master-peece of his bountie I must conceale, let it suffize that you are utterly deceived in the name of a Bishop, and ignorant of the good deedes they have done. Opin. If it be as you say, I shall have a better conceit of them then I had; but in the mean time I am carried, with violence in the throng I can doe no oter then I doe. Time. Well Opinion, Omnia tempus habent; and my comfort is this, Nullum violentum diuturnum: Nothing violent lasts long. So fare you well, but be sure to keep a good tongue in your head. Op. I warrant you Father. FINIS
