S2846 12439699 62074
THE HISTORY OF Timon of Athens, THE MAN-HATER. As it is acted at the DUKES THEATRE. Made into a PLAY. By THO. SHADWELL. Licensed, Feb. 18. 1677/8. Ro. L'Estrange. LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Henry Herringman, at the Blue Anchor, in the Lower Walk of the New Exchange, 1678.
To the Most ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE GEORGE DUKE of BUCKINGHAM, &c. May it please your Grace, NOthing could ever contribute more to my having a good opinion of my self, than the being favour'd by your Grace: The thought of which has so exalted me, that I can no longer conceal my Pride from the World; but must publish the Joy I receive in having so noble a Patron, and one so excelling in Wit and Judgment; Qualities which even your Enemies could ne∣ver doubt of, or detract from. And which make all good men and men of sence admire you, and none but Fools and ill men fear you for 'em. I am extreamly sensible what ho∣nour it is t me that my Writings are ap∣proved by your Grace; who in your own
have so clearly shown the excellency of Wit and Judgment in your Self, and so justly the defect of 'em in others, that they at once serve for the greatest example, and the sharp∣st reproof. And no man who has perfectly understood the Rehearsal, and some other of your Writings, if he has any Genius at all, can write ill after it. I pretend not of an Epistle to make a De∣clamation upon these and your other excel∣lent Qualities. For naming the Duke of Buckingham is enough: who cannot have greater commendations from me than all who have the honour to know him already give him. Amongst which number I think it my greatest happiness to be one, and can never be prouder of any thing can arrive to me, than of the honour of having been admitted sometimes into your Graces Conversation, the most charming in the World. I am now to present your Grace with this History of imon, which you were pleased to tell me you liked, and it is the more wrthy of you, since it has the inimitable hand of Shakespear
in it, which never made more Masterly strokes than in this. Yet I can truly say, I have made it into a Play. Which I humbly lay at your feet, begging the continuance of your Favour, which no man can value more than I shall ever do, who am unfeignedly, My Lord, Your Graces Most Obedient, humble Servant, THO. SHADWELL.
Prologue TO TIMON. SInce the bare gleanings of the stage are grown The only portion for brisk Wits o'th' Town, We mean such as have no crop of their own; Methinks you should encourage them that sow, Who are to watch and gather what does grow. Thus a poor Poet must maintain a Muse, As you do Mistresses for others use: The wittiest Play can serve him but one day, Though for three months it finds you what to say. Yet you your Creditors of wit will fail, And never pay, but borrow on and rail. Poor Echo's can repeat wit, though they've none, Like Bag-pipes they no sound have of their own, Till some into their emptiness be blown. Yet— To be thought Wits and Judges they're so glad, And labour for't, as if they were Wit-mad. Some will keep Tables for the Wits o'th'Nation, And Poets eat them into reputation. Some Scriblers will Wit their whole bus'ness make, For labour'd dullness grievous pains will take; And when with many Throes they've travail'd long, They now and then bring forth a Foolish Song. One Fop all modern Poets will condemn, And by this means a parlous Judg will seem.
Wit is a common Idol, and in vain Fops try a thousand wayes the name to gain. Pray judge the nauseous Farces of the Age, And meddle not with sence upon the Stage; To you our Poet no one line submits, Who such a Coil will keep to be thought Wits: 'Tis you who truly are so, he would please; But knows it is not to be done with ease. In the Art of Judging you as wise are grown, As in their choice some Ladies of the Town. Your neat shap't Barbary Wits you will despise, And none but lusty Sinewy Writers prize. Old English Shakespear stomachs you have still, And judge as our Fore-fathers writ with skill. You Coin the Wit, the Witlings of the Town Retailers are, that spread it up and down; Set but your stamp upon't, though it be brass, With all the Wou'd-be-Wits, 'twill currant pass. Try it to day and we are sure 'twill hit, All to your Soveraign Empire must submit.
Timon of Athens, OR THE MAN-HATER. ACT I. SCENE I. Demetrius. Dem. HOw strange it is to see my Riotous Lord With careless Luxury betray himself! To Feast and Revel all his hours away; Without account how fast his Treasure ebbs, How slowly flows, and when I warn'd him of His following dangers, with his rigorous frowns He nipt my growing honesty i'th' Bud, And kill'd it quite; and well for me he did so. It was a barren Stock would yield no Fruit: But now like Evil Councellours I comply, And lull him in his soft Lethargick life. And like such cursed Politicians can Share in the head-long ruine, and will rise by't: What vast rewards to nauseous Flatterers, To Pimps, and Women, what Estates he gives! And shall I have no share? Be gon, all Honesty, Thou foolish, slender, thredbare, starving thing, be gon!
Enter Poet. Here's a fellow-horseleech: How now Poet, how goes the world? Poet. Why, it wears as it grows: but is Lord Timon visible? Dem. Hee'll come out suddenly, what have you to pre∣sent him? Poet. A little Off-spring of my fruitful Muse: She's in tra∣vel daily for his honour. Dem. For your own profit, you gross flatterer. By his damn'd Panegyricks he has written [Aside. Himself up to my Lords Table, Which he seldom fails; nay, into his Chariot, Where he in publick does not blush to own The sordid Scribler. Poet. The last thing I presented my Noble Lord was Epi∣gram: But this is in Heroick style. Dem. What d'ye mean by style? that of good sence is all alike; that is to say, with apt and easie words, not one too little or too much: And this I think good style. Poet. O Sir, you are wide o'th' matter! apt and easie▪ Heroicks must be lofty and high sounding; No easie language in Heroick Verse; 'Tis most unfit: for should I name a Lion, I must not in Heroicks call him so! Dem. What then? Poet. I'de as soon call him an Ass. No thus— The fierce Numidian Monarch of the Beasts. Dem. That's lofty, is it? Poet. O yes! but a Lion would sound so baldly, not to be Endur'd, and a Bull too- - - but The mighty Warriour of the horned Race: Ah - - - how that sounds! Dem. Then I perceive sound's the great matter in this way. Poet. Ever while you live. Dem. How would you sound a Fox as you call it? Pot. A Fox is but a scurvey Beast for Heroick Verse. Dem. Hum - - - is it so? how will a Raven do in Heroick?
Poet. Oh very well, Sir. That black and dreadful fate-denouncing fowl. Dem. An excellent sound - - - But let me see your Piece. Poet. I'le read it - - - 'Tis a good morrow to the Lord Timon. Dem. Do you make good morrow sound loftily? Poet. Oh very loftily!— The fringed Vallance of your eyes advance, Shake off your Canopy'd and downie trance: Phoebus already quaffs the morning dew, Each does his daily lease of life renew. Now you shall hear description, 'tis the very life of Poetry. He darts his beams on the Larks mossie-house, And from his quiet tenement does rouze The little charming and harmonious Fowl, Which sings its lump of Body to a Soul: Swiftly it clambers up in the steep air With warbling throat, and makes each noat a stair. There's rapture for you! hah!— Dem. Very fine. Poet. This the sollicitous Lover straight alarms, Who too long slumber'd in his Coelia's arms: And now the swelling Spunges of the night With aking heads stagger from their delight: Slovenly Taylors to their needles hast: Already now the moving shops are plac'd By those who crop the treasures of the fields, And all those Gems the ripening Summer yields. Who d'ye think are now? Why—Nothing but Herb-wo∣men: there are fine lofty expressions for Herb-women! ha!- - - Already now, &c. Dem. But what's all this to my Lord?
Poet. No, that's true, 'tis description though. Dem. Yes, in twenty lines to describe to him that 'tis about The fourth hour in the morning—I'le in and let Him know in three words 'tis the seventh. [Exit Demetrius. Enter Musician. Poet. Good morning Sir: whither this way? Mus. To present his Honour with a piece of Musiek. Enter Demetrius. Dem. My Lord will soon come out. Poet. He's the very spirit of Nobility— And like the Sun when ever he breaks forth, His Universal bounty falls on all. Enter Merchant, Jeweller, Painter, and several others. Jewell. Good morrow Gentlemen. Paint. Save you all. Dem. Now they begin to swarm about the house! Poet. What confluence the worthy Timon draws? Maick of bounty—These familiar Spirits Are conjur'd up by thee. Merch. 'Tis a splendid Jewel. Jewel. 'Tis of an excellent water. Poet. What have you there, Sir? Paint. It is a Picture Sir, a dumb piece of Poetry: but you present a speaking Poem. Poet. I have a little thing slipt idly from me: The fire within the flint shews not it self Till it be struck; our gentle flame provokes It self— Dem. You write so scurvily, the Devil's in any man that pro∣vokes You, but your self. Poet. It is a pretty mocking of the life. Paint. So, so. Dem. Now must these Rascals be presented all, As if they had sav'd his honour or his life; And I must have a feeling in the business.
Enter certain Senators going in to Timon. Poet. How this Lord is follow'd! [Enter more who pass over. Paint. See more, well, he's a noble spirit! Jewel. A most worthy Lord! Poet. What a flood of Visitors his bounty draws! Dem. You see how all conditions, how all minds, As well of glib and slippery Creatures, as Of grave and austere quality, present Their services to Lord Timons prosp'rous fortune. He to his good and gracious nature does subdue All sorts of tempers, from the smooth fac'd flatterer To Apemantus, that Philosophical Churle Who hates the world, and does almost abhor Himself— Paint. He is a most excellent Lord, and makes the finest Picture! Poet. The joy of all mankind; deserves a Homer for his Poet. Jewel. A most accomplisht person! Poet. The Glory of the Age! Paint. Above all parallel! Dem. And yet these Rogues, were this man poor, would ly him, As I would them, if I were he. [Soft Musick. Poet. Here's excellent Musick! In what delights he melts his hours away! Enter Timon and Senators, Timon addressing him∣self courteously to all. Tim. My Lord, you wrong your self, and 'bate too much Of your own merits: 'Tis but a trifle. Aelius. With more than common thanks I must receive it. Isidore. Your Lordship has the very soul of bounty. Phaeax. You load us with too many Obligations. Tim. I never can oblige my friends too much. My Lord, I remember you the other day Commended a Bay Courser which I rode on.
He's yours, because you lik'd him. Phaeax. I beseech your Lordship pardon me in this. Tim. My word is past: is there ought else you like? I know my Lord, no man can justly praise But what he does affect; and I must weigh My Friends affections with my own: So kindly I receive your visits, Lords: My heart is no enough to give, me thinks, I could deal Kingdoms to my Friends and ne're be weary. Aelius. We all must stand amaz'd at your vast bounty! Cleon. The spirit of Magnificence reigns in you! Phoeax. Your Bounty's as diffusive as the Sea. Tim. My Noble Lords, you do me too much honour. Isand. There lives not such a Noble Lord on Earth. Thrasil. None but the Sun and He oblige without A prospect of Return. Enter a Messenger and whispers Timon. Tim. Lampridius imprison'd! say you? Mess. Yes, my good Lord, five Talents is his debt: His Means are short, his Creditors most strict, He begs your Letter to those cruel men, That may preserve him from his utter ruine. Tim. I am not of that temper to shake off My Friend when most he needs me: I know him▪ A Gentleman that well deserves my help; Which he shall have: I'le pay the debt and free him. Mess. Your Lordship ever binds him to your service. Tim. Commend me to him, I will send his Ransom, And when he's free, bid him depend on me: Tis not enough to help the feeble up, But to support him after—tell him so. Mess. All happiness to your honour. [Exit Messenger. Enter an Old Athenian. Old Man. My Lord, pray hear me speak. Tim. Freely, good Father. Old Man. You have a Servant nam'd Diphilus. Tim. I have so, that is he.
ld Man. That fllow there by night frequents my house, I am a man that from my first have been Inclin'd to thrift, and my Estate deserves A nobler Heir than one that holds a trencher. Tim Go on. Old Man I have an only Daughter: no Kin else, On whom I may confer what I have got: The Mad is fair, o'th' youngest for a Bride, And I have bred her at my dearest cost. This man attempts her love; pray my good Lord Joyn with me to forbid him; I have often Told him my mind in vain. Tim. The man is honest. Old Man. His honesty rewards him in himself; It must not bear my Daughter. Tim. Does she love him? Old Man. She is young and apt. Tim. Do you love her? Diffil. Yes, my good Lord, and she accepts of mine. Old Man. If to her marriage my consent be wanting, I call the gods to witness, I will make The Beggars of the street my Heirs e're she Shall have a drachma. Tim. This Gentleman of mine has serv'd me long; There is a duty om a Master too: To build his Fortune I will strain a little, What e're your Daughters Portion weighs, this Mans shall counterpoise. Old Man. Say you so my Noble Lord! upon your honour This, and she is his. Tim. Give me thy hand: my Honour on my promise. Diffil. My Noble Lord, I hank you on my knees: May I be as miserable as I shall be base When I forget this most surprizing favour: No Fortune or Estate shall e're be mine, Which I'le not humbly lay before your feet. Tim. Rise. I ne're do good with prospect of return, That were but merchandizing, a mere trade Of putting kindness out to use.
Poet. Vouchsafe to accept my labours, and long live your Lordship. Tim. I thank you; you shall hear from me anon: What have you there my friend? Paint. A piece of Limning for your Lordship. Tim. 'Tis welcome. I like it, and you shall find I do. Jewel. My Lord, here is the Jewel! Tim. 'Tis Excellent! Enter Apemantus. Jewel. Your Lordship mends the Jewel by the wearing. Tim. Well mock't. Poet. No, my good Lord, he speaks what all men think. Apem. Scum of all flatterers, wilt thou still persist For filthy gain, to gild and varnish o're This great Man's Vanities! Tim. Nay, now we must be chidden. Poet. I can bear with your Lordship. Apem. Yes, and without him too: vain credulous Timon, If thou believ'st this Knave, thou'art a foo. Tim. Well, gentle Apemantus, good morrow to thee. Apem. Till, I am gentle; stay for thy good morrow Till thou art Timons dog, and these Knavs honest. Tim. Why dost thou call them Knaves▪ Apem. They're Athenians, and I'le not recant; Th'are all base Fawners; what a coile is he With smiling, cringing, jutting out of Bus: I wonder whether all the legs they make Are worth the summes they cost you; friendship's full Of dregs; base filthy dregs. Thus honest fools lay out their wealth for cringes. Ailius. Do you know us fellow? Apem. Did I not call you by your names? Tim. Thou preachest against Vice, and thou thy self art proud Apemantus. Apem. Proud! that I am not Timon. Tim. Why so? Apem. To give belief to flatt'ring Knaves and Poets, And to be still my self my greatest flatterer:
What should Great Men be proud of stead of noise And pomp and show, and holding up their heads, And cocking of their noses; pleas'd to see Base smiling Knaves, and cringing fools bow to 'em? Did they but see their own ridiculous folly, Their mean and absurd vanities; they'd hide Their heads within some dark and little corner, And be afraid that every fool should find 'em. Tim. Thou hast too much sowrness in thy blood. Poet. Hang him,—n'er mind him— Apem. What is this foolish animal man, that we Should magnifie him so? a little warm, And walking Earth that will be ashes soon; We come into the world crying and squalling, And so much of our time's consum'd in driv'ling infancy, In ignorance sleep, disease and trouble, that The remainder is not worth the being rear'd to. Phaeax. A preaching fool. Apem. A fool? if thou hadst half my wit thou'dst find Thy self an Ass! Is it not truth I speak? Are not all the arts and subtleties of men, All their Inventions, all their Sciences, All their Diversions, all their Sports, little enough To pass away their happiest hours with, And make a heavy life be born with patience? Tim. I with the help of friends will make mine easier Than what your melancholy frames. Apem. How little dost thou look before thee! Thou, who tak'st such great felicity in Fools and Knaves, And in thy own enjoyments, wilt e're long Find 'em such thin, such poor and empty shadows, That thou wilt wish thou never hadst been born. Tim. I do not think so. Phaeax. Hang him, send him to the Areopagus, and let him Be whipt! Apem. Thus innocence, truth and merit often suffer, Whil'st injurers, oppressors and desertless fools Swell in their brief authority, look big
And strut in Furs; 'tis a foul shame, But 'tis a loathsome Age,—it has been long Imposthumating with its villanie; And now the swelling's broken out In most contagious ulcers; no place free From the destructive Pestilence of manners; Out upon't, 'tis time the world should end! Tim. Do not rail so—'tis to little purpose. Apem. I fear it is, I have done my morning lecture, And I'le be gone— Tim. Whither? Apem. To knock out an honest Athenians brains. Tim. Why? that's a deed thou'lt die for Apemantus. Apem. Yes, if doing nothing be death by the Law. Tim. Will nothing please thee? how dost thou like this Pi∣cture? Apem. Better than the thing 'twas drawn for, 'twill Neither lie, drink, nor whore, Flatter a man to his face, and cut his Throat behind his back; For since false smiles, and base Dishonour traffique with mans nature, He is but mere outside; Pictures are Even such as they give out: Oh! did you see The insides of these Fellows minds about you, You'd loath the base corruptions more than ll The putrid Excrements their bodies hide. Aelius. Silence the foul mouth'd villain. Tim. He hurts not us. How lik'st thou this Jewel? Apem. Not so well as plain dealing, which will not cost a Man a doit. Tim. What dost thou think this Jewel worth? Apem. What fools esteem it, it is not worth my thinking. Lo, now the mighty use of thy great Riches! That must set infinite value on a Bawble! Will't keep thee warm, or satisfie thy thirst, Or hunger? No, it is comparison That gives it value; then, thou look'st upon Thy finger, and art very proud to think
A poor man cannot have it: Childish pleasure! What stretcht inventions must be found to make Great wealth of use? Oh! that I were a Lord! Tim. What would'st thou do? Apem. I would cudgel two men a day for flattering me, Till I had beaten the whole Senate. Phaeax. Let the Villain be soundly punish'd for his Licentious tongue. Tim. No, the man is honest, 'tis his humour: 'Tis odd, And methinks pleasant. You must dine with me Apemantus. Apem. I devour no Lords. Tim. No, if you did, the Ladies wou'd be angry. Apem. Yet they with all their modest simperings, And varnish'd looks can swallow Lords, and get Great bellies by't, yet keep their virtuous Vizors on, till a poor little Bastard steals into The world, and tells a tale. Enter Nicius. Tim. My Noble Lord, welcome! most welcom to my arms▪ You are the Fountain from which all my happiness Did spring! your matchless Daughter, fair Mellissa. Nic. You honour us too much my Lord. Tim. I cannot, she is the joy of Athens! the chief delight Of Nature, the only life I live by: Oh, that her vows Were once expir'd; it is methinks an Age till that blest day When we shall joyn our hands and hearts together. Nic. 'Tis but a week, my Lord. Tim. 'Tis a thousand years. Apem. Thou miserable Lord, hast thou to compleat All thy calamities, that plague of Love, That most unmanly madness of the mind, That specious cheat, as false as friendship is? Did'st thou but see how like a siveling thing Thou look'st and talk'st, thou would'st abhor or laugh at Thy own admir'd Image. Tim. Peace: I will hear no railing on this subject.
Apem. Oh vile corrupted time, that men should be Deaf to good Counsel, not to Flatterie. Tim. Come my dear friends, let us now visit our gardes, resh our selves with some cool Wines and Fruit: I am transported with your Visits! There is not now a Prince whom I can envy, it be in that he can more bestow Upon he men he loves. . My Noble Lord, who would not wed your friend∣, though without a Dowrie? Isodor. Most worthy Timon! who has a life you may not  your own? Phaeax. We are all your slaves. Poet. The joy of all Mankind. Jewel. Great spirit of Nobleness. Tim. We must not part tis day my Friends. Apem. So, so, crouching slaves aches contract and make your supple Joynts to wither; that there should be so little Love among these Knaves, yet all this courtesie! They hate and scorn each other, yet they kiss As if they were of different Sexes: Villains, Villains. Exeunt Omnes. Enter Evandra. Re-enter Timon. Tim. Hail to the fir Evandra! methinks your looks are chang'd▪ And clouded with some grief that misbecomes 'em. Evan. My Lord, my ears this morning were saluted with Te most unhappy news, the dismal'st story The only one cou'd have afflicted me; My dream foretold it, and I wak'd affighted With a cold sweat o're all my limbs. Tim. What was it Madam? Evand. You speak not with the kindness you were wont, I have been us'd to tenderer words than these: It is too true, and I am miserable! Tim. What is't disturbs you so? too well I guess. [Aside. . I hear I am to lose your Love, which was The only earthly blssing I enjoy'd, Ad that on which my life depended. Tim. No, I must ever love my Excellent Evandra!
Evan. Melissa will not suffer it: Oh cruel Timon, Thou well may'st blush at thy ingratitude! Had I so much towards thee, I ne're shou'd show My face without confusion: Such a guilt, As if I had destroy'd thy Race, and ruin'd All thy Estate, and made thee infamous! Thy Love to me I cou'd prefer before All cold respcts of Kindred, Wealth and Fame. Tim. You have been kind so far above return, That 'tis beyond expression. Evan. Call to mind Whose Race I sprung from, that of great Alcides, Though not my Fortune, my Beauty and my Youth And my unspotted Fame yielded to none. You on your knees a thousand times have sworn, That they exceeded all, and yet all these, The only treasures a poor Maid possest, I sacrific'd to you, and rather chose To throw my self away, than you shou'd be Uneasie in your wishes; since which happy And yet unhappy time, you have been to me, My Life, my Joy, my Earth, my Heaven, my All, I never had one single wish beyond you; Nay, every action, every thought of mine, How far soe're their large circumference Stretcht out, yet center'd all in you: You were My End, the only thing could fill my mind. Tim. She strikes me to the heart! I would I had Not seen her. [Aside▪ Evan. Ah Timon, I have lov'd you so, that had My eyes offended you, I with these fingers Had pluckt 'em by the roots, and cast them from me: Or had my heart contain'd one thought that was Not yours, I with this hand would rip it open: Shew me a Wife in Athens can say this; And yet I am not one, but you are now to marry. Tim. That I have lov'd you, you and Heav'n can witness By many long repeated acts of Love,
And Bounty I have shew'd you— Evan. Bounty! ah Timon! I am not yet so mean, but I contemn Your transitory dirt, and all rewards, But that of Love, your person was the bound Of all my thoughts and wishes, in return You have lov'd me! Oh miserable sound! I would you never had, or alwayes would. Tim. Man is not master of his appetites, Heav'n swayes our mind to Love. Evan. But Hell to falseshood: How many thousand times y' have vow'd and sworn Eternal Love; Heav'n has not yet absolv'd You of your Oaths to me; nor can I ever, My Love's as much too much as yours too little. Tim. If you love me, you'l love my happiness, Melissa; Beauty and her Love to me Has so inflam'd me, I can have none without her. Evan. If I had lov'd another, when you first, My dear, false Timon swore to me, would you Have wisht I might have found my happiness Within anothers armes? No, no, it is To love a contradiction. Tim. 'Tis a truth I cannot answer. Evan. Besides, Melissa's beauty Is not believ'd to exceed my little stock, Even modesty may praise it self when 'tis Aspers'd: But her Love is mercenary, Most mercenary, base, 'tis Marriage Love: She gives her person, but in vile exchange She does demand your liberty: But I Could generously give without mean bargaining: I trusted to your honour, and lost mine, Lost all my Frinds and Kindred: but little thought I should have lost my Love, and cast it on A barren and ungrateful soil that would return no fruit. Tim. This does perplex me, I must break it off. [Aside. Evan. The first storm of your Love did shake me so,
It threw down all my leaves, my hopeful blossoms, Pull'd down my branches; but this lat'er tempest of your hate Strikes at my root, and I must wither now, Like a desertless, sapless tree: must fall— Tim. You are secure against all injuries While  have breath— Evan. And yet you do the greatest. Timon. You shall be so much partner of my fortune As will secure you full respect from all, And may support your quality in what pomp You can desire. Evan. I am not of so course a Mould, or have So gross a mind, as to partake of ought That's yours without you— But, oh thou too dear perjur'd man, I could With thee prefer a dungeon, a low and loathsome dungeon Before the stately guilded fretted Roofs, The Pomp, the noise, the show, the revelling, And all the glittering splendour of a Palace. Tim. I by resistless fate am hurry'd on— Evan. A vulgar, mean excuse for doing ill. Tim. If that were not, my honour is engag'd— Evan. It had a pre-engagement— Tim. All the great men of Athens urge me on To marry and to preserve my Race. Evan. Suppose your Wife be false; (as 'tis not new In Athens;) and suffer others to graft upon Your stock; where is your Race? weak vulgar reason▪ Tim. Her honour will not suffer her. Evan. She may do it cunningly and keep her honour. Tim. Her love will then secure her; which is as fervent Evan. As yours was once to me, and may continue Perhaps as long, and yet you cannot know She loves you. Since that base Cecropian Law Made Love a merchandize, to traffick hearts For marriage, and for Dowry, who's secure? Now her great sign of Love, is, she's content To bind you in the strongest chains, and to
A slavery, nought can manumize you from But death: And I could be content to be A slave to you, without those vile conditions— Tim. Why are not our desires within our power? Or why should we be punisht for obeying them? But we cannot create our own affections; They're mov'd by some invisible active Pow'r, And we are only passive, and whatsoever Of imperfection follows from th' obedience To our desires, we suffer, not commit And 'tis a cruel and a hard decree, That we must suffer first, and then be punish't for't. Evan. Your Philosophy is too subtle—but what Security of Love from her can be like mine? Is Marriage a bond of Truth, which does consist Of a few trifling Ceremonies? Or are those Charms or Philters? 'Tis true, my Lord, I was not First lifted o're the Threshold, and then Led by my Parents to Minerva's Temple: No young unyok'd Heifers blood was offer'd To Diana; no invocation to uno, or the Parcae: No Coachman drove me with a lighted torch; Nor was your house adorn'd with Garlands then; Nor had I Figs thrown on my head, or lighted By my dear Mothers torches to your bed: Are these slight things, the bonds of truth and constancy? I came all Love into your arms, unmixt With other aims; and you for this will cause My death. Tim. I'de sooner seek my own, Evandra. Evan. Ah, my Lord, if that be true, then go not to Melissa, For I shall die to see another have Possession of all that e're I wisht for on earth. Tim. I would I had not seen Melissa:— Evan. Ah my dear Lord, there is some comfort left; Cherish those noble thoughts, and they'l grow stronger, Your lawful gratitude and Love will rise, And quell the other rebel-passion in you;
Use all the endeavours which you can, and if They fail in my relief, I'le die to make you happy. Tim. You have moved me to be womanish; pray retire, I will love you. Evan. Oh happy word! Heav'n ever bless my Dear; Farewell: but will you never see Mellissa more? Tim. Sweet Excellence! Retire. Evan. I will—will you remember your Evandra? Tim. Yes, I will. How happy were Mankind in Constancy, 'Twould equal us with the Celestial Spirits! O could we meet with the same tremblings still, Those panting joyes, those furious desires, Those happy trances which we found at first! But, oh! Unhappy man, whose most transporting joy Feeds on such luscious food as soon will cloy, And that which shou'd preserve, does it destroy. [Exit Timon. ACT II. Enter Melissa and Chloe. WHat think'st thou Chloe? will this dress become me? Chlo. Oh, most exceedingly! This pretty curle Does give you such a killing Grace, I swear That all the Youth at the Lord Timon's Mask Will die for you. Mel. No: But dost thou think so Chloe? I love To make those Fellows die for me, and I All the while look so scornfully, and then with my Head on one side, with a languishing eye I do so Kill 'em again: Prithee, what do they say of me, Chloe? Chlo. Say! That you are the Queen of all their hearts, Their Goddss, their Destiny, and talk of Cupids flames,
And darts, and Wounds! Oh the rarest language, 'Twould make one die to hear it; and ever now And then steal some gold into my hand, And then commend me too. Mel. Dear Soul, do they, and do they die for me? Chlo. Oh yes, the finest, properest Gentlemen— Mel. But there are not many that die for me? humh— Chlo. Oh yes, Lamachus, Theodorus, Thessalus, Eumolpides, Memnon, and indeed all that see your Ladiship. Mel. I'le swear? how is my complexion to day? ha Chloe? Chlo. O most fragrant! 'tis a rare white wash this! Mel. I think it is the best I ever bought; had I not best Lay on some more red Chloe? Chlo. A little more would do well; it makes you look So pretty, and so plump, Madam. Mel. I have been too long this morning in dressing. Chlo. Oh no, I vow you have been but bare three hours. Mel. No more! well, if I were sure to be thus pretty but seven Years, I'de be content to die then on that condition. Chlo. The gods forbid. Mel. I'le swear I would; but dost thou think Timon will Like me in this dress? Chlo. Oh he dies for you in any dress, Madam! Mel. Oh this vile tailor that brought me not home my new Habit to day; he deserves the Ostracisme! a Villain, To disorder me so; I am afraid it has done harm To my complexion: I have dreamt of it these two nights, And shall not recover it this week— Chlo. Indeed Madam he deserves death from your eyes. Mel. I think I look pretty well? will not Timon Perceive my disorder?—hah— Chlo. Oh no, but you speak as if you made this killing Preparation for none but Timon. Mel. O yes, Chloe, for every one, I love to have all th Young Blades follow, kiss my hand, admire, adore me, And die for me: but I must have but one favour'd Servant; it is the game and not the quarry, I Must look after it in the rest.
Chlo. Oh Lord, I would have as many admirers as I could. Mel. Ay so would I—but favour one alone. No, I am resolv'd nothing shall corrupt my honesty; Those admirers would make one a whore Chloe, And that undoes us, 'tis our interest to be honest. Chlo. Would they? No I warrant you, I'de fain see Any of those admirers make me a Whore. Mel. Timon loves me honestly and is rich— Chlo. You have forgot your Alcibiades: He is the rarest person! Mel. No, no, I could love him dearly: oh he was the beau∣tiful'st man, The finest wit in Athens, the best companion, fullest of mirth And pleasure, and the prettiest wayes he had to please Ladies, He would make his enemies rejoyce to see him. Chlo. Why? he is all this, and can do all this still. Mel. Ay, but he has been long banish'd for breaking Mercu∣ries Images, and profaning the mysteries of Proserpine; Besides, the people took his Estate from him, And I hate a poor Fellow, from my heart I swear: I vow methinks I look so pretty to day, I could Kiss my self Chloe. Chlo. Oh dear Madam—I could look on you for ever: oh What a world of murder you'l commit to day! Mel. Dost thou think so? ha! ha! no, no— Enter a Servant. Serv. The Lord Timon's come to wait on you, and begs Admittance. Enter Timon. Mel. Desire his presence. Tim. There is enchantment in her looks, A fresh I am wounded every time I see her: All happiness to beautiful Melissa. Mel. I shall want none in you my dearest Lord. Tim. Sweetest of Creatures, in whom all th' excellence Of heav'nly Woman-kind is seen unmixt; Nature has wrought thy mettle up without allay. Mel. I have no value, but my love of you, And that I am sure has no allay, 'tis of
So strong a temper, neither time nor death, Nor any change can break it— Tim. Dear charming sweet, thy value is so great, No Kingdom upon Earth should buy thee from me: But I have still an enemy with you, That guards me from my happiness; a Vow Against the Law of Nature, against Love, The best of Nature, and the highest Law. Mel. It will be but a week in force. Tim. 'Tis a whole age: in all approaching joys, The nearer they come to us, still the time Seems longer to us: But my dear Melissa, Why should we bind our selves with vows and oaths? Alas, by Nature we are too much confin'd, Our Liberties so narrow, that we need not Find fetters for our selves: No, we should seize On pleasure wheresoever we can find it, Lest at another time we miss it there. Chlo. Madam, break your Vow, it was a rash one. Mel. Thou foolish Wench, I cannot get my things▪ In order till that time; dost think I will Be marri'd like some vulgar Creature, which Snatches at the first offer, as if she Were desperate of having any other? Tim. Is there no hope that you will break your vow? Mel. If any thing, one word of yours wou'd do't: But how can you be once secure, I'le keep A vow to you, that would not to my self? Tim. Some dreadful accident may come Melissa▪ To interrupt our joyes; let us make sure O'th' present minute, for the rest perhaps May not be ours. Mel. It is not fit it shou'd, if I shou'd break a vow; No, you shall never find a change in me, All the ixt stars shall sooner stray With an irregular motion, than I change: This may assure you of my love, if not Upon my knees I swear—
Were I the Queen of all the Universe, And Timon were reduc'd to rags and misery, I would not change my love to him. Tim. And here I vow, Should all the frame of Nature be dissolv'd, Should the firm Centre shake, should Earthquakes rage With such a fury to disorder all The peaceful and agreeing Elements, Till they were huddled into their first Chaos, As long as I could be, I'de be the same, The same adorer of Melissa! Mel. This is so great a blessing Heav'n cann't add to it▪ Tim. Thou art my Heav'n, Melissa, the last mark Of all my hopes and wishes, so I prize thee, That I could die for thee. Enter a Servant of Timons. Serv. My Lord, your dinner's ready, and your Lordships Guests wait your wisht presence: the Lord Nicias is already there. Tim. Let's hast to wait on him Melissa. Mel. It is my duty to my Father. [Exeunt. Enter Poet, Apemantus, Servants setting things in order for the Feast. Poet. His honour will soon be here, I have prepar'd the Mas∣kers; They are all ready. Apem. How now Poet? what piece of oppery hast thou to present to Timon? Poet. Thou art a senceless snarling Stoick, and hast no taste of Poetry. Apem. Thy Poetrie's insipid, none can taste it: Thou art a wordy foolish Scribler, who Writ'st nothing but high-sounding frothy stuff; Thou spread'st, and beat'st out thy poor little sence, 'Tis all leaf-gold, it has no weight in it. Thou lov'st impertinent description, And when thou hast a rapture, it is not The sacred rapture of a Poet, but Icoherent, extravagant, and unnatural,
Like mad-mens thoughts, and this thou call'st Poetical. Poet. You are judge! shall dull Philosophers judge Of us the nimble fancies, and quick spirits Of the Age? Apem. The Cox-combs of the Age: Are there such eminent fopperies as in the Poets of this time? their most unreasonable heads Are whimsical, and fantastick as Fidlers, They are the scorn and laughter of all witty men, The folly of you makes the Art contemptible, None of you have the judgement of a Gander. Enter Aelius, Nicias, Phaeax, and the other Senators. Poet. You are a base snarling Critick; write your Self, do and you dare. Apem. I confess 'tis a daring piece of valour, for a man Of sence to write to an Age that likes your spurious stuff. Nici. What time of the day is't, Apemantus? Apem. Time to be honest. Aelius. That time serves alwayes. Apem. Then what excuse hast thou, that would'st thus long Omit it? Isid. You stay to be at the Lord Timons feast. Apem. Yes, to see Meat fill Knaves, and Wine heat Fools. Cleon. Well, fare thee well. Apem. Thou art an Ass to bid me farewell. Cleon. Why so? Apem. Because I have not so little reason or honesty to Return thee one good wish for it. Phaeax. Go hang thy self. Apem. I'le do nothing at thy bidding, make thy requests to Thy friend, if there be such a wretch on earth. Phaeax. Be gon▪ unpeaceable dog, or I will spurn thee from me. Apem. Though I am none, I'le fly like a dog the heels of The Ass. Nici. He's opposite to all humanity— Aelius. Now we shall taste of Timons bounty. Phaeax. He hath a heart brimful of kindness and good will— Isid. And pours it down on all his friends, as if Plutus
The god of Wealth were but his Steward. Phaeax. No Meed but he repayes sev'n-fold above Its self, no gift but breeds the giver such Return as does exceed his wishes. Thrasil. He bears the noblest mind that ever govern'd man. Phaeax. Long may he live with prosperous fortunes. But I fear it— Aelius. I hear a whisper, as though he fails his Creditors, Even of their interest. Phaeax. I fear it is too true—well 'tis pity: but he's a good Lord! Enter Timon with Melissa, Chloe, Nicias, and a great train with him. Here he comes my Noble Lord. Nici. Most worthy Timon! Aelius. My most honour'd Lord. Tim. You over-joy me with your presence! is there On Earth a sight so splendid, as Tables well Fill'd with good and faithful friends, like you? Dear Melissa! be pleas'd to know my friends: Oh Apemantus! thou'rt welcome. Apem. No, thou shalt not make me welcome; I come to tell thee truth, and if thou hear'st me not I'le lock thy Heav'n from thee hereafter: think On the ebb of your Estate, and flow of debts; How many prodigal bits do slaves and flatterers gorge? And now 'tis noble Timon, worthy Timon, royal Timon, And when the means is gone that buyes this praise, The breath is gone, whereof the praise is made. Tim. It is not so with my Estate. Apem. None are so honest to tell thee of thy vanities, So the gods bless me. When all your Offices have been opprest With riotous feeders, when every Vault has wept With drunken spilth of wine, when every room Has blaz'd with lights, and bray'd with Minstrels, Or roaring inging drunkards; I have retir'd To my poor homely Cell, and set my eyes At flow for thee, because I find something in
Thee that might be worthy—but as thou art I Hate and scorn thee. Tim. Come, preach no more, had I no Estate, I Am rich in Friends, my Noble Friends here, The dearest loving Friends that ever man Was blest with. Nic. Oh might we have an happy opportunity to show how We love and honour you! Aelius. That you wou'd once but use our hearts. Isand. We'd lay 'em out all in your service. Phaeax. Yes, all our selves, if you wou'd put us to a Tryal, then we were perfect. Tim. I doubt it not, I know you'd serve me all; Shall I distrust my Friends? I have often wisht My self poorer that I might use you—We are Born to do good one to another: Friends, Unless we use 'em, are like sweet instruments hung Up in cases: But oh, what a precious comfort 'Tis to have so many like Brothers, commanding One anothers fortunes! Trust me, my joy brings water To my eyes. Phaeax. Joy had the like conception in my eyes. Apem. Ho, ho, ho—I laugh to think that it conceiv'd a Bastard. Tim. What dost thou laugh for? Apem. To hear these smell-feasts lye and fawn so, Not only flattering thee, but thy Mutton and thy Partridge, These Flies, who at one cloud of winter-showers Would drop from off you. Cleon. Silence, the Dog. Phaeax. Let the snarling Cur be kickt out. Apem. Of what vile earth, of what mean dirt a Lord is Kneaded! Tim. The man I think is honest, and his humor hurts us not. Apem. I would my reason wou'd do thee good, Timon. Mel. This is an odd snarling fellow; I like him. Apem. If  could without lying, I'de say the same of thee. Mel. Why? prethee what dost thou think of me?
Tim. He'll srl at thee. Mel. No matter. Apem. I think thou art a piece of white and red Earth, The Picture of Vanity drawn to th'life; I am thinking how handsome that Skull will Be when all the Flesh is off; that face thou art So proud of, is a poor vain, transitory thing, And shortly will be good for nothing. Mel. Out on him, scurvy poor Fellow. Tim. No more of this, be not so sullen; I'l be kind To thee and better thy Condition. Apem. No, I'll have nothing; should I be brib'd too, There would be none left to rail at thee, and the Thou'dst sin the faster: Timon, thou givest so long, Thou'lt shortly give thy self away. Tim. I'll hear no more: let him have a Table by Himself. Apem. Let me have some Roots and Water, such as Natur intended for our Meat and Drink before Eating and Drinking grew an Art. [The Meat is serv'd up with Kettle Drums, and Trumpets. Tim. Sit Dear Melissa, this is your Feast: And all you see is yours. And all that you can wish for shall be so. Come, sit Lords, no Ceremony, That was devis'd at first to set a gloss On feigned deeds, and hollow-hearted welcomes, Recanting goodness, sorry ere 'tis shown: True friendship needs 'em not: you're more welcome To my Fortunes, than my Fortunes are to me. [They sit. Will you not have some Meat Apemantus? Apem. I scorn thy Meat, 'twould choak me; for I should Ne'r flatter ye; Ye Gods, what a number of men Eat Timon! and yet he sees 'em not. It grieves me to see so many dip their meat In one mn's Bloud, and all the madness is He cheers 'em to't, and loves 'em for't:
I wonder men dare trust themselves with men; Methinks they should invite them without knives, 'Twere safer far. That fellow that sits next him, Now parts bread with him, pledges his breath In a divided Draught, may next day kill him; Such things have been. If I were a Huge Man I shou'd be afraid to drink at meals, Left they shou'd spy my Wind Pipes dang'rous places. Great Men should drink with Harness on their Throats. Tim. Now my Lords, let Melissa's health go round Aelius. Let it flow this way— [Kettle-Drums and Trumpets sound. Apem. How this pomp shows to a little Oyl and Roots? These healths will make thee and thy State look ill. Phaeax. Peace Villain. Apem. Here's that which is too weak to be a Sinner; Here's honest Water ne'r left man i'th'mire, This and my Root will still keep down My sawcy and presumptuous Flesh, That it shall never get the better of me— Apemantus' Grace. Immortal Gods I crave no Pelf, I pray for no man but my self, rant I may never be so fond To trust man on his Oath or Bond; Or a Harlot for her weeping, Or a Dog that seems a sleeping, Or a Gaoler with my freedom, Or my Friends if I shou'd need 'em. Amen, Amen, and so fall to't, Great Men sin, and I eat Root. Much good may't do thee good Apemantus. Nici. Our noble Lord Timon's health, let it go round, And Drums, and Trumpets sound. [Kettle Drums, &c. Apem. What madness is the pomp, the noise, the splendor,
The frantick Glory of this foolish life! We make our selves fools to disport our selves, And vary a thousand antick ugly shapes Of Folly and of Madness, these fill up The scenes and empty spaces of our lives. Life's nothing but a dull repetition, A vain fantastick dream, and there's an end on't. Tim. Now my good Lords and Friends, I speak to you, You that are of the Council of four hundred, In the behalf of a dear Friend of mine. Nici. One word of yours must govern all the Council, And any thing in Athens. Tim. I Speak chiefly To you my Lord and Father; and to Phaeax. Phaeax. My good Lord command me to my death and I'll obey. Tim. I have receiv'd notice from Alcibiades., (Whose Enemies you have been, and whose Friends I beg you will be now) that he in private Will venture into Athens; Not openly because he will not trust The Insolence of the tumultuous Rabble; If he sollicites his recallmet with you, There lives not on this earth a man that has Deserv'd so well from the Nobility; He has preserv'd ev'n Athes in his Exile, By Tissaphernes power he has kept us from The Lacedemonian Rage, and other Foes That might have laid this City low in ashes. How many famous Battels has he wo? But which is more, by his advice and power, Even in his absence he has wrested The Government from the insulting Vulgar; Whose Wisedom's Blindness, and whose Power is Madness: And plac'd it in your noble Hands; methiks You in return should take off his hard entence Of Banishment, and render back all his Estate. Phaeax. Is there a thing on Earth you would command us That we would disoby?
Nici. I am absolutely yours in all Commands. Aelius. How proud am I that I can serve Lord Timon! Apem. Thinkst thou thy self thy Countries friend now Ti∣mon▪ His foul Riot and his inordinate Lust, His wavering Passions, and his headlong Will, His selfish Principles, his contempt of others, His Mockery, his various Sports, his Wantonnes, The Rage and Madness of his Luxury Will make the Athenians hearts ake, as thy own Will soon make thine. Isod. Hang him, we never mind him. Isand. When will he speak well of any man? Apem. When I can find a man that's better than A beast, I will fall down and worship him. Tim. Thou art an Athenian, and I bear with thee. Is the Masque ready? Poet. 'Tis, my noble Lord. Apem. What odd and childish folly Slaves find out To please and court all thy distemper'd Appetites! They spend their flatteries to devour those men Upon whose Age they'l void it up agen With poysonous spite and envy. Who lives that's not deprav'd, or else depraves? Who die that bear not some spurns to their Graves Of their friends giving? I should fear that those Who now are going to dance before me, Should one day stamp on me: it has been done. Tim. Nay, if you rail at all Society, I'll hear no more—be gone. Apem. Thou may'st be sure I will not stay to see Thy folly any longer, fare thee well; remember Thou would'st not hear me, thou wilt curse thy self for't. Tim. I do not think so—fare thee well. [Exit Apemantus. Enter Servant. Serv. My Lord, there are some Ladies masqu'd desire admit∣tance. Ti. Have not my doors been always opento Ev'ry Athenian? They do me hour,
Wait on 'em in, were I not bound to do My duty here, I would. Chloe. I have not had the opportunity To deliver this till now, it is a Letter From Alibiades. Mel. Dear Alcibiades, Oh how shall I love him, When he's restor'd to his Estate and Country! He will be richer far than Timon is, And I shall chuse him first of any man; How lucky 'tis I should put off my Wedding. Enter Evandra with Ladies masqu'd. Tim. Ladies, you do my house and me great honour; I should be glad you would unmask, that I Might see to whom I owe the Obligation. 1. Lad. We ask your pardon, we are stoln out upon Curiosity, and dare not own it. Tim. Your pleasure Ladies, shall be mine. Evan. This is the fine gay thing so much admir'd, That's born to rob me of my happiness, And of my life; her face is not her own, Nor is her love, nor speech, nor motion so: Her smiles, her amorous looks, she puts on all, There's nothing natural: She always acts And never shews her self; How blind is Love That cannot see this Vanity! [Masque begins. Enter Shepherds and Nymphs. A Symphony of Pipes imitating the chirping of Birds. Nymph. Hark how the Songsters of the Grove Sing Anthems to the God of Love. Hark how each am'rous winged pair, With Loves great praises fill the Air. Chorus. On ev'ry side the charming sound Does from the hollow Woods rebound. Retornella
Nymph. Love in their little veins inspires Their cheerful Notes, their soft Desires: While Heat makes Buds or Blossoms spring, These pretty couples love and sing. Chorus with Flutes. But Winter puts out their desire, And half the year they want Loves fire. Retornella. Full Chorus. But Ah how much are our delighs more dear, For only Humane Kind love all the year. Enter the Maenades and Aegipanes. 1 Bach. Hence with your trifling Deitie A greater we adore, Bacchus, who always keeps us free From that blind childish power. 2 Bach. Love makes you languish and look pale, And sneak, and sigh, and whine; But over us no griefs prevail, While we have lusty Wine. Chorns with Hout-boys Then hang the dull Wretch who has care in his soul, Whom Love, or whom Tyrants, or Laws can controul, If within his right hand he can have a full Bowl. Nymph. Go drivel and snore with your fat God of Wine, Your swell'd faces with Pimples adorning, Soak your Brains over night and your senses resign, And forget all you did the next Morning. Nymph. With dull aking Noddles live on in a mist, And never discover true Joy: Would Love tempt with Beauty, you could not resist, The Empire he slights, he'd destroy. 1 Bach. Better our heads, than hearts should ake, His childish Empire we despise; Good Wine of him a Slave can make, And force a Lover to be wise. Better, &c.
2 Bach. Wine sweetens all the cares of Peace, And takes the Terrour off from War. To Loves affliction it gives ease, And to its Joy does best prepare. It sweetens, &c. Nymph. 'Tis Love that makes great Monarchs fight, The end of Wealth and Power is Love; It makes the youthful P0ets write, And does the Old to Youth improve. Retornella of Hout-boys. Bach. 'Tis Wine that Revels in their Veins, Makes Cowards valiant, Fools grow wise, Provokes low Pens to lofty strains, And makes the young Loves Chains despise. Retornella. Nymphs and Shepherds. Love rules the World. Maenades and Aegipanes. 'Tis Wine, 'tis Wine. Nymphs and Shepherds. 'Tis Love, 'tis Love. Maenades and Aegipanes. 'Tis Wine, 'tis Wine. Enter Bacchus and Cupid. Bacchus. Hold, Hold, our Forces are combin'd, And we together rule Mankind. General Chorus. Then we with our Pipes, and our Voices will join To sound the loud praises of Love and good Wine. Wine gives vigour to Love, Love makes Wine go down. And by Love and good Drinking, all the World is our own. Tim. 'Tis well design'd, and well perform'd, and I'll Reward you well: let us retire into my next Apartment, where I've devis'd new pleasures for you, And where I will distribute some small Presents, To testifie my Love and Gratitude. Phaeax. A noble Lord! AElius. Bounty it self.
Tim. Thus my Melissa will we always spend Our time in Pleasures; but who e're enjoys Thee, has all this life affords sum'd up in that. Evan. These words did once belong to me, but Oh! My stubborn heart, wilt thou not break at this? Tim. Ladies I hope you'l honour me with you presence, And accept of a Collation. 1 Lady. We ask your pardon, and must leave you. Tim. Demetrius, wait on them. Evan. My Lord, I'd speak with you alone. Tim Be pleased Madam, to retire with your father, I'l wait on you instantly. [to Melissa. [Exeunt all but Timon and Evandra. Who are you Madam? Evan. One who is come to take her last leave of you. Tim. Evandra! What confusion am I in! Evan. I am sorry in the midst of all your joys I should disturb you thus: I had a mind To see you once before I dy'd; I ne'r Shall trouble you again. Tim. Let me not hear these killing words. Evan. They'l be my last, and therefore give'em room: I am hastning to my death, then you'l be happy, I ne'r shall interrupt your joys again, Unless the Memory of me should make You drop some tears upon my dust; I know Your noble Nature will remember that Evandra was, and once was dear to you, And lov'd you so, that she cou'd dye to make You happy. Tim. Ah dear Evandra! that would make Me wretched far below all misery; I'd rather kill my self than hear that news: I call the gods to witness, there's not one On Earth I more esteem. Evan. Esteem! alas! It is too weak a Cordial to preserve My fading life, I see your passion's grown
Too headstrong for you. Oh my dearest Timon! I, while I have any breath, must call you so; Had you once struggled for my sake, And striven to oppose the raging fury of Your fatal Love, I should have dy'd contented. But Oh! false to your self, to all my hopes, And me; you suckt the subtile poyson in So greedily, you would not stay to taste it. Tim. She moves me strongly; I have found from her The truest and the tenderest Love that e'r Woman yet bore to Man. Evan. I find you're gone too far in the disease T' admit a Cure: I will perswade no longer; Death is my remedy, and I'll embrace it. Tim. Oh talk not of Death: I'll love you still: I can love two at once, trust me I can. Evan. No, Timon, I will have you whole, or nothing: I love you so, I cannot live to see That dear, that most ador'd person in anothers arms: My Love's too nice, 'twill not be fed with crumbs, And broken meat, that falls from your Meissa. No dear false Man, you soon shall be at rest, I came but to receive a parting Kiss: You'l not deny me that? Tim. I will not part with you; we'l be friends for ever. Evan. No, no, it cannot be, forgive this trouble, Since 'tis the last, I'll never see you more; And may Melissa ever love you as The Excellence of your form deserves; and may She please you longer than th' unfortunate Evandra could. Tim. Gods! Why should I not love this Woman best? She has deserv'd beyond all measure from me; She's beautiful, and good as Angels are; Aside. But I have had her Love already. Oh most accursed Charm, that thus perverts me! To Her. Y' have made a Woman of me. Evan. I'l have but one last look of that
Bewitching Face that ruin'd me. Oh, I could devou it with my eyes: but I'll Remove it from thee. I ne're Shall die contented while I look on thee. Tim. Be patient till I give thee satisfaction. Evand. No, dearest Enemy, I'll remove the guilt From thee, and thus I'll place it on my self. [Offers to stab her self. Tim. Hold, dear Evandra, if thou lov'st my life Preserve thy own; for here I swear, that minute When thou attemptst thy life, I will lose mine. Where's Diphilus? Enter Diphilus. Diph. Here my Lord. Tim. Wait on Evandra home, and take a care Sh' attempts not any mischief on her self: Sh'is agitated by a dang'rous passion▪ My dear! let Diphilus wait on thee home; As soon as ever my Company is gone, I'll see thee, and convince thee that I love thee. Evand. No, no: I cannot hope—farewel for ever. [Ex. Diph. and Evand. Tim. I must resolve on something for her comfort; For the Empire of the Earth I wou'd not lose her; There is not one of all her Sex exceeds her In Love, or Beauty— O miserable state of humane life! We slight all the injoyments which we have; And those things only value which we have not: Where is Demetrius? Dem. My Lord! Tim. Where is the Casket which I spoke for? Dem. It ▪is here my Lord: I beg your Lordship hear me speak. I have business that concerns you nearly— Tim. Some other time; of late thou dost perplex me Each moment with the hateful me of business,
That mortal Foe to pleasure, I'll not hear it. [Ex. Timon. Dem. So! all now is at an end! He does command us to provide great gifts, And all out of an empty Coffer. His promises fly so beyond his 'state, That what he speaks is all in Debt; He owes For every word; His Land is all engag'd, His money gone; would I were gently turn'd Out of my Office; lest he shou'd borrow all I have gotten in his service. Well! Happier is he that has no friend to feed, Than such who do ev'n Enemies exeed. [Ex. Demet. ACT III. Enter Timon and Demetrius. Tim. DEmetrius! How comes it that I have been thus incounter'd With clamorous demands of broken Bonds, And the unjust detention of money long since due? I knew I was in debt, but did not think I had gone so far; wherefore before this time Did you not lay my state fully before me? Dem. You would not hear me. At many times I brought in my accounts, Laid 'em before you—you would throw 'em off, And say, you found 'em in my Honesty. I have beyond good manners, pray'd you often To hold your hand more close and was rebuk't for't. Tim. You should have prest it further. Dem. What e're I durst I did, it was my interest, For if my Lord be poor, what then must I be? Call me before the exactest Auditors, And let my life lie on the proof:
Oh my good Lord, the world is but a world, If it were yours to give it in a breath, How quickly were it gone? Tim. Have you no money in the Treasury? Dem. Not enough to supply the riot of two meals. Tim. Let all my Land be sold. Dem. 'Tis all engag'd; And some already's forfeited and gone, That which remains will scarce pay present dues; The future comes apace. Tim. To Lacedaemon did my Land extend. Dem. How many times have I reti'd and wept, To think what it would come to. Tim. Prithee! no more, I know thou'rt honest. Dem. It grieves me to consider 'mongst what Parasites And trencher Friends your wealth has been divided. I cannot but weep at the sad reflection, When every word of theirs was greedily Attended to, as if they'd been pronounc'd From Oracles. I never could be heard. Tim. Come; preach no more, thou soon shall find that I Have not misplac'd my Bounty, why dost weep? I am rich in friends and can use all their wealth Freely as I can bid thee speak. Dem. I doubt it. Tim. You soon shall see how you mistake my fortune. Now I shall try my friends. Who waits there? Enter three Servants. 1 Ser. My Lord! Tim. Go you to Phaeax and to Cleon, you to Isand And Aelius, you to Isodore and Thrasillus. Commend me to their loves, and let them know, I'm proud that my occasions make me use 'em For a supply of money. Let the request Be fifty Talents from each man. 1 Serv. We will, my Lord.
Tim. Thou, Demetrius, shalt go to the Senate, from whom Even to the States best health I have deserv'd This hearing. Petition them to send me 500 Talents. Dem. I must obey. The next room's full of Importunate slaves and hungry Creditors, go not to 'em. [Ex. Dem. Tim. What! must my doors b' oppos'd against my passage? Have I been ever free, and those been open For all Athenians to go in and out At their own pleasure? My Porter at my Gate Ne're kept man out, but smil'd and did invite All that past by it, in, and must he be My Gaoler, and my House my Prison! no, I'll not despair: my friends will never fail me. [Exit. Scene is the Porch or Cloister of the Stoicks. Apemantus speaking to the people and several Senators. Apem. 'Mongst all the loathsome and base diseases of Corrupted Nature, Pride is most contagious. Behold the poorest miserable wretch Which the Sun shines on; in the midst of all Diseases, rags, want, infamy and slavery, The Fool will find out something to be proud of. Aelius. This is all railing. Apem. When you deserve my precepts, you shall have 'em, Mean while, if I'll be honest, I must rail at you. Cleon. Let's walk, hang him, hear him not rail. Phaeax. Our Government is too remiss in suffering the Licence of Philosophers, Orators, and Poets. Apem. Show me a mighty Lordling, who's puft up, And swells with the opinion of his greatness; He's an Ass. For why does he respect himself so, But to make others do it? wretched Ass! By the same means he seeks respect, he loses it. Mean thing! does he not play the fool, and eat, And drink, and void his excrements and stink, Like other men, and die and rot so too?
What then shou'd it be proud of? 'Tis a Lord; And that's a word some other men cannot Prefix before their names: what then? a word That it was born to, and then it could not hlp it. Or if made a Lord, perhaps it was [Enter Timons 3 Servants. By blindness or partiality i'th' Government. If for desert, he loses it in Pride; Who ever's proud of his good deeds, performs Them for himself; himself shou'd then reward 'em. Oh but perhaps he's rich, 'Tis a million to one There was villany in the getting of that dirt, And he has the Nobility to have knaves for his Ancestors. Phaeax. Hang thee thou snarling Rascal, the Government's To blame in suffering thee to rail so long, Apem. The Government's to blame in suffering the things I rail at. In suffering Judges without Beards, or Law, Secretaries that Can't write; Generals that durst not fight, Ambassadors that can't speak sence; Block-heads to be great Ministers, and Lord it over witty men; Suffering great men to sell their Country for filthy bribes, Old limping Senators to sell their Souls For vile extortion: Matrons to turn incontinent; And Magistrates to pimp for their own Daughters. Ruine of Orphans, treachery, murther, rapes, Incests, adulteries and unnatural sins, Fill all your dwellings, here's the shame of Government, And not my railing. Men of hardn'd foreheads, And sear'd hearts. 'Tis a weak and infirm Government, That is so froward it cannot bear me words. Aelius. Well, babling Philosophy, call Rascal, we shall ma You tremble one day. Apem. Never. Sordid great man! it is not in your power, I fear not man no more than I can love him. 'Twere better for us that wild beasts posseft The Empire of the Earth, they'd use men better, Than the do one another. They'd 're prey
On man but for necessy of Nature. Man undoes man in wantonness and sport, Bruits are much honester than he; my dog When he fawns on me i no Courtier, He is in earnest; but a man shall smile, And wish my throat cut. Cleon. Money of me, say'st thou? 1 Serv. Yes! he saies he's proud he has occasion to make Use of you. Cleon. Is't come to that?[Aside. Unfortunate man! I have not half a Talent by me! But here are other Lords can do it. I honour him so, that if he will, I'll sell my Land for him; But prethee excuse me to him, I am in great haste At this time. [Ex. Cleon. 1 Serv. 'Tis as I thought. How monstrous and deform'd a Thing is base ingratitude! Here's Phaeax. My Lord? Phaeax. Oh! one of Lord Timons men?  gift I warrant you. Why this hits right. I dreamt of a silver Bason and Ewer to night. How does that honourable, compleat, Free-hearted Gentleman, thy very bountiful good Lord? 1 Serv. Well in his health, my Lord. Phaeax. I am heartily glad, what hast thou under thy Cloak, honest youth? 1 Serv. An empty Box which by my Lords Command I come to entreat your Honour to supply with fifty Talents He has instant need of. He bids me say he does not Doubt your friendship. Phaeax. Hum! not doubt it! alas, good Lord! He' a noble Gentleman! had he not kept so good a House, 'Twould have been better: I've often din'd with him, And told him of it, and come again to Supper for That purpose to have him spend less, but 'twould not do: I m sorry for't: but good Lad thou art hopeful and of Good parts. 1 Serv. Your Lordship speaks your pleasure. Phaeax. A prompt spirit, give thee thy due. Thou know'st What's reason. And eanst use thy tie well, if the time use
Thee well—'Tis no time to lend money. Thou art wise, Her money for thee—good Lad wink at me and say Thou saw'st me not. 1 Serv. Is't possible the World should differ so, And we alive that liv'd in't? Apem. What art thou sent to invite those Knaves again To feast with thy luxurious Lord? 1 Serv. No: I came to borrow fifty Talents for him, And this Lord has given me this to say, I did not see him. Apem. Is't come to that already? Base slavish Phaeax, thou of the Nobility? Let molten Coin be thy damnation. Phaeax. Peace Dog. Apem. Thou worse! thou trencher▪ fly, thou flatterer, Thou hast Timons meat still in thy gluttonous paunch, And dost deny him money. Why should it thrive, And turn to nutriment when thou art poison? 2 Serv. My noble Lord. Isand. Oh how does thy brave Lord, my noblest friend? 2 Serv. May it please your honour, he has sent— Isan. Hah—what has he sent? I am so much oblig'd To him, he's ever sending. How shall I thank him? hah, What has he sent? 2 Serv. He has sent me to tell you he has occasion To use your friendship, he has instant need Of fifty Talents— Isan. Is that the business? hah▪ I know his honour is but merry with me, He cannot want as many hundreds. 2 Serv. Yes, he wants fifty, but is assur'd of your Honours Friendship. Isan. Thou art not sure in earnest? 2 Serv. Upon my life I am. Isan. What an unfortunate Wretch am I? to disfurnish My self upon so good a time, When I might have shown how much I love And honour him: This is the greatest affliction E're fell upon me: the Gods can witness for me
I was just sending to my Lord my self: I have no power to serve him, my heart bleeds for't. I hope his honour will conceive the best; Beast that I am, that the first good occasion Shou'd not be in my power to use; I beg A thousand pardons.—Tell him so— Apem. Thou art an excellent Summer friend! How often hast thou dipt i'th' dish with him? He has been a Father to thee with his purse, Supported thyestate; when e're thou drink'st, His silver kisses thy base Lip, thou rid'st upon His Horses, ly'st on his Beds. Isan. Peace, or I'll knock thy brains out. [Ex. ▪san. 2 Serv. My Lord, Thrasillus— Thra. He's comes to borrow, I must shun him. I hope your Lord is well. 2 Serv. Yes, my Lord, and has sent me— Thra. To invite me to Dinner. I am in great hast— But I'll wait on him if I can possible. [Ex. Thra. Apem. Good Fool, go home. Dost think to find a grateful Man in Athens? 3 Serv. If my Lord's occasions did not press him very much I would not urge it. Aelius. Why would he send to me? I am poor. There's Phaeax, Cleon, Isodore, Thrasillus, and Isander, and many Men that owe their fortunes to him. 3 Serv They have been toucht and found base mettle. Aelius. Have they deny'd him; and must you come to me? Must I be his last refuge? 'tis a great slight, Must I be the last sought to? he might have Consider'd who I am. 3 Serv. I see he did not know you. Aelius. I was the first that e're receiv'd gift from him, And I will keep it for his honours sake, But at present I cannot possibly supply him: Besides, my Fther made me swear upon His Death, I never should lend money. I've kept the Oath e're since. ▪Fare thee well. [Ex. Aelius.
3 Serv. They all fly us! Apem. The barbarous Herd of mankind shun One in affliction, and turn him out as Deer do one that's hunted, go, go home To thy fond Lord, and bid him Curse himself, That would not hear me: bid him live on root And water, and know himself; he had better Have shun'd Mankind than be deserted by them. [Ex. Omnes. Enter Melissa and Chloe. Mell. Who could have thought Timon so lost i'th' world? With what amazement will the news of this So sudden alteration be receiv'd by all Athenians? Chloe. Is it for certain true? Mel. Certain as death or fate! my father has assur'd me Of it, that he is a Bankrupt, his Credit gone, and all His ravenous Creditors with open Jaws will swallow him. ▪Tis well I am inform'd, I'll stand upon my guard. Enter Page. Page. Madam, a Gentleman below desires admittance. Mel. See Chloe, if it be Lord Timon, or any one from him, ay I am not well. I will not be seen: be sure I Be not. Chlo. I warrant you. [Ex. Chloe. Mel. Seen by a Bankrupt! no, base poverty Shall never enter here. Oh, were my Alcibiades Recall'd, he would adore me still, and wou'd be Rich too. Enter Alcibiades in disguise, and Chloe. Chloe. It is a Gentleman in disguise, I know him not. Alcib. But my Melissa does. [Pulls off his Disgise. Mel. My Alcibiades! my Hero! Te Gods have hearkn'd to my vows for thee,
And have Crown'd all my wishes. Thou'rt more welcome To me than the return of the Suns heat Is to the frozen Region of the North, That's cover'd half the year with Snow and Darkness. Alcib. My Joy, my life, my blood, my soul, my liberty, And all that's pretious in the earth, I have Within my arms: This treasure far outweighs The joys of Conquest, or deliverance From banishment or slavery. Mel. How proud am I of all thy victories! 'Twas thou that Conquer'd, but I triumph'd for thee, All day I sigh'd and wisht, and pray'd for thee, And in the night thou entertain'dst my sleeps, And whensoe're I dreamt thou wert in danger, I cry'd out, my Alcibiades, and in my dreams I was valiant, and methought I fought for thee. Alcib. Oh my Divine Melissa! the Cordial of thy love Is of so strong a spirit, 'twill overcome me, One kiss and take my soul; another and 'Twill sally out; Oh, I could fix whole ages on Thy tender lip; and pity all the Fools That keep a senseless pother in the world for pow'r, And pomp, and noise, and lose substantial bliss. Mel. There is no bliss but love; and but for that The world would fall in pieces! Oh, with what a grief Have I sustain'd thy absence! had not my Father Prevented my escape, I had come to thee. Alcib. 'Twas well for Athens safety that thou did'st not; I had neglected all my Conquests which Preserved this base ungrateful town; for I In thee shou'd have all that I fought for; Thou Would'st have been life, liberty, Country, and Estate to me. Mel. I have the end of all my hopes and wishes, If the ungrateful Senate will let me keep thee. Alcib. 'Twas I that made them what they are, in hopes They soon would call me home to thee. It was the thought of that which fir'd my Soul, At every stroke the memory of Melissa
Gave vigour to my arm, and made me conqur. Mel. Oh, let ambition never more disturb Thy noble mind, let love in peace possess it. Let not the noise of Drums and Trumpets clangor, Clashing of arm, and neighing Steeds, and groans Of bleeding men entice thee from me. Alcib. The Senae shall not dare remove me from thee. Should they once offer it, I've an Army will Toss their usurious bags about their ears, Rifle their Houses, deflour their Wives and Daughters, And dash their brains out of their doating heads. But dear Melissa, since our hearts so long Have been united, let's not stay for friends, For ceremony▪ but come, compleat our joys; True love's above senseless formalities. Mel. If any thing from you could anger me, This would; but know, none shall invade my vertue Without my life: but on my knees I vow No other man, though Crown'd the Emperour Of all the World, should ever have my love, And though thy Country basely should desert thee, I would continue firm. Alcib. And here I swear, that could I conquer all the Universe, I'd lay the Crowns and Scepters at thy feet For thee to tread on. By thy self I swear, An Oath more sacred far to me, than all Mock Deities which knavish Priests invent, Are to the poor deluded Rabble. Chloe. Madam! Your Father is come in. Mel. Let us retire: my Father has not yet Forgotten his enmity, the breaking of the Peace with the Lacedemonians, and his foil Which he thinks you caus'd in Sicily, Hee'l not forgive. Alcib. Had he injur'd me beyond all sufferance, I would have forgiven him for begetting thee. [Exeunt.
Enter Timon and Servant. Tim. Is't possible? deserted thus? what large professions Did all these make but yesterday? did they all refuse to lend, Say you? 1 Serv. The rumour of your borrowing was soon Disperst, and then at sight of one of us They would stop, start, turn short, pass by, or seem To overlook us, and avoided us, As if we had been their mortal Enemies; And who suspected not when they were mov'd, Came off with base excuses. Tim. Ye Gods! what will become of Timon? I'll go to 'em My self, they will not have the face to use me so. Enter Demetrius. Oh Demetrius! what news bring'st thou from the Senate? Dem. I am return'd no richer than I went. Tim. Just Gods! it cannot be. Dem. They answer in a joint and corporate voice, That now they are at ebb, want Treasure, cannot Do what thy would, are sorry; you are Honourable; But yet they could have wisht; they know not, Something has been amiss; a noble nature May catch a wrench; would all were well; 'tis pity; And so intending other serious matters, After distateful looks, and these hard fractions, With certain half caps and cold careless nod, They froze me into silence. Tim. The Gods reward their Villy, Old men Have their ingratitude natural to 'em; Their blood is cak'd and cold, it seldom flows, 'Tis want of kindly warmth which makes 'em cruel, And Nature as it grows again towards earth, Is fashion'd for the Journey, dull and havy. Heav'n keep my Wits! or is't a blessing to be mad?
Demetrius follow me; I'll try 'em all my self. Dem. The Senate is assembling again, You'll find 'em in the Senate House. [Exeunt. Enter many Creditors with Bills and Papers, Re-enter Demetrius. Dem. How now, what makes this swarm of Rascals here? Each looking big, and with the visage of demand. 1 Cred. We wait for certain sums of money due. Dem. If money were as certain as your waiting, Why then proffer'd you not your Bills and Bonds When your false Masters eat of my Lords meat? Then they would smile and fawn upon him, And swallow the interest down their greedy throats. Enter Timon and Servants. Tim. If Melissa be at home, tell her I'll wait on her suddenly. 1 Cred. Now, let's put in; my Lord, my Bill. 2 Cred. Here's mine. 3 Cred. And mine. 4 Cred. My Master's. Tim. Hold, hold, my wits. Knock me down; Cleave me to the waste. What would you have, you Harpyes? 1 Cred. We ask our due. Tim. Cut my heart in pieces and divide it. 4 Cred. My Master's is thirty Talents. Tim. Tell it out of my blood. 2 Cred. Five thousand Crowns is mine. Tim. Five thousand drops pays that. What yours, and yours? 3 Cred. My Lord. 1 Cred. My Lord. Tim. Here, take me, pull me in pieces, will you? The gods consume, confound, and rot you all. 1 Cred. What a Devil, is he mad? 2 Cred. Mercy on us, let us be gone.
3 Cred. Let's go, hee'll murder some of us. Tim. They have e'en taken my breath from me. Slaves, Creditors, Dogs, preserve my wits, you Gods. Dem. My Lord, be patient; passion mends it not. [Lampridius crosses the stage and shuns Timon. Tim. See Lampridius, whom I redeem'd out of Prison. His Father dead since, and he rich. Now the Villain Shuns me. Enter Phaeax. Oh my good Friend Phaeax. Phaeax. Oh my Lord—I am glad to see your Lordship. I have a sudden occasion calls me hence, I'll wait on you instantly. [Ex. Phaeax. Tim. I could not have believ'd this. Enter Cleon. My Lord. Cleon. Oh my good Lord, I am going to see If I can serve your Lordship in the Command I receiv'd from you by your Servant. [Ex. Cleon. Tim. Oh black Ingratitude! that Villain has A Jewel at this moment on, which I presented him, ost me three thousand Crowns. Dem. You'll find 'em all like these. Tim. There are not many sure so bad. How have I lov'd these men, and shewn 'em kindness, As if they had been my Brothers, or my Sons! [Enter Diphilus, seeing Timon, mfles his face▪ and turns away. Look, is not that my Servant Diphilus, whom I marry'd to The old Man's Daughter, and gave him an estate too; And now he hides himself, and steals from me? How much is a Dog more generous than a man; Oblige him once, hee'l keep you Company, Ev'n in your utmost want and misery.
Enter Aelius. Who's that? Aelius? my Lord—Aelius. Demetrius, go let him know Timon would speak With him— [Dem. goes to him, he turns back. Do you not know me Aelius? Aelius. Not know my good Lord Timon! Tim. Think you  have the Plague? Aelius. No, my Lord. Tim. Why do you shun me then? Aelius. I shun you? I'd serve your Lordship with my life. Tim. I ll not believe, he who would refuse me money, Wou'd venture his life for me. Aelius. I am very unfortunate not to have it in my Power To supply you; but I am going to the Forum, to a Debter, If I receive any, your Lordship shall command it. [Ex. Aelius. Tim. Had I so lately all the Caps and Knees of th' Athenians, And is't come to this? Brains hold a little. Enter Thrasillus. Thras. Who's there? Timon? [runs back. Tim. There's another Villain. Enter Isander. How is't Isander? Isand. Oh Heav'n! Timon! Tim. What, did I fright you? am I become so dreadful An Object? is poverty contagious? Isand. Your Lordship ever shall be dear to me. It makes me weep to think I cou'd not serve you When you sent your Servant. I am expected at the Senate. I humbly ask your pardon; I'll sell all I have But I'll supply you soon. [Ex. Isander. Tim. Smooth tongue, dissembling, weeping knave, farewel.
And farewel all Mankind! It shall be so—Demetrius? Go to all these fellows. Tell 'em I'm supply'd, I have no Need of 'em. Set out my condition to be as good As formerly it has been. That this was but a Tryal, And invite 'em all to Dinner. Dem. My Lord, there's nothing for 'em. Tim. I have taken order about that. Dem. What can this mean? [Ex. Demetrius. Tim. I have one reserve can never fail me, And while Melissa's kind I can't be miserable; She has a vast fortune in her own disposal. The Sun will sooner leave his course than she Desert me. Enter first Servant. Is Melissa at home? 1 Serv. She is, my Lord; but will not see you. Tim. What does the Rascal say? Damn'd Villain To bely her so? [Strikes him. 1 Serv. By Heav'n 'tis truth. She saies she will not see you. Her woman told me first so. And when I would not Believe her, she came and told me so her self; That she had no business with you; desir'd you would Not trouble her; she had affairs of consequence; &c. Tim. Now Timon thou art faln indeed; fallen from all thy Hopes of happiness. Earth, open and swallow the Most miserable wretch that thou did'st ever bear. Enter Melissa. 1 Serv. My Lord, Melissa's! passing by. Tim. Oh Dear Melissa! Mel. Is he here? what luck is this? Tim. Will you not look on me? not see your Timon? And did not you send me word so?
Enter Evandra. Mel. I was very busy, and am so now; I must oby my Father; I am going to him. Tim. Was it not, Melissa, said; If Timon were reduc'd To rags and misery, and she were Queen of all the Universe, She would not change her love? Mel. We can't command our wills; Our fate must be obey'd. [Ex. Mel. Tim. Some Mountain cover me, and let my name, My odious name be never heard of more. O stragling Senses whither are you going? Farewel, and may we never meet again. Evandra! how does the sight of her perplex me! I've been ungrateful to her, why should I Blame Villains who are so to me? Evan. O Timon! I have heard and felt all thy afflictions; I thought I never shou'd have seen thee more; Nor ever would, had'st thou continu'd prosperous. Let false Melissa basely fly from thee, Evandra is not made of that course stuff. Tim. Oh turn thy eyes from an ungrateful man! Evan. No, since I first beheld my ador'd Timon, They have been fixt upon thee present, and when absent I've each moment view'd thee in my mind, And shall they now remove? Tim. Wilt thou not fly a wretched Caitif? who Has such a load of misery beyond Te strength of humane nature to support? Evan. I am no base Athenian Parasite, To fly from thy Calamities; I'll help to bear 'em. Tim. Oh my Evandra, they're not to be born. Accursed Athens! Forest of two legg'd Beasts; Plague, civil War, and famine, be thy lot: Let propagation cease, that none of thy Confounding spurious brood may spring To infect and damn succeeding Generations;
May every Ifant like the Viper gaw A passage through his mothers cursed Womb; And kill the hag, or if they fail of it, May then the Mothers like fell rav'nous Bitches Devour their own base Whelps. Evan. Timon! compose thy thoughts, I know thy wants, And that thy Creditors like wild Beasts wait To prey upon thee; and base Athens has To its eternal Infamy deserted thee. But thy unwearied bounty to Evandra Has so enrich'd her, she in wealth can vie With any of th' extorting Senators, And comes to lay it all at thy feet. Tim. Thy most amazing generosity o'rewhelms me; It covers me all o're with shame and blushes. Thou hast oblig'd a wretch too much already, And I have us'd thee ill for't; fly, fly, Evandra! I have rage and madness, and I shall infect thee. Earth! take me to thy Center; open quickly! Oh that the World were all on fire! Evan. Oh my dear Lord! this sight will break my heart; Take comfort to you, let your Creditors Swallow their maws full; we have yet enough, Let us retire together and live free From all the smiles and frowns of humane kind; I shall have all I wish for, having thee. Tim. My senses are not sound, I never can Deserve thee: I've us'd thee scurvily. Evan. No, my dear Timon, thou hast not. Comfort thy self, if thou hast been unkind, Forgive thy self and I forgive thee for it. Tim. I never will; Nor will I be oblig'd to one, I have treated so injuriously as her— [Aside. Evan. Pray, my Lord, go home; strive to compose Your self. All that I have was and is yours; I wish It ne're had been, that yet I might have shewn By stronger proofs how much I love my Timon.
Tim. Most Excellent of all the whole Creation, Thou art too good that thou should'st e're partake Of my misfortunes— And I am resolv'd not to involve her in 'em. [Aside. Prithee Evandra go to thy own House, I am one more to give my flatt'ring Rogues An entertainment but such a one as shall befit 'em; And then I'll see thee. Evan. Heav'n ever bless my Dear. [Ex. Timon and Evandra. Enter Phaeax, Cleon, Isander, Isidore, Thrasillus, Aelius. Phae. I think my honourable Lord did but try us. Cleon. On my life it was no more. His Steward assur'd Me hi condition was near as good as ever. Isand. That I doubt—but 'tis well at present By his new feasting. Aelius. I am sorry I was not furnish'd when he sent to me. Isid. I am sick of that grief, now I see how all things go. Enter Timon and Attendants. Tim. Oh! my kind friends! how is't with you all? How I rejoice to see you! Come, serve in Dinner. Phaeax. My noble Lord! never so well as when your Lordship is so. Aelius I am sick with shame that I Should be so unfortunate a Beggar when you sent to me. Tim. No more, no more, I did but make Tryal: I have No need of any sums; my Estate is in good health still. Phaeax. Tryal my good Lord? Would any one refuse Your Lordship were it in his power? Command half My estate! I am sorry I was so in hast, I could Not stay to tell you this. I have receiv'd Bills even now. Pray use me—I hope he will not take me at my word. [aside Isan. Take it not unkindly, my good Lord, that I could Not ve you. Now my Lord command me—I am able.
Tim. I beseech you do not think on't: I know ye love me, All of ye. Phaeax. Equal with our selves, my dear Lord. Thra. If you had sent but two hours before to me?— Cleon. Now I have money, pray command it. Tim. No more, for Heav's sake; think you I distrust My kind good friends! you are the best of friends. My fortune ne're shall drive me from you, and should Mine fail, which I hope it never will, I know I may command all yours. Phaeax. I shall think my self happy enough if you would But command my utmost Drachma. Aelius. That were honour indeed; to serve Lord Timon, I would with life and fortune. Isan. Alas! who would not be proud of it? Isid. Not a man in Athens. Cleon. There's no foot of my Estate your Lordship May not call your own. Thra. Nor mine, my noble Lord. Tim. Thanks to my worthy friends. Who hs such Kind, such hearty friends as I have? Aelius. All cover'd Dishes. Isan. Royal chear I warrant you. Phaeax. Doubt not of that; if money or the season Can afford it. Isid. The same good Lord still. Tim. Come, my worthy Friends, let's sit! make it Not a City feast, to let the meat cool e're we agree Upon our places. The GRACE. You great Benefactors, make your selves prais'd for your own gifts, base ungrateful man will not do it of him∣self; reserve still to give, lest your Deities be despis'd; were▪ your Godheads to borrow of men, men would forsake ye: make the meat belov'd more than the man that gives it. Let no Assembly of twenty be without a score of Villains. If there be
twelve women, let a dozen of'em be.... as they are. Confound I beseech you, all the Senators of Athens, together with the common people. What is amiss make fit for destruction▪ for these my present friends, as they are to me nothing so in no∣thing bless them, and to nothing are they welcome, but Toads and Snakes: A feast fit for such venemous Knaves. Phaeax. What does he mean? Aelius. He's mad I think. Tim. May you a better feast never behold. You knot of mouth friends, vapours, lukewarm Knaves; Most smiling, smooth detested Parasites, Courteous destroyers, affable Wolves, meek Bears, You Fools of Fortune, Trencher Friends, Time Flies, Cap and knee Slaves; an everlasting Leprosie Crust you quite o're; what, dost thou steal away? Soft, take thy Physick firt, and thou, and thou; stay I will Lend thee mony—borrow none. Phaeax. What means your Lordship? I'll be gone. Cleon. And I. He'l murder us. Aelius. This is raging madness; fly, fly. [They run off. Tim. What all in motion! henceforth be no feast, Whereat a Villain's not a welcome guest. Burn House, sink Athens, henceforth hated be Of Timon, man and all humanitie. [Ex. Timon. ACT IV. Timon Solus. Tim. LET me look back upon thee! Oh thou wall That girdlest in those Wolves! Sink in the Earth, And fence not Athens longer; that vile Den Of savage Beasts; ye Matrons all turn Whore; Obedience fail in Children; Slaves and Fools Pluck the grave wrinkled Senate from the Bench,
And minister in their ead. To general filths Convert o'th' instant green Virginity; Do't in their Parents Eyes. Bankrupts hold fast, Rather than render back, out with your Knives, And cut your Trusters Throats. Bound Servants steal; Large handed Robbers your grave Masters are, And pill by law. Maid to thy Masters Bed, Mistress to the Brothel. Son of twenty one, Pluck the lin'd Crutch from thy old limping Sire: And with it beat his brains out. Piety, Fear, Religion to the Gods; Peace, Justice, Truth, Domestick awe, night rest, and neighbourhood, Instruction, Manners, Mysteries and Trades, Degrees, Observations, Customs and Laws, Decline to your confounding contraries; And let confusion live. Plagues incident to men, Your potent and infectious feavours heap On Athens ripe for vengeance. Cold Sciatica Criple the Senators, that their limbs may halt As lamely as their manners. Lust and Liberty Creep in the minds and marrows of your youth; That 'gainst the stream of virtue they may strive And drown themselves in riot. Itches, blains, Sow all the Ahenians bosoms, and their Crop Be general Leprosie. Breath infect breath; That their Society as their friendship, may Be meerly poison. Nothing, nothing I bear from thee: Faewel. thou most detested Town, and sudden Ruie swallow thee. [Ex. Tim. Scene the Senate House, all the Senate sitting—Alcibiades. Nic. How dare you, Alcibiades, Knowing your Sentence not recall'd, venture hither? Alcib. You see my reverend Lords what confidence▪ I place in you, that durst expose my person Before my sentence be recall'd: I am not now Petitioner for my self; I leave my case To your good and generous natures, when you shall
Think I've deserv'd your favour for my service. I am an humble Suitor to your vertue, For mercy is the vertue of the Law, And none but Tyrants use it cruelly: 'Tis for a Gallant Officer of mine; As brave a man as e're drew Sword for Athens. 'Tis Thrasibulus, who in heat of blood, Has stept into the Law above his depth. Nic. True, he has kill'd a man. Alcib. I've been before the Areopagus, and they refuse All mercy. He is a man (setting his Fate aside) of comely Vertues, nor did he soil the fact with Cowardise; But with a noble fury did revenge His injur'd reputation. Phaeax. You strive to make an ugly deed look fair. Nic. As if you'd bring man-slaughter into form, And valour did consist in quarrelling. Aelius. That is a base and illegitimate valour: He's truly valiant that can wisely suffer. Isan. All single Combates are detestable, And courage that's not warranted by law, Is much too dangerous a vice to go unpunished. Isid. If injuries be evil, death is most ill, And then what folly is it for the less ill To hazard life the chiefest good? Cleon. There's no such courage as in bearing wrong. Alcib. If there be such valour in bearing, what Do we abroad? Women are then more valiant That stay at home. And the Ass a better Captain Than is the Lyon. The Malefactor that is Loaden with Irons, wiser than the Judge. Nic. You cannot make gross sins look clean With eloquence. Alcib. Why do fond men expose themselves to Battle, And not endure all threats, and sleep upon e'm, And let the foes quietly cut their throats? Come my Lords—be pitiful and good. Nic. He that's more merciful than Law, is cruel.
Alcib. The utmost law is downright Tyranny: To kill I grant is the extreamest guilt, But in defence of Honour. Phae. Honour! is any Honour to be fought for But the Honour of our Country? Alcib. Who will not fight for's own, will never fight For that: Let him that has no anger judge him; How many in their anger would commit This Captains fault—had they but courage for it? Cleon. You speak in vain. Alcib. If you will not excuse his Crime, consider Who he is, and what he has done; His service at Lacedaemon and Byzantium, Are bribes sufficient for his Life. Nic. He did his duty, and was rewarded with His pay, and if he had not done it, he should Be punisht. Alcib. How my Lords! is that all the return For Souldiers toils, fasting and watching; The many cruel ardships which they suffer; The multitude of hazards, blood, and loss Of Limbs? Isn. Come, you urge it too far, he dies. Alcib. He has slain in fight hundreds of Eemies. How full of valour did he bear himself In the last conflict! what death and wounds he gave! Isid. H'has given too many. Aelius. He is a known Rioter, he has a fin That often drowns him; in that beastly fury He has committed outrages. Phae. Such as we shall not name, since others were Concern'd in 'em, you know. Nic. In short, His days are foul, and nights are dangerous; And he must die. Alcib. Hard Fate! he might have dy'd nobly in fight, And done you service: if not for his deserts; Conder all my actions Lords, and join 'em
With his—your reverend Ages love security, And therefore shou'd cherish those that give it you. Phae. You are too bold—he dies. No more— Alcib. Too bold, Lord! do you know who I am? Cleon. What saies he? Alcib. Call me to your remembrances. Isan. Consider well the place, and who we are? Alcib. I cannot think but you have forgotten me. Must I sue for such common grace, And be deny'd? my wounds ake at you! Nic. Y'are insolent! we have not forgotten yet Your riot and destructive Vices; whoredos, Prophaneness, giddy headed passions. Phae. Your breaking Mercury's Statues, and mocking The mysteries of sacred Proserpine. Alcib. Insolent! now you provoke me. I am vext to see Your private malice vented in a place Where honest men would only think On publick Interest. 'Tis base, and in another place You would not speak thus.▪ Nic. How say you! Alcib. I thought the Images of Mercury had only been The Favourites of the Rabble, and the rites of Proserpine: These things are mockery to men O▪sence. What folly 'tis to worship Statues when You'd kick the Rogues that made 'em! Phae▪ How dare you talk thus? you have been a Rebel? Alcib. Could any but the basest of mankind Urge that to me by whom he keeps that head That utters this against me? my Rebellion! It was 'gainst the common people. And you all Are Rebels against them. Nic. Cease your Insolence! we sided not with Spartans. Alcib. What means had I to humble th' Athenian Rabble but that? Phae. It was well done to get your friend King Agis His Wif with Child in his absence. Alci. He was a Blockhead, and I mended his breed for him.
But what is that to'th' matter now in hand? You have provok'd me , and I must  yo, It is by me you sit in safety ere. Phae. By you, bold man? Alcib. Yes by me! fearful man! You have incens'd me now beyond all patience, And I must tell you what ye owe me, Lords. 'Twas I that kept great Tissapherns from The Spartans aid, by which Athens by this Had been one heap of Rubbish, I stopt A hundred and fifty Gallies from Phoenicia, Which would have fallen upon you: 'Twas I made This Tissaphernes, Athens Friend, upon condition That they would awe the common people, and take The Government into the best mens hands; Would you were so; I sent Pisander then To form this Aristocracy, and promis'd The Persian Generals Forces to assist you; And when you had this pow'r, you ast me off That got it you. Nic. My Lords! let him be lenc'd; Shall he thus beard the Senate? Alcib. I will be heard, and then your pleasure Lords. Did not your Army in the Isle of Samos, Offendeda at your Goverment, chuse me General? And would have march't to your detruction, Which I diverted? in that time your Foes Would soon have on the County of Ionia, Of th' Hellespont and all the other es, While you had been ploy'd t home With Civil Wars. I kept some back by force, And by fair words others, in which , This man of Stiria, whom you thus conde, Having the loudest voie of all the Atheians Employ'd by me, cry'd out to all the Army; And thus we kept 'em from you, Lords, and now Athens a second time was sav'd by me. Phae. 'Tis a shame that we shou'd suffer this!
Alcib. 'Tis a shame these things are unrewarded. Another time I kept five hundred Sail Of the Phenicians from the aid Of the Lacedemonians, won from 'em a Sea Battle, Before the City of Abidus; In spite of Pharnabazus mighty Power. Think on my Victory all Cizicum, where I Slew Mendorus in the Field, and took the City; I brought then the Bythinians to your yoke, Won Silibraea on the Hellespont; And then Byzantium: thus not only I Diverted the Torrent of the Armies fury From you, but turn'd it on the Enemies, And all the while you safely told your money, And let it out upon extorted Interest; Must I be after all poorly deny'd His life who has so often ventur'd it for you? Phae. He dies, and you deserve it, but our sentence▪ Is for your insolence, we banish you; If you be two hours more within these wall, Your head is forfeited. Do you all consent? All Sen. All, All! Alcib. All, all! I am glad I know you all! Banish me! Banish your dotage! your extortion! Banish your foul corruptions and self ends! Oh the base Spirit of a Common-wealth! One Tyrant is much better than four hundred; The worst of Kings would be asham'd of this: I am only rich in my large hurts from you. Is this the Balsome the ill natur'd Senate Pours into Captains wounds? ha! banishment? A good man would not stay with you, I embrace▪ My Sentence: 'Tis a cause that's worthy of me. [Ex. Alcib. Nic. Was ever—heard such daring insolence? Shall we break up the Senate? All Sen. Ay, Ay▪
Timon in the Woods digging. Tim. O blessed breeding Sun, draw from the Fens, The Bogs and muddy Marishes, and from Corrupted standing Lakes, rotten humidity Enough to infect the Air with dire consuming Pestilence, And let the poisonous exhalations fall Down on th' Athenians; they're all flatterers, And so is all mankind. For every degree of fortune's smooth'd And sooth'd by that below it; the learn'd pate Ducks to the golden Fool; There's nothing level In our conditions, but base Villany; Therefore be abhor'd each man and all Society; Earth yields me roots; thou common whore of mankind, That put'st such odds amongst the rout of Nations; I'll make thee do thy right office. Ha, what's here? Gold, yellow, glittering precious gold! enough To purchase my estate again: Let me see further; What a vast mass of Treasure's here! There ly, I will use none, 'twill bring me flatterers. I'll send a pattern on't to the Athenians, And let 'em know what a vast Mass I've found, Which I'll keep from 'em. I thik I see a Passenger Not far off, I'll send it by him to the Senate. [Ex. Timon. Enter Evandra. Evan. How long shall I seek my unhappy Lord? But I will find him or will lose my life. Oh base and shameful Villany of man, Amongst so many thousands he has oblig'd, Not one would follow him in his afflictions! Ha! here is a Spade! sure this belongs to some one▪ Who's not far off, I will enquire of him.
Enter Timon. Tim. Who's there? what beast art thou that com't To trouble me? Evan. Pray do not hurt me. I am come to seek The poor distressed Timon, did you see him? Tim. If thou be'st born of wicked humane race, Why com'st thou hither to disturb his mind? He has forsworn all Company! Evan. Is this my Lord! oh dreadful transformation! My dearest Lord, do you not know me? Tim. Thou walk'st upon two legs, and hast a face Erect towards Heav'n; and all such Animals I have abjur'd; they are not honest, Those Creatures that are so, walk on all four, Prithee be gone. Evan. He's much distracted sure? Have you forgotten Your poor Evandra? Tim. No! I remember there was such a one, Whom I us'd ill! why dost thou follow misery? And add to it? prithee be gone. Evan. These cruel words will break my heart, I come Not to increase thy misery but mend it. Ah, my dear Timon, why this Slave-like habit? And why this Spade? Tim. 'Tis to dig roots, and earn my dinner with. Evan. I have converted part of my estate To money and to Jewels, and have brought 'em To lay 'em at thy feet, and the remainder Thou soon shalt have. Tim. I will not touch 'em; no, I shall be flatter'd. Evan. Comfort thy self and quit this savage life; We have enough in spite of all the baseness Of th' Athenians, let not those Slaves Triumph o're thy afflictions; wee'l live free. Tim. If thou disswad'st me from this life, Thou hat'st me; For all the Principalities on earth,
I would not change this Spade! prithee be gone, Thou tempt'st me but in vain. Evan. Be not so cruel. Nothing but death shall ever take me from thee. Tim. I'll never change my life: what would'st thou Do with me? Evan. I'd live the same: Is there a time or place, A temper or condition I would leave My Timon in? Tim. You must not stay with me? Evan. Oh too unkind! I offer'd thee all my prosperity— And thou most niggardly deniest me part Of thy Afflictions. Tim. Ah soft Evandra! is not the bleak Air Too boist'rous a Chamberlain for thee? Or dost thou think these reverend trees that have Outliv'd the Raven, will be Pages to thee? And skip where thou appoint'st 'em? Will the Brook Candid with Morning Ice, be Caudle to thee? Evan. Thou wilt be all to me. Tim. I am savage as a Satyr, and my temper Is much unsound, my brain will be distracted. Evan. Thou wilt be Timon still, that's all I ask. Tim. It was a comfort to me when I thought That thou wer't prosperous; Thou art too good To suffer with me the rough boist'rous weather, To mortifie thy self with roots and water, 'Twill kill thee▪ Prithee be gone. Evan. To Death if you command. Tim. I have forsworn all humane conversation. Evan. And so have I but thine. Tim. 'Twill then be misery indeed to see Thee bear it. Evan. On my knees I beg it. If thou refusest me, I'll kill my self. I swear by all the Gods. Tim. Rise my Evandra!
I now pronounce to all the world, there is One woman honest; if they ask me more I will not grant it: Come, my dear Evandra, I'll shew thee wealth enough I found with digging, To purchase all my land again, which I Will hide from all mankind. Evan. Put all my Gold and Jewels to't. Tim. Well said Evandra! look, here is enough To make black white, foul fair, wrong right; Base noble, old young, Cowards valiant. Ye God here is enough to lug your Priests And Servants from your Altars. This thing can Make the Hoar'd Leprose ador'd, place Thieves And give 'em title, knee and approbation; This makes the toothless, warp'd and wither'd Widows Marry again. This can embalm and sweeten Such as the Spittle-House and ulcerous Creatures Would cast the gorge at: this can defile The purest Bed, and make divorce 'twixt Son And Father, Friends and Kindred, all Soiety; Can bring up new Religions, and kill Kings. Evan. Let the Earth that breeds it, hide it, there 'twill Sleep, and do no hired mischief. Tim. Now Earth for a root. Evan. ▪Tis her unfathom'd Womb teems and feeds all, And of such vile corrupting mettle, as Man, her proud arrogant—Child is made of, does Engender black Toads, and Adders blue, the guilded Newt And eye-less venom'd worm, with all The loathsome Births the quickning Sun does shine on. Tim. Yield him, who all thy humane Sons does hate, From out thy plenteous bosom some poor roots; Sear up thy fertile Womb to all things else; Dry up thy marrow, thy Veins, thy Tilth and pasture, Whereof ungrateful man with liquorish draughts And unctuous morsels greases his pure mind, That from it all consideration slips. But hold a while—I am faint and weary,
My tender hands not u  to toil▪ Evan. Repose y    love —your head Upon my lap, and when thou hast refrest Thy self, I'll gather Fruits and Berries for thee. Enter Apemantus. Tim. More Plague! more man! retire into my Cave. [Ex. Evan. Apem I was directed hither, men report That thou affect'st my manners, and dost use 'em. Tim. 'Tis then because I would not keep a Dog Should imitate thee. Apem. This is in thee a nature but infected▪ A poor unmanly melancholy, sprung From change of fortune▪ Why this Spade? this place? This slave-like Habit, and thes looks of care? Thy sordid   wear silk, lye soft, Hug their diseas'd perfumes, and have forgotten That ever Timon  Shome ot these woods, By putting on the cunning of a Carper. Be thou a flatt'rer now and seek to thrive By that which has undone thee. Hinge thy knee, And let each Great  breath blow off thy Cap. Praise his most monstrous deformities▪ And call his foulest Vices excellent. Thou wert us'd thus. Tim. Dost thou love to hear thy self prate? Apem. No; but thou should'st hear me speak. Tim. I hate th spch▪ and spit at thee. Apem. Do not assume my likeness to disgrace it. Tim. Were I like thee, I'd use the Copy As the Original shou'd be us'd. Apem. How should it be us'd? Tim. t should be hang'd. Apem. Before thou wrt  Mad▪man, now a Fool; Art thou proud still? call any of those Creatures Whose naked  live in all the spight Of angry , whose  un-housed trunks
To the conflicting Elemens expos'd, Answer mee Naure, bid 'em  th, And thou shlt fi— Tim. An A of thee— Apem. I love thee better now than e're I did— Tim. I hate thee worse— Apem. Why so? Tim. Thou flatterest misery. Apem. I flatter not, but ay thou art  Wretch— Tim. Why dost thou seek me out? Apem. Perhaps to vex thee. Tim. Always a Villains office or a Fools. Apem. If thou do put on this sour life and habit To castigate thy Pride, 'twere well, but thou Dost it infor'dly, wert  ot a Beggar, Thou'd'st be a Couer again. Tim. Slave thou ly't, 'tis next thee the lat thing Which I would be on earth. Apem. How much does willing poverty exl Uncertain pomp! for this is ing still, Never compleat, that always at high wish; But thou hast a contentless wretched being, Thou shou'd'st desire to die being serable. Tim. Not by his advice that is more miserable. Apem. I am contented with my poverty▪ Tim. Thou ly'st. Thou would'st not  so if thou we. But 'tis a burthen that is light to thee, For thou hast been alwaies us'd to carry it. Thou art a thing whom Fores With favour never clapt, but bd a Dog; Hadst thou like me from thy first swah To all the sweet, degrees, that this brief world Afforded me; thou wou'd'st ave plung'd thy self I general riot, melted down thy youth I different Beds of lust, and  learn't The Icy preceps of Morlity, But had'st pursu'd the lluring game beore thee. Apem. Thou ly'st—I would have liv'd  as  do
Tim. Poor Slave! thou dost not know thy self! thou well Can'st bear what thou hst been bred to; But for me, who had the world as my Confectionary, The Tongues, the Eyes, the Ears, the  of all men, At duty more than I cou'd frame Imployments for, That numberless upon me stuck as leaves Upon the Oak, they'ave with one Winters brush Faln from their boughs and left me open, To every storm that blows: for me to bear this Who never knew but better, is a great ; Thy nature did commence in suff'ance. Time Hath made thee hard in't. Why should'st thou hate me? They never flatter'd thee: If thou wilt Curse, Curse then thy Father who in spite put stuff To some She-Beggar, and compounded thee, A poor Hereditary Rogue. Apem. Poor As! The middle of humanity thou ne're Didst know, but the extremity of both ends; When thou wert in thy gilt and thy perfumes, Men mockt thee for thy too much curioity; Thou in thy rags kow'st none. Tim. Be gone thou tedious prating Fool. That the whole life of Athens were in this One root, thus would I at it. Apem. I'll mend thy Feat. Tim. Mend my condition, take thy self away. Ap. What would'st thou have to Athens? Tim. Thee thither in a Whirlwind. Apem. When I have nothing else to do, I'll see thee agai. Tim. If there were nothing living but thy self, Thou should'st not even then be welcoe to me; I hd rther be a Beggars Dog tan . Apem. Tho art a  Fool. Tim. Would thou wert clean enough to spit upon. Apem. Thou art too d to Curse: no miry That I could wi thee but thou hast already. Tim. Be gone thou Issue of a Mangy Dog.
I swoun to see thee. Apem. Would thou would'st burst. Tim. Away, thou tedious Rogue, or I will cleave thy scull. Apem. Farewel Beast. Tim. Be gone Toad. Apem. The Athenians report thou hast found a Mass Of Treasure; they'll find thee out: The plague Of Company light on thee. Tim. Slave! Dog! Viper! out of my sight. [Ex. Apem. Choler will kill me if I see mankind! Come forth Evandra? Thou art kind and good. Enter Evandra. Canst thou eat roots and drink at that fresh spring? Our feasting's come to this. Evan. Whate're I eat Or drink with thee is feast enough to me; Would'st thou compose thy thoughts and be content, I shou'd be happy. Tim. Let's quench ou thirst at yonder murmuring Brook, And then repose a while. [Exeunt. Enter Poet, Painter and Musician. Poet. As I took note o' the place it cannot be far off, Where he abides. Mus. Does the rumour hold for certain, that he's so full of Gold? Poet. 'Tis true! H' has found an infinite store of Gold, He has sent a Pattern of it to the Senate; You will see him a Palm again in Ahens, And flourish with the highest of 'em all. Therefore 'tis fit in this suppos'd distress, We tender all our services to him— Paint. If the report be true we shall succeed. Mus. If we shou'd not— Re-enter Timon and Evandra. Poet. Wee'll venture our joint labours. Yo is he, I know by the description.
Mus. Let's hide our selves and see how he will take it. [A Symphony. Evan. Here's Musick in the Woods, whence comes it? Tim. From flattering Rogues who have heard that I Have Gold; but that their disappointment would be greater, In taking pains for nought, I'd send 'em back— Poet. Hail-worthy Timon— Mus. Our most noble Master— Paint. My most excellent Lord. Tim. Have I once liv'd to see three honest men? Poet. Having so often tasted of your bounty, And hearing you were retir'd, your friends faln off, For whose ungrateful natures we are griev'd, We come to do you service. Mus. We are not of so base a mold; we should Desert our noble Patron! Tim. Most honest men! oh, how shall I requite you? Can you eat roots, and drink cold water? Poet. Whate're we can, we will to do you service. Tim. Good men! come you are honest, you have heard That I have gold enough! speak truth, y'are honest. Poet. So it is said: but therefore came not we. Mus. Not we my Lord. Paint. We thought not of it. Tim. You are good men, but have one monstrous fault. Poet. I beseech your honour, what is it? Tim. Each of you trusts a damn'd notorious Knave. Paint. Who is that, my Lord? Tim. Why one another, and each trusts himself. Ye base Knaves, Tripartite! begone! make haste! Or I will use you so like Knaves. [He stones 'em. Poet. Fly, fly,— [All run out. Tim. How sick am I of this false World? I'll now Prepare my Grave, to lie where the light foam Of the outragious Sea may wash my Corps. Evan. My dearest Timon, do not talk of Death; My Life and thine together must determine. Tim. There is no rest without it; prithee leave
My wretched Fortun, and live long and happy, Without thy Timon. There is wealth enough. Evan. I have no wealth but thee, let us lie down to rest; I am very faint and heavy— [They lie down. Enter Melissa and Chle. Mel. Let the Chariot stay there. It is most certain he has found a Mass of money, And he has sent word to the Senate he's richer than ever. Chlo. Sure were he rich, he would appear again. Mel. If he be, I doubt not but with my love I'll charm Him back to Athen, 'twas my dserting him has Made him thus Melancholy. Chlo. If he be not, you'l promise love in vain. Mel. f he be not, my promise shall be vain; For I'll be sure to break it: Thus you saw When Alcibiades was baish'd last, I would not see him; I am always true To interest and to my self. There Lord Timon lies! Tim. What wretch at thou come to disturb me? Mel. I am one that loves thee so, I cannot lose thee. I am gotten from my Father and my Friends, To call thee back to Athens, and her arms Who canot live without thee. Evan. It is Melissa! prihee listen not To her dstructive Syrens voi. Tim. Fear not. Mel. Dot thou not know thy dear Melissa? To whom thou ma'st such vows! Tim. O yes, I know that piece of vanity, That frail, proud, inconstant foolish thing. I do remember once upon a time, She swore eternal love to me, soon after She would not see me, shun'd me, sghted me. Mel. Ah now I see thou never lov'dt me Timon, That was a tryal which I made of thee, To find if thou didst love me, if thou hadst
Thou  ave   lov'd thee hen ch more Tha ll the World—bu tou   I , And any little change can drive thee from me, And thou wilt leave me miserable. Evan. Mind not that Crocodiles tears, She would betray thee. Mel. I there no truth among Mankind? had I So much ingratitude, I had left Thy fallen fortune, and ne're seen thee more: Ah Timon! could'st thou have been kind, I ould Rather hae beg'd with thee, than have enjoy'd With any other all the Pomp of Gr; But thou rt lost d hast forgotten all thy Oaths. Evan. Why shou'd you strive to invde anothers right? He's mine, for ever mine: Te Shall keep him from thee. Mel. Thine! poor mean Fool! s marriage made him so? No,—Thou art his Co, dist thing; I would enjoy him honestly. Tim. Peace, screech Owl: There is much more hoy In this one woman  in all thy Sex Blended togethe; our hearts are on; And she is mine for ever: wert thou the Queen Of all the Universe, I would ot change her for thee. Evan. Oh my dear Lord! this is a better ordial Than all the World c give. Tim. False! prod! affecd! vai fantastick thing; Be goe, I would not see thee, uless I were A Basil : thou st'st that thou art honest of thy Body, As if the Body made one honest: Thou hast a vile Corrupted filthy mind— Mel. I am no Whore as she is. Tim. Thou ly'st, she's none: But thou at one in thy Soul: Be gone, or thou' prke me to do a thing , And beat thee . Mel. Farewel Beast.— [Ex. Ml. d Chlo. Evan. Let me kiss thy hand my st Lord, If it were possible more   ever.
Tim. Let's now go seek some rest within my Cave, If any we can have without the Grave. [Exeunt. ACT V. Enter Timon and Evandra. Tim. NOW after all the ollies of this life, Timon has made his everlasting Mansion; Upon the beached Verge of the Salt Flood; Where every day the swelling Surge shall wash him; There he shall rest from all the Villainies, Betraying smiles, or th'oppressig frowns Of proud and impotent Man. Evan. Speak not of death, I cannot lose thee yet, Throw off this dire consuming Melancholy. Oh could'st thou love as I do, thou'd'st not have Another wish but me. There is no state on Earth Which I can envy while I've thee within These Arms—take comfort to thee, think not yet Of Death—leave not Evandra yet. Tim. Thinkst thou in Death we shall not think, And know, and love, better than we can here? Oh yes, Evandra! There our Happiness Will be without a wish—I feel my long sickness Of health and living now begin to mend, And nothing will bring me all things: thou Evandra Art the thing alone on Earth would make me wish To play my part upon the troublesome Stage, Where folly, madness, alshood, and cruelty, Are the only actions represented. Evan▪ That I have lov'd my Ti faithfully Without one erring thought, the Gods can witness; And as my life was true, my death shall be, If I one minute after thee survive, The scorn and infamy of all my Sex
Light on me, and may I live to be Melissa's Slave. Tim. Oh my ador'd Evandra! Thy kindness covers me with shame and grief, I have deserv'd so little from thee; Wer't not for thee I'd wish the World on Fire. Enter Nicias, Phaeax, Isidore, Isander, Cleon, Thrasillus, and Aelius. More Plagues yet! Nici. How does the Worthy Timon? It grieves our hearts to see thy low condition, And we are come to mend it. Phaeax. We and the Athenians cannot live without thee, Cast from thee this sad grief, most noble Timon, The Senators of Athens greet thee with Their love, and do with one consenting voice Intreat thee back to Athens. Tim. I thank 'em and would send 'em back the Plague, Could I but catch it for 'em. Aelius. The Gods forbid, they love thee most sincerely. Tim. I will return 'em the same love they bear me. Nic. Forget, most noble Timon: they are sorry They shou'd deny thee thy request; they do Confess their fault; the publick body Which seldom does recant, confesses it. Cleon. And has sent us— Tim. A very scurvy sample of that Body. Phaeax. Oh my good Lord! we have ever lov'd you best Of all mankind. Thras. And equal with our selves. Isid. Our harts and souls were ever fixt upon thee. Isan. We would stake our lives for you. Phae. We are all griev'd to think you should So mis-interpret our best loves. Cleon. Which shall continue ever firm to you. Tim. Good men, you much surprise me, even to tears;
Lend me a Fools heart and Womens eyes, And I'll beweep these Comforts, worthy Lords. Nic. We beg your honour will interpret fairly. Phae. The Senate has reserv'd some special dignities Now vacant, to confer on you. They pray You will return, and be their Captain, Allow'd with absolute Command. Nic. Wild Alcibiades approaches Athens With all his force; and like a Savage Bear Roots up his Countries peace; we humbly beg Thy just assistance. Phae. We all know thou'rt worthy, And hast oblig'd thy Country heretofore Beyond return. Aelius. Therefore, good noble Lord. Tim. I tell you Lords, If Alcibiades kill my Country-men, Let Alcibiades know this of Timon, That Timon cares not: But if he sack fair Athens, And take our goodly aged men by th' Beards, Giving up purest Virgins to the stain Of beastly mad-brain'd War; Then let him know, In pity of the aged and the young, I cannot chuse but tell him that I care not, And let him take't at worst; for their Swords care not▪ While you have throats to answer: for my self There's not a Knife in all the unruly Camp, Bt I do love and value more than the Most reverent Throat in Athens, tell 'em so! Be Alcibiades your Plague, ungrateful Villains. Phae. Oh my good Lord, you think too hardly of us. Aelius. Hang him! there's no hopes of him▪ Nic. Hee'll ne'r return; he truly is Misanthropos. Phae. You have gold my Lord, will you not serve Your Country with some of it? Tim. Oh my dear Country! I do recant, ommend me kindly to the Senate, tell 'em they will come all in one Body to me,
And follow my advice, they shall be welcome. Nic. I am sure they will, my noble Lord. Tim. I will instruct 'em how to ease their griefs; Their fears of Hostile strokes▪ their Aches, Losses, Their covetous pangs, with other incident throes That Natures fragil Vessels must sustain In lifes uncertain Voyage. Phae. How my good Lord! this kind care is noble. Tim. Why even thus— I will point out the most convenient Trees In all this Wood, to hang themselves upon. And so farewel, ye Covetous fawning Slaves be gone! Let me not see the face of man more, I Had rather see a Tiger fasting— Nic. He's lost to all our purposes. Phae. Let's send a party out of▪Athens to him, To force him to confess his Treasure; And put him to the torture, if he will not. Nic. It will do well, let's away. [Drums. Aelius. What Drums are those? Phae. They must belong to Alcibiades! To Horse and fly, or we shall chance be taken. [Exeunt. Tim. Go fly, Evandra, to my Cave, or thou Maist suffer by the rage of lustful Villains. Enter Alcibiades with Phryne and Thais, two Whores. Ali. Command a halt, and send a Messenger To summon Athens from me! What art thou there? speak. Tim. A two leg'd Beast, as thou art, Cankers gnaw thee For shewing me the face of man again. Alci. Is man so hateful to thee! what art thou? Tim. I am Misanthropos! I hate Mankind: And for thy part, I wish thou wer't a Dog, That I might love thee something. But now I think on't, thou art going
Against yo Cursed Town: go on! it is A worthy cause. Alci. Oh Timon! now I know thee, I am sorry For thy misfortunes; and hope a little time Will give me occasion to redress 'em. Tim. I will not alter my condition For all you e're shall Conquer; no, go on, Paint with man's blood the Earth: die it well. Religious Canons, civil laws are cruel, What then must War be? Alcib. How came the noble Timon by this change? Tim. As the Moon does by wanting light to give, And then renew I could not like the Moon, There were no Suns to borrow of. Alcib. What friendship shall I do thee? Tim. Why, promise me friendship and perform none; If thou wilt not promise, thou art no man: If thou dost perform, thou art none neither. Alcib. I am griev'd to see thy misery. Tim. Thou saw'st it when I was rich. Alcib. Then was a happy time. Tim. As thine is now, abus'd by a brace of Harlots. What dost thou fight with women by thy side? Alcib. No, but after all the toils and hazards of the day With men, I refresh my self at night with Women. Tim. These false Whores of thine have more destruction In 'em than thy Sword. Phry. Thou art a Villain to say so— Thais. Is this he, that was the Athenian Minion? A snarling Rascal. Tim. Be Whores still, they love you not that use you; Employ all your salt hours to ruie youth, Soften their manners into a Lethargy Of sense and action. Phry. Hang thee Monster; we are not Whores, we Are Mistresses to Alcibiades. Tim. The right name is Whore, do not miscal it, Ye have been so to many.
Thais. Out on you Dog▪ Alcib. Pray pardon him; His wits àre lost in his calamities; I have but little gold, but here's some for thee. Tim. Keep it, I cannot eat it. Alcib. Wilt thou go 'gainst Athens with me? Tim. If ye were Beasts, I'd go with ye: But I'll not herd with men; yet I love thee Better than all men, because thou wert born To ruine thy base Country. Alcib. I've sent to summon Athens; if she obeys not, I'll ly her on a heap. Tim. It were a glorious act; go on, go on! Here's gold for thee; stay, I'll fetch thee more. Alcib. What mysterie is this! where shou'd he have this? Tim. Here's more Gold and Jewels! go on, Be a devouring Plague; let not Thy Sword skip one, spare thou no Sex or Age: Pity not honour'd Age for his white Beard, He's an Usurer: strike the counterfeit Matron, It is her habit only that is honest, Her self's a Bawd: Let not the Virgins Cheek Make soft thy Sword, nor Milk-Paps giving suck: Spare not the Babe, whose dimpled smiles, From Fools exhaust their mercy; think 'twill be A Rogue or Whore e're long if thou shouldst spare it. Put Armour on thy eyes and ears, whose proof, Nor yells of Mothers, Maids, nor crying Babes, Nor sight of Priests in Holy Vestments bleeding, Shall pierce one jot. Phryn. Hast thou more gold, good Timon? give us some▪ Thais. What pity 'tis he should be thus Melancholy! He is a fine person now. Tim. Oh flattering Whores! but that I am sure you will Do store of mischief, I'd not give you any: Here! be sure you be Whores still, And who with pious breath seeks to convert ye, Be strong in Whore llure and burn him up;
Thatch your thin Sculls with burhens from the dead, Some that were hang'd, no matter, Wear them! betray with them, Whore still; Paint till a Horse may mie upon your faces— A Pox on Wrinkles,  say. Thais. Well, more Gold, say what thou wilt. Tim. Sow your Consumptions in the bones of men; Dry up their Marrows, pain their shins And shoulders: Crack the Lawyers voice, that he May never bawl, and plead false title more. Entice the lustful and dissembling Priests, That scold against the quality of flesh, And not believe themselves; I am not well. Here's more, ye proud, lascivious, rampant Whores. Do you damn others, and let this damn you; And Ditches be all your Death-Beds and your Graves. Phry. More counsel▪ and more money, bounteous Timon. Tim. More Whore! more mischief first, I've given you earnest. Alcib. We but disturb him! farewel, If I thrive well, I'll visit thee again. Tim. If I thrive well, I ne're shall see thee more: I feel Death's happy stroak upon me now, He has laid his Icy hands upon me at length; He will not let me go again, Farewel. Confound Athens, and then thy self. [Ex. Timon. Alcib. Now march, sound Trumpets and beat Drums, And let the terrour of the noise invade The ungrateful, Cowardly, usurious Senate. [Exeunt. Enter Nicias, Aelius, Cleon, Thrasillus, Isidore, Isander, upon the works of Athens. Nic. What shall we do to appease his rage? He has an Amy able to devour us. Phae. We must e'en humbly bow our necks, that he May tread on 'em. Aelis. He is a man of easie nature,  won by soothings.
Nic. I tremble let he should revenge our sentence. Isid. If we shou'd resist, he'll level Athens. Isan. And then woe to our selves, Our Wives and Daughters. Nic. What will become of you and me Phaeax? We have been Enemies to him long. I tremble for it. Phae. Let us appear most forward in delivering up the Town to him. Nic. If we resist, hee'l ue a Conquerours Power, And nothing then will scape the fury of The Headstrong Souldiers, we must all submit. See, he approaches. These Drums and Trumpets Strike terrour in me! Heav'n, help all. [Enter Herald. Enter Alcibiades and his Ary. Alcib. What answer make they to my summons? Herald. They are on the works to treat with you. Alcib. There's a white Flag! let us approach 'em. Hoa! you on the works! give me and my Army entrance, Or I'll let loose the fury of my Souldiers, And make you all a prey to spoil and rapine; And such a flame 'll light about your ears, Shall make Greece tremble. Nic. My noble Lord! we mean nothing less. Phae. Only we beg your honour will forgive us. Nic. W' have been ungrateful, and are much asham'd on't; Your Lordship shall tred upon our necks if you think good; We cannot but condemn our selves; But we appeal to your known mercy and Your Generosity. Phae. March noble Lord into our City With all the Banners spread;-we are thy Slaves. Aelius. Your footstools. Isid. What ever you will make us. Thras. Enter our City, noble Alcibiades: but leave Your rage behind you. Isan. St but your Foot against our Gates, and they
Shall open—so you will enter like a friend. Alcib. Open the Gates without Capitulations, For if I set my battering Rams to work, You must expect no mercy. Nic. We will my good Lord— [They all come down, Nic. present Alcibiades the Keys upon his Knees. Our lives and Fortunes now are in thy hands; But we fly to thy mercy for protection. Alcib. You merit as much mercy as you show'd To Thrasibulus, such monstrous ingratitude Will make your villainous names grow odious To all the race of men, but to your elves To whom vertue is so. Phae. 'Twas the whole Senates voice. Alcib. A Senate, a Den of Thieves! I little thought When I wrested the Pow'r from the Rabble, To give it you, you would be worse than they; But most of you deserve the Ostracism: Some of you are such Rogues you'd shame the Gibbet. Nic. Good my Lord! tread on our necks, but pardon us. Phae. Wee'l be your Slaves if you'l forgive us. Alcib. Can you forgive Thrasibulus whn he's dead? Must we be us'd thus after our frequent hazards, and our Toils, hard weary marching! watching! fasting! Such dreadful hardships, lying out such nights A Beast could not abide without a Covert, And all for Pusy-lazy-knaves, that snort In peace at home, and wallow in their bags? Must we the Bullwarks of our Country be Thus us'd? Phae. Cease to reproach us, my good Lord. Aelius. We are full of shame and guilt. Cleon. Pardon us, good Alcibiades. Thras. We heartily repent. Isid. Wee'l kiss thy feet, good Lord. Isan. Do with us what thou wilt. Alcib. You six of the foremost here must meet me
In the , where I'll order the To Assemble all the people— And on your Knees present your selves With Halters 'bout your necks! Phae. Oh my good Lord! Alcib. Dispute it not, for by the Gods if you Fail in this point, I'll hang ye all, Rifle your Houses, and extirpate all Your race—March on. Give order that not a man shall break his ranks, Or shall offend the regular course of Justice, On penalty of Death—March on— [Ex. Omnes. Enter Timon and Evandra coming out of the Cav. Evan. Oh my dear Lord! why do you stoop and bend Like Flowers ore-charg'd with dew, who's yielding stalks Cannot support 'em? I have a Cordial which Will much revive thy Spirits. Tim. No, sweet Evandra, I have taken the best Cordial, Death, which now Kindly begins to work about my Vitals; I feel him, he comforts me at heart. Evan. Oh my dear Timon! must we then part? That I should live to see this fatal day! Had death but seiz'd me first, I had been happy. Tim. My poor Evandra! lead me to my Grave! Lest Death o'retake me—he pursues me hard: He's close upon me. 'Tis the last office thou Can'st do for Timon. Evan. Hard, stubborn Heart, Wilt thou not break yet? Death, why art thou coy To me that court thee? Tim. Lay me gently down In my last tenement. Death's the truest Friend, That will not flatter, but deals plainly with us. So, now my weary Pilgrimage on Earth Is almost fiisht! Now my best Evandra
I charge thee, by our loves, our mutual loves, Live! and live happy after me: and if A thought of Timon comes into thy mind, And brings a tear from thee, let some diversion Banish it—quickly, strive to forget me. Evan. Oh! Timon! Thinkst thou! I am such a Coward, I will not keep my word? Death shall not part us. Tim. If thou'lt not promise me to live, I cannot Resign my life in peace, I will be with thee After my Death; my soul shall follow thee, And hover still about thee, and guard thee from All harm. Evan. Life is the greatest harm when thou art dead. Tim. Can'st thou forgive thy Timon who involv'd Thee in his sad Calamities? Evan. It is a blessing to share any thing With thee! oh thou look'st pale! thy countenance changes! Oh whither art thou going? Tim. To my last home. I charge thee live, Evandra! Thou lov'st me not, if thou wilt not obey me; Thou only! dearest! kind! constant thing on earth, Farewel. [Dies. Evan. He's gone! he's gone! would all the world were so, I must make haste, or I shall not o're-take Him in his flight. Timon, I come, stay for me, Farewel base World. [Stabs her self. Dies. Enter Alcibiades, Phrinias, and Thais, his Officers and Soul∣diers, and his Train, the Senators. The Pēople by degrees assembling. Enter Melissa. Mel▪ My Alibiades, welcome! doubly welcome! The Joys of Love and Conquest ever bless thee. Wonder and terrour of Mankind, and Joy Of Woman kind: now thy  happy: She has liv'd to see the utmost day she wisht for,
Her Alcibiades return with Conquest O're this ungrateful City; and but that I every day heard thou wert marching hither, I had been with thee long e're this. Alcib. What gay, vain, prating thing is this? Mel. How my Lord! do you question who Melissa is? And give her such foul Titles? Alcib. I know Melissa, and therefore give her such Titles: for when the Senate banisht me; She would not see me, tho' upon her knees Before she had sworn eternal love to me; I see thy snares too plain to be caught now. Mel. I ne'r refus'd to see you, Heav'n can witness! Who ever told you so, betray'd me basely: Not see you! sure there's not a sight on earth I'd chuse before you: You make me astonish'd! Alcib. All this you swore to Timon; and next day Despis'd him—I have been inform'd Of all your falsehood, and I hate thee for't; I have Whores, good honest faithful Whores! Good Antidotes against thy poison—Love; Thy base false love; and tell me, is not one Kind, faithful, loving Whore, better than A thousand base, ill-natur'd honest Women? Mel. I never thought I should have liv'd to hear This from my Alcibiades. Alcib. Do not weep, Since I once lik'd thee, I'll do something for thee: I have a Coral that has serv'd me well, I will prefe ou to him. Mel. How have I merited this scorn—Farewel, I'll never see you more. [Exit. Alcib. I hope you will not. Enter Souldiers with drawn Swords, haling in Apemantus. How now! what means this violence? 1 Sould. My Lord! this snarling Villainous Philosopher,
With open mouth rail'd at the Army; He said the General was a Villain: shall we Cut his throat? Alcib. No! touch him not! unhand him! Why Apemantus didst thou call me Villain? Apem I always speak my thoughts: not all The Swords o'th' Army bent against my throat Can fright me from the truth— Alcib. Why, dost thou think I am one? Apem. 'Tis true, this base Town deserves thy scourge, And all the Terror and the punishment, Thou can'st inflict upon it: the deed is good, But yet thou dost it ill; private revenge, Base passion, headstrong lust, incite thee to it; Had they not banish'd thee, thou wou'dst have suffer'd Wrong still to prosper, and th' insulting Tyrants To thrive, swell and grow fat with their oppression, And wouldst have join'd in them. Alcib. Thou rail'st too much for a Philosopher. Apem. Nay frown not, Lord, I fear thee not, nor love thee, All thy good parts thou drown'st in vice and riot, In passion, and vain-glory: how proud art thou Of all thy Conquests—when a poor rabble Of idle Rogues who else had been in Jails, Perform'd 'em for thee; How false is Souldiers honour With Drums and Trumpets, and in the face of day With daring impudence Men go to murther Mankind—but in the greatest actions of their Lives The getting men, they sneak and hide themselv 'th' dark; I scorn your folly and your madness. Alcib. Thou art a snarling Cur. 1 Sould. Shall I run him through? Alcib. Hold. Apem. I fear thee not. Alcib. My ever honoured Socrates favour'd thee, And for his sake I spare thee. Apem. How much did Socrates lose his pains in thee! Hadst thou observ'd his principles, thou'd'st been honest.
Enter Nicias, Thrafillus, Phaeax, Isidore, Isander, Aelis, and Cleon, with Halters about their necks. Nicias. We come my noble Lord at thy Command, And thus we humbly kneel before thy mercy. Phae. Spare our lives, and wee'l employ 'em in Thy service, worthy Alcibiades. Alcib. Do you acknowledge you are ungrateful Knaves? All. We do. Alcib. And that you have used me basely. All. We have, but we are very sorry. Alcib. I should do well to hang you for the Death Of my brave Officer; but thousand such base lives As yours would not weigh with his! go, ye have Your liberty. And now the people are assembled, I will declare my intentions towards them. [He ascends the Pulpit My Fellow Citizens! I will not now upbraid You for the unjust sentence past upon me, In the return of which I have subdu'd Your Enemies and all revolted places, Made you Victorious both at Land and Sea, And have with continual toil and numberless dangers Stretcht out the bounds of your Dominions far Above your hopes or expectations. I will not recount the many enterprises, No Grecian can be ignorant of. 'Tis enough You know how I have serv'd you. Now it remains I farther shou'd declare my self; I come First to free you good Citizens of Athens From the most insupportable yoaks Of your four hundred Tyrants; and then next To claim my own Estate which has unjustly By them been kept from me that rais'd them. I do confess, I in revenge of your decree▪ Against me, set up them, but never thought They would have been such Cued Tyrants to you,
Till now, they have gone on and fill'd the time With most licentious acts; making their wills, Their base corrupted wills, the scope of Justice, While you in vain groan'd under all your suff'rings. Thus when a few shall Lord it o're the rest, They govern for themselves and not the People. They rob and pill from them, from thence t' increase Their private stores; but when the Government Is in the Body of the People, they Will do themselves no harm; therefore henceforth I do pronounce the Government shall devolve upon the People, and may Heav'n prosper 'em. People shout and cry, Alcibiades! Alcibiades! Long live Alcibiades, Liberty, Liberty, &c. [Alcib. Descends. Enter Messenger. Mes. My noble Lord! I went as you commanded, And found Lord Timon dead, and his Evandra Stab'd, and just by him lying in his Tomb, On which was this Inscription. Alcib. I'll read it. Here lies a wretched Corse, of wretched Soul bereft, Timon my name, a Plague consume you Caitiffs left. Poor Timon! I once knew thee the most flourishing man Of all th' Athenians, and thou still hadst been so, Had not these smiling, flattering Knaves devour'd thee, And murder'd thee with base ingratitude. His death pull'd on the poor Evandra's too; That Miracle of Constancy in Love. Now all repair to their respective homes, Their several Trades, their bus▪ness and diversions; And whilst I guard you from your active Foes, And fight your Battels, be you secure at home. May Athens flourish with a lasting Peace; And may its wealth and power ever increase. All the People shout and cry, Alcibiades! Alcibiades! Liberty, Liberty, &c.
Epilogue. IF there were hopes that ancient solid Wit Might please within our new fantastick Pit; This Play might then support the Criticks shock, This Scien grafted upon Shakespears stock; For join'd with his our Poets part might thrive, Kept by the vertue of his sap alive. Though now no more substantial English Playes, Than good old Hospitality you praise; The time shall come when true old sence shall rie In Judgment over all your vanities. Slight kickshaw Wit 'th' Stage, French meat at Feasts▪ Now daily Tantalize the hungry Guests; While the old English Chine us'd to remain, And many hungry onsets would sustain. At these thin Feasts each Morsel's swallow'd down, And ev'ry thing but the Guests stomach's gone. At these new fashion'd Feasts you' have but a Tast, With Meat or Wit you scarce can break a Fast. This Jantee slightness to the French we owe, And that makes all slight Wits admie 'em so. They're of one Level, and with little pains The Frothy Poet good reception gains; But to hear English Wit there's use of brains. Though Sparks to imitate the French think fit In want of Learning, Affectation, Wit, And which is most, in Cloaths, wee'l ne'r submit. Their Ships or Plays o're ours shall ne're advance, For our Third Rates shall match the First of France, With English Judges this may bear the Test, Who will for Shakespear's part forgive the rest. The Sparks judge but as they hear others say, They cannot think enough to mind the Play.
They to catch Ladies (which they dress at) come, Or cause they cannot read or think t home; Each here deux yeux and amrous looks imparts, Levells Creva and Perriwigs at Hearts; Yet they themselves more than the Ladies mind, And but for vanity wou'd have 'em kind. No passion— But for their own Dear persons them can move, Th' admire themselves too much to be in Love. Nor Wit, nor Beauty, their hard Hearts can strike, Who only their own sence or persons like. But to the men of Wit our Poet flies, To save him from Wits mortal Enemies. Since for his Friends he has the best of those, Guarded by them he fears not little Foes. And with each Mistress we must favour find, They for Evandra's sake will sure be kind; At least all those to constant Love inclin'd. FINIS.
