S3353 12255785 57444
Imprimatur, Ra. Barker, Reverendissi∣mo in Christo Patri ac Dom. Domino, Iohanni Archiep. Cant. à Sacris Domesticis. Ex AEdibus Lambith. June 10. 1692.
A SERMON Preached at the TEMPLE-CHURCH, MAY 29. 1692. And Printed at the Desire of the BENCH-TABLE OF THE HONOURABLE SOCIETY OF THE INNER-TEMPLE. By WILLIAM SHERLOCK, D.D. Dean of St. Paul's, Master of the Temple, and Chaplain in Ordinary to Their MAJESTIES. LONDON: Printed for Will. Rogers, at the Sun over-against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. MDCXCII.
To the WORSHIPFUL The MASTERS of the Bench OF THE HONOURABLE SOCIETY OF THE INNER-TEMPLE. My Honoured Friends, TO justify my Publication of this Sermon, which the Reader will easily perceive was not intended by me for the Press, I must acquaint the World, that it is done in perfect Obedience to your Commands. Your great Loyalty and Zeal for Their Majesties Government, gave you too good an Opinion of it when you heard it from the Pulpit; and if it should
not answer your Expectations from the Press, yet I hope you will own it as a Te∣stimony of my due Submission to your Iudg∣ments, and of those just Respects, which your many and repeated Favours daily chal∣lenge from, Gentlemen, Your much obliged and humble Servant, WILL. SHERLOCK.
1 TIM. II. 1, 2. I exhort therefore, that first of all, sup∣plications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men: For Kings, and for all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. ST. Paul wrote this Epistle to Ti∣mothy, to instruct him in the dis∣charge of his Episcopal Office and Power, to which he had or∣dained him: And the first thing he gives him in charge (where∣by we may guess what weight he laid on it) is this in my Text, I exhort therefore, That first of all, or I first of all exhort, that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all men. To affix a proper and distinct signification on these words, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of thanks, which are recommended as the distinct parts of Prayer, Learned men tell us,
that , which we render Supplications, sig∣nifies Prayer to avert evils, , Prayers for the obtaining some good; and that , are properly Intercessions or Prayers for other men; but this is too general a notion of it, since in this place the Apostle applies Supplications and Prayers, as well as Intercessions, to praying for other men, even for all men: And therefore the proper notion of , is to intercede for a sinner, for the pardon of his sin, and to reconcile him again to God, whom he hath offended, as the word is most commonly used. Giving of Thanks is blessing God for good things al∣ready received; which the same Apostle makes essential to an acceptable and effectual Prayer. 4. Phil. 6. Be careful for nothing, but in every thing by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God. Thus we pray for our selves, That God would deliver us from evil, that he would do us good, that he would forgive our sins; and we thank him for the Bles∣sings, and all the good things we already enjoy; and thus we must do for others, even for all men; tho the Apostle has not so much regard here to our private Prayers, as to the Publick Offices of Religion, those Publick Prayers which are made in the Publick Assemblies by the Bishop and Mi∣nisters,
and the whole Congregation of Chri∣stians: For this advice which St. Paul gives Timothy in these Epistles, concerns the Publick Worship, and Government and Discipline of the Church; we must in our private Devotions pray not only for our selves, but for all mankind; but Publick Prayers, the united Desires and Pe∣titions of the Church, offered up by the Mini∣sters of Christ, whose office it is to Bless and to Pray for the people, are most effectual and pre∣vailing. Before I proceed to what I principally intend, viz. Our Prayers for Kings, and all that are in Authority, it will be useful to show you, on what great Reasons this Duty is founded, of praying for all men, as well as for our selves; and that both with respect to our selves, to other men, and to God. First, With respect to our selves. Now 1. This is the noblest exercise of the most Divine Cha∣rity; this is truly to love all men as our selves; when we are touched with a sense of their wants, as well as of our own, and do heartily beg all those Blessings for them of God, which we do for our selves; when we are so far from envy∣ing their happiness, that we rejoice in it, and bless God for it, as we do for our own: Our
Charity cannot be perfect without this; for our power of doing good extends but to a few in∣stances, and can reach but a very few persons; and if our Charity be no larger than our power, it is a very worthless thing: But a Divine Cha∣rity wishes well to the whole Creation, and therefore recommends all mankind to the care and protection of that Almighty Goodness which governs the world. This is the highest Perfection both of the Man and the Christian; this is the true Spirit of Prayer, to offer up our Prayers to the God of Love, in the Spirit of Love and Charity. 2dly. This obliges us to the exercise of many Christian Graces and Vertues; if we pray God to forgive our enemies, to be sure we must for∣give them our selves; we must exercise great Patience, and Meekness, and Forbearance to∣wards them; if we pray God to relieve the poor, to restore the sick, to reform the vicious, to enlighten those who are in error and dark∣ness, and to reduce wandring sheep into his fold, to deliver the oppressed, to support and comfort those who suffer for Righteousness sake, each of these Petitions involve a Duty in them; for what we pray God to do, we must do our selves, as
far as it is in our power; and therefore our Pray∣ers for other men oblige us to do good to them, both to their souls and bodies; and he who does heartily pray for other men, will do them all the good he can: The same Charity which in∣spires his Prayers, will govern his actions; for it is a prophane Contempt and Mockery of God to ask him to do that which we will not do our selves. 3dly. Our Prayers for our selves are most ac∣ceptable to God, when we pray for other men also; as they must needs be, because they are offered up in the spirit of universal Charity, which alone, through the Merits of our Saviour Christ, makes our Prayers, our Alms, and all the good we do, acceptable to God: No Prayer can be lost, which is put up in Faith and Charity: If our Prayers do no good to those particular men for whom we pray, if they be not fit or worthy to receive the Mercies we pray for, yet our pray∣ers, our peace, our blessing, shall return into our own bosoms, 10. Matt. 13. Secondly, It is very apparent of what use these Prayers are to the world. For many times the Prayers of good men avert those Judgments
which hang over a wicked Nation, and procure publick Blessings for them: Those who never pray for themselves, may reap the benefit of other mens Prayers; and the Prayers of those, who do pray for themselves, will be more ef∣fectual, when they are backed and reinforced by the united Prayers of the whole Church for them. It is a mighty comfort to every good Christian to think, that he shares in the Prayers of the whole Christian Church; especially when he is under a cloud himself, and either cannot pray himself, or prays with great disturbance of thoughts, with great diffidence and distrust, and despondency of spirit; at such times especially all men are very desirous, that other good Chri∣stians would pray with them, and for them; and such men may comfort themselves, that how un∣fit soever they are to pray themselves, they have the Prayers, not only of their Friends and imme∣diate Pastors, who personally know them, but of all good Christians all the World over, who offer up their Prayers for themselves, and for all Mankind, especially for all the Members of Christ's Mystical Body; which is a priviledge to be valued next to the Intercession of Christ for us all, and should mightily reconcile us to a du∣ty, which is so universally beneficial: for pray∣ing
for other men intitles us to their Prayers for us; and though we are not particularly na∣med in their Prayers, God knows to whom they belong, and will apply them himself. Thirdly, And there is great reason, why God should command, and encourage, and reward our Prayers for each other: Not only 1. Be∣cause it is the exercise of the most Divine Cha∣rity, and the Instrument of many Christian Vir∣tues, as you have already heard, which you will grant a sufficient reason why God should encou∣rage it. But 2dly, Because it is the most becoming Address we can make to God, and that which also makes the most glorious and lovely represen∣tation of him; that he is the Prince and the Fa∣ther of all Mankind; who made, and who governs, and who preserves, and provides for all his Creatures; which is as great and ho∣nourable a thought as we can have of God; and indeed this teaches us how to pray to God, and what to expect from him. That we must not flatter our selves that he will be fond and partial to us; for all men are his Creatures, the Soul of the Father, and the Soul of the Son, are both his; and therefore as we may expect from God the kindness of a Gra∣cious
and Merciful Creator, and through our Lord Jesus Christ, the kindness of a Father; so we must expect, that he will deal equally by all: That he will make no other difference, but what our personal Qualities and Virtues make: And therefore we must not presume to ask any thing of God, which is to the injury, or prejudice, or lessening of our Brother, to gratify our Pride, or Revenge, or some other evil Passions; for we pray to a common Father, who will adjust the Interests of Mankind, and have a due regard to the happiness of all. And 3dly, This gives credit and reputation to Religion in the World; that true Piety and Virtue makes the Prayers of good men effectual, not only for themselves, but for others; that the better men are, the more power they have with God, which makes them a kind of Patron Saints, and tutelar Angels to the places where they live; this is a mighty honour to be the Friends and Favourites of God, to be able to fetch down Blessings from Heaven by our Prayers: This makes Religion and Virtue truly venerable in the sight of all men; and it becomes the Wisdom of God to dispence his Blessings in such a man∣ner, as may conciliate Esteem and Reverence to true Religion in the World.
It is time now to pass from this general Command of praying for all men, to that parti∣cular direction to pray for Kings, and for all that are in Authority. But before I shew you, what great reason there is to pray for Kings, it will be necessary to inquire, what Kings we must pray for. For though St. Paul makes no difference, there are some who do: Some there are among our selves, who withdraw from our Communion, because we pray in our pub∣lick Offices for Their present Majesties King WILLIAM, and Queen MARY, whom God long preserve. There is not a more express Command for any thing in Scripture, than there is for praying for Kings, and for all that are in Authority, , in a state of Eminence and Superiority above o∣thers. And if Their present Majesties be so, as it is visible to all the World that they are, then they are included in this Apostolical Precept, to pray for Kings, and all in Autho∣rity. Upon what Pretences some among us reject so plain a Duty, is sufficiently known: They say, by Kings, the Apostle means only Lawful and Rightful Kings; that is, such Kings as are advan∣ced to the Throne by an antecedent Legal Right,
according to the Laws and Constitutions of the Countries and Kingdoms which they govern. And therefore in an Hereditary Kingdom no man is, or can be King, and no man must be prayed for as King, but He who has the Hereditary Right, as being the next lineal Heir. This Right, they say, is in the late King Iames, not in Their present Ma∣jesties; and therefore notwithstanding Their be∣ing in possession of the Throne, we must not own Them, nor pray for Them as King and Queen. I do not intend, nor is it fitting, to dispute Their Majesties Right, which is no matter of Scruple to me: Nor would it become me, be∣fore Two such learned Societies of Law, to say what the Laws of the Land require in such Cases. And therefore to keep to my own Profession, I shall only desire these Persons to tell me, where there is any such distinction as this in Scripture? viz. That we must not pray for all Kings, but only for legal Kings, who had an antecedent legal Right; for in any other sense, those are legal Kings, who are invested with the Regal Authority, with all the Legal Rites of investiture. The Command is in general, to pray for Kings, and for all that are in Authority; and if we may excuse our selves from so plain a Duty by distinctions of our
own inventing, there are few Duties in Reli∣gion, but what we may deliver ourselves from by such arbitrary Distinctions. As for instance, There is an express Command in Scripture, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him one∣ly shalt thou serve. Which one would think were a very express Prohibition of the Worship of Saints or Angels, or any other Being besides God. But the Papists easily avoid this by the help of a Distinction, which the Scripture is un∣acquainted with: They say, we must worship God only with the Worship of Latria, but we may worship Saints and Angels with the Wor∣ship of Dulia, tho' the Scripture appropriates all Religious Worship to God. Thus as our Sa∣viour tells the Pharisees, God commanded saying, Honour thy Father and thy Mother, and he that curseth Father or Mother, let him die the death: But ye say, Whosoever shall say to his Father or Mother, it is a gift by whatsoever thou maist be profited by me, and honour not his Father nor his Mother, he shall be free; thus have you made the commandment of God of none effect by your tradi∣tion, 15 Matth. 4, 5. Thus it is in our pre∣sent Case; the Apostle commands us to pray for Kings, and for all that are in authority: No,
say these Men, not unless they be Legal Kings, tho' they have all the Ensigns of Majesty, and are invested with the Regal Authority and Pow∣er, with all the Legal and Customary Rites and Solemnites of Investiture, and are acknowledg∣ed and recognized for King and Queen by the Estates of the Realm. And thus this Com∣mand is of no effect neither; for it seems it is a matter of Wit, or Law, or Philosophy, to know who is King; whereas St. Paul supposed that it was a plain matter of sense; that he who administred the Government with a Re∣gal Authority, and was owned and submitted to by the Nation, was the King for whom we must pray. There is reason to conclude, that St. Paul speaks of such Kings, if we will allow, that he spoke the Language of the Age wherein he li∣ved; for in that Age, and in all the Ages of the World ever since, those were called Kings, and had the Preheminency of Power and Au∣thority, who by the Consent and Submission of the People administred the Government with a Regal and Soveraign Authority, whether they had any Anticedent Right or Title to the Government or not.
I will not now dispute this matter, but would only desire these Persons to consider, whether they are as certain that by All Powers, 13 Rom. 1. the Apostle onely means all such Powers as had an antecedent legal Right and Title to Power, as they are, that he expresly teaches, That all power is of GOD? Whe∣ther they are as certain, that it is unlawful to pray for Kings, who are legally invested with the Royal Power, though as they imagine, without any antecedent legal Right to the Crown, as they are, that the Apostle com∣mands us to pray for Kings, and for all that are in authority? Whether they are as certain, that it is their Duty to adhere to a supposed Right against the publick Judgment of the Na∣tion, in opposition to their Present Majesties, (who fill the Throne by the Consent and Au∣thority of the Estates of the Realm) though to the great Disturbance of Government, and to the most apparent Ruine (could they pre∣vail) of the true Religion, the Lives and For∣tunes of their Fellow-subjects, and the Liber∣ties of their Native Country, as they are, that it is our Duty to pray for Kings? In a word, whether they are as certain, that the Roman
Powers at that time were Legal and Rightful Powers, by such an Antecedent Legal Right as they now insist on, as they are, that St. Paul commanded the Christians to be subject to those Powers, and to pray for them? These are very proper Questions about the degrees of Evidence and Certainty: For if the Rule be plain and certain, and the Excepti∣ons from this Rule uncertain; if the Rule have a Divine Authority, and the Exceptions have nothing to support them but some un∣certain Reasonings, such Reasonings as con∣tradict the general Sence and Practise of Man∣kind in all Revolutions; I think wise and good Men ought to chuse the safer side, and to suspect their own Reasonings, since the Scripture has made no such Exceptions (no not in a time of the most violent Usurpati∣ons, when if ever there was the greatest reason to have made them,) and the gene∣rality of Mankind, and even the most so∣ber and considering Men reject them, as having no solid foundation in Reason and Nature.
Having premis'd this, I proceed now to con∣sider the Manifold Obligations, which lie up∣on us to pray for Kings. First, Because Kings are the great Instru∣ments of the Divine Providence in the World, they are those great Wheels which move and alter the whole Scene of humane Affairs; eve∣ry Irregularity in their Motions is soon felt, and causes very fatal Convulsions in the State; their Mistakes are like the Eclipses of the Sun, but more portentous and ominous than they, their Smiles or Frowns are like the kind or ma∣lign Influences of the Heavens, which revive drooping Nature, or threaten an universal Ruine, Quicquid delirant Reges, the People suf∣fer by the Indiscretions and ill Government of a Prince, but a wise, and just, and religious King is the greatest Blessing in the World, and therefore we have as much Reason to Pray for the King, as we have to pray that God would make his Sun to shine, or the Rain to descend on the Earth.
Secondly, Though Kings act with a Sovereign Power, yet they are intirely under God's Go∣vernment, The king's heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water, he turneth it whi∣thersoever he will, 21 Prov. 1. makes his Will and Affections run in this or that Channel, as will best serve the ends of his Providence and Government. The most absolute Prince is un∣der secret and invisible Restraints; God can a thousand ways change his Purposes and divert him from what he intended to something else, which he little thought of; and indeed it is very fitting that those who are so much above humane Restraints, should be managed by an unseen Hand: For if God does not govern those who govern the World, there is in a great measure an end of his Providence, for then the Fate of Kingdoms would be at the Will of Princes, and that has the greatest In∣fluence of any thing else upon the Happiness or Misery of private and particular Men. Now if God can, if God does govern Prin∣ces, this makes it necessary to pray heartily to God for them, for there is the first Spring of Motion; if we make God our Friend, he will
bless, and direct, and counsel our Prince who acts under him, and in Subordination to his Counsels and Decrees. Thirdly, I need add no more to convince you how necessary it is to pray for Kings, but to shew you how much they need our Prayers, how much they need the Assistance and Direction of God to prevent those Inconveniences and Miscarriages, which all humane Governments are subject to. For 1. The Government of Kingdoms and Nations is a Work of great Difficulty, and that which requires somewhat more than hu∣mane Art and Skill; it is no easie mat∣ter to deal with the various Lusts, and In∣terests, and Passions of Men, to maintain Peace at home and abroad, to adjust the Interests of Subjects and Neighbour-Princes, to make War and Peace, to advance the Trade of the Nati∣on and to govern it when it is rich; to be lo∣ved by Subjects without being thought easie and remiss which exposes to Contempt, and to be feared without being hated; to know whom to trust, and whom to be aware of, to discern
Mens Integrity and Abilities for Counsel, or for the Administration of Justice, for Civil or Military Employs, to know how to choose Favourites, and which is as hard a thing how to govern them; when to resist the Fury and Torrent of the People, and when to comply without seeming to yield, and a thousand other emergent Difficulties there are, which require very prudent and yet extempore Reme∣dies, where every false step proves very inju∣rious either to Prince or People. These are the true Atlasses, who bear the Weight of the World upon their Shoulders, and if we find it so difficult to govern a Family, a Parish, a little Corporation, to attend to one or to very few things, of any moment and conse∣quence, shall we not assist those by our Pray∣ers who have so much a heavier Burden to bear, and which unless they carry it steady, we our selves shall be crushed with the Fall of it. 2. We must consider also, that without the Divine Assistance and Counsel, Princes are but like other Men, and liable to the same Mistakes, nay indeed they are more expos'd to Misinfor∣mations,
and Misrepresentations, and such like Abuses, which have a very ill Influence upon Government, then other Men are: No Prince can so particularly inspect all the Affairs of his Kingdom, as a Man can his own Family and particular Estate, but they are forced to see and hear with other Mens Eyes and Ears, which too often prove very corrupt Medi∣ums, and tincture the Object with their own private Passions: Court-Factions, and the cross Interests of aspiring Favourites, who carry on their private Intrigues without any regard to the Publick Good, or the Service of their Prince, but will Sacrifice all to undermine a Rival, and to gratifie their Ambition and Re∣venge, may sugest very ruinous Counsels to the dividing both the Hearts and the Inte∣rests of Prince and People, and Court Para∣sites, who are only Ecchoes to the Prince's Inclinations, and always advise what they think he would have advised; betray him to those Mischiefs which might be prevented by faithful Counsellors: This is the Unhappy State of Kings, which nothing but the Di∣vine Counsel and Providence can prevent:
And is not this a very forcible Reason to pray for them? Especially, 3dly, when we consider, that Kings are exposed to more and greater Tem∣ptations then other Men; they have the same Passions that other Men have, but not the same Restraints to curb them, they have nothing but the Fear of GOD, and the Considerations of Religion and another World, which we find too weak to govern the ge∣nerality of Mankind, without some more sen∣sible Motives: What a Temptation is Sove∣reign Power, when we see very few Men, who can use any degree of Power without a∣busing it; a Power which will justifie what it does, and make it right, which will not be opposed nor contradicted, which governs the Opinions or the Tongues of Men; which never wants Flatterers to admire whatever it does, which can stamp new Titles and Cha∣racters of Honour when it pleases, and at least change the Names and the external Value of Things, though the Nature of Things is some∣what stubborn: a Power which is apt to have
very tender Resentments, and to be very severe in its Revenge, which gives free scope to all the irregular Appetites and Passions of Humane Nature. Such a Power, I say, as this, which is so easily abused, and which is almost an invincible Temptation to abuse it self; and which can do so much Mischief when it is abused, is a sufficient reason to make us very earnest and importunate in our Prayers to GOD for Kings. But if ever there were reason to pray for Kings, certainly we have great reason to pray for the long Life and prosperous Reign of their present Majesties, whom GOD hath set over us. The Apostle directs us to pray for Kings, that under them we may live quiet and peace∣able lives in all godliness and honesty. As for Godliness, this we must take care of, what∣ever our Prince be. No Prince can take our Religion from us, if we resolve to keep it; but they may disturb our Quiet and Peaceable Enjoyment of it: which was the
State of the Christian Church under Hea∣then and Persecuting Emperours, and the reason of this Command to Pray for the Peaceable Enjoyment and Profession of their Religion. This we enjoy with great Advantages un∣der their Majesties Government, and there∣fore have great reason to pray for them, under whom we may if we please, live quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and hone∣sty. Thanks be to GOD, we are so far from any danger of being persecuted for our Religion, that nothing can more effectually recommend us to the Favour of our Prin∣ces, than the sincere Practise of Religion and Vertue. They set us an Example of it themselves, they like, commend, reward it, where they see it: Nay, we have a King who exposes his own Sacred Person to all the Fa∣tigues and Hazards of War to secure to us our Peace at Home, and the quiet possessi∣on of our Religion; to break the power of that great Oppressor, who Invades the Li∣berties of Europe, and Persecutes the Professours
of the true Religion, wherever he has Interest or Power to do it. We have a King who has already rescued this Church and Kingdom, when their Condition ap∣peared hopeless and desperate; and cer∣tainly had been so, long before this, had not God made Him the glorious Instru∣ment of our Deliverance. And shall we not pray for such a King, who is the ve∣ry light of our eyes, and the breath of our nostrils? To whom we owe our Laws and Liberties, and Religion, and on whose Preservation, and long and prosperous Reign, depends our greatest visible Hope and Pro∣spect of a quiet and secure Enjoyment of them for the time to come. And as we must pray, so we must give God Thanks for King's too, and for all the Bles∣sings we enjoy under their Government: This is one part of the Solemnity of this Day; to bless God for the Restauration of the King and Royal Family, and our Ancient Go∣vernment and Constitution both in Church and State, after the Miseries and Calamities
of a Civil War, and the Oppression of our Fellow-Subjects; and those who can remem∣ber those Days, must confess, that this was a very great Mercy. And though the Glory of this Day seemed to be Eclips'd and overcast in the Reign of the late unfortunate Prince, yet it breaks forth again with a new Lu∣stre and Brightness in the Advancement of their present Majesties, from whose Govern∣ment we may reasonably expect as great Blessings to this Church and Kingdom, as ever they yet enjoyed. Kings are God's Ministers, and advan∣ced to the Throne by him, and a good King, is as great a Temporal Blessing, as God can bestow upon any Nation, and the very Advancement of their Majesties to the Throne, was it self a great and imme∣diate Deliverance, as great as our Redempti∣on from Popery and Arbitrary Power. And yet this is not all we are to bless God for; but we are bound also to bless him for the almost miraculous Preservation of the King's Person, as well from Treachery and
Violence, as from the Chances of War, and for the no less miraculous Successes of his Arms, especially the late wonderful Success at Sea, of which I hope future Ages will feel the blessed Effects: A Success in all the Circumstances of it so wonderful, that I know no Story that equals it, except we may compare it to the miraculous Over∣throw of Pharaoh and all his Host in the Red Sea. And yet it is no less wonderful, that any English Protestants should invite the French to conquer them, to place a zea∣lous Papist and an Arbitrary Prince upon the Throne again; and that after all the Miracles of Providence whereby these De∣signs have been defeated, and as we have Reason to hope, for ever disappointed, there should be any Protestants, who think it their Interest, as long as ever they can for∣bear, not to believe it, and when they can disbelieve it no longer, think it a great Judgment and Calamity upon them to be delivered.
But let Vs bless God, that he hath answered our Prayers, and saved us out of the Hands of our Enemies; let us humbly beseech him to continue these Mercies to us, and the glo∣rious Instruments of them; to bless their Ma∣jesties Persons, Counsels and Arms, and to perfect this Deliverance at Sea by as surprizing Successes, which after such auspicious and pro∣mising Beginnings, we hope in God, may at∣tend his Majesty's Person and Arms in Flan∣ders: Which we beg Almighty God to grant through our Lord Jesus Christ; To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all Honour, Glory and Power, now and for ever. Amen. FINIS.
