S6024 11741796 48494
MEMORIALS OF The Most Reverend Father in God, Thomas Cranmer, SOMETIME Lord Archbishop of CANTERBURY. WHEREIN The HISTORY of the CHURCH, and the REFORMATION of it, during the Primacy of the said ARCHBISHOP, are greatly Illu∣strated; and many singular Matters relating there∣unto, now First Published. In Three Books. Collected chiefly from RECORDS, REGISTERS, Authentick LETTERS, and other ORIGINAL MANUSCRIPTS. By IOHN STRYPE, M. A. LONDON; Printed for RICHARD CHISWELL, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church-Yard. MDCXCIV.
EFFIGIES VERA REVERENDISSIMI CMERI ARCHIEPISCOPI CANTUARIENSIS H Holbein pinxit Natus. 1489 July. 2. Consecratus 1533. Marzo. Martyrio. Coronatus. 1556. Mar 21. pag 179: Printed for Ric: Chiswell at the Rose and Crowne in St Pauls Church yard
TO THE Most Reverend Father in God, JOHN, By the DIVINE PROVIDENCE, Lord Archbishop of CANTERBVRY, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan; AND One of Their Majesties most Honourable Privy Council. May it please Your Grace, TO pardon the Presumption of the Obscure Person that dedicates this Book to Your GRACE, for the sake of the Renowned Man it treats of, Viz. One of your Illu∣strious Predecessors, an Archbishop of Canterbury, that hath deserved so eminently of that See, nay,
and of the whole British Church; I may say, that deserved Best of any Archbishop before him, that wore that Mitre. To whose solid Learning, De∣liberation, and indefatigable Pains, both the Kings and People of this Realm owe their Deliverance from the long and cruel Bondage of Rome. For it is true what the Romanists say in Obloquy of this Archbishop, and we Protestants say it to his Eternal Fame, That he was the first of all the Archbishops of Canterbury that made a Defection from the Papal Chair; Thereby vindicating this Crown from a base Dependance upon a Foreign Jurisdiction.In his Three Conversi∣ons. But whereas Parsons saith, That this was the first Change of Religion in any Archbishop of Canterbury from the beginning unto his days; this is not so true; For sundry of Archbishop Cranmer's Predecessors, (to look no further than Two or Three hundred Years backward) were of different Judgments from the Church of Rome in some Points. His immediate Predecessor, War∣bam, approved of the King's Title of Supreme Head of the Church under Christ, in his own Kingdom, against the Doctrine of the Pope's Uni∣versal Authority. And a Century of Years be∣fore him, Archbishop Chichely, tho he were made the Pope's Legate, refused to exercise his Power Legantine, further than he should be authorized
thereunto by the King. And Archbishop Islip, as long before him, disliked of Dissolving those Marriages that were contracted by such as had be∣fore vowed the single Life. For tho he laid a Pu∣nishment upon a Countess of Kent, who being a Widow, and then Professed, afterwards secretly married to a certain Knight, named Abrincourt; yet he divorced them not, but permitted them to live together. And the Judgment of Archbishop Arundel, who lived in K. Richard the Second's Reign, was for the Translation of the Scriptures into the Vulgar Tongue, and for the Laities use thereof. For He, preaching the Funeral Sermon of Queen Anne, the beloved Wife of that King, after she deceased at Sheen, in the Year 1392. commended her, as for her other Vertuous Ac∣complishments, so particularly for her Study of the Holy Scriptures, and of the Sense of them; and for having them in the Vulgar Tongue; as I find by an Ancient MS. Fragment,E Foxij MSS. writ near Three hundred Years ago, formerly belonging to the Church of Worcester, in these Words fol∣lowing; Also the Bushop of Caunterbury, Thomas of Arundel, that now is, sey a Sermon at Westminster, thereas was ma∣ny an hundred of people, at the buryeng of quene Anne, (of whose Sowle God have mercy.) And in his com∣mendation
of her he seyd, That it was more joy of her, than of any woman, that ever he knew. For notwith∣standing that she was Alien born, [being the Daugh∣ter of the Emperor Charles IV.] she had on English al the iiij gospels, with the Doctors upon hem. And he seyd, that she sent them unto him. And he seyd, that they were good and true, and commended her, in that she was so great a Lady, and also an Alyan, and wolde study so holy, so vertuouse bokes. And he blamed in his Ser∣mon sharply the negligence of the Prelates, and other men, &c. So that it is not true what Parsons saith, if he mean, That no Archbishops of Canterbury before Cranmer, varied from the Church of Rome in any of her Doctrines. But true it is, tho not so much to their Credits, that none of them, however sen∣sible they were of the Roman Errors and Supersti∣tions, did in good earnest bestir themselves to set this Church free of them, before our abovenamed Archbishop (being the sixty eighth from Augustine the Monk) resolutely and bravely undertook and effected it. Indeed they spent not their Zeal, their Treasure, and their Interest this way so much, as in contending about Superiority and their Prero∣gatives, in exempting their Clergy from the Cog∣nizance of the Temporal Magistrate, in Appli∣cations to, and Courting of the Bishops of Rome,
in Persecuting those they called Hereticks, in Eterni∣zing their own Names, by founding Religious Hou∣ses, and building Stately Palaces, and Shrines, and in exhibiting themselves in great Worldly Pomp and Appearance. But blessed be God for Archbishop Cranmer; by means of whose Reformation succeeded a Se∣ries of better, tho not so splendid, Archbishops. Who made conscience of minding things more suitable to their high Vocation, and the Spiritual Trust committed to them: Men that regarded lit∣tle or nothing the vain shews of exterior Grandeur and Glory, nor sought Great Things for them∣selves, but with their great Predecessor St. Paul, (on whom lay the Care of all the Churches) spent and wore out themselves in the Restoration of the Kingdom of Christ, so happily begun by the said Archbishop Cranmer in this Island. Such were Parker, Grindal, Whitgift, the Three first Prote∣stant Archbishops next after him; what he planted they watered, and God gave a Blessed Increase to. Whose most excellent Lives and Conducts in the Government of this Church, as well as in their own more private and Domestick Conversa∣tion; their rare Piety, Prudence, Patience, Cou∣rage, and Activity, I can scarcely temper my Pen
from making excursions into. Of which I could fill even Volumes (had I Leisure, Favour, and Countenance) from those Large Collections which I have for divers Years been storing up with great delight, partly out of their own Original Letters, and partly from other MSS. in their times. But besides these first Archbishops during the Long Reign of Q. Elizabeth, who by their Care and Diligence established and settled that Refor∣mation, of which Archbishop Cranmer laid the first Stones, we are beholden unto the same Arch∣bishop for all the rest of the Worthy and Painful Prelates of that Metropolitical See, who have taken Care of this Excellently Reformed Church, even unto Your GRACE. Whose Deserts to∣wards this Church and the Reformation, have raised you to sit in Archbishop Cranmer's Chair; tho with as much Reluctancy in You, as was in Him. Of Your GRACE'S Endowments to qualify You for this most Eminent Station, I will be wholly silent; knowing how abhorrent Your Generous Nature is from Reading or Hearing Your Own Commendations. Nor, MY LORD, is this my End in this my Dedication: But this it is, That You would
so far Encourage these my Weak and Imperfect Labours (done out of a Good Intent) as to cast a Favourable Eye upon them, for the sake of Your Glorious Predecessor, the Subject of this Book; and to repute me among the Number, May it please Your GRACE, Of Your most Humble, and most Obedient Servants, JOHN STRYPE.
THE PREFACE. I Think it fit, by way of Preface to these Memorials, to admonish the Reader of a few things preparatory to the Perusal thereof: As, What it was put me at first upon making these Collections concerning Arch∣bishop Cranmer, and the State of the Church in his time: What induced me to make them Publick: And, What Credit may be given to them; with some other occasional matters. I. As to the first, I have been for a long time not a little addicted to read whatsoever I could of the Reformation of this famous Church; that I might truly understand, for what Reasons it was at first attempted; in what Methods it proceeded; by what Men it was chiefly managed and car∣ried on; and how it stood in truth as to its Doctrine, Disci∣pline and Government, Reputation, Learning, Piety, and such like, in its first Establishment, and the Earlier Times of it. For which purpose I did not only read over what we have in Print of these Matters, but for more satisfaction I was carried on to look into MSS. whether Registers, Re∣cords, Letters, Instruments, and such like: A great sort of which by Providence fell into my hands. And besides them, I have turned over many more in Libraries and else∣where; from whence I made Transcriptions, Extracts, and Collections, for my own use and satisfaction; which swel∣led to no little bulk. And while I was doing this, I took always a more curious View into the Lives, Manners, and Doings, Learning, Virtues, and Abilities of the chief lead∣ing men, whether Archbishops and Bishops, or other Church-men; of whom we have but little Account extant, tho many of them very Great and Good men; little more remaining of some of them, than their Names. The Reverence I bore in my mind to Archbishop Cran∣mer, the Father of the Reformation here in England, and the
first of that Ancient Metropolitan See, that so bravely shook off the Pope and his Appendages, inclined me especially to gather up what Notices I could of him. Afterwards, as my leisure served me, out of my indigested Mass of Notes, I compiled into some order, Memorials of him, and of the Affairs of the Church during his Primacy; in which he for the most part was concerned, and bore a great share with K. Henry, and the Lord Cromwel, his Vicegerent in Spiri∣tuals. After some Years, these Memorials lying by me, I enlarged considerably, and digested them into Annals, and had thoughts of making them Publick, being excited and encouraged thereunto by my Friends, who were privy to these my Doings. II. And indeed many Considerations induced me here∣unto: As, in general, the great Benefit of reading Histories of former Times; which what that is, take in the Words of Iohn Fox;In his Pro∣testation to the whole Church of England. For the things which be first, are to be prefer∣red before those which be later: And then is the reading of Histories much necessary in the Church, to know what went before, and what followed after. And therefore not without cause, History in old Authors is called, The Wit∣ness of Times, the Light of Verity, the Life of Memo∣ry, the Teacher of Life, and Shewer of Antiquity. With∣out the knowledge whereof, man's Life is blind, and soon may fall into any kind of Error, as by manifest experience we have to see in these desolate later Times of the Church, whenas the Bishops of Rome, under colour of Antiquity, have turned Truth into Heresy, and brought in such new∣found Devices of strange Doctrine and Religion, as in the former Ages of the Church were never heard of: And all through Ignorance of Times, and for lack of True Hi∣story. And therefore the Use of History being so conside∣rable, Historians in some Kingdoms have been maintained by Publick Encouragement. And so the Writer of the Epi∣stle to K. Edward, before Erasmus's Paraphrase Englished, propounded once to that King, That there should be a Publick Salary allotted to some able Persons, to Translate good Books, and to Write Chronicles, for bestowing so great a Benefit on the Commonwealth.
But particularly the History of the Church, and matters relating to Religion, have a more special benefit, as being conversant about Spiritual things, which are weightier by far, and concern us more a great deal than Temporal. But, the more is the pity, in this sort of History there is a greater De∣fect than in the other; I speak of our own Nation; for tho the History of the State in the last Age, was excellently done by the Pens of the Lord Herbert and Mr. Cambden; yet the Matters of the Church they professedly declined, or did but touch at; the former saying expresly, His intention was not in an History to discuss Theological Matters,Pag. 418. Edit. 1672. as holding it sufficient to have pointed at the places where they are controverted. And the latter in his History, as often as he came to matters of the Church, tells us, That he left his Readers to the Ecclesiastical Historian. Which hath made me wonder at, and apt to accuse the Slothfulness of that Age, that during all the time of K. Henry, K. Edward, and Q. Mary, wherein Religion was so tossed about, and took up so much of those Reigns, there is no one Ecclesiastical Hi∣story thereof written, except that of the diligent and learned Mr. Fox; and during the long Reign of Q. Elizabeth and K. Iames, I think none at all. Till of late years, when by length of time, and destruction of many Original MSS. by the Civil Wars, divers remarkable Transactions were buried and lost, some few Learned Men employed themselves in Collecting and Publishing what Memorials of Religion and the Church they could retrieve; as namely, Dr. Fuller, Dr. Heylin, and especially Dr. Burnet, now the Right Reverend Bishop of Sarum; to whom the English Church must be ever beholden for his great and happy Pains contributed hereunto. But yet there be good Gleanings after these Writers; and many things of remark there are, relating to the Church in those Three busie Reigns of Henry, Edward, and Mary, whereof these Historians are either wholly silent, or speak imperfect∣ly, or erroneously: Some whereof in my Searches I have met with; which I have disposed in these Memorials. But besides the General Benefit of History, especially Ecclesiastical, this Particular History now recommended unto the English Nation, may produce this good effect, To make us value and esteem, as we ought, our Reformed Reli∣gion, when we see by what just and fair ways it went on,
and how it prevailed like Christianity at first, notwithstand∣ing the great Opposition it met with, and what sort of men they were, such as Gardiner and Boner, who especially set themselves to stop it. Moreover, Reading the Lives of Exemplary Men, and such as were Famous in their Generation, hath a great Vertue in it, to influence the Manners of men. Their wise Saying, their discreet Behaviour, their just Management of Matters committed to their trust; their Zeal, their Charity, their Awe of God, their Contempt of the World, and such like, are not only delightful to read or hear, but do insensibly in∣stil into mens minds a secret Approbation thereof, and draw them on to an Imitation. This Land hath produced many admirable men; the Knowledg of whom, and the Benefit of whose Examples, is utterly lost, for want of some Wri∣ters to leave their Memory unto the World. It was a thing complained of in the last Age, That as that Age abounded more in Writers, than any Age before it, so there were ve∣ry few that set themselves to Pen the Lives of Excellent men; as Samuel, the Learned and Worthy Son of Iohn Fox spake:Life of Iohn Fox. But he ever thought it, as he said, most unjust, notwithstanding, to deprive the world of the memory of matters done by them, by whose Labours and worthy Deeds, the common state of the Countrey was so much bettered. And if the Use of History, as the same Author saith, is to form the Lives and Manners of men, that being the chief end of History; then I add, No part of History doth more promote this, than the History of the Deeds of Famous men. It was another great Inducement to me to let this Work see the light, to be grateful to the Memory of this Holy Prelate, that hath so well deserved of this Church; and to whom, under God, she oweth that Excellent Constitution, and Reformed State in which she is; which cost him so dear, so many Pensive Thoughts, so many long hours Study, so many Consultations and Debates with Learned men, so much Correspondence abroad, so many Speeches, Argu∣ments, and Strugglings, in the Parliament, in the Convoca∣tion, before the King, the Clergy, the People; so much Danger, and Trouble, and Envy, and Reproach, and at last his dearest Blood. Posterity would be highly injurious to such a Person as this, if he should not be recorded with
all due Respect and Honour. It was a commendable Pra∣ctice of the Ancient Persians, to write in Records the Names and good Deeds of such as had deserved well of the King and Kingdom, to remain for ever. And these Records Kings themselves did sometimes use to read. The King Ahasuerus called one Night for them to be read to him, to en∣tertain his waking hours, Esther VI. And Xerxes in an Epi∣stle of his to Pausanias, extant in Thucidides, told him,. That his Good Deed was upon Record in his Palace for ever. For these Records were esteemed so precious, that they were kept within the Walls of the Palace. And this Custom of Wri∣ting up the Remembrance of Men of Merit, seemed also to be among the Iews. Thus it is said of Iudas Macchabeus, That the Remembrance of him was for a blessing for ever., 1 Mac. III. 7. To which does, I suppose,  that Book of Remembrance, or Record, allude, (in Mal. III. 16.) that was written for those that feared God, and thought on his name. And surely it is agree∣able to God's Will, that this Piece of Gratitude should be shewn to men of singular Vertue deceased, to keep their Names and Good Deeds upon Record, for Posterity to know, and to thank God for. And this Office of Love and Duty seems highly conveni∣ent to be done towards Archbishop Cranmer, that something might appear in the world for his Vindication, under those many base Aspersions, and lying Insinuations, that are and have been Printed by Papists, to defame and blacken him to Posterity. One of them hath these words, (which shew that he cared not what he said,Parsons Three Con∣versions, Part 3. p. 84. so he might but throw his dirt upon the chief Lights of the Reformation), The very Pillars of this Rank, [which he names to be] Luther, Bucer, P. Martyr, Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Hooper, Ro∣gers, Farrar, Taylor, Tyndal, all Married Priests and Friars, [but some of them were never Friars, and others never Married] were men given to their Sensualities, both of Women, and other like their Commodities, after the fa∣shion of other ordinary men. Neither is there recounted any one eminent Action in all their Lives, that I have read, either of chastening their Bodies, mortifying their Appe∣tites, contemning the World and the Pleasures thereof, while they might have and use the same; or finally, any more excellent Spirit in them above the rest, or of any su∣pernatural
Concurrence of God with their Actions in any one thing. But did he converse so much in Fox, as to un∣dertake in one or two Books to answer and confute him and his Martyrs; and yet doth he meet with nothing there of none of these men in that Martyrology, but what was Or∣dinary to other men, and that shewed not some more ex∣cellent Spirit to be in them? It is a sign he read but little there, or read with a cankered mind. This ensuing Book shall effectually confute these Misreports and Slanders of Cranmer, one of these Pillars, as he calls them; and shall abundantly make it appear, That he was no Sensualist, nor addicted (notwithstanding his High Place) to the Plea∣sures and Commodities of this world; and that his Life shone bright by his many eminent Actions of Piety, Mor∣tification, Contempt of the world; and that he was of a more excellent Spirit than that of the ordinary rank of men; and that for some Ages there scarce arose his Fellow; and final∣ly, that he must needs have some supernatural Concurrence and mighty Aid of God's Grace with him, in many of the Affairs that passed through his hands. III. The Third thing remains, (which is indeed the main matter that makes an History of any account), and that is, What Credit may be given to what I have writ: For if it stand not upon the Foot of Truth, it is not Histo∣ry, but a Romance, a Legend, a mere Tale. And here I remember what Iohn Fox said to Alan Cope, concerning an History-Controuler, which is as true of an History-Writer: If you will be a Controuler in Story-matters,Acts and Mon. Vol. I. p. 532. Edit. 1610. Diligence is required, and great searching out of Books and Au∣thors, not only of our time, but of all Ages, and espe∣cially where matters of Religion are touched, pertaining to the Church; it is not sufficient to say what Fabian, or what Hall saith, but Records must be sought, and Registers must be turned over: Letters also and ancient Instruments ought to be perused, and Authors with the same compa∣red; finally, the Writers among themselves one to be compared with another; and so with Judgment to be weighed, with Diligence to be laboured, and with Sim∣plicity, pure from all Addiction and Partiality, to be ut∣tered.
Now to measure my self with this: Diligence and Faith∣fulness, I trust, hath not been wanting in me: I have been governed by a hearty Desire and Love of Truth: I have read over such Printed Books as are of the best Credit and Vogue; and I have often compared them with good MSS. especially when I have had occasion to make use of them; which I have done but sparingly and briefly, that I might not cumber the Book with what hath been known and writ∣ten afore. But the Collections I have here made▪ and do publish to the world, are chiefly from Manuscript Records, Registers, Letters, Orders of Council, Original and Au∣thentick. For besides Archbishop Cranmer's Register, in a great Folio, in which I have bestowed some considerable time, I have had the Perusal of several Rare Papers (Vo∣lumes I may say) of Sir Iohn Cotton, preserved in his Inva∣luable Library; and of Archbishop Parker, that great An∣tiquarian, collected by him, and now remaining in the pri∣vate Library of Bennet-College in Cambridge; among which there is a Writing, entituled, A Declaration concerning the Progeny, with the Manners and Trade of Life, and bringing up, of the most Reverend Father in God, Thomas Cranmer, late Archbishop of Canterbury; and by what Order and Means he came to his Preferments and Dignities. Which I perceive was drawn up by Cranmer's Secretary, at the desire of Archbishop Parker, and for his use. I have been conversant in what remaineth of the Papers of Iohn Fox, communicated to me by the Favour of my good Friend William Willys, of Hackney, Esquire. Among which there is a MS. Life of Cranmer; Annals writ by an Augustine Monk of Canterbury, from the year 1532. to 1538. Many Letters of Fox, and other Learned Men to him, relating to the Af∣fairs or Afflictions of the Church in those Times; and abundance more, too long here to be inserted. I have con∣sulted also many MSS. of great Worth, originally belong∣ing to the Lord Treasurer Burleigh's Secretary, imparted to me by Sir Will. Hickes, of Low-Leyton in Essex, Knight and Baronet: Wherein are divers of Archbishop Cranmer's Let∣ters, written by his own Pen. By the Kindness of the Re∣verend Mr. Nicolas Battely of Kent, and his great readiness and zeal to forward my Design, I have received a great ma∣ny material Excerpta out of the Registers and Records of the
Cathedral Church of Canterbury, and out of other Books and MSS. William Petyt of the Inner-Temple, Esquire, and Keeper of the Tower-Records, did with great humanity com∣municate unto me his Collection of excellent Papers, con∣tained in two large Volumes: Which tho in these Memo∣rials I have made but little use of, yet may be admirably subservient to me, or whosoever's Lot else it may happen to fall to, to give the world some account of Qu. Elizabeth's Archbishops, and the Church-Affairs in their times. In this Catalogue of Friends and Assistants, I must mention also the Reverend Dr. Thomas Smith, and Mr. Henry Wharton; Mr. Laughton, Keeper of the Publick Library in Cambridge, and Mr. Harrison, Fellow of Sidney-College in that University. Unto all these Gentlemen now named, I do here (as I ought in Gratitude) publickly acknowledge my self beholden. I did also consult the MS. Library at Lambeth, by the fa∣vourable Permission of the last, and the present Archbishop of Canterbury. But tho there be divers Shelves of very choice MSS. yet I found little or nothing there, serviceable to my purpose; unless it should please God to lengthen my Life and Health, to write in this Method concerning Archbishop Whitgift. Neither was I successful in Enquiries which I pro∣cured Friends to make, from such as were Relations of the Archbishop, in any Matters or Notices concerning him. There is one Mr. Cartwright of Nottinghamshire, that is an Heir of that Ancient Family of the Cranmers, a Worthy Gentleman, and now, or late, Justice of the Peace for that County; who being made acquainted with my Design, and moved to impart any Letters or Writings that might be of use thereunto, answered a Friend, that he was plundered in the late Civil Wars of abundance of Papers, and not a few to that effect; but that now he had not any thing left to con∣tribute, but his own good wishes to the Undertaker. But still further, for the better satisfying the Readers in the Truth of what I write, I have, according to a good pra∣ctice first begun by Mr. Sumner of Canterbury,In his Antiq. of Canterb. cast the most material Records and Original Letters together by them∣selves in an Appendix, that those that please may read them there, rather than in the Body of the Story, where it might too much interrupt the Thread of the Discourse, and make the reading more tedious. Which Appendix will serve both
as a Proof of the History, and moreover as a Repository for many choice Monuments of Antiquity; which other∣wise being in loose Papers, and private Studies, might in time be utterly extinguished, and irrecoverably lost. And I do here protest once for all, that I have not inserted into this Book any one single Historical Passage out of mine own head, but such as I have either found in some credible published History, or in some oldBook printed in those times, or the Prefaces and Epistles to them; or, lastly, in some good MS. or other. I have digested these Memorials into Annals, and have laid matters under their respective Years, and Months, and Days, as near as I could: Sometimes indeed I have been left to conjecture at the true time; which I have done with as much Care and Exactness, as by considering all Circum∣stances I could. Yet herein I am not so confident, but that I may sometimes perhaps make a mistake. And if I do so, it will, I hope, be excused to me, considering that I was fain oftentimes to go by guess (grounded however upon the best probability I could make), the Papers I used being not seldom without Date, sometimes of the Year, sometimes of the Month, and sometimes of both. I thought it not amiss, (tho I have not observed it done in any other History) to set down under every Year, what Bishops, Diocesan and Suffragan, were Consecrated in the Province of Canterbury, and by whom. And I am jealous some of the Suffragans may be omitted by me; which De∣fect must be attributed to the Registers rather than to me. I have taken particular heed to the Convocations, and to what was done in them. And because the Affairs of the English Church have such a near relation unto the Archbi∣shops of the Church, so as their Histories are but maimed and imperfect, without some respect had to those Affairs, I have diligently interwoven many Ecclesiastical Emergen∣cies into this History; and a great many more I have been forced to omit, tho well worthy the Publick, left the Vo∣lume might swell too much. If any might perhaps deem this a needless Work, the Life of this Archbishop having been writ already in the Book of Martyrs, and the British Antiquities; I answer such, that I have therefore been short, and it may be silent in some things more
fully and largely treated of elsewhere: But here are number∣less Notices given concerning the Archbishop, some which are no where else, others very imperfectly, observed; be∣sides the Narrations of the State, and History of the Church, (which are every where interposed), in most of which the Archbishop bore a part. The Cathedral Church of Canterbury, now called Christ-Church, I have in some places stiled Trinity Church, because I so find it named in those particular Records I make use of in those places; and it seems in some of the first years of our Archbishop, it ordinarily went by that old Name. My Stile may seem rough and unpolished, and the Phrases here and there uncouth; the reason of which is, because I confess I have often taken the very Expressions and Words of the Papers I have used; and so may fall sometimes into obsolete Terms, and a Style not so acceptable to the pre∣sent Age, whose Language is refined from what it was an Hundred and fifty or forty years ago. But I have chosen to do this, that I might keep the nearer Truth, and lest that by varying of the Language, I might perhaps sometimes vary from the true meaning of my Writer. And in truth, he that is a Lover of Antiquity, loves the very Language and Phrases of Antiquity. The Reader will find some few things here, which are already published in the late Specimen, put forth by Anthony Harmer; he and I, it seems, lighting unwittingly upon the same Records, to wit, K. Edward's Council-Book, and the Register of Christ-Church, Cant. Nor could I strike out of my Book what I found published in the said Specimen, having fully finished it, and the Copy being under the Press some Weeks before that Book came forth, and the matters there related interwoven into the Contexture of my History. And now after all this Pains that I have taken in fulfilling this Task, (which I assure the Readers have not been small, nor of a few Years) let me not for every little slip fall un∣der their Censure and Reproach, but rather let them use me with Gentleness and Charity; considering how few, tho much abler, will trouble themselves to Labour and Drudge, and take Journeys, and be at Expences, in making such Col∣lections
for the Publick Good. It calls to mind what hap∣pened upon the Death of the Laborious Antiquary, Iohn Stow, who had been a Collector of Matters for the English History Seven and forty years, and dyed 1605. and had all the Collections of Reiner Wolf, (another Historian, and a Printer in K. Edward the Sixth's days), and if he had lived but one year longer, intended to have published his long Labours: But after his death, there was not a man to be found, to take the small Pains to review his Papers, and fit them for the Press: Many indeed were talked of to do it, both Persons of Quality among the Laity and Clergy, (For the World had great and earnest expectation to see Stow in Print) But when they were spoke to to, take the good Work in hand, some of them said, That they thought the giving out of their Names was rather done by secret Ene∣mies, on purpose to draw them into Capital Displeasure, and to bring their Names and Lives into a general question. Others said, That they who did such a Work, must flatter, which they could not, neither wilfully would they leave a Scandal unto their Posterity. Another said, he could not see, how in any Civil action a man should spend his Travel, Time, and Money worse, than in that which acquires no Regard or Reward, except Backbiting and Detraction. And one among the rest swore an Oath, and said, He thank∣ed God that he was not yet mad, to waste his Time, spend Two hundred Pounds a Year, (which it seems Stow had done) trouble himself and all his Friends, only to gain as∣surance of endless Reproach, loss of Liberty, and bring all his days in question. Yet at last, one Edward Howes under∣took it, and effected it: But it happened just so to him, having been intolerably abused and scandalized for his La∣bour. So slothful and backward are most to take Pains in Works of this nature, and so apt to censure those that do. I hope I shall meet (if not with Thanks, at least) with more candid men, and better usage. But whatever happens, I shall arm my self with Patience to undergo it, since I intend nothing hereby, but to be ser∣viceable unto my Countrey, and God's Church, and to Ju∣stify the excellent Reformation of it in these Kingdoms; and finally to do Right unto the Memory of that truly
Great and Good Archbishop of Canterbury. And thus re∣commending the Success of this Work unto God's Blessing, I here make an End. J. STRYPE. Sept. 29. 1693. Low-Leyton. I desire the Reader to take Notice, That when I quote Fox's Acts and Monuments, it is the Edition in the Year 1610. And when the Life of K. Henry VIII. by the L. Herbert, it is the Edition of 1672. And when the History of the Reformation by Bishop Burnet, it is that of the Year 1681. Farewel.
A TABLE OF THE Books, Chapters, and Contents, OF THESE MEMORIALS OF ARCHBISHOP CRANMER. BOOK I. CHAP. I. Cranmer's Birth, Education, and Rise. A Worthy Work to revive his Memory. His Family. Account of his younger years. Sent to Cambridge, An. 1503. Sets himself to study the Scripture.Anno 1489, 1503, 1511, 1516, 1523, 1529, 1530▪ Is made Doctor of Divinity. Marries. Refuses to go to Wolsey's Col∣lege, Oxon. He is made one of the University-Examiners. The King's great Cause first proposed to the Universities. The occasion of his Rise. His Opinion of the King's Cause. The King sends for him. Suitably placed with the Earl of Ormond. Friendship and Correspondence between the Earl and Cranmer. A Pro∣vidence in his being placed here. Cranmer disputes at Cambridge. Grows dear to the King and his Court. CHAP. II. Pole's Book about the King's Matrimony. Pole's Book against the King's dissolving his Marriage. Cranmer peruses it. Anno 1530. His Ac∣count of it. His Censure thereof. CHAP. III. Cranmer's Embassies. He is employed in Embassies: To the Pope: Offers him a Dispute in favour of the King's Cause. To the Emperor.Anno 1530, 1531, 1532. Cornel. Agrippa gained by Cranmer to the King's Cause. Becomes acquainted with Osiander; and marries his Kinswoman. Treats with the Emperor about the Contract of Traffick; and about sending Sup∣plies against the Turk. Sends the King the News in those Parts; And the Pro∣clamation for a General Council; And the Tax of the States of the Empire. He goes in an Embassy to the Duke of Saxony, and other Protestant Princes.
CHAP. IV. Cranmer made Archbishop of Canterbury. Anno 1532, 1533.Made Archbishop of Canterbury. His Dignities before he was Archbishop. Arch∣bishop Warham foretels a Thomas to succeed him. Archbishop Warham for the King's Supremacy. Cranmer's Testimony of Warham. A Reflection upon a Pas∣sage relating to Cranmer in Harpsfields History. Cranmer tries to evade the Arch∣bishoprick. Declares the reason thereof to the King. The Archbishop's Brother is made Archdeacon of Canterbury. The King linked Cranmer with him in all his Proceedings about Q. Katherine. The King and Archbishop appeal from the Pope to a General Council. The King writes to Dr. Boner his Ambassador in that behalf. The Archbishop is Consecrated. The Pope's Bulls. The Archbishop surrenders them to the King. The method of the Consecration. The Archbi∣shop's Oath for the Temporalties. The Archbishop pronounceth the Divorce. The Archbishop's Judgment of the Marriage. CHAP. V. The Archbishop Visits his Diocess. The Archbishop forbids Preaching. Visits his Diocess. The delusion of a Nun in Kent.Anno 1533. The Archbishop appeals from the Pope. The Archbishop's Letter to Boner. Disputes in the Parliament against the Pope's Supremacy. Licenses for Chappels. CHAP. VI. The Archbishop presseth the Translation of the Bible. Anno. 1534.The Archbishop labours the Reformation of the Church. What he did this Con∣vocation. A Book for Preaching, and the Beads. Dispersed by the Archbishop to all the Bishops. The Archbishop of York preaches at York. The Clergy and Uni∣versities subscribe against the Pope. Cranmer and others administer the Oath of Succession to the Clergy: And to Sir Tho. More, who refused it. Cranmer's Ar∣gument with him. More offers to swear to the Succession it self. Bishop Fisher offers the same. The Archbishop writes to Crumwel in their behalf. The Archbi∣shops endeavour to save the Lives of More and Fisher. CHAP. VII. The Archbishop Visits the Diocess of Norwich. A Premunire brought against Bishop Nix. The Archbishop visits this Bishop's See. The Bishop of Norwich a Persecutor.Anno 1534. Godric, Lee, and Salcot, Consecrated Bishops. CHAP. VIII. The Archbishop Preacheth at Canterbury. Anno 1535.The Archbishop preaches up the King's Supremacy at Canterbury. A Prior preaches against him. Whom he convents before him. The Archbishop acquaints the King with the matter. A Provincial Visitation. Winchester herein opposeth him. The Archbishop's Vindication of his Title of Primate. The Bishop of London refuseth his Visitation: And Protests against him. Cranmer sends him a part of the New Testament to translate: And his Answer. Lawney's Jest upon Bishop Stokesly. Who this Lawney was.
CHAP. IX. Monasteries visited. Monasteries visited. The Archbishop for their Dissolution. The Visitors Informa∣tions. Bishops, Diocesan and Suffragan, Consecrated.Anno 1535. Suffragan Bishops usual in the Realm. Bishops without Title. Nic. Shaxton, Edw. Fox, Will. Barlow, Geo. Brown. A Memorial of the good Services of Archbishop Brown in Ireland. Tho. Mannyng. Iohn Salisbury. CHAP. X. The Audience Court. The Archbishop's Audience-Court struck at. The Archbishop defends it.Anno 1536. The Arch∣bishop promoting a Reformation in the Convocation. CHAP. XI. Articles of Religion. Articles published and recommended by the King. The Original thereof.Anno 1536. The Original sent into the North to shew to the Rebels. The Contents of them. Articles of Faith. Articles relating to Ceremonies. A Conjecture that the Pen of the Archbishop was here. CHAP. XII. Cranmer's Iudgment about some Cases of Matrimony. Two remarkable Books published. I. The Book of Articles. II. A Book against the Pope, called, The Bishop's Book.Anno 1536. Certain Cases of Matrimony put to the Arch∣bishop. His Solution. Refuseth to grant a Dispensation for the Marriage of a Relation. His Letter thereupon. He restrains the number of Proctors. Which some complain of to the Parliament. The Archbishop divorceth Q. Anne. A License for a Chappel. Bucer this year dedicates a Book to the Archbishop. Bi∣shops consecrated; Richard Sampson, William Rugge, Rob. Warton. CHAP. XIII. The Bishop's Book. The Bishop's Book by the Archbishop's means. Winchester's Opposition. The King makes Animad versions upon it. Published. How esteemed.Anno 1537. Enlarged and Re∣printed. Some account of the foresaid Book. Names of the Composers. CHAP. XIV. The Archbishop visits his Diocess. Goes down into his Diocess. Gets a License to visit. The Vicar of Croydon.Anno 1537. The Archbishop visits his Diocess. What course he took for the preventing of Su∣perstition.
CHAP. XV. The Bible Printed. Anno 1537.His Joy at the publishing the English Bible. Presents one by Crumwel to the King. Cranmer's Letters to Crumwel. Some further Particulars▪ concerning this Edition of the Bible. The Printer's Thanks and Requests to Crumwel▪ Grafton to Crum∣wel. The Printer apprehensive of another Edition. Other Requests of the Printer. CHAP. XVI. Many Suffragan Bishops made. The Feast of S. Thomas, &c. forbid. Rob. Holgate Consecrated Bishop. Iohn Bird; Lewis Thomas;Anno 1537. Some account of Bird. Thomas Morley; Rich. Yngworth; Iohn Thornton; Richard Thornden; Iohn Hodgkin; Henry Holbeach; Suffragans. CHAP. XVII. The Bible in English allowed. The Archbishop reads upon the Hebrews. A Declaration for reading the Bible. The Bible received and read with great Joy.Anno 1538. The Archbishop had a hand in Lambert's Death. The Bishops dispute against Lambert's Reasons. CHAP. XVIII. The Archbishop's Iudgment of the Eucharist. Anno 1538.Cranmer zealous for the Corporal Presence. His Reasons for it. Sanders his slanders of the Archbishop concerning his Opinion in the Sacrament. When Cranmer changed his Opinion. Latimer of the same Judgment. Divers Priests marry Wives. The King's Proclamation against Priests Marriages. Anabaptists. A Commission against them. The way wardness of the Priests occasions the King to write to the Justices. The Archbishop visits the Diocess of Hereford. Bishops Consecra∣ted, William Finch, Iohn Bradley. CHAP. XIX. The Act of Six Articles. The Archbishop makes Nic. Wotton Commissary of his Faculties. The King offend∣ed with the Archbishop,Anno 1538, 1539. and some other Bishops. The Six Articles opposed by the Archbishop. The Arguments the Archbishop made use of at this time, lost. The King's Message to the Archbishop by the Lords. A Book of Ceremonies: Laboured to be brought in. A Convocation. The Papists rejoice. Two Priories surrendred to the Archbishop. The Archbishop and Crumwel labour with the King about the new Bishopricks. Bishops this year, Iohn Bell, Iohn Skyp. CHAP. XX. The Archbishop in Commission. The Archbishop's Enemies accuse him. His Honesty and Courage in discharge of a Commission.Anno 1540. And his Success therein. Questions of Religion to be discussed by Divines, by the King's Command. The Names of the Commissioners.
Seventeen Questions upon the Sacrament. The Archbishop's Judgment upon these Questions. The Judgments of other Learned Men concerning other Points. An Act to prevent Divorces. The Archbishop to Osiander, concerning the Ger∣mans abuse of Matrimony. CHAP. XXI. The largest Bible printed. Some account of printing the English Bible. The New Testament printed, 1526. And Burnt. Reprinted about 1530. Burnt again.Anno 1540. The Scripture prohibited in a Meeting at the Star-Chamber. The New Testament Burnt the third time. The whole Bible printed 1537. Matthews, that is, Rogers's Bible. About 1538, the Bible printed again in Paris. The Printers fall into the Inquisition. The Bible printed with French Presses in London. The largest Bible published in the year 1540. Boner's Admonition for reading the Bible. The Bible supprest again, Anno 1542/3. King Henry's Judgment for the use of the Bible. CHAP. XXII. The Archbishop retired. The Archbishop keeps himself more retired. The Archbishop issues out his Com∣mission for the Consecrating of Boner. Boner's Oath of Fidelity.Anno 1540. The Archbi∣shop makes a Commissary in Calais. Butler a better Commissary. His Troubles. The occasion thereof, the discovery of a Religious Cheat. Glazier Commissary in Calais. The Archbishop's Judgment of Admission of Scholars into the School belonging to the Cathedral. Bishops Consecrated; Edmund Boner, Nic. Hethe, Tho. Thirlby. Some account of Thirlby's Rise. CHAP. XXIII. All-Souls College visited. The Archbishop visits All-Souls College. Visits it a second time. The Archbishop gives Orders about Shrines.Anno 1541. The King to the Archbishop for searching after Shrines. The Archbishop's Orders accordingly to his Dean, his Archdeacon and Commissary. The Archbishop lays Bekesburn to the See. Learned Preachers prefer∣red by the Archbishop. The Archbishop makes some recant. A Convocation. Their business. Bishops consecrated, William Knight, Iohn Wakeman, Iohn Cham∣bre, Arthur Bulkely, Robert King. CHAP. XXIV. The King's Book revised. The King's Book revised by the Archbishop. Divers Discourses of the Archbishop. The goodly Primer.Anno 1542. The Archbishop instrumental to the Reformation of Scotland. An Act procured by the Archbishop. Paul Bush Consecrated. CHAP. XXV. Presentments at a Visitation. The King's Book published by Authority. A Visitation at Canterbury. Presentments. Reflections upon the former Presentments.Anno 1543. The Prebendaries and Preachers ad∣monished by the Archbishop.
CHAP. XXVI. A black Cloud over the Archbishop. The Prebendaries Plot against the Archbishop. Winchester the chief Manager. Win∣chester designs the Death of divers of the Court:Anno 1543. And of the Archbishop and his Friends. The Papers relating to Archbishop Cranmer's Accusation. The Contents thereof. The Canons and Preachers of Canterbury▪ Cranmer's Chap∣lains complained of at the Sessions. They prepare the Articles and prfer them. They Article against the Archbishop himself. London's Practices. A great Mass of Articles against the Archbishop procured. The chief Instruments Gardiner, Serles, Shether. The Bishop of Winchester's discourse with a Prebendary of Can∣terbury. Willoughby and London wait at the Council-Chamber. Willoughby brought to the L. Privy Seal, and to Winchester. The Contents of the Articles against the Archbishop. More Articles against his Commissary. More still. The Witnes∣ses. The Prebendaries deliver the Articles. CHAP. XXVII. The King the Archbishop's Friend in this Danger. The King himself discovers all to the Archbishop. The Archbishop desires a Com∣mission. The Archbishop in Commission expostulates with his Accusers.Anno 1543. Sh∣ther in Prison sends to Winchester. Their Reasons which they pretended for what they did. Cockes and Hussey Commissioners, and his Officers false. New Com∣missioners sent down. The Register false. The Delinquents Chambers and Chests searched. The Treachery of Thornton and Barber. The Archbishop's dis∣course to them. The Conspirators are imprisoned. Their Release. Their Con∣fessions and Letters. The Ends of the Conspirators. CHAP. XXVIII. The Archbishop falls into more Troubles. The Archbishop accused before the Parliament.Anno 1543, 1544▪ The Palace of Canterbury burnt. The Council accuse the Archbishop. The King sends privately for him. Comes before the Council. The King rebukes the Council for Cranmer. The King changes the Archbishop's Arms. CHAP. XXIX. Occasional Prayers and Suffrages. Prayers to be made against immoderate Rain. English Suffrages commanded to be used.Anno 1544. The Contents of the King's Letter to that end. A Procession for the King's Expedition. The Councl's Letter to the Archbishop. Popery prevails. Gardiner and the Bishops now carry all. Bishop of Landaff removed to York. His Oath. CHAP. XXX. The Archbishop reformeth the Canon Law. Anno 1545, 1546.The Archbishop sets upon reforming the Canon Law. An Act concerning it. The Progress made by the Archbishop in this Work. The MS. of these Laws. The Archbishop labours in this Work under K. Edward. The Archbishop employed in mending Service-Books. The King consults with the Archbishop for the Re∣dress of certain Superstitions. The Opportunity of Winchester's absence taken.
The Archbishop prevails with the King in two great Points. Seeks to re∣dress Alienation of the Revenues of the Cathedral. Scripture and Sermons more common by the Archbishop's means. Anthony Kitchen Consecrated. A Pro∣clamation against the English Testament. He interprets a Statute of his Church. The Archbishop by the King's Command pens a Form for a Communion. His last Office to the King. BOOK II. CHAP. I. He Crowns King Edward. COnceives great hopes of K. Edward. The Archbishop takes a Commission to execute his Office. K. Edward Crowned by the Archbishop.Anno 1546. The manner of the Coronation. The Archbishop's Speech at the Coronation. CHAP. II. A Royal Visitation. A Royal Visitation on foot. The Visitors. The method of this Visitation.Anno 1547. The Homilies, and Erasmus's Paraphrase. CHAP. III. Homilies, and Erasmus's Paraphrase. The Archbishop to Winchester concerning the Homilies. The Archbishop, &c. com∣pose Homilies. Winchester in the Fleet.Anno 1547. The Bishop of Winchester's Censure of the Homily of Salvation; And of the Archbishop for it. Winchester's Censure of Erasmus's Paraphrase. His account of his Commitment. Erasmus vindicated. Winchester's Letter to Somerset concerning these things. The Archbishop appoints a Thanksgiving for a Victory. The Archbishop to the Bishop of London. CHAP. IV. A Convocation. A Convocation in the first year of the King.Anno 1547. Dr. Redman's Judgment of Priests Marriage. The Archbishop's Influence on the Parliament. The Communion in both kinds established. The Archbishop's Queries concerning the Mass. The Archbishop assists at the Funeral of the French King. The Marquess of Nor∣thampton's Divorce committed to the Archbishop. Processions forbid by his means. Examines the Offices of the Church. CHAP. V. The Archbishop's Catechism. The Archbishop puts forth a Catechism: And a Book against Vnwritten Verities.Anno 1547. His Care of Canterbury.
CHAP. VI. The Archbishop's Care of the University. Anno 1547.The Archbishop's Influence upon the University. Some of S. Iohn's College ap∣ply to him upon the apprehension of a danger. Offended with some of this College; and why. The ill condition and low estate of the University. An Ad∣dress of the University to the Archbishop. The Sum thereof. The Success of the Universities Address to him, and others. Another Address to him against the Townsmen. Roger Ascham's Application to him for a Dispensation for eat∣ing flesh. Favourably granted by the Archbishop. The Archbishop's Opinion concerning Lent. Ascham acquaints him with the present state of the Univer∣sity, as to their Studies. Sir Iohn Cheke, the Archbishop's dear Friend: The prime Instrument of Politer Studies there. The Impediments of that University's flourishing state laid before him. CHAP. VII. Dr. Smith, and others, recant. Dr. Smith recants at Paul's Cross. His Books. Gardiner offended with this Recan∣tation.Anno 1547. Other University-men recant. Smith affronts the Archbishop. His incon∣stancy. The Archbishop's Admonition to the Vicar of Stepney. The Archbishop licenseth an eminent Preacher. Who preacheth against the Errors and Supersti∣tions of the Church. Is bound to answer for his Sermon at the Assizes. How far the Reformation had proceeded. Ridley Consecrated Bishop. CHAP. VIII. The Churches Goods embezzled. New Opinions broached. Anno 1548.Churches prophaned. Church-Ornaments embezzl'd. The Council's Letter to the Archbishop thereupon. A Form of Prayer sent to the Archbishop; With the Council's Letter. New Opinions broached. Champneys revokes Six Articles; and abjures. Other Heresies vented. Asheton's Recantation. Other Errors still. Ioan Bocher's Heresy. Latimer's Censure of her. George Van Paris. CHAP. IX. The Archbishop visits. Anno 1548.The Archbishop visits his Diocess. His Articles for the Clergy; and for the Laity. An exchange made between the Archbishop and the L. Windsor. Farrar Bishop of S. Davids Consecrated. Some account of this Bishop. The Archbishop sway'd by Farrar's Enemies. CHAP. X. The Archbishop answers the Rebels Articles. Rebellion in Devon. The Archbishop answers the Rebels Articles. Some account thereof.Anno 1549. Crispin. Moreman. Cardinal Pole. The Archbishop procures Sermons to be made against the Rebellion. Peter Martyr's Sermon upon this occasion. The French take occasion at this Rebellion. Bucer's Discourse against the Sedition. The Archbishop's Prayer composed for this occasion.
CHAP. XI. Bishop Boner deprived. The Archbishop deprives Boner.Anno 1549. Discourse between the Archbishop and him con∣cerning his Book; and concerning the Sacrament. Chargeth the Archbishop concerning the Preachers he allowed. The Archbishop's Answer to Boner's Declaration. Papists insist upon the Invalidity of the Laws made in the King's Minority. An Ordination of Priests and Deacons. The Office of Ordination reformed. The Archbishop visits some vacant Churches. S. Davids. Glocester. Norwich. London. A new Dean of the Arches. CHAP. XII. Duke of Somerset's Troubles. The Common-Prayer ratified. The Archbishop writes to the Lords at Ely-House. Their Answer. The Archbi∣shop gets the Common-Prayer-Book confirmed.Anno 1549. CHAP. XIII. The Archbishop entertains learned Foreigners. The Archbishop harbours Learned Strangers. Bucer writes in the Archbishop's Family. The Archbishop's Guests.Anno 1549. Martyr dedicates his Lectures at Oxon to the Archbishop. The Archbishop writes to Bucer to come over. Bucer and Fagius Professors at Cambridge Fagius dies. The Archbishop sends Money to Fagius's Widow. Bucer laments his Loss. CHAP. XIV. Peter Martyr disputes in Oxford, being challenged thereunto. Peter Martyr challenged publickly to a Disputation. His Answer hereunto.Anno 1549. Declines it at present; and why. They agree upon the Conditions of a Disputation. They Dispute. Martyr sends the Sum of the Disputation to the Archbishop. The Disputation published by Martyr: And by Tresham. Smith writes to the Archbishop from Scotland. Disputations at Cambridge before the Commissioners. Bucer disputes. His Judgment of the Sacrament. CHAP. XV. Matters of the Church, and its State now. Relicks of Popery remaining. The Council gives Orders to the Justices:Anno 1549. And writes to the Bishops. Neglect in London. Adulteries frequent. Books dispersed by Protestants. Preaching against Len. Gardiner's Judgment of a Rhime against Lent. Latimer counsels the King about Marriage. Foreign Protestants their Offer to K. Edward. CHAP. XVI. Ridley made Bishop of London. The Communion-Book reviewed. Ridley made Bishop of London. Rochester vacant.Anno 1550. Bucer writes to Dorset not to spoil the Church. The Common-Prayer-Book reviewed. Bucer and Martyr employed in it.
CHAP. XVII. Hoper's Troubles. Anno 1550.Hoper nominated for Bishop of Glocester. He and Ridley confer about the Habits. The Archbishop writes to Bucer for his Judgment in this matter. The Questions. Martyr writes to Hoper. Hoper's Two Objections: Considered. Another Ob∣jection of Hoper considered. Other things urged by him. Hoper confined to his House, and Silenced. Committed to the Archbishop's Custody. Sent to the Fleet. Hoper Conforms. Martyr to Gualter concerning Hoper's Conformity. CHAP. XVIII. Bishop Hoper visits his Diocess. Hoper visits his Diocess. His Articles of Religion. His Injunctions and Interroga∣tories.Anno 1550. Holds Worcester in Commendam And visits that Church and See. Goes over both h Diocesses again. The Councels Order concerning the two Ca∣nons. License for the Bishop of Glocester to attend upon the Dutchess of Somer∣set in the Tower. Other matters relating to this Bishop. CHAP. XIX. Troubles of Bishop Gardiner. Divers great Lords repair to Gardiner. The Council's proceedings with him. Ar∣ticles propounded to him to subscribe.Anno 1550. Winchester sequestred for three months. The Sequestration expires. The Commissioners sit to examine him. A Letter of some Noblemen whom he had bely'd. Gardiner offers his Book against Cran∣mer to the Commissioners. He is deprived. The Council's Order for his strait Confinement. Poynet made Bishop of Winton. CHAP. XX. Bishop Hethe, and Bishop Day; their Deprivations. Other Popish Bishops dealt with. Bishop Hethe's Troubles. Sent for before the Council.Anno 1550. Day, Bishop of Chichester, his Troubles. Bishop Day will not pull down Altars. Appears before the Council. The Archbishop and Bishop of Ely reason with him. The Council give him time to confer. Before the Council again. Be∣fore the Council the third time. And the fourth time, when he was sent to the Fleet. Commissioners appointed for Worcester and Chichester. They are deprived. Placed the one with the L. Chancellor, and the other with the Bishop of Lon∣don. Day writes to Kings-College for leaving off Masses. His unnatural Carriage towards his Brother. Preaches against Transubstantiation. His Change charged on him. CHAP. XXI. Papists grow bold. Loose Professors restrained. The Papists write Libels. Several Papists now taken up. Chedsey, Morgan, Sir Ant. Brown,Anno 1550. White. Other Professors restrained.
CHAP. XXII. Foreigners allowed a Church. A Lasco. The Archbishop's care of the Souls of Strangers residing here. The Dutch Con∣gregation under Iohn a Lasco. The occasion of his coming into England.Anno 1550. His business here. From Embden he wrote to the Archbishop: And to Cecyl. The sad condition of the Protestants there. Latimer mentions A Lasco to the King. Contest among A Lasco's people. The care of A Lasco over his Church, and its Privileges. Favourably received by the L. Chancellor Goodrich. Labours with the Secretary to procure Letters from the Council in behalf of his Church. The extent of his Superintendency. Melanchon thought to shelter himself un∣der him. His great Abilities for Government. Erasmus's Praise of him. Pur∣chased Erasmus's Library. A Lasco a married man. His Influence in the Refor∣mation under Q. Elizabeth. Blamed for medling in our Controversies. A Church of Italians constituted in London. Michael Angelo their Minister. The Service the Archbishop did for this Church: And for the Minister. Divers of this Church fall out with their Minister, and go to Mass again. A Conjecture at the Cause thereof. Their Minister sends their Names to the Secretary, and accuses them. The Morals of this man tainted. Writes a Penitent Letter to the Secretary. A French Church also in London. CHAP. XXIII. The Church at Glastenbury. Another Church of Strangers at Glastenbury.Anno 1550. Their Trade Weaving. Valerandus Pollanus their Preacher and Superintendent. How they came to fix here. Condi∣tions of Trade between them and Somerset. Their Trade obstructed by the Troubles of Somerset. Apply themselves again to the Council, and to the Se∣cretary Cecyl. The Council become their Patrons, and assist them. Orders from the Lords to set this Manufacture forwards. Pollanus very serviceable to them. An Apology for the largeness of the former relation. After the King's Death they remove to Frankford. Prove Friends to the English Exiles there. A Spa∣nish Church. Cassiodorus and Corranus their Preachers. Many of K. Philip's Spa∣niards become Protestants. Great Numbers of Protestants in Spain and Italy. CHAP. XXIV. The Archbishop's care of the Revenues of the Church. Bucer dies. The Archbishop labours to preserve the Revenues of the Church. The detaining the Church-Revenues a Scandal to the Reformation.Anno 1550. Calvin to the Archbishop upon this matter: And to the Duke of Somerset. Bucer publickly disputeth at Cambridge. Dieth. The University wrote up concerning his Death. Bucer's Li∣brary. His Widow retires to Germany. The Correspondence between him and Martyr. A Plot of the Papists at Oxon against Martyr, at an Act. Martyr's Judg∣ment of the Communion-Book. Bucer's great dangers. Poynet Consecrated, and Hoper. CHAP. XXV. The Archbishop publisheth his Book against Gardiner. Cranmer publisheth his Book of the Sacrament. His first Book of that Subject. Wrote against by Gardiner and Smith.Anno 1551. Vindicated in another Book by the Archbishop. The Method of the Archbishop's Reply. The Judgments made of this Book. How the Archbishop came off from the Opinion of the Corpo∣ral
Presence. The Archbishop's great Skill in Controversy. Peter Mrtyr enlight∣ned by Cranmer. Fox's Conjecture of the Archbishop. A second Book of Gardi∣ner against the Archbishop. The Archbishop begins a third Book. Martyr takes up the Quarrel. Cranmer puts out his Book of the Sacrament in Latin. Printed again at Embden. Cranmer's second Book intended to be ut into Latin. Some Notes of Cranmer concerning the Sacrament. Martyr succeeds Cranmer in this Province. Writes against Gardiner: And Smith. CHAP. XXVI. The Duke of Somerset's Death. The Duke of Somerset's Death. Winchester suppos'd to be in the Plot. Articles against the Duke.Anno 1551. What he is blamed for. The new Book of Common-Prayer established. Coverdale made Bishop of Exon. Scory Bishop Elect of Rochester. The Archbishop appoints a Guardian of the Spiritualties of Lincoln; And of Wigorn; And of Chichester; And of Hereford; And of Bngor. Hoper visits his Diocess. Two Disputations concerning the Sacrament. Dr. Redman dies. The Archbishop and others appointed to reform Ecclesiastical Laws. The method they observed. Scory, Coverdale, Consecrated. CHAP. XXVII. The Articles of Religion. The Articles of Religion framed and published. The Archbishop's diligence in them.Anno 1552. The Archbishop retires to Ford. CHAP. XXVIII. Persons nominated for Irish Bishopricks. Consulted with for fit Persons to fill the Irish Sees. Some account of the four Di∣vines nominated by him for the Archbishoprick of Armagh.Anno 1552. Mr. Whitehead, Mr. Turner, Thomas Rosse, or Rose, Robert Wisdom. The Character the Archbishop gave of the two former. Turner designed for Armagh: But declines it. Goodacre made Archbishop of Armagh. Letters from the Council to Ireland, recommend∣ing the Irish Bishops. CHAP. XXIX. The Archbishop charged with Covetousness. Anno 1552.A Rumour given out of the Archbishop's Covetousness and Wealth. Which Cecyl sends him word of. The Archbishop's Answer for himself and the other Bi∣shops. This very slander raised upon him to K. Henry. K. Henry promised him Lands. This Promise performed by K. Edward: His Purchases. The Archbi∣shoprick fleeced by K. Henry. Lands past away to the Crown by Exchange. Lands made over to the Archbishop. The Archbishop parted also with Knol and Otford to the King. What moved him to make these Exchanges. His Cares and Fears for the King. CHAP. XXX. His care for the Vacancies. Falls sick. Anno 1552.His Care for filling the Vacancies of the Church. Laboured under an Ague this Autumn. The great Mortality of Agues about this time. That which most con∣cerned him in his Sickness. The Secretary sends the Archbishop the Copy of the Emperor's Pacification.
CHAP. XXXI. His Kindness for Germany. His Kindness for Germany.Anno 1552. His Correspondence with Germany; And with Herman Archbishop of Coln. The suitableness of both these Archbishops Dispositions. Their diligence in Reforming. CHAP. XXXII. Troubles of Bishop Tonstal. The Troubles of Bishop Tonstal. The Causes of this Bishop's Punishment.Anno 1552. A Bill in Parliament to attaint Tonstal. The Care of the Diocess committed to the Dean. CHAP. XXXIII. The New Common-Prayer. The Archbishop in Kent. The New Common-Prayer began to be used.Ann 1552. This Book put into French for the King's French Subjects. The Age still vicious. A new Sect in Kent. The Arch∣bishop's business in Kent. A Letter for Installing Bishop Hoper. The Vicar of Be∣den. Sampson and Knox. The Council favour Knox. Iohn Taylor Consecrated. CHAP. XXXIV. A Catechism. The Archbishop opposeth the Exclusion of the Lady Mary. Great use made of the Archbishop at Council.Anno 1553. The Articles of Religion enjoined by the King's Authority. The Catechism for Schools. A Catechism set forth by the Synod. The Archbishop opposeth the New Settlement of the Crown. Denyeth before the Council to subscribe to the Exclusion of the Lady Mary. Sets his hand. The Archbishop ungratefully dealt with. The Council subscribe and swear to the Limited Succession. CHAP. XXXV. The King dies. The King dies. His Character. The Archbishop delights in this Prince's Profici∣ency. K. Edward's Writings. The King's Memorial for Religion.Ann 1553. The Arch∣bishop frequent at Council. His Presence in the Council in the year 1550. In the year 1551. In the year 1552. And 1553. Iohn Harley Consecrated Bishop. BOOK III. CHAP. I. Queen Mary soon recognized. The Archbishop slandered and im∣prisoned. THE Archbishops and Counsellors concern with the Lady Iane.Anno 1553. They declare for Q. Mary: And write to Northumberland to lay down his Arms. The Queen owned by the Ambassadors. The Archbishop misreported to have said Mass. Mass at Canterbury. Which he makes a Publick Declaration against. The Declaration. Appears before the Commissioners at Puls: And before the Council. The Archbishop of York committed to the Tower; and his Goods sei∣zed, At Battersea, At Cawood. Gardiner's passage of the two Archbishops.
CHAP. II. Protestant Bishops and Clergy cast into Prisons, and deprived. This Reign begins with Rigor. The Protestant Bishops deprived. The hard usage of the Inferior Clergy.Anno 1553. Professors cast into the Mrshalsea. Winchester's Alms. P. Martyr writes of this to Calvin. The state of the Church now. The Queen leaves all matters to Winchester. The Queen Crowned. The Service still said. The Queen's Proclamation of her Religion. Signs of a Change of Religion. CHAP. III. The Archbishop adviseth Professors to fly. Anno 1553.The Archbishop adviseth to flight. Cranmer will not fly. Whither the Professors fly: And who. Duke of Northumberland put to Death. His Speech. Sir Iohn Gates his Speech. And Palmer's. The Duke lbours to get his life. Whether he was always a Papist. CHAP. IV. Peter Martyr departs. A Parliament. Ann 1553.P. Martyr departs. Malice towards him. A Scandal of the Queen. A Parliament. The Parliament repeal Q. Katherine's Divorce; And Cranmer taxed for it. CHAP. V. The Archbishop attainted. Ann 1553.The Archbishop attainted of Treason. The Dean of Canterbury acts in the Vacan∣cy. The Archbishop sues for Pardon of Treason. Obtains it. He desires to open his mind to the Queen concerning Religion. CHAP. VI. A Convocation. Anno 1553.A Convocation. How it opened. The Archbishop and three more crowded toge∣ther in the Tower. CHAP. VII. The Queen sends to Cardinal Pole. Ann 1553.The Queen sends to Pole. The Contents of her Letters. Concerning the Supre∣macy. Concerning the New Bishops. Pole's Advice to the Queen. Instructions to Goldwl. Disgusts his Stop. Sends to Rome about this his Stop: And to the Emperor. His Judgment of two late Acts of Parliament. CHAP. VIII. The Dealings with the Married Clergy. Anno 1553.The Married Clergy deprived and divorced. Married Priests in London cited to ap∣pear▪ Interrogatories for the Married Clergy. Turnor's Confession. Boner deprives the Married Clergy in London without Order. Married Prebendaries in Canterbu∣ry proceeded against. Edmund Crnmer deprived of all. The Injustice of these Pro∣ceedings. Martin's Book against Priests Marriage. Wherein Winchester had the greatest hand. Answered by Poyne. The Confessions of the Married Priests. Mar∣ried Priests that did their Penance, hardly dealt with. CHAP. IX. Evils in this Change of Parliament. Anno 1553.A twofold Evil upon this Turn of Religion. The Dissimulation of the Priests. A Parliament restore the Pope. A design to revive the Six Articles.
CHAP. X. Archbishop Cranmer disputes at Oxon. A Convocation appoint a Dispute with Cranmer at Oxford.Ann 1554. The Questions Sent to Cambridge. The Disputants of Oxford and Cambridge. Cranmer brought before them. His Behaviour. Ridley brought: And Latimer. Cranmer brought to his Disputation. His Notaries. Cranmer's Demands. Cranmer disputes again. The Papists undecent management of the Disputation. The Protestants glad of this Disputation. Dr. Taylor to the three Fathers after their Disputations. Ridley pens the Relation of his Disputation. The University sends the Disputations up to the Convocation. Various Copies of these Disputations. CHAP. XI. Cranmer condemned for an Heretick. Cranmer condemned for Heresy. Cranmer writes to the Council. Disputation in∣tended at Cambridge. Their condition after Condemnation.Anno 1554. Their Employment in Prison. Other Works of Ridley in Prison. CHAP. XII. A Parliament. Pole reconciles the Realms. The Queen's Letters, directing the Elections of Parliament men.Ann 1554. Pole comes over. The Cardinal absolves Parliament and Convocation. The Clergy again wait upon the Legate. A Commission granted by him against Hereticks. His Commissions to all the Bishops to reconcile their Diocesses. The Commission to the Dean and Chapter of Canterbury. The Legate's Instructions to the Bi∣shops. Pole a severe Persecutor. CHAP. XIII. A Convocation. Articles framed therein. A Convocation. Articles presented to the Upper-House.Anno 1554. Cranmer's Book to be burnt. Men burnt to death without Law. CHAP. XIV. The Condition of the Protestants in prison. Free-Willers. Popery fully established. Protestants. The Pastors in Prison. Free-Willers.An 1554. Brad∣ford's Concern with them. His Kindness to them. Bradford gaineth some of them. Careless's pains with them. Philpot's counsel. Careless draws up a Con∣fession of Faith. Some few Arians. The Prisoners offer to justify K. Edward's Proceedings. And again offer it. CHAP. XV. The Exiles, and their Condition. The Exiles. The Lutherans refuse to give harbour to them. The English at Wesel. The Lutherans Heat against Sacramentaries. At Zurick and other places well received.Anno 1554. Their Employments. Contentions at Frankford. Some Children of the Exiles bap∣tized by Lutherans. Pieces of Ridley's Writings conveyed to Frankford. Exiles at Basil. Divers of the Exiles, Writers. Scory, Old, Sampson, Turner, Iuel, Becon, Hum∣frey, Traheron. Fox: His Acts and Monuments. Books by him published in Exile. Translates Cranmer's Book of the Sacrament into Latin. Lever to Fox, Bale, Knox. How the Exiles subsisted. CHAP. XVI. Many Recant. Some go to Mass. Many Recant. The Persecution hot. Gospellers go to Mass.Ann 1554. Bradford labours to hinder it. Ann Hartipoll goes to Mass. The Lady Vane puts certain Cases concern∣ing the Mass.
CHAP. XVII. A Bloody Time. The Queen's Great Belly. A Convocation. Anno 1555.Many burned. Instructions to the Justices. Orders sent in to Norfolk against the Pro∣fessors The effect thereof. The Earl of Sussex receiveth Information against some▪ Popish Spies set every where. The Protestants frequently assmble. Conidently reported, that a Male Heir to the Crown was born. The Queen's Great Belly. Like a Design. The Queen's Zeal. A Convocation. CHAP. XVIII. Ridley and Latimer burnt. Anno 1555.Some petition the Queen for Cranmer. He seeth Ridley and Latimer going to their Burning. Latimer's Character. Cranmer's Employment in Prison. Report of the Queen's Death. CHAP. XIX. The last proceedings with Cranmer. Anno 1555.Proceedings against Cranmer. Martin acts as the Queen's Proctor. Cranmer's greatest Trouble at this time. Interrogatories put to him; with his Answers▪ Witnesses sworn against him. Cited to Rome. The Pope's Ltters against him. The Process against him at Rome. The Pope's Letters read. They degrade him. He appeals. He is ill dealt with in his Process. The Reasons of his Appeal. He presseth his Appeal. CHAP. XX. Cranmer writes to the Queen. Ann 1555.Writes two Letters to the Queen. The Contents of the first. The Contents of his second Letter. The Bailiff of Oxford carries his Letters. Cardinal Pole answereth them. Some account of the Cardinal's Letter to Cranmer. Another Letter of the Cardinal to Cranmer. CHAP. XXI. He Recants, Repents, and is Burnt. Anno 1555.He Recants. Notwithstanding his Burning is ordered. A Letter from Oxford con∣cerning Cranmer's Death. Cranmer brought to S. Maries. Cole's Sermon. Turns his Speech to Cranmer. After Sermon all pray for him. His Penitent Behaviour. Speaks to the Auditory. He Prayeth. His Words before his Death. Conesseth his Dissembling. His Reply to my Lord Williams. Goes to the place of his burn∣ing. His Talk and Behaviour at the Stake. He burneth his Right Hand. Two Remarks upon his Martyrdom. Who instigated the Queen to put him to death. No Monument for him but his Martyrdom. His Heart unconsumed. The Bai∣liffs Expences about these three Martyrs. The Bailiffs not repaid. Humfrey to Archbishop Parker in their behalf. CHAP. XXII. Cranmer's Books and Writings. His Books and Writings. His first Book. Other of his Writings. His Book of the Doctrine of the Sacrament. Other Writings mentioned by Bishop Burnet. More of his Writings still. Archbishop Parker was in pursuit of certain MSS. of Cran∣mer concealed. What the Subject of his numerous Writings were. CHAP. XXIII. The Archbishop's Regard to Learned Men. Paul Fagius, and Martin Bucer placed at Cambridge by his means. Procures them Ho∣norary Stipends from the King. Allowances to P. Martyr and Ochin. Dr. Mowse
Master of Trinity-Hall, favoured by Cranmer. His Inconstancy. And Ingratitude. Becomes Readr of the Civil Law at Oxon. The Archbishop a Patron to Learned Foreigners. To Erasmus, allowing him an Honorary Pension. To Alexander Alss, a Scoth-man. By him Melancthon sends a Book to the Archbishop. And to the King. Aless brought by Crumwel into the Convocation. Where he asserts Two Sacraments only. Writes a Book to clear Protestants of the Charge of Schism. Translated a Book of Bucer's about the English Ministry. Received into Crumwel's Family. Aless Professor of Divinity at Leipzig. Four others recom∣mended by Melancthon to the Archbishop. Viz. Gualter. Driander. Driander placed at Oxon. Eusebius Menius. Iustus Ionas. CHAP. XXIV. Melancthon and the Archbishop great Friends. Divers memorable Passages between Melancthon and our Archbishop. Sends Me∣lancthon certain Publick Disputations in Oxford and Cambridge. Melancthon's Re∣flections thereupon. Sends the Archbishop his Enarration upon the Nicene Creed. The beginning of their Acquaintance. The Archbishop propounds a weighty matter to Melancthon, for the Union of all Protestant Churches. The diligence of the Archbishop in forwarding this Design. Mlancthon's Judgment and Ap∣probation thereof. His Caveat of avoiding ambiguous expressions. Renews the same Caution in another Letter. Peter Martyr of this judgment. What Me∣lancthon thought of the Doctrine of Fate. CHAP. XXV. The Archbishop corresponds with Calvin. The Archbishop breaks his purpose also to Calvin. Calvin's Approbation thereof, and Commendation of the Archbishop. Offers his Service. Excites the Archbi∣shop to proceed. This excellent purpose frustrated. Thinks of drawing up Ar∣ticles of Religion for the English Church. Which he communicates to Calvin. And Calvin's Reply and Exhortation. Blames him for having not made more Progress in the Reformation. But not justly. The Clergy preach against Sacri∣lege. The University-men declaim against it in the Schools. And the Redress urged upon some at Court. Calvin sends Letters and certain of his Books to the King. Well taken by the King and Council. What the Archbishop told the Messenger hereupon. CHAP. XXVI. The Archbishop highly valued Peter Martyr. P. Martyr and the Archbishop cordial Friends. The use the Archbishop made of him. Martyr saw the Voluminous Writings, and Marginal Notes of the Arch∣bishop. Two Letters of Martyr from Oxford. An Instance of his love to the Archbishop. CHAP. XXVII. The Archbishop's favour to John Sleidan the Historian. The Archbishop's favour to Iohn Sleidan. Procures him a Pension from the King. The Payment neglected. Sleidan labours with the Archbishop to get the Pensi∣on confirmed by Letters-Patents. Sends his Commentaries to the King. Designs to write the History of the Council of Trent: For the King's use. Sends the King a Specimen thereof. In order to the proceeding with his Commentaries, de∣sires Cecyl to send him the whole Action between K. Henry VIII. and Pope Cle∣ment VII. Bucer writes to Cecyl in behalf of Sleidan. Iohn Leland.
CHAP. XXVIII. Archbishop Cranmer's Relations and Chaplains. His Wives and Children. His Wife survived him. Divers Cranmers. The Archbi∣shop's stock. Aslacton. Whatton. The Rectories whereof the Archbishop pur∣chased. His Chaplains. Rowland Taylor. His Epitaph. A Sermon preached the day after his Burning Wherein the Martyr is grosly slandered. Iohn Ponett. Thomas Becon. Richard Harman. CHAP. XXIX. Archbishop Cranmer's Officers. Robert Watson the Archbishop's Steward. His Secretary Ralph Morice. His Paren∣tage. Well known to divers eminent Bishops. Presents Turner to Chartham. And stands by him in his Troubles for his faithful Preaching. An Instance of the Archbishop's Kindness to this his Secrerary. Morice his Suit to Q. Elizabeth for a Pension. His second Suit to the Queen, to confirm certain Lands descend∣ed to him from his Father. He was Register to the Commissioners in K. Ed∣ward's Visitation. Suffered under Q. Mary. Morice supplied Fox with many ma∣terial Notices in his Book. Morice a Cordial Friend to Latimer. CHAP. XXX. A Prospect of the Archbishop's Qualities. Morice's Declaration concerning the Archbishop. His Temperance of Nature. His Carriage towards his Enemies. Severe in his behaviour towards offending Protestants. Stout in God's or the King's Cause. His great Abilities in answer∣ing the King's Doubts. Cranmer studied three parts of the Day. Would speak to the King, when none else durst. Lady Mary. Q. Katherine Howard. His Hos∣pitality. Falsly accused of Ill Housekeeping. CHAP. XXXI. Archbishop Cranmer preserved the Revenues of his See. The preserving the Bishops Revenues owing to the Archbishop. The Archbishop vindicated about his Leases. By long Leases he saved the Revenues. Justified from diminishing the Rents of the See. Oford and Knol. Curleswood. Chislet Park. Pasture and Medow. Woods. Corn. The best Master towards his Ser∣vants. An Infamy that he was an Hostler. CHAP. XXXII. Some Observations upon Archbishop Cranmer. Observations upon the Archbishop. His Learning very profound. His Library. An excellent Bishop. His Care of his own Diocess. At the great Towns he preach∣ed often. Affected not his high Stiles. His diligence in reforming Religion. Puts K. Henry upon a purpose of reforming many things. The King again pur∣poseth a Reformation. Hs Influence upon K. Edward. CHAP. XXXIII. Archbishop Cranmer procures the use of the Scriptures. A great Scripturist. Procures the publishing the English Bible. The Bishops oppose it. The first Edition of the Bible. The Preface to the Bible made by the Arch∣bishop. The Contents thereof. The Frontispiece of Cranmer's Edition of the Bible.
CHAP. XXXIV. Archbishop Cranmer compassionate towards Sufferers for Religion. His Affection and Compassion towards Professors of the Gospel. Particularly for Sir Iohn Cheke a Prisoner; And the Lord Russel. A Patron to such as preached the Gospel in K. Henry's days. His Succour of Afflicted Strangers in K. Ed∣ward's days. England harborous of Strangers. The Archbishop's favour to Fo∣reigners. Unjustly charged with Covetousness. His Words to Cecyl upon this Charge. Reduced as he feared to stark Beggary before his Death. CHAP. XXXV. Some account of Archbishop Cranmer' Housekeeping. Some Account of his Housekeeping. Retrenches the Clergy's superfluous House∣keeping. His Pious Design therein. Others charged him with Prodigality. CHAP. XXXVI. Archbishop Cranmer Humble. Peaceable. Bold in a good Cause. Humble and Condescending. Peaceable and Mild. His Speech upon the News of Wars abroad. Unacquainted with the Arts of Court-Flattery. Would never crouch to Northumberland. He and Ridley fall under that Duke's displeasure. Bold and undaunted in God's Cause. Falsly charged with Cowardice, and too much Flexibility. Of ardent Affections. Cranmr compared with Cardinal Wolsey. CHAP. XXXVII. Osiander's and Peter Martyr's Character of the Archbishop. Osiander's Character of the Archbishop. And Peter Martyr's. Bale's Character of the Archbishop. The difficult times wherein Cranmer lived. CHAP. XXXVIII. The Archbishop vindicated from Slanders of Papists. A lying Character of this Archbishop by a late French Author. Allen's Calumny of the Archbishop. Wiped off. Cleared from his Charge of Apostacy. Saunders Falshoods of the Archbishop. Parsons his Complements to the Archbishop. Fox in behalf of Cranmer. The Conclusion.
Errata and Emendations belonging to the Memorials. Where the Reader finds this mark * after the Figure denoting the Line, he is to tell from the bottom. PAge 5. Line 21. for At read All. P. 29. l. 11. r. Imprisoned. P. 30, 31. in the Margent, in three places, r. 1534. P. 36. l. 8. after Appendix, Note, That the Dissolution of S. Swithins in Winchester (tho laid here under the year 1535.) happened not that year, but about five years after, viz. 1540. But the occasion of the Discourse there, which was of the vast Wealth obtained to the King by the Fall of Religious Houses, made the Author produce it in this place, as an Instance thereof. Ibid. l. 20. * r. Diocesan. P. 37. Among the Diocesan Bishops Consecrated under the year 1535▪ place Hugh Latymer Consecrated Bishop of Worcester, and Iohn Hildesly, or Hilsey, a Friar, of the Order of Preachers, first of Bristow, and afterwards of Oxford, Consecrated Bishop of Rochester, next after Iohn Fisher, Executed for Treason. These two I had omitted in their Places, not meeting with them in Cranmer's Register. The former I suppose was consecrated with Shaxton in April, as the lat∣ter might be with Fox and Barlow in September, his Temporalties having been restored to him in the beginning of October. This Hilsey was a great Assistant to Archbishop Cranmer, and a lear∣ned man. He wrote a Book of Prayers, with Epistles and Gospels (in English, I suppose) which he dedicated to the Lord Crumwel; by whose command it was published. P. 57. l. 17. After Him add, But he could not see his Desire effected by these men, till it was happily done by other hands. P. 75. l. 7. r. Superstitions. P. 58. l. 6. * f. Three or four, r. Four or five. P. 59. l. 14. del. Some years after came forth, &c to th end of the Paragraph. P. 77. l. 4. * After Winton, Whereas I had said, That the Bishop of Winchester was not in a Commission there specified,Hist. Reform. Vol. I. p. 274. it appears by Crumwel's Speech, set down by the Bishop of Sarum, that that Bishop was then indeed a Commissioner. Here my MS. deceived me. But be it noted what the L. Paget testified before the Commissioners at that Bishop's Trial in 1549; namely, That Acts and Mon. first Edit. p. 815 because he was so wilful in his opinion, and addicted to the Popish part, the King left him out of the Commission for Compiling the last Book of Religion. And what that Book was, I know not, unless the Necessary Erudition. P. 78. l. 13. * after Hands, dele the Period. P. 85. l. 21. * Remove th Close of the Parenthesis after That. P. 94. l. 8. * r. Translation. P. 95. l. 13. after Bulkley insert was Consecrated. P. 97. l. 4. * r. Abused. P. 104. l. 17. * r. one. P. 109. l. 16. r. Archbishop's Endeavour. P. 126. l. 13. * After Arms, Whereas it was conjectured there, that the King changed Archbi∣shop Cranmer's Coat of Arms about 1544, it must have been several years before: For his New Coat of the Pelicans may be seen in the Frontispiece of the great English Bible, printed 1540. And how long before that time, I know not. P. 135. l. 16. * r. Church living. P. 146. l. 7. * f. Counties r. Episcopal Sees. P. 149. l. 25, 26. These words, When the old Order was broken, and a New brought in by Homilies, to be within a Parenthesis. Ibid. l. 5. * after and, add said. P. 151. l. 17. dele and. Ibid. after Charge, add was. P. 153. l. 4. r. Protectors. P. 154. l. 17. after them, instead of a Period make a Colon. P. 186. l. 16. f. them r. it. P. 196. l. 15. * r. Bucer. P. 197. l. 4. in the Marg. r. Vit. P. 219. l. 8, 9, 10, 11. dele the Comma's on the sides. P. 220 l. 1. r. Aug∣mentations. P. 226. l. 4. r. Wreaked. P. 234. l. 25. r. Strangers. P. 235. l. 7. r. Embark. P. 237. l. 12. of the Marg. r. Extent. P. 238. l. 14. * dele the Comma's before Leave. P. 239. l. 4. r. Stras∣burgh. P. 243. l. 14. r. Glastenbury. P. 266. l. 22. r. Superstitious. P. 268. l. 5. r. Counsil. P. 270. l. 12. * add in the Margent, The Sweating Sickness. P. 271. l. 12. r. two. P. 286. l. 12. f. were r. was. P. 306. l. 23. r. other. Ibid. l. 5. dele the Comma. P. 307. l. 16. * r. Hand. P. 311. l. 14. r. one. P. 314. l. 14. * r. Joh. Ibid. l. ult. after Humfrey make a Comma. P. 315. l. 24.  r. con∣vince. P. 349. l. 19. after all add and. P. 351. l. 11. * r. Conversation. P. 352. l. 5. * after it add in. P. 354. l. 25. r. Corpus. P. 378. l. ult. r. but. P. 395. l. 10. f. Contrived r. Composed. P. 396. l. 21. del. With a Preface. P. 394, 395, 396, 397, 398, 399, 400. on the Top of each Margent, del. An. 1555. P. 411. l. 10. r. was P. 421. l. 21. * after him add be. P. 422. l. 1. f. Flesh r. Fish. P. 424. l. 4. * r. one. Ibid. l. 3. * f. John r. Thomas. P. 425. l. 2. after two add to. P. 427. l. 20. after appointed add a. P. 437. l. 9. * f. Historiae r. Historia. P. 444▪ l. 18. * f. 1538, or 1539. r. 1537, or 1538. P. 448. l. 1. f. that r. the. Ibid. l. 9. * r. Sanctuary. P. 461. l. 5. f. infringing r. incurring. Ibid. l. 28. after about add with. P. 464. l. 22. f. is r. was. Errata in the Appendix. PAge 7. in the Margent, for Sir W. S. read Sir W H. P. 8. l. 10. * r. Popes. P. 45. l. 9. * r. Con∣troversiam. P. 46. l. 13. * r. Oecolampadio. Ibid. l. 3. * r. nec. P. 55. l. 9. dele the Colon. P. 56. l. 13. r. Concedant. Ibid. r. concessit. P. 116. l. 18. after Parcyalyte add as. P. 131. l. 18. r. Circumcision. And so P. 132. l. 21. and l. 29. and l. 31. P. 143. l. 15. * r. praeponenda. P. 180. l. 6. * r. Decanatu. P. 183. l. 18. after Verbo add a Comma; and after Consentientibus dele the Com∣ma. l. 19. after Authoritatibus add a Comma. P. 188. l. 18. after Liberantes instead of the Period make a Semicolon. Ibid. l. 20. after Legati dele the Period. P. 190. l. 22. before dam add quibus. Ibid. l. 6. * Draw the Comma after Eos, before it. P. 191. l. 12. r. Procedetur. P. 193. l. 10. * r. deterrimo carcere. P. 194. l. 13. * f. ita r. ira. P. 195. l 17. r. Bernher. P. 197. l. 6. * f. quin r. quum. P. 199. l. 5. Cognoscentiae perhaps for Ignoscentiae. Ibid. l. 11. * r. imbuerat. P. 212. l. 3. r. your. P. 222. l. 14. Remove the Comma after Abripere, before it. P. 224. l. 20. * r. punitus. P. 232. l. 20. r. habes. P. 237. l. 16. * r. angustijs. P. 238. l. 17. f. 1552. r. 1553. P. 251. l. 9. r. Appointment.
MEMORIALS OF Arch-Bishop CRANMER. BOOK I. CHAPTER I. Cranmer's Birth, Education and Rise. THE Name of this most Reverend Prelate,A worthy Work to re∣vive his Me∣mory. deserves to stand upon Eternal Record; having been the first Protestant Arch-Bishop of this Kingdom, and the greatest Instrument, under God, of the hap∣py Reformation of this Church of England▪ In whose Piety, Learning, Wisdom, Conduct and Blood, the Foundation of it was laid. And therefore it will be no unworthy Work to revive his Memory now, though after an hun∣dred and thirty Years and upwards. I pretend not to write a com∣pleat Narrative of his Life and Death, that being scarce possible at such a distance of Time, and in the want of full Intelligence and Information of the various Matters that passed through his Hands, and the Events that befel him. All that I attempt by this present Undertaking, is, to retrieve and bring to light as many Historical Pas∣sages as I can, concerning this Holy Prelate; by a careful and long search, not only into printed Books of History, but the best Ar∣chives, and many most precious and inestimable Manuscripts that have fallen into my hands. I shall pass over, in a few words, his earlier Days,His Family. because I have so much to say of him in his riper Years. Aslacton, a Town in the County of Nottingham, was the Place of his Birth; and the second Day of Iuly, in the Year 1489, was the Day of it.Anno 1489. He was the Son of Thomas Cranmer Esq a Gentleman of a right ancient Fami∣ly; whose Ancestor came in with the Conqueror: And for a long Series of Time the Stock continued in good Wealth and Quality▪ as it did in France; for there were extant, of his Name and Fami∣ly there, in the Reign of Henry the Eighth. One whereof came then into England, in company with the French Ambassador: To whom, for Relation-sake, our Bishop gave a noble Entertain∣ment▪
Account of his younger Years.Our Youth was put to learn his Grammar of a rude Parish-Clerk in that barbarous Age. Under whom he learn'd little, and endu∣red much, from the harsh and curst Disposition of his School-master. Though his Father were minded to have his Son educated in Learn∣ing, yet he would not he should be ignorant of Civil and Gentle∣man-like Exercises.Life of Cranm. in the MSS. C.C.C.C. Insomuch that he used himself to Shoot. And many times his Father permitted him to Hunt and Hauk, and to ride rough Horses: So that when he was Bishop, he feared not to ride the roughest Horses that came into his Stables; which he would do very comely. As otherwise at all times there was not any in his House that would become an Horse better. And after his Studies, when it was time for Recreation, he would both Hauk and Hunt, the Game being prepared for him. And sometimes he would shoot in the Long-Bow, and many times kill the Deer with his Cross-Bow, though his Sight was not perfect; for he was pore-blind. Sent to Cam∣bridg, An. 1503.But to return to his younger Days. He lost his Father early; but his Mother, at the Age of fourteen Years, Anno 1503, sent him to study at Cambridg. Where he was nursled in the grossest kind of Sophistry,Life of Cranm. inter Foxii MSS. Logick, Philosophy Moral and Natural: Not in the Text of the old Philosophers, but chiefly in the dark Riddles of Duns, and other subtile Questionists. And in these he lost his Time, till he came to two and twenty Years of Age.Anno 1511. After that, he gave himself to the reading of Faber, Erasmus, good Latin Authors, four or five Years together,Anno 1516. unto the Time that Luther began to write. And then considering what great Controversy was in Matters of Religion, not only in Trifles, but in the chiefest Articles of our Sal∣vation, he bent himself to try out the Truth herein. Sets himself to study the Scripture.And forasmuch as he perceived he could not judg indifferently in such weighty Matters, without the Knowledg of the Holy Scrip∣tures; therefore before he was infected with any Man's Opinions or Errors,Anno 1519. he applied his whole Study three Years therein. After this, he gave his Mind to good Writers, both New and Old: not rashly running over them; for he was a slow Reader, but a diligent Marker of whatsoever he read, seldom reading without Pen in Hand. And whatsoever made either for the one Part, or the other, of things in Controversy, he wrote it out, if it were short, or at least noted the Author, and the Place, that he might find it, and write it out at lei∣sure: which was a great help to him in debating of Matters ever after. Is made Do∣ctor of Divi∣nity, An. 1523.This kind of Study he used, till he was made Doctor of Divinity: which was about the Thirty-fourth Year of his Age, and about the Year 1523. But before this, being Master of Arts, and Fellow of Iesus Col∣lege,Marries. he married a Gentleman's Daughter. And then leaving the College, he read the Common Lecture in Buckingham College; be∣fore that called Monks College, because Monks studied there; but now Magdalen College. But in a Year after, his Wife travailing with Child, both she and the Child died. And being now single again, immediately the Master and Fellows of his old College chose him in Fellow again: where he remained.
During his Residence here, divers of the ripest and solidest sort of Scholars were sought out of this University of Cambridg, to be trans∣planted into Cardinal Wolsey's new College in Oxon,Refuses to go to Wolsey's Col∣lege, Oxon. to be Fellows there. Our Cranmer was nominated for one by Dr. Capon, to whom that Matter was, as it seems, intrusted by the Cardinal. And tho the Salary was much more considerable there, and the way to Prefer∣ment more ready, by the Favour of the Cardinal, to such as were his own Scholars; yet he refused to go, chusing rather to abide a∣mong his old Fellow-Collegians, and more closely to follow his Stu∣dies and Contemplations here: though he were not without danger for his incompliance with this Invitation, giving them that were con∣cerned great Offence hereat. But of those that went from Cam∣bridg at this time, who were all Men pick'd out for their Parts and Learning, these were the chief, Clark; Friar, afterwards Doctor of Physick. Sumner; Harman, afterwards Fellow of Eaton. Betts, af∣terwards Chaplain to Queen Ann. Cox, afterwards School-master to King Eward. Frith, afterwards a Martyr. Baily, Godman; Drum, afterwards one of the six Preachers at Canterbury. Lawney, after∣wards Chaplain to the Duke of Norfolk. All these were cast into Prison for suspicion of Heresy; and divers through the hardship thereof died. So that well it was for Cranmer that he went not. Soon after he took his Degree of Doctor of Divinity,He is made one of the U∣niversity Ex∣aminers. and became the Reader of the Divinity-Lecture in his own College. And out of the value the University had of his Learning, he was appointed one of the Examiners of such as commenced Batchelors and Doctors in Divinity. According to whose Approbations, the University allow∣ed them to proceed. In which Place he did much Good; for he used to examine these Candidates out of the Scriptures. And by no means would let them pass, if he found they were unskilful in it, and unacquainted with the History of the Bible. So were the Fri∣ars especially, whose Study lay only in School-Authors. Whom therefore he sometimes turned back as insufficient, advising them to study the Scriptures for some Years longer, before they came for their Degrees, it being a shame for a Professor in Divinity to be un∣skilled in the Book, wherein the Knowledg of God, and the Grounds of Divinity lay. Whereby he made himself from the beginning hated by the Friars. Yet some of the more ingenuous sort of them afterward rendred him great and publick Thanks for refusing them; whereby, being put upon the Study of God's Word, they attained to more sound Knowledg in Religion. One of these was Dr. Barat, a White Friar, who lived afterwards in Norwich. Not long after this,The King's great Cause first proposed to the Univer∣sities. King Henry being perswaded that the Mar∣riage between him and Q. Katharine, Daughter to K. Ferdinand of Spain, was unlawful and naught, by Dr. Longland Bishop of Lincoln, his Confessor, and other of his Clergy; he sent to six of the best learned Men of Cambridg, and as many of Oxford, to debate this Question, Whether it were lawful for one Brother to marry his Brother's Wife, being known of his Brother? Of the which Cambridg Doctors, Cranmer was appointed for one, such was his Fame then in that Uni∣versity for Learning. But because he was not then at Cambridg, ano∣ther was chosen in his stead. These Learned Men agreed fully, with
one Consent, that it was lawful, with the Pope's Dispensation, so to do. But if Cranmer had been there, he would have been of ano∣ther Mind, as we shall see in the Sequel. The Occasion of his Rise.This great Matrimonial Cause, gave the first step to Dr. Cranmer's Preferment: For when Fox and Gardiner, the one the King's Almo∣ner, and the other his Secretary, lighting by chance in Dr. Cranmer's Company, at one Mr. Cressies House, situate in Waltham-Abbey Pa∣rish in Essex, had on design fallen upon Discourse of that Matter, purposely to learn his Judgment therein, knowing him an eminent noted Reader of Divinity in Cambridg: He gave his own Sense of the Cause,His Opinion of the King's Cause. Life of Cran∣mer, in theMSS. C.C.C.C. in words to this effect: I have nothing at all studied, said he, for the Verity of this Cause; nor am beaten therein, as you have been. Howbeit, I do think that you go not the next way to work, to bring the Matter unto a perfect Conclusion and End, especially for the satisfaction of the troubled Conscience of the King's Highness. For in observing the common Process, and frustratory Delays of these your Courts, the Matter will linger long enough; and peradventure in the end come to small effect. And this is most certain, said he, there is but one Truth in it. Which no Men ought, or better can discuss than the Divines. Whose Sentence may be soon known, and brought so to pass with little Industry and Charges, that the King's Conscience may there∣by be quieted and pacified. Which we all ought to consider, and regard in this Question or Doubt; and then his Highness in Con∣science quieted, may determine himself that which shall seem Good before God. And let these tumultuary Processes give place unto a certain Truth. The King sends for him.His Opinion, thus unwillingly drawn from him, was so much liked of by them to whom he spake it, that they thought it worth their acquainting the King with it. Which they did within two days after at Greenwich. Whereupon the King commanded he should be sent for to the Court. Which was done, and he brought into the King's Presence. Who, having heard him discourse upon the Mar∣riage, and well observing the Gravity and Modesty, as well as Learn∣ing of the Man, resolved to cherish and make much of him. This was about August 1529,Anno 1529. the King having commanded him to digest in Writing, what he could say upon the foresaid Argument; retain∣ed him, and committed him unto the Family and Care of the Earl of Wiltshire and Ormond, named Sir Thomas Bolen, dwelling then at Durham-House: Esteeming him a fit Person for Cranmer to reside with, who had himself been employed in Embassies to Rome and Germany about the same Matter; and so able to instruct our Divine in particular Passages relating thereunto: And likewise would be sure to afford him all the Security, and Favour, and Aid possible, from the Prospect, that if the King's former Marriage could be pro∣ved unlawful, and thereby null and void, his own Family would be in a fair probability to be highly advanced, by the King's matching with his Daughter the Lady Ann Bolen. Sutably placed with the Earl of Ormond.Nor was Cranmer unsutably placed here, in regard of the Disposi∣tion of his Noble Host, being accounted one of the learnedest Noble∣men in the Land, and endued with a Mind enclined to Philosophy.
Erasmus, who had good Intelligence in England, and knew this Earl himself, gives this Account of him to Damianus à Goes: Est enim Vir, ut uno ore praedicant omnes, unus prope inter Nobiles eruditus,Epist. 19. li. 27. ani∣mó{que} planè Philosophico. He was also much addicted to the Study and Love of the Holy Scriptures, as the same Erasmus in an Epistle to him mentioneth, and commendeth him for.Impensius gratu∣lor tuae soelicita∣ti, quod homini potenti, Lalco, & Aulico, perspici∣am etiam sacra Literas sse cor∣di, te{que} nobili illius Margaretae desiderio tenri. Epist. 34. lib. 29. I do the more congratu∣late your Happiness, when I observe the Sacred Scriptures to be so dear to a Man, as you are, of Power, one of the Laity, and a Courtier; and that you have such a desire to tha Pearl of Price. He was also a Patron of Learning and Learned Men. And if there were nothing else to testify this, it would be enough to say, that he was well-affect∣ed to the Great Erasmus, and a true valuer of his Studies. The World is beholden to this Noble Peer, for some of the Labours that proceeded from the Pen of that most Learned Man. For upon his desire Erasmus wrote three Tracts: One was, Enarrations upon the Twenty second Psalm, intituled, Dominus regit me; but more truly the Twenty third. Another was an Explication of the Apostles Creed. And the third, Directions how to prepare for Death. And from these Subjects, which this Noble-man chose to desire Erasmus his Thoughts of, we may conclude also his Pious and Religious Mind. At which his vertuous Accomplishments, as they rendred his House a sutable Harbour for the Learned and Pious Cranmer, so they were not a little encreased by his Converse and Familiarity there. For while Cranmer abode here,Friendshipand Correspon∣dence between the Earl and Cranmer. a great Friendship was contracted between him and that Noble Family; especially the chief Members of it, the Countess, and the Lady Ann, and the Earl himself; who often held serious Conferences with him about the great Matter. And in the Earl's absence from Home, Letters passed between them; Cranmer writing to him of the Affairs of the Court, and of the Welfare of his Family, as well as of other more weighty Things. In one Letter, dated from Hampton-Court, in the Month of Iune, (which by Circumstance must be in the Year 1530.) he writ to him;Anno 1530. That the King's Grace, my Lady his Wife, my Lady Ann his Daughter, were in good Health: And that the King, and my La∣dy Ann, rode the Day before to Windsor from Hampton-Court, and that Night they were look'd for again there; praying God to be their Guide. And I cannot look upon this Pious and Learned Man's placing here in this Family,A Providence in his being placed here. but as guided by a peculiar Hand of Divine Provi∣dence. Whereby this House became better acquainted with the Knowledg of the Gospel; and had the Seeds of true Religion scat∣tered in the Hearts of those Noble Persons that were related to it: Particularly of Her, who was afterwards to be advanced to that high and publick Station, to be Consort to the King. And that she be∣came a Favourer, and as much as she durst, a Promoter of the purer Religion, must, I think, in a great measure be owing thereunto. When Cranmer had accomplished the King's Request,Cranmer Di∣sputes at Cam∣bridg. and finished his Book, he himself, the Secretary, and the Almoner, and other Learned Men, had in Commission to dispute the Cause in Question, in both the Universities. Which being first attempted at Cambridg,
Dr. Cranmer,MS. Life of Cranmer. by his Authority, Learning and Perswasion, brought over divers Learned Men in one Day, of the contrary Part and O∣pinion, to be on his Part. For being now, after some absence, re∣turned to Cambridg, divers of the University, and some of those Doctors that before had given in their Judgments to the King for the Validity of the Pope's Dispensation, repaired to him, to know his Opinion: And, after long Reasoning, he changed the Minds of Five of the Six. Then almost in every Disputation, both in Private Houses, and in the Common Schools, this was one Question, Whether the Pope might dispense with the Brother to marry the Brother's Wife, after Carnal Knowledg? And it was of many openly defended, that he might not. The Secretary, when he came Home, acquainted the King with what they had done, and how Dr. Cranmer had changed the Minds of Five of the said Learned Men of Cambridg, and of many others beside. Afterward this University, as well as the other, determined the King's Cause against the Pope's Dispensation. Grows dear to the King and his Court.From an Academic, our Doctor being now become a Courtier, he so prudently demeaned himself, that he was not only dear to the Earl of Wiltshire's Family, but grew much favoured by the Nobility in general;Lie of Henr. 8. p. 375. as the Lord Herbert collects from the Historians of those Times; and especially by the King himself. He was very much a∣bout him, the King holding frequent Communication with him, and seemed unwilling to have him absent. Which may appear from hence; that when Cranmer was minded for some reason to resort to the Earl of Wiltshire, who was then from Hampton-Court, and as it seems at London, upon some Occasions of his own, he doubted, whether the King would let him go. And so he writ to him, that he would come the next Day to him, If the King's Grace let him not. CHAP. II. Pole's Book about the King's Matrimony.An. 1530. Pole's Book a∣gainst the King's Dissol∣ving his Mar∣riage.ABout this time, a Book of Reginald Pole, afterwards Cardinal, earnestly perswading the King to continue his Marriage with his Queen, fell into Dr. Cranmer's Hands. I do not find mention of this Book in any Historian, that hath come to my Hands. No, not in his Life published by Bacatellus, Bishop of Ragusa, though he hath there given us a Catalogue of his Books. But in likelihood the Rea∣son was, because this was some private Discourse, or Letter, chiefly intended for the King's own Use; as appears from some words of Cranmer concerning it, Viz. That it was writ with that Elo∣quence, that if it were set forth, and known to the common Peo∣ple, [an evidence it was a more private Writing] it were not pos∣sible to perswade them to the contrary. It was penned about the Year 1530, as may be collected from another Passage in the said Writing, wherein he mentioneth the King's living in Wedlock with Queen Katherine twenty Years, the expiration of which fell in about that Time. What induced Pole to write on this Subject, is to me uncertain; for he avoided, as much as could be, to meddle in this
Affair, out of Fear of the King's Displeasure, which was the Reason of his departing Abroad. Probably it was at the King's Command; like as some Years after he commanded him to write his Judgment of the Title of Supream Head, which he had lately assumed. Which occasioned Pole's four Books of Ecclesiastical Vnity. For some about the King had told him, it would have a great Influence upon the Peo∣ple, especially the Nobility, if he could bring Pole over to allow, and approve of his Marriage. Who was a Person, tho then but Young, yet highly valued in the Nation for his Piety, and Learning, and great Descent. The Book was soon delivered, whether by the Earl of Wiltshire,Cranmer perses it. or the King himself, unto the Examination and Consideration of Cranmer, now the great Court-Divine. Who, after he had greedily perused it, sent the Contents of it, in a Letter to his Friend and Patron the Earl, being then absent from Court. The Book, though the Argument of it chiefly depended upon Divinity, proceeded more on Political Principles than Divine. Take the following account of it, as Cranmer gave it in his said Letter. First,His account of it. Pole treated of the Danger of Diversity of Titles to the Crown. Which might follow, if the present Marriage with Queen Katherine were rejected, (in which there was an Heir) and another consummated. As appeared by the Titles and Pretensions of the two Houses of Lancaster and York. And that the King ought to provide against the Miseries that might be brought upon his Realm by the People, if he should reject his Daughter, whom they took for his Lawful Heir, and should perswade them to take another. Then he urged the Danger of incurring the Emperor's Displeasure, the Queen being his Aunt, and the Princess his Cousin. Then he proceeded to consider the Reasons that moved the King to his present Resolutions: Namely, That God's Law forbad marrying the Bro∣ther's Wife. And that the People, however averse at first, (besides that it belongd not to them to judg of such Matters) would be content in the King's Doings, when they should know, how the ancient Doctors of the Church, and so many great Universities were on the King's Side. And, that however the Emperor might fall out with the King for this Matter, yet God would never fail those, that stood on his part, and refused to transgress his Commandments: and that England might depend on the French King's Aid, by virtue of the League, which he had entred into with the King, and the old Grudg, which he bore towards the Emperor. Afterwards Pole goes on to review these Reasons. And first, his Judgment was, that Scripture might be brought to justify this Marriage, and that there was as good ground of Scripture for that, as for the part which the King then took, namely, the unlawfulness of it. That if indeed he thought the King's Part was just, and that his Marriage were un∣doubtedly against God's Pleasure, then he could not deny, but that it should be well done for the King to refuse it, and take another Wife. Yet he confessed, that for his own part, he could not find in his Heart to have any Hand, or be any furtherer or abetter in it: Acknowledging however, that he had no good Reason for it, but only out of Affection and Duty to the King's Person. Because he
would not disannul the Princess his Daughter's Title, nor accuse the most part of the King's Life, as the Books written on the King's part did: As though he had lived in a Matrimony, Shameful, Abomina∣ble, Bestial, and against Nature. This seemed an high Comple∣ment of Pole's indeed, that he would rather chuse to let the King live and die in an habitual Breach of God's Law, than be guilty of some∣thing that might argue a want of civil Affection and Duty in him. And as concerning the People, his Judgment was, That neither by Learning, nor Preaching, would they ever be brought into an ill Conceit of the King's former Marriage, and to think so dishonoura∣bly of their King, as to live so many Years in Matrimony so abomi∣nable. But as they had begun to hate Priests, this would make them much more to do so: nay, and the very Name of Learning too. As for the Authority of the Universities, they were many times led by Affection, which was well known. And he wished they had ne∣ver erred in their Determinations. He shewed, that they were brought to the King's Part with great difficulty. Moreover, against the Universities Authority, he set the Authority of the King's Fa∣ther, and his Council, the Queen's Father, and his Council, and the Pope and his. Then he proceeded to Political Considerations, of the Pope, and Emperor, and the French King. That the Pope was a great Adver∣sary of the King's purpose, he had shewed divers tokens already; and that not without cause. Because if he should consent, he should do against his Predecessors, and restrain his own Power, which he would rather gladly enlarge, and likewise raise Seditions in many Realms, as in Portugal. Of whose King the Emperor married one Sister, and the Duke of Savoy the other. Then he went on extol∣ling the Emperor's Power, and lessening that of the French King, as to his aiding of us. Mentioning the Mischief the Emperor might do England, by forbidding only our trading into Flanders and Spain. That the French never used to keep their Leagues with us, but for their own Ends; and that we could never find in our Hearts to trust them. And that the two Nations never loved one another. And that if the French should but suspect, that this new Matrimo∣ny (of the King with the Lady Ann Bolen now purposed) should not continue, we must not expect Succor of them, but upon intole∣rable Conditions. And then lastly, he comes to deliberate for the saving the King's Honour. Which as it was impossible to do, if he proceeded one step further, for he had already, he said, gone to the very Brink; so he began to propound certain means for the rescue of it. Thus far is Cranmer's Relation of the Book. But here he breaks off, the Messenger that tarried for the Letter being in haste: promising the next Day to come to the Earl, to whom he wrote all this, and relate the rest to him by Word of Mouth. These Means in short were (as I collect from some other Passages of this Letter) to refer the Matter wholly to the Pope, and to reject the thoughts of matching with the Lady Ann. The which was now much talked of; For the King and She were very great, and about this very time they both rode together from Hampton-Court to Windsor▪ though she were yet no more then the Lady Ann, without any other Title.
The Censure which our Divine gave of this Book, and the Writer, was this, (wherein his Modesty and Candor, as well as Judgment ap∣peared) That Pole had shewed himself both Witty and Eloquent:Cranmer's Cen∣sure thereof. And that for his Wisdom, he might have been of Counsel to the King: and such his Rhetorick, that if his Book should have been set forth, and known to the common People, he believed it were not possible to perswade them to the contrary. Concerning that which he chiefly drove at, namely, That the King should commit his great Matter to the Pope's Judgment, Cranmer gave his Opinion, That he seemed therein to lack much Judgment: And that though he pressed it with such goodly Eloquence, both of Words and Sentence, that he were likely to perswade many; yet him, he said, he perswaded in that Point nothing at all. No, Cranmer had too well studied the Point, to leave such a Case of Conscience to the Pope's Decision. But in many other things in this Discourse of Pole, he professed, he was much satisfied. I have placed this whole Letter in the Appendix at the end of these Memorials,Num. 1. as I shall do many other Letters and Papers of value, partly for the Satisfaction of more curious Readers, that love to see Originals, and partly for the preservation of many choice Monuments, relating to this Man, and these Times, and for the transferring them to posterity. CHAP. III. Cranmer's Embassies. IN the Year 1530, Dr. Cranmer was sent by the King into France, Italy, and Germany, with the Earl of Wiltshire,He is employ∣ed in Ambas∣sies, Chief Ambas∣sador, Dr. Lee Elect Arch-Bishop of York, Dr. Stokesly Elect of London, Divines; Trigonel, Karn, and Benet, Doctors of the Law, to dispute these Matrimonial matters of his Majesty at Paris, Rome, and other places: Carrying the Book he had made upon that Sub∣ject with him. From France they took their Journey to the Pope;To the Pope. where Cranmer's Book was delivered to him, and he ready to justify it, and to offer a Dispute against the Marriage openly, upon these two Points, which his Book chiefly consisted of, viz.Offers him a Dispute in Fa∣vour of the King's Cause. I. That no Man, Iure Divino, could, or ought to marry his Bro∣ther's Wife. II. That the Bishop of Rome by no means ought to dispense to the contrary. But after sundry Promises and Appointments made, there was no Man found to oppose him, and publickly to dispute these Matters with him. Yet in more private Argumentations with them that were about the Pope, he so forced them, that at last they openly granted, even in the Pope's chief Court of the Rota, that the said Marriage was against God's Law. But as for the Pope's Power of Dispensing with the Laws of God, it was too advantagious a Tenet to be parted with. But Dr. Cranmer boldly and honestly denied it utterly before them all.
The King's Ambassadors from the Pope repaired to the Emperor Charles V. Cranmer only being left behind at Rome, to make good his Challenge, and withal, more privately to get the Judgments and Subscriptions of the Learned Men there in the King's Case: which was one of his Businesses also in Germany after. What he did in this latter Affair, he signified by a Letter to Crook, another of the King's Agents for that purpose in Italy:Hist. Refor. P. 1. p. 89. Namely, That his Suc∣cess there at Rome was but little: and that they dared not to at∣tempt to know any Man's Mind, because of the Pope, who had said, that Friars should not discuss his Power. And added, That he looked for little Favour in that Court, but to have the Pope and all his Cardinals declare against them. To the Empe∣ror.Here at Rome Cranmer abode for some Months. But in all the Journey he behaved himself so learnedly, soberly and wittily, that the Earl of Wilts gave him such Commendations to the King by his Letters,Life of Cran. inter Foxii, MSS. that the rest coming home, he sent him a Commission with Instructions to be his sole Ambassador to the Emperor in his said great Cause. Which Commissional Letters of the King to him bare date Ianuary 24. 1531.An. 1531. wherein he was stiled Consiliarius Regius & ad Caesarem Orator. By this opportunity of travelling through Ger∣many,Hist. Luther. Per Seckendorf. following the Emperor's Court, by his Conferences he fully satis∣fied many Learned Germans, which afore were of a contrary Judg∣ment; and divers in the Emperor's own Court and Council also. One of the chiefest of these, and who suffered severely for it, was Cornelius Agrippa, Kt. Doctor of both Laws, Judg of the Preroga∣tive Court,Cornelius Agrip∣pa gained by Cranmer to the King's Cause. and Counsellor to the Emperor, and a Man of deep Learning. Who confessed to the said Ambassador, that the Marriage was naught, but that he durst not say so openly, for fear both of the Pope and Emperor. Yet he was afterwards cast into Prison, where he died, for expressing his Mind, as was thought, somewhat more plainly in this Affair. Becomes ac∣quainted with Osiander.While he was now abroad in Germany, he went to Norimberg, where Osiander was Pastor. And being a Man of Fame and Learn∣ing, our Ambassador became acquainted with him: sending for him sometimes to discourse with him; and sometimes he would go to Osiander's House, to visit him and his Study. This eminent Divine of the German Protestant Church he also gained to favour the King's Cause. For he wrote a Book of Incestuous Marriages, wherein he determined the King's present Matrimony to be unlawful. But this Book was called in by a Prohibition, printed at Augsburgh. And there was also a Form of a Direction, drawn up by the same Osi∣ander, how the King's Process should be managed: Which was sent over hither.Multa graviter, multa sapienter, c plan divini∣tus d Christiana doctrina, ac ve∣ra religione dis∣putares. In Ep. Dedicat. ante Harmon. E∣vangel. Cranmer's Discourse with Osiander, at these their Meet∣ings, concerning divers Matters relating especially to Christian Doctrine, and True Religion, were so wise and good, that that great Divine stood in admiration of him, as though he had been in∣spired from Above. In one of their Conferences, Osiander com∣municated to him certain Papers, wherein he had been attempting to harmonize the Gospels: but by reason of the Difficulty that often arose, had thrown them aside. A thing this was which Cranmer declared to him his great Approbation of; as he was always a
Man greatly studious of the Scripture, and earnestly desirous that the right knowledg thereof might be encreased. So he vehemently exhorted him to go forward in this Study, and to finish it with all convenient speed: For that it would not only, (he said) be of use to the Church of Christ, but adorn it. These Admonitions gave new strength to Osiander to fall afresh about this Work, and at last to bring it to a conclusion. In the Year 1537, he published it, and de∣dicated it to Cranmer, then Arch-Bishop, the great Encourager of the Author. In some of these Visits, Crnmer saw Osiander's Niece,And marries his Kinswo∣man. and obtained her for his Wife. Whom when he returned from his Embassy, he brought not over with him: But in the Year 1534. he privately sent for her. And kept her with him till the Year 1539, in the se∣vere time of the six Articles; when he sent her back in Secret to her Friends in Germany for a time. By these Visits, and this Affini∣ty, there grew a very cordial Love between Cranmer and Osiander: and a great Correspondence was maintained by Letters between them long after. A parcel of these Letters in Manuscript, the Right Reverend the Bishop of Sarum mentioned in his History of the Re∣formation. Which he met with in the exquisite Library of Mr. Ri∣chard Smith, as he told a Friend of mine. But notwithstanding my enquiry after them, I had not the good fortune to see them, nor to find into whose Hands they were come, after the selling of that Library by Auction. Which Letters, if I could have procured a sight of, might have served somewhat perhaps in this my Under∣taking. We are now slipp'd into the Year 1532.An. 1532. And among other Ser∣vices which he did Abroad, (besides his promoting the King's great Matrimonial Cause among the German Princes and States,Treats with the Emperor about the Con∣tract of Traf∣fick. as well as others) he was employed for the establishing and securing a Traffick, between the Merchants of England, and the Emperor's Low Countries. Concerning which the former Contract, it seems, began to shake, occasioned by that Luke-warmness of Affection, that now grew between these two Monarchs. About this Affair our Ambassador had divers Conferences with Monsieur Grandeville, the Emperor's great Minister, at Regensburgh. The effect of his last Sollicitation was, that Grndeville had told him that the Diet concerning the said Contract was held in Flanders, where the Queen of Hungary was Governess; and therefore that the Emperor would do nothing therein without her advice; and that he would make answer by her, rather than by him. And so Cranmer desired the King, that it would please his Grace no further to look for An∣swer from him therein, but from the Queen, unto whom the whole Answer was committed. Another Business our Ambassador was now agitating at this Court for the King, was,And about sending Sup∣lies against th Turk. about sending Supplies to the Emperor against the Turk: Who had now made a formidable Invasion in Hungary, with an Army consisting of three hundred thousand Men. The Emperor had lately, by virtue of a former League, and for the Common Cause of Christianity, demanded certain Forces of the
King for this purpose. Now what measures his Ambassador was to take with the Emperor in this Affair, William Paget, his Maje∣sty's Servant (the same that was afterward Secretary of State) was dispatched to him with Instructions: Wherein were contained what Answer he should make to the Emperor's Demands. Which he re∣ported accordingly to Grandeville. The which Answer he delivered to him in writing, upon the desire of Grandeville, for this Reason, as he urged, that he might relate the same the more truly to the Em∣peror. He was now, in the Month of September, drawing towards the Turk from Abagh, a Place not far from Regensburgh, where our English Ambassador now resided; not having yet returned any Reply to him, prevented by that hurry of Business that then lay upon the Emperor. So that upon Grandeville's intimation to repair unto the Emperor at Lintz, which was in his way to Vienna; and that there he should have an Answer in Writing again, the Ambas∣sador followed thither, in Company with the Ambassador of France. And so he, with the other Ambassador, in eight or ten days space, furnished themselves with Wagons, Horses, Ships, Tents, and other things necessary to the Journey, for themselves and their Train. Sends the King the News in those Parts;But before his departure, he informed the King of the News in those Parts. As, that the Turk resided still in Hungary in the same Place, invironed on all parts: Of which more at large he had writ∣ten in his former Letters. That King Ferdinando, the Emperor's Brother, who was then at Regensburgh, was to meet the Emperor at Passaw, fourteen miles from thence: and so both were to pass forth to Lintz, which was the mid-way from Regensburgh to Vienna. That the Emperor would tarry there to take Counsel what to do, and there all the Ambassadors should know his Pleasure. And the Pro∣clamation for a General Council.He sent the King also the Copy of the Emperor's Proclamation concerning a General Council, and a Reformation to be had in Ger∣many, for the Controversies of the Faith. Which he was constrained to do, his Affairs with the Turk pressing him so much. The Sum thereof was; That his Imperial Majesty declared Peace throughout all Germany: Enjoining, that none should be molested for the Cause of Religion, until the Council should be called: or, in case there were none, until some other Means should be found out by the States of the Empire, for healing the present Divisions. And that he would use his utmost diligence, that a Council should be denounced within six Months, and the Year after to be commen∣ced. And that if this could not be obtained, then these Matters should be referred to the Imperial Diets, to be handled there. That in the mean time all Judicial Proceedings, relating to Reli∣gion, should be suspended; and that no Law-Suits should hereaf∣ter be commenced against the Protestants: and that in case any were,Sleid. Com∣ment. he commanded that they should be void and null. This Edict was published in the Month of August this Year. And the Tax of the States of the Em∣pire.Together with the aforesaid Proclamation, he transferred over to the King the Tax of all the States of the Empire; that is, How many Souldiers every Man was limited to find for Aid against the Turk. Whence our Ambassador made a particular Observation to his Master, for his better Direction, what number of Forces it were
equal for him to send; and to justify his Refusal to comply with the Emperor, in case he should have demanded more than was his Pro∣portion: Taking his Measures from the said Tax. And the Obser∣vation, which he made was this, That his Grace might perceive▪ that the greatest Prince in Germany (only the Duke of Burgundy, and Austria excepted) was not appointed above 120 Horsemen, and 554 Footmen. A Transcript of this Letter of Cranmer to the King, I have put in the Appendix.No II. These Passages will serve to shew Dr. Cran∣mer's Diligence, Wisdom, and other Abilities in the Quality he now stood in of an Ambassador. Being now resident in the Emperor's Court,He goes in an Embassy to the Duke of Saxony, and o∣ther Protestant Princes. the King made use of him in another Embassy, but to be more secretly made, to the Elector Frederick, Duke of Saxony, that the Emperor might not be privy to it. For in the Month of Iuly, Dr. Cranmer departed in∣cognito from Ratisbon, (where the Emperor was, and had there ap∣pointed a Diet,Hist. Luthera∣nism. per Seckendors. in order to the coming to some Terms of Peace with the Protestants, until a Council should be called) and came private∣ly to the Duke, then abiding in a certain Hospital, as it was called, and delivered Letters to him, and to Philip Duke of Lunenburgh, and Wolfgang Prince of Anhalt. At this first Congress, he assured the Elector of his Master the King of England's Friendship, as the Let∣ters he delivered imported. The next day he returned to the Elector's Court, Pontanus and Spalatinus, two of the Elector's Coun∣sellors, being present. Here at this Meeting he required divers things concerning Peace with the Emperor, the State of Religion, Aid against the Turk, and the Goods of the Church, which the Princes were said to invade. He spake magnificent things of the King his Master: as what mighty Aids he had offered the Emperor against the Turk; and as he told them, the French King would do. And so taking Letters to the King from Frederick, dated Iuly 15. he was dismissed. But four days after, he came again privately with one Servant only; and had conference with Spalatinus all alone: telling him, that he had forgot, as he pretended, one part of his Message: and that was, That not only his Master, but the French King, was ready to give Assistance to the Elector, and his Confede∣rates, in the case of Religion. And he desired to know in what state the Business of the Election of Ferdinand stood; whom, being the Emperor's Brother, he had made King of the Romans by a pre∣tended Election. Which Election gave offence, and Frederick, Duke of Saxony, had manifested Imperfect and Defective. What Answer was given to Cranmer was not known: Only it was thought that this was somewhat unseasonably acted, because saith my Author,Seckendorf, ub supra. there was Peace at this time between the Emperor and the English, which the Kings Ambassador by those Offers did desire to disturb. This it seems was the Judgment of the Protestants concerning this Overture to them by the King's Ambassador, as tho it were not sincere. But I do not find, but, that whatsoever Peace was now between the Emperor and the English, the former League with him was shaking by reason of the Emperor's disobliging the King, in siding so ear∣nestly with Queen Katharine, in the Controversy between the King and her.
CHAP. IV. Cranmer made Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. Made Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury.AND this great Trust the King, his gracious Master, commit∣ted to him, as a mark of the Honour he had for him, and a Sign of further Preferment he was minded to advance him to. And about this very time happened a fair Opportunity to the King to ma∣nifest his Favour to him; Warham, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, de∣parting this mortal Life, whereby that See became Vacant. The Preferment indeed seemed too great for Cranmer, at one stride to step into, without some other intervening Dignities, to have been first conferred on him. But the King, thinking him the fittest Man of all the English Clergy to be promoted to this high Office, resol∣ved to give it to him, though now absent abroad upon his Business. Hereupon the King commanded him to hasten Home, though he concealed the Reason from him, which was to take the Arch∣bishoprick he had designed for him. Which when he came Home, in Obedience to his Majesty, though much against his Inclination, and after many Refusals, proceeding from his great Modesty and Humility, and certain Scruples, at length he did accept. His Dignities before he was Arch-Bishop.It doth not appear to me what Ecclesiastical Places he had before: only that he was the King's Chaplain, and Arch-deacon of Taunton. The Pope also, in honour to his Master, had constituted him Poeni∣tentiary General of England. He had also a Benefice, while he lived in the Earl of Wiltshire's Family, which was bestowed upon him by the King: A mention whereof I find in one of his Letters to the said Earl. Arch-Bishop Warham fore∣tells a Thomas to succeed him.It was in the Month of August 1532, that William Warham, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury died: a wise and Grave Man, a great Patron of the most Learned Erasmus, and once Lord Chancellor of England. Who seemed to foresee and foretell, or at least to conjecture, that Thomas Cranmer should succeed him, as judging him, in his own Mind, the fittest Person for the King's and Church's Service in that juncture, to enter upon that See. For this truth, methinks, we may pick out of those malicious words of Harpsfield in his Ecclesia∣stical History, viz. That Arch-Bishop Warham should say, That a Thomas should succeed him; who by a loose and remiss indul∣gence of a licentious sort of Life granted to the People, and by unsound Doctrines, would more disgrace the Church of Canter∣bury, and all the rest of the Church of England, than Thomas the Martyr did amplify it by his Martyrdom. And that he admonish∣ed his Nephew, and Name-sake, William Warham, Arch-deacon of Canterbury, that if any Thomas should succeed in the See, while he lived, he should not by any means enter into his Service. It is not unusual, (nay it is seldom otherwise) for Popish Historians to stuff their Histories with strange Prophecies and Falshoods, mix∣ed with some Truth. And I suppose the Matter might be no more than this. This grave and sober Arch-Bishop was sensible of the gross Encroachments of the Bishops of Rome upon the Authority of
the Kings of this Realm in their own Dominions: and his Judg∣ment stood for the restoring of this Imperial Crown to its antient Right and Soveraignty, and for the abridging the Papal Power. And knowing how learned a Man Dr. Thomas Cranmer was, and perceiving what an able Instrument he was like to prove in vindi∣cating the King's Right to the Supremacy in his own Kingdoms, the Arch-Bishop upon these Accounts might think him the fittest to succeed in the Archiepiscopal Chair, and might have some reason to believe that the King intended him thereunto. And that Arch-Bishop Warham was of this Judgment,Arch-Bishop Warham for the King's Supre∣macy. it may ap∣pear, if we trace some Footsteps of him. In the Year 1530, when all the Clergy were under a Praemunire, and a Petition was drawing up in the Convocation for that Cause, the King in the said Petition was addressed to by the Title of Supream Head of the Church, and Clergy of England. At this Title, when the Arch-Bishop found some of the Clergy to boggle, who were yet afraid openly to declare their disallowance of it, he took the opportunity of their Silence to pass the Title, by saying, That Silence was to be taken for their Con∣sent. In the last Synod, wherein this Arch-Bishop was a Member, and the main Director, many things were debated about Abolishing the Papacy. This Synod was prorogued from April 26, to October 5.At. Brit. In the mean time he died. But had he lived, and been well, unto the next Sessions, some further Steps had been made in evacuating the Bishop of Rome's Usurpations; as may be guessed by what was done under his influence the last Sessions, when the Supremacy of that foreign Prelate was rejected. Something more of this Arch-Bishop's Endeavours,Cranmer's Te∣stimony of Warham. of restoring the King to his Supremacy, appears by what Arch-Bishop Cranmer said to Brooks, Bishop of Glocester, before a great Assembly, not long before his Burning. Brooks had charged him for first setting up the King's Supremacy. To which Cranmer replied, That it was Warham gave the Supremacy to Henry VIII, and that he had said, he ought to have it before the Bishop of Rome, and that God's Word would bear it. And that upon this the Universities of Cambridg and Oxford were sent to, to know what the Word of God would allow touching the Supremacy. Where it was rea∣soned and argued upon at length: and at last both agreed, and and set to their Seals, and sent it to the King, That he ought to be Supreme Head, and not the Pope. All which was in Arch-Bishop Warham's Time, and while he was alive, three quarters of a Year before ever Cranmer had the Arch-Bishoprick of Canterbury, as he also added in that Audience. So that these things considered, we may conclude, that Warham did think, that none would be so fit to come after him as Cranmer, a Learned and diligent Man, to carry on this Cause, which he, be∣fore him, had begun: and so might speak of him as the properest Person to be advanced to this See. To this I will add the Sense of an Ingenious and Learned Friend of mine concerning this Passage in Harpsfield's History:A reflection upon a Passage relating to Cranmer in Harpsfield's History▪ Which the Au∣thor also of the Athenae Oxonienses hath made use of to the good
Arch-Bishop's Discredit: and which Somner also had unluckily se∣lected, though without design to hurt his good Name, and is all he writes of him. But may it not be considered, saith he, that the pretended Martyr Thomas Becket,Antiq. of Cant. though he died in vindication of the Privileges of the Church, yet he was the first betrayer of the Rights of his See? He made the greatest Breach upon the Autho∣rity of the Primacy of Canterbury, by resigning the Arch-Bishoprick into the Pope's Hands, and receiving it again from him, as the Pope's Donation. But it is the Honour of the blessed Martyr, Tho∣mas Cranmer, that he was the first, who began to claim the Pri∣macy, and retrieve the Rights of his See from being slavishly sub∣jected to the Roman Power. Indeed, little credit is to be given to the Author, who first published this Story; considering what a Violent Man he was, and how much prejudiced against Cranmer, and interessed in the Popish Cause: and coming into the Arch-Deaconry of Canterbury by the deprivation of the Arch-Bishop's Brother. Cranmer tries to evade the Arch-Bishop∣rick.Cranmer Noluit Episcopari, had no mind to be Arch-Bishop. He loved his Studies, and affected Retirement, and well knew the Dan∣gers and Temptations of a publick Station. But especially he could not induce his Mind to take his Office from the Pope, and to swear Fidelity to him as well as to the King: whereby he should ensnare himself in two contrary Oaths. Wherefore when the King sent for him home from his Embassy in Germany, with a design to lay that honourable Burden upon him, he, guessing the Reason, first endea∣voured to delay his coming, by signifying to the King some Mat∣ters of Importance, that would require his tarrying there somewhat longer for the King's Service: Hoping in that while, the King might have bestowed the Place upon some other. In fine, our Historians say, he stayed abroad one half Year longer. But I find him in England in the Month of November, which was not much more than a quarter of a Year after Warham's Death. Then the King was mar∣ried to the Marchioness of Pembroke, and Cranmer was present. So that the King must have sent for him home in Iune, two or three Months before the Arch-Bishop's Death: probably while he was in a declining dying Condition. But after, when that which Cran∣mer seemed to suspect of certain Emergences in those parts, wherein the English State might be concerned, fell not out; the King again commanded his return Home. Now more perfectly knowing, by some of his Friends, the King's Intentions to make him Arch-Bishop, he made means by divers of his Friends to shift it off, desiring rather some smaller Living. Declares the reason thereof to the King.At length the King brake his Mind to him, that it was his full Purpose to bestow that Dignity upon him for his Service, and for the good Opinion he conceived of him. But his long disabling himself nothing disswaded the King, till at last he humbly craved the King's Pardon, for that he should declare to him, and that was, That if he should accept it, he must receive it at the Pope's Hand, which he neither would nor could do: for that his Highness was the only Supream Governour of the Church of England, as well in Causes Ecclesiastical as Temporal; and that the full Right of
Donation of all manner of Benefices and Bishopricks, as well as any other temporal Dignities and Promotions, appertained to him, and not to any other Foreign Authority. And therefore if he might serve God, him and his Countrey in that Vocation, he would accept it of his Majesty, and of no Stranger, who had no Authority within this Realm. Whereat the King made a Pause; and then asked him how he was able to prove it. At which time he alledged several Texts out of Scripture, and the Fathers, proving the Supream Authority of Kings in their own Realms and Domini∣ons: and withal shewing the intolerable Usurpations of the Bishops of Rome. Of this the King talked several times with him; and perceiving that he could not be brought to acknowledg the Pope's Authority, the King called one Dr. Oliver, an eminent Lawyer, and other Civilians, and devised ith them, how he might bestow the Arch-Bishoprick upon him, salving his Conscience. They said, he might do it by way of Protestation: and so one to be sent to Rome to take the Oath, and do every thing in his Name. Cranmer said to this, It should be super animam suam: and seemed to be satisfied in what the Lawyers told him. And accordingly, when he was consecrated, made his Protestation, That he did not admit the Pope's Authority any further, than it agreed with the express Word of God. And that it might be lawful for him at all times to speak against him, and to impugn his Errors, when there should be occasion. And so he did. Whether Warham, the Arch-deacon,The Arch-bi∣shop's Bro∣ther is made Arch-deacon of Canterbury. had conceived any Prejudice against our new Arch-Bishop, by some warning given him by the former Arch-Bishop, as was hinted above; or whether he was wil∣ling to give place upon Cranmer's Entreaty, that he might provide for his Brother: so it was, that Edmund Cranmer, Brother to the Arch-Bishop, succeeded Warham in the Arch-deaconry of Canterbury,Somner Hist. of Cant. p. 322. ex lib. Eccles. Cant. and the Provostship of Wingham. Who parted with both these Dignities by Cession. And by the Privity and Consent of the Arch-Bishop, he had a Stipend, or Pension, of sixty pounds per Annum, allowed him during his Life, out of the Arch-deaconary; and twenty pounds per Annum out of Wingham, by his Successor a∣foresaid. Who continued Arch-deacon until Queen Mary's Days, and was then deprived, and his Prebend, and his Parsonage of Ickham, all taken from him in the Year 1554, for being a married Clerk. The first was given to Nicholas Harpsfield; the second to Robert Collins, Bachelour of Law, and Commissary of Canterbury; and the third to Robert Marsh. The King had before linked him into his great Business about Queen Katharine and the Lady Anne.The King link∣ed Cranmer with him in all his proceed∣ings about Q: Katharine. So now when he had nomi∣nated him for Arch-Bishop, he made him a Party and an Actor in every step almost which he took in that Affair. For to fetch the Matter a little backward; Not long before the Archiepiscal See was devolved upon Cranmer, the King had created the Lady Anne Mar∣chioness of Pembroke, and taken her along with him in great State into France, when by their mutual Consent there was an Interview appointed between the two Kings. At Calais King Henry permitted Francis the French King to take a view of this Lady, who then made
both Kings a curious and rich Mask, where both honoured her by dancing: This was in the month of October. In the Month before I find a parcel of very rich Jewels were sent from Greenwich to Hampton Court by Mr. Norrys,Anno 1532. Sept. 21. probably he who was Groom of the Stole, and executed upon Queen Ann's Business afterwards. Which Jewels as some of them might be for the King's own wearing, now he was going into France; so in all probability others were either lent or given to the Marchioness to adorn and make her fine, when she should appear, and give her entertainment to the French King. For the sake of such as be curious,Append. No III. I have set down, in the Appendix, a Particular of these most splendid and Royal Jewels, from an O∣riginal signed with the King's own Hand in token of his Receit of them. Immediately after the King's and e Marchionesses return from France, he married her. At which Wedding, though very private, the Arch-Bishop was one that assisted,Rex D. Annam Bullenam, Thoma Cran∣mero, sacra Ministrante, Vxorem duxit. according to the Lord Herbert; but, according to the Author of the Britannic Antiquities, did the Sacred Office. When she was crowned Queen, which was Whit∣sontide following, the Arch-Bishop performed the Ceremonies. When, after that, the King had a Daughter by her, he would have the Arch-Bishop assist at the Christening, and be her Godfather. And before this, when Queen Katharine was to be divorced from the King, and the Pope's Dispensation of that Marriage declared Null, our Arch-Bishop pronounced the Sentence, and made the Declaration solemnly and publickly at Dunstable Priory. Thus the King dipped and engaged Cranmer with himself in all his Pro∣ceeding in this Cause. Now as all these doings had danger in them, so especially this last highly provoked the Pope for doing this without his Leave and Authority, as being a presumptuous Encroachment upon his Prerogative. Insomuch that a publick Act was made at Rome, that unless the King undid all that he had done, and restored all things in integrum, leaving them to his Decision, he would ex∣communicate him. And this Sentence was affixed and set up pub∣lickly at Dunkirk.The King and the Arch-bishop appeal from the Pope to a General Council. Which put the King upon an Appeal from the Pope to the next General Council, lawfully called. The Arch-Bishop also, foreseeing the Pope's Threatning hovering likewise o∣ver his Head, by the King's Advice, made his Appeal by the English Ambassador there. I have seen the King's Original Letter to Dr. Bonner, ordering him to signify to the Pope, in Order and Form of Law,The King writes to Dr. Bonner in that behalf. No. IV. his Appeal, sending him also the Instrument of his Appeal, with the Proxy devised for that purpose. This bare date August 18th from his Castle at Windsor: I have reposited it in the Appendix. Which Order of the King Bonner did accordingly discharge, at an Audience he got of the Pope at Marceilles, November 7. And that Letter which the Lord Herbert saith, he saw of Bonner to the King, wherein he signified as much, must be his Answer to this of the King to him. An. 1533.Dr. Cranmer having now yielded to the King to accept the Arch-Bishoprick, it was in the beginning of the next Year, viz. 1533. March 30. and in the 24th of King Henry,The Arch-Bishop is con∣secrated. that he received his Con∣secration:
But that ushered in with abundance of Bulls, some dated in February, and some in March, from Pope Clement, to the number of Eleven: as may be seen at length in the beginning of this Arch-Bishop's Register. The first was to King Henry upon his Nomination of Cranmer to him to be Arch-Bishop.The Pope's Bulls. The Pope alloweth and promoteth him ac∣cordingly. The second was a Bull to Cranmer himself, signifying the same. The third Bull absolved him from any Sentences of Ex∣communication, Suspension, Interdiction, &c. It was written from the Pope to him, under the Title of Arch-deacon of Taunton in the Church of Wells, and Master in Theology; and ran thus: Nos ne forsan aliquibus sententiis, censuris & poenis Ecclesiasticis, ligatus sis, &c. Volentes te a quibusvis excommunicationis, suspensionis, & interdicti, aliis{que} Ecclesiasticis sententiis, censuris, & poenis, a jure vel ab Homine, quavis occase vel causa latis, &c. Authoritate prae∣dicta, tenore praesentium, absolvimus, & absolutum fore nuntiamus, non obstantibus constitutionibus, & ordinationibus Apostolicis, &c. One might think, that this Bull was drawn up peculiarly for Cranmer's Case. Who, by reason he might have been suspected as infected with Lutheranism, or had meddled too much in the King's Matrimo∣nial Cause; and so intangled in the Churches Censures, might have need of such assoiling. But I suppose it was but a customary Bull. A fourth Bull was to the Suffragans of Canterbury; that is, to all the Bishops in the Province: signifying Cranmer's Advancement, to be their Metropolitan. Another to the City and Diocess of Canterbury. Another to the Chapter of the said Church. Another to the Vas∣sals of the Church; that is, to all such as held Lands of it. Ano∣ther to the People of the City. Another, wherewith the Pall was sent to the Arch-Bishop of York, and the Bishop of London. Ano∣ther, of the Destination of the Pall: Which the Bull saith, was ta∣ken de corpore B. Petri, to be presented to him by the Arch-Bishop of York, and the Bishop of London, or one of them, after he had received the Gift of Consecration. In this Bull of the Destination is an Order, not to use the Pall but on those proper Days which were expresly mentioned in the Privileges of the Church. On pur∣pose to beget a greater Esteem and Veneration of this, and whatso∣ever Baubles else came from Rome, and brought such Treasure thi∣ther. The Arch-Bishop according to Custom,The Arch-Bi∣shop surren∣ders them to the King. received these Bulls, which the Pope sent him to invest him with the Arch-Bishoprick. But he surrendred them up to the King; because he would not own the Pope, as the giver of this Ecclesiastical Dignity, but the King only, as he declared at his Trial before Queen Mary's Commissioners at Oxford in the Year 1555. As to the Act of Consecration, first,The Method of the Consecra∣tion. They assembled in the Chap∣ter-House of the King's Colledg of S. Stephen, near the King's Palace of Westminster. Present as Witnesses Watkins, the King's Protho∣notary, Dr. Iohn Tregonwel, Thomas Bedyl Clerk of the King's Council, Richard Guent Doctor of Decrees, of the Court of Canter∣bury principal Official, and Iohn Cocks the Arch-Bishop's Auditor of the Audience, and Vicar-general in Spirituals. The first thing that
was done by the Arch-Bishop Elect, was for the satisfaction of his Conscience. Who was now before his Consecration to take an Oath of Fidelity to the Pope, which will follow by and by. This he saw consisted by no means with his Allegiance to his Soveraign. And therefore how common and customary soever it were for Bishops to take it; yet Cranmer in the first place, in the said Chapter-house, before the said Witnesses, made a Protestation; wherein he declared, that he intended not by the Oath that he was to take, and was customary for Bishops to take to the Pope, to bind himself to do any thing contrary to the Laws of God, the King's Prerogative, or to the Common-wealth and Statutes of the Kingdom: nor to tie him∣self up from speaking his Mind freely in Matters relating to the Reformation of Religion, the Government of the Church of Eng∣land, and Prerogative of the Crown. And that according to this Interpretation and Meaning only he wld take the Oath, and no otherwise. This Protestation, because I think it is not recorded in our Historians,De Minister. p. 154. No. V. except Mason, (and in him imperfect) I have put it into the Appendix verbatim, as I transcribed it out of the Arch-Bishop's Register. And having made this Protestation, he bad the Prochonotary to make one or more publick Instruments thereof, and desired the forementioned Persons to be Witnesses thereunto. After this Protestation made, he in the presence of these Witnesses, being arrayed in Sacerdotal Garments, went up to the step of the high Altar, to receive Consecration; where was sitting in a Chair, honourably adorned, Iohn Longland the Bishop of Lincoln, having on his Pontificals, assisted by Iohn Voicy Bishop of Exon, and Henry Standish Bishop of S. Asaph; holding in his hand a Schedule with the Oath, which he was now going to take to the Pope: and having withal his Protestation, he, before the aforesaid Witnesses, asserted and protested, that he would read the Schedule, and perform the Oath therein contained under the said Protestation, which he said he made the same day in the Chapter-house before those Witnesses, and no otherwise, nor in any other manner. And then presently after, kneeling on his Knees, read the Schedule, containing the Oath to the Pope.No. VI. Which I have reposited in the Appendix. Then the Bishops proceeded to the consecrating of the Arch-Bishop. And then again, after the solemn Consecration was finished, being about to receive his Pall, when he was to take another Oath to the Pope, he protested again in the presence of the same Wit∣nesses, that he took the following Oath under the same Protestation as he made before in the Chapter-house, nor would perform it any other ways; and then took the Oath. And after he had taken it, desired the Prothonotary the third time to make a publick Instru∣ment or Instruments thereof. Which he did. The Arch-Bi∣shop's Oath for the Temporal∣ties.To these Oaths I will add one more, which the Arch-Bishop took with a better Stomach to the King, for his Temporalties. This was for the most part the accustomable Oath of Bishops to the King, when they sued for their Temporalties; but hardly reconcilable with the Oath they had taken to the Pope: Because in this Oath was mentioned a renouncing of all Privileges and Grants of the Pope by virtue of his Bulls, that might be prejudicial to the King, and
an Acknowledgment, that they held their Bishopricks only of the King, which the Arch-Bishop worded more fully, viz. That he held his Archbishoprick of the King immediately and only, and of none other.No. VII. The Arch-bi∣shop pro∣nounceth the Divorce. I refer the Reader to the Appendix for this Oath. One of the first Services the Arch-Bishop did for the King, was the pronouncing the Sentence of Divorce from his former Queen Katharine, which was done May 23; but drew an implacable ha∣tred upon him from the Pope and Emperor abroad, as well as the Papists at home. And Queen Mary would not forget it, when She came to the Crown, taking then her full Revenge upon him: though in the same Commission, wherein this Sentence was pronounced, sat the Bishops of Winton, London, Bath, Lincoln, and many other great Clerks. And though he pronounced the Sentence, he was but the Mouth of the rest, and they were all in as deep as he. There is a short Account of Arch-Bishop Cranmer's Judgment of the unlawfulness of this Marriage, digested under twelve Articles,The Arch-bi∣shop's Judg∣ment of the Marriage. with his own Name writ by himself on the top of the Paper. Which Bishop Burnet transcribed from a Cotton Manuscript,Vol. I. Collect. p. 95. and in∣serted into his History. It bears this Title: Articuli ex quibus plane admodum demonstratur, Divortium inter Henricum VIII. Angliae Regem Invictissimum, & Serenissimam Catharinam necessario esse faciendum. The twelfth and concluding Article is this: We think that the pre∣tended Matrimony of Henry King of England, and Catharine the Queen, hath been, and is none at all, being prohibited both by the Law of God and Nature. CHAP. V. The Arch-Bishop visits his Diocess. AFter his Sentence against Q. Katharine,The Arch-bi∣shop forbids preaching. and confirmation of Q. Ann's Marriage, one thing he did, which looked as if he was not like to prove any great Friend to a Reformation. For he forbad all Preaching throughout his Diocess, and warned the rest of the Bishops throughout England to do the same,Foxii MSS. as I have it from an old Journal made by a Monk of St. Augustine's, Canterbury. But this was only for a time, till Orders for Preachers, and the Beads could be finished: it being thought convenient that Preaching at this Juncture should be restrained, because now the Matter of Sermons chiefly consisted in tossing about the King's Marriage with the Lady Anne, and condemning so publickly and boldly his doings against Q. Katharine, the Priests being set on work by her Friends and Faction. In October or November the Arch-bishop went down to Canterbury,Visits his Dio∣cess. in order to a Visitation. The third day of December the Arch-bishop received the Pontifi∣cal Seat in the Monastery of the Holy Trinity.August. Monks Journal. And soon after, viz. the Ninth of the same Month, began to go on Visitation through∣out all his Diocess, that he might have finished that Work before the Sessions of the Parliament.The Delusion of a Nun in Kent. This same Year a remarkable Delusion was discovered in the Arch-bishop's
Diocess, and even under his Nose, the Scene being chiefly laid in Canterbury, by some belonging to the Cathedral Church. For a certain Nun, called Elizabeth Barton, by marvellous Hypocrisy mocked all Kent, and almost all England: For which Cause she was put in Prison in London; Where she confessed many horrible things against the King and the Queen. This forenamed Elizabeth had many Adherents, but especially Dr. Bocking, Monk of Christ's-Church in Canterbury, who was her chief Author in her Dissimula∣tion. All of them at the last were accused of Treason, Heresy and Conspiracy. And so stood in Penance before the open Cross of S. Paul's in London; and in Canterbury in the Church-yard of the Monastery of the Holy Trinity, at the Sermon time they stood over the high Seat: where of the Preacher they were grievously rebuked for their horrible Fact. And in April the next Year, she, with Bock∣ing and Dering, another Monk of Canterbury, were led out of Prison through all the Streets of London unto Tyburn, where she and these Monks, and also two Brothers of the Minors, suffered with the rest upon the Gallows for Treason and Heresy. The Arch-bi∣shop appeals from the Pope.In the Month of November the Arch-bishop sent a Letter to Bonner the King's Ambassador at Marseilles, together with his Appeal from the Pope, to be there signified, as was hinted before. The reason whereof was this; Upon the King's Divorce from Q. Katharine, the Pope had by a publick Instrument declared the Divorce to be null and void, and threatned him with Excommunication, unless he would revoke all that he had done. Gardiner Bishop of Winton about this time, and upon this occasion, was sent Ambassador to the French King; and Bonner soon after followed him to Marseilles, Where Gardiner at the interview between the French King and the Pope, now was. For the King and the Council apprehended some Mischief to be hatching against the Kingdom by the Pope: who was now inciting the Emperor and other Princes to make War upon us. And indeed he had vaunted, as the Ld Herbert de∣clares, that he would set all Christendom against the King. And the Emperor in discourse had averred, that by the means of Scot∣land he would avenge his Aunt's Quarrel. The Arch-bishop in this Juncture had secret intimation of a Design to excommunicate him, and interdict his Church. Whereupon, as the King by Bonner, No∣vemb. 7, had made his Appeal from the Pope to the next General Council lawfully called; so by the King and Council's Advice, the Arch-bishop soon after did the same: sending his Appeal with his Proxy, under his Seal, to Bonner, desiring him together with Gar∣diner, to consult together, and to intimate his Appeal in the best manner they could think expedient for him. And this Letter he wrote by the King's own Commandment. It was not the Hand of the Arch-bishop, nor of his Secretary. So I suppose it was drawn up by some of his own Lawyers; and is as followeth: The Arch-bi∣shop's Letter to Bonner. Cleopat. E. 6.In my right hearty manner I commend me to you. So it is, as you know right well, I stand in dread, lest our Holy Father the Pope do intend to make some manner of prejudicial Process against me and my Church. And therefore having probable Con∣jectures thereof, I have appeal'd from his Holiness to the Gene∣ral
Council, accordingly as his Highness and his Council have advised me to do. Which my Appeal and Procuracie under my Seal, I do send unto you herewith; desiring you right-heartily to have me commended to my Ld of Winchester, and with his Ad∣vice and Counsel to intimate the said Provocation after the best manner, that his Lordship and you shall think most expedient for me. I am the bolder thus to write unto you, because the King's Highness commandeth me this to do, as you shall, I trust, further perceive by his Grace's Letter: Nothing doubting in your Goodness, but at this mine own desire you will be contented to take this Pains, though his Highness shall percase forget to write unto you therein. Which your Pains and Kindness, if it shall lie in me in time to come to recompense, I wol not forget it with God's Grace. Who preserve you, as my self. From Lambeth, the xxviith day of November. Thomas Cantuar. Cranmer being now placed at the Head of the Church of England,Disputes in thé Parliament a∣gainst the Pope's Supre∣macy. next under God and the King, and the chief care of it devolved upon him, his great study was conscientiously to discharge this high Vocation. And one of the first things, wherein he shewed his good Service to the Church, was done in the Parliament in the latter end of this Year 1533. When the Supremacy came under debate,Life of Cranm. inter Foxii MSS. and the usurped Power of the Bishop of Rome was propounded, then the old Collecti∣ons of the new Arch-bishop did him good service; for the chief, and in a manner the whole burden of this weighty Cause was laid upon his Shoulders. Insomuch that he was forced to answer to all that ever the whole Rabble of the Papists could say for the defence of the Pope's Supremacy: And he answered so plainly, directly and truly to all their Arguments, and proved so evidently and stoutly, both by the Word of God, and Consent of the Primitive Church, that this usurped Power of the Pope is a meer Tyranny, and directly against the Law of God: and that the Power of Emperors and Kings is the highest Power here upon Earth: Unto which, Bishops, Priests, Popes and Cardinals ought to submit themselves, and are as much bound to obey, as their Temporal Subjects, or Lay-men, (as the Priests call them) that the Issue was the abolishing of that Foreign Papal Power, and the expulsion of it out of this Realm, by the full consent of Parliament. A Licence dated Feb. 13. this Year,Licences for Chappels. was granted by the Arch-Bi∣shop to Mary the Relict of Sir Henry Guilford Kt. to have the Eucha∣rist, Matrimony and Baptism,Cran. Reg: ministred in any Chappel or Oratory within her Mannors where she should reside, during her Life. And such a Licence, dated also Feb. 13. the next Year, was granted by him to Margaret Marchioness of Dorset. Whether indulged to them by the Arch-Bishop, the rather to free them from danger for not fre∣quenting their Parish-Churches, and for the avoiding the Superstitious and Idolatrous Worship there performed; and that there might be some private Places for purer worshipping God, and administration of the Sacraments; or only for the Convenience of those Ladies, the Reader hath liberty to judg.
An. 1534.CHAP. VI. The Arch-bishop presseth the Translation of the Bible. The Arch-Bishop labours the Reforma∣tion of the Church.THIS Rub of the Papal Power being now taken out of the way, and the King's Supremacy settled in the next Sessions of Parliament, in Novemb. 1534. a Way was opened for a Reformation of Errors and Abuses in Religion. So that, as the Arch-bishop judg∣ed it a thing impossible to make any amendment of Religion under the Pope's Dominion; so he thought it now (the same being dis∣patched out of the Realm) a mee time to restore the true Doctrine of Christ, according to the Word of God, and the old Primitive Church, within his Jurisdiction and Cure; and with the said Pope, to abolish also all false Doctrine, Errors and Heresies, by him brought into the Church; for the accomplishing of which he let pass no Op∣portunities. What he did this Convoca∣tion.A Convocation now afforded him one. Our Arch-bishop, from his first entrance upon his Dignity, had it much in his mind to get the Holy Scriptures put into the Vulgar Language, and a Liberty for all to read them. The Convocation now was so well disposed, by the influence of the Arch-bishop and his Friends, that they did petition the King, that the Bible might be translated by some Learned Men of his Highnesses nomination. And as this good Motion was briefly made in the House by the Arch-bishop, so they agreed upon him to carry their Petition. But they clogged it with another, which the Arch-bishop did not so well approve of: For about the Month of De∣cember they pass'd this Order of Convocation. The Bishops, Ab∣bots, Priors of this Upper House of Convocation, of the Province of Canterbury, met together in the Chapter-House of St. Paul; unanimously did consent, that the most Reverend Father the Arch-bishop, should make instance in their Names to the King, that his Majesty would vouchsafe, for the encrease of the Faith of his Subjects, to decree and command, That all his Subjects, in whose possession any Books of suspect Doctrine were, especially in the Vulgar Language, imprinted, beyond or on this side the Sea, should be warned, within three Months, to bring them in before Persons to be appointed by the King, under a certain Pain to be li∣mited by the King. And that moreover his Majesty would vouchsafe to decree, that the Scriptures should be translated into the Vulgar Tongue, by some honest and learned Men, to be nominated by the King, and to be delivered unto the People according to their Learning. This was resolved in the Convocation, Decemb. 19. Accordingly the King issued out soon after his Proclamation. What this Proclamation was I do not know, unless it were one I meet with about this time, against bringing in, or printing seditious Books of Anabaptists and Sacramentaries, who were said to be lately come into the Realm: and against some of his own Subjects, who publick∣ly disputed in Taverns and other open Places, upon those Points of Religion, which the King was offended withal. For the Correcti∣on
and Regulating of which, the King in the said Proclamation com∣manded sundry Articles to be observed; which for the length of them I have put into the Appendix.No. VIII. Unless perhaps this Proclama∣tion may belong to the Year 1538. About the month of Iune this Year,A Book for preaching, and the Beads. was a Book drawn up for Bishops and Priests, wherein was an Order for preaching; and in the same were Forms devised for the Beads, as well for Preachers, as Curates. In which Forms the King's Title of Supream Head was specified. In this Book was commandment given by the King, that very Preacher should, before Easter, once in solemn Audience, de∣are the usurped Jurisdiction, within this Realm, of the Bishop of ome, and the King's just Cause to decline from the same: and also to open and declare such things as might avow and justify the King's refusal of Marriage with the Princess Dowager, and his contract anew with Queen Ann. And also in the same Book an Order was given for the suppression of the General Sentence or Curse.Dispersed by the Arch-bi∣shop to all the Bishops. This Book the Arch-bishop, who we may well suppose had a great hand in it, sent, by the King's Commandment, to all the Bishops, and to the Arch-bishop of York, though out of his Province: that Arch-bishop lying under some Jealousy as it seems with the King. Therefore after the receit of the Book,The Arch-bi∣shop of York preaches at York. the said Arch-bishop of York the next Sunday, which was the second Sunday after Trinity, went from Cawood to York, and there in his own Person declared, as well the King's Cause touching the Matrimony, as his refusal of the Pope's Jurisdiction, so fully, that nothing that needed to be o∣pened was left unspoken, as that Arch-bishop wrote himself to the King in his own Vindication. And that the Auditory might be the greater, he sent to York forthwith, upon the receit of the Book, to publish there, that he would be there the next Sunday following, and caused the Churches to make an end of their Service in such time, as every Man might have opportunity to be at the Sermon: and especially required the Mayor and his Brethren, and one Mr. Magnus, and Sir George Lawson, his Majesty's Chaplains to be there: And a very great Confluence there was. Then the Arch-bishop preached from that Text, Vxorem duxi, &c. Whence he took occasion to utter, and declare both his foresaid Matters, and the Injury done to the King's Highness by Pope Clement. As the Convocation this Year had declared the Pope to have no Jurisdiction in this Kingdom, so this would not serve the King,The Clergy and Universi∣ties subscribe against the Pope. till all the Learned and Spiritual Men in England had subscribed to it with their Hands. The Arch-bishop's Church of Canterbury began. For the Prior and Convent thereof, moved and influenced not a little by their Diocesan, solemnly subscribed an Instrument for abo∣lishing the Pope's Supremacy, and for acknowledgment of the King Supream Head of the Church of England, under this Position.Cleopat. E. 6. p. 208. Quod Romanus Episcopus non habet majorem aliqam jurisdictionem a Deo sibi collatam in hoc regno Angliae, quam quivis externus Episcopus. That is,
That the Bishop of Rome hath not some greater Iurisdiction conferred upon him by God in this Realm of England, than any other Fo∣reign Bishop. This was consented to by the Prior's own Hand subscribed, and sixty nine of the Convent besides. The Original whereof is in a Volume of the Cotton Library.Page 458. In another place of the same Vo∣lume is extant the Subscription of the Bishops, Deans, and several Abbots; and after that, of the University of Oxford, and all the particular Colleges: and after that, the Names of all the subscrib∣ing Priors of England. Cranmer and o∣thers admini∣ster the Oath of Succession to the Clergy.The Arch-bishop was one employed about the Act of Succession, that was made the last Sessions of Parliament: which was to invest the Succession to the Crown upon the Heirs of Q. Ann; and that Q. Katharine should be no more called Queen, but Princess Dowager. In the Preamble to the Act, there were certain Touches against the Pope's Supremacy, and against his Power of dispensing in the King's former Marriage with his Brother's Wife, carnally known by him. To this Act all Persons were to swear, to accept and main∣tain the same, upon pain of Treason. The Arch-bishop of Canter∣bury, the Ld Chancellor Audley, Secretary Crumwel, the Abbot of Westminster, and others, were the King's Commissioners appointed to tender this Oath. The Nobility and Gentry took it, none de∣nying, to which they set their Hands in a long List. On the 13th of April, the Commissioners sat at Lambeth to receive the Oaths of the Clergy, and chiefly those of London, that had not yet sworn; who all took it, not one excepted. And a certain Doctor, Vicar of Croyden, that it seems made some boggle before, went up with the rest: of whom Sir Thomas More, who then stood by, made an Observation, how, as he past, he went to my Lord's Buttery-hatch, and called for Drink, and drank valde familiariter; whether, saith he sarcastically, it were for Gladness, or Driness, or Quod ille notus erat Pontifici. The Oath also now was taken by Dr. Wylson, a great Court-Divine in those Days, who for Queen Katharine's Business was a Prisoner at this time, though a great while he was unsatisfied, and consulted much with Sir Thomas More a∣bout the Lawfulness of taking it. And to Sir Thomas More who refused it.The same Day were conveyed hither from the Tower, Bishop Fisher, and Sir Thomas More, the only Layman at this Meeting, to tender this Oath to them. Who both, being separately called, re∣fused it. After the Clergy were sworn and dispatched, immedi∣ately Sir Thomas by himself was sent for the second time.Sir Thomas More's Letters. Now he had much talk with the Lords, who would fain have brought him to comply. They urged him to declare the Cau∣ses why he would not Swear: But he excused his so doing. Then they charged him with Obstinacy: He said, it was not Obstinacy, but because he might not declare his Mind without peril of incurring the King's further Displeasure. He told the Commissioners, that for his part he condemned not the Consciences of any; but that he was dissatisfied in his own Conscience for cer∣tain Reasons.Cranmer's Ar∣gument with him. The Arch-bishop taking hold of this, spake to him thus, That it appeared well, that Sir Thomas did not take it for a
very sure thing and a certain, that he might not lawfully swear, but rather as a thing uncertain and doubtful. But you know, said my Lord, for a certainty, and for a thing without doubt, that you be bound to obey your Soveraign Lord the King. And therefore are you bound to leave off the doubt of your unsure Conscience, in refusing the Oath, and take the sure way in obey∣ing of your Prince who commands you to Swear. This Argu∣ment, as Sir Thomas confessed in one of his Letters to his Daugh∣ter Roper, seemed so subtil, and with such Authority coming out of so Noble a Prelate's Mouth, that he could answer again nothing thereto: but only that he thought with himself, that he might not so do, because that in his Conscience this was one of the Causes in which he was bounden, that he should not obey his Prince; sith that whatsoever other Folks thought in the Matter, (whose Consci∣ence or Learning, as he said, he would not condemn, or take upon him to judg) yet in his Conscience the Truth seemed on the other Side, wherein he had informed his Conscience neither suddenly nor slightly, but by long leisure and diligent search for the Matter. In fine, the farthest Sir Thomas could be brought,More offers to swear to the Succession it self. and which he offered voluntarily that Morning, was to swear to the Succession, (which was the main Design of the Act) though not to the Pream∣ble. At parting the Lord Chancellor bad the Secretary, before More, take notice, that More denied not, but was content to swear the Succession. More assented and said, in that Point he would be con∣tented, so that he might see the Oath so framed, as might stand with his Conscience. Fisher Bishop of Rochester, offered the same before this Assembly,Bishop Fisher offers the same. that More had done: and in a Letter of his afterwards writ to the Se∣cretary, assigned the Reason why he could, with a good Conscience, swear to the Succession, viz. because he doubted not but that the Prince of a Realm, with the Assent of the Nobles and Commons, might appoint his Successors according as he pleased.No. IX. In the Appen∣dix this Letter will be found, which Bishop Fisher writ upon occasion of the Secretary's Advice, who laboured to gain him, that he should write to the King, to declare his Mind to him in swearing to the Suc∣cession; and to petition him to let that suffice, because his Consci∣ence could not consent to the rest of the Act. The Secretary also had sent unto Fisher, lying in the Tower, Lee Bishop Elect of Lich∣field and Coventry; to whom he declared again, that he would take the Oath to the Succession; and moreover, that he would swear ne∣ver to meddle more in Disputation of the Matrimony, and promised all Allegiance to the King. But he told Lee, his Conscience could not be convinced, that the Marriage was against the Law of God, because of a Prohibition in the Levitical Law. See Lee's Letter, in the Appendix, to Secretary Crumwel.No. X. The Arch-bishop,The Arch-bi∣shop writes to Crumwel in their behalf. soon after that meeting of the Commissioners at Lambeth, retired to Croydon: And being a Man not kind to his own Party and Perswasion only, and fierce and bloody-minded to them that differed from him, but compassionate towards all, Friend and Foe; his tender Spirit suggested to him, to make this serve for an Occasion to intercede for More and Fisher, to Crumwel; shewing him
in a Letter, dated April the 17th, how adviseable in his Judgment it would be to be satisfied with that Oath they had offered to swear, in case they would swear to maintain the said Succession against all Power and Potentates: Urging to him that there would be these Ad∣vantages gained thereby. First, That it would be a means to satisfy the Consciences of the Princess Dowager and the Lady Mary; who it seems made it a Matter of Conscience and Sin to abandon their Titles. Also, that it might tend to stop the Emperor's Mouth, and the Mouths of other their Friends, when Fisher and More, who had stickled so much for them, should now own that Succession, which would be in effect a disowning of them. Secondly, That it might be a means to resolve and quiet also many others in the Realm that were in doubt, when such great Men should affirm by Oath and Sub∣scription, that the Succession mentioned in the said Act was good, and according to God's Laws. And he thought, that after two such had sworn, there would be scarce one in the Kingdom would reclaim a∣gainst it. And thirdly, That though a great many in the Realm could not be brought to alter from their Opinions of the Validity of the King's former Marriage, and of the Bishop of Rome's Authority, that it would be a great Point gained, if all with one accord would own and acknowledg the Succession. The Arch-bi∣shop's endea∣vour to save the Lives of More & Fisher.Weaver, the Author of the Funeral Monuments, transcribed this Letter out of the Cotton Library, and inserted it into his said Book: and the thing he takes notice of therein, is the Wisdom and Policy of the prudent Arch-bishop. I shall take notice of another thing, and which I suppose was the great Cause that employed his Pen at this time, namely, his tender Heart, and abhorrence from Blood-shedding: Propounding these Politick Considerations to the Secretary, which were the properest Arguments to be used with a Statesman, and for him to use and urge before the King; that so he might be an Instru∣ment of saving the Lives of these Men, however they differed from him, and it may be were none of his very good Friends. This Let∣ter of the Arch-bishop's, as I my self took it from the Original, I thought worthy depositing among Cranmer's Monuments in the Ap∣pendix.No. XI. But this Offer of theirs, notwithstanding the Arch-bishop's Arguments and Endeavours, would not be accepted. The King would not be satisfied with this Swearing by halves. CHAP. VII. The Arch-bishop visits the Diocess of Norwich. A Premunire brought a∣gnst Bishop Nix.THE Popish Bishops were now at a low ebb; and being under the Frowns of their Prince, other Men took the opportuni∣ties, upon their Slips, to get them punished. A Storm now fell up∣on Richard Nix Bishop of Norwich, a vitious and dissolute Man, as Godwin writes.Cotton Libra. Cleop. F. 1. Against him was a Premunire this Year (25 of Hen. VIII.) brought. That, De tout temps, there had been a Custom in the Town of Thetford in the County of Norfolk, that no Inhabitant of the same Town should be drawn in Plea in any Court Christian
for any Spiritual Causes, but before the Dean in the said Town. And there was a Presentment in the King's Court, before the Mayor of the Town, by twelve Jurors, that there was such a Custom. And be∣side, that whosoever should draw any Man out of the said Town, in any Spiritual Court, should forfeit six shillings and eight pence. The Bishop nevertheless cited the Mayor to appear before him, pro Salute animae: And upon his appearance libelled for that Cause, and enjoined him, upon pain of Excommunication, not to admit the said Presentment. And whenas the Bishop could not deny his Fact, Judgment was given, that he should be out of the King's Protection, his Goods and Chattels forfeited, and his Body in Prison during the King's Pleasure. For which he had the King's Pardon. Which was afterwards confirmed in Parliament. This Bishop's Diocess was now in such disorder,The Arch-bishop visit this Bishop's See. that the Arch-bishop instituted a Visitation of that See; wherein William May LL. D. was the Arch-bishop's Commissary. The 28th of Iuly, the Bishop was called and summoned to appear, but appeared not: And so was pronounced Contumax.Cranmer's Reg. But at another meeting he sent Dr. Cap his Proctor, by whom he made a Protestation against their Doings and Jurisdiction; and that it was not decent for that Reverend Father to appear before him, the Arch-bishop's Official. However at ano∣ther meeting, the Bishop not appearing at the Time and Place ap∣pointed, Dr. May declared him obstinate, and to incur the Penalty of Obstinacy. After this the Bishop, by his Proctor, was willing to submit to obey Law, and to stand to the Command of the Church, and to do Penance for his said Contumacy, to be enjoined by the Arch-bishop, or his Commissary. At another Court the Bishop appeared in Person, and then shewed himself willing to take the said Commissary for Visitor, or any other in the Name of the Arch-bishop of Canter∣bury. This Bishop was now fourscore Years old, and blind, as appears by a Writing of his sent by his Proctor, dated Septemb. 1534. He died two Years after, and came in to be Bishop in the Year 1500. This Bishop seems to have made himself very odious in his Diocess,The Bishop of Norwich a Pe∣secutor. by his Fierceness and Rigors against such as were willing to be better informed in Religion; whom he would stile Men savouring of the Frying-pan. He seized such Books as were brought from beyond-Sea, of which sort there were now many, which tended to lay open the Corruptions of the Church; and especially the New Testament, which he could not endure should be read. And when some of these commonly gave out, that it was the King's Pleasure that such Books should be read, he sent up studiously by the Abbot of Hyde, to have this shewed to the King; and begged his Letters under his Seal, to be directed to him, or any body else whom the King pleased in his Diocess, to declare it was not his Pleasure such Books should be a∣mong his Subjects, and to punish such as reported it was. He sent also a Letter to Warham then Arch-bishop of Canterbury, making his Complaint and Information to him, desiring him to send for the said Abbot, who should tell him what his Thoughts were for the sup∣pression of these Men; and intreating the Arch-bishop to inform the King against these erroneous Men, as he called them. Some part of his Diocess was bounded with the Sea, and Ipswich and Yarmouth,
and other Places of considerable Traffick, were under his Jurisdicti∣on.An. 1535. And so there happened many Merchants and Mariners, who by Converse from Abroad, had received knowledg of the Truth, and brought in divers good Books. This mightily angred the zealous Bi∣shop, and he used all the Severity he could to stop the Progress of Evangelical Truth, and wished for more Authority from the King to punish it; for his Opinion was, that if they continued any time, he thought they would undo them all, as he wrote to the Arch-bishop. This Letter is in the Appendix.No. XII. Bishops Consecrated. April the 19th, the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, invested in his Pontificals,Goodrick Lee, and Salcot con∣secrated Bi∣shops. consecrated Thomas Goodrick, Doctor of Decrees, Bishop of Ely, in his Chappel at Croydon; together with Rowland Lee, Doctor of Law, Bishop of Litchfield and Coventry; and Iohn Salcot, alias Capon, Doctor of Law, Bishop of Bangor: being assisted by Iohn Bishop of Lincoln, and Christopher Bishop of Sidon. CHAP. VIII. The Arch-bishop preacheth at Canterbury. An. 1535.IN order to the bettering the State of Religion in the Nation, the Arch-bishop's Endeavours, both with the King and the Clergy,The Arch-bishop preach∣es up the King's Supre∣macy at Can∣terbury. were not wanting, from time to time. And something soon after fell out, which afforded him a fair opportunity: which was this. The King resolving to vindicate his own Right of Supre∣macy against the Encroachments of Popes in his Dominions, espe∣cially now the Parliament had restored it to him, being at Win∣chester, sent for his Bishops thither about Michaelmas, ordering them to go down to their respective Diocesses, and there in their own Persons to preach up the Regal Authority, and to explain to the People the Reason of excluding the Pope from all Jurisdiction in these Realms. Our Arch-bishop, according to this Command, speeds down into his Diocess to promote this Service for the King, and the Church too. He went not into the neerer parts of Kent about Otford and Knol, where his most frequent Residence used to be; because his Influence had a good effect for the Instruction of the People thereabouts in this, as well as in other Points of sound Religion: But he repaired into the East parts of his Diocess, where he preached up and down upon the two Articles, of the Pope's Usurpations, and the King's Supremacy. But the People of Canter∣bury being less perswaded of these Points, than all his Diocess be∣sides, there in his Cathedral Church, he preached two Sermons: wherein he insisted upon three things. I. That the Bishop of Rome was not God's Vicar upon Earth, as he was taken. Here he declared by what Crafts the Bishop of Rome had obtained his usurped Authority.
II. That the Holiness that See so much boasted of, and by which Name Popes affected to be stiled, was but a Holiness in Name; and that there was no such Holiness at Rome. And here he launched out into the Vices and profligate kind of living there. III. He inveighed against the Bishop of Rome's Laws. Which were miscalled Divinae Leges, and Sacri Canones. He said, that those of his Laws, which were good, the King had commanded to be observed: And so they were to be kept out of obedience to him. And here he descended to speak of the Ceremonies of the Church: that they ought not to be rejected, nor yet to be observed with an Opinion, that of themselves they make Men holy, or remit their Sins; seeing our Sins are remitted by the Death of our Saviour Christ. But that they were observed for a common Commodity, and for good Order and Quietness, as the Common Laws of the Kingdom were. And for this Cause, Ceremonies were instituted in the Church, and for a remembrance of many good things; as the King's Laws dispose Men unto Justice and unto Peace. And therefore he made it a general Rule, that Ceremonies were to be ob∣served as the Laws of the Land were. These Sermons of the Arch-bishop,A Prior preaches a∣gainst him. it seems, as they were new Doctrines to them, so they were received by them at first with much gladness. But the Friars did not at all like these Discourses: They thought such Doctrines laid open the Truth too much, and might prove prejudicial unto their Gains. And therefore by a Combina∣tion among themselves, they thought it convenient, that the Arch-bishop's Sermons should be by some of their Party confuted, and in the same place where he preached them. So soon after came up the Prior of the black Friars in Canterbury, levelling his Discourse against the three things that the Arch-bishop had preached. He asserted the Church of Christ never erred: that he would not slander the Bishops of Rome; and that the Laws of the Church were equal with the Laws of God. This angry Prior also told the Arch-bishop to his Face, in a good Audience, concerning what he had preached of the Bishop of Rome's Vices, that he knew no Vices by none of the Bishops of Rome. And whereas the Arch-bishop had said in his Sermon to the People, that he had prayed many Years, that we might be separated from that See, and that he might see the Power of Rome destroyed, be∣cause it wrought so many things contrary to the Honour of God, and the Wealth of the Realm; and because he saw no hopes of amendment; and that he thanked God he had now seen it in this Realm; for this the Prior cried out against him, that he preached uncharitably. The Arch-bishop not suffering his Authority to be thus affronted,Whom he con∣vents before him. nor the King's Service to be thus hindred, convented the Prior before him before Christmass. At his first examination, he denied that he preached against the Arch-bishop, and confessed that his Grace had not preached any thing amiss: But sometime afterward, being got free from the mild Arch-bishop, and being secretly upheld by some Persons in the Combination, he then said, he had preached amiss in many things, and that he purposely preached against him. This
created the Arch-bishop abundance of Slander in those parts. The Business came to the King's Ears, who seemed to require the Arch-bishop to censure him in his own Court. But upon occasion of this, the Arch-bishop wrote his whole Cause in a Letter to the King,The Arch-bishop ac∣quaints the King with the matter. dated from his House at Ford, 1535. Decla∣ring what he had preached, and what the other had preached in con∣tradiction to him. And withal entreated his Majesty, that he, the Arch-bishop, might not have the judging of him, lest he might seem partial; but that he would commit the hearing unto the Lord Privy Seal, who was Crumwel: or else to assign unto him other Persons, whom his Majesty pleased; that the Cause might be jointly heard together. He appealed to the King and his Council, If the Pri∣or did not defend the Bishop of Rome, though he had said nothing else, than that the Church never erred. For then they were no Errors, as he inferred, that were taught, of the Pope's Power; and that he was Christ's Vicar in Earth, and by God's Law Head of all the World, Spiritual and Temporal; and that all People must believe that de necessitate Salutis; and that whosoever did any thing against the See of Rome, is an Heretick. But if these be no Errors, then your Grace's Laws, said he, be Erroneous, that pro∣nounce the Bishop of Rome to be of no more Power than other Bishops, and them to be Traitors, that defend the contrary. In fine, in the stomach of an Arch-bishop, and finding it necessary to put a stop to the ill designs of these Friars, he concluded, That if that Man, who had so highly offended the King, and openly preached against him, being his Ordinary, and Metropolitan of the Province, and that in such Matters as concerned the Autho∣rity, Mis-living and Laws of the Bishop of Rome; and that also within his own Church: if he were not looked upon, he left it to the King's Prudence to expend, what Example it might prove unto others, with like colour to maintain the Bishop of Rome's Authority; and of what estimation he the Arch-bishop should be reputed hereafter, and what Credence would be given unto his preaching for time to come. And he left his Majesty to hear the Testimony of Dr. Leighton, one of the King's Visitors, who was present at the Sermon the Arch-bishop then made. This Letter, the Contents whereof I have now set down, I have placed in the Appendix,No. XIII. as well worthy the preserving among the rest of the Mo∣numents of this Arch-bishop, as I transcribed it out of the Cotton Li∣brary. I do not find what Issue this Business had: but I suspect the Black Friars of Canterbury had a black Mark set upon them by the King for this Opposition of his Arch-bishop, in the discharge of his Commands. But to speak a little of a Provincial Visitation, Iure Metropolitico, which the Arch-bishop had begun the last Year,A Provincial Visitation. viz. 1534, being his first Visitation. It was somewhat extraordinary; for such a Visi∣tation had not been in an hundred Years before. For this he got the King's Licence, to countenance his doings, knowing what oppositi∣ons he should meet with. In the Month of May we find him at his House at Otford about this Business: The main End whereof was to promote the King's Supremacy, and, as opportunity served, to cor∣rect
the Superstitions of this Church, and to inspect even Bishops and Cathedrals themselves. In Apr. 1535,Winchester here∣in opposeth him. Cranmer had sent his Monition to Steph. Gardiner Bishop of Winchester, that he would visit his Diocess. The Bishop, who never lo∣ved the Arch-bishop, and being a great upholder of the old Popish Su∣perstitions, was the more jealous of this Visitation, opposing himself as much as he could against it; and would have picked an Hole in Cran∣mer's Coat, for stiling himself, in the Instrument of the Process, To∣tius Angliae Primas; as though this had been an high Reflection up∣on the King, and detracted much from his Supremacy. Of this therefore he went and made a Complaint to the King himself: and taking it in some Indignation, that the Arch-bishop should visit his Diocess, he pretended to the King, that the Clergy of his Diocess would be driven to great streights, and mightily oppress'd, if it should be now visited again, having been visited but five Years ago by his Predecessor Warham; especially being also to pay a new Duty, enjoined by the Parliament, namely, their Tenths; hoping hereby to evade the Arch-bishop's inspection into the Corruptions of the Diocess of Winchester. All this Crumwel, his Friend, certified him of, by his Chaplain,The ABp's vindication of his title of Primate one Champion. Winchester indeed, whatsoever he pretended, tendred not so much the King's Cause, as his own, that he might not be visi∣ted. For otherwise he would have complained to the King of this Matter before Cranmer's signification to him of a Visitation, since he always bare the Title of Primate of all England, as being the com∣mon Stile of the Arch-bishop. And if this Stile of Primacy was a diminution to the King, it would have been so to the Pope, when Winchester held him, as he did once, for Supream Head of the Church: but then he never made any complaint against those Arch-bishops that stiled themselves Primats. The Pope's Supream Au∣thority was not less thought of, because he had such Primates un∣der him, but rather more. And the King might therefore have such as were Primates under him, without any derogation to his Autho∣rity. Nor did Cranmer value at all Names and Titles; and if he thought it any thing interfering with the King's Honour, he would himself have been the first to sue for the taking it wholly away. This he signified in a Letter to Secretary Crumwel; which because it hath many excellent things declarative of the good Temper and Spirit of Cranmer, I have presented it to the Reader's Eye in the Appendix,No. XIV. being an Original in the Cotton Library. And as Winchester had pick'd a Quarrel with him for one part of his Archiepiscopal Stile; so Stokesly Bishop of London,The Bp of London refu∣seth his Visi∣tation. a Man of the same inveterate Temper against Cranmer, refused his Visitation, be∣cause he stiled himself, in his Monitions, Apostolicae Sedis Legatus. For under that Title he Convented that Bishop, with the Abbots, Priors, and Arch-deacon of London, to appear before him at a Visita∣tion, which he intended to hold at the Chapter-house in St. Paul's Church London. But the Bishop of London, and the Chapter, war∣ned him of assuming that Title, as making against the King's Prero∣gative. And at the Visitation it self in S. Paul's, they made a Pro∣testation; which was openly read. The import whereof was, that
they would not accept him as such a Legate, and neither admit nor submit to his Visitation under that Name; and required the Arch-bishop's Register to enter their Protestation. And upon his refusal thereof, delivered a Certificate of what they had done. Stokesly also contended with him for suspending all the Jurisdiction of the Bishop, Dean, and Arch-deacon, during his Visitation. To which the Arch-bishop answered, it was no more than his Predecessors had usually done in those Cases. In fine, they appealed, in their own justifica∣tion, unto the King, and desired his Licence to defend themselves against him by the Laws, and as the Parliament had provided. Thus they shewed before, their secret Malice, and violent Opposition against the good Arch-bishop, and how afraid they were of his Visitation; glad to catch any thing to enervate his Authority. The sum of which Appeal drawn up by Stokesly, being somewhat too long to be subjoined here,No. XV. may be read in the Appendix. Finally, upon the Arch-bishop's visiting of his Diocess, he entred three Protestations against it (as may appear in Stokesley's Register) for preserving his Privileges.And protests gainst him. Cranmer sends him a part of the New Te∣stament to translate. And his Answer.This Man ever carried himself perversely to the Arch-bishop. It was not long after this time, that the Arch-bishop, whose Mind ran very much upon bringing in the free use of the Holy Scripture in English among the People, put on vigorously a Translation of it. And that it might not come to be prohibited, as it had been, upon pretence of the Ignorance or Unfaithfulness of the Translators, he proceeded in this method.xii MSS. First, He began with the Translation of the New Testament; taking an old English Translation thereof, which he divided into nine or ten Parts; causing each Part to be written at large in a paper Book, and then to be sent to the best Lear∣ned Bishops and others; to the intent they should make a perfect Correction thereof. And when they had done, he required them to send back their Parts, so corrected, unto him at Lambeth, by a day li∣mited for that purpose: and the same course, no question, he took with the Old Testament. It chanced that the Acts of the Apostles were sent to Bishop Stokesly to oversee and correct. When the Day came, every Man had sent to Lambeth their Parts corrected, only Stokeslye's Portion was wanting: My Lord of Canterbury wrote to the Bi∣shop a Letter for his Part, requiring him to deliver them unto the Bringer his Secretary. He received the Arch-bishop's Letter at Ful∣ham. Unto which he made this Answer; I marvel what my Lord of Canterbury meaneth, that thus abuseth the People, in giving them liberty to read the Scriptures: which doth nothing else but infect them with Heresy. I have bestowed never an Hour upon my Porti∣on, nor never will. And therefore my Lord shall have this Book again, for I will never be guilty of bringing the simple People into Error. My Lord of Canterbury's Servant took the Book, and brought the same to Lambeth unto my Lord, declaring my Lord of London's Answer. When the Arch-bishop had perceived that the Bishop had done nothing therein, I marvel, said he▪ that my Lord of London is so froward that he will not do as other Men do. One Mr. Thomas▪ Lawney stood by;wney's Jest upon Sokesly. and hearing my Lord speak so much of the Bishop's untowardness, said, I can tell your Grace why my
Lord of London will not bestow any labour or pains this way. Your Grace knoweth well, that his Portion is a piece of New Te∣stament. But he being perswaded, that Christ had bequeathed him nothing in his Testament, thought it mere madness to bestow any labour or pain, where no Gain was to be gotten. And besides this, it is the Acts of the Apostles; which were simple poor Fellows, and therefore my Lord of London disdained to have to do with any of them. Whereat my Lord of Canterbury, and others that stood by, could not forbear from laughter. This Lawney was a witty Man,Who this Law∣ney was. and Chaplain to the old Duke of Norfolk, and had been one of the Scholars placed by the Cardinal in his New College at Oxon. Where he was Chaplain of the House, and Prisoner there with Frith, another of the Scholars. In the Time of the six Articles he was a Minister in Kent, placed there, I suppose, by the Arch-bishop. When that severe Act was past, more by the Authority of a Parliament, than by the Authority of the Word of God, it chanced, that my Lord of Norfolk meeting with this his Chaplain, said, O! my Lawney, (knowing him of old much to favour Priests Matrimony) whether may Priests now have Wives or no? If it please your Grace, replied he, I cannot well tell whether Priests may have Wives or no: But well I wot, and am sure of it, for all your Act, that Wives will have Priests. Hearken, Masters, said the Duke, how this Knave scorneth our Act, and maketh it not worth a Fly. Well, I see by it that thou wilt never forget thy old Tricks. And so the Duke, and such Gentlemen as were with him, went away merrily, laughing at Lawney's sudden and apt Answer. The Reader will excuse this Digression. CHAP. IX. Monasteries visited. THis Year the Monasteries were visited by Cramwel,Monasteri visited. The ABp for their Dissolution. Chief Vi∣sitor. Who appointed Leighton, Legh, Petre, London, his De∣puties, with Injunctions given them to be observed in their Visita∣tion. Indeed the King now had thoughts of dissolving them, as well as visiting them. Whose Ends herein were, partly because he saw the Monks and Friars so untoward towards him, and so bent to the Pope; and partly to enrich himself with the Spoils. Arch-bishop Cranmer is said also to have counselled and pressed the King to it▪ but for other Ends, viz. That out of the Revenues of these Mo∣nasteries, the King might found more Bishopricks; and that Dio∣cesses being reduced into less compass, the Diocesans might the better discharge their Office, according to the Scripture and Primitive Rules: And because the Arch-bishop saw how inconsistent these Foundations were with the Reformation of Religion; Purgatory, Masses, Pilgrimages, Worship of Saints and Images being effectual to their Constitution, as the Bishop of Sarum hath observed.Hist. R. P. . p. 189, 190. And the Arch-bishop hoped that from these Ruins there would be new Foun∣dations in every Cathedral erected, to be Nurseries of Learning, for
the use of the whole Diocess. But however short our Arch-bishop fell of his Ends, desired and hoped for by these Dissolutions, the King obtained his. For the vast Riches that the Religious Houses brought in to the King, may be guessed by what was found in one, namely, S. Swithins, Winchester. An account of the Treasures where∣of I having once observed from a Manuscript in the Benet Library, thought not amiss here to lay before the Reader; which he may find in the Appendix.No. XVI. The Visitors Informations.When these Visitors returned home from their Visitation, they came well stock'd with Informations of the loose, wicked and abo∣minable Lives, and Irregularities of the chief Members of these Houses of Religion, having by diligent inquisition throughout all England collected them. These Enormities were read publickly in the Parliament-House, being brought in by the Visitors. When they were first read, nothing was done with these unclean Abbots and Pri∣ors: But within a while, saith Latimer in a Sermon before King Edward,Second Ser∣mon. how bad soever the Repts of them were, some of them were made Bishops, and others put into good Dignities in the Church: that so the King might save their Pensions, which were otherwise to be paid them. Now I will, at the conclusion of my Collections for this Year, set down the Names of the Bishops this Year consecrated, both Diocesan and Suffragan:Bishops Dio∣cesan and Suf∣fragan conse∣crated. there having ben an Act of Parliament made in the six and twentieth of the King, (that is, the last Year) for furnishing the Diocesses with six and twenty Suffragans, for the better aid and comfort of the Diocesans: The Ses whereof are all set down in the said Act. But I doubt whether there were ever so many made. At least the mention of the Acts of the Consecration of some of the Suffragans in the Province of Canterbury are omitted in the Register. Suffragan Bps usual in the Realm.Before this Act of Parliament enjoining the number of Suffragans, Suffragans were not unusual in the Realm. Whom the Bishops Dio∣cesans, either for their own ease, or because of their necessary ab∣sence from their Diocesses in Ambassies abroad, or Attendance upon the Court, or civil Affairs, procured to be consecrated to reside in their steads. Thus to give some Instances of them, as I have met with them. About the Year 1531, I find one Vnderwood, Suffra∣gan in Norwich, that degraded Bilney before his Martyrdom. Cer∣tain, bearing the Title of Bishops of Sidon, assisted the Arch-Bishops of Canterbury. One of these was named Thomas Wellys, Prior of S. Gregories by Canterbury. He, being Arch-Bishop Warham's Chap∣lain, was sent by him to Cardinal Wolsey, to expostulate with him in his Lord's Name, for encroaching upon his Prerogative Court. There was afterwards one Christopher, that bore that Title, and as∣sisted Arch-bishop Cranmer about these Times in Ordinations; and another Thomas, intitled also of Sidon, succeeded. Long before these, I find one William Bottlesham, Espicopus Navatensis, Anno 1382, at the Convocation House in London, summoned against the Wickli∣vites,Ex Regist. ABp Courtney. that then shewed themselves at Oxford. Robert King, Abbot of Oseney, while Abbot, was consecrated titular Bishop, and called Episcopus Roannensis, a See in the Province of the Arch-bishoprick of
Athens. This is he that resigned Oseny, and Tame, under the name of Bishop of Reonen: Of which See the Bishop of Sarum was at a stand.Hist. Re. Coll. p. 148. Godwin's Catal. He was translated from this imaginary Bishoprick to be Bi∣shop of Oxford, in the Year 1541. One Iohn Hatton had the Title of Episcopus Negropont: He was Suffragan under the Arch-bishop of York. Iohn Thornden, who was several times Commissiary of Oxon, while Arch-bishop Warham was Chancellor of that University, was stiled Episcopus Syrinensis. And hereafter,Ath. Oxonien. in the progress of this Book, we shall meet with a Bishop of Hippolitanum, who assisted Arch-bishop Cranmer at his Ordinations. These were but Titulary Bishops; and the use of them was, to supply the Diocesans absence, to consecrate Churches and Church-yards, and to reconcile them, to assist at Ordinations, and confer Orders, to confirm Children, and the like. Sometimes these Suffragans had no Titles at all to any place,Bishops with∣out Title. but were Bishops at large. Such an one, named Richard Martin, is met with in an old Register at Canterbury, who was Guardian of the Gray-Fryars there. By his last Will, made 1498, he gave a Library to the Church and Covent. He was Parson of Ickham, and Vicar of Lyd in Kent; and writ himself in the said Will,Sumner's Antiq. of Cant. Bishop of the Vni∣versal Church: By which the Antiquarian supposed nothing else was meant, but that he was a Bishop in Name, endued with Orders, but not with Jurisdiction Episcopal, having no particular Charge to in∣tend, but generally officiating as Bishop in any part of the Christian Church. This I have writ, that the Reader may not be put to a stand, when he shall, in these Commentaries, meet with some of these Titular Bishops. But proceed we now to the Bishops that were this Year Conse∣crated. Diocesan Bishops. April the 11th, Nicholas Shaxton was consecrated Bishop of Sarum,Nic. Shaxton. in the King's Chappel of S. Stephen, by our Arch-bishop, Iohn Bi∣shop of Lincoln and Christopher Sidoniens. assisting. Septemb. the 15th, was the Act of Confirmation and Election of Edward Fox, Elect of Hereford,Edward Fox. William Barlow. and of William Barlow Prior of the Priory of Canons Regular of Bisham, of the Order of S. Augustin Sarum, for the Bishoprick of S. Asaph. The Consecration of these two last are not inserted in the Register. March the 18th,George Brown. the Act of Confirmation and Election of George Brown, D. D. Provincial of the Order of Friars Augustin in the City of London, for the Arch-bishoprick of Dublin. Consecrated March the 19th by the Arch-bishop at Lambeth, Nicholas Bishop of Sarum, and Iohn Bishop of Rochester assisting. Of this last-mentioned Bishop, I shall take some further notice,A Memorial of the good Ser∣vices of ABp Brown in Ire∣land. Life and Death of Geo. Brown, printed in Dublin. having been the first Protestant Bishop in Ireland, as Cranmer was in England; a great furtherer of the Reformation in that Land, being a stirring Man, and of good Parts and Confidence. He was first ta∣ken notice of by Crumwel, Lord Privy Seal, and by his sole means preferred to this Dignity in the Church of Ireland: upon the obser∣vation
that was taken of him, when he was Provincial of the Au∣gustin Order in England, advising all People to make their Applica∣tion only to Christ, and not to Saints. Whereby he was recom∣mended unto K. Henry, who much favoured him. When the King's Supremacy was to be brought in, and recognized in Ireland, which was the same Year wherein he was made Arch-bishop; he was ap∣pointed one of the King's Commissioners, for the procuring the No∣bility, Gentry and Clergy, to reject the Pope, and to own the King for Supream Head of the Church. In which Commission he acted with that diligence, that it was to the hazard of his Life, such op∣position was made to it in that Realm. At which time, in an As∣sembly of the Clergy, George Dowdal Arch-bishop of Ardmagh made a Speech to them, and laid a Curse upon those, whosoever they were, that should own the King's Supremacy. Within five Years after this, this Arch-bishop Brown caused all Superstitious Relicks and Images to be removed out of the two Cathedrals in Dublin, and out of the rest of the Churches in his Diocess; and ordered the Ten Commandments, the Lord's Prayer, and the Creed, to be set up in Frames above the Altar in Christ's-Church Dublin. In K. Edward VI. his Reign, he received the English Common-Prayer-Book into that Realm, upon the King's Proclamation for that purpose, after much opposition by Dowdal. And it was read in Christ's-Church, Dublin, on Easter Day, 1551. He preached also a Sermon in Christ's-Church, for having the Scripture in the Mother-Tongue, and against Image-worship. And for this his forwardness and conformity in Religion, and the perverseness of the other Arch-bishop of Ardmagh, who had violently resisted all good Proceedings, the Title of Prima∣cy was taken from him, and conferred upon the Arch-bishop of Dublin: And Dowdal was banished, or, as others say, voluntarily left his Bishoprick. And then Goodacre, sent from England with Bale for the See of Ossory, succeeded. In Q. Mary's days, Dowdal was restored: and, being a great Man in this Reign, expulsed Arch∣bishop Brown from his See, for being a married Man: Who two or three Years after was succeeded by Hugh Corwin, (a Complier in all Reigns) and Brown soon after died. Suffragan Bishops. Tho. Mannyng.The first of these standing in the Register of the Arch-bishop, was the Suffragan of the See of Ipswich. The Bishop of Norwich, according to the direction of the late Act,Regist. Cran. (wherein the Bishop was to nominate two for Suffragan to the King, and the King was to name one of them to the Arch-bishop, to receive Consecration) humbly signified to the King, that he was destitute of the Aid of a Suffragan; and so prayed him to appoint, either George, Abbot of the Monastery of S. Mary's of Leyston, or Thomas Mannyng, Prior of the Monastery of S. Mary's of Butley, to be his Suffragan; without mentioning for what place. And on the 7th of March, in the 27th of his Reign, he sent to the Arch-bishop to make the latter Suffragan of Gipwich. Who was accordingly consecrated by the Arch-bishop, and invested in insigniis Episcopalibus; Nicholas Bishop of Sarum, and
Iohn Bishop of Rochester, assisting. The Date not specified; but pro∣bably on the same Day with the Consecration following,An. 1536. there being the same Assistants. The said Bishop of Norwich sent to the King,Iohn Salisbury. recommending to him to be Suffragan, Thomas de Castleacre, of the Cluniac Order, and Iohn Salisbury Prior of S. Faiths of Horsham, of the Order of S. Benet, both Priors of Monasteries in Norwich Diocess. The King sent to the Arch-bishop to consecrate Iohn the Prior of S. Faiths, for Suffragan of Thetford. Accordingly he consecrated him March the 19th, Ni∣cholas Bishop of Sarum, and Iohn Bishop of Rochester assisting. CHAP. X. The Audience Court. THE good Arch-bishop almost every Year met with new Op∣position from the Popish Clergy.An. 1536. The late Act for abolishing the Pope's Authority, and some Acts before that, for restraining of Applications to Rome,The ABp's Audience Court struck at. served them now as a Colour to strike at one of the Arch-bishop's Courts, viz. that of the Audience, (a Court which the Arch-bishops used to hold in their own Houses, where they received Causes, Complaints and Appeals; and had learned Civilians living with them, that were Auditors of the said Causes, before the Arch-bishop gave Sentence) pretending that he held it as the Pope's Legat: Urging also the great Troubles and Inconvenien∣ces it caused, both to the Clergy and the Laity; and that every Man must, by virtue of that Court, be forced up to London, from the farthest part of the Land, for a slanderous Word, or a Trifle. And that they thought it convenient, if it were the King's Pleasure to continue that Court, that he would settle it upon some other, and not upon the Arch-bishop, that so it might appear, the Original of that Court was from the King, and not from the Pope. And lastly, that it would not be safe to constitute the Arch-bishop the Pope's Le∣gat, because it would infringe the Power of the Vicar-General. This was drawn up in way of Petition and Complaint, either to the King or Parliament, by a Combination of some of the Convocation, as I suspect, the Paper being writ by the Hand of the Register of the Lower House of Convocation. The great Wheel we may be sure, that set a moving this Device, was Winchester, his never-failing Ad∣versary. The King, notwithstanding,The Abp. de∣fends it▪ bad the Arch-bishop maintain his Court. And he answered all their Pleas against it; and by way of Protestation affirmed, that he kept not his Court by virtue of his Bull from Rome for Legat, and that none could suspect that he did. And that he saw no Cause, but that he might keep that Court by virtue of the late Act of Parliament, that gave Power to enjoy all things that were before had from the See of Rome. And finally, he an∣swered, that it was the King's Will and Command that he should continue his Court. To which the Convocation, or rather some part of it, made a Reply, that may be seen in the Appendix.No. XVII.
But notwithstanding these Discouragements, (which were thrown in probably to hinder his good Designs) the Arch-bishop vigorously prosecuted a Reformation at this Convocation.The ABp. pro∣moting a Re∣formation in the Convoca∣tion. Where, assisted by Crumwel, the King's Vicar General, he earnestly laboured for the re∣dress of several Abuses and Errors in the English Church. And that not without good Success at length. For after much deliberati∣on among the Clergy there assembled, and much opposition too, he got a Book of divers good Articles to that purpose to be agreed upon and subscribed. An account of which by and by shall follow. CHAP. XI. Articles of Religion. Articles pub∣lished and re∣commended by the King.NOW though I do not find the King went so far, as that it should be enjoined on all the Clergy to own the Articles of this Book by their own Hands subscribed, yet he published and re∣commended them to all his loving Subjects in general, to accept and repute them to be agreeable to God's Laws, and proper for the esta∣blishment of Peace and Concord: And further probably in prudence the King thought not fit yet to go, considering the great Disputes and Arguments that had happened in the Convocation hereupon. Now because this was one of the great Services our pious Prelate con∣tributed to the Church, and was one of the first Steps made in the Reformation of the Doctrine and Worship, it will not be amiss here, in order to the inlightning this History, to set down the Heads of this Book, though it be done by others before me. And notwith∣standing what the Noble Author of the History of Henry VIII,Life Hen. VIII. p. 466. saith, he gathered by some Records, that this Book was devised by the King himself, and recommended afterwards to the Convocation by Crumwel, yet we have reason to attribute a great share therein to the Arch-bishop. The Original thereof.They that are minded to see a Draught of these Articles from the Original, with the Royal Assent prefixed to them, may have it in Dr. Fuller's Church-History: Which he tells us he transcribed out of the Acts of the Convocation.Book V. p. 213. The Bishop of Sarum also met with an Original of them, in the Cotton Library, wrote out fairly, as it seems for the King's own Use, and subscribed with all the Hands of the Convocation thereunto.Addenda to the Collection, Num. 1. He also hath inserted the Transcript of them in the first part of his History of the Reformation. The Original sent into the North to shew to the Rebels.In the Rebellion in the North, which happened this Year 1536, chiefly raised by Priests and Friars, many Copies of these Articles (for the Book was printed by Barthelet) did Crumwel send by the King's Order, to the Duke of Norfolk, the King's Lieutenant there, to disperse in those Parts, together with the Original Copy it self, as it was signed by the Hands of the Convocation, amounting to the number of 116 Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Arch-deacons, and Proctors of the Clergy. Which the said Duke had order to shew unto the Clergy and others, as occasion served; that they might understand it was a proper Act of the Church, and no Innovation of the King, and a
few of his Counsellors, as they gave out. And after he had made his use of this Original, he was required to reserve it safe for the King. This choice Treasure, which the King himself required such care to be taken of, Sir Robert Cotton afterwards procured, at his no small Expence, no doubt. It is very fairly written in Vellam; and at the bottom of the first Page is written, Robertus Cotton Bruceus, by Sir Robert's own Hand, signifying his Value of this Monument. It is still extant in that incomparable Library in the Volume Cleopatra E. 5. And there I have seen it, and diligently compared it. Ex∣cuse this Digression, and I now proceed to the Articles them∣selves. These Articles were of two sorts: some concerning Faith,The Contents of them. and some concerning Ceremonies. The former sort were digested under these five Titles following. I. The Principal Articles of Faith. And they were these.Articles of Faith. That all those things that be comprehended in the whole Body and Canon of the Bible, and in the three Creeds, are true, and constantly to be believed. That we take and hold the same for the most holy and infallible Words of God. That the Articles of the Faith, con∣tained in the Creeds, are necessary to be believed for Man's Salva∣tion. That the same words be kept, in which the Articles of Faith are conceived. That all Opinions contrary to the Articles; and which were condemned in the four first Councils, are to be utterly refused. II. The Sacrament of Baptism. That it was instituted and or∣dained by Iesus Christ as necessary to Everlasting Life. That by it all, as well Infants as such as have the use of Reason, have Remission of Sins, and the Grace and Favour of God offered them. That Infants, and Innocents must be Baptized, because the Pro∣mise of Grace and Everlasting Life, pertains as well to them as to those who have the use of Reason. And that therefore Baptized Infants shall undoubtedly be saved. That they are to be Baptized, because of Original Sin, which is remitted only by Baptism. That they that are once Baptized, must not be Baptized again▪ That the Opinions of Anabaptists and Pelagians are to be held for detestable Heresies. That those, who having the use of Reason, shall come to Baptism, shall obtain the Remission of all their Sins, if they come thereunto perfectly and truly repentant, confessing and believing all the Articles of the Faith, and having firm Cre∣dence and Trust in the Promise of God adjoined to the said Sa∣crament. III. The Sacrament of Penance. That that Sacrament was insti∣tuted of Christ in the New Testament, as a thing so necessary for Man's Salvation, that no Man that after his Baptism is fallen again, and hath committed deadly Sin, can without the same be saved. That such Penitents shall without doubt attain Remission of their Sins. That this Sacrament consists of Contrition, Con∣fession, and Amendment of Life. That Contrition consists, first, of Acknowledgment of our Sins. Unto which the Penitent is brought by hearing and considering the Will of God declared in his Laws, and feeling in his own Conscience that God is angry,
and this joined with Sorrow and Shame, and fear of God's Dis∣pleasure. That, secondly, it consists of Faith, Trust and Confi∣dence in the Mercies and Goodness of God: whereby the Penitent must conceive certain Hope, and repute himself justified, not for any Merit or Work done by him, but by the only Merits of the Blood of Iesus Christ. That this Faith is begotten and confirmed by the Application of Christ's Words and Promises. That Con∣fession to a Priest, the second part of Penance, is necessary, where it may be had. That the Absolution given by the Priest, was instituted of Christ, to apply the Promises of God's Grace to the Penitent. And that the words of Absolution, pronounced by the Priest, are spoken by the Authority given him by Christ. That Men must give no less Faith and Credence to the Words of Absolution, pronounced by the Ministers of the Church, than they would give unto the very Words and Voice of God himself. And that Men in no wise contemn this Auricular Confession. As to the third part of Penance, viz. Amendment of Life, That all are bound to bring forth the Fruits of Penance, that is to say, Prayer, Fasting and Alms-deeds, and to make Restitution and Satisfaction in Will and Deed to their Neighbour, and all other good Works, or else they shall never be saved. That Works of Charity be ne∣cessary to Salvation. That by Penance and such good Works we do not only obtain Everlasting Life, but deserve Remission or Mitigation of these present Pains and Affliction in this World. Mark here by the way, how the Doctrine of Merits is propounded. Our Merits do not extend to Pardon and Everlasting Life, but only to the removal or abatement of temporal Afflictions. IV. The Sacrament of the Altar. That under the Form and Fi∣gure of Bread and Wine is verily and substantially contained that very same Body and Blood, which was born of the Virgin Mary, and suffered upon the Cross. And that the self-same Body and Blood of Christ is distributed unto, and received by all the Communi∣cants. That therefore this Sacrament is to be used with all due re∣verence and honour. And that before any receive it, he ought re∣ligiously to try and search his own Conscience. V. Iustification. That the word signifies Remission of Sins, and our Acceptation or Reconciliation into the Grace and Favour of God. That Sinners attain this Justification by Contrition and Faith joined with Charity. That neither our Contrition and Faith, nor any Work proceeding thence, can merit or deserve the said Justification. That the Mercy and Grace of the Father, promised freely for Christ's Sake, and the Merit of his Blood and Passion, be the only sufficient and worthy Causes thereof. This was the Sum of the Articles concerning Faith. Those con∣cerning Ceremonies followed next: which were likewise comprised under five Titles. Articles rela∣ting to Cere∣monies.I. Of Images. That they be representers of Vertue and good Example. That they be stirrers of Mens Minds, and make them often to remember and lament their Sins: especially the Images of Christ and our Lady. That it was meet they should stand in the Churches, but be none otherwise esteemed. That the Bishops
and Preachers diligently teach the People according to this Doctrine, lest there might fortune Idolatry to ensue. That they be taught also, that Censing, Kneeling, and Offering to Images, be by no means to be done, (although the same had entred by De∣votion, and fallen to Custom) but only to God and in his Ho∣nour, though it be done before the Images. II. Of Honouring Saints. That they are to be honoured, but not with that Confidence and Honour, that is due only unto God, trusting to attain at their Hands, that which must be had only of God. That most especially Christ is to be lauded and praised in them, for their excellent Vertues, which he planted in them; and for their good Example. And that they are to be taken, wherein they may, to be the Advancers of our Prayers and De∣mands unto Christ. III. Of Praying to Saints. That tho Grace and Remission of Sins be to be obtained only of God, by the Mediation of Christ; yet it is very laudable to pray to Saints in Heaven, to be Interces∣sors, and to pray for us and with us unto God, after this manner: All Holy Angels and Saints in Heaven, pray for us and with us unto the Father, that for his dear Son Iesus Christ his sake, we may have Grace of him, and Remission of our Sins, with an earnest purpose (not wanting ghostly Strength) to observe and keep his Holy Command∣ments, and never to decline from the same again unto our lives end. That in this manner we may pray to our Blessed Lady, Saint Iohn Baptist, or any other Saint particularly: So that it be done with∣out any vain Superstition; as to think that any Saint is more mer∣ciful, or will hear us sooner than Christ; or that any Saint does serve for one thing more than another. That Holy Days are to be kept to God, in memory of him and his Saints upon such Days as the Church hath ordained: but may be mitigated and moderated by the King, being Supream Head. IV. Of Rites and Ceremonies. As Vestments in God's Service, Sprinkling Holy Water, Giving Holy Bread, Bearing Candles on Candlemass-day, Giving of Ashes on Ash-wednesday, Bearing of Palms on Palm-sunday; Creeping to the Cross, and kissing it, and offering unto Christ before the same on Good-friday; Setting up the Sepulchre of Christ, Hallowing of the Font, and other-like Exor∣cisms and Benedictions, and laudable Customs. That these are not to be contemned and cast away, but continued, to put us in re∣membrance of Spiritual Things. But that none of these Ceremo∣nies have power to remit Sin. V. Of Purgatory. That Christians are to pray for Souls depar∣ted, and to commit them in their Prayers to God's Mercy, and cause others to pray for them in Masses and Exequies; and to give Alms to others to pray for them, that they may be relieved and holpen of some part of their Pain. But because the Place where they be, the Name thereof, and kinds of Pain there, is to us uncertain by Scripture, therefore we remit this, with all other things, to Almighty God; unto whose Mercies it is meet to commend them. That such Abuses be put away, which under the Name of Purga∣tory have been advanced. As to make Men believe, that through
the Bishop of Rome's Pardons, Souls might clearly be delivered out of Purgatory, and the Pains of it: or that Masses said at Scala Coeli, or otherwise in any Place, or before any Image, might de∣liver them from all their Pains, and send them streight to Hea∣ven. A Conjecture, that the Pen of the ABp was here.These are the Contents of that memorable Book of Articles. There are Reasons added now and then, to confirm the respective Te∣nets there laid down, and many Quotations of Holy Scripture, which for brevity sake I have omitted. Which one may conjecture to have been inserted by the Pen of the Arch-bishop: Who was the great Introducer of this Practice, of proving or confuting Opinions in Religion by the Word of God, instead of the ordinary Custom then used, of doing it by School-men and Popish Canons. We find in∣deed many Popish Errors here mixed with Evangelical Truths. Which must either be attributed to the Defectiveness of our Prelate's Knowledg as yet in True Religion, or being the Principles and Opinions of the King, or both. Let not any be offended herewith, but let him rather take notice, what a great deal of Gospel-Doctrine here came to light, and not only so, but was owned and propounded by Authority to be believed and practised. The Sun of Truth was now but rising, and breaking through the thick Mists of that Idolatry, Supersti∣tion, and Ignorance, that had so long prevailed in this Nation, and the rest of the World, and was not yet advanced to its Meridian Brightness. CHAP. XII. Cranmer's Iudgment about some Cases of Matrimony. Two remarka∣ble Books published.IN this Year then came forth two remarkable Books: whereof both the King, and the Arch-bishop and Bishops might be said to be joint Composers. In as much as they seemed to be devised by the Arch-bishop, and some of the Bishops; and then Revised, No∣ted, Corrected and Enlarged by the King. I. The Book of Articles.The one of these was the Book of Articles of Religion mentioned before. This Book bore this Title, Articles devised by the King's Highness, to stable Christian Quietness and Vnity among the People, &c. With a Preface by the King. Where the King saith, he was con∣strained to put his own Pen to the Book, and to conceive certain Ar∣ticles. Which words, I leave to the Conjecture of the Reader, whether by them he be enclined to think that the King were the first Writer of them, or that being writ and composed by another, they were perused, considered, corrected and augmented by his Pen. II. A Book a∣gainst the Pope, called the Bishop's Book.The other Book that came out this Year, was occasioned by a Piece published by Reginald Pole, intituled De Vnione Ecclesiastica. Which inveighing much against the King for assuming the Supremacy, and extolling the Pope unmeasurably, he employed the Arch-bishop, and some other Bishops, to compile a Treatise, shewing the Usurpations of Popes; and how late it was e're they took this Superiority up∣on them, some hundred Years passing before they did it. And that
all Bishops were limited to their own Diocesses by one of the eight Councils, to which every Pope did swear. And how the Papal Au∣thority was first derived from the Emperor, and not from Christ. For this there were good Arguments taken from the Scriptures and the Fathers. The Book was signed by both the Arch-bishops,Herbert's Life of K. Henry, p. 418. and nineteen other Bishops. It was called the Bishops Book, because de∣vised by them. The Lord Crumwel did use to consult with the Arch-bishop,Certain Cases of Matrimony put to the ABp. in all his Ecclesiastical Matters. And there happened now, while the Arch-bishop was at Ford, a great Case of Marriage: Whom it con∣cerned I cannot tell, but the King was desirous to be resolved about it by the Arch-bishop, and commanded Crumwel to send to him for his Judgment therein. The Case was three-fold. I. Whether Marriage contracted or solemnized in Lawful Age per Verba de presenti, and without carnal Copulation, be Matrimony before God or no? II. Whether such Matrimony be consummate, or no? And, III. What the Woman may thereupon demand by the Law Civil, after the death of her Husband? This I suppose was a cause that lay before the King and his Ecclesiastical Vicegerent, to make some determination of. And I suspect it might relate to Katharine, his late divorced Queen. The Arch-bishop, who was a very good Civilian,His Solution. as well as a Divine, but that loved to be wary and modest in all his Decisions, made these Answers. That as to the first, he and his Authors were of Opinion, that Matrimony contracted per Verba de presenti, was perfect Matrimony before God. 2. That such Matrimony is not utterly consummated, as that term is commonly used among the School-Divines and Law∣yers, but by carnal Copulation. 3. As to the Woman's Demands by the Law Civil, he therein professed his Ignorance. And he had no learned Men with him there at Ford to consult with for their Judgments: only Dr. Barbar, (a Civilian, that he always retained with him) who neither could pronounce his Mind without his Books, and some learned Men to confer with upon the Case; But he added, that he marvelled, that the Votes of the Civil Lawyer should be required herein; seeing that all manner of Causes of Dower be judged within this Realm by the Common Laws of the same. And that there were plenty of well-learned Men in the Civil Law at London, that undoubtedly could certify the King's Majesty of the Truth herein, as much as appertained unto that Law: warily de∣clining to make any positive Judgment in a Matter so ticklish. This happened in the month of Ianuary. And indeed in these Times there were great Irregularities about Marriage in the Realm: many being incestuous and unlawful.Refuseth to grant a Dis∣pensation for the Marriage of a Relation. Which caused the Parliament, two or three Years past, viz, 1533. in one of their Acts, to publish a Table of Degrees, wherein it was prohibited by God's Law to marry. But the Act did not cure this Evil: many thought to bear out themselves in their illegal Con∣tracts, by getting Dispensations from the Arch-bishop: which crea∣ted him much trouble by his denying to grant them. There was one
Massy, a Courtier, who had contracted himself to his deceased Wife's Niece. Which needing a Dispensation, the Party got the Lord Crumwel to write to the Arch-bishop in his behalf: especially because it was thought to be none of the Cases of Prohibition con∣tained in the Act. But such was the Integrity of the Arch-bishop, that he refused to do any thing he thought not allowable, though it were upon the perswasion of the greatest Men, or the best Friends he had. But he writ this civil Letter to the Lord Crumwel upon this occasion. Cleopatra E. 5. His Letter thereupon.MY very singular good Lord, in my most hearty-wise I com∣mend me unto your Lordship. And whereas your Lord∣ship writeth to me in the favour of this Bearer, Massey, an old Servant to the King's Highness, that being contracted to his Sister's Daughter of his late Wife deceased, he might enjoy the Benefit of a Dispensation in that behalf; especially, considering it is none of the Causes of Prohibition contained in the Statute: Surely, my Lord, I would gladly accomplish your Request herein, if the Word of God would permit the same. And where you require me, that if I think this Licence may not be granted by the Law of God, then I should write unto you the Reasons and Autho∣rities that move me so to think; that upon Declaration unto the King's Highness, you may confer thereupon with some other Learned Men, and so advertise me the King's farther Resolution. For shortness of time, I shall shew you one Reason, which is this. By the Law of God many Persons be prohibited, which be not expressed, but be understood, by like Prohibition in equal de∣gree. As S. Ambrose saith, that the Niece is forbid by the Law of God, although it be not exprest in Leviticus, that the Unkle shall not marry his Niece. But where the Nephew is forbid there, that he shall not marry his Aunt, by the same is understood that the Niece shall not be married unto her Unkle. Likewise as the Daughter is not there plainly expressed, yet where the Son is forbid to marry his Mother, it is understood that the Daughter may not be married to her Father; because they be of like de∣gree. Even so it is in this Case and many others. For where it is there expressed, that the Nephew shall not marry his Unkle's Wife, it must needs be understood that the Niece shall not be married unto the Aunt's Husband, because that also is one equa∣lity of degree. And although I could allege many Reasons and Authorities mo for this purpose; yet I trust this one Reason shall satisfy all that be Learned, and of Judgment. And as touching the Act of Parliament concerning the Degrees prohibited by God's Law,Vid. Fox Acts, p. 960. they be not so plainly set forth as I would they were. Wherein I somewhat spake my Mind at the making of the said Law, but it was not then accepted. I requi∣red then, that there must be expressed Mother, and Mother-in-Law; Daughter, and Daughter-in-Law; and so in further de∣grees directly upwards and downwards, in Linea recta; also Sister and Sister-in-Law, Aunt & Aunt-in-Law, Niece and Niece-in-Law. And this Limitation, in my Judgment, would have contained all
degrees prohibited by God's Law, expressed and not expressed: and should have satisfied this Man, and such others which would marry their Nieces-in-Law. I have no News to send you from these Parts; but I much long to hear such News as be concurrent with you. And there∣fore if you have any good News, I pray you to send me some▪ Thus, my Lord, right heartily fare you well. At Ford, the 7th Day of September. Your Lordship's own, Tho. Cantuarien. About this Year as near as I can guess,He restrain the Number of Proctors. the Arch-bishop made an Order concerning the Proctors of his Court of Arches. The Nume∣rousness and Irregularities of Proctors made these Civil Courts uneasy to the People. Complaints were made of their Clamorousness, by reason of the plenty of them, that neither Advocates nor Judges could be heard: of the Injuries they did to Advocates, in retaining and concluding Causes oftentimes without them: and of thrusting themselves into Causes without the knowledg or will of the Par∣ties, and such like. The Evils of which, long after endured, were endeavoured to be redrest by the Canons and Constitutions, made in the beginning of the Reign of King Iames I. Our Arch-bishop conceived, that in order to the Reformation of the Proctors, it were good to begin at first with a restraint of the Numbers of them. Wherefore he decreed, That whereas the Number of the Proctors in the Court of Arches was heretofore about Twenty, or four and Twenty, and my Lord's Grace at liberty to add more; Thence∣forth no more should be admitted, till the Number were reduced to Ten: and then that Number never to be encreased. This liberty, which his Predecessors always had, he willingly infringed himself of, out of no other intent, but for the benefit and ease of the People, whom he saw were inticed to Contention by the crafty Insinuations of this kind of Men, setting Neighbours together by the Ears for their own Lucre. And therefore the fewer of them, the better. And this Number he thought sufficient for the necessary Business of the Court. But some looked upon this as a crafty Fetch,Which some complain of to the Parlia∣ment. and Plot of the Proctors of that Time, upon the good Nature and pious Disposition of the Arch-bishop. That so all others being excluded from offici∣ating as Proctors, they might have all the Business of the Arches in their own Hands. And hence might divers Abuses come into that Court. And for the confirmation of this Order of the Arch-bishop for the tying of his Hands, they, who were Counsellors to the Arch-bishop in this matter, got it confirmed by the Chapter and Convent of Christ's-Church Canterbury. This giving Offence to many, there were some who drew up a long Paper against this Order, and presented it to the consideration of the Parliament; because it could be redressed no other way, the Arch-bishop having put it out of his own Power to do it. In this Paper they set forth, that the said Statute was prejudicial unto the Common-wealth, because the
Number of ten Proctors was not sufficient to dispatch the Causes that came into that Court: and so there must be Delays and prolix Suits, while these Proctors were attending other Causes in the Arch-bishop's Court of Audience, and the Bishop of London's Court of Consistory. Whereas before it had been seen by experience, that Twenty Proctors could not suffice for the managery of the Causes in these Courts, without Delays and Prorogations, from Day to Day. That Causes by this means could not be diligently attended, when there were many Causes, and few Proctors to look after them. And hereby many good Causes were like to perish for lack of good looking after. That this had occasioned the Proctors to neglect a very good Oath, called Iuramentum Calumpniae; which was the best Provision that could be against unlawful Suits, and lengthning them out further than was necessary. This Oath was, that the Parties, or the Proctors should swear, that they believed their Cause was just, and that they should not use unlawful Delays, whereby Justice might be deferred; that they should answer the Judg truly to what he should demand of them; that nothing should be given or promised to the Judges or any other Officer, besides the Fees allowed by Law, and that they should not procure any false Witness. Again, this Paper urged for a good Number of Proctors, that this would be a means, that the Judges could not so easily keep them in subjection, and fear of them: whereby they had been hindred some∣times in speaking freely before them in their Clients Causes. It was urged also, that it was a great discouragement to young Men in studying the Law, when there is so little prospect of Benefit thereby. Lastly, That it was contrary to the Civil and Canon Law, that permits any Man to be Proctor for another, a few ex∣cepted. But this Paper, notably enough written, may be read at large in the Appendix.No. XVIII. And so I leave the Reader to judg of the Ex∣pediency of this Order of the Arch-bishop, by weighing the Arch-bishop's Reasons with these last mentioned. Surely this his Act de∣served commendation for his good Intentions thereby, though some lesser Inconveniences attended, which no doubt he had also well considered before he proceeded to do what he did. The ABp di∣vorseth Queen Ann. Life of King Henry p. 446.When Queen Ann, on May the 2d, was sent to the Tower, by a sud∣den Jealousy of the King her Husband: The next day, the Arch-bi∣shop extreamly troubled at it, struck in with many good Words with the King on her behalf, in form of a Letter of Consolation to him; yet wisely making no Apology for her, but acknowledging how di∣vers of the Lords had told him of certain of her Faults, which, he said, he was sorry to hear: And concluded, desiring that the King would however continue his Love to the Gospel, lest it should be thought, that it was for her sake only that he had favoured it. Being in the Tower, there arose up new Matter against Queen Ann, name∣ly, concerning some lawful Impediment of her Marriage with the King: and that was thought to be a Pre-Contract between her and the Earl of Northumberland. Whereupon the Arch-bishops of Can∣terbury and York were made Commissioners to examine this Matter. And she being before the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, confessed cer∣tain just, true and lawful Impediments, as the Act in the 26 of Hen.
VIII expresseth it; but not mentioning what they were. So that by that Act the said Marriage is declared never to have been good, nor consonant to the Laws. Yet the Earl of Northumberland being examined upon Oath before both the Arch-bishops, denied it: Upon the Truth of which, he received also the Blessed Sacrament. And the Lord Herbert saw an Original Letter to Secretary Crumwel, to the same import. But her Confession of it so far prevailed with the King, that he would be divorced from her; and with our Arch-bishop, that he performed it by due Order and Process of Law. And an Act passed, that the Marriage between the King and Queen Ann was null and void, and the Issue illegitimate. The Arch-bishop granted a Licence,A Licenc or a Chappel. Cran. Regist. dated Iuly the 24th, with the full Consent of Richard Withipol, Vicar of Walthamstow in Essex, to George Monoux Alderman of London, and Thomas his Son, to have the Sacrament administred in his Chappel, or Oratory, in his House De Moones, now a Farm near Higham-hill, in the said Parish of VVal∣thamstow: Indulging therein to the Wife of the said Thomas to be pu∣rified, or churched, in the same Chappel. I the rather mention this, that it may serve to recal the Memory of that pious and charitable Citizen and Draper, Sir Geo. Monoux; who built the fair Steeple of that Parish-Church, and allowed a Salary for ever for ringing the great Bell at a certain Hour in the Night and Morning the Win∣ter half Year. He built also the North Isle of the said Church; in the Glass-windows whereof is yet remaining his Coat of Arms. In the Chancel his Body was interred, under a fair Altar-Monument yet standing. In the Church-yard he founded an Hospital and Free-School, and very liberally endowed it; though now the Endow∣ments are sadly diminished. He also made a Causeway over Wal∣thamstow-Marsh to Lockbridg, over the River Lee, for the conveni∣ency of Travellers from those Parts to London, and left wherewith to continue and keep it in Repair; but that also is lost, and the Ru∣ins now only to be seen. But enough of that. The Germans conceived great hope of good to befal the Church by Cranmer's Influence, and Presidency in England; and took their opportunities of addressing to him.Bucer dedi∣cates this Year a Book to the ABp. This Year Martin Bucer pub∣lished a large Book in Folio upon the Epistle to the Romans, intituled, Metaphrasis & Enrratio; and dedicated it in a long Epistle to the Arch-bishop. Wherein are sundry Expressions, which will shew, how well known abroad the Arch-bishop was already among the Protestants, and what an excellent Bishop they looked upon him to be, and how fixed their Eyes were upon him for doing great things towards a Reformation in England. For thus he writ in this Epistle, Te omnes praedicant animo praeditum Archiepiscopo, & tanti, sic{que} ad gloriam Christi comparati regni, Primate digno, &c. That all Men proclaimed him endowed with a Mind worthy of an Arch-bishop and Primate of so great a Kingdom, and so dis∣posed to the Glory of Christ. That he had so attained to this high Estate in Christ by his spiritual Wisdom, Holiness of Life, and most ardent Zeal to render Christ's Glory more illustrious; that gathering together the Humble, and taking pity upon the Sheepfold, being indeed dispersed and scattered abroad, he always
sought and saved that which was lost, and brought back Christ's poor Sheep to his Fold, and the Pastures of everlasting Life, when they had been before most miserably harassed by the Servants of Superstition, and the Emissaries of the Roman Tyranny. And after, speaking of the King's rooting out the Usurpation of the Pope▪ and his pretended Jurisdiction, by taking to himself the Supremacy, the said Learned Man excited Cranmer to a further Reformation, by telling him, How easy now it would be for him, and the o∣ther Arch-bishops and Bishops, who were endued with the Spi∣rit and Zeal of Christ, from the remainders of the Ecclesiastical Administration, to retain what might contribute to the true edi∣fying of Consciences, the saving Instruction of Youth, and to the just Discipline and Polity of the whole Christian People. For when the Enemies were once removed out of the way, there could not then happen among us any extraordinary great Concussion of Religion, and Ecclesiastical Discipline, or any dashing one against another, as among them in Germany of necessity came to pass: striving so many Years, for the Church of Christ, against such obstinate Enemies. Bishops Con∣secrated.The Consecrations this Year were these. Diocesan Bishops. Rich. Sampson.Iune the 10th Richard Sampson, Doctor of Decrees, and Dean of the King's Chappel, was elected and confirmed Bishop of Chichester, by Resignation of Robert Sherburn,Cran. Regist. who was now very old. No Consecration set down in the Register. William Rugg.Iune William Rugg, a Monk, was consecrated Bishop of Norwich.Godwin's Catal. This is omitted also, if I mistake not, in the Register. Probably he was consecrated with Sampson. Rob. Warton.Iuly the 2d, Robert Warton, Abbot of Bermondsey, was consecra∣ted Bishop of S. Asaph,Cran. Regist. at Lambeth, by the Arch-bishop, Iohn Bishop of Bangor, and William Bishop of Norwich, assisting. Suffragan Bishops. Octob. 20. William More, B. D. consecrated Suffragan of Colchester, by Iohn Bishop of Rochester, by virtue of the Arch-bishop's Letters Commissional to him, assisted by Robert Bishop of S. Asaph, and Tho∣mas Bishop of Sidon. This More held the Monastery of Walden in Essex, an House of Benedictines, in Commendam (where Audley-end now stands) and surrendred it to the King 1539. CHAP. XIII. The Bishops Book. An. 1537. The Bishops Book by the ABp's means.THE pious ABp thought it highly conducible to the Christian Growth of the common People, in Knowledg and Religion, and to disintangle them from gross Ignorance and Superstition, in which they had been nursled up by their Popish Guides; that the Ten Commandments, the Lord's Prayer, and the Creed, and the
Grounds of Religion, should be explained soundly and orthodoxly, and recommended unto their reading. Wherefore he consulting with the Lord Crumwel, his constant Associate and Assistant in such Mat∣ters; and by his and other his Friends, importuning the King, a Commission was issued out from him, in the Year 1537. to the Arch-bishop, to Stokesly Bishop of London, Gardiner of Winchester, Samp∣son of Chichester, Repps of Norwich, Goodrick of Ely, Latimer of Worcester, Shaxton of Salisbury, Fox of Hereford▪ Barlow of S. Da∣vids, and other Bishops and Learned Divines, to meet together, and to devise an wholsome and plain Exposition upon those Subjects, and to set forth a Truth of Religion purged of Errors and Heresies. Accordingly they met at the Arch-bishop's House at Lambeth. Their Course was, that after they had drawn up their Expositions upon each Head, and agreed thereto, they all subscribed their Hands, de∣claring their Consent and Approbation. In the Disputations which happened among them in this Work,Winchester's op∣position. Winchester, the Pope's chief Champion, with three or four other of the Bishops, went about with all subtil Sophistry, to maintain all Idolatry, Heresy and Superstition, written in the Canon Law,Fox MS. Life of Cranmer. or used in the Church under the Pope's Tyranny. But at the last, whe∣ther overpower'd with Number, or convinced by the Word of God, and consent of Ancient Authors, and the Primitive Church, they all agreed upon, and set their Hands to a Godly Book of Religion: Which they finished by the end of Iuly, and staid for nothing but the Vicar-General's Order, whether to send it immediately to him, or that the Bishop of Hereford should bring it with him, at his next coming to the Court. But the Plague now raging in Lambeth▪ and People dying even at the Palace-Doors, the Arch-bishop desired Crumwel, for the King's Licence to the Bishops to depart for their own Safety, their Business being now in effect drawn to a Conclusi∣on. Soon after the Bishops and Divines parted, and the Arch-bishop hastened to his House at Ford near Canterbury. The Book was delivered by Crumwel to the King;The King makes Ani∣madversion upon it. which he at his leisure diligently perused, corrected and augmented. And then, af∣ter five or six Months, assigned Crumwel to dispatch it unto the Arch-bishop, that he might give his Judgment upon the King's Animad∣versions. A Pursevant brought it to Ford. The Arch-bishop ad∣visedly read and considered what the King had writ; and disliking some things, made his own Annotations upon some of the Royal Corrections: there especially, we may well imagine, where the King had altered the Book in favour of some of the old Doctrines and Corruptions. And when he sent it back again with those Annotati∣ons, he wrote these Lines to Crumwel therewith, on the 25th day of Ianuary. MY very singular good Lord:Cleopatra . 5. After most hearty Com∣mendations unto your Lordship; these shall be to ad∣vertise the same; That as concerning the Book lately devised by me, and other Bishops of this Realm which you sent unto me, corrected by the King's Highness; your Lordship shall re∣ceive the same again by this Bearer, the Pursevant, with certain
Annotations of mine own concerning the same. Wherein I trust the King's Highness will pardon my Presumption, that I have been so scrupulous, and as it were a picker of Quarrels to his Grace's Book, making a great Matter of every little Fault, or ra∣ther where no Fault is at all. Which I do only for this Intent; that because now the Book shall be set forth by his Grace's Cen∣sure and Judgment, I would have nothing therein that Momus could reprehend. And I refer all mine Annotations again to his Grace's most exact Judgment. And I have ordered my Annota∣tions so by Numbers, that his Grace may readily turn to every place. And in the lower Margin of this Book, next to the Bind∣ing, he may find the Numbers, which shall direct him to the Words, whereupon I make the Annotations. And all those his Grace's Castigations, which I have made none Annotations upon, I like them very well. And in divers places I have made Annota∣tions; which places nevertheless I mislike not, as shall appear by the same Annotations. Published.At length this Book came forth, printed by Barthelet, in the Year 1537, and was commonly called the Bishops Book, because the Bishops were the Composers of it. It was intituled, The godly and pious In∣stitution of a Christian Man; and consisted of a Declaration of the Lord's Prayer, and of the Ave Mary, the Creed, the Ten Com∣mandments, and the Seven Sacraments. It was Established by Act of Parliament, having been signed by the two Arch-bishops, nine∣teen Bishops, eight Arch-deacons, and seventeen Doctors of Divinity and Law. How esteem'd.The Opinion that the Favourers of the Gospel had of this Book in those Times, may appear by what I find in a Manuscript of the Life of this Arch-bishop, by an unknown Author, that wrote it soon af∣ter the said Arch-bishop's Death: A godly Book of Religion, not much unlike the Book set forth by K. Edward VI. except in two Points.Inter Foxii MSS. The one was the real Preence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament of the Altar. Of the which Opinion the Arch-bishop was at that time, and the most part of the other Bishops and lear∣ned Men. The other Error was of Praying, Kissing, and Kneeling before Images: Which, saith he, was added by the King, after the Bishops had set their Hands to the contrary. But this Book came forth again two Years after, viz. 1540. (unless my Manuscript mistake this Year for 1543.) very much enlarged,Enlarged and reprinted. and reduced into another Form, and bearing another Name, A necessary Doctrine and Erudition of any Christian Man. And because the King had put it forth by his own Authority, it was called now The King's Book, as before it was called The Bishops. But that none might be confounded in these Books, he may know that there was, in the Year 1536,Ld. Herb. Hist. p. 418. another Book also called The Bishops Book, upon the same rea∣son that this was so called, because the Arch-bishops and Bishops had the making thereof. It was a Declaration against the Papal Supre∣macy, written upon occasion of Pole's Book of Ecclesiastical Vnion, mentioned before. And in the Year 1533, there came forth another Book in Latin called The King's Book,Ibid. p. 408. intituled, The Difference be∣tween
the Kingly and Ecclesiastical Power: reported to be made, as Bale writes, by Fox the King's Almoner. Which was transla∣ted into English,Bale's Cent. and put forth by Henry Lord Stafford in King Edward's Days. The King affecting to be thought Learned, affected also to have Books called by his Name; not that he was always the Author of them, but that they came out by his Authority, and had undergone his Corrections and Emendations. But before we pass away from hence,Some Account of the foresaid Book. it may be convenient to give the Reader a little taste of so famous a Treatise as that Bishop's Book was in those Days. And I will do it, not in my own words, but in the words of a very Learned and Eminent Man, the Answerer to Dr. Martin's Book against Priests Marriage, not far from the beginning of Q Mary, supposed to be Ponet Bishop of Winchester▪ then in Exile. Applying himself, in his Preface, unto the Queen's Prelats, he told them; That in their Book intituled, The Institution of a Christian Man, presented by their whole Authorities, to the King of famous Memory, K. Henry VIII. In the Preface thereof they affirmed to his Highness, with one assent, by all their Learnings, that the said Treatise was in all Points concordant and agreeable to Holy Scrip∣ture: yea, such Doctrine, that they would, and desired to have it taught by all the Spiritual Pastors to all the King's loving Sub∣jects, to be Doctrine of Faith. And there intreating of the Sa∣crament of Orders, they desired to have it taught, that we be in no subjection to the Bishop of Rome, and his Statutes, but meerly sub∣ject to the King's Laws, under his only Territory and Jurisdiction. And that the Canons and Rules of the Church, were therefore allowable in the Realm, because the Assent of the King and of the People accepted the same. And that Priests and Bishops what∣soever, never had any Authority by the Gospel in Matters Civil and Moral, but by the Grant and Gift of Princes; and that it was alway, and ever shall be, lawful unto Kings and Princes, and to their Successors, with the Consent of their Parliaments, to revoke and call again into their own Hands, or otherwise to restrain all their Power and Jurisdiction given and permitted by their Authority, Assent or Sufferance, &c. Without the which, if the Bishop of Rome, or any other Bishop whatsoever, should take upon them any Authority or Jurisdiction in such Matters as be Civil, No doubt, said they, that Bishop is not worthy to be called a Bishop, but ra∣ther a Tyrant, and an Usurper of other Mens Rights, contrary to the Laws of God; and is to be reputed a Subverter of the King∣dom of Christ. Yea, besides these things, and many other, as he added, they put in our Creed, or Belief, as an Article of Salvation or Damnation, that the Church of England is as well to be named a Catholick and Apostolick Church, as Rome Church, or any other Church where the Apostles were resident. And that they willed us to believe in our Faith, that there is no difference in Su∣periority, Preeminence or Authority, one over the other, but be all of equal Power and Dignity; and that all Churches be free from the Subjection and Jurisdiction of the Church of Rome. And that no Church is to be called Schismatical, as varying from the Unity of the Church of Christ, if it persist in the Unity of
Christ's Faith, Hope and Charity, and Unity of Christ's Doctrine and Sacraments, agreeable to the same Doctrine. Defence of Priests Mar. p. 226.And that it appertained to Christen Kings and Princes, in the discharge of their Duty to God, to reform and reduce again the Laws to their old Limits and pristine State, of their Power and Jurisdiction, which was given them by Christ, and used in the Primitive Church. For it is, say they, out of all doubt, that Christ's Faith was then most firm and pure, and the Scriptures of God were then best understood, and Vertue did then most abound and excel. And therefore the Customs and Ordinances then used and made, must needs be more conform and agreeable unto the true Doctrine of Christ, and more conducing to the edifying and bene∣fit of the Church of Christ, than any Custom or Laws used or made since that Time. This he collected out of their Exposition of the Sacrament of Orders. The said Learned Author observed, that this Doctrine was set forth by the whole Authority of the Bishops in those Days, presented by the Subscription of all their Names. And since the time of their presenting thereof, by the space almost of twenty Years, (that is, to the middle of Queen Mary) never revoked, but continually from time to time taught by this Book, and by such other Declarations. Names of the Composers.And that one more Particular relating to this Book may be known, namely, who the Bishops and other Divines were, that com∣posed it, and that were commissioned so to do, I shall record their Names, as they were found writ by the Hand of Dr. Sam. Ward, in his own Book, now in the possession of N. B. a Reverend Friend of mine; who hath well deserved of this History. Thomas Cant. Io. Lond. Steph. Winton. Io. Exon. Io. Lincoln. Io. Bathon. Roland. Coven. & Litch. Tho. Elien. Nic. Sarum. Io. Bang. Edward Heref. Hugo. Wigorn. Io. Roffen. Ric. Cicestr. Guili∣elm. Norv. Guilielm. Menevens. Rob. Assav. Rob. Landav. Edoard Ebor. Cuthb. Dunelm. Rob. Carliolen. Richard. Wolman, Archidiac. Sudbur. Guil. Knight, Archid. Rich∣mon. Io. Bell, Archid. Gloc. Edmund. Bonner, Archid. Leicestr. Iohn Skip, Archid. Dorset. Nic. Hethe. Archid. Stafford. Cuthb. Marshal, Archid. Nottingham. Rich. Curren. Archid. Oxon. Gulielm. Cliff, Galfridus Downes, Robertus Oking, Radul. Bradford, Richardus Smith, Simon Matthew, Ioannes Pryn, Guliel. Buckmaster, Guliel. May, Nic. Wotton, Ric. Coxe, Ioannes Edmunds, Thomas Ro∣bertson, Ioannes Baker, Thomas Barret, Ioannes Hase, Ioannes Tyson, Sacrae Theologiae, Juris Ecclesiastici & Civilis Professores. In the Year 1543. The same Book was printed again, amended much both in Sense and Language: yet not having any step in the Progress of the Reformation, more than the former, each Edition express positively the Corporal Presence in the Sacrament. But in this is much added about Free-Will, which it asserts, and Good Works. In 1544, the same was printed again at London in Latin, intituled, Pia & Catholica Christiani Hominis Institutio.
CHAP. XIV. The Arch-bishop visits his Diocess. AS soon as this Business was over with the Arch-bishop and Bi∣shops at Lambeth;Goes down in∣to his Diocess. no Parliament sitting this Year, and a Plague being in London and Westminster, he went down, as was said before, into his Diocess. But before he went, he expressed a great desire to wait upon the King, being then, I suppose, at Hampton-Court, or Windsor; but he feared he should not be permitted, coming out of the smoaky Air, as he wrote to the Lord Crumwel, in that time of Infection. Yet he desired to know the King's Pleasure by him. He had a mind indeed to leave some good Impressions upon the King's Mind in the behalf of the Book, that he and the rest had taken such Pains about, and but newly made an end of. But whether he saw the King now or no, he had his Commission, and took it down with him. Which he advisedly did, the better to warrant and bear him out in what he intended to do in his Diocess, which he purpo∣sed to visit. This was a Year of Visitation.Gets a Licence to visit. For there was a new Visitation now again appointed throughout all England; to see how the People stood affected to the King, to discover Cheats and Impo∣stures, either in Images, Relicks, or such like. The Arch-bishop also thinking good now to visit his Diocess, procured the Licence of the Vice-Gerent, Lord Crumwel, so to do. Because, I suppose, all other Visitations were to cease, to give way to the King's Visita∣tion. And to render his Power of Visiting the more unquestionable, and void of scruple, he desired the Vice-gerent, that in drawing up of his Commission, his Licence to visit might be put into it by Dr. Peter; who was then, if I mistake not, Master of the Faculties to the said Vice-gerent, and afterwards Secretary of State. And be∣cause he would not do any thing without the Counsel and Allowance of the Vice-gerent, he asked his Advice, how he should order in his Visitation such Persons as had transgressed the King's Injunctions. Which came out the Year before under Crumwel's Name: Whereof some were for the restraint of the Number of Holy Days, a great cause of Superstition, and of the continuance of it. And af∣terwards other Injunctions came out: whereof the first was, that in all Parishes, once every Sunday, for a quarter of a Year to∣gether, the Supremacy should be taught, and the Laws to that in∣tent read. These Injunctions were in number Eleven, as they are set down in the Lord Herbert's History.Pag. 472. The Vicar of Croydon under the ABp's Nose,The Vicar of Croydon. had been guilty of certain Misdemeanors: Which, I suppose, were speaking or preaching to the disparagement of the King's Supremacy, and in favour of the Pope. Now before he went into the Countrey, and having as yet divers Bishops and Learned Men with him at Lambeth, he thought it advisable to call this Man before them at this time. But before he would do it, he thought it best to consult with Crumwel, and take his Advice, whether he should now do it, and before these Bishops
or not. So ticklish a thing then was it for the Bishops to do any things of themselves without the privity and order of this great Vice-gerent. Cranmer was aware of it, and therefore required Di∣rection from him in every thing. The ABp vi∣sits his Dio∣cess.But whatsoever was done with this Vicar, the Arch-bishop was soon down in his Diocess; and having taken an Account of the People and Clergy, what Conformity they bare to the King's Laws and Injunctions; he found them superstitiously set upon the observa∣tion of their old Holy Days. Some whereof he punished, and o∣thers he admonished, according to the degree of their Crimes. And he discovered the chief Cause to lie in the Curates and Priests, who did animat the People to what they did: indeed their Interest and Gain was concerned. The great inconvenience of these Holy Days lay partly in the numerousness of them: so that the attendance up∣on them hindred dispatching, and doing Justice in Westminster-hall in the Terms, and the gathering in Harvest in the Countrey: partly in the Superstitions that these Holy Days maintained, in the idola∣trous Worship of supposed Saints: and partly in the Riot, Debau∣chery and Drunkenness, that these Times were celebrated with among the common People; and lastly, the Poverty it brought upon the meaner sort, being detained from going about their ordinary La∣bours and Callings, to provide for themselves and Families. What course he took for the preventing of Superstition.For the prevention of these Superstitions for the Future, and to make the People more obedient to the King's Laws, he gave out strict Orders to all Parsons of Parishes, upon pain of Deprivation, that they should cause the abrogated Holy Days not to be observed for the future; and to present to the Arch-bishop all Persons in their re∣spective Parishes, as should do contrary to any of the King's Ordi∣nances already set forth, or that should be hereafter by his Autho∣rity, relating to the Doctrine and Ceremonies of the Church. And this course he conceived so good an Expedient, that he counselled the Lord Vice-gerent, that all Bishops in their several Diocesses might be commanded to do the same, for the avoiding of Disobedience and Contention in the Realm. By which means, he said, The Evil-Will of the People might be conveyed from the King and his Council, upon the Ordinaries. And so the Love and Obedience of the People better secured to their Soveraign. Such was his care of his Prince, to preserve him in the Affections of his People, that he was willing to take upon himself their Enmity, that it might not light upon the King. But Cranmer had observed these Holy Days were kept by many, even in the Court under the King's Eye; which he well knew was an Example and Encouragement to the whole Nation. And therefore he signified to the Lord Crumwel, that they could never perswade the People to cease from keeping them, when the King's own Houshold were an Example unto the rest to break his own Or∣dinances.No. XIX. See his Letter to Crumwel in the Appendix.
CHAP. XV. The Bible printed. HE was now at Ford; and it was in the Month of August,His joy at the publishing the English Bible. when something fell out, that gave the good Arch-bishop as much Joy as ever happened to him in all the time of his Prelacy. It was the printing of the Holy Bible in the English Tongue in the great Volume. Which was now finished, by the great Pains and Charges of Richard Grafton the Printer. Osiander, who knew the Arch-bi∣shop well, when he was the King's Ambassador in Germany, saith of him, that he was Sacrarum Literarum Studiossimum. Indeed he always had a great value for the Scriptures, because they were the Word of God: and extraordinary desirous he was, from the very first entrance upon his Bishoprick, that the People might have the liberty of reading it; and for that purpose, to have it interpreted into the Vulgar Language. And so by Crumwel's means, he got leave from the King, that it might be translated and printed. The care of the Translation lay wholly upon him; assigning little Portions of this Holy Book to divers Bishops and Learned Men to do; and being dispatched, to be sent back to him. And to his inexpressible Satisfaction, he saw the Work finished in this Year, about Iuly or August. As soon as some of the Copies came to his Hand,Presents one by Crumwel to the King. one he sent to Crumwel, entreating him, that he would present it from him to the King, (and no question he thought it the noblest Present that ever he made him;) and withal to intercede with his Majesty, that the said Book might by his Authority be both bought and used by all indif∣ferently. Both which Crumwel did. For which the Arch-bishop was full of Gladness and Gratitude; and wrote two Letters to him soon after one another, wherein he thanked him most heartily, telling him, How he had hereby made his Memory famous to Posterity within the Realm, among all such as should hereafter be favourers of God's Word: and that he should hear of this good Deed of his at the last Day. That for his part, it was such a content to his Mind, that he could not have done him a greater pleasure, if he had given him a thousand Pounds. And that such Knowledg would ensue hereupon, that it should appear he had done excellent Ser∣vice both to God and the King. He also particularly spake of the Bishop of Worcester, how highly obliged he was sure he was to him for this. But I refer the Reader to his own Letters, which follow. MY very singular good Lord;Cleopatra E. 5. p. 329. Cransmer's Let∣ters to Crum∣wel. In my most harty wise I com∣mend me unto your Lordship. And whereas I understand, that your Lordship at my Request hath not only exhibited the Bible which I sent unto you, to the King's Majesty, but also hath obtained of his Grace, that the same shall be allowed by his Au∣thority to be bought and read within this Realm; My Lord, for this your Pains, taken in this behalf, I give you my most hear∣ty
Thanks: Assuring your Lordship, for the Contentation of my Mind, you have shewed me more pleasure here, than if you had given me a thousand Pounds; and I doubt not but that hereby such Fruit of good Knowledg shall ensue, that it shall well appear hereafter, what high and excellent Service you have done unto God and the King. Which shall so much redound to your Honour, that besides God's Reward, you shall obtain perpetual Memory for the same within this Realm. And as for me, you may reckon me your Bondman for the same. And I dare be bold to say, so may ye do my Lord of Worcester. Thus, my Lord, right hartily fare ye well. At Ford, the xiii day of August. Your own Bound-man ever, T. Cantuarien. And in another Letter fifteen days after, he again renewed his Thanks. Cleopatra E. 6. p. 292.MY very singular and special good Lord, In my most harty wise I commend me to your Lordship. These shall be to give you most hearty Thanks, that any Heart can think, and that in the Name of them, which favour God's Word, for your di∣ligence at this time, in procuring the King's Highness to set forth the said God's Word, and his Gospel, by his Grace's Authority. For the which Act, not only the King's Majesty, but also you shall have a perpetual Laud and Memory of all them that be now, or hereafter shall be God's faithful People, and the Fa∣vourers of his Word. And this Deed you shall hear of at the Great Day, when all things shall be opened, and made manifest. For our Saviour Christ saith in the said Gospel, that whosoever shrinketh from Him and his Word, and is abashed to profess and set it forth before Men in this World, he will refuse him at that Day: And contrary, whosoever constantly doth profess Him and his Word, and studieth to set that forward in this World, Christ will declare the same at the Last Day before his Father and all his Angels, and take upon him the Defence of those Men. Some further Particulars concerning this Edition of the Bible.Now because by these Letters of the Arch-bishop it appears how instrumental Crumwel was, when the Bible was printed, to procure the setting it forth by the King's Authority, I will here relate more at large what Countenance and Assistance he gave to this pious Work all along, and those that were concerned and employed in the doing of it. The Bible, as Fox speaks, had been printed in the Year 1532, and reprinted again three or four Years after. The Un∣dertakers and Printers, were Grafton and Whitchurch, who prin∣ted it at Hamburgh. The Corrector was Iohn Rogers, a Lear∣ned Divine, afterwards a Canon of St. Paul's in King Edward's Time, and the first Martyr in the next Reign. The Transla∣tor was William Tyndal, another Learned Martyr, with the help of
Miles Coverdale, after Bishop of Exeter. But before all this second Edition was finish'd, Tyndal was taken and put to death, for his Reli∣gion, in Flanders, in the Year 1536. And his Name then growing into ignominy, as one burnt for an Heretick, they thought it might prejudice the Book, if he should be named for the Translator thereof: and so they used a feigned Name, calling it Thomas Matthews Bible; though Tyndal before his death had finished all but the Apocrypha, which was translated by Rogers abovesaid, who added also some Mar∣ginal Notes. In this Bible were certain Prologues, and a special Table collected of the common Places in the Bible, and Texts of Scripture for proving the same: And chiefly the common Places of the Lord's Supper, the Marriage of Priests, and the Mass. Of which it was there said, that it was not to be found in Scripture. This Bible giving the Clergy offence, was gotten to be restrained. Some Years after came forth the Bible aforesaid, wherein Cranmer had the great Hand; which, as I suppose, was nothing but the former corrected, the Prologues and Table being left out. When Grafton had finished this Work,The Printer's thanks and re∣quests to Crumwel. and printed off fifteen hun∣dred Bibles at his great Charge, amounting to five hundred Pounds, (a round Sum in those days) the Ld. Crumwel desired to have six of his Books. Which he forthwith sent by his Servant, a clear Man of all suspicion of any Infection, coming that day out of Flanders, Grafton not adventuring to come himself with the Books, because of the In∣fection at London where he was. These Books therefore he sent, toge∣ther with a Letter of Thanks, for being so assistant in the publicati∣on; (which, as he writ in his Letter, the Arch-bishop said, the Ti∣dings of did him more good than the Gift of ten thousand Pounds) and for procuring the King's Licence, which was thought fit to be signified in the Title Page in red Letters, thus, Set forth by the King's most gracious Licence. But several would not believe the King had licensed it: and therefore he desired further of Crumwel, that he would get it licensed under the Privy Seal, which would be a Defence for the present, and for the future. But take the Letter as Grafton himself penned it. MOST humbly beseeching your Lordship to understand,Graton to Crumwel. Clopatra E. 5. that according to your Request, I have sent your Lordship six Bibles; which gladly I would have brought my self, but because of the Sickness which remaineth in the City: and therefore I have sent them by my Servant, which this day came out of Flanders. Requiring your Lordship, if I may be so bold as to desire you, to accept them as my simple Gift, given to you for those most godly Pains; for which the heavenly Father is bound, even of his Justice to reward you with the Everlasting Kingdom of God. For your Lordship's moving our most gracious Prince to the Allowance and Licensing of such a Work, hath wrought such an Act worthy of Praise, as never was mentioned in any Chronicle in this Realm: and, as my Lord of Canterbury said, the Tydings thereof did him more good than the gift of 10000 l. yet certain there are which believe not, that it pleased the King's Grace to license it to go forth. Wherefore if your Lordship's Pleasure were such
that we might have it Licensed under your Privy Seal, it would be a Defence at this present, and in time to come, for all Ene∣mies and Adversaries of the same. And forasmuch as this Re∣quest is for the maintenance of the Lord's Word, which is to maintain the Lord himself, I fear not, but that your Lordship will be earnest therein. And I am assured that my Lord of Can∣terbury, Worcester, and Salisbury, will give your Lordship such Thanks, as in them lieth. And sure ye may be, that the Heaven∣ly Lord will reward you for the Establishment of his Glorious Truth. And what your Lordship's Pleasure is in this Request, if it may please your Lordship to inform my Servant, I and all that love God heartily are bound to pray for your Preservation all the days of our Life. At London the xxviii day of this present Month of August, 1537. Your Orator while he lveth, Richard Grafton, Grocer. The Printer apprehensive of another Edition.And as this Printer had addressed to Crumwel for the Privy Seal, so he apprehended now a further need of the Corroboration of Au∣thority, upon another Account. For some observing how exceeding acceptable the English Bible was to the common People, were de∣signing to print it in a less Volume and smaller Letters: whereby it would come to pass, that Grafton would be undersold; and so he and his Creditors would be undone: and besides, it was like to prove a very ill Edition, and very Erroneous. Insomuch that Grafton affirmed, they would commit as many Faults as there were Senten∣ces in the Bible. And it must needs be so, because then the Printers were generally Dutchmen within the Realm, that could neither speak nor write true English: nor for Covetousness-sake would they allow any Learned Men at all to oversee and correct what they printed, as formerly it had been printed, but Paper, Letter, Ink and Correction would be all naught. Therefore he desired one Favour more of the Lord Crumwel;Other Requests of the Prin∣ter. and that was, to obtain for him of the King, that none should print the Bible for three Years but himself. And to move him, he said he was sure the Bishop of Canterbury, and other his special Friends would not be unthankful to him. He ur∣ged to him, that his whole Living lay upon this Point. And for the better and quicker sale of his Books, he desired also, that by his Commandment in the King's Name, every Curate might be obliged to have one; hat they might learn to know God, and to instruct their Parishioners; and that every Abby should have six, to be laid in several places of the Convent. He wished some Commissions might be issued out to the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, and the Bi∣shops of Sarum and Worcester; and they would readily cause this to be done in their Diocesses. To which he earnestly added his own Arguments to provoke Crumwel to yield to his request. This Letter may be found in the Appendix.No. XX.
CHAP. XVI. Many Suffragan Bishops made. IT was now forbidden by the Parliament, and in pursuance there∣of, by the Bishops in their several Diocesses,The Feast of S. Thomas, &c. forbid. that the Feast of S. Thomas a Becket, the pretended Martyr, should be celebrated any more; nor of S. Laurence, nor of divers others, the Feasts of the Twelve Apostles excepted, and of our Lady, S. Michael,August. Monks Journal. and Mary Magdalene. Also the Feast of the Holy Cross was forbid; and com∣manded, that none should presume to keep those Feasts Holy; that is, they should ring no Bells, nor adorn their Churches, nor go in Procession, nor do other such-like things as belonged to the Celebra∣tion of Festivals. So when S. Thomas's Eve came, which had used constantly by the Arch-bishops of Canterbury, and their Domesticks to be celebrated by Fasting, Arch-bishop Cranmer took no notice of that Eve, but eat Flesh, and supped in his Parlour with his Family. Which created much Observation, it having never been seen before; the Arch-bishop thinking it unworthy, that a Man of that Devotion to the See of Rome, and disloyalty to his natural Prince, should b so religiously commemorated. Bishops Diocesan Consecrated. March the 25th, Robert Holgate, Master of the Order of Sempring∣ham, was consecrated Bishop of Landaff,Rob. Holgate Consecrated Bp. in the Chappel of S. Mary in the Conventual Church of Friars Preachers of the City of London, by Iohn Bishop of Rochester, by virtue of Letters Commissional from the Arch-bishop to him; Iohn Bishop of Bangor, and Nicolas Bishop of Sarum, assisting. This Holgate was either Abbot or Prior of S. Mary Watte, an House of Gilbertines, which he held in Com∣mendam, and surrendred in the Year 1539. Suffragan Bishops. Iune the 24th▪ Iohn Bird,Iohn Bird▪ S. Th. P. Provincial of the Order of Friars Carmelites of the City of London, was consecrated Suffragan of the See of Penrith, in Landaff Diocess. And, Lewis Thomas, formerly Abbot of the Monastery of Kynmer,Lewis Thoma. Suf∣fragan Bishop of the See of Salop; both consecrated at Lambeth by the Arch-bishop. The Assistant Bishops at this Consecration not mentioned in the Register. Of Bird, a word or two;Some account of Bird. I find him in Norwich about the Year 1531. busy with Bilney before his Death. He was a Person K. Hen∣ry made use of; for in the Year 1535, he, with Fox the Almoner, and Bedel a Clark of the Council, were sent to Q. Katharine, divor∣sed from the King, to forbear the Name of Queen. Which never∣theless she would not do.Lord Herbert's Hist. Hen. 8. He preached certain Sermons before the King against the Pope's Supremacy. Bale, in his Exposition upon the Revelations, makes him to be one of the Ten Horns that shall hate the Whore. Godwin asserts of him, that he was once Bishop of Ossory. Bale in his Centuries, mentions not at all his being an Irish
Bishop; but naming his Preferments, first calls him Episcopus Penri∣censis: In 1539, made Bishop of Bangor; and removed to Chester 1541. He was married, and therefore upon Q. Mary's access to the Crown, was deprived of his Bishoprick; but complied with the old Religion. I find him alive in the Year 1555, being then at Fulham at Bishop Bonner's,Fox's Acts. and there he lodged. Upon his coming, he brought his Present with him, a Dish of Apples, and a Bottle of Wine. While he was here, he exhorted Mr. Hawkes, Convented for pretended Heresy before Bonner, to learn of his Elders, and to bear with some things, and be taught by the Church, and not to go too far. In that Queen's Reign he became Bonner's Suffragan, and Vicar of Dunmow in Essex. Tho. Morley.November the 4th, Thomas Morley, formerly Abbot of Stanley in Sarum Diocess, of the Cistertian Order, was consecrated in the Chap∣pel of Lambeth, Suffragan of the See of Marlborough, by the Arch-bishop, assisted by Iohn Bishop of Lincoln, and Iohn Bishop of Ro∣chester. Rich. Yngworth.December the first, the Arch-bishop, according to the Direction of the Act for Suffragan Bishops, nominated to the King two Persons, out of which he might elect a Suffragan for Dover, viz. Richard Yngworth Prior of the Priory of Langley-Regis, and Iohn Codenham, both Doctors in Divinity. December the 8th, The King answered Cranmer's Letter by his Privy Seal: wherein he appointed Yngworth to be consecrated for his said Suffragan. And accordingly December the 9th, Iohn Bishop of London, by virtue of Commissional Letters from the Arch-bishop, assisted by Iohn Bishop of Rochester, and Ro∣bert Bishop of St. Asaph, consecrated the said Yngworth. On the 10th, the Arch-bishop issued out his Commission to the said Suffra∣gan, ordaining him his Suffragan by those Presents, until he should think fit to withdraw his said Commission again. Signifying, that what he was to do, was, within his Diocess and City of Canterbury, and Jurisdiction of Calis, and the Marches thereof, to confirm Chil∣dren, to bless Altars, Chalices, Vestments, and other Ornaments of the Church; to suspend Places and Churches, and to reconcile them; to consecrate Churches and Altars new set up; to confer all the lesser Orders; to consecrate Holy Oil of Chrism and Holy Unction; and to perform all other things belonging to the Office of a Bishop. The Bishop's Letter to the King, desiring him to appoint him a Suffragan, out of those two above-named; And the Arch-bishop's Commissio∣nal Letters to Suffragan Yngworth,No. XXI. No. XXII. may be seen in the Appendix. And he that is minded to read the Form of the King's Mandate to the Arch-bishop for making a Suffragan, may find it in The History of the Reformation.Vol. I. Collect. 51. Book. 2. The Reason why the Arch-bishop all this while, that is, from the first making the Act, in the Year 1534, to this Time, had nomina∣ted none for Suffragan to this See till now, might be, because there seemed to be a Suffragan already, even the same that had been in the time of Arch-bishop Warham,Ioh. Thornton Suffragan. See Sumner's Hist. Cant. Ap∣pend. p. 423. Rich. Thornden· namely, Iohn Thornton▪ Prior of Do∣ver; who was one of the Witnesses appointed by that Arch-bishop to certify what was found and seen at the opening of S. Dunstan's Tomb. Richard Thornden seems to have succeeded Yngworth in this
Office some Years after; and was very dear to the Arch-bishop, ha∣ving been by him preferred to be Prebend of Canterbury; though he proved very false to him, and was among those that made a treache∣rous Combination against him in the Year 1543. And in Q. Mary's Time became a great Persecutor. December the 9th, Iohn Hodgkin, Professor of Divinity,Iohn Hodgkin. was consecrated at the same time, and by the same Bishops as above; but to what See is not mentioned. The Bishop of London▪ together with this Hodgkin, had nominated to the King Robert Struddel Pro∣fessor of Divinity. Both he recommended to the King by Letters, to be made Suffragans at large, without mention of any See in his Diocess; but only expressing that his Diocess wanted the comfort of Suffragans, that might bear a part in his Cure; and so mentioned those two: adding, that the King might appoint them to some See within the Province of Canterbury. Hodgkin, if I mistake not, was consecrated Suffragan of Bedford: And was afterwards one of those that assisted at the Consecration of Arch-bishop Parker. He was a Black Friar. In the Year 1531, he, with Bird, laboured with Bil∣ney at Norwich, a little before his Death, to bring him off from the Doctrines for which he was condemned. Afterwards Hodgkin coming nearer under the Arch-bishop's Eye, by his means came to better knowledg in Religion, and married a Wife; but in Queen Mary's Time put her away. March 24. Henry Holbeach, Prior of the Cathedral Church of Wigorn, S. T. P. (Hugh Bishop of Wigorn,Henry Holbeach. having recommend∣ed him to the King for Suffragan Bishop of Bristow) was accord∣ingly consecrated in the Bishop of London's Chappel, in the said Bishop's House, situate in Lambeth-Marsh, by the said Bishop, Hugh Bishop of Wigorn, and Robert Bishop of S. Asaph, assist∣ing. CHAP. XVII. The Bible in English allowed.An. 1538. THE next Year I find the careful Arch-bishop again at Canter∣bury,The ABp reads upon the Hebrews. looking after his Charge. And here he read Lectures upon the Epistle of S. Paul to the Hebrews, half the Lent, in the Chapter-House of the Monastery of the Holy Trinity. Now, viz. 1538. the Holy Bible was divulged, and exposed to common sale; and appointed to be had in every Parish-Church.A Declaration for reading the Bible. And then, that the Sacred Book might be used with the more benefit, both of the Clergy and Lay-People, for this Reason a Declaration was issued out, to be read openly by all Curates, upon the publish∣ing of this Bible: shewing the godly Ends of his Majesty in per∣mitting it to be in English: and directions how they should read and
hear it. Namely, to use it with Reverence and gre Devotion: to conform their Lives unto it; and to encourage those that were under them, Wives, Children and Servants, to live according to the Rules thereof; that in doubtful Places, they should confer with the Learned for the Sense, who should be appointed to preach and explain the same, and not to contend and dispute about them in Ale∣houses and Taverns. They that are minded to read this Declara∣tion,No. XXIII. may find it in the Appendix. This Bible was of so quick sale, that two Years after it was printed again. The Bible re∣ceived and read with great Joy.It was wonderful to see with what joy this Book of God was re∣ceived, not only among the Learneder sort, and those that were no∣ted for Lovers of the Reformation, but generally all England over, among all the Vulgar, and common People; and with what greediness God's Word was read, and what resort to Places where the read∣ing of it was. Every body that could, bought the Book, or busily read it, or got others to read it to them, if they could not them∣selves; and divers more elderly People learned to read on purpose. And even little Boys flocked among the rest to hear Portions of the Holy Scripture read.Inter Foxii MSS. One William Maldon, happening in the Company of Iohn Fox, in the beginning of the Reign of Q. Eliza∣beth, and Fox being very inquisitive after those that suffered for Re∣ligion in the former Reigns, asked him, if he knew any that were persecuted for the Gospel of Iesus Christ, that he might add it to his Book of Martyrs; He told him▪, he knew one that was whipp'd by his own Father in K. Henry's Reign for it. And when Fox was very inquisitive who he was, and what was his Name, he confessed it was himself: and upon his desire he wrote out all the Circum∣stances. Namely, That when the King had allowed the Bible to be set forth to be read in all Churches, immediately several poor Men in the Town of Chelmsford in Essex, where his Father lived and he was born, bought the New-Testament, and on Sundays fat reading of it in the Lower end of the Church: many would flock a∣bout them to hear their reading; and he among the rest, being then but fifteen Years old, came every Sunday to hear the glad and sweet Tidings of the Gospel. But his Father observing it, once angrily fetch'd him away, and would have him to say the Latin Mattins with him. Which grieved him much. And as he returned at other times to hear the Scripture read, his Father still would fetch him a∣way. This put him upon the thoughts of learning to read English, that so he might read the New Testament himself. Which when he had by diligence effected, he and his Father's Apprentice bought the New Testament, joining their Stocks together; and to conceal it, laid it under the Bed-straw, and read it at convenient Times. One night, his Father being asleep, he and his Mother chanced to discourse concerning the Crucifix, and kneeling down to it, and knocking on the Breast then used, and holding up the Hands to it, when it came by on Procession: This he told his Mother was plain Idolatry, and against the Commandment of God, where he saith, Thou shalt not make any graven Image, nor bow down to it, nor wor∣ship it. His Mother enraged at him for this, said, Wilt thou not
worship the Cross, which was about thee when thou wert Christ∣ned, and must be laid on thee when thou art dead?An. 1537. In this heat the Mother and Son departed, and went to their Beds. The Sum of this Evening's Conference she presently repeats to her Husband: which he impatient to hear, and boiling in Fury against his Son, for denying worship to be due to the Cross, arose up forthwith, and goes into his Son's Chamber, and like a mad Zealot, taking him by the Hair of his Head with both his Hands, pulled him out of the Bed, and whipped him unmercifully. And when the Young Man bore this beating, as he related, with a kind of Joy, conside∣ring it was for Christ's Sake, and shed not a tear; his Father, seeing that, was more inraged, and ran down and fetched an Halter, and put it about his Neck, saying he would hang him. At length, with much intreaty of the Mother and Brother, he left him almost dead. I extract this out of the Original Relation of the Person himself, wrote at Newington, near London, where he afterwards dwelt. Which relation he gave to Iohn Fox. This Year Nicolson, a very Learned Man,The ABp had a hand in Lam∣bert's Death greatly acquainted with Tindal and Frith, and who by reason of trouble from the Bishops formerly, for the better concealing of himself for time to come, called himself Lambert, was adjudged to the Flames, and cruelly burnt. Wherein our Arch-bishop and the Lord Crumwel unhappily had their hands; the one in reading the Sentence against him De Haeretico comburendo, by the King's Commandment: and the Arch-bishop first in having him before him in a judiciary way, and af∣terwards in disputing publickly against him in favour of the Doctrine of the Corporal Presence. The first occasion of Lambert's Troubles was this. At the hearing of a Sermon of Dr. Taylor (he who was afterwards Bishop of Lincoln, and a favourer of the Gospel) preach∣ed by him at S. Peter's Cornhil, he came and presented him with Ten Reasons against Transubstantiation, written by him. Dr. Taylor▪ by Dr. Barnes his means, who, though in other things he favoured a Reformation, and suffered Death upon the Six Articles; yet was hot against Sacramentaries at this time, thinking the broaching that Doctrine might throw in some Impediment to the progress of the Gospel; Dr. Taylor, I say, by Barnes his Advice, carried these Rea∣sons to the Arch-bishop. Who, upon this, conventing Lambert be∣fore him, endeavoured to reclaim him, by holding much discourse with him. The News of this came to the Court. And by the insti∣gation of the Bishop of Winchester, the King resolved to dispute with him himself in a very publick and solemn manner: and that because he had appealed from the Bishops to the King. The Day being come, and the King present, with all his Bishops on the right Hand, and his Nobles on the Left,The Bishops dispute against Lambert' e∣son. accompanied with his Lawyers and other Attendants, on purpose to terrify him, and to make an open Signification, that though he had cast off the Pa∣pal Supremacy, yet he intended not to be a favourer of Heresy so called; first commanded Richard Sampson Bishop of Chichester (Fox saith it was Day Bishop of Chichester, but in that he was mistaken, for he was not yet Bishop) to begin, and give the Reason of the meeting. He appointed the Bishops now present to answer Lambert's
Ten Reasons, as Fox; or his Eight, as the Bishop of Chichester in his Declaration mentioned.An. 1538. The Arch-bishop answered the second, for the King himself had disputed against the first. The Arch-bishop, according to his mild Temper, but withal according to the false Opinion, which he then most confidently maintained, stiling him Brother Lambert, desired the Matter might be decided indifferently between them. And that if he convinced Lambert by Scripture, Lambert would be willing to come over from his Opinion: But if Lambert on the other hand could by Scripture convince him, he promised to imbrace his Opinion. Then he fell upon Lambert's Reason, which was taken out of the Acts of the Apostles, where Christ appeared unto Paul by the way. Disputing from that place, that it was not disagreeable to the Word of God, that the Body of Christ may be in two places at once. Which being in Heaven, was seen the same time by S. Paul upon the Earth. And, said the Arch-bishop, If it may be in two places, why by the like Reason may it not be in many places? In what order and course the rest of the Bishops disputed, or rather baited this poor Man, it is uncertain, only Winchester had the sixth place, Tunstal of Durham next to him, and next Stokesly Bishop of London. Richard Bishop of Chichester, who was reputed a Man of great Learning, had his course, to whose turn it came to confute Lambert's Sixth Reason, which was taken from that of S. Paul to the Romans,Rom▪ x. Who hath ascended up to Heaven, to bring Christ down from thence? His Argument is preserved in the Cotton Library.Cleopatra E. 5. No. XXIV. I refer the Reader to the Appendix, where he shall meet with it. Whereby may be seen after what a haughty and indecent manner this meek Confessor of Christ was dealt with▪ as though they designed rather to run him down, and brow-beat him, than answer him. CHAP. XVIII. The Arch-bishop's Iudgment of the Eucharist. Cranmer zea∣lous for the Corporal Presence.BUT to return to Cranmer, whose Opinion in the Point of the Sacrament we will stay a little upon. He was now a strong tickler for the Carnal Presence, and seemed greatly prejudiced to that Opinion. There was one Ioachim Vadianus, a Learned Man of S. Gal in Helvetia, and an Acquaintance of the Arch-bishop's. He had framed a Treatise, intituled, Aphorisms upon the Consideration of the Eucharist, in six Books: Which were intended to prove no Cor∣poral Presence. This Book he presented to the Arch-bishop: but though he loved him as a Learned Man, yet he declared himself much displeased with his Argument; and wrote to him, That he wished he had employed his Study to better purpose, and that he had begun his Correspondence with him in some better and more appro∣ved Subject: Adding, That he would be neither Patron nor Approver of that Doctrine, until he saw stronger Proofs for it. And so much did he dislike Oecolampadius and Zuinglius their Opinion in this Mat∣ter, that he applied that Censure of S. Hierom concerning Origen to
them; That where they wrote well, no body writ better; and where ill, no body worse. And he wished those Learned Men had gone no further, than to confute Papistical Errors and Abuses, and had not sown their Tares with their good Corn. That which detained our Arch-bishop in this Error,His Reasons for it. was the Ve∣neration he had for the Ancient Doctors of the Church, whose Writings, as he then thought, approved the Doctrine of this gross Presence; judging that none could ever reconcile those Authors to the contrary Opinion. Indeed he judged it the very Doctrine of the Fathers from the beginning of the Church: And he reckoned that it must be a Truth, because otherwise it could not consist with God's Goodness to his Spouse, to leave her in such blindness so long. It seemed also that he built this his Error upon the words of Scripture, taking the sense of This is my Body literally. Vadian by this Book had intended to have brought Cranmer off from this Opinion. And before him several Attempts had been made that way; but he remained so rooted therein, that he seemed to be ever unmoveable. He supposed also, that the giving up this Doctrine would prove a great Impediment to the Work of the Gospel, that now proceeded well in the Nation. He advised and beseeched all, both Lutherans and Zuinglians, that the Churches of Christ would lay aside their Controversies in that Matter, and agree and unite in a Christian Concord together, that they might propagate one sound pure Doctrine, consonant to the Discipline of the Primitive Church. And this would be the way to convert even Turks themselves to the Obedience of the Gospel. But I recommend the Reader to the Arch-bishop's own Letter to the said Vadianus; wherein he may see how fast and firm he stuck to this Doctrine in these days. He will find it in the Appendix.N. XXV. Sanders, in his lying Book of the English Schism, would make his Reader believe,Sanders Slan∣ders of the Abp concerning his Opinion in the Sacrament. that Cranmer was of this Opinion for another Reason, namely, because his Master K. Henry thought so: and that he had so devoted himself to him, that he in all things whatsoever believed, and did, in conformity to him: giving Cranmer therefore the Nick-name of Henricianus. But we must attribute that Suggestion to the well-known venemous Pen of that Man, who cared not what he writ, so he might but throw his Dirt upon the Reformation, and the Reformers. The said Author with the same Malice would have it, that Cranmer was very variable and inconstant, having been first for a Corporeal Presence, afterwards a Lutheran, and then a Calvinist: And that he thus changed his Opinion, as a Sycophant and Flatterer, to comply with every Man's Humour that was uppermost. That all the time of K. Henry, he remained of that King's Opinion, who was a vehement Enemy to Luther; but when he was dead, he became wholly Lutheran, and put forth a Catechism dedicated to K. Edward, and printed it, in which he taught, that every Christian that re∣ceived the Sacrament, either under the Bread, or in the Bread, or with the Bread, certainly received into his Mouth the very true Body and Blood of Christ. But that scarce a Month passed, when the Wretch (that is his word) understood, that the Duke of Somerset, the King's Governour, was a Calvinist, and not a Lutheran, What
should he do? He printed his Catechism again, changed the word; and of an Henrician and a Lutheran, became a Calvinist. When Cran∣mer changed his Opinion.But to give a more true and respectful account of our Arch-bishop, as to his continuance in this Opinion, and his change of it. Hitherto we have seen his Opinion for a Corporal Presence. In the next Year, (viz. 1539.) I find one Adam Damplip of Calais, a Learned Preacher, convented before him, and several other Bishops, for not holding the Real Presence. From which Opinion the Arch-bishop, with the rest, did endeavour to bring him off: Though then he marvelled much at the Answers that Damplip made, and confessed openly and plainly, that the Scripture knew no such term as Transubstantiation. In the Year 1541, he had one Barber, a Master of Arts of Oxford, brought before him for denying the said Corporal Presence: the Arch-bishop disputed again earnestly for that Doctrine against this Man, yet could not but admire at his readiness in citing his Places out of S. Augu∣stin, nor could tell how to confute them, as Mr. Raphe Morice his Secretary related afterward to Iohn Fox.Acts and Mon. p. 1101. And this Tenet he held to the very last Year of K. Henry, that is, to the Year 1546. When by more mature and calm deliberation, and considering the Point with less prejudice, and the sense of the Fathers more closely; in conference with Dr. Ridley, afterwards Bishop of Rochester, and his Fellow-Martyr, he at last quitted and freed himself from the Fet∣ters of that unsound Doctrine; as appears by the Epistle Dedicatory before his Book of the Sacrament in Latin, printed by the Exiles at Embden. Which Epistle we may give credit to, being written (as is thought) by Sir Iohn Cheke, who well knew the Arch-bishop, and Matters relating to him. Latimer of the same Judg∣ment.After Arch-bishop Cranmer and Ridley had changed their Opinion, Latimer not long after changed his in this Point. For as they all three died Martyrs at Oxon, I am willing to join them together here. It was but seven Years before his Burning that he relinquish'd that old Error, that is, about the Year 1547, as he confessed to Dr. VVeston in his Disputation. There is an Argument the said Latimer made use of, to prove the deceit of the Blood of Hales; which Argument supposes him then of this Opinion. It was pretended by the Priests, that none could see this Blood, but those that were confessed and absolved by the Priest, and so clean in Life; and their seeing of it, was a sign they were so. But said Latimer in those Times, for the exposing of this Fraud;Fox, p. 1581. Those Wretches that scourged Christ, and nailed him to his Cross, did see his Blood with their bodily Eyes, and yet were not in clean Life. And we see the self-same Blood in form of Wine, when we have consecrate, and may both see it, feel it, and receive it to our Damnation, as touching bodily receiving. We shall perhaps say more of the Arch-bishop's Opini∣on in the Eucharist, when we come to speak of his Book relating to that Argument. Divers Priests marry Wives.Divers Priests now, as well Religious as Secular, had married themselves, after the Example of the Arch-bishop, who kept his Wife secretly with him. But some of these married Priests were so indiscreet, that they lived publickly and openly with their Wives, though the Ecclesiastical Laws were in force against such Marriages,
nor had they any Allowances by the King and Realm in Parliament; Only some had Dispensations (as 'tis said) from the Arch-bishop. Therefore the King, prest by some of the Papists about him, (who began now, after Lambert's Death, to listen to them) set forth a Pro∣clamation, Novemb. 16. for the stopping of such Matrimonies. Which ran in this Tenor. That the King's Majesty understanding that a few in number of this his Realm, being Priests, as well Religious as other,The King's Proclamation against Priests Marriages. had taken Wives, and married themselves, &c. His Highness in no wise minding, that the generality of the Clergy of this his Realm should, with the Example of such a few number of light Persons, proceed to Marriage without a common Consent of his Highness, and his Realm; Did therefore streightly charge and command, as well all and singular the said Priests, as have attempted Mar∣riages, that be openly known, as all such as would presumptuously proceed to the same, that they, ne any of them, should minister any Sacrament, or other Ministry Mystical: Ne have any Office▪ Dignity, Cure, Privilege, Profit or Commodity, heretofore ac∣customed and belonging to the Clergy of this Realm; but should be utterly, after such Marriages, expelled and deprived from the same; and be had and reputed as Lay-persons to all intents and purposes. And that such as should after this Proclamation, con∣trary to his Commandment, of their presumptuous Mind, take Wives and be married, should run in his Grace's Indignation, and suffer further Punishment and Imprisonment at his Grace's Will and Pleasure. Dat. xvi. Novembris, Anno Regni sui xxx. Wherein we may observe what a particular regard the King had for the Arch-bishop in relation to his Wife, that the danger of the Proclamation might not reach him, by limiting the Penalty, not to such as were married and kept their Wives secretly, but to such as should marry hereafter, and such as kept them openly. And we may observe further, that it seemed to be in the King's Mind in due time, to tolerate Marriages to Priests by Act of Parliament, which that Clause seems to import, that these Priests had married themselves without a common Consent of his Highness and his Realm.Defence of Priests marriage, p. 198. And Bishop Ponet, or whoever else was the Author of the Defence of Priests Mar∣riage, assures us, that the King intended to permit Priests to take Wives, knowing how necessary it was to grant that Liberty; and he affirms, that it was not unknown to divers that heard him speak oft of that Matter. But was hindred by some jealous Councellors, that pretended, how ill the People would take it had it been done by his Authority. The Sect of Anabaptists did now begin to pester this Church;Anabaptists and would openly dispute their Principles in Taverns and publick places, and some of them were taken up. Many also of their Books were brought in and printed here also: which was the cause that the King now set out a severe Proclamation against them and their Books. To which he joined the Sacramentaries, as lately with the other come into the Land; Declaring, That he abhorred and de∣tested their Errors; and that those that were apprehended, he would make Examples. Ordering, that they should be detected▪
and brought before the King or his Council; and that all that were not, should in eight or ten days depart the Kingdom. This Procla∣mation may be read in the Appendix. Num. VIII. Where I have misplaced it. A Commission again them. Cranm. Regist.A Commission also was then given out to the Arch-bishop, to Iohn Bishop of Lincoln, Rich. Bishop of Chichester, and others, against this Sect. Which Commission was signed at the bottom by Thomas Crumwel. The wayward∣ness of the Priests. Clopat. E. 6. p. 222.It was observed, that the Parsons, Vicars and Curates did read confusedly the Word of God, and the King's Injunctions, lately set forth, and commanded by them to be read: humming and hauking thereat, that almost no Man could understand the meaning of the In∣junction. And they secretly suborned certain spreaders of Rumors and false Tales in Corners, who interpreted the Injunctions to a false sense. And because there was an Order, that all Christnings, Marriages and Burials should be registred from time to time, and the Books surely kept in the Parish Churches, they blew abroad, that the King intended to make new Exactions at all Christnings, Weddings and Burials: adding, that therein the King went about to take away the Liberties of the Realm, for which they said, Thomas a Becket died. And they bad their Parishioners, not∣withstanding what they read, being compelled so to do, that they should do as they did in Times past, to live as their Fathers; and that the old Fashion is the best: and other crafty and seditious Para∣bles they gave out among them. Occasions the King to write to the Justices.This forced the King to write his Letters to the Justices of Peace, to take up such seditious Parsons, Vicars and Curates. And in these Letters is explained the true Reason of Thomas a Becke's Contention with K. Henry II. As that he contended, that none of the Clergy offending should be called to account, or corrected, but in the Bishop's Courts only, and not by the Laws of the Realm: and that no King should be Crowned but by the Arch-bishop of Canter∣bury only. He visits the Diocess of H∣reford.The Church of Hereford being now become vacant by the Death of Fox, (an excellent Instrument of the Reformation) the Arch∣bishop committed the custody of the Spiritualities to Hugh Coren Do∣ctor of Canon Laws, and Prebendary of that Church, and by him visited the Church and Diocess, and gave certain Injunctions to the Parsons,Cranm. Regist. Vicars, and other Curats there. These Injunctions, as I find them in Cranmer's Register, were eight in number. Which I shall not here insert at large, because they may be met with in the History of the Reformation.Par. I. Book III. Collect. 12. But in short, they enjoined the Obser∣vation of the King's Injunctions, given by his Majesty's Commissa∣ries in the Year 1536. They enjoined, that they should have by the first of August, a whole Bible in Latin and English; or at least a New Testament in the same Languages. That they should every day study one Chapter of the Bible or Testament, conferring the Latin and English together; and to begin at the beginning of the Book, and so continue to the End. That they should not discourage any Lay-men from reading the Bible, but encourage them to it. And to read it for the Reformation of their Lives, and Knowledg of
their Duty; and not to be bold and presumptuous in judging of things before they have perfect Knowledg. That they should, both in their Preachings and Confessions, and in other their Doings, excite their Parishioners unto such Works as are commanded by God ex∣presly: Adding, that for this God should demand of them a strict Reckoning. And to teach them, that other Works which they do of their own Devotion, are not to be so highly esteemed as the other. And that for the not doing them, God will not ask any Account. That no Friar have any Cure or Service in their Churches, unless he were dispensed withal and licensed by the Ordinary. That they ad∣mit no young Person to the Sacrament, who never received it before, unless such Person openly in the Church, after Mass upon a Holy∣day, say the Lord's Prayer, the Creed, and the Ten Command∣ments. That they twice a Quarter declare the Bands of Matrimo∣ny, and the danger of using their Bodies, but with such Persons as they might by the Law of God; and that no privy Contracts be made, as they would avoid the extream Peril of the Laws of the Realm. No Diocesan Bishop Consecrated this Year. Bishops Suffragans. Robert Bishop of S. Asaph recommended to the King Iohn Bradley,Bishops conse∣crated. Abbot of the Monastery of Milton, of the order of S. Benedict, or William Pelles, both Batchellors of Divinity, to the Dignity of Suf∣fragan within the Diocess [Province rather] of Canterbury,Cranm. Registi men∣tioning no particular See. The Bishop of Bath and Wells also re∣commended two to the King, out of which to nominate a Suffragan to some See within the Province of Canterbury, viz. William Finch, late Prior of Bremar, and Richard Walshe, Prior of the Hospital of S. Iohn Baptist of Bridgewater. April the 7th,William Fnch▪ William Finch was nominated by the King to the Arch-bishop to be Consecrated for Suffragan of Taunton; and then consecrated in the Chappel of S. Maries in the Conventual Church of the Friars Preachers, London, by Iohn Bishop of Rochester, by virtue of Letters Commissional from the Arch-bishop, Robert Bishop of S. Asaph, and William Suffragan of Colchester assisting. And, March the 23.Iohn Bradly▪ Iohn Bradley was consecrated Suffragan of Shafts∣bury, in the Chancel of the Parish-Church of S. Iohn Baptist in Southampton, by Iohn Bishop of Bangor, by the Letters Commissio∣nal of Thomas Arch-bishop of Canterbury, Iohn Ipolitanen▪ and Thomas Suffragan of Marleborough, assisting. CHAP. XIX. The Act of Six Articles. THIS Year, October the 6th, I meet with a Commission,The ABp makes Nic. Wotton Commissary of his Faculties. Cranm. Regist. ad Fa∣cultates, granted from the Arch-bishop to a famous Man, Ni∣colas Wotton, LL. D. a Man of great Learning, and made use of
by the King afterwards in divers Embassies, and a Privy-Counsellor to King Henry,An. 1539. and his three Children successively Princes of the Realm, and Dean of Canterbury and York. This Commission was in pursuance of a late Act of Parliament, to this Tenor, That in what∣soever Cases, not prohibited by Divine Right, in which the Bishop of Rome, or Roman See, heretofore accustomed to Dispence, and also in all other Cases in which the Bishop or See of Rome accustomed not to dispence, if so be they were not forbid by Divine Right; in these Cases the Arch-bishop had Power granted him to Dispense. In this Office he constituted Wotton his Commissary or Deputy, for the Term of his natural Life. He succeeded Edmund Boner, Master of the Arch-bishop's Faculties,Ath. Oxon. p. 124. now preferred to the Bishoprick of Hereford. So that Cranmer took notice of the Merits of this Man, who was so much made use of afterwards in the Church and State; and was of that great Esteem and Reputation, that he was thought on, in the begin∣ning of Q. Elizabeth's Reign for ABp of Canterbury. In the Year 1528. he was Doctor of Laws, and the Bishop of London's Official. In the Year 1540, he was Resident for the King in the Duke of Cleve's Court; and had been employed in the Match between the King and the Lady Ann of that House the Year before; and perhaps this might be the first time he was sent abroad in the King's Business. An. 1539.In the Year 1539, the King took occasion to be displeased with the Arch-bishop and the other Bishops of the new Learning, as they then termed them,The King of∣fended with the ABp and some other Bishops. because they could not be brought to give their Consent in the Parliament, that the King should have all the Mona∣steries suppressed to his own sole use. They were willing he should have all the Lands as his Ancestors gave to any of them; but the Re∣sidue they would have had bestowed upon Hospitals,Life of Cranm. inter Foxii MSS. Grammar-Schools for bringing up of Youth in Vertue and good Learning, with other things profitable in the Common-wealth. The King was hereunto stirred, by the crafty Insinuations of the Bishop of Win∣chester, and other old dissembling Papists. And as an effect of this Displeasure, as it was thought, in the Parliament this Year, he made the terrible bloody Act of the Six Articles: Whereby none were suf∣fered to speak a word against the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, upon pain of being burnt to Death as an Heretick, and to forfeit all his Lands and Goods, as in case of Treason. And moreover, it was made Felony, and forfeiture of Lands and Goods, to defend the Communion in both kinds, Marriage in a Priest, or in any Man or Woman that had vowed Chastity: or to say any thing against the necessity of Private Masses and Auricular Confession. Which Arti∣cles were plainly enough designed against any that should dare to open their Mouths against these Romish Errors, and especially to impose Silence, and that on pain of Death, upon many honest Preachers that were now risen up, and used to speak freely against these Abuses; and as a good means to keep the poor People still se∣curely in their old Ignorance and Superstition. But before this Act passed, marvellous great struggling there was on both Parts,The six Arti∣cles opposed by the ABp. for and against it. But the side of the Favourers of the Gospel at this time was the weaker, the King, now enclining
more to the other Party, for the reason abovesaid, and for other Causes: Wherein I refer the Reader to the Conjectures of the Lord Herbert. The Bishops disputed long in the House, some for it, and some against it.Life of K. Henry p. 512. The Arch-bishop disputed earnestly three days against it, using divers Arguments to disswade passing the Act. Which were so remarkable for the Learning and Weight of them, that the King required a Copy of them. And though he was re∣solved not to alter his purpose of having this Act made, yet he was not offended with the Arch-bishops freedom, as knowing the Sin∣cerity of the Man. Even those in the House that dissented from him, were greatly taken with the Gravity, Eloquence, and Learning he then shewed, and particularly the Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk. Who told him so at his Table soon after: being sent by the King to him, to comfort him under his dejection for this Act, with Crum∣wel, and many other Lords. The Papist Writers say he opposed it, because himself was a Married Man, and so it would touch him close. But it is plain, that there were other of these Six Articles which he utterly disliked. And especially he abhorred the rigorous penalty of the Act. But hereupon he privately sent away his Wife into Germany among her Friends. On this side also were, beside the Arch-bishop, the Bishops of Ely, Sarum, Worcester, Rochester, and St. Davids: York, Durham, Winchester, and Carlile went vigorously the other way. Against the former the King himself argued, with his Learning, out of the Scriptures; and would by all means prove these Articles thence. The Parliament Men said little against this Bill, but seemed all unanimous for it: Neither did the Lord Chan∣cellor Audley, no, nor the Lord Privy Seal, Crumwel, speak against it: the Reason being, no question, because they saw the King so resolved upon it. Nay, it came to be a flying Report, that the Arch-bishop of Canterbury himself, and all the Bishops, except Sarum, consented. But this is not likely, that Cranmer, who had so openly and zealously opposed it, should be so soon changed, and brought to comply with it. Nay, at the very same time it passed, he staid and protested against it, though the King desired him to go out, since he could not consent to it. Worcester also, as well as Sa∣rum, was committed to Prison: and he, as well as the other, resign∣ed up his Bishoprick upon the Act. In the foresaid Disputation in the Parliament-house,The Argument the ABp made use of at this time, lost. the Arch-bi∣shop behaved himself with such humble modesty, and obedience in word towards his Prince; protesting the Cause not to be his, but God's; that neither his Enterprize was misliked of the King, and his Allegations and Reasons were so strong, that they could not be re∣futed. Great pity it is, that these Arguments of the Arch-bishop are lost; which I suppose they are irrecoverably, because Fox that lived so near those Times, and so elaborate a Searcher after such Papers, could not meet with them; and all that he could do, was to wish that they were extant to be seen and read. However I will make my Conjecture here, that I am apt to think, that one of the main Mat∣ters insisted on by him at this time, was against the cruel Penalty an∣nexed to these Articles. For I find in one of the Arch-bishop's Ma∣nuscript Volumes, now in Benet-College Library, there is in this
very Year, a Discourse in Latin upon this Subject, Num in haereti∣cos jure Magistratui gravius animadvertere liceat: Decisio Vrbani Rhe∣gii, Interprete Iacobo Gisleno. Anno 1539. Which Book I suppose he might at this juncture have read over, and made use of. The King's Message to the ABp by the Lords.The Dukes and Lords of Parliament, that as above was said, came over to Lambeth to visit and dine with him, by the King's Com∣mand, used words to him to this Tenor; The King's Pleasure is, that we should in his behalf cherish and comfort you, as one, that for your travail in the late Parliament, declared your self both greatly Learned, and also Discreet and Wise: And therefore, my Lord, be not discouraged for any thing that past there contrary to your Allegations. The Arch-bishop replied, In the first place, my Lords, I heartily thank the King's Highness for his singular good Affection towards me, and you all, for your pains. And I hope in God, that hereafter my Allegations and Authorities shall take place, to the Glory of God, and Commodity of the Realm. Every of the Lords brought forth his Sentence in commendation of him, to shew what good-will both the King and they bare to him. One of them entred into a Comparison between the said Arch-bishop and Cardinal Wolsey, preferring the Arch-bishop before him for his mild and gentle Nature; whereas he said, the Cardinal was a stub∣born and churlish Prelate, that could never abide any Noble-man. The Lord Crumwel,MS. Life of Cranmer, in C.C.C.C. as Cranmer's Secretary relates, who himself heard the words, You, my Lord, said he, were born in an happy Hour I suppose; for do or say what you will, the King will always take it well at your Hands. And I must needs confess, that in some things I have complained of you to his Majesty; but all in vain, for he will never give credit against you, whatsoever is laid to your Charge: But let me, or any other of the Council be complained of, his Grace will most seriously chide, and fall out with us: And therefore you are most happy, if you can keep you in this State. A Book of Ce∣remonies la∣boured to be brought in.The Roman Zealots having obtained this Act of the Six Articles, desisted not, but seconded their Blow by a Book of Ceremonies to be used by the Church of England, so intituled; all running after the old Popish strain. It proceeded all along in favour of the Roman Church's superstitious Ceremonies, endeavouring to shew the good signification of them. The Book first begins with an Index of the Points touched therein; viz. Churches and Church-yards, the hallowing and reconcileing them. The Ceremonies about the Sacrament of Baptism. Ordering of the Ministers of the Church in general. Divine Service to be sung and said in the Church. Mattins, Prime and other Hours. Ceremonies used in the Mass. Sundays, with other Feasts. Bells. Vesture and Tonsure of the Ministers of the Church, and what Service they be bound unto. Bearing Candles upon Candlemass-day. Fasting Days. The giving of Ashes. The covering of the Cross and Images in Lent. Bearing of Palms. The Service of Wednesday, Thursday and Friday before Easter. The hallowing of Oil and Chrism. The washing of the Altars. The hallowing of the Font upon Satur∣day in the Easter-Even. The Ceremonies of the Resurrection in
Easter-Morning. General and other particular Processions. Be∣nedictions of Bells or Priests. Holy Water, and holy Bread. A general Doctrine to what intent Ceremonies be ordained, and of what value they be. The Book it self is too long to be here in∣serted; but such as have the Curiosity,Cleopatra E. . p. 259. may find it in the Cotton Li∣brary, and may observe what Pains was taken to smooth and var∣nish over the old Supperstions. I do not find this Book mentioned by any of our Historians. The Bishop of Winchester, with his own Pen, hath an Annotation in the Margin of one place in the Book. And I strongly suspect he was more than the Revisor of it; and that it was drawn up by him and his Party, and strongly pushed on to be owned as the Act of the Clergy.A Convoca∣tion. For this Year there was a Convo∣cation. The King had sent his Letters, written March the 12th, in the 30th Year of his Reign, viz. 1538. to the Arch-bishop of Can∣terbury, for summoning a Convocation, to meet together at St. Paul's the second day of May. But this Assembly, by the King's Letters to him, was prorogued till November the 4th. At this Convocation, I suppose, these Articles were invented and propounded to the House. All this long Book, in behalf of the Ceremonies, did our laborious Metropolitan put himself to the pains of answering, and thereby hindred the Reception of it. For concerning this, I do interpret that Passage of Fox, viz. That the Arch-bishop confuted eighty eight Articles devised by a Convocation, and which were laboured to be received, but were not. But to return to the six Articles. Great triumphing now there was on the Papists Side,The Papists rejoice. as appears by a Letter wrote from some Roman Catholick Member of the House of Lords to his Friend. Which may be read in the Appendix.No. XXVI. But after some time, the King perceiving that the said Arch-bishop and Bishops did this thing, not of Malice or Stubbornness, but out of a zeal they had to God's Glory and the Common-wealth, reformed in part the said Six Articles, and somewhat blunted the Edg of them. March 20. Two Commissions were sent to the Arch-bishop to take the Surrender of two Houses of Religious Persons; namely,Two Priories surrendred to the ABp. that of Christ's-Church Canterbury, and that of Rochester. Towards the latter end of this Year,The ABp and Crumwel la∣bour with the King about the new Bishop∣ricks. several new Bishopricks were founded out of old Monasteries; and several Deaneries and Colleges of Prebends out of divers Priories belonging to Cathedral Churches. Herein as Crumwel, so Cranmer had a great Hand. Who laboured with the King, that in these New Foundations there should be Rea∣ders of Divinity, Greek and Hebrew, and Students trained up in Religion and Learning. From whence, as a Nursery, the Bishops should supply their Diocesses with honest and able Ministers. And so every Bishop should have a College of Clergy-men under his Eye, to be preferred according to their Merits. For it was our Arch-bishops regret, that the Prebendaries were bestowed as they were. This Complaint Bishop Burnet tells us he saw in a long Letter of Cranmer's own hand.Hist. Ref. P. I. p. 301. Bishops Confirmed. In Arch-bishops Cranmer's Register I find these Bishops Confirmed,Bishops this Year. their Consecrations being omitted.
August the 11th, Iohn Bell, LL. D. brought up in Baliol College, and Arch-deacon of Glocester,An. 1540. was Confirmed Bishop of Worcester, upon the Resignation of Bishop Latimer, in the Chappel of Lambeth. He is stiled in the Register,Iohn Bell. the King's Chaplain and Councellor. Iohn Skyp.November the Iohn Skyp, D. D. Arch-deacon of Dorset, and once Chaplain to Queen Ann Bole, was Confirmed Bishop of Hereford. The King's Letter to the Archbishop to consecrate him bears date November 8. CHAP. XX. The Arch-bishop in Commission. An. 1540.THE next Year, viz. 1540. The Arch-bishop lost his great Friend and Assistant in carrying on the Reformation, I mean the Lord Crumwel.The ABp's E∣nemies accuse him. And when he was, by Popish Craft and Malice, taken off, their next Work was to sacrifice Cranmer. And many were the Accusations that were put up against him: and Trial was made many ways to bring him to his Death, or at least to bring him in dis∣grace with the King. His Honesty and Courage in discharge of a Commission,And first they thought to compass their Ends against him by oc∣casion of a Commission now issued out from the King to a select Number of Bishops, whereof the Arch-bishop was one, (which Commission was confirmed by Act of Parliament) for inspecting in∣to Matters of Religion, and explaining some of the chief Doctrines of it. These Commissioners had drawn up a set of Articles, fa∣vouring the old Popish Superstitions. And meeting together at Lam∣beth they produced them, and vehemently urged that they should be established, and that the Arch-bishop would yield to the Allow∣ance of them; especially seeing there was a signification, that it was the King's Will and Pleasure that the Articles should run in that Tenour. But they could not win the Arch-bishop neither by Fear nor Flattery; No, though the Lord Crumwel at this very time lay in the Tower. There was not one Commissioner now on his part, but all shrank away, and complied with the Time: and even those he most trusted to, viz. Bishop Hethe of Rochester, and Bishop Skip of Hereford. The Arch-bishop as he disliked the Book already drawn up by them, so he presented another Book, wherein were divers Amendments of theirs. After much arguing and disputing, nor could the Arch-bishop be brought off, Hethe, and Skip, with a Friend or two more, walked down with him into his Garden at Lambeth, and there used all the Perswasion they could; urging to him, that the King was resolved to have i so, and the Danger therefore of op∣posing it. But he honestly persisted in his constancy: telling them, That there was but one Truth in the Articles to be concluded up∣on, which if they hid from his Majesty, by consenting unto a contrary Doctrine, his Highness would in process of Time perceive the Truth, and see how colorably they had delt with him. And he knew, he said, his Grace's Nature so well, that he would ne∣ver after credit and trust them. And they being both his
Friends, he bad them beware in time, and discharge their Con∣sciences in maintenance of the Truth. But though nothing of all this could stir them, yet what he said, sufficiently confirmed the Arch-bishop to persist in his Resolution. The Arch-bishop standing thus alone, went himself to the King,And his Suc∣cess therein. and so wrought with him, that his Majesty joined with him against all the rest of them; and the Book of Articles past on his side. When indeed this stifness of Canterbury was the very thing his Ene∣mies desired; thinking that for this Opposition, the King would certainly have thrown him into the Tower; and many Wagers were laid in London about it. So that this ended in two good Issues; that the Arch-bishop's Enemies were clothed with Shame and Dis∣appointment, and a very good Book, chiefly of the Arch-bishop's composing, came forth for the Instruction of the People, known by the Name of A necessary Erudition of any Christian Man. A parti∣cular Account whereof may be read in the History of the Reformation.Hist. Ref. P. I. p. 286. This vexed Winchester to the Heart, that his Plot took no better Effect: but he put it up, till he should find other Opportunities to attack him, which after happened, as we shall see in the sequel of this Story. But this Matter deserves to be a little more particularly treated of:Questions of Religion to be discussed by Divines, by the King's Com∣mand. The King had, as was said before, appointed several of the Eminent Divines of his Realm, to deliberate about sundry Points of Religion then in Controversy, and to give in their Sentences distinctly. And that in regard of the Germans, who the last Year had sent over in Writing, the Judgment of their Divines respecting some Articles of Religion; and had offered his Majesty to appoint some of their Di∣vines to meet some others of the King's, in any Place he should as∣sign; or to come over into England to confe together. And also in regard of a more exact review of the Institution of a Christian Man, put forth about two or three Years before, and now intended to be published again, as a more perfect Piece of Religious Instruction for the People. The King therefore, being minded thorowly to sift di∣vers Points of Religion, then started and much controverted, com∣manded a particular number of Bishops, and other his Learned Chaplains and Dignitaries, to compare the Rites and Ceremonies, and Tenets of the present Church, by the Scriptures, and by the most Ancient Writers; and to see how far the Scripture, or good Antiquity did allow of the same. And this I suppose he did by the instigation of Arch-bishop Cranmer. The Names of the Commissioners were these;The Names of the Commi∣sioners. Cranmer ABp of Canterbury, Lee ABp of York, Boner Bishop of London, Tunstal Bishop of Durham, Barlow Bishop of S. David's, Aldrich Bishop of Carlisle, Skyp Bishop of Hereford, Hethe Bishop of Rochester, Thirleby Bishop Elect of Westminster; Doctors, Cox, Robinson, Day, Oglethorp, Redman, Edgeworth, Symonds, Tresham, Leyghton, Curwen, Crayford. Where we may wonder, not to see the Name of the Bishop of Win∣ton: But if we consider the Reason the King gave why he left him out of the Number of his Executors, viz. because (as he told seve∣ral Noble-men then about him) that Bishop was a turbulent wilful Man; and if he were joined with them, they should have no quiet
in their Consultations: The same Reason we may conclude moved the King now in these Deliberations about Religion to lay him aside. These Persons were generally learned and moderate Men, and such as we may conjecture the Arch-bishop had the Nomination of to the King. However, we may be sure, Winchester was not idle at this time. Seventeen Questions up∣on the Sacra∣ment.And first the Doctrine of the Sacraments was examined, by pro∣pounding seventeen distinct Questions drawn up, as I have reason to conclude, by the Arch-bishop, on which the Divines were to consult. But each one was to set down in Writing his Sense of every of these Questions singly and succinctly. These Questions are the same with those in the History of the Reformation.Part I. Collect. xxi. p. 201. The Right Reverend Au∣thor hath set down there the several Answers that those Bishops and Divines, that he met with in Bishop Stillingfleet's Manuscript, made to each Question; which I shall not now repeat after him. But I find in a Cotton Book a few Pages that deserve (according to my poor Judgment) to be transcribed,Cleopatra E. 5. p. 36. of something which is not in that History, being the Answers of other Bishops and Divines in the same Commission. The first is Nameless; but for some Reasons I believe him to be the Bishop of Durham. Each Page consisteth of three Columes; the middle Colume contains the Questions. On one side-Colume is writ his Answer to each Question; on the other side-Colume are the King's Notes upon the Answer, wrote by his own Hand:N. XXVII. I refer the Reader to the Appendix for this. There follow in the Cotton Book, Solutions of each of these Questions by another, omitted by the Bishop of Sarum in his History. He is nameless also, but appears to have been some popishly affected Bishop, but yet one that conversed much with the Arch-bishop, the Bishop of S. David's, and Dr. Cox, and was, I suppose, Thirleby Elect of Westminster: For in many places in the Margin of his Paper, are set the Names of those Men; for what purpose I do not know, unless to signify their Judgments as agreeable with his; though in these very places some∣times their Minds and his differ. This Man's Answer also was per∣used by the King, who sometimes writ his own Objections in the Margin.No. XXVIII. This also I have cast into the Appendix. The ABp's Judgment up∣on these Que∣stions.In the conclusion of this famous Consultation upon these seventeen Articles concerning the Sacraments (their Resolutions being drawn up in Writing under their own hands.) The Arch-bishop having these Discourses given into his hand, for the King's Use, drew up a Summary of each Man's Judgment: Which together with his own, he caused to be written fairly out by his Secretary, and so presented to the King.Vol. I. Book 3. Collect. XXI. The Bishop of Sarum hath saved me the trouble of writing them out in this Work, having presented them already to the World in his History,Cleopatra E. 5. from another Manuscript than the Cotton Book which I make use of, which is a true Original. The Arch-bishop's Summary may be found among the Collections in the said History, against the word Aggrement in the Margin, and the Arch-bishop's own Judgment against his Name in the Margin. At the conclu∣sion of his Paper, which he sent to the King, he subscribed thus, most warily and modestly, with his own Hand,
T. Cantuarien. This is mine Opinion and Sentence at this pre∣sent; which nevertheless I do not temerariously define, but refer the Judgment thereof unto your Majesty. Besides these 17 Questions,The Judg∣ments of other Learned Men concerning other Points. there are in this choice Cottonian Ma∣nuscript, divers others propounded to another Combination of Bi∣shops and Divines, perhaps about this time, or rather, I conceive, three Years before, with their Answers under their Hands thereunto, being called together in order to the composing the Book called The Institution. As, concerning Confirmation; Whether this Sacrament be a Sacrament of the New Testament, instituted by Christ, or not? What is the outward Sign, and invisible Grace, that is conferred in the same? What Promises be made, that the said Graces shall be re∣ceived by this Sacrament? The Bishop of Sarum hath printed among his Collections, the Resolutions of the Arch-bishop of Canterbury and Bishop of London to these Queries; having taken them out of this Manuscript Volume which I use. But there be here the Opinions of many more, both Bishops and other Dignitaries of the Church: As namely the Arch-bishop of York, the Bishops of Ely, Rochester, Lin∣coln, Bangor, and Sarum. Then follows the Opinion of the Bishop of London, and next of the Arch-bishop of Canterbury. Then come the Judgments of Dr. Wotton Dean of Canterbury, Dr. Barber Arch-dea∣con of Cleveland, and Warden of All-Souls Oxon, and one of the Convocation in 1562. Dr. Bell a Civilian, employed in the King's Business against Queen Katharine, Arch-deacon of Glocester, and soon after Bishop of Worcester; Dr. Wolman Dean of Wells, Dr. Marshall Arch-deacon of Nottingham, Dr. Cliff Treasurer of the Church of York, Dr. Edmunds, the same, I suppose, that was Master of Peter-house, Cambridg; Dr. Downs Chancellor of the Church of York; Dr. Marmaduke, the same probably that was called Marmaduke VValdeby; Dr. Robinson, for Robertson, I suppose, Arch-deacon of Leicester; Dr. Smith, he probably that was Professor of Divinity in Oxon; Dr. Buckmaster, and another nameless. And as these Learned Men treated of this Point of Confirmation, so by the various Heads and Discourses I meet with here, they all gave their Judgments of divers other chief Points of Religion; as De Fide, De Salvatione, De Matrimonio, De Poenitentia, De Sa∣cramentorum usu, and De auriculari Confessione. Where is a Letter of the King's own writing, in answer to somewhat the Bishop of Dur∣ham had writ upon that Argument. This Royal Letter the Bishop of Sarum hath printed in his History. Of Priests Marriage;Part I. Addend to the Collect. No. XI. where∣of the King wrote a short Discourse. Of Pilgrimages; Of Purga∣tory; of this there is a Discourse wrote by Latimer. And after fol∣lows another by the King. Latimer's Discourse is animadverted up∣on by the King's Pen in the Margin; De utra{que} specie. Three or four large Discourses thereupon, in favour of Receiving in one Kind: One whereof was part of the King's Answer to the German Ambas∣sadours, that were sent hither about a Treaty, in the Years 1538, and 1539. The Second is part of an Apology, by an English Di∣vine, to those German Protestants, for Communion in one Kind,
and for private Mass. And this latter probably is the Bishop of Dur∣ham's, because the Correction of the Paper, (transcribed as it seems by his Secretary) here and there is his own Hand. So that some of these Discourses were, I make no doubt, drawn up by the Divines for the King's Use, in order to his Answer to the Writing, which the German Agents the last Year had composed, before their Voyage home. But these Papers, some English and some Latin, are so large, that they would too much swell this Vo∣lume, and intangle the Thred of the Discourse, if I should here in∣sert them: And therefore I must omit them, and proceed to other matters. An Act to pre∣vent Divorces.In this thirty second Year of the King, by a seasonable Law, a stop was put to an Evil that now mightily prevailed: Namely, the frequency of Divorces. For it was ordinary to annul Marriages, and divide Man and Wife from each other, who it may be had lived long together, and had Children in Wedlock: When upon any disgust of Man or Wife, they would withdraw from one another; and so in effect make their Children Bastards, upon pretence of some Pre-contract or Affinity: Which by the Pope's Law required a Divorce. The King himself took particular care of this Act, and there were two rough Draughts of it, which I have seen in the Cotton Library: both which he himself revised diligently, and cor∣rected with his own Pen. These Divorces the Arch-bishop highly disliked; and might probably have laid before the King the great Inconveniences, as well as Scandal, thereof. It troubled him to see how common these Divorces were grown in Germany, and After-Marriages, and Bigamy. There is a Letter of his to Osiander, the German Divine, concerning Matrimony: In what Year written ap∣peareth not; unless perhaps in this Year, or the following, now that the King was employing his Thoughts about redress of this Business.The ABp to Osiander, con∣cerning the Germans abuse of Matrimony. The sum of the Letter, is to desire Osiander to supply him with an Answer to some things, that seemed to reflect a Fault upon those in Germany that professed the Gospel; and that was, that they al∣lowed such as were divorsed to marry again, both Parties divorsed being alive: and that they suffered, without any Divorce, a Man to have more Wives than one. And Osiander had acknowledged as much expressly to Cranmer, in a Letter, seeming to complain of it, and added, that Philip Melancthon himself was present at one of these Marriages of a second Wife, the first being alive. Indeed if any thing were done among those Protestants, that seemed not just and fair, to be sure Cranmer should presently be twitted in the Teeth for it. And then he was fain to make the best Answers he could, either out of their Books, or out of his own In∣vention. And he was always asked about the Affairs in those Parts. And sometimes he was forced to confess some things, and be ready to blush at them, (such a concern had he for Germany) as concerning their Allowance of Usury, and of Concubines to their Noble-men: as he wrote to the said German. But I will not longer detain the Reader from perusing the excellent Learned Letter of the Arch-bishop,No. XXIX. which he may find in the Appendix, concerning this Subject.
CHAP. XXI. The largest Bible printed. THE largest English Bible coming forth in Print this Year,Some account of printing the English Bible. wherein our Arch-bishop out of his Zeal to God's Glory had so great an influence, I shall here take occasion to give some account of the Translation of, as well as I can, there having been no exact Story thereof any where given, as I know of. The first time the Holy Scripture was printed in English,New Testa∣ment printed in 1526. (for written Copies thereof, of Wickliffs Translation, there were long be∣fore, and many) was about the Year 1526. And that was only the New Testament translated by Tindal, assisted by Ioy and Constantine, and printed in some Foreign Parts, I suppose at Hamburgh or Antwerp. For in this Year I find, that Cardinal Wolsey and the Bishops con∣sulted together for the prohibiting the New Testament of Tindal's Translation to be read. And Tonstal Bishop of London▪ issued out his Commission to his Arch-deacons for calling in the New Testa∣ment.And burnt. Fox's Acts p. 929. This Year also Tonstal and Sir Thomas More bought up al∣most the whole Impression, and burnt them at Paul's Cross. I think it was this first Edition, that Garret, alias Garrerd, Curate of Hony-Lane, afterwards burnt for Heresy, dispersed in London and Oxford. Soon after Tindal revised his Translation of the New Testament,Reprinted a∣bout 1530. and corrected it, and caused it again to be printed about the Year 1530.Inter Foxii MSS. The Books finished were privily sent over to Tindal's Bro∣ther, Iohn Tindal, and Thomas Patmore Merchants, and another young Man; who received them and dispersed them. For which having been taken up by the Bishop of London, they were adjudged in the Star-Chamber, Sir Thomas More being then Lord Chancellor, to ride with their Faces to the Horse Tail, having Papers on their Heads, and the New Testaments and other Books (which they dispersed) to be fastened thick about them, pinned or tacked to their Gowns or Clokes, and at the Standard in Cheap themselves to throw them into a Fire made for that purpose:Burnt again. and then to be fined at the King's Pleasure. Which Penance they observed. The Fine set up∣on them was heavy enough, viz. eighteen thousand eight hundred and forty Pounds and ten Pence: as was extant to be seen in the Records of the Star-Chamber. Anno 1531. The Bishops came into the Star-Chamber,The Scripture prohibited, in a Meeting at the Star-Chamber. and com∣muning with the King's Counsel, and alledging that this Testament was not truly translated, and that in it were Prologues and Prefaces of Heresy and Raillery against Bishops; upon this Complaint the Testament, and other such like Books were prohibited. But the King gave Commandment to the Bishops at the same time, that they calling to them the best Learned out of the Universities, should cause a New Translation to be made; so that the People might not be ignorant in the Law of God. But the Bishops did nothing in obedience to this Commandment. The same Year, viz. 1531. in the Month of May,New Testa∣ments burnt the third Time. Stokesly Bishop of London, (as Tonstal, his Predecessor, had done four or five Years
before) caused all the New Testaments of Tindal, and many other Books which he had bought up, to be brought to Paul's Church∣yard▪Fox. p. 937. and there openly burnt. The whole Bi∣ble printed 1537.In the Year 1537. The Bible, containing the Old and New Testa∣ments, called Matthews Bible, of Tindal's and Roger's Translation, was printed by Grafton and Whitchurch at Hamburgh, to the number of fifteen hundred Copies. Which Book obtained then so much Favour of the King, by Crumwel's and Canterbury's Means, that the King enjoined it to be had by all Curates, and set up in all Parish-Churches throughout the Realm.Matthews, that is, Roger's Bible. It was done by one Iohn Rogers, who flou∣rished a great while in Germany, and was Superintendent of a Church there; being afterwards a Prebend of S. Paul's, and the first Martyr in Queen Mary's Days. He is said, by my Author, to have translated the Bible into English from Genesis to the end of the Revelations, making use of the Hebrew, Greek, Latin, German, and English [that is Tyndal's] Copies. He added Prefaces, and Notes out of Luther: and dedicated the whole Book to King Henry, under the Name of Thomas Matthews,Balaei Centur. by an Epistle prefixed; mind∣ing to conceal his own Name. Graston, and the rest of the Mer∣chants concerned in the Work, thinking that they had not Stock enough to supply all the Nation, and this Book being of a Volume not large enough, and considering the Prologues and Marginal Notes gave offence to some, and being put on by those that favoured the Gospel, that as many as possible could be, might be printed, for the dispersing the Knowledg of Christ and his Truth; they resolved to imprint it again, which they intended should be of a larger Volum than any before: and therefore it was called, when it came forth, The Bible in the largest Volume. They intended also, in order to this Edition, to have the former Translation revised, and to omit several Prologues and Annotations. And Miles Coverdale was the Man now, that compared the Translation with the Hebrew, and mended it in divers places, and was the chief Overseer of the Work. But though they left out Matthews's, that is Roger's Notes, yet they resolved to make Hands and Marks on the sides of the Book: which meant, that they would have particular notice to be taken of those Places, being such Texts as did more especially strike at the Errors and Abuses of the Romish Church. About 1538. the Bible prin∣ting again in Paris.Grafton resolved to print this Bible in Paris, if he could obtain leave, there being better Paper and cheaper to be had in France, and more dextrous Workmen. For this purpose the Lord Crumwel, who stood by him in this Enterprize, procured Letters of the King, as Fox relates, to Francis the French King, which were conveyed to Boner then Ambassador at that Court, for him to present them to that King. The Contents of which Letters of King Henry were to this effect, For a Subject of his to imprint the Bible in English in his Dominion, both in regard of his Paper and Workmen. The King at the same time wrote to his said Ambassador to aid and assist the Undertakers of this good Work in all their reasonable Suits. Boner did not only present this Letter to Francis, and obtained with good Words the Licence desired, but he shewed great Friendship to the Merchants and Printers, and so encouraged them, that the Work
went on with good Speed and Success. And to shew, how well af∣fected he was now to the Holy Bible, he caused the English there in Paris to print the New Testament in English and Latin,Fox▪ p. 1086. and took off a great many of them himself, and distributed them to his Friends. But the Principle, that moved Boner in all this, was, that he might the better curry Favour with Crumwel, and recommend himself to him, who being the great Favourite now with the King, was the fittest Instrument for his Rise. The Letters Patents that Boner procured of the French King for the printing this Bible, may be seen in the Appendix.No. XXX. Wherein indeed I do not find any speci∣fication of King Henry's Letters to Francis, but only mention made that he had sufficient Testimony, that the said Henry had allowed them to print the Bible as well in Latin as English, and being finished, to bring the Impression safely over. But notwithstanding this Royal Licence,The Printers fall into the Inquisition. such was the oversway∣ing Authority of the Inquisition in Paris, that the Printers were had up into the said Inquisition. For in the Year 1538, there was an Instrument dated December the 17th, coming from Henry Garvais, S. Th. D. Prior of the Convent of the Friars-Preachers, Paris, and Vicar-General of the Venerable Father, Friar Matthew Ory, of the same Order, and D. D. Inquisitor-General of Heretical Pravity in the whole Kingdom of France, by Apostolical and Regal Authority especi∣ally Deputed: Setting forth,Cleopatra E. ▪ That since from the Translation of the Sacred Scriptures, as well of the Old Testament as New, into the Mother-Tongue, which cometh to the Hands of the simple, it is found in these last Days, that some have taken occasion of Error in the Faith; and that it is provided by Edicts of the Supream Court of Parliament, that none should print the Old and New Testament in his Mother-Tongue, or sell it being printed; and that it was known to him, that one Francis Regnault, a Book∣seller of the City of Paris in those Days, did print the Bible in the Vulgar Britannick, or English Language; by reason of which, Scandals and Errors might arise in the Church: Therefore he gave out his Order to all Priests, Vicars, Curates, &c. to cite the said F. Reginault, and all other that it might concern, to answer, &c. And to inhibit them under Canonical Pains, to imprint the said Bible, nor to make away, or conceal, from him or his Posses∣sion, the Sheets that are already printed, unless they were seen by him, and otherwise appointed. Dated at Paris, under the Seal used in such cases, and the Sign Manual of the Notary Publick, or sworn Scribe of the said Holy Inquisition. Le Tellier. But before this happened,The Bible printed with French Presses in London▪ they were gone through even to the last part of the Work. And then great Troubles arose: The Printer was sent for by the Inquisitors, and charged with certain Articles of Heresy: And the English-men likewise that were at the Cost and Charges hereof, and the Corrector Coverdale. Therefore finding it not safe to tarry any longer, they fled away as fast as they could, leaving behind them all their Bibles, the Impression consisting of five and twenty hundred in Number; which were seized. And if
you would know what was done with them, the Lieutenant-Crimi∣nal caused them to be burnt in Mbert-place, as heretical Books. Only a few escaped,The English Bible burnt the fourth time. the Lieutenant selling them for Waste-paper to a Haberdasher, being about four dry-Fats full. But however not long after, the English that were concerned in this Work, by the Encouragement of Crumwel, went back to Paris again, and got the Presses, Letters, and Printing-Servants, and brought them over to London. And so became Printers themselves, which before they ne∣ver intended. And so at length in this Year 1540, they successfully printed off the Bible of the largest Volume: and after that there were sundry other Impressions also. The largest Bible publish∣ed in the Year 1540.To this Impression of the Bible, that came forth in these trouble∣some Times, and through extraordinary Opposition, the King gave Countenance, commanding the buying and setting it up. For as it had been printed about three Years before; and Crumwel, the King's Vicar-General, in his Injunctions in the King's Name, had ordered all Incumbents of Livings to provide one, and to set it up publickly in their Churches: So this Year the King, by his Proclamation in the Month of May, did again command, that this Bible of the lar∣gest Volume should be provided by the Curates and Parishioners of every Parish, and set up in their Churches. For as yet, notwith∣standing the first Injunctions, many Parishes in the Realm were de∣stitute of them: Whether it were by reason of the unwillingness of the Priests to have the English Bible, or the People to be any ways acquainted with it, for fear it should make them Hereticks, as their Curats told them. He stinted also the Time, namely, that it should be every where provided before All-Saints Day next coming, and that upon a Penalty of forty Shillings a Month, after the said Feast, that they should be without it. The said Proclamation also set the Price, at ten Shillings a Book unbound; and well Bound and Clas∣ped, not above twelve Shillings. And charged all Ordinaries to take care for the seeing this Command of the King the better exe∣cuted. Boner's Admo∣nitions for reading the Bible.And upon this, Boner, being now newly Bishop of London, set up six Bibles in certain convenient Places of S. Paul's Church; together with an Admonition to the Readers, fastned upon the Pillars to which the Bibles were chained, to this Tenor; That whosoever came there to read, should prepare himself to be edified and made the better thereby. That he should join thereunto his readiness to obey the King's Injunctions made in that behalf. That he bring with him Discretion, honest Intent, Charity, Reverence, and quiet Behaviour. That there should no such Number meet together there, as to make a Multitude. That no Exposition be made thereupon, but what is declared in the Book it self. That it be not read with Noise in time of Divine Service: Or that any Dis∣putation or Contention be used at it. The Bible sup∣rest again, An. 154.But it was not much above two Years after, that the Popish Bishops obtained of the King the suppression of the Bible again. For after they had taken off the Lord Crumwel, they made great complaint to the King (their old Complaint) of the Translation, and of the Prefaces: Whereas indeed and in truth, it was the Text it self, ra∣ther
than the Prefaces or Translation that disturbed them. Where∣upon it was forbid again to be sold, the Bishops promising the King to amend and correct it, but never performed it. And Grafton was now, so long after, summoned and charged with printing Matthews's Bible. Which he, being timerous, made Excuses for. Then he was examined about the great Bible, and what the Notes were he intnded to set thereto. He replied, that he added none to his Bible, when he perceived the King and the Clergy not willing to have any. Yet Grafton was sent to the Fleet, and there remained six Weeks; and before he came out, was bound in three hundred Pounds, that he should neither sell nor imprint any more Bibles, till the King and the Clergy should agree upon a Translation. And they procured an Or∣der from the King, that the fals Translation of Tindal, as they cal∣led it, should not be uttered, either by Printer or Bookseller; and no other Books to be retained, that spoke against the Sacrament of the Altar: No Annotations or Preambles to be in Bibles or New Te∣staments in English, (that so they might keep Scripture still as ob∣scure as they could): Nor the Bible to be read in the Church, and nothing to be taught contrary to the King's Instructions. And from henceforth the Bible was stopp'd during the remainder of King Hen∣ry's Reign. But however for some certain Ends,K. Henry's judg∣ment for the use of the Bi∣ble. the King restrained now and then the use of the Scriptures, to comply with the importunate Suits of the Popish Bishops; yet his Judgment always was for the free use of them among his Subjects, and (in order to) that for the translating and printing them. For proof of which, I will recite the words of the Translator of Erasmus's Paraphrase upon S. Luke, in his Preface thereunto; viz. Nic. Vdal, a Man of Eminency in those Days, a Canon of Windsor, and a Servant unto Q. Katharine▪ the King's last Wife; His most Excellent Majesty, from the first day that he wore the Imperial Crown of this Realm, foresaw that to the execu∣ting the Premisses, [viz. to destroy counterfeit Religions, and to root up all Idolatry done to dead Images] it was necessary, that his People should be reduced to the sincerity of Christ's Religion by knowing of God's Word. He considered, that requisite it was his Subjects were nurled in Christ by reading the Scriptures, whose Knowledg should easily induce them to the clear espying of all the Slights of the Romish Juggling. And therefore as soon as might be, his Highness, by most wholsome and godly Laws, pro∣vided that it might be lawful for all his most faithful loving Sub∣jects to read the Word of God, and the Rules of Christ's Disci∣pline, which they professed. He provided, that the Holy Bible should be set forth in our own Vulgar Language, to the end that England might the better attain to the Sincerity of Christ's Do∣ctrine, which they might draw out of the clear Fountain and Spring of the Gospel.
CHAP. XXII. The Arch-bishop retired. The ABp keeps himself more retired.OUR Arch-bishop, after the unhappy Death of the Lord Crum∣wel, so excellent an Instrument in correcting the Abuses of Re∣ligion, out of sorrow and care of himself, betook himself to more Retirement, and greater Privacy. For in and after this Year 1540, I find nothing in his Register, but the Acts of Confirmations, and Elections, and Consecrations of Bishops, as Bishopricks fell vacant: the Arch-bishop very seldom Consecrating any himself, but com∣missionating others by his Letters to Confirm and Consecrate. And nothing to be found a great way on in the Register concern∣ing giving Ordinances and Injunctions to the Diocess or Province. And no wonder, for there was now no Vicegerent in Ecclesiasticals, to be ready to hearken to the Arch-bishop's Directions and Counsels for reforming Abuses, and to see them executed in the Church. And his own Sorrows, and the Troubles he met with in these Times from his Enemies, made him judg it convenient for him now more warily to conceal himself till better Days. The ABp is∣sues out his Commission for the Conse∣crating of Bo∣ner.But before the Death of Crumwel, when Boner, Bishop Elect of London, was to be consecrated, the Arch-bishop probably not liking him, and seeing through him, whatever his Pretences were; and therefore declining to have any hand in his Preferment; sent his Commission in April to Stephen Bishop of Winchester, Richard Bishop of Chichester, Robert Bishop of S. Asaph, and Iohn Bishop of Hertford, [i. e. Hereford] to consecrate him. Which it is said in the Regi∣ster they did accordingly, per Sacri chrismatis unctionem, & manuum suarum impositionem. In this Consecration, the Prior and Chapter of Canterbury insisted, it seems, upon an ancient Privilege of their Church, which I do not find in this Register they had at other Con∣secrations done; namely, that the Consecration should be celebrated at the Church of Canterbury, and at no other Church or Oratory, without their Allowance. And so in a formal Instrument, they gave their Licence and Consent, directed to the Arch-bishop, to proceed to the Consecration elsewhere.Cranm. Regist. The Letter is from Thomas the Prior, and the Chapter of Canterbury; and it ran thus. Licet antiquitus fuerit salubriter ordinatum, hactenus{que} in & per totam vestram Provinciam Cantuar' inconcussè observatum, quod quili∣bet Suffraganus Ecclesiae vestrae Metropoliticae Christi Cantuar' memo∣ratae in Ecclesia vestra Metropolit' Cantuar' & non alibi, pntialiter consecrari & benedici debeat, &c. Yet they gave their Consent, that he might be Consecrated in any other Oratory: But yet so, that neither they, nor the Church, received any Prejudice, and re∣serving to themselves a decent Cope, as every Suffragan of the Church of Canterbury, according as his Profession was, ought to give to the same Church by Right and ancient Custom; and the Rights, Liberties, Privileges, and other Customs of the said Church always, and in all things, being safe. The renewing of this their old pretended Privilege look'd like some check to the Arch-bishop,
and as though they required of him a sort of dependence on them now more than before; and it shewed some secret Ill-will to∣wards him, which brake out more openly not long after, as we shall shew in the Process of our Story. In the Register is also recorded Boner's Oath of Fidelity to the King against the Bishop of Rome: Which I will add here,Boner's Oath of Fidelity. that Men may see with what little Affection to the Pope this Man was let into the Bishoprick, which he afterwards made so much use of for him and his Usurpations; though thereby he stands upon Record for ever for Perjury. But the Oath was this: Ye shall never consent nor agree, that the Bishop of Rome shall practise, exercise, or have any manner of Authority, Jurisdicti∣on or Power, within this Realm, or any other the King's Domi∣nions, but that ye shall resist the same at all times to the uttermost of your Power: And that from henceforth ye shall accept, repute, and take the King's Majesty to be the only Supream Head in Earth of the Church of England, &c. So help you God, and all Saints, and the Holy Evangelists. Signed thus, ✚ In fidem praemissorum Ego Edm. Boner Elect. & Confirmat. Londoniens. huic praesenti chart a subscripsi. By the Arch-bishop's Letters,The ABp makes a Com∣missary in Calais. bearing date May 20. he made Ro∣bert Harvey B. LL. his Commissary in Calais, and in all the other Neighbouring Places in France, being his Diocess. A Man surely wherein the good Arch-bishop was mistaken, or else he would never have ventured to set such a Substitute, of such bigotted cruel Princi∣ples, in that place. This Harvey condemned a poor labouring Man of Calais, who said,Fox p. 1120. he would never believe that any Priest could make the Lord's Body at his pleasure. Whereupon he was accused before the Commissary, who roundly condemned him to be burnt, inveighing against him, and saying, He was an Heretick, and should die a vile Death. The poor Man said, He should die a viler shortly. And so it came to pass; for half a Year after, he was hang'd, drawn and quartered for Treason. He seemed to have succeded in the room of a Man of better Prin∣ciples,Butler a better Commissary. called Sir Iohn Butler: Who was deprived of his Commissa∣riship by some Bishops, Commissioners from the King for the exa∣mining several Persons suspect of Religion in Calais. The Council there had, about the Year 1539, complained of him as a maintainer of Damplip, a learned and pious Preacher there. So he was sent for into England, and charged to favour Damplip, because he preached so long there, and was not restrained nor punish'd by him: He an∣swered warily and prudently, that the Lord Lisle, Lord Deputy, and his Council, entertained and friendly used him, and countenanced him by hearing him preach; so that he could not do otherwise than he did. After long attendance upon the King's Commissioners, he was discharged, and returned home, but discharged also of his Com∣missary's place too.
And having been an Officer of the Arch-bishop's, I will add a word or two more concerning him. About the Year 1536, he was apprehended in Calais, and bound by Sureties not to pass the Gates of that Town,His Troubles. upon the Accusation of two Souldiers, that he should have said in contempt of the Corporal Presence, That if the Sacra∣ment of the Altar be Flesh, Blood and Bone, then there is good Aqua vitae at John Spicer's: Where probably was very bad. This Butler, and one Smith, were soon after brought by Pursevants into England; and there brought before the Privy-Council in the Star-Chamber, for Sedition and Heresy, (which were Charges ordinarily laid against the Professors of the Gospel in those Times) and thence sent to the Fleet: and brought soon after to Bath-place, there sitting Clark Bishop of Bath, Sampson Bishop of Chichester, and Reps Bishop of Norwich, the King's Commissioners. And no wonder he met with these Troubles: For he had raised up the hatred of the Friars of Calais against him,The occasion thereof, the Discovery of a Religious Cheat. by being a Discove∣rer and Destroyer of one of their gross Religious Cheats. There had been great talk of a Miracle in S. Nicolas Church, for the con∣viction of Men, that the Wafer after Consecration was indeed tur∣ned into the Body, Flesh and Bones of Christ. For in a Tomb in that Church, representing the Sepulchre, there were lying upon a Marble Stone three Hosts sprinkled with Blood, and a Bone repre∣senting some Miracle. This Miracle was in writing, with a Pope's Bull of Pardon annexed, to those, I suppose, that should visit that Church. There was also a Picture of the Resurrection, bearing some relation to this Miracle. This Picture and Story Damplip freely spake against in one of his Sermons, saying, that it was but an Illusion of the French before Calais was English. Upon this Sermon, (the King also having ordered the taking away all superstitious Shrines) there came a Commission to the Lord Deputy of Calais, to this Sir Iohn Butler, the Arch-bishop's Commissary, and one or two more, that they should search, whether this were true; and if they found it not so, that immediately the Shrine should be plucked down; and so it was. For breaking up a Stone in the corner of the Tomb, instead of the three Hosts, the Blood and the Bone, they found souldered in the Cross of Marble lying under the Sepulchre, three plain white Counters, which they had painted like unto Hosts, and a Bone, that is in the tip of a Sheep's Tail. This Damplip shewed the next Day, being Sunday, unto the People; and after that, they were sent to the King by the Lord Deputy. But this so angred the Friars and their Creatures, that it cost Damplip his Life, and Commissary Butler much trouble, and the loss of his Office. After Harvey, Hugh Glazier B. D. and Canon of Christ's-Church, Canterbury,Glazier Com∣missary in Calais. succeeded in the Office of Commissary to the Arch-bishop fo Calais. He was once a Friar, but afterwards favoured the Refor∣mation. He was put up to preach at Paul's Cross the first Lent af∣ter King Edward came to the Crown: and then asserted the observa∣tion of Lent to be but of human Institution.ABp's Judg∣ment of Ad∣mission of Scholars into the School be∣longing to the Cathedral. This Year the Cathedral Church of Canterbury was altered from Monks to Secular Men of the Clergy, viz. Prebendaries, or Canons, Petticanons, Choristers and Scholars. At this Erection were present
Thomas Cranmer Arch-bishop, the Lord Rich Chancellor of the Court of the Augmentation of the Revenues of the Crown; Sir Christopher Hales Knight, the King's Attorney, Sir Anthony Sentleger Knight, with divers other Commissioners.Foxii MSS. And nominating and electing such convenient and fit Persons, as should serve for the Furniture of the said Cathedral Church according to the new Foundation, it came to pass, that when they should elect the Children of the Grammar-School, there were of the Commissioners more than one or two, who would have none admitted, but Sons, or younger Brethren, of Gen∣tlemen. As for other Husband-mens Children, they were more meet they said for the Plough, and to be Artificers, than to occupy the place of the Learned sort. So that they wished none else to be put to School, but only Gentlemens Children. Whereunto the most Reverend Father the Arch-bishop, being of a contrary Mind, said, That he thought it not indifferent so to order the matter. For, said he, poor Mens Children are many times endued with more singular Gifts of Nature, which are also the Gifts of God, as with Eloquence, Memory, apt Pronunciation, Sobriety, and such like; and also commonly more apt to apply their Study, than is the Gentleman's Son delicately Educated. Hereunto it was on the other part replied, That it was meet for the Ploughman's Son to go to Plough, and the Artificer's Son to apply the Trade of his Parents Vocation; and the Gentleman's Children are meet to have the knowledg of Government and Rule in the Common-Wealth. For we have, said they, as much need of Ploughmen, as any other State. And all sorts of Men may not go to School. I grant, replied the Arch-bishop, much of your meaning herein, as needful in a Common-wealth: But yet utterly to exclude the Ploughman's Son, and the Poor Man's Son from the benefit of Learning, as though they were unworthy to have the Gifts of the Holy Ghost bestowed upon them, as well as upon others, is as much to say, as that Almighty God should not be at liberty to be∣stow his great Gifts of Grace upon any Person, nor no where else, but as we and other Men shall appoint them to be employed, ac∣cording to our Fancy, and not according to his most godly Will and Pleasure: Who giveth his Gifts both of Learning, and other Perfections in all Sciences, unto all Kinds and States of People in∣differently. Even so doth he many times withdraw from them and their Posterity again those beneficial Gifts, if they be not thankful. If we should shut up into a strait Corner the bountiful Grace of the Holy Ghost, and thereupon attempt to build our Fancies, we should make as perfect a Work thereof, as those that took upon them to build the Tower of Babel. For God would so provide, that the Off-spring of our best-born Children should peradventure become most unapt to learn, and very Dolts, as I my self have seen no small number of them very dull, and without all manner of Capacity. And to say the truth, I take it, that none of us all here being Gentlemen born (as I think) but had our beginning that way, from a low and base Parentage. And through the be∣nefit of Learning, and other Civil Knowledg, for the most part all Gentlemen ascend to their Estate. Then it was again answered,
That the most part of the Nobility came up by Feats of Arms, and Martial Acts. As though, said the Arch-bishop, that the noble Captain was always unfurnished of good Learning and Knowledg to perswade and disswade his Army Rhetorically. Who rather that way is brought unto Authority, than else his manly Looks. To conclude, the poor Man's Son, by pains∣taking, will for the most part be learned, when the Gentleman's Son will not take the pains to get it. And we are taught by the Scriptures, that Almighty God raiseth up from the Dunghil, and setteth him in high Authority. And whensoever it pleaseth him of his Divine Providence, he deposeth Princes unto a right humble and poor Estate. Wherefore if the Gentleman's Son be apt to Learning, let him be admitted; if not apt, let the poor Man's Child that is apt enter his Room. With words to the like effect. Such a seasonable Patron of poor Men was the Arch-bishop. Bishops consecrated. April the 4th, Edmond Boner LL. D. Bishop of Hereford, conse∣crated Bishop of London,Edm. Bone. Nic. Hethe. and Nicolas Hethe, consecrated Bishop of Rochester, in a Chappel in S. Paul's, on the North side of the Nave, by Stephen Bishop of Winton,Cranm. Regist. assisted by Richard Bishop of Chichester, Robert Bishop of S. Asaph, and Iohn Bishop of Hereford; by virtue of Commissional Letters from the Arch-bishop. Tho. Thirlby.December the 29th, Thomas Thirlby, consecrated the first Bishop of Westminster in S. Saviours Chappel, near the Sepulchre of Henry VIII. in the Church of Westminster, by the Bishop of London; assisted by Nicolas Bishop of Rochester, and Iohn Suffragan of Bedford, by Let∣ters Commissional from the Arch-bishop. Some account of Thirlby's Rise.Dr. Butts, the King's Physician, first moved him to take Dr. Thirl∣by into his Service; for that the said Thirleby was accounted a favourer of all such as favoured sincere Religion. The Arch-bishop soon became acquainted with him, and liked his Learning, and his Qualities so well, that he became his good Lord towards the King's Majesty, and commended him to him, to be a Man worthy to serve a Prince, for such singular Qualities as were in him. And indeed the King soon employed him in Embassies in France and elsewhere: So that he grew in the King's Favour by the means of the Arch-bishop; who had a very extraordinary Love for him, and thought nothing too much to give him, or to do for him. And we may conclude it was by his means, that after the dissolution of the Bishoprick of Westminster, he was preferred to Norwich, in the Year 1550. He complied with King Edward's Proceedings all his Reign; and so he did with Queen Mary's during hers, being then translated to Ely. And was then made use of to be one of the Bishops, (Boner being the other) that were sent to Oxon, to degrade the Arch-bishop, which he did with Tears. If this Bishop did not, to his uttermost endeavour, practise to save the Arch-bishop's Life,In a Letter to Day the Prin∣ter, An. 1565. he not only did him much wrong, but also abused his singular Benevolence with over-much Ingratitude. I use the words of Morice the Arch-bishop's Secretary, as though he suspected he did not.
CHAP. XXIII.An. 1541. All-Souls College visited. THE following Year, the College of All-Souls, Oxon,The ABp vi∣sits All-Sols College. under∣went the Arch-bishop's Visitation, by virtue of a Commission, May 12. to Iohn Cocks, the Arch-bishop's Vicar-general in Spirituals, Iohn Rokesby LL. D of the Arches, Walter Wright LL. D. Publick Notary, and Iohn Warner M. D. Warden of the College. This Vi∣sitation was occasioned upon a Complaint of the very ill and loose Behaviour of the Members of that House.ABp Cranm. Registi The College grew scan∣dalous for their Factions, Dissentions, and Combinations one against another; for their Compotations, Ingurgitations, Surfeitings, Drun∣kennesses, enormous and excessive Comessations. They kept Boys in the College, under pretence of poor Scholars. They entred not into Orders, and became not Priests after they were Masters of Art: Nor observed their Times of Disputations. Their Habit and Appa∣rel was gaudy. And other things there were among them contrary to the Statutes of the College. This Visitation was prorogued, and all the Visitors were reduced to one, viz. Dr. VVright. And in concusion, the Arch-bishop gave them a Set of Injunctions, Decla∣rations and Interpretations of their Statutes, to the number of Four and twenty. One was for the better frequenting Chappel, and singing the Service. Another for the Residence of the Warden, not to be absent above sixty Days in a Year. The rest were, to observe, at the Dean's Command, the solemn Times of Disputation. That such Bachelors of Arts that were Fellows, should take their Degrees of Masters of Arts, when they were standing for it. That several of them, being Masters of Arts, should take Priests Orders. That the Master and the rest, Fellows and Scholars, should wear long Gowns to their Heels, plain Shirts, and not gathered about the Neck and Arms, and adorned with Silk; and the rest should wear decent Garments. Concerning keeping Boys, beside such as were Servants; that if any of the Fellows, Scholars, or Servants of the College, shall keep any poor Scholars, Boy, or Youth, to lodg with him in his Chamber, or within the College, to nourish him with the Fragments of the College, after such a Day, that he be then admo∣nished by the Warden, or Sub-warden, &c. and such Boys to be ex∣pelled the College. But it seems this Visitation did not effect the good Ends intended by it:Visits it a se∣cond Time. For not long after another Commission for the Visitation of this College, was given by the Arch-bishop to Iohn Barbar LL. D. Official of his Court of Canterbury. In the Month of October,The AB give order about Shrines. there issued out the King's Letters to our Arch-bishop for taking away superstitious Shrines. Which I sup∣pose the Arch-bishop himself procured, having complained to the King, how little effect former Orders from his Majesty had taken, (and particularly in his own Church) for the Images and Bones of supposed Saints; with all the Monuments of their pretended Mira∣cles, to be taken away and defaced: and how his Injunctions were
illuded, which commanded, that there should be no Offerings nor setting up Candles to them in any Church, and specially in the Ca∣thedral Church of Canterbury; which once before had been scoured of these Superstitions, when Thomas a Becket's Tomb, and the the Riches thereof were taken away. The King in this Letter com∣manded him to cause due search to be made in his Cathedral Church for Shrines, and coverings of Shrines, &. and to take them away, that there remain no memory thereof; and to command all the Cu∣rats and Incumbents of Livings to do the like. The King's Letters were as follow. By the KING. The King to the ABp for searching after Shrines.MOST Reverend Father in God, right Trusty, and right in∣tirely Well-beloved, We greet you well: Letting you wit, that whereas heretofore, upon the Zeal and Remembrance which we had to our bounden Duty towards Almighty God, perceiving sundry Superstitions and Abuses to be used and embraced by our People,ABp Cranm. Regist. whereby they grievously offended Him and his Word; We did not only cause the Images and Bones of such as they re∣sorted and offered unto, with the Ornaments of the same; and all such Writings and Monuments of fained Miracles, wherewith they were illuded, to be taken away in all places of our Realm; but also by our Injunctions commanded, that no Offering, or setting of Lights or Candles, should be suffered in any Church, but only to the Blessed Sacramen of the Altar: It is lately come to our knowledg, that this our good Intent and Purpose notwithstanding, the Shrines, Coverings of Shrines, and Monuments of those things, do yet remain in sundry places of our Realm, much to the slander of our Doings, and to the great Displeasure of Almighty God, the same being means to allure our Subjects to their former Hypo∣crisies and Superstition; and also that our Injunctions be not kept, as appertaineth. Fro [for] the due and speedy reformation where∣of, we have thought meet by these our Letters, expresly to Will and Command you, that incontinently upon the Receipt hereof, you shall not only cause due search to be made in your Cathedral Church for those things; and if any Shrine, Covering of Shrine, Table, Monument of Miracles, or other Pilgrimage, do there con∣tinue, to cause it to be taken away, so as there remain no memo∣ry of it: But also that you shall take order with all the Curats, and others, having Charge within your Diocess, to do the Sembla∣ble. And to see that Our Injunctions be duly kept, as ap∣pertaineth, without failing, as we trust you, and as you woll answer to the contrary. Yeven [under] our Signet, at our Town of Hull, the iiii day of October, in the xxxiiii Year of our Reign. This was dated from Hull, for the King was now in his Progress towards Scotland, to meet the Scots King according to appointment; though he met him not. Whereupon the Arch-bishop, by his Letter dated from Lambeth, Oct. 15. to Richard Lyel LL. D. Dean of the Deaneries of Shoreham,
Croyden, Bocking, Risburgh, Terring and Pageham, enjoined him to take care to execute the King's Will: To cite before him with all speed, all and singular the Ministers of the Collegiate Churches;The ABp's Or¦ders accord∣ingly to his Dean, his Arch-Deacon and Commis∣sary. and Rectors, Vicars and Priests of the Parish-Churches within the Deaneries aforesaid; and then to declare to them the Contents of the King's Letters, and to command them to observe exactly the King's Injunctions. The like Letters he also sent to Edmond Cran∣mer Arch-deacon of Canterbury. An Answer to which the said Edmond wrote to the Arch-bishop, dated Oct. 29. signifying his do∣ing according to the Arch-bishop's Commandment. The like were written to Hugh Glazier, the Arch-bishop's Commissary General in the Town of Calais, and the Marches of the same. Who sent his Answer to the Arch-bishop, Nov. 24. from the Town of Calais. I am apt to think that these Letters of the King were Circulary, and sent with the same Command to all the Bishops to see executed in their several Diocesses; though the Effect of them was, according as the Bishops themselves stood affected. This Year an exchange was made by the Abp of the Mannor of Bi∣shopsbrn for Bekesburn,The ABp lays Bekesburn to the See. with Sir Iohn Gage, Comptroller of the King's Houshold. Bekesburn, anciently called Livingsbrn, was healthfully and conveniently seated, lying an easy distance from Canterbury, whensoever the Arch-bishops were minded to be retired. This place ABp Parker took a great delight in, and intended greatly to enlarge by Buildings; but died before he began his Purpose. ABp Cranmer made considerable Buildings here, and probably would have done more, had he continued in his Prelacy. In the Year 1552, he finish∣ed the Gate-house now standing; as appears from the North and South sides thereof, wherein are two Stones set in the Brick-work, with the Letters of his Name T. C. and Coat of Arms, and Motto, Nosce Teipsum, & Deum; together with the Date, 1552. This Man∣nor now returned to the Church again; from whence it had been for some time severed; only the Owners changed. For whereas, before the Dissolution of the Monasteries, it belonged to the Priors of Christ-Church, Canterbury; now it came to the Arch-bishops. This Man∣nor was not given to Christ-Church till after the Year 1400. Thomas Goldstone, a Prior of that Church, and a great Builder, built the Mannor-house for a Mansion for the Priors, and a Chappel annexed, and a new Hall adjoining to the Dormitory, and divers other Edifices there;Angl. Sacra, Vol. 1. p. 148. as we learn from the History of the Priors of Canterbury late∣ly published. To which we may add a Record in that Church, to direct us in the Computation of the Time: Viz. Anno Dom. 1508. In vigiliis S. Marci Capella dedicatur in Manerio de Lyvyngsborn,Records of Chr. Ch. Cant. procu∣rante Thoma Goldston. At the Dissolution this was alienated and gi∣ven to Gage; and from him it came to Arch-bishop Cranmer and his Successors. And the Bargain was confirmed by Act of Parliament, Anno Henr. 34. The Arch-bishop,Learned Prea∣chers prefer∣red by the ABp. as he had opportunity, preferred Learned and Pious Men in his Diocess, in the Benefices of his Church; and such who freely preached against the Pope, and his Superstitions, against Images, and the Worship of them. The chief of these were Nic. Ridley (afterwards Bishop of London) whom he made Vicar of
Herne, and Prebend of Canterbury; and Iohn Scory (afterwards Bishop of Chichester) whom he made one of the six Preachers; Michael Drum, and Lancelot Ridley, worthy Men, were two more of the Six. These he preferred, and divers others about through his Diocess, that set the Abuses of Popery open before the Peoples Eyes in their Sermons. This so angred the Men of the old Religion, and parti∣cularly some of his own Church in Canterbury, that they detected them to the Arch-bishop, by articling against them for their Doctrine. This they did this Year, when the Arch-bishop visited his Church. And about two Years after they did so again, as shall be taken notice of in due Season. The ABp makes some recant.About this time it was, that Serles and Shether, two of the Six Preachers of Canterbury, were by the Arch-bishop's Censure put to Recantation for some unsound Passages they had preached. Which made them such Enemies to the Arch-bishop, and such Contrivers of his Ruin, by devising and drawing up a great number of Articles against him, if they could have accomplished their Design, as shall be seen hereafter under the Year 1543. It was observed of Shether at this time, that after the pronouncing his Recantation, or Declara∣tion, he added these words, Good Christians, I take God to record, that I never preached any thing to you in my Life but the Truth. And so in short gave himself the Lie, and overthrew all the Recan∣tation he had made before. A Convocati∣on. Their Business. Fuller's Ch. Hist. from the Records of Canterbury.The latter end of the Year there was a Convocation: Wherein one of the Matters before them was concerning the procuring a true Translation of the New Testament. Which was indeed intended, not so much to do such a good Work, as to hinder it. For having decried the present Translation, on purpose to make it unlawful for any to use it, they pretended to set themselves about a new One. But it was merely to delay and put off the People from the common use of the Scripture: As appeared plainly enough, in that the Bishops themselves undertook it. And so having it in their own Hands, they might make what delays they pleased. For in the third Session, a Proposition was made for the Translation, and an Assignation to each Bishop of his Task. As Matthew to the Arch-bishop of Can∣terbury, Mark to the Bishop of Lincoln, Luke to Winton, Iohn to Ely: and so of the rest. But the Arch-bishop saw through all this. And therefore, in a Sessions that followed after, told the House from the King, to whom I suppose he had discovered this Intrigue, that the Translation should be left to the Learned of both Univer∣sities. This was a Surprize to the Bishops, who all, except Ely and S. David's, protested against it, and began to undervalue the Suf∣ficiency of the Universities, as much decayed of late; and that they were but young Men: and that the greatest Learning lay in the Con∣vocation-men. But the Arch-bishop roundly said, that he would stick by his Master's Will and Pleasure; and that the Vniversities should ex∣amine the Translation.
Bishops Consecrated. May 29, being Sunday,William Knight. William Knight was Consecrated Bishop of Bath and Wells by Nicolas Bishop of Rochester, by Virtue of the Arch-bishop's Letters to him, assisted by Richard Suffragan of Dover, and Iohn Suffragan of Bedford, in the Chappel of the said Bishop of Bath's House, situate in the Minories without Aldgate. September the 25th, Iohn Wakeman, late Abbot of Teuksbury,Iohn Wakman. was Consecrated the first Bishop of Glocester, by the Arch-bishop, Edmond Bishop of London, and Thomas Bishop of Westminster assisting. Iohn Chambre B. D. was Consecrated first Bishop of Peterburgh,Iohn Chambre. Octob. 23. in the Cathedral Church of Peterburgh, in the Presbytery there, by Iohn Bishop of Lincoln, Thomas Bishop of Ely, and William Bishop of Norwich, by Commission from the Arch-bishop. February the 19th, Arthur Bulkeley,Arthur Bulkeley. in the Chappel of Iohn Incent LL. D. Dean of St. Paul's, by Iohn Bishop of Sarum, by virtue of Letters Commissional from the Arch-bishop, William Bishop of St. David's and Iohn Bishop of Glocester assisting. Robert King, another Abbot, and Titular Bishop Reonen,Robert King. Suffra∣gan to the Bishop of Lincoln, was this Year Consecrated Bishop of Oxford. The Date, or his Consecrators I cannot assign, the Act be∣ing omitted in the Arch-bishop's Register. He was first a Monk of Rewly, a Priory without Oxford, of the Cistertian Order. Then Abbot of Bruerne in Oxfordshire. After, Abbot of Thame, of which he was also called Bishop: and lastly of Oseney. Both which he surrendred to the King at the dissolution of Monasteries. This Man, when Suffragan, preached at S. Mary's in Stamford, where he most fiercely inveighed a∣gainst such as used the New Testament. In Q. Mary's Reign he was a persecutor of the Protestants, and died, 1557. CHAP. XXIV. The King's Book revised. THE Arch-bishop was this Year, among other things,An. 1542. employ∣ed in the King's Book, as it now was called, that is, The Eru∣dition of any Christian Man, spoken of before.The King's Book revised by the ABp. For the King was minded now to have it well reviewed, and if there were any Errors, and less proper Expressions, to have them corrected and amended. And so to have it recommended unto the People as a compleat Book of Christian Principles, in the stead of the Scripture; which upon pretence of their abuse of, the King would not allow longer to be read. Accordingly a Correction was made throughout the Book: and the correct Copy sent to Cranmer to peruse. Which he did, and added his own Annotations upon various Passages in it at good length. And had it not been too long, I had transcribed it wholly out of a Volume in the Benet-College Library. But for a taste take this that follows. In the Title, under his own Hand, was this written,
Animadversions upon the King's Book. Vpon the Chapter of Original Sin. Misllan D. inter MSS. C.C.C.C.For the first Offence of our Father Adam.] No Man shall be damned for the Offences of Adam, but for his own proper Offences, either Actual, or Original. Which Original Sin every Man hath of his own, and is born in it, although it came from Adam. The principal means (viz. God's Favour) whereby all Sinners attain their Iustification]. This Sentence importeth, that the Favour and Love of the Father of Heaven towards us, is the Means whereby we come to his Favour and Love. And so should one thing be the Means to it self. And it is not the use of Scripture to call any other the Means and Mediator for us, but only Jesus Christ, by whom our access is to the Father. Having assured Hope and Confidence in Christ's Mercy, willing to enter into his perfect Faith.] He that hath assured Hope and Confidence in Christ's Mercy, hath already entred into a perfect Faith, and not only hath a Will to enter into it. For perfect Faith is nothing else but assured Hope and Confidence in Christ's Mercy. Vpon the Explication of the Tenth Commandment. Without due Recompence.] This Addition agrees not well with the Coveting of another Man's Wife, wherein is no Recompensation. And in the other things, although Recompensation be made, yet the Commandment nevertheless is transgrest and broken. Vpon another Chapter concerning Obedience to the Civil Power. By his Ordinate Power.] This word Ordinate Power obscureth the Sentence in the understanding of them that be simple and unlear∣ned: and among the Learned it gendreth Contention and Disputati∣on, rather than it any thing edifieth. Therefore methinketh it bet∣ter, and more plain as it is in the print, or else to say, By his Ordi∣nance. For the Scripture speaketh simply and plainly, Potestati ejus quis resistit? By these few Passages, which I have carefully taken out of the Arch-bishop's own Book, may be seen of what a Critical and Exact Judgment he was. Divers Dis∣courses of the ABp.But besides these Adversaria in these Papers of the Arch-bishop's Annotations, there be divers large Discourses of his, upon several Heads of Religion, drawn up, as I conceive, upon the King's Com∣mand, to be inserted into his Book above mentioned. I have ex∣tracted some of these Discourses; as upon Faith, Justification, and Forgiveness of Injuries: Wherein may be seen his sound Opinion in those great Doctrines of Christian Religion. I took also out of the same Volume, some Specimen of three other Discourses of his. One with this Title, writ by his own Hand, De Consolatione Christi∣anorum
contra metum mortis. Ex Doctoribus Ecclesiasticis. Compi∣led, I guess, as well for his own use, being not inapprehensive of his ticklish Station and Danger, from so many and implacable Ene∣mies which he had, as to be inserted in the aforesaid Book. The others were two Exhortations, to take the Pains of Sickness well, and Adversity patiently: the one taken out of Cyprian, the other out of S. Augustin, Lib. De visitatione infirmorum. The Specimen of them are in the Appendix; as also the Discourses of Faith,No. XXXI. No. XXXII. Justifica∣tion, and Forgiveness of Injuries. This Year Boner Bishop of London set forth Injunctions for the Clergy of his Diocess,The goodly Primer. containing Directions for their Preaching and Conversation; together with a Catalogue of certain Books prohibi∣ted: Which the Curats were to enquire after in their respective Pa∣rishes, and to inform their Ordinaries of them, and of those in whose possessions they found them. Among these Books were the English Testament of Tindal, and divers other Pieces of the said godly and learned Man; some Prefaces and Marginal Glosses of Thomas Mat∣thews in his English Bible. A Book of Friar Barnes. The Supplica∣tion of Beggars. The Practice of Prelates. The Revelation of An∣tichrist. The Church of Iohn Rastal. The Disputation between the Father and the Son. The Preface made in the English Primers by Marshal. This Marshal was he, I suppose, whose Christian Name was Cutbert, and was D. D. and Arch-deacon of Nottingham, and died about 1549. At this Book I will stop a little, being a Book of Eminency and Remark in those Times; and that hath such a strain of Truth and serious Piety in it, that it seems very probable, that the Arch-bishop had a considerable hand it, and procured the Publication of it, Cum privilegio Regali. It was stiled A Goodly Primer, or Book of Prayers, and called The King's Primer. I speak of the second Edition, which was about the Year 1535. It began with an Ad∣monition to the Reader, containing very sharp and severe Reflecti∣ons upon the Popish Devotions, and praying to Saints. And to∣wards the conclusion, the Writer professeth, That this his Admo∣nition proceded neither of blynde Zele, or Affection, neyther of Wyll or Purpose to offend or displease any Man, moch less than to displease any Saint in Heven; and in no wyse than our blessed Lady, but evin of very pure Love to the Honour of God, and Helth of Mennes Souls. Then followeth a pious Exposition of the Ten Commandments; and the Creed. Then is a general Confession of Sin. Which goes according to the Commandments, after this manner: 1. I have not set my whole Belief, Confidence, Trust and Hope in thee, &c. 2. I have divided thy Worship and Honour from Thee, and given it to thy Creatures, and to dead things, imagined of my own fond Fantasy; I mean, in the misusing of Images. 3. I have abased thy Name, &c. 4. In the Sabbath-day I have not given my self to hearing, reading and learning the Holy Scriptures, &c. Then comes an Exposition upon the Lord's Prayer, and the Salutation.
Some short Prayers. Some Graces before and after Meat; most of which are Graces still retained in our English Primers, after the Catechism. And the Method of the Book is the same with our Childrens Primer now in use. In this Edition there was a Litany added, with a Preface before it, directly against praying to Saints, and shewing the difference of the Case, between present∣ing our Petitions to God, and presenting a Petition to an Earthly King: that though this latter cannot be done without the mediation of some Servant of the King, yet the former may be done immediately to God, in the Name of Christ. Besides, he said, there were many doubtful Saints: that many Saints canonized by the Bishop of Rome, whether they were Saints or no, he committed to the secret Judgment of God. By this taste of the Preface, you ea∣sily see, why Bishop Boner placed it among the prohibited Books, to be diligently searched for. The Litany the Author added, for the sake of many People, that thought there could be no right Prayers without they were in the old form of Processions, which were by way of Litany, or Supplication to Angels and Saints. And so he writ in this Preface, that it was for the Conten∣tation of such weak Minds, and somewhat to bear their Infirmities, that he had at this his second Edition of the Primer, caused the Litany to be printed. In this Litany all doubtful Saints are left out, and he addresseth only to the Holy Angels S. Michael; S. Raphael, &c. to pray for us; And the Blessed Apostles, S. Peter, S. Paul, S. Andrew, &c. The Prayer for the King, nameth K. Henry VIII, and his gracious Son Prince Edward. In the Kalendar Thomas a Bec∣ket's Days are still retained in red Letters. But I suppose that was done of course by the Printer, using the old Kalendar. In the same Book is a large and pious Paraphrase on Psalm LI. A Dialogue between the Father and the Son. Meditations on Christ's Passion; and many other things. The ABp in∣strumental to the Reforma∣tion in Scot∣land.By somewhat that happened this Year, the Arch-bishop proved very instrumental in promoting the Reformation of corrupt Reli∣gion in the Neighbouring Nation of Scotland: which this Year had received a great Overthrow by the English Army; and great Numbers of Scotish Noblemen and Gentlemen were taken Prisoners, and brought up to London, and after disposed of in the Houses of the English Nobility and Gentry, under an easy Restraint. The Earl of Cassillis was sent to Lambeth;Hist. Reform. Vol. 1. p. 320. where the good Arch-bishop shew∣ed him all Respects, in providing him with Necessaries and Conve∣niences, but especially in taking care of his Soul. He detected to him the great Errors of Popery, and the Reasons of those Regula∣tions that had been lately made in Religion in England. And so successful was the Arch-bishop herein, that the Earl went home much enlightned in true Religion; which that Nation then had a great aversion to, for they highly misliked the Courses King Henry took. Which Prejudices the King understanding, endeavoured to take off, by sending Barlow Bishop of S. Davids to Scotland, with the Book of The Institution of a Christian Man. Which nevertheless
made no great Impression upon that People. But this that happened to the Scotish Nobility, that were now taken Prisoners, and especi∣ally this Guest of the Arch-bishop, becoming better enclined to Reli∣gion by the Knowledg they received while they remained here, had a happier Effect, and brought on the Reformation that after hap∣pened in that Kingdom. The Parliament being summoned in Ianuary,An Act procu∣red by the ABp. in order to the King's making War with France, (whither he intended to go in Person) the Arch-bishop resolved to try this Occasion to do some good Service again for Religion, which had of late received a great stop. His En∣deavour now was to moderate the severe Acts about Religion, and to get some Liberty for the Peoples reading of the Scripture.Hist. Refor. Vol. 1. p. 321. Cranmer first made the Motion, and four Bishops, viz. Worcester, Hereford, Chichester and Rochester, seconded him. But Winchester opposed the Arch-bishop's Motion with all earnestness. And the Faction combi∣ned with so much Violence, that these Bishops and all other fell off from the Arch-bishop; and two of them endeavoured to perswade the Arch-bishop to desist at present, and to stay for a better Oppor∣tunity. But he refused, and followed his Stroke with as much vigour as he could; and in fine, by his perswasion with the King and the Lords, a Bill past. And the King was the rather inclined thereun∣to, because he being now to go abroad upon a weighty Expedition, thought convenient to leave his Subjects at home as easy as might be. So with much struggling, an Act was past, intituled, An Act for the Advancement of True Religion, and the Abolishment of the contrary. In this Act, as Tindal's Translation of the Scriptures was for∣bidden to be kept or used, so other Bibles were allowed to some Persons, excepting the Annotations and Preambles, which were to be cut or dashed out. And the King's former Proclama∣tions and Injunctions with the Primers, and other Books printed in English, for the Instruction of the People before the Year 1540, were still to be in force, which it seems before were not. And that every Nobleman and Gentleman, might have the Bible read in their Houses: and that Noble Ladies, and Gentlewomen, and Merchants might read it themselves. But no Men or Women under those Degrees. That every Person might read and teach in their Houses, the Book set out in the Year 1540, (which was, The necessary Erudition of a Christian Man) with the Psalter, Primer, Pater noster, Ave, and Creed in English. But when Winchester and his Party saw that they could not hinder the Bill from passing, they clogged it with Provisoes, that it came short of what the Arch-bishop intended it; as that the People of all sorts and conditions universal∣ly might not read the Scriptures, but only some few of the higher Rank. And that no Book should be printed about Religion without the King's Allowance. And that the Act of the Six Articles should be in the same Force it was before.
A Bishop Consecrated. Paul Bush.Iune the 25th, being Sunday, Paul Bush, Provincial of the Bon∣hommes, was consecrated the first Bishop of Bristol, by Nicolas Bishop of Rochester, assisted by Thomas Bishop of Westminster, and Iohn Suf∣fragan of Bedford. This Consecration was celebrated in the Parish-Church of Hampton in the Diocess of Westminster. CHAP. XXV. Presentments at a Visitation. An. 1543.BY the Act above-mentioned, the generality of the People were restrained from reading the Holy Scriptures.The King's Book publish∣ed by Autho∣rity. But in lieu of it was set forth by the King and his Clergy, in the Year 1543, a Do∣ctrine for all his Subjects to use and follow; which was the Book a∣bovesaid: and all Books that were contrary to it, were by Authority of Parliament condemned. It was printed in London by Thomas Bar∣thelet. This Book the Arch-bishop enjoined to be made publick in his Diocess, (as I suppose it was in all other Diocesses throughout the Kingdom) and allowed no preaching or arguing against it. And when one Mr. Ioseph, once a Friar in Canterbury, now a learned and earnest Preacher, (and who was afterward preferred to Bow-Church in London) had attempted to preach against some things in the Book, the Arch-bishop checked and forbad him: For indeed there were some Points therein, which the Arch-bishop himself did not ap∣prove of, foisted into it by Winchester's Means and Interest at that time with the King. Which Bishop, politickly as well as flattering∣ly, called it The King's Book, a Title which the Arch-Bishop did not much like; for he knew well enough Winchester's Hand was in it. And so he told him plainly in K. Edward's Time, when he might speak his Mind; telling him in relation thereunto, That he had se∣duced the King. But because of the Authority of the Parliament ratifying the Book, and the many good and useful Things that were in it, the Arch-bishop introduced and countenanced it in his Diocess, and would not allow open preaching against it. A Visitation at Caterbury.The Arch-bishop, about the Month of September, held a Visita∣tion in Canterbury: chiefly because of the Jangling of the Preachers, and the divers Doctrines vented among them, according as their Fancies, Interests or Judgments led them. The Visitation proceed∣ed upon the King's Injunctions and other late Ordinances. And here I shall set down before the Reader some of the Presentments, as I take them from an Original in a Volume that belonged to this Arch∣bishop.Intit. Accusatio Cranmer, inter MSS. C.C.C.C. Wherein notice may be taken, what ignorance was then in some of the Priests; what bandying against one another, and what good Progress the Gospel did begin to make, and what good Numbers of Priests and Lay-men there were, that savoured of the Gospel-Doctrine. Presentments.Sir Humphrey Chirden, Parson of S. Elphins, on a Sunday in Lent,
said, If Iudas had gone to God and confessed his Fault, saying Peccavi, as he went unto the Priests, he had not been damned.An. 1543. This Passage was plain enough levelled against confessing to a Priest. But this was presentable, because against the Six Articles. One Lancaster, the Parson of Pluckley, was presented, because that when one Giles said, That he blessed himself daily and nightly, say∣ing, In nomine Patris, & Filii & Sp. Sancti; and then said, In the Honour of God and our Lady, and all the company of Heaven, and for all Christen Souls, that God would have prayed for, a Pater∣noster, an Ave, and a Creed; the said Parson said to him, That if he knew it of Truth, that the said Giles used the same form of Pray∣er, he would not accompany him, nor once drink with him. Vincent Ingeam, a (Justice of Peace I suppose) commanded, on Easter Munday, 33o of the King, that no Man should read, or hear the Bible read, upon pain of Imprisonment: and cast two into Pri∣son, the one for speaking against him therein, and the other for show∣ing him the King's Injunctions concerning the same. He repugned against the Doings of the Commissary, for taking down the Image of S. Iohn, by the King's Commandment. Where I find, among other witnesses to this, one Daniel Cranmer, a Relation doubtless of the Arch-bishop. Sir Thomas, Curate of Sholden, and Thomas Sawier set up again four Images, which by the King's Commandment were taken down, for Abuses by Pilgrimages and Offerings: viz. S. Nicolas, S. Stephen, S. Laurence, and our Lady. Another accused for forsaking his own Parish-Church at the time of Easter, two Years together, [not liking his Parish-Priest for his af∣fection to the Gospel] and for going to Walsingham [in Pilgrimage▪] and that he would at no time shew to the Vicar a lawful Certificate, that he had received the Blessed Sacrament at the time commonly accustomed, as a Christen Man ought to do. And obstinately re∣fused to learn his Pater Noster, Ave, Credo, and Ten Command∣ments in English, according to the King's Injunctions. Sir Edward Sponer, Vicar of Boughton, had not declared to his Parishioners the right use of Ceremonies, neither shewed the dif∣ference between them, and Works commanded by God, as he is com∣manded by the King's Proclamation. He had not preached against the Bishop of Rome his usurped Power, and set forth the King's Su∣premacy, as he is bound by the King's Injunctions, and other his Proceedings. He hath not preached his Quarters Sermons, neither at Boughton, nor at his Benefice in the Mersh. He never declared, that the Even of such Saints, whose Days be abrogated, be no Fasting-days. The Arch-deacon of Canterbury (that was Edmund the Arch∣bishop's Brother) the morrow after the Ascension was three Years, took out of the Church of S. Andrews in Canterbury, three lamp Tapers brenning before the Sacrament, and a Coat from a Rood, and did violently break the Arms and Legs of the Rood. Sir William Kemp, Vicar of Northgate, had not read the Bible since Pentecost, as he was commanded by the Ordinary. He doth not de∣clare to his Parishioners the right use of Holy Water, Holy Bread,
bearing of Candles upon Candlemassday, giving of Ashes, bearing of Palms, creeping to the Cross. For lack wherof the most part of the said Parish be as ignorant in such things, as ever they were. And many of them do abuse Holy Water, insomuch that against Tem∣pests of Thunder and Lightning, many run to the Church for Holy Water to cast about their Houses, to drive away Evil Spirits and De∣vils, notwithstanding the King's Proclamations in the same. He hath not read to them the King's Injunctions, as he ought to do, by reason whereof his Parish be blind and ignorant in them. Bartholomew Ioy confessed to his Curate in general, saying, I am a Sinner. And when the Vicar asked him, wherein he had sinned, he answered, that he had confessed himself to the Lord already, and that he would make none other Confession at that time; and so de∣parted. Iohn Tofts, Christopher Levenysh, Bartholomew Ioy, in the 30th of the King, pulled down all the Pictures in the Church of Northgate in Canterbury, except only the Rood, Mary and Iohn, the Twelve Apostles, the Picture of our Lady and S. Iohn Baptist. And in the thirty fourth of the King, Tofts pulled down the Picture of our Lady, and had her and the Tabernacle home to his House, and there did hew her all to Pieces. And at another time, the same Tofts openly, with a loud Voice, read the Bible in English in the Church to his Wife, Sterkies Wife, George Tofts Wife, to the Midwife of the same Parish, and to as many others as then were present. Ioanna Meriwether of S. Mildreds Parish, for displeasure that she bare towards a young Maid, named Elizabeth Celsay, and her Mo∣ther, made a Fire upon the Dung of the said Elizabeth; and took a holy Candle, and dropt upon the said Dung. And she told unto her Neighbours, that the said Enchantment would make the Cule of the said Maid to divide into two parts. Rafe, the Bell-ringer of Christ-Church, at the Burial of Dr. Champion, [the Arch-bishop's Chaplain] after the Priest had censed his Grave, and a Boy was bearing away the Censers and the Coals, called after the Boy, and took the Censers, and poured the hot Coals upon him in his Grave, to the great slander of the said Dr. Champion, as though he had been an Heretic, worthy burning. Also he said, the King was con∣tent that all Images should be honoured as they were wont to be. Coxson, Petty Canon of Christ-Church, made his Testament, by the advice of Mr. Parkhurst, Mr. Sandwich and Mr. Mills, Canons of the said Church; and gave and bequeathed to every Vicar of Christ-Church twenty Pence, that had a pair of Beads, and would say our Lady Psalter for his Soul departed. And this was executed according to the Will. The Parson of Alyngton never preached in the Church of Alyng∣ton, nor declared against the usurped Power of the Bishop of Rome, nor set forth the King's Supremacy according to the King's Procla∣mations, Letters and Injunctions. He hath been a great setter forth in his Parish of the Maid of Kent, Pilgrimages, fained Relicks, and other such Superstitions; and yet never recanted, and reproved the same, according to the King's Majesty's Injunctions. He hath not declared to his Parishioners, that the Eves of such Holy-days as be
abrogate, be no Fasting-days, according to the King's Injunctions. So upon the Sundays, Candlemass-day, Ash-wednesday, Palm-Sun∣day, and Good-Friday, he hath not declared the true use of the Ceremonies, used those Days according to the King's Proclamation. The Curate of Stodmersh did dissuade Men from eating of White∣meats the last Lent, and rebuked them that did eat White-meats. About Alhallontide was twelve-month he preached in S. Dunstan's Church beside Canterbury, that Men should love God, and fear God, but not to trust him too much. Turnor, in the time of his being at Chartham, did cast no Holy Water, neither before the Sacrament, nor upon any Altar in the Church, (except the high Altar.) Nor also before the Crucifix in the Rood-loft, according to the laudible Ceremony. He christned three Children upon one day, and did not anoint them with Holy Oil, neither upon Back nor Belly. He neither incensed the Crucifix in the Rood-loft, nor any Altar in the Church, except the high Al∣tar: Nor distributed any Holy Candles among his Parishioners, as hath been accustomed. Sir Iames Newnam and one Lawrence, took down an Image of our Lady; to the which was no Offering, except Candles at the Purifica∣tion of Women: nor any Miracles noted to be done there by the said Image. Scory, one of the six Preachers, said, that much Superstitions were used in the Church, as making of Crosses upon Palm-Sunday, set∣ting of them up, and Blessing them with the Holy Candles; Ring∣ing of Bells in the Thunder. For think you, said he, that the Devil will be afraid, or flee away at Cross-making, hurling of Holy Water, ringing of Bells, and such other Ceremonies; when he was not a∣fraid to take Christ himself, and cast him on his Back, and set him on a Pinacle? Those things that be good of themselves, may not utterly be put away, although they be abused. For then the Holy Sacrament of the Altar should be set aside, which is daily bought and sold. Serles, one of the six Preachers, in a Sermon said, If the Preacher preach Error and erroneous Doctrine, the simple Man, though he receive it and believe it, it doth not infect nor corrupt him. And this he repeated twice. He said also, that Moses sent Letters from Hell, to teach the State thereof, and how Men should live. And another likewise out of Heaven. Item, they say, (said he) that only Faith justifies, and that it maketh no matter how we do live: Christ died for us, and by his Blood hath washed all our Sins away; there∣fore what needeth us to fast or pray? Sandwich a Canon of Christ's-Church, said in his Sermon in the Year 1542. Whereas a good Christian or Evil, preach∣ed unto you truly the Word of God, as I report me to the Conscience of you all; yet some that have evil Ears, did Evil report of me. But if their Ears were cut off, as Malchus's was, and set up where every Man might wonder at them, I think therein a Man should not wish much against Charity. At another time, in the Year 1543. he said in his Sermon, Some, if they are given to Goodness, to follow the Decrees of Holy Church, to kneel
before the Blessed Sacrament, they will counsel them from the same, and say, Deus in manufactis Templis non habitat. They will have none of the Holy Doctors. They will not have S. Augustin, S. Am∣brose, S. Hierom, S. Gregory, Basil, Gregory Nazianzen, &c. Since the time we have been given to new Fangles, the Spirit of new Fangle hath brought in the Spirit of Error. But what Remedy then, said he, to obtain the Spirit of Truth again? Of that, said he, I spake the last time that I preached, and shewed you that we must re∣turn where we went out. We must return to our Dog, to our Con∣science again; and that will certify us where is the Truth. Shether, one of the six Preachers, said, That there was one strait Way to the Truth, in which we & all Men have gone a long time; saving a few now of late, not being content to follow that Trade, have wandred in divers Pathways to seek a neerer way to the Truth. But they are like unto one, that being clean lost, was fain to ask which way he might go to the end of his Journey? And to such it was answered, You be clean out of the Way, and there is none other means for you, but even to turn back again, and to begin your Jour∣ney again where you left. Nothing at all, as the Informer adds, admonishing the People of the Way, which Men had lost, by defend∣ing and retaining the Usurpations of Rome: Nor no mention, that the King's Majesty hath reformed the Abuses of Superstitious Reli∣gion. But even as one, that would have all things honestly refor∣med, to revert again into their Superstition, for the maintenance of all Blindness and Error, commanded every Man to turn back, and to begin where they left. Dr. Willowby the Vicar of Chilham, keepeth still in his Church a certain Shrine gilt, named S. Austin's Shrine: Which Shrine was conveyed from S. Austin's of Canterbury, unto the Parish-Church of Chilham, at the suppression of the Monastery of S. Austin's. Item, a Rood there, which had Shoes of Silver, being a Monument of Pil∣grimage, or Offering, standeth yet still, being only spoiled of the Monument. He said, Images had Power of God to help sick People, vowing unto them, the Communication then being of our Lady of Cutupstreet, between the said Vicar and own Dawson of Chartham, a Miller. Memorandum, that Potter's Wife was banished out of Fe∣versham, for her suspect lying with Dr. Willowby, and also was com∣pelled to forsake Chilham for the same, about two or three Years past; and yet she remains in the Company of the said Doctor. Serles, mentioned before, in a Sermon made in the Chapter-house of Christ's-Church, An. 1543, said, Some that occupy this place of Preach∣ing, say no Mattins, Mass nor Even-song once in a Quarter. They be never seen confessed, nor to occupy Porteous, nor Mass-Book. These use no Vocal Prayer: Beware of their Doctrine. In the Church of Leneham in the Day of Assumption, he said, That as the Moon is in the Full at fourteen Days, even so Mary was conceived fully with Christ, when she was fourteen Years old. Item, he said, That if one had looked in Mary, when she was full conceived with Christ, he should have perceived him in his Mother's Womb, with a Bush of Thorns on his Back: For he was Crucified, Crowned, and pricked with Thorns. That Mary bare Christ poorly; for she had
no Fire, but begged a Coal of one, and a Stick of another to warm her Child. He preached, that Mary nourished her Son with Milk, but not with material Milk, but with Milk that came from Heaven: For no Woman else can nourish her Child with material Milk, than she that is conceived by knowledg of Man. [And no question this Heavenly Milk came along the milky Way.] That all the whole Faith of the World remained in Mary only for the space of three Days and three Nights. That Faith was dead in the Apostles, and in all the World, from the Death of Christ till his Resurrection, and remained in the Virgin Mary whole and only. That the Sorrows that she had, were greater and more painful than Christ's, but for Death only. That Christ descended into Hell, and rose the third Day and ascended into Heaven, and many more with him; saying thus, Mul∣ta corpora ascenderunt cum Christo, ut perhiberent testimonium. In Ashford he preached, that Prayer was not acceptable with God, but in the Church only, and no where else; alledging this Text, Domus mea domus orationis vocabitur. Then and there he said also, You Fel∣lows of the new Trick, that go up and down with your Testaments in your Hands, I pray you what Profit take you by them? [this last Passage relating to the Testament, was interlined by Cranmer him∣self]. As Adam was expulsed out of Paradise for meddling with a Tree of Knowledg, even so be we for meddling with the Scripture of Christ. He said, There were some that said, that part of the Ave Maria was made to a Strumpet. That Christ in the Gospel con∣founded Mary Magdalene with two Parables, likening her to an Ale∣stake, and to a poor Woman whom an Emperor had married, and in his presence did lie with a leprous Lazar-man. Anno 1542, Preach∣ing in Kennyngton-Church on Good-friday, he said, That as a Man was creeping to the Cross upon a Good-friday, the Image loosed it self off the Cross, and met the Man before he came to the Cross, and kiss'd him. At the Funeral of Mr. Boys, he preached, That by the receiving of the Sacraments and Penance, all a Man's deadly Sins were forgiven clearly, but the venial Sins remained; and for them they that died should be punished, except they were relieved by Masses and Dirges after their Death. [This that follows is Cranmr's hand,] He preacheth no Sermon, but one part of it is an Invective against the other Preachers of Christ's Church. Shether preached at Sandwich in the Year 1542, That Baptism taketh away but only Original Sin. At another time there, That every Man, since the Passion of Christ, hath us much Liberty and Free-will, as ever Adam had in Paradise before his Fall. That the new Preachers, with the liberty of the Gospel, have caused our Li∣vings to be worse than the Turks. That Zacharias, and Elizabeth his Wife, kept all the Commandments of God▪ and that it was a light thing for every Man to keep them, if he would. That Christ and Baptism did nothing else but wash away Original Sin▪ and that if any Man after Baptism did fall, he must purchase Remission of his Sins by Penance, as Mary Magdalene did. That a certain King was sick of a Leprosy, and had a Vision to go to Iordan to be washed, and should be whole. And as he was in his good Intent going, h thought that he had as good and sweet Water in his own Country, as that
was; and so returned back and washed himself therein, but nothing at all he thereby mended: And then he went to Iordan, and so was made whole. He compared Man's Conscience to a Dog. Beware of these false Preachers, which preach to you new Fangles. Will you know how to discern a true Preacher from a False? You have a Dog, which is your Conscience: Whensoever you shall come to any Ser∣mon, ask your Dog, What he saith unto it? If he say, it be good, then follow it: but if your Dog bark against it, and say it is naught, then beware and follow it not. Adding these words, If you will ask your Conscience, What she thinks of such new Fangles as are brought into the Church of God, she will say, that they be naught. He also preached, that Men now-a-days say, that Holy Water signifieth of Christ Blood. O! these are very glorious words. But it is not fit, good Christians, that such new Fangles and Fantasies of Men should be brought into the Church of God. Item, In all his Sermons he commonly useth to make Invectives against the other Preachers of this Cathedral Church; making the People believe, that the Preachers of the Church, preach nothing but a carnal Li∣berty, new Fangles, new Auricular Confession, Prayers, Fasting, and all good Works. This last is added by Cranmer's Hand, as are also several other Passages above, according as he himself took the Examination. And as the Gospellers thus articled against the Papists, so the Pa∣pists were as hot in drawing up Articles against the Gospellers. Scory, before-mentioned, was accused, that he preached in a Ser∣mon at S. Elphies, on Ascension-day 1541. That there was none in Heaven but Christ only; [meaning, I suppose, as Mediators there with God, in opposition to the Intercession of Saints]. Then fol∣loweth, writ by Cranmer's hand, these words; The Witnesses a∣gainst him, were Bradkirk Priest, Shether, Marden, Colman; Ad∣ding, These four be Witnesses against all the Articles of Ridley and Scory, in the first Detection made to me two Years past. Then follow more Accusations of Scory. He preached in August ast, in the Chapter-house of Christ's-Church, That no Man may pray in any wise in Latin, or other Tongue▪ except he understand what he prayeth. And that Priests and Clarks do offend, taking any Money or Reward for saying Dirige and Mass. He said▪ that some Preachers brought in their Sermons Gesta Romanorum, perswading to the Peo∣ple, that it was the Gospel or the Bible. Another time, Anno 1541▪ he preached in Lent in Christ's-Church, Canterbury▪ That only Faith justifies; and he that doth deny, that only Faith doth justify, would deny, if he durst be so bold, that Christ doth justify. He preached at Christ's-Church another time, That the Supper of the Lord, which is Sacrificium & Hostia, is not Hostia pro peccatis, but Hostia Ldis. He preached at Faversham, Anno 1542▪ in the Feast of Dedication▪ That the Dedication of material Churches was instituted for the Bi∣shop Profits; and that he could not see by Scripture, that they might use any such Fashions for that purpose, as for Conjuration. And then they must conjure the Devil out of the Ground, or out of the Lime and Stones. And if so, then it were as necessary for every Man's House to be consecrate or dedicate. Admit, quoth he, that
the Dedication of the same were lawful, yet the Bishops should al∣ways preach, (for that is their Office); and other Men might and may consecrate them as well as they. Item, This sumptuous adorning of Churches, is against the old Fashion of the Primitive Church. They had no such Copes, nor Chalices, nor other Jewels, nor Gildings, nor Paintings of Ima∣ges, as we now have. And therefore if I were Curate, I would sell all such things, or lay them to pledg to help the Poor. At Christmass last there was a general Procession by the King's Ma∣jesty, and Mr. Scory preached these words: Every Country hath a Custom to chuse a Patron. As England hath chosen S. George; Scotland, S. Andrew, &c. thinking, rather by intercession of Saints to obtain the Victory of their Enemies. But, good People, quoth he, forasmuch as Saints be circumscript, it is not possible for the Saint that is in the North, to hear the Prayer that is made in the South; nor that Saint that is in the South, to hear the Prayer that is made in the North. But this last Passage of the Christmass Sermon hath a Cross struck through it. Ridley, the Prebendary, was charged, Sept. 22. 1543, that he preach∣ed at S. Stephens, in the Rogation Week, Anno Reg. 32. that Auri∣cular Confession was but a meer positive Law, and ordained as a god∣ly Means for the Sinner to come to the Priest for Counsel; but he could not find it in Scripture. And that there was no meeter Terms to be given to the Ceremonies of the Church, than to call them Beg∣garly Ceremonies. That Te Deum hath been sung commonly in English at Herne, where the said Mr. Doctor is Vicar. Brooks, one of the six Preachers, was accused for preaching, That all Masters and Mistresses were bound to eat Eggs, Butter and Cheese in Lent, to give Example to their Housholds to do the same. [This the Papists thought a breaking of Lent, to allow this eating of White-meats, whereas Fish only ought to be eaten.] And he thought, that the Ceremonies of the Church were but Beggarly Ceremonies, and that was the meetest Term he could give them. Thomas Carden, Vicar of Lime, in a Lenten-Sermon, Anno 1543, said, He supposed S. Katharine was rather a Devil in Hell, than a Saint in Heaven. And that the People said naught, and that this term was naught to say, That they should receive their Maker at Easter; but they should say, we shall receive our Housel. He preached, That the Water in the Font is no better than other Wa∣ter is. Drum, one of the six Preachers, in the Year 1543, preached in a Sermon made in Christ's-Church, that we may not pray in an Un∣known Tongue; for if we do, we do but mock with God, and of God we be mocked. As if a Man do come to a Lord, and babble to him words he knoweth not, the Lord will but mock him, and ac∣count him for a Fool. So thy Prayer, Man, not understood, is but babbling; and for that before God thou art but a Fool. Your Psal∣mody and Song in the Church is so taken with God, if that you, which do occupy your selves therein, do not understand it. And thou, that so babblest, dost break the Command of God: For it is written, Non accipies nomen Dei in vanum. And you do call on God
vainly, when you do call upon him in a Tongue that you understand not. Wherefore to such as know not the Latin, it must be needful to pray in the Mother-Tongue. Item, That the Material Church is a thing made and ordained to content the Affections of Men, and is not the thing that pleaseth God, nor that God requires; but is a thing that God doth tolerate for the weakness of Men. For as the Father contenteth his Child with an Apple, or a Hobby-horse; not because these things do delight the Father, but because the Child, ruled by Affections, is more desirous of these things than the Father is rejoiced in the Deed: So Almighty God, condescending to the Infirmities of Man, and his weakness, doth tolerate material Churches, gorgeously built, and richly decked; not because he requires, or is pleased with such things. This Drum was one of the Cambridg Men, that Car∣dinal Wolsey transplanted into his College at Oxon, and who suffered Imprisonment there some time after with Cox and Frith, and divers others of the same College for Matters of Religion. But however Drum afterwards fell away into Papistry. Lancaster, Parson of Pluckley, useth not in the Church-porch any Hally Water, according to the laudable Custom of the Church. A great part of his Parish useth not to receive Hally Bread. Going on Procession, he useth not to rehearse Sancta Maria, nor any other Saints Names. The Curate of Much Mongam, going on Procession, refuseth, and will in no wise sing, nor say, the Litany in such manner as all other Curates do. Reflections up∣on the former Presentments.All these Collections I have made out of the Original of this Visi∣tation of the Arch-bishop. Wherein may be seen the particular Matters in these Times vented and tossed about in the Pulpits; the trifling way of Popish Preaching, consisting in ridiculous lying Fables and Stories, as is used still in the Popish Countries; and with how much more Solidity, Truth and Reason the Sermons of those, who favoured the Gospel, were replenished. We may observe here also, how diligent our Arch-bishop was in his care of his Diocess, and the pains he took to come to a perfect Detection of his Clergy, in order to their Regulation, and divers other things, which an ingenious Reader will take notice of. The Prebenda∣ries and Prea∣chers admo∣nished by the ABp.The Arch-bishop had all the Prebendaries and Preachers before him in his Consistory, at Croydon, on Trinity-Sunday was twelve Month; where he argued with them, instructed, rebuked, exhorted them, according as he saw needful for ever Man, with relation unto the Articles above-said. He told Serles, who had preached in favour of Images in Churches, as Representatives of Saints, and not Idols, That Imago & Idolum was one thing; but the one was the Latin, the other the Greek. To which Gardiner, a Prebend of the Church, replied, That he did not think, that an Image and an Idol was one, but that an Image, not abused with Honor, is an Image, and not an Idol. This saying of the Arch-bishop did so gaul them, that they took occasion after, in their Sermons, to confute it. And they lyingly reported in Canterbury, that the ABp should say, He would be even with Gardiner, or that Gardiner should repent his
reasoning with him. Whereas all that Cranmer said, was, that the Communication that Gardiner had that Day, should be repeated again at his Grace's coming to Canterbury. The same day the Arch∣bishop told them, that he had set in their Church six Preachers, three of the old Learning, and three of the New. Now Gardiner told him, he thought that would not be for the most quietness in Preachers. The Arch-bishop replied, that he had shewed the King's Grace what he had done in that Matter, and that the King's Plea∣sure was, that it should be so. He then also gave them Warning, that none should inveigh against others in their Sermons. CHAP. XXVI. A black Cloud over the Arch-bishop. SOon after this,The Prebenda∣ries Plot a∣gainst the ABp. a great and black Cloud hung over our Arch-bi∣shop's Head, that threatned to break upon him in Thunder and Lightning. The Prebendaries and others of the Church of Canter∣bury for the most part were addicted to the Pope and the old Super∣stitions. Which the Arch-bishop endeavouring to abolish, and to bring in truer knowledg of Religion among them, caused them to do what they could to oppose him. And indeed they usually carried themselves disobligingly enough to him. Which made him say to one of them, viz. Gardiner, alias Sandwich, You and your Company hold me short, but I will hold you as short. They seemed now to have a fair Advantage against him, upon account of the Statute of the Six Articles: which the King at this time stood much upon the exe∣cution of; and did give out, that he required Justices and others, his Officers, in their several Places, to give notice of all Disobedience against it. The Bishop of Winchester also was now in great Favour with the King, a constant Adversary to Canterbury, and implacably set against the New Learning, as it was then called. He thought to take this opportunity to deal so effectually with the King, as to get the Gospel destroyed, and all that adhered to it. And moreover, about this time was given out a saying ordinarily, That the Bishop of Winchester had bent his Bow to shoot at some of the head Deer: Mean∣ing, as the Issue made manifest, the Arch-bishop of Canterbury and Queen Katharine Par, and others of the Court. And to carry on his Purpose, he being a Privy-Counsellor himself,Winchester the chief Mana∣ger. had an understanding with some of the Council, who were of his Mind, and ready to second these his Ends: as among the rest was Baker, the Chancellor of the Court of Augmentations. These were his Confidents at home. Abroad, to be his Soliciter, and his great Agitator, he had a very fit Man for his purpose, one Dr. London, Warden of New-College Oxon, Prebend of Shipton in the Church of Sarum, Canon of Windsor, and Dean of Osenay, a very busy Zealot. Who was in his Time the great Contriver and Practiser of Mischief against good Men, that could not comply with Papal Superstitions. He was one of the three, that some Years before now prosecuted most rigorously the good Students in the Cardinal's College, when
by Imprisonment and hard Usage several of them died. But this Man was met with: not long after this, suffering publick shame for Perjury, and died in a Jail. At one and the same time Winchester, with this his trusty Partner, London, was driving on two Games to∣gether: The one was to bring into trouble several of the King's own Court, that were Favourers of the Gospel; not liking that such should be so near the King: and the other was to overthrow the good Arch-bishop, and his Friends in his Diocess of Canterbury, and to extinguish that Light of the Gospel that began notably to shine there. Winchester de∣signs the Death of divers of the Court.For the compassing the first, they procured among them a special Sessions to be held at Windsor: Wherein they not only, upon the Six Articles, condemned four poor honest Men, viz. Persons, Filmer, Testwood and Marbeck, whereof the three former were burnt to Death; but they drew up a bundle of Indictments against a very great many,Fox. and some of Eminency about the King, as Cardin and Hobby, Knights, of the King's Privy-Chamber; with the Ladies, Harman and Welden, Snowbal and his Wife, and a great many more of the King's true and peaceable Subjects. One Ockham, that served for Clark of the Peace at that time, had these Indictments ready, to carry them to the chief Patron of these Plots, the Bishop of Winchester. But this Design, notwithstanding the Privacy and crafty Contrivance of it, took not effect; but he rather brought himself into Disgrace thereby. For one Fulk, belonging unto the Queen, being at Sessions at Windsor at that time, and observing what was done, hastily rode to Court, and discovered to the Persons con∣cerned what was hatching against them, letting them know, that Ockham was coming with his Indictments to the Bishop of Winchester: who as soon as he had received them, would without doubt have laid them before the King and his Council. But by this seasonable Notice they way-laid Ockham, and Cardin and others seized him, and all his Papers, as soon as he came to Court, before he got to Winchester. These Papers were perused by some of the Privy-Coun∣cil; and seeing what large numbers, it may be, of themselves and of their Friends, as well as others, were indicted, and designed for Death, they thought fit to acquaint the King with it. And he, not liking such bloody Doings, gave them all a Pardon: And observing how Winchester was the great Agen in all this, never liked him after. But Winchester and London had other Irons in the Fire against the Arch-bishop and his Friends at and about Canterbury:And of the ABp and his Friends. and particu∣larly Dr. Ridley a Prebendary, Scory, Lancelot Ridley, and Drum, three of the Preachers. And to bring Mischief upon these, by the instigation of Winchester and practice of London, several of the Pre∣bendaries, and some of the Six Preachers, combine in a Resolution to draw up Accusations, both against the Arch-bishop and against his Friends. But neither did this Winchester's second Plot succeed, but rather drew Shame upon himself, and those that assisted in it. The Papers relating to ABp Cranmer's Accusation.There is a Volume in the Benet College Library, intitled, Accusa∣tio Cranmeri: wherein are contained the rough Papers of the Exa∣minations, that were taken of these Accusers of the Arch-bishop;
the Interrogatories put to them; their Confessions and Submissions to the Arch-bishop. Upon which Papers this was writ by the hand of Arch-bishop Parker, in whose possession they afterwards came, viz. Memorandum, That King Henry, being divers times by Bishop Gardiner, informed against Bishop Cranmer, and the said Gardiner having his Instructions of one Dr. London, a stout and filthy Pre∣bendary of Windsor, who there convicted [of Perjury] did wear a Paper openly, and rode through the Town with his Face to∣ward the Horse-tail; and also had Information of Mr. Moyles, Mr. Baker, and of some others promoted by the said Cranmer; (Whose Tales he uttered to the King) perceiving the Malice, trusted the said Cranmer with the Examination of these Matters; which he did of divers Persons, as by this doth appear. Hence I have carefully extracted some Particulars,The Contents thereof. that I may give a particular Account of this exquisite Piece of Malice; which aimed at nothing less than this good Man's Life, and that they might make him tread the same Path with his Friend Crumwel two or three Years before, as a Reward of his endeavours in setting forward a Reformation in the Church. But first I will set down the Names of the Prebendaries and Preachers of the Cathedral Church of Canterbury,The Canons and Preachers of Canterbury. because we shall have occasion often to mention divers of them. Canons of Canterbury, Anno 1543. Richard Thornden Suffragan of Dover, Arthur Sentleger, Richard Parkhurst Parson of Leneham, Nicolas Ridley, Iohn Meines, Hugh Glazier, William Hunt, William Gardiner, Iohn Milles, Iohn Daniel, Robert Goldson, Iohn Baptist. The Six Preachers. Robert Serles Vicar of Charing, Michael Drum, Lancelot Ridley, Iohn Sory, Edmund Shether, Thomas Brooke. Many of these he had himself preferred, and was a special good Lord unto. And yet such was the ingratitude of several of them, that they voluntarily yielded to be made Tools to carry on this wicked Machination against him. The Names of the chief Actors were Thornden, who lived in the Arch-bishop's Family, and eat at his Table, and with whom he used to converse most familiarly: Gardiner, whom Cranmer had taken as his own Child▪ and he had resigned up himself to him with Heart, Body and Service, as he once solemnly professed to th Arch-bishop: Sentleger, Milles, Parkhurst, Serles and Shether; and one Dr. Willoughby, beneficed in Kent, and the King's Chaplain. Their first Attempt which they made was,Cranmer's Chaplains complained of at the Sessi∣ons. to prefer Bills of Ac∣cusation against the Arch-bishop's Chaplains and Preachers, viz. The two Ridleyes, Scory, Turner, Bland, Drum, Lancaster and others; and slantingly through their Sides, striking at the Arch-bishop himself. This they did to the Justices at their Sessions, upon the Statute of the Six Articles. And that by the suggestion of London; who
thought it convenient that the Articles should first be carried to the Sessions, and from thence returned to the Council-Board. Willoughby, being the King's Chaplain, and a Man of some Quality, was pre∣vailed with to present the Articles to the Justices, and to make them willing to meddle in this Affair, which otherwise they had no great Stomach to do, fearing they might draw the King's displeasure upon themselves. Willoughby, by the direction of London, told Moyle and Thwaits, and the other their Fellow-Justices, That they should be shent for suffering such Preaching and Contention, without doing any thing therein to stop it. And this was that they drove at; that after these Articles were preferred from the Justices up to Court, and seen and read by the King and Council, a Commission should then be obtained: and such put into the Commission, as might ef∣fectually take order with the Preachers. And these three Prebenda∣ries, Parkhurst, Gardiner and Mills, they laboured especially to be put in Commissioners; and that the Arch-bishop himself should be left out: For so London had promised. They prepare the Articles, and prefer them.Their next Care was to prepare the Articles. Gardiner and Serles are extraordinary diligent in this Work, and had been gathering Matter a good space before. The Writings were finished at Justice Moyle's House. And Willoughby seems to be the Man that offered the Bill in Court. They dealt earnestly with Baro, Clark of the Peace, to draw up the Indictment against the good Men complained of in their Bill of Articles, (the chief whereof were Iohn Bland, and Richard Turner) but he denied it. And when the Jury, that were to be sworn, came, they took them not orderly as they stood in the Panel, but overleaped some of them, and left them unsworn, that they might be sure to have such Men as would do their Business. After they had proceeded thus far, their next Care was to get their Articles sent up to the Court, and laid before the King and Council. They Article against the ABp himself.And to these foresaid Articles, they drew up another Book against the Arch-bishop himself▪ the matter being first plotted between Dr. London and Serles, a discontented Man, lately imprisoned. And this created them a new Diligence, and divers Journeys from Kent to London to take their Instructions, and from London to Kent, to get their Informations. And there was at last a parcel of Articles (Trifles for the most part) raked out of the Dunghil, picked up any where, and from any Person without Proof. For they had nothing to shew for the truth of them, but Hear-say and Report, and scarce∣ly that. Serles inveighles Dr. Willoughby into this Business, and brings him into acquaintance with Dr. London. In whose House the Articles are first read, to whom it was propounded to present them. But when Searles had said, that the things mentioned in the Articles were such as were openly spoken, Willoughby replied, Though he heard such things, he was not sure they were true; and there was no Record to affirm them true, no Witnesses Hands being subscribed. And so made a great boggle at presenting them, and put Serles upon that Work. But London urged Willoughby to carry them to the Council, telling him, that it would be a Matter of great Danger for him, being so near the King, if he should not
give information of such ill things in that Country where he lived; especially knowing the King's Pleasure, that such Matters should not be concealed, but that complaint should be made of them to Him and his Council. And he bad him not fear; for that he himself had made such a Spectacle Little think∣ing what a Spe∣ctacle he was soon after to make there, when he was carried on Horse-back through the Town, with a Paper upon his head, declaring his Perjury, and his Face to the Horse's Tail. at Windsor in bringing to light abomi∣nable Heresies, (meaning in causing those three poor Men to be burnt, and indicting so many more their Maintainers) whereat the King, he said, was astonished, and angry, both with the Doers and Bearers. And therefore if he should now shrink, he should shew himself to be no true Subject. Upon these words, which created some fear in Willoughby, if he should decline what London put him on to do, he was content to present them. Thus having gotten a Person ready for this part of the Drudgery, to prefer the Complaints against the Arch-bishop, London writ them over again, and added other new Articles, as he pleased.London's Pra∣ctices. Which Serles himself liked not: But London said, he meant, by putting in some things, to bring the Matter before the Justices, and certain of the Spirituality for his purpose. Matters, many of them, of mere untruth, and not so much as the pretence of a Rumor for. But he told Willoughby and Serles, that it should never be known to be their doings. And so Willoughby took the old Copy with him into Kent, to get it recorded, and signed with Hands. And London sent a Copy to the Bishop of Winchester. Willoughby being now at Canter∣bury about this Business, requiring the Prebendaries to sign the Ar∣ticles, they all refused. Up rode Willoughby to London again, and acquaints Dr. London therewith with a heavy heart. Then he began another practice, to tamper with the Justices, bidding Willoughby let them know, that the King would be angry with them for taking no more notice of the Disorders in Kent. London went also himself to Moyles Lodging, a Leading Justice then in Kent, and talked with him, exhorting him to forward this Work against the Arch-bishop; telling him, That he himself had taken up my Lord of Canterbury before the Council; meaning thereby to signify to him, that he need∣ed not to fear him so much as he seemed to do, or his Interest at the Court. Upon this Moyle sent to several other Gentlemen and Justi∣ces to search out for any Priests that wanted a Crown, [as a Reward for their Information] who should enquire about the Country for what things were rumoured against the Arch-bishop. And so as ma∣ny Rumors and Bruits as were brought, were presently turned in∣to Articles. But Moyle warily sent all the Reports that came to his hand to the Arch-bishop, not so much out of good-will to him, as that he might pretend to discharge his Duty in giving Information to the Diocesan of Abuses in his Diocess: thereby also reckoning to avert the Displeasure of the Arch-bishop from himself. But this London liked not of, and told him he would mar all. At length Serles and Willoughby had got together a mass of Ac∣cusations; whether true or false mattered not,A great Mass of Articles against the ABp procured. but a great heap they made. For these two were the chief Collectors of Articles, both at Canterbury, and other Places in Kent: London having ad∣vised them to get as much Matter as could be devised; for it would be the goodliest Deed, as he said, and the most bounden Act to the
King that ever they did. These Reports were digested into two or three Books. Serles brought up some of the Articles roughly drawn to London; and London transcribed them, and brought them to the Bishop of Winchester: and there they were copied out by German Gardiner, his Secretary, another busy Man. The chief In∣struments. GARDINER.Gardiner, the Prebendary, by this time had gotten a Book of Ar∣ticles, signed by the rest of the Prebendaries, and Willoughby brought them up: some of the Prebendaries coming up too, being about to be the Presenters of the Book themselves. Winchester, and Baker, Chan∣cellor of the Court of Augmentations, gave the said Prebendaries encouragement to proceed in what they went about. And busy London to make the Articles the better entertained, when they should be presented to the Council, had officiously shewn the Copy of them to several of the said Council before-hand. SERLES.I must here give this further note concerning Serles: that he was so zealous a Man, that he had the Year before put up to the Coun∣cil Articles against the Preachers of the Gospel. But they were such, that the Council thought not fit the King should see them. Which he complained of; and it seems at his return was clapt up in Prison for his pains, for some either malicious Insinuations, or irregular Pra∣ctices herein. SHETHER.Shether was another of the Gang, and one of the forwardest in this invidious Business against the innocent Arch-bishop. He was one of those that came up to London to present the Bill. It may be guessed what a hot-headed Man he was, by a passage we meet with concerning him,Fasti Oxon. p. 686. when he was Proctor at Oxford in the Year 1535. In which Year he made such a Combustion betwixt the Uni∣versity and the Towns-men, that they being enraged against him, he went in danger of his Life. So that he and his Company were fain to go armed when they went abroad. And when he was out of his Proctorship, the University allowed him to defend him∣self from the Towns-men at the University Charge, if he should be set upon by them. This Shether brought up also his Collections to one Ford his Brother-in-Law, to write them out: which amounted to a great Book of two days Labour. For they were resolved to have enough; and to make out in Bulk, what was wanting in Truth. The Bishop of Winchester's Dis∣course with a Prebendary of Canterbury.Take an hint or two here of Gardiner Bishop of Winchester, the secret Machine in all this ingrateful Work. Coming once from the Council, that then was beyond the Sea at Calais, about the time of the Breach with France, he after hearing Mass at the Cathedral Church at Canterbury, took his Name-sake Gardiner, the Prebendary, by the Hand, and asked him how he did, and how they did in Canterbury? meaning in relation to Religion professed in the City. And when Gardiner answered, But meetly; he enquired, How they did within the House among themselves, with relation to the Church-men belonging to it? He told him, That they did not agree all in Preaching. So do I hear, said Winchester. Then he asked, wherein they did not agree? Gardiner then repeated somewhat of Ridley's and Scory's Sermons: and this among other things, That Prayer ought to be made in a Tongue known, and not in a
Tongue unknown; for so it were but babling. Winchester then said, He missed. For the Germans themselves are now against that saying. Well, said he, this is not well. My Lord of Canterbury will look after this, I doubt not, or else such Preaching will grow unto an evil Inconvenience: I know well he will see Remedy for it. Well, how do you do with them? Gardiner replied, My Lord, Hardly: I am much marked in my Sermons. And I cannot tell whe∣ther I be taken, or no. I pray your good Lordship of your Counsel, what were best for me to do. I had rather leave Preaching betimes, than to be taken in my Sermons. Then said Winchester, Do thus: Write your Sermons into a Book, every word, as you will preach it; and when you go into the Pulpit, deliver your Book unto the chief∣est Man there, that can read, and let him take heed of your Book while you do preach, and say no more, but that you have written and studied for; And I warrant you, you shall do well enough. And when you do hear any Man preach any otherwise then well, hold you contented, and meddle not; so shall you do best. Then he past forth his time in Communication concerning the Ordinances of their Choir, their Statutes, their Masses, and Hours of them. And at the last sent for Ridley the Prebendary, and had some confe∣rence with him: but what, it is uncertain. The bulky Articles being at last hammered out and made ready,Willoughby and London wait at the Council-Chamber. London now required Willoughby to deliver them to the Council; which he would fain have shrunk from. He then charged him upon his Allegiance to go with him to the Council-Chamber-Door, mean∣ing to have him into the Council. Having gotten him there, he went in, and informed some of the Privy-Council, (and Friends, I suppose, to the Matter) that Dr. Willoughby was without, desiring he might be called in. Willoughby was before instructed by London to use words to the Council to this Tenor, when he should deliver his Articles: viz. That the King and they had been at great Char∣ges, and taken great Pains to set a good and godly Way among them, [meaning the Statute of the Six Articles.] And for all that they had with them in Kent the most enormous Heresies. And because he heard, that it was the King's Will and Pleasure, that every Man, on pain of his Allegiance, should bring in what he knew, or else if he knew and did conceal it, it should be his damage; therefore in discharge of his Duty, he came to tender that Bill of Articles. But this Speech was not delivered that Day, the Council not being at leisure. And lest some People, knowing the pragmatical temper of London, might be jealous what he did at the Court, and suspect it was for no Good to the Professors of the Gospel, it was studiously given out, that he was there for some Promotion from the King. The next day the sedulous Man carried Willoughby to the Lord Privy-Seal, [Lord Russel, if I mistake not] with his Articles;Willoughby brought to the Lord Privy-Seal, and to Wichester. but neither would my Lord-Privy-Seal see them, having no leisure, as he pretended: I suppose, because he liked them not, and loved my Lord of Canterbury. The Day after London carried him to the Bishop of Winchester. Into whom he went and tarried an Hour, carrying
in the Copy of the Articles. In which time, no question, the Bishop and his trusty Substitute contrived for the managing of the Matter. Soon after Willoughby being with Winchester, and desiring him, That he might not be put to present the Articles, not being able to testify to the Truth of them, Winchester bade him Fear not to do his Duty: and that if the Matter were not to be abidden by, the Doers should bear the blame, and not the Presenter. And that it was all our Duties to stand in such things as were contrary to the King's Injunctions. But notwithstanding Willoughby got himself excused, and delivered them not; but the Prebendaries soon after Easter did. The Contents of the Articles against the ABp.The Articles are not specified in the Papers I use; but by the In∣terrogatories and other Passages, it appears that some of them were these that follow: That he rebuked Serles for that he preached, that Images might be permitted in the Church, as Representatives of Saints, and not be Idols. Item, That the Arch-bishop spake openly before all the Prebendaries and Preachers in Consistory, that the King's Pleasure was to have the Six Preachers consist of three of the New Learning, and three of the Old. Item, That Serles and Shether underwent Censure laid upon them by the Arch-bishop for some∣what they had preached, when the Honesty of their Audience of∣fered themselves to testify, that they were falsely accused, and that that which was laid against them was not true: and although they were a great Number, yet they could not be admitted. That they were Innocent Preachers, and being Innocent, were condemned, the one to Prison, and the other to read a Declaration of false surmised Articles. Item, That those that would speak against evil Opinions, dared not; for if they did, they were complained of, and called Se∣ditious Persons, stirring the People to Commotion: and complaining to their Ordinary, they got nothing but displeasure; and the evil Preachers had much more Favour and Boldness. Item, That there were two Images of Christ, and two of our Lady, that were taken down; whereunto was neither Oblation, nor any Lights standing before them. More Articles against his Commissary.Other Articles, which were of Serles his own collecting, as appears by the Interrogatories, that Cranmer under his own hand had prepared to put to him, were such as these, and were chiefly against the Arch-bishop's Commissary. That there were a great number of evil Preachers in Canterbury Diocess. That the Arch-bishop's Com∣missary [Dr. Leigh] in his Visitation, commanded, that the Wax-Candles, blessed upon Candlemass-day, should not be delivered unto the People. That Holy-Water should not be born, nor cast into Mens Houses. That in some Churches, by the Commissaries com∣mand, all the Images were pulled down, and hewed with Axes. That the Commissary was most conversant with Abjured Persons, and other suspect of Heresy, aiding, maintaining, and succouring them. That Ioanna Bochier was delivered by the Favour of the Com∣missary. [Whereas indeed she was by the King's Pardon. This is she that was afterwards burnt for Arianism in King Edward's Days]. That one Giles came to Canterbury, in a Courtier's Coat, and a Beard, being a Priest, and there lodged ten Days. And one Hardes, a
Justice, complained of him to the Commissary, but the Commissa∣ry did nothing. [Whereas in truth he was not a Priest, but a Lay∣man.] That a Taylor in Canterbury did openly read and expound the Scripture in his own House: and open resort thither was suffered by the Commissary. That the Master of S. Iohn's in Canterbury at his Death refused to receive, and despised the Blessed Sacrament: and yet by the Sufferance of the Commissary, was both buried like a true Christian, and also was of very many praised for a good and holy Man. That Mr. Bland in communication with Mr. Sponer, Vicar of Boughton, denied Auricular Confession to be requisite, and deli∣vered his Opinion to the said Sponer in Writing. Which the Com∣missary hearing, desired Sponer to let him see the Writing, swear∣ing that he would not keep it from him: But when he had the Bill, he put it into his Purse. That the Commissary resigned a Benefice to the said Bland, binding Bland, and his Successor, by a Writing made under the Hand of my Lord of Canterbury, and the Chapter, to pay unto him, and his Assigns, a great part of the clear yearly Value for many Years. This was the Sum of Serles's Articles: but most of them were found to be frivolous and false. Articles yet more against our Arch-bishop were,More still. That he held a constant correspondence with Germany, sending Letters thither, and receiving Letters thence. That he gave out a great many Exhibiti∣ons in Germany, and had many Pensioners there. (In relation to which, there seemed to be a design carrying on, that the Bishop of Winchester should seize some of these Letters of the Arch-bishop. For Gardiner told him whose Hands they past through, namely one Fuller of Canterbury, and that if the said Bishop would send for him, and command him upon his Allegiance, he should know more. Or at least, that he might make use of Fuller for a Witness to serve to prove this Article.) Moreover, they put in their Articles, That his Grace's Sister was a Milner's Wife, and that She and her Husband lived nine or ten Years together in Canterbury. And then that She married to one Mr. Bingham, her former Husband being yet alive: and that Mr. Commissary married her Daughter. And though he were thus a married Priest, yet he was joined with Mr. Dean [Wotton] to be one of the Proctors of the Clergy in the Convocation-house: and not of their Election, but that it was obtained by the Interest of his Affinity. The chief Witnesses and Persons concerned as Vouchers and In∣formers, were, Roper, Balthazar a Chirurgion, Heywood, Moor,The Witnesses. Bec∣kinsal, German Gardiner. At length, after much adoe, some of the Prebendaries,The Prebenda∣ries deliver the Articles. in the Name of the Church of Canterbury, delivered into the Council not long after Easter, the Articles swelled to a good Quantity of Paper. And so they came at last into the King's Hand. Having received them, he bade Baker the Chancellor of the Court of Augmentation, a Kentish Man, being one of the Privy-Council, and a Privado in this Matter, to send to Canterbury for some to prove the Articles. The said Chancellor orders the Dean, ignorant of the Matter, to send to Shether & Serles to come up as secretly as might be to London. Being come up, Shether repairs to the Dean: Who ad him with Gar∣diner
and Parkhurst, to go to the Chancellor who sent for them. Being come before him, he said to them, That the King had a Book against the Arch-bishop delivered to him; which he had himself perused. And because that he perceived, that they could say some∣what, wishing also for Serles, (who was not yet come) he told them the King willed them to say what they knew; fearing no Person, but to dread only one God and one King. Whereupon they took the Book, and drew out such Articles as they could witness of. He bad them return to Canterbury, and provide the Witnesses there; and that She∣ther the youngest should come back again, after he had perfected the Book in the Day and Year, and to bring it with him. From him they applied again to the Bishop of Winchester, the great Wheel, and shewed him what Baker had said to them. CHAP. XXVII. The King the Arch-bishop's Friend in this Danger. The King him∣self discovers all to the ABp.THE King well perceiving the Malice of the Men, and a Plot contrived against an honest and innocent Man, strengthned with the Favour and Aid of Winchester, and several of the Coun∣sellors, and the imminent danger the Arch-bishop was in, except he himself did interpose, it pleased God to turn the King's Heart to him. So he put the Book of Articles in his Sleeve; and passing one Evening in his Barge by Lambeth-Bridg, the Arch-bishop stand∣ing at the Stairs to do his Duty to his Majesty; he called him into the Barge to him; and accosting him with these words, O my Chap∣lain, now I know who is the greatest Heretick in Kent, communicated to him these Matters, shewing him the Book of Articles against him and his Chaplains, and bad him peruse it. This both surprised, and troubled the Arch-bishop not a little: that those of his own Church, and Justices of the Peace whom he had obliged, should deal so trea∣cherously with him. He kneeled down to the King, and well-know∣ing how false the Articles were,The ABp de∣sires a Com∣mission.desired him to grant a Commission to whomsoever it pleased him, to try the Truth of these Accusati∣ons, so as from the highest to the lowest they might be well punished, if they had done otherwise than became them. The King told him He would grant a Commission, and that such Affiance and Confidence he had in his Fidelity, that he should be the chief Commissioner himself, to whom he would wholly commit the Examination, with two or three more such as he should chuse. When the Arch-bishop replied, That it would not seem indifferent to make him a Commis∣sioner, who was a Party accused; the King told him, That he was sure he would not halt with him, although he were driven to accuse himself, but would speak the Truth of himself, if he had offended. The King added, That he knew partly how the Matter came about, [namely, by Winchester's subtile means] and that if he handled the Matter wisely, he should find a pretty Conspiracy against him. The King named but one, viz. Dr. Belhouse, to be in the Commis∣sion; and the Arch-bishop named Dr. Iohn Cocks his Vicar-General,
and Anthony Hussey his Register. The Commissin was made out of hand, and he was commanded to go himself into Kent upon it: And the King commanded the Commissioners particularly, that it should be sifted out, who was the first Occasion of this Accusation. Pre∣sently every one that had meddled in this Detection, shrunk away, and gave over their hold. The Arch-bishop came to Feversham himself, and there, as it seems,The ABp in Commission expostulates with his Ac∣cusers. sat upon the Commission, and drew up some Interrogatories with his own Hand for some of these Informers; and having summoned these Ac∣cusers before him, argued and expostulated meekly, and sometimes earnestly with them; chiefly insisting upon their Ingratitude and Disingenuity with him. He asked Sentleger, if he were at Home on Palm-sunday? (that was the Day, when the Prebendaries signed the Articles) Sentleger saying, He was then at his Benefice, the Arch∣bishop declared the Procession done that Day, as he called it; and said, Whether he and the rest were present that Day, they were all knit in a Bond among them, which he would break: adding, in a passionate way of Expression; O, Mr. Sentleger, I had in you and Mr. Parkhurst, a good Judgment, and especially in you; but ye will not leave your old Mumpsimus. To which Sentleger boldly replied, That he trusted they used no Mumpsimus's, but those that were consonant to the Laws of God and the Prince. And with She∣ther, one of the busiest Enemies the Arch-bishop had in this Affair, the Arch-bishop so fatherly discoursed and argued, that Shether could not forbear weeping. He and Serles, two of the chief Agents, were committed to Custody. But Shether presently dispatcheth his Servant to the Bishop of VVinchester, declaring how he and Serles were in Durance,Shether in Pri∣son sends to Winchester. and re∣commended their Case to him. VVinchester went into the Council-Chamber, probably to try his Interest with the Council to get them released. But it seems he soon perceived how the King stood affect∣ed, and so there was nothing yet to be done: And therefore he told the Servant, he could give him no Answer as yet. A Day or two af∣ter, at the Servant's departing, he told him, That his Master was a Child for weeping to the Arch-bishop, when he should have an∣swered; and that he should not weep for shame, but answer like a Man; and that he should take a good Heart, for he should have Friends. That he would not forget him: but he must know of the Council first what to do; and so desired the Servant to have him re∣commended to the Prebendaries all in general; bidding him tell them, That my Ld of Canterbury could not kill them, and that there∣fore they should bear their Sufferings; for all he did was against him∣self, and that he should see what would come of it. Ford, a Brother-in-law of Shether's, and a Party, told the Servant, That he should tell his Brother, that he should never recant; for if he did, he would never be his Friend while he lived, nor none should that he could let; and that my Lord of VVinchester should be his Friend. But to return to the Arch-bishop's Examination of them.Their Reason which they pretended for what they did. When he asked them what the reason was of these their doings; they pre∣tended one one thing, and another another. Gardiner said, that which moved him was, Because he observed such Jarrings among
them, and so much Unquietness about Matters of Religion; and that he thought it was by the Arch-bishop's Sufferance: Which the Arch-bishop convinced him was false. Shether pretended that Baker, the Chancellor of the Augmentations, had willed him to mark the chief Fautors of new Opinions. VVilloughby desired Dr. Thornton, who was very great with the Arch-bishop, but secretly false to him, that he would let his Lordship know, that he never put up Article against any Man in his Life; for that he was charged to have put up, or ready to have put up, the Articles. Thornton bad him stick to it, and not be afraid; for, saith he, I have spoken my Mind to the Council there∣in, as I am bound, and so be you, being the King's Chaplain. Cockes and Hussey Commis∣sioners, and his Officers false.But the Arch-bishop left the further discovery of this Mischief to the diligence of Cockes and Hussey his Officers: this was about Au∣gust. They sat six Weeks, saith my Manuscript; but being secret Favourers of the Papists, handled the Matter so, that nothing would be disclosed and espied, but every thing colourably was hid. The Arch-bishop secretly observed this; but Morice his Secretary wrote to Dr. Butts the King's Physicians, and Sir Anthony Denny of his Bed-Chamber, That if the King sent not some others to assist the Arch-bishop, than those that were with him, it was not possible any thing should come to light; wishing that Dr. Legh, or some such other stout Man, that had been exercised in the King's Ecclesiastical Af∣fairs in his Visitation, might be sent to him. And Dr. Legh was soon dispatched with Instructions from the King into Kent, with the King's Ring, which he delivered to the Arch-bishop on Alhollow-Even. And with Dr. Legh, Dr. Rowland Taylor another Civilian, a bold and stirring Man, was joined; who afterwards was burnt for his constancy in Religion. New Commis∣sioners sent down.These new Commissioners startled the Delinquents; and they be∣gan to be very uneasy, and full of Anger, as well as Fear. One cried, Thank my Lord's Grace; that is a way to have Quietness in Kent, to have Dr. Legh there. Of Dr. Taylor they said, he was a Man of an evil Judgment, and notified for, and brought up in the same. And another, reflecting upon these Men, said, I would all Ambitious Knaves were hang'd; I would all maintainers of new Opinions were hang'd; I would all Knaves that break Orders were hang'd; I would all Knaves that are against the Common-Wealth were hang'd. The Register false.Hussey the Register, who had the Examinations of these Men, had private Conferences with them; and let Serles and Sandwich (alias Gardiner) have the Copies of their Accusations, before they were to be called before Legh, that they might the better know what Answers to make. The Delin∣quents Cham∣bers and Chests searched.But to proceed, to see what Course Dr. Legh took. Immediately upon his coming, according to the King's Advice, he gave Commis∣sion to about nine or ten of the Arch-bishop's Officers and Gentlemen, such as were tried Men of Wit and Audacity, to go and search the Purses, Chests and Houses of certain Prebendaries and Gentlemen, viz. such as were deemed or suspected to be of this Confederacy, within the Cathedral Church and without; and what Letters and Writings they could find with them, to bring to the Arch-bishop and him.
They all went about their Work in the same Hour; and within four Hours after, the whole Conspiracy was discovered, by finding of Letters, some from the Bishop of Winchester, some from Dr. London at Oxon, and from Justices of the Shire. In the Chambers and Chests of some Gentlemen of the County, were found Letters serving to that purpose. And among the rest there came to the Arch-bishop's Hand two Letters, one of Thornton, and the other of Dr. Barber;The Treache∣ry of Thornton and Barber. whom the ABp retained with him in Houshold, for expedition of Matters in Suit before him, being his Officer, and as a Counsellor to him in the Law when need required: Both promoted by him; Thornton, who was Suffragan of Dover, he made Prebendary of his Church, and whom he always set at his own Mess. The Arch-bishop taking them a-part, shewed them their Letters, and upbraided them with their Falseness and Ingratitude. They fell down on their Knees to the Arch-bishop, and with many Tears begged his Pardon, acknow∣ledging that they had been a Year ago tempted to do what they had done. The Arch-bishop before them casting up his Hands to Heaven,The ABp's Discourse to them. ap∣plied himself to God, thanking him that he had, in the midst of so many Enemies and false Friends, vouchsafed him one great Friend and Master, meaning the King, without whose Protection, as he said, he were not able to stand upright one Day. He prayed God to make them good Men, and bad them ask God forgiveness, seeing he had never deserved such usage at their Hands. He added, that now he perceived there was no Fidelity nor Truth among Men; and that he was brought to that Point, that he feared his left Hand would accuse his Right: But that he needed not to marvel at it, seeing Christ prophesied of such a World to come in the latter Days.Mark XIII.12. The Brother shall betray the Bro∣ther to death, and the Father the Son: and Children shall rise up against their Parents, &c. He prayed God of his Mercy to finish that Time shortly: and so dismist them with gentle and comfortable words. And it was observed, that there never after appeared, neither in his Countenance nor his Words, any remembrance thereof. But he thought fit no more to trust them; and so discharged them of his Service. And so he did one Mr. Talbot, another false Man, which was also of his Counsel and Chamber. But Dr. London took occasion hence to say, That they could tell a shrewd Tale, if they were examined; and that it was not for nought they were put out of Service, as tho the reason were, that they should no more have opportunity of knowing any of the Arch-bishop's Doings or Sayings. All the foresaid seized Papers and Writings, were put into a Chest,The Conspira∣tors are im∣prisoned. and brought up to Lambeth, the King being minded to peruse them, and to punish the Principals. In fine, divers of the chief of the Knot were committed to Prison, where they remained till the next Year, some more closely confined than others; all during the Arch-bishop's Pleasure. All that the Arch-bishop required of them, was Repentance and Recantation, and an ingenuous confession of their Faults and Falseness to him. Abiding for some time under Affliction, their Spirits began to mollify; and then, by supplicatory Letters to the Arch-bishop, they begged his Pardon, made their Confessions, and desired their Liberty.
About which time a Parliament was at hand. Then great labour was made by their Friends for a General Pardon from the King, procuring him a Subsidy,Their Release. the easier to obtain it. Which indeed fol∣lowed, and wiped away all Punishment and Correction for their Fault. But without the King's Indulgence, they were like suddenly to have had their Liberty by the Arch-bishop's Intercession for them, being a Man that delighted not in revenge. The Confessi∣ons & Letters.In the before-mentioned Manuscript Volume, belonging to Benet-College, whence I have extracted most of these Relations, are re∣maining the Interrogatories prepared for Dr. London, wrote by the Arch-bishop's own Hand, together with the humble Confessions and Letters of Willoughby, Gardiner, Serles, Milles, Sentleger, and others concerned.No. XXXIII. Some of which I have transcribed into the Appen∣dix. Gardiner's Expressions seemed so penitent, stiling the Arch-bishop his Father, that it made such an Impression upon the Arch-bishop's Heart, that when he saw him next, he told him, Ye call me Father, in good Faith I will be a Father to you indeed. Yet this very Man, so ingrateful he was, that soon after this kind Reconciliation of the Arch-bishop to him, and (as it seems) his deliverance out of Pri∣son, he and the rest had fresh Communications together again: Inso∣much that the Arch-bishop was fain to enter upon a new trouble with them, putting them under Restraint again, and interrogating them concerning their late Communication. Unless this Letter of Gardiner writ unto his Grace, may admit of a more favourable In∣terpretation. MOST honourable Father; Unadvisedly, as God shall save me, I have offended your Grace; and I think not the con∣trary, but that some back Friend hath done me more hurt and hindrance, than I have at your Grace's Hands deserved. For I know well in mine own Conscience, I have nothing so highly of∣fended, as I do perceive that your Grace is informed of me. In good Faith I speak it of my Conscience, and before God, I would I were under Ground. For now have I lost that, which I never thought to lose again: Yea that of which had I was as glad as ever I was of Benefit received in this World, as knoweth my Sa∣viour Christ Jesus: Who preserve your Grace. Yours, VVill. Gardiner. The Ends of the Conspira∣tors.But while these things were transacted at Canterbury, on the Arch-bishop's behalf, against these false Accusers, Dr. London, one of the great Incendiaries, was censured at Windsor. For he, and one Sy∣mons a Lawyer, and Ockham, that laid Traps for others, were catch'd at length themselves. They were Men that busied themselves in framing Indictments, upon the six Articles, against great Numbers of those that favoured or professed the Gospel, and in sending them to Court to Winchester; who was to prefer the Complaints to the Coun∣cil. The King being more and more informed of their base Conspi∣racies, and disliking their bloody Dispositions, commanded the Council should search into the Matters. And so London and his
Fellows being examined before the said Council, were in the end found to be perjured, in denying, upon their Oaths, what they had indeed done, and was proved manifestly to their Faces. Hereupon they were adjudged perjured Persons, and appointed to ride through Windsor, Reading and Newbery, where they had done most Mischief, with their Faces towards the Horse-Tail, and a Paper upon their Heads, declaring their Crime; and to stand upon the Pillory in each of those Towns. And that Punishment they underwent, and then were sent to the Fleet. London not long after died there, probably out of Shame and Sorrow: This was the End of one of these Con∣spirators. German Gardiner was a Year after hanged, drawn and quartered, as a Traitor, for denying the King's Supremacy. And the Bishop of Winchester after this, never had Favour or Regard of the King more. And Heywood, another of the Crew of the Infor∣mers and Witnesses, was condemned for Treason with Gardiner; but making a Recantation, his Life was spared. CHAP. XXVIII. The Arch-bishop falls into more Troubles. AFter this, the Arch-bishop received two terrible Shocks more, if I am right in the placing them, as I think I am, though I leave Fox to follow Morice, the Arch-bishop's Secretary, in his Ma∣nuscript Declaration of the said Arch-bishop. The former was a Complaint that was made openly against him in Parliament; and the latter, when the Lords of the Privy-Council accused him unto the King, and required that he should be sent to the Tower. Sir Iohn Gostwick, a Knight for Bedforshire,The ABp ac∣cused before theParliament. MS. Declara∣tion of ABp Cranmer. a Man of great Ser∣vice in his Time, but Papistical, stood up in the House, and laid to his Charge his Sermons and Lectures, both at Sandwich and Canter∣bury, containing, as he said, manifest Heresy against the Sacrament of the Altar. Though it was much they should accuse him in that Point, seeing he then held a Corporal Presence; but it displeased them that it was after the Lutheran way, rather than after theirs of Transubstantiation. But the King perceived easily this proceeded of Malice, for that he was a Stranger in Kent, and had neither heard the Arch-bishop preach nor read there. Knowing thereby that he was set on, and made an Instrument to serve other Mens Purposes; the King marvellously stormed at the Matter, calling Gostwick open∣ly, Varlet, and said, That he had plaid a villanous part, to abuse in open Parliament the Primate of the Realm, especially being in Fa∣vour with his Prince as he was. What will they do with him, said he, if I were gone? Whereupon the King sent word unto Gostwick, by one of his Privy-Chamber, after this sort; Tell the Varlet Gostwick, That if he do not acknowledg his Fault unto my Lord of Canterbury, and so reconcile himself towards him, that he may become his good Lord, I will soon both make him a poor Gostwick, and otherwise punish him to the Example of others. He wondred (he said) he could hear my Lord of Canterbury
preaching out of Kent. And that if he had been a Kentish-Man, he might have had some more shadow to put up an Accusation a∣gainst him. Now Gostwick, hearing of this grievous Threat, came with all possible speed unto Lambeth, and there submitted him∣self in such sorrowful case, that my Lord out of hand not only for∣gave all his Offences, but also went directly unto the King for the ob∣taining of the King's Favour; which he obtained very hardly, and upon condition, that the King might hear no more of his meddling that way. This happened, I suppose, in the Parliament that began in Ianuary,The Palace of Canterbury burnt. and continued till March 29. 1544. The Arch-bishop's Palace at Canterbury was this Year burnt, and therein his Brother-in-Law, and other Men, according to Stow. I find no Bishops Consecrated in this Year. An. 1544.At length the Confederacy of the Papists in the Privy-Council (whereof I suspect the Duke of Norfolk to be one,The Council accuse the ABp. a great Friend of Winchester's, by whose Instigation this Design was set on Foot) came and accused him most grievously unto the King; That he, with his Learned Men, had so infected the whole Realm with their un∣savoury Doctrine, that three parts of the Land were become abo∣minable Hereticks. And that it might prove dangerous to the King, being like to produce such Commotions and Uproars, as were sprung up in Germany. And therefore they desired, that the Arch-bishop might be committed unto the Tower, until he might be examined. The King was very strait in granting this. They told him, That the Arch-bishop being one of the Privy-Council, no Man dared to object Matter against him, unless he were first committed to durance. Which being done, Men would be bold to tell the Truth, and say their Consciences. Upon this Prswasion of theirs, the King granted unto them, that they should call him the next Day before them, and, as they saw cause, so to com∣mit him to the Tower. The King sends privately for the ABp.At Midnight, about Eleven of the Clock, before the Day he should appear before the Council, the King sent Mr. Denny to my Lord at Lambeth, willing him incontinently to come over to VVestminster to him. The Arch-bishop was in Bed, but rose straitway and repaired to the King, whom he found in the Gallery at VVhitehall. Being come, the King declared unto him what he had done, in giving Li∣berty to the Council to commit him to Prison: for that they bare him in hand, that he and his learned Men had sown such Doctrine in the Realm, that all Men almost were infected with Heresy; and that no Man durst bring Matter against him, being at Liberty, and one of the Council. And therefore I have granted to their Request, said the King; but whether I have done well or no, what say you, my Lord? The Arch-bishop first humbly thanked the King, that it had pleased him to give him that warning before-hand. And that he was very well content to be committed to the Tower for the trial of his Doctrine, so that he might be indifferently heard; as he doubted not but that his Majesty would see him so to be used. Whereat the King cried out, O Lord God, what fond Simplicity have you, so to permit your self to be imprisoned, that every
Enemy of yours may take Advantage against you? Do not you know, that when they have you once in Prison,An. 1544. three or four false Knaves will soon be procured to witness against you, and condemn you; which else, now being at Liberty, dare not once open their Lips, or appear before your Face? No, not so, my Lord, (said the King) I have better regard unto you, than to permit your Enemies so to overthrow you. And therefore I will have you to Morrow come to the Council, which no doubt will send for you. And when they break this Matter unto you, require them, that being one of them, you may have so much Favour, as they would have themselves; that is, to have your Accusers brought before you. And if they stand with you, without regard of your Allegations, and will in no Condition condescend unto your Re∣quest, but will needs commit you to the Tower, then appeal you from them to our Person, and give to them this my Ring; (which he then delivered unto the Arch-bishop) by the which (said the King) they shall well understand, that I have taken your Cause into my Hand from them. Which Ring they well know, that I use it for no other Purpose, but to call Matters from the Council into mine own Hands, to be ordered and determined. And with this good Advice Cranmer, after most humble Thanks, departed from the King's Majesty. The next Morning, according to the King's Monition,Comes before the Council. and his own Expectation, the Council sent for him by Eight of the Clock in the Morning. And when he came to the Council-Chamber-Door, he was not permitted to enter into the Council-Chamber, but stood without among Serving-men and Lacquies above three quarters of an hour; many Counsellors and others going in and out. The Mat∣ter seemed strange unto his Secretary, who then attended upon him; which made him slip away to Dr. Butts, to whom he related the manner of the thing. Who by and by came, and kept my Lord Company. And yet e're he was called into the Council, Dr. Butts went to the King, and told him, that he had seen a strange Sight. What is that, said the King? Marry, said he, my Lord of Canter∣bury is become a Lacquey, or a Serving-man: For to my knowledg, he hath stood among them this hour almost at the Council-Chamber-Door. Have they served my Lord so? It is well enough, said the King, I shall talk with them by and by. Anon Cranmer was called into the Council, there it was declared unto him, That a great Complaint was made of him, both to the King and to them, That he, and others by his Permission, had infected the whole Realm with Heresy: And therefore it was the King's Pleasure that they should commit him to the Tower, and there for his Trial, to be examined. Cranmer required, as is before declared, with many, both Reasons and Perswasions, that he might have his Accusers come there before them, before they used any further Extremity against him. In fine, there was no Intreaty could serve, but that he must needs depart to the Tower. I am sorry, my Lords, said Cranmer, that you drive me unto this Exigent, to appeal from you to the King's Majesty; who by this Token hath resumed this Matter into his own Hand, and dischargeth you thereof. And so delivered the
King's Ring unto them. By and by the Lord Russel swore a great Oath, and said, Did not I tell you, my Lords, what would come of this Matter? I know, right well, that the King would never permit my Lord of Canterbury to have such a Blemish, as to be imprisoned, unless it were for High-Treason. And so as the man∣ner was, when they had once received that Ring, they left off their Matter, and went all unto the King's Person, both with his Token, and the Cause. The King re∣bukes the Council for Cranmer.When they came unto his Highness, the King said unto them; Ah, my Lords, I thought that I had had a discreet and wise Coun∣cil, but now I perceive that I am deceived. How have you hand∣led here my Lord of Canterbury? What make ye of him? A Slave? Shutting him out of the Council-Chamber among Serving∣men. Would ye be so handled your selves? And after such taunt∣ing words as these spoken, the King added, I would you should well understand, that I account my Lord of Canterbury as faithful a Man towards me, as ever was Prelate in this Realm, and one to whom I am many ways beholden, by the Faith I owe unto God, and so laid his Hand upon his Breast. And therefore who loveth me, said he, will upon that Account regard him. And with these words all, and especially my Lord of Norfolk, answered and said, We meant no manner of Hurt unto my Lord of Canterbury, that we requested to have him in Durance. Which we only did, because he might, after his Trial, be set at Liberty to his greater Glory. Well, said the King, I pray you use not my Friends so. I per∣ceive now well enough, how the World goeth among you. There remaineth Malice among you one to another; let it be avoided out of hand, I would advise you. And so the King departed, and the Lords shook Hands every Man with the Arch-bishop. Against whom never more after durst any Man spurn, during King Henry's Life. And because the King would have Love always nourished between the Lords of the Council and the Arch-bishop, he would send them divers times to Dinner with him. And so he did after this Reconciliation. The King changes the ABp's Arms.Thus did the King interpose himself divers times between his Arch-bishop, and his irreconcileable Enemies the Papists: and ob∣serving, by these Essays against him, under what Perils he was like to come hereafter for his Religion, about this Time it was, as I con∣jecture, that the King changed his Coat of Arms. For unto the Year 1543, he bore his Paternal Coat, of Three Cranes Sable, as I find by a Date set under his Arms, yet remaining in a Window in Lambeth-House. For it is to be noted, That the King per∣ceiving how much ado Cranmer would have in the Defence of his Religion, altered the Three Cranes, which were parcel of his Ancestors Arms, into Three Pelicans, declaring unto him, That those Birds should signify unto him, that he ought to be ready, as the Pelican is, to shed his Blood for his young Ones, brought up in the Faith of Christ. For, said the King, you are like to be tasted, if you stand to your Tackling at length. As in very deed many and sundry times he was shouldered at, both in this King's Reign, as you have heard, and under the two succeding Princes.
CHAP. XXIX. Occasional Prayers and Suffrages. OCcasional Prayers and Suffrages, to be used throughout all Churches, began now to be more usual than formerly. For these common Devotions were twice this Year appointed by Autho∣rity, as they had been once the last; which I look upon the Arch-bishop to be the great Instrument in procuring: That he might by this means, by little and little, bring into use Prayer in the English Tongue, which he so much desired: and that the People, by under∣standing part of their Prayers, might be the more desirous to have their whole Service rendred intelligible; whereby God might be ser∣ved with the more Seriousness and true Devotion. The last Year there was a plentiful Crop upon the Ground:Prayers to be made against immoderate Rain. But when the Time of Harvest drew near, there happened a great Plague of Rain. So in August Letters were issued out from the King to the Arch-bishop, that he should appoint certin Prayers to be used for the ceasing of the Wet-weather; and to write to the rest of the Province to do the like. But hear the King's Letter. MOST Reverend Father in God, right Trusty,Cranm. Regist. and right in∣tirely Beloved, We greet you well. And forasmuch as there hath been now a late, and still continueth, much Rain, and other unseasonable Weather, whereby is like to ensue great Hurt and Damage to the Corn and Fruits now ripe upon the Ground, unless it shall please God, of his infinite Goodness, to stretch forth his holy Hand over us: Considering, by sundry Ex∣amples heretofore, that God at the Contemplation of earnest and devout Prayers, oftentimes extended his Mercy and Grace; and hath also assuredly promised, that whensoever we call upon him for Things meet for us, he will grant unto us the same: We, having the Governance and Charge of his People committed unto Us, have thought good to cause the same to be exhorted by You, and other the Prelats of this our Realm, with an earnest repentant Heart for their Iniquities, to call unto God for Mercy; and with devout and humble Prayer and Supplication, every Person, both by himself apart, and also by Common-Prayer, to beseech him to send unto us such seasonable and temperate Weather, to have in those Fruits, and Corn on the Ground, which hitherto he hath caused so plenteously to grow. For the which purpose we require you, and nevertheless com∣mand you, to send unto all your Brethren, the Bishops within your Province, to cause such general Rogations and Processions to be made incontinently within their Diocesses, as in case like here∣tofore hath been accustomed in this behalf accordingly. Yevon under our Signet, at our Manor of the Moor, the 20th Day of August, the XXXV Year of our Reign.
The Arch-bishop accordingly sent his Order, dated August 23. 1543. to Edmond Bishop of London, that there might be Prayers and Sup∣plications in his Diocess every Fourth and Sixth Days of the Week. And the like Order was dispatched to all the other Bishops in his Pro∣vince; By their Prayers, as was accustomed, to implore God's Mercy to avert his Wrath, that the People had justly deserved. And not to cease their Prayers and Suffrages till further Order from him. English Suffra∣ges command∣ed to be used.It is not so evident, that these Prayers were in the English Tongue. But in the Year following, viz. 1544. there were, without Contro∣versy, certain Suffrages drawn up in our Mother-Tongue by the Arch-bishop's means; which he intended to be universally observed every where. Upon the Arch-bishop's pious Motions, as it seems, the King issued out his Letters to him, dated in Iune, for the publi∣cation of these Prayers in English, to be from thenceforth continually used in the Church; together with setting forth the King's Injuncti∣ons, by Preaching and good Exhortation, that the People, who be∣fore did but slackly observe their Devotions, for want of understand∣ing the Divine Service, might henceforth more frequently and more fervently resort to religious Worship. I shall not here set down the King's Letter, as I transcribed it out of Arch-bishop Cranmer's Register,The Contents of the King's Letter to that intent. Cranm. Regist. Fol. 48. because Bishop Burnet hath prin∣ted it already in his first Volume, among the Collections, pag. 264. It runs in such a pious strain, as tho none but the Arch-bishop had been the Suggestor thereof. That since at that time Christendom was plagued with Wars, Hatred and Dissensions, and in no Place was Peace and Agreement: and since it was out of the Power of Man to redress these Miseries, God alone being able to restore Peace, and unite Mens Hearts; Therefore the King was resolved to have general Processions used in all Churches, with all Reverence and Devotion of the People. And because the not understanding the Prayers and Suffrages formerly used, caused that the People came but slackly to the Processions; therefore the King now had pub∣lished certain Prayers in our Native Tongue. Which he, with his present Letter, had sent to the Arch-bishop, for the special Trust and Confidence he had of his Godly Mind, and the earnest desire that was in him for the setting forth of God's Glory, and the true worshipping of his Name. And that these Prayers should not be observed for a Month or two, as his other Injunctions had been, but that they, together with the Injunctions, should be ear∣nestly set forth by Preaching, good Exhortation, and otherwise; in such sort as they might feel the Godly Taste thereof, and godly and joyously with Thanks receive, embrace, and frequent the same. Commanding the Arch-bishop, that he should not only cause the same Suffrages to be used in his own Diocess, but signify the King's Pleasure in this regard to all other Bishops of his Pro∣vince. And that he should have a special respect hereunto; and make report, if any did not with good dexterity accomplish the same. It was given under the King's Signet, at his Manor of S. Iames's, Iune 11. in the 36th of his Reign. I have not met with these Suffrages; which if I had, I should have been enclined to
publish them here; and the rather, because I believe they were of Cranmer's own composing. According to this Letter, the Arch-bishop dispersed his Letters to Edmund Bishop of London, and the other Bishops, with a Copy of the Suffrages to be used: urging withal, the observation of all the King's Injunctions heretofore promulgated, for the confirming and establishing of Sacred Religion. About August this Year,A Procession for the King's Expedition. the King was upon going himself in Per∣son to invade France, against which Nation he was now in Hostili∣ty; and had prepared a mighty Army by Land and Sea for that pur∣pose. Now the Arch-bishop was again called upon by the Privy-Counsellors, to appoint Processions in the English Tongue through the Realm, for the King's good Success in this great Expedition. The Councils Letter ran in this Tenor. AFTER our right-hearty Commendations to your good Lord∣ship: These shall be to signify to the same,The Councils Letter to the ABp. Reg. Cranm. That the King's Highness having so provided for the Safety of his Grace's Realm, as the great Malice of his Enemies shall, by the Grace of God, take small effect: For the repulsing of which, his Highness hath in a readiness to set abroad, at the furthest on Wednesday next, such a puissant Navy, as hath not been seen assembled in the re∣membrance of Man: Considering nevertheless, that all Victories and good Successes come only at the Direction and Appointment of God, following herein that Trade of such a Christian Prince, as he is, hath devised to have Processions throughout the Realm, in such sort as in like Cases hath heretofore laudably been accustomed. Requiring your Lordship therefore, to take Order incontinently, that from henceforth, through your Province, the said Processions be kept continually upon the accustomed Days, and none other∣wise; and sung or said, as the number of the Quoire shall serve for the same, in the English Tongue; to the intent, that there may be an Uniformity in every Place. Whereby it may please God at all times to prosper his Majesty in all his Affairs: And the rather, to have regard at this time unto the Uprightness of his Grace's Quarrel, and to send his Highness victorious Success of the same. And thus we bid your Lordship most heartily well to fare. From Petworth, the 10th Day of August. Your Lordship's assured loving Friends, W. Essex, St. Wynton, Ant. Brown. Will. Paget. The Copy of this Letter the Arch-bishop dispatched to the Bishop of London; and in a Letter of his own, he first stirred him up to take care of making due Provisions for the religious Performance of these Prayers in his Diocess, upon consideration of the King's great Wars by Land and Sea, and his Wars in France, in Scotland, and in the Parts about Bulloign. Then he enjoined him, and all the Bishops in his Province, every Fourth and Sixth Day, to retire to Prayer and Supplication to God; and that the People should, as he wrote, Con∣cinna
modulatione & una voce cunctipotentem Deum Sabaoth, omnis Victoriae largitorem unicum, sanctè & piè, non labiis sed corde puro a∣dorent: In becoming Harmony, and with one Voice, holily and piously, not with the Lips, but with a pure Heart, adore the Al∣mighty God of Sabaoth, the only giver of all Victory. Popery pre∣vails.And in these smaller Matters our Arch-bishop was fain now to be contented to busy himself, since about this Juncture Winton or his Party had the Ascendent, and did all at Court. Concerning these latter Times of King Henry, when the Popish Bishops carried all be∣fore them again; and the Acts of Parliament that were made, whereby the Bishops were empowred to call Sessions as oft as they would, to try those that gave not due Obedience to the Superstitions of the Church,Image of both Churches. and that upon pain of Treason: Thus Iohn Bale complains, whose Words may give us some light into the sad Condi∣tion of these Times. Still remaineth there Soul-Masses, of all Abominations the principal; their prodigious Sacrifices, their Censings of Idols, their boyish Processions, their uncommanded Worshippings, and their Confessions in the Ear, of all Traitery the Fountain; with many other strange Observations, which the Scripture of God knoweth not. Nothing is brought as yet to Christ's clear Institution, and sincere Ordinance, but all remaineth still as the Antichrists left it. Nothing is tried by God's Word, but by the ancient Authority of Fathers. Now passeth all under their Title. Though the old Bishops of Rome were of late Years proved Antichrists, and their Names razed out of our Books; yet must they thus properly, for old Acquaintance, be called still Our Fathers. If it were naught afore, I think it is now much worse; for now are they become laudable Ceremonies, whereas before-time they were but Ceremonies alone. Now are they become necessary Rites, godly Constitutions, seemly Vsages, and civil Or∣dinances, whereas afore they had no such Names. And he that disobeyeth them, shall not only be judged a Felon, and worthy to be hanged, by their new-forged Laws, but also condemned for a Traitor against the King, though he never in his Life hindred, but rather to his Power hath forwarded the Common-Wealth. To put this with such-like in Execution, th Bishops have Autho∣rity, every Month in the Year if they list, to call a Session, to Hang and Burn at their pleasure. And this is ratified and confirmed by Act of Parliament, to stand the more in Effect. Gardiner Bishop of Winchester, had by his Policy and Interest, brought things thus backward again,Gardiner and the Bishops now carry all. and exalted the Power of the Bishops, that of late Years had been much eclipsed. And so he plainly told one Seton, a Man of Eminency in these Times, both for Piety and Learning in London; who met with Troubles there, about the Year 1541, for a Sermon preached at S. Anthonies, against Justi∣fication by Works. This Seton being now it seems fallen into new Troubles, and brought before the aforesaid Bishop; when he was able no longer to withstand the manifest Truth, said to him, Mr. Seton, we know ye are Learned, and plenteously endued with Knowledg in the Scriptures, yet think not that ye shall over∣come us. No, no, set your Heart at rest, and look never to
have it said, that ye have overcome the Bishops. For it shall not be so. Robert Holgate Bishop of Landaff,Bp of Landaff removed to York. was this Year preferred to the See of York. His Confirmation is mentioned in the Arch-bishop of Canterbury's Register: Wherein is set down an Oath which he then took, of Renunciation of the Pope, and Acknowledgment of the King's Supremacy, very full and large. Afterwards I find the same Oath administred to Kitchin Elect of Landaff, and Ridley Elect of Rochester, and Farrar of S. Davids. But I think it not unworthy to be here set down as I find it, seeming to be a new Form drawn up, to be henceforth taken by all Bishops. And this Arch-bishop of York the first that took it. I Robert Arch-bishop of York Elect,The ABp's Oath. Cranm. Regist. having now the Vail of Darkness of the Usurped Power, Authority and Jurisdiction of the See and Bishop of Rome, clearly taken away from mine Eyes, do utterly testify and declare in my Conscience, that neither the See, nor the Bishop of Rome, nor any Foreign Potestate hath, nor ought to have, any Jurisdiction, Power or Authority within this Realm, neither by God's Law, nor by any just Law or Means. And though by Sufferance and Abusions in Time past, they afore∣said have usurped and vindicated a feigned and unlawful Power and Jurisdiction within this Realm, which hath been supported till few Years past; Therefore because it might be deemed, and thought thereby, that I took or take it for Just and Good, I there∣fore do now clearly and frankly renounce, forsake, refuse and re∣linquish that pretended Authority, Power and Jurisdiction, both of the See and Bishop of Rome, and of all other Foreign Powers: And that I shall never consent or agree, that the foresaid See or Bp of Rome, or any of their Successors, shall practise, exercise, or have any manner of Authority, Jurisdiction or Power within this Realm, or any other the King's Realms or Dominions; nor any Foreign Potestate, of what State, Degree, or Condition he be; but that I shall resist the same to the uttermost of my Power; and that I shall bear Faith, Troth, and true Allegiance to the King's Majesty, and to his Heirs and Successors declared, or hereafter to be declared, by the Authority of the Act, made in the Sessions of his Parliament holden at Westminster, the 14th day of Ianuary, in the 35th Year, and in the Act made in the 28th Year of the King's Majesty's Reign. And that I shall accept, repute, and take the King's Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, when they, or any of them shall enjoy his Place, to be the only Supream Head in Earth, under God, of the Church of England and Ireland, and all other his Highness Dominions. And that with my Body, Cunning, Wit, and uttermost of my Power, without Guile, Fraud, or other un∣due Means, I shall observe, keep, maintain and defend all the King's Majesty's Stiles, Titles and Rights, with the whole Effects and Contents of the Acts provided for the same, and all other Acts and Statutes made and to be made within the Realm, in and for that purpose, and the Derogation, Extirpation and Extinguish∣ment of the usurped and pretended Authority, Power and Juris∣diction
of the See and Bishop of Rome, and all other Foreign Po∣testates as afore. And also as well his Statute made in the said 28th Year, as his Statute made in the Parliament holden in the 35th Year of the King's Majesty's Reign, for Establish∣ment and Declaration of his Highness Succession, and all Acts and Statutes made and to be made in Confirmation and Corro∣boration of the King's Majesty's Power and Supremacy in Earth, of his Church of England and of Ireland, and all other his Grace's Dominions. I shall also defend and maintain, with my Body and Goods, with all my Wit and Power. And thus I shall do a∣gainst all manner of Persons, of what State, Dignity, Degree or Con∣dition soever they be; and in no wise do nor attempt, nor to my Power suffer, or know to be done or attempted, directly or indi∣rectly, any thing or things privily or apertly, to the let, hindrance, damage or derogation of any of the said Statutes, or any part thereof, by any manner of Means, or for or by any manner of Pre∣tence. And in case any Oath hath been made by me to any Per∣son or Persons, in Maintenance, Defence or Favour of the Bishop of Rome, or his Authority, Jurisdiction or Power, or against any the Statutes aforesaid, I repute the same as vain and adnichilate. I shall wholly observe and keep this Oath. So help me God, and all Saints, and the Holy Evangeles. And then after this Oath, followed the Prayers before the Benedi∣ction of the Pall, and the Ceremonies of delivering it. CHAP. XXX. The Arch-bishop Reformeth the Canon Law. An. 1545.OUR Arch-bishop seeing the great Evil and Inconvenience of Canons and Papal Laws which were still in Force,The ABp sets upon reform∣ing the Canon Law. and studied much in the Kingdom, had in his Mind now a good while to get them suppressed, or to reduce them into a narrower Compass, and to cull out of them a set of just and wholsome Laws, that should serve for the Government of the Ecclesiastical State. And indeed there was great need of some Reformation of these Laws: For most of them extolled the Pope unmeasurably, and made his Power to be above that of Emperors and Kings. Some of them were, That he that acknowledged not himself to be under the Bishop of Rome, and that the Pope is ordained of God to have the Primacy over the World, is an Heretick. That Princes Laws, if they be against the Canons and Decrees of the Bishop of Rome, be of no Force. That all the Decrees of the Bishop of Rome ought to be kept perpetually, as God's Word spoken by the Mouth of Peter. That all Kings, Bishops and Noblemen, that believe or suffer the Bishop of Rome's Decrees in any thing to be violated, are accur∣sed. That the See of Rome hath neither Spot nor Wrinkle. And abundance of the like, which the Arch-bishop himself drew out of the Canon Laws,Part I. among the Collecti∣ons, p. 257. and are set down by the Bishop of Sarum in his History.
Therefore by the Arch-bishop's Motion and Advice, the King had an Act past the last Year, viz. 1544.An. 1545. That his Majesty should have Authority, during his Life, to name thirty two Persons;An Act con∣cerning it. that is to say, sixteen Spiritual, and sixteen Temporal, to examine all Ca∣nons, Constitutions and Ordinances, Provincial and Synodal, and to draw up such Laws Ecclesiastical, as should be thought by the King and them convenient to be used in all Spiritual Courts. Accord∣ing to this Act, tho it seems this Nomination hapned some time before the making of the same, the King nominated several Persons to study, and prepare a Scheme of good Laws for the Church. Who brought their Business to a Conclusion, and so it rested for a time. The Arch∣bishop being now to go down into Kent, to meet some Commissio∣ners at Sittingborn, went to Hampton-Court to take his leave of the King. There he put him in mind of these Ecclesiastical Laws, and urged him to ratify them. So the King bad him dispatch to him the Names of the Persons, (which had been chiefly left to Cranmer's Election) and the Book they had made. This care he, going out of Town, left with Heth Bishop of Rochester. So that these Laws, by the great Pains of the Arch-bishop,The Progress made by the ABp in this Work. and some Learned Men about him, were brought to that good Perfection, that they wanted nothing but the Confirmation of the King. And there was a Letter drawn up ready for that purpose for the King to sign. It was directed to all Arch-bishops, Bishops, Abbots, Clerks, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Barons, Knights and Gentlemen, and all others of whatsoever Degree, his Subjects and Liege-men: Giving them to understand, That in the room of the corrupt Laws, Decrees and Statutes that proceeded from the Bishops of Rome, which were all abolished, he had put forth by his Authority another Set of Eccle∣siastical Laws, which he required to be observed, under pain of his Indignation.No. XXXIV. The Copy of this Letter may be read in the Ap∣pendix. But whatsoever the Matter was, whether it were the King's other Business, or the secret Oppositions of Bishop Gardiner, and the Papists, this Letter was not signed by the King. I have seen the Digest of these Ecclesiastical Laws in a Manuscript in Folio, fairly written out by the Arch-bishop's Secretary,The MSS. of these Laws. Inter Fox. MSS. with the Title to each Chapter prefixed, and the Index of the Chapters at the beginning, both of the Arch-bishop's own Hand. In many pla∣ces there be his own Corrections and Additions, and sometimes a Cross by him struck through divers Lines. And so he proceeded a good way in the Book. And where the Arch-bishop left off, Pe∣ter Martyr went on, by his Order, to revise the rest in the Me∣thod he had begun. And in the Title, De Praescriptionibus, the greatest part of the seventh Chapter is Martyr's own writing, viz. beginning at this word Rumpitur,Reformatio Le∣gum Ecclesiast. Lond. 1640. which is in Pag. 248. of the prin∣ted Book, Lin. 23. and so to the end of the Chapter. So that this Manuscript I conjecture was the first Draught of these Laws, pre∣pared in the Reign of King Henry, and revised in the Reign of King Edward his Successor, when P. Martyr was appointed by that King's Letters to be one of those that were to be employed in this Work; who was much at this Time with the Arch-bishop. In this Draught were several Chapters afterwards added, partly by Cranmer, and partly
by Martyr. There was yet a latter, and more perfect Draught of these Laws, as they were compleated and finished in King Edward's Reign. This Draught fell into the Possession of Arch-bishop Par∣ker. From whence he published the Book in the Year 1571, inti∣tuling it, Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum, &c. Which was printed again in the Year 1640. Both these Manuscript Draughts were diligently compared together by Iohn Fox; and the main Difference seemed to consist, in putting the latter into a new Method, and pla∣cing the Titles differently. The ABp la∣bours in this Work under K. Edward.For in this Matter Cranmer was much busied in King Edward's Reign also, being greatly desirous to bring that good Work to per∣fection. For he thought it greatly inconvenient, when the Pope's Power was abrogated, that his Laws should remain in Force; holding it highly necessary, that the Nation might have a Body of wholsome Laws, for the good Administration of Justice in the Spiri∣tual Courts. Wherefore he procured in the fifth Year of that King, Letters Commissional to him, and seven more, diligently to set about the perusal of the old Church-Laws; and then to compile such a Bo∣dy of Laws, as should seem, in their Judgments, most expedient to be practised in the Ecclesiastical Courts and Jurisdictions: These se∣ven were, Thomas Goodrick Bishop of Ely, Richard Cox the King's Almoner, Peter Martyr, William May, Rowland Taylour, Iohn Lucas and Richard Goodrick. But the Matter was in effect wholly intrust∣ed by the King to the Arch-bishop, who associated to himself in the active part of this Work, Taylour, Martyr and Haddon. The Me∣thod they observed in managing this Affair, was, that after they had finished a Title, and drawn it up, it was then sent to Dr. Had∣don, who was a Civilian, and an accurate Latinist, to peruse: And if any thing was less elegantly expressed, to correct it. So I find at the Title De Decimis, these words writ by Cranmer; This is finished by us, but must be over-seen again by Dr. Haddon. Thus for instance, I observe these Corrections by Haddon's Pen, in the Chapter intituled, De Commodis quae perveniunt à Sacris ritibus; instead of Gratiarum actionis mulierum a partu, he corrected it, Levatarum puer∣perarum: And in another place, Cuicun{que} hoc Praerogativum est, in∣stead of hoc Praerogativum, he put, Hoc peculiare jus tribuitur, quod Praerogativum vocant. But his Corrections are very few, and but of words less proper: The Work and Words were mainly Cranmer's own. But all this great and long Labour of the Arch-bishop came to no effect, by reason of the King's untimely Death, and it may be, the secret opposition of Papists. The ABp em∣ployed in mending Books of Ser∣vice.At the same time that he being at Hampton-Court, dealt with the King concerning the Reformation of the Canon-Laws, he also gave him an Account of a Business his Majesty had imployed him in, and with him also Heth and Day Bps of Worcester and Chichester, and some other of his Chaplains, and Learned Men; whom he had of late appoin∣ted with the Arch-bishop to peruse certain Books of Service, deli∣vered by the King to them, wherein there were many Superstitions fit to be amended. Which the Arch-bishop, in the Name of the rest, at this time acquainted the King with: As namely, the Vigil, and ringing of Bells all the Night long upon Alhallow-Night; and
the covering of Images in the Church in the time of Lent, with the lifting the Vail that covereth the Cross on Palm-Sunday, and kneel∣ing to the Cross at the same time. He moved the King in his own Name, and the Name of the rest, that these things might be abo∣lished, and the Superstitions, and other Enormities and Abuses of the same. And that because all other Vigils, which in the beginning of the Church were godly used; yet for the manifold Superstitions and Abuses, which did after grow by means of the same, were many Years past taken away throughout Christendom, and there remained nothing, but the Name of the Vigil in the Calendar, saving only upon Alhallow-Day at Night, he moved that it might be observed no more. And because creeping to the Cross was a greater Abuse than any of the other, (for there the People said, Crucem tuam adoramus, Domine: And the Ordinal saith, Procedant Clerici ad Crucem adorandum nudis pedibus: and it followeth in the said Ordinal, Ponatur Crux ante ali∣quod Altare, ubi à Populo adoretur: Which by the Bishop's Book, intituled, A necessary Instruction, is against the second Command∣ment) therefore he desired of the King, that the creeping to the Cross might also cease hereafter. These superstitious Usages were allowed in the Articles of Reli∣gion, put forth Anno 1536.The King con∣sults with the ABp for the Redress of cer∣tain Supersti∣ons. Cranmer then not having Interest enough to procure the laying them aside, or thinking it then not a fitting season to attempt it, as being in vain to oppose what the King him∣self at that time approved of. But now the King listned to the Arch-bishop, and bad him confer with the Bishop of Worcester, and send to him their Thoughts, what course they would advise him to take for Redress. The Arch-bishop accordingly consulted with the said Bishop, who then went along with Cranmer in the Reformation. The Effect of which was, as the Arch-bishop wrote to the King soon after from Bekesbourn, That his Majesty should send his Letters to both the Arch-bishops to reform these Superstitions; and they to send in the King's Name to all the Prelates within their respective Provinces to the same purpose. The Arch-bishop withal sent to the King the Minutes of a Letter to be sent to him, the said Arch-bishop, to that intent. He also advised the King, that at the same time that this Alteration was commanded to be made, he should set forth some Doctrine which should declare the Cause of the abolishing these U∣sages, for the Satisfaction of the Consciences of the People. For he knew well, as he wrote, that the People would think the Honour of Christ was taken away, when this honouring of the Cross was taken away: And therefore that they should need some good In∣struction herein. He nominated the Bishops of Worcester and Chi∣chester, and some other his Graces Chaplains for the preparing this: And this, he said, would make the People obey him without mur∣muring; nay, be thankful to him for shewing them the Truth: And it would be a Satisfaction to other Nations, when they should see the King do nothing but by the Authority of God's Word, and for the setting forth of God's Honour,Hist. Ref. Vol. II. Collect. p. 236. and not the diminishing thereof. This Letter of the Arch-bishop to the King is extant in the Paper-Office, whence the Bishop of Sarum extracted a Copy.
These things were agitated in the Bishop of VVinchester's Absence, whom the King had sent Ambassador this Year with the Bishop of VVestminster to Charles the Emperor, about the Mediation of a Peace between England and France.The opportu∣nity of Win∣chester's Ab∣sence taken. The Arch-bishop took this occasion to move the King in these good Purposes for a further Reformation of Abuses in Religion; towards the which the King appeared to be in so good a Mind, VVinchester being absent, who, if he had been at Home, would undoubtedly have done his Endeavour to put a Check to these Attempts. But it must be attributed to his being Abroad, that the King gave an Ear to the Arch-bishop, and apointed a Set of more moderate Bishops and Divines to prepare Matter for his Allowance and Ratification. But VVinchester, tho at a distance, had Informa∣tion of these Designs by his Intelligencers; and by making the King believe, that if he suffered any Innovations in Religion to proceed, the Emperor would withdraw his Mediation for a League: by these crafty Means of this Man, these good Motions proceeded no further. The ABp pre∣vails with the King in two great Points.So that there were two Abuses in Religion, which our Arch-bishop by Time and seasonable Inculcation, brought the King off from. He had a very great Esteem for Images in Churches, and for the Worship used to the Cross. And many Disputations and Discourses happened between the King and the Arch-bishop concerning them. Once at the King's Palace at Newhal in Essex, Canterbury and Winchester being alone with the King, a Talk happened about Images, and the Arguments that were used for abolishing them were considered. The Arch-bishop, who built all his Arguments upon the Word of God, produced the second Commandment, and thence he raised his Argument. But the King discussed it as a Commandment relating only to the Jews, and not to us; as VVinchester relates in one of his Letters to the Duke of Somerset; adding, (because the reasoning was so much to his own Mind) That the King so discussed it, that all the Clerks in Christen∣dom could not amend it. And when at another time, one had used Arguments against the Image of the Trinity, whether Cranmer, or some else I know not, VVinchester heard the King answer them too: So possess'd was the King once with an Opinion of retaining them; and yet at length, by the Arch-bishop's wise and moderate Carriage and Speeches, the King was brought to another Opinion, and to give his Orders for the abolishing of a great many of them; namely of such as had been abused. But when he had done this, he would not forgo the other, but commanded Kneeling and Creeping to the Cross. And gross was the Superstition that was committed in this blind Devotion; which the King, by the Arch-bishop's means being at length sensible of, was prevailed with, that this also should no more be used, as you heard before. There was one thing more this careful Arch-bishop recommended to the King this Year.Seeks to re∣dress Alienati∣on of the Re∣venues of the Cathedral. He was troubled for his Cathedral Church of Canterbury, observing how the Revenues of it were diminished, and made away daily by the Prebendaries thereof, to satisfy the insatia∣ble Greediness of the Laity, and it may be their own too. And the Courtiers and others were hard to be withstood, when they were minded to rake from the Church. The Practice was, that when any were minded to get a Portion of Land from the Church, they
would first engage the King therein, and so the Church was to make it over to him. An then by Gift, or for some trifling Consideration, as a Sale, it was conveyed to them from the King. Nay, sometimes they would use the King's Name, without his know∣ledg. Cranmer had the Honesty and the Courage to make Complaint of this Abuse and Injury done to the Revenues of the Cathedral. That those of the Church, to their Disquietment, and also great Charges, did alienate their Lands daily, as it was said, by the King's Commandment: But he was sure, he said, that others had gotten the best Lands, and not his Majesty. Therefore he sued, that when his Majesty was minded to have any of their Lands, that they might have some Letters from him to declare his Pleasure, without the which they were sworn to make no Alienation: and that the same Alienations might not be made at other Mens Pleasures, but only to his Majesty's Use. By which Means it is likely, the Prebendaries had more quiet Possession of their Lands for the time to come. By this Time the Arch-bishop had compassed two very good Things,Scripture and Sermons more common by the ABp's means. in order to the furthering the Common People in Know∣ledg and True Religion. The one was, that he brought in among the Laity a more common use of the Scriptures; and the other, that Sermons were more frequently preached than had been be∣fore. But both these, to the Grief of the Arch-bishop, were sadly abused: For now the Contending of Preachers in their Pulpits, one against another, grew more and more, and became most scanda∣lous. So that few preached the Word of God truly and sincerely, but ran almost wholly upon Matters controverted; and in that rail∣ing manner, that their Expressions were very provoking. So that this came to the sowing of Discord among the People, instead of pro∣moting Love, Unity, and solid Religion. The Laity on the other hand, some of them railed much on the Bishops, and spoke con∣temptibly of the Priests, and taunted the Preachers. The Scrip∣tures were much read, but the Effect of it appeared too much in their making use of it only for Jangling and Disputation upon Points of Religion, and to taunt at the Ignorance or Error of Priests. O∣thers on the other hand, to be even with the Gospellers, made it their Business to derogate from the Scripture, to deal with it irre∣verently, and to rhime and sing, and make sport with it in Ale∣houses and Taverns. These things came to King Henry's Ears,Vid. Herb. Hist. P. 600. which made him very earnestly blame both the Laity and Spiri∣tuality for it, in a Speech which he made at the Dissolution of his Parliament this Year. A Bishop Confirmed. Anthony Kitchin, alias Dunstan, D.D.Anth. Kitchin. was Elected and Confirmed Bishop of Landaff, May 2. The ABp sent his Commissional Letters, dated the same Day, to Thomas Bishop of Westminster for his Consecration: But the Consecration is not entred in the Register.
His Oath to the King began thus: I Anthony Kitchin, Elect Bi∣shop of Landaff, having now the Vale of Darkness of the Usur∣ped Power, Authority and Jurisdiction of the See and Bishop of Rome, clearly taken away from mine Eyes, do utterly testify and declare in my Heart, that neither the See, nor the Bishop of Rome, nor any Foreign Potestate hath, or ought to have, &c. as before. An. 1546.Another Proclamation was set out the next Year, (which was the last issued out under this King) prohibiting again Tindal's and Coverdale's English New Testament,A Proclamati∣on against the English Testa∣ment. or any other than what was permitted by Parliament; and also the English Books of Wickliff, Frith, &c. the King being vexed with the Contests and Clamours of the People one against another, while they disputed so much of what they read, and practised so little. He interprets a Statute of his Church.A small matter oftentimes creates great Brablings and Contenti∣ons in Fraternities. Such a small thing now occurred in the Arch-bishop's Church. Two of the Prebends were minded to change Houses; but the rest it seems made some Opposition, as reckoning it contrary to a certain Statute of that Church. The Arch-bishop hearing hereof, seasonably interposed, and interpreted their Statute for them. The Preachers also of this Church, seem not to have been fairly dealt with by the Prebends, both as to their Lodgings and Benefits. But at a late Chapter they had obtained an Order in their behalf. This the Arch-bishop now, who favoured Preach∣ing, reminded them speedily to make good. Concerning both these Affairs, he wrote this Letter to them, for the preserving Quietness, Peace and good Order in his Church. Ex Regist. Ec∣cles. Christ. Cant.AFter my hearty Commendations: Whereas I am informed, that you be in doubt whether any Prebendary of that my Church, may exchange his House or Garden with another Pre∣bend of the same Church-Living, and that you be moved by this Statute so to think, which here followeth; Statuimus ut Canoni∣cus de novo Electus, & demissus in demortui, aut resignantis, aut quovismodo cedentis aedes succedat. These be to signify unto you, that neither this Statute, nor any other Reason that I know, maketh any thing against the Exchange between two Prebends Living, but that they may change House, Orchard or Garden du∣ring their Life, this Statute or any other Reason contrary not∣withstanding. And whereas you have appointed your Preachers at your last Chapter, their Chambers and Commodities, I require you that they may be indelayedly admitted thereunto, according to that your Order. Thus fare you well. From my Mannor of Croyden, the 12th of December, 1546. Th. Cantuariens. To my loving Friends, the Vice-dean and Prebendaries of my Church in Canterbury.
This was the last Year of King Henry. And the two last things the Arch-bishop was concerned in by the King, were these. The King commanded him to pen a Form,The ABp by the King's Command pens a Form for a Commu∣nion. for the Alteration of the Mass into a Communion. For a Peace being concluded between Henry and the French King, while that King's Ambassador, Dr. Annebault was here, a notable Treaty was in hand by both Kings, for the promoting that good Piece of Reformation in the Churches of both Kingdoms, of abolishing the Mass. The Kings seemed to be firm∣ly resolved thereon, intending to exhort the Emperor to do the same. The Work our King committed to the Arch-bishop, who no question undertook it very gladly. But the Death of the King prevented this taking Effect. The last Office the Arch-bishop did for the King his Master,His last Office to the King. was to visit him in his last Sickness, whom of all his Bishops and Chap∣lains he chose to have with him at that needful Hour, to receive his last Comfort and Counsel. But the King was void of Speech when he came, though not of Sense and Apprehension. For when the King took him by the Hand, the Arch-bishop speaking comfortably to him, desired him to give him some Token, that he put his Trust in God through Iesus Christ, according as he had advised him; and thereat the King presently wrung hard the Arch-bishop's Hand, and soon af∣ter departed, viz. Ianuary the 28th. The End of the First Book.
MEMORIALS OF Arch-Bishop CRANMER. BOOK II. CHAPTER I. He Crowns King Edward. OUR Arch-bishop having lost his old Master,Conceives great Hopes of K. Edward. was not so sorrowful, but the Hopefulness of the new One did as much revive and solace him; because he concluded, that the Matters requisite for the Reformation of the Church, were like now to go on more roundly, and with less Impediment. One of the very first Things that was done in young King Edward the Sixth's Reign, in relation to the Church, was, that the Bishops,The ABp takes a Com∣mission to exe∣cute his Office. who had the Care of Ecclesiastical Matters, and the Souls of Men, should be made to depend intirely upon the King and his Council, and to be subject to suspension from their Office, and to have their whole Episcopal Power taken from them at his Pleasure, which might serve as a Bridle in case they should oppose the Proceedings of a Reformation. In this I suppose the Arch-bishop had his Hand: For it was his Judgment, that the Exercise of all Episcopal Juris∣diction depended upon the Prince: And that as he gave it, so he might restrain it at his Pleasure. And therefore he began this Mat∣ter with himself, Petitioning, That as he had exercised the Autho∣rity of an Arch-bishop during the Reign of the former King; so that Authority ending with his Life, it would please the present King Edward, to commit unto him that Power again. For it seemed, that he would not act as Arch-bishop, till he had a new Commission from the new King for so doing. And that this was his Judgment, appeared in the first words of that Commission granted to him; In the composing of which I make no question he had his Hand. Quandoquidem omnis juris dicendi autoritas,Cranm. Regist. at{que} etiam juris∣dictio omnimoda, tam illa quae Ecclesiastica dicitur, quam Secularis, à Re∣gia potestate, velut à supremo capite, ac omnium Magistratuum infra Regnum nostrum fonte & scaturigine, primitus emanaverit, &c. That is, Since all Authority of exercising Jurisdiction, and also all
kind of Jurisdiction, as well that which is called Ecclesi∣astical, as Secular, originally hath flowed from the King's Power, as from the Supream Head, and the Fountain and Source of all Magistracy within our Kingdom: We therefore in this part yielding to your humble Supplications, and consult∣ing for the Good of our Subjects, have determined to commit our Place to you, under the Manner and Form hereunder descri∣bed. And the King then licenseth him to ordain within his Diocess, and to promote and present to Ecclesiastical Benefices; and to insti∣tute and invest; and if occasion required, to deprive; to prove Te∣staments, and the rest of the Business of his Courts. And so all the rest of his Offices were reckoned. This was dated Feb. 7. 1546. But yet all these things were committed to him, with a Power of Revocation of the Exercise of this Authority reserved in the King, & durante beneplacito. Thus a formal Commission was made to him; I do not transcribe it,Hist. Re. P. II. Coll. p. 90. because the Bishop of Sarum hath saved me that Pains. And hence I find, that the Arch-bishop in some of his Writings is stiled, The Commissary of our dread Soveraign Lord King Edward. K. Edward crowned by the ABp.One of the first Exercises of his Episcopal Power, was the Coro∣nation of young King Edward. Which was celebrated February the 20th, at the Abbey of Westminster, the Arch-bishop assisting now at his Coronation, as he had done about nine Years before at his Chri∣stening,C.C.C.C. Li∣brary. Miscel∣lan. B. when he stood his Godfather. The Form and Solemnity of it, and wherein the Arch-bishop bore so great a part, was in this man∣ner, as I collect and transcribe out of a Manuscript in Benet College. The manner of the Coronati∣on.First, There was a goodly Stage richly hanged with Cloth of Gold and Cloth of Arras; and the Steps from the Choire contained two and twenty Steps of height; and down to the high Altar but fifteen Steps, goodly carpetted, where the King's Grace should tread with his Nobles. Secondly, The high Altar richly garnished with divers and costly Jewels and Ornaments of much Estimation and Value. And also the Tombs on each side the high Altar, richly hanged with fine Gold Arras. Thirdly, In the midst of the Stage was a goodly thing made of seven steps of height, all round, where the King's Majesty's Chair Royal stood; and he sat therein, after he was crowned, all the Mass-while. Fourthly, At nine of the Clock all Westminster Choire was in their Copes, and three goodly Crosses before them: and after them other three goodly rich Crosses, and the King's Chappel with his Children, following all in Scarlet, with Surplices and Copes on their Backs. And after them ten Bishops in Scarlet with their Ro∣chets, and rich Copes on their Backs, and their Mitres on their Heads, did set forth at the West Door of Westminster towards the King's Palace, there to receive his Grace; and my Lord of Canter∣bury with his Cross before him alone, and his Mitre on his Head. And so past forth in order, as before is said. And within a certain space after were certain blew Cloths laid abroad in the Church-floor against the King's coming, and so all the Palace, even to York place.
Then is described the setting forward to Westminster Church to his Coronation, Unction and Confirmation. After all the Lords in order had kneeled down and kiss'd his Gra∣ce's right Foot, and after held their Hands between his Grace's Hands, and kiss'd his Grace's left Cheek, and so did their Homage; Then began a Mass of the Holy Ghost by my Lord of Canterbury, with good singing in the Choire, and Organs playing. There at Offering time his Grace offered to the Altar a Pound of Gold, a Loaf of Bread, and a Chalice of Wine. Then after the Levation of the Mass, there was read by my Lord Chancellor, in presence of all the Nobles, a General Pardon granted by King Henry the Eighth, Father to our Liege Lord the King, that all shall be pardoned that have offended before the 28th day of Ianua∣ry last past. When the King's Majesty, with his Nobles, came to the Place of the Coronation, within a while after, his Grace was removed into a Chair of Crimson Velvet, and born in the Chair between two Noble∣men, unto the North-side of the Stage, and shewed to the People; and these words spoken to the People by my Lord of Canterbury, in this manner, saying: Sirs, here I present unto you K. Edward, the rightful Inheritor to the Crown of this Realm. Wherefore all ye, that be come this Day to do your Homage, Service, and bounden Duty, Be ye willing to do the same? To the which all the People cried with a loud Voice, and said, Yea, Yea, Yea; and cried, King Edward; and prayed, God save King Edward. And so to the South-side in like manner, and to the East-side, and to the West-side. After this, his Grace was born again to the high Altar in his Chair, and there sat bare-headed: And all his Nobles and Peers of the Realm were about his Grace, and my Lord of Canterbury Principal. And there made certain Prayers and Godly Psalms over his Grace; and the Choire answered with goodly Singing, the Organs playing, and Trumpets blowing. Then after a certain Unction, Blessing, and Signing of his Grace, he was born into a Place by the high Altar, where the Kings use al∣ways to kneel at the Levation of the Parliament-Mass. And there his Grace was made ready of new Garments; and after a certain space brought forth between two Noble-men, and sat before the High Altar bare-headed. Then after a while his Grace was anointed in the Breast, his Soles of his Feet, his Elbows, his Wrists of his Hands, and his Crown of his Head, with vertuous Prayer said by the Bishop of Canterbury, and sung by the Choire. Then anon after this, a goodly fair Cloth of red Tinsel Gold was hung over his Head: And my Lord of Canterbury kneeling on his Knees, and his Grace lying prostrate afore the Altar, anointed his Back. Then after this, my Lord of Canterbury arose and stood up, and the fair Cloth taken away. Then my Lord Protector, Duke of Somer∣set, held the Crown in his Hand a certain space; and immediately after began Te Deum, with the Organs going, the Choire singing, and the Trumpets playing in the Battlements of the Church. Then immediately after that, was the Crown set on the King's Majesty's
Head by them two, [viz. Somerset, and the Arch-bishop of Canter∣bury]. And after that another Crown; and so his Grace was crowned with three Crowns. The Relation breaks off here abruptly. But what is wanting, may be supplied by the Order of the Coronation,Hist. Ref. Vol. 11 Collect. p. 93. as Bishop Burnet hath taken it out of the Council-Book, and given it us in his Hi∣story. The ABp's Speech at the Coronation. Foxes & Fire∣brands, Part 2.At this Coronation there was no Sermon as I can find, but that was supplied by an excellent Speech which was made by the Arch-bishop. It was found among the inestimable Collections of Arch-bishop Vsher; and though published of late Years, yet I cannot but insert it here, tending so much to illustrate the Memory of this great and good Arch-bishop. MOST Dread and Royal Soveraign: The Promises your Highness hath made here, at your Coronation, to forsake the Devil and all his Works, are not to be taken in the Bishop of Rome's Sense, when you commit any thing distastful to that See, to hit your Majesty in the Teeth, as Pope Paul the Third, late Bishop of Rome, sent to your Royal Father, saying, Didst thou not promise, at our permission of thy Coronation, to forsake the Devil and all his Works, and dost thou run to Heresy? For the Breach of this thy Promise, knowest thou not, that 'tis in our Power to dispose of thy Sword and Scepter to whom we please? We, your Majesty's Cler∣gy, do humbly conceive, that this Promise reacheth not at your Highness Sword, Spiritual or Temporal, or in the least at your Highness swaying the Scepter of this your Dominion, as you and your Predecessors have had them from God. Neither could your Ancestors lawfully resign up their Crowns to the Bishop of Rome or his Legats, according to their ancient Oaths then taken upon that Ceremony. The Bishops of Canterbury for the most part have crowned your Predecessors, and anointed them Kings of this Land: Yet it was not in their Power to receive or reject them, neither did it give them Authority to prescribe them Conditions to take or to leave their Crowns, although the Bishops of Rome would encroach up∣on your Predecessors by their Act and Oil, that in the end they might possess those Bishops with an Interest to dispose of their Crowns at their Pleasure. But the wiser sort will look to their Claws and clip them. The solemn Rites of Coronation have their Ends and Utility; yet neither direct Force or Necessity: They be good Admonitions to put Kings in mind of their Duty to God, but no encreasement of their Dignity: For they be God's Anointed; not in respect of the Oil which the Bishop useth, but in consideration of their Power, which is Ordained; Of the Sword, which is Authorized; Of their Persons, which are elected of God, and endued with the Gifts of his Spirit, for the better ruling and guiding of his People. The Oil, if added, is but a Ceremony: If it be wanting, that King is yet a perfect Monarch notwithstanding, and God's Anoin∣ed,
as well as if he was inoiled. Now for the Person or Bishop that doth anoint a King, it is proper to be done by the chiefest. But if they cannot, or will not, any Bishop may perform this Ce∣remony. To condition with Monarchs upon these Ceremonies, the Bi∣shop of Rome (or other Bishops owning his Supremacy) hath no Authority: but he may faithfully declare what God requires at the Hands of Kings and Rulers, that is, Religion and Vertue. Therefore not from the Bishop of Rome, but as a Messenger from my Saviour Iesus Christ, I shall most humbly admonish your Royal Majesty what Things your Highness is to perform. Your Majesty is God's Vicegerent, and Christ's Vicar within your own Dominions, and to see, with your Predecessor Iosias, God truly worshipped, and Idolatry destroyed; the Tyranny of the Bishops of Rome banished from your Subjects, and Images remo∣ved. These Acts be Signs of a second Iosias, who reformed the Church of God in his Days. You are to reward Vertue, to re∣venge Sin, to justify the Innocent, to relieve the Poor, to procure Peace, to repress Violence, and to execute Justice throughout your Realms. For Precedents on those Kings who performed not these Things, the Old Law shews how the Lord revenged his Quarrel; and on those Kings who fulfilled these things, he poured forth his Blessings in abundance. For Example, it is written of Iosiah, in the Book of the Kings, thus; Like unto him there was no King, that turned to the Lord with all his Heart, according to all the Law of Moses; neither after him arose there any like him. This was to that Prince a perpetual Fame of Dignity, to remain to the End of Days. Being bound by my Function to lay these Things before your Royal Highness; the one as a Reward, if you fulfil; the other as a Judgment from God, if you neglect them: Yet I openly declare, before the living God, and before these Nobles of the Land, that I have no Commission to denounce your Majesty deprived, if your Highness miss in part, or in whole, of these Performances: Much less to draw up Indentures between God and your Majesty, or to say you forfeit your Crown with a Clause for the Bishop of Rome, as have been done by your Majesty's Predecessors, King Iohn, and his Son Henry of this Land. The Almighty God of his Mercy, let the Light of his Countenance shine upon your Majesty, grant you a prosperous and happy Reign, defend you and save you: and let your Subjects say, Amen. God save the King. I find no Bishop Consecrated this Year.
An. 1547.CHAP. II. A Royal Visitation. A Royal Visi∣tation on foot.BY these and other pious Instigations of the Arch-bishop, who was of high esteem with the King, he began early to think of the Church, and to take care about rectifying the Disorders of its Members. For about April there was a Royal Visitation resolved up∣on all England over, for the better Reformation of Religion. And accordingly in the beginning of May, Letters were issued out from the King to the Arch-bishops, that they and all their Fellow-Bishops, should forbear their Visitations, as was usually done in all Royal and Archiepiscopal Visitations. And it was enjoined, that no Ministers should preach in any Churches but in their own. Titus B. 2.In a Volume in the Cotton Library, there be extant the King's Letters to Robert Arch-bishop of York, relating to this Visita∣tion; signed by our Arch-bishop, the Duke of Somerset the Pro∣tector, and his Brother Sir Thomas Seymour, the Lord Russel, Favou∣rers of the Reformation; the Lord St. Iohns, Petres the Secretary, who went along with it; Gage Controuler of the Houshold, and Baker Chancellor of the Court of Augmentations, back-Friends to it.Hist. Ref. Vol. II. Collect. p. 103. I do not set down the Letter it self, because the Bishop of Sarum hath already published it in his History. Very worthy sober and learned Men were appointed for Visitors, both of the Laity and Clergy. And there was a Book of Injuncti∣ons prepared, whereby the King's Visitors were to govern their Vi∣sitation. The Original of which Book of Injunctions is extant in Benet-College Library: There I have seen them, being signed by Thomas Arch-bishop of Canterbury, the Duke of Somerset, Sir Tho∣mas Seymour, and divers others of the Privy-Council; but no Bishop save Cranmer only; he being, I suppose, the only Bishop then a Pri∣vy-Counsellor; and now often appearing in the Council for the bet∣ter forwarding of Religion. These Injunctions are printed in Bi∣shop Sparrow's Collection,Vol. 11. p. 28. and briefly epitomized in the History of the Reformation. The Visitors.The Persons nominated for this present Employment were these, as I find them set down in a Manuscript, formerly belonging to Arch-bishop Parker,Vol. intit. Sy∣uodalia. but now in the Benet-College Library: Where you may observe the Visitors were divided into six Sets, and to each Set were apportioned particular Counties, and a Preacher and a Re∣gister, in this exact Method following. Visitors. Added by ABp Parker. Counties visited. Dean of Westminster. Boston. York. Sir Iohn Herseley Kt.   Durysme. Nicholas Ridley, Preacher.   Carlyll. Edward Plankney, Register.   Chester.
Sir Anthony Coke, Kt.   Westminster. Sir Iohn Godsalve, Kt. He belonged to the Office of the Signet, and was Protono∣tary.     Dr. Christopher Nevison. The Elder. London. Iohn Gosnold. A Lawyer.   Dr. Madewe, Preacher.   Norwich. Peter Lylly, Register.   Ely. Sir Iohn Hales, Kt.   Rochester. Sir Iohn Mason, Kt.     Sir Anthony Cope, Kt.   Canterbury. Dr. Cave. A Lawyer.   Mr. Briggs, Preacher. Once of Pembroke. Chichester. Rafe Morice, Register.   Winchester. Dean of Pauls. Dr. May. Sarisbury. Dean of Exeter. Dr. Hains. Exeter. Sir Walter Buckler, Kt.   Bath. Mr. Cotisford, Preacher.   Bristow. Iohn Redman, Register. Of Haslingfeld. Glocester. Dean of Lincoln. Dr. Taylor. Peterburgh. Dr. Rowland Taylor.   Lincoln. Mr. Iohn Ioseph. Once of Canterbury, Oxford.   a Friar. Coventry. Iohn Old, Register.   Litchfeld. Mr. Morison. Once Husband to the Earl of Rutland's Wife. Worcester.   Hereford. Mr. Syddel.   Landaff. Mr. Ferrowr, Preacher. After L. Bishop of S. Davids. S. Davids. George Constantine, Register.   Bangor. Hue Rawlins, Preacher in the Welch Tongue.   S. Asse. Where we may observe, that in every Company of Visitors was joined one Preacher, or more; whose Business, in the respective Cir∣cuits, was to preach to the People, to dehort them from the super∣stitious use of Beads and such-like Things, and to learn them to worship God truly in Heart and Mind, and to obey the Prince. The Method which these Commissioners used in their Visitation,The Method of this Visitation. as we collect from what was done at S. Pauls, London, was this. They summoned the Bishop, and the Members of each Cathedral; and first sware them to renounce the Bishop of Rome, and to the
King's Supremacy: and then that they should present all things in their Church and Diocess, needful to be reformed. Then certain Interrogatories and Articles of Enquiry were read to them by the Register. To perform which, an Oath was administred to them. Af∣ter that, the printed Injunctions, and others not printed, with the Book of Homilies, were delivered, both to the Bishop for his Church, and the Arch-deacons for their respective Arch-deaconries; strictly injoining them to see them speedily executed, reserving other new In∣junctions to be ministred afterwards, as they should see cause. Their next Work was to examine the Canons and Priests by virtue of their Oaths which they had taken, concerning their Lives and Doctrines. What was discovered in other Places concerning the Vices of the Clergy, we may conlude from what was found among the Dignita∣ries of St. Pauls.Fox. For when the Canons and Priests belonging to this Church were examined, one of them, named Painter, openly con∣fessed, that he had often carnally used a certain Married-man's Wife, whom he would not name: And divers others, both of the Canons and Priests, confessed the same of themselves. There be remaining, in the Archives of the Church of Canter∣bury, the Injunctions of the King's Visitors to the Dean and Chap∣ter there, bearing date Sept. 22. An. 1 Edw. VI. subscribed by the Visitors Hands. Which Injunctions do all relate to the particular Statutes of the Church, and are of no other moment. The Homilies, and Erasmus's Paraphrase.There was now a Book of Homilies prepared for present use, to be read in all Churches, for the Instruction of the People: and Eras∣mus's Paraphrase upon the New Testament in English, was to be set up in all Churches, for the better instruction of Priests in the Sense and Knowledg of the Scriptures. And both these Books, by the King's Injunctions aforementioned, were commanded to be taught and learned. CHAP. III. Homilies, and Erasmus's Paraphrase. ARch-bishop Cranmer found it highly convenient to find out some Means for the Instruction of the People in true Religion,The ABp to Winchester con∣cerning the Homilies. till the Church could be better supplied with learned Priests and Mi∣nisters. For which purpose he resolved upon having some good Ho∣milies or Sermons, composed, to be read to the People; which should in a plain manner teach the Grounds and Foundation of true Religi∣on, and deliver the People from popular Errors and Superstitions. When this was going in hand with, the Arch-bishop sent his Letters to the Bishop of Winchester, to try if he could bring him to be wil∣ling to join in this Business; shewing him, that it was no more than what was intended by the former King, and a Convocation in the Year 1542, wherein himself was a Member, to make such a stay of Errors, as were then by ignorant Preachers spread among the People. But this Bishop was not for Cranmer's Turn; in his Answer signify∣ing to him, That since that Convocation the King, his old Ma∣ster's
Mind changed, and that God had afterwards given him the Gift of Pacification, (as he worded it) meaning, that the King made a stop in his once intended Reformation. He added, That there was a Convocation that extinguished those Devices, and this was still in force: And therefore, that now nothing more ought to be done in Church-Matters. And a Copy of this Let∣ter he sent to the Lord Protector, trying to perswade him also to be of his Mind. The Arch-bishop answered these Letters of Winchester: Wherein he again required these Homilies to be made, by virtue of that Con∣vocation five Years before; and desired Winchester to weigh things. But he replied, It was true, they communed then of such things,See his Letters to the Prote∣ctor, in Fox. but they took not effect at that time; nor needed they to be put in execution now. And that in his Judgment it could not be done without a new Authority and Command from the King's Maje∣sty. Then he used his Politicks, urging, That it was not safe to make new Stirs in Religion: That the Lord Protector did well in putting out a Proclamation to stop vain Rumors; and he thought it not best to enterprize any thing to tempt the People with occa∣sion of Tales, whereby to break the Proclamation. And as in a natural Body, he said, Rest without Trouble did confirm and strengthen; so it was in a Common-wealth, Trouble travaileth, and bringeth things to loosness. Then he suggested the Danger the Arch-bishop might involve himself in, by making Alterati∣ons. That he was not certain of his Life, when the old Or∣der was broken, and a new brought in by Homilies; that he should continue to see the new Device executed. For it was not done in a Day; He wished there were nothing else to do now. He suggested, that a new Order engendred a new Cause of Pu∣nishment against them that offend; and Punishments were not pleasant to them that have the Execution. And yet they must be, for nothing may be contemned. There were two Letters Win∣chester sent to the Arch-bishop, in answer to as many from the Arch-bishop: In which he laboured to perswade the Arch-bishop, not to innovate any thing in Religion during the King's Minority; and par∣ticularly to forbear making Homilies, and refusing for himself to meddle therein. An imperfect part of one of these Letters I have laid in the Appendix, as I transcribed it from the Original.No. XXXV. So when it was perceived that Winchester would not be brought to comply, and join in with the Arch-bishop and the rest, they went about the composing the Homilies themselves. Cranmer had a great hand in them:The ABp. &c. compose Ho∣milies. And that Homily of Salvation particularly seems to be of his own doing. This, while he was in composing it, was shewn to Winchester by the Arch-bishop; to which he made this Ob∣jection. That he would yield to him in this Homily, if they could shew him any old Writer, that wrote how Faith excluded Charity in the Office of Justification; and that it was against Scripture. Upon this Canterbury began to argue with him, and to shew him how Faith excluded Charity in the Point of Justify∣ing. And Winchester denied his Arguments. And in fine, such was his Sophistication, that the Arch-bishop at last told him; He liked
nothing unless he did it himself: and that he disliked the Homily for that Reason, because he was not a Counsellor. The Council had now put this Bishop in the Fleet, for his Refra∣ctoriness to the King's Proceedings;Winchester in the Fleet. where, if his Complaint to the Lord Protector were true, he was somewhat straitly handled: For he was allowed no Friend or Servant, no Chaplain, Barber, Taylor, nor Physician. A sign he gave them high Provocation. While he was here, the Arch-bishop sent for him once or twice to discourse with him, and to try to bring him to comply with their Proceed∣ings in reforming Religion. He dealt very gently with him, and told him; That he was a Man, in his Opinion, meet to be called to the Council again: but withal told him, that he stood too much in Obstinacy; that it was perverse Frowardness, and not any Zeal for the Truth. And laboured to bring him to allow the Book, which was now finished, and the Paraphrase of Erasmus. The former he could not allow of, because of the Doctrine therein by Cranmer asserted,The Bp of Win∣chester's Cen∣sure o the Ho∣mily of Salva∣tion, of Justification by Faith without Works. Which Cranmer took pains to perswade him about; telling him, his Intent was hereby, only to set out the Freedom of God's Mercy. But Win∣chester challenged him to shew Scripture for it, or any one ancient Writer, That Faith in justifying excludeth Charity. This Winche∣ster afterward declared at large to the Lord Protector; and added, That the Arch-bishop in that Homily of Salvation, had taken such a Matter in hand, and so handled it, as, if he were his extream Enemy, he would have wished him to have taken that Piece in hand, and so to have handled it as he did. He represented one of the Arch-bishop's Arguments for Faith excluding Charity to be thus, out of that Homily; We be justified by Faith without all Works of the Law: Charity is a Work of the Law: Ergo, We are justified without Charity. But I warn the Reader to consult the Homily it self, before he pass his Judgment upon Cranmer's Argument, as it is here repre∣sented by one that was none of his Friend. In fine, he said, There were as many Faults in that Homily of Salvation, as he had been Weeks in Prison, and that was seven, besides the Matter, viz. making a Trouble without Necessity. And of the ABp for it.In short, he charged the Arch-bishop for troubling the World with such a needless Speculation as this is; because, he said, that in Baptism we are justified, being Infants, before we can talk of the Justification we strive for. For all Men receive their Justifica∣tion in their Infancy in Baptism. And if they fall after Baptism, they must arise again by the Sacrament of Penance. And so this Doctrine, he said, was to be sent to the Universities; where it is meet to be talked and disputed of, and not fit for Homilies. And to disparage further the Arch-bishop's Judgment, he told the Pro∣tector, That if my Lord of Canterbury would needs travail in this Matter, he should never perswade that Faith excluded Charity in Justification, unless he borrowed Prisons of the Protector; and then he might percase have some to agree to it: As poor Men kneel at Rome when the Bishop of Rome goeth by, or else are knocked on the Head with a Halbard. And then he made some scoffing mention of the Strength of God's Spirit in the Arch-bishop,
and his Learning in his Laws, so as to be able to overthrow with his Breath all Untruths, and establish Truths. I make no Reflection upon all this unseemly Language of this Bishop, but leave it to the Reader to judg hereby of the Learning and Spirit that was in him. And could we have retrieved the Arch-bishop's own Arguments and Replies to these Barkings of Winchester, they would have left to the World a full Vindication of Cranmer and his Doctrine. As to Erasmus's Paraphrase, the said Bishop pretended,Winchester's Censure of E∣rasmus's Para∣phrase. He found divers things in it to condemn the Work: and that he agreed with them that said, Erasmus laid the Eggs, and Luther hatched them: and that of all the monstrous Opinions that have risen, evil Men had a wondrous Occasion ministred to them from that Book. He also wrote to the Protector the particular Objections he made against it. He said, He might term it in one word Abomination, both for the Malice and Untruth of much Matter out of Erasmus's Pen: and also for the arrogant Ignorance of the Translator of it; considering that Book was authorized by the King, and a Charge laid upon the Realm of twenty thousand Pounds, by enjoining every Parish to buy one: Whereof he had made an Estimate by the probable number of Buyers, and the Price of the Book. He charged the Translator with Ignorance, both in Latin and Eng∣lish; a Man (he said) far unmeet to meddle with such a Matter, and not without Malice on his part. Finally, The Matter he had to shew in both the Books, was in some part dangerous; and the Concealment thereof a great Fault, if he did not utter it. And that he pretended, made him some-while ago write to the Council, declaring his Mind in relation thereunto. For which he was sent to the Fleet. The true Occasion whereof, as I take it from his own Letter,His Account of his Commit∣ment. Inter Foxil MSS. writ∣ten with his own Hand, which I have before me, was this▪ Upon the Departure of the Lord Protector against the Scots, the King's Vi∣sitors began their Visitation. Then as soon as the Bishop heard of the Visitation, and the Books of Homilies and Injunctions were come to his hands, he wrote to the Council, trusting, upon such earnest Advertisements as he made, they would incontinently have sent for him; and upon knowledg of so evident Matter as he thought he had to shew, would have staid till the Protector's Re∣turn. He saw (as he said) a Determination to do all things sud∣denly at one time. Whereunto, though the Protector had agreed, yet of his Wisdom, as the Bishop conjectured, he had rather these Matters should have tarried till his Return, had he not been pres∣sed on both Sides, (an Expression which the Protector in a Letter to him had used). He reckoned, that if he could have staid this Matter in his Absence, though by bringing himself into extream Danger, besides his Duty to God and the King, he should have done the Protector a Pleasure, of whom he had this Opinion, that willingly and wittingly, he would neither break the Act of Par∣liament, nor command Books to be bought by Authority, that contained such Doctrine as those Books did. Thus he had, he said, remembrance of his Grace in these his Letters to the Council; but he chiefly made not his Grace, but God his Foundation, with
the Preservation of the late deceased King's Honour, and the Sure∣ty of the King then being. His Writing, he confessed, was ve∣hement; but he would have none offended with it, for he wrote it with a whole Heart; and if he could have written it with the Blood of his Heart, he would have done it, to have staid the thing till it had been more maturely digested. He touched lively one Point in his Letter to the Council, and considered whether the King might command against a Common Law, or an Act of Par∣liament; and shewed the Danger of it in the late Lord Cardinal, and the Lord Typtoft before him, who was Executed on Tower-hill, for acting against the Laws of the Land, though it were by the King's Commission; and by other Precedents. Not long after these Letters of the Bishop to the Council, they sent for him. When he came before them, he came furnished with his Trinkets, his Sleeves and Bosom trussed full of Books, to fur∣nish his former Allegations. He was heard very well, and gently. Then he shewed Matter that he thought would have moved them: For there he shewed the two contrary Books, [meaning the Ho∣milies, and Erasmus's Paraphrase]. But the Council told him, they were not moved: and added, That their Consciences agreed not with his; using many good Words to bring him to Conformity. After he had been aside from them, and was returned again, they entred a precise Order with him, either to receive the Injunctions, or to refuse. In which Case they told him, that the Protector was privy to what was done there. The Bishop answered, That he would receive them as far as God's Law and the King's would bind him. And because he saw they drew to such Preciseness, he told them, there were three Weeks of Delay to the coming of the Visi∣tors to him. In the mean time he offered to go to Oxford, to abide the Discussion there. That Offer was not allowed. He desired to go to his House at London, and have Learned Men speak with him there. That was not accepted. He entred then the Allegation of the Gospel, of the Servant that said, he would not do a thing, and yet did it: And so the Bishop said, it might be, that although he then said Nay, as his Conscience served him, yet he might change, and was a Man that might be tempted. But as his Con∣science was then, he thought, that God's Laws and the King's let∣ted him. Then they asked him, if he had spoken to any Man of what he found in the Books. To which he answered truly, [ac∣knowledging he had]. But told the Lords, that he thought it hard, unless there were a greater Matter than this, to send him to Prison for declaring his Mind before-hand, what he minded to do, before it had been by him done; who had all the mean time to re∣pent himself. In the End the Council committed him to the Fleet. Of his Be∣haviour under this Censure, he hath these words; That he had well digested it; and so all might be well, he cared not what be∣came of his Body. That he departed as quietly from them as ever Man did, and had endured with as little grudg. He had learned this Lesson in the World, never to look backward, as S. Paul saith, ne remember that is past. That he would never grudg or com∣plain of any thing for himself.
To the Lord Protector, to whom he wrote all this Account of him∣self, turning his Discourse, he said, That he thought it very weigh∣ty, to have these Books recommended to the Realm in the King's Name by his (the Protector) Direction, since the King himself knew nothing of them, and therefore nothing could be ascribed to him: And his Grace had been so occupied, as all Men knew, that he had no leisure to peruse them. And yet of such sort were the Books according to the Account he had before written; and that if no Man had advertised the Council, as he had, it was be∣cause they had not read them as he had done. In Vindication of the Learned Author of the Paraphrase,Erasmus vindi∣cated. so be∣dashed by Winchester, I will here use the words of him that writ the Epistle Dedicatory before the translated Paraphrase on the Acts. I cannot but judg, that whoso are prompt and hasty Condemners of Erasmus, or eager Adversaries unto his Doctrine, do, under the Name and Colour of Erasmus, rather utter their Stomach and Hatred against God's Word, and the Grace of the Gospel, which Erasmus for his part most diligently and most simply laboureth to bring to light. And to such as said, that his Doctrine was scarcely sincere, and that he did somewhat err, he answered, That Eras∣mus, forasmuch as he was a Man, and so esteemed himself, would that his Works should none otherwise be read or accepted, than the Writings of other mortal Men. And that after his Judgment, a little Trip among so many notable good Works for the interpre∣tation of Scripture, and for the help of the Simple, should rather be born withal, than so many good Things to be either rejected, or kept away from the hungry Christian Reader. It is a cold Cha∣rity that can bear with nothing; and an eager Malice it is, that for a Trifle, or a Matter of nothing, would have the Ignorant to lack so much good edifying, as may be taken of Erasmus. Mention was made a little above,Winchester's Letter to So∣merset concern∣ing these things. of the Bishop of Winchester's Objections aganst the Paraphrase of Erasmus, sent by him in a Let∣ter to the Lord Protector. This Paper I have met with in Sir Iohn Cotton's Library; and being somewhat long, I have put it into the Appendix: Wherein may be seen at large the Bishop's Quarrels,No. XXXVI. both against the Paraphrase and the Homilies; labouring here to shew, that the Book of Homilies and Erasmus's Paraphrase, did contradict each other, and therefore could not both be received; and that there were Errors in each, and so neither ought to be admitted. More∣over, he urged the Danger of making Alterations in Religion con∣trary to the Laws then in Force; designing thereby, if he could over-perswade the Protector, to enervate the King's late Injunctions. For the Papists, whose chief Instrument was VVinchester, saw it was time now to bestir themselves to overthrow these Proceedings that were in hand, if it were possible. When this Affair happened between the Council and the Bishop,The ABp ap∣points a Thanksgiving for a Victory. for which they cast him into the Fleet, Somerset the Protector was absent in an Expedition against the Scots: By whose Conduct, in the Month of September, God blessed the King with a very glorious Victory, in a Battel fought near Musselburrough. Which redounded much to the Protector's Honour, wherein was more Danger than he
looked for, which gave him the greater occasion to shew his Va∣lour: For there were but few lost on the English-side; but fifteen thousand Scots reckoned to be slain, and two thousand taken Priso∣ners. For this Victory a Publick Thanksgiving was thought fit to be Celebrated. And the Arch-bishop required of the Bishop of Lon∣don, to procure a Sermon at S. Pauls, before the Mayor and Alder∣men, and immediately after a Procession in English, and Te Deum. The Arch-bishop's Letter (which will shew what the Court thought of that good Success) was as followeth. AFter our right hearty Commendations: Whereas it hath plea∣sed Almighty God to send the King's Majesty such Victory against the Scots,The ABp to the Bp of London. Cranm. egist. as was almost above the Expectation of Man, and such as hath not been heard of in any part of Christendom this many Years: In which Victory above the Number of 15000 Scots be slain, 2000 taken Prisoners; and among them many Noble-men, and others of good Reputation; all their Ordnance and Baggage of their Camp also won from them. The King's Majesty, with Advice of his Highness Privy-Council, presently attending upon his Majesty's most Royal Person, well-knowing this, as all other Goodness, to be Gifts of God, hath and so doth account it. And therefore rendereth unto him the only Glory and Praise for the same: And so hath willed me, not only in his Ma∣jesty's Cathedral Church, and other Churches of my Diocess, to give Thanks to Almighty God, but also to require, in his Name, all other Bishops in the Province of Canterbury to do, or cause to be done, semblably in their Course. Which his Majesty's Pleasure I have thought good to signify unto you: Requiring you, not on∣ly to cause a Sermon to be made in your Cathedral Church, the next Holy-day after receipt hereof, declaring the Goodness of God, and exhorting the People to Faith and amendment of Life; and to give Thanks to God for this Victory; but also at the same time, immediately after the Sermon, and in presence of the Mayor, Aldermen, and other the Citizens of London, to cause the Pro∣cession in English, and Te Deum, to be openly and devoutly sung. And that you do also cause the like Order to be given in every Parish-Church in your Diocess, upon some Holy-day, when the Parishioners shall be there present, with as much speed as you may; not failing, as you tender his Majesty's Pleasure. Thus fare you heartily well. From Oatlands, the 18th Day of Decem∣ber It should be Sept. I suppose., the Year of our Lord God, 1547. Your loving Friend, Tho. Cantuarien. The Counsellors Pleasure is, you shall see this executed on Tuesday next, in St. Pauls in London. This be given in haste.
CHAP. IV. A Convocation. THE Parliament now sat:A Convocati∣on in the first Year of the King. C.C.C.C. Li∣brary. Vol. in∣tit. Synodalia. And a Convocation was held No∣vember the 5th. Some Account of what was done here, I will in this place set down, as I extracted it out of the Notes of some Member, as I conceive, then present at it. Session 1. Nov. 5. Iohn Taylor Dean of Lincoln, chosen Prolocutor by universal Consent. Sess. 2. Nov. 18. This Day the Prolocutor was presented to the Arch-bishop and Bishops in the Upper House. Sess. 3. Nov. 22. It was then agreed, that the Prolocutor, in the Name of the whole House, should carry some Petitions unto the most Reverend Father in God the Arch-bishop, viz. I. That Provision be made, that the Ecclesiastical Law may be examined, and promulged, according to that Statute of Parliament in the 35th Year of Henry VIII. II. That for certain urgent Causes, the Convocation of this Clergy may be taken and chosen into the Lower House of Parlia∣ment, as anciently it was wont to be. III. That the Works of the Bishops and Others, who by the Command of the Convocation, have laboured in examining, re∣forming and publishing the Divine Service, may be produced, and laid before the Examination of this House. IV. That the Rigour of the Statute of paying the King the First-Fruits, may be somewhat moderated in certain urgent Clau∣ses, and may be reformed, if possible. The fourth Session is omitted in the Manuscript, the Writer pro∣bably being then absent. Sess. 5. Nov. ult. This Day Mr. Prolocutor exhibited, and caused to be read pub∣lickly, a Form of a certain Ordinance, delivered by the most Re∣verend the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, for the receiving of the Bo∣dy of our Lord under both Kinds, viz. of Bread and Wine. To which he himself subscribed, and some others, viz. Mr. Prolocu∣tor, Mr. Cranmer Arch-deacon of Canterbury, Mr. May, Mr. Ien∣yngs, Mr. VVilliams, VVilson, Carleton, &c.
Sess. 6. Decemb. 2. This Session, all this whole Session, in Number Sixty-four, by their Mouths did approve the Proposition made the last Session, of taking the Lord's Body in both Kinds, nullo reclamante. The same Day with Consent were chosen, Mr. Dr. Draycot, Bellasis, Dakyns, Ieffrey, Elize ap Rice, Oking, Pool, and Ap Har∣ry, to draw up a Form of a Statute for paying Tithes in Cities, &c. This was a thing the Clergy now were very intent upon. For I find in the Arch-bishop's Reformation of the Ecclesiastical Laws, there is a Law made for paying Tithes in Cities, as was done in London. Sess. 7. Decemb. 9. By common Consent were nominated and assigned Mr. Rowland Merick, Iohn ap Harry, Iohn VVilliams, and Elizeus Price, DD.LL. to obtain the following Effects, viz. That the Petition made to have this House adjoined to the Lower House of Parliament, may be granted. Item, That a Mitigation of the sore Penalty expres∣sed in the Statutes against the Recusants, for non-payment of the perpetual Tenths, may be also obtained. And the same Day were likewise appointed, Mr. Dean of VVin∣chester, and Mr. Dr. Draycot, to accompany Mr. Prolocutor to my Lord of Canterbury, to know a determinate Answer, what In∣demnity and Impunity this House shall have to treat of Matters of Religion, in Cases forbidden by the Statutes of this Realm to treat in. Sess. 8. Dec. 17. This Day was exhibited a certain Proposition under these words, viz. That all such Canons, Laws, Statutes, Decrees, Usages and Customs, heretofore made, had or used, that forbid any Person to contract Matrimony, or condemn Matrimony already contracted by any Person, for any Vow or Promise of Priesthood, Chastity or Widowhood, shall from henceforth cease, be utterly void, and of none Effect. To which Proposition many subscribed, partly in the Affirmative, partly in the Negative. In the Affirmative, 53 Voices. In the Negative, 22 Voices. And here I will insert a few words, which I take out of a Book writ very near this Time, and by one who was well acquainted with the Affairs of this Convocation.Defence of Priests Mar∣riage, p. 268. The Affirmants, saith he, of this Proposition were almost treble so many as were the Negants. Amongst which Affirmants, divers were then unmarried, and ne∣ver afterwards did take the Liberty of Marriage; as Dr. Taylor the Bishop, Dr. Benson, Dr. Redman, Dr. Hugh VVeston, Mr. Wotton, &c. Of them that denied it, notwithstanding their Sub∣scriptions
to the contrary, as few as they were, yet some of them took upon them the Liberty of Marriage not long after, as Dr. Oken, Mr. Rayer, Mr. Wilson, &c. This Subscription following was made by the Hand of Iohn Red∣man,Dr. Redman's Judgment of Priests Mar∣riage. S. T. P. in this very Convocation, who, being absent this Ses∣sion, (for his Name is not among the 53) was desired to declare his own Sense in this Point, under his own Hand, being so Learned a Man, and in such great Credit universally, for his Ability in deciding Questions of Conscience. I think that although the Word of God do exhort and counsel Priests to live in Chastity, out of the Cumber of the Flesh and the World, that thereby they may the more wholly attend to their Calling: Yet the Band of containing from Marriage, doth only lie upon Priests of this Realm, by reason of Canons and Consti∣tutions of the Church, and not by any Precept of God's Word; as in that they should be bound by reason of any Vow, which, in as far as my Conscience is, Priests in this Church of England do not make: I think that it standeth well with God's Word, that a Man which hath been, or is but once married, being otherwise ac∣cordingly qualified, may be made a Priest. And I think that for∣asmuch as Canons and Rules made in this behalf, be neither uni∣versal nor everlasting, but upon Consideration may be altered and changed: Therefore the King's Majesty, and the higher Powers of the Church, may, upon such Reasons as shall move them, take away the Clog of perpetual Continency from the Priests; and grant, that it may be lawful to such as cannot, or will not contain, to marry one Wife. And if she die, then the said Priest to marry no more, remaining still in his Ministration. Some larger Account of this memorable Convocation, especially as to some of these Matters then under their Hands, may be read in Bi∣shop Stillingfleet's Irenicum,Irenic. p. 387. published by him from a Manuscript Vo∣lume once belonging to Arch-bishop Cranmer. In this Convocation the Arch-bishop bore the great Sway;The ABp's In∣fluence on the Parliament. and what things were agitated herein, were chiefly by his Motion and Direction: Some whereof were turned into Laws by the Parliament, that was now sitting, through his Activeness and Influence. As parti∣cularly that Repeal of the Statute of the Six Articles, and of some other severe Laws, decreeing divers things Treason and Felony, made in the former King's Reign. For when the Arch-bishop in the Convocation had made a Speech to the Clergy, exhorting them to give themselves to the study of the Scriptures, and to consider what Things in the Church needed Reformation, that so the Church might be discharged of all Popish Trash, not yet thrown out; Some told him, that as long as the Six Articles remained, it was not safe for them to deliver their Opinions: This he reported to the Council.Hist. Rs. Vol. 1. p. 40. Upon which they ordered this Act of Repeal. By his means also another great thing, moved in the Convocation,The Commu∣nion in both Kinds esta∣blished. was now ratified, and made a Law by this Parliament: which was, for the Administration of the Communion under both Kinds through∣out the Kingdom of England and Ireland. And upon this the King appointed certain Grave and Learned Bishops, and others,Fox. to assem∣ble
at Windsor-Castle, there to treat and confer together; and to conclude upon and set forth, one perfect and uniform Order of Com∣munion, according to the Rules of Scripture, and the Use of the Primitive Church. And this being framed, it was enjoined to be used throughout the Realm, by a Proclamation, and all required to receive it with due Reverence. The ABp's Queries con∣cerning the Mass.I meet with a Writing of the Arch-bishop without Date, consisting of Queries concerning the Mass, in order to the abolishing it, and changing it into a Communion. Which I know not where so well to place as here, now the Convocation was employed upon this Mat∣ter: For it seems to have been drawn up by the Arch-bishop, on pur∣pose to be laid before the Consideration of this House. The Queries were these. What or wherein Iohn, Fasting, giving Alms, being Baptized, or receiving the Sacrament of the Altar in England, doth profit and avail Thomas dwelling in Italy, and not knowing what Iohn in England doth? Whether it profit them that be in Heaven, and wherein? Whether it lieth in the Faster, Giver of Alms, Receiver of the Sacrament, him that is Baptized, to defraud any Member of Christ's Body of the Benefit of Fasting, Alms-Deeds, Baptism, or Receiving of the Sacrament; and to apply the same Benefit to one Person more than to another? What thing is the Presentation of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Mass, which you call the Oblation and Sacrifice of Christ? And wherein standeth it in Act, Gesture or Word; and in what Act, Gesture or Word? Is there any Rite or Prayer, and expressed in the Scripture, which Christ used or commanded at the first Institution of the Mass, which we be now bound to use; and what the same be? Whether in the Primitive Church there were any Priests that lived by saying of Mass, Mattens and Even-song, and praying for Souls, only? And where any such State of Priesthood be al∣lowed in the Scriptures, or be meet to be allowed now? For what Cause were it not expedient nor convenient, to have the whole Mass in the English Tongue? Wherein consisteth the Mass by Christ's Institution? What Time the accustomed Order began first in the Church, that the Priests alone should receive the Sacrament? Whether it be convenient that the same Custom continue still within this Realm? Whether it be convenient that Masses Satisfactory should con∣tinue; that is to say, Priests hired to sing for Souls departed? Whether the Gospel ought to be taught at the Time of the Mass, to the understanding of the People being present? Whether in the Mass it were convenient to use such Speech as the People may understand? The ABp as∣sists at the Fu∣neral of the French King.To proceed to some other Things, wherein our Arch-bishop was this Year concerned. In Iune the Church of S. Pauls was hanged with Black, and a sumptuous Hearse set up in the Choire, and a Dirige
there sung for the French King, who deceased the March precedent. And on the next Day the Arch-bishop, assisted with eight Bishops more, all in rich Mitres, and their other Pontificals, did sing a Mass of Requiem;Stow. and the Bishop of Rochester preached a Funeral Ser∣mon. A nice Matter was now put by the Council to the Arch-bishop,The Marquess of Northamp∣ton's Divorce committed to the ABp. having some other Bishops and Learned Men joined with him, to the Number of Ten. The Case was, Whether a Man divorced from his Wife for her Adultery, might not lawfully marry again? This was propounded upon the Account of a great Man in those Times, name∣ly, the Brother of Queen Katherine Par, Marquess of Northamp∣ton; who had gotten a Divorce from his Wife, the Daughter of Bourchier Earl of Essex, for Adultery. The Canon Law would not allow marrying again upon a Divorce, making Divorce to be only a Separation from Bed and Board, and not a Dissolving the Knot of Marriage. This was a great Question depending among the Civilians. And it being committed to the Determination of our Arch-bishop, and some other Delegates, (tho the Marquess staid not for their Re∣solution, but in this Interval married Elizabeth Daughter of the Lord Brook) he searched so diligently into the Scriptures first, and then into the Opinions of Fathers and Doctors, that his Collections swel∣led into a Volume,Bp of Wigorn. yet remaining in the Hands of a Learned Bishop of this Realm: The Sum whereof is digested by the Bishop of Sa∣m. Cranmer seemed to allow of Marriage in the Innocent Per∣son.Hist. Ref. Vol. 2. p. 56. He was a Means also to the Council of forbidding Processions:Processions for∣bid by his means. Wherein the People carried Candles on Candlemass-day, Ashes on Ash-wednesday, Palms on Palm-sunday; because he saw they were used so much to Superstition, and looked like Festivals to the Hea∣then Gods. So that this Year on Candlemass-day, the old Custom of bearing Candles in the Church, and on Ash-wednesday following, giving Ashes in the Church,Stow. was left off through the whole City of London. He was a Member of a Committee this Winter,Examines the Offices of the Church. appointed to ex∣amine all the Offices of the Church, and to consider where they needed Reformation, and accordingly to reform them. Of this Commission were most of the Bishops, and several others of the most Learned Divines in the Nation. And a new Office for the Commu∣nion was by them prepared, and by Authority set forth, as was ob∣served before; and received all over England. CHAP. V. The Arch-bishop's Catechism. THIS Year the Arch-bishop put forth a very useful Catechism,The ABp puts forth a Catechism. intituled, A short Instruction to Christian Religion, for the sin∣gular Profit of Children and young People. This Catechism went not by way of Question and Answer, but contained an easy Exposition of the Ten Commandments, the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and the
two Sacraments. The first and second Commandments were put together as one, and the whole recital of the Second omitted, ac∣cording to the use in those Times. But that Commandment is ex∣plained under the first. The Substance of this Book is grave, seri∣ous and sound Doctrine. It is said in the Title Page, to be overseen and corrected by the Arch-bishop. Indeed it was a Catechism wrote originally in the German Language, for the use of the younger Sort in Norinberg; Translated into Latin by Iustus Ionas, Junior, who now was entertained by the Arch-bishop in his Family; and thence turned into our Vulgar Tongue by the said Arch-bishop, or his special Order. But 'tis certain, so great a Hand he had therein, that in the Arch-bishop's first Book of the Sacrament, he said, that it was translated by himself, and set forth. Bishop Gardiner in his Book against the Arch-bishop, takes advantage of two things in this Catechism against him, as though he himself, when he put it forth, was of the Opinion of the Corporal Presence. The one was a Picture that stood before the Book, where was an Altar with Candles lighted, and the Priest apparelled after the old Sort, putting the Wafer into the Communicant's Mouth. The other is an Expres∣sion or two used somewhere in the Book, That with our bodily Mouths we receive the Body and Blood of Christ: And, that in the Sacrament we receive truly the Body and Blood of Christ. And, this we must be∣lieve, if we will be counted Christen Men. But to both, Cranmer in his next Book against Gardiner made answer, That as for the Picture, it was that was set before the Dutch Edition of the Book, and so none of his doing; but that he afterwards caused the Popish Pi∣cture to be altered into a Picture representing Christ eating his last Supper with his Disciples. As for the Expressions, he said, he taught, that we in the Sacrament do receive the Body and Blood of Christ spiritually; and, that the words Really and Substantially were not used, but Truly. And in his Answer to Dr. Richard Smith's Preface, wrote against the said Arch-bishop, who it seems had twit∣ted him also with this Catechism, he spake largely of these his Ex∣pressions in his own Vindication. And a Book a∣gainst Vnwrit∣ten Verities.There was another Book of the Arch-bishop's against Vnwritten Verities, which I do by Conjecture place here, as put forth under this Year, or near this Time. Which I suppose Dr. Smith nibbled at in his Book of Traditions, which this Year he recanted. The Book was in Latin, and consisted only of Allegations out of the Bi∣ble and Ancient Writers. In Queen Mary's Days the Book was again published by an English Exile, naming himself E. P. The Title it now bore was, A Confutation of Vnwritten Verities, by divers Autho∣rities, diligently and truly gathered out of the Holy Scripture, and An∣cient Fathers; By Tho. Cranmer, late Arch-bishop, and burned at Ox∣ford, for the Defence of the true Doctrine of our Saviour. Translated and set forth by E. P. Before it, is a Preface of the Translator to his Country-men and Brethren in England. In it he lamented the woful State of Things in England, by the Restoring of Popery, and the Persecution of Protestants there; and shewed what a kind of Man the chief Bishop then in England, viz. Cardinal Pool, was, who in the last King's Reign went from Prince to Prince, to
excite them to make War against his own Prince and Coun∣try. This Treatise is but a bare Collection of places of Holy Scripture, and Ancient Fathers, to prove, That the Canon of the Bible is a true, and sound, and perfect Doctrine, containing all Things ne∣cessary to Salvation: That neither the Writing of the Old Fathers, without the Word of God, nor General Councils, nor the Oracles of Angels, nor Apparitions from the Dead, nor Customs, can be sufficient in Religion to establish Doctrine, or maintain new Ar∣ticles of Faith. Then Reasons are given against Unwritten Veri∣ties, and the places of Holy Scripture, and other Writers, which the Papists bring to maintain Unwritten Verities, are answered. At last the Objections of the Papists are confuted, in a concluding Chapter. Which last part was not writ by the Arch-bishop, but by the Translator. For relating here the Story of the Holy Maid of Kent, he saith, she was examined by Tho. Cranmer Arch-bishop of Canterbury. And at last he saith, I have plainly and fully answered to all that I remember the Papists do, or can allege by Writing, Preaching, or Reasoning, for the Defence of their Unwritten Ve∣rities; on which they build so many detestable Idolatries and He∣resies. But yet if any be able to answer so plainly and truly to the Scriptures, Authorities, and Reasons rehearsed by me, as I have done to theirs, and to prove their Doctrines by as plain Testimo∣nies and Reasons as I have done mine, I shall not only acknowledg my Ignorance and Error, but I shall gladly return into England, recant my Heresies, &c. Hence it is plain, that the Conclusion of the Book, as well as the Preface, was writ by the Translator. I will add one Passage taken out of this Book, about the middle, whereby it may be seen what a Clergy was now in England: Having quoted the Canons of the Apostles,Ca. 3. Let not a Bishop or Deacon put away his Wife, &c. He makes a heavy complaint against the fre∣quent practice of beastly Sins in the Priests, Adultery, Sodomy, &c. and that they never were punished. And in my Memory, (as he proceeds) which is above thirty Years, and also by the Informa∣tion of others, that be twenty Years elder than I, I could never learn that one Priest was punished. This is some Account of the Care he took for the Church in gene∣ral, as Metropolitan.His Care of Canterbury. But he had a particular Care of his own Dio∣cess, now his Power was not checked, as it was in the former Reign, especially of the City of Canterbury; which had been formerly the backwardest in Religion of any other Place of his Diocess. He sup∣plied this City with store of excellent Learned Preachers, Turner, the two Ridleys, Becon, Besely, and Iohn Ioseph, who this Year went along with the King's Visitors, as one of their Preachers. These converted not a few to sincere Religion; as may appear by those Numbers of Canterbury, that in Queen Mary's Reign suffered the Torment of Fire for their Profession of the Gospel. But in that Reign all the Preachers fled, so that there was scarce one remaining in the City: Which was looked upon as a particular Sign of God's Displeasure against that Place, because the Professors there, and o∣thers, reformed not themselves, according to those Opportunities of
Grace, which God had put into their Hands. And so I find in a Letter to them, wrote by some eminent Person in Prison in Queen Mary's Reign. Alas! how few faithful Servants hath the Lord of Life in these troublesome Days within Canterbury,Fox's MSS. to whom a∣bove all other People, in comparison of multitude, he hath sent most plenteously his Word, in the Mouths of most excellent Preachers. But even as the People were Negligent, Hard-hearted, nothing willing to take the lively Word unto their Defence, against the World, the Devil and the Flesh —Even so hath he permitted the same Preachers to be dispersed, that not one of them should be a comfortable Example to such an unkinde Peo∣ple. CHAP. VI. The Arch-bishop's Care of the University. The ABp's In∣fluence upon the Universi∣ty.THE Arch-bishop was a great Patron of all solid Learning, be∣ing a very Learned Man himself. And knowing very well how much the Libertas Philosophandi, and the Knowledg of Tongues, and the other Parts of Humane Learning tended to the preparing Mens Minds for the reception of True Religion, and for the detect∣ing of the gross Errors and Frauds of Popery, which could subsist on∣ly in the thick Darkness of Ignorance; these things made him al∣ways cast a favourable Aspect upon the Universities, and especially that of Cambridg, whereof he himself was once a Member. Which the Governors, and the rest of the Gremials, very well knew, and therefore did frequently apply to him, as often as they had need of the Favour of the Court or Parliament. Roger Ascham, Fellow of S. Iohn's College, and one of the floridest Wits of this University, and who succeeded Sir Iohn Cheke in reading the Greek Lecture, said of him in a Letter he sent him, (wherein he stiled him Literarum Decus & Ornamentum); That he was the Man who was accu∣stomed to express great Joy at the good Progress of Learning, such was his singular good-will towards it; and when it went otherwise than well with it, he alone could apply a Remedy; such was his Sway and Authority. And so much was he the known Mecaenas of Learning, that according to the publick Encouragement or Preju∣dice it received, so the Vulgar accounted the Praise or Dispraise thereof to redound upon Cranmer. So that if Learning were Dis∣countenanced, it was esteemed to cast some Disparagement upon him; if it flourished, it was a sign that Cranmer prevailed at Court. For to that purpose do those words of the said Ascham to the Arch∣bishop in another Letter seem to tend. Nulla hoc tempore literis vel insperata clades, vel expectata commoditas accidere potest, cujus tu non aut author, ad magnam commendationem, aut particeps ad aliquam repre∣hensionem,Some of St. Iohn's College apply to him upon the ap∣prehension of a Danger. voce ac sermone omnium jactatus eris. In this Year 1547, and in the Month of October, there fell out an Accident in S. Iohn's College in Cambridg, which made those of that College that favoured Learning and Religion, (as that House was the
chief Nursery thereof in that University) judg it highly necessary to apply themselves to the Arch-bishop, to divert a Storm from them. The Case was this; A French Lad of this College, Cizer to one Mr. Stafford there, had one Night, in hatred to the Mass, secretly cut the String, whereby the Pix hung above the Altar in the Chappel. The like to which was indeed done in other Places of the Nation by some zealous Persons, who began this Year, without any Warrant, to pull down Crucifixes and Images out of the Churches. As was parti∣cularly done in S. Martins Ironmonger-lane, London. This Affront to the Popish Service made a great Noise in the College: And the sober Party among them feared the ill Effect it might have upon the whole College, either to its Disparagement or Prejudice, when the News of it should come to Court; especially by the means of such who stomached much the Decay and Downfal of Superstition, and endea∣voured what in them lay to obscure and eclipse the rising Light of the Gospel. Therefore after the Matter had been taken into Examinati∣on by themselves, quietly and without Tumult, they thought fit, by Consent, to acquaint the Arch-bishop with it in a Letter; which one of their Members, Thomas Lever, a Learned and grave Man, carried; who likewise should inform him of all Circumstances: and so committed both the Cause and Person to his Grace's Judgment and Censure. But withal letting him know, that the Youth was well Learned, and before this had carried himself quietly and modestly; and that Mr. Stafford, who was a great Student, could not tell how to be without him: But however, such was his Prudence, that he was willing to leave his Scholar and his Fault to the Arch-bishop's Discretion. By which Message they warily avoided the Odium of this Action, as though they had countenanced any violent or illegal Methods for the removal of Superstition, before it were done by Publick Authority; and likewise rescued their Scholar from Expul∣sion, or too rigorous Punishment, which some in the College would have been apt to inflict upon him, had not the Matter been thus pru∣dently removed from them. Let me here insert another Matter that happened the Year after in the same College;Offended with some of this College, and why. whereat divers took Occasion so to represent it to our Arch-bishop, as to create in him, as much as they could, an ill Opinion of the better sort of the Members thereof. About Novem∣ber or December, in the Year 1548, some of the College got this Que∣stion to be disputed in the Chappel concerning the Mass, Ipsáne Coe∣na Dominica fuerit, nécne? It was handled with great Learning by two Learned Fellows of the House, Thomas Lever and Roger Hutchin∣son. The Noise of this soon spread in the University; and many were much displeased at it. At last Ascham being a very fit Person to undertake it, was prevailed with by the rest, to bring this Questi∣on out of the private Walls of the College, into the publick Schools: yet as was pretended, with this mind and meaning, not dogmatical∣ly to assert any thing, but modestly and freely to learn from Lear∣ned Men, what could be fetched out of the Holy Scriptures to de∣fend the Mass, which had taken up, not only the chiefest Place in Religion, and Mens Consciences, but took away in effect all the Use and Benefit of the faithful Ministry of the Word and Sacraments
from Christians. This Business they set about with Quietness, they conferred their common Studies together, propounded to themselves the Canonical Scriptures, by the Authority whereof they wish'd the whole might be decided: They took also along with them, con∣cerning this Matter, the Ancient Canons of the Early Church, the Councils of Fathers, the Decrees of Popes, the Judgments of Do∣ctors, the great Plenty of Questionists, all the Modern Authors, both German and Roman. But this Design of theirs was not only the Subject of Talk in the University, but noted in the publick Sermons; and such Labour there was among some in opposition to it, that Dr. Madew, then Vice-chancellor, was prevailed with by his Letters to for∣bid the Disputation. They obeyed, but took it hardly, that they might not as well dispute in favour of the Question, as others might preach as much as they would against it. But it ended not here; for their Adversaries industriously carried the Report hereof to our Pre∣late, and did so blacken the Business by their Slanders, and loud and tragical Clamours, that he became somewhat offended with the Un∣dertakers. These on the other hand, no question, applied themselves to him with their just Defence: and not only to him, but to others, and particularly to Mr. Cecyl, one formerly their Colleague, who was now Master of Requests to the Protector, letting him know the whole Matter; that he might upon occasion represent the Cause the more favourably to the Arch-bishop. And Ascham himself was their Scribe; whose Epistle, penned in a handsome Latin Stile, be∣ing not extant among his printed Epistles, and being subservient to the History of the University in those Times, I have thought wor∣thy to be inserted among the Originals.No. XXXVII. In this Letter he charged the other Party as well with Malice as Ignorance: For this their Question was very agreeable to Thomas Aquinas, who proved that the Mass exceeded the Lord's Supper in many Prerogatives, and much differed from it by many Notes; as, Women, Children, Bastards, maimed Persons, were not allowed to partake of the Mass, but they were received to the Holy Supper. So that should any say, (as he proceeds in his Letter) that the Mass and the Supper were the same, they might exclaim against them much more. Their Adversaries had charged them with being too rash, in not staying for what Reforma∣tion the State should make: But he said, that all Cambridg wanted rather Spurs to put them forward, than a Bridle to keep them back. But though their Dispute were prohibited, yet their Studies upon the same Argument had in a manner encreased; having now written a just Treatise of the Mass, which they intended shortly to present to the Protector; and waited only for Cecyl's and Cheke's Advice therein. But I must beg Pardon of the Reader for this Excursion. The ill Condi∣tion and low Estate of the University. And as I have given an Instance or two of the private Address of a particular College to him in a particular Case, so I will subjoin ano∣ther more publick of the University in general. In the Year above∣said, being the first Year of the King, the University laboured un∣der the Fears of the Encroachments of the Town upon their Pri∣vileges, and likewise under great Suspicions of being spoiled of its Revenues, or at least of having them much diminished; she having observed how those of her Sister, the Church, were daily invaded
by secular Hands. These Fears put Cambridg now in a decaying State, and the Studies of good Literature began to be but little mind∣ed. Add also hereunto, that Ecclesiastical Preferments, which for∣merly were the peculiarRewards of Academicks, were now ordinarily enjoyed by mere unlearned Lay-men.Hist. Ref. Part II. p. 8. So the Earl of Hartford held a Deanery, a Treasureship of a Cathedral Church, and four of the best Prebends; and his Son three hundred Pounds a Year out of a Bi∣shoprick. And Learned Men were seldom taken notice of, or had Honours conferred on them; and if they obtained any Rewards, they were but small. Nor were Scholars now in any Repute or Va∣lue: So that neither Poor nor Rich abode long at their Studies in the University, to attain to any considerable Degrees of Learning. The Poor could not, because the Encouragements there were scarce capable to maintain them; and the richer Sort would not, chusing rather to fol∣low some other Course, because of the obscure and neglected Condi∣tion Learning then lay under. The Grammar Schools also became disused, Parents chusing any other Calling for their Children, rather than to bring them up to Letters: As Roger Ascham, a Man that well knew the State of the University, complains in a Letter to the Marquess of Northampton. This was the Cause that the said As∣cham pensively thus writ unto our Arch-bishop not long after. That the University was then in so depressed and drooping a Condition, that very few had hope of coming thither at all, and fewer had any Comfort to make long tarrying when they were there: And that Abroad it retained not so much as the Shadow of its An∣cient Dignity. At this low Ebb the University now was,An Address of the University to the ABp. when King Edward the Sixth came to the Scepter. But there being a Parliament this Year in the Month of November, the chief Officers thereof thought it ad∣viseable however to prevent it, if they could, from sinking lower, and to keep at least what they had, by getting their Ancient Privi∣leges confirmed by that Parliament. And for this purpose they writ their earnest Letters to the Arch-bishop: Iohn Madew their Vice-chancellor, the Bearer, urging to him, Not only,The Sum thereof. that it was a thing usual at the beginning of Princes Reigns, to shew that Favour to the University to have their Privileges renewed by Parliament; but chiefly, that the Favour his Grace should do to it, would be a true piece of Service to the Religion which he had such a tender Care of. That every one knew how much it concerned the Common-wealth, that Account should be made of Learning; but how much it con∣cerned the pure Religion, (as they stiled that of the Reformation) he alone did consider above all others. That he knew, how that about five hundred Years past or more, the knowledg of Letters, by the Fault of Kings, who ought to have cherish'd it, began to with∣draw it self from Men, and to hide it self in Darkness. In which dark Times, so involved in Ignorance, that notable wild Boar out of the Wood spoiled the Vineyard of Christ above measure: Not only treading down the Kings of the Earth, and conferring upon himself the Empire of the World, but so invaded and broke into the Holy Seat and Temple of Conscience, that now there were scarce any Manners of Men, any Course of Life, any Rite of Ce∣remonies,
any Sacrament of the Church, any Footstep of Christ, which were not either laid waste by his Thunder, or defiled by his Breath: Or, to speak in milder, but more significant terms with S. Paul, which were not most foully corrupted and adultera∣ted by the Wisdom of humane Will-worship. That it was this Night of Discipline, and want of Knowledg, which robbed us of God's Word, and advanced the Empire of Man's Doctrine to that Arbitrary Height, that instead of the true Worship of God, the right using of things Divine, a holy and pure Course of Life; Hypocrisy, Idolatry and Adultery were most cunningly conveyed and brought in. That they did the more willingly mention this Pest of Ignorance, conceiving great Hope that the Honour of Learning would be restored anew, now when all things tended in a wonderful manner to the illustrating of true Religion, which good Learning did necessarily accompany. And that since God had now raised him up on purpose for the restoring of the Gospel, and had so long reserved him for that End, they doubted not but he would give all his Pains and Authority to preserve the Welfare of Learning. And that somewhat for this Reason, because at that time there could happen no Calamity or Advantage thereunto, but every Man would be apt either to charge him with the Blame of the one, or attribute to him the Praise of the other. This elo∣quent Letter indicted by the Pen of Ascham, then the University-Orator, having some remarkable Passages of the State of the Univer∣sity at that Time, and of the great Sway the Arch-bishop then car∣ried in the Publick, and the marvellous Good-will he was esteemed to bear towards Learning,No. XXXVIII. I have therefore placed in the Appendix, tho printed before. The Success of the Univer∣sity's Address to him and others.This Favour of having their Privileges confirmed, sued for in the forementioned Letter, the University then got, partly by the Means of their cordial Patron the Arch-bishop, and partly by the Interces∣sion and Friendship of Queen Katherine Par, a great Favourer of Learning and pure Religion, of Wriothesly Lord Chancellor, the Earl of Warwick, the Marquess of Northampton, the Earl of Arundel, and Sir William Paget; to all whom at that time they addressed their Letters: whether it were out of fear of the difficulty of getting the thing done, or to take this Opportunity to obtain the Countenance of the great Men of the Court. Another Ad∣dress to him against the Townsmen.Some time after, upon another Occasion, the Heads of the Uni∣versity made another Application to their Patron the Arch-bishop; which was, to befriend them at Court against the Townsmen their old Enemies, who were now wresting from them one of their Anci∣ent undoubted Privileges; namely, the use of the Prisons of the Toll-booth and Castle. The Occasion was this; In the time of Sturbridg-Fair, the Proctors, upon great Complaints made to them, going their Rounds one Night, had taken certain evil Persons in Houses of Sin, and had brought them to the Toll-booth, in order to the com∣mitment of them there. But having sent to the Mayor for the Keys, he absolutely refused to part with them. So they were fain to carry their Prisoners to the Castle, where they left them in Custody. But the Mayor's Son, after an Hour or two, let them all out to return, if
they pleased, to their former Lewdness; to the Breach of Law, and Affront of the Magistrate. Upon this the University sent their Let∣ters to the Arch-bishop, making certain of their grave Members the Bearers, to relate the Matter more fully; earnestly requiring that such Insolence might be punished: and that the King and his Council would make such Men feel what it was to violate Laws, and to che∣rish Impunity, and to break their Oaths, which they had taken to maintain the University-Privileges. They urged to him, how serviceable and ready their University had been to him in his pious Labours and Counsels, in establishing the true Doctrine in the Church; and what fit and worthy Men they had sent him for his Assistance in that good Work. In like manner they required and expected of him, that their Dignity might be maintained and preserved by his Aid and Authority. That the University was then but in a low Condition, and that Abroad it scarcely retained the Shadow of its former Glory. But if at Home, and within it Self, the Bonds and Sinews of its Safety should thus be cut, as not to have a Power to restrain Vice by Imprisonment, what could the Kingdom, Religion, and the King's Majesty hope for any more from that University? They inculcated, how Learning, and the true Religion rise and fall together; and that if it went otherwise than well with the one, the other would feel the Smart of it. And truly (say they) no remarkable Dammage can light upon the Studies of Learning, which by the same Motion draws not along with it the true Religion into the same Catastrophe. And these Considerations they made use of, to excite his Grace to assist them in vindicating their Privileges, and in having that gross In∣fringement of them punished. Upon the same Occasion they wrote their Letters also to Sir William Paget, a great Friend of theirs, and eminent Patron of good Learning. What the Issue of these Appli∣cations was, I find not, but may conclude, they received a Success proportionable to the good Will and Authority of those to whom they were made. And as the whole Body of the University knew what Favour our Prelate bore to it,Roger Ascham's Application to him for a Dis∣pensation for eating Flesh. so every single ingenious Member confided in him, and applied to him in their Needs. Roger Ascham, the Univer∣sity Orator, whom I had occasion to mention before, was a Man of a weak Constitution, and had contracted more frailty, by reason of a long Ague that then hung about him, and his Complexion became Melancholy by the Relicts of that stubborn Distemper. He had also in his Nature a great averseness to the Fish-diet. Upon these Reasons he address'd his Letters to the ABp with an humble Suit, very hand∣somly penned, that he might be dispensed with as to abstinence from Flesh-meats, Lent and Fish-days, being then strictly observed in the Colleges. And this Licence he desired might be, not only Temporary, but perpetual, as long as he lived; which was somewhat extraordina∣ry. But to encline the Arch-bishop to yield to his Suit, he told him, That it was not to pamper his Flesh, nor out of an affectation of do∣ing that which was unusual, or against common Custom, but only for the preserving his Health, and that he might the more freely pursue his Studies. He added, That the Air of Cambridg was
naturally Cold and Moist, and so the Fish-diet the more unwhol∣some. He desired therefore, That by his Authority he might no longer be tied by that Tradition, which forbad the Use of certain Meats at certain Times. He said, That those who granted this Liberty to none but such as laboured under a desperate Disease, did like them who never repaired their Houses, but when they were just ready to fall down by Age. Thrifty House-keepers did other∣wise: So did skilful Physicians, who did not use to prescribe their Physick when it was too late, but always put a stop to Beginnings. That they who never would impart the using of this Liberty (of eating Flesh) to any, but when all Health was despaired of, knew not what good a prudent Foresight did in all Common-wealths, and did too insolently abuse a good Thing bestowed upon us by God, when little or no use at all could be made of it. Nay, that such a Good was no Good at all, being External, but in that re∣spect only, as there might some use be made of it. That we ought not therefore unprofitably to abuse Food to Diseases that are desperate, but to accommodate it to the preservation of Health. And so did S. Paul command, Therefore I exhort you to take some Food, for this is for your Health. Then he subjoins a Passage of Herodotus in his Euterpe, concerning the Egyptian Priests, from whom issued originally all kinds of Learning and Arts, and who were al∣ways conversant in Learned Studies. These, saith that Author, re∣ligiously tied themselves, ever to abstain from all eating of Flesh. No doubt for this only Cause, saith Ascham, Nè ignea vis ingenii at{que} praestantia, ullo frigido succo, quem esus piscium ingeneraret, ex∣tingueretur. That the Wits of Men, that have a noble fiery Qua∣lity in them, might not be quenched by some cold Juice, which the eating of Fish might ingender. And that it was somewhat unjust, he adds, that when so many kinds of Superstition flowed in such a plentiful measure from the Egyptians, as might easily be pro∣ved, and thence derived themselves, first to the Greeks, then to the Romans, and afterwards to our Times, through that Sink of Popery, that that single worthy Counsel and Remedy of those most Lear∣ned Men, enjoined for the enlarging and spreading of Learning, should be debarred us to follow; and that by such as were either unlearned themselves, or superstitious Men: Whereby the best Wits received so great Prejudice and Dammage. That none knew better than his Lordship whence this Custom arose, by whom che∣rished, and by what kind of Men brought down to us. And, lastly, how unwholsome and unfit all eating of Flesh was in the Spring-time. And that he might obtain this Favour, he would use it without giving Offence, or making any common Speech of it, with Quietness and Silence, with Abstinence and Thanks∣giving. Favourably granted by the ABp.This Letter he got his Friend Poinet, the Arch-bishop's Chaplain, (the same I suppose who after was Bishop of Winchester) to put into his Grace's Hand, and to further his Request what he could. The Issue whereof was to his Heart's desire: For though the Arch-bishop knew him not, nor was easily drawn to dispence with the Church's Ancient Discipline and Rites; yet he received his Suit with all Hu∣manity;
and such he found to be the Modesty and Ingenuity of the Man, and what he requested to be grounded upon such reasonable and just Causes, that he readily yielded to it. And whether he thought it out of his Power to grant a Licence of that Latitude, to discharge a Person for all Time to come, from the Obligation of keeping Lent, or to avert the Censure he might incur if he should have done it by his own Authority, or reckoning it a Matter of Law rather than Religion, he put himself to the trouble of procuring the King's Licence under the Privy Seal for this Man: And when he had done that, considering an Academick's Poverty, he released him of the whole Charges of taking it out, paying all the Fees himself: and so conveyed it to him by Dr. Tayler the Master of his College. And indeed the Arch-bishop's Opinion concerning Lent,The ABp's Opinion con∣cerning Lent. made way for his more ready yielding to Ascham's Request: For he held the keeping of Lent, as founded in a Positive Law, rather than as a Religious Duty, and thought it necessary that so the People should be taught and instructed. As appears by his Articles of Visitation in the second Year of King Edward: One whereof ran thus, That enquiry should be made, whether the Curats had declared, and to their Wit and Power had perswaded the People, that the manner and kind of Fasting in Lent, and other Days in the Year, was but a meer positive Law: And that therefore all Persons having just Cause of Sickness, or other Necessity, or being licensed by the King's Majesty, may moderately eat all kind of Meat, without grudg or scruple of Conscience. The same Ascham knowing well how the Arch-bishop's Mind stood affected to Cambridg, his old Nurse,Ascham ac∣quaints him with the pre∣sent State of the University, as to their Stu∣dies. Epistol. libro 2. and how well he wish'd it for the sake of Religion, acquainted him with the State of the University about the beginning of King Edward's Reign, and the Course of the Studies that were then used. That there were very many began to affect the Study of Divinity. [A new Study, it seems then; the Pope's Laws and the School-men having before employed the Heads of almost all]. That the Doctrines of Original Sin and Predestination were much canvased. But many went rather according to Pighius, highly applauding him, than according to S. Augustin, though he exceeded all others that either went before or followed after him, for the excellency of his Wit and Learning, and the greatness of his Industry and Opportunities. That others among them made the reading of God's Word their daily Exercise. And for the helping their Understandings in the sense of it, they made use of, and ad∣hered to the Judgment of S. Augustin chiefly; and studied hard the Tongues. The Knowledg of Languages began to be affected. And such as studied them were reckoned the best Masters; as qua∣lifying them best for teaching of others, or understanding them∣selves. That for Oratory, they plied Plato and Aristotle; from whose Fountains among the Greeks, Loquens illa prudentia (as he stiled Oratory) that speaking Prudence might be fetched. And to these among the Latins they added Cicero. They conversed al∣so in Herodotus, Thucidids and Xenophon, the three Lights of Chronology, Truth, and Greek Eloquence; and which brought a great Lustre to their other Studies. The Greek Poets, which
they took delight in, were Homer, Sophocles and Euripides, the one the Fountain, the two others the Streams, of all Eloquence and Learned Poetry. Which they were of Opinion, did more largely water their other Studies, than Terence or Virgil; which in some former Years were chiefly read. Thus was the Method of University-Studies altered (so much for the better,) from reading the Schoolmen, and Metaphysical Niceties, the Pope's Canons and De∣cretals, to converse in politer and more manly Learning, which tend∣ed so much to solid Knowledg, and preparation of Mens Minds to the Entertainment of the Gospel. Sir Iohn Cheke, the ABp's dear Friend, the prime Instru∣ment of poli∣ter Studies there.The great setter on foot of this ingenuous Learning in the University, was Sir Iohn Cheke of S. Iohn's College, now prefer∣red to be the King's Tutor, a Person for whom the Arch-bishop had a very tender Love, and affectionate Kindness. For so Ascham writ to him in his former Letter, That many had addicted themselves to this course of Study, by the Aid and Conduct, Example and Counsel of that excellent Man. And that they bore the better his going from them to the Court, who had brought them on in so good a Course; because they knew their Disprofit was abundantly recompensed by the Profit and Safety that would accrue to the whole Common-wealth by him. Applying that of Plato to him, Plurimum Reip. interesse, ut unus aliquis existat semper praestans excellens{que} Vir, ad cujus virtutis imitationem, caeteri volun∣tate, industria, studio, & spe erecti, totos sese effingant & accommo∣dent. The Impedi∣ments of the Universities flourishing state laid be∣fore him.Afterwards he acquainted the most Reverend Person, to whom he wrote, with those things which proved great Hindrances to the flou∣rishing Estate of the University; that by his Counsel and Authority, if possible, they might be redressed. And they were two. The one was, That they wanted elderly Men, very few such remaining among them, by whose Example the younger Sort might be ex∣cited to study, and by whose Authority the Manners of the rest might be rightly formed and fashioned. The other Impediment was occasioned by such as were admitted: Who were for the most part only the Sons of Rich Men, and such as never intended to pursue their Studies to that degree, as to arrive at any eminent Pro∣ficiency and Perfection in Learning, but only the better to qualify themselves for some Places in the State, by a slighter and more su∣perficial Knowledg. The Injury accruing thence to the University was double; both because by this means, all hope of ripe and com∣pleated Learning was immaturely cut off in the very Bud; and also all the Expectations of the poorer sort, whose whole Time was spent in good Studies, was eluded by these Drones, occupying those Places and Preferments, which more properly belonged unto them. For Parts, Learning, Poverty and Election, were of no strength at Home, where Favour and Countenance, and the Let∣ters of Noblemen, and such-like extraordinary and illegal Courses from Abroad, bore all the Sway.
CHAP. VII. Dr. Smith and others recant. AND now before I conclude this Year, let me pass from more publick Matters, and present the Reader with two or three Passages, wherein the Arch-bishop had to do with private Men. May the 15th, Richard Smith D. D. Master of Whittington College,Dr. Smith re∣cants at Paul's Cross. and Reader of Divinity in Oxford, a hot turbulent Man, made his Recantation at Pauls Cross, convinced and moved thereunto by the Pains of the Arch-bishop. What his Errors were, that he had pub∣lickly vented in the University, and in his Writings, may be known by the words of his Recantation, which were these: I do confess and acknowledg, that the Authority, as well of the Bishop of Rome, whose Authority is justly and lawfully abolished in this Realm, as of other Bishops, and others called the Ministers of the Church, consisteth in the Dispensation and Ministration of God's Word, and not in making Laws, Ordinances and Decrees over the People, besides God's Word, without the Consent and Authority of the Prince and People. I say and affirm, that with∣in this Realm of England, and other the King's Dominions, there is no Law, Decree, Ordinance, or Constitution Ecclesiastical, in force, and available by any Man's Authority, but only by the King's Majesty's Authority, or of his Parliament. This Man had wrote two Books in favour of Popish Doctrine;His Books. and those he also now disclaimed, viz. A Book of Traditions, and another of the Sacrifice of the Mass. In the former of which he maintained, That Christ and his Apostles taught and left to the Church many things without writing; which he asserted were stedfastly to be believed, and obediently fulfilled, under pain of Damnation. In the other Book he maintained, That Christ was not a Priest after the Order of Melchizedeck, when he offered him∣self upon the Cross for our Sins, but after the Order of Aaron: and that when Christ did offer his Body to his Father, after the Order of Melchizedek, to appease his Wrath, it was to be under∣stood not of the Sacrifice of the Cross, but of the Sacrifice that he made at his Maundy, in form of Bread and Wine. In which Book were other Errors. He that is minded to see his Recantation of these his Books, may have it in the Appendix,No. XXXIX. as I transcribed it out of an old Book made by Becon, intituled, Reports of certain Men. This Recantation he not long after made at Oxon, viz. in August following: Where he also protested openly, That he would abide in the sincere and pure Doctrine of Christ's Gospel, all humane trifling Traditions set apart, even unto Death, though it should cost him his Life. And this Recantation he also printed, for fur∣ther Satisfaction to the World. Bishop Gardiner, who was now at Winchester,Gardiner of∣fended with this Recanta∣tion. was very uneasy at the News of this Recantation, which some took care to bring down to him. He signified to the Protector, That Smith was a Man with whom he had no Familiarity, nor cared for his Acquaintance.
That he had not seen him in three Years, nor talked with him in Seven. He was greatly displeased with the first words of his Re∣cantation,Psal. 116.11. (which yet were but the words of Scripture) Omnis Homo mendax: Making all the Doctors in the Church (as he in∣ferred) to be Liars with himself: How it argued his Pride; for he that sought for such Company in Lying, had small Humility; and that he would hide himself by that Number: that his de∣praving of Man's Nature in that sort, was not the setting out of the Authority of Scripture. He said, he neither liked his Tra∣ctation, nor yet his Retractation. That he was mad to say in his Book of Vnwritten Verities, that Bishops in this Realm could make Laws, wherein, he said, he lied loudly. About this time Chadsey,Other Univer∣sity-Men re∣cant. Standish, Yong, Oglethorp, and divers others recanted (whose Recantations Fox had by him to shew) as well as Smith, whom we have now before us. Smith affronts he ABp.After this Recantation he carried not himself according to it; but favoured the Old Errors: And in the Year 1549, offered some Af∣front unto Arch-bishop Cranmer, opposing him in the Doctrine of the Lawfulness of Priests Marriage, and endeavoured to make a Rout in Oxford, to the endangering P. Martyr's Life: and printed a Book the same Year against him, De Votis Monasticis. Whereupon incurring, as he apprehended, some Danger, he fled into Scotland. But weary of being there, and willing to have his Peace made in England, he wrote two Letters to the Arch-bishop from thence; professing that he would out of hand, by open Writing in the Latin Tongue, re∣voke all that erroneous Doctrine, which he had before taught and published, and set forth the pure Doctrine of Christ. And for a Proof hereof, he would straight after his return into England, set forth a Book in Latin, in defence of the most lawful Marriage of Priests. In the Year 1550, he wrote certain Treatises against P. Martyr, prin∣ted at Lovain. And the same Year came out his Book against the Arch-bishop's Treatise of the Sacrament. His Inconstan∣cy.This Man was of a most inconstant, as well as turbulent Spirit. For in the Reign of Queen Mary he turned to the Religion then professed; and was great with Bishop Boner in those Times, but greatly despi∣sed for his Fickleness. He once attempted to discourse with Hawks in Boner's House in London; Hawks threw in his Dish his Recantation. To which when he said, it was no Recantation, but a Declaration; the other gave him this Rub, To be short I will know, whether you will Recant any more, ere ever I talk with you, or believe you? and so departed from him. We shall hear of him again in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, when he again complied, and submitted himself to Arch-bishop Parker. And last of all returned to his old Opinions, and fled to Lovain. The ABp's ad∣monition to the Vicar of Stpney.Pass we from this Man to another of the same Strain, with whom the Arch-bishop had to do. As the Popish Clergy in the former King's Reign had made all the rudest and eagerest Opposition they dared, against the Steps that were then made towards a Reformati∣on, so they ceased not to do in this King's; nay and more, hoping to shelter themselves under a milder Government. One Instance of this appeared in what was done by the Quondam Abbot of Tower-hill,Foxii MSS.
London: Who for some Recompence of the loss of his Abby, was made Vicar of Stepney-Church; succeeding I suppose Mr. Hierom, burnt to death in the Year 1540, with Dr. Barnes and Garret. He being a bold Man, and addicted to the old Superstition, would commonly disturb the Preachers in his Church, when he liked not their Do∣ctrine, by causing the Bells to be rung when they were at the Ser∣mon; and sometimes beginning to sing in the Choir before the Ser∣mon were half done; and sometimes by challenging the Preacher in the Pulpit: For he was a strong, stout, Popish Prelat. Whom there∣fore the Godly-disposed of the Parish were weary of, and especially some of the eminentest Men at Limhurst, whose Names were Driver, Ive, Poynter, March and others. But they durst not meddle with him, until one Vnderhil, of the Band of Gentlemen-Pensioners, of a good Family, and well respected at Court, came to live at Lime∣hurst. He being the King's Servant, took upon him to reprehend this Abbot for these and such-like his Doings: and by his Authority carried him unto Croyden to the Arch-bishop there, the Persons above-named going along as Witnesses. In fine, the mild Arch-bishop sent him away with a gentle Rebuke, and bad him to do no more so. This Lenity offended Vnderhil, who said, My Lord, methinks you are too gentle unto so stout a Papist. To which Cranmer re∣plied, Well, we have no Law to punish them by. No Law, my Lord, said the other? If I had your Authority, I would be so bold to unvicar him, or minister some sharp Punishment upon him, and such other. If ever it come to their Turn, they will shew you no such Favour. Well, (said the good Arch-bishop) if God so provide, we must abide it. Surely (replied the other again) God will never con you Thanks for this, but rather take the Sword from such as will not use it upon his Enemies. And so they par∣ted. And this indeed was the constant Behaviour of the Arch-bishop towards Papists, and such as were his Enemies. For which he was now, and at other times, taxed by Men of hotter Spirits: but his Opi∣nion was, that Clemency and Goodness, as it was more agreeable to the Gospel, which he laboured to adorn, so was more likely to obtain the Ends he desired, than Rigour and Austerity. The Arch-bishop did one thing more this Year of good Conduce∣ment to the promoting true Religion, and exposing False:The ABp Li∣censeth an e∣minent Prea∣cher. and that was in countenancing and licensing an earnest Preacher in the South-West Parts, named Thomas Hancock, a Master of Arts, whose Mouth had been stopped by a strict Inhibition from Preaching in the former King's Reign. The Arch-bishop saw well what a useful Man he had been in those parts of England where he frequented, having been a very diligent Preacher of the Gospel, and Declaimer against Papal Abuses, in the Diocesses of two bigotted Bishops, Gardiner of Win∣chester, and Capon of Sarum. In this first Year of the King, many zealous Preachers of the Gospel, without staying for publick Orders from Above, earnestly set forth the Evangelical Doctrine, in confu∣tation of the Sacrifice of the Mass, and the Corporal Presence in the Sacrament, and such like. And of the Laity there were great num∣bers every where, especially in populous Towns, of such as did now more openly shew their Heads, and their good Inclinations to the
New Learning, as it was then called. In Southampton of the Diocess of Winchester; in Salisbury, Pool and Dorset, of the Diocess of Sarum, did this Hancock chiefly converse, and officiate in the latter end of K. Henry. When he was suspended à Celebratione Divinorum, by Dr. Raynold,Foxil MSS. Commissary under Dr. Steward, then Chancellor to Bp Gardi∣ner, upon pretence of the Breach of the Act of Six Articles; because he had taught, out of the Ninth to the Hebrews, That our Saviour Christ entred once into the Holy Place, by the which he obtained unto us everlasting Redemption. That he once suffered, and that his Body was once offered, to take away the Sins of many People. And that one only Oblation sufficed for the Sins of the whole World. And though all this was but mere Scripture, yet they found it to contradict their Notions, and therefore they thought con∣venient to suspend him. But as these Bishops did what they could to stifle all Preaching of God's Word, so the Arch-bishop's Principle was to encourage and send forth Preachers. So Hancock, notwithstanding his former Suspension, obtained a Licence from our Arch-bishop to preach. Now to follow this Preacher a little after his Licence obtained. At Christ-Church Twinham,Who preach∣eth against the Errors and Su∣perstitions of the Church. Foxii MSS. in the County of Southampton, where he was born, (as I take it from his own Narration) he preached out of the Sixteenth Chapter of S. Iohn, The Holy Ghost shall reprove the World of Sin, of Righteousness, &c. because I go to the Father. The Priest being then at Mass, Hancock declared unto the People, That that the Priest held over his Head, they did see with their bodily Eyes; but our Saviour Christ doth here say plainly, that we shall see him no more. Then you, saith he, that do kneel unto it, pray unto it, and honour it as God, do make an Idol of it, and your selves do commit most horrible Idolatry. Whereat the Vicar, Mr. Smith, sitting in his Chair, in the face of the Pulpit, spake these words; Mr. Hancock, you have done well until now; and now have you plaid an ill Cow's part, which when she hath given a good Mess of Milk, overthroweth all with her Foot, and so all is lost. And with these words he got him out of the Church. Also in this first Year of the King, the same Person preached in S. Thomas Church at Salisbury,Is bound to answer for his Sermon at the Assizes. Dr. Oking Chancellor to Bishop Capon, and Dr. Steward Chancellor to Bishop Gardiner, being present, with divers others of the Clergy and Laity. His place was, Every Plant which my Heavenly Father hath not planted, shall be rooted out. Whence he inveighed against the Superstitious Ceremonies, Holy Bread, Holy Water, Images, Copes, Vestments, &c. And at last against the Idol of the Altar, proving it to be an Idol, and no God, by the First of S. Iohn's Gospel, No Man hath seen God at any time; with other pla∣ces of the Old Testament. But that the Priest held over his Head, they did see, kneeled before it, honoured it; and so made an Idol of it: And therefore they were most horrible Idolaters. Where∣at the Doctors, and certain of the Clergy, went out of the Church. Hancock seeing them departing, charged them, They were not of God, because they refused to hear the Word of God. But when the Sermon was ended, Thomas Chaffen the Mayor, set on, as is likely, by some of the Clergy, came to him, laying to his Charge the
Breach of a Proclamation, lately set forth by the Lord Protector, That no Nick-names should be given unto the Sacrament, as Round-Robin, or Iack in the Box. Whereto he replied, That it was no Sacrament, but an Idol, as they used it. But for all this Excuse, the Mayor had committed him to Jail, had not Six honest Men been bound for his Appearance the next Assizes, to make his Answer: As Dr. Ieffery, about this time had committed two to Prison for the like Cause. So that now if we look back upon this first Year of the King,How far the Reformation had proceed∣ed. we may perceive, how busy and diligent our Arch-bishop was in re∣dressing Abuses, and restoring the Church to its true State of Chri∣stian Piety and Devotion; by procuring a Royal Visitation over England, for inspection into the Manners and Abilities of the Clergy, and for taking away of Superstitions; by getting a Book of plain Ho∣milies to teach the common People, (in the composing whereof he himself had a very great hand) and Erasmus his Paraphrase in Eng∣lish upon the New Testament, for the better furnishing the Clergy and others with a sound and sober understanding of the Scriptures; and by encouraging Preachers, and such-like means. So that if you would particularly know in what forwardness the ABp had already put Religion, taking in his Endeavours in the last King's Reign hi∣therto, I recommend to your reading his Homily or Sermon Of Good Works:Part 3. Shewing out of what abundance of Superstitions the Church was now emerged. Briefly, to pass over the Ungodly and Coun∣terfeit Religion, [he means, of Monks and Friars] let us re∣herse some other kinds of Papistical Superstitions and Abuses, as of Beads, of Lady-Psalters and Rosaries, of fifteen O's, of S. Ber∣nard's Verses, of S. Agathe's Letters, of Purgatory, of Masses Satisfactory, of Stations and Jubilees, of fained Relicks, or hal∣lowed Beads, Bells, Bread, Water, Psalms, Candles, Fire, and such other. Of superstitious Fastings, of Fraternities or Brother∣hoods, of Pardons, with such-like Merchandize: Which were so esteemed or abused, to the great Prejudice of God's Glory and Com∣mandments, that they were made most high and most holy Things; whereby to obtain to the everlasting Life, or Remission of Sins. Yea also vain Inventions, unfruitful Ceremonies, and ungodly Laws, Decrees and Conceits of Rome; wherein such were ad∣vanced, that nothing was thought comparable in Authority, Wis∣dom, Learning and Godliness unto them. So that the Laws of Rome, as they said, were to be received of all Men, as the four Evangelists: To the which all the Laws of Princes must give place. And the Laws of God also partly were left off, and less esteemed, that the said Laws, Decrees and Councils, with their Traditions and Ceremonies, might be more duly kept, and had in greater Reverence. Thus were the People, through Ignorance, so blinded with the godly Shew and Appearance of those things, that they thought the keeping of them to be more Holiness, more perfect Service and honouring of God, and more pleasing to God, than the keeping of God's Commandments. Such have been the corrupt Inclinations of Man, ever superstitiously given, to make new honouring of God of his own Head; and then to have more
Affection and Devotion to keep that, than to search out God's Ho∣ly Commandments, and to keep them. And furthermore, to take God's Commandments for Man's Commandments, and Man's Commandments, for God's Commandments, yea, and for the highest and most perfect and holiest of all God's Command∣ments. And so was all confused, that scant well-learned Men, and but a small number of them, knew, or at the least would know, and durst affirm the Truth, to separate or sever God's Command∣ments from the Commandments of Men. Whereupon did grow such Error, Superstition and Idolatry, vain Religion, overthwart Judgment, great Contention, with all ungodly Living. A Bishop Consecrated. Ridley conse∣crated Bp. Cran. Reg. p. 321.September the 5th, being Sunday, Nicolas Ridley, D. D. Prebend of Canterbury, was Consecrated Bishop of Rochester, by Henry Bi∣shop of Lincoln, assisted by Iohn Suffragan of Bedford, and Thomas Suffragan of Sidon, in the Chappel belonging to the House of May, Dean of S. Pauls. He was Consecrated according to the old Custom of the Church, by the Unction of holy Chrism, as well as Imposi∣tion of Hands. Present among others, Iohn Whytwel the Arch-bi∣shop's Almoner, Rich. Tayler M. A. Nic. Bullingham, Gregory Tod, and Tho. Bernard, his Chaplains. CHAP. VIII. The Church's Goods embezelled. New Opinions broached. AS the Reformation of Abuses in Religion went forward under such a King,Churches pro∣faned. and such an Arch-bishop, so there wanted not for Evils accompanying it, as there do commonly the best Things; the Profaneness of some, and the Covetousness of others, giving occa∣sion thereunto. Sacred Places set apart for Divine Worship, were now greatly profaned; and so probably had been before by ill Cu∣stom: For in many Churches, Cathedral as well as other, and espe∣cially in London, many Frays, Quarrels, Riots, Blood-sheddings were committed. They used also commonly to bring Horses and Mules into and through Churches, and shooting off Hand-guns: Making the same which were properly appointed to God's Service and Common-Prayer, like a Stable or Common Inn, or rather a Den or Sink of all Unchristiness; as it was expressed in a Proclamati∣on which the King set forth about this Time,Cotton Libr. Titus B. 2. as I suppose, (for I am left to conjecture for the Date) by reason of the Insolency of great Numbers using the said evil Demeanours, and daily more and more encreasing: Therein forbidding any such Quarrelling, Shooting, or bringing Horses and Mules into or through the Churches, or by any other Means irreverently to use the Churches, upon pain of his Majesty's Indignation and Imprisonment. For it was not thought fit, that when Divine Worship was now reforming, the Places for the said Worship should remain unreformed.
Beside the profanation of Churches, there prevailed now another Evil, relating also to Churches, viz. That the Utensils and Orna∣ments of these Sacred Places, were spoiled, embezelled,Church Orna∣ments embe∣zelled. and made away, partly by the Church-wardens, and partly by other Pa∣rishioners. Whether the Cause were, that they would do that them∣selves, which they imagined would e're long be done by others, viz. robbing the Churches. Which, it may be, those that bore an Ill-will to the Reformation might give out, to render it the more odious. But certain it is, that it now became more or less practised all the Na∣tion over, to sell or take away Chalices, Crosses of Silver, Bells, and other Ornaments. For the stopping of this, in the Month of April, the Protector, and the Lords of the Council, writ to our Arch-bishop this Letter, upon the Information and Complaint, as it is likely, of the said Arch-bishop himself, in whose Diocess especially this Sacri∣lege prevailed. AFter our right hearty Commendations.The Council's Letter to the ABp thereup∣on. Cran. Regist. Whereas we are in∣formed, that the Church-wardens and Parochians of divers Parishes do alienate and sell away their Chalices, Crosses of Silver, Bells, and other Ornaments of the Church: Which were not given for that purpose to be alienated at their pleasure; but either to be used to the Intent they were at first given, or to some other neces∣sary and convenient Service of the Church. Therefore this is to will and require you immediately, upon the sight hereof, to give strait Charge and Commandment, on the King's Majesty's be∣half, to every Parish-Church within your Diocess, that they do in no wise sell, give, or otherwise alienate any Bells, or other Orna∣ments, or Jewels, belonging unto their Parish-Church, upon pain of his highest Displeasure, as they will answer to the contrary at their Peril. Thus fare you well. From Westminster, the last day of April 1548. Your loving Friends, E. Somerset Tho. Cheyney. Will. Seint-Iohn. Will. Paget. I. Russell. Tho. Smith. Will. Herbert. H. Arundel. A. Denny. Ioh. Baker. . It is not an improbable Conjecture, that the Arch-bishop procured this Letter, to arm Church-wardens with an Answer to such greedy Courtiers and Gentlemen, as used often to resort to them; and in their own, or the Council's Name, required these Goods of their Churches to be yielded up to them; and threatned them if they did not. The next Month the Council sent the Arch-bishop a Form of Prayer, to be used by himself and those of his Diocess.A Form of Prayer sent to the ABp. Wherein God was implored to grant the Nation Peace and Victory over her Ene∣mies: For now all things round about appeared in a Posture of War; and Preparation of Arms were making: Which caused the King also to raise Forces. And for a Blessing upon them, the Privy-Council sent to the Arch-bishop, together with the Form, an Order for the speedy using of it. The Tenor of the Letter follows.
AFter our hearty Commendations to your good Lordship. Hearing tell of great Preparations made of Foreign Princes, and otherwise, being inforced for the Procurement and Continu∣ance of Peace,With the Council's Let∣ter. Cran. Regist. to make Preparation of War: Forasmuch as all Power and Aid valuable cometh of God; the which he granteth, as he hath promised by his Holy Word, by nothing so much as by hearty Prayers of good Men: The which is also of more Effica∣cy, made of an whole Congregation together, gathered in his Holy Name: Therefore this is to will and require you, to give Advertisement and Commandments to all the Curats in your Dio∣cess, That every Sunday and Holy-day, in their Common-Prayer, they make devout and hearty Intercessions to Almighty God for Victory and Peace. And to the Intent, that you should not be in Doubts what sort and manner thereof we do like, we have sent unto you one: Which we would that you and they should follow, and read it instead of one of the Collects of the King's Majesty's Procession. Thus we pray you not to fail to do with all speed, and bid you farewel. From Westminster, the 6th of May, 1548. Your loving Friends,E. Somerset. R. Rich, Canc. W. Seint-Iohn. I. Russel. Th. Cheyney. New Opinions Broached.Now that the Liberty of the Gospel began to be allowed, divers false Opinions and unsound Doctrines began to be vented with it; of which publick Cognizance began now to be taken. As that the Elect sinned not, and that they could not sin. That they that be Regenerate, never fall away from godly Love. That the Elect have a right to take so much of the Things of the World, as may supply their Necessities. And there were some that openly prea∣ched these Doctrines, and set forth and published Books to the same Tenor. Several of these Hereticks, in the Month of April, were conven∣ted before the Arch-bishop of Canterbury,Cranm. Regist. Sir Thomas Smith; Richard Cox, Hugh Latimer, Doctors of Divinity; William May, Dean of St. Pauls; William Cook, Richard Lyel, Doctors of Law, and others the King's Commissioners. Then did one Iohn Champneys, of Strat∣ford on the Bow, abjure. He taught, and wrote, and defended; 1. That a Man after he is Regenerate in Christ, cannot sin. 2. That the outward Man might sin, but the inward Man could not. 3. That the Gospel hath been so much persecuted and ha∣ted ever since the Apostles Times, that no Man might be suffered openly to follow it. 4. That godly Love falleth never away from them which be regenerate in Christ. Wherefore they can∣not do contrary to the Commandments of Christ. 5. That that was the most principal of our marked Mens Doctrine, that make the People believe that there was no such Spirit given unto Men whereby they should remain Righteous, and always in Christ. Which is [as he wrote and asserted] a most devilish Er∣ror. 6. That God doth permit to all his Elect People their bodily Necessities of all earthly Things.
All these he revoked: Granting or confessing now, 1. That a Man, after he is regenerate in Christ, may sin, being destitute of his Spirit. 2. That the inner Man doth sin,Champneys re∣vokes six Arti∣cles. when the outward Man sinneth actually with the consent of the Mind. 3. That di∣vers times, sithence the Apostles Times, to follow the Doctrine of Christ hath been suffered openly. 4. That godly Love falleth from them, that be regenerate in Christ, being destitute of the Spirit: and that then they may do contrary to the Commands of Christ. 5. That it is no erroneous Doctrine, which he affirmed in his Book to be a devilish Error, and our marked Mens Doctrine, viz. To make the People believe, that there was no such Spirit given unto Man, whereby he should remain Righteous always in Christ. But I confess, [saith the Abjurer] that a Man having the Spirit, may afterwards fall, and not be Righteous. 6. That God doth not permit to all his Elect People their bodily Necessi∣ties of all worldly things to be taken, but by a Law and Order ap∣proved by the Civil Policy. To which by me now spoken I mean, ne understand any other Sense than hath been here opened; to use again his very words in his Abjuration. And so touching the Holy Gospel with his Hand, before the King's Commissioners, he abjured, promising, That he should never hold, teach or believe the said Errors, or damned Opinions above rehearsed. And so subscribed his Name. Then the Arch-bishop in his own Name,And abjure. and in the Name of the other Commissioners, gave him his Oath. 1. That he should not by any means hereafter teach or preach to the People, nor set forth any kind of Books, in print or otherwise, nor cause to be printed or set forth any such Books, that should contain any manner of Doctrine, without a special Licence thereunto of the King's Ma∣jesty, or some of his Grace's Privy-Council first had and obtained. 2. That the said Champneys, with all speed convenient, and with all his diligence, procure as many of his Books, as are passed forth in his Name, to be called in again, and utterly destroyed, as much as in him should lie. 3. That he should the Sunday following at∣tend at Pauls Cross upon the Preacher, all the time of the Sermon, and there penitently stand before the Preacher with a Faggot on his Shoulder. And then he had two Sureties bound in five hundred Pounds, that he should perform his Penance. This was done April 27. There were other Heresies also now vented abroad,Other Heresies vented. as the denial of the Trinity, and of the Deity of the Holy Ghost: And the Asser∣tion, That Jesus Christ was a mere Man, and not true God, because he had the Accidents of Humane Nature; such as hungring and thirsting, and being visible: And that the Benefit Men receive by Jesus Christ, was the bringing them to the true Knowledg of God. There was one Iohn Assheton a Priest, that preached these Doctrines: Who on the 28th of December was summoned to Lambeth, to appear there before the Arch-bishop.Cranm. Regist. Where Iohn Whitwel the Arch-bi∣shop's Almoner, and Thomas Langley, both Priests, and his Grace's Chaplains, exhibited a Schedule of divers Heresies and damned Opi∣nions against the said Assheton. Which are recited in the Abjuration which he made. The Tenor whereof is as followeth.
In the Name of God, Amen. Before you, most Learned Fa∣ther in God, Thomas Arch-bishop, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, Commissary of our most dread Soveraign Lord, and excellent Prince,Assheton's Re∣cantation. Edward VI, by the Grace of God, &c. I Iohn Assheton Priest, of my pure Heart, Free-will, voluntary and sincere Knowledg, confess and openly recognize, that in Times past, I thought, believed, said, heard and affirmed these Errors, Heresies, and damnable Opinions following; that is to say, 1. That the Trinity of Persons was established by the Confession of Athanasius, declared by a Psalm, Quicun{que} vult, &c. And that the Holy Ghost is not God, but only a certain Power of the Fa∣ther. 2. That Iesus Christ, that was conceived of the Virgin Mary, was a holy Prophet, and especially beloved of God the Fa∣ther; but that he was not the true and living God: Forasmuch as he was seen, and lived, hungred and thirsted. 3. That this only is the Fruit of Iesus Christ's Passion; that whereas we were stran∣gers from God, and had no knowledg of his Testament, it pleased God by Christ, to bring us to the acknowledging of his holy Power by the Testament. Wherefore I the said Iohn Assheton, detesting and abhorring all and every my said Errors, Heresies, and damned Opinions, wil∣lingly, and with all my Power, affecting hereafter firmly to be∣lieve in the true and perfect Faith of Christ, and his Holy Church, purposing to follow the true and sincere Doctrine of holy Church with a pure and free Heart, voluntarily mind, will, and intend ut∣terly to forsake, relinquish, renounce and despise the said detesta∣ble Errors, Heresies, and abominable Opinions: Granting and confessing now, 1. That the blessed Trinity consisteth in Three di∣stinct Persons, and one Godhead; as God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, coequal in Power and Might. 2. That Jesus Christ is both God and Man, after his holy Nature, eternal∣ly begotten of his Father, of his own Substance; and in his Hu∣manity was conceived by the Holy Ghost incarnate, and for our Re∣demption, being very God, became Man. 3. That by the Death of Iesus Christ we be not only made Partakers of the Testament, and so disposed to the Knowledg of his godly Will and Power, but also that we have full Redemption and Remission of our Sins in his Blood. Then he subscribed his Hand to this Confession be∣fore the Arch-bishop, exhibiting it for his Act; and lifting up his Hand, beseeched his Grace to deal mercifully and graciously with him; and touching the Gospel, gave his Faith that he would faith∣fully and humbly obey the Commands of the Holy Mother-Church, and whatsoever Penance the said most Reverend Father should lay upon him. Other Errors still.To these erroneous Doctrines we must add others, that now also spread themselves: As that Christ took not Flesh of the Virgin; That the Baptism of Infants was not profitable. Of which Error one Michael Thombe of London, Butcher, recanted the Year follow∣ing, viz. 1549, May 11. having been then convented before the Arch-bishop at Lambeth.
I Michael Thombe of London, Bocher, of my pure Heart and free Will, voluntarily and sincerely acknowledg and confess, and openly recognize, that in times past, I thought, believed, said, heard and affirmed, these Errors and Heresies, and damnable Opi∣nions following: that is to say, That Christ took no Flesh of our Lady; and that the Baptism of Infants is not profitable, because it goeth before Faith. Wherefore I, the said Michael Thombe, de∣testing and abhorring all and every such my said Errors, Heresies, and damned Opinions; and with all my Power affecting hereafter firmly to believe in the true and perfect Faith of Christ, and of the Holy Church, purposing to follow the true and sincere Doctrine of Holy Church, with a pure and free Heart, voluntarily mind, will, and intend, utterly to forsake, relinquish, renounce and de∣spise the said detestable Errors, Heresies, and damnable Opinions; granting and confessing now, That Christ took Flesh of the Virgin Mary; and that the Baptism of Infants is profitable and necessary. And by this Submission and Penance doing, Thombe escaped. But another of the same Opinion, more obstinate, came to a sadder End; and was Burnt; namely, Ioan Bocher, or Ioan of Kent.Ioan Boches Heresy▪ Her Opi∣nion is in the Instrument drawn up against her in the ABp's Regi∣ster. Which ran thus; That you believe that the Word was made Flesh in the Virgin's Belly; but that Christ took Flesh of the Vir∣gin you believe not, because the Flesh of the Virgin being the out∣ward Man, was sinfully gotten, and born in Sin. But the Word, by the Consent of the inward Man of the Virgin, was made Flesh. This she stood perversely in. So the Arch-bishop himself excommu∣nicated her judicially; the Sentence being read by him, April 1549, in S. Mary's Chappel within the Cathedral Church of Pauls, Sir Tho∣mas Smith, William Cook Dean of the Arches, Hugh Latimer, Ri∣chard Lyell, LL. D. the King's Commissioners, assisting. She was com∣mitted afterwards to the Secular Arm; and certified so to be by an Instrument made by the Commissioners to the King. After she was condemned, she was a Sevennight in the Lord Chancellor Rich his House: and every day the Arch-bishop and Bishop Ridley came and reasoned with her, that if possible they might save her from the Fire: But nothing would do. I will here produce Latimer's Censure of her,Latime's Cen∣sure of her▪ who well knew her Case, being one of the Commissioners that sat up∣on her. She would say, (saith he in his Sermon on S. Iohn Evange∣list's Day) That our Saviour was not very Man, nor had received Flesh of his Mother Mary. And yet she could shew no reason why she should believe so. Her Opinion was this, The Son of God, said she, penetrated through her as through a Glass, taking no Sub∣stance of her. This foolish Woman denied the common Creed, Natus ex Maria Virgine, and said that our Saviour had a fantastical Body. A Dutch Man, an Arian, named George van Paris, denying Christ to be true God, came to a like End with Ioan, namely,Georg Van Pa∣ris. that of burning to Death, being condemned for Heresy; that was in the Year 1551. But tho I make some Anticipation in my History, yet I do it, that I may lay these Heresies here together, that started up, or rather shewed themselves more visibly in this Reign.
CHAP. IX. The Arch-bishop Visits. THE Arch-bishop in this Year held a Visitation in divers Places throughout his Diocess.The ABp visits his Diocess. Wherein enquiry was to be made con∣cerning the Behaviour both of the Priests and the People, in eighty six Articles. Whereby may be seen the Arch-bishop's conscientious Care and Solicitude for the abrogating of Superstition, and the pro∣moting of true Religion: That he might reduce the Clergy to Learning, Sobriety, and Diligence in their Vocation; and the Peo∣ple to Loyalty and Obedience to the King, and the sincere worship∣ping of God. His Articles for the Clergy.Concerning the Priests, he ordered enquiry to be made; Whe∣ther they preached four times a Year against the usurped Power of the Bishop of Rome, and in behalf of the King's Power and Au∣thority within his own Realms. Whether in their Common-Prayers, they used not the Collects made for the King, and men∣tioned not his Majesty's Name in the same. Whether they had destroyed and taken away out of the Churches, all Images and Shrines, Tables, Candlesticks, Trindals or Rolls of Wax, and all other Monuments of feigned Miracles, Idolatry and Superstition; and moved their Parishioners to do the same in their own Houses. Enquiries were made concerning their due Administration of the Sacraments; concerning their preaching God's Word once at least in a Quarter; and then exhorting their Parishioners to Works com∣manded by Scripture, and not to Works devised by Mens Fancies, as wearing and praying upon Beads, and such-like. Concerning the plain reciting the Lord's Prayer, the Creed, and Ten Command∣ments in English, immediately after the Gospel, as often as there were no Sermon. Concerning the examining of every one that came to Confession in Lent, whether they were able to say the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and Ten Commandments, in English. Con∣cerning the having Learned Curats, to be procured by such as were absent from their Benefices. Concerning having the whole Bible of the largest Volume in every Church, and Erasmus's Paraphrase in English. Concerning teaching the People of the Nature of the Fast of Lent, and other Days in the Year, that it was but a mere positive Law. Concerning Residence upon Benefices, and keeping Hospitality. Concerning finding a Scholar in the Universities, o some Grammar-School, incumbent on such Priests as had an hundred pounds a Year. Concerning moving the Parishioners to pray rather in English, than in a Tongue unknown, and not to put their Trust in saying over a number of Beads. Concerning having the New Testament in Latin and English, and Erasmus's Paraphrase, which all Priests under the Degree of Batchelors in Divinity, were exa∣mined about. Concerning putting out of the Church-Books the Name of Papa, and the Name and Service of Thomas Becket, and the Prayers that had Rubricks, containing Pardons and Indulgen∣ces. And many the like Articles. Which may be seen by him
that will have recourse to them, as they are printed in Bishop Spar∣row's Collections. Those Articles that related to the Laity, were,And for the Laity. Concerning the Letters or Hinderers of the Word of God read in English, or preached sincerely. Concerning such as went out of the Church in time of the Litany, or Common-Prayer, or Sermon. Concern∣ing ringing Bells at the same time. Concerning such as abused the Ceremonies, as casting Holy Water upon their Beds, bearing about them Holy Bread, S. Iohn's Gospel; keeping of private Holy∣days, as Taylors, Bakers, Brewers, Smiths, Shoemakers, &c. did. Concerning the misbestowing of Money arising from Cattel, or other moveable Stocks of the Church, as for finding of Lights, Torches, Tapers or Lamps, and not employed to the poor Man's Chest. Concerning abusing Priests and Ministers. Concerning praying upon the English Primer, set forth by the King, and not the Latin, for such as understand not Latin. Concerning keeping the Church-Holy-day, and the Dedication-day, any otherwise, or at any other time than was appointed. Concerning Commoning and Jangling in the Church, at the time of reading the Common-Prayer or Homilies, or when there was preaching. Concerning maintenance of Error and Heresy. Concerning common Swearers, Drunkards, Blasphemers, Adulterers, Bawds. Enquiries were also to be made after such as were common Brawlers, Slanderers; such as used Charms, Sorceries, Inchantments and Witchcraft; such as contemned their own Parish-Church, and went else-where. Concerning Marrying within the Degrees prohibited, and with∣out asking the Bannes. Concerning the honest discharge of Wills and Testaments, in such as were Executors or Administrators. Concerning such as contemned married Priests, and refused to re∣ceive the Communion and other Sacraments at their Hands. Con∣cerning such as kept in their own Houses Images, Tables, Pi∣ctures, Painting, or Monuments of fained Miracles undefa∣ced, &c. In this Year also the Arch-bishop,An Exchange made between the ABp and the Lord Wind∣sor. with the Dean and Chapter of Canterbury, granted the Patronage, Rectory, &c. of Rieborough Mo∣nachorum in the County of Bucks, to the Lord Windsor, for fourscore and nineteen Years: And in Exchange, the said Lord granted to the Arch-bishop the Advouson, Patronage and Nomination of Mid∣ley in Kent for the same duration of Years. September the 9th, being Sunday, Robert Farrar,Bishop of S. Davids Conse∣crated. Cran. Regist. Fol. 327. D. D. was Con∣secrated Bishop of S. Davids, by Thomas Arch-bishop of Canterbury, endued with his Pontificals, and assisted by Henry Bishop of Lincoln, and Nicolas Bishop of Rochester, at Chertsey in the Diocess of Winton, in the Arch-bishop's House there. Then certain Hymns, Psalms and Prayers being recited, together with a Portion of Scripture read in the vulgar Tongue, out of S. Paul's Epistles, and the Gospel of S. Mat∣thew, the Arch-bishop celebrated the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ. There communicated the Reverend Fathers, Tho∣mas Bishop of Ely, Thomas Bishop of Westminster, Henry Bishop of Lincoln, Nicolas Bishop of Rochester, and Farrar the new Bishop; together with William May Dean of S. Pauls, Simon Hains Dean of
Exon, Thomas Robertson and Iohn Redman, Professors of Divinity, and others. The Arch-bishop then distributed the Communion in English Words. This Bishop (as it is writ in the Margin of the Register) was the first that was consecrated upon the bare Nomina∣tion of the King, according to the Statute that for that purpose was published in the first Year of his Reign. The Form of the King's Letters Patents, whereby he constituted Farrar Bishop, is ex∣tant in the Register, dated from Leghes, August 1. in the second Year of his Reign. Some account of this Bishop.At this Bishop of S. Davids I will stay a little: proving unhappy by his Preferment unto a Church, whose Corruptions, while he en∣deavoured to correct, he sunk under his commendable Endeavours. He was an active Man, and made much use of in Publick Affairs in K. Henry and K. Edward's Days; having been first a Canon of S. Ma∣ry's in Oxon. He was with Bp Barlow, when he was by K. Henry sent Ambassador to Scotland, An. 1535. Another time employed in carrying old Books of great Value from S. Oswalds, a dissolved Monastery, as it seems, unto the Arch-bishop of York. And in the Royal Visitation in the beginning of King Edward, he was one of the King's Visitors, being appointed one of the Preachers, for his great Ability in that Faculty: And being Chaplain to the Duke of Somerset, was by his means advanced to be Bishop; and upon his Fall he fell into great Troubles. This Bishop, not long after his first entrance upon his Bishoprick, resolved to visit his Diocess, like a careful Pastor, hearing of very great Corruptions in it, and particularly among those that belonged to the Chapter of the Church of Carmarthen; and chiefly Thomas Young Chaunter, after Arch-bishop of York, (who pulled down the great Hall in the Palace there for lucre of the Lead) and Rowland Meric, one of the Canons, after Bishop of the said See of S. Davids, and Father to Sir Gilly Merick, that came to an untimely Death, by being in the Business of the Earl of Essex. These two having been before Commissaries of this Diocess, had spoiled the Cathedral Church of Crosses, Chalices, and Censors; with o∣ther Plate, Jewels and Ornaments, to the value of five hundred Marks or more; and converted them to their own private Benefit: and had sealed many Blanks (Sede Vacante) without the King's Licence or Knowledg. Whereupon the Bishop issued out his Commission to his Chancellor for visiting the Chapter, as well as the rest of the Diocess. But the Commission was, it seems, drawn up amiss by the said Chan∣cellor, to whom the Bishop left the forming the Draught: For it ran in the old Popish Form, and so the King's Supremacy not sufficiently acknowledged therein; though he professed to visit in the King's Name and Authority. This these two, in Combination with his own ingrateful Register, George Constantine, whom he had preferred, took their Advantage of; not only to disobey the said Commission, but to accuse the poor Bishop of a Praemunire. For which he was sain to go down from London, whither they had before brought him up, to answer at the Assizes of Carmarthen. And when by reason of the Molestations they gave him, and their detaining him in London, he could not be so exact in paying in the Tenths, and First-Fruits and Subsidies, due from the Clergy of his Diocess; they took hold of this as
another Crime to lay to his Charge. And hereupon in fine, he was kept in Prison a long time, and so remained when Queen Mary en∣tred upon the Government. Upon which Occasion he fell into the Hands of the Pope's Butchers. Who at last, for maintaining the Truth, sent him into his Diocess, and burnt him at a Stake. And thus these Men became the Instruments of his Death. In their vexatious Suits against this good Bishop,The ABp swayed by Far∣rar's Enemies. undertaken the better to conceal their own Faults, our Arch-bishop seemed to be engaged, giving too much credit to the ill Reports that Farrar's Enemies raised against him, in a great heap of frivolous and malicious Articles, exhibited to the King's Council. Who appointed Sir Iohn Mason and Dr. VVotton to examine them: Though, I suppose, our pious Arch-bishop afterwards saw through this Malice, and forbore any further to give Influence to those that prosecuted this honest Man: Understanding by Letters, which that afflicted Man sent, both to him and Bishop Goodrick Lord Chancellor, his unjust Vexa∣tions wrought by his Adversaries. One whereof, I mean his Regi∣ster, remained Register to that very Popish Bishop that succeeded him, nay, and was assistant at his Trial and Condemnation. In short, hear what one writes that lived nearer those Times, and might therefore be presumed to know more of these Matters. This was a Conspiracy of his Enemies against him,Sutlis Answ. to Parson's Threefold Convers. of England. and of wicked Fellows who had robbed the Church, kept Concubines, falsified Records, and committed many other gross Abuses. To con∣clude, I find, by a private Letter written to Iohn Fox, that these Men, knowing how they had wronged the good Bishop, came to him be∣fore his Death, and asked him Forgiveness; and he like a good Chri∣stian forgave them, and was reconciled to them. CHAP. X. The Arch-bishop answers the Rebels Articles. THE Commons this Year brake out into a dangerous Rebelli∣on; and though they were once or twice appeased,An. 1549. Rebellion in Devon. and scat∣tered in some Places, yet they made Insurrections in others: And chiefly in Devon, where they were very formidable for their Num∣bers. The Reason they pretended was double: The one was, the Oppression of the Gentry in enclosing of their Commons from them. The other, the laying aside the old Religion; which, because it was Old, and the Way their Forefathers worshipped God, they were very fond of. The Ld Russel, Ld Privy-Seal, who was sent against them, of∣fering to receive their Complaints, the Rebels sent them to him, drawn up under 15 Articles. As before they had sent their Demands in seven Articles, and a Protestation that they were the King's, Body and Goods. In Answer to which the King sent a Message to them, that may be seen in Fox. They sent also a Supplication to the King: To the which an Answer was made by the King's Learned Counsel. I shall take notice only of the fifteen Articles,The ABp Aswers the Re∣bels Articles▪ unto which our Arch-bishop drew up an excellent Answer at good length: For no
Man was thought so fit as he, to open and unravel these Mens Re∣quests,An. 1549. and to unfold the unreasonableness of them; and to shew what real Mischief they would pluck down upon themselves and the Nation, should all the Decrees of our Forefathers, and the Six Arti∣cles be revived again: and what great Injury Religion would receive, should the Latin Masses, and Images, and the worshipping the Sacra∣ment, and Purgatory, and Abbies, be restored, and Cardinal Pole come Home, and the English Bible be called in, and such-like things which their Demands consisted of. This Answer of the Arch-bishop I judg worthy preserving; (and therefore, though somewhat long, I have laid in the Appendix;N•. XL.) because it will shew his Wisdom, Learn∣ing, and the Knowledg of the State of the Kingdom that he was fur∣nished with. I met with these Writings in the Manuscript Libra∣rary of Benet College, being the rough Draught of them, all under the Arch-bishop's own Hand. He charged them with Ignorance in put∣ting up such Articles. And concluded them not to be their own Minds to have them granted, had they understood them, but that they were indeed devised by some Priests, and rank Papists and Traitors to the Realm; which he would not so much as think of them. So that he gently told them, that he must use the same expression to them, that Christ did to Iames and Iohn, They asked they wot not what. The Arch-bishop wrot this Answer after the Rout at Exeter given them by the Lord Russel,Some Account thereof. and the taking Prisoners divers of their Captains and Priests, and between the Condemnation and Execu∣tion of Humphrey Arundel, and Bray Mayor of Bodmin; Whom he prayed God to make penitent before their Deaths, to which they were adjudged. For which two the Rebels in one of their Articles, had required safe Conduct to make their Grievances known to the King. As they had, in another Article, demanded two Di∣vines of the same Popish stamp, to be sent to them to preach, name∣ly, Moreman and Crispin: Who both seemed now, being Priests of that Country, to be under Restraint upon suspicion: Men, as the Arch-bishop told them, ignorant of God's Word, but of notable Craft, Wilfulness and Dissimulation, and such as would poison them, instead of feeding them.Crispin. Of Crispin I find little, but that he was once Proctor of the University of Oxon, and Doctor of the Faculty of Physick,Morman. and of Oriel College. Moreman was beneficed in Corn∣wal in King Henry's Time, and seemed to go along with that King in his steps of Reformation, and was observed to be the first that taught his Parishioners the Lord's Prayer, the Creed and the Ten Commandments in English; yet shewing himself in the next King's Reign a Zealot for the old Superstitions. Hence we perceive the Rea∣son why the Arch-bishop charged him to be a Man full of Craft and Hypocrisy. In Q. Mary's Time he was, for his Popish Merits, preferred to be Dean of Exeter, and was Coadjutor to the Bishop of that Diocess (probably then superannuated,) and died in that Queen's Reign. Besides these two, there was another Clergy-man the Rebels spent a∣nother Article in speaking for,Cardinal Pole. namely, Cardinal Pole: Whom they would have sent for Home, and to be preferred to be of the Privy-Council. But Cranmer told them his Judgment; first, in general, of Cardinals, that they never did Good to this Realm, but always Hurt:
And then in particular of this Cardinal, that he had read once a vi∣rulent Book of his writing against King Henry, exciting the Pope, the Emperor, the French King, and all other Princes, to invade this Realm: And therefore that he was so far from deserving to be called Home, and to live in England, that he deserved not to live at all. In fine, in this excellent Composition of the Arch-bishop, his Design was, to expose the Abuses and Corruptions of Popery, and to con∣vince the Nation what need there was, that such Matters should be abolished, as the Pope's Decrees, Solitary Masses, Latin Service, hanging the Host over the Altar, Sacrament in one Kind, Holy Bread, and Holy Water, Palms, Ashes, Images, the old Service-Book, pray∣ing for Souls in Purgatory: And to vindicate the English Service, the use of the Holy Scriptures in the Vulgar Tongue, and other Matters relating to the Reformation, made in King Edward's Time. Which he doth all along with that strain of happy Perspicuity and Easiness, that one shall scarcely meet with elsewhere, mixed every where with great Gravity, Seriousness and Compassion. The Arch-bishop thought it highly convenient in these Commo∣tions round about, to do his Endeavour to keep those People,The ABp pro∣cures Sermons to be made against the Re∣bellion. that were still and quiet as yet, in their Duty. And for this Purpose had Sermons composed, to be now read by the Curats to the People in their Churches, to preserve them in their Obedience, and to set out the Evil and Mischief of the present Disturbances. I find in the same Volume where Cranmer's Answers aforesaid are,Miscelln. D. a Sermon a∣gainst the Seditions arising now every where, with the Arch-bishop's Interlinings, and marginal Notes and Corrections. This Sermon was first wrote in Latin by Peter Martyr, (as a Note of Arch-bishop Parker's Hand testifieth) at Arch-bishop Cranmer's Request to the said Learned Man, no question; and so by his Order translated into English, and printed, I suppose, for the common Use in those Times. It begins thus; The common Sorrow of this present Time, dear beloved Brethren in Christ, if I should be more led thereby,Peter Martyr's Sermon upon this Occasion▪ than by Reason and Zeal to my Country, would move me rather to hold my Peace than to speak. For the great Evils which we now suffer, are to be bewail∣ed with Tears and Silence, rather than with Words. And here∣unto I might allege for me the Example of Iob, who when he came to his extream Misery, he lying upon a Dunghil, and three of his Friends sitting upon the Ground by him for the space of se∣ven Days, for great Sorrow, not one of them opened his Mouth to speak a word to another. If then the miserable Estate of Iob, like a hard and sharp Bit, stopped his Mouth from speaking; and the lamentable Case of their Friend, staid these three Men, being of Speech most Eloquent, that they could not utter their words; surely it seems, that I have a much more cause to be still, and hold my peace. For there was the piteous Lamentation of no more but one Man, or one Houshold, and that only concerning temporal and worldly Substance; but we have cause to bewail a whole Realm, and that most Noble, which lately being in that State, that all other Realms envied our Wealth, and feared our Force, is now so troubled, so vexed, so tossed and deformed, and that by Sedition
among our selves, of such as be Members of the same, that no∣thing is left unattempted to the utter Ruin and Subversion thereof: And besides this, the everlasting Punishment of God threatneth as well the Authors and Procurers of these Seditions, as all other that join themselves unto them, &c. Besides this Sermon of P. Martyr's, there is another Discourse pen'd by him under his own hand on the same occasion, designed as it seems to be translated into English, and sent to the Rebels; thus beginning: Tantum voluit Deus vim charitatis & amoris magnitudinem, inter populum & magistratum intercedere, ut per Hieremiam admonuerit ple∣bem Israeliticam, quod pro Rege Nebuchadnezar orarent, qui corum Rempub. everterat, illosque adhuc captivitate Babylonica premebat. Dominus tametsi voluit suos, instar columbarum, simplices degere, idem nihilominus admonuit, ut serpentum prudentiam imitarentur, qua suas actiones Literarum Sacrarum praecepts regerent & moderarentur, cave∣rent{que} ne aliena consilia, ut Papistarum vel Seditiosorum se in transver∣sum auferrent. Si potuissetis (quod est prudentium) in longinquum prospicere, omnino vidissetis caeteros hostes (uti nunc res ipsa declarat) fretos vestris tumulti∣bus in vestrum Regnum arma sumpturos, & ausuros impunè, qui nun∣quam, si in officio mansissetis, tentassent, &c. The French take Occasion at this Rebel∣lion.This last Paragraph respected the French King, who taking occasion from these Broils at Home, brake out into open Hostility against the Kingdom, recalling his Ambassador, and on a sudden brought his Ships against the Isles of Iersey and Guernsey, with an intent to have con∣quered them. But by the Valour of the Inhabitants, and some of the King's Ships, he was beaten off with great Loss. This was in the Month of August. Bucer's Dis∣course against the Sedition.Martin Bucer also wrote a Discourse against this Sedition, as well as Martyr. Both of them were now, I suppose, under the Arch-bishop's Roof, entertained by him. And he thought it convenient that these learned Foreigners should give some publick Testimony of their Dis∣like of these Doings. Bucer's Discourse subjoined to Martyr's, began in this Tenor: Quae dici possunt ad sedandos animos plebis, & ab omni conatu seditio∣so absterrendos (quod ad rem ipsam attinet) inscripta sunt omnia, in Re∣verendissimi D. N. M. Ven. Collegae nostri Pet. Martyris Schedis, ut no∣stra adjectione nulla sit opus, tamen ut consensum spiritus testemur, ha subjecta libuit annotare, &c. The ABp's Prayer, com∣posed for this Occasion.An Office of Fasting was composed for this Rebellion, which be∣ing allayed in the West, grew more formidable in Norfolk and York∣shire. For I find a Prayer composed by the Arch-bishop, with these words preceding; The Exhortation to Penance, or the Supplication, may end with this or some other-like Prayer. And then the Prayer followeth: O Lord, whose Goodness far exceedeth our Naughtiness, and whose Mercy passeth all Measure, we confess thy Judgment to be most Just, and that we worthily have deserved this Rod wherewith thou hast now beaten us. We have offended the Lord God: We have lived wickedly: We have gone out of the Way:
We have not heard thy Prophets which thou hast sent unto us, to teach us thy Word, nor have done as thou hast commanded us: wherefore we be most worthy to suffer all these Plagues. Thou hast done justly, and we be worthy to be confounded. But we Provoke unto thy Goodness; we Appeal unto thy Mercy; we humble our selves; we knowledg our Faults. We turn to thee, O Lord, with our whole Hearts, in Praying, in Fasting, in Lament∣ing and Sorrowing for our Offences. Have Mercy upon us, cast us not away according to our Deserts, but hear us, and deliver us with speed, and call us to thee again according to thy Mercy: That we with one Consent, and one Mind, may evermore glorify Thee, World without End. Amen. After this follow some rude Draughts written by Arch-bishop Cranmer's own Hand, for the Composing, as I suppose, of an Ho∣mily, or Homilies, to be used for the Office aforesaid: which may be read in the Appendix.No. XI. CHAP. XI. Bishop Boner Deprived. ON the 8th of September,The ABp de∣prives Boner. a Commission was issued out from the King to our Arch-bishop, together with Ridley Bishop of Ro∣chester, Petre and Smith, the two Secretaries, and Dr. May Dean of Pauls, to examine Boner Bishop of London, for several Matters of Contempt of the King's Order. The Witnesses against him were William Latimer and Iohn Hoper. After the patience of seven Ses∣sions at Lambeth, in all which he carried himself disdainfully, mak∣ing Excuses and Protestations, first against Sir Thomas Smith, and then against them all, and Appealing to the King, the Arch-bishop in the Name of the rest declared him Obstinate, and pronounced a Sentence of Deprivation against him; and committed him to the Marshalsea for his extraordinary Rudeness to the King's Commis∣sioners; and there he abode all this King's Reign. I will only men∣tion somewhat of his Behaviour towards the good Arch-bishop. At his first appearance before the Commissioners,Discourse be∣tween the ABp and him▪ concerning his Book. which was on the 10th of September, when they told him the Reason of their Com∣mission, viz. To call him to Account for a Sermon lately by him made at Pauls Cross; for that he did not publish to the People the Article he was commanded to preach upon, that is, of the King's Authority during his Minority: He after a bold scoffing manner gave no direct Answer to this, but turned his Speech to the ABp, swearing, That he wished one thing were had in more Reverence than it was, namely, the Blessed Mass, as he stiled it: And tel∣ling the Arch-bishop withal, That he had written very well of the Sacrament; but he marvelled he did not more honour it. The Arch-bishop perceiving his gross Ignorance concerning his Book, by his commending that which was contrary to his Opinion, said to Bo∣ner, That if he thought it well, it was because he understood it not. Boner after his rude manner replied, He thought he understood it
better than he that wrote it. To which the Arch-bishop subjoined, That truly he would make a Child of ten Years old understand as much as he. But what is that, said he, to our present Mat∣ter? Concerning the Sacrament.At this first Session, when Boner had said, That he perceived the Cause of his present Trouble was, for that in the Sermon made at Pauls Cross, before-mentioned, he had asserted the true Presence of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar; The Arch-bishop said, That he spake much of a Presence in the Sacrament; but he asked him, What Presence is there, and what Presence he meant? Boner then in heat said, My Lord, I say and believe, that there is the very true Presence of the Body and Blood of Christ. What, and how do you believe? said he to the Arch-bishop. Then the Arch-bishop not minding to answer his Question at this time, asked him further, Whether Christ were there, Face, Nose, Mouth, Eyes, Arms and Lips, with other Lineaments of his Body? At which Boner shook his Head, and said, He was right sorry to hear his Grace speak those words, and urged the Arch-bishop to shew his Mind. But the Arch-bishop wisely waved it, saying, That their being there at that time, was not to dispute of those Matters, but to prosecute their Commission against him. Chargeth the ABp concern∣ing the Preachers he allowed.At another of these Sessions, staying at the Chamber-Door, where the Commissioners sat, perceiving some of the Arch-bishop's Gentle∣men standing by, he applied himself to them, requiring and charg∣ing them, in God's behalf, and in his Name, That where they should chance to see and hear corrupt and erroneous Preachers against the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar, they should tell their Lord and Master of the same, and of these his Sayings also to them, as they were Christian Men, and should answer before God for the contrary. And being committed by the Delegates to the Under-Marshal; and going away, he turned again, and told the Arch-bishop, That he was sorry that he being a Bishop, should be so handled at his Hands; but more sorry, that he suffered abomi∣nable Hereticks to practise as they did in London and elsewhere, infecting and disquieting the King's Liege People. And therefore he required him, as he would answer to God and the King, that he would henceforth abstain thus to do. And if he did not, he said, he would accuse him before God and the King's Majesty. Answer to it, added he, as well as you can. And so departed. The ABp's An∣swers to Boner's Declaration.When Boner, after the Sentence of Deprivation, made a solemn Declaration there against their Proceedings, saying, That he came compelled, and not of his own free will, being brought as a Priso∣ner: And so appealed again from them to the King. The Arch-bishop answered his Declaration; and told him, That whereas he said, he came coacted, or else he would not have appeared; he marvelled at him, for that he would thereby make them and the Audience to believe, that because he was a Prisoner, he ought not therefore to answer. Which if it were true, were enough to con∣found the whole State of the Realm: For I dare say, said the Arch-bishop, that of the greatest Prisoners and Rebels that ever the Keeper there hath had under him, he cannot shew me one that
hath used such Defence as you have here done. To which Boner said, That if his Keeper were learned in the Laws, he could shew him his Mind therein. The Arch-bishop said, That he had read over all the Laws as well as he, but to another End and Purpose than he did, and yet he could find no such Privilege in this Matter. He was Deprived in the beginning of October, and the See remained void for some Months till the next Year, when Ridley was translated thither, as we shall see by and by. Indeed this was the most plausible Pretence the Papists had,Papists insist upon the inva∣lidity of the Laws made in the King's mi∣nority. and which they made much use of, (Which Boner and Gardiner had cun∣ningly invented;) viz. That though the King were to be obeyed, and all were bound to submit to his Laws, yet not to the Orders and Placits of his Counsellors, who made what Innovations they pleased in his Name, and were none of his Laws: and that there∣fore things should remain in the State wherein the former King left them, till the King, now a Child, came to Years of Discre∣tion to make Laws himself. This the Rebels in Devon made use of. And this also the Lady Mary urged very boldly to the Lords of the Council, for her incompliance with the Communion-Book, and for continuance of the use of the Mass; telling them in a Letter, That she was resolved to remain obedient to her Father's Laws, till the King her Brother should have perfect Years of Discretion to order that Power that God had given him. Which Letter, where∣of I have the Original, may be seen in the Appendix.No. XLII. For the satisfy∣ing therefore of the People in this, the Preachers were fain to do their Endeavours in the Pulpits: Shewing them, that those that were in Office under the King, were by the Word of God to be obeyed as the King himself. There be some Men that say, (as Latimer in one of his Sermons in these Days,Lat. Serm. Fol. 25.) when the King's Majesty himself com∣mandeth me so to do, then I will do it, not afore. This is a wicked Saying, and damnable. For we may not so be excused. Scripture is plain in it, and sheweth us, that we ought to obey his Officers, having Authority from the King, as well as unto the King himself. Therefore this Excuse will not, nor cannot serve afore God. Yet let the Magistrates take heed to their Office and Duty. This Year the Arch-bishop celebrated a great Ordination,An Ordination of Priests and Deacons. consist∣ing of such chiefly as shewed themselves Favourers of the King's Proceedings, to be sent abroad to preach the Gospel, and to serve in the Ministry of the Church. At this Ordination Bishop Ridley also assisted the Arch-bishop. The old Popish Order of conferring of Holy Orders was yet in force, the new Office as yet not being prepa∣red and established: But this Ordination nevertheless was celebrated after that Order that was soon after established. At this Ordination great Favour was shewn, and Connivance to such who, otherwise be∣ing well qualified for Piety and Learning, scrupled wearing the Ha∣bits used by the Popish Priests. I meet with two famous Men now ordained: The one was Robert Drakes, who was Deacon to Dr. Tay∣ler Parson of Hadley, at the Commandment of Arch-bishop Cranmer, afterwards Parson of Thundersley in Essex, and in the Year 1556, burnt to death in Smithfield, for his constant Profession of Christ's Religion.
The other was Thomas Sampson, Parson of Breadstreet, London, and successively Dean of Chichester and Christ's-Church, Oxon. Who in a Letter of his written to Secretary Cecyl in Q. Elizabeth's Reign, said, That at his Ordination he excepted against the Apparel; and by the Arch-bishop and Bishop Ridley, he was nevertheless permitted and admitted. The Office of Ordination re∣formed.All the Divine Offices were now reformed, but only that for Or∣dination of Ministers. Therefore for the doing of this the Council appointed Twelve Learned Men, consisting half of Bishops, and half of other inferior Divines: Whose Names I do not meet with, excepting Hethe Bp of Worcester. Who because he would not assist in this Work, was sent to Prison. The chief of them no doubt was the Arch-bishop. After mature deliberation, this Office was agreed upon, and finished. And Ponet was the first Bishop Consecrated after this new Form. And that I suppose may be the reason, that it is set down at length in the Arch-bishop's Register in that manner as it is there to be seen: as we shall see under the next Year. The ABp Vi∣sits some Va∣cant Churches. S. David's.Upon the Vacancy of Cathedral Churches the Arch-bishop used to visit. So now the Church of S. Davids being vacant upon the remove of Barlow to Bath and Wells, the Arch-bishop issued out a Commission to Eliseus Price to visit that Church. And upon the Vacancy of Glocester by the Death of Wakeman,Glocester. there was a Com∣mission to I. Williams, LL. D. and Prebendary there, to be his Com∣missary, and to visit that Church, and to be Keeper of the Spiritu∣alties of the City and Diocess of Glocester in this third Year of the King.Norwich. This Year also the Church of Norwich being become Vacant by the Resignation of Repps, the Arch-bishop granted a Commission to Iohn Bishop Suffragan of Thetford, and Dean of the Church of the Holy Trinity Norwich, to be his Deputy and Commissary for Visi∣tation and Jurisdiction. But somewhat before this, he constituted Roland Taylor, LL.D. and Will. Wakefeld D. D. to be Keepers of the Spiritualties of Norwich. From whose Jurisdiction he protested not to derogate by those his Commissional Letters to the Suffragan, nor to withdraw from them any Authority of Jurisdiction. This was dated February 15. Also the Church of London being Vacant by the Deprivation and Destitution of Boner,London. the Arch-bishop con∣stituted Gabriel Donne, Residentiary of S. Pauls, to be his Official, and Keeper of the Spiritualties, to exercise all manner of Episcopal Jurisdiction in the said City and Diocess. A new Dean of the Arches.This Year he made Griffin Leyson LL.D. Dean of the Arches. CHAP. XII. Duke of Somerset's Troubles. The Common-Prayer Ratified. The ABp writes to the Lords at Ely-house.WHEN most of the Council had combined together, in the Month of October, against the Protector of the King's Per∣son, the Duke of Somerset, and had withdrawn themselves to Ely-House, the King then being at Hampton-Court, and suddenly conveyed by the said Duke to Windsor, upon the fear of Tumult, then I find
the Arch-bishop and but two Privy-Counsellors more with the King and the Protector there. Being here, the good Arch-bishop, though he would not forsake his Friend the Duke, nor the King his Master; yet he did what lay in him to appease and pacify these Heats. And so he with the Lord Paget and Secretary Smith, in their own and the King's Name, wrote an earnest Letter to the Separating Counsellors, and sent it by Sir Philip Hoby. Wherein, as appears by their Answer, They were charged by the Arch-bishop with creating much Care and Sorrow to the King, and that he thought they had not that Care that beseemed them, of pacifying the present Uproars, and for the preservation of the State from Danger: That they forgat the Benefits they had received from the King's Father, nor were mindful of their Duty of Allegiance: That their Doings bespake Wilfulness; and that the Protector meant nothing but the Safety and Protection of the King, in what he had done; and that he had that consideration of his Duty to God, that the Promise and Oath he made, required. They were advised to do as they would be done unto. And mention was made of Cruelty more than once, charging them obliquely therewith. And in fine he wrote, that He, and those with him, knew more than they did, to whom they writ. Probably he meant, that he knew that this Anger against the Duke arose from the private Malice of some of them, or their Hatred of the Reformation, notwithstanding all the fair Pretences of their Care of the King, and the Protector's Misgovernment. This Letter the Lords from Ely-house, answered,Their Answer. Charging and commanding the Arch-bishop, and those with him, to have a con∣tinual earnest watch of the King's Person, and that he be not re∣moved from Windsor-Castle, as they would answer the same at their utmost Perils. They wondred much, they said, that they would suffer the King's Royal Person to remain in the Guard of the Duke's Men, and that Strangers should be Armed with the King's Armour, and be nearest about his Person. For, it seems, many of the King's Servants, in this Fear, were removed away. They advised the Arch-bishop, and the Lord Paget, to come over to their Side, and to leave the poor Duke alone. Upon this the Arch-bishop and the others wrote a second Letter, dated October the 10th. Wherein they assured the Lords, that they could, whensoever they pleased to re∣quire it, give such very good Reasons for their so often mentioning Cruelty in their other Letter, as they questioned not, they would be well satisfied with. And so upon the Lord's propounding a Meeting with the King and them, they accorded thereunto, in great prudence willing, for Peace and Quietness, in that dangerous Time, so to do. These Letters are recorded in the History of the Reformation.Vol. II. Collect. p. 187.188. The ABp gets the Common-Prayer-Book confirmed. The Common-Prayer-Book, and Administration of the Sacra∣ments, by the great care and study of the Arch-bishop, was now finished, and settled by Act of Parliament: which would not down with a great many. But upon the taking up of the Duke of Somer∣set in the Month of October, and laying him in the Tower, it was ge∣nerally said, that now the old Latin-Service should come in again, the common Opinion being, that the Common-Prayer was peculi∣arly
of his procuring. And that there were such Designs among Somerset's Enemies, who were generally favourers of the old Reli∣gion, it is not improbable. The good Arch-bishop thought it now time to interpose in this thing, and to obtain from the Privy-Council, somewhat to confirm the Book of Common-Prayer. So there was in Decemb. 25. a general Letter drawn up to all the Bishops of England: Letting them understand, That there was no inten∣tion of bringing in again Latin-Service, conjured Bread and Water, nor any such abrogated Ceremonies. And that the abo∣lishing of these, and the setting forth of the Book of Common-Prayer, was done by the whole State of the Realm. That the Book was grounded upon the Holy Scripture, and was agreeable to the Order of the Primitive Church, and much to the edifying of the Subject. And therefore that the changing of that for the old Latin-Service would be a preferring of Ignorance to Knowledg, Darkness to Light, and a preparation to bring in Papistry and Superstition again. The Bishops therefore were bid with all speed to command their Deans and Prebendaries, and all Parsons, Vicars and Curates, to bring to such Places as the Bishops should ap∣point, all Antiphoners, Missals, &c. and all other Books of Service: and that they be defaced and abolished, that they be no let to that Godly and uniform Order set forth. And to commit to Ward any stubborn and disobedient Persons, that brought not the said Books, and to certify the Council of their Misbehaviour. That they should make search, if any of these Superstitious Books were withdrawn or hid. That, whereas there were some Persons who refused to contribute to the buying of Bread and Wine for the Communion, according to the Order of the Book, whereby many-times the Holy Communion was fain to be omitted, to convent such Persons before them, and admonish them; and if they refused to do accordingly, to punish them by Suspension, Excommunication, or other Censure. This was signed by the Arch-bishop and the Lord Chancellor Rich, and four more. CHAP. XIII. The Arch-bishop entertains learned Foreigners. The ABp har∣bours Learned Strangers.THE Arch-bishop had now in his Family several Learned Men. Some he sent for from beyond Sea, and some in pity he enter∣tained, being Exiles for Religion. Among the former sort was Martin Bucer, a Man of great Learning and Moderation, and who bore a great part in the Reformation of Germany. While he and the rest abode under his Roof, the Arch-bishop still employed them, sometimes in learned Conferences and Consultations held with them, sometimes in writing their Judgment upon some Subjects in Divinity. Here Bucer wrote to the Lady Elizabeth, a Letter bearing Date the 6th of the Calends of September, commending her Study in Piety and Learning, and exciting her to proceed therein; incited so to do, I make no doubt,MSS. C.C.C.C. Miscellan. A. by the Arch-bishop, whom Bucer in that Letter makes men∣tion
of, and stileth Patrem suum, & benignissimum hospitem. Hence also he wrote another Letter to the Marquess of Northampton (who was a Patron of Learning, and a Professor of Religion) in the be∣half of Sleidan, who was promised a Pension by the King, to en∣able him to write the History of the Progress of Religion, begin∣ning at Luther. A part of the Letter translated into English, ran thus. Therefore if we should not take care, that this so great Act of Di∣vine Goodness towards us, [viz. the Reformation began in the Year 1517] should be most diligently written, and consecrated to Posterity, we should lie under the Crime of the neglect of God's Glory, and most foul Ingratitude. Therefore Iohn Sleidan, a ve∣ry Learned and Eloquent Man, five Years ago began to compile an History of this Nature, as the Work he had published did wit∣ness. But after he was much encouraged in this Undertaking, and well furnished with Matter; the Calamities that befel Germa∣ny, for our own Deserts, intercepted the pious Attempts of this Man, so very useful to the Church. Nor doth it appear now from whence, besides the King's Majesty, we may hope that some small Benignity may be obtained for Sleidan; since the Salaries which he received for this purpose from the German Princes, failed; and he was poor. That Iohn Alasco, Dr. Peter Martyr, and he, considering these things, and weighing how the truly Christian King Edward was even born with a desire of illustrating the Glory of Christ, and what need there was to set Sleidan again upon fi∣nishing the History of the Gospel restored to us; they had there∣fore presumed to supplicate the King in his behalf, and intreated the Marquess to promote and forward their Supplication, and to vouchsafe to contribute his Help also. We shall hear more of this hereafter. I find also Annotations writ by the said Bucer upon S. Matthew,Bucer writes in the ABp's Fa∣mily. MSS. C.C.C.C. Miscellan. D. reaching as far as the eighth Chapter, and there ending, in this me∣thod: There is the Latin Translation, with large Notes added in the Margin; and at the end of each Chapter common Places collected from thence in the nature of Inferences and Observations. Which I conclude the Arch-bishop put him upon doing while he was now with him. The Work was looked over and examined by the Arch-bishop, Notes and Corrections of his own Hand being here and there inserted. Also the Gospel of S. Mark is handled in the same me∣thod, by another of the Arch-bishop's Guests. Which Writing hath this Inscription by Cranmer's Hand; Petrus Alexander in Marcum. At this time therefore there were at the Arch-bishop's House,The ABp's Guests. (besides Bucer) Alasco, Peter Martyr, Paulus Phagius, Peter Alex∣ander, Bernardine Ochin, Mat. Negelinus, (after a Minister of Stras∣burgh) who accompanied Bucer and Fagius into England, and others whose Names do not occur. Three of these were soon after prefer∣red to publick Places of Reading in the Universities. Peter Alexander was of Artois, and lived with the Arch-bishop before Bucer came into England. He was a Learned Man, but had different Sentiments in the Matter of the Eucharist, enclining to the belief of a Corporeal Presence with the Lutherans. Though some Years after he came over
to a righter Judgment, as his Companion Peter Martyr signified to Calvin, in a Letter wrote from Strasburgh. Peter Martyr coming about the beginning of the Year 1549, unto the University of Oxford,Calvin. Ep. 197, Martyr dedi∣cates his Le∣ctures at Oxon to the ABp. his first Readings were upon the eleventh Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians. In which Chapter is some Discourse of the Lord's Supper. The Professor when he came so far, took occasion to expatiate more largely upon that Argument; and the rather, that he might state it aright in the midst of those hot Contests that were then about it among Learned Men. These Le∣ctures on the Sacrament he soon after printed at London, for the Be∣nefit of the World, (as they were two Years after done at Zurick) and dedicated them to his Patron, the Arch-bishop. And that part∣ly to give a publick Testimony of his Sense of the Arch-bishop's great Humanity and Benefits towards him: Which were so large, that he must do nothing else but tell of them, to be sufficiently thankful for them. And known it was to all (as he said) how obligingly he received, and how liberally he entertained both him∣self, and many other Strangers of his Rank and Condition. And partly that by his Authority he would protect and defend what he should find in his Book to be consonant to the Holy Scriptures, and agreeable to the King's Laws. For he had, he said, Skill and In∣dustry enough to do it; who had himself often, both in Publick and Private, conflicted with the Adversaries, and with admirable Learning, accuracy of Wit and Dexterity, vindicated the Truth from the spinous and confused Cavils of Sophisters. Nor did he want Will to stand up for Sound and Christian Doctrines, as all good Men knew: who saw how earnest he was in his Labours of restoring Religion; that for that Cause he drew upon himself ma∣ny Enmities and threatning Dangers. The ABp writes to Bucer to come over.The first Occasion of Bucer's Call into England was thus. He had wrote to Iohn Hales (a learned English-man, his Acquaintance) the sad Estate of Germany, and that he could scarce stay any longer in the Place where he was. This Hales acquainted the Arch-bishop with; which made a great Impression upon his compassionate Soul, and he brake out into those words of the Psalmist, Mirifica misericor∣dias tuas, qui salvos facis sperantes in te a resistentibus dexterae tuae. And forthwith writ to Brucer a Letter in October 1548, to come over to this Realm, which should be a most safe Harbour for him, urging him to become a Labourer in the Lord's Harvest here begun; and using other Arguments with him to move him hereunto, in the most obliging Stile possible, calling him, My Bucer. And that he might come over the safer from Harms and Enemies, the Arch-bishop re∣commended him to one Hills an English-Merchant, to provide for his Passage.No. XLIII. The Arch-bishop's Letter may be found in the Appendix. To this Letter Bucer wrote an Answer, seeming, upon some Conside∣rations, to decline the Arch-bishop's Invitation. This Letter coming to the Arch-bishop's Hands, he shewed to Peter Alexander; who by the Arch-bishop's Order, wrote back to Bucer, in the said Arch-bi∣shop's and the Protector's Name, to call him again over; which Let∣ter was dated March 24, from Lambeth; telling him withal, that the good old Man Latimer saluted him. Letters, I suppose, of the
same Import, were also dispatched to the Learned Fagius. Bucer and Fagius, who were thus honourably invited into England by repeated Letters of the Lord Protector, and Arch-bishop Cranmer,Bucer and Fa∣gius Professors at Cambridg. were by them also nominated for Publick Professors in the University of Cambridg, the one of Divinity, the other of the Hebrew Tongue. This was looked on by their Friends as a notable piece of God's good Providence, that when these two eminent Champions of the true Religion were in so much present Danger in Germany, so seasonable a Refuge was provided for them elsewhere.Vet. P. Fag. per Ministr. aliquos Eccles. Argent▪ They both arrived safe in England in the end of April, and abode with the Arch-bishop a∣bove a quarter of a Year, until towards the end of the long Vacation, the Arch-bishop intending they should be at Cambridg when the Term should begin, in order to their Reading. During this Interval, while they continued at Lambeth, they were not idle, being every day busied in some Study and Exercise agreeable to their Function, as was hinted before. But the main of their Thoughts were taken up in preparing for their University-Lectures. Which of what Subject-Matter they should be, the Arch-bishop himself directed. As it had been a great while his pious and most earnest Desire, that the Holy Bible should come abroad in the greatest Exactness, and true Agree∣ment with the original Text. So he laid this Work upon these two Learned Men. First, That they should give a clear, plain and suc∣cinct Interpretation of the Scripture, according to the Propriety of the Language. And, Secondly, Illustrate difficult and obscure Pla∣ces, and reconcile those that seemed repugnant to one another. And it was his Will, and his Advice, that to this End and Purpose their publick Readings should tend. This pious and good Work, by the Arch-bishop assigned to them, they most gladly and readily under∣took. For their more regular carrying on this Business, they allot∣ted to each other by consent, their distinct Tasks. Fagius, because his Talent lay in the Hebrew Learning, was to undertake the Old Testament, and Bucer the New. The Leisure they now enjoyed with the Arch-bishop, they spent in preparing their respective Lectures. Fagius entred upon the Evangelical Prophet Esaias, and Bucer upon the Gospel of the Evangelist Iohn. And some Chap∣ters in each Book were dispatched by them. But it was not long, but both of them fell Sick: which gave a very unhappy stop to their Studies. Fagius his Distemper proved mortal;Fagius dies▪ who was seized at first with a very acute Fever. And notwithstanding Physick and Atten∣dance, remaining very ill, he had a great desire to remove to Cam∣bridg to his Charge appointed him, hoping the Change of Air might help him. He made a shift to travel thither, leaving his dear Colleague sick behind him. But Fagius still declining in his Health, ardently desired Bucer's Company: Who on the fifth of November came to Cambridg. And ten Days after Fagius deceased, aged about forty five Years, to the extraordinary Loss of that University, and the Grief of all pious Men that wished well to Religion: and which was most to be lamented, before he had given any Specimen of his Learning and Abilities in England; though he had already given many to the World: all shewing what a Master he was in
Hebrew and Rabbinical Learning. His published Labours of this nature (all within the space of six Years) may be seen in the Appen∣dix: Which I have placed there for the preserving the Memory of that Learned Professor,No. XLIV. which our University of Cambridg was once honoured with. The ABp sends money to Fa∣gius's Widow.The good Arch-bishop troubled at the sudden Death of this Lear∣ned Man, from whom he had promised himself some great Good to accrue to the University, sent a Letter, November the last, unto his sorrowful Companion Bucer, desiring him, among other things, as from him, to comfort Fagius's Widow, and to let her know, that he had sent her by the Carrier seven and twenty Pounds, which was part of the Stipend due out of the Exchequer to her Husband. Which although it were not yet pay'd into Cranmer's Hands, yet he thought good to send her the Money so soon, that it might be some allevia∣tion of her present Sorrow. There were fifty Pounds due for his Readings, reckoning from Lady-day last, when his Pension began; but three Pounds were disbursed for Charges in taking out the Patent, and twenty Pounds the Arch-bishop had sent him before. Bucer laments his Loss. MSS. C.C.C.C.Bucer above all lamented the loss of his Mate, and wrote a sorrow∣ful Letter ad Fratres & Symmystas, to his Brethren and fellow-Mi∣nisters in Germany, upon this Subject. And in a Letter to P. Martyr, then at Oxon, he not only complained of this heavy Loss, but, as if himself were like to follow him, of several things that made him uneasy at Cambridg, where he was now placed; as of the want of a convenient House, of a Body impatient of Cold, which the Time of the Year made him begin to feel, need of Necessaries: That the Letters Patents were not yet signed [for his Salary] and the slow and uncertain paiment of his Pension. But Cranmer, out of that high respect he had for him, was not wanting in his diligence in due time to make all easy to him; and to have so useful and grave a Man well provided for. But the next Year, the last Day of February, he followed his Companion to the other World: But not before he had made himself and his Learning known to the University. Which to qualify him to moderate at the publick Disputations at the Com∣mencement, had given him the Degree of Doctor, as a peculiar Honour done him, without the common Rites and Forms ordina∣rily used in those Cases. Yet he chose to do his Exercises, respond∣ing the first Day of the Commencement, and opposing the second, with great Learning, and no less Satisfaction of the University. CHAP. XIV. Peter Martyr disputes in Oxford, being Challenged thereunto. THE Papists in both Universities were resolved to try the Metal and Learning of their new Professors; being exceed∣ingly nettled at their coming, and offended at their Readings. Those of P. Martyr at Oxon highly provoked many in that Uni∣versity,P. Martyr chal∣lenged pub∣lickly to a Dis∣putation. that could not endure to hear the old Error of the Corporeal Presence opposed. And of such there were not a few, and especially
PETRUS MARTYR VERMILIUS, S.S. Theologiae apud Oxonienses rofessor Regius. Natus Florentiae Sept. 8 Anno MD Obijt Nov: 12. MDLXII.
the Heads of the Colleges; the elder Sort being more stiff and preju∣diced to their old Ways and Opinions. This doctrine of the Sacra∣ment was first obscured, and afterwards depraved: and so this Er∣ror being entertained, became a Door for the letting in a Flood of Superstition and Idolatry into the Church.Vit. Mart. per Simler. This Martyr well knew, and therefore with wonderful Pains endeavored to vindicate the Truth of the Eucharist from Error and Corruption. And this procured him many Enemies here. For they could not endure him: and first raised up among the People Slanders against him; as though he impugned the Doctrine of the Antients, and shook the laudable Ceremonies of the Church, and prophaned the Sacrament of the Altar, and in effect trampled it under his Feet. And this Noise being a little stilled, not long after, the Day before he was to read publickly, they set up Bills in English upon all the Doors of the Churches, that on such a Day there should be a publick Disputation about the Presence of Christ in the Sacrament, Martyr knowing no∣thing of it, though he was designed to be the Disputant. The Day being come, the Schools were filled with great numbers of such who favoured the Papists. And these were instructed to be ready to make loud Clamors and Tumults, and to proceed to Blows, if need were. The Students also and the Towns-Men flocked to∣gether at the Noise of this Dispute, to see the Event, and to make a Party, according as they stood affected. When the Day was come, notwithstanding his Friends perswaded him not to adventure him∣self to read that Day, lest he might incur some Danger, he went and did his Duty. For he said, He would not be wanting to his Office, nor neglect the place the King had intrusted him with, and that there were many, that came questionless to hear his Lectures, whom he would not disappoint. As he, with his Friends accom∣panying him, went to his Reading, a Servant of Richard Smith, D.D. whom we have before spoke of, the Chief in this Plot, met him and delivered him a Letter from his Master, wherein he Challenged him to a Dispute that Day. Being come to the Chair, he gently told his Adversaries,His Answer hereunto. in a mo∣dest Speech to them, That he refused not to dispute, but that at that time he came to read, and not to dispute. And so themselves yielding to it, he proceeded to his Lecture; which he performed with much constancy and undauntedness, without the least distur∣bance of Mind, or change of Countenance or Colour, or hesitation in his Speech, notwithstanding the Murmur and Noise of the Ad∣versaries. Which got him much Credit and Applause. As soon as he had done his Reading,Declines it at present, and why. the Adversaries began to make loud Cries, that he should Dispute, and especially Smith the Champion. But he modestly refused it, and said, He would do it at another time, and that he was not then prepared, because they had so studiously concealed the Propositions to be disputed of, and had not propounded them publickly, according to the accustomed man∣ner; and that he knew nothing of them till that very Day. But they told him, He could not be unprepared, who had read so much of the Lord's Supper, whatsoever Arguments they propounded in this Matter. They still rudely urging him; he said, He would do
nothing in such a Matter, without the King were first made privy to it, especially when the thing tended to Sedition. Moreover, for a lawful Disputation, it was requisite, he said, that certain Questions be propounded, Judges and Moderators constituted; and publick Notaries be present, that might impartially and faithfully write down the Arguments and Speeches on both Sides. They agree upon the Con∣ditions of a Disputation.In fine, the Matter came to that pass, that fearing a Tumult, the Vice-chancellor decided the Controversy after this manner, That both P. Martyr, and Smith, with some Friends, should meet in his House, and should appoint the Propositions to be disputed of, the Time, the Order and Manner of Disputation. And so the Vice-chancellor, the Beadle making him way, went to the Pulpit where the Professor was, and took him by the Hand, and led him down through the Crouds to his own House, his Friends going along with him; and among the rest Sidal and Curtop, then vigorous Defen∣ders of the Truth; but after, in Q. Mary's Days, revolting. Smith also and his Friends, Cole, Oglethorp, and three more, repaired to the Vice-chancellor; where it was agreed, after some jangling, That Martyr should observe the same Order in Confuting, as he did in Teaching; and abstaining from strange, barbarous and am∣biguous Words, wont to be used in the Schools: he said, he would use only Carnaliter and Corporaliter, Realiter and Substantialiter, because the Scripture useth only the words Flesh and Body, Res or Substantia. And so it was agreed▪ and the Day set was the fourth of May ensuing. And it was agreed also on both Sides, That all this whole Matter should be signified to the Council, that they might have Cognizance of the thing. And by them the Day of the Dispu∣tation was appointed, when some from the King, as Judges and Keepers of Peace, would be present at it. The Papists reported fals∣ly, That he having appointed the Time of the Disputation to be ten Days hence; in the mean time got the Magistrates acquainted with this Affair, that they might stop and forbid it, (which they did indeed, proroguing it till some Months after the first Challenge) And that afterwards when the Professor saw his Opportunity, he provoked to a publick Disputation, offering to dispute of his Questions for∣merly propounded, and thought there would be none to take him up▪ For Smith, they say, smelt out some crafty Device taken against him, and so appeared not at the Dispute. And then indeed few thought convenient to be there, their Plot of making a Rout and Confusion being spoiled. Indeed Smith, conscious to himself of making this Tu∣mult, fled before the Day came, and went into Scotland. But Dr. Tresham, a zealous Man, that this Cause might not fall, was desirous to undertake the Disputation; and did so, with Dr. Chedsey, and Mr. Morgan, before the King's Visitors; who were Henry Bishop of Lin∣coln, Dr. Cox Chancellor of that University, Dr. Simon Haines Dean of Exeter, Richard Morison Esq Christopher Nevison Doctor of Ci∣vil Law. Before these honourable Umpires, (who came with the King's Letters Patents) the Disputation concerning Transubstantia∣tion, and the Carnal Presence in the Sacrament, lasted four days; wherein P. Martyr the Respondent did acquit himself very sufficient∣ly, both from Scripture and Fathers. The Sum of which may be
seen in Fox's Monuments, and the whole in Martyr's Works, in that part thereof intituled, De Eucharistia Disputatio. The first day of the Disputation was May the 28th:They Dispute. It was mana∣ged between Martyr and Tresham. Dr. Cox the Chancellor, began with a Speech. Then Martyr made his Proemial Oration and Prayer. Then Tresham succeeded with another Oration, bestowing some Prai∣ses upon Martyr. Which he replying upon, and briefly and modestly declining, began his Argument. The next Disputation, on May 29, was between Martyr and Chedzey; after Martyr had made a short Speech and Prayer, and Chedzey his Preface. The third Action was between Morgan, Tresham and Martyr. The Disputation of the fourth day, Iune 1, was again between Chedzey and Martyr. And then all was concluded by another Speech uttered by the said Chancellor. Wherein he had these words: Peter (and a Peter indeed for his steady Constancy) Martyr, (and rightly called Martyr, for the numberless Testimonies by him produced in the behalf of Truth) must needs obtain much Favour and Respect from us, and all good Men; First, That he hath taken such vast pains in standing under even a Burden of Disputations. For i Not Hercules himself a∣gainst two, what shall we think of Peter alone against all? Second∣ly, That he hath undertook the Challenge of a Disputation: And so stopped the vain Speeches of vain Men, who dispersed envious and odious Insinuations concerning him; as that either he would not, or dared not to maintain his own Tenets. And, lastly, that he hath so excellently well answered the Expectation of the chief Magistrates, and so of the King himself; while he hath not only recommended to the University the Doctrine of Christ from God's lively Fountains, but also hath not permitted any (as much as lay in him) to muddy or obstruct them. But I refer the Reader for the rest to Dr. Cox's own Oration.[No. XLIV.] The Professor drew up the whole four days Disputation soon after,Martyr sends the Sum of the Disputation to the ABp. and sent it by his constant Friend and Companion Iulius, to his Pa∣tron the Arch-bishop. And with the same Messenger he conveyed a Letter, dated Iune 15, to Bucer then at the Arch-bishop's House, concerning his said Disputation. Therein he signified the Obstinacy and Boldness of his Opponents; and that he feared, That his Do∣ctrines he then maintained, might not altogether square with Bu∣cer's Judgment. But he said in his own Justification, That he granted the Body of Christ was present to us by Faith, and that we are incorporated into him by Communication. He confessed here, that we do partake of the Matter of the Sacrament, namely, the Body and Blood of Christ; but he meant it in Mind and Faith. And in the mean time he granted, that the Holy Ghost is Effica∣cious in the Sacraments, by virtue of the Lord's Institution. But that which he especially endeavoured to assert, was, That they mixed not the Body and Blood of Christ carnally with the Bread and Wine, by any Corporeal Presence. Nor yet would he have the Sacrament to be Symbols without Honour and Reverence. Another thing he asserted, which he thought might offend Bucer, was, That it was not agreeable to the Body of Christ, how∣ever glorified, to be in many Places at once. But for this, he
wrote Bucer, as he urged in the Disputation, that the Scrip∣ture obliged to no such belief; How the reason of an humane Body reclaimed against it; and the Fathers affirmed that such a Quality was granted to no Creature, but belonged to God alone. And so, inviting him, and Fagius and Alexander to Oxford, concluded his Letter. The Disputati∣on published by Martyr;But when the Papists dispersed vain Stories and many Falshoods concerning this Business, he was forced, his Friends also urging him thereunto, to publish an Account hereof. And with what Fidelity and Diligence he drew up his Book, the Testimonies of two of the King's Counsellors, Ear-Witnesses, added thereto, sufficiently con∣firmed. In the Preface to his Relation of these Disputes, he assign∣ed two Reasons that made him publish them. The one was the Ca∣lumnies of evil Men; the other the Desires of his Friends. Under the former he complained, how he was by his Adversaries bespat∣tered among all sorts of People, Princes, Nobles, Commons, Ci∣tizens, Clowns: And that all Corners, Streets, Houses, Shops, Taverns, sounded their Triumphs over him; and he doubted not, that it was dispersed by them into other Nations. Upon these Considerations,Quid enim n∣gare ausm Rever. Archi∣piscopo Cant. cui plant omnia debto? In Praefat. ad Disp. his great Patron, the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, (to whom he dared to deny nothing) and the King's Visitors, be∣sides others of his Friends, had advised and desired him to put forth these his Disputations in his own Vindication, and in the Vindication of the Truth. These he professed to write with all Fidelity: And that he might be the more exact, he had compared his own Collections with the Relations that were drawn up by the Adversaries; and that having read theirs, what he could recal that he had before omitted, which was of any moment, he restored out of their Writings. But Tresham, the chief Disputant, pretending himself aggrieved with this Book,And by Tre∣sham. as tho Martyr had therein misrepresented him, and expressed some Indignation against him, and added some things that were not spoken; wrote himself another Account of this Disputation, in justification of himself against the Professor; and set a Preface before it, by way of Epistle, to the King's Privy-Council. Wherein he most angrily bespattered this Reverend Man, calling him Pseudo-Martyr, a doting old Man, Subverted, Impudent, and the famous Master of Errors: And that he fled into Germany to obtain the more Licence for his Lust, and that he might enjoy his Adultery, meaning his Wife. The Disputation it self is too long to be tran∣scribed; it is extant among the Foxian Manuscripts. But the Epi∣stle Dedicatory, or Preface before it, I will not omit, that the Rea∣der may there observe the malicious Spirit of Martyr's Adversaries, and collect some further Account of this Disputation.No. XLV. But the Reader must remember, that it was an angry Antagonist that wrote it. Dr. Smith, who had done his best to cause a Riot in the Universi∣ty,Smith writes to the ABp from Scotland. and thereby to endanger the King's Professor, and was therefore got away into Scotland; conscious likewise to himself of Calumnies and Wrongs done by him against the Arch-bishop; some time after wrote to the Arch-bishop a submissive Letter, praying him to for∣give
all the Injuries he had done his Grace, and to obtain the King's Pardon for him, that he might return Home again. And he pro∣mised to write a Book for the Marriage of Priests, as he had done before against it. That he was the more desirous to come Home into England, because otherwise he should be put upon writing against his Grace's Book of the Sacrament, and all his Proceedings in Religion, being then harboured, as he would make it believed, by such as required it at his Hands. But in Q. Mary's Days he revolted again, and was a most zealous Papist, and then did that indeed, which he gave some Hints of before; for he wrote vehemently against Cranmer's Book. But from Oxford, let us look over to Cambridg.Disputations at Cambridg before the Commissio∣ners. Where Disputa∣tions likewise were held in the Month of Iune, before the King's Commissioners, who were Ridley Bishop of Rochester, Thomas Bishop of Ely, Mr. Cheke, Dr. May, and Dr. Wendy, the King's Physician. The Questions were, That Transubstantiation could not be proved by Scripture, nor be confirmed by the Consent of Antient Fathers for a thousand Years past. And that the Lord's Supper is no Ob∣lation or Sacrifice, otherwise than a Remembrance of Christ's Death. There were three Solemn Disputations. In the first Dr. Madew was Respondent, and Glyn, Langdale, Sedgwick, and Yong, Opponents. In the Second, Dr. Glyn was Respondent on the Po∣pish side, Opponents Pern, Grindal, Guest, Pilkington. In the third, Dr. Pern was Respondent: Parker, Pollard, Vavasor, Yong, Opponents. After these Disputations were ended, the Bishop of Rochester determined the Truth of these Questions ad placitum suum, as a Papist wrote, out of whose Notes I transcribe the Names of these Disputants. Besides these Disputations, when Bucer came to Cambridg,Bucer Disputes. he was engaged in another with Sedgwick, Pern and Yong, upon these Questi∣ons. I. That the Canonical Books of Scripture alone do teach suf∣ficiently all things necessary to Salvation. II. That there is no Church in Earth that erreth not, as well in Faith as Manners. III. That we are so freely justified of God, that before our Justi∣fication, whatsoever good Works we seem to do, have the Nature of Sin. Concerning this last he and Yong had several Combates: Which are set down in his English Works. As to Bucer's Opinion of the Presence in the Sacrament,His Judgment of the Sacra∣ment. the great Controversy of this Time, it may not be amiss to consider what so great a Professor thought herein; and especially by what we saw before, that Martyr and he did somewhat differ in this Point. For as he would not admit those words Carnally and Naturally, so neither did he like Realiter and Substantialiter. Bucer's Judgment drawn up by himself sententiously in 54 Aphorisms, may be seen in the Appendix, as I meet with it among Fox's Papers.No. XLVI. It is extant in Latin among his Scripta Anglicana, and intitled Concessio D. M. Buc. de Sancta Eucharistia, in Anglia Aphoristicos scripta, Anno 1550. And so we take our leave of Bucer for this Year. We shall hear of him again in the next.
CHAP. XV. Matters of the Church, and its State now. LET me now crave a little room to set down some Matters that relate to the Church coming within the compass of this Year, which will shew what mean Advances Religion as yet had made in the Nation. Relicks of Po∣pery remain∣ing.Divers Relicks of Popery still continued in the Nation, by means partly of the Bishops, partly of the Justices of Peace, Popishly af∣fected. In London Bishop Boner drove on but heavily in the King's Proceedings, though he outwardly complied. In his Cathedral Church there remained still the Apostles Mass, and our Lady's Mass, and other Masses under the Defence and Nomination of our Lady's Communion, used in the private Chappels, and other remote places of the same Church, tho not in the Chancel, contrary to the King's Proceedings. Therefore the Lord Protector and others of the Coun∣cil wrote to the Bishop Iune 24.Fox's Acts. Complaining of this, and ordering that no such Masses should be used in S. Paul's Church any longer; and that the Holy Communion, according to the Act of Parliament, should be ministred at the high Altar of the Church, and in no other place of the same, and only at such times as the high Masses were wont to be used; except some number of People, for their necessary Business, desired to have a Communion in the Morning; and yet the same to be exercised in the Chancel at the high Altar, as was appointed in the Book of Publick Service. Accordingly Boner directed his Letters to the Dean and Chapter of Paul's, to call toge∣ther those that were resident, and to declare these Matters. The Council gives Orders to the Justices.As it was thus in London, so in the Countries, too many of the Justices were slack in seeing to the execution of the King's Laws, relating not only to Religion, but to other Affairs. And in some Shires that were further distant, the People had never so much as heard of the King's Proclamation, by the Default of the Justices, who winked at the Peoples neglect thereof. For the quickening of the Justices of Peace at this time, when a Foreign Invasion was daily expected, and Foreign Power was come into Scotland to aid that Nation against England; the Lord Protector and the Privy-Council assembled at the Star-Chamber, and called before them all the Justi∣ces, (which was a thing accustomed sometimes to be done, for the Justices to appear before the King and Council, there to have Ad∣monitions and Warnings given them for the discharge of their Du∣ty). And then the Lord Chancellor Rich made a Speech to them, That they should repair down into their several Countries with speed; and give warning to other Gentlemen to go down to their Houses, and there to see good Order and Rule kept, that their Sessions of Goal-delivery, and Quarter-Sessions be well observed, that Vagabonds and seditious Tale-bearers of the King or his Council, and such as preached without Licence, be repress'd and punished. That if there should be any Uproars, or Routs, and Riots of lewd Fellows, or privy Traitors, they should appease
them. And that if any Enemy should chance to arise in any Place of England, they should fire the Beacons, as had been wrote to them before, and repulse the same in as good Array as they could. And that for that purpose they should see diligently, that Men have Horse, Harness and other Furniture of Weapon ready. And to the Bishops the Council now sent Letters again for Redress of the Contempt and Neglect of the Book of Common-Prayer;And writes to the Bishops. which to this time, long after the publishing thereof, was either not known at all to many, or very irreverently used: Occasioned espe∣cially by the winking of the Bishops, and the stubborn Disobedience of old Popish Curats. The Letter is dated the 23d of Iuly, and is extant in Fox. In London, by the Connivance and Remisness of the Bishop,Neglect in London. many neglected the Divine Service then established: and others did in secret Places of the Diocess often frequent the Popish Mass, and other Superstitious Rites, not allowed by the Laws of England. The Sins of Adultery greatly encreased. The Churches, and par∣ticularly the Mother-Church of S. Paul's, ran into Dilapidations; the Glass was broken, and the Ornaments and other Buildings belonging to Churches neglected. Many refused to pay Tithes to their Curates, probably of both sorts; such as were Papists to those Curats as more diligently preached Reformation, and obeyed the King's Laws: and such as were not so, to such Curats as were more backward thereunto. Bishop Boner also himself now seldom came to Church, seldomer preached and celebrated the English Communion. Where∣fore the Council sent certain private Injunctions to Boner for the re∣dress of these things. That he should preach in his own Person at Paul's Cross, and declare certain Articles, relating to the be∣fore-mentioned Neglects, which the Council now sent to him to redress. That he should preach once in a Quarter, and exhort the People to Obedience; and that he should be present at every Ser∣mon at Paul's Cross: that he should on the principal Feasts ce∣lebrate the Communion, and at all times, that his Predecessors used to Celebrate and sing High Mass. That he should call before him all such as did not frequent the Church and Common-Pray∣er, and the Holy Communion, and punish them, as also Adulte∣rers: and that he should look to the Reparation of S. Paul's and other Churches, and that the People pay their Tithes. The Adulteries before hinted,Adulteries frequent. which the Council thought fit to recommend to the Bishop to take particular cognizance of, makes me add, that about this time the Nation grew infamous for this Crime. It began among the Nobility, and so spread at length among the in∣ferior sort. Noblemen would very frequently put away their Wives, and marry others, if they liked another Woman better, or were like to obtain Wealth by her. And they would sometimes pretend their former Wives to be false to their Beds, and so be divorced, and marry again such whom they fancied. The first occasion of this seemed to be in the Earl of Northampton, divorcing himself, from his first Wife Anne, Daughter to the Earl of Essex, and after marrying Elizabeth Daughter to the Lord Cobham. In like manner Henry Son of William Earl of Pembroke, put away Katharine Daugh∣ter
to Henry the Duke of Suffolk, and married Mary, the Daughter of Sir Henry Sidney. These Adulteries and Divorces encreased much; yea, and marrying again without Divorce; which became a great Scandal to the Realm, and to the Religion professed in it, and gave much Sorrow and Trouble in good Men to see it. In so much that they thought it necessary to move for an Act of Parliament to punish Adultery with Death. This Latimer in a Sermon preached in the Year 1550, signified to the King. For the Love of God, saith he, take an order for Marriage here in England. Books disper∣sed by Pro∣testants.This is some Account of the Retardation of Religion. On the other hand the Endeavors of those that wished well to it were not wanting. Now the Protestants began more freely to put forth Books, and to disperse such as were formerly printed beyond Sea, in the behalf of Religion against Popery, and concerning such as had suffered under the Cruelties of the Church of Rome. Bale about these Days disper∣sed his Books. One was The Image of both Churches, applying the Divine Prophecy of the Revelations to the Apostate Church of Rome. Another was a Vindication of the Lady Anne Ascue, who suffered the cruel Death of Burning about the end of King Henry's Reign: Whose Cause the Papists studiously had rendred bad. This Book he intitled The Elucidation of Anne Ascue's Martyrdom. Which was this Year exposed publickly to sale at Winchester, and the Parts there∣abouts, as a Reproach to the Bishop of Winchester, who was the great Cause of her Death. Four of these Books came to that Bishop's own Eyes being then at Winchester; they had Leaves put in as Ad∣ditions to the Book, some glewed, and some unglewed: which probably contained some further Intelligences that the Author had gathered since his first writing of the Book. And herein some Re∣flexions were made freely, according to Bale's Talent, upon some of the Court, not sparing Paget himself, though then Secretary of State. Another of Bale's Books that went now about, was touching the Death of Luther. Therein was a Prayer of the Duke of Saxony mentioned, which the Bishop of Winchester gladly took hold on: Wherein that Duke, as to the justness of his Cause, remitted himself to God's Judgment to be shewed on him here in this World, if the Cause he undertook were not Just concerning Religion; and desired God, if it were not Good, to order him to be taken and spoiled of his Honors and Possessions. Since which the Duke was taken Prisoner: and at the very time of his taking, the Papists made an Observation, that the Sun appeared so strangely in England, as the like had not been seen before. So apt are Men to interpret Events according to their own preconceived Opinions. But at this Winchester took much Advantage.Letter to the Lord Pro∣tector. Whereas indeed the Issues of God's Providence in this World are not favourable always even to the best Causes. Preaching against Lent.The keeping of Lent was now called into Controversy; and asserted, that it was not to be observed upon a religious Account. And this was done the rather, because the Papists placed so much Religion in the bare Fast. In the Pulpit it began to be cried down. Tongue and Ioseph, two great Preachers in London, said, That Lent was one of Christ's Miracles, which God ordained not Men to imitate or
follow. And that it was an insupportable Burden. There was a set of Rhimes now made about the burial of Lent, which was called, Iack of Lent's Testament, and publicly sold in Winchester Market: therein Steven Gardiner, the Bishop was touched, who was a great Man for keeping it. For in the Ballad Stephen Stockfish was bequeathed in this Will to Stephen Gardiner. Of this he made a long Complaint to the Protector. But yet this Neglect of Lent was not encouraged by the Superiors. For it was kept at Court; and Preparations for the King's Diet were made accordingly this Lent by the Protector. The Protestants indeed were for keeping it, and an Order was issued out for that purpose; tho not upon a Religious but Politick Account. But the greater part of the ordinary People would not be brought to it by this Distinction. So that the Preachers were fain to be employed. Latimer preached, That those that regard-not Laws and Statutes, were despisers of Magistrates. There be Laws made of Diet, he said, what Meats we shall eat at all times. And this Law is made in Policy, as I suppose, for Victual's sake, that Fish might be uttered as well as other Meat. Now as long as it goeth so politickly, we ought to keep it. Therefore all ex∣cept those that be dispensed withal, as sick, impotent Persons, Women with Child, old Folk, &c. ought to live in an ordinary obedience to those Laws, and not to do against the same in any wise. Gardiner urged the great Inconvenience these Rhimes against Lent might occasion.Gardiner's Judgment of a Rhime against Lent. That they could serve for nothing but to learn the People to rail, and to make others forbear to make their usual Provisions of Fish against the ensuing Year, fearing Lent to be sick, as the Rhime purported, and like to die. About these Times there arose much talk of the King's matching.Latimer coun∣sels the King about Marri∣age. The Protestants were much afraid of his marrying with some Foreign Princess Abroad, that might turn his Heart from Religion. But the Popishly-affected did their endeavours to perswade him to please him∣self with some Lady Abroad, as best agreeable with Politick Ends, as the enlarging of his Dominions, and the Surety and Defence of his Countries. Some therefore put Latimer upon giving the King Coun∣sel in this Matter from the Pulpit. So he advised the King to chuse him one that is of God, that is, which is of the Houshold of Faith; and such an one as the King can find in his Heart to love, and lead his Life in pure and chaste Espousage with. Let him chuse a Wife that fears God. Let him not chuse a Proud Wanton, and one full only of rich Treasures and worldly Pomp. The Sentiments of the Protestant Foreigners concerning the present English State, deserves a particular Remark.Foreign Pro∣testants their offer to King Edward. They took such great Joy and Satisfaction in this good King, and his Establishment of Religion, that the Heads of them, Bullinger, Calvin, and others, in a Letter to him, offered to make him their Defender, and to have Bishops in their Churches as there were in England, with the tender of their Service to assist and unite together. This netled the Learned at the Council of Trent, who came to the knowledg of it by some of their private Intelligencers; and they verily thought, that all the Here∣ticks, as they called them, would now unite among themselves, and
become one Body, receiving the same Discipline exercised in Eng∣land. Which if it should happen, and that they should have Here∣tical Bishops near them in those Parts, they concluded that Rome and her Clergy would utterly fall. Whereupon were sent two of their Emissaries from Rotterdam into England, who were to pretend them∣selves Anabaptists, and preach against baptizing Infants, and preach up Rebaptizing, and a Fifth Monarchy upon Earth. And besides this, one D. G. authorized by these Learned Men, dispatched a Let∣ter written in May 1549, from Delf in Holland, to two Bishops, whereof Winchester was one, signifying the coming of these pre∣tended Anabaptists, and that they should receive them and cherish them, and take their Parts if they should chance to receive any Checks. Telling them, that it was left to them to assist in this Cause, and to some others whom they knew to be well-affected to the Mother-Church. This Letter is lately put in print. Sir Henry Sydney first met with it in Queen Elizabeth's Closet, among some Pa∣pers of Queen Mary's.Fox's and Firebrand's, Part II. He transcribed it into a Book of his, called, The Romish Policies. It came afterwards into the Hands of ABp Vsher; and was transcribed thence by Sir Iames Ware. Let it be remembred here, and noted, that about this time Winchester was appointed, with Ridley Bishop of Rochester, to examine certain Anabaptists in Kent. I find no Bishops Consecrated this Year. CHAP. XVI. Ridley made Bishop of London. The Communion-Book reviewed. An. 1550.RIdley Bishop of Rochester, was designed to succeed Boner, lately deprived, in the Bishoprick of London; and April 3. took his Oath,Ridley made Bp of London. an half Year being almost spent before he entred upon the Care of that See, after Boner's Deprivation. At his entrance, he was ex∣ceeding wary not to do his Predecessor the least Injury in Goods that belonged to him. He had not one Penny-worth of his moveable Goods; for if any were found and known to be his, he had Licence to convey them away,Ridl. Letter, among the Letters of the Martyrs. otherwise they were safely preserved for him. There was some quantity of Lead lay in the House, which he used about it and the Church; but Ridley paid for it, as Boner's own Officers knew. He continued Boner's Receiver, one Staunton, in his Place. He paid fifty three or fifty five Pounds for Boner's own Servants common Liveries and Wages, which was Boner's own Debt, remaining unpaid after his Deposition. He frequently sent for old Mrs. Boner, his Pre∣decessor's Mother, calling her his Mother, and caused her to sit in the uppermost Seat at his own Table, as also for his Sister, one Mrs. Mongey. It was observed, how Ridley welcomed the old Gentlewo∣man, and made as much of her as though she had been his own Mo∣ther. And though sometimes the Lords of the Council dined with him, he would not let her be displaced, but would say, By your Lordships favour, this Place of Right and Custom is for my Mother Boner. But to see the base Ingratitude of Boner; when he was re∣stored again in Q. Mary's Reign, he used Ridley far otherwise than
Ridley had used him: For he would not allow the Leases which Rid∣ley had made; which was in danger to redound to the utter Ruin and Decay of many poor Men. He had a Sister with three Chil∣dren, whom he married to one Shipside a Servant of his, and provided for them. This Sister Boner turned out of all, and endeavoured the Destruction of Shipside, had not Bishop Hethe delivered him. Ridley, in his Offices, and in an Iron Chest in his Bed-Chamber, had much Plate, and considerable Quantities of other Goods; all which Boner seized upon. Insomuch that Ridley, but a little before his Burning, wrote a Supplicatory Letter to the Queen to take this into her Con∣sideration, That the poor Men might enjoy their Leases, and Years renewed, for that they were made without Fraud or Covin, ei∣ther for their Parts, or his; and the old Rents always reserved to the See, without any kind of Dammage thereof: Or at least, that they might be restored to their former Leases and Years, and might have rendred to them again such Sums of Money as they paid him and the Chapter, as Fines for their Leases and Years taken from them. Which Fines he desired the Queen would command might be made good out of the Plate and other Things he left in his House; half whereof would disburse those Fines. This did so much run in the good Man's Mind, that at the time of his Burning, he desired the Lord Williams, then present, to remember this his Suit to the Queen. Which he promised him he would do. But what Effect it had I cannot tell. In the Vacancy of the Church of Rochester,Rochester Va∣cant. by the remove of Rid∣ley, the Arch-bishop committed the Spiritualities to William Cook, LL. D. April 18. The Nobility and Gentry this Year,Bucer writes to Dorset, not to spoil the Church. flying so much upon the Spoil of the Church, Bucer, by the Arch-bishop's Instigation, as well as his own Inclinations, wrote to the Marquess of Dorset to forbear, disswading him from spoiling the Church of her Maintenance. In which Letter he hath these Expressions. Antiquum dictum est,MSS. C. C. C. C. Miscellan. D. nemi∣nem posse vere ditari furtis aut rapinis, quibus invaduntur res alienae; multo minus peculatu, quo defraudatur Respublica. Quem igitur habeat sensum Dei, qui dubitet, minimè omnium posse cujusquam opes augeri salutariter Sacrilegiis, quibus acciduntur res Ecclesiasticae? Sunt nimium amplae hae opes, addictae Ecclesiis; & in luxum permulti eas diripiunt. Homines planè otiosi; nec ullam Reip. conferentes utilitatem. Submo∣veantur igitur hi fuci ab Ecclesiae alvearibus, nec depasci permittantur apum labores. Deinde procurentur, ut restitutis passim Scholis nusquam desint Ecclesiarum frugi ministri, &c. That is, It is an old Saying, No body can grow Rich by the stealing, and taking away of private Peoples Possessions; much less by robbing of the Publick. What Sense therfore hath he of God, that doubts not that his Riches shall en∣crease to good purpose, that commits Sacrilege, and robs the Church of what belongs to it? But it is objected, the Church hath too much, and many spend it in Luxury. The Church-men are idle, and bring no Profit to the Common-Wealth. Let these Drones there∣fore be removed from the Hives of the Church, but let not the Pains of the Bees be eaten up. And then having Schools of good Li∣terature every where restored, let not the Church want sober Mi∣nisters, &c.
A Review was made of the Book of Common-Prayer, about the latter end of the Year, by Arch-bishop Cranmer, and the Bishops. Divers things that savoured too much of Superstition, were endea∣voured to be changed or amended.The Common-Prayer-Book reviewed. But there were among them some that made what opposition they could. The Arch-bishop had now by Wilkes, Master of Christ's College, desired Bucer (that great Divine then at Cambridg) that he would take an impartial view of the whole Book, having procured him a Translation of it into Latin, done by Aless, the Learned Scotch Divine, for his understanding of it, and that he should judg, if he thought any thing in the Book might be more explained, agreeable with God's Word, and for better Edifica∣tion of Faith. Bucer in answer sent the Arch-bishop word, first, what his Judgment was of the Book, and then what Course he in∣tended to use in the Examination of it, that he was now to make. He said, That when he first came into England, and by the help of an Interpreter took some knowledg of the Rites and Doctrines of this Church, that he might see whether he could join his Ministry with it,Nec enim quic∣quam in illis de∣prehendi quod non sit ex Verbo Dei desumptum, aut saltem ei non adversetur, commodè accep∣tum. Buceri Scripta Angli∣can. he thanked God, That had inclined the Officers of the Church to reform the Ceremonies to that degree of Purity; and that he found nothing in them that was not taken out of the Word of God, or at least was not repugnant to it, being fitly taken. For some few things there were, added he, that unless they were candidly interpreted, might seem not so sufficiently agreeable with the Word of God. As for what he was now to do in order to the fulfilling what the Arch-bishop required of him, he intended in short Notes, at every Chapter of the Book, to observe what he thought to be according to God's Word, and to be retained and vindicated; what to be taken away or mended, and what to be more plainly explained and allowed. After his perusal of the Book, he gave this Judgment in general;Modus quo{que} ha∣rum Lectionum ac precum, & tempora▪ sunt ad∣modumcongruen∣ter, & cum Verbo Dei, & observa∣tion priscarum Ecclesiarum con∣stituta. Religio∣ne igitur summa retinenda erit, & vindicanda haec Ceremonia. Censura, inter Scripta An∣glican. That in the Description of the Communion and daily Prayers, he saw nothing enjoined in the Book, but what was a∣greeable to the Word of God, either in Word, as the Psalms and Lessons; or in Sense, as the Collects. Also that the Manner of their Lessons and Prayers, and the Times of using them, were con∣stituted very agreeable, both with God's Word, and the Observa∣tion of the Ancient Churches. And therefore that that Book ought to be retained and vindicated with the greatest strictness. What particular Animadversions the said Learned Man made upon the Book, may be seen in his Scripta Anglicana, and in the Bishop of Sarum's History, as he hath there abridged them. And such a Defe∣rence was given to his Judgment, that most of the things that he excepted against were corrected accordingly. And that the Book might be the more exact, and perhaps be the more agreeable to the Doctrine and Practice of Foreign Churches, the Arch-bishop recom∣mended the diligent examination of it unto another great Divine, Peter Martyr, who was now at Lambeth; the Arch-bishop desiring him to note what he thought good concerning the Book, and because he knew not the Language, the Version of Sir Iohn Cheke (who had also translated it into Latin) was given him. He was also requested to set down in writing what he thought deserved Correction. And he accordingly made his Annotations.
Martyr agreed clearly in Judgment with Bucer about the Book, as he wrote to him in a Letter sent him to Cambridg, extant among Arch-bishop Parker's Manuscripts.Bucer & Martyr employed in it. MSS. C.C.C.C. Vol. intit. Epist. Viror. illustr. & German. On the back-side of which Let∣ter is written, by that Arch-bishop's own Hand, Censura libri com∣munium precum. In this Letter Martyr told Bucer, that the same things that he disapproved of, the same likewise had he [P. Mar∣tyr] done. And that afterward he drew them up into Articles, and shewed them to the Arch-bishop of Canterbury. That to all that Bu∣cer judged ought to be amended, he had subscribed; and that he thanked God, that had given occasion to admonish the Bishops of these things. From this Letter it appears, that the Arch-bishop had told Martyr, that in the Conference among the Divines, concerning the Correction of these Publick Prayers, it was concluded to make many Alterations. But what those things were, as the Arch-bishop told him not, so neither, as he wrote, did he dare to ask him. But what Cheke told him, did not a little refresh him; viz. That if they themselves would not change what ought to be changed, the King would do it of himself; and when they came to a Parliament, the King would interpose his Majesty's own Authority. CHAP. XVII. Hoper's Troubles. IN the Month of Iuly, Iohn Hoper,Hoper nomina∣ted for Bp of Glocester. who had lived long abroad in Germany and in Switzerland, and conversed much with Bullin∣ger and Gualer, the chief Reformers there, but returned into Eng∣land in King Edward's Reign, and retained by the Duke of Somerset, and a famous Preacher in the City, was nominated by the King to the Bishoprick of Gloucester. But by reason of certain Scruples of Conscience he made to the wearing of the old Pontifical Habits, as the Chimere and Rochet, and such-like, and disliking the Oath cu∣stomarily taken, he was not Consecrated till eight Months after, and endured not a little Trouble in the mean Season. Soon after his nomination, he repaired to the Arch-bishop, desiring him in these things to dispense with him. But the Arch-bishop, for certain Rea∣sons, refused it. Then was the Arch-bishop solicited by great Men. The Earl of Warwick, afterwards the great Duke of Northumberland, wrote to him a Letter dated Iuly 23, the Bearer whereof was Hoper himself, that the rather at his Instance he would not charge the Bishop Elect of Gloucester with an Oath burthenous to his Conscience. Which was, I suppose, the Oath of Canonical Obedience. And when Hoper had sued to the King, either to discharge him of the Bi∣shoprick, or that he might be dispensed with in the Ceremonies used in Consecration, (which he knew the Arch-bishop could not do, no more than to dispense with the Laws of the Land, whereby he should run into a Premunire) the King wrote a Letter to Cranmer, dated Aug. 5, therein freeing him of all manner of Dangers, Penalties and Forfeitures that he might incur by omitting those Rites; but yet (by any thing that appears in the Letter) without any urging or per∣swasion
used to the Arch-bishop to omit the said Rites, leaving that to his own Discretion. But the Arch-bishop thought the King's bare Letters were not sufficient to secure him against established Laws. He and Ridley confer about the Habits.When this would not do, then endeavour was used to satisfy Ho∣per's Conscience. And Ridley, Bishop now of London, was thought, for his great Learning, to be a fit Person to confer with him. There were long Arguings between them, and at last it came to some Heats. And Hoper still remained resolved not to comply, holding it, if not unlawful, yet highly inexpedient, to use those very Vestments that the Papal Bishops used. The Council upon this sent for Hoper, and because they would in no wise the stirring up of Controversies be∣tween Men of one Profession, willed him to cease the Occasion hereof. Hoper humbly besought them, that for Declaration of his Doings, he might put in Writing such Arguments as moved him to be of the Opinion he held. Which was granted him. These Argu∣ments it seems were communicated to Ridley to answer. And Octo∣ber the 6th,MS. of the Council Book. the Council being then at Richmond, the Arch-bishop present, they wrote to the Bishop of London, commanding him to be at Court on Sunday next, and to bring with him what he should for Answer think convenient. The ABp writes to Bucer for his Judg∣ment in this Matter.In the mean time, to bring the Question to more Evidence and Sa∣tisfaction, the Arch-bishop according to his Custom, to consult in Religious Matters with the learnedest Men of other Nations, wrote to Cambridg to Martin Bucer for his Judgment. Who upon occasion of this Controversy, wrote two Epistles; one to Hoper, and ano∣ther to the Arch-bishop, both de re Vestiariâ. That to the latter was in answer to these two Queries, which Cranmer had sent for his Re∣solution about. TheQuestions.I. Whether, without offending of God, the Ministers of the Church of England may use those Garments which are now used, and prescribed to be used by the Magistrates? II. Whether he that affirms it Unlawful, or refuseth to use these Garments, sinneth against God, because he saith that is Unclean which God hath sanctified; and against the Magistrate, who com∣mandeth a political Order? Script. Anglic. p. 705. & 681.Bucer to both these Questions, gave his Resolution in the Affirma∣tive, in his Answer to the Arch-bishop, dated Decemb. 8. But he thought, considering how the Habits had been Occasion to some of Superstition, and to others of Contention, that it were better, at some good Opportunity, wholly to take them away. Martyr writes to Hoper.Besides Bucer's Letter to Hoper from Cambridg, mentioned before, P. Martyr from Oxon wrote him a large Letter, dated Novemb. 4. For both these good Men were desirous that Hoper should have Satisfaction, that so useful a Man might come in place in the Church. To both these Hoper had wrote, and sent his Arguments against the Episcopal Vestments, by a Messenger dispatched on purpose. Martyr told him, That he took much delight in that singular and ardent Study that appeared in him,Inter P. Mart. Epist. that Christian Religion might again aspire to a chaste and pure Simplicity. That for his part he could be very hardly brought off from that simple and pure Way, which he knew they used a great while at Strasburgh, where the difference of Gar∣ments
in Holy Things was taken away. And so he prayed God it might continue. Thus he said, Hoper might see that, in the Sum, they both agreed together; he wishing for that which Hoper endeavoured. That in Rites, he was for coming as near as possi∣ble to the Sacred Scripture, and for taking Pattern by the better Times of the Church. But yet that he could not be brought by his Arguments, to think that the use of Garments was destructive, or in their own Nature contrary, to the Word of God: A Matter which he thought to be altogether . And that therefore indifferent Things, as they were sometimes to be taken away, so might be used. And that if he had thought this were wicked, he would never have communicated with the Church of England. That there might be some great Good follow from the use at pre∣sent of the Garments; namely, that if we suffered the Gospel to be first preached, and well rooted, Men would afterwards better and more easily be perswaded to let go these outward Customs. But now when a Change is brought in of the necessary Heads of Religion, and that with so great difficulty, if we should make those things that are indifferent to be impious, so we might alie∣nate the Minds of all; that they would not endure to hear solid Doctrine, and receive the necessary Ceremonies. That there was no doubt England owed much to him, for his great pains in Preach∣ing and Teaching. And in return he had gained much Favour and Authority in the Realm, whereby he was in a Capacity of do∣ing much Good to the Glory of God. Only he bad Hoper take heed, that by unseasonable and too bitter Sermous, he became not an Hindrance to himself. Besides, that by looking upon these in∣different Things as sinful and destructive, we should condemn ma∣ny Gospel-Churches, and too sharply tax very many which an∣ciently were esteemed most famous and celebrated. And whereas there were two Arguments that made Hoper ready to charge the use of these Vestments to be not indifferent,Hoper's two Objections, he proceeded to consider them. One was this; That this would be to call back again the Priesthood of Aaron. The other, That they were In∣ventions of Antichrist; and that we ought to be estranged, not only from the Pope, but from all his Devices. But as to the former he shewed him, That the Apostles,Considered. for Peace-sake, commanded the Gentiles to abstain from Blood and Fornication; which were Aaronical Customs. And so are Tithes for the maintenance of the Clergy. Psalms and Hymns can scarce be shewn to be commanded in the New Testament, to be sung in publick Assemblies, which are very manifest to be used in the Old. That there are not a few things that our Church hath borrowed from the Mosaical Decrees; and that even from the very first Times. The Festivals of the Resurrection, of the Nativity, of Pentecost, and of the Death of Christ, are all Footsteps of the Old Law. And are they to be therefore abolished? He wished with all his Heart, that the Churches in Germany by this one Loss might obtain their former Liberty. As to the second Argument, He could not see how it could be as∣serted upon good Grounds, that nothing is to be used by us, that is
observed in the Popish Religion. We must take heed, that the Church of God be not prest with too much Servitude, that it may not have liberty to use any thing that belonged to the Pope. Our Ancestors took the Idol-Temples, and used them for Sacred Houses to worship Christ. And the Revenues that were Consecrated to the Gentile Gods, and to the Games of the Theatre, and of the Vestal Virgins, were made use of for the maintenance of the Mi∣nisters of the Church; when these before had served not only to Antichrist, but to the Devil. Nor could he presently grant, that these Differences of Garments had their Original from the Pope. For we read in Ecclesiastical History, that Iohn at Ephesus wore a Petalum [a Mitre]. And Pontius Diaconus saith of Cyprian, that when he went to be Executed, he gave his Episcopal Garments. Birrus to the Execu∣tioner, his Episcopal Garments. Dalmatica to the Deacons, and stood in Linnen. And Chrysostom makes mention of the white Garments of Mini∣sters. And the Ancients witness, that when the Christians came to Christ, they changed their Garments, and for a Gown put on a Cloak; for which when they were mocked by the Heathens, Tertullian wrote a Learned Book De Pallio. And he knew Hoper was not ignorant, that to those that were initiated in Baptism, was delivered a white Garment. Therefore before the Tyranny of the Pope, there was a Distinction of Garments in the Church. Nor did he think, that in case it were granted, that it was in∣vented by the Pope, that the iniquity of Popery was so great, that whatsoever it touched was so dyed and polluted thereby, that good and godly Men might not use it to any holy purpose. Hoper himself granted, that every humane Invention was not therefore presently to be Condemned. It was an humane Invention to communicate before Dinner: it was an humane Invention, that the things sold in the Primitive Church were brought and laid at the Apostles Feet. That he was ready to confess with him that these Garments were an humane Invention, and of themselves edified not; but it was thought by some conducive, to be born with for a time: For that it might be a cause of avoiding those Contentions, whereby greater Benefits might be in danger to be obstructed. But that if hence an occasion of Erring might be given to the Weak, they were to be admonished, that they should hold these things indifferent: and they were to be taught in Sermons, that they should judg not God's Worship to be placed in them. Hoper had writ, that the Eyes of the Standers-by, by reason of these Garments,Another Ob∣jection of Ho∣per considered. would be turned away from thinking of serious things, and detained in gazing upon them. But this would not happen when the Garments were simple and plain, without Brave∣ry, and such as hitherto were used in the Service of God. But Martyr answered, That Use and Custom would take away Ad∣miration. And perhaps when the People were moved with Ad∣miration, they would the more attentively think of those things that are serious. For which end, he said, the Sacraments seemed to be invented, that from the Sight and Sense of them we might be carried to think of Divine Things.
Hoper urged moreover, That whatsoever was not of Faith, was Sin. But said Martyr, That we may enjoy a quiet Conscience in our Doings, that of the Apostle seems much to tend,Other things urged by him. and that to the Clean all things are clean, saith the same Apostle to Titus; and to Timothy, that every Creature of God is good. He urged also, That we ought to have express Scripture for what we do in holy things. But Martyr was not of that Mind, But that that was enough in general, to know by Faith, that in∣different things cannot defile those who act with a pure and sin∣cere Mind and Conscience. And this was the substance of P. Martyr's Judgment of these things. Which might give much light to that Reverend Man in this Controversy, though he was not yet convinced, nor could comply. As Hoper all this while refused the Habits,Hoper Confined to his House, and silenced. so we may conjecture by a Passage in the former Letter, that he liberally declamed against them in the London Pulpits. For Martyr takes notice to him of his unseasonable, and too bitter Sermons. Whether it were for this, or his incompliance, or both together, I know not, but at length he was, by the Privy-Counsel commanded to keep his House;Council-Book. unless it were to go to the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, or the Bishops of Ely, London or Lincoln, for Counsel and Satisfaction of his Conscience; and neither to Preach nor Read, till he had further Licence from the Council. But notwithstanding this Command, he kept not his House, and writ a Book and Printed it, intituled, A Confession of his Faith: Written in such a manner, that it gave more distaste, and wherein was contained Matter he should not have written. He went about also complaining of the King's Councellors; as Martyr wrote in a private Letter to Bucer. On Ianuary the 13th. The Court then at Greenwich,Committed to the ABp's Custody. he appeared there before the Council, (the Arch-bishop being then present,) touching the matter of not wearing the Apparel, and for disobeying the Council. Who for this Disobedience, and for that he continued in his former Opinion of not wearing the Apparel prescribed for Bishops to wear, committed him to the Arch-bishop of Canterbury's Custody, either there to be reformed, or further punished, as the obstinacy of his Cause required. Being with the Arch-bishop he did his endeavour to satisfy him.Sent to the Fleet. But Hoper was as immoveable to whatsoever the said ABp could propound and offer, as he was before with Ridley. So the Arch-bishop signi∣fied to the Council, that he could bring him to no Conformity,Council-Book. but that he declared himself for another way of Ordination, than was established. The Effect of this was, that on Ianuary 27, Upon this Letter of the Arch-bishop, That Hoper could not be brought to any Conformity, but rather persevering in his Obstinacy (they are the words of the Council-Book) coveted to prescribe Orders and ne∣cessary Laws of his Head, it was agreed that he should be commit∣ted to the Fleet. And a Letter was drawn for the Arch-bishop to send Mr. Hoper to the Fleet upon the occasion aforesaid: and ano∣ther Letter to the Warden of the Fleet to receive him, and to keep him from the Conference with any Person, saving the Ministers of that House. This Disobedience of Hoper to the Council's Orders
will make the severity of the Council less liable to censure. Neither was Cranmer any other ways instrumental to Hoper's Impri∣sonment, than by doing that which was expected from him, viz. giving a true Account of his unsuccessful dealing with him. But at last he complied,Hoper con∣forms. and received Consecration after the usual Form: and the Church enjoyed a most excellent Instrument in him at this time, for his Learning, Zeal, Courage and Activity. Martyr to Gual∣ter concer∣ning Hoper's Conformity.This News Peter Martyr signified in a Letter to Gualter. For he and Bullinger, and the rest of his Friends at Zurick, had heard of this Contention, and were much concerned for this their Acquaintance. But as he was Consecrated in March, so in April following Martyr wrote to the said Gualter, That he had never been wanting to Hoper [whether in his Counsel for satisfying his Conscience, or in respect of his Interest with the Arch-bishop or other chief Men,] and that he always hoped well of his Cause. That he now was freed of all his troubles, and that he was actually in his Bishoprick, and did discharge his Office piously and strenuously. This was the more acceptable News to the Foreigners, because some of the Bishops took occasion, upon this Disobedience of Hoper, liberally to blame the Churches abroad, among which Hoper had been, as tho they had infused these principles into him: and then fell foul up∣on Bucer and Martyr, that were set the one Professor in Cambridg, and the other in Oxon; as though they would corrupt all the Youth in both Universities: who would suck in from them such Princi∣ples, as Hoper had done. This Bucer heard of, and writ it with a concern to Marr. Who writ again, how amazed and almost stu∣pified he was to hear this. But that it was well, that the Bishops saw his Letter to Hoper, which would vindicate him from such Im∣putations. And indeed both his and Bucer's Letter, concerning this point, did or might seasonably stop this Clamour. CHAP. XVIII. Bishop Hoper Visits his Diocess. Hoper Visits his Diocess.THE Summer next after his Consecration, he went down and made a strict Visitation of his Diocess, fortified with Letters from the Privy-Council; that so his Authority might be the greater, and do the more good among an ignorant, superstitious, stubborn Clergy and Laity. I have seen a Manuscript in Folio, giving an Ac∣count of the whole Visitation, of the Method thereof, and of the Condition he found the Clergy of the Diocess in, as to their Learn∣ing and Abilities. First, He sent a general Monitory Letter to his Clergy, signifying his Intention of coming among them; gravely advising them of their Office, and what was required of them who were entred into this Holy Vocation. This Letter may be found in the Appendix.No. XLVII. When he visited them, he gave them Articles con∣cerning Christian Religion, to the number of Fifty; which bore this Title, Articles concerning Christen Religion, given by the Reverend Father in Christ, John Hoper Bishop of Gloucester, unto all and sin∣gular
Deans, Parsons, Prebendaries, Vicars, Curats, and other Eccle∣siastical Ministers within the Diocess of Glocester, to be had and retained of them, for the Vnity and Agreement, as well as the Doctrine of God's Word, as also for the Conformation of the Ceremonies agreeing with God's Word. Let me give the Reader but a taste of them. I. That none do teach any manner of thing to be necessary for the Salvation of Man,His Articles of Religion. other than what is contained in the Books of God's Holy Word. II. That they faithfully teach and instruct the People commit∣ted unto their Charge, that there is but one God, Everlasting, In∣corporate, Almighty, Wise and Good, the Maker of Heaven and Earth, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; by whom also he will be called upon by us. And though one God in Essence and Unity in the Godhead, yet in the same Unity three distinct Persons. III. That they teach all the Doctrines contained in the three Creeds. IV. That they teach, that the Church of God is the Congre∣gation of the Faithful, wherein the Word of God is truly preached, and the Sacraments justly ministred, according to the Institution of Christ. And that the Church of God is not by God's Word taken for the Multitude or Company of Men, as of Bishops, Priests, and such other; but that it is the company of all Men hearing God's Word, and obeying to the same; lest that any Man should be seduced, believing himself to be bound unto an ordinary Suc∣cession of Bishops and Priests, but only unto the Word of God, and the right use of his Sacraments. V. That tho the true Church cannot err from the Faith; yet nevertheless, forasmuch as no Man is free from Sin, and Lies, there is, nor can be any Church known, be it never so perfect or holy, but it may err. These are the five first. Then he gave them Injunctions to the number of one and thirty; Seven and twenty Interrogatories and Demands of the People and Pa∣rishioners, and of their Conversation,His Injunctions and Interroga∣tories. to be required and known by the Parsons, Vicars and Curats. Sixty one Interrogatories and Exa∣minations of the Ministers, and of their Conversation, to be requi∣red and known by the Parishioners. There were also Articles, whereupon all Ministers were examined concerning the Ten Com∣mandments, the Articles of Faith, and the Petitions of the Lord's Prayer, viz. to each Minister were these Questions put; 1. Concerning the Commandments, 1. How many Commandments. 2. Where they are written. 3. Whether they can recite them by Heart. 2. Concerning the Christian Faith, 1. What are the Articles of the Christian Faith. 2. Whether they can recite them by Heart. 3. That they corroborate them by Authority of Script. 3. Concerning the Lord's Prayer, 1. Whether they can say the Petitions by Heart. 2. How they know it to be the Lord's Prayer. 3. Where it is written.
Which Demands, how easy soever they were, many Curats and Priests (such was the Ignorance of those Days) could say but little to. Some could say the Pater Noster in Latin, but not in English. Few could say the Ten Commandments. Few could prove the Articles of Faith by Scripture. That was out of their way. The Memory of such as have been greatly useful in the Church or State, ought religiously to be preserved. Of this Number was this Bishop, who as he was naturally an active Man, put forth all his Strength and Vigour of Body and Mind, to set forward a good Re∣formation in Religion, and afterwards as couragiously shed his Blood for it. Holds Worcester in Commendam.Therefore I cannot part with this good Prelat till I have gathered up and reposited here some farther Memorials of him. The Diocess of Worcester becoming void by the Deprivation of Hethe in Octob. 1551. and requiring an industrious Man to be set over that See, it was given to Hoper to hold in Commendam. In the Year 1552, in Iuly, he vi∣sited that Diocess, which he found much out of Order. But before he had finished, he was fain to go back to Glocester, hearing of the ungodly Behaviour of the Ministers there. He left them the last Year seemingly very compliant to be reformed, and took their Sub∣scription to his Articles of Religion. But in his absence, when his Back was turned, they became as bad altogether as they were before. Yet he conceived good hopes of the Lay-people, if they had but good Justices and faithful Ministers placed among them, as he wrote to Secretary Cecyl. To whom he signified his Desire, that the Articles of Religion, which the King had mentioned to him when last at London, were set forth. Them he intended to make the Clergy, not only subscribe, (which being privately done, he saw they re∣garded not) but to read and confess them openly before their Pa∣rishioners. At his Visitation he constituted certain of his Clergy Su∣perintendants, who in his absence were to have a constant Eye over the Inferior Clergy. And visits that Church and Sec.After this Visit to Glocester, he returned back again to VVorcester in October, and then proceeded in his Visitation there. Here Iohnson and Iollisf, two Canons of this Church, disallowing some Doctrines, recommended to them by the Bishop, (in his Articles abovesaid) held a Dispute thereupon with him, and Mr. Harley, (who was af∣terward Bishop of Hereford.) And one of these, behaved himself most insolently and disrespectfully to both. The Bishop sent up by Harley, a large Relation of his Visitation in writing, and the Matter these Canons misliked, and recommended Harley to the Secretary to give Account of the Disputation. This caused him to break out into a Complaint, for want of good Men in the Cathedrals. Ah! Mr. Secretary, that there were good Men in the Cathedral Churches! God then should have much more Honour than he hath, the King's Majesty more Obedience, and the poor People better Knowledg. But the Realm wanteth Light in such Churches, whereas of right it ought most to be. In Worcester Church he now put in execu∣tion the King's Injunctions for the removal of Superstition. For which there arose a great Clamour against him, as though he had
spoiled the Church, and yet he did no more than the express Words of the Injunctions commanded to be done. After his Visitation was over, he accounted not his Work done;Goes over both his Dio∣cesses again. but soon went over both his Diocesses again, to take account of his Clergy, how they profited since his last examining them; and to oversee even his Superintendents themselves, to commend their Well-doings, and to see what was ill done. So great was his Pains and Zeal; which made him most truly and experimentally write as he did to the Secretary: There is none that eat their Bread in the sweat of their Face, but such as serve in Publick Vocation. Yours is wonderful, but mine passeth. Now I perceive that private La∣bours be but Plays, nor private Troubles but Ease and Quietness. These Matters I extract from two Original Letters of this Bishop to Secretary Cecyl; which I have thought well worthy of preserving in the Appendix; and there they may be met with.No. XLVIII. Whereas it was mentioned before,The Council's Order con∣cerning the two Canons. MS. Council-Book. how the Bishop had sent up a Writing of the Matters in Controversy, between the two Canons and himself, we may see what Care the Council took hereof, and what Countenance they gave the Bishop, by an Order they made Novemb. 6. 1552. Which was, that a Letter should be wrote to Mr. Cheke and Mr. Harley, to consider certain Books sent unto them touching Matters of Religion in Controversy, between the Bishop of VVorcester, and two of the Canons of VVorcester, and to certify their Opinion hither, that further Order may be therein taken. Ian. 29. 1551.Licence for the Bp of Glocester to attend up∣on the Dut∣chess of Somer∣set in the Tower. Upon suit made by the Dutchess of Somerset to Sir Philip Hobby, and Mr. Darcy Lieutenant of the Tower, to be a Mean unto the King's Majesty, and my Lords, that the Bishop of Glocester, (who had been Chaplain unto the Duke) might be suffered to have access unto her for the settling of her Conscience; Order was by their Lordships taken for the same, and a Letter written to the Lieutenant of the Tower in that behalf, as followeth; To the Lieutenant of the Tower, to permit the Bishop of Glocester, from time to time, to speak with the Dutchess of Somerset, in the presence of Sir Phi∣lip Hobby, and of the said Lieutenant: And in case the said Lady of Somerset desire to speak with the said Bishop apart, that in that case they license her so to do. May 29, 1552.Other Matters relating to this Bishop. A Warrant to make a Book to the Elect Bishop of VVorcester and Glocester, of discharge of the first Fruits and Tenths to be paid for the same, in consideration, that he hath departed with certain Lands to the King's Majesty. Which probably he seeing would, whether he would or no, be pulled away from him, to be conferred upon some of the Mighty of the Court, made the best of a bad Market, and got himself freed from that Charge payable to the King. April 12, 1553. A Letter was wrote to the Chancellor of the Augmentations, to cause a Book to be made from the Bishop of Wor∣cester and Glocester, of a Surrender to the King's Majesty of his Juris∣diction in the Forest of Dean, with a certain Deanery, which of right belongeth to the Bishoprick of Hereford. And thereupon to make another Book of the Grant thereof from his Highness to Mr. Harley Elect Bishop of Hereford.
April 16, 1553. A Letter to the Chancellor of the Agumentati∣ons, to cause a Book to be devised in form of Law, Licensing the Bp of Worcester and Glocester, to give to three poor Vicarages in his Diocess, the Parsonages whereof are impropriated to his Bishoprick, such Augmentation of Living towards their better Maintenance, as he shall think convenient, out of the Lands of the said See. April 25, 1553. A Warrant to the Receiver of the Wards, to de∣liver to the Bishop of Worcester, by way of Reward, twenty Pounds for his Attendance here ever since the Parliament by his Majesty's Commandment. These are Transcriptions out of a Council-Book. CHAP. XIX. Troubles of Bishop Gardiner. IN this Year 1550, the Council and our Arch-bishop had much trouble, with some other Bishops also, of a quite different Judg∣ment from the above-spoken of; I mean Gardiner Bishop of Win∣chester, Nicolas Bishop of Worcester, and Day Bishop of Chichester. Of whom what I shall here briefly set down, are for the most part Extractions out of an old Council-Book, and K. Edward's Journal. At Greenwich, June 8. was this Order of Council concerning Bishop Gardiner,Divers great Lords repair to Gardiner. Considering the long Imprisonment that the Bishop of Winchester hath sustained, it was now thought time he should be spoken withal; and agreed, that if he repented his former Ob∣stinacy, and would henceforth apply himself to advance the King's Majesty's Proceedings, His Highness in this Case would be his good Lord, and remit all his Errors passed. Otherwise his Ma∣jesty was resolved to proceed against him as his Obstinacy and Contempt required. For the Declaration whereof, the Duke of Somerset, the Lord Treasurer, the Lord Privy-Seal, the Lord great Chamberlain, and Mr. Secretary Petre, were appointed the next Day [i. e. Iune 9.] to repair unto him. Signed by E. Somerset. T. Cant. W. Wilts. I. Bedford. E. Clynton. T. Ely. A. Wyngfeld. W. Herbert. W. Petre. Edw. North. Accordingly, Iune 9. The Duke of Somerset, the Marquess of Northampton, the Lord Treasu∣rer, the Earl of Bedford, and Secretary Petre, went to the Bishop of Winchester, to know what he would stick to; Whether to conform to, and promote the King's Laws, or no? He answered, That he would obey and set forth all things set forth by the King and Par∣liament. And if he were troubled in Conscience, he would reveal it to the Council, and not reason openly against it. And then he desired to see the King's Book of Proceedings. At Greenwich, Iune 10. Report was made by the Duke of Somerset and the rest, sent to the Bishop of Winchester, that he desired to see the said Book. The next day were the Books sent to him, and delivered to him by the Lieutenant of the Tower, as the Council appointed, to see if he would set his Hand to them, and promise to set them forth to the People. At Greenwich, Iune 13. the Lieutenant of the Tower, de∣clared unto the Council, that the Bishop, having perused the Books
of the Proceedings, said unto him. He could make no direct answer, unless he were at Liberty, and so being, he would say his Conscience. On the 14th Day, the Duke of Somerset, and five more of the Coun∣cil again repaired to the Bishop, to whom he made this Answer; I have deliberately seen the Book of Common-Prayer. Altho I would not have made it so my self, yet I find such things in it, as satisfy my Conscience. And therefore I will both execute it my self, and also see others my Parishioners to do it. And this the Councellors testified under their Hands, as his Saying. Iuly the 9th. There were certain Articles drawn up,The Council's proceedings with him. signed by King and Council, for the Bishop to subscribe; which contained the Confession of his Fault, the Supremacy of the King and his Succes∣sors; the establishing of Holy Days, or dispensing with them to be in the King; the Service-Book to be Godly and Christian; the acknowledgment of the King to be Supream Head, and to submit to him and his Laws under Age; the abolishing the Six Articles; and the King's Power of correcting and reforming the Church. These Articles, together with a Letter from the King, the Earl of Warwick Lord great Master, the Lord S. Iohn Lord Treasurer, Sir William Herbert Master of the Horse, and Secretary Petre, carried to the Bishop, requiring him to sign them. Which he did, only making exception to the first. Iuly 10. The said Lords made report unto the Council, that they had delivered the King's Letter unto the Bishop, together with the Articles. Unto all which Articles he subscribed thus with his own Hand, Stev. Winton, saving the first. Against which he wrote in the Margin these words, I cannot in my Conscience confess the Preface, knowing my self to be of that sort I am indeed, and ever have been. To which Articles, thus subscribed by the Bishop, these of the Council wrote their Names, E. Somers. W. Wilts, I. Warwick, I. Bedford, W. Northampton, E. Clynton, G. Cobham, William Paget, W. Herbert, W. Petre, Edw. North. Iuly 11. at Westminster, This was brought to the Council. And his boggling in this manner at the Confession displeased the King, that being the principal Point. But to the intent he should have no just cause to say he was not mercifully handled, it was agreed, that Sir VVilliam Herbert and the Secretary should go the next day to him to tell him, that the King marvelled he refused to put his Hand to the Confession. And that if the words thereof seemed too sore, then to refer it to himself, in what sort, and with what words he should devise to submit himself; That upon the acknowledg∣ment of his Fault, the King might extend his Mercy towards him, as was determined. Iuly 13. Sir VVilliam Herbert and the Secretary reported, that the Bishop stood precisely in his own Justification. He said,Articles pro∣pounded to him to sub∣scribe. That he could not subscribe to the Confession, because he was Innocent, and also because the Confession was but the preface to the Articles. Upon this it was agreed by the Council, that a new Book of Ar∣ticles, and a new Submission should be devised for the Bishop to sub∣scribe. And the Bishop of London, Secretary Petre, Mr. Cecyl, and Goodrick, a Common Lawyer, were commanded to make these
Articles according to Law. And then for the more authentick pro∣ceeding with the Bishop, the two former Persons were again to re∣sort to him with the new Draught, and to take with them a Di∣vine, which was the Bishop of London, and a Lawyer which was Goodrick. These Articles were 22 in Number, and to this Tenor, That King Henry VIII. had justly supprest Monasteries; That persons may Marry, who are not prohibited to contract Matri∣mony by the Levitical Law, without the Bishop of Rome's Di∣spensation. That vowing or going Pilgrimages were justly abolished; the Conterfeyting S. Nicholas, St. Clement, &c. was mere Mockery. That it is convenient that the Scriptures should be in English. That the Late King, and the present, did upon just ground, take into their Hands Chauntries, which were for main∣tenance of private Masses. That private Masses were justly taken away by the Statutes of the Realm, and the Communion placed instead thereof, is very Godly. That it is convenient, that the Sacrament should be received in both Kinds. That the Mass, where the Priest doth only receive, and others look on, is but the Invention of Man. That it was upon good and Godly Conside∣ration ordered in the Book, that the Sacrament should not be lifted up, and shewed to the People to be adored. That it is politickly and godly done, that Images in Churches, and Mass-Books were enacted to be abolished. That Bishops, Priests and Deacons have no Commandment in the Law of God to vow Cha∣stity, or abstain from Marriage. And that all Canons and Con∣stitutions which do prohibit Marriage to the Clergy, be justly taken away by Parliament. That the Homilies and the Forms set forth of making Arch-bishops, Bishops, Priests and Deacons, are Godly and wholsome, and ought to be received. That the Orders of Subdeacon, Benet and Colet, &c. be not necessary, and justly left out in the Book of Orders. That the Holy Scriptures contain sufficiently all Doctrines necessary to Salvation. That upon good and godly Consideration it was injoined that Erasmus's Paraphrases should be set up in Churches. And that it was the King's Pleasure, that the Bishop should affirm these Articles by Subscription of his Hand, and declare himself willing to publish and preach the same. These Articles were brought to the Bishop by the Master of the Horse, and Secretary Petre, with the Bishop of London and Goodrick. To whom the Bishop answered, That he would not consent to the Article of Submission; Praying to be brought to his Trial, and desired nothing but Justice. And for the rest of the Articles, when he was at Liberty, then it should appear what he would do in them, it not being reasonable he should subscribe them in Prison. This being reported to the Council, Iuly 15, it was agreed, that he should be sent for before the whole Council, and examined, Whe∣ther he would stand at this Point? Which if he did, then to de∣nounce the Sequestration of his Benefice for three Months, with intimation, if he reformed not in that space, to deprive him. This Order was Signed by Somerset, Wilts, Bedford, Clynton, Paget, Wyngfield, Herbert.
Iuly 19. The Bishop of VVynton was brought before the Coun∣cil; and there the Articles before mentioned were read unto him distinctly. Whereunto he refused either to subscribe or consent:Winchester Se∣questred for three Months. Answering in these words, That in all things his Majesty would command him, he was willing and most ready to obey; but foras∣much as there were divers things required of him, which his Conscience would not bear, therefore he prayed them to have him excused. And thereupon Secretary Petre, by the Council's Or∣der proceeded to read the Sequestration. Thus fairly and calmly was this Bishop dealt with by the King and his Council, from Iune 8. to Iuly 19. And notwithstanding this Sentence, the Council favo∣rably ordered, that the Bishop's House and Servants should be maintained in their present State, until the expiration of the three Months; and that the Matter in the mean time should be kept secret. The three Months expired Octob. 19. but with such Clemency was he used, that it was November 23,The Sequestra∣tion expires. before his Business was re∣newed. And then,Council-Book. considering the time of his Intimation was long sithence expired, it was agreed, that the Bishop of Ely, Mr. Secre∣tary Petre, Dr. May and Dr. Glynne, all Learned in the Civil Law, should substantially confer upon the Matter: and upon Tuesday next, the 26th day of this present, to certify unto the Council, what was to be done duly by order of the Law in this Case. And now the Arch-bishop of Canterbury began to be concerned in this troublesome Business. A Commission, dated Decemb. 12, was issued out from the King, to the said Arch-bishop, and to the Bishops of London, Ely, Lincoln, to Sir VVilliam Petre, Sir Iames Hales, and some other Lawyers, to call the said Bishop of VVinchester before them, and, continuing in his Contempt, to proceed to deprive him. December 14. The Lieutenant of the Tower was ordered to bring the Bishop on Monday next to Lambeth before my Lord of Canterbu∣ry, and other Commissioners, upon his Cause: and likewise upon their Appointment to bring him thither from day to day, at times by them prefixed. December 15, was the day of VVinchester's first Appearance.The Commis∣sioners sit to examine him. The Business done this Session, was the opening and reading the Com∣mission, and after that, divers Articles against the Bishop. Who then made a Speech. Wherein first, He protested against these his Judges, and excepted against their Commission; and required this his Protestation to be entred into the Acts of the Court. Then de∣siring a Copy of the Commission, it was granted him, together with that of the Articles too, to make his Answers to. Next, the Archbishop gave him his Oath to make true Answer. Which he took still with his Protestation. Then the Bishop desiring Counsel, the Arch-bishop and the rest not only granted his Request, but allowed him whomsoever he should name. Which was the next Day allowed also by an Order of Council. Certain honourable Persons were deposed, and sworn for Witnesses, as Sir Anthony Wing∣field Controller of the Houshold, Sir William Cecyl Secretary, Sir Rafe Sadleir, Sir Edward North, Dr. Cox Almoner, and others. The Bishop also protested against them, and the Swearing of them.
At this first Sessions he had also said, in the hearing of a great Mul∣titude present, concerning the Duke of Somerset and some other Privy-Counsellors, sent to him in the Tower, That they had made an end with him before, for all the matters for which he was committed. In so much that he verily thought he should never have heard any more of it. A Letter of some Noble∣men, whom he had belied.This, coming soon to the Ears of these Nobles, highly offended them, as reporting falsely of them. So that to justify themselves in as publick a manner, the next Sessions they sent their Letter, dated December 17, signed by the Duke of Somerset, the Earls of Wiltshire and Bedford, and Sir Edward North: wherein they denied any such Matter; saying, That the Bishop defended his Cause with Untruths, and that upon their Fidelities and Honours, his Tale was false and untrue; For that their coming to him in the Tower was to do their endeavour to reclaim him. And they prayed the Commissioners, that for their Vindication, they would cause this their Letter to be publickly read. Which was accord∣ingly done; though the Bishop, thinking how this would reflect up∣on him, under his former Protestation, laboured hard that he might first be heard, and that he had something to propose, why it should not be read. Which notwithstanding they would not grant. Ianuary 19. The Council sitting at Greenwich, the Bishop's Ser∣vants came and desired, that certain of them might be sworn upon certain Articles for Witness on his behalf. And if they might not be sworn, that upon their Honours, as they would answer before God, they would witness truly according to their Conscience, and as effectually as if they were sworn upon a Book. And they were allowed. Gardiner offers his Book against Cran∣mer to the Commissio∣ners.The Bishop to make his Cause the more plausible, as though he were the publick Defender of the Roman Catholick-Church in Eng∣land at this time, laboured to make it believed, that he fell into all this Trouble for the Defence of the Real Presence in the Sacrament, and for maintaining the Catholick Doctrine in a Sermon before the King; and that he made his Book to vindicate himself therein. And therefore in one of his Appearances before the Commissioners, openly in the Court delivered them his Book against Arch-bishop Cranmer, printed in France: and to make it suit the better, he had altered some lines in the beginning of his Book, so as to make it to relate to his present Case. But in truth Gardiner had wrote, and finished his Book before. This Cranmer unvailed in his Answer to this Book of Gardiner's:Page 2. Saying there, That he made his Book, before he was called before the Commissioners, as he could prove by a Book under his own Hand-writing; and that he was called before the Commissioners by his own Suit and Procure∣ment, and as it were inforcing the Matter. But indeed the true Cause was, That he was called to Justice for his manifest Con∣tempt and continual Disobedience from time to time, or rather Rebellion against the King's Majesty; and was deprived of his State for the same.
In short, after a greal deal of Pains and Patience, the Bishop was by the Arch-bishop and the rest of the Commissioners deprived, after no less then two and twenty Sessions, held at divers places,He is deprived. that is, from the 15th of December to the 14th of February: though Stow falsely nameth but seven. The Bishop when he saw the Sen∣tence Definitive ready to be pronounced, made an Appeal from them to the King. For his doing which he produced these Reasons. For that these his pretended Judges were not indifferent, but prejudi∣ced against him. That my Lord of Canterbury had caused him to be sent to Prison, (whereas the Arch-bishop was only present at the Council when he was by them ordered to the Tower). And so had Hales, Goodrick and Gosnold counselled to send him thither. Also, that the Arch-bishop and the Bishops of London and Lincoln, did contrary to the Laws Ecclesiastical, and taught and set forth ma∣nifest condemned Errors against the Presence in the Sacrament. And because the Bishop, as well in his Writings, as otherwise, did set forth the Catholick Faith of the very Presence of Christ's Body and Blood: therefore they shewed themselves unduly affected to∣wards him. That Sir William Petre decreed the Fruits of his Bishoprick to be sequestred de facto, sed non de jure, and now was Judg in his own Cause. But notwithstanding this Appeal, the Arch-bishop with the rest of the Commissioners pronounced him Deprived, and his Bishoprick void. After this was done, the Bishop appealed again to the King, instantly, more instantly, most instant∣ly, from their Sentence as Injust, and of no effect in Law; and asked of them Letters Dimissory to be granted to him, and a Copy of the Judgment. But the Judges declared they would first know the pleasure of the King and his Council therein. And so this last Session brake up. The day after, being the 15th of February,The Council's order for his strait Confine∣ment. the Council sitting at VVestminster, upon debating the Bishop of VVinton's Case; Foras∣much as it appeared, he had at all times, before the Judges of his Cause, used himself unreverently to the King's Majesty, and slan∣derfully towards his Council; and especially Yesterday,Council-Book. being the Day of his Judgment given against him, he called his Judges He∣reticks and Sacramentaries, they being there the King's Commissio∣ners, and of his Highness's Council; it was therefore concluded, by the whole Board, that he should be removed from the Lodging he hath now in the Tower, to a meaner Lodging, and none to wait upon him but one, by the Lieutenant's Appointment, in such sort as by the resort of any Man to him, he have not the liberty to send out to any Man, or to hear from any Man. And likewise that his Books and Papers be taken from him, and seen; and that from henceforth he have neither Pen, Ink, nor Paper, to write his dete∣stable Purposes, but be sequestred from all Conferences, and from all means that may serve him to practise any way. March 8. at VVestminster. This day, by the King's Majesty's own Appointment, Dr. Poynet Bishop of Rochester,Poynet made Bp of Winton. was chosen Bishop of VVinchester. And the Arch-bishop of Canterbury had given him 266 l. 13 s. 4 d. (i. e. 400 Marks) for his Pains and Charges about the Bishop of VVinchester. And thus I have, from very Authentick
Authority, gathered together these Memorials of this turbulent haughty Man; who was now so seasonably laid aside in this King's Reign, till we hear of him loudly in the next; when he sufficiently wracked his Revenge against our good Arch-bishop and the true Re∣ligion. CHAP. XX. Bishop Hethe and Bishop Day, their Deprivations. Other Popish Bps dealt with.WHile the aforesaid Bp lay under Sequestrationin the Tower, two other Bps that were wayward to the King's Proceedings in the Reformation of the Church, (viz. of Worcester and Chichester) came under the Hands of the Privy-Council, resolving to make them com∣ply, or deprive them. That others more willing and better affected to Reformation, might succeed and do service in the Church; and that the Arch-bishop might go forward with less Stop and Impediment in the good Work he had dedicated himself unto. Both of them were of the Arch-bishop's raising, and seemed very compliant with the Arch-bishop during K. Henry's Reign. But now both hung off from him, seeming much offended with him for his relinquishing the Doctrine of the Corporeal Presence, and for writing a Book a∣gainst it. Whereof they made mention, with dislike, in their De∣positions in the Bishop of Winchester's Trial before the Commissio∣ners. Bp Hethe's Troubles.In the last Year, the Year 1549, Twelve Learned Divines, Bishops and others, were appointed by the Council to prepare a new Book for the Ordination of Ministers, purged of the Superstitions of the old Ordinal. Hethe Bishop of Worcester was nominated for one of these. But he not liking the thing, would not agree to what the others did, nor subscribe the Book when made. For which, in March, he was committed to the Fleet; where he lay under easy Confinement all the next Year, the Year 1550; during which time I find him once produced as a Witness on Bishop Gardiner's behalf. Sent for before the Council. Council-Book.But in the Year 1551, the Court being at Chelsey, and the Council sitting September 22. by virtue of the King's express Command∣ment, Nicols Bishop of Worcester was sent for, and came before the Lords and others. To whom was repeated the Cause of his Impri∣sonment to be, For that he refused to subscribe the Book devised for the Form of making Arch-bishops, Bishops, Priests and Deacons, being authorized by Parliament. At the time of which refusal, be∣ing not only gently and reasonably required to subscribe it, but also being manifestly taught by divers other Learned Men, that all Things contained in the Book were Good and True, and that the Book was expedient and allowable, the said Bishop declared himself to be a vry obstinate Man. And for this his doing, it was now shewed unto him, that he deserved longer Imprisonment. Never∣theless the King's Majesty's Clemency was such, that now if he had, or would reconcile himself to obey his Majesty in this former Com∣mandment, he should recover the King's Majesty's Favour. For
which Cause it was told him, That he was then presently sent for, and willed now to subscribe the same. Whereunto he answered, That he took the Cause of his Imprisonment to be as was alleged, and that also he was very gently used, rather like a Son than a Subject. Nevertheless (he said) he remained still in the same mind, not willing to subscribe it, although he would not disobey it. And although he was reasoned withal by every of the said Council in dis∣proving his manner of answer, that he would not subscribe it, being every thing in the said Book, True and Good; and being devised by eleven other Learned Men, to which he was joined as the twelfth, and received of all the whole Estate of the Realm; agreeing also that he would obey it, not subscribe it, which contained a Contradiction in Reason: Yet he still, as a Man not removeable from his own Con∣ceit, refused to subscribe it. Whereupon to prove all manner of Ways for the winning of him to his Duty, he was offered to have Conference with Learned Men, and to have time to consider the Matter better. Whereunto he said, That he could not have better Conference than he had heretofore: and well might he have time, but of other Mind he thought never to be: Adding, that there were many other things whereunto he would never consent, if he were demanded, as to take down the Altars and set up Tables. And in this sort seeing him obstinately settled in Mind not to be con∣formable, he was in the King's Majesty's Name expresly command∣ed and charged to subscribe the same Book before Thursday next fol∣lowing, being the 24th hereof, upon pain of Deprivation of his Bi∣shoprick, to all and singular Effects which might follow thereof. And hearing the Commandment, he resolutely answered, He could not find in his Conscience to do it, and should be well content to abide such End, either by Deprivation or otherwise, as pleased the King's Majesty. And so as a Man incorrigible, he was returned to the Fleet. This Order was subscribed by these of the Privy-Council, W. Wilts. I. Warwyck. W. Herbert. W. Cecyl. Io. Mason. That which gave the Council the first Occasion against Day Bishop of Chichester,Bp of Chi∣chester his Troubles. was partly his refusal of complying with the Order of changing the Altars in his Diocess into Tables; and partly going down into his Diocess, and there preaching against it,Council-Book. and other Mat∣ters of that nature then in agitation, to the raising of dangerous Tu∣mults and Discontents among the People. This came to the Coun∣cil's Ears; and Octob. 7. this Year, Dr. Cox, the King's Almoner, was ordered to repair into Sussex, to appease the People by his good Doctrine, which were now troubled through the seditious preaching of the Bishop of Chichester and others. Novemb. 8. The said Bishop appeared before the Council to an∣swer such things as should be objected against him for preaching. And because he denied the words of his Accusation, therefore he was commanded within two days to bring in writing what he preached. Novemb. 30. This day the Duke of Somerset declared to the Coun∣cil, That the Bishop of Chichester came within two days past,Bp Day will not pull down Altars. and shewed to him, that he received Letters from the King's Majesty, signed with his Majesty's Hand, and subscribed with the Hands of divers Lords of the Council. The Tenor of which Letter here en∣sueth;
Right Reverend Father in God, &c. [It is the same Letter as is printed in Fox's Acts, about pulling down Altars]; According to this Letter the said Bishop said, He could not conform his Consci∣ence to do that he was by the said Letter commanded; and therefore prayed the said Duke he might be excused. Whereunto the said Duke, for Answer, used divers Reasons moving the said Bishop to do his Duty, and in such things to make no Conscience, where no need is. Nevertheless the said Bishop would not be removed from his former Opinion. Therefore the said Duke said, He would make report to the rest of the Council. And so in the end he prayed the Lords of the Council this Day, that the Bishop might be sent for, and shew his Mind touching this Case. Which was agreed, and Commandment given for the Bishop to be at the Council the next Day. Appears be∣fore the Coun∣cil.Decemb. 1. The Bishop came before the Council; and being asked what he said to the Letters sent to him from the King's Majesty? He answered, That he could not conform his Conscience to take down the Altars in the Churches, and in lieu of them to set up Tables, as the Letter appointed. For that he seemed for his Opinion to have the Scripture, and Consent of the Doctors and Fathers of the Church; and contrariwise did not perceive any strength in the six Reasons, which were set forth by the Bishop of London to perswade the taking down Altars and erection of Tables. And then being demanded what Scripture he had? he alledged a saying in Esay.Es. xix.19. Which place, being considered by the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of London, and other Lords of the Council, was found of no purpose to maintain his Opinion. The ABp and Bp of Ely rea∣son with him.And thereupon by the said Arch-bishop and Bishop of Ely divers good Reasons were given to prove, that it was convenient to take down the Altars, as things abused; and in lieu of them to set up Tables, as things most meet for the Supper of the Lord, and most agreeable to the first Constitution. And besides that, his other Reasons were then fully answered. The Council give him time to confer.Wherefore the Council commanded him expresly, in the King's Name, to proceed to the execution of his Majesty's Commandment in the said Letter expressed. Whereunto he made request, That he might not be commanded to offend his Conscience: saying, If his Conscience might be instructed to the contrary, he would not thus molest the Council with his refusal. Which his Saying con∣sidered by the Council, moved them to shew thus much Favor unto him; that they willed him to resort unto the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of Ely or London, and confer with them in the Matter, so as he might be instructed by them to accept the just Command of the King's Majesty with a safe Conscience. And for his second Answer, Day was given him until the 4th of this Month. At which day he was commanded to return again. Before the Council again.Decemb. 4. This day, the Bishop of Chichester came before the Council; and was demanded, Whether he had been with the Arch-bishop of Canterbury and the other Bishops, according to former Order given him; Who answered, That he was one Afternoon at Lambeth, to have waited on the Arch-bishop, but he was answe∣red,
that he was at the Court. And upon a demand what time his Grace would come home, one of the Chamberlains, as he saith, answered, That he doubted it would be late e're his Grace come home, because he so used. Therefore he tarried not. And to any other Bishops he made no repair: saying further, He had not been well in Health. For the which cause he took some Physick yesterday. The Arch-bishop thereunto said, that the same Af∣ternoon that the Bishop of Chichester had been there, he came home very early on purpose to have conferred with the said Bishop. For the which cause he had leave of the King's Majesty to depart the same day home sooner than for other Business he might conveni∣ently. To the Matter, he was asked, what mind he was of, touch∣ing the executing the King's Command; and what he could say▪ why the same should not be obeyed? Who answered as he did be∣fore, That his Conscience would not permit him to do the same; for that the same was against the Scripture and the Doctors. And being asked of the first, he alledged a place in the last to the Hebrews, mentioning the word ALTAR. Which place,Heb. xiii.10▪ being considered, was manifestly by the Arch-bishop of Canterbury and the Bishop of Ely, declared to be meant of Christ: as by the very Con∣text of the same most manifestly appeared to every Reader. Next to this he alledged the former place of Esay, which also was most evident to be meant otherwise than he alledged, and so proved. As to the use of the Primitive Church, besides the Texts of the New Testament, it was most clearly by Origen contra Celsum, proved, That in his time, Christen Men had no Altars, by direct negative Propositions. Besides this, the abuse of the Altars was shewed un∣to him, and Reasons declared how necessary it was to reform the same. Touching the naming the Table an Altar, it was left indif∣ferent to him, because Antient Writers sometimes call the Table an Altar. But yet, notwithstanding that his own Reasons were fully solved, and divers good and weighty Reasons made, he persevered in the pertinacy of his own singular Opinion. Whereupon the Council, rehersing to him the evil that should come of this his Disobedience, if he should be suffered, commanded him, in the King's Majesty's Name, upon his Allegiance expresly to become an obedient Subject, and so to execute the King's Commandment. And for that it should appear to him, that there was as much Fa∣vor meant as might be, not offending the King's Majesty, in his Majesty's behalf they would be so bold as to appoint him Sunday next to make his final Answer; And in the mean time he might advise himself, and weigh the Cause as it ought to be. And so the day was given him. Decemb. 7.Before the Council the third Time. The Bishop of Chichester again appeared before the Council; and being asked touching the execution of his Majesty's Commandment in the Letter, he answered plainly, He could not do it, saving his Conscience: For the Altars seemed to him a thing antiently established by the agreement of the Holy Fathers, and confirmed by Antient Doctors, with the Custom also of a number of Years, and as he thought, according to the Scriptures▪ Wherefore he could not in Conscience consent to the abolishing
of them, and determined rather to lose all that ever he had, than to condemn his own Conscience, with many other Circumstan∣ces to that effect. Finally, the Matter being well debated, it was thought good yet to give him two Days respit further to be advi∣sed, in hope he might reconcile himself: which if he did not up∣on his next Answer, appointed to be upon Tuesday next, the Council agreed to proceed ordinarily against him, as against a con∣temptuous Person, by way of Sequestration. And the fourth Time, when he was sent to the Fleet.December 9. This day the Bishop of Chichester appeared before the Council: and being demanded whether he would obey the King's Commandment in pulling down the Altars, as is before rehersed? he answered, That he thanked both the King's Highness, and his Council, of their great Clemency used towards him: but he said he could not by any means perswade himself to do that thing, that was against his Conscience. Wherefore he prayed them to do with him what they thought requisite; for he would never obey to do the thing, that his Conscience would not bear. Whereupon for his Contempt he was, by the Order of the whole Council, committed to Ward in the Fleet, till further Order should be taken for him. Commissioners appointed for Worcester and Chichester.We hear no more of him and his Fellow, the Bishop of Wor∣cester, till nine Months hence. And so we leave them both in the Fleet, till September 27, 1551. When we find Sir Roger Cholmely, Kt. Lord chief Baron of the Exchequer, Sir Richard Read, Richard Good∣rick, Iohn Gosnold, Iohn Oliver and Richard Ryel, being Commis∣sioners appointed by the King's Majesty for the Proceedings in the Causes laid against these two Bishops, were commanded by Letter from the Council, to call the said Bishops before them at Whitehall; and beginning with the Bishop of Worcester's Cause, to proceed also with Chichester. So as the Judgment of the one might succeed the other, without any delay of time more then needed. And when the Acts of the Council proceeded in those Causes should be requisite, the same, upon knowledg given thither, should be sent them. And in the mean time to use for their Instruction the Acts that were passed upon Worcester's Cause, and those that Mr. Read had already con∣cerning Chichester; with Admonition, seeing their Contempts so evi∣dent, not to give them any long delay, by granting any Learned Counsel, or otherwise by such Pretexts. They are de∣prived.Septemb. 28. The Council sent a Letter to the Lord-Chancellor, with the Commission directed to the above-named Persons, for the examination and determining of the Bishops of Worcester and Chi∣chester's Causes: Praying him to send the same to such of the Coun∣cil as are at or near London, whose Hands be not thereto, that they might sign it; and then to seal it, and send it with a Letter from the said Lords, inclosed within his, to the said Commissioners. According to these Orders, within less than a Month, these two Bishops were at last Deprived, after the expectation of their Com∣pliances a long while. And October 24, 1551. The Council sent a Letter to the Chan∣cellor of the Augmentations, to take immediate Order for seizure in the King's Majesty's Hands of the Temporalties of their Bishopricks,
lately given to his Highness by the Judgment past by the Com∣missioners, appointed for the hearing of those Bishops Causes. These Bishops remained Prisoners in the Fleet after their Depri∣vation, till the next Summer. When,Placed the one with the Lord Chancellor, the other with the Bp of London. as it seems for their Healths sake, they desired to be removed to some place of better Air, and more Liberty. Whereupon Iune 15, 1552. Dr. Day was sent to the Bishop of Ely, Lord Chancellor, and Dr. Hethe to the Bishop of Lon∣don, by the appointment of his Majesty. And they were directed to use them as to Christian Charity should be most seemly. At whose Hands the King doubted not but they should receive such Christian Advice, as would tend to the Glory of God. Iuly 17. Upon the motion of the Bishop of London, the Lords of the Coun∣cil were content, that he should send Dr. Hethe unto the Bishop's own House at London [from Fulham] to recover his Health, and then to have him again. So far more kindly were these Popish Bishops dealt withal in this Reign, than the Protestant Bishops were in the next. Hoper Bishop of Glocester succeeded in the See of Worcester, and Scory Bishop of Rochester in that of Chichester. I will here crave the Reader's leave to insert two or three words concerning Bishop Day; thereby to judg the better of him. About the Year 1547.Day writes to King's Col∣lege for leaving off Masses. Saying of Masses was laid aside in King's College in Cambridg, the Members of which College generally favoured the Gospel. Day, the Provost thereof (which Place he held in Commendam with his Bishoprick) hearing of this, wrote an angry Letter to the Vice-provost, and in him to the whole College, for divers things which they had done, relating to Reformation; and particularly for leaving off saying Masses. In which he said, They departed from the Institution of the House, and that they did it rashly, and besides the Law: There being as yet no Law for so doing. He charged them with the Breach of Statute; and so would involve them in the Sin of Perjury. And whereas in their publick Disputations they gave Questions against Popish Doctrines, he charged them with disputing wickedly and turbu∣lently, to the wounding of tender Consciences, and the Infamy of the House. And finally, required, that things should be put in the same posture they were before. To which the College, by Dr. Haddon's elegant Pen, wrot an Answer:Haddoni Ep. p. 169. That as to their abolishing Masses, they said, they were private Masses; and the Statutes of the College did seem to enjoin only Masses, wherein was a Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ. That that was not Perjury, when by the common Consent of the College some minuter Matters of the Statutes were changed. That had he himself been there, he would have done as they did, conside∣ring the Reports that came from the Court, brought by Witnes∣ses worthy of Credit. And that as for their Disputations they urged, that it was free for them to dispute Matters controverted, for better Inquiry into the Truth. And that it was done with Lenity, without any perversness of Speech. He had a younger Brother named William (who was above forty Years after Bishop of Winton).His unnatural Carriage to∣wards his Bro∣ther. This Man was a Scholar of the College, while his Brother was Provost and Bishop. To whom he
sent once a Request, to supply him with a little Money to buy him some Books and other Necessaries he stood in need of at that time.Hatcher's MS. Catal. of Pro∣vosts, &c. of King's Coll. His Brother answered him, knowing him to be well affected to the Gospel, That for his part he held it not fit to relieve those that were not of the True Church, and therefore he would not in any wise re∣lieve him. Thus had his Religion destroyed in him the very Princi∣ples of Nature. Preaches against Tran∣substantiation.This Bishop had been a vehement Asserter of Transubstantiation: yet in April 1550. he preached against it at Westminster; which King Edward thought fit to take notice of in his Journal; and he complied, and went along with all the Steps of the Reformation till the declining of this Year 1550; when the Matter of taking down Altars was set on Foot. For then it seems either there was a Prospect that the Reformation, carring on, would have a Stop, or it was secretly agreed, among the Popishly affected, now to fall off. His Change charged on him.In Queen Mary's Days he was a mighty busy Man, and one of the Commissioners for the examination and condemning to Death the Professors of Religion. When in Conference with Bradford, that Holy Man had charged him for departing from the Reformed Church, as it was in King Edward's Days; he told him, That he was but a young Man, (and yet in the first Year of that King he was five or six and forty Years of Age;) and that coming from the University, he went with the World. But it was always against his Con∣science. He could it seems dispense with his Conscience upon Occasion: and yet what a Man of Conscience was he when Altars were to be pulled down? He sat a Commissioner upon Hoper, toge∣ther with Winchester, London, Durham and Landaff: and however gently he had been used in his Trouble, that was forgot, and he treated that Reverend Man most rudely, undecently falling upon him with foul Words, and with a scornful Countenance calling him Hypocrite. CHAP. XXI. Papists grow bold. Loose Professors restrained. The Papists write Libels.THUS indeed when the Papists found they could not prevail by outward Force, which they had tried to the utmost the last Year, they now used other Arts. One among the rest was to libel the Government, and disperse scurrilous Rhimes and Ballads upon the Preachers. One of these was this Year fastned upon the Pulpit of some eminent Church; probably of S. Paul's. Which neverthe∣less soon had an Answer to it. And not long after a more witty Ballad was put abroad, glancing, as it seems, at the Arch-bishop, up∣on occasion of the Liberty of reading the Bible, and of the English Service, and the publishing the Homily-Book, and other good Books: Whipping the Government under the Person of one Iohn No-body, because that notwithstanding all these religious Pretences, there was so much Sin, Lechery, Adultery, Bribery and want of Charity.
A tast of this their Poetry, I have put into the Appendix: because some probably may be so Curious as to peruse the Fancy of that Age.No. XLIX. The Papists were at this Juncture very bold,Several Pa∣pists now taken up. whether it were that they had taken up a Conceit that the old Religion would be again restored upon the Disgrace of the Duke of Somerset, or upon some other Reasons. To stay these Men, the Council as they had proceeded before against some Popish Bishops, so they thought fit to use some Rigors towards others noted to be the forwardest Men. One of these was Dr. Chedsey,Council-Book. Chedsey. who was one of the Disputants against P. Martyr, the King's Professor. He took now upon him to preach openly at Oxford against the Steps of the Reformation that were made, and making. Wherefore, March 16, he was commited to the Marshalsea for seditious Preaching. Where he lay till November the 11th 1551. And then he was ordered to be brought to the Bishop of Ely's, where he enjoyed his Table, and an easier Restraint. March 19.Morgan. Serjeant Morgan was committed to the Fleet for hearing Mass in the Lady Mary's Chappel. March 22, Sir Anthony Brown was committed to the Fleet for the same Offence.Brown. And three days after, viz. March 25. Mr. White Warden of Winchester,White. appeared before the Council, and confessed, that he had divers Books and Letters from beyond Sea, and namely, from one Martyn, a Scholar there, who opposed the King's Majesty's Proceedings utterly. And it being manifest that he had consented to things of that sort in such wise, that greater Practices were thought to be in him that ways, he was committed to the Tower: where lying for some months, he shewed better Conformity in Matters of Religion. So that in Iune 14, 1551. The Council wrote a Letter to the Arch-bishop that he should send to the Lieutenant of the Tower for Mr. White to be brought to him, and with him to remain, till such time as he should reclaim him. Which being done, he was to be sent back again to the Tower, until the King's Majesty's further Pleasure upon his Lordship's Certificate of his Proceedings with him. This White, however he complied now, was in Queen Mary's Reign made Bishop successively of Lincoln and Winchester, and preached that Queen's Funeral Sermon: and was deprived by the next Queen, for refusing Conformity to the Religion then established. And while the Papists on one hand were so busy in promoting their Ends,Other Profes∣sors restrained. there were a looser sort of Professors of Religion dis∣graced the Reformation on the other. For some there were that took the liberty of meeting together in certain Places, and there to propound odd Questions, and vent dangerous Doctrines and Opinions. Of these also the Council having notice, they thought it very fit to discountenance and restrain them. Ianuary 27. A num∣ber of Persons, a sort of Anabaptists, about sixty, met in a House on a Sunday, in the Parish of Bocking in Essex; where arose among them a great Dispute, Whether it were necessary to stand or kneel, bare-head, or covered, at Prayers: and they concluded the Ceremony not to be material; but that the Heart before God was required, and nothing else. Such other like warm Disputes there were about Scripture. There were likewise such Assemblies now
in Kent. These were looked upon as dangerous to Church and State. And two of the Company were therefore taken and Com∣mitted to the Marshalsea; and Orders were sent to apprehend the rest, viz. to Sir George Norton Sheriff of Essex, to apprehend and send up to the Council those Persons that were assembled for Scrip∣ture Matters in Bocking: Nine of them were named, being Cow∣herds, Clothiers, and such like mean People. The like Order was sent to Sir Edward Wotton and to Sir Thomas Wyat, to apprehend others of them, seven whereof are named, living in Kent. Febru∣ary 3. Those that were apprehended for the meeting at Bocking, appeared before the Council, and confessed the Cause of their As∣sembly to be, For to talk of the Scriptures; that they had refused the Communion for above two Years, and that, as was judged, upon very superstitious and erroneous Purposes: with divers other evil Opinions, worthy of great Punishment. Whereupon five of them were committed: and seven of them were bound in Recognizance to the King in forty pound each Man. The Condi∣tion, to appear when they should be called upon, and to resort to their Ordinaries for resolution of their Opinions, in case they had any Doubt in Religion. CHAP. XXII. Foreigners allowed Churches. A Lasco. The ABp's Care of the Souls of Stran∣gers residing here.WE shall now shew a remarkable Instance of the ABp's Episcopal Piety, in the care he took of the Souls of Foreigners, as well as of the Native English. For in King Edward's Reign there were great numbers of Stangers in the Realm; French, Dutch, Italians, Spaniards, who abode here upon divers Occasions: some for Trade and Commerce, and some no doubt to be secret Spies, and Promo∣ters of the Pope's Affairs, and to hinder the Propagation of the Religion: But the most were such as fled over hither, to escape the Persecutions that were in those Times very violently set on foot in their respective Countries, and to enjoy the Liberty of their Con∣sciences, and the free Profession of their Religion. Our Prelate had a chief hand in forming these Strangers into distinct Congregations for the Worship of God, and in procuring them convenient Church∣es to meet in, and setting Preachers of their own over them, to instruct them in the true Religion: Cecyl and Cheke joining with him in this pious Design, and furthering it at Court with the King and Duke of Somerset. And this they did both out of Christian Charity, and Christian Policy too: this being a probable means to disperse the Reformed Religion into Foreign Parts. That when any of these Strangers, or their Children, should return into their own Country, they might carry the tincture of Religion along with them, and sow the Seeds of it in the Hearts of their Country∣men.The Dutch Congregation, begun under Iohn a Lasco. This Year, the German or Dutch Congregation began under Iohannes a Lasco, a Noble-Man of Poland, stiled their Supirinten∣dent:
IOHN A-LASCO POLANDER First Pastor of the DUTCH Church in ENGLAND. Regn. Edw. 6.
and this by the Favour and Influence of our Arch-bishop, who had entertained him in his Family with respect due to his Quality, and great Piety. This Person had forsaken his Country and Honours for the sake of the Gospel, and became a Preacher to a Protestant Congregation at Embden in East-Friezland.The Occasion of his coming into England. But seeing all things look Black and Stormy round about him, and tending to a Persecution, he took an Opportunity to embrak for England. Where, being a Person not only of Honour, but of great Learning and Piety, and withal an Exile for the sake of Christ, and volunta∣rily taking up the Ministry out of Zeal to promote the Gospel, he met with a very honourable and friendly Reception; and soon be∣came acquainted with many eminent Persons here: as with Dr. Tur∣ner, the Duke of Somerse's Physician, and Dean of Wells. Sir Iohn Cheke, Sir William Cecyl, and our Arch-bishop; and, by their means, with the Duke of Somerset himself.His Business here. His chief Business here seemed to be, to make some Provision for himself and his Congregation, in case of Persecution. For this purpose he got a Conference with the said Duke, a way, as it seems, being made thereunto by the Arch∣bishop; requesting that he and his Congregation might have leave to transplant themselves to London, that they might have a Church here, and certain Privileges likewise: moving the Protector there∣unto by Arguments as well taken from Charity as Policy, namely, that hereby a Trade and gainful Manufacture would be introduced into England. He desired therefore that they might be incopora∣ted by the King's Letters Patents, and that some old dissolved Church or Monastery might be granted to them, to worship and serve God in. When he had done this, he desired a certain Italian Friend or his to acquaint Cecyl with the Sum of his Discourse with the Protector: and so taking an opportunity on a sudden, of passing a∣gain to Embden along with some Ambassador, that was going into those Parts, he took his leave of England; leaving the Arch-bishop and Cecyl to second his Business with the Duke as occasion should serve. Being at Yarmouth, before his going Aboard, he wrote to Cecyl his full Mind in case he and his Congregation should be driven away. He desired him, That if he should understand any thing concer∣ning his Call into England, or would be enformed by him of any other matters, that he would convey his Letters unto one Robert Legat, an English Man, living at Embden, who would communicate them unto him. Being arrived at Embden, he writ to the Arch-bishop,From Embden he wrote to the ABp; relating all Passages that he knew concerning the State of Affairs, and particu∣larly of Religion in those Parts: desiring him to impart them to the Protector. He write also unto Cecyl,And to Cecyl. his Letter bearing date in April 1549, referring him to the Protector's Letters: and withal acquainting him in what a ticklish and dangerous Condition they were. That they certainly expected the Cross:The sad Con∣dition of the Protestants there. that they did mutually exhort one another to bear it, with invocation upon God's Holy Name; that by Patience and Faith they might over∣come all whatsoever God should permit to be done against them, to the Glory of his Name, or for their Trial. They were sure he had a care of them, and that he was so powerful, that he
could in a moment, by a Word of his Mouth, dash in pieces all the Forces of their Enemies, whatsoever they were. And that he was so good, that he would not suffer so much as an Hair, without cause, to fall from their Head, altho the whole World should make an Assault upon them. And that he could no more wish them Harm, than a Mother could her own Infant, or any one the Apple of his own Eye; yea, no more than he him∣self could not be God. Who was to be praised in all things whatsoever happened to them, since he permitted nothing to fall out to them, but for their Good; and so, for their Welfare. And that therefore they committed themselves wholly to him, and did expect with all Toleration whatsoever he should allow to be done to them. In this pious manner did A Lasco write to Cecyl; and no doubt in the same Tenour to the Arch-bishop. This made a very great Impression upon the Godly Hearts of them both, and caused them vigorously to use their Interest with the Protector, to provide a safe Retreat for him and his Congregation. Which was obtained for them soon after. His whole Letter in a hansome Latin Stile, as some Memorial of him,No. L. I have reposited in the Appendix. Latimer men∣tions A Lasco to the King.Latimer also made way for his Reception: who in one of his Ser∣mons before K. Edward made honourable mention of him; using an Argument proper for that Audience, namely, How much it would tend to the bringing down God's Blessing on the Realm, to receive him, and such pious Exiles as he. Iohn a Lasco was here a great Learned Man, and, as they say, a Noble-Man in his Country; and is gone his way again. If it be for lack of Entertainment, the more pity. I could wish such Men as he to be in the Realm. For the Realm should prosper in receiving them.Third Sermon before the King, Anno 1549. He that re∣ceiveth you, receiveth me, said Christ. And it should be for the King's Honour to receive them, and keep them. It was but a little after the King had received this Congregation of Foreigners into England, and had granted them a Church, viz. St. Augustins,Contest a∣mongst A Lasco's People. MSS. of Benet College. but great Contest happen'd among them about their Church, yielded them for their religious Worship. This P. Martyr took notice of with grief to Bucer: and addeth, That their Minds were so implacable to one another, that the Difference was fain to be referred to the Privy-Council to make an end of. But not to leave our Superintendent yet. The Care of A Lasco over his Church, and its Privileges.A Lasco with his Strangers being settled at London, and incorpo∣rated by the King's Patents, being their chief Pastor and a stirring Man, was very industrious to procure and maintain the Liberties and Benefits of his Church. The Members thereof had planted themselves chiefly in S. Katharines, and in great and little South∣wark. Here they were now and then called upon, by the Church-wardens of their respective Parishes, to resort to their Parish Churches: though the Ministers themselves did not appear in it. In the Month of November, Anno 1552, some of these Strangers, inhabiting the parts of Southwark, were again troubled by their Church-wardens, and threatned with Imprisonment, unless they would come to Church. Whereupon their Superintendent A Lasco applied himself to the Lord Chancellor, who then was Goodrich,
Bishop of Ely. By the way one might enquire, why he resorted not rather to his Friend and Patron, the Arch-bishop of Canterbury. But the reason may soon be guessed: namely, That after the Fall of Somerset, the Arch-bishop's good Friend, he came not so often to Court, or transacted Business there, unless sent for: knowing his Interest likewise to be but little with the Duke of Northùmberland, who now bare all the Sway, and who had a jealous Eye of him, as he had of all Somerset's Friends. And so the Arch-bishop might have rather hindred than forwarded A Lasco's Business if he had ap∣peared in it. But this en passent.Favourably re∣ceived by the Lord Chancel∣lor Goodrich. The Chancellor gently received A Lasco, and dismissing him, sent him to Secretary Cecyl with this Message, to get him to propound the Business the next Day in the Afternoon at the Council-Board, when himself should be there: promising him likewise, that he would be assistant to him, in pro∣curing him a Warrant in Writing to be directed to all Ministers and Church-wardens of the Parishes of Southwark and S. Katharines, that for the time to come the Strangers of this Congregation should receive no Molestation in that regard any more.Labours with the Secretary to procure Let∣ters from the Councel in be∣half of his Church. Accordingly A Lasco, the next Morning sent one of the Elders of his Church to Cecyl with his Letter, excusing himself that he came not, being grievously afflicted with a Pain in his Head. Therein he acquain∣ted him with the Sum of his Conference with the Lord Chancel∣lor: adding, that the obtaining such a Warrant would be necessary for them to produce and shew to such as at that present did annoy them, and to be hereafter kept by the Church. That they might not be forced at other times, upon the like Occasions, to create new trouble to the King's Council, or himself, in suing for new War∣rants of that Nature. Meaning hereby to put the Secretary upon drawing this up the more formally and substantially. And so intreat∣ing him to hear what the Elder had to say, and to dispatch him, he took his leave.No. LI. This Letter also is inserted in the Appendix. The Superintendency of A Lasco seemed to extend not only to this particular Congregation of Germans,The extant of his Superinten∣dency. but over all the other Churches of Foreigners set up in London, as also over their Schools of Learning and Education. They were all subject to his In∣spection, and within his Jurisdiction.Melancthon's Epistles, prin∣ted at Leyden, 1647. And Melancthon in an Epistle to him in the Month of Septemb. 1551. speaks of the Purity of Doctrine in his Churches. His Condition now, as to worldly Cir∣cumstances, began to be so good, that he was able to relieve and succour such Learned Foreigners as should retire hither. For when one Nicolas Forst, a Learned and grave Man, who had lived long in the University of Lovain, and had spent some time with Me∣lancthon, was minded, for the sake of Religion, to convey himself into England; he recommended him earnestly to the Superintendent, as a Person fit to teach in his Churches and Schools: and that he would friendly entertain him as an Exile for the same Cause him∣self was, and find him some little Nest to remain in. Nay,Melancthon thought to shelter himself under him. and the said Melancthon himself had some thoughts of sheltering him∣self under A Lasco here, as appears by the forementioned Letter, wherein he stiles him his Patron. For the Superscription of his Letter is thus, Illustri, Magnifico, ac Reverendo Viro, Nobilitate generis,
Virtute & Sapientia praestanti Dn. Iohanni a Lasco, Patrono suo colendo. So much of Deference and Honour did Learned and Pious Men then use to give him. In this Letter Melancthon told him, that the Calamities of the Churches were great, and that he himself expected Banishment, and might probably in a short time arrive where he was. And in respect of his hospitable reception of Strangers, he told him, that he believed he did often remember that saying of the exiled Queen, Non ignara mali, miseris succurrere disco. His great Abi∣lities for Go∣vernment. Erasmus's Praise of him. Ep. 3. Lib. 28.Nor was A Lasco any ways unfurnished for this Spiritual Govern∣ment, being a Man of good Learning, and of great Piety, Strictness and Gravity from his younger Age: and of whom the great Eras∣mus himself acknowledged, that he learned much. For in his Epistle to Iohannes a Lasco, the Arch-bishop of Gnesne, who was Namesake and Unckle to our Superintendent, he speaks thus of his Nephew, That he was but Young, yet Grave beyond his Years; and that he himself accounted it none of the least parts of his Happiness, that he happened to have his Converse and Society for some Months: praising the Endowments that God had given him; And particularly, concerning the Benefits he received by him, he could not but confess, Senex juvenis convictu factus sum melior, ac sobrietatem, temperantiam, verecundiam, linguae moderationem, mo∣destiam, pudicitiam, integritatem, quam juvenis a sene discere debuerat, a juvene senex didici. That by the Conversation of that young Man, he an old Man became better: and that Sobriety, Temperance, Awfulness, government of the Tongue, Modesty, Chastity, Integrity, which the Young ought to learn of the Old, he an old Man had learned of a Young. This he wrote in August 1527, soon after A Lasco was gone from him.Lib. 19. Ep. 15. And in Iune the same Year, while he resided with him, in another Letter to Leonard Cox, a Learned English Man, he signi∣fied the great complacency he took in his Company. Iohannis a Lasco tale sum expertus ingenium, ut vel hoc uno amico mihi videar satis beatus. That he had found A Lasco's Parts to be such, that he seemed happy enough in his single Friendship. And this good Understanding continued between them, as long as Erasmus lived.Purchased Erasmus's Li∣brary. For A Lasco seems to have been with him in his last Sickness; when as the last Token of Erasmus's esteem of him, he made a purchase to him of his own Library,Abel Rediviv. (that incomparable Treasure,) if we may believe the Author of his Life in English. A Lasco a mar∣ried Man.A Lasco thought not the Clergy obliged to Celibacy, or single Life: for he himself was a married Man. Who his Wife was, I know not; but as for her Qualities, she was in all probability a pious and discreet Woman, whereby she gained a great share in his Affections. He stiled her, The other part of himself. But in August 1552. God deprived him of her. Which Stroke put him for some time under much sadness, and indisposition both of Mind and Body, as appears by one of his Letters. His influence in the Refor∣mation under Q. Elizabeth.He was alive at the Accession of Q. Elizabeth to the English Throne. And though he came not back then to England again, whence he departed upon K. Edward's Death, yet, according to that great In∣terest
he had here with the most eminent Persons, and even the Queen her self, he neglected not by his Letters to promote the Reforma∣tion, and to give his grave Counsel in order thereunto. And Zanchy, Publick Professor at Stratsburgh, knowing the sway he bare here, in a Letter to him in the Year 1558, or 59, excited him in these words; Non dubito, quin T. P. jamdudum scripserit ad re∣ginam, ei{que} consuluerit, quae pro illius regni conservatione, & regni Christi instauratione facienda judicarit, &c. That he doubted not, he had before now written to the Queen, and given her his Ad∣vice, what he judged fit to be done for the preservation of her Kingdom, and for the restoring of the Kingdom of Christ. Yet he would not omit to pray him, to do it again and again by his repeated Letters. For I know, said he, how great your Autho∣rity is with the English, and with the Queen her self. Now cer∣tainly is the time that you, and such as you be, should by your Coun∣sels help so pious a Queen, and consult for the Safety of so great a Kingdom, yea, and succour the whole Christian Church every where afflicted and vexed. For we know that if Christ's King∣dom be happily introduced into the Kingdom of England, no small Aid will thence come to all the other Churches dispersed through Germany, Poland, and other Countries. There is one thing that is wont to be urged against him,Blamed for medling in our Controversies. and which makes him to this Day to be somewhat ill thought of; which was, that he opposed himself so openly, by writing against the Habits prescribed the Clergy, and the posture of Kneeling at the Reception of the Holy Sacrament. Whereby he incurred the Cen∣sure of a meddling Temper, and of Ingratitude to that Nation that so kindly had entertained him. Concerning the Habits, Bucer and he had some Controversy. The sum of which on both parts Arch-bishop Parker drew up, (upon the desire, I suppose, of Sir William Cecyl) about the Year 1565, when that Controversy was hotly renewed again by Humfrey and Sampson. This Sum who∣soever is minded to see, may probably hereafter find it in the Me∣morialls of that Arch-bishop, if God grant Life, and Opportunity to me, to write them. About this time, viz. in the Year 1550, or 1551,A Church of Italians consti∣tuted in Lon∣don. there was also a Church of Italians constituted in London, by the influence and care of our Arch-bishop and Sir William Cecyl, under A Lasco's Super∣intendency. This Church consisted of divers Italian Nations, as Florentines, Genoezes, Milanois, Venetians and others: though seve∣ral of them joined themselves with this Congregation, more out of worldly Ends, than Conscience, as will appear afterward. For they had a kindness for the Mass, and could not endure to hear the Pope's Supremacy called in question, and inveighed against.Michael Angelo their Minister. One Michael Angelo Florio, a Florentine by birth, was appointed their Preacher: probably Brother, or Kinsman, unto Simon Florio, Preacher at the City of Clavenna among the Rhaetii, an eminent Professor of the Gospel in those parts: who wrote a Letter to Gratalorius an Italian Physician, concerning two whole Towns in Calabria, utterly destroy∣ed by reason of the rigor of Persecution exercised there: and about eight hundred, or a thousand of the Inhabitants put to Death, be∣cause
they professed the Gospel. Which Letter is extant in Fox, in his Table of the Italian Martyrs. For the encouragement of this Congregation the Arch-bishop procured the Members of it to be free Denizens,The Service the ABp did for this Church; to live and traf∣fick here with as much Freedom, as natural English Subjects. Which they were admitted to by swearing Fidelity and Allegiance. For their more easy and convenient dwelling here, they often petitioned th King for new Privileges and Immunities, as they saw they needed them. And such Favour and Countenance was shewn them, that they seldom failed of their Suits.And for the Minister. The Arch-bishop also, that their Preacher might be provided for, dealt with the Congregati∣on, and made them oblige themselves to provide him with all Ne∣cessaries, as a Dwelling, and a competent yearly Salary. In the Year 1552,Anno 1552. Michael Angelo sued again to our Arch-bishop for some favour to be obtained from the King, whether it were for the better esta∣blishment of his Church, or for some further Immunities to be granted to the Members thereof, it doth not appear. But this the most Reverend Man readily furthered, by writing in that behalf to the Duke of Northumberland from his House at Ford near Can∣terbury, the Duke being, I suppose, with the King in Progress at this time. He likewise dispatched another, dated Novemb. 20. the Year abovesaid, to the Secretary, entreating him to forward that Cause as much as lay in him. Divers of this Church fall out with their Mi∣nister, and go to Mass again.But however serviceable this their Minister had been unto these Italians, in preaching the Gospel to them, and soliciting the Arch-bishop for their Benefit; yet many of them carried themselves but little obliging to him. Whether it were some Misbehaviour, or Imprudences in him, which he was not altogether void of, or his too violent declaiming against the Pope and Popish Doctrines, which they were not yet enough ripened in Evangelical Knowledg to re∣ceive, or that he too roughly charged them with the hardness of their Hearts, and backwardness to receive Gospel-Truths, as he did use to do: but many of them wholly withdrew from him, and went to Mass again. His Contribution also fell very low, not having received above five Pounds in a considerable time from them. Hereupon he resorted to the Secretary, Making heavy Complaints of his own Poverty, that many of his People had forsaken his As∣sembly, spake very slanderously against him and his Ministery, and the Gospel which he preached, after they saw and heard him in an open manner preaching against the Pope's Doctrines, his Tyranny and Hypocrisy, and reproving them for their Unbelief, and the hardness of their Hearts. The too much Vehemency and Passion of this Man,A Conjecture at the Cause thereof. and his neglect of informing the Judgments of these Italians in milder and more leisurely Methods, I suspect to have been a great cause of this Apostacy. But upon this Complaint, the Secretary bade the Pastor send him a List of the Names of those that had thus behaved themselves,Their Minister sends their Names to the Secretary, and accuses them. and that he himself would call them before him, and discourse with them. Accordingly he sent the Names of fourteen in a Letter to the said Secretary, withal aggravating to him their Misbehaviour, and informing of their daily going to Mass: and adding, that there∣fore,
they, being free Denizons, and so Subjects to the English Laws, ought to be punished as any English-Man would be, if he heard Mass. He quoted a place or two in Deuteronomy, where those, that rebelled against God, the Laws and the Judges, should be slain without Mercy. He subjoined, that Elisha by God's Command anointed Iehu to be King for this very purpose, that he should wholly root out the House of Ahab, and kill all the Priests of Baal. And thence makes his uncharitable Conclusion, (more agreeable to the Religion, that he was so hot against) that therefore these Italians should be so served, since they opposed the Gospel, and the King's Pious Proceedings. But it might make one apt not to think over∣favourably of this Man; a Pastor, thus to turn Accuser of his Flock; a Professor of the Reformed Religion, to require the utmost Rigor of Punishment for differing in Religion. I also find the Morals of this Man tainted,The Morals of this Man tain∣ted. having once made a very foul Slip, being guilty of an Act of Uncleanness. For which Sir William Cecyl, Secretary of State, who had been his good Friend, was exceedingly displeased with him, and withdrew all Favour and Countenance from him, calling him Wicked Man, and intending to inflict some severe Punishment upon him: which seemed to be Banishment out of the Nation, or at least turning him out of his Family, where he seems to have been entertained.Writes a peni∣tent Letter to the Secretary. Angelo wrote him a very penitent Letter, minding him of the frailty of Human Nature, and of the Mercy of God to Moses, Aaron, David, Ionas, Peter after their Falls. And that if he were forced to depart the Kingdom, he must either be compelled to renounce the Truth of the Gospel, or have his Blood shed by the Enemies thereof. This was as I suppose, in the Year 1551. In fine, he got over this Brunt, and recovered mild Cecyl's Favour. For I find a Year after, our Arch-bishop wrote to him to further a certain Business of Michael Angelo at Court, as much as he could. This is all I have to say of that Italian Congregation, and the Minister thereof. For further memory of which, I have added in the Appendix two Letters of this Michael Angelo to Secretary Cecyl,No. LII. LIII. whence many of the Matters, next above mentioned, were col∣lected. As there was thus a German and Italian Church in London,A French Church also in London. so also there was a third of French Men, under A Lasco's Superintendency. One Member of which, a very honest Man, and of sound Religion, by the general Testimony of that Church, had desired to set up a Printing-house for his Livelihood, chiefly for printing the Liturgy, and other Books of the Church of England, in French, for the use of the French Islands under the English Subjection. In whose behalf the Superintendent readily interceeded by a Letter with the Secre∣tary to procure the King's Letters Patents▪ for his Licence and Au∣thority so to do. The issue of which will be seen in the progress of this History. The Letter I have transcribed to accompany two others of A Laso in the Appendix.No. LIV.
CHAP. XXIII. The Church at Glastenbury. Another Church of Strangers at Glastenbury. Their Trade Weaving.IN the same Year, viz. 1550. another Church of Strangers, and they most what French, and Walloons, began to settle at Glasten∣bury in Somersetshire. They were Weavers, and followed the Manu∣facture of Kersies, and Cloth of that Nature, as I conjecture. Their great Patrons were the Duke of Somerset, and Sir William Cecyl, I add, and our Arch-bishop, though I do not find his Name mentioned in the Papers I make use of, relating to this Church: For there is no question, but that his Counsel and Aid concurred in the settlement of this Church, as well as those in London: and particularly as to the Preacher; whom I suspect to have been one of those Learned Foreign Divines, whom he harboured in his own House.Valerandus Pol∣lanus their Preacher and Superintendent. His Name was Valerandus Pollanus, a Man of great worth both for Learning and Integrity, who had the Title of Superin∣tendent of the Strangers Church at Glastenbury, as Iohn a Lasco had of that at London; given to each, to fix a Character of Honour and Esteem upon their Persons, and perhaps to exempt them and their Churches from the Jurisdiction of the Bishops of those respective Diocesses. This Pollanus turned into Latine, and printed, the Dis∣putations held in the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign, between the Protestants and Papists at the Convocation, Anno 1553. If any desire to know the particular State and Condition of the establish∣ment of these Strangers, as to their Trade, it stood thus. How they came to fix here.Pollanus in behalf of the rest, had preferred a Petition to the Duke of Somerset, and the rest of the Lords of the Council, to this Effect; That they might be permitted to form themselves into a Church for the free Exercise of Religion, and to follow peace∣ably their Calling of Weaving; declaring, as an Argument to per∣swade them to allow the same, the considerable Benefit that would accrue thence to the Realm. And that for Shops and Work∣ing-houses, and for reception of them and their Families, they might enjoy some old dissolved Religious House. Their Petiti∣on was condescended to. And the Duke, being a great Cherisher of those of the Religion, resolved to be their Patron, and to take the managing of this whole Cause upon himself. The Duke in the Month of Iune this Year, had made an exchange of certain Lands with the King, and that probably for the better accommodating of these Strangers. He had parted with the Castle and Lordship of Sleford, and other Lands and Tenements in the County of Lincoln, to the King: and the King had granted him, in lieu thereof, all and singular his Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with their Appurtenances, in the Town of Glastenbury, (namely what had belonged to the Abby) and other Lands and Tenements in Kingston upon Hull, to the value of 214 l. 14 s. 5 d. obq. as I find in a Manuscript Book, mentioning the several Sales that King made. Having obtained such Conveniences in Glastenbury, he re∣solved to plant this Manufacture here; which he thought would
tend so much to the Benefit of the Country, himself, and these poor Strangers too. Conditions were mutually entred into. The Conditions on Somerset's part were, That he should pro∣vide them Houses convenient for their Occupations,Conditions of Trade between Somerset and them. and to con∣tain themselves and Families: that five Acres of Pasture Land, or as much as would serve for the feeding of two Cows through∣out the Year, should be allotted to each of them: and until Land were so allotted, they should enjoy the Park in common for the said use, with some part also of the Gardens. They were also to be supplied with Monies from the Duke to buy Wool, and defray other Charges necessary to set them on Work. They were also empowered to employ both English Men and Women, as they should have occasion, in Spinning, and other Works belonging to their Trade. And so accordingly they went down to Gasten∣bury, and fell to work. But upon the Troubles and Fall of Somerset,Their Trade obstructed by the Troubles of Somerset. which happened a∣bout fourteen or fifteen Months after, their Affairs were much ob∣structed. His Servants neglected to furnish them with Money ac∣cording to Contract. Nor was he at leisure now to regard them. The People, among whom they lived, took this opportunity to express what little kindness they had for them: it being the Temper of the Common-sort to be jealous of Strangers, and rude to them. So that they were not without their Discontents and Discourage∣ments: For they wanted those Conveniences of room for Work∣houses and Habitations, that were promised them. They ran in Debt, and were forced to lay to pawn the Clothes they had wove, to supply their Wants. Cornish, one of the chief of their Procura∣tors, appointed to oversee them, and further their Trade, proved very deceitful and false to them. Who came to them, pretending Letters from the Council, and treating them at first with fair Words, and after with Threatnings: and so compelled them to deliver the Clothes, that they had made, to him, though they had by mere Necessity been forced before to pawn them. He had also by his Importunity and Fraud, got the Grant of the Park from them, though he knew the Duke had fully purposed and intended it for their Use, for the necessary Maintenance of themselves and Families. Things being in this ill Condition with them,Apply them∣selves again to the Council, and Somerset no longer able to befriend them, they were glad to apply again to those above. Pollanus therefore in their behalf petitioned the Lords of the Council to take their declining State into their consideration, and to carry on that good Work the Duke of Somerset had begun. He did also ply the Secretary to further their Petition,And to the Se∣cretary Cecyl: (who was indeed of his own accord their most hearty Friend;) and laboured particularly with all earnestness imaginable, both by Word of Mouth, and by divers Letters, to get the Factory discharged of Cornish, urging that the Weavers had never found the least grain of Inte∣grity, Justice or Candour in him. This Man was now very indu∣strious and busy at Court to get himself continued in his Office: which the Strangers understanding, were as diligent to get them∣selves delivered of him. The Superintendent had but a little be∣fore
dispatched to the Secretary one Peter Wolf, a good Man, and a great Sufferer, a Brabanter by Nation, to relate the evil Deeds of this Man: and now again he dispatched Stephen Le Provost, a Dea∣con of his Church, with another Message to the same import to the said Secretary. Telling him, That those who were to be set over others, ought themselves in the first place to be Honest and Just; but especially they ought to be so in the highest degree, that were to be placed over such Good Men, and who were Exiles only for the sake of Christ: Unless any could be willing that such upright Men should be undone, and that those very considerable Advantages that were likely to accrue to the Com∣mon-wealth by them, should be diverted to some other Place or Country. That they could not enough wonder with what fore∣head this Man should attempt this thing, after he had so plain∣ly betrayed his base Treachery and Ill-will towards them: and could not but know, how very hardly they could away with him, and who were going to sue to the Duke for that which they now desired. That himself was sollicited by the Prayers of those Good Men, to write this to him, that he would be their Advo∣cate with the Lords in this behalf. The Council become their Patrons, and assist them.The Result was, That the Lords consented to uphold and en∣courage them. And sent down their Letters to the Overseers of this Manufacture, and to the chief Officers of the Town, Powis, one of the King's Servants, and Hyet the chief Magistrate and others, to examine into the present State of these Strangers, and to give them in writing an Account thereof. These Letters the Su∣perintendent delivered to them; and one Clark a Justice of Peace was then present. Who being a Gentleman and a Scholar, that understood both French and Latin, did, out of his good Will to them, interpret to the rest Pollanus's Petition to the Lords of the Council, and the Contents of their Contract with the Duke of Somerset, and other Matters relating to this Business; that so they might be the better acquainted with their Affairs, and it might ap∣pear there were no Neglects or Breaches of Covenants on the Strangers parts. And so Letters were dispatched back to the Lords from the Overseers, signifying how they had examined the Affairs of these Strangers, and had found all things Fair and Just on their side; mentioning likewise what considerable Commodity they hoped for by them: and likewise from the chief of the Town to the same import. Orders from the Lords to set this Manu∣facture for∣wards.Speedily upon this, Orders came down from the Lords to certain Gentlemen of the Town and Neighbourhood, whereof one Dyer was one, a Person of good Religion, and their cordial Friend, com∣missionating them to set this Manufacture forward, and to take care the Undertakers might be relieved in what they needed, ac∣cording to their former Contract with the Duke. So they obtained the use of the Park for the running of threescore Head of Kine, till other Pasture were provided them. Thirty Houses were ordered to be forthwith repaired and fitted up for them. And Money was paid sufficient for the clearing them of their Debts. These Gen∣tlemen had also assigned them a stated Provision of Money for the
future, but it was too scanty; the Allowance that they had propor∣tioned them for two Months, would scarcely hold out for five Weeks. Nor was any Wool at all bought for their use, though their Stock was almost at an end; and then their Work must stand still for want thereof, having no Money themselves to purchase more: and to take it up upon Credit, would enhance the price thereof. For one Crowch had demanded of them thirty two Shil∣lings for Wool, when they could buy it of their Neighbours for four and twenty, had they Money. Their only hope was in Dyer, who promised them Wool at a far more reasonable rate, and kindly of∣fered them a long Day of paiment for it, without consideration for forbearance: their Doubt only was, whether his Wool was proper for their Use. But the Interest of Cornish was such, that he was continued by the Lords in his Office over these Tradesmen, and en∣joyed a part of the Park to himself. These things were transacted in the Month of November, Anno 1551, which was the Month af∣ter the Duke's Commitment. In all this Affair Pollanus was very much employed,Pollanus very serviceable to them. taking a great deal of Pains in settling this Trade. For he took many Journeys between Glastenbury and the Court, and was, as himself wrote, at incredible Expences; and in fifteen Months space received not an Half-penny, though he had a large Family to maintain. The Office also of surveying the Reparation of the Houses lay upon him. And fearing the Lords of the Council might be displeased at the great∣ness of the Charge they had been at already in the Repairs, and the little Profit that as yet arose to quit the Cost, he entreated the Se∣cretary, that he would bear up their Reputation with the Lords; telling him, That he doubted not, that the Project would here∣after redound much to their own Praise, by reason of the very great Emolument, that all Men should perceive would come to the Realm thereby within three Years, God prospering them, as he had begun o do. And for himself, all he desired was, that for all his Charge and Trouble, he might obtain a Stipend of fifty Pounds, to be settled upon him. The Letters of Valerandus Pol∣lanus, being three in number, I have inserted in the Appendix.No. LV.LVI.LVII. An Apology for the large∣ness of the former Rela∣tion. I acknowledg, that many of these things I have related concer∣ning this Business, may seem too little and minute for an Histori∣an to take notice of. But I was loth any Particulars of so remarka∣ble a Design should be lost, which in probability would have turned so much to the Benefit of our Nation. It being also an Instance of the pious Care, and good Policy, that was then taken by the Court for the Relief and Sustentation of poor Fugitives, flying hither from their Native Country, Friends and Livelihood, for Christ's Sake, and yet that the Publick might be as little burthened by them as might be. Queen Mary's access to the Crown spoiled this good Design.After the King's Death they remove to Frankford▪ For all Strangers being then commanded suddenly to depart the Realm, this Congregation accordingly brake up, and removed themselves to Frankford in Germany. Where the Magistrates kindly entertained them, and allowed them a Church. And when afterwards,Troubles at Frankford▪ viz. 1554. divers of the English Nation fled thither for their Religion,
the Governors of the Town, upon their Petition received them al∣so, and all other such English as should resort thither upon the same Account, as many did. And two Members of this French Congre∣gation,Prove Friends to the English Exiles there. mindful undoubtedly of the former Kindness themselves or their Countrymen had received in England, assisted them much; namely, Morellio a Minister, and Castalio an Elder. The English here made use of the same Church the French did; these one Day, and the English another: and upon Sundays the use of it respectively, as themselves could agree. And as there were settled here Congregations of French, Italians and Dutch Strangers, so I am very apt to believe, there was also a Church of Spaniards too.A Spanish Church. Indeed I do not find express mention of any such till the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's Reign; when Cassiodorus and Anthonius Corranus Hispalensis [of Sevil] (a Member of the Ita∣lian Congregation) were their Preachers,Cassiodorus, and Corraus their Preachers. of whom I shall have oc∣casion to say something in my Memorials of Arch-bishop Grindal. It is certain,Many of King Philip's Spani∣ards become Protestants. that in Queen Mary's Days many of those Spani∣ards, who came over in the Retinue of Philip, the Spanish Prince, or after, forsook Popery, and became Professors of the Reformed Religion. Which one cannot well tell how it should come to pass, unless it were by the hearing of the Gospel preached in their own Language here. And it is observable, that among these, many had been sent for over, in that Queen's Time, to convert our Nation from Heresy, as they termed it, and to reduce it to the Roman Church. This notable Success and Power, which the clear Evi∣dence of Truth had upon these Men, was in those Times taken much notice of, as it might well be. Iames Pilkington, the Master of S. Iohn's College in Cambridg, and who was afterwards Bishop of Durham, makes a Note of it to the University, in the Sermon which he preached at the Restitution of Bucer and Fagius, in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, after the barbarous Indigni∣ties that had been offered them in the former Queen's Reign, in raking their dead Bodies out of their Graves, and burning them. It is much more notable, said he, that we have seen to come to pass in our Days, that the Spaniards, sent for into the Realm on purpose to suppress the Gospel, as soon as they were returned Home, replenish'd many parts of their Country with the same Truth of Religion, to the which before they were utter Enemies. Great num∣bers of Prote∣stants in Spain and Italy.Nay, and not long after this, such earnest Professors of the True Religion were found in Spain, that many of them indured the fiery Trial, and offered up their Bodies to the Flames, for Christ's Sake, and more were cast into Prisons. And yet the Gospel got ground there to admiration: as Zanchy gave a Relation thereof to A Lasco in one of his Letters. Wherein he spake of the great numbers of true Professors in Italy also. The Place being so much to our pre∣sent purpose, I will take leave to lay before the Reader. In Cala∣briae duobus Castellis,Zanchii Ep. Lib. 2. &c. In two Castles of Calabria, one belonging to the Duke of Montalto, the other to a Nobleman of Naples, were found 4000 Brethren, being the remainders of those Brethren, called Waldenses. They were for many Years unknown, and lived safely in their Ancestors Possessions. For though they approved not of Masses,
yet they thought the Faithful might go to them with a safe Consci∣ence. But being untaught this bad Doctrine, they did wholly and uni∣versally abstain going any more. And so it came to pass, that they could not be concealed any longer. Therefore a Persecution was raised up against them. They writ to the Brethren at Geneva, to assist them by their Prayers, their Counsel, and also by humane Aid. We see also in Italy, where the Seat of Antichrist is, there is a great Har∣vest; but very few to gather it. O God, have Mercy upon Italy. In Spain very many were burnt, more cast into Prison. Nevertheless in the mean time, the Gospel goes forward, as we hear, wonderfully. And in another Letter he writes thus; There is a very great Perse∣cution in Italy, nor a less in Spain: A sign there be many Faithful there that dare confess Christ. CHAP. XXIV. The Arch-bishop's Care of the Revenues of the Church. Bucer dies. I Return now to our Prelate again, to take a further view of him,The ABp la∣bour  pre∣serve the Re∣venues of the Church. acting in his high Function in the English Church. It must not be omitted to be ranked among his good Services towards it, that he did what in him lay to preserve the Revenues of it in his Time, when there were so many hungry Courtiers gaping after them. These were again in a new Danger after the Duke of Northumber∣land and his Party had removed Somerset, and made themselves the great Controllers of Publick Affairs. It was indeed the Scandal of the Reformation,The detaining the Church-Revenues a Scandal to the Reformation. that the Demeans that had been settled long before by our pious Ancestors, for the maintenance of God's Ministers, as they had been formerly wrong∣fully appropriated to Monasteries, and swallowed up by Lazy Monks, so they had not now recurred and been restored to their true Owners; but became possest by Lay-men. So that in many scores of Parishes there remained not sufficient to buy Bread for the Incumbents and their Families. And it was more than suspicious, that many Patrons did render the Condition of the Church still worse in these Days, by retaining and reserving to themselves, whe∣ther by Contract or Power, the Tithes of the Benefices they presented to. And by these means Pluralities and Nonresidences, the old Mischief of the Church, were not redressed, but rather made neces∣sary. This Abuse grieved good Men, and Lovers of the Reforma∣tion, both at Home and Abroad, because they saw how the preach∣ing of the Gospel was obstructed hereby. Concerning this,Calvin to the ABp upon this matter. Bucer from Cambridg wrote privately to Calvin in the Year 1550. And this made Calvin address a Letter to our Arch-bishop, telling him, That for the flourishing State of Religion he thought it highly needful to have fit Pastors that might seriously set themselves to perform the Office of Preaching. One great obsta∣cle whereof he makes very truly to be, Quod praedae expositi sunt Ec∣clesiae reditus; That the Rents of the Church were exposed to be a Prey.Ep. 127. Which he calls Malum sanè intolerabile. And of the same thing, and
not long after, viz. Iuly 1551. he admonished the Duke of Somerset, in a French Letter all of his own hand-writing: which because of the Antiquity of it,And to the Duke of So∣merset. No. LVIII. and the Matter it treats of, referring to our Church, and not being among his printed Epistles, I have added in the Ap∣pendix. In which Letter he excites the Duke to take care, that there might be fit and able Ministers, fixed in Parishes, to teach the People. The want whereof he attributed to two Causes. The one whereof he made to lie in the Universities; and the other in the Matter that we are speaking of. That the Revenue of the Cures was withdrawn and dispersed away: So that there was nothing to maintain good Men, who were fit to perform the Office of true Pastors. And hence it came to pass, that ignorant Priests were put in; which made great Confusion. For the Quality of the Persons begat great Contempt of God's Word. Advising the Duke to endeavour to bring those that had these Spiritual Posses∣sions, to be willing to part with them: in as much as they could not prosper in defrauding God's People of their Spiritual Food, which they did by hindring the Churches of good Pastors. Bucer, the King's Divinity-Professor at Cambridg, was this Year engaged in a publick Disputation,Bucer publickly disputeth at Cambridg. as his Collegue, Peter Martyr, the King's Professor at Oxon, had been there the last. Before this Dis∣putation happened, Bucer communicated his Purpose to his said Collegue and Friend. Who having sufficient experience of the vain∣glorious Ends of the Papists in these kinds of Disputations, and of their unfair Dealings, advised him in a Letter, not to engage in it, but to decline it. On which Letter Arch-bishop Parker, into whose Hands it fell,MSS. C.C.C.C. wrote this Inscription, Ad Bucerum, prudens Marty∣ris consilium, ut non det se in disputatione cum gloriosulis Thrasonibus. But it seems he was too far engaged to avoid it with Reputation, nor thought he fit to do it for the vindication and sake of Truth. The Questions disputed of, and his Antagonists were before menti∣oned. It seems he came off with great Credit; for his Friend Martyr in a Letter to him, soon after it was over, professed a great deal of gladness, that his Disputations had that good Success: and that it so well happened was by God's Providence: Which he said, he could scarce have believed to have been a thing possible, with∣out Visitors, or other grave Judges; since the Papists reckoned it enough for their Business only to dispute, afterwards studiously dispersing their Lies, to their own Advantage, and the disparage∣ment of those that disputed against them. And therefore Martyr said, he wondred not, that Christ in the beginning confirmed the Dispu∣tations of his Apostles with Miracles. Novem. 9. Bucer began a learned Reading of the Power and Use of the Ministry, but lived not to finish it. For the latter end of this Year put an end to this Learned Man's Life.Dieth. Of whose Coun∣sel and Advice our Arch-bishop made great use in the Steps he made for Reformation of Religion. He made his Will before he left Strasburgh: but the Codicil to that Will he added, February 22. a few days before his Death. Wherein he left to his Wife to take the Advice of Mr. Bradford, and the Minister of Alhallowes, for ordering of his Burial, and constituted two eminent Men of that University
MARTINUS BUCERUS S.S. Theologiae apaid Cantabrigienyes Profefsor Regius. Natus Selestadij Anno MCCCCXCI. Denatus MDLI.
his Executors, namely, Dr. Matthew Parker, who was afterwards Arch-bishop of Canterbury, and Dr. Walter Haddon, after Master of Requests to Q. Elizabeth. And both of them adorned his Funerals, the one with a English Sermon before the University, and the other with a Latin Oration, being University-Orator. Both which are extant in print. He died but poor; and seemed to be in some want of Necessaries in his last Sickness. For there is a short Letter, in a scrawling Hand, which I have seen, wrote by him to the afore∣said Parker, then Master of Benet-College, and his great Friend, to lend him ten Crowns. Which because it was the last Letter, I be∣lieve, he ever wrote, and but short, I shall here insert. S. D. Oro D. T. Clarissime D. Doctor, ut des mihi X coronatos mutuò, uno tantum mense. Reddam bona fide. Opt. vale. D. T. deditiss. in Dno. Martinus Bucerus manu peraegrè propria. Under which is writ by Dr. Parker, out of the Honour he had for his Memory, Scriptum novissimum omnium quod scripsit D. Bucerus, paulo aute mortem ejus. Bucer's Friends,The Universi∣ty wrote up concerning his Death. after they had taken care for giving him an hono∣rable Funeral, consulted the Supply of his Widow, Wibrand Bucerin; that she might be well gratified, and presented with some Gratui∣ties that might shew the Respect the Nation had for her learned Husband. So the University wrote a Letter to the King and Council concerning Bucer's Death, and their respectful Interment of him, with the signification of their Desire, that his Majesty would send them another able Professor in his room. With this University-Let∣ter, Dr. Parker wrote another to Sir Iohn Cheke; entreating him to present their Letter, and that he would particularly speak to the Council, and to the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, to remember the Widow. Sir Iohn Cheke, March 9. wrote a Letter in answer to Dr. Parker's; which I have placed in the Appendix.No. LIX. He therein lamen∣ted the loss of this Man: commended him for his Depth of Know∣ledg, Earnestness in Religion, Fartherliness in Life, and Authority in Knowledg. He added, that the King would provide some grave Learned Man to maintain God's true Learning in that University: though he thought in all Points they would not meet with Bucer's like. He desired Parker, that all Bucer's Books and Writings might be sent up and saved for the King's Majesty, except Mrs. Bucer might turn them to better Account some other way. These Books and Papers were apprized at one hundred Pounds.Bucer's Libra∣ry. But she received but fourscore Pounds of those that bought them. Which she desired Parker and Haddon, the Executors here in England, to testify under their Hands: that she might shew it, to vindicate her Truth and Honesty, not to have wronged the Heirs. The Li∣brary was divided into three parts. The King had the Manuscripts, which was one part; The Dutchess [of Somerset, I suppose] had the greater part of the Books, and the Arch-bishop of Canterbury had the remainder: for which he for his share, paid her forty Pounds. The University gave her an hundred Crowns: the King
an hundred Marks more, besides her Husband's half-year's Pension, though he died before Lady-day when it came due. He also allowed for such reasonable Repairs as Bucer had bestowed about the House wherein he lived.His Widdow retires to Ger∣many. And, March 31. 1551. She had a Passage by Sea granted her with eight Persons in her Company. She returned unto Strasburgh, whither She retired, by Mr. Rich. Hills Merchant, the Sum of two hundred twenty six Pounds, two Shillings. From Strasburgh, in February the next Year, She wrote a Letter to the Executors, wherein She acknowledged their Kindness to her, pray∣ing God for them, in respect of their singular Humanity and Bene∣fits which they had shewed to her Husband and her self, and especi∣ally when he was dead. Miseram me, said She in that Letter, omni{que} solatio destitutam non deseruistis, sed in vestram me tutelam be∣nigne suscepistis; omnia deni{que} Christianae charitatis officia demonstrastis. Bucer left a Son named Nathaniel, and a Daughter named Elizabeth, behind him, at Strasburgh, when he came into England: Which, I suppose, were all the Children he left surviving him, whom he had by a former Wife that died of the Plague there. By her he had many more, but they died before him. The Corre∣spondence be∣tween him and Martyr. MSS.C.C.C.C.As long as Bucer lived, there was a dear Correspondence between him and P. Martyr, while they were the one at Cambridg, and the other at Oxford. In the private Library at Benet-College, there be still remaining divers Letters from Martyr to him. One whereof was writ upon occasion of Bucer's communicating to him his Judg∣ment of the Habits; which he had composed for the use of Hoper. Which Letter began thus, S. P. Perlegi, Vir Dei, quae de Vestium discrimine doctè pié{que} scripsisti, ac ex illis non mediocrem voluptatem cepi, tum quia vera quae praedicas in∣telligebam, tum quod per omnia consentiebant cum his, quae ego Londinum ad Hopperum ipsum, pridie ejus diei, qua tuae mihi redderentur miseram. So that hence it appears they were both unanimous for wearing of the Habits enjoined: and so had given their Judgments to Hoper. In the same Letter he answered a Case put to him by Bucer, Quamdiu fidem in Christo generalem, confusam aut implicitam satisfuisse ad ho∣minum salutem. And the resolution of this Question being the chief Matter of this Letter, Arch-bishop Parker (into whose Hands it fell) intitled it thus, Quamdiu Fides implicita licuerit. And on the Margent of the same Letter, where he entred upon a∣nother Argument, is written by the same Hand, De concordi confessione in re Sacramentaria. For A Lasco had lately wrote to Martyr his Desire, that some Con∣fession about the Sacrament might be drawn up; to which he and Bucer, and Bernardin, and Martyr, might set their Hands, to testify the Foreign Protestants Consent. Another Letter wrote by Martyr to Bucer, bore this Title, set to it by the same Hand with the former, Quibus artibus instituerint Disputationem Theologicam in Comitiis Oxoniensibus. And on the side of this Letter, Gaudet Disputationem non esse factam & Astutia Papistica in Dis∣putatione.
In a third Letter he gave Bucer advice, that he should not engage in any Disputation with the vain-glorious Papists. There is yet a fourth Letter: Wherein Martyr communicated to him, how he had been employed by the Arch-bishop of Canterbury in taking into examination the English Book of Common-Prayer, with his Judgment thereon. This Letter hath this Title put to it by Parker, Censura libri communium precum. The Contents of the second and fourth Letter,A Plot of the Papists at Oxo, against Martyr, at an Act. having some things very remarkable for the Illustration of our History, I shall here set down more largely. In the former, having congratulated Bucer's coming off so well in his Disputation with Young the Papist, he took notice of the unfair Ways the Papists used in their Disputes: and then proceeded to tell what happened to himself the last Act at Ox∣ford this Year, by a Party there, that did what they could to affront him, and the Evangelical Truth which he taught. Certain that then went out Bachelors of Divinity, made this Combination among themselves. One of them they set up to be Respondent. The Op∣ponents, who were of the same Strain, and the Question to be dis∣puted, they supprest, and kept under great silence; on purpose; that Peter Martyr, the King's Professor, should not know: And when some had urged to them, that it belonged to the Professor to know the Question, they answered, That it did not; and that it was enough for them to know it, that were to dispute on it. The Day before the Disputation was to be undertaken, about two of the Clock in the Afternoon, they set up the Question upon the Church-Doors: and then it appeared to be in behalf of Transubstantiation. And to exclude the Professor, they chose to themselves a great Papist, Dr. Chedsey, for their Father. And here the Opponents were to have taken and managed all Martyr's Arguments; and the Respondent was to have assoiled them as he thought good. And then the Opponents were to acknowledg, they were satisfied with the Answers given thereunto. And their Father, who was to oc∣cupy the Professor's Place, was by a Speech highly to approve and applaud all that had been done. And things were so to be ordered that Day, that the Professor should not have any opportunity of speaking. For these Disputations were to have been performed but a little before Night, after the Civilians had finished their parts; which used to be the last Exercises. Or if after this Divinity-Dis∣putation were done, the Professor had been minded to say any thing, he must do it when it was Night, and when the tired Auditors would be all going Home. And then these Disputants and their Party were every where to cry Victory, and carry away the Glory. There was now observed a greater confluence of People at this Act, than could have been believed: For they had sent about their Let∣ters to invite such hither, as were for their own Turn: and all to en∣crease the Triumph. Among the rest there were present the Chaplains of Winchester and Durham. But all this elaborate and fine-spun Plot was by a Providence broken on a sudden; the Vice-Chancellor, whe∣ther he feared any Riot, or for what other Cause, it was uncertain,
forbidding the Divinity-Disputations that Day, without the privity of the Professor. The Matter of Martyr's other Letter, wrote to Bucer in Ianuary, (as the former was in September before) related to the Book of Com∣mon-Prayer. For the Correction of which the Arch-bishop,Martyr's Judg∣ment of the Communion-Book the Bishop of Ely, and the other Bishops were, by the King's Com∣mand, met together in Consultation. And that this Work might be the more effectually performed, the Arch-bishop thought good to have the Judgment herein of both the Publick Professors, Bucer and Martyr. Accordingly Bucer wrote his Censure, and Martyr his Anno∣tations,Pag. 210. as was said before. A Copy of which Censure Bucer had com∣municated to Martyr. Who in this Letter declared his Consent and Approbation thereunto. As to his own Annotations, Cheke's Latin Version which he used, was so brief and defective, that for that reason many things were omitted by him, which he would have noted, had he seen the Book compleat. But after he had sent in those his Annotations to the Arch-bishop who earnestly required them, he saw Bucer's Censure, whereby he perceived divers other things called for Correction, than he had taken notice of. So he reduced whatsoever was wanting in his Annotations, into certain brief Articles, and acquainted the Arch-bishop therewith; and that in them all he did freely agree with Bucer, that it were fit they should be altered. But Martyr's Annotations did fully accord with Bucer's Animadversions, though they were at a distance, and con∣sulted not at all with one another before they wrote their Judg∣ments. But one thing was past over by Bucer, which Martyr wondred at: it was in the Office for the Communion of the Sick. Where it was ordered, That if this private Communion happened to be on the same Sunday, when there should be a pub∣lick One, then the Priest was to take along with him some of the Consecrated Elements, and with them to administer the Sacra∣ment in the House of the Sick. Wherein this offended Martyr, as he said, that the Office that belonged to the Communion should not be repeated before the sick Man, and the rest that communi∣cated with him, since the words of the Supper do rather belong to the Men, than to the Bread and Wine. And his advice was, that all that was necessarily required to the Lord's Supper, should be said and done, whensoever it was privately as well as pub∣lickly celebrated. He subscribed to Bucer's Censure in every thing; and he thanked God, that had administred an Occasion, that the Bishops should by them be admonished of those Matters. So that it was concluded by the Bishops at their Conference about the Com∣munion-Book, that much should be changed therein, as the Arch-bishop told Martyr, then at his House. And if they would not do it, the King was resolved to do it by himself and his Parliament, without them. In this Letter he speaks something concerning Hoper, whose Behaviour he disliked; and concerning Dr. Smith, who had lately written against the Arch-bishop's Book of the Sacrament, and against himself concerning Monastick Vows. Both these Letters, as well worthy the sight and perusal of the Reader, I have repo∣sited in the Appendix.No. LX.LXI.
Thus this Reverend and Learned Foreigner, after many great Dif∣ficulties passed through, for the Cause of Religion, flying from one place to another, came at last to a natural Death and a quiet End in this Land. For his Fame and Wisdom,Bucer's great Dangers. he was called by the Ele∣ctors, Palatine, and of Brandenburgh, with the Emperor's Permis∣sion, to temper the Emperor's Rescript about Religion, which was to be published, that so it might please both Parties. But he thought he could not do it with any Honesty; and rather than meddle with it, he fled to Strasburgh with his Wife and Children: hereby he fell under the Displeasure of those Princes, as well as before he had done under that of the Emperor for the Reformation of Colen; the Envy of which Melancthon escaped, but it fell on poor Bucer. Being at Stras∣burgh, he also contracted much Ill-will by means of the Anabaptists and others whom he opposed, and who by their pretended Sancti∣mony had a great Party there. His Friends apprehended him on these Accounts in great Danger; but he thought of no removal to any other Place, Patron or Church, trusting himself in God's Hands, till Sturmius and some others advised him by all means to depart in∣to England. Which he at length yielding to, the said Sturmius admo∣nished him, for his safer Travel, to take a more uncommon Way, through Lorain and Rhemes, and some other parts of France, to Calais, and there to cross over the Sea. Which he did, and was very hospi∣tably here entertained, as was said before. Bishops Consecrated. Iune 29. Iohn Ponet, or Poynet, D.D. Chaplain to the Arch-bishop,Ponet▪ was Consecrated Bishop of Rochester at Lambeth-Chappel, by the Arch-bishop of Canterbury; assisted by Nicolas Bishop of London, an Arthur Bishop of Bangor. This Consecration was performed with all the usual Ceremonies and Habits, probably for this Reason, to give as little occasion of Offence to Papists as might be, and to keep close to the old Usages, avoiding Superstition: Therefore it was set down in the Register at large in what Formalities all was now done.Cranm. Reg. The Arch-bishop is described, Vsitatis insigniis redimitus, & uno Epitogio, sive Capa, indutus, Oratorium suum praedictum honestè & decenter orna∣tum ingressus, &c. Having on his Mitre and Cope, usual in such Cases, went into his Chappel, handsomly and decently adorned, to celebrate the Lord's Supper according to the Custom, and by Prescript of the Book, intituled, The Book of Common-Service. Be∣fore the People there assembled, the Holy Suffrages first began, and were publickly recited, and the Epistle and Gospel read in the Vulgar Tongue, Nicolas Bishop of London, and Arthur Bishop of Bangor, assisting; and having their Surplices and Copes on, and their Pastoral Staves in their Hands, led Dr. Iohn Ponet, endued with the like Habits, in the middle of them, unto the most Reve∣rend Father; and presented him unto him, sitting in a decent Chair; and used these words, Most Reverend Father in God, we present unto you this godly and well-learned Man to be conse∣crated Bishop. The Bishop Elect forthwith produced the King's Letters Patents before the Arch-bishop. Which by command
of the said ABp, being read by Dr. Glyn, the said Ponet took the Oath of renouncing the Bishop of Rome, and then the Oath of Canonical Obedience to the Arch-bishop. These things being thus dispatched, the Arch-bishop exhorted the People to Prayer and Supplication to the Most High, according to the Order prescribed in the Book of Ordination set forth in the Month of March 1549. According to which Order he was Elected and Consecrated, and endued with the Episcopal Ornaments, the Bishop of London first having read the third Chapter of the first Epistle of Paul to Ti∣mothy, in manner of a Sermon. These things being done, and the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper celebrated upon a Table, co∣vered with a white Linen Cloth, by the Arch-bishop and the two assisting Bishops, the same Arch-bishop decreed to write to the Arch-deacon of Canterbury for the Investiture, Installation and In∣thronization of the said Bishop of Rochester, as it was customary. Present Anthony Huse, principal Register of the Arch-bishop; Peter Lilly, Iohn Lewis, Iohn Incent, publick Notaries; and many others, as well Clerks as Laicks. Hoper.March 8. Iohn Hoper was consecrated Bishop of Glocester, just after the same manner, by the Arch-bishop, Nicholas Bishop of London, and Iohn Bishop of Rochester, assisting, clothed (say the Words of the Register) in Linen Surplices and Copes, and Iohn Elect of Glo∣cester in the like Habit. CHAP. XXV. The Arch-bishop publisheth his Book against Gardiner. An. 1551. Cranmer pub∣lisheth his Book of the Sacrament.THIS Year our Arch-bishop published his Elaborate Book of the Sacrament, confuting the gross and carnal Presence of Christ there, in vindication of a former Book of his, wrote against by Bishop Gardiner and Dr. Smith. For, to give the Reader some di∣stinct Account of this Matter, in the Year 1550, Cranmer printed a Book in English in Quarto with this Title,His first Book. A Defence of the True and Catholick Doctrine of the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Saviour Christ; with a Confutation of sundry Errors concerning the same: Grounded and established upon God's Holy Word, and approved by the Consent of the most ancient Doctors of the Church. The great Reason that moved him to write this Book was, that he might the more effectually purge the Church of Popery, esteeming Transub∣stantiation and the Mass, to be the very Roots of it. The taking away of Beads, Pilgrimages, Pardons, and such-like Popery, was, (as he wrote in his Preface) but the lopping off a few Branches; which would soon spring up again, unless the Roots of the Tree, which were Transubstantiation, and the Sacrifice of the Mass, were pulled up. Therefore out of a sincere Zeal to the Honour of God, he would labour, he said, in his Vineyard, to cut down that Tree of Error, Root and Branch. By this Book very many were enlightned to perceive the Errors of the Popish Doctrines of the Sacrament. This Treatise he divided into five Books or Points.
I. Of the True and Catholick Doctrine and Use of the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ.An. 1551. II. Against the Error of Transub∣stantiation. III. The manner how Christ is present in the Sacra∣ment. IV. Of the eating and drinking of the Body and Blood of Christ. V. Of the Oblation and Sacrifice of our Saviour Christ. In the third Part he made mention of the Bishop of Winchester, in these words: As many of them [i. e. of the Papist Writers] as I have read, (the Bishop of Winchester only excepted) do say, That Christ called not the Bread his Body. This Bishop was much of∣fended that he was named in the Book, and pretended this to be one Reason why he did write against it, to vindicate himself, as well as the Papal Church, hereby so dangerously struck at. This Book of Cranmer's was turned into Latin by Iohn Yong; who complied after∣wards with the old Religion under Queen Mary, and was Master of Pembroke-Hall, Cambridg. At this Book the Defenders of Popery were so nettled,Wrote against by Gardiner and Smith. that in the same Year 1550, Winchester then in the Tower, and fickle Dr. Smith then at Lovain, printed Answers. Of Smith's Book I shall only note by the way, that March 8. 1550. there was an Order of Council to examine the bringer over of his Book against Cranmer. Such a Countenance did the State give to the Arch-bishop and his Book. Gardiner's Book made the greatest noise: Which was printed in France, and intituled. An Explication and Assertion of the true Catho∣lick Faith touching the most Blessed Sacrament of the Altar, with the Confutation of a Book written against the same. In the Beginning of his Book he wrote, That his Sermon before the King, [on St. Pe∣ter's Day] touching the Sacrament of the Altar, gave occasion to the Arch-bishop's Book against it; and that he was called before the King's Commissioners at Lambeth for his Catholick Faith in the Sacrament. Whereas indeed this was not the Cause of his Troubles; nor had some former Copies of his Book these words: But after the Commission was issued forth against him, to make his Cause appear the more specious, as if it were the Cause of the Church, he thought fit to make an Alteration in the beginning of his Book in the manner abovesaid. And to carry on the Scene, he in open Court offered his Book before the King's Commissioners. To this Book of Gardiners,Vindicated in another Book by the ABp. our Arch-bishop studied and composed an Answer; holding himself bound, for the Vindication of the Evan∣gelical Truth, as well as of his own Writing, and for the Satisfa∣ction of the People, not to suffer it to lie untaken notice of. When it was known the Arch-bishop was preparing an Answer against Gar∣diner, the People were in very great expectation, and conceived an earnest desire to see and read it: Having therefore dispatched his Co∣py, and sent it to Rainold Wolf his Printer, it was printed off in the Month of September 1551. But there was some stop put to the pub∣lishing of it, occasioned by a Proclamation issued out from the King; whereby, for some political Ends, both the printing and selling of English Books, without the Allowance of the King's Majesty, or six of his Privy-Council, was forbidden. The Arch-bishop being desirous, that his Book might come abroad the next Term, for the Contentation of many who had long expected the same, sent to Se∣cretary
Cecyl and Sir Iohn Cheke, to procure, either from the King or Council, a Licence to the said Wolf for printing and selling his Book. Which was obtained, and the Book published accordingly. This Letter of the ABp's, dated Sept. 29. I have thought not amiss to reposit in the Appendix.No. LXII. Octob. 1. A Licence was granted to Wolf to publish the Book, under the King's Privilege, the Court then being at Hamp∣ton-Court, and the Arch-bishop himself present. The Title this se∣cond Book of the Arch-bishop's bore was, An Answer by the Reverend Father in God, Thomas Arch-bishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan, unto a crafty and sophistical Cavillation, devised by Stephen Gardiner, Doctor of Law, late Bishop of Winche∣ster, against the true and godly Doctrine of the most Holy Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Saviour Christ. Wherein is also, as occasion serveth, answered such Places of the Book of Dr. Richard Smith, as may seem any thing worthy the answering. Also a true Copy of the Book written, and in open Court delivered by Dr. Stephen Gardiner, not one Word added or diminished, but faithfully in all Points agreeing with the Original. This Book of Arch-bishop Cranmer's, was printed a∣gain at London, 1580, with his Life, and some other things. The Method of the ABp's Re∣ply.His Reply to Gardiner was in the most fair and candid Method that could be devised. For he first set down his own Treatise, Piece by Piece; then Gardiner's Reply thereunto Word for Word, leaving not one Paragraph without a full Answer. His Reply to Smith was only of some things most worthy to be taken notice of, the rest of Smith's Book being meer Trifles. This Reply to Smith he inserted in the Body of his Answer to Gardiner, as occasion served. Only at the end he made a particular Reply to Smith's Preface. The Judg∣ments made of this Book. In Antiq. Brit.It seemed to be a very compleat Exercitation upon that Subject. The Book was stored with so great Learning and Plenty of Argu∣ments, Vt ea Controversia, saith one of his Successors, a nemine un∣quam contra Pontificios accuratius tractata esse videatur; That no one Controversy was by any ever handled against the Papists more accurately. It may not be amiss to mention here the Opinion that Cranmer him∣self had of his Book, in that famous and renowned Confession he made of his Faith in S. Mary's Church, Oxon, immediately before he was led away to his Burning. Where he expressed his full Approba∣tion and great Confidence of the Doctrine contained therein: saying, That as for the Sacrament,Fox's Acts. he believed as he had taught in his Book against the Bishop of VVinchester. The which Book, he said, taught so true a Doctrine of the Sacrament, that it should stand at the last Day before the Judgment of God, where the Papistical Doctrine contrary thereto should be ashamed to shew her Face. The Papists spake as much against this Book, being much galled by it. Dr. Tresham, in his Disputation with Latimer, said, There were six hundred Errors in the Book. Weston, thinking to invalidate the Book by the pretended Novelty of the Doctrine, asked the same Fa∣ther, How long he had been of that Opinion? He said, Not past seven Years; that is, about the Year 1547; and that Arch-bishop Cranmer's Book confirmed his Judgment therein: and added, That if he could but remember all therein contained, he would not fear to an∣swer any Man in this Matter.
The Arch-bishop had acknowledged to the Queen's Commissioners at Oxford, that Ridley had first begun to enlighten him, as to the true Notion of the Presence, as he had maintained it in his Book.How the ABp came off from the Opinion of the Corporal Presence. Here∣upon one of them took occasion to try to baffle the true Doctrine, by making the whole stress of it to depend upon the Authority of single Ridley. Latimer, said he, leaned upon Cranmer, and Cranmer leaned upon Ridley. Whereas the truth of this was no more, but that Rid∣ley reading Bertram's Book of the Body and Blood of Christ, was sharpened to examine the old Opinion more accurately, of the Pre∣sence of Christ's Flesh and Blood; and looking into Ecclesiastical Au∣thors, he found it greatly controverted in the ninth Century, and learnedly writ against. Which made him begin to conclude it none of the ancient Doctrines of the Church, but more lately brought in∣to it. These his Thoughts he communicated to Arch-bishop Cran∣mer, which was about the Year 1546. Whereupon they both set to examine it with more than ordinary Care. And all the Arguments that Cranmer gathered about it, he digested into his Book. Nor was the good Arch-bishop ashamed to make a publick Acknowledgment in print of this as well as of his other Popish Errors, in his Answer to Smith's Preface, who it seems had charged him with Inconstancy. This I confess of my self, that not long before I wrote the said Catechism, I was in that Error of the Real Presence, as I was ma∣ny Years past in many other Errors, as of Transubstantiation, of the Sacrifice propitiatory of the Priests in the Mass, of Pilgrima∣ges, of Purgatory, &c. being brought up from my Youth in them. For the which, and other the Offences of my Youth, I do daily pray unto God for Pardon and Mercy. After it pleased God to shew me, by his Holy Word, a more perfect knowledg of his Son Jesus Christ, I put away my former Ignorance. As God gave me Light, so through his Grace I opened my Eyes to receive it. And I trust in God's Mercy for pardon of my former Errors. I set this down the more at large, to shew the great Ingenuity as well as Piety of this good Man. Peter Martyr in the Year following this,The ABp's great Skill in this Contro∣versy. printed a Book of the Sacrament, which was the Sum of what he had read before upon that Point in the University of Oxford. Which Book he dedicated to his Patron, the Arch-bishop of Canterbury: And giving the Reason why he made the Dedication to him, said, That he knew certainly, that Cranmer had so great Skill in this Controversy, as one could hardly find in any one besides. That there was none of the Fa∣thers, which he had not diligently noted; no antient or modern Book extant, that he [Martyr] had not with his own Eyes seen no∣ted by the Arch-bishop's Hand. Whatsoever belonged to the whole Controversy, he said, that the Arch-bishop had digested into particular Chapters; Councils, Canons, Popes Decrees pertain∣ing hereunto: and that with so great labour, that unless he had been an Eye-Witness of it and seen it, he could not easily have believed others, if they had told him, in regard of the infinite Toil, Diligence and Exactness, wherewith the Arch-bishop had done it. He added, that the Arch-bishop had not bestowed such kind of Pains and Study in the Matter of the Sacrament only,
but that he had done the same thing, as to all other Doctrines, in effect, which in that Age were especially under Controversy. And this that Learned Man said, he had made good Observation of. Nor, as he went on, that he wanted Skill, a Method, and Industry in defending what he held. Which might, he said, be known by this, because he had so often conflicted with his Ad∣versaries, both publickly and privately, and by a marvellous strength of Learning, quickness of Wit, and dexterity of Ma∣nagement, had asserted what he held to be true, from the thorny and intricate Cavils of Sophisters [glancing at his Controversies with Winchester, who was commonly then called the Sophister] and that he wanted not a Will, yea, a Mind ready to defend Sound and Cristian Doctrines. That all Men did sufficiently understand, who saw him burn with so great an endeavour of re∣storing Religion, that for this Cause only he had great and heavy Enemies, and neglected many Commodities of this Life, and un∣derwent horrible Dangers. The great and intimate Converse that P. Martyr had with Cranmer, gave him opportunity to know him very well: and therefore I have chosen to set down this Character that he gave of him, and particularly of his Ability in this Contro∣versy of th Eucharist. P. Martyr in∣lightned by Cranmer.And I am apt to think that the careful perusal of these Authorities, collected by the Arch-bishop, and his Conversation with this Learned Prelate, being much with him at Lambeth, was a cause of bringing Martyr to the True Doctrine. For at his first coming to Oxon, he was a Papist, or a Lutheran, as to the belief of the Presence. And so Feckenham,Fox's Acts. Dean of S. Paul's, told Bartlet Green at his Exami∣nation; and that Martyr perceiving the King's Council, as he un∣charitably suggested, to be of another Opinion, he, to please them, forsook the true Catholick Faith. But Mr. Green, who had been a hearer of him at Oxon, replied, That he had heard Martyr say, That he had not, while he was a Papist, read S. Chrysostom upon the tenth to the Corinthians, nor many other places of the Doctors. But when he had read them, and well considered them, he was content to yield to them, having first humbled himself in Prayer, desiring God to illuminate him, and bring him to the true under∣standing of Scripture. Fox's Conje∣cture of the ABp.As to the Authorities the Arch-bishop alledgeth in his Book, it was the Conjecture of Iohn Fox, that he made use of Frith's Book, which he wrote of the Sacrament against More divers Years before: and that from the said Author the Arch-bishop seemed to have col∣lected the Testimonies of the Doctors, which he produced in his Apology against the Bishop of Winchester: and that he gathered the principal and chiefest Helps thence, that he leaned to. But al∣though he might peruse Frith, as he did almost all other Authors that wrote of this Controversy, yet he was too well versed in the Ecclesiastical Writers, that he needed to go a borrowing to the readings of any others for Sentences and Allegations out of them. A second Book of Gardiner a∣gainst the ABp.Cranmer lived to see his Book replied again unto by his Adversary Gardiner, in Latin, under the fained Name of Marcus Antonius Con∣stantius a Divine of Lovain. His Book went under this Title,
Confutatio cavillationum, quibus sacrosanctum Eucharistiae Sacramentum ab impiis Capernaitis impeti solet. Printed at Paris, 1552. In this Book he spared the Name of the Arch-bishop, but reduceth all the Arch-bishop's Book into no less then 255 Objections. To each of which, one by one, the Catholick is brought in making answer. Next, whereas Cranmer had laid down twelve Rules for the finding out the true Sense of the Fathers in their Writings, the Catholick examines them, and enervates them. Then follows a Confutation of the Solutions, whereby the Sectary, as he is called, (that is, Cranmer) endeavoured to take off the Arguments of the Catholicks. And, which is the fourth and last part of the Book, he defends Ca∣tholick Mens Sense of the Allegations out of the Fathers against the Sectaries. Gardiner, when he compiled this Book, was in the Tower a Prisoner; but yet he was under so easy restraint, that he was furnished there with Workmen, and Amanuenses.Preface to P. Martyr's Book, in Def. of Cranmer. As they of old to the building of the Tabernacle, so he to the preparing of his Book, a kind of Papistical Tabernacle, [to use the words of Martyr] all sorts contributed something. For his Book was Pandora's Box, to which all the lesser Gods brought their Pre∣sents. For every Man, were his Learning less or more, that had any Arguments for the Popish Doctrine, brought them all to him, (many whereof were windy and trivial enough) and he out of the heap made his Collections as he thought good. But Watson and Smith were his chief Assistants. The Arch-bishop, though the Times now soon after turned,The ABp be∣gins a third Book; but, lives not to ∣nish it. and he cast into Prison, was very desirous to prepare another Book in Con∣futation of Marcus Antonius, and in Vindication of his own Writing. He lived long enough to finish three Parts: whereof, two unhappily perished in Oxford, and the third fell into Iohn Fox's Hands, and for ought I know, that by this time is perished also. But the great desire he had to finish his Answer to that Book, was the chief cause, that at his last Appearance before the Queen's Commissioners, he made his Appeal to a General Council. That thereby he might gain some time and leisure to accomplish what he had begun, before his Life were taken away, which he saw was likely to be within a very short space. Otherwise, [as he writ to his Lawyer, who was to draw up his Appeal] it was much better for him to die in Christ's Quarrel, and to reign with him, than to be shut up and kept in that Body. Unless it were to continue yet still a while in this Warfare, for the Commodity and Profit of his Brethren, and to the further advancing of God's Glory. Peter Martyr, his surviving and learned Friend,Martyr takes up the Quar∣rel. being solicited by many English-Men by Letter and word of Mouth, undertook the answering this Book. But before he had finished it, an English Divine and Friend of Martyr's, with whom he held Correspondence in Q. Mary's Reign, wrote him word, in the Year 1557. that an Answer to Antonius, by some other hand, was then in the Press, naming the Author. Martyr replied, That he was rather glad of it,Mat. Epist. than any ways moved or disturbed at it, as a disappointment of what he was doing: and added, that he expected nothing from that Man, but what was very exquisite, acute and elaborate. But
that he feared the noise thereof would not hold true. And so it proved. Whether this Learned Man withdrew his Book, that he might give way to that which P. Martyr was writing, or whether it were a Flam given out to stop Martyr in his Design, it is uncertain. But not long after this Learned Italian put forth his Answer. He had it under the Press at Zurick in December 1558; and it came out the next Year.P. Martyr Ep. Wherein, as he wrote to Calvin, he did unravel and confute all the Sophisms and Tricks of the Bishop of Winchester. And it came forth very seasonably, as Martyr hoped. For hereby the English Papalins might see, at this time especially, that that Book was not, as they boasted hitherto, invincible. He gave this Title to his Book, Defensio Doctrina veteris & Apostolicae de S.S. Eucharistiae Sacramento. In the Preface to which he shewed, How this Work fell to his Lot: Not that that most Reverend Father wanted an As∣sistant, for he could easily have managed Gardiner himself. For he knew how Cranmer, in many and various Disputes, formerly had with him, came off with Victory and great Praise; but because the ABp when in Prison, was forced to leave his Answer, which he had begun, unfinished, by reason of his strait keeping, having scarce Paper and Ink allowed him, and no Books to make use of; and being cut off so soon by Death, before he could bring to per∣fection what he had writ. Wherein, as Martyr said, he had har∣der measure by far from the Papists, than Gardiner had from the Protestants in K. Edward's Days, when he wrote his Book. Gardiner in that Book of his, under the Name of M. Constantius, had shewn such foul play with Cranmer's Book,Cranmer puts out his Book of the Sacra∣ment in Latin. mangling it, and taking Pieces and Scraps of it here and there, and confounding the Method of it, to supply himself with Objections to give his own Answers to with the most advantage; that the Arch-bishop thought, that if Learned Foreigners saw but his first Book of the Sacrament, as he wrote it, it would be vindication enough against Gardiner's new Book against it: And therefore he took order to have it translated in∣to the same Language in which Gardiner wrote, that is, Latin, that impartial Strangers might be able to read and judg: and Sir Iohn Cheke elegantly performed it for his Friend the Arch-bishop. This Book of Cranmer's thus put into Latin, with some Additions, came forth 1553. Before it he prefixed an Epistle to King Edward VI. da∣ted at Lambeth, Idib. Mart. the same Year. Wherein he said, It was his Care of the Lord's Flock committed to him, that put him upon renewing and restoring the Lord's Supper according to the Institution of Christ. And that that was the Reason, that about three Years ago he set forth a Book in English against the principal Abuses of the Papistical Mass. Which Book had great Success upon the Peoples Minds, in bringing them to embrace the Truth. Whereby, he said, he perceived how great the Force of Truth was, and understood the Benefits of the Grace of Christ, that even the Blind should have their Eyes opened, and partake of the Light of Truth, as soon as it was revealed, and shewed it self clear∣ly to them. But that this gave great Offence unto Gardiner, then Bishop of Winchester, so that he thought nothing was to be done till he had answered the Book, supposing that there would be no
helper of so declining & forsaken a Cause, unless he put to his Hand. And so the Arch-bishop proceeded to shew how that Bishop first put forth his English Book, endeavouring to overthrow the true Doctrine,Constantius li∣bro latinè scripto, ita argumenta mea persequitur▪ ut sibi optimum videtur, & ut causam juvet; saepe truncata, saepe inversa, saepe disjecta, sic intro∣ducit; ut non ma∣gis a me agnosci potuerint, quam Medeae liberi in multa membra dissecti & desormati, &c. and to restore and bring again into Repute the Mass, with all its Su∣perstitions; and afterwards his Latin Book, under a feigned Name. In which Gardiner had so unfairly dealt with the Arch-bishop's Ar∣guments, chopping and changing, defacing and disfiguring them, that he could not know them for his own; and all that he might make it serve his own turn the better: Insomuch that he resolved to have his own Book translated out of English into Latin, that his true Opi∣nion and Mind in this Controversy might the better be apprehend∣ed. The whole Epistle is writ in a pure elegant Latin Stile, with a good sharpness of Wit. The publication of this his Latin Book, he thought sufficient for the present to entertain the World, till he should put forth, in Latin also, a full Answer to Gardiner, which he intended shortly to do. To this Latin Book, the Arch-bishop occasionally reviewing it, while he was in Prison, made sundry Annotations and Additions; not of any new Arguments, but only of more Authorities out of the Fathers and Ancient Writers. This valuable Autograph fell into the Hands of some of the English Exiles at Embden, it may be by the Means of Bp Scory, who was Superintendent of the English Church there,Printed again at Embden. or Sir Iohn Cheke, who also for some time was in this Place, both great Friends of the Arch-bishop. In the Year 1557, the Exiles here prin∣ted it with this Title, Defensio, &c. a Thoma Cranmero Martyre scripta. Ab Authore in Vinculis recognita & aucta. Before it, is a new Preface to the Reader, made as it is thought by Sir Iohn Cheke, re∣lating to the Arch-bishop and this his Book, shewing how well-weighed, and well-thought on this Doctrine of the Sacrament was, before he published it, and that he let it not go abroad, till he had diligently compared and pondred all Scriptures and Ancient Authors, and confirmed it at last by his Blood. In the body of the Book, the places where any Enlargements are,Autographon ∣jus in nostra a∣pud Aembda∣nos Ecclesia pro Thesauro quo∣dam, & clariss. viri, sancti{que} Christi Martyris Mnemosyno ser∣vamus. In Epist. are signified by an Hand point∣ing thereunto. In the Margent is often to be found this word Object. with certain Numbers added: Which Numbers shew those Places which Gardiner, under the Name of Marcus Antonius, did endeavour to confute. The very Original these English Exiles here at Embden kept, as a great Treasure, among them, and as a Memorial of the Holy Martyr. Besides this, the Arch-bishop fully intended to have his Vindicati∣on of his Book, impugned by Gardiner, put into Latin also; but he lived not to see that done.Cranmer's se∣cond Book in∣tended to be put into Latin. Fox. Epp. MSS. But care was taken of this Business among the Exiles. Insomuch that both Sir Iohn Choke and Iohn Fox were busied about it at the same time. But the former surceased, and left the whole Work to Fox then at Frankford, after he had finished the first part. In this Piece done by Cheke, Iohn a Lasco had an hand; for he put in the Latin School-Terms, instead of more pure good Latin which Cheke had used. And it was judged fit that such Words should be used,. where the ABp in his English had used them. And this Cheke and A Lasco themselves wrote to Fox. Fox undertook the rest, by the Incitation and Encouragement of P. Martyr, and of Grindal and Pilkington, both Bishops afterwards. Who gave him Di∣rections
for the translating; and as Doubts occurred concerning the Sense of certain Matters in the Book, as he met with them, he con∣sulted with these Men for their Judgments therein. Grindal in one Letter, bad him write a Catalogue of all Passages by him doubted of, and send it to him. Fox finished his Translation in the Year 1557, before Iune. For which he had a Congratulatory Letter from Grindal, who was his chief Assistant and Counsellor herein. The Work was dispatched to the Press, at Basil I suppose; and when one Part was printed, the Censors of the Press thought it would be bet∣ter to defer an Argument of that Nature to better Times, the Con∣troversy having been bandied up and down so much already. But Froscover undertook the printing of the whole Book. Fox would do nothing of himself; but leaving himself to the Judgment of his Learned Brethren, to commit the Work now to Froscover, or no, Queen Mary's Death, and the return of the Exiles, I suppose, stop∣ped further progress in this Matter. The Original Manuscript, un∣der Fox's own Hand, in very cleanly elegant Latin, I have lying by me: It bears this Title, De totâ Sacramenti Eucharistiae causa Institu∣tionum Libri V. Autore D. THOMA CRANMERO Archiepis∣copo Cantuariensi. Quibus & Stephani Garneri Episcopi Wintoniensi, & SMYTHI Doctoris Theologi, impugnationibus, respondetur. Some Notes of Cranmer con∣cerning the Sacrament. Miscellan. A.And that I may bring here together all that relates to Cranmer, as to this Matter of the Sacrament, I must not omit what I saw in the Benet-Library. There is a thin Note-book of this Arch-bishop's with this Title, wrote by his own Hand, De re Sacramentaria; which I verily believe are his Meditations and Conclusions, when he set himself accurately to examine the Sacramental Controversy, and fell off from the Opinion of the Carnal Presence. The Notes consist of nothing but Quotations out of ancient Ecclesiastical Authors about the Lord's Supper; interlined in many Places by the Arch-bishop's Pen. On the top of some of the Pages are these Sentences writ by himself, being Doctrines provable out of the Sentences there produced, and transcribed. Panis vocatur Corpus Christi, & Vinum Sanguis. Panis est Corpus meum, & Vinum est Sanguis meus; figurativae sunt locutiones. Quid significet haec figura, Edere carnem, & bibere sanguinem. Mali non edunt & bibunt corpus & sanguinem Domini. Patres Vet. Testamenti, edebant & bibebant Christum, sicut & Nos. Sicut in Eucharistia, ita in Baptismo, presens est Christus. Contra Transubstantiationem. After this, follow these Writings of the Arch-bishop's own Hand (which Arch-bishop Parker elsewhere transcribed for his own Satis∣faction). Multa affirmant crassi Papistae, seu Capernaitae, quae ne{que} Scriptura ne{que} ullus Veterum unquam dixerat. Viz. Quod Accidentia maneant sine subjecto. Quod Accidentia panis & vini sunt Sacramenta: non panis & vinum.
Quod Panis non est figura, sed accidentia panis. Quod Christus non appellavit panem corpus suum. Quod cum Christus dixit; Hoc est corpus meum, pronomen Hoc non refertur ad panem, sed ad corpus Christi. Quod tot corpora Christi accipimus, aut toties corpus ejus accipimus, quoties, aut in quot partes, dentibus secamus panem. Thus having set down divers Assertions of Papists, or Capernaites, as he stiled them, which neither Scripture nor Ancient Fathers knew any thing of; his Notes proceed to state wherein Papists and Protestants disagree. Praecipua Capita in quibus a Papisticis dissentimus. Christum Papistae statuunt in pane, nos in homine comedente. Illi in comedentis ore, nos in toto homine. Illi Corpus Christi aiunt evolare, masticato vel consumpto pane: Nos manere in homine dicimus, quamdiu membrum est Christi. Illi in pane statuunt per annum integrum, & diutius, si duret panis: Nos in homine statuimus inhabitare, quamdiu Templum Dei fuerit. Illorum Sententiâ, quod ad realem praesentiam attinet, non amplius edit homo quam bellua, ne{que} magis ei prodest, quam cuivis animanti. Thus God made use of this Arch-bishop,Martyr suc∣ceeds Cranmer in this Pro∣vince. who was once of the most violent Asserters of the Corporal Presence, to be the chief∣est Instrument of overthrowing it. But this good Work required to be carried on after Cranmer's Death. For great Brags were made of Gardiner's second Book; and it was boasted, that none dared to encounter this their Goliath. P. Martyr was thought the fittest Man to succeed Cranmer in this Province, to maintain the Truth that be∣gan now to shine forth. He, overcome by the Solicitation of Friends,Writes against Gardiner, composed a Book against Gardiner, as was said before, and printed it at Zurick. Wherein, I. He defended the Arguments of our Men; which had been collected together, and pretended to be con∣futed by Gardiner's Book. II. He defended those Rules which Cran∣mer had put forth in his Tract of the Sacrament. III. He main∣tained those Answers, whereby the Arguments of the Adversaries were wont to be refuted. And, IV. He asserted the just and true Interpretation of certain Places out of the Fathers, which Gardiner and his Companions brought for themselves and their Errors. After this Defence followed another by the same Author, printed in the same Town of Zurick, against two Books of Dr. Rich. Smith,And Smith. concerning the single Life of Priests, and Monastick Vows: which he wrote at Lovain against Martyr. For when Martyr had read at Oxford upon 1 Corinthians Chap. vii. where the Apostle speaks much of Virginity and Matrimony; (the Notes of which Readings Smith had very diligently taken, being constantly present at them) from thence he composed two Books, not so strong as malicious, Of the Celibacy of Priests, and of Vows: designing thereby to confute Martyr's Arguments: Which he therefore thought fit to vindicate. In this Book he not only answered Smith's Arguments, but what∣ever else he could meet with upon that Subject. But it was thought
to be a very improper Undertaking, and proved cause of Mirth, that so filthy a Fellow as Smith was known to be, and once taken in the Act of Adultery, should write a Book of Priestly Chastity. Which occasioned these Verses made by Laur. Humfrey, Haud satis affabrè tractans fabrilia Smithus, Librum de vita caelibe composuit, &c. Dúm{que} pudicitiam, dum vota monastica laudat, Stuprat, sacra notans foedera conjugii, CHAP. XXVI. The Duke of Somerset's Death. New Bishops. The Duke of Somerset's Death.THE Arch-bishop of Canterbury this Year lost the Duke of Somerset, whom he much valued, and who had been a great Assistant to him in the Reformation of the Church, and a true Friend to it. His violent Death exceedingly grieved the good Arch-bishop, both because he knew it would prove a great Let to Religion, and was brought about by evil Men, to the shedding of Innocent Blood, for the furthering the Ends of Ambition: and be∣gat in him Fears and Jealousies of the King's Life. It is very re∣markable what I meet with in one of my Manuscripts.Inter Foxii MSS. There was a Woman, somewhat before the last apprehension of the Duke, Wife of one Woocock of Pool in Dorsetshire, that gave out, that there was a Voice that followed her, which sounded these words always in her Ears, He whom the King did best trust, should deceive him, and work Treason against him. After she had a good while reported this, Sir William Barkley, who married the Lord Treasurer Winchester's Daughter, sent her up to London to the Council, with two of his Servants. She was not long there, but, without acquainting the Duke of Somerset, whom it seemed most to concern, (he being the Person whom the King most trusted) was sent home again with her Purse full of Money. And after her coming home, She was more busy in that talk than before. So that She came to a Market-Town, called Wimborn, four Miles from Pool, where she reported, that the Voice continued following her as before. This looked, by the Cir∣cumstances, like a practice of some Popish Priests accustomed to dealing in such Frauds, to make the World the more inclinable to believe the Guilt of the good Duke, which Somerset's Enemies were now framing against him. And so some of the Wiser Sort thereabouts did seem to think; For there were two Merchants of Pool that heard her, and took a Note of her Words, and came to the House of Hancock, Minister of Pool, who was known to the Duke, counselling him to certify my Lord of her. Which Hancock accordingly did, and came to Sion, where the Duke then was, and told him of the Words. He added, Whom the King doth best trust we do not know, but that all the King's loving Subjects did think that his Grace was most worthy to be best trusted; and that his Grace had been in Trouble: and that all the King's Loving
Subjects did pray for his Grace to the Almighty to preserve him, that he might never come in the like trouble again. Then the Duke asked him whether he had a Note of the Words. Which when he had received from Hancock, he said, to him, sus∣pecting the Plot, Ah! Sirrah, this is strange, that these things should come before the Councellors, and I not hear of it. I am of the Council also. He asked Hancock, Before whom of the Council this matter was brought? Who replied, He knew not cer∣tain, but as he supposed. The Duke asked him, Whom he suppo∣sed? He answered, Before the Lord Treasurer, because his Son-in-Law, Sir W. Barkley sent her up. The Duke subjoyned, It was like to be so. This was three weeks before his last Apprehension. This I extract out of Mr. Hancock's own Narration of himself and and his Troubles: to which he added, That at his first apprehen∣sion, the report was, that the Duke, what time as he was fetch'd out of Windsor-Castle, having the King by the Hand, should say, It is not I that they shoot at; This is the Mark that they shoot at, meaning the King. Which by the Sequel proved too true. For that good, Godly and vertuous Prince lived not long after the Death of that good Duke. Indeed it seemed to have been a Plot of the Papists,Winchester sup∣pos'd to be in the Plot. and the Bishop of Winchester at the Bottom of it. This is certain, when in October 1549. the Duke was brought to the Tower, the Bishop was then born in hand, he should be set at Liberty. Of which he had such Confidence that he prepared himself new Apparel against the Time he should come out; thinking verily to have come abroad within eight or ten Days. But finding himself disappointed, he wrote an expostulatory Letter to the Lords within a Month after, to put them in remembrance, as Stow writes. The Articles that were drawn up against the Duke,Articles a∣gainst the Duke. upon his second Apprehension and Trial, were in number Twenty, which I shall not repeat here, as I might out of a Manuscript thereof, be∣cause they may be seen in Fox. But I do observe one of the Articles is not printed in his Book, namely the Tenth: which ran thus. Also, you are charged, that you have divers and many times, both openly and privately said and affirmed, That the Nobles and Gentlemen were the only Causes of the Dearth of things, where∣by the People rose, and did reform things themselves. Whence it appears, that one Cause of the hatred of the Nobility and Gentry against him, was, because he spake against their Debauches and Ex∣cesses, Covetousness and Oppressions. But that which I chiefly ob∣serve here is, that the draught of these Articles, which I have seen, were made by Bp Gardiner, being his very Hand, unless I am much mis∣taken. So that he, I suppose, was privately dealt with and consul∣ted, (being then a Prisoner in the Tower) to be a Party in assisting and carrying on this direful Plot against the Duke, to take away his Life: Notwithstanding his outward Friendship and fair Corre∣spondence in Letters with the said Duke. But Gardiner was looked upon to be a good Manager of Accusations; and he was ready enough to be employed here, that he might put to his Hand in
taking off one that was such a great Instrument of promoting the Reformation. He is generally charged for the great Spoil of Churches and Chap∣pels;What he is blamed for. defacing antient Tombs and Monuments, and pulling down the Bells in Parish-Churches, and ordering only one Bell in a Steeple, as sufficient to call the People together. Which set the Commonalty almost into a Rebellion. The new Book of Common-Prayer esta∣blished.As the Arch-bishop the last Year had procured Amendments and Alterations in the Book of Publick Prayers, and had consulted there∣in with the two Learned Foreign Divines, Bucer and Martyr; so this Year, in Ianuary, an Act was made by the Parliament for autho∣rizing the new Book, and obliging the Subjects to be present at the reading of it. In this Book the general Confession was added, and the Absolution. At the beginning of the second Service was added the Recital of the Ten Commandments, with the short Ejaculation to be said between each Commandment. Something was left out in the Consecration of the Sacrament, that seemed to favour a Corporal pre∣sence. Several Rites were laid aside, as that of Oil in Confirmation, and Extream Unction, and Prayer for the Dead, which was before used in the Communion-Office, and that of Burial: together with the change and abolishing of some other things that were offensive or Superstitions: as may be seen by those that will take the pains to compare the two Books, the one printed in the Year 1549, and the other 1552. And this was brought about by the great and long Diligence and Care of our pious Arch-bishop, and no question to his great Joy and Satisfaction. So that I look upon that, but as an improbable report, that was carried about in Frankford in those unseemly Branglings among the English Exiles there, that Bullinger should say,Troubles at Frankford. That Cranmer had drawn up a Book of Prayers an hun∣dred times more perfect, then that which was then in being, but the same could not take place, for that he was matched with such a wicked Clergy and Convocation, with other Enemies. But as his Authority was now very great, so there was undoubtedly a great Deference paid to it, as also to his Wisdom and Learning, by the rest of the Divines appointed to that Work: so that as nothing was by them inserted into the Liturgy, but by his good Allowance and Ap∣probation, so neither would they reject or oppose what he thought fit should be put in or Altered. Coverdale made Bp of Exon.The Learning, Piety, and good Deserts of Miles Coverdale, in translating the Holy Scriptures into the English Tongue, and in a constant preaching of the Gospel, and sticking to the true Profession for many a Year; and withall, very probably, their antient acquain∣tance in Cambridg, were reasons that made our Arch-bishop a par∣ticular Friend to him. When the Lord Russel was sent down against the Rebels in the West, he was attended by Coverdale to preach among them. Coverdale afterwards became Coadjutor to Veyzy the Bishop of Exeter, who seldom resided, and took little care of his Diocess. But this Year, whether voluntarily, or by some Or∣der, he resigned up his Bishoprick, having first greatly spoiled it of its Revenues. And when some wise and bold Person, and ex∣cellent Preacher, was found extreamly needful to be sent thither, to
inspect the Clergy and Ecclesiastick Matters in those Parts, the late Rebellion having been raised chiefly by Priests in hatred to the Re∣ligion, heating, and disaffecting the Minds of the common People, Coverdale was judged a very fit Person to succeed in that Charge. Being now Bishop Elect of Exon, he had long attended at Court to get his Matters dispatched; namely, The doing of his Homage, and the obtaining a Suit to be excused the paiment of his first Fruits, being but a poor Man. But such at that Time were the great and urgent Affairs of the State, or the secret Hinderers of the Gospel, that he found nothing but Delaies. So that he was forced to apply himself unto his Friend, the Arch-bishop, to forward his Business. Who forthwith sent his Letters to Secretary Cecyl, making Coverdale himself the Bearer, Entreating him to use his In∣terest to get this Bishop dispatched, and that with speed: Urging this for his Reason, (becoming his paternal Care over his Province) That so he might without further delay go down into the Western Parts, which had great need of him. And also because he was minded on the 30th of August, to consecrate him and the Bishop of Rochester [Scory] according to the King's Mandate. This Scory was at first preferred by the Arch-bishop to be one of the six Preachers at Canterbury:Scory Bp Elect of Rochester. and always continued firm to the Purity of Religion, and endured Trouble for the good and whole∣some Doctrine that he preached; having been presented and com∣plained of, both in the Spiritual Courts, and to the Justices at their Sessions, when the Six Articles were in Force. He was a Married Man, and so deprived at the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign, fled beyond Sea, and was Superintendent of the English Congregati∣on at Embden in Friezland. There, in the Year 1555, he wrote and printed A Comfortable Epistle unto all the Faithful that be in Prison, or in any other Trouble for the defence of God's Truth. Wherein he doth as well by the promises of Mercy, as also by the Examples of divers holy Martyrs, comfort, encourage and strengthen them patiently, for Christ's Sake, to suffer the manifold cruel and most tyrannous Persecutions of Antichristian Tormentors. As the Book bears title. There were divers Bishopricks vacant this Year.The ABp ap∣points a Guar∣dian of the Spiritualties of Lincoln. As that of Lin∣coln by the Death of Holbech. The Arch-bishop deputed the Spiri∣tualties to Iohn Pope, LL. B. and Chancellor of that Church. The Church commending unto the Arch-bishop this Pope, and two more, viz. Iohn Prin, LL. D. Subdean of the Church, and Christopher Massingberde, LL. B. Arch-deacon of Stow. So he chose the first: But yet he committed a special trust to Taylor, the Dean of Lincoln,Cranm. Reg▪ (whom he knew to be tight to Religion) sending a Commission fiduciary to him, before Pope entred upon his Office, to give the said Pope his Oath, Legally and faithfully to perform his Office com∣mitted to him by the Arch-bishop, and to answer to the said Arch-bishop for all Obventions coming to him by virtue of his Jurisdicti∣on and Office; and that he should not, by Malice or Wrong, squeez the Subjects of the King, and of that Diocess, whether Clerks or Laics; that he should not knowingly grieve them in their Estates or Persons: and that he shall abstain from Oppressions, Extortions and unlawful Exactions: and that he shall renounce the Bishop of
Rome his usurped Jurisdiction and Authority, according to the Sta∣tutes of Parliament. And of all this he wrote a Letter to the said Pope, signifying that he required such an Oath of him to be taken before the Dean. The Tenor of the Arch-bishop's Letter to the Dean went on further, requiring him by his sound Council, singu∣lar Prudence, and by the assistance of his sincere Judgment, to be present with him in any hard Cases and of great Moment, and that he would not be wanting to him in any Matters of that sort, being a Person of that Knowledg in Sacred & Prophane Learning, of that Prudence, Circumspection and Dexterity in managing Business. And so finally joined him with Pope to perform all this piously and catholickly, according to the Rule of Evangelick Religion, and the Exigency of the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom. And deputed him his Vice-gerent. This Letter was dated at Croydon, the 20th of August. This Commission seemed to be somewhat extraordi∣nary: The occasion whereof might be, because the Arch-bishop did not confide in this Chancellor of the Church, suspecting his Reli∣gion, and Compliance with the King's Proceedings, therefore he thought good to associate him with Taylor the Dean, of whom he was well assured. And of Wigorn.The Church of Worcester became also Vacant by the Deprivation of Hethe the Bishop. The Arch-bishop committed the Spiritualties thereof to Iohn Barlo Dean of the said Church, and Roland Taylor LL. D. his Domestick Chaplain.Cranm. Regist. These he constituted his Officials to exercise all Episcopal Jurisdiction. This Commission was dated at Lambeth, Ian. 10. 1554, by an Error of the Scribe for 1551. as appears by a Certificate sent from the Church to that Arch-bishop sig∣nifying the Vacation of it. And of Chiche∣ster.Upon the Vacancy of the Church of Chichester, by the Depri∣vation of Day, the Arch-bishop made Iohn Worthial Arch-deacon of Chichester, and Robert Taylor LL. B. Dean of the Deanery of South-Malling, his Officials. This Commission to them, dated Novemb. 3, 1551, was to Visit, &c. And of Here∣ford.Upon the Vacancy of the Church of Hereford, by the Death of Skip late Bishop there, the Spiritualties were committed to Hugh Coren, LL. D. Dean of that Church, and Rich. Cheny, D.D. Arch-deacon of Hereford. Their Commission was to Visit, &c. And of Bangor.Upon the Vacancy of the Bishoprick of Bangor, either by the Death of Bulkly the Bishop, or his Resignation upon his blindness, the Arch-bishop made his Commissaries, Griffin Leyson his principal Chancellor and Official, Rowland Merick a Canon of S. David's, and Geofrey Glynn, L L. D D. The Church of Rochester also became this Year Vacant by the Translation of Scory to Chichester. In these Va∣cancies the Bishopricks were lamentably pilled, by hungry Courtiers, of the Revenues belonging to them. Hoper visits his Diocess.This Year Bishop Hoper was by the Council dispatched down (as was said before) into his Diocess: where things were much out of order, and Popery had great footing; and therefore it wanted such a stirring Man as he was. That he might do the more Good, he had the Authority of the Lords of the Council to back him, by a Commission granted to him and others. He brought most of the
Parish-Priests and Curates from their old Superstitions and Errors concerning the Doctrine of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. The Recantation of one of them of more note named Phelps, the In∣cumbent of Ciciter, which he made publickly and subscribed, may be seen in the Appendix.No. LXIII. This Year there happened two learned Conferences in Latin,Two Disputa∣tions concern∣ing the Sacra∣ment. privately managed, about the Corporeal Presence in the Sacrament. The one on the 25th of November, in the House of Sir William Cecyl Secretary of State, performed by the said Cecyl, Sir Iohn Cheke, Horne Dean of Durham, Whitehead and Grindal, on the Protestant side: and Feckenham and Yong on the Popish. But first before they began, Cecyl under his solemn Protestation assured them, that every Man should have free Liberty to speak his Mind, and that none should receive any Dammage or incurr any Danger. Cheke began by propounding this question, Quis esset verus & germanus sensus verbo∣rum Coenae, Hoc est corpus meum; Num quem verba sensu grammatico accepta prae se ferebant, an aliud quiddam. To whom Feckenham an∣swered. There were present besides those that disputed, these noble and learned Persons, The Lord Russel, Sir Anthony Coke, Mr. Hales, Mr. Wroth, Mr. Frogmartin, Mr. Knolles, Mr. Harrington. The second Disputation was Decemb. 3. following, in Mr. Morisin's House: where were present the Marq. of Northampton, the Earl of Rutland, the Lord Russel, and those above named, and Watson added on the Papists side. Then Cheke again propounded the Question, Whe∣ther the words of the Supper are to be understood in a gram∣matical, or in a figurative Sense? To which Watson Respond∣ed. Both these Disputations are too large for this place, but they are set down in one of the Manuscript Volumes of the Benet-Li∣brary.Miscellan. C. In November died Dr. Iohn Redman,Dr. Redman dies. Master of Trinity-College in Cambridg, and one of the great Lights of that University, for the bringing in solid Learning among the Students: a Prebendary of the Church of Westminster;Bcon's Reports. Fox's Acts. and who in the Year 1549 assisted in the compiling the English Book of Common-Prayer, and preached a Sermon upon the Learned Bucer's Death the day following his Fu∣neral. He was a Person of extraordinary Reputation among all for his great Learning and Reading, and profound Knowledg in Divi∣nity. So that the greatest Divines gave a mighty Deference to his Judgment. And therefore when he lay sick at Westminster, many learned Men repaired to him, desiring to know his last Judgment of several Points, then so much controverted. And he was very ready to give them Satisfaction. Among the rest, that came, were Richard Wilks Master of Christ's College Cambridg, Alexander Noel, afterwards Dean of Paul's, and Yong, a Man of Fame in Cambridg for his disputing against Bucer about Justification. In these Con∣ferences with these learned Man, he called the See of Rome, Sentina Malorum, A Sink of Evils; he said, That Purgatory, as the School∣men taught it, was ungodly, and that there was no such kind of Purgatory as they fancied. That the offering up the Sacrament in Masses and Trentals for the Sins of the Dead, was ungodly. That the Wicked are not partakers of the Body of Christ, but receive
the outward Sacrament only. That it ought not to be carried about in Procession. That nothing that is seen in the Sacrament, or perceived with the outward Sense, is to be worshipped. That we receive not Christ's Body Corporaliter, grosly, like other Meats, but so Spiritualiter, that nevertheless Verè, truly. That there was not any good ground in the old Doctors for Transubstantiation, as ever he could perceive; nor could he see what could be answered to the Objections against it. That Priests might by the Law of God marry Wives. That this Proposition, Faith only justifies, so that this Faith signify a true lively Faith, resting in Christ, and embracing him, is a true, godly, sweet and comfortable Doctrine. That our Works cannot deserve the Kingdom of God. And, he said, that it troubled him that he had so much strove against Justification by Faith only. A Treatise whereof he composed, which was printed at Antwerp after his Death, in the Year 1555. He said also to Yong, That Consensus Ecclesiae was but a weak Staff to lean to; and exhorted him to read the Scriptures, for there was that which would comfort him, when he should be in such a case as he was then in. One asked him concerning the Doctrine of the School-Doctors, that Bread remained not after Consecration. He replied, There was none of the School-Doctors knew what Consecratio did mean. And pausing a while, said, It was Tota actio, The whole Action in ministring the Sacrament, as Christ did institute it. After the Conference with him was ended, Yong reti∣ring into another Chamber, said to Wilks, that Dr. Redman so moved him, that whereas he was before in such Opinion of certain things, that he would have burned and lost his Life for them, now he doubt∣ed of them. But I see, said he, a Man shall know more and more by process of time, and by reading and hearing others. And Mr. Dr. Redman's saying shall cause me to look more diligently for them. Ellis Lomas, Redman's Servant, said, he knew his Master had declared to King Henry, that Faith only justifieth, but that he thought that Doctrine was not to be taught the People, lest they should be negligent to do good Works. All this I have related of this Divine, that I may in some measure preserve the Memory of one of the Learnedest Men of his Time; and lay up the dying Words of a Papist, signifying so plainly his dislike and disallowance of ma∣ny of their Doctrines. The Sweating-sickness breaking out this Year in great violence, (whereby the two Sons of the Duke of Suffolk were taken off) Let∣ters from the Council dated Iuly 18, were sent to all the Bishops, to perswade the People to Prayer, and to see God better served. The ABp and others appoin∣ted to Reform the Ecclesiasti∣cal Laws.It being enacted 1549, That the King might, during three Years, appoint sixteen Spiritual Men, and sixteen Temporal, to examine the old Ecclesiastical Laws, and to compile a Body of Ecclesiastical Laws, to be in force in the room of the old: this third Year, Octob. 6. a Commission was issued out to the same number of Persons, autho∣rizing them to reform the Canon Laws; that is to say, to eight Bishops, eight Divines, eight Civil Lawyers, and eight Common. Whose Names, as they occur in an Original, are as follow:
BISHOPS. The Arch-bishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of London, Winchester, Ely, Exeter, Glocester, Bath, Rochestre. DIVINES. Mr. Taylor of Lincoln, Cox, Almoner, Parker of Cambridg, Lati∣mer, Cook, [Sir Anthony I suppose] Peter Martyr, Cheke, Ioannes a Laseo. CIVILIANS. Mr. Peter, Cecyl, Sir Tho. Smith, Taylor of Hadeligh, Dr. May, Mr. Traheron, Dr. Lyel, Mr. Skinner. LAWYERS. Justice Hales, Justice Bromly, Goodrick, Gosnal, Stamford, Carel, Lucas, Brook Recorder of London. It was so ordered,The Method they observed. that this number should be divided into four distinct Classes, or Companies; each to consist of two Bishops, two Divines, to Civilians, and two Common-Lawyers. And to each Company were assigned their set parts: Which when one Company had finished, it was transmitted to the other Companies to be by them all, well considered and inspected. But out of all the number of two and thirty, eight especially were selected, from each rank two, viz. out of the Bishops, the Arch-bishop and the Bishop of Ely; out of the Divines, Cox and Martyr; out of the Civilians, Taylor and May; out of the Common-Lawyers, Lucas and Goodrick: To whom a new Commission was made Novemb. 9, for the first forming of the Work, and preparation of the Matter. And the Arch-bishop supervised the whole Work. This Work they plied close this Winter. But lest they should be straitned for time, the Parliament gave the King three Years longer for accomplishing this Affair. So, Feb. 2. A Letter was sent from the Council to make a new Commission to the Arch-bishop, and to the other Bishops and Learned Men, Civilians and Lawyers, for the establishment of the Ecclesiastical Laws, according to the Act of Parliament made in the last Session. This was a very noble Enterprize, and well worthy the Thoughts of our excellent Arch-bishop. Who with indefatigable Pains had been, both in this and the last King's Reign, labouring to bring this Matter about, and he did his part, for he brought the Work to per∣fection. But it wanted the King's Ratification, which was delayed, partly by Business, and partly by Enemies. Bishops Consecrated. August the 30th. Iohn Scory, Ponet being translated to Winchester,Scory. Cranm. Regist▪ was consecrated Bishop of Rochester, at Croyden, by the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, assisted by Nicolas Bishop of London, and Iohn Suf∣fragan of Bedford. Miles Coverdale was at the same time and place Consecrated Bi∣shop of Exon, all with their Surplices and Copes,Coverdal. and Coverdale so habited also.
An. 1552.CHAP. XXVII. The Articles of Religion. The Articles of Religion fra∣med and pub∣lished.OUR Arch-bishop, and certain of the Bishops and other Divines, but whom by Name I find not, were this Year chiefly busied in composing and preparing a Book of Articles of Religion; which was to contain what should be publickly owned as the Sum of the Do∣ctrine of the Church of England. This the Arch-bishop had long before this bore in his Mind, as excellently serviceable for the creating of a Concord and Quietness among Men, and for the putting an End to Contentions and Disputes in Matters of Religion. These Arti∣cles the Arch-bishop was the Penner, or at least the great Director of, with the assistance, as is very probable, of Bishop Ridley. And so he publickly owned afterwards, in his Answer to certain Interroga∣tories put to him by Queen Mary's Commissioners;Fox. viz. That the Catechism, the Book of Articles, and the Book against Winchester, were his Doings. These Articles were in number Forty two, and were agreed to in the Convocation 1552. And in the Year 1553, they were published by the King's Authority both in Latin and Eng∣lish. After they were finished, he laboured to have the Clergy sub∣scribe them: but against their Wills he compelled none; though af∣terwards some charged him falsly to do so: Which he utterly denied, as he declared before the said Queen's Commissioners. But to enter into some Particulars concerning so eminent a Matter Ecclesiastical as this was. The ABp's di∣ligence in them.In the Year 1551, the King and his Privy-Council ordered the Arch∣bishop to frame a Book of Articles of Religion for the preserving and maintaining Peace and Unity of Doctrine in this Church, that being finish'd, they might be set forth by Publick Authority. The Arch-bishop, in obedience hereunto, drew up a set of Articles, which were delivered to certain other Bishops to be inspected and subscribed, I suppose, by them. Before them they lay until this Year 1552. Then, May 2. a Letter was sent from the Council to our Arch-bishop, to send the Articles that were delivered the last Year to the Bishops, and to signify whether the same were set forth by any Publick Autho∣rity according to the Minutes. The Arch-bishop accordingly sent the Articles, and his Answer, unto the Lords of the Council. In Sep∣tember I find the Articles were again in his Hands. Then he set the Book in a better Order, and put Titles upon each of the Articles, and some Additions for the better perfecting of the Work, and sup∣ply of that which lacked. And so transmitted the Book again from Croydon, Septemb. 19. to Sir William Cecyl and Sir Iohn Cheke, the one the King's Principal Secretary, and the other his Tutor, being the two great Patrons of the Reformation at the Court: Desiring them together to take these Articles into their serious Considerations; for he well knew them to be both wise and good Men, and very well seen in Divine Learning. And he referred it to their Wisdoms, whether they thought best to move the King's Majesty therein before his coming to Court; as though he conceived the King might make
some demur in so weighty an Affair, till he should consult with the Metropolitan, in order to the coming to a Resolution; or that there were some great Persons about the King, that might cast some Scru∣ples and Objections in his Mind concerning it, which he by his Pre∣sence might prevent, or be ready at hand to resolve. Cecyl and Cheke thought it more convenient the Arch-bishop should offer them to the King himself. So coming to Court soon after, he delivered the Book to the King, and moved him for their publishing and due observati∣on. And so leaving them before the King and Council, they were then again delivered unto certain of the King's Chaplains, who made some Alterations. For I find,Council-Book. that Octob. 2. a Letter was di∣rected to Mr. Harley, Bill, Horn, Grindal, Pern and Knox, to con∣sider certain Articles (which must be these Articles of Religion) exhibited to the King's Majesty, to be subscribed by all such as shall be admitted to be Preachers or Ministers in any part of the Realm; and to make report of their Opinions touching the same. The Time of the Year declined now towards the latter end of No∣vember; and the Arch-bishop being retired down from Croydon to his House at Ford near Canterbury, the Privy-Council, Novemb. 20. dis∣patched, by a Messenger, the Articles unto him to be reviewed, and for his last Hand, that they might be presented before the Con∣vocation, and allowed there; and so be published by the Royal Au∣thority. The Arch-bishop received the Book and Letter from the Council, Novemb. 23. And making some Notes upon it, enclosed them in a Letter to the Lords, and sent them, together with the Book, the next day; beseeching them to prevail with the King, that all Bishops should have Authority to cause their respective Clergy to subscribe it: And then he trusted, (as he wrote) that such a Concord and Quietness in Religion would soon follow, as otherwise would not be in many Years. And there∣by God would be glorified, the Truth advanced, and their Lordships rewarded by him, as the setters forth of his true Word and Gospel.No. LXIV. This pious Letter may be read in the Ap∣pendix. The King went a Progress this Summer;The ABp re∣tires to Ford. and the Arch-bishop re∣tired to Croydon; where I find him in Iuly, August and September. And thence, Octob. 11. he went to Ford, to spend some time in his Diocess. Now he was absent from the Court, and the King abroad at that distance, that he could not frequently wait upon him, and be present at the Council; his Enemies were at work to bring him into trouble, as we shall see by and by. CHAP. XXVIII. Persons nominated for Irish Bishopricks. THERE were certain Bishopricks in Ireland about this time va∣cant; one whereof was that of Armagh.Consulted with for fit Persons to fill the Irish See. And it was thought convenient to have them filled by Divines out of England. In the Month of August the Arch-bishop was consulted with for this; that
so by the Influence of very wise and learned Men, and good Preachers, the Gospel might be the better propagated in that dark Region. But because it was foreseen to be difficult to procure any English Men, so endowed, to go over thither, therefore Secretary Cecyl, being then with the King in his Progress, sent a Letter to the Arch-bishop at Croyden, to nominate some worthy Persons for those Preferments, and whom he thought would be willing to undertake them. He re∣turned him the Names of Four, viz. Mr. Whitehead of Hadley, Mr. Turner of Canterbury, Sir Thomas Rosse and Sir Robert Wisdome. He said, He knew many others in England that would be meet Per∣sons for those Places, but very few that would gladly be perswaded to go thither. For it seems the English were never very fond of living in Ireland. But he added concerning these four which he had named, That he thought, they being ordinarily called, for Conscience-sake would not refuse to bestow the Talent committed unto them, wheresoever it should please the King's Majesty to ap∣point them. He recommended likewise a fifth Person for this Promotion, one Mr. I suppose this might be a slip of the ABp's Pen or Memory, writing Whita∣cre for Gooda∣cre, who after∣wards was pla∣ced in that Irish See, and ha been Poynet's Chap∣lain. Whitacre, a wise and well-learned Man, (as he characters him) who was Chaplain to the Bishop of Winchester [Poynet]. But he doubted whether he would be perswaded to take it upon him. Some Account of the four Divines nomi∣nated by him for the Arch∣bishoprick of Armagh. Mr. Withead.It may not be amiss to make some enquiry who and what those Four before-mentioned Persons were. Mr. Whithead was an Exile in Queen Mary's Reign, and Pastor of the English Congregation at Frankford. And at the Conference in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's Government, he was one of the Nine Disputants on the Protestant side, and one of the appointed Eight to revise the Service-Book. The Writer of the Troubles at Frankford mentions three, viz. Coverdale, Turner, and this Whitehead; of whom he saith, That they were the most ancient Preachers of the Gospel, and the most ancient Fathers of this our Country; and that from their Pens, as well as their Mouths, most of Queen Eli∣zabeth's Divines and Bishops first received the Light of the Gospel. Why Cranmer should stile him VVhithead of Hadley, I do not appre∣hend, seeing Dr. Rowland Taylor, his Chaplain, was now Paron of Hadley, who not long after was there burnt: And one Yeomans was Taylor's Curat there, who also was afterwards burnt at Norwich. But I suppose this was some other Hadley. Mr. Turner.I find two about this Time bearing the Name of Turner; both eminent Men, and Preachers: The one was named William Turner, a Doctor in Physick, and greatly befriended by Sir Iohn Cheke and Sir William Cecyl. This Man, a Native of Northumberland, was the first English Man that compiled an Herbal; which was the Ground∣work of that which Gerard laid the last Hand unto. He was a Re∣tainer to the Duke of Somerset in Edward the Sixth's Time, and was Physician in ordinary to his Family. And the Year before this, viz. 1551, I find him Dean of Wells. The other was Richard Turner, a Staf∣fordshire-Man, in former time Curate of Chartam in Kent, and com∣monly called Turner of Canterbury, living in the family of Mr. Morice, the Arch-bishop's Secretary, (of whom afterwards) who held the Impropriation of that Parsonage, and had presented this Man to the
Vicarage. For his free and bold preaching against Popish Errors, and asserting the King's Supremacy, and for the extraordinary Success of his Ministry in bringing Multitudes of People in those Parts, out of Ignorance and Superstition, he was put to much Trouble and Danger. He was first complained of to the King: And being brought up, the Arch-bishop, and other Ecclesiastical Commissio∣ners, were commanded to examine him upon certain Articles. But by the secret Favour of the Arch-bishop, and his own prudent An∣swers, he was then discharged. Soon after, upon some false Reports told of him, King Henry was so offended, that he sent for the Arch-bishop, willing him to have him whipt out of the Country. But the Arch-bishop pacified the King, and sent him Home the second time. Afterwards, a third time, his old Enemies, the Popish Cler∣gy, got him convented before the Privy-Council, and committed for Doctrines preached by him, before he came into Kent. The Arch-bishop being then down in his Diocess, Turner was sent back to him with an Order to recant. To whom when his fast Friend and Patron, Mr. Morice, had applied himself in his behalf, the Arch-bishop himself, being now under some Cloud, dared not to in∣terpose, because, as he then said, it had been put into the King's Head, that he was the great Favourer and Maintainer of all the Hereticks in the Kingdom. Morice then, that he might prevent this Recantation, if possible, which would have been such a Refle∣ction to the Doctrine he before had preached, addrest his Letters to Sir Anthony Denny, Gentleman of the King's Bed-Chamber, and Sir William Butts, his Physician, relating at large Turner's Cas. And by their means the King became better informed of the Man, and in fine commanded him to be retained as a faithful Subject. This Story is at large related by Fox. And this, I judg, to be that Turner, whom the Arch-bishop nominated for Ireland▪ having lived long in his Diocess, and so well known to him; and whom he had, I suppose, removed to Canterbury, to a Prebend, or some other Prefer∣ment there. Here he did this remarkable and bold piece of Service▪ that when about three Years past the Rebels were up in Kent, he then preached twice in the Camp near Canterbury: for which the Rebels were going to hang him. But God preserved him. In Queen Mary's time he fled to Basil;Bale's Cent. where he expounded upon S. Iames, the Hebrews and the Ephesians, to the Exiles there: when Iames Pilkington expounded Ecclesiastes, and both Epistles of of Peter, and the Galatians; And Bentham, the Acts of the Apostles. Thomas Rosse, or Rose, was also as memorable a Man;Thomas Rosse, or Rose. very emi∣nent both for his Preachings and Sufferings. He was a West-country Man, but by Providence was removed into Suffolk. And at Hadley had preached against Purgatory, and worshipping Images, about the time that Bilney and Latimer did the like in Cambridg, (which was five and twenty or thirty Years past:) whereby he had brought many to the knowledg of the Truth in that Town. About the Year 1532, when certain Persons out of their Zeal against Idolatry, had stolen by Night the Rood out of the Church at Dover-court in Essex, for which being found guilty of Felony, they were hanged; Rose
seemed to have been privy hereunto; For with the Rood they conveyed away the Slippers, the Coat and the Tapers belonging to it: which Coat Rose burnt. Whether for this, or some other thing, he was complained of to the Council, and brought before them, and by the Bishop of Lincoln was committed to Prison. Where he lay for some Days and Nights with both his Legs in an high pair of Stocks, his Body lying along on the Ground. Thence he was removed to Lambeth, in the Year that Cranmer was Conse∣crated, (which was 1533) who set him at liberty. Afterward he was admitted by Crumwel to be his Chaplain, that thereby he might get a Licence to preach. After various tossings from Place to Place, for safety of his Life, he fled into Flanders and Germany, and came to Zurick, and remained with Bullinger, and to Basil, where he was entertained by Grineus. After some time he returned back into Eng∣land. But was glad to fly beyond Sea again. Three Years after in his Voyage back to his own Country again, he was taken Prisoner by some French, and carried into Diep, where he was spoiled of all he had. His Ransom was soon after paid by a well-disposed Person, who also brought him over into England. Then the Earl of Sussex received him, and his Wife and Child privately into his House. But when this was known, the Earl sent him a secret Letter to be gone. And so he lurked in London till the Death of King Henry VIII. King Edward gave him the Living of VVest-Ham near London, in Essex. Being deprived upon Queen Mary's coming to the Crown, he was sometime Preacher to a Congregation in London. But was taken at one of their Meetings in Bow-Church-yard. Which I sup∣pose was in the Year 1555. For then he was in the Tower: and thence in the Month of May, by the Council's Letters, he was de∣livered to the Sheriff of Norfolk, to be conveyed and delivered to the Bishop of Norwich, and he either to reduce him to recant, or to proceed against him according to Law. Much Imprisonment and many Examinations he underwent, both from the Bishops of Win∣chester and Norwich, but escaped at last, by a great Providence, be∣yond Sea, where he tarried till the Death of Queen Mary. And af∣ter these his Harassings up and down in the World, he was at last, in Queen Elizabeth's happy Reign, quietly settled at Luton in Bed∣fordshire, where he was Preacher, and lived to a very great Age. Robert Wisdome.The fourth was Robert Wisdome, a Man eminent, as the rest, both for his exemplary Conversation, and for his Preaching, toge∣ther with his Sufferings attending thereon. In Henry the Eighth his Reign he was a Person of Fame among the Professors of the Gospel in the South Parts of the Nation: whence, after many painful La∣bours and Persecutions, he fled into the North: as did divers other Preachers of the pure Religion in those Times. There in Stafford∣shire he was one of those, that were entertained by Iohn Old, a pious Professor, and Harbourer of good Men: and Thomas Becon was another, who was taken up with Bradford in the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign, and committed to the Tower. Of this Old the said Becon, in a The Iewel of Ioy. Treatise of his, printed in Edward the sixth his Reign, gives this Character. That he was to him and VVisdom, as Iason was to Paul and Silas: He received us joyfully into his
House, and liberally for the Lord's Sake ministred to our Neces∣sities. And as he begun, so did he continue a right hearty Friend, and dearly loving Brother, so long as we remained in the Country. They were both forced to recant openly at St. Pauls Cross, in the Year 1544, together with one Shingleton, And herupon, I suppose, they con∣veyed themselves into the North parts for Secu∣rity. While VVisdom was here, he was ever vertuously occupied, and suffered no Hour to pass without some good Fruit: employing himself now in Writing, as he had before in Preaching. Besides other Books formerly writ by him, he penned here a very godly and fruitful Exposition upon certain Psalms of David. Of the which he translated some into English Metre. There is one of them, and I think no more, still remaining in our ordinary singing Psalms, namely, the hundred twenty fifth. Which in the Title is said to be composed by R. W. There is also a Hymn of his preserved and set usually at the end of our English singing Psalms, in our Bibles, beginning, Preserve us Lord by thy dear Word. He writ here also ma∣ny godly and learned Sermons upon the Epistles and Gospels, read on Sundays. He translated a Postil of Antonius Corvinus, a Luthe∣ran Divine, and divers other Learned Mens Works. And some of his Adversaries, having laid certain Errors to his Charge very un∣justly, he writ a Confutation thereof; a Book, it seems, replenish'd with all kind of godly Learning. These, and several other things, he writ, while he was here, but they were not published. After his abode in this Place some time, he was by Letters called away again among his former Friends and Acquaintance. And what be∣came of him afterwards, I find not, until here in Edward the Sixth's Reign, he was nominated by our Arch-bishop, to be made Arch-bishop of Armagh. But in Queen Mary's Reign he fled to Frankford, where he remained one of the Members of the English Congregati∣on there. And when an unhappy Breach was made there among them, some being for the use of the Geneva Discipline and Form, and others for the continuance of that Form of Prayers that had been used in England in K. Edward's Days; and the Faction grew to that Head, that the former separated themselves from the rest, and de∣parted to Geneva: this Wisdome did, in a Sermon preached at Frank∣ford, vindicate the English Book, and somewhat sharply blamed them that went away, calling them Mad-heads. As one Tho. Cole wrote from thence to a Friend, with this Censure on him, That he so called them, he would not say, Vnwisely, [alluding to his name Wisdom] but he might well say, Vncharitably. I have thought good to give this Account of these Men, that we may perceive hence the good Judgment of our Arch-bishop in pro∣pounding them for those Irish Preferments; so fit and well qualified for them, as in other Respects of Prudence and Learning, so especi∣ally for their tried Zeal and Boldness in preaching the Gospel, and their Constancy in suffering for it; which were Vertues that there would be great occasion for in Ireland. Of all these Four,The Character the ABp gave of the two for∣mer. our Arch-bishop judged Mr. Whithead the fit∣test; giving this Character of him, That he was endued with good Knowledg, special Honesty, fervent Zeal, and politick Wisdom. And the next to him in fitness he judged Turner; of whom he gives this Relation, That he was Merry and Witty withal, Nihil appetit, nihil ardet, nihil somniat, nisi Iesum Christum. And in the lively
preaching of Him and his Word, declared such Diligence, Faith∣fulness and Wisdom, as for the same deserveth much Commenda∣tion. Turner designed for Armagh▪In fine, Turner was the Man concluded upon by the King, for the Arch-bishoprick of Armagh; Whithead either being not overcome to accept it, or otherwise designed. And the Arch-bishop had Order from Court to send to Canterbury for him to come up. Which ac∣cordingly he did. And now, about the middle of September, much against his Will, as not liking his designed Preferment, Turner wai∣ted upon the Arch-bishop. Who urging to him the King's Will and Pleasure, and his ordinary Call unto this Place, and such-like Argu∣ments, after a great Unwillingness, prevailed with him to accept it. But the Arch-bishop told the Secretary, that Turner seemed more glad to go to hanging, (which the Rebels three Years before were just going to do with him, for his preaching against them in their Camp) than he was now to go to Armagh. He urged to the Arch∣bishop, That if he went thither, he should have no Auditors, but must preach to the Walls and Stalls; for the People understood no English. The Arch-bishop on the other hand endeavoured to answer all his Objections. He told him, They did understand English in Ireland; tho whether they did in the Diocess of Ar∣magh, he did indeed doubt. But to remedy that, he advised him to learn the Irish Tongue; which with diligence he told him he might do in a Year or two. And that there would this Advantage arise thereby, that both his Person and Doctrine would be more accep∣table, not only unto his Diocess, but also throughout all Ireland. And so by a Letter to Secretary Cecyl, recommended him to his Care; entreating, That he might have as ready a Dispatch as might be, because he had but little Money. But declines it.This Letter of the Arch-bishop is dated Sept. 29, 1552. So that it must be a Mistake in the late excellent Historian, when he writes, That Bale and Goodacre were sent over into Ireland to be Bishops, in the Month of August.Hist. Ref. Vol. 1. p. 205. Which cannot agree with this Letter of Cranmer, which makes Turner to be in nomination only for that See a Month after. And by certain Memorials of King Edward's own Hand, which I have, it appears, that as Turner at last got himself off from accepting that Bishoprick, so by the Date thereof it is evi∣dent, it was vacant in October following. For the King under that Month put the providing for that Place, which Turner refused, a∣mong his Matters to be remembred. The Arch-bishop's Letters con∣cerning this Irish Affair are in the Appendix.N.LXV, LXVI. So that at last this Charge fell upon Hugh Goodacre, the last Man, as it seems,Goodacre made ABpof Armagh. nominated by the Arch-bishop; whom he termed A Wise and Learned Man. He and Bale, as they came together out of Bishop Poynet's Family unto their Preferments, so they were consecrated to∣gether by Brown Arch-bishop of Dublin, Febr. 2. assisted by Thomas Bishop of Kildare, and Eugenius Bishop of Down and Connor. Which makes me think they were not come over long before. Goodacre died about a quarter of a Year after at Dublin, and there buried, not with∣out suspicion of Poison, by procurement of certain Priests of his Diocess, for preaching God's Verity, and rebuking their common
Vices, as Bale writes. He left many Writings of great Value behind him, as the said Bale his dear Friend relates; but none, as ever I heard of, published. As he was a sober and vertuous Man,Vocation of Iohn Bale. Beatae memoriae in Hibernià concionatorem vigilantissimum, ac Theologica e∣loquentia non immerito com∣mendatum. Ba∣laei Centur. so he was particularly famed for his Preaching. He was at first, I suppose, Chaplain to the Lady Elizabeth; at least to her he had been long known. And for him, about the Year 1548, or 1549, she procured a Licence to preach from the Protector; as appears by a Letter she wrote from Enfield to Mr. Cecyl, who then attended on him. Of which Goodacre himself was the Bearer. Wherein she gave this Te∣stimony of him; That he had been of long time known unto her to be as well of honest Conversation, and sober Living, as of suf∣ficient Learning and Judgment in the Scriptures, to preach the Word of God. The advancement whereof, as she said, she so desired, that she wished there were many such to set forth God's Glory. She desired him therefore, that as heretofore at her Re∣quest, he had obtained Licence to preach for divers other honest Men, so he would recommend this Man's Case unto my Lord, and therewith procure for him the like Licence as to the other had been granted. And lastly,Letters from the Council to Ireland, recom∣mending the Irish Bishops. that Goodacre and his Collegue Bale might find the better Countenance and Authority, when they should exercise their Functions in that Country, the Privy-Council wrote two Letters to the Lord-Deputy and Council of Ireland; the one dated Octob. 27. in commendation of Bale Bishop Elect of Ossory;Council-Book. and the other da∣ted Novemb. 4. in commendation of Goodacre Bishop Elect of Ar∣machan. CHAP. XXIX. The Arch-bishop charged with Covetousness. TO divert the King, after the loss of his Unkle,A Rumour gi∣gen out, of the ABp's Cove∣tousness and Wealth. whom he dearly loved, Northumberland took him in Progress in the Summer of this Year. While he was in this Progress, some about his Person, that they might the better make way for their Sacrilegious Designs, and to make the King the more inclinable to lay Hands on the Epis∣copal Demeans, or at least to clip and pare them, buzzed about the Court Rumours, how Rich the Arch-bishop of Canterbury and the other Bishops were; and withal, how niggardly and unsutably they lived to their great Incomes, laying up, and scraping together to enrich themselves and their Posterities; whereby Hospitality was neglected, which was especially required of them. Hereupon Sir William Cecyl the Secretary, who was now with the King,Which Cecyl sends him word of. and took notice of these Discourses, and saw well the malicious Tendency thereof; (and moreover thought them perhaps in some measure to be true) laboured to hinder the ill Consequence: For he was ever a very great Favourer, as of the Reformed Clergy, so of their Estate and Honours. This put him upon writing a private Letter from Court to the Arch-bishop, desiring him favourably to take a piece of good Counsel at his Hands, as he intended it innocently and out of a good
Mind, acquainting him with the Reports at the Court of his Riches, and of his Covetousness; reminding him withal of that Passage of St. Paul, They that will be Rich, fall into Temptation and a Snare; meaning probably thereby, the Danger that he and the rest of his Brethren might expose their Revenues to thereby.The ABp's An∣swer, for him∣self and the other Bishops. The Arch-bishop seemed somewhat netled, and perceiving the ill Designs, dispatched an Answer hereunto, giving a true Account of his own Condition, and of the other Bishops as to temporal Things, and letting him un∣derstand, how much the World was mistaken in him and the rest▪ That for himself he feared not that Saying of St. Paul half so much as he did stark Beggary. That he took not half so much Care for his Living, when he was a Scholar of Cambridg, as he did at that present. For although he had now much more Reve∣nue, yet, he said, he had much more to do withal. That he had more Care now to live as an Arch-bishop, than he had at that Time to live like a Scholar. That he had not now so much as he had within ten Years past by an hundred and fifty Pounds of cer∣tain Rent, besides Casualties. That he paid double for every thing he bought. And that if a good Auditor had this Account, he should find no great Surplusage to grow rich upon. And then as for the rest of the Bishops, he told him, That they were all Beggars, but only one single He probably was Holgate ABp of York. Man of them: and yet he dared well say, that he was not very Rich. And that if he knew any Bishop that were Covetous, he would surely admonish him. In∣treating the Secretary, that if he could inform him of any such, he would signify him, and himself would advertise him, thinking he could do it better than the other. Who seemed to have hin∣ted his Mind to the Arch-bishop, that he intended to do it. This Letter will be found among the rest in the Appendix.No. LXVII. No doubt the Arch-bishop was thus large and earnest on this Sub∣ject to supply the Secretary with Arguments to confute that malici∣ous Talk at Court concerning the Bishops, and to prevent the Mis∣chiefs hatching against them. This very Slander raised upon him to K. Henry.Nor indeed was this the first time this Arch-bishop was thus slan∣dered. For some of his Enemies, divers Years before, had charged him to his loving Master, King Henry VIII. with Covetousness and ill House-keeping. And the chief of these, that raised this Report, was Sir Thomas Seimour. But the King made him to convince him∣self, by sending him to Lambeth about Dinner-time upon some pre∣tended Message. Where his own Eyes saw, how the Arch-bishop lived in far other sort than he had told the King, keeping great and noble Hospitality. So that when he returned, he acknowledged to his Majesty, that he never saw so honourable a Hall set in this Realm, besides his Majesty's, in all his Life, with better Order, and so well furnished in each Degree. And the King then gave this Testimony of him,Fox. Ah good Man! all that he hath, he spendeth in House-keeping. K. Henry pro∣mised him Lands.For this Reason probably it was, as well as upon the account of his good Service, and also of the Exchanges he was forced to make, that the said King gave him a promise of a Grant of some Lands, and by a general Clause in his Will signified as much; which was,
That certain Persons should be considered. Accordingly I find in the forementioned Manuscript-Book of Sales of King's Lands, that Thomas Arch-bishop of Canterbury did, in the first Year of King Edward VI. partly by Purchase,This promise performed by King Edward. and partly by Exchange of o∣ther Lands, procure divers Lands of the King. He obtained the Rectory of VVhalley, Blackbourn and Rachdale in the County of Lancaster, lately belonging to the Monastery or Abby of VVhalley in the same County; and divers other Lands and Tenaments in the Counties of Lancaster, Kent, Surrey, London, Bangor. And this partly in Consideration of King Henry VIII. his Promise, and in performance of his Will; and partly in exchange for the Mannor and Park of Mayfield in the County of Sussex; and divers other Lands and Tenements in the Counties of Middlesex, Hertford, Kent, Bucking∣ham and York. This Purchase he made, I suppose, not for himself, but for his See. About the same time he also bought of the King,His Purchases. for the sum of five hundred and eighty Pounds eight Shillings and four Pence, the Mannor of Sleford in the County of Lincoln, and of Mid∣dleton-Cheny in the County of Northampton, and divers other Lands and Tenements in the said Counties. He made another Purchase of the King the same Year, that is the first of his Reign, for four hundred twenty nine Pounds, fourteen shillings and two Pence, and for the fulfilling the last Will of the late King, and in consideration of Services, as it is expressed in the said Book of Sales. This Pur∣chase was the Priory of Arthington in the County of York, and di∣vers other Lands and Tenements in York, Nottingham and Kent. An Extract of which three Purchases, exactly taken out of the said Book, with the Value of the Lands, and the Rent reserved, and the Time of the Issues, and the Test of the Patent, I have thought fit to in∣sert in the Appendix:No. LXVIII. which probably may not be unacceptable to curious Persons. Which Purchases, when we consider,The Arch-bi∣shoprick flee∣ced by K. Henry. we might be ready to make a stand, to resolve our selves, how the Arch-bishop could represent his Condition so mean as he did in the Letter before-mentioned, as though he feared he should die a Beggar. But it will unriddle this, if we think how the Arch-bishoprick had been fleeced by King Henry VIII. in ten Years before: insomuch that the Rents were less by an hundred and fifty Pounds per Annum, than they were before; besides the loss of Fines, and other accidental Benefits, as it is mentioned by the Arch-bishop in his Letter. Add those extraordinary Expen∣ces he was at in the maintenance of Divines and Scholars Strangers, that were Exiles for Religion, and the Salaries, and Pensions, and Gratuities sent to Learned Men abroad: besides his great and libe∣ral House-keeping, and constant Table, and large Retinue. But to make appear more particularly in this place,Lands past a∣way to the Crown by Ex∣change. how K. Henry pared his Revenue, I will give one Instance of what was past away at one clap by Exchange: which was indeed so considerable, that it was commonly called The great Exchange. This way of exchanging Lands was much used in those Times; wherein the Princes com∣monly made good Bargains for themselves, and ill Ones for the Bishopricks. This Exchange made by Cranmer with the King, was on the first day of December, in the twenty ninth Year of his Reign,
being the very Year of the Suppression of the greater Abbies and Re∣ligious Convents. They were the ancient Demeans belonging to the Arch-bishoprick, consisting of many noble Manors, whereof some had Palaces annexed to them. I shall name only those that lay in the County of Kent,Villar Cantian. as I find them dispersed in Philpot's Book of Kent. I. The Manor and Palace of Maidstone: Which Palace Lland saith, was once a Castle. II. The Manor and Palace of Charing. III. Wingham. IV. Wingham-Brton, in the  of Alresford. But in this Philpot is mistaken; for ths was  Edward Bainton for ninety nine Years, by means of the King' own Solicitation to the Arch-bishop. V. Wrotham. VI. Saltwood; that had in times past a magnificent Castle and Park; and many Manors held of it by Knights Service; which made it called an Honour. VII. Tenham. VIII. Bexley. IX. Aldington. Where was a Seat for the Arch-bishop, a Park, and a Chase for Deer, called Aldington-Frith. Besides Clive or Cliff; and Malingden, a Manor appendant thereunto: which King Henry took away from this See and Bishop, without any Satisfaction, as far as I can find. Also Pynner, Heyes, Harrow, Mortlake, &c. were part of this great Exchange.Lands made over to the Arch-bishop. In lieu of these Demeans past over to the Crown by way of Exchange, the King conveyed several Manors to the Arch-bishop, all which had appertained to the lately dissolved Religious Houses. Namely these among others: I. Pising; a parcel of the Abbey of S. Radigunds. II. Brandred; another Manor belonging to the said Abbey. III. The College of Bredgar. IV. Raculver; another Abbey suppress'd. V. Dudmanscomb; belonging to the Priory of S. Martins in Do∣ver. The Arch-bi∣shop parted also with Knoll and Otford to the King.One Author, viz. Kilburn, that hath wrote of Kent, makes Cranmer also to have made over to the King the sumptuous Palace of Otford, built by Arch-bishop VVarham, which cost him thirty three thousand Pounds (a vast Sum in those Days) as Lambard tells us. Philpot, another Writer of that County, saith, That this was in∣corporated into the Revenue of the Crown by the Builder himself, Arch-bishop VVarham, about the twelfth Year of that King's Reign; together with the Magnificent Seat of Knoll near Sevenoke; ex∣changing both with the King for other Lands, to extinguish the Pas∣sions of such as looked with regret and desire upon the Patrimony of the Church.MSS.C.C.C.C. But it appears by a Writing of Cranmer's own Secretary, that this Arch-bishop parted with both Otford and Knoll at once to the King, after he had possessed them some Years, and not VVar∣ham, as Philpot mistakes. What moved him to make these Exchan∣ges.The World is apt to blame Cranmer for parting with these Reve∣nues of the See. But surely it was a true Apology that the Author
before-named, made for the Arch-bishop's great Exchange, namely, Because he finding that the spreading Demeans of the Church were in danger to be torn off by the Talons of Avarice and Rapine, to mortify the growing Appetites of Sacrilegious Cormorants, ex∣changed them with the Crown. Which may be enough to stop any Clamours against this most Reverend Prelat for this his doing: Especially considering what I shall add upon this Argument here∣after, from his own Secretary. His Care and Concern for the Welfare of the English Church,His Cares and Fears for the King. made him ever most earnestly to love the King, and to have a very tender Regard for the Safety of his Person. Who in the Summer of this Year, as was hinted before, went a Progress, accompanied by the Duke of Northumberland; brought about probably by him to get more into the King's Affections, and to have his own Designs the bet∣ter to take effect, and with the less Opposition and Controll: and possibly, that the King might be the further off from the Arch-bishop to consult withal. But he had now a more especial Concern upon him for his Majesty at this Time, as though his Mind had propheti∣cally presaged some Evil to befal the King in that Progress, (and in∣deed it was the last Progress that ever he made). And so methinks do these Expressions of the Arch-bishop sound, in a Letter dated in Iuly, to Cecyl, then attending the Court; Beseeching Almighty God to preserve the King's Majesty, with all his Council and Fa∣mily, and send him well to return from his Progress. And in a Letter the next Month, He thanked Cecyl for his News; but espe∣cially, said he, for that ye advertise me, that the King's Majesty is in good Health: Wherein I beseech God long to continue his Highness. And when in the latter end of the following Month, the Gests (that is, the Stages of his Majesty's Progress) were altered, which looked like some ill Design, the Arch-bishop entreated Cecyl to send him the new resolved-upon Gests from that time to the end, that he might from time to time know where his Majesty was; ad∣ding his Prayer again for him, That God would preserve and prosper him. CHAP. XXX. His Care for the Vacancies. Falls Sick. WHILE the King was thus abroad,His care for filling the Va∣cancies of the Church. and the Arch-bishop ab∣sent, unworthy or disaffected Men were in a fairer probabili∣ty of getting Promotions in the Church, while he was not at hand for to nominate fit Men to the King, and to advise him in the bestowing the vacant Dignities and Benefices. The Arch-bishop knew very well, how much Learning and Sobriety contributed towards the bringing the Nation out of Popery, and that nothing tended so ef∣fectually to continue it as the contrary. This Matter the Arch-bishop seemed to have discoursed at large with Secretary Cecyl at parting. Who therefore, by a Letter sent to the said Arch-bishop, then at his House at Ford, desired him to send him up a Catalogue
of Learned Men, and such as he esteemed fit for Places of Preferment in the Church and University: that so as any Place fell in the King's Gift, the said Secretary might be ready at the least Warning to re∣commend fitting and worthy Men to supply such Vacancies, and to prevent any Motion that might be made by any Courtiers or Simo∣nists, for ignorant Persons, or corrupt in Religion. In answer to which Letter, the Arch-bishop writ him word, That he would send him his Mind in that Matter with as much Expedition as he could. And undoubtedly we should have seen the good Fruits of this after∣wards in the Church, had not the untimely Death of that admira∣ble Prince, that followed not long after, prevented this good De∣sign. Labored under an Ague this Autumn.This Year the Arch-bishop laboured under two Fits of Sickness at Croydon. The latter was caused by a severe Ague; of which his Physicians doubted whether it were a Quotidian, or a double-Tertian; and seizing him in the declining of the Year, was in danger to stick by him all the Winter. But by the Care of his Physicians, in the lat∣ter end of August, it had left him two Days, which made him hope he was quit thereof; yet his Water kept of an high Colour. That second Day he wrote to Cecyl, and desired him to acquaint Cheke how it was with him. And now the most Danger was, as he said, that if it came again that Night, it was like to turn to a Quartan, a most stubborn Ague, and likelier to conti∣nue and wear him out. A Disease indeed, that carried off his Successor, Cardinal Pole, and was, as Godwin observed, a Disease deadly and mortal unto elder Folk. The great Mortality of Agues about this Time.The Arch-bishop's Friends had reason to fear his Distemper, if we think of the Severity of Agues in that Age, greater, as it seems, than in this. Roger Ascham complaineth to his Friend Iohn Sturmi∣us, Anno 1562; That for four Years past, he was afflicted with continual Agues; that no sooner had one left him, but another presently followed; and that the State of his Health was so im∣paired and broke by them, that an Hectick Fever seiz'd his whole Body: And the Physicians promised him some Ease, but no solid Remedy.Stow's Chron. And I find, six or seven Years before that, mention made of hot burning Feavers, whereof died many old Persons; and that there died in the Year, 1556, seven Aldermen within the space of ten Months. And the next Year, about Harvest-time, the Quartan Agues continued in like manner, or more vehemently than they had done the Year before; and they were chiefly mortal to old People, and especially Priests: So that a great number of Parishes be∣came destitute of Curats, and none to be gotten; and much Corn was spoiled for lack of Harvest-men. Such was the Nature of this Disease in these Days. That which most concern∣ed him in his Sickness.But the Severity or Danger of the Arch-bishop's Distemper, did not so much trouble him as certain Inconveniences that attended it, viz. That it put him off from hose pious and holy Designs that he was in hand with, for God's Glory, and the Good of the Church. For so he exprest his Mind to his Friend the Secretary; However the Matter chance, the most Grief to me is, that I cannot proceed in such Matters as I have in hand, according to my Will and De∣sire.
This Terrenum Domicilium is such an Obstacle to all good Purposes. So strongly bent was the Heart of this excellent Prelat to the serving of God and his Church. But out of this Sickness he escaped; for God had reserved him for another kind of Death to glo∣rify him by. A little before this Sickness befel him,The Secretary sends the Arch-bishop the Copy of the Emperor's Pacification. something fell out which gave him great Joy. Cecyl knew how welcome good News out of Germany would be to him, and therefore in Iuly sent him a Copy of the Pacification; that is, the Emperor's Declaration of Peace through∣out the Empire, after long and bloody Wars; which consisted of such Articles as were favourable unto the Protestants, after much persecuti∣on of them: As, that a Diet of the Empire should shortly be sum∣moned, to deliberate about composing the Differences of Religion, and that the Dissensions about Religion should be composed by pla∣cid and pious and easy Methods. And that in the mean time all should live in Peace together, and none should be molested for Reli∣gion; with divers other Matters. And in another Letter soon after,Vid. Slid. Lib. 24. the said Cecyl advised him of a Peace concluded between the Emperor and Maurice Elector of Saxony, a warlike Prince, and who headed the Protestant Army. Which being News of Peace among Chri∣stians, was highly acceptable to the good Father. But he wanted much to know upon what Terms, out of the Concern he had that it might go well with the Protestant Interest. And therefore Cecyl having not mentioned them, the Arch-bishop earnestly, in a Letter to him, desired to know whether the Peace were according to the Articles, meaning those of the Pacification, or otherwise. Which when he understood, (for upon the same Articles that Peace be∣tween the Emperor and Duke Maurice stood) it created a great Tranquillity to his pious Mind. Thus were his Thoughts employ∣ed about the Matters of Germany, and the Cause of Religion there: Which he rejoiced not a little to see in so fair a way to a good Conclusion. CHAP. XXXI. His Kindness for Germany. TO this Country he had a particular Kindness;His Kindness for Germany. not only because he had been formerly there in quality of Ambassador from his Master King Henry, and had contracted a great Friendship with many eminent Learned Men there, and a near Relation to some of them by marrying Osiander's Niece at Norinberg; but chiefly and a∣bove all, because here the Light of the Gospel began first to break forth and display it self, to the spiritual Comfort and Benefit of other Nations. He had many Exhibitioners in those Parts, to whom he allowed Annual Salaries: Insomuch that some of his Officers grum∣bled at it, as though his House-keeping were abridged by it. For when once in King Henry's Reign, one in discourse with an Officer of his Grace, had said, He wondred his Lordship kept no better an House, (though he kept a very good one): He answered,
It was no wonder, for my Lord, said he, hath so many Exhibitions in Germany, that all is too little to scrape and get to send thi∣ther. His Correspon∣dence with Germany,He held at least a monthly Correspondence to, and from Learned Germans: and there was one in Canterbury, appointed by him on pur∣pose to receive and convey the Letters. Which his Enemies once, in his Troubles, made use of as an Article against him. And Gardi∣ner, a Prebend of Canterbury, and preferred by the Arch-bishop, of this very thing treacherously, in a secret Letter, informed his grand Enemy and Competitor, Gardiner the Bishop of Winton. And with Her∣man Arch-bi∣shop of Colen.Among the rest of his Correspondents in Germany, Herman, the memorable and ever-famous Arch-bishop and Elector of Colen, was one; who by the Counsel and Direction of Bucer and Melancthon, did vigorously labour a Reformation of corrupt Religion within his Province and Territories. But finding the Opposition against him so great, and lying under the Excommunication of the Pope for what he had done; and being deprived thereupon by the Emperor of his Lands and Function, he resigned his Ecclesiastical Honour, and betook himself to a retired Life: which was done about the Year 1547. But no question, in this private Capacity, he was not idle in doing what Service he could for the good of that Cause which he had so generously and publickly espoused, and for which he had suffered so much. I find, that in this Year 1552, our Arch-bishop had sent a Message to Secretary Cecyl, who accompanied the King in this Summer's Progress, desiring him to be mindful of the Bishop of Colen's Letters. And in another Letter, dated Iuly 21, he thanked the Secretary for the good remembrance he had thereof. What the Contents of these Letters of the Arch-bishop of Colen were, it ap∣peareth not: But I am very apt to think the Purport of them was, that Cranmer would solicite some certain Business in the English Court, relating to the Affairs of Religion in Germany, and for the obtaining some Favour from the King in that Cause. But the King being now abroad, and the Arch-bishop at a distance from him, he procured the Secretary, who was ever cordial to the State of Religion, to solicit that Arch-bishop's Business for him; sending him withal that Arch-bishop's Letters for his better Instruction. And this, whatever it was, seems to have been the last good Of∣fice that Arch-bishop Herman did to the Cause of Religion; for he died, according to Sleidan, in the Month of August; and our Arch-bishop's Letter, wherein that Elector's Letters are mentioned, were writ but the Month before. The Sutable∣ness of both these Arch-bi∣shops Disposi∣tions.And if one may judg of Mens commencing Friendship and Love, according to the sutableness of their Tempers and Dispositions, our Arch-bishop of Canterbury, and the Arch-bishop of Colen, must have been very intimate Friends. It was said of this Man, that he often wished, That either he might be instrumental to the propagating the Evangelical Doctrine and Reformation of the Churches under his Iuris∣diction, or to live a private Life. And when his Friends had often told him, what Envy he would draw upon himself by the changing of Religion, he would answer, like a true Christian Philosopher, That nothing could happen to him unexpectedly, and that he had long
since fortified his Mind against every Event. These two Passages spake the very Spirit and Soul of Cranmer. Which they may see that are minded to read what Fox saith of him, as to his Undauntedness and Constancy in the maintaining of the Truth, against the many Temptations and Dangers that he met with during these three Reigns successively. And lastly,Their dili∣gence in Re∣forming. as our Arch-bishop devoted himself wholly to the reforming of his Church; so admirable was the Diligence, Pains and Study this Arch-bishop took in contriving the Reformation of his. He procured a Book to be writ concerning it, called Instauratio Ecclesiarum, which contained the Form and Way to be used for the redressing the Errors and Corruptions of his Church. It was com∣posed by those great German Divines, Bucer and Melancthon; which Book was put into English, and published here as a good Pattern, in the Year 1547. This Book he intended to issue forth through his Jurisdiction, by his Authority to be observed. But first he thought fit well and seriously to examine it: and spent five Hours in the Morn∣ing for five Days, to deliberate and consult thereupon: Calling to him to advise withal in this great Affair, his Coadjutor Count Stol∣berg, Husman, Ienep, Bucer and Melancthon. He caused the whole Work to be read before him; and as many Places occurred, wherein he seemed less satisfied, he caused the Matter to be disputed and ar∣gued, and then spake his own Mind accurately. He would patiently hear the Opinions of others, for the information of his own Judg∣ment; and so ordered things to be either changed or illustrated. And so dextrously would he decide many Controversies arising, that Me∣lancthon thought that those great Points of Religion had been long weighed and considered by him, and that he rightly understood the whole Doctrine of the Church. He had always lying by him the Bible of Luther's Version; and as Testimonies chanced to be alledged thence, he commanded that they should be turned to, that he might consider that which is the Fountain of all Truth. Insomuch that the said Melancthon could not but admire, and talk of his Learning, Pru∣dence, Piety and Dexterity, to such as he conversed with; and par∣ticularly to Iohn Caesar,Mel. Epist. Printed at Leyden, 1647. Pag. 34. to whom in a Letter he gave a particular Account of this Affair. And it is to be noted by the way, that the said Book, according to which the Reformation was to be modelled, contained only, as Melancthon in his Letter suggested, a necessary In∣struction for all Children, and the Sum of the Christian Doctrine; and the Appointments for the Colleges and Ecclesiastical Hierarchy were very moderate; the Form of the Ecclesiastical Polity being to remain as it was, and so were the Colleges, with their Dignities, Wealth, Degrees, Ornaments thereunto belonging; only great Su∣perstitions should be taken away.Nec aliam vi∣deo, nisi hanc unam, ut retine∣ant Episcopi & Collegia sa , & suas opes, & recipiant doctri∣nam piam. Ubi supra. Which the wise Melancthon afore∣said did so approve of, that he professed he had often propounded it in Diets of the German Nation, as the best way to Peace. And this I add, that it might be observed how Arch-bishop Cranmer went by the same Measures in the Reformation of the Church of England; maintaining the Hierarchy, and the Revenues, Dignities and Customs of it, against many in those Times that were for the utter abolishing them, as Relicks of Popery. Such a Correspondence there was be∣tween
our Arch-bishop, and the wisest, moderatest and most learned Divines of Germany. But let us look nearer Home. CHAP. XXXII. Troubles of Bishop Tonstal. AS the last Year we heard of the Deprivation of two Popish Bi∣shops,The Troubles of Bp Tonstol. so this Year another underwent the like Censure, I mean Tonstal Bishop of Durham; whose Business I shall the rather relate, because our Arch-bishop had some Concern in it. Septemb. 21. A Commission was issued out to the Lord Chief Justice and his Col∣leagues,MS. of an old Council-Book. to examine and determine the Cause of Tonstal Bishop of Durham, and eight Writings touching the same; which he is wil∣led to consider, and to proceed to the hearing and ordering of the Matter, as soon as he may get the rest of his Colleagues to him. It was not long after, viz. about the midst of October, that this Bishop by these Commissioners (whose Names, besides the Chief Justice, do not occur) was deprived, and his Estate confiscated. Octob. ult. Sir Iohn Mason was ordered by the Council to deliver, to the use of Dr. Tonstal, (so he is now stiled) remaining Prisoner in the Tower, such Money as should serve for his Necessities, until such time as fur∣ther Order shall be taken touching his Goods and Money lately ap∣pertaining to him. Decemb. 6. It was agreed by the Council, that Dr. Tonstal, late Bishop of Durham, should have the Liberty of the Tower: where he continued till the Time of Queen Mary. The Cause of this Bp's Pu∣nishment.But we will look back to learn for what Cause this severe Punish∣ment was inflicted upon this Reverend grave Bishop, and the rather, because the Bp of Sarum could not find, as he writes, what the Particu∣lars were. In the Year 1550, a Conspiracy was hatching in the North, to which the Bishop was privy at least, if not an Abetter. And he wrote to one Menvile in those Parts relating to the same. This Menvile himself related unto the Council, and produced the Bishop's Letter. Which was afterwards, by the Duke of Somerset, withdrawn and concealed, as it seems, out of kindness to Tonstal. But upon the Duke's Troubles, when his Cabinet was searched, this Letter was found: Upon which they proceeded against Tonstal. This is the sum of what is found in the Council-Book. Viz. May 20. 1551. The Bishop of Durham is commanded to keep his House. Aug. 2. He had licence to walk in the Fields. Decemb. 20. Whereas the Bishop of Durham, about Iuly 1550, was charged by Vivian Men∣vile, to have consented to a Conspiracy in the North, for the making a Rebellion; and whereas, for want of a Letter written by the said Bishop to the said Menvile, (whereupon great trial of this Matter depended) the final Determination of the Matter could not be proceeded unto, and the Bishop only commanded to keep his House; the same Letter hath of late been found in a Casket of the Duke of Somerset's after his last Apprehension. The said Bishop was sent for, and this Day appeared before the Coun∣cil, and was charged with the Letter, which he could not deny
but to be his own Hand-writing: and having little to say for him∣self, he was then sent to the Tower, there to abide till he should be delivered by Process of Law▪ Agreeable to this is that King Ed∣ward writes in his Journal. Decemb. 20. The Bishop of Durham was, for concealment of Treason written to him, and not disclo∣sed, sent to the Tower. In the latter end of the Year 1551, a Parliament sitting,A Bill in Par∣liament to at∣taint Tonstal. it was thought convenient to bring in a Bill into the House of Lords, at∣tainting him for Misprision of Treason. But Arch-bishop Cranmer spake freely against it, not satisfied it seems with the Charge laid against him. But it past, and the Arch-bishop protested. But when it was carried down to the Commons, they would not proceed upon it, not satisfied with the bare Depositions of Evidences, but requi∣red that the Accusers might be brought Face to Face: And so it went no further. But when the Parliament would not do Tonstal's Business, a Commission was issued out to do it, as is above spoken. In the mean time,The Care of the Diocess committed to the Dean. that the Bishoprick might not want a due Care taken of it, during the Bishop's Restraint, Feb. 18. 1551, a Letter was sent from the Council to the Prebendaries of Durham, to con∣form themselves to such Orders in Religion and Divine Service, stand∣ing with the King's Proceedings, as their Dean, Mr. Horn, shall set forth, whom the Lords required them to receive and use well, as being sent to them for the Weal of the Country by his Majesty. CHAP. XXXIII. The new Common-Prayer. The Arch-bishop in Kent. THE Book of Common-Prayer having the last Year been care∣fully Revised and Corrected by the Arch-bishop and others,The new Com∣mon-Prayer began to be used. the Parliament in April this Year enacted, that it should begin to be used every where at All-Saints Day next. And accordingly the Book was printed against the Time, and began to be read in S. Paul's Church, and the like throughout the whole City. But because the Posture of Kneeling was excepted against by some, and the words used by the Priest to the Communicant, at the reception of the Bread, gave Scruple, as though the Adoration of the Host were in∣tended: therefore to take off this, and to declare the contrary to be the Doctrine of this Church, Octob. 27. a Letter was sent from the Council to the Lord-Chancellor, to cause to be joined to the Book of Common-Prayer lately set forth, a Declaration signed by the King, touching the Kneeling at the receiving of the Communion. Which in all probability was done by the Motion of the Arch-bishop, who in his late Book had taken such pains to confute the Adoration; and now thought it necessary, that some publick Declaration should be made in the Church-Service against it. So now the first of Novem∣ber being come, Dr. Ridley, the Bishop of London, was the first that celebrated the new Service in S. Paul's Church;Stow's Chron. which he did in the Forenoon: And then in his Rochet only, without Cope or Vestment, preached in the Choir. And in the Afternoon he preached at Pauls-Cross,
the Lord-Mayor and Aldermen, and Citizens present. His Sermon tended to the setting forth this new Edition of the Common-Prayer. He continued preaching till almost five a Clock; so that the Mayor and the rest went home by Torch-light. By this Book of Common-Prayer, all Copes and Vestments were forbidden through∣out England. The Prebendaries of St. Pauls left off their Hoods, and the Bishops their Crosses, &c. as by Act of Parliament is more at large set forth. Provision also was made for the King's French Dominions, that this Book,This Book put into French for the King's French Sub∣jects. with the Amendments, should be used there. And the Bi∣shop of Ely, Lord Chancellor (a great forwarder of good Reforma∣tion) procured a learned French-man, who was a Doctor of Divini∣ty, carefully to correct the former French Book by this English new One, in all the Alterations, Additions and Omissions thereof. For the first Common-Prayer Book also was in French, for the use of the King's French Subjects: Being translated by Commandment of Sir Hugh Paulet, Governour of Calais: And that Translation, overseen by the Lord Chancellor, and others at his Appointment. The Be∣nefit of this last Book was such, that one of the French Congregati∣on in London sought, by the Means of A Lasco's Interest with Se∣cretary Cecyl, for a Licence under the King's Letters Patents, to translate this Common-Prayer, and the Administration of Sacra∣ments, and to print it, for the use of the French Islands of Iersey and Guernsey. But Cecyl, after a Letter received from A Lasco in August to that effect, not willing to do this of his own Head, and reckoning it a proper Matter to be considered by the Arch-bishop, who were to be intrusted with the translating of such a Book, desi∣red him, being now at Ford, to give him his Advice and Judgment herein, both as to the Work and as to the Benefit. To whom the Arch-bishop gave this Answer; That the Commodity that might arise by printing of the Book, was meet to come to them who had already taken the Pains in translating the same. Enforming the Secretary who they were; namely those formerly, and now of late employed by Sir Hugh Paulet, and the Lord-Chancellor. But I find this Book was not presently finished, being not printed till the Year 1553, for the Use of Iersey and Guernsey. The Age still vicious.Notwithstanding this cleansing of the Church from Superstition and Idolatry, and bringing in the Knowledg of the Gospel, by the Arch-bishop's constant Pains and Study, the People generally, even the Professors themselves, were bad enough as to their Morals; and Religion had yet got but little hold of them. A clear sight of the Behaviour of these Times may be seen by what Tho. Becon,Iewl of Ioy. a Chap∣lain of Cranmer's, writ in his Preface to a Book put forth in those Days: What a nomber of fals Christians lyve ther at thys present day, unto the excedynge dishonour of the Christen Profession, which with theyr Mouth confesse that they know God, but with theyr Dedes they utterly denye hym, and are abhominable, diso∣bedient to the Word of God, and utterlye estranged from al good Works? What a swarm of grosse Gospellers have we also among us, which can prattle of the Gospel very fynely, talk much of the Justification of Faith, crake very stoutly of the free remissyon
of all theyr Sins by Christ's Blood, avaunce themselves to be of the Number of those, which are predestinate unto Eternal Glory? But how far do theyr Life differ from al true Christianitie? They are puffed up with al kynd of Pryde: they swel with al kynd of Envy, Malice, Hatred and Enmity against theyr Neghbour, they brenne with unquencheable Lusts of Carnal Concupiscence, they walowe and tumble in al kynd of beastly Pleasures: theyr gredy covetous Affects are insatiable: thenlarging of theyr Lordshipps, thencreasyng of theyr Substance, the scrapyng together of theyr Worldly Possessions infynite, and knoweth no End. In fyne, all theyr Endeavours tend unto thys End, to shew themselves very Ethnycks, and utterly estraunged from God in theyr Conversati∣on, although in Words they otherwise pretend. As for theyr Almes-Dedes, theyr Praying, theyr Watchyng, theyr Fastyng, and such other Godly Exercises of the Spirit, they are utterly banished from these rude and gross Gospellers. All theyr Religion consist∣eth in Words and Disputations, in Christen Acts and Godly Dedes nothyng at all. These evil Manners of the Professors themselves, looked with so sad a Face, that it made the best Men assuredly ex∣pect a Change and woful Times to follow. Septemb. 27.A new Sect in Kent. A Letter was sent from the Council to the Arch-bishop, to examine a Sect newly sprung up in Kent. Whereof there was now a Book of Examinations sent him:Council-Book. and to commune with a Man and a Woman (the Informers) bearers of the Letter, who could inform him somewhat of the Matter. And to take such or∣der in the same according to the Commission, that these Errors might not be suffered thus to overspread the King's Faithful Subjects. What this Sect was appeareth not. The Anabaptists were taken notice of, and a Commission issued out against them some Years before. These were Sectaries more new, and whereof the Council very late∣ly was informed. It may be they were of the Family of Love, or David George his Sect, who made himself some-time Christ, and some-time the Holy Ghost. For a little before these Times, divers Sects sprang up under the Profession of the Gospel, in High and Low-Germany; some whereof dispersed themselves into England. Which Sects began to do so much hurt to the Reformation among us, that the Author before-mentioned, laments it in these words: What wicked and ungodly Opinions are there sown now-a-days of the Anabaptists, Davidians, Libertines, and such other pestilent Sects, in the Hearts of the People, unto the great Disquietness of Christ's Church, moving rather unto Sedition, than unto pure Religion; unto Heresy, than unto things Godly? The examination of this new Sect, was one of the Businesses the Arch-bishop was employed in,The ABp's Bu∣siness in Kent. while he was in his Retirement at his House near Canterbury. Another was, the sitting upon a Com∣mission to him and other Gentlemen of Kent, for enquiry after such as had embezelled the Plate and Goods belonging to Chauntries, &c. given by the Parliament to the King, and converting them to their own uses. But this being somewhat an odious Work, he was not very forward to enter upon, especially because he thought, whatso∣ever he and the other Commissioners should recover, would be but
swallowed up by the Duke of Northumberland and his Friends, and the King be little the better. But because he did not make more haste, he was charged by his Enemies at Court as a neglecter of the King's Business. Which cost him a Letter in excuse of himself to the said Duke: signifying, that he omitted this Business a while till the Gentlemen and Justices of Peace of Kent, who where then mostly at London, were come home. A Letter for Installing Bi∣shop Hoper. Council-Book.Decemb. 2. A Letter was sent from the Council to the Arch-bishop, to grant out a Warrant. Ad Installandum, for the Bishop of VVorcester and Glocester, without paying any Fees for the same, because he paid Fees for another Mandate, which served to no purpose. The Vicar of Beden.Febr. 20. An Order was sent to the Arch-bishop from the Council to examine the Vicar of Beden in the County of Berks, according to an Information inclosed,Council-Book. and to advertise the Lords of his Pro∣ceedings therein. What this Vicar's Crime was I know not; but I observe about these Times the Priests and Curats were very busy Men, and would take liberty, sometimes to speak against the King's Proceedings, or his Arch-bishop, with bitterness enough, and some∣times to vent fond Opinions, so that oftentimes they were fetched up to the Council-board; and after an Appearance or two, referred to the Arch-bishop to examine and punish: as being Matters rela∣ting to Religion; and so proper for his Cognizance. Sampson and Knox.About the latter end of this Year, Thomas Sampson was preferred to the Deanery of Chichester, having been Parson of Alhallowes-Bredstreet, London. February the 2d, A Letter was sent from the Privy-Council to the Arch-bishop, to bestow the said Living upon Mr. Knox, who was one of the King's Chaplains, and in good esteem in the Court for his Gift of Preaching. The Council favour Knox. Collect. Vol. 2. p. 42.This Knox was the Man, whose Name was so dashed in the King's Journal, where the Names of the King's six Chaplains were inserted, that Bishop Burnet could not read it. The Council bare a great favour to him, as appears by those several Letters they wrote in his behalf. One was mentioned before, sent to the Arch-bishop for a Living in London; but in that Knox succeeded not, the Arch-bishop preferring Laurence Saunders (afterwards a Martyr) there∣unto. Knox, being sent this Year into the North, one of the King's Itinerary Preachers,Council-Book. a Warrant, dated Octob. 27, was grant∣ed from the Council to four Gentlemen, to pay to him his Majesty's Preacher in the North (so he is stiled) forty Pounds, as his Majesty's Reward. And again Decemb. 9, a Letter was sent from the Council to the Lord VVharton (who was Lord VVarden in the Northern Bor∣ders) in commendation of Mr. Knox. And the next Year, viz. 1553, being returned out of the North, and being then in Bucking∣hamshire, that he might find the more acceptance and respect there, the Council wrote a Letter to the great Men in those Parts, viz. the Lord Russel, Lord Windsor, to the Justices of the Peace, and the rest of the Gentlemen within that County, in favour of the said Knox the Preacher.
A Bishop Consecrated. June 26. Iohn Taylor, S. Th. P. Dean of Lincoln,Iohn Taylor. a Learned and Pious Man, was Consecrated Bishop of Lincoln at Croyden-Chappel, by the Arch-bishop, assisted by Nicolas Bishop of London, and Iohn Bishop of Rochester. CHAP. XXXIV. A Catechism. The Arch-bishop opposeth the Exclusion of the Lady Mary. WE are now come to the last Year of good K. Edward's Reign:An. 1553. when the Arch-bishop was as commonly at the Council, as he used to be before. For the Counsellors made great use of him,Great use made of the ABp at Coun∣cil. and did not use to conclude any thing in matters relating to the Church without him. And if he came not, they often sent for him: and once the last Year, in October, when he had fixed his Day of going into Kent, they staied him for some Days, that they might confer with him about some certain Matter; I suppose, relating to the Articles of Religion, that were then under their Hands. To look no further than the latter end of the last Year; He was at Council at Westminster in February, and this Year, in March and April. And the Court being at Greenwich, where the King lay sick, and died, the Arch-bishop was there at Council in Iune: but not after the eighth Day. The reason he came no more, we may well conjecture to be, because he did no ways like the Methods that were now taking by Northumberland, to bring the Crown into his own Family, and disenherit the King's Sisters. For soon after, viz. Iune 11. The Lord Chief Justice Mountagne, and some other Judges, with the King's Attorny and Solicitor, were sent for to the Council to consult about drawing up the Instrument. On one of these Council-Days,The Articles of Religion en∣joined by the King's Autho∣rity. he procured the King's Letters in behalf of the Book of Articles, which he had taken such Pains about the two last Years, both in composing and in bringing to effect. The King had before given order to the Arch-bishop by his Letters, to put forth these Articles. And now they were put forth, he pro∣cured the King's Letters also to his own Officers, for to see the Cler∣gy of his Diocess to subscribe thereunto. So the King's Letters were directed to the Official of the Court of Canterbury, and the Dean of the Deanery of the Arches, and to their Surrogates, Deputies,Cran. Regist. &c. Setting forth, That whereas he had given order unto Thomas Arch-bishop of Canterbury, in Letters sealed with his Signet, for the Honour of God, and to take away Dissension of Opinion, and confirm Consent of true Religion, that he should expound, publish, denounce, and signify some Articles and other things, breathing the right Faith of Christ, for the Clergy and People within his Jurisdiction, the King therefore enjoined them, the
Arch-bishop's Officers,An. 1553. that they should cause all Rectors, Vicars, Priests, Stipendiaries, School-masters, and all that had any Eccle∣siastical Employment, to appear in Person before the Arch-bishop in his Hall at Lambeth, there further to obey and do on the King's part, according as it shall be signified, and to receive according to Reason, and the Office owing to the King's Royal Dignity. And in obedience hereunto, the Official, Iohn Gibbon, LL. D. Com∣missary of the Deanery of the Blessed Virgin of the Arches, signi∣fied by an Instrument, dated Iune 2, to the Arch-bishop, that he had cited the Clergy. I do not find the success of this; only that the City-Clergy made their appearance before the Arch-bishop at Lambeth: and that he did his endeavor by Perswasion and Argument to bring them to subscribe: Which no question very few refused. But this Matter afterwards served Q. Mary's Commissioners, for one of their Interrogatories to be put to the Arch-bishop, as though he had compelled many against their Wills to subscribe. Which he de∣nied, saying, He compelled none, but exhorted such to subscribe as were willing first to do it, before they did it. In the Month of May, the King by his Letters Patents command∣ed a Latin Catechism to be taught by School-masters to their Scho∣lars. It was intitled,The Catechism for Schools. Catechismus brevis, Christianae disciplinae sum∣mam continens. The King in his Letters, dated May 20. said, It was made by a certain Pious and Learned Man, and presented to him; and that he committed the diligent examination of it to certain Bishops and other Learned Men, whose Judgment was of great Authority with him. The same Bishops and Learned Men, I suppose, that were framing and preparing the Articles of Religion the last Year. The Author of this Catechism is not certainly known. Some conjecture him to be Ponet, the Bishop of Win∣chester. The Learned Dr. Ward, one of the English Divines sent to the Synod of Dort, having this Catechism in his Library, (now in the possession of a Friend of mine) wrote therein these words, Aro Nllo autore, siquid ego divinare possum. Meaning probably Alex∣ander Nowel, who was now, if I mistake not, School-master of West∣minster, and afterwards Dean of S. Pauls. But whosoever was the Author, the Arch-bishop we may conclude to be the furtherer and recommender of it unto the King: it being that Prelate's great De∣sign, by Catechisms, and Articles of Religion, and plain Expositi∣ons of the Fundamentals, to instil right Principles into the Minds of the Youth and common People, for the more effectual rooting out Popery, that had been so long entertained by the industrious nursel∣ling up the Nation in Ignorance. A Catechism set forth by the Synod.There was a Catechism that came forth about this time, (whether it were this or another, I cannot say) allowed by the Synod, or Convocation. In the beginning of Q. Mary, the Popish Divines made a great stir about this Catechism, and thought they had a great Advantage against it, because it was put forth as from the Synod, whereas that Synod knew nothing of it. Whereupon Weson the Prolocutor in Q. Mary's first Convocation, brought a Bill into the House, declaring that Catechism, being Pestiferous and full of He∣resies, to be foisted upon the last Synod fraudulently, and therefore
that the present Synod disowned it. To which he set his own hand, and propounded that all the House should do the like: Which all but six consented to. One whereof was Philpot, Arch-deacon of Winchester, who stood up, and told them in justification of those that published the said Catechism, that the Synod, under K. Edward, had granted to certain Persons, to be appointed by the King, to make Ecclesiastical Laws. And whatsoever Ecclesiastical Laws they or the most part of them did set forth, according to a Statute in that behalf provided, might well be said to be done by the Synod of London; although such as were of the House then had no notice thereof before the Promulgation. And therefore in this Point he thought the setters forth of the Catechism had nothing slandered the House, since they had that Synodal Authority unto them com∣mitted. And moreover he desired the Prolocutor would be a Means unto the Lords, that some of those that were Learned, and the pub∣lishers of this Book, might be brought into the House, to shew their Learning that moved them to set forth the same; and that Dr. Rid∣ley and Rogers,Fox. and two or three more might be Licensed to be pre∣sent at this Disputation, and be associate with them. But this would not be allowed. The last thing we hear of concerning our Arch-bishop in this King's Reign,The ABp op∣poseth the new Settle∣ment of the Crown. was his denial to comply with the new Settlement of the Crown, devised and carried on by the domineering Duke of Northumberland, for the Succession of Iane, Daughter to Gray, Duke of Suffolk, whom he had married to one of his Sons. This he did both oppose, and when he could not hinder, refused to have any hand in it. First, he did his endeavour to stop this Act of the King. He took the boldness to argue much with the King about it once, when the Marquess of Northampton, and the Lord Darcy, Lord Chamberlain, were present. And moreover, he signified his desire to speak with the King alone, that so he might be more free and large with him. But that would not be suffered: But if it had, he thought he should have brought off the King from his Purpose, as he said afterward. But for what he had said to the King, the Duke of Northumberland soon after told him at the Council-Table, That it became him not to speak to the King, as he had done, when he went about to disswade him from his Will. To the Council the Arch-bishop urged the entailing of the Crown by K. Henry upon his two Daughters, and used many grave and pithy Reasons to them for the Lady Mary's Legitimation, when they argued against it. But the Council, replied, That it was the Opinion of the Judges, and the King's Learned Counsel in the Law, that that Entailing could not be prejudicial unto the King; and that he being in pos∣session of the Crown, might dispose of it as he would. This seemed strange unto the Arch-bishop. Yet considering it was the Judgment of the Lawyers, and he himself unlearned in the Law, he thought it not seemly to oppose this Matter further. But he re∣fused to sign: Till the King himself required him to set his Hand to his Will, and saying, That he hoped, he alone would not stand out, and be more repugnant to his Will than all the rest of the Council were. Which words made a great Impression upon the
Arch-bishop's tender Heart, and grieved him very sore, out of the dear Love he had to that King, and so he subscribed. And when he did it, he did it unfeignedly. All this he wrote unto Queen Mary. Denieth before the Council to subscribe to the Exclusion of the Lady Mary. Foxii MSS.To which I will add what I meet with in one of my Manuscripts. When the Council and the chief Judges had set their Hands to the King's Will, last of all they sent for the Arch-bishop [who had all this while stood off;] requiring him also to subscribe the same Will, as they had done. Who answered, That he might not without Perjury. For so much as he was before sworn to my Lady Mary by King Henry's Will. To whom the Council answe∣red, That they had Consciences as well as he; and were also as well sworn to the King's Will as he was. The Arch-bishop an∣swered, I am not judg over any Man's Conscience, but mine own only. For as I will not condemn their Fact, no more will I stay my Fact upon your Conscience, seeing that every Man shall answer to God for his own Deeds, and not for other Mens. And so he refused to subscribe, till he had spoken with the King herein. And being with the King, he told the Abp, that the Judges had informed him, that he might lawfully bequeath his Crown to the Lady Iane, and his Subjects receive her as Queen, notwithstand∣ing their former Oath to King Henry's Will. Then the Arch-bi∣shop desired the King, that he might first speak with the Judges: Which the King gently granted. And he spake with so many of them, as were at that time at the Court, and with the King's Attorney also: Who all agreed in one, that he might lawfully subscribe to the King's Will by the Laws of the Realm. Where∣upon he returning to the King, by his Commandment granted at last to set his Hand.Sets his Hand. The ABp in∣gratefully dealt with.From the whole Relation of this Affair we may note as the Ho∣nesty, so the Stoutness and Courage of the Arch-bishop, in the ma∣nagement of himself in this Cause against Northumberland, who hated him, and had of a long time sought his Ruin: and the Ingra∣titude of Q. Mary, or at least the Implacableness of Cranmer's Ene∣mies; that the Queen soon yielded her Pardon to so many of the former King's Council, that were so deep and so forward in this Bu∣siness, but would not grant it him, (who could not obtain it, till after much and long suit:) And that it should be put into two Acts of her Parliament (to make him infamous for a Traitor to Posterity) that he and the Duke of Northumberland were the Devisers of this Succession, to deprive Q. Mary of her Right: Which was so palpa∣bly false and untrue on the Arch-bishop's part. But this was, no question, Winchester's doing; through whose Hands, being now Lord Chancellor, all these Acts of Parliament past, and the wording of them. The Council subscribe and swear to the limited Succes∣sion. Vol. II. p. 223.Finally, I have only one thing more to add concerning this mat∣ter: Which is, that besides the Instrument of Succession, drawn up by the King's Council Learned in the Law, signed by himself, and 32 Counsellors, and dated Iune 21, according to the History of the Reformation, there was another Writing, which was also signed by 24 of the Council. And to this I find our Arch-bishop's Name. Herein they promised by their Oaths and Honours (being com∣manded
so to do by the King) to observe all and every Article contain∣ed in a Writing of the King's own Hand, touching the said Succession, and after copied out and delivered to certain Judges and Learned Men to be written in Order. This Writing thus signed, with the other Writing of the King, being his Devise for the Succession, may be seen in the Appendix, as I drew them out of an Original.[No. LXVIII.] CHAP. XXXV. The King dies. THE good King made his most Christian departure Iuly the 6th, to the ineffable loss of Religion and the Kingdom,The King dies. be∣ing in a likelihood, by his early Beginnings, to prove an incompa∣rable Prince to the English Nation. It was more than whispered that he died by Poison. And however secretly this was managed, it was very remarkable, that this Rumour ran not only after his Death, but even a Month or two before it, Reports spred that he was dead. For which, as being rash Speeches against the King,Cooper's Chron. they stu∣diously took up many People, and punished them. Before his Fa∣ther K. Henry had him, his only Son lawfully begotten, it was 28 Years from his first entrance upon his Kingdom. And this Heir made amends for the Nation's so long expectation of a Prince:His Character. His singular Excellency in all kind of Princely Towardliness (to use the words of one who lived in those Times) was such,Nic. Vdal his Pres. to Erasm. Paraphrase. that no Place, no Time, no Cause, no Book, no Person, either in publick Audience, or else in private Company, made any mention of him, but thought himself even of very Conscience bound to pow∣dre the same with manifold Praises of his incomparable Vertues and Gifts of Grace. And again; How happy are we English-Men of such a King, in whose Childhood appeareth as perfect Grace, Vertue, godly Zeal, desire of Literature, Gravity, Pru∣dence, Justice and Magnanimity, as hath heretofore been found in Kings of most mature Age, of full Discretion, of antient Fame, and of passing high Estimation. And again, That God hath of singular Favour and Mercy towards this Realm of England, sent your Grace to reign over us, the thing it self, by the whole Pro∣cess, doth declare. The Arch-bishop his Godfather took exceeding complacency in a Prince of such Hopes,The ABp de∣lights in this Prince's Profi∣ciency. and would often congratulate Sir Iohn Cheke his School-master having such a Scholar, even with Tears. His Instructors would sometimes give Account to the Arch-bishop of his Profici∣ency in his Studies, a thing that they knew would be acceptable to him. Thus did Dr. Cox his Tutor in a Letter acquaint the ABp of the Prince's Towardliness, Godliness, Gentleness, and all honest Qua∣lities: and that both the Arch-bishop, and all the Realm ought to take him for a singular Gift sent of God. That he read Cato, Vives his Satellitium, Esop's Fables, and made Latin, besides things of the Bible; and that he conned pleasantly and perfectly. The Arch-bi∣shop out of his dear Love to him, and to encourage him, would
sometimes himself write in Latin to him. And one of his Letters to him is yet extant in Fox. His great Parts might be seen by his Letters, Journals, Memori∣als,K. Edward's Writings. Discourses, and Writings; which were many: divers lost, but of those that are yet extant, these are the most: Fox.A Letter to the Arch-bishop of Canterbury his God-father, from Ampthil, in Latin, being then but about seven Years old. Fox.Another in Latin to the Arch-bishop from Hartford: which was an Answer to one from the Arch-bishop. Mr. Petyt's MSS.A Letter in French to his Sister, the Lady Elizabeth, writ Decemb. 18▪ 1546. Sir W. H. MSS.A Letter to his Unkle, the Duke of Somerset, after his Success against the Scots, 1547. Sir W. H. MSS.To Q. Katharine Par, after her Marriage with the Lord Admiral his Unkle. Sir W. H. MSS.Another Letter to her. Sir W. H. MSS.A Letter to the Earl of Hartford, his Cousin, in Latin. Full. Ch. Hist.A Letter to Barnaby Fitz-Patrick, concerning the Duke of Somer∣set's Arraignment. Full. Ch. Hist.Another to B. Fitz-Patrick; consisting of Instructions to him, when he went into France. Ibid.Another to Fitz-Patrick, giving him an Account of his Progress, in August 1552. Mr. Petyt's MSS.Orders concerning the Habits and Apparel of his Subjects, accord∣ing to their Degrees and Qualities. Mention is also made in the History of the Reformation of Let∣ters in Latin to K. Henry his Father, at eight Years old, and to Queen Katharine Par. Cotton Libr. and Hist. Ref.His Journal, writ all with his own Hand, from the beginning of his Reign 1547, until the 28th of Novemb. 1552. Trinity-Col. Libr.A Collection of Passages of Scripture against Idolatry in French; Dedicated to the Protector. Cott. Librar.A Discourse about the Reformation of many Abuses both Ecclesi∣astical and Temporal. Cott. Libr.A Reformation of the Order of the Garter; Translated out of English into Latin by K. Edward. These four last are published in the History of the Reformation, Volume II. among the Collections. Sir W. H. MSS.A Book written in French by him at twelve Years of Age, against the Pope, intitled, A L'encontre les abus du Monde. Sir W. H. MSS.A Memorial, February 1551. Sir W. H. MSS.Another Memorial, dated Octob. 13. 1552. Sir W. H. MSS.Another Memorial. Fox.His Prayer a little before his Death. I shall reherse none of these Writings, but only one of the Memo∣rials; because it bordereth so near upon our present History, and shews so much this Young Prince's Care of Religion, and for the good Estate of the Church, animated, admonished, counselled and directed in these Matters by the Arch-bishop.
For Religion. Octob. 13. 1552. I. A Catechism to be set forth,The King's Memorial for Religion. for to be taught in all Grammar-Schools. II. An Uniformity of Doctrine; to which all Preachers should set their Hands. III. Commissions to be granted to those Bishops, that be Grave, Learned, Wise, Sober, and of good Religion, for the executing of Discipline. IV. To find fault with the slightfulness of the Pastors, and to deliver them Articles of Visitation, willing and commanding them to be more diligent in their Office, and to keep more Preachers. V. The abrogating of the old Canon-Law, and establishment of a New. VI. The dividing of the Bishoprick of Durham into two; and placing of Men in them. VII. The placing of Harley into the Bishoprick of Hereford. VIII. The making of more Homilies. IX. The making of more Injunctions. X. The placing of one in a Bishoprick in Ireland, which Turner of Canterbury hath refused. Some of these things were already done, and some in Hand. Hereby we may see what further Steps in the Reformation would have been made, had the good King lived. So that in this King's Reign, Religion made a good Progress, and Superstition and Ido∣latry was in a good manner purged out of the Church. Which was the more to be wondred at, considering the Minority of the King, the grievous Factions at Court, and the too common Practice then of scoffing and buffooning Religion, and the more conscienti∣ous Professors of it. For of this sort of Men, Russians and dissolute Livers, there were many followed the Court, and were Favorites to the Leading-Men there, I mean, the two Dukes; and proved after, base Time-servers and Flatterers in the Reign of Queen Mary. During this Reign, Arch-bishop Cranmer was a very active Man,The Ab  at Coun∣cil. and great Deference seemed to be given to his Judgment, by the King and Council, in the Matters that were then transacting; espe∣cially as concerning the Reformation of Religion. For I find him very frequently at the Council-Board, and often sent for thither, or sent unto when absent. And here I will not think much to set down all the particular Days when, and Places where, he was present in Person with the Privy-Counsellors; from the Year 1550, beginning, unto the middle of the Year 1553, near the the Time of the King's Death; as it was extracted carefully out of a Council-Book, that commenceth at the above-said Year. Anno 1550, April 19.His Presence in Council in the Year 1550. He was present at the Council then at Green∣wich. This Month one Putto, who had been put to silence for his lend Preaching, [that is against the Steps made in the Reformation] and did now nevertheless, of his own Head, preach as lendly as he had done before, was referred to the Arch-bishop, and the Bishop of Ely, to be corrected, April 28. The Arch-bishop present at Council,
May 2, 4, 7, 11, (On this day the Duke of Somerset was called again to Council) and 15. At the Star-Chamber, May 16. At Westmin∣ster May 28, Iune 5. At Greenwich, June 8, 11, 13, 20, 22. At Westminster, Iune 28, 29, 30. and Iuly 1. About which time the Arch-bishop seemed to depart into his Diocess, and there to re∣main that Summer. Octob. 11. There was an Order of Council for a Letter to be writ to him, in answer to his of complaint against the Vicar of Dertford, to imprison him for his Disobedience unto him; and in Prison to endure, until the said Arch-bishop should come to Court. Octob. 18. Was another Order of Council for three Letters to be writ: The One to the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, another to the Bishop of Ely, and another to th Bishop of Lincoln. Be∣cause (as the Words run) the Parliament draweth near: Before which time his Majesty thinketh it expedient to have some Mat∣ters there to be consulted. Their Lordships were required im∣mediately to repair to the Court, where they shall understand his Majesty's further Pleasure. And that Day his Grace was sent for. November 11. He was present at Council. At West∣minster, November 16, 17, 18, 26. December 4. When the Arch∣bishop and Bishop of Ely answered the Bishop of Chichester, then before the Council, as to the Texts by him produced in behalf of Altars. Decemb. 5, 9, 11, 13. On which Day a Letter was sent to the Lieutenant of the Tower to bring the Bishop of Winchester to Lambeth before the Arch-bishop. Ianuary 13. He was present at the Council at Greenwich, when Hoper was ordered to be committed to the Arch-bishop's Custody. Present again at Council at Green∣wich, Febr. 8. At Westminster the 16, 18. Then upon the Report of the Arch-bishop made of one Young, a Learned Man, [I suppose he of Cambridg, that was Bucer's Antagonist] viz. That he had preached seditiously, [against the King's Proceedings in Religion] it was ordered that the Arch-bishop, and the Bishop of Ely should examine him, and thereupon order him, as they should think good. He was present at Council, still at Westminster, March 4, 8. (When he was appointed to receive a Sum of Money in respect of his Charges and Pains in his Process against the late Bishop of Winchester, now deprived) 9, 11, 12, 22, 24. In the Year 1551.Anno 1551. March 26, 31. At Greenwich, April the 8, 9, 11, 26. May 4, 10, 24, 25. Iune 4, 14. (when a Letter was given to the Arch-bishop to send to the Lieutenant of the Tower, for the bringing White Warden of New-College in VVinchester, and delivering him to the Arch-bishop, to remain with him, till he might reclaim him) 15, 21, 22. At Richmond, August 9. At Hampton-Court, Octob. 1. When a Licence was granted to VVolf, under the King's Privilege, to print the Arch-bishop's Book. At VVestminster, Octob. 17, 19, 22, 28. Novemb. 2, 5, 9, 10, 15, 17, 21, 26. Decemb. 11, 12. (13. A Letter was sent from the Council to the Arch-bishop to send them a Book touching Religion, sent out of Ireland) 17, 18, 19. Ian. 24, 31. Febr. 8, 16, 22, 28. March 22. In the Year 1552.Anno 1552. He was present at the Council now sitting at VVest∣minster, March 30. April 4, 5, 8, 9, 11, 18, 19, 24. From which time, till the Month of Octob. he was not at the Council, and yet
seems to have been at Home. Octob. 7. The Council sent to him to stay his going into Kent, till Tuesday, because the Lords would confer with him; that is till Octob. 11. when he was again present at Council. The Arch-bishop now retired into his Diocess, and was at his House at Ford. Whither several Messages and Letters were sent to him from the Council: as Nov. 20. They sent him the Articles of Religion, (framed chiefly by him, and reviewed by the King's Chaplains) for his last Review, in order to the putting them into due Execution. Nov. 24. Another sent him according to the Minute, of some Bu∣siness unknown. Decemb. 2. Another Letter to him for the installing of Hoper, without paying any Fees. And another Feb. 2. in favour of Mr. Knox, to be by him collated to the Living of Alhallows. This Month he returned, and was at the Council at Westminster. Like∣wise Febr. 21, 22, 2, 27, 28. Anno 1553. March 25. April 1, 7. At Greenwich, Iune 2, 3, 6, 8.An. 1553. And that was the last time mentioned in the Council-Book ending at Iune 17. Nor cared he to come afterwards, the Business then in transaction not pleasing him. A Bishop Consecrated. May 26. Iohn Harley, S. T. P. was Consecrated,Iohn Harley. (and was the last that was Consecrated in this King's Reign) Bishop of Hereford, upon the Death of Skip, by the Arch-bishop, at Croyden Chappel, Nicolas Bishop of London, and Robert Bishop of Carlile, assisting. This Har∣ley was one of the King's Six Chaplains, Bill, Bradford, Grindal, Pern and Knox, being the other five, that were appointed to be Iti∣neraries, to preach sound Doctrine in all the remotest Parts of the Kingdom, for the Instruction of the Ignorant in right Religion to God, and Obedience to the King. The End of the Second Book.
MEMORIALS OF Arch-Bishop CRANMER. BOOK III. CHAPTER I. Queen Mary soon recognized. The Arch-bishop Slandered and Imprisoned. I Find the Arch-bishop present among Queen Iane's Counsel∣lors. Whose Party seemed to be resolute for her until the 19th of Iuly.The ABp's and Counsellors concern with the Lady Iane. All these Persons of Quality were with her in the Tower, consulting of Affairs for her Service: Thomas Arch-bishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of Ely Lord Chan∣cellor, the Earl of Winchester Lord Treasurer; the Dukes of Suffolk and Northumberland; the Earls of Bedford, Arundel, Shrews∣bury, Pembroke; the Lords Darcy and Paget; Sir Thomas Cheiney, Sir Richard Cotton, Sir VVilliam Petre, Sir Iohn Cheke, Sir Iohn Baker, Sir Robert Bowes, being all of her Council. All which (ex∣cepting Northumberland) signed a Letter dated Iuly 19. to the Lord Rich, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Essex, who had signified to them, that the Earl of Oxford was fled to the Lady Mary. In their Letter they exhorted him to stand true and tight to Q. Iane, as they said they did, and would do. It was penned by Cheke; for Secretary Cecyl was absent, and Petre the other Secretary, though present, did it not, though he signed it.No. LXIX. The Letter is in the Ap∣pendix. The Day before this Letter was sent, viz, Iuly 18, there being a Rising in Buckinghamshire, and the Parts thereabouts, Queen Iane her self, thinking her self sure of Sir Iohn Bridges and Sir Ni∣colas Poyntz, signed a Letter to them, therein ordering them to raise with speed all the Power they could of their Servants, Te∣nants, Officers and Friends, to allay that Tumult: And so She had written to other Gentlemen in those Parts to do. This Letter also I have put in the Appendix.No. LXX. And yet, (to see the vicissitude of Mens Minds, and uncertainty of human Affairs) Iuly 20.They declare for Q. Mary. Divers of those very Counsellors that but the Day before set their Hands resolvedly to stand by Q. Iane, proclaimed Q. Mary in the City of London, and immediately dis∣patched the Earl of Arundel, and the Lord Paget unto her with a
Letter, writ from Baynard's-Castle, (where they now were removed from the Tower). In which Letter they beg her Pardon, and to re∣mit their former Infirmities, and assure her, calling God to witness to the same, that they were ever in their Hearts her true Subjects since the King's Death: but could not utter their Minds before that time without great Destruction and Bloodshed of themselves and others.No. LXXI. The Copy of this Letter may be read in the Appendix. The same day the Council wrote to the Duke of Northumberland their Letters dated from VVestminster,And write to Northumberland to lay down his Arms. sent by an Herald. Where∣in the Duke was commanded and charged in Q. Mary's Name to disarm, and discharge his Souldiers, and to forbear his return to the City, until the Queen's Pleasure. And the same was to be de∣clared to the Marquess of Northampton, and all other Gentlemen that were with him. The Herald was also, by virtue of his Let∣ters from the Council, to notify in all Places where he came, That if the Duke did not submit himself to the Queen's Highness,Stow. he should be taken as a Traitor, and they of the late King's Coun∣cil would persecute him to his utter Confusion. And thus far our Arch-bishop went. For this was signed by him, and the Bishop of Ely, Lord Chancellor, the Marquess of VVinchester, the Duke of Suffolk, the Earls of Bedford, Shrewsbury, Pembrook; the Lord Darcy, Sir Richard Cotton; Petre and Cecyl, Secretaries; Sir Iohn Baker, Sir Iohn Mason, Sir Robert Bowes. The Duke saw it in vain to op∣pose, and so submitted to this Order. And the Plot that his mbi∣tion had been framing so long and with so much Art, fell on a sudden. The Queen owned by the Ambassadors.Very speedily Queen Mary was owned Abroad, as well as at Home: Dr. VVotton Dean of Canterbury, Sir VVilliam Pickering, Sir Thomas Chaloner, Ambassadors in France, writ their Letters to her and the Council, acknowledging her, and ceasing any further to act as Am∣bassadors. She continued Dr. VVotton, and sent for Pickering and Chaloner Home; and sent Sir Anthony St. Leger, the beginning of Au∣gust, Ambassador thither joined with VVotton. This Determination the Council August 12, signified to the said three Ambassadors. The ABp mis∣reported to have said Mass.But now to cast our Eyes upon the State of Religion at this Time. Upon this Access of Queen Mary to the Crown, whose Interest as well as Education made her a Zealous Papist, the good Progress of Religion was quite overthrown; and the pious Arch-bishop's Pains and long Endeavours in a great measure frustrated; and he himself soon after exercised with great Afflictions. The first pretended Oc∣casion of which was this. It was reported Abroad, soon after King Edward's Death, that the Arch-bishop had offered to sing the Mass and Requiem at the Burial of that King, either before the Queen, or at S. Paul's Church, or any where else; and that he had said, or resto∣red Mass already in Canterbury. This indeed had the Suffragan of Dover, Dr. Thornton, done, but without the Arch-bishop's Consent or knowledg. Mass at Canter∣bury.But however such good Impressions of Religion had the Arch-bishop left at Canterbury, that though Mass was set up there, and Priests were through fear forced to say it, yet it was utterly contrary to their Wills. And about New-years-tide, there was a Priest said Mass there one Day, and the next came into the Pulpit, and desired all
the People to forgive him. For he said, he had betrayed Christ; but not as Judas did, but Peter. And then he made a long Sermon against the Mass. But the aforesaid slanderous report so troubled the Arch-bishop,Which he makes a pub∣lick Declarati∣on against. that to stay it, he wrote a Letter to a Friend of his, that he never made any promise of saying Mass, nor that he did set up the Mass in Canterbury: but that it was done by a false, flattering lying Monk, Dr. Thornden (such a Character in his just Anger he gave him) who was Suffragan of Dover, and Vice-dean of that Church, in the absence of Dr. Wotton, who was then abroad in Embassy.Foxii MSS. This Thornden, saith my Manuscript (writ but a few Years after by Scory, or Becon, as I conjecture) was, A Man, having neither Wit, Learning, nor Honesty. And yet his Wit is very ready. For he preacheth as well extempore, as at a Years warning: so learnedly, that no Man can tell what he chiefly intendeth or goeth about to prove: so aptly, that a gross of Points is not sufficient to ty his Sermon together: Not unlike to Iodocus a Monk, of whom Erasmus maketh mention in his Colloquies, who, if he were not garnished with these glorious Titles, Monk, Doctor, Vice-dean, and Suffragan, were worthy to walk openly in the Streets with a Bell and Cocks-comb. Besides this Letter, the Arch-bishop resolved to do something in a more publick manner, in vindication of the Reformation, as well as of himself. So he devised a Declara∣tion: Wherein he both apologized for himself against this false Re∣port, and made a brave Challenge, with the assistance of Peter Mar∣tyr, and a few more, to maintain, by Disputation with any Man, the Reformation made under K. Edward. This Declaration, after a first draught of it, he intended to enlarge, and then, being sealed with his own Seal, to set it upon the Doors of S. Paul's Church, and other Churches in London. This Writing, wherein the good Religion and Doctrine practised and taught in the former Reign, was so nobly owned, and offered to be defended in such a publick manner, was not only read by some Body boldly in Cheapside, but many Copies thereof were taken; and so became dispersed. It was also soon after printed in Latin, and I suppose in English too. Sure I am, in the Year 1557, it was printed beyond Sea by the Exiles. From which Print I shall here transcribe it, being sent from Grindal to Iohn Fox, for his use in the writing his History. A Declaration of the Reverend Father in God Thomas Cranmer Arch-bishop of Canterbury, condemning the untrue and slanderous Report of some, which have reported, That he should set up the Mass at Canterbury, at the first coming of the Queen to her Reign 1553. AS the Devil, Christ's antient Adversary, is a Liar,The Declara∣tion. and the Father of Lying; even so hath he stirred his Servants and Members to persecute Christ, and his true Word and Religion. Which he ceaseth not to do most earnestly at this present. For whereas the most noble Prince of famous Memory, King Henry VIII, seeing the great Abuses of the Latin Masses, reformed some∣thing
herein in his Time; and also our late Soveraign Lord K. Ed∣ward VI, took the same whole away, for the manifold Errors and Abuses thereof, and restored in the place thereof Christ's Holy Supper, according to Christ's own Institution, and as the Apo∣stles in the Primitive Church used the same in the beginning. The Devil goeth about by lying to overthrow the Lord's Holy Supper, and to restore the Latin Satisfactory Masses, a thing of his own Invention and Device. And to bring the same more ea∣sily to pass, some have abused the Name of Me, Thomas Arch-bishop of Canterbury, bruting abroad, that I have set up the Mass at Canterbury, and that I offered to say Mass before the Queen's Highness, and at Paul's Church, and I wot not where. I have been well exercised these twenty Years, to suffer and bear evil Re∣ports and Lies; and have not been mych grieved thereat, and have born all things quietly. Yet when untrue Reports and Lies turn to the hindrance of God's Truth, they be in no wise to be tolerate and suffered. Wherefore these be to signify to the World, that it was not I that did set up the Mass at Canterbury, but it was a false, flattering, lying and dissembling Monk, which caused the Mass to be set up there, without my Advice or Counsel. And as for offering my self to say Mass before the Queen's Highness, or in any othea Place, I never did, as her Grace know∣eth well. But if hr Grace will give me leave, I shall be ready to prove, against all that will say the contrary; and that the Com∣munion-Book, set forth by the most innocent and godly Prince, K. Edward VI, in his High Court of Parliament, is conformable to the Order, which our Saviour Christ did both observe and com∣mand to be observed, and which his Apostles and Primitive Church used many Years. Whereas the Mass, in many things, not only hath no Foundation of Christ, his Apostles, nor the Primitive Church, but also is manifest contrary to the same: and containeth many horrible Blasphemies in it. And altho many, either unlearned, or maliciously do report, that Mr. Peter Martyr is un∣learned; yet if the Queen's Highness will graunt thereunto, I with the said Mr. Peter Martyr, and other four or five which I shall choose, will by God's Grace, take upon us to defend, that not only our Common-Prayers of the Churches, Ministration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies, but also that all the Doctrine and Religion, by our said Soveraign Lord K. Edward VI, is more pure, and according to God's Word, than any that hath been used in England these thousand Years: so that God's Word may be the Judg, and that the Reason and Profes may be set out in writing. To thentent as well all the World may examine and Judg them, as that no Man shall start back from their Wri∣ting; and what Faith hath been in the Church these fifteen hundred Years, we will joyne with them in this Point: and that the Doctrine and Usage is to be followed, which was in the Church fifteen hundred Years past. And we shall prove, that the Order of the Church, set out at this present in this Church of England by Act of Parliament, is the same that was used in the
Church fifteen hundred Years past. And so shall they never be able to prove theirs. Some Copies of this Declaration soon fell into the Hands of cer∣tain Bishops, who brought them to the Council. The Council sent a Copy to the Queen's Commissioners.Appears be∣fore the Com∣missioners at Pauls, Who soon after ordered him to appear before them, and to bring in an Inventory of his Goods. The reason, as is alledged, of his being ordered to bring in this Inventory, was, because it was then intended, that he should have a sufficient Living assigned him, and to keep his House, and not meddle with Religion. So on the Day appointed, which was August 27, the Arch-bishop, together with Sir Thomas Smith, Secretary of State to K. Edward, and May Dean of S. Pauls, came before the Queen's Commissioners in the Consistory of Pauls: and the Arch-bishop brought in his Inventory. We are left to guess what he was now cited for. I suppose, it was to lay to his charge Heresy, and his Marriage; What more was done with him at this time I find not. He retired to his House at Lambeth, where he seemed to be con∣fined. For about the beginning of August,And before the Council. as may be collected from a Letter of the Arch-bishop's to Cecyl, he was before the Council, about the Lady Iane's Business, without all question. And then with the severe Reprimands he received, was charged to keep his House, and be forth-coming. At that time he espied Cecyl who was in the same Condemnation; and would fain have spoken with him, but durst not, as he told him in a Letter dated August 14; as it seems, out of his Love and Care of him, lest his very talking with Cecyl might have been prejudicial to that Pardon which he now lay fair for. But by Letter he desired him to come over to him to Lam∣beth, because he would gladly commune with him, to hear how Matters went, and for some other private Causes, Cecyl being now at Lierty. September 13 following, the Arch-bishop was again summoned to appear that Day before the Queen's Council. Then he appeared, and was dismissed; but commanded to be the next Day in the Star-Chamber. And so he was. The effect of which appea∣rance was, that he was committed to the Tower, partly for setting his Hrnd to the Instrument of the Lady Iane's Succession, and partly for the publick Offer he made a little before of justifying openly the Religious Proceedings of the deceased King. But the chief Reason was the inveterate Malice his Enemies conceived against him for the Divorse of K. Henry from the Queen's Mother: the blame of which they laid wholly upon him, though Bishop Gardiner and other Bi∣shops were concerned in it as deep as he. In the Tower we leave the good Arch-bishop a while, after we have told you, that soon af∣ter the Queen coming to the Tower, some of the Arch-bishop's Friends made humble suit for his Pardon, and that he might have access to her: but She would neither hear him, nor see him. Holgate also,The ABp of York commit∣ted to the Tower; and his Goods seized▪ C.C.C.C. Li∣brar. Miscell. B the other Arch-bishop, about the beginning of October, was committed to the Tower, upon pretence of Treason, or great Crimes: but chiefly, I suppose, because he was Rich. And while he was there, they rifled his Houses at Battersea and Cawood. At his former House they seized in Gold coined three hundred
Pounds; in Specialties and good Debts, four hundred Pounds more; in Plate gilt and Parcel gilt, sixteen hundred Ounces: A Mitre of fine Gold with two Pendants, set round about the sides and midst with very fine pointed Diamonds,At Battersea. Saphires and Balists, and all the Plain with other good Stones and Pearls, and the Pendants in like man∣ner, weighing one hundred twenty five Ounces. Six or seven great Rings of fine Gold, with Stones in them; whereof were three fine blew Saphires of the best; an Emerald very fine; a good Turkeys, and a Diamond; a Serpent's Tongue set in a Standard of Silver, gilt and graven; the Arch-bishop's seal in silver, his Signet, an old Antick in Gold: The Counterpane of his Lease of Wotton, betwixt the late Duke of Northumberland and him, with Letters Patents of his Purchase of Scrowby. At Cawood.Taken from Cawood, and other Places appertaining to the Arch-bishop, by one Ellis Markham; First, in ready Money, nine hundred Pounds: Two Mitres; in Plate, parcel gilt, seven hundred and seventy Ounces; and gilt Plate, eleven hundred fifty seven Ounces; One broken Cross of Silver gilt, with one Image broken, weighing forty six Ounces; three Obligations, one 37 l. 5 s. 10 d; another for 15 l; another for 10 l. Sold by the said Markham fivescore Beasts, and four hundred Muttons. Sold all the Sheep belonging to the Arch-bishop, supposed to be two thousand five hundred. More∣over, he took away two Turky-carpets of Wool, as big and as good as any Subject had: Also a Chest, full of Copes and Vestments of Cloth of Tissue: Two very good Beds of Down, and six of the best young Horses that were at Cawood. Profered to make Sale of all his House-hold-stuff in five Houses; three very well furnished, and two metely well. Sold all his Stores of Household: Wheat, two hundred Quarters; Malt, five hundred Quarters; Oats, sixty Quar∣ters; Wine, five or six Tun. Fish and Ling, six or seven hundred, with very much Household Store; as Fuel, Hay, with many other things necessary for Household. Horses at Cawood, young and old, four or five scorce: They received Rent of his own Land, five hundred Pounds yearly at the least. This was done by this Markham upon pretence, that he was guilty of Treason, or great Crimes. He gave to many Persons Money to the value of an hundred Pounds and above, that they should give Information against him. Besides, they took away good Harness and Artillery sufficient for seven score Men. All this Spoil was committed, when he was cast in the Tower. Of all this Injury he made a Scedule afterwards, and com∣plained thereof to the Lords. By this one Instance, which I have set down at large, as I extracted it from a Paper in the Benet-College Library, we may judg what Havock was made of the Professors of Religion, in their Estates as well as their Persons; as this Bishop was served, before any Crime was proved against him. Thus the other Arch-bishop (of York) was not to go without Ani∣madversion, any more than he of Canterbury. The former lay eighteen Months in the Tower, and was deposed at last for being Married,Gardiner's Pas∣sage of the two ABps. as well as Cranmer. Of this, Gardiner Bishop of Win∣chester, in his Sermon at Paul's Cross, (at which were present King Philip and Cardinal Pole) gave, as he thought this nipping Gird:
Thus while we desired to have a Supream Head among us, it came to pass, that we had no Head at all; No, not so much as our two Arch-bishops. For that on one side, the Queen, being a Woman, could not be Head of the Church; and on the other side, they were both convicted of one Crime, and so deposed. This Arch-bishop of York continued in Prison till 1554, when the Queen granted the Request of the new King, for the Liberty of a great many Pri∣soners, whereof this Prelate was one. He died the next Year through Grief (as it is probable) and Suffering. CHAP. II. Protestant Bishops and Clergy cast into Prisons, and deprived. INdeed in this first Entrance of Q. Mary's Reign,This Reign be∣gins with Ri∣gour. it was a wonder to see that fierceness that it was ushered in with; the Papists thinking that this Rigour at first would terrify all out of their for∣mer Principles of true Religion, and bring them to the Devotion of the Church of Rome again. And it was as marvellous to observe the stedfastness of the generality of the Professors. This Queen be∣gan her Reign after that manner,Halts Oration. (I use the words of one that lived in that Time) that it might be conjectured, what She was like after to prove. Sending up for abundance of People to ap∣pear before the Council, either upon the Lady Iane's Business, or the Business of Religion; and committing great numbers into Prisons. And indeed She boasted her self a Virgin sent of God to ride and tame the People of England. To explain somewhat these Austerities. They thought fit to be∣gin with the Protestant Clergy, Bishops and others.The Protestant Bishops depri∣ved. For this pur∣pose a Commission was directed to the Bishops of London, Win∣chester, Chichester and Durham, Men sufficiently sowred in their Tempers by what befel them in the last Reign. These were to dis∣charge the Protestant Bishops and Ministers of their Offices and Pla∣ces, upon pretence, either of Treason, Heresy or Marriage, or the like, to make way for their own Men.Registr. Eccl. Cant. Thus Iohn Tayler Bishop of Lincoln was deprived, because he had a bad Title, there being this clause in the Letters Patents, whereby he was made Bishop, Quamdiu bene se gesserit, and because he thought amiss concerning the Eucharist. Iohn Hoper was deprived of the Bishoprick of Worcester by the restitution of Nicolas Hethe, formerly deprived: and removed from the See of Glocester, for his Marriage and other Demerits. Iohn Harley Bishop of Hereford deprived for Wedlock and Heresy. Robert Farrar, Bp of S. David's, deprived for Wedlock and Heresy. William Barlow, Bishop of Bath, made a voluntary Re∣signation. The Bishoprick of Rochester was void three Years, since Scory was translated to Chichester. Iohn Bird, an old Man, Married, was deprived of the Bishoprick of Chester. Thomas Cranmer Arch-bishop of Canterbury (for I do but transcribe now out of the Register of the Church of Canterbury) being called in∣to question for high Treason, by his own Confession was judged
guilty thereof. Whence in the Month of December the See of Canterbury became Vacant. Robert Holgate Arch-bishop of York was deprived for Wedlock, and was cast into the Tower, and led a private Life. The like happened to Miles Coverdale of Exeter, by the restoring Iohn Vayse, who out of fear had formerly re∣signed. Cuthbert Bishop of Durham, formerly deprived, was resto∣red. Edmund Bonner Bishop of London restored: Nicolas Ridley being removed from the said See, and cast into Prison for making an ill Sermon, and being noted for heretical Pravity. Stephen Gar∣diner Bp of Winchester restored: Iohn Poinet being ejected and Impri∣soned, and deprived of Episcopacy for being Married. To which I must add, the See of Bristol, resigned by Paul Bush the Bishop thereof. The hard U∣sage of the in∣ferior Clergy.How they proceeded with the inferior Clergy in general for being Married, may be measured by their proceedings with the Clergy of London and Canterbury, which we shall see by and by. So that K. Edward's Clergy were now in the very beginning of this Queen very hardly used. Some were deprived, never convict, no or never called Mr. Rich. Wilks. (I use the words of an Dr. Parker. Author that Lived in that Queen's Reign, and felt her Severity) Some called, that were fast locked in Prison, and yet nevertheless deprived immediately Mr. Bradford, Bullingham, and May.. Some deprived without the cause of Marriage after their Or∣ders A great Num∣ber.. Some induced to resign upon promise of Pension, and the Promise, as yet never performed Dr. Ponet, Tay∣lr, Parker.. Some so deprived, that they were spoiled of their Wages, for the which they served the half Year before; and not ten days before the Receit sequestred from it. Some prevented from his half Years Receit, after Charges of Tenths and Subsidy paid, and yet not deprived six weeks after. Some deprived of their Receits somewhat after the day,Preface to the Defence of Priests Marri∣age. with the which their Fruits to the Queen's Majesty should be contented. And in general the Deprivations were so speedy, so hastily, so without warning, &c. The Bishops (saith another Mr. Aylmer. Writer and Sufferer in these Days) that were Married, were thrust out of the Parliament-House, and all Married Deans and Arch-deacons out of the Convocation: many put out of their Livings, and others re∣stored, without Form of Law. Yea some Noble-men and Gen∣tlemen were deprived of those Lands which the King had given them, without tarrying for any Law, lest my Lord of VVinchester should have lost his Quarter's Rent.Harbour for Faithful Sub∣jects. Many Churches were changed, many Altars set up, many Masses said, many Dirges sung, before the Law was repealed. All was done in post haste. Professors cast into the Mar∣shalsea.Nor was their Deprivation all they endured, but they, together with many other Professors of the Religion, were taken up very fast: For VVinchester did resolve to make quick Work, to reduce, if he could, the Realm to the old Religion. So that they came into the Marshalsea thick and three-fold for Religion, sent by him thither. And that they might be sure to suffer Hardship enough, when the Bishop's Almoner, Mr. Brook's (he, who was I suppose after Bishop of Glocester) came to this Prison with his Master's Alms-Basket, he told the Porter,Winchester's Alms. named Britain, that it was his Lord's Pleasure that none of the Hereticks that lay there, should have any part of his Alms. And that if he knew any of them had any part thereof,
that House should never have it again so long as he lived. To which the Porter replied, That he would have a care of that he would warrant him; and that if they had no Meat till they had some of his Lordship's, they should be like to starve. And so he bad him tell his Lord: and added, That they should get no favour at his Hand. These Sufferings P. Martyr, now gotten out of England,Pet. Martyr writes of this to Calvin. took no∣tice of in a Letter to Calvin, dated Novemb. 3. Where having related to him, how the two Arch-bishops of Canterbury and York, the Bi∣shops of Worcester and Exon, and many other Learned and Pious Preachers, were in Bonds for the Gospel, and together with them many other godly Persons were in extream Danger, he proceeded to mention two things to Calvin, to mitigate the Trouble he knew he conceived for this ill News. The own was, That although the Infirmity of some betrayed them, yet great was the constancy of far more than he could have thought. So that he doubted not England would have many famous Martyrs, if Winchester, who then did all, should begin to Rage according to his Will. The other was, That it was the Judgment of all, that this Calamity would not be long. And therefore, said Martyr,P. Martyr's Epist. let us pray to God, that he would quickly tread down Satan under the Feet of his Church. The same Learned Man,The State of the Church now. speaking in another Letter concerning the good Forwardness of Religion at the first coming of Queen Mary to the Crown, said, That he had many Scholars in England Stu∣dents in Divinity, not to be repented of, whose Harvest was al∣most ripe. Whom he was forced to see, either wandring about in uncertain Stations, or remaining at home unhappily subverted. And that there was in this Kingdom many Holy as well as Learned Bishops, that were then in hard Confinement, and soon to be dragged to the extremest Punishments, as if they were Robbers. And that here was the foundation of the Gospel, and of a Noble Church laid: and by the Labours of some Years the holy Build∣ing had well gone forward, and daily better things were hoped for. But that unless , God from above,P. Martyr Amico cuidam. came to the succour of it, he thought there would not be a Footstep of Godliness left at last, as to the external Profession. All the Matters of the Church the Queen left wholly to the ma∣nagement of the Bishop of Winchester,The Queen leaves all Mat∣ters to Winche∣ster. whom She now advanced from a Prisoner in the Tower, to be Lord High Chancellor of England. And indeed the Governance of the whole Realm was committed to him with a few other. He ruled Matters as he would, and that all England knew and saw plainly. Nay, the Consent of the whole Par∣liament followed his Head and his Will. So that against their Wills, and against the Wills of many thousand true Hearts in the Realm, as they of the Parliament well knew, they condescended unto him: and what he could not do in one Parliament, that he did in another. So that in a Year and an half he had three Parliaments. During which time, many things the Parliament condescended unto against their Wills. As that the Queen should Marry with a Foreign Prince; that the Service in the English Tongue should be taken away: that
the Bishop of Rome should have his old ejected Authority here again: as one of the Divines in those Times had intended to have told Winchester to his Face,I. Rogers. had he been permitted Speech. October 1. The Queen was Crowned at the Abby-Church at West∣minster.The Queen crowned. And then was proclaimed a Pardon; but not over-graci∣ous. For all the Prisoners in the Tower and Fleet were excepted, and sixty two besides; whereof the Printers of the Bible, Grafton and Whitchurch, were two. Most of these excepted were of the chief Professors of the Gospel: No Pardon for them. At the Coronation, among other triumphal Showes, Paul's Steeple bare top and top Gallant, like a Ship with many Flags and Banners, and a Man stood triumphing and danceing on the top. Whereat one Vnderhill, a Gen∣tleman, that sat on Horse-back there to see the Show, said to those a∣bout him, At the Coronation of King Edward I saw Paul's Steeple lay at Anchor, and now She wears top and top Gallant: Surely the next will be Ship-wrack or it be long. And indeed there follow∣ed a Ship-wrack of the Church. The Service still said.The Service established in K. Edward's Days did not cease upon Queen Mary's grasping the Scepter. But the Ministers performed the Worship of God, and celebrated the Holy Sacrament, and used the Common-Prayer diligently and constantly. And the People fre∣quented the same with more seriousness than before. They fore∣saw what Times were coming; which made them meet often toge∣ther, while they might: Lamenting bitterly the Death of K. Edward, and partaking of the Sacrament with much Devotion. It was the Bishop of Winchester's Resolution, to redress this in London: For he was purposed to stifle the Religion as speedily and as vigorously as he could. And one way he had to do this, was to send his Spies in∣to all the Churches in London. And these would come into the Churches, and disturb the Ministers with rude Words and Actions in their very Ministration; and then go to the Bishop and make their Informations. And so the Ministers were fetch'd up by the Officers before him, and then committed, unless they would comply. And this in the very beginning of the Queen's Reign, when the Preachers did but according to the Laws then in Force, before the Parliament had repealed the Book of Common-Prayer, and the rest of K. Edward's Reformation. And there were forward Men in most Parishes, that were very active and violent for the restoring the old Superstitions.The Queen's Proclamation of her Reli∣gion. For the Queen had set forth a Proclamation, which did declare what Religion She did profess in her Youth, That She did continue in the same, and that She minded therein to end her Life: Willing all her Loving Subjects to embrace the same. And this they reckoned to be sufficient Warrant to set up Mass, and in∣troduce Popish Priests and Popish Usages every-where, without stay∣ing for Orders and Acts of Parliament. Signs of a Change of Re∣ligion.Nor was this Change of Religion, and these Miseries following it, unexpected. The Learned and pious Sort in King Edward's Time did reckon upon a great Calamity impending over their Heads: Concluding thereupon, from two Causes, among others. One was, the corrupt Manners that generally overspred the Nation, notwith∣standing the Light of the Gospel, and the much and earnest preaching
up of Sobriety and Vertue. The other was, the taking off by Death divers most eminent Men, the great Stays of Religion. So that the Preachers did commonly in their Sermons declare and foretel, what afterwards indeed fell out. This Becon, an Exile, in his Epistle to those in England, that suffered Persecution for the Testimony of Christ's Gospel, spake of in these words. Divers Signs had we long before, besides the Godly Admonitions of the faithful Prea∣chers, which plainly declared unto us an utter subversion of the true Christian Religion to be at Hand, except it were prevented by hasty and harty Repentance. What shall I speak of that good and mighty Prince Edward, Duke of Somerset, which in the Time of his Protectorship, did so banish Idolatry out of this our Realm, and bring in again God's true Religion, that it was a wonder so weighty a Matter to be brought to pass in so short a Time. Was not the ungentle handling of him, and the unrighteous thrusting him out of Office, and afterwards the cruel Murthering of him, a Man, yea, a Mirror of true Innocency, and Christian Patience, an evident token of God's Anger against us? The sudden taking away of those most goodly and vertuous young Imps, the Duke of Suffolk and his Brother, by the sweating Sickness, was it not also a manifest Token of God's heavy Displesure against us? The Death of those two most worthy, and godly Learned Men, M. Paulus Fagius, and D. Martin Bucer, was it not a sure Prog∣nostication, some great Mishap concerning Christen Religion to be at Hand? But passing over many other, to come to that which is most lamentable, and can never be remembred of any true Eng∣lish Heart without large Tears, I mean the Death of our most Godly Prince and Christen King, Edward VI. that true Iosias, that earnest destroyer of false Religion, that fervent setter up of God's true Honour, that most bounteous Patron of the godly Learned, that most worthy Maintainer of good Letters and Ver∣tue, and that perfect and lovely Mirror of true Nobility, and sin∣cere Godliness: Was not the taking away of him, (alas! for Sor∣row) a sure Sign and an evident Token, that some great Evil hanged over this Realm of England? Who, considering these things, perceived not a Shipwreck of the Christen Religion to be at Hand? CHAP. III. The Arch-bishop adviseth Professors to fly. THE Favourers of Religion,The ABp ad∣viseth to flight. seeing it was now determined to proceed in all manner of Severity against them, began to flee into other Countries for their Safety as fast as they could. Indeed there were some, that made a Case of Conscience of it: Among the rest one Mrs. Wilkinson, a Woman of good Quality, and a great Re∣liever of good Men. Her the Arch-bishop out of Prison advised to escape and avoid a Place where She could not truly and rightly serve God. He took off with spiritual Arguments the Objections,
which She or others might make for their stay; As their lothness to leave their Friends and Relations, and that it might look like a slan∣dering of God's Word, if they should thus run away, and decline the open and bold Defence of it. The Letter of the Arch-bishop de∣serves to be read, as it fell from that Venerable Prelat's own Pen. Which I have therefore put in the Appendix.No. LXXII. Though Cranmer himself refused to flee, being advised by his Friends so to do,Cranmer will not flee. because of the Reports that were abroad, that he should be speedily carried to the Tower. For he said, It would be no ways fitting for him to go away, considering the Post in which he was; and to shew that he was not afraid to own all the Changes that were by his means made in Religion in the last Reign. Whither the Prosessors fly.But great numbers fled, some to Strasburgh, some to VVesel, some to Embden, some to Antwerp, some to Duisburgh, some to Wormes, some to Frankford, some to Basil, Zuric, and Arrow in Switzerland, and some to Geneva, to the number of eight hundred, and upwards. And these are the Names of some of these Refugees. BISHOPS. And who?Poynet of VVinchester, Barlow of Bath and Wells, Scory of Chichester, Coverdale of Exon; And Bale of Ossory. DEANS. Richard Cox, Dean of Christ's-Church Oxon, and of Westminster; Iames Haddon, Dean of Exeter, Robert Horn of Durham, William Turner of Wells, Thomas Sampson of Chichester. ARCH-DEACONS. Edmund Cranmer, the Arch-bishop's Brother, Arch-deacon of Cant. Iohn Aelmer of Stow, Bullingham of Lincoln, Thomas Young Pre∣center of S. Davids. DOCTORS of Divinity and Preachers. Edmund Grindal, Robert King, Edwin Sands, Ios. Iewel, Reinolds, Pil∣kingtons, two Brothers; Iohn Ioseph, David Whitehead, Iohn Alvey, Iohn Pedder, Iohn Biddil, Thomas Becon, Robert and Richard Turner, Edmund Allein, Levers, three Brothers, Iohn Pekins, Tho. Cottisford, Tho. Donel, Alex. Nowel with hi Brother, Barthol. Traheron, Iohn Wollock, Iohn Old, Iohn Medwel, Ioh. Rough, Iohn Knocks, Iohn Appleby, Iohn Perkhurst, Edward Large, Galf. Iones, Robert Crowley, Robert Wisdome, Robert VVatson, VVilliam Goodman, Ant. Gilby, VVill. VVhittingham, Iohn Makebrey, Hen. Reynolds, Iames Perse, Iugg, Edmunds, Cole, Mounteyn; two Fisher's, Da. Simson, Iohn Ben∣dal, Beaumont, Humfrey Bentham; Reymiger, Bradbridg, Saul, &c. Besides, of Noble-men, Merchants, Trades-men, Artificers and Plebeians, Chiliades. Pref. to Cranmer's Book of the Sacrament, in Latin. many hundreds. And God provided graciously for them, and raised them up Friends in England, that made large Contributi∣ons
from time to time for their Relief, and for the maintenance of such as were Scholars and Students in Divinity especially. And great was the Favour that the Strangers shewed to their Fugitive Guests. Here at home Vengeance was taken upon those that set up the Lady Iane. And the Chief of all, the Duke of Northumberland,Duke of Nor∣thumberland put to death. was brought to Towerill to lose his Head. Who indeed was cared for by no Body, and was the only Instrument of putting the King upon altering the Succession; and who was broadly talked of to have been the short∣ner of that excellent Prince's Life by Poison, to make Room the sooner for his Son's Advancement, who had Married the said Iane. In Prison he was Visited by Bishop Hethe, and afterwards pretended to be brought off by him to the acknowledgment of the Roman Ca∣tholick-Religion. After his Condemnation he, with the Marquess of Northampton, Sir Andrew Dudley, Sir Iohn Gates, Sir Thomas Pal∣mer, heard a Mass within the Tower, and received the Sacrament in one kind, after the Popish fashion. The Duke of Northumberland was drawn hereunto by a Promise that was made him, That if he would Recant and hear Mass, he should have his Pardon, yea, though his Head were upon the Block. In his Speech August 22, when he was Executed▪ he acknowledged,His Speech. How he had been misled by others; and called the Preachers Sediti∣ous, and Leud, and advised the People to return home to the old Re∣ligion. And that since the new Religion came among them, God had plagued them by Wars and Tumults, Famine and Pestilence. He propounded the example of the Germans, how their new Doctrine had brought Ruin upon them. And quoted that Article in the Creed to them, I believe the Catholick Church, to convine them of the Roman Catholick Faith. If this Speech were not of Hethe's inditing to be used by the Duke, yet this Argument from the Creed, I am apt to think was his, it being his Custom to make use of it. For I find in a Conference betwixt this Bishop, and Rogers, he asked him, if he did not know his Creed, and urged Credo sanctam Ecclesiam Ca∣tholicam. But Rogers could tell him, that he did not find the Bishop of Rome there. If any be minded to see the Duke's Speech at length, he may have recourse to the Appendix, where I have set it down,No. LXXIII. as I found it in one of the Cottonian Volumes. But Gates and Palmer, notwithstanding their hearing Mass,Sir Iohn Gates his Speech; at their Execution the same Day and Place, confessed the Faith they had learned in the Gospel. The former confessed, That he had lived as vitiously and wickedly all his Life, as any in the World. And yet, that he was a great reader of the Scripture; but a worse follower there was not living. For he read it, not to edify, but to dispute, and to make Interpretations after his own Fancy. Ex∣horting the People to take heed how they read God's Word, and played and gamed with God's Holy Mysteries. For he told them, that except they humbly submitted themselves to God, and read his Word charitably, and to the intent to be edified thereby; it would be but Poison to them, and worse. And so asked the Queen, and all the World Forgiveness. Palmer thanked God for his affliction. For,And Palmer's. That he had lear∣ned
more in one little dark Corner of the Tower, than ever he learned by any Travailes, in as many Places as he had been. There he had seen God, what he was, and his numerous Works, and his Mercies. And seen himself thorowly what himself was; a Lump of Sin and Earth, and of all Vileness the vilest. And so concluding, that he feared not Death; That neither the sprinkling of the Blood of two shed before his Eyes, nor the shedding there∣of, nor the bloody Ax it self, should make him affraid. And so praying all to pray for him, he said some Prayers, and without any daunting laid down his Head upon the Block. The Duke's la∣bours to get hi Life.But the Duke of Northumberland submitted himself to base and mean Practices to save his Life. He renounced his Religion: nay, disavowed, That he ever was of the Religion professed in K. Ed∣ward's Days (if we may believe Parsons) but only hypocritically for worldly Ends complied with it.Wardword, p. 43. And if he might but have lived, he could have been contented to spend his Days in a Mouse-hole. For from a Priest I have this Relation, and the Papists best knew the Intrigues of Queen Mary's Reign. After Sentence pro∣nounced upon him, he made Means to speak with Bishop Gardiner, who he knew could do most of any with the Queen. When the Bishop came to him in Company with another Councellor, to be Witness of their Discourse, (who himself told my Author these Pas∣sages) the Duke asked the Bishop, If there were no hope at all for him to live, and to do some Penance the rest of his Days for his sins past. Alass! said he, let me live a little longer, though it be but in a Mouse-hole. The Bishop replied, That he wished to God any thing could have contented his Grace, but a Kingdom, when he was at liberty, and in prosperity. And even at that present he wished it lay in his Power to give him that Mousehole: For he would allow him the best Palace he had in the World for that Mousehole. And did moreover then offer to do for him what he could possible. But because his offence, he said, was great, and Sentence past against him, and his Adversaries many, it would be best for him to provide for the worst: and especially, that he stood well with God, in matter of Conscience and Religion. For to speak plainly, as he went on, it was most likely he must Die. The Duke answered, He would dispose himself, and desired he might have a learned Priest sent him for his Confession, and spiri∣tual Comfort. And as for Religion, said he, you know, my Lord Bishop, that I can be of no other but of Yours, which is the Ca∣tholick. For I never was of any other indeed, nor ever so foolish as to believe any of that which we had set up in K. Edward's Days: but only to use the same for my own purpose of Ambition. For which God forgive me. And so I mean to testify publickly at my Death. For it is true. The Bishop, saith my Author, went away with an afflicted Heart, and shed many Tears, as he returned: and went to the Queen, and entreated so earnestly for him, as he had half gained her Consent for his Life. Which so much terrified the Duke's Adversaries, as presently they got the Emperor Charles, that was in Flanders, to write to the Queen a very resolute and ear∣nest Letter, that it was not safe for her, nor his Estate, to Pardon his Life. And with that he was Executed.
Whatever credit is to be given to the rest of this Relation, I can hardly believe that Passage that he is reported to say to the Bishop, That he was never otherwise than a Roman-Catholick, and that he did all along dissemble his Religion for worldly Ends:Whether he was always  Papist. and that he would testify as much at his Death. Because this doth no ways comport with his Speech upon the Scaffold; wherein he mentioneth no such thing, but rather the contrary. Nor did he declare any such thing when he came to Die. He said indeed, that he was de∣ceived and misled, but no where, that he dissembled. And if he were deceived, he dissembled not. CHAP. IV. Peter Martyr departs. A Parliament. THE Strangers had this piece of Mercy shewn them,P. Martyr de∣parts. that they were suffered to depart the Kingdom. Among the rest that went away this Year was Peter Martyr, the famous and learned Pro∣fessor of Divinity in Oxford. But with much ado; For at first he was not only forbid to read his Lectures, but not to stir a Foot out of the City of Oxon, nor to convey any of his Goods away. He obeyed, and afterwards was permitted by the Council to depart. He came first to Lambeth to the Arch-bishop; but when he was commit∣ted to Prison, Martyr went to London, where he remained in great Danger, both for his Religion, and for his great Familiarity with the Arch-bishop, and other pious Protestant Bishops. However he thought not fit to transport himself without leave from the Go∣vernment. He signified to them, that he came not hither on his own Head, but that he was sent for by K. Edward, and sent from the Town of Strasburgh. And produced his Broad-seals from both. And so since there was no further need of him, he desired leave to depart. Which he obtained by Letters from the Queen her self. But the Pa∣pists, his fatal Enemies, cried out, That such an Enemy of the Po∣pish Religion ought not to be dismist, but to be fetched out of the Ship, and carried to Prison, and punished. He understood also by his Friends, that when he was got over the Sea, the Danger was not past. For there were Snares for him in Flanders and Brabant; whereby they made no doubt to take him. But he used his Wits to save himself. For when other Congregations of Protestant Strangers went straight, some for Freezland, and some for Denmark, by Vessels they had hired, (among which was Iohn a Lasco's Congregation) he procured an honest and godly Ship-master, who kept him fourteen Days in his own House, that so all might think he was gone with the other Strangers, and his Enemies cease making search for him in the Ves∣sels that were bound for Foreign Parts. And then the Master sailed away with P. Martyr to Antwerp, going into that Place by Night for the more privacy. And by him he was brought to his Friends; and by them, before Day, conveyed in a Waggon out of Town, and so travelled safely through Countries that hated him, unto Strasburgh. And by God's Goodness, and his own Celerity, he arrived safe among
his Friends, who received him with the greatest Joy. And the Se∣nate conferred upon him his old Place which he enjoyed before he went for England.Vit. P. Mart. per Simler. And Martyr needed not to be discontented that he was gotten out of England,Malice towards him. considering how insufferably he was affronted, undermined, belied by the Popish Party in Oxon: Who, one would think might have better intreated a Man of Quality by Birth; a Man besides, of great Learning, Integrity and Reverence, and whom the King had thought good for his great Parts to place for his Professor of Divinity in that University; and a Man who also had always carried himself inoffensively unto all. The blame of this inhospitable Usage might lie upon the English Nation, and be a Reflection upon the Natives; were it not more truly to be laid to the furious Spirit that Popish Prin∣ciples inspire Men with. This Peter Martyr did resent, and took no∣tice of to the Arch-bishop of Canterbury in his Epistle Dedicatory, before his Book of the Eucharist. There he writes, That he could not have thought there were any in the World, unless he had found it, that with such crafty Wiles, deceitful Tricks, and bitter Slanders, would rage so against a Man that deserved no manner of Evil of them, nor ever hurt any one of them either in Word or Deed. And yet they tore his Name with most shameless Lies; and would never make an end. And if they did thus rudely carry themselves towards him in K. Edward's Time, what then may we conclude they would do, when the Government favoured them? A Scandal of the Queen.In this first Year of Q. Mary, a very foul Scandal was blown about of her, that She was with Child by her Chancellor, Bishop Gardi∣ner; however it was raised, whether of her Enemies to render her odious, or of some Zealots of Popish Religion, to shew the desire they had of her Matching with him, or some other round Roman Catholick, as he was, and for whom She carried a very great Reve∣rence. A great Reflection upon her Chastity, and might have spoiled her Marriage. It fled as far as Norfolk, and there spred it self. But such an infamous Report, not being fit to be put up, Henry Earl of Sussex, being Lord Lieutenant of that County, took upon him to examine this Scandal, and to search it to the very first Re∣porter.Titus B. 2. And so I find a Bill drawn, in the Cotton-Library, subscri∣bed by that Earl's own Hand, which set forth, that Laurence Hunt of Disse in Norfolk, came to Robert Lowdal, Chief Constable, and told him, That he did hear say, that the Queen's Majesty was with Child by the said Bishop, and that his Wife did tell him so. And when his Wife was examined, She said, She had it of one Sheldrake's Wife. And when Sheldrake's Wife was examined She said, She had it of her Husband. And when he was examined, he said he had it of one Wilby of Diss. And Wilby examined, said, he had it of one Iohn Smith, of Cockstreet. And Iohn Smith said, he heard it of one Widow Miles. And She being examined, said, she had it of two Men, but what they were she could not tell, nor where they dwelt. And then after this Bill follow all their Examinations distinctly. Which I suppose was drawn up for the Council, signed with Sussex's Hand. And what followed of this I know not. Only in ano∣ther Manuscript there is a Memorial of one Iohn Albone of Trunch
in Norfolk, who in the first of the Queen was indicted for saying, that the Queen was with Child by Winchester. A Parliament met this Year in the Month of October. The Queen knew how difficult it would be to obtain her Purpose,A Parliament. to overthrow all that had been established concerning Religion in her Brother's Days; And therefore when this Parliament was to be summoned, She impeached the free Election of Members, by dispatching abroad into the several Counties her Letters directing the choice.Hales Oration▪ And such Knights and Burgesses were chosen by Force and Threatning for many Places, as were judged fit to serve her Turn. And divers that were duly chosen, and lawfully returned, were thrust out, and others without any Order or Law put in their Places. For the People were aware what the Queen intended this Parliament should do; and therefore did bestir themselves in most Places to return ho∣nest Men. In the Upper House Taylor Bishop of Lincoln was in his Robes violently thrust out of the House. In the House of Com∣mons, Alexander Nowel, and two more, chosen Burgesses, lawfully chosen, returned and admitted, were so served. Which, according to the Judgment of some, made the Parliament actually void, as by a Precedent of the Parliament holden at Coventry in the 38o of H. VI. it appeareth. As also her third Parliament was reckoned by many to be void, because in the Writs, from Philip and Mary, part of the Title of the Kings of England, viz. Supream Head of the Church of England, was left out. Which by a Statute made in the 35o of Henry VIII. was ordained to be united and annexed for ever to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. In which third Parliament of the Queen they repealed what was done by K. Henry VIII. for the restitution of the Liberty of the Realm, and extinguishing the usurped Authority of the Bishop of Rome. This Flaw Gardiner, the Lord Chancellor well seeing, thought craftily to excuse by saying, (as may be seen in a Piece of the Statute made in the same Parliament, Cap. 8.) That it lay in the free Choice, and free Liberty of the Kings of this Realm, whether they would express the same Title in their Stile, or no. But it is replied to this, that though any Man may renounce his own private Right, yet he may not renounce his Right in that which toucheth the Common-Wealth, or a third Person. And this Title and Stile more touched the Common-Wealth, and the Realm of England, than the King. In this first Parliament an Act was made for confirmation of the Marriage of the Queen's Mother to her Father K. Henry.The Parlia∣ment repeal Q. Katherine's Divorce; and Cranmer taxed for it. Herein the leading Men shewed their Malice against the good Arch-bishop by their wording of the Preamble: as That Thomas Cranmer, late Arch-bishop did, most ungodly and against Law, judg the Divorce upon his own unadvised Understanding of the Scriptures, and up∣on the Testimonies of the Universities, and some bare and most untrue Conjectures. And they declared the Sentence given by him to be unlawful. But I cannot let this pass, for the Reputation of the Arch-bishop, without taking notice of the Censure that the Bishop of Sarum doth worthily bestow upon Bishop Gardiner,Hist. Reform. Vol. 2. p. 254. whom he concludes to be the drawer up of this Act: That he shewed himself herein to be past all Shame, and that it was as high a
pitch of Malice and Impudence, as could be devised. For Gar∣diner had been setting this on long before Cranmer was known to the King, and had joined with him in the Commission, and had given his Consent to the Sentence. Nor was the Divorce meerly grounded upon Cranmer's understanding the Scriptures, but upon the fullest and most studied Arguments, that had perhaps been in any Age brought together in one particular Case. And both Houses of Convocation had condemned the Marriage before his Sentence. CHAP. V. The Arch-bishop Attainted. The ABp at∣tainted of Treason.THIS Parliament Attainted Cranmer with the Lady Iane and her Husband, and some others. And in November he was adjug∣ed guilty of High Treason at Guild-hall. And under this Judgment he lay for a good while: which was very uneasy to him, desiring to suffer under the imputation of Heresy under this Government, rather than Treason. He was now looked upon as devested of his Arch-bishoprick, being a Person attainted: And the Fruits of his Bi∣shoprick were Sequestred. The Dean of Canterbury acts in the Vacan∣cy.Canterbury being now without an Arch-bishop, the Dean, Dr. VVotton, acted in that Station, according to his Office, in the Vacancy of the See. So he sent out many Commissions. There was a Com∣mission from him to Iohn Cotterel, and VVilliam Bowerman, to exer∣cise Jurisdiction in the See of VVells,Ex Reg. Eccl. Cant. by the Resignation of Barlow Bishop there. Another Commission to the See of Bristol, upon the Resignation of Bush. Another for the See of Litchfield, up∣on the Death of Richard Sampson. Which Commission was di∣rected to David Pool, LL. D. dated 1554. Septemb. ult. Another to exercise Jurisdiction in the See of Exon, Vacant by the Death of Veysy, February 9. 1554. Another for the Consecration of Gilbert Bourn Bishop of Bath and VVells, Iohn VVhite Bishop of Lincoln, Morice Griffith of Rochester, Iohn Cotes of Chester, Henry Morgan of S. David's, Iames Brook of Glocester. Who were all Consecrated to∣gether in the Church of S. Saviour's Southwark, April 1. 1554. This Commission I suppose was to the Bishop of VVinchester. Another Commission for the Consecration of Hopton Bishop of Norwich, dated Octob. 6. 1554. consecrated Octob. 28. following. Another Commission to Consecrate Holiman Bishop of Bristol, and Bayn Bi∣shop of Litchfield, dated Novemb. 16, 1554. consecrated Novemb. 18. following. Another Commission to Consecrate Iames Turbervil Bi∣shop of Exon, who was Consecrated September 8. 1555. And for VVilliam Glin Bishop of Bangor, the same Date. All these five last named were Consecrated in a Chappel of the Bishop of London in London. The ABp sues for Pardon of Treason.The poor Arch-bishop most instantly sued to the Queen for his Pardon, acknowledging his Fault in the most submissive manner that could be. But though She had granted Pardons to divers others that had signed K. Edward's Will, and made no such boggle to do it as the
Arch-bishop did, yet the Arch-bishop remained unpardoned. He sent divers humble petitionary Letters to the Queen and her Council for the obtaining this Favour. In one Letter to her, he called it his Hainous Folly and Offence: and said, That he never liked it; nor that any thing that the Queen's Brother ever did, grieved him so much: and that if it had been in his Power, he would have letted the doing of it: That divers of the Queen's Council knew what he had said to the King and the Council against proceeding in it: and that he endeavoured to talk to the King alone about it, but was not permitted: and that when he could not disswade him from this Will, he was hardly brought to sign it, notwithstanding what the Judges told him, to satisfy him in Point of Law. And that at last it was the King's earnest Request to him, that he would not be the only Man that refused it. Which with the Judgment of the Lawyers, overcame him to set his Hand. But I refer the Reader to the Appendix to weigh this whole Letter,No. LXXIV. as it is there transcribed. Another Petition the next Year, 1554, he sent up from Oxon, by Dr. VVeston, to the Council. And therein he begged them to interceed with the Queen for his Pardon. But VVeston carrying it half-way to London, and then opening it, and seeing the Contents of it, sent it back again to the Arch-bishop, and refused to be the Mes∣senger. This at length was the Resolution that was taken concerning him in this Matter: (because for shame,Obtains it. they could not deny him a Par∣don, when others far more Guilty, and deeper in the Business, had it) That he should be pardoned the Treason as an Act of the Queen's Grace, and then he should be proceeded against for Heresy, for di they were resolved he should. When this Pardon was at length ob∣tained, he was right glad; being very gladly ready to undergo Af∣flictions for the Doctrine that he had taught, and the Reformation he had set on Foot, because this he reckoned to be suffering for God's Cause, and not as an Evil-doer. The Arch-bishop looked now with weeping Eyes upon the present sad Condition of Religion,He desires to open his Mind to the Queen concerning Re∣ligion. and the miserable Apostacy of the Church, lapsed into all the formerly rejected Superstitions. Nor could he now procure any Redress. Yet he felt a pressure upon his Spirit to do something towards it. So he attempted in a Letter to the Queen, to get Liberty from her freely to open to her his Mind about the State of Religion: Hoping that when She heard plainly and truly the Reasons that moved her Father and Brother to do what they did (a thing studiously concealed from her) She might be bet∣ter inclined. He told her, That indeed it lay not in him▪ nor in any private Subject, to reform Things, but only in her Majesty, but quietly to suffer what they could not amend; yet he thought it his Duty, considering what Place he once bore, and knowing what he did, and bearing a great part in all the Alterations made in Re∣ligion, to shew the Queen his Mind. And when he had done this, then he should think himself discharged. And therefore he ear∣nestly sued to her for her leave. But I do not find that ever he ob∣tained it.
CHAP. VI. A Convocation. A Convocati∣on.THERE was now a Convocation: which was so packed, or so compliant, that six only of the whole House publickly owned K. Edward's Reformation: Haddon Dean of Exon, Philips Dean of Rochester, Young Chanter of S. David's, Philpot Arch-dea∣con of VVinchester, Elmer Arch-deacon of Stow, and Cheiny Arch-deacon of Hereford, which last owned the Presence with the Papists, but denied the Transubstantiation. The Queen commanded this Convocation to hold a publick Disputation at S. Paul's Church, con∣cerning the Natural Presence of Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar. Which how well it was opposed by four or five of the six (for Young went away) in the presence of abundance of Noblemen and others, recourse is to be had to Fox. There was a true Report of the Disputation of these Men at this Convocation, which Philpot, one of the Disputants, wrote, and had it printed. Which he owned at one of his Examinations before the Bishop of London and others; And perhaps may be the same we have extant in Fox's Mon∣ments. But because both Fox and Bishop Burnet are brief concerning the opening of this Convocation,How it open∣ed. therein I shall be more large and par∣ticular. The Bishop of London's Chaplain, Harpsfield, began in a Sermon at Paul's to the Clergy then assembled. That finished, those of the Upper House advised those of the Lower to chuse a Prolocu∣tor. And they chose Weston Dean of VVestminster. Who by P Dean of Chichester, and VVymbesly Arch-deacon of London, was presented by Speeches to the Bishops. At which time VVeston made his gratulatory Oration to the House, and the Bishop of London an∣swered him. Which Sermon and four Orations were put together in a Book printed in December, 1553. by Cawood. Harpsfield's Text was, Attendite vobis, & universo gregi, &c. Act. 20. Whence he took occasi∣on to treat of three Things. I. How well Paul took heed to him∣self and his Flock. II. How ill the Pastors of late regarded each. III. What way was to be used, that they might take heed to them∣selves and their Flocks. Under the first Head he shewed how S. Paul took heed to himself by keeping under his Body, and bring∣ing it into Subjection: by taking heed of three Pests of an Ecclesiastical Lie, Flattery, Avarice, and Vain-glory: and that he might in all things propound himself a Pattern to Believers. And Secondly, as he thus took heed to himself, so he took heed to the Flock in three particulars: In the Doctrine, which he preached; In his diligence to preserve his Flock from Wolves; and in his Impo∣sition of Hands, whereby he provided it Ministers for the Church. And then, when he came unto the Second Head in the Division of his Discourse, he took occasion at large to vent his Malice against the Reformed Ministers in K. Edward's Days; shewing how they failed in all the Particulars before-said. That they were Belly-Gods; gave themselves over to Junketings and pampering of their
Carcases: that they were unchaste, taking to themselves Wives, some that had lived threescore Years single. That they were Flat∣terers, Insinuating themselves into the Favour of the Courtiers: Covetous also, keeping no Hospitality; Vain-glorious, vaunting themselves to understand the Holy Scripture, as well as any of the Antients, daring to compare themselves with Hierom, Augustin, Ambrose, &c. And some of them from a Shop, endued with no liberal Discipline, not so much as Grammar, would mount the Pulpit, and there give out themselves for Learned Men, if they did but rail against whatsoever was Holy, and boast that they had the Spirit. No Vice of the Laity, but they were guilty of it. And then as to their neglect of the Flock, their Doctrine was such, as they might well repent and be ashamed of. How did they tear the Lord's Flock, and how many Souls send to Hell, and what pernicious Doctrines bring into the Kingdom? That they brought into the Ministery, and to preach God's Word, Coblers, Dyers, Weavers, Fullers, Barbars, Apothecaries, Beggers, Jesters, fitter for the Plow-tail than the Ministry of the Word. And with a great deal more of such railing Stuff were the Minds of the Clergy to be prepared, vigorously to overthrow all the Reformation, and to bring back Popery again. The Tower, as well as the Fleet and Marshalsea,The ABp and three more crowded toge∣ther in the Tower. was crowded with Prisoners. All that were supposed to favour Religion, or that made any whisper against the Popish Religion, or that had any the least Hand in Q. Iane's Business, being taken up and committed. The Tower being so full, our Arch-bishop Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, and Bradford, were all thrust together into one Chamber. Which how∣ever inconvenient it were, yet they were very glad to be together; that they might have the opportunity of conferring with one ano∣ther, and establishing one another. There they read over the New Testament together with great deliberation and study; on purpose to see if there were any thing that might favour that Popish Doctrine of a Corporal Presence. But after all, they could find no Presence, but a Spiritual. Nor that the Mass was any Sacrifice for Sin. But they found in that Holy Book, that the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross was perfect, holy and good; and that God did require none other, nor that it should be ever done again: as Latimer, one of the four, related in his Protestation given to VVeston. CHAP. VII. The Queen sends to Cardinal Pole. THE Queen out of that great Opinion She had of Cardinal Pole,The Queen sends to Pole. either to make him her Husband, or her Arch-bishop in Cran∣mer's Room, sent Letters to him, one dated from London, October 28. written in Latin, conveyed to him from the Emperor's Court: pro∣bably brought thither by Commendone, who had been sent by the Pope's Legat in that Court, a private Agent unto her: and another Dated Ianuary 28. The Cardinal was coming now from the Pope,
as his Legate, and in his Journey staid, for some Reason of State, in the Emperor's Dominions. In this stay he thought fit in answer to both her Letters, to send his Mind at large by his Messenger Thomas Goldwel; who was once, if I mistake not, Prior of the Church of Canterbury; but long since fled out of England, and lived with Pole; and by the Queen afterwards preferred to the Bishoprick of S. Asaph. The Contents of her Letters.The Contents of the Queen's former Letter consisted in two Points: The one concerning the difficulty She feared in renouncing the Title of the Supremacy.Concerning theSupremacy. For She writ him, that when the Parliament yielded to the abolishing of the Laws, wherein her Mother's Matri∣mony was made Illegitimate, the lower House willingly agreed to the establishment of her Right of succeeding to the Crown, but made a great boggle of abolishing the Title of the Supremacy: thinking that might be a way to the introducing the Pope's Authori∣ty again, which they could not gladly hear of: And therefore neither did they like to hear of a Legate from the Pope. Hence the Queen, who knew Pole was now commissioned by the Pope for his Legate in this Kingdom, and ready to come, did entreat him to stop for a while. And She desired his Advice, in case the Parliament would not be brought to let go the Law, wherein the Supremacy was pla∣ced in the Crown Imperial of this Land. The other Point, wherein the Queen desired information of the Cardinal, was, how the Com∣mission She had privately given to Commendone, was published in the Consistory of Rome, as her Ambassador resident at Venice had certified her. Concerning the new Bi∣shops.The Sum of her other Letter to the Cardinal, was, concerning cer∣tain Persons, that She had in her intentions to make Bishops in the void Sees: They were Morgan, White, Parfew, Coates, Brooks, Ho∣liman and Bayn: How they might be put into those Sees without de∣rogation to the Authority of the See Apostolick. For She intended not to extend the Power of the Crown further than it was in use before the Schism. She sent him also the two Acts that had past in the Par∣liament, the one of the Legitimation of the Matrimony of Q. Ka∣tharine with K. Henry, and the other of the Sacraments to be used in that manner as they were used the last Year of K. Henry VIII. which She sent to him, because She knew they would be Matter of Com∣fort and Satisfaction to him. Pole's Advice to the Queen.As to both these Letters of the Queen, he gave Instructions to Gold∣wel to signify to her Majesty what his Thoughts were. As to the first his Advice was, That the Authority and Acceptableness of the Per∣son goes a great way, to make any Proposition well entertained and received by the People.Instructions to Goldwel. Titus B. 2. And that seeing there were none, neither of the Temporalty nor Spiritualty, but that had either spoke or writ against the Pope's Supremacy; therefore he thought that her Majesty her self would be the fittest Person to propound it with her own Mouth. Which was the course the Emperor took to justify his War with the French King. He did it by his own Mouth before the Pope and Cardinals. He would have her at the same time to let the Parliament know plainly, that he (Cardinal Pole) being the Pope's Legate, was to be admitted and sent for.
And therefore that in order to this the Law of his Banishment might be repealed, and he restored in Blood. As to the second Point, which seemed to offend the Queen, that Commendone had re∣vealed that in the Consistory, which She told him in much Secresy, Pole said, That he kept her Counsel, and told nothing that he heard from her Mouth, but only what he had heard of certain devout Catholicks that knew the Queen's mind. Which was in general concerning the devout Mind her Majesty bare to God and the Church: But that nothing was spoken of that particular Mat∣ter, that She would have none but the Pope made acquainted with. Which private matter it seems was, that She desired the Pope to make Pole his Legate to England. But that he should be thus stopped in his Journey,Disgusts his stop. when the Pope had sent him upon such a weighty Errand, the Cardinal sig∣nified in the same Letter his disgust of. And, He feared it might be so ill taken by the Pope and Cardinals, that they might send for him back again to Rome, and not permit him to go on that intended charitable Design. And that it was contrary to her first Commission; when She shewed, more fervency to receive the Obedience of the Church, (as he took the confidence to tell her). And that therefore he was in some suspicion, that the next Com∣mission he should receive from the Pope, should be to return back into Italy again: Because the Pope might think, that he had done his part touching his Demonstration of his Care of the Queen, and her Realms, when he offered both so readily all Graces that tended to make a Reconciliation of both to the Church. In which perhaps, (said he) the Cardinals would think his Holiness had been too Liberal. And that they might take his Stop, without their Consent, for a great Indignity. And this Revocation he still more feared, if his stay should be deferred any longer space. The Cardinal upon this his Stay sent a Servant of his by Post to Rome to make a fair Excuse for this Stop; namely,Sends to Rome about this his stop, that the Queen shortly trusted that the Matters of the Parliament should have that Satisfaction that the Cardinal desired. Which was the effect of a Letter the Queen writ to one Henry Pyning his Servant. He also let the Pope know by the aforesaid Messenger, that it was the Empe∣peror's Advice, that the Queen should proceed in Matters of Religi∣on warily and slowly, and not to be too hasty, until temporal Matters were better settled. He also wrote Letters to the Emperor,And to the Emperor. which he sent by his Ser∣vant Pyning, to perswade him to remove this Stop: and bad his said Servant to repair to the Emperor's Confessor, that he should perso∣nally resort unto him, and by all means possible, move the Emperor to let the Cardinal go forward. As to the two Acts of Parliament, which the Queen sent him,His Judgment of two late Acts of Par∣liament. he wrote her, That they were partly to his Satisfaction, and partly not. For the Act of Ratification of the Matrimony was defec∣tive, in that the Parliament mentioning the Wisdom of the Parents in making the Match, did make no mention of their Wisdom; in that, besides their own Consent, they procured the Pope's Dis∣pensation, and the Authority of the See Apostolick; whereby the
impediments of Conjunction by the Laws of the Church were taken away: Which, (he added) ought by all means to have been mentioned. As to the other Act for Confirmation of the Sacra∣ments, the defect of that, (he said) lay, in that this Act made those capable of partaking of the Sacraments, that were not yet entred into the Unity of the Church, and remained still in Schism. But to receive more full Satisfaction in these matters I refer the Reader to the Instructions given by the Cardinal to Goldwel, as they may be read in the Appendix.No. LXXV. CHAP. VIII. The Dealings with the Married Clergy. The married Clergy depri∣ved, and di∣vorced.THE Marriage of the Clergy gave great Offence to those that were now uppermost. For many of both Perswasions, Pa∣pists as well as Protestants, had taken Wives; it being allowed by a Law in K. Edward's Days; but would now no longer be endured, and was pretended to be against an Oath they had taken, when they received Holy Orders. For the Queen sent a Letter and Instructions, dated March 4, to all the Bishops; some of the Contents whereof were, To deprive all the Married Clergy, and to amove them from their Benefices and Promotions Ecclesiastical; and besides this, not to suffer them to abide with their Wives, or Women, (as the Papists now chose rather to stile them) but to divorse and punish them. But that such Priests should be somewhat more favourably dealt withall, that with the Consent of their Wives, did openly promise to abstain. These nevertheless were to be enjoined Pe∣nance by the Bishop, and then it lay in him to admit them again to their former Ministration; but not in the same Place they were in before. Of which they were to be deprived; and a part of that Benefice they were outed of, was to be allowed them, ac∣cording to the Bishop's Discretion. According to these Instructi∣ons of the Queen, a sad Havock was made among the Clergy, some thousands being computed to be put out of their Livings upon this Account. And a good Expedient it proved to get rid of the soberer Clergy, that were not for the present Turn. That the Reader may take some prospect of these Transactions with the Married Clergy, I will here set down what was done with some of them under the Jurisdiction of Canterbury by the Dean and Chapter, our Arch-bishop being now laid aside. Married Priests in London cited to appear.Of those Priests, beneficed in London, that pertained to the Arch-bishop of Canterbury's Jurisdiction there, nine were cited, by a Ci∣tation March 7, (that is but three Days after the Queen's Letter) from the Dean and Chapter, Sede Cant. tunc vacante, (as it is said in the said Citation) to appear in Bow-Church London, before Henry Harvey, LL. D. Vicar-general, for being Married Men. These Per∣sons thus cited were these: Iohn Ioseph Rector of the Church of S. Mary Le Bow, Stephen Green Rector of S. Dionys Back-Church, Laurence Saunders Rector of the Church of Alhallowes in Bredstreet.
Peter Alexander Rector of Alhallowes Lumbard-street, Christopher Ashburn Rector of S. Michael's Crooked-Lane, Thomas Mountain Rector of S. Michaels in Riolane, Iohn Turnor Rector of S. Leonards in East-cheap, Richard Marsh Rector of S. Pancrace, Iohn Eliot School-master in the Parish of S. Leonard East-cheap. It may not be amiss to set down the Tenor, wherein the Citation ran, viz. That since it was (alas!) notoriously manifest,Ex Regist. ccl. Cant. Quod Rectores & Presbyteri, quorum nomina in pede hujus Edicti specificantur, con∣tra jura Ecclesiae, sanctorum patrum Decreta, & laudabiles Ecclesiae Ca∣tholicae generatim observatas & usitatas consuetudines, sese praetextu foederis conjugalis cum nonnullis foeminis illicitè conjunxerint, sub falsa Matrimonii appellatione, cum iisdem publicè cohabitaverint, & im∣pudicè vixerint, in voti sui aliàs emissi violationem, animarum su∣arum detrimentum, ac aliorum Christi fidelium exemplum longè perniciosum, in Christi Ecclesia non ferendum, unde pro officii nostri debito, & tantorum scelerum ab Ecclesiae Christi eliminati∣one penitus eradicandum, &c. juxta illustrissimae Dominae nostrae Reginae monitionis in hac parte continentiam procedere volentes, &c. The Citation was returned by the Apparitor: who declared, That he found and personally cited Richard Marsh and Iohn Turnor, and that he affixed the Citation of the rest on the Church Doors, belong∣ing to the respective Rectors, on March 8. And no wonder the Ap∣paritor met with no more of them, some being fled, and some in Prison, and some already violently turned out of their Churches and gone. On March 16. according to the Citation, Marsh and Tur∣nor made their personal appearance, and were sworn to make true answer to such Interrogatories as should be put to them. What those Interrogatories were, I shall set down by and by. These Persons con∣fessed, that they made profession of Religious Vows, and after holy Orders, were married, and lived with their Wives. Hereupon Sen∣tence was denounced against them, to prohibite them to officiate, and to suspend them from the Profits of their Benefices. And on Monday following, to appear again to receive further Sentence of Deprivation, Divorce, &c. Iohn Eliot, School-master, it seems sub∣mitted to Penance: for he was not presently thrust out of his School, but enjoined not to teach his Scholars Matins, Psalter, or the like, in English, but in Latin, so as they might be able to answer the Priest that officiated. The rest, that appeared not, were declared contuma∣cious, and to be proceeded against on Monday following, by Depri∣vation, &c. The Interrogatories ministred unto these Men,Interrogato∣ries for the married Cler∣gy. and to be mini∣stred to all other Married Priests, were these. I. An fuit Religiosus: Cujus ordinis; & in quo Monasterio sive Domo. II. An fuit promotus ad sacros Ordines, dum fuit in Monasterio. III. In quo & quibus sacris: & an ministravit in Altaris ministe∣rio; & quot annis. IV. An citra professionem regularem conjunxit se mulieri sub appel∣latione Matrimonii. V. Cum qua: & in qua Ecclesia fuit solemnizatio Matrimonii; & per quem.
VI. Quam duxit, eratne soluta, an vidua. VII. An cohabitavit cum ea in una & eadem domo, ut vir cum uxore. VIII. An prolem, vel proles ex ea sustentaverit, necne. IX. An post & citra Matrimonii hujusmodi solemnizationem, assecu∣tus fuit, & est, beneficium ecclesiasticum, habens Curam animarum, & quot annis illud obtinuit. X. An officium Sacerdotis post & citra assertum matrimonium hujus∣modi contractum, in altaris ministerio se immiscuit, & Sacramentis & Sacramentalibus ministrandis se ingessit. XI. An praemissa omnia & singula fuerunt & sunt vera. According to these Articles, the Confessions of Marsh, Turnor and Eliot, are registred at large. On Monday March 19, Sentence was pronounced against Marsh and Turnor, 1. Of Deprivation from their Benefices. 2. Of Suspension from their Priestly Function. 3. Of Inhibition to cohabit with their Wives. 4. Of nulling and voiding the pretended Bond of Matrimony; And, 5. of declaration of fur∣ther Punishments, according to the Canons of the Church. And▪ March 20, the like Sentence was pronounced against the rest that did not appear. Next, the Sentence of Divorce against Iohn Turnor and his Wife was pronounced: and he was ordered to do penance on May 14, 1554, in his late Parish-Church of East-cheap, by hold∣ing a burning wax Taper, and making a Solemn Confession openly and distinctly, with a loud Voice, standing in the Body of the Church before the face of the People, in these words following: Turnor's Con∣fession.GOod People, I am come hither, at this present time, to declare unto you my sorrowful and penitent Heart, for that being a Priest,Ex Regist. Eccl. Cant. I have presumed to marry one Amy German, Widow; and under pretence of that Matrimony, contrary to the Canons and Custom of the Universal Church, have kept her as my Wife, and lived contrary to the Canons and Ordinances of the Church, and to the evil Example of good Christen People: Whereby now being ashamed of my former wicked living here, I ask Almighty God Mercy and Forgiveness, and the whole Church; and am sorry and penitent even from the bottom of my Heart therefore. And in to∣ken hereof, I am here, as you see, to declare and shew unto you this my Repentance, that before God on the latter Day you may testify with me of the same. And I most heartily and humbly pray, and desire you all, whom by this evil Example doing I have greatly offended, that for your part you will forgive me, and re∣member me in your Prayers, that God may give me Grace, that hereafter I may live a continent Life, according to his Laws, and the godly Ordinances of our Mother the holy Catholick Church, through and by his Grace. And do here before you all openly pro∣mise for to do, during my Life. The manner of the Restitution of these Priests, thus performing their Penance, may be seen in the Appendix.No. LXXV. And this is some Account of the Church of Canterbury's Doings, in pursuance of the Queen's Instructions before-mentioned.Boner deprives the married Clergy in Lon∣don, without order. But Bi∣shop Boner, with his Zeal, was before-hand with the Queen; not staying for any Orders from Above in dealing with his Clergy; but
of his own Power, in the latter end of February, deprived all mar∣ried Priests, in his Diocess in London, from their Livings. And af∣ter this done, commanded them all to bring their Wives within a fortnight, that they might be divorced from them. These were some of the Doings with the Married Priests in Lon∣don. And in the same manner did they proceed about this time in Canterbury with Edmund Cranmer, the Arch-bishop's Brother,Married Pre∣bendaries in Canterbury, pro∣ceeded against. Arch-deacon and Prebendary of that Church; together with William Wil∣loughby, William Devenish and Robert Goldson, Prebendaries, and divers others. For March 15. At the Chapter-house in Canterbury, before Henry Harvey LL. D. Vicar-general, Richard Bishop of Dover, Subdean, Richard Parkhurst and Iohn Mills, Prebendaries of the said Church, personally appeared the said Arch-deacon and Prebendaries, Thomas Brook and Tho. Stevens, Preachers, and Sherland and Good∣rick Petty Canons of the said Church: Who all subscribed with their own Hands to a Confession of certain Articles exhibited against them, touching their being Married. And being asked, what they could say, why they should not be suspended, and deprived for the said pretended Marriages, They gave this Answer, as it is set down in the Register of that Church; Se nihil habere dicendum, &c. That they had nothing to say that might be profitable for them, the Ecclesiastical Law, and the Decrees of the Holy Fathers stand∣ing in their full Force: But by the Law of God, they thought they had lawfully married their Wives; and being married, might not forsake them with a safe Conscience. Then Sentence of Suspension from Priestly Function, Sequestration, Deprivation, and Prohibition to live with their Wives, was pronounced. It is regi∣stred, that they acquiesced in these Sentences against them, no one of them appealing, but all remaining silent. This is the Account of the good Arch-bishop's Brother, his manner of Deprivation, and his peaceable Behaviour under it. Thus he was deprived of his Prebend,Edmund Cran∣mer deprived of all. and one Robert Collins was admitted into the same: Of his Rectory of Ickham, and Robert Marsh succeeded him there, April 12. 1554. and of his Arch-deacon∣ry, and Nicolas Harpsfield was admitted thereunto.Reg. Eccl.Cant. Who at the same time entred into Obligation to pay, out of the Profits of the said Arch-deaconry, unto William Warham late Arch-deacon, during his Life, a yearly Pension of forty Pounds Sterling, March 31. 1554. But some of the Church then appeared not, being either fled, or in Prison; and those were pronounced Contumacious, viz. Iohn Ioseph, Peter Alexander, and Bernard Ochin, Prebendaries; Lancelot Ridley, Richard Turner, Thomas Becon and Richard Besely, Preachers. These Doings in all Quarters of the Realm raised great Admirati∣on among the People, upon divers and sundry Considerations,The Injustice of these Pro∣ceedings. inci∣dent and depending upon such Proceedings: Since these Marriages were no more than what were agreeable to the Laws of the Land. So that these married Preachers, in Marrying themselves, were no Transgressors of the Law: and yet underwent as great Punishments, as though they were so in some high Degree. And the Proceedings seemed contrary even to the Queen's Commission, comprized in cer∣tain Articles (before-mentioned) to her Bishops: Which was,
That they should proceed, according to Learning and Discretion, in these weighty Matters, and that they should not put any other Canons and Constitutions of the Church in exercise, than such as might stand with the Law of the Realm. Yet they went in most Pla∣ces both against Learning and Discretion, and the Laws of the Land. Martin's Book against Priests Marriage.For the bringing this to pass, they first possest the Queen with great Prejudices against these Marriages. They cried in her Ears, how un∣comely these Copulations were; how against God and his Honour; how against the Churches Decrees and Discipline; and how worthy to be dissolved again. And when they had obtained their Ends with the Queen, and gotten out her Letter and Instructions for that pur∣pose, and by Warrant thereof executed their Purposes; then for the giving a better Countenance to a thing that looked so odious, and had so much Severity in it, to the ruining of so many thousand Fa∣milies, Books were thought fit to be published; the purpose of which was to make Married Priests contemptible, and to shew how unlaw∣ful and wicked Marriage was in Men of Holy Orders. Dr. Thomas Martin's Book made the greatest Noise; a Book writ with a Brow of Brass, so did it abound with confident Untruths and Falshoods. And to the further accumulation of the heavy State of the Ministers deprived, were added in this Book most slanderous Accusations, and untrue Matters surmised against them to the Queen and Realm. The Author greatly pretended Antiquity and Authority all along for his Doctrine: Whereas indeed it was nothing but counterfeited Imitation of Authority, and belying Antiquity. And in short, (to give you the sense of one Supposed to be Bp Ponet. who wrote against the Book, and did suf∣ficiently expose it) It was meer Subtilty without Substance, Wit without Wisdom, Zeal without Knowledg, and Heat without Charity. To give but one Instance of the unfair and false dealing of the Author, he saith, in his Book, That the Hereticks affirmed, that all Priests and Bishops must of necessity Marry, whether they have the Gift of sole Life, or no; and that they were so beastly and ignorant, that they should teach that the Fel∣lowship and Company of a Woman in a Spiritual Man, is a means to perfect Religion, and that single Life was an hindrance to the same, and that they should despise all manner of Virginity and single Life in them that had the Gift of God; and that they pro∣nounced it wicked and abominable, and termed it a Doctrine of Devils, and the Invention of Antichrist. All which Bishop Ponet, in the Name of all the Protestants, in his Book did utterly deny, that ever they said, writ, or thought so. Wherein Win∣chester had the greatest Hand.This Book was indeed made by the Bishop of Winchester, when he was in the Tower, (and he borrowed much of it from Albertus Pighius) and published about that time: Martin being then a Student at the University of Bourges in France; it once happened in some Conversation there, that Edward the King of England was com∣mended, whether it were for his Vertue, or Learning, or Abilities beyond his Years; whereat Martin began, as it seemed, to eclipse the King's Honour by mentioning the Imprisonment of Winchester, say∣ing, That there was a Head-Papist Prisoner in England, meaning him. Upon which several asked him, Whether it was not the same
Winchester, that had set out an Hodgpodg concerning Marriage of Priests? He laughing, answered, It was even he. But that no Man ought to marvel; for that VVinchester was more meet for Warlike,Declaration of Boner's Arti∣cles, 1554. than for Ecclesiastical Disputations. Which Passage I have from Bale; who was acquainted at that University with Franciscus Baldwin, the Learned Professor of Law there.Thomas Mar∣tin, or Win∣chester under that Name Fol. 15. Mr. Mar∣tin, Winche∣ster's own Voice. Fol. 40. Gardi∣ner in his Book lately spread under the Name of Tho. Mar∣tin. Fol. 77. Bale's Declar. Out of this Book Martin framed that which went under his Name, with Winchester's Privity. And this was well enough known to Bale and others in those Times. Ponet said, that Martin was abused by others, who set him a-work to bear the Name, and to desire the Fame of so gay a Book, rather than he was the Author of it indeed. The said Ponet, or Poinet, late Bishop of Winchester, but now an Exile, very learnedly answered this Book, in two several Treati∣ses. The first was intitled, An Apology against Tho. Martin's Blasphe∣mies. In this Treatise, upon occasion of the Papists prohibition of Marriage to Priests, he proved, that the said Papists were Hereticks, and had taken part in the most principal Parts with all the Hereticks,Answered by Ponet. that had corrupted the true Church of Christ. The Second Trea∣tise, replenished with great Learning, he lived not to finish, (though some doubt whether he were the Author of this Book) but the Copy falling into the Hands of Matthew Parker Arch-bishop of Canterbury, he published it in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's Reign, with very large and excellent Additions of his own. Ponet had thorowly stu∣died this Point, and I believe was put upon the Study of it by Arch-bishop Cranmer, whose Chaplain he was. For before this, he put forth two Books upon this Argument, viz. Of the Marriage of Mi∣nisters; And a Defence of that Marriage. The last thing I have to say concerning these Orders taken with the Married Clergy, is, That there were two things thought very Hard,The Confes∣sions of the Married Priests. which were put upon those that were willing to comply, and put away their Wives. The one was in relation to the publick Confessions they were to make. Which were put into their Mouths by others, and drawn up for them in that manner, as made them tell horrible Lies. They must speak their own Shame in Bills of their Penance: lying against themselves most vilely, and most shamefully; disabling their Credit and Estimation for ever. And to give an Instance: One such Confession, which was much cried out against, was made by one Sir Iohn Busby of Windsor, Iune 29. in the Year 1555. Which Ponet calleth a goodly Confession of his hearty and earnest Repen∣tance. Which, saith he, was so finely penned,Def. of Pr. Marr. p. 269. and so Catholickly tracted, that I warrant you it was none of the smallest Fools that forged it. The other thing was,Married Priests that did their Penance, hard∣ly dealt with. that after these poor Men had thus done their Penances, and spoke their Confessions, the Imposers of these Penalties upon them were not so good as they pretended they would be, and as the Queen's Instructions required them to be, towards them: Not restoring them to their Ministration. Some that had been two or three Years parted from their Wives, could not be ad∣mitted again to Ministration: yet they must do open Penance, and go by the Cross, without any Redemption or Entreaty, that could be made.
CHAP. IX. Evils in this Change. A Parliament. A twofold Evil upon this turn of Reli∣gion.BY this time the face of the Church was perfectly changed: and all the Reformation that was made for twenty Years be∣fore, namely, from Cranmer's first ascent to the Archiepiscopal Chair to this time, was unravelled in less than a Year, and abolished. But the Favourers of the Gospel lamented it exceedingly: And Bishop Ridley writ a Treatise, wherein he shewed what a deplorable Change in Religion this was, by setting down at large what Religi∣on was in K. Edward's Days, and what it was at that present, laying the Cause of this sore Judgment upon the vile and naughty Lives of the People, so unsuitable to the good Religion professed. The Professors lamented two great Evils, lighting upon the People upon this turn of Religion: Not only that it brought the People into error and Superstition, but involved them universally in the Crime of Perjury. The blame of which they laid upon the Po∣pish Clergy. For they not only had connived at, but allowed and encouraged the casting off the Pope's Supremacy, and made both Priests and Laity swear to the King. And now they set up the Pope's Authority again in England, and required all to swear to that. For they compelled not only such as were Priests to perjure themselves, but all the Laity, Nobility, Gentry, Magistrates, Merchants and others; for hardly any were exempted the Oath of Supremacy in the former Reigns. For in every Law-day, the Keepers of the same were sworn to call all the Young Men of their Hundred, even as they came to Years of Discretion, to swear never to receive the Bishop of Rome, nor no other Foreign Potentate, to be Head of the People of England, but only the King and his Successors. Which Oath, if it were unlawful, as the Clergy-Men now said, then all the Realm had reason of high Displeasure against them, that so led them and knew it.The Dissimu∣lation of the Priests. Such gross Dissembling were the Bishops guilty of to the invol∣ving the People in Guilt. And this dissembling Quality the Priests still retained in this Queen's Days. For when any came to some of them, shewing them that his Conscience was not satisfied in the present way of Religion, the Priest would tell him, that he said the Truth; My Conscience, would he say, is as yours; but we must bear for a time; and that he himself looked for another Change. When another of a contrary Opinion came to the Priests, and talked about Religi∣on, they would say to him, That they had been deceived; and thanks be to God, said they, that ye kept your Conscience all this while. And even so was mine, but I durst not do any otherwise, but trusted that this time would come, as is now, thanks be to God. Nay and sometimes in the same Town, they would minister the Ser∣vice two ways to the People, to please both. In so much that the Bishops and Priests grew, for this Cause, as well as for their Cruelty, into great dislike with the People. This more at large is shewed in a short Manuscript Treatise I have, made by a certain Person nameless, imprisoned for Religion, intitled thus, All sorts of People of England
have just Cause of displeasure against the Bishops and Priests of the same.An. 1554. There was this Year, April 2, a new Parliament,A Parliament restore the Pope. that the last Year being dissolved. Great was the Sadness that now possessed the Hearts of the English Nation, even of Papists themselves, the most considerate and wisest part of them, seeing the great Slavery the Kingdom was like to be ensnared in, by what the Parliament was now in doing; that is to say, restoring the Pope's Tyranny here in England, that had been so long and happily cast out, and allowing the Queen's matching with Prince Philip; whereby a Spaniard should become King of England: Which when P. Martyr had signified, in a Letter from Strasburgh, to Calvin, May 8, he told him, Tanta est rerum perturbatio, ut nullo pacto explicari queat: That it could not be told what a Disturbance there now was; and that all good Men that could, fled away from their own Country, from all Parts of the Land: Mentioning three noble Knights to be come lately to Stras∣burg, not less famous for Piety then Learning, Morisin, Cheke and Cook. At this Parliament, wherein the Mass was set up, and con∣firmed by an Act, all that were suspected to favour the Truth, were turned out of the House. Which made Hoper out of Prison in one of his Letters write, Doubtless there had not been seen before our Time such a Parliament as this, that as many as were suspected to be Favourers of God's Word, should be banished out of both Houses. In this Parliament a strong and certain Report went,A Design to re∣vive the Six Articles. that the bloody Act of the Six Articles should be revived, and put in execution. This created abundance of Terror in Mens Hearts. There was no∣thing but Sighs and Lamentations every where: and a great many were already fled out of the Realm; unto whom this Rumor had reached. Iohn Fox, a Learned and Pious Man, who had an excel∣lent pathetick Stile, was now set on work. Who took his Pen in his Hand, and in the Name of the Protestant Exiles, wrote a most ear∣nest expostulatory Letter to the Parliament, to disswade them from restoring this Law again. He told them they had a Queen, who as She was most Noble, so She was ready to listen to sound and whole∣some Counsel. And that they had a Lord Chancellor, that as he was Learned, so of his own Nature he was not Bad, were it not for the Counsels of some. But that, as among Animals, some there were that were born to create Trouble and Destruction to the other: so there were among Mankind some by Nature cruel and destructive; some to the Church, and some to the State. The Letter is worthy the Reading. Which I have therefore placed in the Appendix,No. LXXVI. as I transcribed it out of a Manuscript Collection of Fox's Letters. There was indeed such a Design in the House of Commons, of bringing again into force that Act of the Six Articles; but whether it were by the importunity of this and other Petitions, or that the Court thought it not convenient so much to countenance any of K. Henry's Acts, this Business fell. And this Parliament was short-liv'd, for in May it was dissolved; by reason of a Bill for confirming Abby-Lands to the present Possessors, which it seems gave offence to the Court.
CHAP. X. Arch-bishop Cranmer disputes at Oxon. A Convocati∣on appoint a Dispute with Cranmer at Ox∣ford.A Convocation of the Clergy now met in S. Paul's, but was ad∣journed, the Prolocutor Dr. Weston Dean of Westminster, and some other of the Members, being sent to Oxon (and it was general∣ly thought the Parliament would remove thither too) to dispute cer∣tain Points of Religion in Controversy, with three of the Heads of the Protestant Party, Arch-bishop Cranmer, Bishop Ridley, and old Father Latimer, now all Prisoners. Who for that purpose, in the Month of April, were removed from the Tower, by the Queen's War∣rant to the Lieutenant, towards Windsor, and there taken into Custody of Sir Iohn (afterwards Lord) Williams, who conveyed them to Oxford, there to remain in order to a Disputation. The Convocation, while they sat at London, agreed upon the Questions to be disputed; and they resolved, that these three pious Men should be baited by both the Universities; and therefore that they of Cam∣bridg should be excited to repair to Oxford, and engage in this Dis∣putation also. The Questions were these: The Questions.I. In Sacramento Altaris virtute verbi divini a Sacerdote prolati, praesens est realiter, sub speciebus panis & vini, naturale corpus Christi, conceptum de virgine Maria: item naturalis ejus sanguis. II. Post consecrationem non remanet substantia panis & vini, ne{que} alia ulla substantia, nisi substantia Christi, Dei & Hominis. III. In Missa est vivisicum Ecclesiae Sacrificium pro peccatis, tam vivo∣rum, quam mortuorum, propitiabile. Sent to Cam∣bridg.These Questions the Convocation sent to the University of Cambridg, requiring them seriously to weigh and deliberate upon them, and if they contained true Doctrine, then to approve of them. Accordingly the Senate of that University met, and after due deli∣beration found them agreeable in all things to the Catholick Church, and the Scripture, and the antient Doctrine taught by the Fathers: and so did confirm and ratify them in their said Senate. And because Cranmer, Ridley and Latimer, the Heads of the Hereticks, that held contrary to these Articles, were formerly Members of their Universi∣ty, and being to be disputed withal at Oxford concerning these Points, they decreed, in the Name of all the University, to send seven of their Learned Doctors to Oxford, to take their parts in dis∣puting with them, and to use all ways possible to reclaim them to the Orthodox Doctrine again. And accordingly the said Senate, April 10. made a publick Instrument to authorize them in their Names to go to Oxford and dispute: Which Instrument may be seen in the Appendix.No. LXXVII. They also wrote a Letter the same Date to the University of Oxford, to signify, that they had appointed those Per∣sons to repair unto them, not so much to dispute Points so profes∣sedly Orthodox, and agreeable to the Fathers and General Councils, and the Word of God, as to defend those Truths in their Names, and reduce those Patrons of false and corrupt Doctrine, if possible, unto a sound Mind.No. LXXVIII. This Letter is also in the Appendix. So that this
coming of the Cambridg-Divines to Oxford was to seem a voluntary thing, to shew their Zeal for Popery, and vindication of their Uni∣versity against liking or approbation of Cranmer and his two Fellow-Prisoners. So roundly was the University already come about to the old forsaken Religion. This Oxford-Disputation was after this manner;The Dispu∣tants of Oxford and Cambridg. Hugh Weston S.T.P. Prolocutor of the Lower House of Convocation, Owin Oglethorp, Iohn Seton, W. Chedsey S. Th.P.P. Hen. Cole, Will. Geffrey LL.PP. William Pye, Ioh. Feckenham, Ioh. Harpsfield, S.T.B.B. representing the whole Lower House of Convocation, went down to Oxford. To them were join∣ed by Commission, the Chancellor of the University, the Vice-Chan∣cellor, the Professors and Doctors, &c. as namely, Holyman, Tresham, Ri. Marshal, Morwent, Smith, S. T. P. P. of Oxford: And Iohn Young, William Glyn, Ri. Atkinson, Tho. Watson, Cutbert Scot, Alban Lang∣dale, Tho. Sedgwick, S. Th. P. P. of Cambridg, in the Name of the Whole University. All these being met at S. Mary's, there were read the Letters Commissional to them, sealed with the Bishop of London's Seal, and the Subscription besides of the Bishops of Winton, Dur∣ham, Wigorn, Chichester, Lincoln, Bath, Roff. Hereford, S. Davids, Glocester and Oxon. And with these Letters were conveyed certain Articles, which had been lately by the Upper House resolved upon; which Articles were, of the Sacrament of the Altar, of Transubstan∣tiation, and of the Adoration of the Eucharist, and the Reservation of the Sacrament of the Church, and of its Institution, and by whom, and for whom, and to whom it is to be offered. The Contents of the Let∣ter were to summon before them Cranmer, Ridley and Latimer, and to propound those Articles to them to dispute on publickly. The Sum of which it seems were contracted into the three Questions abovesaid. Then they provided themselves three publick Notaries. Next, they celebrated and sung the Mass of the Holy Ghost. Then they went a Procession according to the Custom of the University. This formal Pageantry being finished, and the Commissioners re∣turned to S. Mary's, and being come into the Choire, to the number of three and thirty, seated themselves before the Altar. And then sent to the Mayor and Bailiffs to bring Dr. Cranmer before them, by virtue of the Queen's Letters to them. Who within a while was brought guarded with Bill-men. Coming before them, he gave them great Reverence,Cranmer brought be∣fore them. and stood with his Staff in his Hand. They offered him a Stool to sit, but he refused. Then VVeston the Prolocutor, began a Speech, wherein he commended Unity in the Church of Christ: and withal turning to the Arch-bishop, told him, how he had been a Catholick Man once, and in the same Unity, but that he had separated himself from it by teaching and setting forth erroneous Doctrine, making every Year a new Faith. And therefore that it had pleased the Queen to send them to him to recover him again, if it might be, to that Unity. And then shewed him the Articles to be disputed on, causing them to be read to him, and requiring his Answer and Opinion thereupon. Then the Arch-bishop answered extempore, That as for Unity, he was very glad of it, and said, that it was a Preserver of all Com∣mon-wealths, as well Heathen as Christian. And illustrated the
Matter by some Stories out of the Roman History. And added, that he should be very glad to come to an Unity, so it were in Christ, and according to the Church of God. Then he read over the Arti∣cles three or four times. And being asked, whether he would sub∣scribe to them, he answered, That in the form of words in which they were conceived, they were all false and against God's Word; and therefore that he would not agree in that Unity with them. Nevertheless, he said, if they would give him a Copy of the Arti∣cles, and time to consider of them, he would by to Morrow send them an Answer. Which was granted him, the Prolocutor bidding him write his Mind of them that Night. It was moreover agreed between them, that in whatsoever he dissented from them, they would proceed to publick Disputation thereupon, in the publick Schools, by Scholastical Arguments in Latin. And lastly, they told him, he should have what Books he would ask for. And so VVeston gave the Mayor charge of him, to be had to Bocardo, where he was before. His Behaviour.His Behaviour all this while was so grave and modest, that many Masters of Art, who were not of his Mind, could not forbear weeping. This was the Work of Saturday. On Sunday Cranmer sent in what he had writ upon the Articles to the Prolocutor to Lincoln-College, where he lay. Ridley brought,After Cranmer was carried back, the Mayor and Bailiffs brought Bishop Ridley. And when the same Articles were read to him, he said, That they were not true. But desired a Copy of them, and he would draw up in writing his Answer, and soon transmit it to them. And did offer to dispute, as Cranmer had done before. And Latimer.Lastly, Latimer was brought, to whom the Prolocutor said as he had to the two former. Latimer confessed, that in the Sacrament of the Altar there was a certain Presence, but not such an one as they would have. And he also promised to send them his Answer shortly to these Articles, requiring a Copy. But by reason of his old Age, his Infirmities, and the weakness of his Memory, he said, he could not bear a Dispute; but that he could and would declare his Mind of the said Articles. All this that I have above said concerning the managery of this Affair, I do for the most part extract out of a Letter of VVeston's writ unto the Bishop of London, from Oxon. I cannot here omit old Father Latimer's Habit at this his appearing be∣fore the Commissioners, which was also his Habit, while he re∣mained a Prisoner in Oxford. He held his Hat in his Hand; he had a Kerchief on his Head, and upon it a Night-cap or two, and a great Cap such as Townsmen used, with two broad Flaps, to but∣ton under his Chin: an old thredbare Brisow freez Gown, girded to his Body with a penny lether Girdle, at which hanged, by a long string of Leather, his Testament, and his Spectacles without case hanging about his Neck upon his Breast. This was the Work of Saturday. Cranmer brought to his Disputation.On Monday Cranmer was brought into the Respondents Place in the Divinity-Schools, the Mayor and Aldermen sitting by him. In the midst of the Disputation, because what he was to answer was more than he could well remember extempore, he gave in to Dr. VVeston
his Opinion written at large in answer to each Proposition; and de∣sired Weston, who sat on high, to read it. These Writings are pre∣served in Fox's Monuments, and may there be seen. This Disputa∣tion began at eight in the Morning, and lasted till two. The Beadle had provided Drink, and offered the Arch-bishop thereof sometimes; but he refused; nor did he stir all the while out of his Place, though the Prolocutor had granted him leave to retire for a while, if he had any occasion. And after having learnedly and boldly maintained the Truth against a great many clamorous Opponents, he was carried back by the Mayor to Prison. And then the two next days Ridley and Latimer took their Courses. Cranmer had cautiously provided two Notaries to take Notes of what he said, lest he might be misrepresented.His Notarie▪ And they were Iewel, afterward Bishop of Sarum, and one Gilbert Mounson. Who also at Ridley's request were granted him. Cranmer required at the Commissioners Hands,Cranmer's De∣mands. more time to have these weighty Matters more diligently scann'd and examined: Urging, that he had so much to speak, that it would take up many Days, that he might fully answer to all that they could say. He required also, that he and his Fellows might Oppose, as well as Re∣spond: that they might produce their Proofs before the Popish Doctors, and be answered fully to all that they could say. But neither of these Demands would be allowed him. Which he in a Letter complained of to the Council. For indeed, as Cranmer plain∣ly apprehended, the Design now was not to look impartially into the Truth or Falshood of these Doctrins, but to gain Glory to them∣selves, and to have a shew for the Resolution that was before taken up of condemning them all three. The same Week, on Thursday, Harpsfield disputed for the degree of Bachelor of Divinity. And among other Opponents,Cranmer di∣sputes again. Cran∣mer was called forth for one by Dr. Weston. Where first taking notice of Weston's opposing Harpsfield out of the Scripture against a Corporal Presence (which was Harpsfield's Question) but whereas he left the sense of the Scripture to the Catholick Church, as Judg, Cranmer told him he was much mistaken, especially because, that under the Name of Church, he appointed such Judges, as had cor∣ruptly judged, and contrary to the sense of the Scriptures. He wondred also, he said, why Weston attributed so little to the reading of Scriptures, and conferring of Places, seeing Scripture doth so much commend the same, in those very Places which himself had alledged. And as to his Opinion of these Questions, he said, they had neither ground of the Word of God, nor the Primitive Church. Nay, and that the Schools have spoken diversly of them, and do not agree among themselves. And having prefaced all this, he began his Disputation with Harpsfield, by asking him some Questions: as how Christ's Body was in the Sacrament, according to his Mind and Determination? And whether he had the Quantity and Qualities, Form, Figure, and such-like Properties of Bodies? And when there was great declining to answer this; and some affirmed one thing, and some another; Harpsfield said, they were vain Questions, and not fit to spend time about; and added, that Christ was there as it
pleased him to be there. Cranmer to that, said, He would be best con∣tented with that Answer if their appointing of the Carnal Presence, had not driven him of necessity to have inquired, for disputation-sake, how they placed him there, sithence they would have a natural Body. Then some denied it to be Quantum; some said, it was, Quantitativum; and some affirmed, that it had Modum quanti: and some denying it, Dr. Weston then stood up, and said, It was Corpus quantum, sed non per modum quanti. A very grave decision of the Point! Then Cranmer asked, Whether good and bad Men do eat the Body in the Sacrament; and then, how long Christ tarried in the Eater. Harpsfield said, They were curious Questions, unmeet to be asked. Cranmer replied, He took them out of their Schools, and School-men, which they themselves did most use. Then he asked, how far he went into the Body, and how long he abode in the Body. With these Questions Cranmer puzzled them most heavily. For which way soever they answered, there would follow Absurdities, and Inextricable Difficulties. In conclusion, Dr. Weston gave him this Complement, That his wonderful gentle Behaviour and Modesty was worthy much commendation: Giving him most hearty thanks in his own Name, and in the Name of all his Bre∣thren. At which all the Doctors put off their Caps. The Papists un∣decent ma∣nagement of the Disputati∣on.On Wednesday, as soon as Latimer, who came up last, had ended his Disputation, the Papists cried Victoria, applauding themselves loudly, as though they had vindicated their Cause most strenuously and satisfactorily against Cranmer, and his two Fellows. And so VVeston had the confidence to tell them to their Faces. Though to him that reads the whole Disputation, and considereth the Argu∣ments on both sides impartially, there will appear no such matter: allowing for all the Hissings and Noises, confused Talk and Taunts, that were bestowed upon these very Reverend and good Men. Whereof Ridley said,In his Preface to his Account of his Dispute. in reference to his Disputation, That he never in all his Life saw or heard any thing carried more vainly and tumultuously; and that he could not have thought, that there could have been found among English Men any Persons, honoured with Degrees in Learning, that willingly could allow of such Va∣nities, more fit for the Stage, than the Schools. He added, That when he studied at Paris, he remembred what Clamors were used in the Sorbon, where Popery chiefly reigned; but that that was a kind of Modesty in comparison of this Thrasonical Ostentation. Whence he concluded very truly, That they sought not for the sincere Truth in this Conference, and for nothing but vain Glory. The Prote∣stants glad of this Disputati∣on.But the Professors of the Gospel on the other hand, were as glad of this Dispute, wherein these three chief Fathers of the Church had so boldly and gallantly stood in the defence of the Truth, and maintained the true Doctrine of the Sacrament so well. And Dr. Rowland Taylor, in Prison elsewhere at this time for Christ's sake, wrote them a Congratulatory Letter in the Name of the rest. Which is as followeth.
RIght Reverend Fathers in the Lord, I wish you to enjoy con∣tinually God's Grace and Peace through Jesus Christ. And God be praised again for this your most excellent Promotion,Dr. Taylor to the three Fa∣thers after their Disputa∣tions. which ye are called unto at this present, that is, That ye are counted worthy to be allowed amongst the number of Christ's Records and Witnesses. England hath had but a few Learned Bishops, that would stick to Christ ad ignem inclusive. Once again I thank God heartily in Christ for your most happy Onset, most valiant Pro∣ceeding, most constant suffering of all such Infamies, Hissings, Clappings, Taunts, open Rebukes, loss of Living and Liberty, for the Defence of God's Cause, Truth and Glory. I cannot utter with Pen how I rejoice in my Heart for you three such Captains in the Foreward, under Christ's Cross, Banner, or Standard, in such a Cause and Skirmish: when not only one or two of our dear Redeemer's strong Holds are besieged, but all his chief Castles, ordained for our Safeguard, are trai∣terously impugned. This your Enterprize, in the sight of all that be in Heaven, and of all God's People in Earth, is most plea∣sant to behold. This is another manner of Nobility, than to be in the Forefront in worldly Warfares. For God's sake, pray for us, for we fail not daily to pray for you. We are stronger and stronger in the Lord, his Name be praised; and we doubt not, but ye be so in Christ's own sweet School. Heaven is all, and wholly of our side. Therefore Gaudete in Domino semper, & ite∣rum gaudete, & exultate: Rejoice always in the Lord, and again rejoice and be glad. Your assured in Christ, Rowland Taylor. Ridley knowing their Tricks,Ridley pens the Relation of his Disputation. and suspecting they would publish hi  unfairly, and to their own advantage, prudently took  gave an account of it with the greatest exactness, as he  it in his Memory. He was promised by the Prolocu∣tor, hat he should have a view of the Dispute, as it was taken by the Notaries, that he might supply and amend, and alter, as he should see any Error or Mistake in the Notes. He promised him likewise, and that in the Face and hearing of the rest of the Com∣missioners, and the whole Schools, that he should have a Time and Place allowed him, wherein he might produce, what he had more to say, for the confirmation of his Answers. But nothing was perfor∣med. Ridley never found Language more ready to him, nor such a Presence of Mind in any Business he had to do, as he had in this Dis∣putation. Which he took particular notice of, and thanked God for. Of this Relation, as he himself had penned it, he wrote to Grindal, then at Frankford, That except he had that he gathered him∣self after his Disputation done, he could not think that he had it truly; but if he had that, then he had therewithal the whole man∣ner, after the which he was used in that Disputation. This whole Disputation between these three excellent Men,The University sends the Dis∣putations up to the Convoca∣tion. and the Oxford-Divines, was, under the Seal of the University, and the Subscription of Notaries, exhibited into the House of Convocation by Hugh VVeston, and some Lawyers. This Iohn Fox had found
some Years after, writ in the Register of a certain Church in London. Whereupon, for the sight hereof, he applied himself to Dr. Incent, that had been Actuary: But he put him off, telling him the Writings were in Boner's Hand, or in the custody of the Arch-bishop of Can∣terbury, and that he had them not; probably not being minded they should come to light. Fox, when his Pains succeeded not, wrote to the ArchBp and the Bp of London, Parker and Grindal, about 1567, acquainting them with this; and desired their assistance: and the ra∣ther because perhaps there might have been other things met with there, not unworthy knowledg, under the same Seal. And so he left the Arch-bishop and Bishop to consult as they thought fit, for the finding out these Writings of the Disputations. Various Co∣pies of these Disputations.Fox by his diligence procured many and divers Copies of them. Which I have seen; and that which he printed in his Acts and Mo∣numents, was I suppose from a Copy which he reckoned the largest and truest. Ridley apprehended, there would many Copies of these Disputations fly about, (as there were) whereby they might be wronged. Therefore to prevent Misrepresenting, as I said before, he wrote a brief Account of what he had said at his Disputation. This whether he writ it in English or Latin originally, I cannot tell; I suppose in Latin; as it was lately in the Year 1688 published at Oxon. Among Fox's Manuscripts I meet with a better Copy than that, which by comparing both, I find faulty in many things: be∣sides Ridley's Epilogue to the Reader, which is there placed as a Pre∣face before the Book, the true place being at the end of it. CHAP. XI. Cranmer condemned for an Heretick. Cranmer con∣demned for Heresy.WIthin two days after these Disputations were ended, that is, on Friday April 20, Cranmer, with his two Fellows, were brought again to S. Mary's before the Commissioners. VVeston disswaded them from their Opinions; and asked them, Whether they would subscribe? and required them to answer directly and peremptorily: and told the Arch-bishop that he was overcome in Disputation, with more words to that purpose. To whom the Arch-bishop boldly re∣plied, That whereas VVeston said, that he had answered and oppo∣sed, and could neither maintain his own Error, nor impugn the Truth, he said, All that was false. For he was not suffered to oppose as he would, nor could answer as he was required, unless he would have brawled with them, and ever four or five interrupting him. Latimer and Ridley, being asked what they would do? said, They would stand to that which they had said. Then being called together, Sentence was read over them, That they were no Mem∣bers of the Church; and therefore they were condemned as Here∣ticks. And while this was reading, they were asked if they would turn? They bad them read on in the Name of God: for they were not minded to turn. And so the Sentence of Condemnation was awarded against them. Then the Arch-bishop said, From this
your Judgment and Sentence, I appeal to the just Judgment of the Almighty: trusting to be present with him in Heaven. For whose Presence in the Altar I am thus condemned. And so Cran∣mer was returned to Bocardo, and the other two to other Places: as they were kept apart almost all the while they were in Oxon. VVeston, after this ingrateful Business done,Cranmer writes to the Council. went up the next week to London. And Cranmer wrote to the Lords of the Council a Letter, containing two Points: One was to desire the Queen's Par∣don, as to his Treason, (for so little Favour could he find at Court, that he had not yet this absolutely granted him) And the other was an account of the Disputation: Weston being desired by the ABp to carry the Letter. But after he had carried it half way, reading the Contents, he liked them so ill, that he sent back the Letter most churlishly to Cranmer again. Indeed he cared not to carry Complaints of himself to the Court. But because it gives further light into these Matters, I have inserted it in the Appendix.No. XXIX. It was such an imaginary Victory, as they had now got at Oxford,Disputation in∣tended at Cam∣bridg. that they intended also to obtain at Cambridg. And much talk at this time arose, that Hoper, Rogers, Crome and Bradford, whom they had in Prisons at London, were to be had to this Universiy▪ to be baited, as Cranmer, Ridley and Latimer newly had been at Oxford: and several of the Doctors of Oxford should be sent in likewise to Cambridg for this purpose. But Hoper, Farrar, Taylor, Philpot, Bradford, and the others, having an inkling of it, consulted among themselves what to do; and resolved to decline it, unless they might have indifferent Judges. And for this purpose Bradford sent a pri∣vate and trusty Messenger to Oxford to Ridley, to have his, and his two Fellows, their Judgments concerning this Matter. They were at this time all separated from one another: So, though Ridley sig∣nified this in a Letter to Cranmer, yet he could only give his own Sense. He misliked not, he said, what they were minded to do.In his Letter to Bradford. For he looked for none other, but that if they answered before the same Commissioners that he and his Fellows had done, they should be served and handled as they were, though ye were as well Learned, said he, as ever was either Peter or Paul. Yet he thought occasion might afterward be given them; and the consideration of the profit of their Auditory might perchance move them to do other∣wise. But determinately to say what was best he could not, but trusted, He whose Cause they had in hand, would put them in Mind to do that, which should be most for his Glory, the Profit of his Flock, and their own Salvation. It came at length to that forward∣ness, that VVeston and his Complices had taken out the Commission. And it was easy to obtain such a Commission at such a Lord Chan∣cellor's Hands. And they were likely speedily to put it in execution. Hoper, who seemed to have the first notice of it, sent the intelligence in a Letter to Farrar, Taylor, Bradford and Philpot, Prisoners in the King's Bench. He shewed them what his Advice was, and desired them to consult among themselves what Course were best to be taken. His own Thoughts were, considering what foul Play the three Learned Men had at Oxford, and which they were like to have themselves at this Disputation; I. Because they did commonly make
false Allegations of the Doctors, and took Pieces and Scraps of them, to prove their Tenets, against the real Mind and Sense of those Au∣thors, they should therefore refuse wholly to dispute, unless they might have Books present before them. II. To have sworn Nota∣ries, to take things spoken indifferently: which would be hard to have, the Adversaries having the oversight of all things: and so would make theirs better, and the Protestants worse. III. If they perceived, when they were disputing, that two or three, or more, spake together, and used Taunts and Scoffs, as they did at Oxon, then to refuse to dispute any longer; but to appeal to be heard be∣fore the Queen, and the whole Council. Whereby this Benefit would happen, that they should be delivered from the Commissioners, appointed to hear and judg them, who meant nothing less, than to hear the Cause indifferently, being all Enemies already unto the Pro∣testants, and their Cause, and at a point to give Sentence against them. And then many at the Court might be strengthned, who know the Truth already; and others better informed, who erred rather of Zeal than Malice; and a third sort, that be indurate, might be an∣swered fully to their shame. He knew, he said, the Adversaries would deny their Appeal, but yet he advised to challenge it, and to take witness thereof, of such as should be present, and require, for indifferency of Hearing and Judgment, to be heard either before the Queen and Council,Hoper's Letter. or else before all the Parliament, as it was used in K. Edward's Days. So wise and wary now were they. But I do not find, that this Project of the Papists went further. And let us return, and visit these three faithful Prisoners of Iesus Christ.Their Condi∣tion after Con∣demnation. After their Disputation and Condemnation, their Servants were discharged, that so they might not have any Conference, or Intelligence of any thing abroad. But God provided for every one of them, instead of their Servants, faithful Fellows, that would be content to hear and see, and do for them whatsoever they could, as Ridley wrote in a Letter to Bradford. To these Fathers also came supplies of Meat, Money and Shirts from London, not only from such as were of their Acquaintance, but from Strangers, with whom they had no acquaintance; doing it for God's Sake, and his Gospel's. The Bailiffs so watched them now, that they would not suffer them to have any Conferences among themselves. The Scholars of that University seemed universally against them. Which Ridley, in a Letter to his Friend Bradford, could not but take notice of, calling it, A wonderful thing, that among so many, never yet Scholar of∣fered any of them, so far as he knew, any manner of Favour, either for, or in Christ's Cause. They had all things common among them, as Meat, Money, and whatever one had, that might do another good. Their Imploy∣ment in Prison.Neither of them now in Prison, were idle. Old Latimer read the New Testament through seven Times deliberately, while he was a Prisoner. Cranmer busied himself earnestly in vindication of his Writings of the Sacrament against Winchester, under the Name of Marcus Constantius. And so did Ridley: who in two Treatises, which he now made, shewed how Winchester varied from other Pa∣pists in eighteen Articles, and from himself in eighteen more. And a
third Paper he wrote, shewing several things Winchester yielded un∣to, concerning the spiritual Use of the Sacrament. Fox hath set down these in his History, and preserved them to us, these Collecti∣ons of Ridley falling into his Hands. Ridley also wrote, while he was a Prisoner in Oxford, De Abominationibus Sedis Romanae, & Pon∣tificum Romanorum: and Annotations more large upon Tonstal's first Book, (of Transubstantiation, I suppose;) and more sparingly upon the Second. He was now also diligent to set others on work for the exposing false Religion: Desiring one Grimbold to translate Lauren∣tius Valla his Book, which he made and wrote against the Fable of Constantine's Donation and glorious Exaltation of the See of Rome. And having done that, he would have had him to translate a Work of Aeneas Sylvius, De Gestis Basiliensis Concilii. In which altho,Letters of the Martyrs. said he, there be many things, that savour of the Pan, yet I dare say the Papists would glory but a little to see such Books go forth in English. He directed Austin Bernher, Latimer's Servant, to re∣commend those Works unto Grimbold, who had been his Chaplain, and a Man, (as Ridley gave him the Character) of much Eloquence both in English and Latin; (but he complied and subscribed.) And he also bad Austin tell Grimbold, That if he would know where to have these Books, he might find them in a Work set forth by Ortwinus Gratius, intitled, Fasciculus rerum expetendarum. And ad∣ded, That if such things had been set forth in our English Tongue heretofore, he supposed great Good might have come to Christ's Church thereby. But we have not yet mentioned all the Pieces that Ridley wrote in Prison. For besides those above-mentioned, were these following.Other Works of Ridley in Prison. I. A little Treatise, which was jointly composed by him and Lati∣mer in the Tower (which is preserved in Fox) with the Letters N. R. before Ridley's Sayings, and H. L. before Latimer's. II. A Draught, which he drew out of the Evangelists and S. Paul, shewing thence that the words of the Lord's Supper are figuratively to be under∣stood, alledging out of the Doctors, three of the Greek Church, Origen, Chrysostom and Theodoret, and three of the Latin, Tertullian, Augustin and Gelasius. III. Three Positions to the third Question propounded in Oxford, concerning the Propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass. IV. His Disputation in the Schools, as he wrote it, after it was over. V. A Letter, Ad Fratres in diversis Carceribus. All these fell into the Hands of the Papists, by this Mishap, or Treachery. Grimbold expressing a great desire to have every thing that Ridley had writ during his Imprisonment, Mr. Shipside, Ridley's Brother-in-Law, procured and sent him all those Writings before mentioned: but they were all seized, whether in Grimbold's Possession, or in the sending them to him, it was uncertain. Some suspected Grimbold himself, but others rather the Messenger, for it would not enter into Shipside's Head, that Grimbold should play such a Iudas's part.
CHAP. XII. A Parliament. Pole reconciles the Realm. The Queen's Letters, direct∣ing the Electi∣ons of Parlia∣ment-men.GREAT Care was now to be taken of getting Parliament-men, that might do what was to be laid before them, now the Pope's Legat was to be received, and the last Parliament failing Ex∣pectation. Therefore Letters were dispatched from the Queen, and Interests made all the Nation over, to procure such Persons to be elected, as should be named to them. In a Manuscript containing divers Orders that were sent into Norfolk in Q. Mary's Time, there is a Letter from that Queen, Anno 2o, dated Octob. 6, to the Earl of Sussex, directing him to assist in choosing such Men to sit in Parlia∣ment, As were of Wise, Grave and Catholick sort, such as indeed meant the true Honour of God, with the Prosperity of the Nati∣on. The Advancement whereof We, (as the Letter runneth) and our dear Husband the King, do chiefly profess and intend, with∣out alteration of any Man's particular Possession, as amongst other false Rumors, the hinderers of our good Purposes, and favourers of Heresies, do most utterly report. For to make the intent of restoring the Abby-Lands to be the less credited, it was thought convenient to be laid upon the Hereticks. With these general Let∣ters, there seemed to go private Instructions what particular Men were to be set up. For upon the aforesaid Letter, the Earl of Sussex sent a Letter, Octob. 14, to Sir Tho. Woodhouse, High Sheriff of Norfolk and Suffolk, and to Sir William Woodhouse, about the Elections of Knights of those Shires, viz. That they should reserve their Interests and Voices for such as he should name, and that he would soon consult with them about the Matter. He then, in pursuit of the Queen's Letter, recommended to the Bailiff of Yarmouth, Iohn Millicent, to be elected Burgess for that Town. This Parliament sate Novemb. 11. Cardinal Pole was this Summer brought to Flanders by the Empe∣ror,Pole comes o∣ver. who had stayed him before on the Way. The Queen sent over the Lord Paget, and the Lord Hastings to the Cardinal to conduct him over, in quality of the Pope's Legate. And the same day he landed at Dover, (which was Novemb. 21.) the Bill past for the taking off his Attainder. Three days after he came to London, and so to Lambeth-house: Which was ready prepared for his coming. Cardinal Pole, before he came into England, and in the last Reign, had the reputa∣tion here ordinarily of a vertuous, sober and learned Man, and was much beloved by the English Nation as well for his Qualities, as his honourable Extraction. Latimer, in one of his Sermons before K. Edward, hath these words of him: I never remember that Man, (speaking of Pole) but I remember him with a heavy Heart; a Witty Man, a Learned Man, a Man of a Noble House: so in favour, that if he had tarried in the Realm, and would have con∣formed himself to the King's Proceedings, I heard say, and I be∣lieve it verily, he had been Bishop of York at this Day. And he would have done much good in that part of the Realm. For those Quarters have always had need of Learned Men, and a
preaching Prelate. One great Author the Cardinal much con∣versed in, was S. Hierom. Latimer wished, That he would have fol∣lowed S. Hierom in his Exposition of that Place, Come out of her, my People. Where that Father understood it of Rome, and called that City, The purple Whore of Babylon. Almighty God saith, Get you from it; get you from Rome, saith Hierom. It were, subjoined Latimer, more commendable to go from it, than to go to it, as Pole hath done. Soon after his return into England,The Cardinal absolves Par∣liament and Convocation. he was mighty busy in recon∣ciling the Realm to the Pope. He performed it in his own Person to the Parliament on the thirtieth of November, with much Solem∣nity; and to the Convocation on the sixth of December. On which day, the Parliament being dissolved, he, the Lord Legate, sent for the whole Convocation of Upper and Lower House to Lambeth: And there he absolved them all from their Perjuries, Schisms, and Here∣sies. Which Absolution they received upon their Knees. Then he gave them an Exhortation, and congratulated their Conversion: and so they departed. Ianuary 23. Upon the dismission of the Convocation,The Clergy again wait up∣on the Legate. the Bishops and inferior Clergy waited again upon the Legate at Lambeth. Where he willed them all to repair to their Cures and Charges, and exhorted them to entreat their Flocks with all Mildness, and to en∣deavor to win them by Gentleness, rather than by Extremity and Rigor: and so let them depart. Ianuary 28. He granted a Commission to the Bp of VVinchester,A Commission granted by him against Hereticks. and divers other Bishops, to sit upon, and judg according to the Laws lately revived against Hereticks, all such Ministers and others that were in Prison for Heresy. Which was done undoubtedly to take off all the eminentest of the Protestant Clergy, then in hold. And the very same day (such haste they made) they sat in Commission in S. Mary Overies Church, upon Rogers, Hoper and Cardmaker. And the next to that, upon Hoper and Rogers again, upon Taylor also and Bradford; when the two former were formally excommunicated. The day following, they sat upon Taylor and Bradford again: to which were added Ferrar, Crome and Saunders. Then they excom∣municated Bradford and Saunders. But that this Reconciliation to the Pope and Church of Rome might sound the louder in all Parts and Corners of the Nation,His Commis∣sions to all the Bishops, to reconcile their Diocesses. and all Persons every where might make their formal Submissions to the Pope, and thankfully take the mighty Benefit of his Yoke upon them again, the Legate was not contented to reconcile the Nation himself under their Representatives in the Parliament and Convoca∣tion; but upon pretence that he could not, in his own Person, pardon and reconcile all the People, therefore he granted out a Commission to each Bishop in his own Diocess, to do it to their respective Clergy and Laity, deputed in his Name, and by his Authority de∣rived from the Pope. Such a Commission he granted February 8,The Commis∣sion to the Dean and Chapter of Canterbury. to the Dean and Chap∣ter of Canterbury, that See being then held Vacant. Therein au∣thorizing them to absolve all manner of Persons, as well Lay as Ecclesiasticks, Religious as Secular, from their Schism, Heresies and Errors, and from all Censures due thereupon. And to dis∣pense
with the Clergy upon divers Irregularities: as with such who had received Orders from Schismatical Bishops, or had been collated into their Livings by them. To dispense also with the Religious and Regulars for departing from their Cloisters with∣out the Pope's Licence, permitting them to wear the Habit of Priests, and to serve Cures, considering the scarcity of Priests, and to live out of their Cloisters. Also, to dispense with Priests that had married Wives, though they were Widows, or Women defiled, and with such who had been twice married, doing Pe∣nance and forsaking their Wives. Allowing them to minister at the Altar, and to serve Cures, provided it were out of the Dio∣cesses, where they were married. The said Bishops, by this Commission, were also empowered to grant, to fit Rectors and Curates, a Power to reconcile and absolve their respective Parishes. This Commission I have placed in the Appendix,No. LXXX. as it was transcribed out of the Register of the Church of Canterbury. The Legate's Instructions to the Bishops.The Lord Legate also, for the better discharging of this his migh∣ty Office, gave out his Instructions, how the Bishops and Officials of the Vacant Sees should perform this Work of the Reconciliation, deputed to them by the said Legate: together with the Form of Ab∣solution to be pronounced. Which Instructions and Form, as they were extracted from the said Register,No. LXXXI. may be found in the Appendix. Each Bishop was to call before him the Clergy of his respective City, and to instruct them in divers things: As concerning the Pope's fatherly Love and Charity towards the English Nation, in sending Cardinal Pole his Legate hither, as soon as he knew the Lady Mary was de∣clared Queen, to bring this Kingdom, so long separated from the Catholick Church, into Union with it, and to comfort and restore them to the Grace of God: Concerning the joyful coming of the said Legate; concerning what was done the last Parliament, when the Lords and Commons were Reconciled; and concerning the re∣pealing of all the Laws made against the Authority of the Roman See by the two last Kings, and restoring Obedience to the Pope and Church of Rome: Concerning the Authority restored likewise to the Bishops; especially, that they might proceed against Hereticks and Schismaticks. Then the Bishops were to acquaint their Clergy with the Faculties yielded to them by the Legate: which were to be read openly. Then all that were lapsed into Error and Schism, were to be invited humbly to crave Absolution and Reconciliation, and Dis∣pensations as well for their Orders, as for their Benefices. Next, a Day was fixed, when the Clergy were to appear, and petition for the said Absolutions and Dispensations. On which day, after they had confessed their Errors, and sacramentally promised that they would make Confession of the same to the Bishop himself, or some other Catholick Priests, and to perform the Penance that should be en∣joined them; then the Bishop was to reconcile them, and to dis∣pense with their Irregularities: Always observing a distinction be∣tween those that only fell into Schism and Error, and those who were the Teachers of them, and Leaders of others into Sin. The same time was to be appointed another day for a Solemn Festival; wherein the Bishops and Curates in their Churches should signify to the People
all that the Bishops before had spoken to their Clergy; and then should invite them all to confess their Errors, and to return into the Bosom of the Church; promising them, That all their past Crimes should be forgiven, if so be they repented of them, and renounced them. And a certain Term was to be fixed, namely the whole Octaves of Easter, within which Term all should come and be re∣conciled. But the Time to be reconciled in, being lapsed, all that remained unreconciled, as also all that returned to their Vomit after they had been reconciled, were to be most severely proceeded against. The said Bishops and Officials (where any Sees were Vacant) were to name and depute the Rectors of the Parish-Churches, and other fit Persons, who should absolve the Laity of their Parishes from He∣resy and Schism, and Censures, according to a Form to be given them by the Bishops. The Bishops, and Officials, and Curates, were to have each a Book; in which were to be writ the Names and Parishes of all that were re∣conciled: That it might afterwards be known, who were reconciled, and who were not. After the Octave of Easter was past, the Bishops were to visit, first their Cities, and then their Diocesses; and to summon before them all such as had not been reconciled; and to know of them the Cause why they would not depart from their Errors: and remaining obstinate in them, they were to proceed against them. In this Visitation, all the Clergy were to be required to shew the Titles of their Orders and Benefices; and notice was to be taken, if any Defect were therein. And now the Bishops were to take care to root out any Errors in their Diocesses, and to depute fit Persons to make Sermons, and hear Confessions. They were also to take care to have the Sacred Canons observed; and to have inserted into the Books of Service the Name of S. Thomas the Martyr, and of the Pope, formerly blotted out: and to pray for the Pope, according as it was used before the Schism. They were advised to insist much upon the great Miseries we were in before, and the great Grace that God now had shewed to this People: Exhorting them to acknowledg these Mercies, and devoutly to pray for the King and Queen, that had deserved so exceedingly well of this Kingdom; and especially to pray for a happy Off-spring from the Queen. In these Instructions there are several Strictures,Pole a severe Persecutor. that make it ap∣pear Pole was not so gentle towards the Hereticks, (as the Professors of the Gospel were then stiled) as is reported, but rather the contra∣ry; and that he went hand in hand with the bloody Bishops of these Days. For it is plain here, that he put the Bishops upon proceeding with them according to the Sanguinary Laws, lately revived, and put in full Force and Virtue. What an Invention was that of his, a kind of Inquisition by him set up, whereby not a Man might escape, that stood not well affected to Popery? I mean, his ordering Books to be made and kept, wherein the Names of all such were to be written, that, in every Place and Parish in England, were reconci∣led: and so whosoever were not found in those Books, might be known to be no Friends to the Pope; and so to be proceeded against. And
indeed after Pole's crafty and zealous Management of this Reconci∣liation, all that good Opinion that Men had before conceived of him, vanished: and they found themselves much mistaken in him; espe∣cially, seeing so many Learned and Pious Gospel-Bishops and Mi∣nisters imprisoned and martyred under him, and by his Commission. Insomuch that now People spake of him as bad as of the Pope him∣self, or the worst of his Cardinals. The Gospellers before this did use to talk much among themselves, that he did but dissemble at Rome in his present outward Compliances with them and their Su∣perstitions; and that he would, upon a good Opportunity, shew him∣self an open Professor of the Truth. And indeed he often had Con∣ferences before him of Christ, and of the Gospel, of a living Faith, and Justification by Faith alone; and he often would wish the true Doctrine might prevail. But now the Mask was taken off, and he shewed himself what he was. A notable Letter to this Purpose was written, concerning the Cardinal, about this Time, by a pious Ita∣lian to his Friend, who had conceived these good Opinions of him. This I have put in the Appendix; and the rather, because it will give some Light into our present History.No. LXXXII. CHAP. XIII. A Convocation. Articles framed therein. AT a Convocation the latter end of this Year, an Address was made by the Lower House to the Upper,A Convoca∣tion. wherein they peti∣tioned for divers things in 28 Articles, meet to be considered for the Reformation of the Clergy.Articles pre∣sented to the Upper House. One whereof was, That all Books, both Latin and English, concerning any heretical, erroneous, or slanderous Doctrines, might be destroyed and burnt throughout the Realm.Cranmer's Book to be burnt. And among these Books, they set Thomas Cranmer, late Arch-bishop of Canterbury, his Book, made against the Sacrament of the Altar, in the forefront; and then next, the Schismatical Book, as they called it, viz. the Communion-Book. To which they subjoined the Book of ordering Ecclesiastical Ministers, and all suspect Transla∣tions of the Old and New Testament; and all other Books of that nature. (So that if Cranmer's Book was burnt, it was burnt with very good Company, the Holy Bible, and the Communion-Book.) And that such as had these Books, should bring the same to the Ordi∣nary by a certain Day, or otherwise to be taken and reputed as Fa∣vourers of those Doctrines. And that it might be lawful for all Bishops to make enquiry, from time to time, for such Books, and to take them from the Owners. And for the repressing of such pesti∣lent Books, Order should be taken with all speed, that none such should be printed or sold within the Realm, nor brought from be∣yond Sea, upon grievous Penalties. And from another Article we may learn, from what Spring all the Bloody Doings that followed the en∣suing Years sprang; namely, from the Popish Clergy. For they petitioned, That the Statutes made in the fifth of Richard II. and in the second of Henry IV. and the second of Henry V. against
Heresy, Lollards, and false Preachers, might be revived, and put in force. And that Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical Ordinaries [whose Hands had been tied by some later Acts] might be resto∣red to their pristine Jurisdiction against Hereticks, Schismaticks, and their Fautors, in as large and ample manner, as they were in the first Year of Henry VIII. I shall not recite here the whole Address, as I find it in a Volume of the Benet-College Library,Intit. Synoda∣lia. Hist. Ref. Vol. 2. Collect. p. 266▪ be∣cause the Bishop of Sarum hath faithfully printed it thence in his History. Only I observe, that the 17th Article is in the Manuscript scratched out and crossed, viz. That all exempt Places whatsoever might be from henceforth under the Jurisdiction of the Arch-bi∣shop or Bishop, or Arch-deacon, in whose Diocesses or Arch-dea∣conaries they were. That they judged might grate a little too much upon the Pope's Authority, which they were now receiving, since these Exemptions were made by Popes. And the last, or 28th Article was added by another Hand, viz. That all Ecclesiastical Persons, that had lately spoiled Cathedral, Collegiate or other Churches, of their own Heads, might be compelled to restore them, and all singular things by them taken away, or to the true value, and to reedify such things as by them were destroyed or de∣faced. This I suppose was added by Boner's Interest, that he might hereby have a pretence against Ridley his Predecessor; it affording a fair opportunity to crush the good Bishops and Preachers, that had in Zeal to God's Glory taken away out of their Churches all In∣struments of Superstition and Idolatry. And it might serve their turn, who had lately in a most barbarous manner plundered the rich Arch-bishop of York▪ And as they of this Convocation were for burning Hereticks Books,Men burnt to Death without Law. so they were as well disposed to the burning of the Hereticks themselves. For Protestants were already not only imprisoned, but put to Death, without any Warrant of Law, but only by virtue of Commissions from the Queen, and the Lord Chancellor. Where∣upon, when one in the Convocation started this Objection, That there was no Law to condemn them: Weston, the Prolocutor, an∣swered, It forceth not for a Law: We have a Commission to pro∣ceed with them: and when they be dispatched, let their Friends sue the Law. CHAP. XIV. The Condition of the Protestants in Prison. Free-Willers. BY this time, by the diligence of the Papists,Popery fully established. the Popish Religi∣on was fully established in England. This Apostacy Cranmer saw with a sad Heart before his Death, and all his Labour overtur∣ned. And Ridley sends the bad News of it from Oxon to Grindal beyond Sea, in these words; To tell you much naughty Matter in a few words, Papismus apud nos, ubi{que} in pleno suo antiquo robore regnat. As for the Protestants, some were put in Prisons,Protestants. some escaped
beyond Sea: some went to Mass, and some recanted, and many were burned, and ended their Lives in the Flames for Religion's sake. The Pastors in Prison.They that were in Prison, whereof Cranmer was the chief, being the Pastors and Teachers of the Flock, did what in them lay to keep up the Religion, under this Persecution, among the Professors. Which made them write many comfortable and instructive Letters to them; and send them their Advices, according as Opportunity served. Free-Willers.One thing there now fell out, which caused some disturbance among the Prisoners. Many of them that were under restraint for the Profession of the Gospel, were such as held Free-will, tending to the derogation of God's Grace, and refused the Doctrine of Absolute Predestination, and Original Sin. They were Men of strict and holy Lives, but very hot in their Opinions and Disputations, and unquiet. Divers of them were in the King's-Bench, where Bradford, and ma∣ny other Gospellers were. Many whereof by their Conferences they gained to their own Perswasions.Bradford's con∣cern with them. Bradford had much discourse with them. The Name of their chief Man was Harry Hart: Who had writ something in defence of his Doctrine. Trew and Abingdon were Teachers also among them: Kemp, Gybson and Chamberlain were others. They ran their Notions as high as Pelagius did, and va∣lued no Learning: and the Writings and Authorities of the Learned they utterly rejected and despised. Bradford was apprehensive, that they might now do great Ham in the Church, and therefore out of Prison wrote a Letter to Cranmer, Ridley and Latimer, the three chief Heads of the Reformed, (though Oppressed) Church in England, to take some Cognizance of this Matter, and to consult with them in remedying it. And with him joined Bishop Ferrar, Rowland Taylor and Iohn Philpot. This Letter, worthy to be read, may be found among the Letters of the Martyrs, and transcribed in the Appendix.No. LXXXIII. Upon this Occasion Ridley wrote a Treatise of God's Election and Predestination. And Bradford wrote another upon the same Subject; and sent it to those three Fathers in Oxord for their Approbation: and theirs being obtained, the rest of the emi∣nent Divines, in and about London, were ready to sign it also. His Kindness to them.I have seen another Letter of Bradford to certain of these Men, who were said to hold the Error of the Pelagians and Papists con∣cerning Man's Free-will, and were then Prisoners with him in the King's-Bench. By which Letter it appeared, that Bradford had often resorted to them, and conferred with them; and at his own Charge and Hindrance had done them good. But seeing their Obstinacy and Clamours against him, he forbore to come at them any more: but yet wrote Letters to them, and sent them Relief. They told him, He was a great Slander to the Word of God in respect of his Doctrine, in that he believed and affirmed the Salvation of God's Children to be so certain, that they should assuredly enjoy the same. For they said it hanged partly upon our Perseverance to the end. Bradford said, it hung upon God's Grace in Christ; and not upon our Perseverance in any Point: For then were Grace no Grace. They charged him, that he was not so kind to them as
he ought, in the Distribution of the Charity-Money, that was then sent by well-disposed Persons to the Prisoners in Christ, [of which Bradford was the Purse-bearer] But he assured them he never de∣frauded them of the Value of a Penny: and at that time sent them at once thirteen Shillings and four Pence; and if they needed as much more, he promised that they should have it. But abating these little casual Heats and Peevishnesses, there was a good Christi∣an Correspondence maintained among them. The fore-mentioned Holy Man advised them, That though in some things they agreed not, yet let Love bear the Bell away; and let us pray, said he, one for another, and be careful one for another. He said, That he was persuaded of them, that they feared the Lord, and therefore he loved them. I have loved you in him, my dear Hearts, though you have taken it otherwise, without Cause on me given. He ad∣ded, That he had not suffered any Copy of his Treatise of Predestina∣tion to go abroad, because he would suppress all Occasion so far as might be. I am going, said he, before you to my God and your God, to my Father and your Father, to my Christ and your Christ, to my Home and your Home. By Bradford's Pains and Diligence he gained some from their Er∣rors: and particularly one Skelthorp: for whom,Bradford gain∣eth some of them. in a Letter to Care∣less, he thanked God, who gave this Man to see the Truth at the length, and to give place to it; hoping that he would be so heedy in all his Conversation, that his old Acquaintance might thereby think themselves gone astray. Careless also, another eminent Martyr, as well as Bradford,Careless's Pain with them. had much conference with these Men, Prisoners with him in the King's-Bench. Of whose Contentiousness he complained in a Letter to Philpot.Martyrs Letters. Philpot's Coun∣sel. And there is extant an Answer of Philpot to Careless about them: Where he writes, That he was sorry to hear of the great Trouble which these Schismaticks did daily put him to, and wish∣ed that he were with him in part, to release his Grief. He bad him take his Advice, and to be patient, whatsoever his Adversa∣ries could say or do against him: That he should commit the Suc∣cess of his Labours [in rightly informing these Men] unto God, and not to cease▪ with Charity, to do his endeavour in the defence of the Truth, against these arrogant and self-willed blinded Scat∣terers. That these Sects were necessary for the trial of our Faith, and for the beautifying thereof: Not to be perverted with them that were perverse and intractable. That he should shew as much Modesty and Humility as he might possible: and that then others, seeing his modest Conversations among these contentious Bablers, should glorify God in the Truth of him, and the more abhor them. That he should be content that Shimei do rail at David, and cast Stones a while. That he should desire all the Brethren, in the Bowels of Jesus Christ, to keep the Bond of Peace, which is the Unity of Christ's Church: To let no Root of Bitterness spring up, which the Devil, with all his Diligence, seeketh to thrust in a∣mong the Children of God. To kiss one another with the Kiss of unfeigned Brotherly Love, and to take one another by the Hand cheerfully, and say, Let us take up our Cross together, and go to the Mount of Calvary.
This Contention could not be laid asleep amongst them, notwith∣standing the grievous Tribulations they endured for the same Cause of Religion. They wrote also against one another: For in 1556, Careless wrote a Confession of his Faith,Careless draws up a Confessi∣on of Faith. some Part whereof savour'd absolute Predestination against Free-will. This Confession he sent unto the Protestant Prisoners in Newgate from the King's-Bench, where he lay. Whereunto they generally subscribed; and particular∣ly twelve that were a little before condemned to die. Hart having gotten a Copy of this Confession, on the back-side thereof wrote his Confession in opposition thereunto. When they in Newgate had sub∣scribed Careless's Confession, this Hart propounded his unto them; and he, with one Kemp and Gybson, would have persuaded them from the former to the latter, but prevailed not. One Chamberlain also wrote against it. I do not meet with this Confession; only I find one Article was, That the Second Book of Common-Prayer, set forth in K. Edward's Days, was Good and Godly: But that the Church of Christ hath Authority to enlarge and diminish things in the same Book, so far forth as it is agreeable to Scripture. This Paper of Careless's Confession, with the Answer wrote on the back∣side by Hart, fell by some accident into the hands of Dr. Martin, a great Papist; who took occasion hence to scoff at the Professors of the Gospel, because of these Divisions and various Opinions amongst them. But Careless, before the said Martin, disowned Hart, and aid that he had seduced and beguiled many a simple Soul with his foul Pelagian Opinions, both in the Days of K. Edward, and since his De∣parture. Some few Ari∣ans.Besides these Anti-predestinarians, there were some few, who laid in Prison for the Gospel, were Arians, and disbelieved the Divinity of Jesus Christ. Two of these lay in the King's-Bench. These dif∣ferent Opinions occasioned such unseemly quarrelsom Disputes and Heats among them, that the Marshal was ain to separate them from one another. And in 1556, the Noise of this reached to the Council; who, the better to know the Matters controverted between them, sent Dr. Martin to the King's-Bench to examine it. The Prisoners offer to justify K. Edward's Proceedings.These were some of the Transactions that past among the Prisoners. Another Matter concerning them deserves relating: which was this; They boldly and bravely made a Declaration to the Queen and Parlia∣ment that sat this Year: taxing them for overthrowing (as they had lately done) the Laws of K. Henry and K. Edward, and the Reforma∣tion so maturely and deliberately made, and after the Rejection of a Religion, which, as they said, there was not a Parish in England de∣sired to have restored again. They offered likewise to maintain the Ho∣milies and Service, set forth in K. Edward's Days, before them, either by Writiting, or by Disputation in the English Tongue. By whom this Declaration was drawn up, unless by Iohn Bradford, I know not: for I meet with it a MS. which contains divers Pieces of that good Man. This remarkable Declaration I have reposited in the Appen∣dix.No. LXXXIV. This now is the second time a publick Challenge was made to justify K. Edward's Reformation; the former the last Year by Cran∣mer, the latter now by divers of the Learned Men in Prison.
After they had lain fifteen or sixteen Months thus in Prison, their Livings, Houses and Possessions, Goods and Books taken from them, they made such another Address unto the King and Queen,And again of∣fer it. and the Parliament: therein undertaking, either by Word or Writing, before them, or indifferent Arbiters to be appointed by them, to prove themselves no Hereticks, nor Teachers of Heresy, as they were pre∣tended to be, nor cut off from the true Catholick Church, (though by the Popish Clergy excommunicated:) and Secondly, By the Testimony of Christ, his Prophets and Apostles, and the Godly Fa∣thers of the Church, to prove the Doctrine of the Church, the Ho∣milies and Service, taught and used in K. Edward's Time, to be the true Doctrine of Christ's Catholick Church, and most agreeable to the Articles of the Christian Faith. And this was the third publick Challenge they made. This being preserv'd in Fox's Acts,Edit. 1610. p. 1348. I forbear to transcribe it. CHAP. XV. The Exiles, and their Condition. BUT let us now turn our Eyes from the Prisoners,The Exiles. which were kept under close Confinement here in England, unto the Exiles, that by the good Providence of God made their Flight into foreign Countries from these Storms at home. These were both of the Cler∣gy and Laity. Who, though great watch was laid for them, and Prohibitions given out against any that should privately attempt to transport themselves, yet by taking their Opportunities, and the fa∣vour of divers Masters of small Vessels at Lee in Essex, and upon the Coasts in those Parts, they safely got to the other side of the Sea. They scattered themselves,The Lutherans refuse to give Harbour to the Exiles. and took up their Harbours as they could. But they found little Hospitality in Saxony, and other pla∣ces in Germany, where Lutheranism was professed. But on the con∣trary, the Exile English were much hated by those of that Pro∣fession, because they looked upon them as Sacramentaries, and holding as Calvin and Peter Martyr did in the Doctrine of the Sacrament. Therefore when any English came among them for Shelter, they expelled them out of their Cities. And when a grave Pastor of Saxony, (a Friend of P. Martyr's,Mart. Ep. p. 770. who though he were a Minister, yet was not of their Mind) had entertained some of them, the rest clamoured against him, and hated him for it. About this time the Saxon Divines wrote many Books against the Sacramenta∣ries; and namely,Ep. P. Martyr. ad Calvin. Anno 1555. one Ioachim Westphalus wrote a Book against Cal∣vin. And he and the rest got these Books printed at Frankford, on purpose, as Martyr conjectured, the more to spight the English and French Churches that abode now there, and to provoke them. At Wesel the English were under some trouble:The English at Wesel. and the Senate were about to command them to depart thence, because of their dif∣ferent Sentiments from the Augustan Confession in some Points.Bal. Praef. ad Act. Pontif. But Philip Melancthon interposed, and interceded with the Senate on their
behalf. And when some clamoured against them, he took their part, saying, That their Case ought to be weighed by friendly Disputations, and not exploded by Noise and Hissing: and de∣clared his judgment to be, That these poor Exiles were to be re∣tained and helped, not afflicted and vexed by any rough Sentence. He wrote also to the Governors of Frankford to the same purpose, viz. That the English were not to be oppressed, but to be cherished, considering their Sentiments were found in the main Articles of the Christian Confession: and that whereas they differed in some Points, they were to be instructed and informed, and not to be rudely thrown out from among them by Force and Violence. The Lutherans Heat against Sacramentaries.And indeed it was admirable to observe at this Time the exceed∣ing Heats that were in the Lutherans against all other Protestants, only for differing from them in this one Point of the Sacrament. There was a Book published in the Year 1555. in favour of their Opinion of the Corporeal Presence, which was called, Farrago Doctrinae Lutheranae. This P. Martyr called Valdè insulsa, a very foolish Book. It contained a Collection of Sentences out of the Fa∣thers, and also out of the Writings of Luther, Philip, Brentius, Po∣meran, &c. They added some out of Bucer, Illyricus, and Ioachim Westphalus, to shew that they agreed together. They inserted divers Letters sometime writ against the Sacramentaries. Indeed Calvin and Martyr they mentioned not by Name, but A Lasco they did. In this Book there was a Discourse added under this Title, Quod Christi Corqus sit ubi{que}. Which was to serve as a Proof of their Doctrine. And in the conclusion there was a Common-place, De Magistratus officio. Which was thought to be put in upon no other reason, but to in∣flame and irritate Princes against the Sacramentaries. These Saxon Divines were exceeding hot against those that believed not as they did. In their ordinary Discourses they stiled them Hereticks, False Prophets, Suermeros, Sacramentiperdas. About this Time they were gathering new Votes against Calvin, and, as it was thought, they in∣tended to attempt some Excommunication against such as differed from them in this Point. And this that I have said is enough to explain the Reason of the Inhospitality of the Lutherans to our Exiles. At Zurick and other Places well received.But in other Places they were received with much Kindness, and had the Liberty of their Religious Worship granted them, as in Strasburgh, Frankford, Embden, Doesburge, Basil, Zurick, Arrow, Geneva. At Zurick they were received into one House with Bullinger, and had great Favour and Countenance shewn them by the Towns-men and Magistrates. Who offered them, by Bullinger, to supply them with such a quantity of Bread-corn and Wine, as should serve to sustain thirteen or fourteen People. But they with Thanks refused it: Having, I suppose, wherewith to subsist otherwise of themselves, and being willing to be as little burthensome as might be. TheirEmploy∣ments.In these Places some followed their Studies, some taught Schools, some wrote Books, some assisted at the Printing-Presse, and grew very dear to the Learned Men in those Places. At Embden, they aving gotten among them, by Sir Iohn Cheke's Means, as was
thought, an Original Copy of Arch-bishop Cranmer's Book of the Sacrament, translated it into Latin, and printed it there, with a Preface before it. And there they preserved the said Original, as a most invaluable Treasure. Here they printed other good Books in English, and conveyed them into England. At Geneva a Club of them employed themselves in translating the Holy Bible into English, intending to do it with more Correctness, than had hitherto been done; having the opportunity of consulting with Calvin and Beza in order thereunto. What they performed may be perceived by the Bible that goes under the Name of the Geneva Bible at this Day. It was in those Days when it first came forth, better esteemed of than of later Times. At Frankford,Contentions at Frankford. where they had great Countenance of the Magistrates of the City, arose great Contentions and Quar∣rels among themselves, about the Discipline of the Church, and in framing a New Service, different from what was before set forth in K. Edward's Reign, to be used in the publick Congregation: which new Service came nearer to the Form of the Church of Geneva. This occasioned great Troubles, Animosities and Separations, to the discredit of themselves and the Reformation. These Matters may be seen at large in the Troubles at Frankford. There is one thing which that Book making I think no mention of, I will here relate.Some Chil∣dren of the Exiles bapti∣zed by Luthe∣rans. Some of the English upon this Dissension carried their Children to be baptized by Lu∣theran Priests: for tho the Lutherans were against the poor Exiles, they thought so well of them, as to be willing their Children should be initiated into the Church by their Ministry. The Occasion whereof seemed to be, that in the Divisions of this Church, one Party would not let their Children be baptized by the English Minister. This causing a new Disturbance, some wrote to the great Divine P. Martyr, now at Argentine, for his Resolution of this Question, An liceat ho∣minibus Evangelicis Baptismum a Lutheranis accipere. To this he an∣swered in a Letter to the Church, disapproving of their doings: Telling them, That the way to heal their Differences, was, to bring their Children to be baptized in such Churches, with which they agreed in Faith and Doctrine. So that this created a new Quarrel among them; for some held it unlawful to receive Baptism from those that were not Orthodox in their Doctrine: and others again thought it lawful. And this made them send to Martyr for his Judgment, as aforesaid. Who wrote, That he would not say it was unlawful, for that it could not be judged by the Word of God; but he disliked the Practice, and propounded divers Argu∣ments against it. Those that were for it, said, It was an indif∣ferent thing. To which Martyr, made this reply, That indiffe∣rent things were not to be used to the Scandal of the Weak. They said, The Difference was not so great between us in the matter of the Sacrament. But Martyr said, It was of great Moment, be∣cause in it there was a Contest concerning the chief Head of Re∣ligion. They added, that the Lutheran Divines did think in the Matter of Baptism, as they did. But Martyr answered, That they were mistaken: for those Divines affirmed more of the Sacra∣ment, than is fit: and tied the Grace of God to Baptism: and that
they thought there was no Salvation without Baptism: and that they affirmed that Infants had Faith. To the Exiles residing here at Frankford, some in the Year 1555, conveyed Gardiner's Book against Cranmer,Pieces of Rid∣ley's Writings conveyed to Frankford. intitled Marcus Antonius, with Ridley's Answer to the Objections of that Book, and a Treatise in English of Transubstantiation, wrote by the same Ridley. This last they intended to turn into Latine, and so to print both. But on second Thoughts they demurred upon it: fearing it might en∣rage Gardiner the more against Ridley, who was yet alive. Where∣upon Grindal wrote to him to know his Mind therein, before they proceeded to Print. Exiles at Basil.Many of the Fugitives took up their Residence at Basil upon two Reasons: one was, because the People of that City were especially very kind and courteous unto such English as came thither for Shel∣ter: the other, because those that were of slenderer Fortunes might have Imployment in the Printing-houses there, the Printers in Basil in this Age having the Reputation of exceeding all others of that Art throughout Germany, for the Exactness and Elegancy of their Printing. And they rather chose English Men for the Overseers and Correctors of their Presses, being noted for the most careful and di∣ligent of all others. Whereby many poor Scholars made a shift to subsist in these hard Times. Divers of the Exiles, Wri∣ters.Indeed many of these Exiles assisted in promoting of Learning and Religion, by publishing to the World their own or other Mens Writings. Scory.Iohn Scory, that had been Bishop of Chichester, wrote a very com∣fortable Epistle unto all the Faithful, that were in Prison, or in any other Trouble for the Defence of God's Truth: Printed in the Year 1555. He was Preacher to the English Congregation at Embden, and stiled their Superintendent. From hence this, and many other good Books were sent into England, by certain Persons, to be dispersed about in London, and other Places. There was one Elizabeth Young, that came thence with a Book, called Antichrist, and several others. Who was taken up for bringing in Prohibited and Heretical Books, and endured much Trouble. There was also another named Thomas Bryce, that brought Books from Wesel into Kent and London; he was watched and dogged, but escaped several Times. Sir Iohn Baker a Kentish Man, and a great Papist, and a Courtier, laid his Spies to attack him. Old.Iohn Old printed a Book at Waterford 1555, intitled, The Acquittal, or Purgation of the most Catholick Christen Prince, Edward VI. against all such as blasphemously and traiterously infamed him, or the Church in his Reign, of Heresy or Sedition. The writing of this Book was occasi∣oned from the Preachers of England in Q. Mary's Time in their Ser∣mons at S. Paul's Cross, and in other Pulpits: spewing out, as the Book expresseth it, with Scolding, Roaring and Railing, the Poison of Antichrist's Traditions; and infaming the Order, Form and Vse of Preaching, Prayers and Administration of the Holy Sacraments, set forth and exercised by common Authority in the Church of England, reformed under the Government of Edward VI. and vilely slandering
of his Father K. Henry VIII. for banishing the violent usurped Power and Supremacy of the Romish antient Antichrist for his Brother's known Wife, and for taking justly upon him the Title and Estate of Supremacy, incident and appertaining, by the undoubted Ordinance of God, to his Regal Office and Imperial Crown. Thomas Sampson, formerly Dean of Chichester,Sampson. wrote an Epistle to the Inhabitants of Alhallows-Breadstreet, where in K. Edward's Time he had been Incumbent. William Turner Doctor of Physick,Turner. and that had been Physician in the Duke of Somerset's Family, and after Dean of Wells, another Exile, put forth a Book, Anno 1555. called A new Book of Spiritual Physick for divers Diseases of the Nobility and Gentlemen of England. Dedi∣cating it to divers of the chief Nobility. It consisted of three Parts. In the first he shewed who were Noble and Gentlemen, and how many Works and Properties belong unto such, and wherein their Office chiefly standeth. In the second Part, he shewed great Diseases were in the Nobility and Gentry, which letted them from doing their Office. In the third Part, he specified what the Diseases were: as namely, the whole Palsy, the Dropsy, the Romish Pox and the Leprosy: shewing afterward the Remedies against these Diseases. For being a very facetious Man, he delivered his Reproofs and Counsels under witty and pleasant Discourse. He wrote also The hunting of the Romish Fox. Iohn Iuel, afterwards Bishop of Salisbury,Iuel. assisted Peter Martyr at Strasburgh, in setting out his Commentaries upon the Book of Iudges. Who being publick Reader of Divinity there, had first read those Commentaries, and had many Learned English-Men for his Audi∣tors; as Poynet, Grindal, Sands, Sir Iohn Cheke, Sir Anthony Cook, and divers other Knights and Gentlemen, as well as Divines. And when he was removed to Zurick to succeed Pelican, he took Iuel with him thither. In Frankford there happening, as was said before, unhappy Contentions about Ceremonies and Matters of Discipline, (and it was feared that these Dissensions might spread themselves in∣to the other Fraternities in Zurick and other places) Iuel's great Business was to allay these Animosities, partly by Letters, and partly by his own verbal Exhortations: That they should, as Brethren, lay aside Strife and Emulation, especially for such small Matters: That they would hereby offend the Minds of all good Men: which things they ought to have a special heed of. Some who seemed more complaining and uneasy at these things, he exhorted to Patience, admonishing, That we ought not to leap from the Smoke into the Fire: and that we ought to bear a part in Christ's Cross, and to consider how much better it was with them, than with their poor Brethren, that endured Tortures in England. And he would often repeat to them, Bear a while then, things will not endure an Age. Thomas Becon, formerly a Minister in Canterbury,Becon. and well known to the Arch-bishop, wrote an Epistle in his Exile, and sent it to cer∣tain Godly Brethren in England: Declaring in it the Causes of all the Miseries and Calamities that were fallen upon England: How they might be redrest; and what a merciful Lord our God is to all
faithful penitent Sinners, that unfeignedly turn to him. This E∣pistle was brought into England, and read of the Brethren in their Religious Meetings, not without Fruit. In this Epistle he added a Supplication to God, at good length, for the restoring of his Holy Word to the Church of England: Wherein the devout Christian com∣plaineth his Grief and Sorrow to his Lord for taking away the Light of Christ's Gospel, and humbly acknowledging his Fault, and wor∣thy Punishment; most heartily wisheth the Subversion of Anti-christ's Kingdom, and the Restitution of Christ's most Glorious King∣dom in this Realm. He wrote also an Epistle to the Massing Priests, wherein he shewed what a wicked Idol the Mass was, and what a Difference there was between the Lord's-Supper and that: and what Popes brought in every part of the Mass, and put them together, as it was then used. Laurence Humfrey, while he was in exile, wrote a Book in Latin, intituled,Humfrey. Optimates, being Instructions for Noble-men, in three Books. It was printed at Basil by Oporinus, and dedicated to Q. Elizabeth soon after her entrance upon her Kingdom. The Reason of this his Discourse was out of an universal Love to Mankind, and de∣sire to better the Condition of the World, whose Welfare depended so much upon the Sobriety and Vertue of those of Noble Rank and Quality: Since Nobility, as he wrote, widely spread it self through all the Regions and Coasts of Christendom, and was preferred to Places of Trust and Honour in all Princes Courts, and was the ve∣ry Nerve and Strength of Commonwealths: and since from it is∣sued the greatest Helps or Hindrances to the Publick Safety, Pure Religion, the Lives and Maners of Men: Therefore he thought the Gentry and Nobility being imbued with Right and Christian Opinions, not formed to the corrupt Rules of Antiquity, Kings would govern better, the Ministers of Ecclesiastical Matters would more faithfully perform their Functions; and the common Sort would more diligently discharge all necessary Offices, and the whole Common-weal might seem more healthfully to breath, to live, and to recover and persist in a good Constitution. Beside this excellent Book both for the Matter and Elegancy of the Latin Stile, he printed two or three other things at Basil; and he wrote, while he was abroad, a Commentary upon the Prophet Isaiah. But I know not whether it were published. Bartholomew Traheron, Library-Keeper to K. Edward, and Dean of Chichester,Traheron. made divers Readings to the English Congregation upon the beginning of St. Iohn's Gospel; and after printed them, against the wicked Enterprizes of the new start-up Arians in England. Iohn Fox, famous to Posterity for his immense Labours in his Acts and Monuments,Fox. was received by the Accurate and Learned Printer Oporinus of Basil, for the Corrector of his Press. He published (and which I think was the first thing he published, and his first-fruits) a Chronological History of the Church. The first Part, from the first Times unto Martin Luther. This Book he presented unto Oporinus, with an handsom Epistle: Wherein he desired to be received by him into his Service, and that he would vouchsafe to be his Learned Pa∣tron, under whom he might follow his Studies, being one that would
be content with a small Salary: Promising him, that if he would employ him either there, at Basil, or at Argentine, or some Univer∣sity, (which he should rather chuse) Aut me, (said he) destitu∣ent omnia, aut efficiam, Christo opitulante, ut omnes politioris literaturae homines intelligant, quantum Operiano & nomini & officinae debeant. While he was here employed by Oporinus,His Acts and Monuments. at spare Hours he began his History of the Acts of the Church in Latin. Which he drew out more briefly at first; and before his return home into England, well near finished. Having here compleated the Copy, which was but the first Part of what he intended, but making a just Volume in Folio, he sent this Work to Basil to be printed. And so it was in the Year 155—. It remained many Years after in those Parts in great Request, and was read by Foreign Nations; although hardly known at all by our own. Being now in Peace and Safety at Home, Fox reviewed this his Work, and in the Year 1566, first published it in English very Voluminous, because of those many Relations of the Persecutions in Q. Mary's Days, that came to his Hands. All this Work he did himself, without the help of any Amanuensis, nor had he any Servant to do his necessary Domestick Business: being fain to be often diverted by his own private Occasions from his Work. He afterwards enlarged these his Labours into three large Volumes, which have since undergone many Editions. But to look back to what he published in his Exile:Books by him published in Exile. There came to his Hand all the Trials and Examinations of the Learned Martyr Ioh. Philpot, Arch-deacon of Winchester, drawn up by himself, and final∣ly his Death, being burnt in Smithfield, 1555. These things Fox put into Latin, (as he had an excellent Latin Stile) and printed with this Title, Mira ac elegans cum primis Historia, vel Tragoedia potius, de tota ratione examinationis & condemnationis J. Philpotti Archidiaconi Wincestriae, nuper in Anglia exusti: Ab autore primum lingua sua congesta; nunc in Latinum versa, Interprete J. F. A. He had also a great Hand in publishing of Zonaras and Balsamon upon the Apostles Canons in Latin. To which he set this Title, Enarrationes, seu Commentarii in Canones Sanctorum Apostolorum & Synodorum, tum quae Vniversales, tum quae Provinciales: Quae{que} item & privatim quorundam priscorum Patrum propriae extiterunt. Autoribus Jo. Zonara Monacho religiosae & Sanctae Glyceriae: Qui prius Drungarius, seu Praefectus erat Biglae, & summus Secretarius. At{que} etiam Theodoro Balsamensi; qui prius ecclesiae Antiochenae Diaconus, Librarius seu custos chartarum, & Praepositus Blachernensium, deinde & Archiepiscopus est factus ejus∣dem Ecclesiae simul & totius Orientis. Which probably was a Book printed at Oporinus's Press, over which he had Care; and made this Title, and perhaps translated it into Latin. Here at Basil,Translates Cranmer's Book of the Sacra∣ment into Latin. Fox was set on work by Peter Martyr to translate into Latin Arch-bishop Cranmer's Book of the Sacrament: that is, his large Dispute with Winchester. Which Fox fell upon, while Cranmer was yet in Prison. In quo [libro] videbit spero, saith he, in a Letter to Oporinus, propediem universa Germania, quicquid de causa Eucharistica vel dici vel objici, vel excogitari a quoquam poterit. But this never saw the Light, the Manuscript thereof yet lying in my Hands. In 1557, Fox set forth a little Book, pleading the Cause of
the Afflicted with their Persecutors, and comforting the Afflicted. Of which Thomas Lever, who was Preacher to the English Congregation at Arrow, gave this Character, in a Letter which he sent to Fox, who had presented him with this Book: Lever to Fox.SAlutem P. in Christo, Charissime Frater; Literas tuas accepi, & libellum parvum, in quo magna cum eruditione, & Pien∣tissimo zelo, causam afflictorum apud persecutores tyrannos sic agis, ut omnes, qui curant aut impios admonendos, aut pios con∣solatione recreandos,Foxii MSS. id plene a te perfectum videant. Quod ipsi bene curatum velint. Et quoniam meae vocationis munus in hu∣jusmodi admonitionibus & consolationibus versatur plurimum, scias velim, quod misso ad me parvo libello, magnum dedisti mihi beneficium. Dignum igitur, nihil habens, quod tibi pro meritis rependam, exiguum aureolum mitto, rogó{que} accipias, ut certum indicium mei animi erga te tuá{que} studia; quibus alendis augendis{que} tantum nunc polliceor, quantum unquam potuero, prae∣stare. Vale in Christo, & mihi saluta Uxorem tuam at{que} omnem Familiam: Rogó{que} ut mei, me{que} ministerii memores sitis in preci∣bus vestris apud Deum. Iterum vale, vivens in Domino. Aro∣viae, 7. Novemb. 1557. Tuus fideliter in Christo, Th. Leverus. Fox also wrote an Expostulatory Letter to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal of England, to desist those Barbarities that were then used towards innocent Men in England: Killing, Burning, Impri∣soning, Sequestring them without all Mercy. The Letter so pathe∣tically penned,No. LXXXV. deserves a place in the Appendix, for the preserva∣tion thereof. Bale.To all these English Writers during their Exile must Iohn Bale the Antiquarian, be added, who now published and printed in Basil, his admirable Book of Centuries, giving an Account of the Lives and Writings of all such as were born English and Scotish. Iohn Knokys or Knox, another Fugitive, is the last I shall men∣tion,Knox. fearing I have been too large in this Digression already. He was a Scotch-Man, but had lived in England in King Edward's Days, with great Respect; and very zealously preached the Gospel in Lon∣don, Buckinghamshire, Newcastle, Berwick, and other Places of the North and South Parts. He wrote now an Epistle to the Faithful in those Places, and to all others in the Realm of England. Where∣in he earnestly disswaded them from communicating in the Idola∣try then established; and to flee, as well in Body as Spirit, having Society with the Idolaters: and that as they would avoid God's Vengeance: as the burning of Cities, laying the Land waste, Enemies dwelling in the strong Holds, Wives and Daughters de∣filed; and Children falling by the Sword. Which he assured them would happen to the Nation, because of its return to Idolatry, and refusing of God's Mercy, when he so long had called upon them. This his Affirmation, he said, would displease many, and content few. But to confirm them in the belief of what he had said, he bad them recollect what he had formerly spoke in their
presence, and in the presence of others: a great part whereof was then come to pass. He mentioned particularly what he said at Newcastle and Berwick, before the Sweating Sickness, and what at Newcastle upon All-Saints Day, the Year in which the Duke of Somerset was last apprehended: and what he said before the Duke of Northumberland in the same Town, and other Places more. Also what he said before the King at Windsor, Hampton-Court and Westminster; and what he said in London, in more Places than one, when both Fires and riotous Banquetings were made for the pro∣claiming of Q. Mary. He foretold these present Calamities; not that he delighted in them, as he said, or in the Plagues that should befal this unthankful Nation. No, his Heart mourned: but if he should cease, he should then do against his Conscience and Know∣ledg. Then he proceeded to give them the ground of this his Certitude: which he took from the Scriptures. And so in con∣clusion, he counselled them, as they would avoid the Destruction that was coming, that they should have nothing to do with the abominable Idol of the Mass; that is, the Seal of that League which the Devil had made with all the pestilent Sons of Antichrist, as he phrazed it.Foxe's MSS. It may be enquired, how these Exiles were maintained,How the Ex∣iles subsisted; consider∣ing the great Numbers of them, and the Poverty of many. God stirred up the Bowels of the abler sort both in England, and in the parts where they sojourned, to pity and relieve them, by very liberal Contributions conveyed unto them from time to time. From Lon∣don especially came often very large Allowances: till Bishop Gardi∣ner, who had his Spies every where, got knowledg of it; and by casting the Benefactors into Prison, and finding means to impoverish them, that Channel of Charity was in a great measure stopped. Af∣ter this, the Senators of Zurick, at the motion of Bullinger their Su∣perintendent, opened their Treasures unto them. Besides, the great Ornaments then of Religion and Learning, Melancthon, Calvin, Bul∣linger, Gualter, Lavater, Gesner, and others, sent them daily most comfortable Letters, and omitted no Duty of Love and Humanity to them all the time of their Banishment. Some of the Princes, and Persons of Wealth and Estate, sent also their Benevolences: Among these was Christopher Duke of Wirtemberg; who gave at one time to the Exiled English at Strasburgh three or four hundred Dollers, be∣sides what he gave at Frankford: as Grindal Bishop of London signi∣fied to Secretary Cecyl, in the Year 1563, when that Prince had sent a Gentleman upon Business to the Queen. The Bishop desired the Se∣cretary to move the Queen to make some signification to this Person, that She had heard of his Master's former Kindness to the poor English, that it might appear his Liberality was not altogether buried in Oblivion: Or at least he wished some remembrance thereof might pass from the Secretary's own Mouth.
CHAP. XVI. Many Recant. Some go to Mass. Many recant.MANY of the Clergy, that were very forward Men under K. Edward, now, by the Terror of the Times, recanted and subscribed. And these were of two Sorts. Some out of weakness did it, but persisted not in it. But as soon as they could, revoked their Subscriptions and Recantations, and after their Releases and Escapes out of Prison, made a sorrowful Confession in publick of their Falls. Of this sort were Scory and Barlow, Bishops; Iewel, and others. But some after their Recantations persisted in the Popish Com∣munion. Of this sort was Bush and Bird, Bps; Harding, Chaplain to the D. of Suffolk, to whom the Lady Iane sent an Expostulatory Letter; Sydal and Curtop of Oxon, Pendleton, West, &c. Of this last-named Person, let me cast in here one or two Remarks. West was in Or∣ders, and had been Steward to Bishop Ridley. Of whom the said Bishop wrote thus to Grindal, then in Strasburg, That his old Companion, and sometime his Officer, relented, but that the Lord had shortned his Days. For it was but a little after his Com∣pliance that he died. Fox writes the Occasion of it, namely, That when he had relented, and said Mass against his Conscience, he shortly after pined away, and died for Sorrow. When his Master the Bishop was laid in Prison for Religion, he shrank away: and out of his compassion to him, being very loth, as it appeared, that his said Master should be put to Death, he wrote a Letter to him, whereby to move him, if he could, to alter his Judgment. The Contents of whose Letter may be gathered out of Ridley's An∣swer.No. LXXXVI. Which Answer being so excellent, I have put into the Appen∣dix, as I transcribed it out of a Manuscript. Which concluded thus, in Answer to a Sentence that West had concluded his with, namely, That he must agree, or die: the Bishop told him, in the Word of the Lord, that if he and all the rest of his Friends did not Confess and Maintain to their Power and Knowledg what was grounded upon God's Word, but either for Fear or Gain, shrank and played the Apostates, they themselves should die the Death. After the receit of which Answer, West either out of Compassion to his Master, or rather out of Anguish for his own Prevarication, died within a few Days himself: and his Master out-lived him, and writ the News thereof into Germany to Grindal his Fellow-Chaplain, as was said before. The Persecution was carried on against the Gospellers with much Fierceness by those of the Roman Perswasion,The Persecu∣tion hot. who were generally exceeding Hot as well as Ignorant: Chiefly headed by two most cruel-natured Men, Bishop Gardiner, and Bishop Boner; in whose Diocesses were London and Southwark, and the next bordering Counties, where∣in were the greatest Numbers of Professors. And the Servants were of the same Temper with their Masters. One of Boner's Servants swore,Tims Letter. By his Maker's Blood, That wheresoever he met with any of these vile Hereticks, he would thrust an Arrow into him.
Many now therefore, partly out of Fear and Terror, and partly out of other worldly Considerations, did resort to Mass, though they approved not of it, and yet consorted likewise with the Gospellers:Gospellers go to Mass. holding it not unlawful so to do: viz. That their Bodies might be there, so long as their Spirits did not consent. And those that used this Practice, bore out themselves by certain Arguments which they scattered abroad. This extraordinarily troubled the good Divines,Bradford la∣bours to hin∣der it. that were then in Prison for the Cause of Christ, and particularly Bradford. Who complained in a Letter to a Friend, That not the tenth Person abode in God's Ways: and that the more did part Stakes with the Papist and Protestant. So that they became maungy Mongrels, to the infecting of all the Company with them, to their no small Peril. For they pretended Popery outwardly, going to Mass with the Papists, and tarrying with them personally at their An∣tichristian and Idolatrous Service: but with their Hearts, they said, and with their Spirits they served the Lord. And so by this means, said he, as they saved their Pigs, I mean, their world∣ly Pleasures, which they would not leese, so they would please the Protestants, and be counted with them for Gospellers. This whole Letter deserveth to be transcribed, as I meet with it in one of the Foxian Manuscripts, but that I find it printed already at Oxon by Dr. Ironside, in the Year 1688. The same Bradford counselled the true Protestants not to con∣sort with these Compliers,Counsels not to consort with them. but to deal with them as a certain emi∣nent Man, named Simeon Arch-bishop of Seleucia, did with Vsta∣zades, an antient Courtier to Sapores King of Persia, who by his Threatnings and Perswasions had prevailed with the said Cour∣tier, a Christian, to bow his Knee to the Sun.Tripart. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 2. For which base compliance Simeon passing by where this Vstazades was, formerly his great Friend and Acquaintance, would not now look at him, but seemed to contemn and despise him. Which when he per∣ceived, it pierced him so to the Heart, that he began to pull asun∣der his Clothes, and to rend his Garments, and with weeping Eyes cryed out, Alas! that ever he had so offended God in his Body, to bow to the Sun. For, saith he, I have herein denied God, although I did it against my Will. And how sore is God dis∣pleased with me, with whom mine old Father and Friend, Simeon, his dear Servant, will not speak, nor look towards me? I may by the Servant's Countenance perceive the Master's Mind. This La∣mentation came to the King's Ear; and therefore he was sent for, and demanded the Cause of his Mourning. He out of Hand told him the Cause to be his unwilling bowing to the Sun. By it, said he, I have denyed God. And therefore, because he will deny them that deny him, I have no little cause to complain and mourn. Wo unto me, for I have played the Traitor to Christ, and also dissembled with my Leige Lord. No Death therefore is sufficient for the least of my Faults; and I am worthy of two Deaths. When the King heard this, it went to his Stomach; for he loved Vstazades, who had been to him and to his Father, a faithful Servant and Officer. Howbeit the Malice of Satan moved
him to cause this Man to be put to Death. Yet in this Point he seemed to gratify him. For Vstazades desired that the Cause of his Death might be published. This I ask, said he, for the Guerdon of my Time-service to thee, and to thy Father. Which the King readily granted, thinking, that when the Christians should all know it, it would make them the more afraid, and sooner to consent to him. But so soon as it was published, and Vstazades put to death, Lord, how it comforted not only Simeon, then being in Prison, but also all the Christians? Bradford having told this History, improved it after this Tenor. This History, I wish, said he, were marked, as well of us as of all our Popish Gospellers, which have none other things to excuse them, than Vstazades had. For his Heart was with God, howsoever he framed his Body. We should behave our selves straitly against such Brethren, as Simeon did; and then they the sooner would play Vstazades Part. Which thing, no marvail, though they do not, so long as we rock them asleep, by regarding them, and their Companions, as daily we do: and so are partakers of their Evil; and at the length shall feel of their Smart and Punishment. Of these outward Compliers with the Mass, was one Ann Har∣tipol,Ann Hartipol goes to Mass. that formerly harboured the Lady Ann Ascue, burnt in King Henry's Reign. She now went to Mass, pretending her Conscience to be ound before God, and that her Conscience gave her leave to go. To whom Philpot wrote an excellent Letter, which is extant among the Letters of the Martyrs. Pag. 247.The People of this Practice had been tampering with the Lady Vane, a pious Lady,The Lady Vane puts certain Cases concer∣ning the Mass. and a great Benefactor to the poor Prisoners of Christ: Insomuch that she propounded to Bradford three Questios concerning the Mass, being Cases of Conscience, what she were best to do, whether to go to it, or not? He told her in a Letter, That the Questions would never be well seen nor answered, until the Thing whereof they arose were well considered. That is, how great an Evil it was: That there was never Thing upon the Earth so great, and so much an Adversary to God's true Service, to Christ's Death, Passion, Priesthood, Sacrifice and Kingdom, to the Ministry of God's Word and Sacrament, to the Church of God, to Repen∣tance, Faith, and all true Godliness of Life; as that was whereof the Questions arose. And that therefore a Christian Man could not but so much the more abhor it, and all things that in any Point might seem to allow it, or any thing pertaining to the same. Bradford also writ a little Book on this Argument, intituled▪ The Hurt of the Mass. This Book he sent to his Acquaintance, to stop their going to the Popish Service; and particularly to Mr. Shaleros, a Friend of his in Lancashire; and recommended the reading of it to one Riddleston, that had defiled himself in this false Service.
CHAP. XVII.An. 1555. A bloody Time. The Queen's great Belly. A Convocation. THE Year 1555, was a bloody Year, and many honest People,Many burned. both of the Clergy and Laity, were burnt alive in all Parts, because they believed not Transubstantiation. Insomuch that a tender Heart cannot but shrink at the very remembrance thereof. And as if there were a kind of Delight in this sort of cruel Execu∣tions, Instructions were sent abroad, in the beginning of the Year,Instructions to the Justices. unto the Justices of Peace through all Counties in England, to en∣quire diligently in every Parish for Persons disaffected to the Popish Religion. And in each Parish were some appointed to be secret In∣formers against the rest. And for the better discovery of such poor Professors of the Gospel, that fled from Place to Place for their Safety, the Constables, and four or more of the Catholick sort in every Pa∣rish, were authorized to take Examination of all such as might be suspected, how they lived, and where they were? And such as ab∣sented from the Mass, and conformed not themselves to the Church, were to be brought before the Justices: Who were to perswade them to conform; and if they would not, to bind them to good Abear∣ing, or commit them to Prison. The Justices were also commanded, by another Order soon after, to deliver such as leaned to Erroneous and Heretical Opinions, and would not be reclaimed by the Justices, to the Ordinaries, to be by them travailed with; and continuing Obstinate, to have the Laws executed upon them. May 27.Orders sent in∣to Norfolk a∣gainst the Pro∣fessors. These Orders came from the King and Queen to the Justi∣ces of Norfolk: Which, as I extract from a Manuscript, relating the Orders sent into that County, were in these special Articles. I. To divide themselves into several Districtions. II. To assist such Preachers as should be sent; [For it was thought convenient to send abroad Itinerary Preachers, as was done in the last King's Reign, who should by their Doctrine endeavour to reduce the People to the old Religion] and to use them reverent∣ly, and to be present at their Sermons; and to travail soberly with such as abstained from coming to Church, or by any other open Doings, should appear not perswaded to conform themselves: and to use others that be wilful and perverse, more roundly, either by rebuking them, or binding them to good Behaviour, or by impri∣soning them, as the Quality of the Persons, and the Circumstance of their Doings may deserve. III. To lay special wait for Teachers of Heresies, and Procurers of secret Meetings to that purpose. That they and their Families shew good Examples, and begin first to reform their Servants, if any of them be faulty. IV. To apprehend spreaders of false and seditious Rumours. V. To procure one or more in every Parish, secretly instructed, to give information of the Behaviour of the Inhabitants. VI. To charge the Constable, and four or more Catholick In∣habitants of every Parish, to give account of idle Vagabonds and
suspected Persons, [meaning by these the poor Professors, or Prea∣chers of the Gospel, who crept about for their own Safety, and had no settled Habitation] and the Retainers of such Persons. To ob∣serve Hue and Cry; and to look after the Watches in every Pa∣rish. VII. To send an Account of Felons, &c. when any should be apprehended. VIII. To meet every Month, and confer about these Matters. The Effect thereof.Whereupon the Justices meeting together, it was resolved by them to obey every of the said Orders: Particularly concerning the Fifth they resolved, That these secret Informations should be given to the Justices; and that the accused Parties should be examined, without knowledg by whom they were accused. The Earl of Sussex receiv∣eth Informati∣on against some.The Earl of Sussex lived in that County, and was one of chief Trust there: For this Earl had Command in Norfolk of Queen Mary's Army, when she first laid her Claim to the Crown; and managed it with that Prudence and Conduct, that others were induced by his Means to come in. This Earl received several Informations against Ministers and others; for it seems, notwithstanding all these severe Usages, the Popish Mass had not yet so prevailed every where, but that in divers places there were some remainders of King Edward's Reformation and Service. Among the rest, the Curat of old Boken∣ham, and divers in that Parish, were complained of, because the Ce∣remonies of the holy Time of Easter were not observed there. And it seems the Bishop's Officers themselves were not all so diligent as they should be. The Earl signified this Information to Hopton the Bishop; who being in his Visitation soon after, sent for several of the Parish, and made his Inquiries, but found things in other sort than were represented to the Earl. And being returned to his House at Norwich, informed him hereof, and desired the Earl to inform him further, if any thing were amiss, even amongst his own Officers, and he would endeavour to reform them. Popish Spies set every where.In these Times, for the better taking up of all Gospellers, there were certain Spies and secret Informers set every where, to give no∣tice of any that came not to Church, or that spake any thing against the Superstitions. For London were Iohn Avales, Beard, and others: For Stepney one Banbury, a Shifter, a Dicer, and a Whoremonger. By which means none almost could be safe. Yet the Professors made▪ some Provision against this Evil. There were some, that kept them Company, who were honest Men; by whom they often had secret Intelligence what Persons Avales and Beard intended to take up. And so several by shifting Places and Houses, were preserved. The Knight-Marshal, Sir Thomas Holcroft, the Under-Marshal, the Knight-Marshal's Secretary, were secret Friends of the Protestants: and when Designs were laid to take any of them, some signification was often privately brought them, that Search would within some few Hours be made for them; and therefore that they should depart from their Lodgings, and conceal themselves. And when any good Men were under their Hands in Prison, they would take all occasions to shew them Kindness,The Prote∣stants fre∣quently assem∣ble. as far as safely they might. But notwithstanding these Persecutions, and that very few of the Mi∣nisters
remained, being either burnt or fled; yet the Protestants in London had very frequently their Assemblies. And sometimes for want of Preachers of the Clergy, Lay-men exercised. Among these, I find one old Henry Daunce, a Bricklayer of White-chappel, who used to preach the Gospel in his Garden every Holy-day: Where would be present sometimes a thousand People. The very beginning of May there was exceeding Joy among the Papists for the Birth of an Heir-male to the Crown.Confidently reported that a Male-Heir to the Crown was Born. Whereof the Report was so confident every where, that in the County of Nor∣folk, the Mayor of Norwich sent word of it to the Earl of Sussex; and the Bishop had Te Deum sung in the Cathedral and other Places of the City. And all expressions of Joy both in City and Country were shewn. And so it was, no question, in other Parts of the Na∣tion. And which is more strange, so long did this Bruit hold, that besides the first Intelligence thereof brought to Norwich, within a day or two after came two Persons more averring the Truth thereof. The Bishop desired the Earl, according as he heard, if he had any further knowledg, to impart it to him. The Contents of all this may be read in the Original Letter, which is transcribed into the Appendix.No. LXXXVII. But the belief of the Queen's great Belly went not over so.The Queen's great Belly. For then it was given out▪ that in Iune about Whitsuntide was the Time that the Queen expected her Delivery: and Midwives, Rockers and Nurses were provided. And just when that Time came, another Rumour was blown about in London, that the Queen was delivered of a Child. And the Bells were rung, Bonfires and Processions made: and in most parts of the Realm so it was. Nay in Antwerp Guns were shot off by the English Ships, and the Lady Regent re∣warded the Mariners with an hundred Pistols. But there happened now two things which make it seem, as tho all this were but Design to impose upon the Belief of the World.Like a Design. The one was this: There was a Woman, living near Aldersgate, delivered Iune the 11th, 1555, being Whitsunday Morning,Fox. p. 1450. of a Man-Child. Unto whom the Lord North, and another Lord came, and desired to have her Child from her, with very fair Of∣fers. As that her Child should be well provided for, and that She should take no care for it, if She would swear, that She never knew nor had such Child. And after this, other Women came to her: of whom one, they said, should have been the Rocker. But She would in no case part with her Child. This very Woman, before Witness, made this Declaration unto Mr. Fox and others▪ about the Year 1568, while he was printing his Book: but he leaves it to the liberty of the Reader to believe what he list. Add to this one other Passage of a Man within four Miles of Berwick▪ who speaking of the Bonfires for Joy of the Birth of a Prince, said, There was a joyful Triumph, but at length all would not prove worth a Mess of Pottage. As the Queen's great Belly gave these great Disappointments,The Queen's Zeal. so while She went with it, it gave her occasion to be more severe against the poor Gospellers, who were now daily burnt. For She thought, and so She said, She could not be safely and happily delivered, nor
that any thing could succeed prosperously with her, unless all the Hereticks in Prison were burnt ad unum, not sparing one. Which Cruelty I do suppose her Priests and Confessors put into her Head.Pet. Martyr ad Pet. Alexand. A Convocati∣on.There was a Convocation in November this Year; Wherein Car∣dinal Pole presided. The Queen gave him a Licence under the Great Seal, to hold a Synod. Wherein She ordered him to decree what Canons he thought fit. So he composed a Book, with a very specious Title, viz. Reformatio Angliae, Ex Decretis Reginaldi Poli Cardinalis, &c. which was printed. A Manuscript Copy whereof was in the famous Library of Mr. Smith, of late Years sold by Auction. The Decrees of this Book, in number Twelve, were agreed to in February. They are briefly set down by the Bishop of Sarum in his History.Part II. p. 324. There was an Article made in Favour of Non-residences;Vol. intit. Syno∣dalia. which I meet with in the Benet-Library: There is no Date, but I strongly conjecture it is to be laid to this Convoca∣tion. The Cardinal seemed not to favour Non-residences; but the rich Clergy, and Dignitaries were of another Mind: wherefore they made this Proposition; Decretum perpetuae Residentiae juxta Canonum Sanctiones optant pii▪ sed multa sunt, quae hodie impediunt, quominus suum effectum juxta bo∣norum virorum vota consequatur. To which are subjoined Reasons for this Proposition; and Remedies for this evil. Which may be read in the Appendix.N. LXXXVIII. CHAP. XVIII. Ridley and Latimer burnt. Some petition the Queen for Cranmer.WE can declare little this Year of the poor Arch-bishop, being now a Prisoner at Oxford, and out of all place of Action. The Arch-Bishoprick was sequestred into the Hands of Cardinal Pole, and his Palace at Lambeth appointed for the Cardinal's Abode. In a Pe∣tition, that some of those that were abroad had sent over to the Queen this Year, to disswade her from these Persecutions that were now so rigorously set on foot in England, they interceded for Cranmer, put∣ting her in mind how he had once preserved her in her Father's Time, by his earnest Intercessions with him for her. So that, they said, she had more reason to believe he loved her, and would speak the Truth to her, than she had of all the rest of the Clergy. But, alas, this did little good. He seeth Ridley and Latimer going to their burning.In October, Ridley and Latimer were brought forth to their Burn∣ing; and passing by Cranmer's Prison, Ridley looked up to have seen him, and to have taken his Farewel of him; but he was not then at the Window, being engaged in Dispute with a Spanish Friar. But he looked after them, and devoutly falling upon his Knees, prayed to God to strengthen their Faith and Patience in that their last, but painful Passage. Latimer's Cha∣racter.And here for a Farewel to these two Reverend Fathers, let us make a little Halt, to take some view of them. Of Ridley sufficient
HUGH LATIMER Bishop of WORCESTER Martyr'd 16 Octob. 1555
has been said to acquaint us with the Worthiness of that Man. Of Latimer a word or two. His Character is best taken from them who best knew him, and lived in his Time.Becon in his Iewel of Ioy. One of these thus speaks of him, while he was yet alive, in the beginning of King Edward. Latimer was very famous, not only for the Pureness of his Life, which had always been Innocent and Blameless, but for the Since∣rity and Goodness of his Evangelical Doctrine. Which since the beginning of his Preaching, had in all Points been so conformable to the Teaching of Christ, and of his Apostles, that the very Ad∣versaries of God's Truth, with all their menacing Words, and cruel Imprisonment, could not withdraw him from it. But what∣soever he had once preached, he valiantly defended the same before the World, without fear of any Mortal Creature, although of ne∣ver so great Power and high Authority, wishing and minding ra∣ther to suffer, not only loss of worldly Possessions, but also of Life, than that the Glory of God, and the Truth of Christ's Gospel should in any Point be obscured or defaced through him. His Life was not dear unto him, so that he might fulfil his Course with Joy, and the Office that he received of the Lord Iesus, to testify the Gospel of God's Favour. His Fame began to grow apace, while he was at Cambridg, [which was some Years before 1530.] doing abundance of Good there among the Students by his Sermons, which were many, by him preached both in Latin and English. The Scholars flocked after him, and took great notice of his Do∣ctrine, and commending it sometimes to Letters, as most faithful Treasures of Memory. Before them he did, by Authorities out of God's Word, and invincible Arguments, besides the Allegation of the Doctors, prove, That the Holy Scriptures ought to be read in the English Tongue of all Christen People, whether they were Priests or Lay-men. Though many Friars and others could not abide this Doctrine, and would resist him, and preach against him, notwithstanding he, or rather God in him, got the Victory. And it came to pass according to his Teaching, [when the reading of the Scripture was allowed by the Royal Authority.] Before the Scholars also he inveighed against Temple-works, good Intents, blind Zeal, superstitious Devotion; as the painting of Taberna∣cles, gilding of Images, setting up of Candles, running on Pil∣grimage, and such other idle Inventions of Men; whereby the Grace of God was obscured, and his Works of Mercy the less re∣garded. He was also wont to rebuke the Beneficed Men, with the Authority of God's Word, for neglecting and not teaching their Flock, and for being absent from their Cures, they themselves be∣ing idle, and masting themselves like Hogs of Epicurus, taking no thought, tho their poor Parishioners miserably pined away, star∣ved, perished and died for Hunger. He would condemn also, at these his University-Sermons, foolish, ungodly and impossible Vows, as the Vow of Chastity: wishing rather that Liberty of Marriage might be granted to them, which had so vowed, by the Higher Powers, than so to continue, through single Life, in all kind of abominable Uncleanness. O how vehement was he in rebuking all Sins, namely, Idolatry, false and idle Swearing,
Covetousness and Whoredom! Again, how sweet and pleasant were his Words in exhorting unto Vertue! He spake nothing, but it left, as it were, certain Pricks or Stings in the Hearts of the Hearers, which moved them to consent to his Doctrine. None, except they were stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in Heart, went away from his Sermons, which were not led with a faithful Re∣pentance of their former Lives, affected with high detestation of Sin, and moved unto all Godliness and Vertue. The Writer of all this said, He knew certain Men, which, through the perswasion of their Friends, went unto his Sermons, swelling blown full, and puft up like Esop's Frogs, with Envy and Malice against him; but when they returned, his Sermon being done, and demanded how they liked him, and his Doctrine, they answe∣red, with the Bishops and Pharisees Servants, There was never Man spake like unto this Man. He would also speak freely against buy∣ing and selling of Benefices, against promoting such to the Livings of Spiritual Ministers, which were unlearned and ignorant in the Law of God; against Popish Pardons; against the reposing our Hope in our own Works, or in other Mens Merits. He was also a charitable Man, when he was at Cambridg, according to his Abi∣lity, to poor Scholars and other needy People: So conformable was his Life to his Doctrine. Insomuch that there was a com∣mon Saying in that University, When Mr. Stafford read, and Lati∣mer preached, then was Cambridg blessed. Cranmer's Em∣ployment in Prison.But to return to our ABp in his Prison. Where he divided his me∣lancholy Time, partly in Disputings and Discourses with Learned Men of the contrary Perswasion, who laboured to bring him over, thinking thereby to obtain a great Glory to their Church; and partly in prepa∣ring an Answer to Bishop Gardiner, under the name of Marcus Anto∣nius, in vindication of his own Book concerning the Sacrament. And he finished three Parts in Prison. Two whereof were lost in Oxford; and one came into the Hands of Iohn Fox, as he tells us himself; which, he said, was ready to be seen and set forth, as the Lord should see good. Bishop Ridley also in his Confinement wrote Marginal Annotations on the side of Gardiner's said Book, with the Lead of a Window, for want of Pen and Ink. Great pity it is, that these last Studies of the Arch-bishop are lost: For even that part which was once in Fox's Custody, is gone with his Fellows, for ought that I can find among his Papers. It was some time before this, that there was a Report spred, that the Queen was Dead.Report of the Queen's Death. The Rumor presently extended it self over the Seas. Which occasioned the Death of one pious Professor of the Gospel, namely, Bartlet Green a Lawyer. For Christopher Goodman having writ to him, his former Acquaintance in Oxford, to certify him of the Truth thereof, he in a Letter in answer wrote thus, The Queen is not yet Dead. This and divers other Letters, that were given to a Bearer, to carry beyond Sea to the Exiles there, were intercepted; and being read at the Council, some would have it to amount to Treason, as though there had been a Plot carrying on against the Queen's Life. But the Law not making those words Treason, he after long lying in the Tower, was sent by
the Council to Bishop Boner. Who upon examination found him too firm to be moved from the Doctrine of the Gospel: and so con∣demned him to the Fire. CHAP. XIX. The last Proceedings with Cranmer. AFter Ridley and Latimer were dispatched,Proceedings a∣gainst Cranmer. and had sealed their Doctrine with their Blood at Oxford: the said Course was re∣solved to be taken with Cranmer late Arch-bishop, but now the Arch-Heretick, as he was esteemed by them. They had been all three con∣demned, and adjudged Hereticks by Dr. Weston in the University of Oxford, after their Disputations. But that Sentence was void in Law; because the Authority of the Pope was not yet received: Therefore they were tried and judged upon new Commissions. The Commission for judging the two former was from Pole the Cardinal, Lord Legate. Wherein the Commissioners constituted were, White Bishop of Lincoln, Brooks Bishop of Glocester▪ and Holiman Bishop of Bristow. But there was a new Commission sent from Rome for the Conviction of Cranmer. Brooks of Glocester was the Pope's Sub-delegate under Cardinal Puteo▪ to whom the Pope had com∣mitted this Process; and Martin and Story, Doctors of the Civil Law, were the Queen's Commissioners: The former of which was now, or soon after, for his good Services, made one of the Masters in Chancery, and was much employed in these Trials of poor Men. Notwithstanding this Man complied in Q. Elizabeth's Reign, and took his Oath against the Pope now a second Time. In this Com∣mission from the Pope, he decreed, in a formality of Words, That the ABp should have Charity and Justice shewed to him, and that he should have the Laws in most ample manner to answer in his behalf. He decreed also, That the said Arch-bishop should come before the Bishop of Glocester, as high Commissioner from his Holiness, for the examination of such Articles as should be produced against him: and that Martin and Story should require, in the King and Queen's Name, the Examination of him. In pursuance of this Command from the Pope, and in Obedience to the King and Queen, they came down to Oxon upon this Commission; and Septemb. 12. (which was seven days before the Condemnation of Latimer and Ridley) sat in S. Mary's Church, accompanied with many other Doctors, and such-like; and among the rest, the Pope's Collector. The Arch-bishop was brought forth out of Prison, habited in a fair black Gown, and his Hood of Doctor of Divinity on both Shoul∣ders. Then some Proctor said aloud, Thomas Arch-bishop of Can∣terbury, appear here, and make answer to that which shall be laid to thy Charge for Blasphemy, Incontinency and Heresy. What due Honour the Arch-bishop gave unto the Queen's Commissioners, as representing the Supream Authority of the Nation, and how he gave none to Brooks, the Pope's Representative, keeping on his Cap; and the Speeches, that the said Brookes, and the other two
made unto him, with the Arch-bishop's discreet and excellent An∣swers, still interposing his Protestation against Brooks his Authority, may be seen at large in Fox's Monuments. Martin acts as the Queen's Proctor.Only it may not be amiss here briefly to mention, (for the better understanding of the Form of the Process) that after the Arch∣bishop was cited, as before was said, into the Court, the Bishop of Glocester first made an Oration, directed unto the Arch-bishop at the opening of his Commission. Next Dr. Martin made a short Speech; and being with Dr. Story, appointed the King's and Queen's Attorneys, he offered unto the said Bishop their Proxy, sealed with the Broad-Seal of England; and then presenting himself to be Proctor on their behalf. After that, he proceeded to exhibit certain Articles against the Arch-bishop, containing Adultery and Perjury, (the one for being Married, the other for breaking his Oath to the Pope.) Also he exhibited Books of Heresy, made partly by him, and partly by his Authority published. And so produced him as a Party prin∣cipal to answer to his Lordship. After this, having leave given him, the Arch-bishop beginning with the Lord's Prayer and Creed, made a long and learned Apology for himself. Which is preserved to Posterity in the Acts and Monuments. His greatest Trouble at this Time.By his Discourse before the Commissioners it appeared, how little he was taken with the splendor of worldly Things. For he profes∣sed, That the loss of his Promotions grieved him not: He thanked God as heartily for that poor and afflicted State in which he then was, as ever he did for the Times of his Prosperity. But that which stuck closest to him, as he said, and created him the greatest Sor∣row, was, to think that all that Pains and Trouble, that had been taken by K. Henry and himself, for so many Years, to retrieve the Antient Authority of the Kings of England, and to vindicate the Nation from a Foreign Power, and from the Baseness and infinite Inconveniences of crouching to the Bishops of Rome, should now thus easily be quite undone again. And therefore, he said, all his Trouble at that time, and the greatest that ever he had in his Life, was to see the King and Queen's Majesties, by their Proctors there, to become his Accusers, and that in their own Realm and Country, before a Foreign Power. For that if he had trans∣gressed the Laws of the Land, their Majesties had sufficient Au∣thority and Power, both from God, and the Ordinance of the Realm, to punish him. Whereunto he would be at all times con∣tent to submit himself. Interrogato∣ries put to him, with his Answers.At this time of his Trial, several Interrogatories were administred unto him, to make answer to: As concerning his Marriage; Con∣cerning his setting abroad Heresies, and making and publishing certain Books of Heresy. To which he confessed, That the Ca∣techism, and the Book of Articles, and the Book against Bishop Gardiner, were of his doing. Concerning subscribing those Arti∣cles, and his compelling Persons to subscribe. Which he denied; but that he exhorted them that were willing to subscribe, he acknow∣ledged. Concerning his open maintaining his Errors in Oxon: [Whereas they brought him to the Disputation themselves.] Con∣cerning his being noted with the Infamy of Schism; and that he
moved the King and Subjects of his Realm, to recede from the Catholick Church and See of Rome. Which he acknowledged: but that their Departure, or Recess, had in it no matter of Schism. Concerning his being twice sworn to the Pope. And Dr. Martin then shewed a Copy of his Protestation against the Pope at his Consecration, under a publick Notary's Hand. That he took upon him the See of Rome, in consecrating Bishops, and Priests, with∣out Leave or Licence from the said See. To which he answered, That it was permitted to him by the Publick Laws of the Realm Concerning his standing out still to subscribe to the Pope's Autho∣rity, when the whole Nation had. This being done, a publick Notary entred his Answers. Then the Bishop of Glocester made another Speech, at breaking up of this Meeting, and Dr. Story ano∣ther, reflecting upon what Cranmer had said, with Reviling and Taunts. The last thing they did at this Meeting was to swear several Per∣sons, who were the next Day to declare what they knew,Witnesses sworn against him. or could remember against this Reverend Father. And these were Dr. Mar∣shal Dean of Christ's-Church, a most furious and zelotical Man; and who to shew his spight against the Reformation, had caused Peter Martyr's Wife, who deceased while he was the King's Professor, to be taken out of her Grave, and buried in his Dunghil: Dr. Smith Publick Professor, who had recanted most solemnly in K. Edward's Days, and to whom the Arch-bishop was a good Friend, yet not long afterwards he wrote against his Book, and was now sworn a Witness against him: Dr. Tresham a Canon of Christ-Church, who was one of the Disputers against Cranmer, and had said, in his Popish Zeal, That there were 600 Errors in his Book of the Sacrament: Dr. Crook; Mr. London, a Relation I suppose of Dr. London, who came to shame for his false Accusation of Cranmer and others in K. Henry's Reign; and now this Man, 'tis like, was willing to be even with Cranmer, for his Relation's sake: Mr. Curtop, another Ca∣non of Christ's-Church, formerly a great Hearer of P. Martyr, Mr. Ward; Mr. Serles, the same, I suppose, who belonged to the Church of Canter∣bury, and had been among the number of the Conspirators against him in K. Henry's Days. And these being sworn, the Arch-bishop was al∣lowed to make his Exceptions against any of them. Who resolutely said, He would admit none of them all, being perjured Men, having sworn against the Pope, and now received and defended him; And that therefore they were not in Christian Religion. And so the good Father was remitted back for that time to Prison again. I know not what the Depositions of these Witnesses were,Cited to Rome. given in against him the next Day. For Fox relates nothing thereof, nor any other, as I know of. Doubtless they were some of the Do∣ctrines that he preached, or taught, or defended, in Canterbury for∣merly, or more lately in his Disputations in the Schools, or in his Discourses in his Prison, or at Christ's-Church, where he sometimes was entertained. But to all that was objected against him he made his Answers. And the last thing they of this Commission did, was to cite him to appear at Rome within eighty Days, to make there his Answer in Person▪ Which he said, He would be content to do, if
the King and Queen would send him. And so he was again remanded back to durance, where he still remained. And an account of what these Commissioners had done, was dispatched to Rome forthwith. From whence the final Sentence was sent in December next. The Pope's Letters against him.Then Pope Paul sent his Letters Executory unto the King and Queen, and to the Bishops of London and Ely, to degrade and deprive him: and in the end of those fourscore Days he was declared Contu∣max, as wilfully absenting himself from Rome, when he was sum∣moned to go, though he was detained in Prison; which might have been a lawful and just Excuse. But these Matters must proceed in their Form, whatsoever Absurdity or Falsehood there were in them. The Process a∣gainst him at Rome.By these Letters Executory, (which are in the first Edition of Fox, but omitted in all the rest) we may collect how the Process went a∣gainst Cranmer at Rome, which I shall here briefly set down. First, the King and Queen sent their Information to the Pope against Tho∣mas Arch-bishop of Canterbury, viz. That he had brought this no∣ble Realm from the Unity of the Catholick Church. That he was a Person guilty of Heresy, and many other grand Crimes, and not worthy to enjoy his Bishoprick, and most worthy greater Punishments, and they requested that Process might be made against him. For the better enquiry into, and taking cognizance of the Truth of these Accusations, the Pope gave a special Commission, signed with his Hand, to Iames Puteo, Cardinal of S. Mary's, and afterwards of S. Simeon, to cite the said Thomas before him, and all such Witnesses as should be needful, to come to a true knowledg of the Arch-bishop's Crimes: and accordingly to give the Pope an ac∣count of all he should find. This he was to do in his own Person, or to constitute any dignified Person, abiding in these Parts, to do the same. So the said Cardinal appointed Brookes Bishop of Glocester, and some Collegues with him, to manage this Commission in his stead. This Brookes, having been Bishop Gardiner's Chaplain, was probably nominated and recommended by the said Gardiner, as I do suppose he was the Person that directed the whole managery of this Process against the Arch-bishop. And so Brookes, being now by this Deputation the Pope's Sub-delegate, proceeded in this Cause, as was said before. In regard of the Arch-bishop's Citation to Rome to an∣swer there, and make his personal appearance before the Pope, the Letters Executory say, Comparere non curaret, as an Aggravation of his Crime, that he took no care to appear, (which was false;) and that therefore, as the said Letters ran, the King and Queen's Proctors at Rome, named Peter Rouilius, and Anthony Massa de Gallesio, and Alex∣ander Palentarius, the Proctor of the Pope's Treasury, had sued that Contumacy might be definitively pronounced against the said Thomas Cranmer, being cited and not appearing. Therefore, He, Pope Paul IV. sitting in the Throne of Justice, and having before his Eyes God alone, who is the Righteous Lord, and judgeth the World in Righteousness, did make this definitive Sentence, pro∣nouncing and decreeing the said Thomas Cranmer to be found Guil∣ty of the Crimes of Heresy and other Excesses, to be wholly un∣mindful of the Health of his Soul, to go against the Rules and Ec∣clesiastical Doctrines of the Holy Fathers, and against the Aposto∣lical
Traditions of the Roman Church and Sacred Councils, and the Rites of the Christian Religion hitherto used in the Church; especially against the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Lord, and Holy Orders; by thinking and teaching otherwise, than the Holy Mother Church preacheth, and observeth; and by de∣nying the Primacy and Authority of the Apostolick See; and against the Processions, which every Year, on Corpus Christi Day, were wont to be celebrated by the Pope's Predecessors. Mention also is made of his Bringing in again the Heresy abjured by Beren∣garius, of his believing the false and heretical Doctrines of Wicklif and Luther, those Arch-Hereticks: printing of Books of that na∣ture, and publishing them, and defending those Doctrines in pub∣lick Disputations, and that before his Sub-delegate, and persisting herein with Obstinacy. Therefore the Pope excommunicated him, and deprived him of his Arch-bishoprick, and all other Places▪ and Privileges whatsoever, and adjudged him to be delivered over to the Secular Court, and all his Goods to be confiscate. And the Pope absolved all Persons from any Oath of Fidelity given to Cranmer, and imposed perpetual Silence upon him. And more∣over, upon the instance of the abovesaid Proctors, commanded the Bishops of London and Ely to degrade him, and so to deliver him over to the Secular Court. This bore date December 14. In obedience to these Letters from Rome, the two Bishops,The Pope's Letters read. the Pope's Delegates, came down to Oxford; and sitting in the Choire of Christ's-Church, before the High Altar, the said Commissional Let∣ters were read: wherein it was specified, That all things were in∣differently examined on both Parties, and Counsel heard as well on the King's and Queen's behalf, who were Cranmer's Accusers, as on the behalf of Cranmer, so that he wanted nothing to his ne∣cessary Defence. Whereat the Arch-bishop could not but exclaim (while these things were reading) against such manifest Lies, That, as he said, when he was continually in Prison, and could never be suffered to have Counsel or Advocate at Home, he should produce Witness, and appoint his Counsel at Rome. God must needs punish, added he, this open and shameless Lying. But this Command of Degrading our Arch-bishop was presently proceeded upon: Thomas Thirlby Bishop of Ely, his old Friend,They degrade him. in∣finitely before-time obliged by the Arch-bishop, shed many Tears at the doing of it. So that Cranmer moved at it, was fain to comfort him, and told him, He was well contented with it. So they apparel∣led the Arch-bishop in all the Garments and Ornaments of an Arch∣bishop; only in mockery every thing was of Canvas, and old Clouts. And the Crosier was put into his Hand. And then he was, piece by piece, stript of all again. When they began to take away his Pal, he asked them, Which of them had a Pal, to take away his Pal? They then answered, acknowledging they were his Inferi∣ors, as Bishops, but as they were the Pope's Delegates, they might take away his Pal. While they were thus spoiling him of all his Garments, he told them, That it needed not; for that he had done with this Gear long ago. While this was doing, Boner made a Triumphant Speech against the poor Arch-bishop. But when they
came to take away his Crosier, he held it fast, and would not deliver it: but pulled out an Appeal out of his left Sleeve under his Wrist, and said, I appeal unto the next General Council; and herein I have comprehended my Cause,He Appeals. and the Form of it, which I de∣sire may be admitted. And prayed divers times to the standers by to be Witnesses, naming them by their Names. This Appeal is preserved in Fox, which is well worthy the reading. He is ill dealt with in his Process.The Arch-bishop was all along ill dealt with in divers respects in this his Process, which himself was well sensible of. One was, That he had desired the Court, that considering he was upon his Life, he might have the use of Proctors, Advocates and Lawyers. But they would allow him none. After the Court, wherein Brooks was Sub-delegate, had done, they promised him that he should see his Answers to Sixteen Articles, that they had laid against him; that he might correct, amend and change them, where he thought good. And that Promise they performed not. And so entred his Answers upon record, though his Answer was not made upon Oath, nor re∣served, nor made in judicio, but extra judicium. Which Cranmer made a Protest of: But not to the Bishop of Glocester, as Judg, whom he would not own, but to the King's and Queen's Proctors, Martin and Story. To them, for these Reasons, he wrote a Letter, That he trusted they would deal sincerely with him, without Fraud or Craft, and use him as they would wish to be used in the like case themselves: Bidding them remember that with what Measure they meet, it should be measured to them again. The Reasons of his Appeal.Therefore to make himself some amends for all this foul Dealing, his last Refuge was an Appeal. Whereof he seriously bethought himself, when, and in what manner to make it. The Causes for his resolving upon it, besides those already mentioned, were, because he remembred Luther once did so in such a Case; and that he might not seem rashly to cast away his own Life; and because he was bound by his Oath never to receive the Pope's Authority in this Realm; and because the Commissioners had broken their Promise with him, as above was said: and because he thought the Bishop of Rome was not an indifferent Judg in this Cause, which was his own Cause: for all the Arch-bishop's Troubles came upon him for departing from him. He therefore wrote privately to a trusty Friend, and Learned in the Law, then in the University, to instruct him in the Order and Form of an Appeal: and whe∣ther he should first Appeal from the Judg-Delegate to the Pope, or else from that Judg immediately to a General Council. And so earnestly entreated him to lay aside all other Studies, and to take this in Hand presently, because he was summoned, to make his Answer at Rome, the sixteenth Day of this Month, that is, of Fe∣bruary. There was one reason more moved him to Appeal, which must not be omitted, namely, that he might gain Time to finish his Answer to Marcus Antonius. He feared after all, they would not admit his Appeal. But he did not much pass, and desired God's Will might be done: So that God might be glorified by his Life or Death. He thought it much better to die in Christ's Quarrel, than to be shut in the Prison of the Body, unless it were for the
advancement of God's Glory, and the Profit of his Brethren. This Letter of the Arch-bishop being writ with so much Strength and Presence of Mind, and shewing so much Prudence and Wit, is hap∣pily preserved in Fox's Monuments where it may be read. This Appeal,He presseth his Appeal. when the Arch-bishop had produced and preferred to the Bishop of Ely, he told him, That they could not admit of it, because their Commission was to proceed against him, Omni Appellatione remota. Cranmer replied, That this Cause was not every private Man's Cause, but that it was between the Pope and him immediately, and none otherwise: and that no Man ought to be Judg in his own Cause. And therefore they did him the more Wrong. So at last Thirlby received it of him, and said, If it might be admitted, it should. And so after this Interruption, they proceeded to degrade him, taking off the rest of his Habits. And then put him on a poor Yeoman-Beadle's Gown threadbare, and a Towns-man's Cap. And Boner told him, He was no Lord any more: and so was sent to Prison. CHAP. XX. Cranmer Writes to the Queen. AND now,Writes two Letters to the Queen. having undergone these Brunts with all this Gravi∣ty, Discretion, Learning and Courage, he next resolved to give the Queen a true and impartial Account of these Transactions, to prevent Misreports, and to justify himself in what he had said and done. Two Letters therefore he wrote to her, but thought not fit to entrust them with the Commissioners, since Weston had served him such a Trick in the like Case before. In these Letters he rela∣ted the reason of his refusing the Bishop of Glocester for his Judg, and of his Appeal. For as he thought it his Duty at that juncture to de∣clare himself in that publick manner against the Bishop of Rome, so he reckoned he ought to declare himself also to the Supream Ma∣gistrate. And therefore before the Bishop of Glocester, and the Commissioners, he said, That as he had thus discharged his own Conscience towards the World, so he would also write his Mind to her Grace touching this Matter. He wrote to her,The Content of the first. That the twelfth Day of that Month he was cited to appear at Rome the eightieth Day after. And that it could not but grieve the Heart of a natural Subject to be accused by the King and Queen of his own Country, and before any outward Judg: as if the King and Queen were Subjects within their own Realm, and were fain to complain and require Justice at a Stran∣ger's Hand against their own Subject, being already condemned to Death by their own Laws. As though the King and Queen could not have or do Justice within their own Realm, against their own Subjects; but they must seek it at a Stranger's Hand in a strange Land. Then he proceeded to shew her, why he refused the Pope's Autho∣rity, when Brooks Bishop of Glocester came to try him; namely,
Because he was sworn never to consent, that the Bishop of Rome should have, or exercise any Authority or Jurisdiction in the Realm of England. Another reason why he denied his Authority, was, Because his Authority repugned to the Crown Imperial of this Realm, and to the Laws of the same. For the Pope saith, all manner of Power, both Temporal and Spiritual, is given unto him of God: and that Temporal Power is given to Kings and Emperors to use it under him. Whereas contrary to this Claim, (said the Arch-bishop) the Imperial Crown of this Realm is taken imme∣diately from God, to be used under him only, and is subject to none but God alone. Moreover, to the Imperial Laws of this Realm, all the Kings in their Coronations, and all Justices, when they receive their Of∣fices, are sworn, and all the whole Realm bound to defend them. But contrary hereunto the Pope (he said) made void, and com∣manded to blot out of our Books, all Laws and Customs repug∣nant to his Laws. Then he proceeded to shew, how contrary the Laws of the Realm, and the Pope's Laws were. And therefore that the Kings of this Realm had provided for their Laws by the Premunire. So that if any Man let the execution of the Law by any Authority from the See of Rome, he fell into the Premunire. And to meet with this, the Popes had provided for their Law by Cursing. He supposed that these things were not fully opened in the Par∣liament-house, when the Pope's Authority was received again: For if they were, he could not believe, that the King and Queen, the Nobles and Commons would again receive a Foreign Autho∣rity, so hurtful and prejudicial to the Crown, and to the Laws and State of this Realm. He rebuked the Clergy, who were the main Movers of this at the Parliament, for their own Ends. For they desired to have the Pope their chief Head, to the intent that they might have, as it were, a Kingdom and Laws within them∣selves, distinct from the Laws of the Crown; and live in this Realm like Lords and Kings, without damage or fear of any Man. And then he glanced at some of the Clergy, [probably meaning Thirlby, Hethe, Tonstal, &c.] that they held their Peace for this Consideration, though they knew this well enough. Who if they had done their Duty to the Crown and Realm, should have opened their Mouths at this Time, and shewn the Peril and Danger that might insue to the Crown hereby. Another Cause he urged to the Queen, why he could not allow the Pope's Authority, was, Because he subverted not only the Laws of the Nation, but the Laws of God. So that whosoever be un∣der his Authority, he suffered them not to be under Christ's Reli∣gion purely. For proof of which he gave these Instances. God's Will and Commandment is, that when the People be gathered to∣gether to serve God, the Ministers should use such a Language as the People might understand, and take profit thereby. For God said by the Mouth of S. Paul, As a Harp or Lute, if it give no cer∣tain sound, that Men may know what is stricken, who can dance after it? it is put in vain. So it is in vain, profiteth nothing, if
the Priest speak to the People in a Language they know not. And whereas, when he urged this to the Commissioners, they told him, That that Place respected Preaching only. He told the Queen, That S. Paul's words meant it not only of Preaching, for that he spake expresly of Praying, Singing and giving Thanks, and of all other things, which the Priests say in the Churches. And so (he said) all Interpreters, Greek and Latin, Old and New, School-Authors, and others, that he had read, understood it: Till about thirty Years past, Eckius and others of his Sort, began to invent this new Exposition. And so (he said) all the best Learned Di∣vines, that met at Windsor 1549, for the Reformation of the Church, both of the New Learning and the Old, agreed with∣out Controversy, (not one opposing) that the Service of the Church ought to be in the Mother-Tongue; and that that Place of S. Paul was so to be understood. Again, Christ ordained the Sacrament to be received of Christi∣an People, under both Forms of Bread and Wine, and said, Drink ye all of this. The Pope gives a clean contrary Command, That no Lay-man shall drink of the Cup of their Salvation. So that if he should obey the Pope in these things, he must needs disobey his Saviour. Again, He instanced in the Pope's taking upon him to give the Temporal Sword to Kings and Princes, and to depose them from their Imperial States, if they were disobedient to him; and in commanding Subjects to disobey their Princes: Assoiling them as well from their Obedience, as their lawful Oaths made unto them; directly contrary to God's Commandment, that commandeth all Subjects to obey their Kings, and their Rulers under them. Then he spake of the Superiority the Pope claimed above Kings and Emperors, and making himself Universal Bishop. And how his Flatterers told him he might dispense against God's Word, both against the Old and New Testament: and that whatsoever he did, tho he drew innumerable People by heaps with himself to Hell, yet might no mortal Man reprove him; because he is the Judg of all Men, and might be judged by no Man. And thus he sat in the Temple of God, as he were a God, and named himself God, and dispensed against God. If this were not (he said) to play An∣tichrist's part, he knew not what Antichrist was, that is, Christ's Enemy and Adversary. Now (added he) until the time that such a Person may be found, Men might easily conjecture where to find Antichrist. He took God to record, that what he spake against the Power and Authority of the Pope, he spake it not for any Malice he ought to the Pope's Person, whom he knew not; nor for fear of Punishment, or to avoid the same; thinking it rather an Occasion to aggravate, than to diminish the same: but for his most bounden Duty to the Crown, Liberty, Laws and Customs of this Realm of England; and most especially to discharge his Conscience, in uttering the Truth to God's Glory, casting away all Fear by the Comfort which he had in Christ, who saith, Fear not them that kill the Body.
As touching the Sacrament, he said, That forasmuch as the whole Matter stood in the understanding those words of Christ, This is my Body; This is my Blood: He told the Commissioners, That Christ in those words made demonstration of the Bread and Wine, and spake figuratively, calling Bread his Body, and Wine his Blood; because he ordained them to be Sacraments of his Body and Blood. And he told them, He would be judged by the old Church, which Doctrine could be proved Elder; and that he would stand to. And that forasmuch as he had urged in his Book Greek and Latin Authors, which above a thousand Years continu∣ally taught as he did; if they could bring forth but one old Au∣thor, that said in these two Points as they said, he offered six or seven Years ago, and offered so still, that he would give place. Then he shewed her how fond and uncomfortable the Papists Doctrine of the Sacrament is: For of one Body of Christ is made two Bodies: One natural, having distance of Members, with Form and Proportion of Man's perfect Body; and this Body is in Heaven. But the Body of Christ in the Sacrament, by their own Doctrine, must needs be a monstrous Body, having neither di∣stance of Members, nor Form, Fashion or Proportion of a Man's natural Body. And such a Body is in the Sacrament, teach they, as goes into the Mouth with the Form of Bread, and entreth no further than the Form of Bread goes, nor tarrieth no longer than the Form of Bread is by natural Heat digesting. So that when the Form of Bread is digested, the Body of Christ is gone. And what Comfort (said he) can be herein to any Christian Man, to receive Christ's unshapen Body, and it to enter no further than the Stomach, and depart by and by as soon as the Bread is consumed? It seemed to him a more sound and comfortable Doctrine, that Christ hath but one Body, and that hath Form and Fashion of a Man's true Body. Which Body spiritually entreth into the whole Man, Body and Soul. And though the Sacrament be consumed, yet whole Christ remaineth, and feedeth the Receiver unto eternal Life, if he continue in Godliness, and never departeth until the Receiver forsaketh him. That if it could be shewed him, that the Pope's Authority be not prejudicial to the things before-mentioned; or that his Do∣ctrine of the Sacrament be erroneous, then he would never stand perversly in his own Opinion, but with all humility submit him∣self to the Pope, not only to kiss his Feet, but another Part also. For all these Reasons he could not take the Bishop of Gloucester for his Judg, representing, as he did, this Pope. But another Rea∣son was, in respect of his own Person, being more than once perju∣red, having been divers times sworn never to consent that the Bishop of Rome should have any Jurisdiction within this Realm, but to take the King and his Successors for Supream Heads thereof. And he was perjured again, in taking his Bishoprick both of the Queen and the Pope, making to each of them a solemn Oath: Which Oaths be so contrary, that the one must needs be Perjury. And further, in swearing to the Pope, to maintain his Laws, Decrees, Constitu∣tions and Ordinances, he declared himself an Enemy to the Impe∣rial
Crown, and to the Laws of the Realm. Whereby he shewed himself not worthy to sit as a Judg in this Realm. This was the Sum of this excellent Letter of the Arch-bishop to the Queen. He wrote another to her soon after: wherein he plainly told her,The Contents of his second Letter. That at her Coronation, she took an Oath to the Pope, to be obe∣dient to him, to defend his Person, to maintain his Authority, Honour, Laws and Privileges: And at the same time another Oath to the Kingdom, to maintain the Laws, Liberties and Cu∣stoms of the same. He prayed her to weigh both Oaths, and see how they did agree; and then to do as her Grace's Conscience should give her: For he was sure (he said) she would not wil∣lingly offend. He feared there were Contradictions in her Oaths, and that those that should have informed her Majesty thoroughly, did not their Duties herein. He complained, that he was now kept from Company of Learned Men, from Books, from Coun∣sel, and from Pen and Ink, saving to write to her Majesty at that time: and as to his appearance at Rome, he said, if she would give him leave, he would appear there; and he trusted God would put in his Mouth to defend his Truth there, as well as here. These Letters of his,The Bailiff of Oxford carri∣eth his Letters. one of the Bailiffs of Oxon carried up to the Queen. Something else he wrote to her, enclosed and sealed; which he required Martyn and Story to be delivered without delay, and not to be opened until it were delivered unto her own Hands. These and other of his smart and learned Letters, no question made Im∣pression upon the Queen, or at least upon those that read them; for they were delivered by the Queen to no less a Person than the Holy Father, Cardinal Pole himself; who was advised to frame an Answer to them. So he wrote to the Arch-bishop in answer to one of them,Pole answer∣eth them. a long Letter, dated from St. Iames's, Novemb. 6. Wherein he pretended a great deal of Compassion to his Soul; which he told him was ready to be lost, as well as his Body: And that the Condemnati∣on that was lately past on him, was so horrible to him to hear, that he testified to him before God, and upon the Salvation of his Soul, that he would rather chuse to be the Means of bringing him to Repentance, than to receive the greatest Benefit that could be gi∣ven him under Heaven in this World. Which the Cardinal might say, to take off the Odium of the Suspicion, as though he hastened Cranmer's Death, that he might jump into his Place. And so the Cardinal proceeded to attempt to convince him in the two great Points of his Letter, viz. concerning the Authority of the Pope, and concerning the Sacrament of the Altar. Especially, because Cran∣mer had said in his Letter, That he would not be perverse, to stand wilfully in his own Opinion, if any could shew him by Reason, that his Doctrines were Erroneous. But I refer the Reader to the Appendix, if he be minded to read the Cardinal's Letter;No. LXXXIX. which I met with among Fox's Manuscripts. By comparing of this Letter of Pole's with that of Cranmer's, any one may see a mighty diffe∣rence. Strength, Evidence and Conviction in the Arch-bishop's, who had Truth on his Side, but a Flashiness and Debility in the Car∣dinal's, made up of poor Shifts and weak Arguings, and impertinent
Allegations of Scripture, and personal Reflections, to help out a bad Cause. To mention some few of this sort. He charged the Arch-bishop with Covetousness and Ambition,Some Account of the Cardi∣nal's Letter to Cranmer. in affecting the Archbishoprick. And then, by and by, not well remembering what he had said be∣fore, in his Heat against the good Arch-bishop, he gives a contrary Reason thereof, namely, That he might be in a capacity to reform the Church according to his Mind. And that it was for the sake of that, that he took an Oath to the Pope at his Consecration, though he were fain to make a Protestation against the said Oath. He said in this Letter, That the Arch-bishop's fall into Error, was not as the fall of others usually were, by Frailty or Curiosity, but by deliberate Malice: And that the Arch-bishop, by his Pro∣testation that he made before he took his Oath to the Pope, brake his Oath, and was forsworn before he did swear. Which methinks is pretty strange. And concerning this Protestation, he said, It was a privy Protestation, and that he had privy Witnesses of it: Whereas it was done in the most open and publick manner that could be, two or three times over, before Publick Notaries, and by them entred on Record, on purpose that all might take notice of it. And whereas the Arch-bishop had said, That it was much more probable, that the Bread and Wine should be a Figure, than the real Body and Blood. The Cardinal said, The more probable it was, the more false; be∣cause the great Sophister and Father of Lies deceived by probabili∣ty of Reason. The Consequence whereof one would think should be, the more improbable any Opinion in Religion was, the more true. But (he said) the true Doctrine was taught another way. He represented the Arch-bishop, as challenging them of the other Side to bring any one single Doctor of the Church, that ever spake in favour of Transubstantiation; leaving out, For a thousand Years next after Christ, which the Arch-bishop expresly had said. And in fine, every where he triumphed over the Arch-bishop's wilful Blindness and Ignorance; and told him, in much Charity, That he was under the Vengeance of God, a Member of Satan, and damned. This, and a great deal more, may be seen in Pole's Letter. To which I might have added another Letter of the said Cardi∣nal to the same Arch-bishop,Another Letter of the Cardi∣nal to Cran∣mer. concerning the Sacrament, a little af∣ter the Disputation at Oxford, but that it would be too prolix, being a just Treatise against Cranmer's Book of that Argument. This Treatise bears this Title. REGINALDI POLI Cardinalis Legati Apostolici Epistola ad Thomam Cranmerum, qui Archiepiscopalem sedem Cantuarien∣sis Ecclesiae tenens, novam de Sacramento Eucharistiae Doctrinam contra perpetuum Catholicae Ecclesiae consensum professus est, ac tra∣didit. Qua Epistola eum nec Magistrum tanti Mysterii, ne{que} Disci∣pulum idoneum esse posse; Simul{que} unde hic ejus Error manarit, ostendit; E ad poenitentiam hortatur.
CHAP. XXI. He Recants, Repents, and is burnt. HAving brought the Arch-bishop unto his Degradation and Ap∣peal, wherein he shewed so much Christian Courage,He Recants. Wisdom and Fortitude, I must now represent him making a great Trip and a sad Fall; and mention one of the greatest Blemishes of his Life. For now the Popish Party, thinking what a piece of Glory it would be, to gain this great Man to their Church, used all Means, all Arts, as well as Arguments, to bring him to recant. They set the Doctors of the University upon him. He was entertained at the Dean of Christs-Church his Lodging: There they treated him with good Fare. They got him to Bowls with them. They let him have his Pleasure in taking the Air. Sometimes they accosted him with Arguments and Disputations: Sometimes by Flatteries, Promises and Threat∣nings. They told him, The Noble-men bare him good Will: that his Return would be highly acceptable to the King and Queen. That he should enjoy his former Dignity in the Church; or if it liked him better, he should lead a quiet Life in more privacy▪ And that it was but setting his Name in two Words in a piece of Paper. They told him, the Queen was resolved to have Cranmer a Catholick, or no Cranmer at all. That he was still lusty and strong, and might live many a Year more, if he would not wil∣lingly cut off his own Life by the terrible Death of Burning. He rejected these Temptations a long while, but at last was overcome and yielded. The Recantation I shall not repeat, it being to be seen at large in Fox. It was signed by his Hand. The Witnesses there∣unto were two or three, who had been exceedingly busy in tam∣pering with him: One Sydal, (a great Professor in the last Reign) and Iohn and Richard two Spanish Friars. The Doctors and Prelats caused this Recantation speedily to be printed and dispersed. When the Queen saw his Subscription,Notwithstand∣ing his Burning is ordered. she was glad of it, but would not alter her Determination to have him burned, by the instigation, as I suppose, of Pole the Legat. The Writ for which was sent down by Hethe, Lord Chancellor, in the latter end of February, under the Broad Seal. It was charged upon his Converters, that they were negligent in procuring his Life from the Queen: But the true Reason was, the Queen was resolved not to grant it. She privately gave Instruction to Cole, to prepare a Sermon to preach at his Burning: And several Lords, and other Ju∣stices of the Peace in those Parts, were ordered to attend there, with their Servants and Retinue, to keep Peace, and to see him Executed. Cole coming with his Errand to Oxon, visited him in the Prison, and asked him if he stood firm to what he had subscribed? This was the Day before his Execution, but saying nothing to him of his deter∣mined Death. The next Day, being the Day he was to be bur∣ned, viz. March 21. he came again, and asked him if he had any Money? And having none, he gave him certain Crowns to bestow to what Poor he would; and so departed, exhorting him to Con-Constancy.
But the disconsolate Arch-bishop perceived to what this tended: and being by and by to be brought to S. Mary's, (where Cole was to preach) there openly to confess what he had more privately subscribed, he resolved with himself to disburden his Conscience, and to revoke his Recantation. And he prepared a Prayer, and a Declaration of his Faith, which he drew up in writing, and carried it privately along with him, to make use of it when he saw his Oc∣casion. The manner how he behaved himself after Cole's Sermon, and how he delivered his last Mind, and with what Bitterness and Tears he did it; and how he was pulled down by the Scholars, Priests and Friars, with the greatest Indignation at this their Disappointment; and how he was led out of the Church forthwith to the Place of Burning, over against Baliol College: and how he there first put his right Hand into the Flames to be consumed, for that base Subscription that it made; and how his Heart was found whole and unconsumed in the Ashes, after he was burnt; These, and the rest of the Particulars of his Martyrdom, I might leave to Fox, and other Historians from him, to relate. Yet because it is not convenient so briefly to pass over such a re∣markable Scene of his Life,A Letter from Oxford con∣cerning Cran∣mer's Death. being his last appearance upon the Stage of this World, I shall represent it in the Words of a certain grave Person unknown, but a Papist, who was an Eye and Ear-Witness, and related these Matters, as it seems, very justly, in a Letter from Oxon to his Friend. Which is as followeth. But that I know for our great Friendship, and long-continued Love,Inter Foxii MSS. you look even of Duty, that I should signify to you of the Truth of such things as here chanceth among us: I would not at this time have written to you the unfortunate End, and doubtful Tragedy of T. C. late Bishop of Canterbury: Because I little plea∣sure take in beholding of such heavy Sights. And when they are once overpassed, I like not to reherse them again; being but a re∣newing of my Wo, and doubling my Grief. For although his former Life, and wretched End, deserves a greater Misery (if any greater might have chanced, than chanced unto him) yet set∣ting aside his Offences to God and his Country, and beholding the Man without his Faults, I think there was none that pitied not his Case, and bewailed his Fortune, and feared not his own Chance, to see so noble a Prelat, so grave a Counsellor, of so long-continued Honour, after so many Dignities, in his old Years to be deprived of his Estate, adjudged to die, and in so painful a Death to end his Life. I have no delight to increase it. Alas, it is too much of it self, that ever so heavy a Case should betide to Man, and Man to deserve it. But to come to the matter: On Saturday last, being the 21th of March was his Day appointed to die.Cranmer brought to S. Maries. And because the Mor∣ning was much Rainy, the Sermon appointed by Mr. Dr. Cole to be made at the Stake, was made in S. Mary's Church. Whither Dr. Cranmer was brought by the Mayor and Aldermen, and my Lord Williams. With whom came divers Gentlemen of the Shire, Sir T. A Bridges, Sir Iohn Browne, and others. Where was prepa∣red,
over against the Pulpit, an high Place for him, that all the People might see him. And when he had ascended it, he kneeled down and prayed, weeping tenderly: which moved a great num∣ber to Tears, that had conceived an assured hope of his Conversion and Repentance. Then Mr. Cole began his Sermon. The sum whereof was this.Cole's Sermon. First, He declared Causes, why it was expedient, that he should suffer, notwithstanding his Reconciliation. The chief are these. One was, for that he had been a great cause of all this Alteration in this Realm of England. And when the Matter of the Divorce, between King Henry VIII. and Queen Katharine, was commenced in the Court of Rome, he having nothing to do with it, set upon it, as Judg, which was the entry to all the Inconveniences that fol∣lowed. Yet in that he excused him, that he thought he did it not of Malice, but by the Perswasions and Advice of certain Learned Men. Another was, that he had been the great setter forth of all this Heresy received into the Church in this last Time; had written in it, had disputed, had continued it, even to the last Hour: and that it had never been seen in this Realm, (but in the time of Schism) that any Man continuing so long, hath been par∣doned: and that it was not to be remitted for Ensamples-sake. Other Causes he alledged, but these were the chief, why it was not thought good to pardon him. Other Causes beside, he said, moved the Queen, and the Council thereto, which were not meet and convenient for every one to understand them. The second Part touched the Audience, how they should con∣sider this thing: That they should hereby take example to fear God: and that there was no Power against the Lord: having be∣fore their Eyes a Man of so high Degree, sometime one of the chiefest Prelates of the Church, an Arch-bishop, the chief of the Council, the second Peer in the Realm of long time: a Man, as might be thought, in greatest assurance, a King of his side; not∣withstanding all his Authority and Defence to be debased from an high Estate to a low Degree; of a Counsellor to be a Caitiff; and to be set in so wretched Estate, that the poorest Wretch would not change Conditions with him. The last and End appertained unto him.Turns his Speech to Cranmer Whom he comforted and encouraged to take his Death well, by many places of Scripture. And with these, and such, bidding him nothing mistrust but he should incontinently receive that the Thief did: To whom Christ said, Hodiè mecum eris in Paradiso. And out of S. Paul armed him against the Terrors of the Fire, by this; Dominus fidelis est: Non sinet nos tentari ultra quam ferre potestis: By the Example of the three Children; to whom God made the Flame seem like a plea∣sant Dew. He added hereunto the Rejoicing of S. Andrew in his Cross; the Patience of S. Laurence on the Fire: Ascertaining him, that God, if he called on him, and to such as die in his Faith, either will abate the fury of the Flame, or give him Strength to abide it. He glorified God much in his Conversion; because it appeared to be only his Work: Declaring what Travel and Con∣ference had been used with him to convert him, and all prevailed
not, till it pleased God of his Mercy to reclaim him, and call him Home. In discouring of which place, he much commended Cran∣mer, and qualified his former Doing. And I had almost forgotten to tell you, that Mr. Cole promised him, that he should be prayed for in every Church in Oxford, and should have Mass and Dirige Sung for him; and spake to all the Priests present to say Mass for his Soul. When he had ended his Sermon, he desired all the People to pray for him:After Sermon all pray for him. Mr. Cranmer kneeling down with them, and pray∣ing for himself. I think there was never such a number so earnest∣ly praying together. For they, that hated him before, now loved him for his Conversion, and hope of Continuance. They that loved him before could not sodenly hate him, having hope of his Confession again of his Fall. So Love and Hope encreased Devo∣tion on every side. His penitent behaviour.I shall not need, for the time of Sermon, to describe his Behavi∣our, his Sorrowful Countenance, his heavy Chear, his Face be∣dewed with Tears; sometime lifting his Eyes to Heaven in Hope, sometime casting them down to the Earth for Shame; To be brief, an Image of Sorrow: the Dolor of his Heart bursting out at his Eyes in plenty of Tears: Retaining ever a quiet and grave Behaviour. Which encreased the Pity in Mens Hearts, that they unfeignedly loved him, hoping it had been his Repentance for his Transgression and Error. I shall not need, I say, to point it out unto you; you can much better imagine it your self. Speaks to the Auditory.When Praying was done, he stood up, and having leave to speak, said, Good People, I had intended indeed to desire you to pray for me; which because Mr. Doctor hath desired, and you have done already, I thank you most heartily for it. And now will I pray for my self, as I could best devise for mine own com∣fort, and say the Prayer, word for word, as I have here written it. And he read it standing: and after kneeled down, and said the Lord's Prayer; and all the People on their Knees devoutly praying with him. His Prayer was thus: He prayeth.O Father of Heaven; O Son of God, Redeemer of the World; O Holy Ghost, proceeding from them both, Three Persons and one God, have Mercy upon me most wretched Caitiff, and miserable Sinner. I who have offended both Heaven and Earth, and more grievously than any Tongue can express, whither then may I go, or whither should I fly for succor? To Heaven I may be ashamed to lift up mine Eyes; and in Earth I find no refuge. What shall I then do? shall I despair? God forbid. O good God, thou art Merciful, and refusest none that come unto thee for Suc∣cour. To thee therefore do I run. To thee do I humble my self: saying, O Lord God, my Sins be great, but yet have Mercy upon me for thy great Mercy. O God the Son, thou wast not made Man, this great Mystery was not wrought, for few or small Of∣fences. Nor thou didst not give thy Son unto Death, O God the Father, for our little and small Sins only, but for all the greatest Sins of the World: so that the Sinner return unto thee with a pe∣nitent
Heart; as I do here at this present. Wherefore have Mer∣cy upon me, O Lord, whose Property is always to have Mercy. For although my Sins be great, yet thy Mercy is greater. I crave nothing, O Lord, for mine own Merits, but for thy Name's Sake, that it may be glorified thereby: and for thy dear Son Jesus Christ's Sake. And now therefore, Our Father, which art in Heaven, &c. Then rising, he said, Every Man desireth, good People,His Words be∣fore his Death. at the time of their Deaths, to give some good Exhortation, that other may remember after their Deaths, and be the better thereby. So I beseech God grant me Grace, that I may speak something at this my departing, whereby God may be glorified, and you edified. First, It is an heavy case to see, that many Folks be so much doted upon the Love of this false World, and so careful for it, that or the Love of God, or the Love of the World to come, they seem to care very little or nothing therefore. This shall be my first Ex∣hortation. That you set not over-much by this false glosing World, but upon God and the World to come. And learn to know what this Lesson meaneth, which S. Iohn teacheth, That the Love of this World is Hatred against God. The Second Exhortation is, That next unto God, you obey your King and Queen, willingly and gladly, without murmur or grudg∣ing: And not for fear of them only, but much more for the Fear of God: Knowing, that they be God's Ministers, appointed by God to Rule and Govern you. And therefore whoso resisteth them, resisteth God's Ordinance. The third Exhortation is, That you Love all together like Bre∣thren, and Sistern. For alas! pity it is to see, what Contention and Hatred one Christian-Man hath to another: Not taking each other, as Sisters and Brothers; but rather as Strangers and mortal Enemies. But I pray you learn and bear well away this one Les∣son, To do good to all Men as much as in you lieth, and to hurt no Man, no more than you would hurt your own natural and lo∣ving Brother or Sister. For this you may be sure of, that whoso∣ever hateth any Person, and goeth about maliciously to hinder or hurt him, surely, and without all doubt, God is not with that Man, although he think himself never so much in God's Favour. The fourth Exhortation shall be to them that have great Sub∣stance and Riches of this World, That they will well consider and weigh those Sayings of the Scripture.He quoted also a third place out of Iames against cove∣tous rich Men; Weep and howl for the Miseries that shall come upon you; your Riches doth rot, your Clothes be Moth-eaten, your Gold and Silver is cankered, &c▪ One is of our Saviour Christ himself, who saith, It is hard for a Rich Man to enter into Heaven: A sore saying, and yet spoke by him, that knew the Truth. The second is of S. Iohn, whose saying is this, He that hath the Substance of this World, and seeth his Brother in Necessity, and shutteth up his Mercy from him, how can he say, he loveth God? Much more might I speak of every part; but Time sufficeth not. I do but put you in remembrance of things. Let all them that be Rich, ponder well those Sentences: For if ever they had any Occasion to shew their Charity, they have now at this present,
the poor People being so many, and Victuals so dear. For though I have been long in Prison, yet I have heard of the great Penury of the Poor. Consider, that that which is given to the Poor, is given to God. Whom we have not otherwise present corporally with us, but in the Poor. And now for so much as I am come to the last End of my Life, whereupon hangeth all my Life passed, and my Life to come, either to live with my Saviour Christ in Heaven, in Joy, or else to be in Pain ever with wicked Devils in Hell; and I see before mine Eyes presently either Heaven ready to receive me, or Hell ready to swallow me up; I shall therefore declare unto you my very Faith, how I believe, without Colour or Dissimulation. For now is no time to dissemble, whatsoever I have written in Times past. First, I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, &c. and every Article of the Catholick Faith, every Word and Sentence taught by our Saviour Christ, his Apostles and Prophets, in the Old and New Testament. Consesseth his dissembling.And now I come to the great Thing that troubleth my Consci∣ence more than any other thing that ever I said or did in my Life: and that is, the setting abroad of Writings contrary to the Truth. Which here now I renounce, and refuse, as things written with my Hand, contrary to the Truth, which I thought in my Heart, and writ for fear of Death, and to save my Life, if it might be: and that is, all such Bills, which I have written or signed with mine own Hand, since my Degradation: wherein I have written many things untrue. And forasmuch as my Hand offended in writing contrary to my Heart, therefore my Hand shall first be punished. For if I may come to the Fire, it shall be first burned. And as for the Pope, I refuse him, as Christ's Enemy and Antichrist, with all his false Doctrine. And here being admonished of his Recantation, and Dissem∣bling, he said, Alas, my Lord, I have been a Man, that all my Life loved Plainness, and never dissembled till now against the Truth; which I am most sorry for. He added hereunto, That for the Sacrament, he believed as he had taught in his Book against the Bishop of Winchester. And here he was suffered to speak no more. His Reply to my L. Williams.So that his Speech contained chiefly three points, Love to God, Love to the King, and Love to the Neighbour. In the which talk he held Men very suspense, which all depended upon the Con∣clusion. Where he so far deceived all Mens Expectations, that at the hearing thereat, they were much amazed; and let him go on a while, till my Lord Williams bad him play the Christen Man, and remember himself. To whom he answered, That he so did: For now he spake Truth. Goes to the place of his Burning.Then he was carried away; and a great number, that did Run to see him go so wickedly to his Death, ran after him, exhorting him, while Time was, to remember himself. And one Friar Iohn, a godly and well-learned Man, all the way travelled with him to reduce him. But it would not be. What they said in particular I
cannot tell, but the Effect appeared in the End. For at the Stake he professed, that he died in all such Opinions as he had taught, and oft repented him of his Recantation. Coming to the Stake with a chearful Countenance,His Talk and Behaviour at the Stake. and willing Mind, he put off his Garments with haste, and stood upright in his Shirt: And a Batcheler of Divinity, named Elye, of Brazen-nose-College, laboured to convert him to his former Recantation, with the two Spanish Friars. But when the Friars saw his Constan∣cy, they said in Latin one to another, Let us go from him; We ought not to be nigh him: For the Devil is with him. But the Batcheler in Divinity was more earnest with him. Unto whom he answered, That as concerning his Recantation, he repented it right sore, because he knew it was against the Truth; with other words more. Whereupon the Lord Williams cryed, Make short, Make short. Then the Bishop took certain of his Friends by the Hand. But the Bachelor of Divinity refused to take him by the Hand, and blamed all others that so did, and said, He was sorry that ever he came in his Company. And yet again he required him to agree to his former Recantation. And the Bishop answered, (shewing his Hand) This is the Hand that wrote it, and there∣fore shall it suffer first Punishment. Fire being now put to him, he stretched out his right Hand,He burneth his right Hand. and thrust it into the Flame, and held it there a good space, before the Fire came to any other Part of his Body; where his Hand was seen of every Man sensibly burning, crying with a loud Voice, This Hand hath offended. As soon as the Fire got up, he was very soon Dead, never stirring or crying all the while. His Patience in the Torment, his Courage in dying, if it had been taken either for the Glory of God, the Wealth of his Country, or the Testimony of Truth, as it was for a pernicious Error, and subversion of true Religion, I could worthily have commended the Example, and matched it with the Fame of any Father of antient Time: but seeing that not the Death, but the Cause and Quarrel thereof, commendeth the Sufferer, I cannot but much dispraise his obstinate stubbornness and sturdiness in dying, and specially in so evil a Cause. Surely his Death much grieved every Man; but not after one sort. Some pitied to see his Body so tormented with the Fire raging upon the silly Carcass, that counted not of the Folly. Other that passed not much of the Body, lamented to see him spill his Soul, wretchedly, without Redemption, to be plagued for ever. His Friends sorrowed for Love: his Enemies for Pity: Strangers for a common kind of Humanity, whereby we are bound one to another. Thus I have enforced my self, for your sake, to discourse this heavy Narration, contrary to my Mind: and being more than half weary, I make a short End, wishing you a quieter Life, with less Honour; and easier Death, with more Praise. The 23d of March. Yours I. A.
All this is the Testimony of an Adversary, and therefore we must allow for some of his Words; but may be the more certain of the Arch-bishop's brave Courage, Constancy, Patience, Christian and Holy Behaviour, being related by one so affected. Two Remarks upon his Mar∣tyrdom.In regard of this Holy Prelat's Life taken away by Martyrdom, I cannot but take notice here of two tngs, as tho God had given him some intimation thereof long before it happened. The one is, that whereas his paternal Coat of Arms was three Cranes, (alluding to his Name) K. Henry appointed him to bear in the room thereof three Pelicans, feeding their Young with their own Blood. The like Coat of Arms, or much resembling it, I find several of Q. Elizabeth's first Bishops took, whether to imitate Cranmer, or to signify their Zeal to the Gospel, and their readiness to suffer for it, I do not determine. The other Remark I make is, what his Friend Andreas Osiander in an Epistle to him in the Year 1537,Ep. Dedicat. antè Harmon. Evan. told him: Which was, that he had Animum vel Martyrio parem; A Mind fit, or ready, for Martyrdom. And so took occasion to exhort him at large, to bear the Afflictions that were to attend him: as though God had inspired that great German Divine with a prophetick Spirit, to acquaint this his faithful Servant by what Death he should glorify God, and what Sufferings he must undergo for his sake. He urged him, To contemn all Dangers in asserting and preserving the sincere Doctrine of Christ, since as S. Paul testified, That all that would live godly in Christ Iesus, must suffer Persecution. How much, said he, ought we to reckon, that you are to receive the various Assaults of Satan, see∣ing you are thus good for the Good of many. But, Tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentior ito. Yield not to these Evils, but go on the more boldly. And seeing you must bear Adversity, remember that we are baptized into the Death of Christ, and buried together with him, that we may be once made partakers of his Resurrection and eternal Happiness. Who instiga∣ted the Queen to put him to death.I do not find, who were the Queen's great Instigators (now Win∣chester was dead) stirring her up not to spare this Prelat, but by any means to put him to Death, and that even after his Subscription; nor for what Reason of State this Resolution was taken at Court, notwithstanding his former good Merits towards the Queen, who therefore certainly must have felt great Strugglings before She could yield to have him die. But I am apt to suspect the Cardinal (who now governed the Queen) had no small Hand in it, to shew his Zeal for the Papacy, and to revenge the Injuries done it in K. Henry's Reign, as well as to succeed in his Place. For his Latin Letter to the Arch-bishop mentioned above, savoured of a great deal of Malice and mortal Hatred towards him. In this Letter it appears the Car∣dinal looked upon our Arch-bishop as a mere Infidel and Apostate from Christianity, and so to be treated. For in the very beginning he makes it a Matter of Conscience to write to him, It being in effect as much as receiving him into his House: Against which S. Iohn gave a charge, speaking of Christians turned Heathens, That they should not be received into our Houses,Ep. John 2.10. nor bid God speed. And therefore, he wrote, he was once in his Mind not to speak
at all to him, but to God rather concerning him, to send Fire from Heaven and consume him. And asketh the Question [as though it could not be reasonably gain-said] whether he should not do justly in this Imprecation upon him, who had before cast out the King out of the House of God, that is, the Church. He meant, as he explained himself, casting him out, as Satan cast out Man from Paradise; not by force, but by deceivable Counsels. That him the Arch-bishop had followed, and by his impious Advice forced the King to disjoin himself from the Communion of the Church, and his Country together with himself; And wickedly betrayed the Church, the Mother of us all; to the opposing whereof, he gave Satan all advantages, to the destruction as well of Souls as Bodies. That he was the worst of all others. For they, being beset on all sides with divers Temptations, a great while resisted, and at last indeed gave way; But he, the Arch-bi∣shop, of his own free accord, walked in the Counsel of the Un∣godly; and not only so, but stood in it, and in the Way of Sin∣ners, and confirmed the King therein: And moreover sat in the Seat of the Scornful. That when he came first to the Episcopal Chair, he was called to it to cheat both God and Man: and that he began his Actions with putting a Cheat upon the King, and to∣gether with him upon the Church, and his Country. This and a great deal more to the same purpose he tells the Arch-bishop plainly and expresly, though under a shew of great Sanctity. Which shews with what an implacable Mind he stood affected towards him. And thus we have brought this excellent Prelate unto his End,No Monumen for him, but his Martyrdom. after two Years and an half's hard Imprisonment. His Body was not carried to the Grave in State, nor buried, as many of his Prede∣cessors were, in his own Cathedral Church, nor enclosed in a Mo∣nument of Marble or Touchstone. Nor had he any Inscription to set forth his Praises to Posterity: No Shrine to be visited by devout Pil∣grims, as his Predecessors S. Dunstane, and S. Thomas had. Shall we therefore say, as the Poet doth; Marmoreo Licinus tumulo jacet, at Cato parvo, Pompeius nullo. Quis putet esse Deos? No; we are better Christians, I trust, than so, who are taught▪ That the Rewards of God's Elect are not Temporal, but Eternal. And Cranmer's Martyrdom is his Monument, and his Name will out∣last an Epitaph, or a Shrine. But methinks it is pity, that his Heart, that remained found in the Fire,His Heart un∣consumed. and was sound unconsumed in his Ashes, was not preserved in some Urn. Which when the better Times of Q. Elizabeth came, might, in Memory of this truly great and good Thomas of Canterbury, have been placed among his Predecessors in his Church there, as one of the truest Glories of that See. Though these three Martyrs, Cranmer, Ridley and Latimer,The Bailiffa Expences a∣bout these three Martyrs. were parted asunder, and placed in separate Lodgings that they might not confer together; yet they were suffered sometimes to eat together in the Prison of Bocardo. I have seen a Book of their Diet every
Dinner and Supper, and the Charge thereof. Which was at the Ex∣pence of Winkle and Wells, Bailiffs of the City at that time; un∣der whose Custody they were.MSS. C.C.C.C. As for example in this Method: The first of October Dinner. Bread and Ale ii d. Item, Oisters i d. Item, Butter ii d. Item, Eggs ii d. Item, Lyng viii d. Item, A piece of fresh Salmon x d. Wine iii d. Cheese and Pears ii d.   ii s. vi d. From this Book of their Expences, give me leave to make these few Observations. They ate constantly Suppers as well as Dinners. Their Meals amounted to about three or four Shillings; seldom ex∣ceeding four. Their Bread and Ale commonly came to two pence or three pence. They had constantly Cheese and Pears for their last Dish, both at Dinner and Supper; and always Wine; the price whereof was ever three Pence, and no more. The Prizes of their Provisions (it being now an extraordinary dear time) were as follow. A Goose 14 d. A Pig 12 or 13 d. A Cony 6 d. A Woodcock 3 d. and some∣times 5 d. A couple of Chickens 6 d. Three Plovers 10 d. Half a dozen Larks 3 d. A dozen of Larks and two Plovers, 10 d. A Brest of Veal 11 d. A Shoulder of Mutton 10 d. Rost Beef 12 d. The last Disbursements (which have Melancholy in the reading) were these.   s. d. For three Loads of Wood-Fagots to burn Ridley and Latimer, 12 0 Item, One Load of Furs-Fagots, 3 4 For the carriage of these four Loads. 2 0 Item, A Post 1 4 Item, Two Chains 3 4 Item, Two Staples 0 6 Item, Four Labourers 2 8 Then follow the Charges for burning Cranmer.   s. d. For an 100 of Wood-Fagots 06 0 For an 100 and half of Furs-Fagots. 03 4 For the carriage of them 0 8 To two Labourers 1 4 The Bailiffs not repaid.It seems the Superiors in those Days were more zealous to send these three good Men to Oxon, and there to serve their Ends upon them, and afterwards to burn them, than they were careful honestly to pay the Charges thereof. For Winkle and Wells, notwithstand∣ing all their Endeavours to get themselves reimbursed of what they had laid out, which came to sixty three Pounds, ten Shillings and two Pence, could never get but twenty Pounds. Which
they received by the means of Sir William Petre, Secretary of State. In so much that in the Year 1566, they put up a Petition to Arch-bishop Parker and the other Bishops; That they would among themselves raise and repay that Sum, which the said Bailiffs were out of Purse in feeding of these three Reverend Fathers. In which Petition they set forth, That in the second and third Years of King Philip and Queen Mary, Arch-bishop Cranmer, Bishop Latimer, and Bishop Ridley, were by order of Council committed to the Custody of them, and so continued a certain Time; and for them they disbursed the Sum of 63 l. 10 s. 2 d. Whereof but 20 l. was paid to them. Therefore they pray his Grace, and the rest of the Bishops, to be a means among themselves, that the remaining Sum may be paid to them, being 43 l. 10 s. 2 d. Or some part thereof. Otherwise they, and their poor Wives and Children should be utterly undone. And to give the better coun∣tenance to these Men, that were going to carry up their Petition, Laurence Humfrey, President of Magdalen College, and the Queen's Professor, wrote this Letter on their behalf to Arch-bishop Parker. IEH. MY humble Commendations presupposed in the Lord.Humfrey to ABp Parker in their behalf. To be a Suitor in another Man's Case, it seemeth Boldness; and in a Matter of Money, to write to your Grace, is more than Sauciness: Yet Charity, Operiens multitudinem peccatorum,Ex Biblioth▪ C.C.C.C. doth move me, and will perswade you to hear him. A Debt is due unto him for the Table of Mr. Dr. Cranmer, by the Queen's Ma∣jesties Appointment. And Mr. Secretary in Oxford, wished him at that time of Business in Progress, to make some Motion to the Bishops for some Relief. The Case is miserable. The Debt is just. His Charges in the Suit have been great. His Honesty, I assure your Grace, deserves pitiful Consideration. And for that my Lord of Sarum writeth to me, as here, in Oxford, he pro∣mised, That his part shall not be behind, what Order soever it please my Lords to take, for the dispatch of the same. I request your Grace, as Successor to that right Reverend Father, and chief Patron of such poor Suitors, to make by your good▪ Means some Collection for him, among the rest of my Lords, the Bishops; that his good Will, shewed to that worthy Martyr, may of you be considered. And so he bound to your Goodness, of his part altogether undeserved. Thus recommending the Common Cause of Reformation to you; and my self, and this poor Man to your good remembrance, I leave to trouble you. Requesting you once again to hear him, and tender his Cause even of Charity for God his Sake. To whose Protection I commend your Grace. From Oxon, November 22, Anno 1566. Your Grace's humble Orator, Laur. Humfrey. Though I cannot trace this any further, yet I make no doubt this Petition was favourably received with the Arch-bishop and Bishops.
It seems in Cranmer's Life-time, Money was sent to Oxford for the sustentation of these Prisoners of Christ, but embezzelled. For one W. Pantry of Oxford received forty Pounds at Mr. Stonelye's Hand, for my Lord Cranmer, and the other two in like Case. This was de∣clared by the Bailiffs, to Thomas Doyley Esquire, Steward to Arch-bishop Parker. CHAP. XXII. Cranmer's Books and Writings. HAving brought our History of this singular and extraordinary Light of the Church to this Period, we will, before we take our leave of him, gather up some few Fragments more: thinking it pity, that any thing should be lost, that may either serve to com∣municate any Knowledg of him to Posterity, or to clear and vindi∣cate him from Aspersions or Misrepresentations, vulgarly conceived of him. And here will fall under our consideration, first his Books and Writings; after them, his Acquaintance with Learned Men, and his Favour to them and Learning: then, some Matters relating to his Family and Officers: And lastly, we shall conclude with some Observations upon him. His Books and Writings.For the Pen of this great Divine was not idle, being employed as earnestly as his Authority and Influence, for the furtherance of Re∣ligion, and rescue of this Church from Popish Superstition and Foreign Jurisdiction. He laid a solid Foundation in Learning, by his long and serious Studies in the University. To which he was much addicted. Insomuch that this was one of the Causes which made him so labour, by the interest of his Friends with King Henry, to be excused from taking the Archbishoprick of Canterbury: because this Promotion would so much interrupt his beloved Studies: De∣siring rather some smaller Living, that he might more quietly follow his Book. And as he had been an hard Student, so he was a very great Writer; both in respect of the number of Books and Trea∣tises he compiled, as of the Learning, Judgment and Moment of them. The first Treatise he wrote was, that which was done at the Command of Henry VIII. viz.His first Book. Concerning the Unlawfulness of his Marriage with his Brother Arthur's Widow. Which he made appear to be both against the Word of God, and against the Judg∣ment of the Antient Fathers of the Church; and therefore a Case indispensable by the Pope. And so well had he studied the Point, and so well was assured of what he had wrote, that he undertook before the King, to maintain the Truth of it at Rome, in the pre∣sence of the Pope himself. The King accordingly dismissed him to the Pope, in joint Embassy with the Earl of Wiltshire, and some others, for that purpose. He presented his Book to the Pope, offering to stand by it against any whomsoever, that should attempt to gain∣say it. But the Pope thought not fit to suffer so tender a Point to be disputed, wherein his Prerogative was so much touched. When
he had finished ths Discourse, it was sent to Cambridg, and had the Approbation and Subscription of the eminentest Doctors there, viz. Slcot, Repps, Cme, and divers others. Among which I suppose, were, Heines, Litiner, Shaxton, Skip, Goodrick, Hethe, who were then Gremials. After this Book, e was much employed in writing more,Other of his Writings. at va∣rious Times, and pon various Occasions. Fox mentioneth Cran∣mer's Book of the eformation; (which I suppose was that of the Publick Service) the Catechism, the Book of Homilies, which was part by him contred, and part by his Procurement, and by him approved and pubished. Likewise the Confutation of eighty eight Articles, devised and propounded by a Convocation in King Henry's Reign, and labored to be received and enjoined, though they were not. But his Discorse,His Book of the Doctrine of the Sacra∣ment. wherein he stated the Doctrine of the Sacra∣ment in five ooks, must especially be remembred. Which he wrote on purpose for the publick Instruction of the Church of Eng∣land. And it s the more to be valued, as being writ by him in his mature Age, after all his great Readings and Studies, and most dili∣gent and serios perusals of all the Ecclesiastical Writers; whereby he became throughly acquainted with their Judgments and Opini∣ons in that Doctrine. And in it are contained his last and ripest Thoughts on hat Argument. This Book displayeth the great Weak∣ness of that istinguishing Doctrine of the Church of Rome, that as∣serts Transubstantiation. Besides these,Other Writ∣ings mention'd by Bp Burnet. many other Writings and Discourses were made by him. Which we are beholden to the Bishop of Sarum, for retrieving the Memory of, and preserving the Substance of divers of them, in his excellent History, viz. A Learned Speech made to the Lords concerning the Pope,Hist. Reform. P. I. p. 174. and a general Council: Which that Right Reverend Author thinks was made about the Year 1534, which was soon after his being made Arch-bishop. Some Queries in order to the correcting of several Abuses in Re∣ligion; whereby the People had been deceived.Vbi supr. p. 364 Some Queries concerning Confirmation:Ibid.With the Answers which were given to them by Arch-bishop Cranmer. Some Considerations to induce the King to proceed to a further Reformation.Ibid. These three last were presented by the Arch-bishop to the King, about the Year 1536, as the Bishop of Sarum supposeth: And having seen the Originals thereof in the Cotton-Library, hath transcribed them to us in the Addenda to the Collections. His Resolution of seventeen Questions concerning the Sacraments,Vbi supr. p. 289 Anno 1540. A Collection of Passages out of the Canon Law,Vbi supr. p. 33 to shew the ne∣cessity of Reforming it, Anno 1542. His Letters to Osiander, and Letters of Osiander to him;Pag. 171. concern∣ing the Proceedings of the German Divines: Whose Violence the Arch-bishop disliked. A Speech made in the Convocation.Hist. Reform. P. II. p. 4. Wherein he exhorted the Clergy to give themselves to the study of the Scriptures, and to
consider seriously what things in the Church neeed Reformation, Anno 1547. His Answer to the Demands of the Rebels in the West; drawn up by him by Order of the Council,Pag. 116. Anno 1549. Pag. 248.His Declaration, to vindicate himself from an Aspersion, That he had caused Mass to be sung in Canterbury: Ad offering therein a publick Dispute to maintain the Reformation, Anno 1553. Besides two Volumes in Folio, writ by Cranmer, own Hand, upon all the Heads of Religion:Hist. Res. P. II. p. 171. Consisting of Allegtions of Texts of Scripture, and of antient Fathers, and later Doctos and School-men, upon each Subject. There were also six or seve Volumes of his Writings, which were in the Lord Burleigh's Issession; as ap∣peared by a Letter of the said Lord, which the Bishop of Sarum saw. But he thought these may now be lost. Most of te forementioned Writings are preserved in the Cotton-Library, or i that of Corpus-Christi, Cambridg; or among the Manuscripts of the Right Reverend Bishop Stillingsleet. Athen. Oxon. p. 578.To which we must add the mention of a bundle of Books lying in the Palace-Treasury in Westminster, in defence of the King's Title of Supream Head, and concerning the Divorce, and seveal other Mat∣ters; with a Peface against Cardinal Pole. Which ae supposed to be written, partly by Dr. Clark Bishop of Bath and Wels, and partly by our Arch-bishop. More of his Writings still.Several other Letters, Speeches, and Arguments of our Arch-bi∣shop, may be found in these Memorials; which I omit here rehersing. But I will add to these divers Pieces besides of this Prelat's writing, as they are set down by Melchior Adam, at the End of Cranmer's Life. Who indeed did but transcribe them from Gesner; and he from Iohn Bale's Centuries. I. A Preface to the English Translation of the Bible. This is transcribed in the Appendix. II. A Catechism of Christian Doctrine; printed by Gualter Lynn, Anno 1548. This Catechism was first framed in Germany; and by the Arch-bishop himself, or his special Order, turned into English. And to fix an Authority to the same, he caused it to be published in his own Name, and owned it for his own Book. This Dr. Rowland Taylor,See Dr. Taylor's Letter in Fox. who lived in the Arch-bishop's Family, declared before Gar∣diner Bishop of Winchester, and Lord Chancellor, at his Examinati∣on before him. And in this sense we must understand the Author of the History of the Reformation, when speaking of this Catechism, he stiles it,Hist. Re. P. II. p. 71. A Work that was wholly his own. It was said before, that Iu∣stus Ionas (he, I suppose, that dwelt with the Arch-bishop) was the Translator of it into Latin. It treated of the Sacrament after the Lutheran way. Which Way the Arch-bishop embraced next af∣ter his rejection of the gross Papal Transubstantiation. This Cate∣chism was printed first by the Arch-bishop's Order about the Time of King Henry's Death, or soon after. In a second Edition te word Not was inserted in a certain place of the Book, to alter the Doctrine of the Real Presence; which was asserted in the first Edition. This Dr. Martin, one of Queen Mary's Commissioners, threw in his Dish at his Examination in Oxford. But the Arch-bishop professed his Ig∣norance
concerning the foisting in of that Word. The addition of which Word indeed he thought was needless, still holding the Body and Blood truly present in the Holy Supper, though after a spiritual manner. III. The Ordinances or Appointments of the Reformed Church. This was the Book of Common-Prayer, with the Preface before it, beginning, There was never any thing, &c. as I learn out of Bale. IV. One Book of Ordaining Ministers. Which I suppose was the Form of Ordination, published in the Year 1550. V. One Book concerning the Eucharist with Luther. With whom Cranmer once consented in the Doctrine of the Presence. VI. A Defence of the Catholick Doctrine, in five Books. Which was his excellent Work, in vindication of himself against Bishop Gardiner, and Dr. Richard Smith. Whereof much hath been said be∣fore. VII. Ecclesiastical Laws, in the Time of King Edward. This was the Book of the Reformation of the Ecclesiastical Laws; the ma∣nagement of which was, by the King's Letters, committed to eight, whereof Cranmer was the chief. VIII. The Doctrine of the Lord's Supper; against Gardiner's Ser∣mon. This Sermon is the same, I suppose, with that Book of his, intituled, A Detection of the Devil's Sophistry, wherewith he robbeth the unlearned People of the true Belief of the most Blessed Sacrament of the Altar. Which gave occasion to the Arch-bishop's first writing upon this Argument. IX. One Book against the Error of Transubstantiation. X. One Book, How Christ is present in the Supper. XI. One Book, Concerning eating the Lord's Supper. XII. One Book, Concerning the offering up of Christ. These five Books last mentioned, are nothing else but the five Parts of his Book of the Holy Sacrament, mentioned before. XIII. One Book of Christian Homilies. Which must be the first Part of our Book of Homilies, published under King Edward. XIV. One Book in answer to the Calumnies of Richard Smith▪ For this Man had writ against Cranmer's Book of the Sacrament, as well as Gardiner; but done so scurrilously, that Cranmer calls it, his Calumnies. XV. Confutations of Unwritten Verities. Written against a Book of the same Smith, intituled, De veritatibus non scriptis. Which he afterward recanted. XVI. Twelve Books of Common-Places, taken out of the Do∣ctors. Those Volumes mentioned by Bishop Burnet, I suppose, were some of these Common-Place Books. XVII. Concerning not marrying the Brother's Wife: Two Books. Which must be those drawn up for the Use, and by the Command of King Henry. XVIII. Against the Pope's Supremacy: Two Books. This was the Declaration against the Papal Supremacy, said to be put forth by the Bishops, in the Year 1536, upon occasion of Pole's Book of Ec∣clesiastical Vnion. XIX. Against the Pope's Purgatory: Two Books.
XX. Concerning Justification: Two Books. I cannot trace these two last-mentioned Books; unless by them be meant, those two Treatises of Justification and Purgatory, that are set at the end of the Institution. XXI. Pious Prayers: One Book. This Book, I suppose, was the Orarium, seu libellus precationum, put forth by the King and Clergy 1545. From whence a Book of Prayers was translated into English, Anno 1552. XXII. Letters to Learned Men: One Book. This I cannot hear any tidings of. XXIII. Against the Sacrifice of the Mass, and against the Adora∣tion of the Bread: One Book. Said to be writ while he was a Pri∣soner. Which makes me conclude it to be part of his Reply to Gar∣diner's second Assault of him, under the Name of Constantius. XXIV. To Queen Mary: One Book, or rather one Letter; which was that he writ after his Examinations before her Commissioners, and the Pope's Sub-delegate. If some body of Leisure, and that had the Opportunity of Libra∣ries, would take the pains to collect together all these Books, and other Writings of this Arch-bishop, and publish them, it would be a worthy Work, as both retrieving the Memory of this extraordinary Man, who deserved so well of this Church, and serving also much to illustrate the History of its Reformation. But I know nothing of this nature done since the industrious Iohn Day, in the Year 1580, printed a Book in Folio, containing our Arch-bishop's Answer unto Stephen Gardiner Bishop of Winchester, against the true Doctrine of the Sacrament: Also to Richard Smith. Also, a true Copy of the Book writ by Stephen Gardiner. Also, The Life and Martyrdom of Cran∣mer, extracted out of the Book of Martyrs. ABp Parker was in pursuit of certain MSS. of Cran∣mer, concealed.And now we are mentioning this great Prelat's Writings, it may not be unworthy to take notice of what I meet with in a Letter of Arch-bishop Parker to Secretary Cecyl, in the Year 1563, his Grace being then at Canterbury. Where he spake of the Great notable writ∣ten Books (as he stiles them) of his Predecessor Dr. Cranmer, which he had left behind him at some of his Houses at or near Canterbury, whether Ford or Bekesborn, or both, or with some Friends in those Parts. These Manuscripts it seems were embezeled, and surreptiti∣ously taken away by private Hands, probably during his restraint in Queen Mary's Days, and now studiously concealed by some that were minded, it may be, to stifle them, being chiefly levelled against the Roman Church and Bishop. Parker, who was a great and painful Searcher after Antient and Learned Manuscripts, and a diligent Re∣triever of eminent Mens Writings, had, by credible Information, learn'd in what Hands many of those Books were; and had sent either for the Persons concerned, or to them, to demand the said Books. But they denied them: Whereupon knowing no other way to reco∣ver them, he desired the Secretary, by some Power from the Queen's Council, to authorize him to enquire and search for those Books, and such-like Monuments, by all Ways, as by the said Parker's Discreti∣on should be thought good; whether giving the Parties an Oath, or viewing their Studies. Wishing he might recover them to be after∣wards
at the Queen's Commandment: Adding, that he should be as glad to win them, as he would be to restore an old Chancel to Repa∣ration. This Letter of Arch-bishop Parker, I have inserted in the Appendix.No. XC. But whether after all his diligence he succeeded in the recovery of those Manuscripts, I know not: I am apt to think he did; and that these Writings of Cranmer, that were in his Possession; and afterwards bequeathed unto the Library of Benet-College; and those other divers Volumes, which were, as was before-said, in the keeping of the Lord Burghley, might be some at least of them. An inquisitive Man would be glad to know,What the Sub∣ject of his nu∣merous Writ∣ings were. what the Matter and Contents of these numerous Writings of our Arch-bishop were: and that seeing so many of them are perished, the knowledg of the various Subjects of them at least might be preserved. This, besides what hath been shewn already, may be gathered by what I find in a Supplication made to Queen Elizabeth by Ralph Morice, that had been his Secretary for the space of twenty Years. During which time, he was employed by that most Reverend Father, in writing for him, about the serious Affairs of the Prince and Realm, committed unto him by those most noble and worthy Princes, King Henry VIII; and King Edward VI, concerning, as well the Writings of those great and weighty Matrimonial Causes of the said K. Henry VIII, as also about the extirpation of the Bishop of Rome, his usurped Power and Authority, the Reformation of corrupt Religion and Ecclesiastical Laws, and Alteration of Divine Service; and of divers and sundry Conferences of Learned Men for the Establish∣ing and Advancement of sincere Religion, with such like. Where∣in, he said, he was most painfully occupied in writing of no small Volumes from time to time. CHAP. XXIII. The Arch-bishop's Regard to Learned Men. FROM these truly Noble and Useful Exercises of his great Knowledg and Learning, let us descend unto the Respect he bare to good Letters. Which appeared from his Favour to Places of Learning, and Men of Learning. We shewed before, what were the Applications of the University of Cambridg to him, and what a gracious Patron he was to it and its Members. Among whose good Offices to that University,Paul. Fagius & Mar. Bucer pla∣ced at Cambridg by his Means. besides those already mentioned, it must not be omitted, that he was the great Instrument of placing there those two very Learned Foreign Divines, Paulus Fagius, and Martin Bucer. By his frequent Letters to them then at Strasburg, urging them with the distracted and dangerous State of Germany, he first brought them over into England in the Year 1548: and having entertained them in his Family, the next Year he pre∣ferred them both in Cambridg, Fagius to be publick Professor of the Hebrew Tongue, and Bucer of Divinity. And beside the University-Salary, he procured for each of them from the King,Procures them honorary Sti∣pods from the King. in the third Year of his Reign, Patents for an Honorary Stipend of an hundred
Pounds per Annum each, De gratiâ speciali Domini Regis, to be paid by the Hands of the Clerk of the Hanaper, or out of the Treasury of the Court of Augmentations, Durante beneplacito Domini Regis: As I find by King Edward the Sixth's Book of Sales, formerly menti∣oned. Which Patents bare date Septemb. 26. Anno 1549. and their Salaries payable from the Feast of the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin. By the way, I do not see any where in the said Book of Sales, that Peter Martyr, placed Professor of Divinity in the other University of Oxon, enjoyed any such Royal Salary, though he also had been invited over by Canterbury with the King's Knowledg and Allowance, and placed there by that Arch-bishop's Means. Allowances to P. Martyr and Ochin.Yet he and his Companion, Ochinus, had their Annual Allowances from the King; and so, I suppose, had all other Learned Foreigners here. Melancthon also, who was now expected over, was intended some more extraordinary Gratuity. Unto this Noble Christian Hospitality, and Liberality, Latimer, the great Court-Preacher, ex∣cited the King in one of his Sermons before him. The Passage may deserve to be repeated. I hear say, Master Melancthon, that great Clerk,The third Sermon. should come hither. I would wish him, and such as he is, two hundred Pounds a Year. The King should never want it in his Coffers at the Year's end. There is yet among us two great Learned Men, Petrus Martyr, and Bernard Ochin, which have an hundred Mark a piece. I would the King would bestow a thousand Pounds on that Sort. These Matters, I doubt not, were concerted between Latimer and our Arch-bishop before: at whose Palace he now was for the most part. As I find by one of his Sermons, wherein he speaks of his taking Boat at Lambeth; and in another Place he mentioneth a Book he met with in my Lord of Canterbury's Library, and elsewhere of many Suitors that applied to him at my Lord of Canterbury's, that interrupted his Studies there. The use I make of this is, that it is a fair Conjecture hence, that this and the many other excellent Things so plainly propounded by this Preacher to King Edward, happened by the Counsel and Suggesti∣on of the Arch-bishop. But to return. Dr. Mowse Ma∣ster of Trinity-Hall, favoured by Cranmer.There was one Dr. William Mowse a Civilian, and probably one of his Officers, whom for his Merits and Learning our Arch-bishop for many a Year had been a special Benefactor to. Sir Iohn Cheke also bare him a very good Will. Upon the removal of Dr. Haddon to some other Preferment, this Dr. Mowse succeeded Master of Trinity-hall in Cambridg. And in the Year 1552, the Arch-bishop valuing his Worth and Integrity, was a Suitor at Court for some further Pre∣ferment for him, whatever it were, which the Study of the Civil Law had qualified him for: writing his Letters on Mowse's behalf to Secretary Cecyl, who was then with the King in his Progress, not to forget him. And accordingly he was remembred, and obtained the Place. For which the Arch-bishop afterwards gave him his most hearty Thanks. And Dr. Mowse also sent the same Secretary a Let∣ter of Thanks from Cambridg for the Preferment he had obtained by his Means: The main Drift thereof was, to excuse himself for his Neglect, in that he had not sooner paid his Acknowledgments. Which, as it seems, the Secretary had taken some notice of, having
expected to be thanked for the Kindness he had done him. This Letter, because there is therein mention made of our Arch-bishop's singular Munificence, and Cheke's Affection towards him, and Mowse himself once making a Figure in that University, I have thought it not amiss to insert in the Appendix:No. XC. Though this Man seemed to be none of the steadiest in his Religion. For I find him put out of his Mastership of Trinity-Hall in the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign, for having been a Protestant, and to make way for the Re∣storation of Dr. Gardiner Bishop of Winchester, who had been outed before. Upon whose Death that Mastership falling void, and Mowse having complied with the Romish Religion, he became Master there again. And soon after, in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, he was deprived by her Commissioners for being a Papist, and one Harvey came in his Room. Dr. Mowse's Fickleness appeared,His Inconstan∣cy, that upon the first tidings that fled to Cambridg of Queen Mary's Success against the Lady Iane's Party, he, with several other temporizing University-Men, changed his Religion, and in four and twenty Hours was both Protestant and Papist. The Truth is, his Judgment vari∣ed according to his worldly Interest. And being one of those that came about so roundly, he was appointed, by the complying Party of the University, to be one of the two (Dr. Hatcher being the other) that should repair unto Dr. Sands then the Vice-Chancellor, to de∣mand of him, without any colour of Reason or Authority, the Uni∣versity-Books, the Keys, and such other things as were in his keep∣ing. And so they did.And Ingrati∣tude. Fox.And my Author makes an Observation of his Ingratitude, as well as of his Inconstancy, viz. That he that was an earnest Protestant but the day before, and one whom Dr. Sands had done much good for, was now become a Papist, and his great Enemy. Thus was our Arch-bishop a Friend to this Man, and divers others, who went along with him, as far as he, and the Times favoured them: but when these failed them, they failed the Arch-bishop through Timorousness in some, and worldly Respects in others. But one more of this Dr. Mowse, and I have done with him.Becomes Rea∣der of the Civil Law at Oxon. Ath. Oxoniens As a Reward of his forwardness at Cambridg, before mentioned, I find he was soon after incorporated at Oxon, (together with Andrew Pern D.D. a Man of the same Inconstancy) and preferred to be Reader of the Civil Law there, in the room of Dr. Aubrey, who probably was removed for Incompliance. And when the next Change hap∣pened under Queen Elizabeth, Mowse came about again; and in the Year 1560, obtained a Prebend in the Church of York. He lived till the Year 1588, leaving some Benefactions to his old College. The Arch-bishop was indeed a great Patron to all Learned and Pious Men, especially those of the Reformation:The ABp a Patron to Learned Fo∣reigners. cherishing those not only of his own Country, but Foreigners and Strangers also. And as he brought over divers with him, when he returned into England from his Embassy in Germany, so he sent for more. And such as came to him, he gave honourable Harbour and Maintenance to; keeping them at his own Cost, till he had made Provisions for them either in the Church, or University.
To Erasmus, allowing him an Honorary Pension.For Erasmus our Arch-bishop had a great value; whose Worth and Service to the Church he well knew. He allowed him an Honorary Pension: promising him, that he would be no less kind unto him, than his Predecessor Warham had been before him. Which Arch-bishop was one of Erasmus his best and most extraordinary Friends and Benefactors. Of whom he used these words to a Friend of his, Qui mihi unus multorum instar erat. Soon after the succession of Cranmer into this Arch-bishop's Room,Eras. Ep. 10. lib. 27. Sir Thomas More wrote to Erasmus, that he that then filled the See of Canterbury, bore no less love to him, than Warham had done before; and, Quo non alius vixit tui amantior, That there was no Man living loved him better. And Eras∣mus himself, mentioning his great Loss in Arch-bishop VVarham, and divers other Patrons of his, that were taken off by Death, com∣forted himself, that God had made up those Losses to him by raising him up other Friends.Ep. 7. lib. 27. So saith he, in the room of VVarham suc∣ceeded the Reverend Thomas Cranmer, (Professione Theologus, Vir integerrimus, candidissimis{que} moribus. Qui ultro pollicitus est sese in studio ac beneficentia erga me, priori nequaquam cessurum: & quod sponte pollicitus est, sponte praestare coepit: ut mihi Vuaramus non ereptus, sed in Cranmero renatus videri queat) By Profession a Divine, a Person of the greatest Integrity, and most unblamable Be∣haviour. VVho of his own accord promised▪ That in Favour and Kindness toward me, he would be no ways behind his Predecessor. And that which he voluntarily promised, he hath voluntarily begun to make good. So that methinks, Warham is not taken away from me, but rather Born again to me in Cranmer. One Specimen of his Mu∣nificence towards this Learned Man I meet with in one of his Letters, wherein he acknowledged to have received of Cranmer eighteen Angels: when the Bishop of Lincoln sent him also Fifteen, and the Lord Crumwel Twenty. To Alexander Aless a Scotch-man.Alexander Aless was another Learned Stranger, whom our Arch-bishop gave Harbour, and shewed Favour to. A Scotch-Man by Birth, but that had long lived and conversed with Melancthon in Germany. Who, knowing the generous and hospitable Disposition of the Arch-bishop, recommended this Aless to him: giving a high Character of him for his Learning, Probity and Diligence in every good Office. In the Year 1535,By him Melan∣cthon sends a Book to the ABp, he brought over from Melancthon a Book, to be presented to the Arch-bishop: wherein That Learned German la∣boured, (as he told the Arch-bishop in his Letter sent at the same time) to state diligently and profitably most of the Controversies, and, as much as he could, to mitigate them: leaving the Judg∣ment of the whole unto his Grace, and such learned and pious Men as He, from whose Judgment, he said, he would never differ in the Church of Christ: desiring him also to acquaint Aless, what his Grace's own Judgment was of the Book, that Aless might sig∣nify the same unto him. Such was the Deference Melancthon gave unto the Learning and Censure of Cranmer. This Book I should suppose to have been his Common Places, but that they came out a Year after.And to the King. By the same Messenger he sent another of these Books to be presented in his Name to the King; and in case the Arch-bishop approved of what he had wrote, he entreated him to introduce the
Bringer, and to assist him in the presenting of it. Upon these Re∣commendations of Aless, and the Arch-bishop's own Satisfaction in the Worth of the Man, he retained him with him at Lambeth, and much esteemed him. This was that Aless, that Crumwel,Aless brought by Cromwel in∣to the Convo∣cation. probably by Cranmer's means, brought with him to the Convocation in the Year 1536, whom he desired to deliver there his Opinion about the Sacrament. Who did so, and enlarged in a Discourse, asserting two Sacraments only, instituted by Christ,Where he as∣serts two Sa∣craments only. namely Baptism and the Lord's Supper. As the Author of the British Antiquities relates ad Ann. 1537. calling him there Virum in Theologia perductum, A thorow-paced Divine. This Man compiled a useful Treatise against the Schism laid to the Charge of Protestants by those of the Church of Rome.Writes a Book to clear Prote∣stants of the Charge of Schism. The Sub∣stance and Arguments of which Book were Melancthon's own Inven∣tion, but Aless composed and brought it into Method and Words. This Book Melancthon sent unto George Prince of Anhalt. The Consolations of which, as he wrote to that Noble and Religious Man, he was wont to inculcate upon himself, against those who ob∣jected commonly to them the horrible Crime of Schism, as he stiles it.Atrox Schismatis crimen. Ep. 36. lib. 1. For, saith he, their monstrous Cruelty is sufficient to excuse us. Which it seems was one of the Arguments whereby they defended themselves against that Charge: Esteeming it lawful and necessary,Satis excusat nos istorum hor∣ribilis crudeli∣tas, quam pro∣ecto n{que} adju∣vare ne{que} appro∣bare debemus. Ubi supra. to leave the Communion of a Church, which countenanced and practised Cruelty, a thing so contrary to one of the great and fundamental Laws of Christian Religion, namely, that of Love; and that their abiding in a Church, where such bloody and barbarous Practices were, would argue their approbation and concurrence. And as Melancthon made use of him in composing his Thoughts into a handsom Stile, so did another great Light of the same Nation,Translated a Book of Bu∣cer's, about the English Mini∣stry. I mean Bucer. In King Edward's Days, he had wrote a Book in the German, that is, in his own Country-Language, about Ordina∣tion to the Ministery in this Kingdom of England, intituled, Ordinatio Ecclesiae, seu Ministerii Eccesiastici in florentissimo Angliae regno. This our Aless turned into Latin, and published, for the Consolation of the Churches every where in those sad Times, as it ran in the Title. If any desire to look backward unto the more early Times of this Man, the first Tidings we have of him was about the Year 1534. When upon a sharp Persecution raised in Scotland, he, with other Learned Men, fled thence into England,Received into Crumwel's Fa∣mily. and was received into Crum∣wel's Family. And it is said, that he became known to, and grew into such Favour with King Henry, that he called him his Scholar. But after Crumwel's Death, in the Year 1540, he taking one Fife with him, went into Saxony:Hist. Res. P.I. p. 308. where both of them were for their great Learning, made Professors in the University of Leipzig. In the Year 1557. I find this Man at Leipzig, where he was Pro∣fessor of Divinity, as was said before.Aless Professor of Divinity at Leipzig. Ml. Ep. p. 39▪ Edit. 1647▪ Hither this Year Melancthon sent to him from Wormes, giving him some Account of the Prepara∣tions that were making by the Roman Catholick Party, in order to a Conference with the Protestants. At which the said Aless was to be present, and make one of the Disputants on the Protestant side. And ten Years before this, viz. 1547, he was the Publick Moderator
of Divinity, both in the Schools and Pulpits of Leipzig, or some o∣ther University. Cum & in Tem∣plis, & in Scho∣lis doctrinam gabernes. Mel. Ep. 111. lib. 3. Four others recommended by Melancthon to the ABp. Viz. Gualter. Dryander.Besides this Aless, there were four other pious and learned Persons, Foreigners, who bringing along with them Letters of Recommen∣dation from the said Melancthon, were courteously received, and freely entertained by our hospitable Arch-bishop, all of them, in the Year 1548, at which time the Persecution grew hot upon the Interim. One of these was Gualter, another Scot by Nation. A second was one named Francis Dryander, an Acquaintance of Melancthon's of long continuance. Whom, as he told the Arch-bishop, he had tried and known inwardly, and found him endowed with excellent Parts, well furnished with Learning; that he judged rightly of the Con∣troversies, altogether free from all wild and seditious Opinions; and that he would soon perceive the singular gravity of his Manners, af∣ter some few Days knowledg of him: motioning withal to the Arch-bishop his fitness to be preferred in either of our Universities. As he did also to K. Edward, in Letters brought at this time to him by the said Dryander. Wherein he recommended him to that King,Ep. 7. lib. 3. as one that would prove a very useful Person either in his Universities, or elsewhere in his Kingdom. Dryander pla∣ced at Oxon.This Recommendation had so much Force, that this Man seemed soon after to be sent and placed at Oxon, and there remained, till in the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign, when all Strangers were com∣manded to depart the Realm, he went hence to Paris, and from thence to Antwerp. Whence he wrote a Letter to one Crispin, a Do∣ctor of Physick in Oxon; therein relating to him a Passage concern∣ing the coarse Entertainment which the Divines of Lovain gave Gardiner Bishop of Winchester, upon the Scandal they took against him for his Book De vera Obedientia.Ad Ann. 1555. Which Letter is extant in Fox. Eusebius Meni∣us.The third was Eusebius Menius, the Son of Iustus Menius. Which Iustus was a Person of great Fame and Esteem, both for his Learning in Philosophy and Divinity, and for the Government of the Chur∣ches within the Territories of Iohn Frederick Duke of Saxony. Of this Eusebius his Son,Mel. Ep. 66. lib. 1. Melancthon writ to our Arch-bishop; That he had good Preferments in Germany, but he could not bear to be∣hold the Calamities of his poor Country, which made him seek for a Being in Foreign Parts. He recommended him to his Grace, desiring him to cherish him. Adding, That in the Gothick Times, what remained of the Church, and of right Doctrines, were pre∣served in our Island; and that Europe being now in a Combustion, it were to be wish'd that some peaceable Harbour might be for Learning. He doubted not but that many flocked hither; but that it was the part of Piety and Goodness, especially to help the Youth of Excellent Men, and the Sons of such as had well deser∣ved of the Church; especially when they themselves also were eminent for their Parts and Learning. And since this Eusebius was a good Mathematician, and had read Mathematicks in one of their Schools, he propounded him to the Arch-bishop, to be a fit Person for the Profession of that Science in our University. Iustus Ionas.The fourth was Iustus Ionas, the Son also of a great German Di∣vine
of the same Name, and who was one of the Four, that in the Year 1530 came to Augsburgh, upon a Diet appointed by the Em∣peror for Religion, with the Elector of Saxony; Melancthon, Agri∣cola, and Georgius Spalatinus, being the other Three.Sleid. lib. 7. The Son came over with Letters commendatory from Melancthon, as the others did. He commended his excellent Parts, and his Progress in all kind of Philosophy and good Manners, and especially his Eloquence; which, he said, he had a Nature divinely framed to. To which it may not be amiss to subjoin what Melancthon somewhere else did observe of his Family. Namely, That his Grandfather was a Person of Fame for Oratory and Civil Prudence: His Father endowed with such Parts as naturally made him an Orator, in respect of his fluen∣cy of Words, and gracefulness of Delivery. And this Felicity of Nature, he improved by a great accession of Learning: Which made him tell our Iustus, that he was born in Oratoria Familia.Ep. 129. lib. 1. And such care did he take of him when he was young, that he took the pains to write him a long Letter, containing Instructions for his Improve∣ment in the Grounds of Learning. This Man the Arch-bishop was very kind to, gave him Harbour, and admitted him freely into his Society and Converse. Insomuch that Iustus Ionas the Father, en∣treated Melancthon, That he would take particular notice to the Arch-bishop, of his great Favour shewed to his Son. Among the Dis∣courses the communicative Prelat held with Ionas while he was with him, one happened concerning a noted Question in Divinity. Where launching out into free communication with him upon that Point, he desired him to impart to Melancthon the Substance of what he had discoursed; and that he should signify to him, that the Arch-bishop requested his Judgment thereof. Which accordingly Ionas did. And Melancthon in a Letter to the Arch-bishop, stiles it non obscarae Quaestio, and that it had already much shaken the Church, and, says he, Concutiet durius, shall shake it yet more. Giving his Rea∣son for this Conjecture, Because those Governours [meaning, I suppose, the Papal Clergy] did not seek for a true Remedy to so great a Matter. It doth not appear to me what this Question was, that the Arch-bishop was so earnest to confer with this great Divine about; whether it were concerning the necessity of Episcopal Go∣vernment and Ordination, or concerning the Use of Ceremonies in the Church, or about the Doctrine of the Sacrament; this last I am apt to believe: But either of them hath, according to Melancthon's Prediction, sufficiently shaken the Churches of Christ. But to return to Ionas. He had written some Pieces, and presented them to the King; for which he intended to reward him. And being now ready to go to France, for the improvement of his Knowledg, and so after a time to return into England again, for which he had a great Affection, he besought Secretary Cecyl, in a well-penned Letter, That whatsoever the King intended to bestow on him, he would do it out of hand, for the supply of his travelling Necessity. This Letter, for the Antiquity of it, and the Fame of the Man, I have inserted in the Appendix.No. XCII. In which is also contained an Extract of part of Ionas the Father's Letter to his Son concerning the Miseries of Germany.
CHAP. XXIV. Melancthon and the Arch-bishop great Friends. Divers memo∣rable Passages between Me∣lancthon and our ABp.THESE Occasions of the frequent mention of Melancthon, do draw us into a relation of some further Passages between him and our Arch-bishop. In the Year 1549, happened several Dispu∣tations, chiefly concerning the Doctrine of the Lord's Supper, be∣fore the King's Commissioners in both Universities. In Oxford they were managed chiefly by Peter Martyr. And in Cambridg, Ridley then Bishop of Rochester, and a Commissioner, was the chief Mode∣rator. Soon after, Martin Bucer in this University, defended three Points, one of the Sufficiency of the Scripture: another concerning the Erring of Churches; and the last, concerning Works done before Iusti∣fication, against Pern, Sedgwick and Yong. They on the Popish Side pretended much, in their Disputations, to have Antiquity and the Fathers for them. These Disputations did our most Reverend Prelate, together with his own Letter,Sends Melan∣cthon certain publick Dispu∣tations in Ox∣ford and Cam∣bridg. Melancthon's Reflections thereupon: Ep. 41. lib. 3. convey to Melancthon by the Hand of one Germani∣cus a German: Who probably might be one of those Learned Strang∣ers, that the Arch-bishop hospitably entertained. The Reflection, that that Divine, in an Answer to his Grace, in the Year 1550, made upon perusal of these Papers, was, That he was grieved to see, that those who sought so much for the Antient Autho∣rities, would not acknowledg the Clearness of them. Nor was there any doubt what the sounder Men in the Antient Church thought. But that there were new and spurious Opinions foisted into many of their Books. Into that of Theophylact most certainly for one. And that there was some such Passage in the Copy, that Oecolam∣padius made use of, when he translated Theophylact, which he liked not of, but yet translated it as he found it: But this was wholly wanting in the Copy that Melancthon had. That the same hap∣pened in Bede's Books, which he supposed might be found more incorrupt among us, [Bede being our Country-Man.] Sends the ABp his Enarration upon the Ni∣cene Creed.The same Melancthon, with this his Letter, sent our Arch-bishop a part of his Enarration upon the Nicene Creed; for this end, that he might pass his Judgment thereon: As he also did, for the same pur∣pose, to A Lasco, Bucor and Peter Martyr, all then in England. The beginning of their Ac∣quaintance.The beginning of this Learned German's Acquaintance with our Prelat was very early. For the Arch-bishop's Fame soon spred abroad in the World, beyond the English Territories. Which was the Cause of that Address of Melancthon, mentioned before, in the Year 1535, and in the Month of August, when he sent a Letter and a Book to him by Alexander Aless. In the Letter, he signified what a high Character both for Learning and Piety he had heard given of him by many honest and worthy Men; and That if the Church had but some more such Bishops, it would be no difficult Matter to have it healed, and the World restored to Peace: con∣gratulating Britain such a Bishop. And this seems to have been the first entrance into their Acquaintance and Correspondence.
PHILIP MELANCTHON
In the Year 1548,The ABp pro∣pounds a weighty Mat∣ter to Melan∣cthon, for the Union of all Protestant Churches. Cranmer propounded a great and weighty Bu∣siness to Melancthon; and a Matter that was likely to prove highly useful to all the Churches of the Evangelick Profession. It was this. The ABp was now driving on a Design for the better uniting of all the Protestant Churches, viz. by having one common Confession and Harmony of Faith and Doctrine, drawn up out of the pure Word of God, which they might all own and agree in. He had observed what Differences there arose among Protestants in the Doctrine of the Sacrament, in the Divine Decrees, in the Government of the Church, and some other things. These Disagreements had rendred the Professors of the Gospel contemptible to those of the Roman Com∣munion. Which caused no small grief to the Heart of this good Man, nearly touched for the Honour of Christ his Master, and his true Church, which suffered hereby. And like a Person of a truly publick and large Spirit, as his Function was, seriously debated and deliberated with himself for the remedying this Evil. This made him judg it very adviseable to procure such a Confession. And in order to this he thought it necessary for the chief and most Learned Divines of the several Churches to meet together, and with all free∣dom and friendliness to debate the Points of Controversy according to the Rule of Scripture. And after mature deliberation, by Agree∣ment of all Parties, to draw up a Book of Articles, and Heads of Christian Faith and Practice. Which should serve for the standing Doctrine of Protestants. As for the Place of this Assembly he thought England the fittest in respect of Safety, as the Affairs of Christendom then stood.The Diligence of the ABp in forwarding this Design. And communicating this his purpose to the King, that Religious Prince was very ready to grant his Allowance and Protection. And as Helvetia, France and Germany, were the chief Countries abroad where the Gospel was prosessed, so he sent his Letters to the most eminent Ministers of each, namely, to Bullinger, Calvin and Me∣lancthon, disclosing this his pious Design to them, and requiring their Counsel and Furtherance. Melancthon first of all came acquainted with it by Iustus Ionas junior, to whom the Arch-bishop had re∣lated the Matter at large, and desired him to signify as much in a Letter to the said Melancthon; and that it was his Request to him, to communicate his Judgment thereupon. This Ionas did, and Melancthon accordingly writ to our Arch-bishop on the Calends of May this Year to this purpose.Ep. 66. lib. 1. Melancthon's Judgment and Approbation thereof. That if his Judgment and Opinion were required, he should be willing both to hear the Sense of o∣ther Learned Men, and to speak his own, and to give his Reasons, , Perswading and being perswaded, as ought to be in a Conference of good Men: letting Truth, and the Glory of God, and the Safety of the Church, not any pri∣vate Affection, ever carry away the Victory. Telling him withal, That the more he considered of this his Deliberation, than which he thought there could be nothing set on foot more Weighty and Necessary, the more he wish'd and pressed him, to publish such a true and clear Confession of the whole Body of Christian Doctrine, according to the Judgment of Learned Men; whose Names should be subscribed thereto. That among all Nations
there might be extant an illustrious Testimony of Doctrine, de∣livered by grave Authority; and that Posterity might have a Rule to follow. And he was of opinion, that this Confession should be much of the nature of their Confession of Augsburgh: only that some few Points in Controversy might be in plainer Words delivered, than was in that. That Ambiguities might not hereafter occasion new Differences.His Caveat of avoiding am∣biguous Ex∣pressions. In Ecclesia re∣ctius est Sca∣pham, Scaphm dicee. And that in the Church it was best to call a Spade a Spade: and not to cast ambiguous Words before Posterity, as an Apple of Contention. And that if in Germany there had been an intire Consent of all the Churches, they had not fallen into those Miseries. And so concludes, earnestly exhorting our Prelat to apply himself vigorously in these his pious Cares and Thoughts for the good Estate of the Churches. Not long after he pursued his first Letter with a second. Where∣in he again reminded our Reverend Father of that Caution,Renews the same Caution in another Let∣ter. viz. That nothing might be left under general Terms, but exprest with all the Perspicuity and Distinctness imaginable. Which I suppose, he said, to meet with the Opinion of some, who thought it might be more convenient, in order to Peace, to suffer some difficult and controverted Points to pass under dubious Expressions, or in the very words of Scripture, without any particular decisive Sense and Explanation imposed on them. And concerning this, 'tis probable our Arch-bishop had desired his Opinion. This Melancthon was against; saying, That for his part, he loved not Labyrinths; and that therefore all his study was, That whatsoever Matters he under∣took to treat of, they might appear plain and unfolded. That it was indeed the Practice of the Council of Trent; which therefore made such crafty Decrees, that so they might defend their Errors by things ambiguously spoken. But that this Sophistry ought to be far from the Church. That there is no Absurdity in Truth rightly propounded: and that this Goodness and Perspicuity of things is greatly inviting, wheresoever there be good Minds. And of this very Judgment was Peter Martyr another great Divine. For when Bucer,Peter Martyr of this Judgment. Quod Vir bonus sibi prsuasisset posse hac ratione tolli gravem, quae est de hac causa, Controversiam, & ita Ecclsiae pacem di desi∣deratam restitui. In Vit. P. Mart. per Iosiam Sinlerm. in a Discourse with him at Strasburg, had advised him, when he spake of the Eucharist, to use more dark and ambi∣guous Forms of Speech, that might be taken in a larger Acceptation, urging to him, That this was the course he himself took, and that a certain good Man [whom I suspect strongly to be our Arch-bishop] had perswaded him, That by this means the great Controversy, concerning the Real Presence in the Sacrament, might be at an end, and so Peace, so long wanted, might be restored to the Church: Martyr was over-perswaded by his Friend so to do, and used for some time the same Form of Speech with him, when he had occasion to discourse of that Doctrine. But afterward he returned to his former more dilucid Stile, as well in the Matter of the Real Presence, as in all other Sub∣jects he treated of. And that both, because he saw this would not suffice them, who held a gross and carnal Presence of Christ's Body, unless their gross manner of Expression were received, and their as gross Interpretation too; and because he found that many weaker Brethren were greatly offended with these Ambiguities of Speech, and so intangled and confounded, that they scarce knew what to
think in this Point. And so leaving Bucer to pursue his obscurer Phrases, he chose to speak more clearly and distinctly. And neither did Bucer disallow of Martyr in this Course, nor was Martyr igno∣rant of Bucer's true Sense, however doubtful his Expressions were: as the Author of his Life tells us. This I mention to shew,Iosia Sim▪ how ex∣actly Martyr accorded with Melancthon in this Opinion, of expressing things in clear and perspicuous Terms; which the said Melancthon thought it highly necessary now to be inculcated, when deliberation was had of drawing up a General Confession of Faith. After he had thus declared his Mind in this Matter,What Melan∣cthon thought of the Doctrin of Fate. he particularly descended to the Doctrine of Fate; telling the Arch-bishop, how the Stoical Disputes of that Subject among them in the beginning, were too rough, and horrid, and such as were prejudicial to Discipline. Which I sup∣pose, might be occasioned from some Passage in the Arch-bishop's Letter, advising with this Learned Man how to propound the Doctrines of Predestination and Free-Will. CHAP. XXV. The Arch-bishop corresponds with Calvin. THESE his Counsels he brake also to Iohn Calvin,Calv. Ep. 12. the chief Guide of the French Churches. Who also highly approved of his pious Proposition. The Arch-bishop,The ABp breaks his Purpose also to Calvin. in a Letter to that great Reformer, had been lamenting the Differences that were in the Re∣formed Churches; having his Eye, I suppose, herein upon those of Geneva and Germany; and like a true Father of the Church, consult∣ing for the making up of the Breaches, he thought no fitter Remedy could be used, than for pious and wise Men, and such as were well exercised in God's School, to meet together and profess their Con∣sents in the Doctrine of Godliness.Calvin's Ap∣probation thereof, and Commendati∣on of the ABp. This Calvin acknowledged was rightly and prudently advised by him: Applauding him, that he did not only lead the way in purging the Doctrine of God's Church from Corruption, but did so voluntarily exhort and encourage others therein. And that he did not only take care of Religion at Home in his own Country, but all the World over. And as to the Meet∣ing and Converse of Divines, for this purpose, which Cranmer had told him he had made the King so sensible of the need and usefulness of, that he was forward in it, and had offered a Place in his King∣dom for them securely to assemble together in; that French Divine wished, That Learned and Wise Men from the chief Churches would accordingly meet, and diligently discussing the chief Heads of Faith, would by common Consent deliver to Posterity the cer∣tain Doctrine of the Scripture. But that among the great Evils of that Age, this also was to be reputed, that Churches were so divided from one another, that Human Society was scarcely kept up among them: much less that Sacred Communion of the Mem∣bers of Christ, which all profest with their Mouths, but few did sincerely take care to preserve. That as to himself, if he might be thought to be of any Use,Offers his Ser∣vice. he would not grudg to pass over ten
Seas, if there were need. That if it were only to contribute some Assistance to the Kingdom of England, he should esteem it a Rea∣son lawful enough; but much more, he thought, he ought to spare no Labour, no Trouble, to procure a Means, whereby the Churches, that were so widely divided, might unite among them∣selves. But he hoped, his Weakness and Insufficiency being such, he might be spared: and that he would do his part in prosecuting that with his Prayers and Wishes, which should be undertaken by others.Excites the ABp to pro∣ceed. And whereas our Arch-bishop had hinted to him his Jealousy, that the Business would hardly find a good Issue by reason of certain Difficulties attending it, Calvin not only exhorted, and earnestly beseeched him to go forward, till it should have some Ef∣fect at least, though it succeeded not in all Respects according to his Wish. And so prayed God to guide him with his Holy Spirit, and to bless his Pious Endeavours. This excellent Purpose fru∣strated.But the Troubles at Home and Abroad frustrated this excellent Purpose, which for two Years he had been labouring to bring to some good Issue. His next Resolution was to go as far as he could in this Matter,Thinks of drwing up Articles of Re∣ligion for the English Church. since he could not go as far as he would. And he bethought himself of assembling together the Divines of his own Church, (and that by the King's Authority) to confer with them about drawing up a Body of Articles of Religion: which Purpose he had likewise communicated to Calvin.Which he communi∣cates to Calvin, Ep. 125. For which he greatly commended him. Telling him, That since the Times were such, that that could not in the least be hoped for, which was so much to be wish'd, viz. That the chief Teachers of the divers Churches, which embraced the pure Doctrine of the Gospel,And Calvin's Reply and Ex∣hortation. might meet together, and pub∣lish to Posterity a certain and clear Confession, out of the pure Word of God, concerning the Heads of Religion then in Con∣troversy; he did extreamly commend that Counsel, which he had taken, to establish Religion in England; lest things remaining any longer in an uncertain State, or not so rightly and duly com∣posed and framed, as it were convenient, the Minds of the People should remain in suspence and wavering. And then quicken∣ing him, told him, That this was his part chiefly to do: That he himself saw well what that Place required of him, or rather what God exacted, in respect of that Office he had laid upon him. That he was of very powerful Authority; which he had not only by the amplitude of his Honour, but the long-conceived Opinion that went of his Prudence and Integrity. That the Eyes of the Good were cast upon him, either to follow his Motions, or to re∣main idle upon the pretence of his Unactiveness. Blames him for having not made more Progress in the Reformation.He took the freedom also with Cranmer, to blame him for not having made more Progress in the Reformation. Which he thought he might have done in the three Years space, wherein King Edward had already reigned. And told him, That he feared, when so many Autumns had been passed in deliberating only, at last the Frost of a perpetual Winter might follow. Meaning that the People would grow stark cold in minding a Reformation. Then he reminded him of his Age, that that called upon him to hasten, lest if he should be called out of the World before Matters in Re∣ligion
were settled, the Conscience of his Slowness might create great Anxiety to him. He particularly put him in Mind of the great want of Pastors to preach the Gospel, and that the Churches Revenues were made such a Prey. Which he called An intolera∣ble Evil. And said, that this was a plain reason, why there was so little Preaching among us. That a parcel of Slow-bellies were nourished from the Revenues of the Church, to sing Vespers in an unknown Tongue. But in the close he excused him in re∣gard of the many and great Difficulties that he wrestled with. Which were certainly most true. In so much,But not justly. that if he had not been a Man of great Conduct and indefatigable Industry, the Re∣formation had not made so fair a Progress as it did in his Time. And one may admire rather that he went so far, the Iniquity of the Times considered, than that he went no farther. For the Great Ones, in the Minority of the King,The Clergy preach against Sacriledg. took their Op∣portunity, most insatiably to fly upon the Spoils of the Church, and Charitable Donations; little regarding any thing else, than to enrich themselves. Very vitious and dissolute they were in their Lives, as the soberer Sort in those Days complained; and therefore the less to be wondered, they were so negligent to provide for the promoting the Reformed Religion and Piety in the Land. In the mean time, the chief Preachers did what they could to redress these Evils: For they plainly and boldly rebuked this Evil Governance; and especially the Covetousness of the Courtiers, and their small regard to live after the Gospel: and sometimes incurred no small Danger by this Freedom. Mr. Rogers Vicar of S. Sepulchres, and afterwards a Mar∣tyr under Queen Mary, was one of these: Who so freely discoursed once at S. Paul's Cross, concerning the Abuse of Abbies, and the Churches Goods, that he was summoned before the Privy-Council to answer for it. And so were divers others upon the same Reason. And I am apt to think that these Preachers did what they did, by the Counsel and Direction of the Arch-bishop. So that the present State of Things, and the Endeavours of him, and the rest of the Clergy considered, he was a little too hastily censured by Calvin in that behalf. But Cranmer was of so mild and gracious a Spirit, that he did not seem to conceive any Displeasure against Calvin for this his unjust Charge of Negligence; but kept up a great Esteem and Value for him. But,The Univer∣sity-Men declaim against it in the School▪ that I may take occasion here to insist a little longer upon this Argument, and vindicate the Honesty and Boldness of the Eng∣lish Clergy, in speaking their Minds against the Sacrilegious Spirit that reigned in these Times; it may not be amiss to give some Ac∣count of a Communication, that happened about December or Ianu∣ary, 1552, at Court, between Sir William Cecyl the King's Secretary, and one Miles Wilson a grave Divine, and Acquaintance of the said Cecyl, and a Man of Eminency in the University of Cambridg. Discourse happening between them of divers and sundry things, re∣lating partly to the propagating Christ's Religion, and partly to the preservation and encrease of the Common-Wealth; the said Wilson delivered to Cecyl an Oration to read, which he had composed, De rebus Ecclesiae non diripiendis; Concerning not spoiling the Church of her
Means: and which he once pronounced in the Publick Schools of the University, about that Time when those Matters were in agitation above. Cecyl, being a good and conscientious Man, had in this Conference signified to him his earnest desire to hear and see what could be proposed out of the Holy Scripture, in so unusual an Ar∣gument. To shew this, and to give also a short view of his said Oration, because the Secretary's infinite Business would not allow him to read long Discourses, Wilson soon after digested the Contents thereof, reducing it into some Syllogisms, and Ratiocinations, more apt to urge, and easier to remember, and more accommodate to perswade. These with his Letter he sent to the Secretary. His Ends herein were to satisfy him in this Point, being a Man of great Stroke in the Publick Transactions of those Times: who might ac∣cordingly use his Interest and Endeavour to retrieve what had been so unjustly taken from the Church; that the famous Schools lately dissolved, to the great ruine of the University, might be re-edi∣fied again; and that those Livings, which were miserably spoiled by covetous Patrons, might be restored, and enjoy their whole Re∣venues, to the real Honour of the State. And lastly, that the Hospitals, impoverish'd or wholly beggar'd, might by his means be remedied and helped by the King's Council; that they might revert to their former Condition; that is, to succour and help the Poor. He urged moreover to Cecyl, that the destruction of Schools would be the destruction of the Universities: and that all Learning would soon cease, and Popery and more than Gothic Barbarism would invade all, if Learned Men were not better taken care of than they were; and if the Rewards of Learning, viz. Rectories, Prebends and all, were taken away from them. And the Re∣dress urged upon some at Court.This Man had also freely discoursed these Matters to two other great and publick-spirited Men, viz. Goodrich the Lord Chancellor, who was Bishop of Ely; and Holgate Arch-bishop of York. To both whom he had also given the Names of a great many Schools, Parso∣nages and Hospitals, that had undergon this sacrilegious Usage. And he particularly mentioned to Cecyl, a Town not far from Cam∣bridg, called Childerlay, where a Gentleman had pulled down all the Houses in the Parish, except his own. And so there being none to frequent the Church, the Inhabitants being gone, he used the said Church, partly for a Stable for his Horses, and partly for a Barn for his Corn and Straw. This Letter of Wilson to the Secretary, to∣gether with his Arguments against pilling the Church subjoined, I have thought worthy preserving in the Repository for such Monu∣ments in the Appendix.No. XCIII. But to return from this Digression, which Calvin's Censure of our Arch-bishop occasioned. And when in the Year 1551, he dispatched into England one Nicolas, (that Nicolas Gallasius, I suppose, who was afterward by Calvin recommended to be Minister to the French Congregation in London, at the desire of Grindal Bishop of London, that he would send over some honest able Person for that Place) with Letters to the Duke of Somerset,Calvin sends Letters and certain of his Books to the King. Ep. 123. and likewise to the King; to whom he presented also, at the same time, his Book of Commentaries upon Esay, and the Canonical Epistles, which he had Dedicated to him; both the
King's Council,Well taken by the King and Council. and the King himself were much pleased and satis∣fied with this Message: And the Arch-bishop told Nicolas, That Calvin could do nothing more profitable to the Church, than to write often to the King. The substance of what he wrote to the King,What the ABp told the Mes∣senger here∣upon. Ep. 120. that was so well taken, was to excite and sharpen the generous Parts of the Royal Youth, as Calvin hinted in a Letter to Bullinger. CHAP. XXVI. The Arch-bishop highly valued Peter Martyr. AS for the Learned Italian, Peter Martyr, who is worthy to be mentioned with Melancthon and Calvin,P. Martyr, and the ABp cor∣dial Friends. there was not only an Acquaintance between him and our Arch-bishop, but a great and cordi∣al Intimacy and Friendship. For of him he made particular use in the Steps he took in our Reformation.The use the ABp made of him. And whensoever he might be spared from his Publick Readings in Oxford, the Arch-bishop used to send for him, to confer with him about the weightiest Matters. This Calvin took notice of, and signified to him by Letter, how much he rejoiced that he made use of the Counsels of that excel∣lent Man.Ep. 127. And when the Reformation of the Ecclesiastical Laws was in effect wholly devolved upon Cranmer, he appointed him and Gualter Haddon, and Dr. Rowland Tayler his Chaplain, and no more, to manage that Business. Which shews what an Opinion he had of Martyr's Abilities, and how he served himself of him in Matters of the greatest Moment. And in that bold and brave Chal∣lenge he made in the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign, to justify, against any Man whatsoever, every Part of King Edward's Reforma∣tion; he nominated and made choice of Martyr therein to be one of his Assistants in that Disputation, if any would undertake it with him. This Divine, when he was forced to leave Oxford upon the Change of Religion, retreated first to the Arch-bishop at Lambeth; and from thence, when he had tarried as long as he durst, he depar∣ted the Realm to Strasburgh. This Man was he that saw,Martyr saw the Voluminous Writings and Marginal Notes of the Arch-bishop. and reported those voluminous Wri∣tings of this Arch-bishop, which he had collected out of all the An∣tient Church-Writers, upon all the Heads of Divinity; and those Notes of his own Pen, that he had inserted in the Margin of his Books. Which the Arch-bishop communicated to him, when he con∣versed with him at his House. And from these and such-like of the Arch-bishop's Labours, he acknowledged he had learned much, espe∣cially in the Doctrine of the Sacrament; as he writ in his Epistle be∣fore his Tract of the Encharist. The Fame of Peter Martyr, and the Desire of preserving all Re∣mains of so Learned a Professor,Two Letters of Martyr from Oxford. and great an Instrument of the Re∣formed Religion, hath inclined me to put two of his Letters into the Appendix, though otherwise not to our present Purpose; being Originals, writ by his own Hand from Oxon.N.XCIV.XCV. The one to Iames Haddon, a learned Court-Divine, and Dean of Exon, to procure a Licence from the King or the Council, for a Friend and Auditor of
his, to preach publickly. The other to Sir William Cecyl, to for∣ward the paiment of a Salary due to him, that read the Divinity-Le∣cture in the Room of Dr. Weston a Papist, who had claimed it him∣self, and laboured to detain it from him. An instance of his Love to the Arch-bishop.I cannot forbear mentioning here an Instance of his Love and great Concern for our Arch-bishop, his old Friend and Patron, after the Iniquity of the Times had parted them, the one then in Prison, and the other at Strasburgh. It was in Iune 1555, when Queen Mary, supposing her self with Child, was reported to have said in her Zeal, That she could never be happily brought to Bed, nor succeed well in any other of her Affairs, unless she caused all the Hereticks she had in Prison to be burnt, without sparing so much as One. Which Opinion, very likely, the Bishop of Winchester, or some other of her Zelotical Chaplains, put into her Head. This Report coming to Martyr's Ears, afflicted him greatly; not only for the De∣struction that was like suddenly to befal many Holy Professors, but more especially for the imminent Hazard he apprehended that great and publick Person, the Arch-bishop to be in. Which made him ex∣press himself in this manner, in a Letter to Peter Alexander, to whom that most Reverend Father had also formerly been a kind Host and Patron; That from those Words of the Queen, he might discover that my Lord of Canterbury was then in great Danger.P. Martyr Ep. Theolog. CHAP. XXVII. The Arch-bishop's Favour to John Sleidan. TO all these Learned and religious Outlandish-Men, to whom the Arch-bishop was either a Patron or a Friend,The ABp's fa∣vour to Iohn Sleidan. or both, we must not forget to join Iohn Sleidan, the renowned Author of those exact Commentaries of the State of Religion, and the Common-wealth in Germany, in the time of Charles V. About the end of March,Procures him a Pension from the King. Anno 1551, He procured for him from King Edward an Ho∣norary Pension of two hundred Crowns a Year, as some Aid for the carrying on his Commentaries, which he then was busy about; and as it seems, encouraged by Cranmer to take in Hand and prosecute. And when Dr. Bruno, a Learned Man, and Father-in-Law to Sleidan, departed out of England, which was about the Time before menti∣oned, being the Agent of the Duke of Saxony, the Arch-bishop informed him of this Stipend, by the King granted unto his Son-in-Law; confirming the same to him in the King's Name, and en∣couraging the Commentator hereby to proceed cheerfully in his use∣ful Undertaking. The Paiment neglected.But upon the Stirs at Court, the paiment of this Pension was neg∣lected a great while. Which caused Sleidan to call upon the Arch-bishop more than once, as also upon his Friends Cheke and Cecyl; entreating them to remind the Arch-bishop of him, and to com∣municate to his Lordship the Letters he had writ to them. But alas! he needed not to have been excited to things of this Nature▪ bearing so good a Will to them, and being of his own Nature so
forward to favour Learned and honest Men, and useful Designs; Nor was his good Will to Sleidan any whit abated, but his In∣terest at Court was, now towards the declension of King Edward's Reign. But because his Pension depended only upon a verbal Promise of the King,Sleidan la∣bours with the ABp to get the Pension con∣firmed by Let∣ters Patents. and the getting it under his Seal might contribute to the paiment of it in better sort hereafter, he laboured with our Prelate, and the two other Persons mentioned, that it might be confirmed by Letters Patents. He urged to them, That he could have employ∣ed himself in other Business, that would have redounded more to his Profit, as many others did. But he reckoned himself called to this Work from Heaven, and that he could take no rest in his Mind till he had brought the History down to that present Time, (it being then the Year 1553) That he had hope, that they, ac∣cording to their Humanity and Prudence, who well understood things, would take some Pains, that the Arrears of his promised Stipend might be paid, and that some further Care might be taken for the due Paiment of it hereafter, that so he might the more conveniently and freely follow that Matter. Leaving it to them to consider how much that Labour cost him: [as to the Charges he means of Correspondence for the getting particular and faithful Accounts of things, that past in all Parts.] And lastly, That it belonged properly to Kings, to cherish such Labours, as would be Ornaments to Religion and Learning, and of Use to the Com∣mon-Good. And in another Address to Secretary Cecyl he desired, That he would plead in his behalf with the most Reverend the Arch-bishop; adding, That he did wholly give up himself to this Work, and was in a diligent pursuit of all Matters in order to the compiling a compleat History. Though I have said so much already of Sleidan, yet I will take this occasion to add somewhat more: that I may retrieve as much as I can of this honest Man, and excellent Writer. In the Month of September, Anno 1552, he sent to the King, together with a Letter,Sends his Commentaries to the King. his Commentaries of the German Wars, brought down to that very Time: being a short Draught of that he intended afterwards more largely and fully to write. And Cheke and Cecyl were the Men that presented them to his Majesty. With this kind of Writing the King declared himself much pleased, as Cecyl wrote him back; and so he and Cheke also were. This Encouragement put our Author upon another Design,Designs to write the History of the Council of Trent. re∣solving to write the whole Actions of the Council of Trent: where∣in he himself had been a part, having been Agent there for five Months from the City of Strasburg. This he intended to do for the King's own Sake.For the King's Use. That he might thorowly understand the Form of Councils, and might then make his Judgment of the rest of the History of the Reformation of Religion, which he was then writing. The Spring after he presented the King with a Specimen of his Writing concerning the Council of Trent.Anno 1553. Sends the King a Specimen thereof. It was the beginning and entrance into that Treatise he intended to write of that Subject. This he desired might be kept in the King's Study, and communica∣ted
to no other Hand; and that no Copy of it might be taken, it being but a small part of a future Work, and so imperfect. He had now, in the Ides of March, compleated his Commentaries from the Year 1517, to the Year 1536; and was resolved, by God's Grace, to go on with it in the same Method. In order to which, in the Month of December before,In order to the proceed∣ing with his Commenta∣ries, desires Cecyl to send him the whole Action be∣tween K. H. VIII. and P. Clement VII. he had desired of Cecyl, that he would procure him the whole Action between King Henry VIII. and Pope Clement VII. when that King vindicated his own Liberty, and that of his Kingdom from Papal Pretences of Supremacy over each. This Matter between the King and the Pope he called, Locus il∣lustris & memorabilis, and judged it very worthy for Posterity to know. Adding, that though he had in his own Hands some Matters relating thereto, yet they were not so exact and certain as he could wish; because he desired to describe every thing properly and most exactly according to Truth. He entreated also, that if either he or Cheke had any other Matters of that Nature to impart, they would oblige him with them. Which Passages make me conclude that in relation to the English Affairs he made great use of Intelligences from Cecyl and Cheke, and probably our Arch-bishop too. Which consideration may add a great Reputation unto the Credit of his Book. Now to preserve as much as we can of this excellent Historian, Iohn Sleidan, I have thought good to insert divers of his Letters in the Appendix; and likewise because mention is often therein made of our Arch-bishop. To which I have subjoined a Letter of Martin Bucer,Bcer writes to Ccyl in behalf of Slidan. No. XCVI.XCVII.XCVIII.XCIX.C.CI.CII. a great Name, wrote to Cecyl in behalf of the said Sleidan. For he did not only importune those Courtiers before mentioned, but when no Answer came from them, he made Bucer also his Soli∣citor from Cambridg. Who Anno 1551, Feb. 18. wrote to Cecyl to further Sleidan's Business, and to dispatch the Paiment of his Stipend; and that Sleidan might be resolved one way or other; giving Cecyl this Memento, That this would well become the Administration of a Kingdom so much adorned as with other things, so with the Benefit of Religion. By the way, the Date of this Letter would deserve well to be noted, serving to judg of the true Date of Bucer's Death. Which by Historians is variously set down, if we may be∣lieve Fuller in his History of the University of Cambridg. It is cer∣tain Bucer was ill when he wrote that Letter to Cecyl; for he men∣tions therein an Epistle, which he sent to Dr. Iohn Quercetanus the Physician, upon the said Cecyl's Desire, the which, he said, he was hardly able to dictate. This Letter to Cecyl, I take, to be writ in his last Sickness, nine Days before the Date, which Sleidan his Friend, assigned for the Day of his Death. To which agrees within a Day a Passage at the end of a Piece of Bucer's,Feb. 27. 1551. intituled, Explicatio de vi & usu S. Ministerii,Scriptae Anglic. where it is said, That he died at Cambridg, before he finish'd it. Pridie Cal. Martias, Anno 1551. Iohn Leland.I have one Learned Man more behind to mention, and he our own Country-Man; to whom our Arch-bishop was a Patron; and that is the celebrated Antiquarian Iohn Leland, Library-keeper to Henry VIII, and who, by a Commission under the Broad Seal, granted to him for that purpose by the King, had got together a vast Heap of
Collections of the Historical Antiquities of this Nation: which he was many Years a making by his Travels and diligent Searches into the Libraries of Abbies and Religious-Houses, before, and at their Dissolution, and elsewhere. From whence he intended to compile a compleat History of the Antiquities of Britain; To which he wholly devoted himself. But being at that time poor, and the Charges of such an Undertaking great, he wanted some Body to make this known to the King, and to recommend him effectually to his Favour and Countenance; and to procure him a Royal Gratuity: For which purpose he made his Application to Cranmer, (who he well knew, was the great Encourager of Learning and Ingenuity) in a very elegant Address in Verse, as he was an excellent Poet. And I am apt to think, the Preferments that soon after befel him, as a good Parsonage near Oxford, and a Canonry of the King's College in that University, and a Prebendship elsewhere, accrued to him by the means of the Arch-bishop, laying open his State before the King. His Copy of Verses were as follow: Ad Thomam Cranmerum Cantiorum Archiepiscopum. EST congesta mihi domi supellex, Ingens, aurea, nobilis, venusta, Qua totus studeo Britanniarum Vero reddere gloriam nitori. Sed fortuna meis noverca coeptis, Iam felicibus invidet maligna. Quare ne pereant brevi vel hora Multarum mihi noctium labores Omnes, & patriae simul decora Ornamenta cadant, suus{que} splendor Antiquis malè desit us{que} rebus, Cranmere, eximium decus piorum, Implorare tuam benignitatem Cogor. Fac igitur tuo sueto Pro candore, meum decus, patronum{que} Vt tantùm faveat, roges, labori Incoepto: pretium sequetur amplum. Sic nomen tibi litterae elegantes Rectè perpetuum dabunt, suós{que} Partim vel titulos tibi receptos Concedet memori Britannus ore. Sic te posteritas amabit omnis, Et fama super aethera innotesces. CHAP. XXVIII. Arch-bishop Cranmer's Relations and Chaplains. TO look now a little into the Arch-bishop's more private and domestick Concerns. He had two Wives.His Wives and Children. While he was Fellow of Iesus College in Cambridg, not being in Orders, he mar∣ried his first, named Ioan, dwelling at the Dolphin, opposite to Iesus Lane, which I think is a publick House to this Day. Which occasi∣oned some of his Enemies afterwards to say, That he was once an Ostler, because he lodged sometime with his Wife at that House. Her he buried within a Year, dying in Child-bed. And then for divers Years he continued studying hard, and reading Learned Lectures in the University, and bringing up Youth, till he was called to the Court. His second Wife, named Ann, he married in Germany, while he was Ambassador there. By her he had Children. In King Henry's Reign he kept her Secret; and upon the Act of the
Six Articles he sent her away into Germany, that he might give no Offence, nor draw any Danger upon himself. In the time of King Edward, when the Marriage of the Clergy was allowed, he brought her forth, and lived openly with her. He had Children that sur∣vived him. For whose sake an Act of Parliament passed in the Year 1562, to restore them in Blood, their Father having been condemned for Treason in consenting to the Lady Iane's Succession to the Crown. For which yet he was pardoned by Queen Mary. Probably the Pardon was only Verbal, or not Authentickly enough drawn up, or might admit of some Doubt: To take off which such an Act was procured. How many Children he had, or what Issue remains of them to this Day, I am not able, after all my Enquiries, to shew. His Wife sur∣vived him. Sincere and mo∣dist Defence of English Catho∣licks.His Wife survived him. For we may give so much Credit to a very angry Book, writ against the Execution of Iustice in England, by Cardinal Allen; Which charging the Arch-bishop with Breach of Vows, saith, That at the very Day and Hour of his Death, he was sacrilegiously joined in pretended Marriage to a Woman, not∣withstanding his Vow and Order. And living she was toward the latter End of Arch-bishop Parker's Time; and for her Subsistence enjoyed an Abby in Nottingham-shire:MS. Life of Cranmer in Be∣net▪ College. which King Henry, upon Dr. Butt's his Motion, without the Arch-bishop's knowledg, grant∣ed to him and his Heirs. Divers Cran∣mers.For his Wife and Children he could not escape many a Taunt from his Enemies behind his Back; and one to his Face from Dr. Martin, one of those that were commissionated to sit as Judges upon him at Oxford. He told him in reproach, That his Children were Bond∣men to the See of Canterbury. Whether there be any such old Canon-Law I know not. But the Arch-bishop smiled, and asked him, If a Priest at his Benefice kept a Concubine, and had Chil∣dren by her, whether those Children were Bond-men to the Be∣nefice, or no? And that he trusted they would make his Childrens Case no worse. I find two of his Name in King Ed∣ward's Reign; but whether they were his, or his Brother Edmund's Sons, or some other Relations, I cannot tell. There was one Richard Cranmer, one of the Witnesses at the Abjuration of Ashton, Priest, an Arian, 1548. Daniel Cranmer of Bilsington, of the Diocess of Canterbury, who about administring to a Will, was for contumacy to the Court of Canterbury,Cranm. Regist. Excommunicate: and a Significavit was issued out against him thereupon, in the Year 1552. There was also a Thomas Cranmer about these Times,Suer's Ant. who bought something in Ware-Lane of the City of Canterbury. He was Publick Notary, and Register to the Arch-deacon in the Year 1569. I find likewise one Robert Cranmer Esq. who was Nephew to the Arch-bishop, and alive at the latter End of Queen Elizabeth. This Robert left one only Daughter and Heiress, named Ann. Whom Sir Arthur Harris of Crixey in Essex, married, and enjoyed with her three Manors; Post∣ling, which came to the said Robert in the beginning of Queen Eli∣zabeth: Kingsnorth in Vlcomb, and Saltwood: Both which he purcha∣sed in the latter end of that Queen. Upon whose Grandchild, Sir Cranmer Harris of Lincoln's-Inn Kt. those Estates descended. There was another Cranmer of Canterbury, who enjoyed a Manor,
called Sapinton, in Petham in Kent. One of whose Off-spring by de∣scent successively was intitled to the Propriety of it,Philpot's Villar. Cantian. and was alive when Philpot published his Book of that County, viz. 1659. There e living at this Time among divers others, two Knights of this Name, Sir Cesar Cranmer once belonging to the Court, and Sir William Cranmer, a worthy Merchant of London, and now Deputy-Governor of the Hamburgh Company. But if we look backward,The AB's Stock. the Arch-bishop's Stock and Pedigree was very Antient, and of good Credit. His Father was Thomas Cranmer of Alacton in Nottinghamshire, Esquire; and his Mother was Agnes, the Daughter of Laurence Hatfield of Willoughby of like De∣gree, a Gentleman, if I mistake not, of the same County. Which two had Issue three Sons, Iohn, and Thomas our Arch-bishop, and Edmund who was the Arch-Deacon: and four Daughters, Dorothy, Ann, Iane and Isabel. Which Sisters of our Arch-bishop were thus matched. Dorothy to Harold Rosel of Radcliff in this County, Esq Ann to Edmund Cartwright of Ossington in Staffordshire, Esquire; Iane to Iohn Moning Lieutenant of Dover-Castle, and Isabel to Sir .... Shepey Knight. Matches, I suppose, especially the two latter, of the Arch-bishop's own making, for the Preferment of his Sisters. His elder Brother Iohn married Ione, Daughter of Fretchvile, of a good Family in the same County. Whose Grand-child Thomas, and Grand-Nephew to our Arch-bishop, had none but Daughters. One of whom being a Coheir, married Iohn Rosel, Grand-child to Harold aforesaid, and the other to good Families in those Parts. The Arch-bishop's great Grand-father, Edmund, married Isabel Daughter and Heir of William de Aslacton, a very Antient Family.Aslacton. This Edmund was alive in the Reign of Henry VI. In the Church of Whatton, in this County,Whatton. is an Antient Monu∣ment of an Ancestor of our Arch-bishop, with this Inscription; Hic jacet Thomas Cranmerus. Qui obiit 27 Maii, 1501. Cujus animae propitietur Deus. Amen. And on the Monument the Coat of Arms of the Cranmer's; being a Chevron, between three Cranes, quar∣tered with those of the Aslactons, Newmarches, Whattons, and two Families more. This might probably enough be the Arch-bishop's Father. The Arch-bishop in the first Year of King Edward VI,The Rectories whereof the ABp purcha∣sed. purchased of that King the Rectories of Whatton and Aslacton, (the Manors whereof belonged to his Family before) with the Advousons of the Churches. Both which had pertained to the dissolved Monastery of Welbeck. Which Rectories the Arch-bishop, as it seems, made over to his Nephew Thomas, Son to his Brother Iohn. For he died seized of them both. And they descended to his Son and Heir Thomas. The Manors of the said Whatton and Aslacton are now come into the noble Family of Dorchester. The Tithes and Glebe to the Armstrongs of Scarrington. For these Collections I am beholden to Thoroton's History of Nottinghamshire. And now in the last place,His Chaplains. let us look into the Arch-bishop's Do∣mestick Affairs. He took great heed to the Well-government of his Family, that all things there might beseem the House of a truly
Christian Bishop, and the chief Spiritual Governour of the English Church. And in order to this, one of his Cares was to have Learned Men about him. A few whereof, as I could retrive them, I shall here mention, and give some Account of. And first let us begin with his Chaplains. Rowland Tay∣lor.I can find but a few of them: but Men they were of great Parts and Atchievements in Learning, as well as Piety. One of them was Rowland Taylor Doctor of both Laws, and preferred by the Arch-bishop to be Parson of Hadley in Suffolk. Who sealed his Do∣ctrine with his Blood. An extraordinary Man, both for his Learning, as well as his bold and brave Profession of Christ's Religion, even to the fiery Trial. He had read over (which was rare in those Days) all S. Augustine's Works, S. Cyprian, Gregory Nazianzen, Eusebius, Origen, and divers other Fathers. He professed the Civil Law, and had read over the Canon Law also: As he told the Lord Chancellor Gardiner, when in his Scorn and Rage together he called him an Ignorant Beetle-brow. The Arch-bishop made use of him in his Af∣fairs: and he was one of those, that were joined with him in King Edward's Days, for making a Reformation in the Ecclesiastical Laws. Soon after he was invested in his Benefice, leaving the AB's Family, he went and resided, like a careful Pastor, and performed among his Parishioners all the Parts of an excellent Minister, in respect of his Doctrine, Example and Charity. He was sent down to his own Parish of Hadley, where he was extreamly beloved, to be burnt. But I refer the Reader to the large and full Account that Fox gives of him in his Book of Acts and Monuments; and shall only recite his Epitaph, as it now remaineth, or lately did, in a brass Plate hang∣ing in the Church of Hadley, where he deserved so well. Gloria in Altissimis Deo. His Epitaph.OF Rowland Taylor's Fame I show, an Excellent Divine, A Doctor of the Civil Law, a Preacher rare and fine. King Henry and King Edward's Days, Preacher and Parson here, That gave to God continual Praise, and kept his Flock in Fear. And for the Truth condemn'd to die he was in Fire and Flame, Where he received patiently the Torment of the same: And strongly suffered to the End. Which made the Standers by, Rejoice in God to see their Friend and Pastor so to die. O Taylor! were thy mighty Fame uprightly here enroll'd, Thy Deeds deserve that thy good Name were cipher'd here in Gold. Obiit 1555. And in Aldham-Common, not far from Hadley Town, is a great Stone, that assigns the Place where he suffered, and on it are written these words, or to this effect, Dr. Taylor for maintaining what was good, In this Place shed his Blood.
His Living was immediately supplied by one Newal.A Sermon preached the Day after his Burning. And to de∣serve his Preferment, or by Commandment perhaps from Above, to render their taking away Dr. Taylor the more justifiable, he made a Sermon February 10, 1555, being the Day next after he suffered, upon this Text, Sic currite, ut comprehendatis. His Work was to perswade the People to return to the old Superstitions, and to bespatter the Martyr with false Reports. And meeting with a Writing,Inter Foxii MSS. that containeth the Sum of this Sermon, I will crave leave here to insert it; to give a Specimen of Popish Preaching in these Days. He exhorted to run in the strait Way, and leave the wide Gate,Wherein the Martyr is grosly Slande∣red. viz. To leave the new-found Learning, and but new found in∣deed; and follow all one Religion. For ye were, said he, errone∣ously taught by soch Men as died yesterday. Of whom I will speak, but for no Malice, as God I take to record. His Opinions were, wherefore he died, one, that Priests might have Wives: the other, that in the Sacrament was not the very Body and Blood of our Saviour Christ, substantially and really. The first, that Priests should have Wives, he could prove by no Scripture, but by three other Authors. And he was demaunded, if he were willing to stand to the last? He answered, Yea, be∣fore God. Then the Book laid afore him, and read to him in Latin and English: and he reading the English of it himself, said he would read the Latin, and so did, and confuted himself. And stood then as amazed; as can witness five hundred. And I dare say, there were a thousand Texts rehersed to him to the contrary: but he could answer not to one. And so had divers Admonitions, but was so stubborn in his own Conceit, according to Paul's Saying, Si sit homo sectuum, Let him be admonished once or twice; And so hath he been: If he will not turn, let him cast out. And so he is now. For better were it so to do, then to put many Souls in danger with evil Doctrin. And one Text I will declare to you for Priests having Wives. S. Paul, when he was tempted, rid to our Saviour Christ, and asked what Remedy were for Temptation, for his Temptation? but whether it were of Lust of the Flesh, or vain Glory, I can∣not tell, but let that go to the Opinion of Men. And Christ an∣swered, Why Paul, is not my Grace sufficient for thee? But he did not say, Take a Wife, and let that be thy Remedy. But they strait take a Drab by the Tail, saying, That no Man can live Chast without the Gift of God. And as concerning the Sacrament, to prove it, he brought Paul in the end of the first to the Corinthians, Luke, Iohn, Sixth of Mark. And it is not to be called the Supper of the Lord, as these Banbury Glosers have called it. For Coenâ factâ, he said, This is my Body, which is, or shall be, betrayed. And in one Text Cyprian, one of the Primitive Church, said in a Sermon of the Supper, The Bread which Christ gave to his Disciples, by the omnipo∣tency of the Word, is made Flesh. And Dionysius and Hilary simi∣liter. To err is a small Fault, but to persevere is a devilish thing. For
it moveth many Minds, to see an Heretick constant, and to die. But it is not to be mervelled at: for the Devil hath Power over Soul and Body. For he causeth Men to drown and hang them∣selves, at their own Wills. Much more he may cause a Man to burn: seeing he is tied, and cannot fly. Barnabe saith so. Cyprian, unus Clericorum, saith, That grievous is the Fault of Discord in Christ's Church, and cannot be cleansed with Burning, or any other Sacrifice. Ergo, Damned. For sure he died in damnable Case, if he did not otherwise re∣pent in the Hour of Pain. For though he did burn in this Case, he sheweth himself a Christian Man no otherwise than the Devil sheweth himself like Christ: and so maketh no End of a Martyr. Austin saith, He that will deny the Church to be his Mother, God will deny him to be his Son. And so Pope Iulius the third prayed for, &c. He made an end for lack of his Books, because he said, he was but new come, and brought not his Books with him. Item, Last, The Person being laboured by the way, to have left his Opinion, answered, Alas! what would you have me to do? Once I have Recanted, and my Living is gone. I am but a Wretch: Make an end of me. And, I warrant you, said not one word at his Death, more than desired the People to pray for him. Which was no Token of a Christian, but of Stubbornness. But I am glad, that ye were so quiet. A right Popish Sermon, patched up of Ignorance, Malice, Un∣charitableness, Lies and Improbabilities: That he had no Scripture to produce for himself. That his Adversaries had a thousand against him. That he should be willing to stand to a Quotation out of a Father, and know no better what it was, as, when he saw it, to be so con∣founded and amazed. That if he were so convinced and speechless, that he should be so stupid and senseless to suffer Death, for Matters, which he saw were not true. But such a Character was here given of him, as was no ways agreeable to the great Learning, Wisdom, and Piety, that this excellent Man was endued with. Iohn Ponet.Iohn Ponet, or Poinet a Kentish Man, and of Queen's College, Cambridg, was another of his Chaplains; a very Ingenious, as well as Learned Man: Afterward Bishop of Rochester, and then of Winchester. A great Friend to that accomplished Scholar, Ro∣ger Ascham; who in confidence of his Friendship, writ to him, when Domestick Chaplain to the Arch-bishop, to deliver his Let∣ter, and forward his Suit to his Grace, to dispense with him from eating Flesh, and keeping Lent, as was mentioned before. He was of great Authority with Cranmer, and of his Council in Matters of Divinity. We may judg of his great Abilities by what Godwin speaks of him, viz. That he had left divers Writings in Latin and English: and that besides the Greek and Latin, he was well seen in the Italian and Dutch Tongues. [Which last he learned pro∣bably in his Exile.] That he was an excellent Mathematician, and gave unto King Henry VIII. a Dial of his own Devise; shew∣ing not only the Hour of the Day, but also the Day of the Month, the Sign of the Sun, the Planetary Hour; yea, the Change of the Moon, the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, with divers other things
as strange, to the great wonder of the King, and his no less Com∣mendation. And he was as eminent for his Gift in Preaching, as for his other Qualifications, being preferred by King Edward for some excellent Sermons preached before him.Stow. One of our Historians writes, that he was with Sir Thomas Wyat in his Insurrection: and after his Defeat, fled into Germany, where in the City of Strasburg he died about the Year 1556. But Bale speaks not a word of his being with Wyat; but that he died being 40 Years of Age, buried at Strasburgh, and attended honourably to his Grave with abundance of Learned Men and Citizens. Thomas Becon a Suffolk Man, seems to have been his Chaplain.Tho. Becon. To Cranmer, Becon dedicated his Treatise of Fasting: wherein he menti∣oned several Benefits he had received from the Arch-bishop. One whereof was, his making him one of the Six Preachers of Canter∣bury. He was deprived in Queen Mary's Reign, as all the other five were, for being Married. He was a famous Writer, as well as Preacher, in the Reigns of King Henry, King Edward, Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth. So eminent, that he was one of the three, Vernon and Bradford (being the other two) that were sent for by Queen Mary's Council, and committed to the Tower in the beginning of her Reign, viz. August 16. 1553. From whence he was not de∣livered till March 22. following. During which time, as he com∣plained himself, he underwent a miserable Imprisonment. To con∣ceal himself in those dangerous Times, he went by the Name of Theodore Basil: and was one of those Authors, whose Names were specified in a severe Proclamation put forth by King Philip and Queen Mary, 1555. as being Writers of Books, which, as con∣trary to the Pope and Roman Catholick Religion, were forbidden to be brought into England, or used, and commanded diligently to be searched for, and brought to the Ordinary, upon Penalty of the Sta∣tute of Henry IV, against Heresy. After his delivery from Prison, skulking about for some time, at length he saved himself by Exile. He was a Man mightily tossed about. For to look upon him, be∣fore this, in King Henry's Reign; then for his Security, he was forced to leave his Friends and Country, wandring as far as Darbyshire, and the Peak: where he privately taught School for a Subsistence. And coming a mere Stranger into Alsop in the Dale, one Mr. Alsop, a pious Man, in that barbarous Country, shewed him great Civility. Af∣terwards he travelled into Stafforshire, where he also educated Chil∣dren in good Literature, and instilled into their Minds the Princi∣ples of Christian Doctrine. After a Year's tarrying there, and in Leicester-shire, he flitted into Warwick-shire, where he taught also divers Gentlemens Sons, and where he met with old Father Latimer to his great Joy, who had first made him acquainted with the Gospel, when he was a Scholar in Cambridg, twenty Years before. He wrote a great many Books, forty in number, suted to the various Occasions of Christians, both in the Persecutions under Queen Mary, and the free Profession and Restoration of the Gospel, under King Edward▪ and Queen Elizabeth: and many more against the Religion of the Roman Church. All these did this learned and painful Author com∣pose for the Benefit of the Professors of Religion. Whereby he did
such Service to the enlightning of Mens Minds in the knowledg of the Truth, and for the exposing the Corruptions of Popery, that it was thought convenient, that some of that Communion should be employed to write against him. And so Richard Smith, sometime Reader of Divinity in Oxon, and one that had subscribed to the Re∣formed Religion, and after fled into Brabant, and became a zealous Assertor of Popery, writ in a bitter Stile against some of Becon's Books, as he had done against the Arch-bishop himself before. I find this Becon put up to preach one of the Lent Sermons at St. Pauls Cross, in the Year 1566. And such then was his Fame for a Preacher, and such his Favour with the greatest Prelats, that the Lord Mayor for that Year sent a Message to Arch-bishop Parker, That his Grace would prevail with him to preach one of the Ser∣mons at the Spittle that Easter. In the Year 1564, he revised and reprinted all his former Books in three Volumes; dedicating the whole to all the Arch-bishops and Bishops of the Realm. And in Commendation thereof, Parkhurst Bishop of Norwich, wrote these Verses to him. Vidi & perlegi doctos, Baecone, Libellos, Quos tua non pridem Sancta Minerva dedit. Dispeream, siquid legi unquam sanctius, aut si Quid potuit populo tradier utilius. Auspice perge Deo tales vulgare Libellos: Vaniloquax sed nec lingua timenda tibi est. Sic Christum possis avido inculcare popello, Sic possis nomen condecorare tuum. Besides these, there was his Postil, being Godly and Learned Ser∣mons on all the Sunday-Gospels in the Year: Printed in Quarto in the Year 1567. I shall say no more of his Chaplains, after I shall have mentioned Richard Harman.Rich. Harman. Who seems to have been one of his first Chap∣lains; being once of King's-College, but went away Scholar (pro∣bably for Religion;) afterwards lived in Iesus-College, and com∣menced Master of Arts with Cranmer: Whom he also preferred to be his Domestick afterwards. This Man was one of those Cambridg-Men that were elected into S. Frideswide's-College in Oxon; and suf∣fered much there for Religion. He was afterwards a Canon of Wind∣sor; but fell back to Popery. CHAP. XXIX. Arch-bishop Cranmer's Officers. Rob. Watson the ABp's Stew∣ard.I Shall now add a few words of Two of his Civil Officers: His Stew∣ard and his Secretary: on Nevyl was his Steward in K. Henry's Reign; who conducted Sir Iohn Seimour, coming with a Message from the King, through the Hall, when the Tables were sumptuously set, unto the ABp at Dinner; him I have nothing to say of. But he had ano∣ther
afterwards, named Robert Watson, born in Norwich, of whom I have a word or two say. He was a great Civilian, and an Exile for Religion in Queen Mary's Reign. But before his escape beyond Sea, he lay in Prison in Norwich a Year and four Months, saith Bale; almost two Years, saith Fox. And then was most fortunately deli∣vered, without doing any Violence to his Conscience, by the Sub∣scription which he made. Being Abroad, he wrote a Piece, intitu∣led, Aetiologia, to all that sincerely professed Christ, wheresoever disper∣sed, especially his Countrymen, the English, banished with him. In this Tract he gave a Relation of himself, and his Imprisonment and Escape; and of the Disputes that happened between him and his Adversaries concerning Transubstantiation, and the Real Presence of Christ in the Sacrament; and by what means he escaped safe in Body and Conscience: Which was a rare Matter to do from such Inquisi∣tors. It was propounded to him to set his Hand to these words, viz. That he believed and confessed, that the Bread and Wine in the Eucharist, through the Omnipotency of God's Word, pronounced by the Priest, were turned into the Body and Blood of Christ; and after Consecration, under the Forms of Bread and Wine, re∣mained the true Body and Blood of Christ, and no other Substance. To which he made this Subscription; His omnibus eatenus assentior & subscribo, quatenus Verbo Dei nituntur, eo{que} sensu, quo sunt ab Ecclesia Catholica, & a Sanctis Patribus intellecta. By the Means of one Dr. Barret, a Learned Friar of Norwich, he was upon this favoura∣ble Subscription dismissed. But Christopherson Dean of Norwich, when he understood it, was much incensed, and laid out to take him again. But he, by the help of Friends, escaped over the Seas. Now lastly of Ralph Morice his Secretary, so much employed,His Secretary▪ Ralph Morice. and so greatly intrusted by our Arch-bishop, it may not be amiss to set down a few Memorials. He was his Secretary, not so much for ordinary Matters incident to his Archiepiscopal Office, as his Ama∣nuensis for Learned Treatises and Discourses which he composed. In this Place he remained for twenty Years, that is, from the Arch-bishop's first entrance upon his See, to the Death of King Edward VI, his good Master. He was a very considerable Person,His Parentage▪ and of good Birth, being the Son of Iames Morice of Royden in the County of Essex Esq. Which Iames was sometime Servant unto the Lady Mar∣garet, Countess of Richmond and Derby, and Clerk of her Kitchin, and Master of her Works; and particularly of Christs-College and S. Iohns in Cambridg, both which she founded. He also and his Son William were joint Receivers of the Lands, called Richmond-Lands; and other Lands, called the Recovered-Lands. Our Ralph, by reason of his Service about the Arch-bishop,Well known to divers emi∣nent Bishops. was well known to Bishop Heth, Bishop Thirlby, Bishop Cox, Bishop Barlow, and Bishop Scory; Men that were much about the Arch-bishop, and his Friends; and who were privy to those Volumes that the Secretary writ out for his Master. He dwelt sometime in Chartham, not far from Canterbury; and had the Farm of that Parsonage, and the Nomination of the Curat. And being a Man of Conscience and Integrity, endeavoured to procure here an honest and able Prea∣cher; and so presented to the Church one Richard Turner,Presents Turner to Chartham▪ a Man of
an irreprehensible Life, and well-learned in the Holy Scriptures. Who, for his Doctrine against the Popish Superstition, and the Pope's Supremacy,And stands by him in his Troubles for his faitul Preaching. met with great Troubles. But his Patron very stifly stood by him, and procured the Arch-bishop to favour him: And having an Interest with Sir Anthony Denny, and Sir William Butts, Courtiers, he wrote Mr. Turner's Case at large to them, and got them to read his Letter before the King. Who, though before he had been by sinister Reports so incensed against him, as to command him to be whip'd out of the Country, now by this Means he conceived better Thoughts of him, and commanded him to be cherish'd as a good Subject; as I have before more at large related. An Instance of the ABp's Kindness to this his Secre∣tary.Another Passage I meet with of this Man, relates to the Kindness of the ABp his Master to him. Who, in token of his Good-will he bore him, and of his readiness to reward his Diligence and Faithful∣ness in his Service, did procure him a Lease of the Parsonage of O∣spring in Kent, being an Impropriation belonging unto S. Iohns-Col∣lege in Cambridg, worth better than forty Marks by the Year de claro, when Wheat was but a Noble the Quarter. This the Arch-bishop got a Grant of from the said College for him. But when the Lease was prepared, and ready to be sealed, one Hawkins of the Guard, by his importunate Suit, got King Henry VIII, to obtain it of the Col∣lege to be sealed for the use of him the said Hawkins. The Arch-bi∣shop then solicited the King in his Servant's behalf, and the King promised him, and also Dr. Day the Master of the College, that he would otherwise recompense Morice for the same, with like Value or better. Which was never done, the King dying before he did any thing for him. Morice his Suit to Q. Elizabeth for a Pension.This caused Morice to prefer a Supplication unto Queen Elizabeth, setting forth his said Case, and desiring therefore her Liberality, Aid and Succour; especially considering, that her Royal Father had in his Will provided, that all such who had sustained any manner of Damage or Hinderance by him, should be satisfied for the same: Su∣ing therefore to her Majesty for a Pension, that had been allowed un∣to one Wilbore, late Prior of the Monastery of S. Augustines, lately deceased, that it might be conferred upon him during his Life. And indeed he seemed now in his old Age, to have need of some such Fa∣vour, his Condition being but mean according to worldly Things, and having four Daughters all marriageable, and not where-with∣al to bestow them according to their Quality. This his Poverty he urged to the Queen, and that the granting him this Pension, would be a good furtherance of his said Daughters Marriage. His second Suit to the Queen, to confirm cer∣tain Lands de∣scended to him from his Fa∣ther.The same Person had some Lands descended to him from Iames his Father, out of two Manors, the one called Royden-Manor, and the other called The Temple, both situate and lying in the Parish of Royden. His said Father, upon some certain Reasons and Agree∣ments, surrendred two long Leases of both these Manors into King Henry VIII his Hands. In consideration of which, and of long and true Services, the said King did give, except and reserve certain Tene∣ments, Lands, Pastures and Meadows out of the said two Lordships, to the Use of the said Iames and his Heirs and Assigns for ever, as appeared by his Letters Patents. And Iames did enjoy them peace∣ably
and quietly, without any molestation, until his Death; which was in the second Year of Queen Mary. But of late the Leases of the Manors being sold away unto others, they laid Claim and Titl unto the said reserved Lands, upon the Information of one Thur∣good, Steward of the Courts there; pretending that there were not Words sufficient in the said Letters Patents to justify the said Excep∣tions. This occasioned Ralph Morice the Son, who enjoyed some of the Copy-holds within the said Exceptions, to sue unto the Queen for her Majesty's Letters Patents, to ratify and confirm the said Ex∣ceptions, that the King's Godly Disposition, Intent and Meaning, might be in Force to Iames Morice's Heirs and Assigns for ever. What Success he had in this and the former Petition, I find not; but am ready to think the Queen gratified him in both, as well for his own Merits, as out of that high Respect she bore to the Memory of our incomparable Prelat, whose Servant he had so long been, and for whose sake he recommended himself and his Suit to her. I have inserted the former of these Supplications in the Appendix,No. CIII. being an Original of Morice's own Hand-writing, and containing some me∣morable Passages in it. This Man was, by the Arch-bishop's Means,He was Regi∣ster to the Commissioners in K. Edward's Visitation. appointed Register in King Edward VI his Visitation, which was in the second Year of his Reign; the Articles whereof were drawn up by the Arch-bishop, and preserved to us in Bishop Sparrow's Collections. And being rea∣dy to depart with the King's Commissioners, the Arch-bishop sent for him to Hampton-Court, and willed him to make Notes of certain Matters in the said Visitation, whereof he gave him particular In∣structions; and had large Discourse with him of the good Success that this Course was like to have. In the beginning of Queen Mary he suffered much:Suffered under Q. Mary. Being glad to fly from his own House; but afterwards taken by the Justices, and committed to Custody. Out of which he escaped by breaking Pri∣son. His House was often searched. But he out-lived those hard Times, and was alive in the Year 1565; and then lived at Bekes∣born. It was this Morice that supplied Mr. Fox,Morice supplied Fox with ma∣ny material Notices in his Book. the Writer of the Acts and Monuments, with those Memorials concerning the Bishop of Winchester, which shewed how small a Share he had in King Hen∣ry's Affections, notwithstanding his boasting thereof, which he was very apt to do; and particularly how that King came to leave him out of his last Will. All which Sir Anthony Denny related to our Arch-bishop, in the hearing of this his Secretary: Who was alive when Fox wrote this, and whom he asserts towards the end of his eighth Book, as a Witness to the same. For it is to be noted here, that among those Persons that assisted this Author with Matter for the compiling his laborious Books, this Morice was one, and to whom we are to reckon our selves beholden for divers other material Passa∣ges of our Church-History, and especially those of his Lord and Master the Arch-bishop, which are preserved in the said Books to Posterity. To Day the Printer he sent many Papers of Monuments for the furnishing Fox's History; and many more he had commu∣nicated; but that in Queen Mary's Reign, his House in two Years
was thrice searched; by which means he lost a great sort of Things worthy perpetual Memory; and especially divers Letters of King Edward to the Arch-bishop, and of the Arch-bishop to him. Morice a cordi∣al Friend to Latimer. Fox.I meet with one Morice, a an of Worship, that was much ac∣quainted with, and very well affected towards Mr. Hugh Latimer, whom the said Reverend Father called His trusty Friend. When he was Parson of West-Kingston in Wiltshire, the Priests at Bristol and thereabouts, had combined against him; and accusing him in several Articles, which they had maliciously and falsly collected out of his Sermons, got him convented before Warham Arch-bishop of Canter∣bury, and Stokesly Bishop of London. By them he was detained a great while, and underwent many an Examination. While he was in these his Troubles, Morice, whom I suspect to be either this Ralph or his Father, wrote a kind Letter to him to comfort him. To which Latimer gives an Answer; wherein he explains at large to him the Reasons of his Troubles, thanking him for this Kindness, as well as for others heretofore shewn him; and for which he prayed God to reward him. CHAP. XXX. A Prospect of the Arch-bishop's Qualities. Morice's Decla∣ration con∣cerning the ABp.THERE is an Original Writing of this Morice's Hand, pre∣served in the Benet-Library, intitled, A Declaration, &c. Which he drew out for the Use, and by the Command of Arch-bi∣shop Parker. Wherein divers remarkable Passages of this Arch-bi∣shop, not yet mentioned, are set down: and particularly, he is here∣in vindicated from one thing, which to this Day he is by some blamed for; namely, for Alienations, and long Leases of the Reve∣nues of the See, granted to the King, and others. A great part therefore of this I shall here transcribe. His Tempe∣rance of Na∣ture.He was of such temperance of Nature, or rather so mortified, that no manner of Prosperity or Adversity could alter or change his accustomed Conditions: For were the Storms never so terrible, or odious, or the prosperous State of the Times never so pleasant, joyous or acceptable; to the Face of the World his Countenance, Diet or Sleep commonly never altered or changed. So that they which were most near and conversant about him, never or sel∣dom perceived, by any Sign or Token of Countenance, how the Affairs of the Prince or Realm went. Notwithstanding privately with his secret and special Friends, he would shed forth many bitter Tears; lamenting the Miseries and Calamities of the World. His Carriage towards hi Enemies.Again, He so behaved himself to the whole World, that in no manner of Condition he would seem to have any Enemy; al∣though in very eed he had both many great and secret Enemies, whom he always bare with such Countenance and Benevolence, that they could never take good opportunity to practise their Ma∣lice against him, but to their great displeasure and hindrance in the
End. And as concerning his own regard towards Slanders and Reproach, by any Man to him imputed, or impinged, such as in∣tirely knew him, can testify, that very little he esteemed or re∣garded the Bruit thereof; because he altogether travailed ever∣more from giving of just occasion of Detraction. Whereupon grew and proceeded that notable Quality or Vertue he had, to be beneficial unto his Enemies. So that in that respect he would not be acknown to have any Enemy at all. For whosoever he had been that had reported evil of him, or otherwise wrought to do him displeasure, were the Reconciliation never so mean or simple on the behalf of his Adversary, if he had any thing at all relented, the Matter was both pardoned and clearly forgotten; and so vo∣luntarily cast into the Satchel of Oblivion behind the back Parts; That it was more clear now out of his Memory, than it was in his Mind, before it was either commenced or committed. Inso∣much, that if any such Person should have had any Suit unto him afterward, he might well reckon, and be as sure to obtain (if by any means he might lawfully do it) as any other of his special Friends. So that on a Time I do remember, that Dr. Hethe late Arch-bi∣shop of York, partly misliking this his over-much Lenity, by him used, said unto him, My Lord, I now know how to win all things at your Hand well enough. How so, quoth my Lord? Marry, saith Dr. Hethe, I perceive, that I must first attempt to do unto you some notable Displeasure; and then by a little relenting, obtain of you what I can desire. Whereat my Lord bit his Lip, as his manner was, when he was moved, and said, You say well; but yet you may be deceived. Howbeit having some consideration so to do, I may not alter my Mind, and accustomed Condition, as some would have me to do. Again, One thing he commonly used,Severe in his Behaviour to∣wards offend∣ing Prote∣stants. wherein many did dis∣commend him; Which was this: He always bare a good Face and Countenance unto the Papists, and would, both in Word and Deed, do very much for them; pardoning their Offences: and on the other side, somewhat over-severe against the Protestants. Which being perceived not to be done, but upon some Purpose, on a Time a Friend of his declared unto him, that he therein did very much harm; encouraging thereby the Papists, and also thereby discouraging the Protestants. Wherunto he made this Answer, and said, What will ye have a Man do to him, that is not yet come to the knowledg of the Truth of the Gospel, nor perchance as yet Called, and whose Vocation is to me uncertain? Shall we per∣haps in his Journey coming towards us, by Severity, and cruel Be∣haviour, overthrow him, and, as it were in his Voiage, stop him? I take not this the way to allure Men to embrace the Doctrine of the Gospel. And if it be a true Rule of our Saviour Christ, to do Good for Evil; then let such as are not yet come to favour our Religion, learn to follow the Doctrine of the Gospel by our Example, in using them friendly and charitably. On the other side, such as have tasted of sincere Religion, and as it were taken hold of the Gospel, and seem in Words to maintain the true Doctrine thereof▪ and then, by the evil Example of their Lives, most perniciously
become Stumbling-blocks unto such as are weak, and not at all as yet entred into the Viage; what would you have me do with them? Bear with them, and wink at their Faults; and so wil∣lingly suffer the Gospel, by their outragious doings, to be trodden under Feet? Using herewith another notable Saying of our Saviour out of our Memory: which saith, The Servant, knowing his Lord and Master's Pleasure and Commandment, if he regardeth not the same, is, as a Man might say, of all others worthy of many Plagues. And thus with these two Scriptures, or Doctrines of our Saviour Christ, he answered mine Eldest Brother, who was earnest with him for his Amendment of this Quality. Mr. Isaac, yet living, is a Witness of the same. Stout in God's or the King's Cause.Again, If there were any Matter of Weight, (besides his own Cause, wherein evermore with all kinds of Persons, he was ready to relent, and give place, according to the Quality of the Matter, more than became his State) which touched God percase, or his Prince, there was no Man more stout, or more inexorable. So far forth, that neither fear of losing of Promotion, nor hope of Gain, or winning of Favour, could move him to relent, or give place unto the Truth of his Conscience. As experience thereof well appeared, as well in defence of the true Religion against the Six Articles in the Parliament, as in that he offered to combate with the Duke of Northumberland in K. Edward's Time; speaking then on behalf of his Prince, for the staying of the Chauntries, until his Highness had come unto lawful Age: and that especially for the maintenance of his better State then. But if at his Prince's Pleasure in case of Religion, at any time he was forced to give place, that was done with such humble Protestation, and so knit up for the safeguard of his Faith and Conscience, that it had been better his Good-will had never been requested, than so to relent or give over as he did. Which most dangerously (besides sundry times else) he especially attempted, when the Six Articles past by Parlia∣ment; and when my L. Crumwel was in the Tower. At what time the Book of Articles of our Religion Viz. The Eru∣dition of a Chri∣sten Man. was new penned. For even at that Season the whole Rabblement (which he took to be his Friends, being Commissioners with him) forsook him, and his Opinion and Doctrine. And so leaving him Post alone, revolted altoge∣ther on the part of Stephen Gardiner Bishop of Winchester. As by Name, Bishop Hethe, Shaxton, Day, and all other of the meaner sort. By whom these so named were chiefly advanced and preferred unto Dignities. And yet this sudden Inversion not∣withstanding, God gave him such Favour with his Prince, that Book altogether past by his Assertion, against all their Minds. More to be marvelled at, the Time considered, than by any Rea∣son to compass how it should come to pass. For then would there have been laid thousands of Pounds to Hundreds in London, that he should, before that Synod had been ended, have been shut up in the Tower, beside his Friend the Lord Crumwel. Howbeit the King's Majesty,The King sides with Cranmer against all the Bishops. having an assured and approved affiance of his both deep Knowledg in Religion, and Fidelity both to God and Him, suspected in that time other Men in their Judgments,
not to walk uprightly, nor sincerely; For that some of them swer∣ved from their former Opinions in Doctrine: And having great ex∣perience of the constancy of the Lord Cranmer, it drave him all along to join with the said Lord Cranmer, in the confirmation of his Opinion and Doctrin against all the rest to their great Admi∣ration. For at all Times,His great Abi∣lity in answer∣ing the King's Doubts. when the King's Majesty would be resolved in any Doubt or Question, he would but send word to my Lord over Night; and by the next Day the King would have in writing brief Notes of the Doctors Minds, as well Divines as Lawyers, both Old and New; with a Conclusion of his own Mind. Which he could never get in such a readiness of any; no, not of all his Chaplains and Clergy about him, in so short a Time. For being thorowly seen in all kinds of Expositors, he could incontinently lay open thirty, forty, sixty or more, some whiles, of Authors. And so reducing the Notes of them altogether, would advertise the King more in one Day, than all his Learned Men could do in a Month. And it was no mervail; for it was well known, that commonly,Cranmer studi∣ed three parts of the Day. if he had not Business of the Prince's, or special urgent Causes be∣fore him, he spent three parts of the Day in Study as effectually, as he had done at Cambridg. And therefore it was, that the King said on a time to the Bishop of Winchester, the King and my said Lord of Winchester defending together, that the Canons of the Apostles were of as good Authority, as the four Evangelists, contrary to my Lord Cranmer's Assertion; My Lord of Canterbury, said the King, is too old a Truant for us twain. Again, His Estimation was such with his Prince,Would speak to the King when none else durst. that in Mat∣ters of great Importance, wherein no Creature durst once move the King for fear of Displeasure, or moving the King's Patience, or otherwise for troubling his Mind, then was my Lord Cranmer most violently, by the whole Council, obtruded and thrust out to undertake that Danger and Peril in Hand. As beside many other times, I remember twice he served the Council's Expectation▪ The first time was, when he staied the King's determinate Mind and Sentence; in that he fully purposed to send the Lady Mary his Daughter, unto the Tower, and there to suffer as a Subject:Lady Mary. because She would not obey the Laws of the Realm, in re∣fusing the Bishop of Rome's Authority and Religion. Whose stay in that behalf the King then said unto the Lord Cranmer, would be to his utter Confusion at the length. The other dangerous Attempt was, in the disclosing the unlawful Behaviour of Queen Katharine Howard towards the King,Q. Katharine Howard. in keeping unlawful Com∣pany with Durrant, her Servant. For the King's Affection was so mervailously set upon that Gentlewoman, as it was never known that he had the like to any Woman. So that no Man durst take in Hand to open to him that Wound, being in great perplexity, how he would take it. And then the Council had no other Refuge, but unto my Lord Cranmer. Who with over-much Importunity gave the Charge: which was done with such Circum∣spection,
that the King gave over his Affections unto Reason, and wrought mervellous colourably for the Trial of the same. His HospitalityNow as concerning the Manner and Order of his Hospitality and House-keeping. As he was a Man abandoned from all kind of Avarice, so was he content to maintain Hospitality, both liberally and honourably, and yet not surmounting the Limits of his Re∣venues: Having more respect and foresight unto the Iniquity of the Times, being inclined to pull and spoil from the Clergy, than to his own private Commodity. For else, if he had not so done, he was right sure that his Successors should have had as much Re∣venues left unto them, as were left unto the late Abbies: Especi∣ally considering, that the Lands and Revenues of the said Abbies, being now utterly consumed and spread abroad; and for that there remained no more Exercise to set on work, or no Officers, but Sur∣veyors, Auditors and Receivers; it was high time to shew an Example of liberal Hospitality. For although these said Work∣men, only brought up and practised in subverting of Monastical Possessions, had brought that kind of Hospitality unto utter Con∣fusion, yet ceased they not to undermine the Prince by divers Per∣swasions, for him also to overthrow the honourable State of the Clergy. Falsly accused of ill House∣keeping.And because they would lay a sure Foundation to build their Purpose upon, they found the Means to put into the King's Head, That the Arch-bishop of Canterbury kept no Hospitality, or House correspondent unto his Revenues and Dignity, but sold his Woods, and by great Incomes and Fines made Money, to purchase Lands for his Wife and Children. And to the intent that the King should with the more facility believe this Information, Sir Thomas Seymor, the Duke of Somerset's Brother, being one of the Privy-Chamber, was procured to take this Matter in hand. And be∣fore he informed the King thereof, he blasted it abroad in the Court. Insomuch that the Gentlemen and he fell out for the same: They declare, That his Report was manifestly false, as well for the keeping of his House, as for the purchasing Lands for his Wife and Children. This notwithstanding, Mr. Seymor went through with his Information, and declared unto the King as is before declared. The King hearing this Tale with the Sequel, (that was, That it was meet for the Bishops not to be troubled, ne vexed with Temporal Affairs, in ruling their Honours, Lordships and Manors; but rather, they having an honest Pension of Money, yearly allowed unto them for their Hospitality, should surrender unto the King's Majesty all their Royalties and Temporalties) said, I do marvel that it is said, my Lord of Canterbury should keep no good Hospitality; for I have heard the contrary. And so with a few more Commendations of my Lord, as one that little regarded the Suit; but yet, as it appeared afterward, some∣thing smelling what they went about, left off any further to talk of that Matter, and converted his Communication to another Purpose. Notwithstanding, within a Month after, whether it was of
Chance, or of Purpose, it is unknown; the King going to Din∣ner, called Mr. Seymour unto him, and said, Go ye straightways un∣to Lambeth, and bid my Lord of Canterbury come and speak with me at two of the Clock at Afternoon. Incontinently Mr. Seymor came to Lambeth, and being brought into the Hall by the Porter, it chanced the Hall was set to Dinner. And when he was at the Skreen, and perceived the Hall furnished with three principal Messes, beside the rest of the Tables thorowly set, having a guil∣ty Conscience of his untrue Report made to the King, recoled back, and would have gone in to my Lord by the Chappel-way. Mr. Nevyl, being Steward, perceiving that, rose up, and went after him, and declared unto him, that he could not go that way; and so brought him back unto my Lord through the Hall. And when he came to my Lord, and had done his Message, my Lord caused him to sit down and dine with him. But making a short Dinner, because he would bring the King word again of his Mes∣sage, he departed and came to the King, before he was risen from the Table. When he came to the King's Presence, said the King, Will my Lord of Canterbury come to Us? He will wait on your Majesty, said Mr. Seymor, at two of the Clock. Then said the King, had my Lord dined before you came? No forsooth, said Mr. Seymor, for I found him at Dinner. Well, said the King, What Chear made he you? With these words Mr. Seymor kneeled down, and besought the King's Majesty of Pardon. What is the matter? said the King. I do remember, said Mr. Seymor, that I told your Highness, that my Lord of Canterbury kept no Hospita∣lity correspondent unto his Dignity: and now I perceive that I did abuse your Highness with an Untruth. For besides your Grace's House, I think he be not in the Realm, of none Estate or Degree, that hath such a Hall furnished, or that fareth more ho∣nourably at his own Table. Ah, said the King, have you spied your own Fault now? I assure your Highness, said Mr. Seymor, it is not so much my Fault as other Mens; who seemed to be ho∣nest Men, that enformed me hereof. But I shall henceforth the worse trust them while they live. Then said the King, I knew your Purpose well enough, you have had among you the Commo∣dities of the Abbies, which you have consumed: Some with super∣fluous Apparel, some at Dice and Cards, and other ungracious Rule. And now you would have the Bishops Lands and Reve∣nues to abuse likewise. If my Lord of Canterbury keep such a Hall, as you say, being neither Term nor Parliament, he is mere∣ly well visited at those Times I warrant you. And if the other Bishops kept the like for their Degree, they had not need to have any thing taken from them, but rather to be added and holpen. And therefore set your Hearts at rest, there shall no such Altera∣tion be made while I live, said the King. So that in very deed, where some had penned certain Books for the altering that State in the next Parliament, they durst never bring them forth to be read. Whereupon it also came to pass, that when the King un∣derstood, that, contrary unto the Report, my Lord of Canterbury had purchased no Lands, his Highness was content, upon the only
Motion of Dr. Butts, without my Lord Cranmer's Knowledg, That he should have the Abbey in Nottinghamshire; which his Wife now enjoyeth. Thus much I have declared concerning Mr. Seymor's Practice, to the intent Men may understand that my Lord Cranmer's Ho∣spitality was a mean to stay the Estate of the Clergy in their Pos∣sessions. CHAP. XXXI. Arch-bishop Cranmer preserved the Revenues of his See. The preserv∣ing the Bishops Revenues ow∣ing to the ABp.AND here I must answer for my Lord Cranmer against certain Objections, which are in divers Mens Heads, That by his Means all the Preferments, Offices and Farmes, are so given and let out, that his Successors have nothing to give or bestow upon their Friends and Servants; nor that such Hospitality can be kept by reason of his Fault, in letting go such things as should have maintained Provisions of Household. But to answer this in a few words, before I descend to any particular Declaration. It is most true, that if he had not well behaved himself towards his Prince, and the World, his Successors should not been cumbred with any piece of Temporal Revenues; either Lands, Woods, or other Revenues. And I pray God they may maintain, in this mild and quiet Time, that which he in a most dangerous World did uphold, and left to his Successors.The ABp vin∣dicated about his Leases. Yet for better declaration, in answer∣ing to those Objections, it is to be considered, that when he en∣tred upon his Dignity, every Man about the King made means to get some Reversion of Farmes, or of other Office of him. In so much, that the King himself made means to him for one or two things, before he was Consecrated: as for the Farm of Wingham-Barton. Which was granted unto Sir Edward Bainton Kt. for fourscore and nineteen Years. When my Lord perceived, that in such Suits as he granted to the King and Queen, Men would needs have an hundred Years save one, he wrote to the Chapter of Christ-Church, and willed them in any Condition, not to confirm any more of his Grants of Leases, which were above one and twen∣ty Years. By this means much Suit was stopped. So that in very deed he gave out his Leases but for one and twenty Years. Which would not satisfy the greedy Appetites of some Men: And therefore they found a Provision for it. For when my Lord had let out certain goodly Farmes, at Pinner, Heyes, Harrow on the Hill, Mortlake, &c. to the number of ten or twelve Farmes, for one and twenty Years, taking no manner of Fine for them; all these Farmes by and by were put into an Exchange for the King. And the King had them not in Possession six Days, but they were my Lord North's and other Mens. And they were not past one Year in their Possessions, but that the Reversion of every of them was sold for more Years: some for an hundred Pounds, and some for more, and some for less, making Sweepstakes of al∣togethers.
And so was my Lord used in all things almost that he did let out for one and twenty Years. By means whereof Justice Hales,By long Leases he saved the Revenues. and other of his Counsel learned in the Laws, advised him to let out his Farmes for many Years, which might be a mean, that they should not be so much desired in Exchanges as they were. For those Farmes, which came to my Lord, came with Years enough upon their Backs. And so upon this Conclusion my Lord was fain to alter his Purpose in letting of his Farmes. Whereupon he did let S. Gregories in Canterbury to Mr. Nevyl, the Priory of Dover, Chislet-Park, and Curleswood-Park, with others, for so many Years as he did, on purpose to stay them, or else he had gone without them one time or other. And as I heard say, since your Grace was Elect, Cur∣leswood-Park was in Exchange, and the Rent thereof paid for one half Year unto the Queen's Use. But so soon as they understood there were so many Years to come, it was reversed to the Arch-bishoprick again. So that hereby partly may be perceived in what State my Lord Cranmer stood with his Lands. And as touching the diminishing of his Rents,Justified from diminishing the Rents of the See. Houses and other Commodities, for the Provision of his Hospitality; if all things be well pondered, he had left the same in better State than he found it. For as touching his Exchanges Men ought to con∣sider with whom he had to do: especially with such a Prince, as would not be bridled, nor be gain-said in any of his Requests, unless Men would danger altogethers. I was by,Otford & Knol. when Otford and Knol were given him. My Lord, minded to have retained Knol unto himself, said, That it was too small an House for his Ma∣jesty. Mary, said the King, I had rather have it, than this House, meaning Otford; for it standeth on a better Soil. This House standeth low, and is Rheumatick, like unto Croiden, where I could never be without Sickness. And as for Knol, it standeth on a sound, perfect, wholesome Ground. And if I should make abode here, as I do surely mind to do now and then, I will live at Knol, and most of my House shall live at Otford. And so by this means both those Houses were delivered up into the King's Hands. And as for Otford, it is a notable great and ample House: Whose Reparations yearly cost my Lord more than Men would think. And so likewise did Maidstone, which had no manner of Commodity to belong unto it. And I am sure that after certain Exchanges past between the King and him, there were an hundred Marks a Year, or thereabouts, allowed unto him in his last Ex∣changes, for Recompence of Parks and Chases. And yet those Parks and Chases, beside the Provision of his Venison, stood him yearly in much more, by the reason of the Patents and Fees belonging unto them, than he by any means else got by them. For as for Curleswood,Curleswood▪ it stood him in twenty Nobles a Year Fee. And yet there was no Gain in it, but only Conies: which the Keeper had also in his Patent. So that the Arch-bishop by suppressing of that, and raising that small Rent it payeth, may spend thereby seven Pounds a Year more than it was accustomed to pay towards the Arch-bishoprick.
Chislet-Park.And touching Chislet-Park, it came to my Lord in Exchange for eight Pounds a Year. And the Farmer payeth ten Pounds. So that thereby is gained forty Shillings a Year. Wherefore it can∣not be indifferently gathered, that my Lord, in preferring his Friends unto these things, hath any whit hindred the Revenues of the Bishoprick. Pasture and Meddow.And as touching Pasture and Meddow for the Provision of his House, both at Croyden, and about Canterbury, Ford and Chislet, there is thrice so much Meddow, Pasture, and Mersh as was left unto him. Woods.And as for the Sale of his Woods, like as he was driven to ex∣change them, and sell them for to maintain his Hospitality, espe∣cially having almost twenty Years together Learned Men conti∣nually sitting with him in Commission; for the trying out, and setting forth of the Religion received, and for the discussing of other Matters in Controversy. Some of them daily in Diet with him, and some evermore living in his House. So provided he again like Woods, more commodious for his Houses; As the Blene-Woods, belonging to S. Austins; and Pyne-Wood, and others, which be known well enough. Corn.And as touching Provision for Corn out of Chislet-Court, and in other Places, it is incredible what a Business he had and adoe with Sir Christopher Hales, for that Farm and Corn; who chal∣lenged it of the King by Promise; and so would have defeated my Lord thereof, had not the King very benignely stood on his Side. And it is no small Revenue to have yearly so much Corn, both Wheat, Malt and Oats, at so mean a Price. And therefore let Men leave off that Report of him, that he was not beneficial to his Successors. Other Bishops, some of them lost whole Manors and Lordships, without any Exchange at all. Thus much my Conscience hath compelled me to say, in defence of my Lord and Master his good Name: Whom I knew to take as much Care for his Successors in that Bishoprick, as ever did Arch-bishop, or shall. And would have as much advanced the same, if the Iniquity of the World would have permitted him. The best Ma∣ster towards his Servants.Now finally, concerning his Behaviour towards his Family: I think there was never such a Master among Men, both feared and intirely beloved. For as he was a Man of most gentle Nature, void of all crabbid and churlish Conditions, so he could abide no such Quality in any of his Servants. But if any such Outragious∣ness were in any of his Men or Family, the correction of those Enor∣mities he always left to the ordering of his Officers: who weekly kept a Counting-house. And if any thing universally were to be reformed or talked of; on that Day, which commonly was Friday, the same was put to Admonition. And if it were a Fault of any particular Man, he was called forth before the Company: To whom warning was given, That if he so used himself after three Monitions, he should lose his Service. There was an Infamy of him, that he should have been an Host∣ler. Which the ignorant Popish Priests, for very Mice had published against him. Saying, That he had no manner of Lrn∣ing
at all, more than Hostlers are wont to have.An Infamy that he was an Hostler. And this Ru∣mour sprang of that, that when he had married his first Wife, be∣ing Reader then of Buckingham-College, he did put his Wife to Board in an Inn at Cambridg; and he resorting thither unto her in the Inn, some ignorant Priests named him to be the Hostler, and his Wife the Tapster. This Bruit then began, but it much more was quickned when he was Arch-bishop than before. Insomuch that a Priest far North, about Scarborough, sitting among his Neigh∣bours at the Ale-house, and talking of Arch-bishop Cranmer, di∣vers Men there commending him: What, said the Priest, make ye so much of him? He was but an Hostler, and hath as much Learning as the Goslings of the Green that go yonder. Upon which words, the honest Men of the Parish which heard him, gave Information to my Lord Crumwel of those his slanderous Words. The Priest was sent for before the Council, and cast in∣to the Fleet; my Lord Cranmer not being that Day mong the Council, nor hearing no manner of word of the Priests Accusa∣tion. It chanced the Priest to lie in the Fleet eight or nine Weeks, and nothing said unto him. He then made Suit by one, named Chersey, (a Grocer dwelling within Ludgate, now yet alive, and Unkle, as I suppose, to the Priest) unto my Lord Cranmer for his Deliverance. This Chersey brought the Copy of the Priest's Ac∣cusation from my Lord Crumwel's House. Whereby plainly ap∣peared, there was nothing laid unto the Priest but those Words against my L. Cranmer. And therefore he besought him to help him out of Prison; for it had put him to great Charges living there, and he had a Benefice which was unserved in his Absence; and said, That he was very sorry he had so unhonestly abused himself towards his Grace. Whereupon my Lord Cranmer sent to the Fleet for the Priest. When he came before my Lord, said my Lord Cranmer to him, It is told me, that you be Prisoner in the Fleet, for calling me an Hostler, and reporting that I have no more Learning than a Gosling. Did you ever see me before this Day? No, forsooth, quoth the Priest. What meant you then to call me an Hostler; and so to deface me among your Neighbours? The Priest made his Excuse, and said, that he was overseen with Drink. Well, said my Lord's Grace, now ye be come, you may oppose me to know what Learning I have. Begin in Grammar, if you will, or else in Philosophy, or other Sciences, or Divinity. I beseech your Grace pardon me, said the Priest, I have no manner of Learning in the Latin Tongue, but altogether in English. Well then, said my Lord, if you will not oppose me, I will oppose you. Are you not wont to read the Bible, quoth my Lord? Yes, that we do dai∣ly, said the Priest. I pray you tell me, quoth my Lord, then, who was David's Father? The Priest stood still, and said, I can∣not surely tell your Lordship. Then said my Lord again, if you cannot tell me that, yet declare unto me who was Solomon's Father? Surely, quoth the Priest, I am nothing at all seen in those Genea∣logies. Then I perceive, quoth my Lord, however you have re∣ported of me, that I had no Learning, I can now bear you Wit∣ness, that you have none at all. There are such a sort of you in
this Realm, that know nothing, nor will know nothing, but sit upon your Ale-bench, and slander all Honest and Learned Men. If you had but common Reason in your Heads, you that have named me an Hostler; you might well know, that the King having in hand one of the hardest Questions that was moved out of the Scripture this many Years, would not send an Hostler unto the Bi∣shop of Rome, and the Emperor's Council, and other Princes, to answer and dispute in that so hard a Question; even among the whole College of Cardinals, and the Rout of Rome. By all like∣lihood the King lacked much the help of Learned Men, that was thus driven to send an Hostler on such a Voyage: Or else the King hath many idle Priests, without Wit or Reason, that can so judg of the Prince and his Council, and of the weighty Matters of the Realm. God amend you, said he, and get ye Home to your Cure, and  hence-forth learn to be an honest Man, or at least a rea∣sona . lamenting his Folly, went his way into his Country; and my Lord Cranmer discharged him out of the Fleet, because there was no Matter against him, but that which only concerned my Lord. My Lord Crumwel within four Days after came to my Lord Cranmer, and sware a great Oath, That the Popish Knaves should pick out his Eyes, and cut his Throat, before he would any more rebuke them for slandering him. I had thought that the Knave Priest, which you have discharged and sent Home, should have recanted at Pauls-Cross on Sunday next. Yea, mary, quoth my Lord Cranmer, you would have all the World know by that mean, that I was an Hostler indeed. What manner of Block∣heads would so think, quoth my Lord Crumwel? Too many Pa∣pists, quoth my Lord Cranmer. Howbeit, quoth he, you have caused the poor Priest to spend all that he hath in Prison; and would you now put him to open Shame too? He is not the first, not by five-hundred of them, that hath called me so; and there∣fore I will not now begin to use Extremity against this Priest: I perceive he is sorry for it. Well, quoth my Lord Crumwel, if you not care for it, no more do I: But I warrant you one Day, if they may, they will make you and me both as vile as Hostlers. This I repeat to declare his Lenity, and Promptness to remit notable Of∣fences; howbeit it should have been placed before if I had re∣membred it. Thus I have hastily penned such Things as came to my Memo∣ry, since Saturday last: Beseeching your Grace to take it in good part, being certainly assured, that I have declared nothing of mine Head, as concerning the very Matters.
CHAP. XXXII. Some Observations upon Arch-bishop Cranmer. BEsides these Observations, made to my Hand by another,Observations upon the ABp. of this great Arch-bishop, I shall gather some further Observati∣ons of his Endowments and Qualities, whether Christian or Moral. Whereby we shall have occasion offered us, of gathering up a few more Memorials of him. He was a most profound Learned Man in Divinity,His Learning very profound. as also in the Civil and Canon Laws. As appeared by those many voluminous Writings and Common-places, by him devised or collected out of all the Fathers, and Church-Writers: which Peter Martyr reported he himself saw; and were indeed communicated to him by the Arch-bishop, while he harboured him at Lambeth. And there was no Book, either of the Antient or Modern Writers, especially upon the Point of the Eucharist, which he had not noted with his own Hand in the most remarkable Places. No Councils, Canons, De∣crees of Popes, which he had not read and well considered. And from this his indefatigable Reading, and exact Knowledg of Authors, he ventured publickly, before the Pope's Delegate, and Queen Mary's Commissioners to make this Challenge, That if it could be proved by any Doctor above a thousand Years after Christ, that Christ's Body is in the Sacrament of the Altar really, he would give over. So that his Library was the Storehouse of Ecclesiastical Writers of all Ages. And which was open for the use of Learned Men.His Library. Here old Latimer spent many an Hour; and found some Books so re∣markable, that once he thought fit to mention one in a Sermon be∣fore the King. And when Ascham of Cambridg, a great Student of Politer Learning, and of Greek Authors, wanted Gregory Nyssen in Greek, (not the Latin Translation of him) and which it seems the University could not afford, he earnestly entreated Poynet his Grace's Chaplain, to borrow it in his Name, and for his use, for some Months of the Arch-bishop. For in those Times it was rare to meet with those Greek Fathers in their own Language, and not spoiled by some ill Latin Translation. Another of his Books I will mention, be∣cause it is now in the possession of a Reverend Friend of mine near Canterbury: in which Book the Arch-bishop's Name is yet to be seen, written thus with his own Hand, Thomas Cantuariensis; and a re∣markable Book it is, which we may conclude, the Arch-bishop often perused, viz. Epistolae & Historiae Joannis Hus. Printed at Wittem∣berg, 1537. And this Learning happening in a Mind possessed with Piety,An excellent Bishop. made him the more deeply sensible of the greatness of the Charge, that lay upon him. And as he well knew under what Needs the Church laboured, so he was very solicitous, that nothing might be wanting on his part: shewing himself a most conscientious Bishop, and tender Pastor of Christ's Flock. He was not guided in his Epis∣copal Function by vain Glory, or Affectation of popular Applause, or
worldly Ambition, or Covetousness, but only by the Holy and Pious Ends, of discharging his Duty, and promoting the Honour of Christ, and the Knowledg of his Gospel, and the Good of his Peo∣ple: as he took God to witness in the Preface of his Book of the Sa∣crament. A Paragraph whereof I think not unworthy to be here inserted, whereby it may appear of what a truly Apostolical Spirit our Arch-bishop was. When I see, said he, Christ's Vinyard overgrown with Thorns, Brambles and Weeds, I know that ever∣lasting Woe appertaineth to me, if I hold my Peace, and put not to my Hand and Tongue, to labour in purging his Vinyard. God I take to witness, who seeth the Hearts of all Men thorowly unto the bottom, that I take this Labour for none other Consideration, but for the Glory of his Name, and the Discharge of my Duty, and the Zeal I have toward the Flock of Christ. I know in what Office God hath placed me, and to what Purpose. That is to say, to set forth his Word truly unto his People, to the uttermost of my Power, without respect of Persons, or regard of Things in the World, but of him alone. I know what Account I shall make to him hereof at the last Day, when every Man shall answer for his Vocation, and receive for the fame, Good or Evil, according as he hath done. I know how Antichrist hath obscured the Glory of God, and the true Knowledg of his Word, overcasting the same with Mists and Clouds of Error and Ignorance, thrô false Glosses and Interpretations. It pitieth me to see the simple and hungry Flock of Christ, led into corrupt Pastures, to be carried blindfold they know not whither, and to be fed with Poison, instead of wholsome Meats. And moved by the Duty, Office and Place, whereunto it hath pleased God to call me, I give warning in his Name unto all that profess Christ, that they flee far from Babylon, if they will save their Souls, and to beware of that great Harlot, that is to say, the pestiferous See of Rome, that she make you not drunk with her pleasant Wine, &c. His Care of his own Dio∣cess.And as he had this Care of the whole Church of this Land, as the high Patriarch thereof, so he particularly had his Eye upon his own Diocess. He took Care, even in King Henry's ticklish Reign, to place such Ministers in Kent, as were Learned, and dared to open their Mouths to preach Gospel-Doctrin, and to convince the People of the Usurpations of the Bishop of Rome, and of the Idolatry and Superstitions, wherein they had been so long nursled up. And for the preventing whereof, for Time to come, he ordered his Arch-deacon, and other his Officers, to take down Images out of Church∣es, and deface them. Which things created him much hatred among the Popish Clergy, whose Gain depended so much therein. He had a peculiar regard of the greater Towns of his Diocess, that such Places might be furnished with able Men, where the Inhabitants were numerous, and the Salaries generally small. Whereby he saw it came to pass, that where there was most need of Learned Men, there the most Ignorant were placed. Therefore he thought this worthy his redressing. I meet with this Memorandum in one of his Note-books:In the Benet-Library▪ These Towns following are especially to be remem∣bred:
that in them there be placed Learned Men, with sufficient Stipends. Sandwich, Dover, Folkston, Ashford, Tenderden, Crambroke, Faversham, Hearn, Whitstable, Marden, Maydston, Wye and Wingham. In these great Towns, as well as Canterbury,At the great Towns he preached of∣ten. he often preached himself. And for his Sermons at Sandwich, he was once complained of openly in the Parliament-house, to have brought him under the Lash of the Statute of the Six Articles. And within seven or eight Years, after his first entrance into the See, he had placed such store of good Preachers about Kent, that at another time, a long List of Articles were drawn up against them, and given in to the Justices of the County at a Quarter-Sessions of the Peace; and they by a Com∣bination preferred the Complaint to the King and Council. His high Estate puffed him not up,Affected not his high Stiles. nor made him forget the great Work of his Calling; which he very earnestly desired to prosecute above all things in the World. Nor did he care at all for the high Titles that were attributed to him, as he was Arch-bishop of Canter∣bury, as may appear by this Passage. Upon occasion of a Question arising concerning his Stile of Primate of all England, for bearing which, in his Summons for a Provincial Visitation, the Bishop of Win∣chester out of Malice, had complained to King Henry against him, as though it were an Encroachment upon the King's Supremacy; he protested to Crumwel, then Secretary, (who had sent him word of it) That as God should be merciful to him in the Day of Judg∣ment, he set not more by any Title or Stile, than he did by the pa∣ring of an Apple, further than it should be to the setting forth God's Word and Will. His Expression was, That they were the Succes∣sors of Diotrephes, that affected glorious Titles, Stiles and Pomps. He professed, He could have been willing that Bishops should lay aside their lofty Stiles, and only write themselves by the Stile of their Offices; The Apostles of Iesus Christ. And wished heartily, that the Christian Conversation of the People, were the Letters and Seals of their Offices, (as the Corinthians were to St. Paul, who told them, that They were his Letters, and the Signs of his Apostleship) and not Paper, Parchment, Lead or Wax. Great indeed and painful was his Diligence in promoting God's Truth, and reforming this Church.His diligence in reforming Religion. Insomuch that he raised up a∣gainst himself the Malice and Hatred of very many thereby. These Memorials, before related, do abundantly evince the same. The Words of Thomas Becon, in an Epistle Dedicatory, deserve here to be transcribed. In plucking up the Enemies Tares,Before his Treatise of Fasting. and in purging the Lord's Field, that nothing may grow therein but pure Wheat, your most godly and unrestful Pains, most Reverend Father, are well known in this Church of England, and thankfully accepted of all faithful Christen Hearts. Insomuch that very many do dai∣ly render unto God most humble and hearty Thanks for the singu∣lar and great Benefits which they have received of him, through your vertuous Travel, in attaining the true Knowledg of Justifi∣cation,
and of the Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood, [those two things especially he laboured to retrieve and promote a true Knowledg of] and such other Holy Mysteries of our Profession. And albeit the Devil roar, the World rage, and the Hypocrites swell, at these your most Christian Labours, which you willingly take for the Glory of God, and the Edifying of his Congregation, yet as you have godly begun, so without ceasing continue unto the end. And so he did, to the effusion of his Blood not many Years after. Puts K. Henry upon a Pur∣pose of re∣forming many things.For he was very sensible of the gross Abuses and Corruptions into which the Christian Church had sunk: Which made him labour much to get it purged and restored to its Primitive Constitution and Beauty. And this he ceased not to make King Henry sensible of, putting him upon the Reformation of the English Church, as he could find Occa∣sion, and Convenience serve him to move him thereunto. Which found at last that good effect upon the King, that towards the latter Years of his Reign he was fully purposed to proceed to a regulating of many more things than he had done. But the subtilty of Gardiner Bp of Winton,As long as Q. Ann, T. Crumwel, Bp Cranmer, Mr. Den∣ny, Dr. Butts, with such-like, were about him, and could prevail with him, What Organ of Christ's Glory did more good in the Church than he? As is apparent by such Monuments, Instruments and Acts, set forth by him; in setting up the Bible in the Church; in exploding the Pope with his vile Pardons; in removing divers super∣stitious Ceremonies; in bringing into order the inordinate Orders of Friars and Sects; in put∣ting Chantrey Prists to their Pensions; in per∣mitting white Meats in Lent; in estroying Pil∣grimage-Worship; in abbrogating idle and su∣perstitious Holy-days; both by Acts Publick, and by private Letters to Bóner. Acts & Monum. p. 1147. a. Edit. 1610. and his own Death, prevented his good Designs. While the aforesaid Bishop was Ambassador Abroad, employed about the League be∣tween the Emperor and the English and French Kings, our Arch-bishop took the op∣portunity of his Absence, to urge the King much to a Reformation; and the King was willing to enter into serious Conference with him about it. And at last he prevailed with the King to resolve to have the Roods in every Church pulled down, and the ac∣customed Ringing on Alhallow-Night suppress'd, and some other vain Ceremonies. And it proceeded so far, that upon the Arch-bishop's going into Kent, to visit his Diocess, the King ordered him to cause two Letters to be drawn up, prepared for him to sign: The one to be directed to the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, and the other to the Arch-bishop of York. Who were therein to be commanded to issue forth their Precepts to all the Bishops in their respective Provinces, to see those Enormities redressed without delay. Which our Arch-bi∣shop accordingly appointed his Secretary to do. And the Letters so drawn up, were sent by the Arch-bishop up to Court. But the King, upon some Reasons of State, suggested to him in a Letter from Gar∣diner, his Ambassador beyond Sea, being by some made privy to these Transactions, suspended the signing of them. The King again purposeth a Reformation.And that put a stop to this Business for that time, till some time after the King, at the Royal Banquet made for Annebault the French King's Ambassador, leaning upon him and the Arch-bishop, told them both his Resolution of proceeding to a total Reformation of Religion: signifying, that within half a Year the Mass both in his Kingdom and in that of France, should be changed into a Commu∣nion; and the usurped Power of the Bishop of Rome should be wholly rooted out of both; and that both Kings intended to exhort
the Emperor to do the same in his Territories, or else they would break off the League with him. And at that time also he willed the Arch-bishop to draw up a Form of this Reformation, to be sent to the French King to consider of. This he spake in the Month of Au∣gust, a few Months before his Death. This his Purpose he also sig∣nified to Dr. Bruno, Ambassador here from Iohn Frederick Duke of Saxony, some little time after, saying, That if his Master's Quar∣rel with the Emperor was only concerning Religion, he advised him to stand to it strongly, and he would take his part. But the King's Death prevented all. And as for this King's next Successor, King Edward,His Influence upon K. Ed∣ward. the Arch-bishop had a special Care of his Education. Whose Towardliness, and zealous Inclination to a Reformation, was attributed to the said Arch-bishop, and three other Bishops, viz. Ridley, Hoper and Lati∣mer, by Rodulph Gualter of Zurick. Who partly by his living some∣time in England, and partly by his long and intimate Familiarity and Correspondence with many of the best Note here, was well acquain∣ted with the Matters relating to this Kingdom. Of the great Influ∣ence of one of these upon this King, viz. the Arch-bishop, the for∣mer Memorials do sufficiently shew. CHAP. XXXIII. Arch-bishop Cranmer procures the Use of the Scriptures. THE Arch-bishop was a great Scripturist:A great Scrip∣turist. and in those darker Times of Popery, was the chief Repairer of the Reputation of the Holy Scriptures. Urging them still for the great Standard and Measure in all controverted Matters, relating to Religion and the Church. By these he disintangled King Henry VIII his great Matrimonial Cause, when all his other Divines, who had the Pope's Power and Laws too much in their Eyes, were so puzzled about it; Shewing how no Humane Dispensation could enervate or annul the Word of God. And in the Course he took about the Reforming of Religion, the Holy Scripture was the only Rule he went by; casting by School-men, and the Pope's Canons and Decretals, and adhering only to the more sure Word of Prophecy, and Divine Inspiration. And so Roger Ascham, in a Letter to Sturmius, in the Year 1550, when they were very busy in the Reforma∣tion, writes:Ea verae Religionis cura apud Josiam nostrum im∣primis, & Cantuariensem, & universum Concilium regium excubat, ut in nulla re aequè laboratum sit, quam ut Religionis, tum Doctrina tum Disciplina, ex Sa∣crarum Literarum Fonte, purissimè bauriatur: & ut sentina illa Romana, qua tot humanae Sordes in Eccl∣siam Christi redndârunt, sunditus obstrutur. Tha uch was the Care of their Iosiah, (meaning King Edward) the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, and the whole Privy-Council, for true Religion, that they laboured in nothing more, than that as well the Doctrine as Discipline of Religion, might be most purely drawn out of the Fountain of the Sacred Scriptures; and that that Roman Sink, whence so ma∣ny Humane Corruptions abounded in the Church of Christ, might be wholly stopped up.
Procures the publishing the English Bible.This his high Value of the Scriptures, made him at last the happy Instrument of restoring them to the Common People, by getting them, after divers Years opposition, printed in the English Tongue, and set up in Churches, for any to read that would, for their Edification and Comfort; when for some hundred Years before those Treasures had, for the most part, been locked up and concealed from them. The Bishops oppose it.But first, great was the Labour of our Arch-bishop, before he could get this good Work effected, being so disliked and repugned by the Patrons of Popery. For he had almost all the Bishops against him; as may appear by what I am going to relate. The King be∣ing by the Arch-bishop brought to encline to the publishing thereof, the Translation done by Coverdale was, by Crumwel or the Arch-bi∣shop, presented into the King's Hands; and by him committed to di∣vers Bishops of that Time to peruse, whereof Stephen Gardiner was one. After they had kept it long in their Hands, and the King had been divers Times sued unto for the Publication thereof, at last being called for by the King himself, they redelivered the Book. And be∣ing demanded by the King; What their Judgment was of the Tran∣slation? they answered, That there were many Faults therein. Well, said the King, but are there any Heresies maintained thereby? They answered, There were no Heresies that they could find maintained in it. If there be no Heresies, said the King, then in God's Name, let it go abroad among our People. This Circumstance I thought fit to mention, being the Substance of what Coverdale himself afterwards at a Paul's-Cross-Semon spake in his own Vindication against some slanderous Reports that were then raised against his Translation; de∣claring his faithful Purpose in doing the same: Confessing withal, That he did then himself espy some Faults; which if he might review it once again, as he had done twice before, he doubted not (he said) but to amend.Defence of the EnglishTranslat. Ch. 1. p. 4. Edit. 1583. This is related by Dr. Fulk, who was then one of Coverdale's Auditors, and heard him speak and de∣clare all this. The first Edi∣tion of the Bible.The first Edition of the Bible was finished by Grafton in the Year 1538, or 1539. That Year our Arch-bishop procured a Proclamati∣on from the King, allowing private Persons to buy Bibles, and keep them in their Houses. And about two or three Years after they were reprinted, and backed with the King's Authority, the former Tran∣slation having been Revised and Corrected,Antiq. Brit. in Vit. Craum. whether by certain lear∣ned Men of both Universities, or by some Members of the Convo∣cation that were then sitting, it is uncertain. But to this Translati∣on the Arch-bishop added the last Hand, mending it in divers Pla∣ces with his own Pen, and fixing a very excellent Preface before it. In which he divided his Discourse between two sorts of Men:The Preface to the Bible made by the ABp. The one, such as would not read the Scripture themselves, and laboured to stifle it from others. The other, such as read the Scripture indeed, but read it inordinately, and turned it into matter of Dispute and Contention, rather than to direct their Lives. And thereby, while they pretended to be Furtherers thereof, proved but Hinderers, as the others were; these being as blameless almost as those. The Contents hereof.As to the former sort; He marvelled at them that they should take Offence at publishing the Word of God. For it shewed them
to be as much guilty of Madness, as those would be, who being in Darkness, Hunger and Cold, should obstinately refuse Light, Food and Fire. Unto which three, God's Word is compared. But he attributed it to the prejudice of Custom: which was so prevalent, that supposing there were any People that never saw the Sun, such as the Cimmerii were fancied to be; and that God should so order it, that that Glorious Light should in process of Time break in upon them, at the first some would be offended at it. And when Tillage was first found out, according to the Pro∣verb, many delighted notwithstanding to feed on Mast and Acorns, rather than to eat Bread made of good Corn. Upon this Reason he was ready to excuse those, who, when the Scripture first came forth, doubted and drew back: But he was of another Opinion concerning such as still persisted in disparaging the pub∣lishing of the Scripture, judging them not only Foolish and Froward, but Peevish, Perverse and Indurate. And yet if the Matter were to be tried by Custom, we might allege Custom for reading the Scripture in the Vulgar Tongue, and prescribe more antient Custom than for the contrary. Shewing that it was not above an hundred Years since the reading it in English was laid aside within this Realm: and that many hundred Years before, it had been translated and read in the Saxon Tongue, being then the Mother Tongue; and that there remained divers Copies of it in old Abbies. And when that Language became old, and out of common usage, it was translated into the newer Tongue: And of this many Copies then still remained, and were daily found. Then from Custom, he proceeded to consider the thing in its own Nature; shewing how available it was that the Scripture should be read of the Laity. For which he takes a large Quotation out of S. Chrysostom, in his third Sermon De Lazaro; Wherein that Father exhorted the People, To read by themselves at home, between Ser∣mon and Sermon; that what he had said before in his Sermons upon such and such Texts, might be the more fixed in their Minds and Memories: and that their Minds might be the more prepared to receive what he should say in his Sermons which he was to preach to them. And that he ever had, and would exhort them, not only to give Ear to what was said by the Preacher in the Church, but to apply themselves to reading the Scriptures at home in their own Houses. And a great deal more upon the same Argu∣ment. And then as to the other sort, our Arch-bishop shewed, How there is nothing so good in the World, but might be abused and turned from Unhurtful and Wholsome, to Hurtful and Noisome. As above in the Heavens the Sun, Moon and Stars, were abused by Idolatry; and here on Earth, Fire, Water, Meat, Drink, Gold, Silver, Iron, Steel, are things of great benefit and use, and yet we see much harm and mischief done by each of these, as well by reason of the lack of Wisdom and Providence in them that suffer Evil by them, as by the Malice of them that work the Evil by them. Advising therefore all that came to read the Bible, which he called The most precious Iewel, and most holy Relick that
remained upon Earth, to bring with them the Fear of God; and that they read it with all due Reverence, and used their Know∣ledg thereof, not to the vain Glory of frivolous Disputation, but to the Honour of God, Encrease of Vertue, and Edification of themselves and others. And then he backed this his Counsel, with a large Passage out of Gregory Nazianzen; which was levelled against such as only talked and babbled of the Scripture out of Season, but were little the better for it. And lastly, he concluded his Preface, by directing to such Qualifications as were proper for such as came to read these Sacred Volumes. Namely, That he ought to bring with him a Fear of Almighty God, and a firm Purpose to conform himself thereunto; and so continue to proceed from time to time, shewing himself a sober and fruitful Hearer and Learner. This whole Preface, for the Antiquity and Usefulness of it, and to preserve as much as we can of the Writings of this most Reverend Man, I have transcribed and placed in the Appendix.No. CIV. The Frontice∣piece of Cran∣mers Edition of the Bible.The Edition in the Year 1540, had a remarkable Frontispiece be∣fore it: Which because it is somewhat rare, both in regard of the Antiquity and Device of it, I will relate. In the upper art there∣of, you see King Henry VIII sitting in State, guarded on each hand of him with the Lords Spiritual and Temporal; holding in his right Hand a Bible closed, which he delivered unto Arch-bishop Cranmer, being on his Knee, in the Name of the rest of the Bishops; all which stood at his right Hand, bare-headed, their Mitres lying up-the Ground, in token of their Acknowledgment of the King's Su∣premacy; and this Motto issuing out of the King's Mouth, Haec praecipe & doce. Holding also in his left Hand another Bible, stretched towards the Lords Temporal, and delivered to one, (whom I suppose to be intended for the Lord Crumwel) at the head of them, standing on the left Side, and this Word coming out of the King's Mouth to∣wards them, Quod justum est, judicate; and this, Ita parvum audie∣tis, ut magnum; and this, A me constitutum est, & decretum, ut in Vniverso Imperio & Regno meo homines revereantur & paveant Deum Viventem. Among these Nobles is the Figure of one on his Knees, and these Words issuing out of his Mouth, Verbum tuum Lucerna pe∣dibus meis. Over the King's Head, is the Figure of God Almighty sitting in the Clouds, with these Words coming out of his Mouth in a Scrole towards the right Hand, Verbum quod egredietur de me, non revertetur ad me vacuum, sed faciet quaecunque volui: And in another Scrole towards the Left, with his Hand pointing to the King, Ecce servum, qui faciet omnes voluntates meas. Underneath the Bishops there is another Figure, representing Arch-bishop Cranmer, his Coat of Arms by him, with the distinction of a Crescent. He stood with his Mitre on his Head, and dress'd in his Pontificalibus, his Chaplain behind him, and a Priest with a Tonsure, kneeling before him, in the posture of a Candidate for Priests Orders, and having his Hand stretched out to receive the Bible offered him by the Arch-bishop, and out of his Mouth this Scrole, Pascite, qui in vobis est, gregem Christi. On the other Side, opposite to the Arch-bishop, and under∣neath the Lords Temporal, stood another Person, whom I conjecture
to be the Lord Crumwel, with his Shield by him blank, without any bearing; and out of his Mouth came, Diverte a malo, sequere pacem & persequere. In the lowest part of this Fronticepiece, you have the resemblance of a Priest, preaching out of a Pulpit before a great Auditory of Persons of all Ranks, Qualities, Orders, Sexes, Ages; Men, Women, Children, Nobles, Priests, Souldiers, Tradesmen, Countrymen. Out of the Mouth of the Preacher went this Verse, Obsecro igitur primum omnium fieri obsecrationes, orationes, postulatio∣nes, gratiarum actiones, pro omnibus hominibus, pro regibus, &c. Im∣plying the Benefit accruing to Princes by the Peoples Knowledg of the Scriptures, namely, That it taught them to obey and pray for them. And out of the Mouths of these Hearers of all sorts, issued, Vivat Rex, Vivat Rex; and out of the Mouths of the Children, God save the King: denoting the great Joy the People conceived for the enjoyment of God's Word, and the preaching thereof, and their Thankfulness to the King for his Permission of the same. In the middle stood the Title of the Bible: which was this; The Bible in English; that is to say, The Contents of all the Holy Scrip∣tures of the Old and New Testament, with a Prologue thereunto made by the Reverend Father in God Thomas Arch-bishop of Can∣terbury. This is the Bible appointed to the Use of the Churches. Printed by Richard Grafton, Cum Privilegio ad imprimendum solum. An. Dom. MDXL. CHAP. XXXIV. Arch-bishop Cranmer compassionate towards Sufferers for Religion. AS he had a great Love and Value for the eminent Professors and Patrons of the Gospel,His Affection and Compas∣sion towards Professors of the Gospel. Particularly for Sir Iohn Chk a Prisoner, so he bare a most compassionate Spirit towards those that suffered for the sake of it. It made a very grea Impression upon him, when he heard that Sir Iohn Cheke had been taken up, and Indicted, soon after Queen Mary's access to the Crown, namely, in the Month of August, which was the next Month after. And not knowing wherefore he was Indicted, whether for his med∣dling in the Lady Iane's Business, or for his Zeal in promoting Reli∣gion, he earnestly desired Sir William Cecyl to inform him whether? If for the former, Considering (as he said) he had been none of the chief Doers in that Matter, he hoped he should have been one of them that should have partaken of the Queen's Favour. But if it were for the latter, viz. his earnestness in Religion, if he suffer for that, (said he) Blessed is he of God, that suffereth for his sake, howsoever the World judg of him. For what ought we to care for the Iudgment of the World, when God absolves us? But wishing most passionately withal, That some means might be used for the Relief of him and the Lord Russel,And the Lord Russel. who it seems was clap'd up for the same Cause. And indeed as our Arch-bishop was in the time of King Edward,A Patron to such as preach∣ed the Gospel in K. Henry's Days. he was the same under King Henry, that is, the common Patron, as far as he might, or dared, of such Priests who were drawn into
Trouble for professing or preaching that Gospel. So he shewed him∣self to Turner before-mentioned: And in the Year 1533, or 1534, I find him in a Commission for the relieving of another that had been most straitly and rigorously handled by Stokesly then Bishop of Lon∣don, and his Chancellor: His Name was Thomas Patmore, Parson of Hadham in Hertfordshire, a Learned and Godly Man, who had by them been condemned to Imprisonment for Life, together with the loss of his Benefice and Goods, because he had perswaded his Curat to marry a Wife; and being privy to his Marriage, did nevertheless suffer him to officiate in his Church: And because he had preached certain Doctrines at Cambridg, as laying little stress upon the Pope's Curse, and that we are saved only by God's Mercy; and that all that are saved, are saved by Faith; and that it is against God's Law to burn Hereticks. This poor Man, after three Years close Imprison∣ment in Lollards-Tower, by the Means of his Friends, who put up frequent Petitions to the King and the Lady Ann Bolen, was at last released, and obtained of the King a Commission to our Arch-bishop, to whom were joined Audley Lord Chancellor, and Crumwel Secretary of State,Fox. to enquire into his Injuries and unjust handling, and to de∣termine thereof according to Equity and Justice. Thus favourable he was to Religion and good Men in the two for∣mer Kings Reigns: But when Queen Mary succeeded, he could no longer be a Sanctuary or Succour unto them, unless it were to comfort them by Words, and to pray for them, as was said be∣fore. The Arch-bishop added, That he was for his part now utterly unable, either to help or counsel, being in the same Condemnation that they were. But that the only thing that he could do, he would not omit; and that was, to pray for them, and all others then in Adversity. But he entreated Cecyl, who by this time seemed to have gotten his Pardon, or at least to be in good assurance of it, and so in a better Capacity to raise up Friends to those ho∣nest Men, to use what Means possible he could for them. His Succour of afflicted Stran∣gers in K. Ed∣ward's Days.This was all he could do now for the Prisoners of Christ. But while he was in Place and Capacity of succouring such distressed Persons, as he was in King Edward's Days, he gave them Counte∣nance, Entertainment at his House and Table, Preferment, Recom∣mendation to the King and Protector. And indeed there was great need of some such Patrons of poor Protestants, the Persecutions in Italy, in Spain, in France, in Germany, and other Places, being abt this Time extreamly hot. Which occasioned the flight of great Numbers into this Nation: Which some of them stiled Chri∣sti Asylum, A Sanctury for Christ Ad vos, ceu in Asylum & por∣tum tutissimum sub Sanctissimi Regis alas con∣fluebant Germa∣ni, Galli, Hispa∣ni, Itali, Poloni, Scoti,  illic Deo suo in Fidei libertate servi∣rent, quam ipsis patria ingrata negabat. Gualt. Praes. ante Hom. in Prior. D. Paul. p. ad Cor.. In the Year 1549, the Perse∣cution in France grew very warm: Which was partly occasioned up∣on the Inauguration of King Henry II, and his Entrance into Paris for that Purpose. For the burning of Martyrs in several Streets of the City, where and when the King was to pass by, made a barba∣rous part of the Solemnity. In this Year many French Protestants, who had been Imprisoned for Religion in their own Country, were either banished, or secretly made their escape into this Kingdom. These applied to some French Ministers, entertained, as it seems, in
the Arch-bishop's Family, with Bucer, Peter Martyr, and others. Which Ministers delivered the Condition of these poor Men to the Arch-bishop. And having a Petition to present to the Lord Pro∣tector, declaring their miserable State, and requiring Relief, he ap∣pointed the French Ministers to apply themselves to Cecyl, then Ma∣ster of Requests to the Lord Protector: and that he might be the more ready to recommend and forward the Petition, to render it the more effectual, he advised Bucer, Martyr, Alexander, and Fagius, to write their Letters jointly unto the said Cecyl, for the French Ministers to carry along with them as their Letter of Credence. For the Arch-bishop well knew that Cecyl had a great Esteem for those Learned Men, and that their Letters would go a great way with him. Such was the particular Care and Diligence our Prelat piously used for Relief of these poor French Exiles. The Copy of this Letter I have thought well worthy to be put in the Ap∣pendix.No. CV. Indeed it was noted at this Time, as a Quality of the Nation,England har∣borous of Strangers. Anglos  esse non nego, & peregrinorum habiti sunt ad∣miratores. Hum∣frid. de Nobilit. That it was , Addicted to shew Favour to Strangers; nay, to admire them. And surely it was not without the Providence of God, that when in these difficult Times, so many Honest, Pious, Learned Men, were forced from their own Countries, Friends and Estates, they found such hospitable Entertainment here. Care was taken for their sufficient Livelyhoods; and for those of them that were towards Learning, Places were assigned them in the Colleges of the Universities, and yearly Stipends settled on them. Of those that were most forward and exemplary in these Christian Offices, Dr. Laurence Humfrey, (one who lived in those Times, and was well acquainted with these Matters) names King Edward in the first place. Who, as he asserts of his own knowledg,In lib. de Nobi∣litat. p. 253. was extraor∣dinarily bountiful to them both in London, and in the Universities. Among the Noble-men, he mentions Henry Earl of Dorset, and Duke of Suffolk: And among the Bishops, Thomas Cranmer the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, of whom he bestowed this Character, That he was worthy to succeed William Warham in his See, whom he so well imitated, both in courteous Behaviour and Hospitality. And as he was in King Edward's Days of such an hospitable Dis∣position towards Strangers,The ABp's Fa∣vour to Fo∣reigners. so he was noted for it in the Reign of his Father King Henry, being wont then to shew himself very kind and humane to such as travelled into these Parts for Learning, as well as for Shelter. Gualter, the great Divine of Zurick, being but a young Man, came into England about the Year 1537; and was so affected with the Civilities he received here, that he let it stand upon Record, in the Preface to his Homilies upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians, how humanely he was received at Ox∣ford, not only by the Students, but by the Publick Professors, and by divers at Court. But among them he particularly men∣tioned, How Arch-bishop Cranmer, whom he stiled, The immortal Glory of England, received him, though a young Man then, and a Stranger, and had no experience of things, nor any Mark or Ex∣cellency to recommend him.
Unjustly char∣ged with Co∣vetousness.And as he was Compassionate and Hospitable, so he was of a free and liberal Disposition, and as became a Christian Bishop, and an English Peer, kept great Hospitality. Yet however he could not escape the Imputation of Niggardise and Closeness. He had been once accused of it to his Master King Henry, but came off with Honour, the King himself clearing him of that injurious Scandal, and giving him a Character of a quite contra∣ry Nature. His words to Cecyl upon this Charge.And again in King Edward's Reign, in the Year 1552, some taking the advantage of his Absence from the Court, slandered him as though he were Covetous. Which coming to his Ear, by the cordial Friendship of Cecyl, the King's Secretary, he wrote that Courtier a Letter in vindication of himself; profes∣sing, That he was not so doted to set his Mind upon things here, which neither he could carry away with him, nor tar∣ry long with them. And that he took not half so much Care for his Living when he was a Scholar at Cambridg, as he did at that present when he was Arch-bishop of Canterbu∣ry; for as he had now much more Revenue than he had then, so he had much more to do withal. And, That he rather feared stark Beggary at last. This, and other things to the same purpose, he signified in that Letter; that Cecyl thereby might the better understand his Condition, and know how and what to plead at Court in his behalf, as Occasion served, as hath been more at large related before. Reduced, as he feared, to stark beggary before his Death.By the way, I cannot but reflect upon one of the Arch-bi∣shop's Expressions, which seemed to have been uttered prophe∣tically; so exactly did the Event answer to his Words: for to stark Beggary he was indeed at last reduced: When in his Im∣prisonment at Oxon, he had not a Penny in his Purse. And which was more, his Enemies were so barbarously severe, that it would not be allowed any well-disposed Person, to relieve his Necessity, nor to give him an Alms, a Privilege allowed any Beg∣gar beside. And when a Gentleman of Gloucestershire, sensible of the Arch-bishop's Need, and withal knowing how dangerous it was to give the poor Arch-bishop any Money, had conveyed somewhat to the Bailiffs, to be by their Hands bestowed on him, Boner and Thirleby, the two Bishops that degraded him, staid this Gentleman, intending to send him up to the Council, had he not gotten off by the Intercession of some Friends.
CHAP. XXXV. Some Account of Arch-bishop Cranmer's House-keeping. BUT the more fully to confute this Calumny,Some Account of his House-keeping. it will not be amiss to look more narrowly into his House-keeping. His daily custom at Lambeth was, to dine in a Room above, where all Noble-men, and Persons of better Quality that came to dine with him, were entertained. Here he was very honourably served, both with Dishes and Attendants. In the Hall the Table was every Day very plentifully furnished, both for Houshold-Servants and Strangers, with three or four principal head-Messes of Officers: Besides the Relief of the Poor at his Gates. And which is a ve∣ry observable Charity, as well as Hospitality, he appropriated his Mansion-house at Bekesborn in Kent, and his Parsonage-Barn, for Harbour and Lodgings for the Poor, Sick and Maimed Soul∣diers, that came from the Wars of Bulloign, and other Parts be∣yond Seas. For these he also appointed an Almoner, a Physi∣cian, and a Chirurgeon, to attend on them, and to dress and ad∣minister Physick to such of them as were not able to resort to their own Countries: Having also daily from his Kitchin hot Broth and Meat. Besides the common Alms of his Houshold, that were bestowed upon the poor People of the Country. And when any of these were recovered, and were able to tra∣vel, they had Money given them to bear their Charges, accord∣ing to the number of Miles they were to pass before they got Home. I do not know whether some might have taken Advantage thus to slander him, from a laudable Endeavour of his,Retrenches the Clergies super∣fluous House-keeping. to re∣duce within some Bounds the Provisions of Clergy-mens Ta∣bles, which in the latter Times of King Henry the Eighth, grew to great Excess and Extravagancy, so unbecoming Spiritual Men. For in the Year 1541, the Arch-bishop, with the Consent of the other Arch-bishop, and most of the Bishops, and divers other Deans and Arch-Deacons, made a Constitution for moderating the Fare of their Tables, viz. That Arch-bishops should not exceed six divers kinds of Flesh, or as many Dishes of Fish on Fish-days. A Bishop not above Five. A Dean, or Arch-Deacon, Four; and all under that De∣gree, Three. But an Arch-bishop was allowed at second Course, to have four Dishes, a Bishop Three, and all others Two; as Custards, Tarts, Fritters, Cheese, Apples, Pears, &c. But if any of the inferior Clergy should entertain any Arch-bishop, Bi∣shop, Dean, or Arch-Deacon, or any of the Laity of like De∣gree, as Duke, Marquess, Earl, Vicount, Baron, Lord, Knight, they might have such Provision as were meet for their Degree: Nor was their Diet to be limited, when they should receive an Ambassador, [to recommend, I suppose, to Foreigners the Eng∣lish
Hospitality.] It was ordered also, That of the greater Fish, or Fowl, as Cranes, Swans, Turkies, Hadocks, Pike, Tench, there should be but one in a Dish: Of lesser Sorts than they, as Capons, Pheasants, Conies, Woodcocks, but Two: Of less sorts still, as of Partridges; an Arch-bishop, Three; a Bishop, and other Degrees under him, Two. The Number of the Black∣birds were also stinted to Six at an Arch-bishop's Table, and to Four for a Bishop. And of little Birds, as Larks, Snytes, &c. the Number was not to exceed Twelve. But so strongly bent were the Clergy in those Days to this sort of Sensuality, that these Injunctions of our Arch-bishop were ob∣served but two or three Months, and so they returned to their old Superfluity again. His pious De∣sign therein.The Arch-bishop's pious Design hereby, was only to curb In∣temperance, and unnecessary Prodigality in such, upon whose Of∣fice those Vices cast such just Reflections: but it could not rea∣sonably argue any covetous Temper in him; for that the Poor might not fare the worse for this Intrenchment of Exorbitant Hospitality, but rather the better, the Arch-bishop in these afore∣said Orders provided, That whatsoever was spared out of the old House-keeping, should not be pocketed up, but laid out and spent in plain Meats for the Relief of poor People. Others charged him with Pro∣digality.And that this Charge may still appear to be nothing but a meer detraction, proceeding from Envy, or some other ill Prin∣ciple, others there were that would blame him for the contrary Vice, of too much lavishing and unprofitable Expence. So hard a matter is it for the best Men to escape the spiteful and veno∣mous Insinuations of the World. But he patiently and with an even Mind bore all.
CHAP. XXXVI. Arch-bishop Cranmer, Humble. Peaceable. Bold in a good Cause. FOR, which is another thing to be remarked in him,Humble and Condescend∣ing. he was ve∣ry Humble and Condescending, and did not only bear to be reproved, but was thankful for it; and that even when the Re∣proof was undeserved. Which was the more to be valued in him, considering the Height and Dignity of his Calling. To give an Instance or two of this. When in the Year 1552, Cecyl had charged him with the Impu∣tation of Covetousness, as a Report that went of him in the Court, and which himself seemed partly to believe, begging withal Pardon of his Grace for his freedom with him: Our Arch-bishop told him, That as for the Admonition, he took it very thankfully; and that he had ever been most glad to be admonished by his Friends; accounting no Man so foolish, as he that would not hear friendly Admonishment. And when at another time, the same Cecyl, (who would always take the liberty to speak his Mind to his Friends, whensoever he thought they wanted Counsel) had signified to him the Hazard he incurred in not shewing more Compliance towards the Duke of Northumberland, who now swayed all; and then apolo∣gizing for his Boldness; Cranmer was so far from taking this ill, that he returned him his very hearty Thanks for his friendly Letter and Advertisements; desiring him to be assured, that he took the same in such good part, and to proceed of such a friendly Mind, as he ever looked for at his Hands, and whereof he would not be unmindful, if Occasion hereafter served, to requite the same. And this good Temper led him also to Gentleness and Lenity.Peaceable and Mild. He was no Huffer nor Contender, but of an exceeding peaceable and amicable Spirit. Whereunto he was moved by the Reason of Policy, as well as Religion: Because he well saw, how a con∣tentious quarrelsome Disposition in great Men, would be apt to give an ill Example unto Inferiors. There happened once, in the Year 1552, a Contest between him and the Lord-Warden of the Cinque-Ports, who lived not far from him; and so probably it might be about some worldly Matters. It was Sir Thomas Cheyny; who in the Year 1549, was one of those that met with Warwick in London, and published a Proclamation against the Arch-bishop's Friend the Duke of Somerset, as a Traitor. Which might be an occasion that the Arch-bishop did not much affect Cheyny, nor Cheyny the Arch-bishop. Concerning this Difference between them, which it seems was taken notice of at Court, when his true Friend Cecyl had wrote to him, advising a Reconciliation, he gave this Christian and meek Answer from his House at Ford;
That there was no Man more loth to be in Contention with any Man than he was; especially with him who was his near Neigh∣bour, dwelling both in one County, and whose familiar and en∣tire Friendship he most desired, and that for the Quietness of the whole County. Adding, That the Examples of the Rulers and Heads, would the People and Members follow. His Peaceableness also appeared in his hearty Desires of the Publick Peace, as well as Private. When upon occasion of hearing of the Wars that were about the Year 1552, eagerly followed, both in Christen∣dom,His Speech up∣on the News of Wars abroad. and out of it, he used these words, The Sophy and the Turk, the Emperor and the French King, not much better in Religion than they, [such it seems was his Censure of them, by reason of the Cruelty and Persecution they exercised, and the Disturban∣ces they made in the World] rolling the Stone, or turn∣ing the Wheel of Fortune up and down; I pray God send us Peace and Quietness with all Realms, as well as among our selves. Unacquainted with the Arts of Court-flat∣tery.But though he were of so quiet and mild a Spirit, yet being a plain down-right Man, he would never learn the Arts of Flattery and base Compliances with them that were uppermost. Which had like to have created him much trouble from Northumberland; to whom he carried not himself with that Deference and Pleasing∣ness as he expected.Would never crouch to Nor∣thumberland. For Cranmer knew the bad Heart of this haugh∣ty Man, and could not forget the ill Measure his Friend, the Duke of Somerset, had found at his Hands. He did not care to make any Application to him, nor to be an Instrument in forwarding any of his designing Business. When he was to write up to some of the Court concerning Reiner Wolf, I suppose for Licence to print the Articles of Religion, Anno 1552, he desired to take Cecyl's Advice, to whom he should write; For I know not, saith he, to whom to write but my Lord of Northumberland; to whom to make any Address he would fain have avoided if he could. There was, about the Year 1552, a Commission issued out for a strict Enquiry to be made after all such as had defrauded the King of any Goods or Treasure, accru∣ing to him by the suppression of Chauntries, or that belonged to Churches. Now this was done by Northumberland and his Crea∣tures, on purpose that it might light heavy upon Somerset's Friends, who had been the chief Visitors in those Affairs, and had many of them been supposed to have enriched themselves thereby. Commis∣sioners were appointed in each County. In Kent the Commission was directed to the Arch-bishop, and to several other Gentlemen and Justices of Peace. The Arch-bishop perceiving well the Spite and Malice of this Commission, acted very slowly in it. Insomuch that Northumberland began to be highly angry with him. Cecyl ob∣serving it, and having ever a great Veneration for that good Man, and fearing he might feel the Effects of his Fury, writ to him, sig∣nifying Northumberland's Displeasure, and giving him Advice to take heed of him. For which the Arch-bishop thanked him, and prudently writ his Excusatory Letter to that Duke, dated Novem∣ber 0, signifying, That the Cause of his Stay of the Commission
was, because he was alone, and that the Gentlemen and Justices of Peace, who were in Commission with him, were then at Lon∣don, [probably because of the Term] before whose coming Home, if he should proceed without them, he might, as he said, travel in vain, and take more Pains than he should do good. And by such soft, but honest words, mollifying him for the Procrastination of that which he had no mind to meddle in. But not long after he, and Ridley Bishop of London, with him,He and Ridley fall under the Duke's Dis∣pleasure. fell under great Displeasure with this Duke, and the rest of the great Men of his Party; who in the latter end of King Edward's Reign governed all. The Reason whereof was, for opposing, as much as they could, though to no effect, the Spoil of the Church-Goods; which were taken away only by a Commandment of the Higher Powers, without Request or Consent of them to whom they did belong; as Ridley himself relates in his Treatise,Ridley's La∣mentation. wherein he la∣mented the Change of Religion in England: Which indeed was more than ever Henry VIII had done. Add to the rest,Bold and un∣daunted in God's Cause. that our Bishop was of a bold and undaunted Courage in the Cause of God, and his Church. It was a brave and generous Act, and worthy the chief Bishop of the English Church; I mean, that publick Challenge which he made, to maintain the Common-Prayer Book, and the other parts of the Reformation, by the Scripture and Fathers, in open Disputation, against whomso∣ever, if the Queen so pleased to permit it. Which was done by him, soon after the Queen's coming to the Throne. And had he not been prevented by others, who dispersed Copies of this Chal∣lenge without his knowledg, it had been made very solemnly, as he freely told the Queen's Council, by fixing this his Declaration on the Doors of S. Pauls, and other Churches, with his Hand and Seal to it. And his Courage herein appeared the greater, because he was at this very Time under a Cloud, and in great Danger; having some time before now, been convented before the Council, and confined to Lambeth. And whosoever shall consider that good Progress,Falsly charged with Cowar∣dice, and too much Flexi∣bility. that by his Means was made in Religion, not only in King Edward's Reign, but even in that of King Henry, under the Discouragements of an∣tiently-rivited Superstition and Idolatry; and withal shall ponder the haughty Nature of that Prince, of so difficult Address, and so addicted to the old Religion; and how dangerous it was to dissent from him, or to attempt to draw him off from his own Per∣swasions; cannot but judg Cranmer to have been of a very bold Spi∣rit, to venture so far as he did. And undoubtedly his Courage went an equal pace with his Wisdom and Discretion, and was no whit inferior to his other excellent Qualifications. And this I say the rather, to vindicate the Memory of this most Reverend Prelat from an unworthy Reflection, made upon him in a trisling Ac∣count of his Life: Wherein he is charged to be,Abl Rdivus. Of too easy and flexible a Disposition, which made him cowardly to comply with the Church of Rome. And, that though he never did any harm
to the Protestants, yet he did not unto them so much good as he might or ought. For the confutation of which, I appeal to num∣berless Passages which I have written of him. But it is easy to see from whence this Author had this Character of our Arch-bishop; namely, from Parsons and Saunders, two malicious calumniating Jesuits.Three Conver∣sions. The former hath these words of him; That to the King's Will and Liking he resolved to conform himself, as well in Religion as in other things. And, that when King Henry was large towards the Protestants, Cranmer was so also; but when the King became more strict and rigorous, especially after the Six Articles, Cranmer was ready to prosecute the same. And therefore Saunders framed a Name for the Arch-bishop, calling him Henricianus; in the same sense as Herod's Creatures in the Scriptures were called Herodiani. A very false Character of this good Arch-bishop, to say no worse of it. Of Ardent Affections.I must here make a Note of one Quality more of our Arch∣bishop. Which was this, That he was a Man of ardent Affecti∣ons, and of an open and generous Temper; and where he lo∣ved, he thought he could never enough express it. An Instance of this I will give in Bishop Thirleby: To whom for the good Quali∣ties he supposed were in him, he had a most earnest Love. An Ac∣count of this I will lay down in the words of Morice, the Arch-bi∣shop's Secretary,Inter Foxii MSS who well knew it. Besides his special Favour to him, saith he, that way, [in re∣commending him to the King] there was no Man living could more friendly esteem any Man of himself, as my Lord Cranmer did this Thirleby: For there was no kind of Pleasure which my Lord Cranmer was liable to do, that was not at this Man's Com∣mandment: Whether it were Jewel, Plate, Instrument, Map, Horse, or any thing else, though he had it from the King's Ma∣jesty; but if this Man did once like, or commend it, the gentle Arch-bishop would forthwith give it unto him. And many times Dr. Thirleby, for Civility-sake, would instantly refuse the same, yet would he send it unto him the next day after to his House. Insomuch that it came into a common Proverb, That Dr. Thirleby's commendation of any Thing of my Lord's, was a plain winning or obtaining thereof. So that some Men thought, that if he would have demanded any Finger, or other Member of his, he would have cut it off to have gratified him there∣with; such was his ardent Affection towards him. This no small sort of honest Men, now living, can testify; that is, about the Year 1565, when this was written. Cranmer com∣pared with Card. Wolsey.It may deserve also a Remark, that our good Prelat rose upon the Fall of another great Church-man, viz. the Cardinal of York. For about that very Time the King rejected Wolsey from his Favour and Employment, Cranmer succeeded into them. It may be also ob∣served, That as the King's great Matter of the Divorce was first moved and managed by Wolsey; so it was taken up, and vigorously
carried on, and successfully ended by Cranmer. And as the former started it upon an unjust Policy, and so in the Issue, by God's secret Judgment, prospered no better by it, it finally proving his Ruin; so the latter acting in it out of a better and more honest Principle of Conscience and Religion, became thereby advanced to the greatest Honour in the Church: Which he held for twenty Years together. Though at last indeed it had the same fatal Issue to him, by the se∣cret Malice of Queen Mary, as it had to the Cardinal before by the secret Displeasure of Queen Ann. But as they were thus parallel in the Cause of their Falls, so their Demeanours under their Calami∣ties were very different. The Cardinal under his, shewed a most ab∣ject and desponding Mind; but our Arch-bishop's Carriage was much more decent under his, remaining Undaunted and Magnani∣mous: having a Soul well fortified by the Principles of solid Vertue and Religion, which the other had not. And this appeared in him, when being brought forth to be baited before Brooks, the Pope's Sub∣delegate; and Martin and Story, the King's and Queen's Commissio∣ners at Oxford; he gravely, and with an unmoved Spirit, used these words; That he acknowledged God's Goodness to him in all his Gifts; and thanked him as heartily for that State wherein he found himself then, as ever he did in the Time of his Prosperity; and that it was not the loss of his Promotions that grieved him at all. CHAP. XXXVII. Osiander's and Peter Martyr's Character of the Arch-bishop. THE last Thing I shall observe of him is, That he always re∣mained the same Man; not altered by his Honours and high Advancements. As he was a Person of great Piety, Goodness, Af∣fability and Benignity, before he was Arch-bishop, and the Sun-shine of Royal Favour, so he continued at all Times after. For a Wit∣ness of this, I will set down two Characters given him by two Fo∣reign learned Men, both which knew him well. The one shall be of Osiander;Osiander's Cha∣racter of the ABp. from whom we may take this Account of what he was before he was Bishop, while he remained abroad in Germany. Osiander, that great Divine of Norinberg, professed to love him for some excellent Endowments that were common to him with some other good Men, but especially for others more extraordinary and peculiar to himself: Of the former sort was, That he was a Gentleman of good Birth and Quality;Epist. Dedicat▪ ante Harmon. Evangelic. that he had an Aspect and Presence that carried Dignity with it, an incredi∣ble sweetness of Manners; that he had Learning beyond the com∣mon Degrees of it; was Benign and Liberal towards all, and espe∣cially to those that were Studious and of good Literature. Of the latter, were those more abstruse and heroical Vertues of his Mind,
rare to be found in the Age wherein he lived; viz. his Wisdom, Pru∣dence, Fortitude, Temperance, Justice; a singular Love towards his Country, the highest Faithfulness towards the King; a Con∣tempt of earthly Things, a Love of Heavenly; a most burning study towards the Evangelick Truth, sincere Religion, and Christ's Glory. And this was Cranmer before he was placed in his high and honourable Station. And Peter Mar∣tyr's.The other Character of Cranmer, is that of Peter Martyr; who thus speaks of him, when he was at the Top of all his earthly Ho∣nour, in the middle of King Edward's Reign; That his Godliness, Prudence, Faithfulness, and his singular Vertues, were known to all the Kingdom.Ep. Dedicat. ante librum de Eucharist. That he was so adorned with the Grace and Favour of Christ, as that, though all others are the Children of Wrath, yet in him Piety, and Divine Knowledg, and other Ver∣tues, might seem to be naturally born and bred, such deep Root had they taken in him. So that Martyr often wished and profes∣sed, he should esteem it as a great Benefit vouchsafed him of God, that he might come as near as might be to his Vertues, which he admired in him as the wonderful Gifts of God. And, as to him∣self and others fled into these Quarters for Religion, that Cran∣mer's Kindness and Humanity, Merits and Benefits towards them were such, that if he should render just Thanks, and speak of them as they deserved, he must do nothing but tell of them; and how much soever he should extol them, the greatness of the Matter would over-reach his Speech. And that it was well known to all how humanely he received not him only, but ma∣ny other Strangers of his Order, and how kindly he treated them. Balt's Chara∣cter of the ABp.To both these I will subjoin the Judgment of another, who, I cannot but conclude, was well-acquainted with the Arch-bishop, and a long and diligent Observer of his Demeanour in his Superintenden∣cy over the Church; and that was Iohn Bale, sometime Bishop of Ossory. He never placed, said he, the Function of a Bishop in the Administration of secular Things,In Centur. but in a most faithful Dispen∣sation of God's Word. In the midst of wicked Babylon, he always performed the part of a good Guide of Israel. And among Papists, that tyrannized against the Truth of Christ, he governed the People of God with an admirable Prudence. No Man ever so happily and steddily persisted, with Christ himself, in the Defence of the Truth, in the midst of falsly lear∣ned Men, in such imminent hazard of his Life, and yet without receiving any Harm. No Man did more prudently bear with some false Apostles for a time, although, with St. Paul, he knew what most pestilent Men they were, that so they might not be provoked to run into greater Rage and Madness. The difficult Times where∣in Cranmer li∣ved.All this that I have before written concerning this our venerable Prelate, cannot but redound to his high Praise and Commenda∣tion. And it is very fit such Vertues and Accomplishments should
be celebrated and recorded to Posterity. Yet I do not intend these my Collections for such a Panegyrick of him, as to make the World believe him void of all Faults or Frailties, the Condition of human Nature. He lived in such critical Times, and under such Princes, and was necessarily involved in such Affairs, as exposed him to greater Temptations than ordinary. And if any Blemishes shall, by curious Observers, be espied in him, he may therefore seem the more pardonable; and his great exemplary Goodness and Usefulness in the Church of God, may make ample Amends for some Errors. CHAP. XXXVIII. The Arch-bishop vindicated from Slanders of Papists. I Have given, I hope, a just, though imperfect, Account,A lying Cha∣racter of this ABp, by a la French Author▪ from undoubted Records, and authentick Manuscripts, as well as the best published Books, of the excellent Endowments of this great Prelat, and of his innocent, prudential, and useful Behaviour in his high Place and Station. So that none, who impartially weighs the Premisses, can conclude otherwise of him, than that he was a very rare Person, and one that deserves to be reckoned among the brightest Lights that ever shone in this English Church. And this all the sober, unprejudiced part of Posterity will believe, notwith∣standing the unjust Calumnies some hot-spirited Papists have cast upon his Memory. I shall pass over the unhandsome Name that Feckenham gave him, calling him Dolt; as he did also his two other Brethren in Tribula∣tion, Ridley and Latimer, Prisoners then in Oxford, (Men by far more Learned than himself) upon occasion of Mr. Hawks esteeming them deservedly Godly and Learned Men. I shall also pass by what Bishop Boner then said of him, viz. That he dared to say, that Cranmer would Recant so he might have his Living: As though he were a Man of a prostituted Con∣science, and would do any thing upon worldly Considerations. But there is a late French Writer, whom I cannot but take notice of with some Indignation; who, to shew his bigotted Zeal to the Roman Church, hath bestowed this most defamatory Character up∣on this our Arch-bishop;Varillas his Hi∣story of Here∣ticks. That he was one of the profligatest Men of England; that had nothing of Christianity in him, but the outward Ap∣pearances; being Ambitious, Voluptuous, Turbulent, and capable of all sorts of Intrigues. Of which all that I have written, is an abundant Confutation; besides the severe Chastisements the right Reverend the Bishop of Sarum hath lately bestowed upon this Author. Who questionless was well versed in those famous Popish Calumniators of our Reformation, and of this our Arch-bishop the great Instaurator thereof, and had a mind to out-do them in their Talent of throwing Dirt. Those, I mean, who, living in the Age past, did most bit∣terly
and virulently, as it fell in their way, fly upon Cranmer's Me∣mory and Fame, to eclipse it to Posterity if they could; namely, Saunders, Allen, and Parsons, and some others. But those who reade these Memorials, will be able easily to confute them, and will perceive that these Men sought not so much to say what was true, as what might serve the Ends of their Anger and Spight, their Reports being made up for the most part of nothing but Lies and Slanders, illy patched together. Allen's Calum∣ny of the ABp. Sincere and mo∣dest Def. of Engl. Catholicks▪ p. 45.Allen, if he were the Answerer of the Execution of English Iusice, saith, That Cranmer was a notorious perjured, and often relapsed Apostata, recanting, swearing and forswearing at every turn. A heavy Charge; but we are left to guess what these Perjuries, these so often Swearings and Forswearings, these Relapses and Recantations be. But it is enough for them to roar out, Notorious Perjuries, &c. But let us see what Oaths Cranmer took, that might occasion his Perjuries. He swore, at his Consecration, the usual Oath to the Pope; and in his future Doings, laboured to restore the King's Supremacy against the Pope's Usurpations, and to promote a Reformation against the Pop's Superstitions. Was this one of his notorious Perjuries? It is pity the doing so good a Thing,Wiped off. should fall under so bad a Name. But at the taking of that Oath, did he not make a solemn Protestation openly before Publick Notaries, and that entred down into Record, That he intended not by the said Oath to do any thing against the Law of God, the King, or the Realm, and their Laws and Prerogatives; nor to be abridged thereby from consulting for the Reformation of Religion? In which way the best Civilians then put him, and assu∣red him, that by this Means: he might safely, without any Guilt, take the Oath to the Pope: Which otherwise he would not have done. And truly, for my part, I think there was no other way to escape that Perjury, that all other Bishops Elect in those Times were intangled in, by swearing two contrary Oaths, one to the Pope, and another to the King. Cranmer sware also, at receiving Orders, to live Chastely; But he afterwards married a Wife. Surely hereby he brake not his Oath, but rather kept it. He did likewise swear to the Succession of Q. Ann: But would Allen have all that submitted to that Act of Parli∣ament to be perjured? That would reflect upon the Wisdom of the three Estates at that Time, in making such an ensnaring Law; and involve all sorts of People, both Clergy, Nobility and Gentry, and all other Persons of Age, in Perjury, as well as the Arch-bishop, ex∣cepting only two Persons, More and Fisher, who would not submit to this Act. And even they themselves offered to swear to the Suc∣cession it self, and refused only to swear to the Preamble of the said Act. There was indeed an Act made, which seemed contrary to this Act, namely, That which in the Year 1536, put by the Succession of Q. Ann, and carried it to the King's Children by another Queen; and to this Act the Subjects were to swear also. And we will suppose that the ABp swore with the rest to this Act. Neither was there any Perjury here; for this Oath in truth was not contrary to the former: For by reason of some lawful Impediment of Queen Ann's Marriage with the King, as was then pretended, it was declared by the Parliament,
That the Issue of that Queen was Illegitimate, and not Inheritable. And the first Oath was only for the Succession of lawful Issue by Queen Ann. Therefore there being no lawful Issue of that Queen, as was then at least supposed, the Oath to the lawful Issue of another Queen might certainly be very innocently taken, without infringing the breach of the former▪ And where at length is this Notorious Perjury, and swearing and forswearing at every turn? Allen again lets fly upon him, calling him Apostata.Cleared from his Charge of Apostacy. But surely it is not Apostacy, to leave Error, Superstition and Idolatry, for the true Doctrine and Profession of the Gospel. He chargeth him also with often Relapsing and Recanting. He made no Relapses nor Re∣cantations at all, as I know of, unless a little before his Death, when he subscribed to a parcel of Popish Articles, by the Importunity of Papists, working upon his Frailty and long-Sufferings. But he soon revoked all again, and died most patiently in the Profession of the true Religion. And to this at last comes all this mighty Clamour, That he was notoriously Perjured, an often relapsed Apostata, recanting, swearing and forswearing at every Turn. Saunders his scurrilous and false Accounts of Cranmer are number∣less; I will only mention one or two. He saith,Saunders Fals∣hoods of the ABp. De Schism. Aug. That from Cam∣bridg he went to the Service of Sir Tho. Bullen, and by his Preferment was made Arch-bishop of Canterbury. Whereas from Cambridg he was immediatly made the King's Chaplain, and wanted not the Recom∣mendation of any to his Preferment, the King being so well acquain∣ted with his Merits. And though he abode sometime with the Earl of Wiltshire, whom he stileth Sir Tho. Bullen, yet it was not in the quality of his Chaplain, but of one whom the King recommended to him. He writeth, That the Arch-bishop carried his Wife about him in a Chest, when he removed; and addeth a ridiculous Story relating thereunto. And his Brother Parsons saith,In his Book of the Three Con∣versions. This was a most certain Story, and testified at that Day by Cranmer's Son's Widow to divers Gentlemen, her Friends, from whom Parsons saith he had it. Other Popish Dignitaries in those Days, kept and conversed with their Concubines and Whores more publickly; and did the Arch-bishop keep his Wife so close? But in case he had travelled with her more openly, who should examine the Arch-bishop, and call him to Ac∣count, whether she were his Wife or his Concubine? and therefore the Story is most improbable. The King himself knew he had a Wife well enough. And when the Arch-bishop saw the Danger of having her with him, he sent her away to her Friends beyond-Sea for a Time. And that silly Story comes through too many Hands, before it came to Parsons, to make it credible. Cranmer's Son tells it to his Wife, No Body knows where: She being a Widow, tells it to certain Gentlemen, No Body knows who: And they tell it to Par∣sons, no Body knows when. No one Place, Person or Time men∣tioned. And so all the Faith of the Matter lies upon a Woman's Evidence, and hers upon the Credit of those two very honest Men, Parsons and Saunders. In Parsons his three Conversions of England,Parsons his Complements to the ABp. are these many fa∣vourable Expressions of our Arch-bishop to be found: That he was the
first Heretick in that Order, [of Arch-bishops of Canterbury.] Be∣cause he was the first that laboured a Reformation of the horrible Errors of the degenerate Church of Rome. And, that he was the first Arch-bishop of Canterbury that ever brake from the Roman Faith. And, that this was the first Change of Religion in any Arch bishop, from the beginning unto his Days. Designing thereby to fix a very black Mark upon him, which rather redounds to his everlasting Ho∣nour.In his Kalendar. That he was an unconstant Man in his Faith and Belief: Incon∣tinent in his Life: Variable in all his Actions: Accommodating himself always to the Times wherein he lived, and to the Humours of those who could do most; and this in Matters even against Right and Conscience. No, but quite contrary, he was constant in his Faith and Belief to the very last, except one Fall, which he soon recovered: Most chaste in his Life, living in the holy State of Marriage: Steady in all his Actions: accommodating himself always, neither to the Times nor to the Humours of any Man, let him be as great as he would, any farther than he might do in Righ and Conscience: And often oppo∣sing King, Parliament, Privy-Council and Synods, to his utmost Dan∣ger, in defence of Truth, and for the disharge of his own Conscience. Again, That he was a [Roman] Catholick in most Points during K. Hen∣ry's Reign. Whereas he was so in no Point, excepting in that of the Corporeal Presence. That he applied himself to the Religion which the State and Prince liked best to allow of in that Time, [of K. Hen∣ry VIII.] From which he was so far, that he often boldly and publickly declared against divers Things which the King was bent upon; as in the Act of the Six Articles, and in composing the Book called The Necessary Erudition. That these three, the King, Queen Ann, and Arch-bishop Cranmer, held the Catholick Faith, Vsages and Rites; and went as devoutly to Mass as ever, and so remained they, in outward shew, even to their Deaths. Though some Years before Cran∣mer's Death, namely, from the first Year of King Edward, the Mass was wholly laid aside, and never used at all. That Cranmer and Crumwel went to Mass, after the King married the Lady Ann Bolen, as before. What they did as to the going to Mass, our Histories tell us little of: If they did, it was with little Approbation of it. And as Crumwel on the Scaffold protested, that he was a good Catholick Man, (but there is difference between a Good Catholick, and a Ro∣man Catholick) and never doubted of any of the Church-Sacraments then used. Thereby intending, I suppose, to make a Difference be∣tween them and the Gospel-Sacraments. But surely Crumwel in his Life-time was so utterly against four or five of them, that he brought Aless, a Learned Man, into a Convocation, to dispute there for two only. And the like Cranmer had done no doubt, if he had been brought to the Scaffold in King Henry's Days. Which had been a happy Case for him. To a Scaffold they of the Roman Perswasion, endea∣voured many a Year to bring him; and they would have thought it a happy Case for them, if they could have brought it to pass. But I verily believe the quite contrary to this confident Assertion, and that he would have owned the Truth to the last, as he did afterwards in the Reign of that King's Daughter, Q. Mary.
That he always fell jump with them that governed, and could do most. No, he never fell in with Gardiner, who sometime had the Ascen∣dent over King Henry; nor with the Duke of Northumberland, who could do most, and did all for a time with the King Edward. That when King Henry was large towards the Protestants, Cranmer was so also, joining with Crumwel to protect them. But when the King became more strait and rigorous, especially after the Six Articles, Cranmer was ready to prosecute the same. He argued long and earnestly in the House against those Six Articles; and when he saw they would pass, he protested against it; and was so troubled about it, that the King sent the Duke of Norfolk, and the Lord Crumwel, and divers other No∣ble Persons, to comfort him in the King's Name. So that I hardly think he would after this be brought to prosecute that bloody Act, the making of which he so utterly disliked. Nor is there the least Foot-step of it in History. Indeed Parsons bringeth in some Per∣sons, in whose Deaths he would have the Arch-bishop to have a Hand. As may appear, saith he, by the Sentence of Death pronounced against Lambert, Tho. Gerard, William Jerome, and Ann Ascue, and others, condemned by him, for denying the Real Presence. Though in King Henry's Time the Arch-bishop believed the Real Presence, yet he was not for putting any to Death that denied it. No; such extream Rigours, for an Error, he utterly detested. Lambert suf∣fered before the Act of the Six Articles. Nor did the Arch-bishop condemn him, but only, by the King's Command, disputed against him. Gerard, [he means Garret] and Ierome, and Ann Ascue, were condemned and burnt indeed; but he had no manner of hand, either in their Condemnation or Death, as we can find in our Histories. But Winchester, Boner, and Wriothesly, and others of that Gang, shed those good Peoples Blood. And it is an impudent Falshood to lay their Condemnation to the Arch-bishop's Charge. He saith further, That to the King's Will and Liking, he resolved to conform himself, as well in Religion, as in all other Things. If he had said this of Bishop Gardiner, the Character would have better by far fitted him. He saith, That he divorced the King of his own Authority from Queen Katherine. Whereas in truth, what he and Winchester, and other Bishops did in this Affair, was by Commission from the King, and not by their own Authority. That he married the King to Queen Ann. That it was in open Parliament, under his Hand∣writing, yet extant, in publick printed Records, to his eternal shame, that the Queen [that is Queen Ann] was never true Wife unto the said King. Where was the eternal Shame of this, when he set his Hand to no more, than what she her self confessed before him? See more of this before. That after this he married the King to Jane Sey∣mour, and after to Queen Ann of Cleves, and after that to Katherine Howard, and after that to Katherine Parre. Which we must take up∣on his Word: For I think it hard by any good History to know it. And what if Cranmer did all this? That he joined with the Protector, in overthrowing K. Henry's Will; and with Dudley against the Pro∣tector. Palpable Falshoods! The contrary whereof is notoriously known to any ordinary Historian. Of the same Truth is, That he
joined with Dudley and the Duke of Suffolk, for the overthrow of the King's two Daughters: and after that with Arundel, Pembroke, Paget, for the overthrow of Northumberland and Suffolk. He joined with these, for the setting the true Heir in the Throne, not for the over∣throw of any particular Persons. Again, he saith, Cranmer and Ridley followed K. Henry's Religion and Humour while he lived, and resolved to enjoy the Pleasures and Sen∣sualities of this Time, [of K. Edward] so far as any way they might at∣tain unto. No, they were Men more mortified, and that made littl Account of the Pleasures and Vanities of this wretched World. Get∣ting Authority into their Hands by the Protector, and others that were in most Place, began to lay lustily about them, and to pull down all them, both of the Clergy and others, whom they thought to be able and likely to stand in their way, or resist their Inventions. Instancing in Gardiner and Boner, and speaking of their unjust Persecution and Deprivation, by such violent and calumnious manner as is proper to Hereticks to use. Whereby a Man may take a taste what they meant to have done if they had had time. Here they are set forth as a couple of most worldly, ambi∣tious, haughty Men, contriving by all, however base and unlawful ways, to build up themselves and their Fortunes upon the Ruin of others, and to beat down all that opposed their Designs. Whereas to any that shall read their Histories, there is nothing in the World so con∣trary to their Aims, Tempers, and Inclinations. And things were done towards the two Bishops before-mentioned, with great Mildness and Patience, under unsufferable Provocations offered by them. Nor was it Cranmer's and Ridley's doings, but rather the King's Council, who thought not fit to put up the Affronts those Bishops had offered to the Government. He saith, That in King Edward's Time Cranmer plaid the Tyrant. That be punished one Thomas Dobb, a Master of Arts of Cambridg, casting him into the Counter, where he died. And John Hume impri∣soned for the same Cause by Cranmer. Both these Passages the Author had from Fox. Dobbs indeed, in the very beginning of K. Edward's Reign, disturbed the Mass that was saying in a Chappel in S. Pauls. For which the Mayor complained of him to the Arch-bishop. And what could he do better than commit him to the Counter, both to pu∣nish him for making a publick Disturbance in the Church, and also to deliver him from the Rage of the Multitude, till his Pardon could be gotten him? Which was obtained soon after from the Duke of Somer∣set: But he suddenly died in Prison, before his Deliverance. And as for Hume, he was a Servant to a very stiff Papist, who sent him up to the Arch-bishop, with a grievous Complaint against him for speaking against the Mass; but whether the Arch-bishop imprisoned him, or what followed, Fox mentioneth not, and leaves it uncertain what was done with him. He saith, That Cranmer stood resolutely for the Carnal Presence in the Sacrament in K. Edward's first Parliament. Wherein a Disputation about it was continued for the space of four Months; that is, from No∣vemb. 4. to March 14. Which was the full time of the second Ses∣sion of that first Parliament, and was in the Year 1548. What he
means by this long Disputation in that Parliament, for so many Months, I cannot tell. Does he mean, that the Parliament did no∣thing else all that Session?K. Edward's Journal. Indeed there was once a notable Di∣spute of the Sacrament, in order to an Uniformity of Prayer to be established. Or does he mean that this four Months Dispu∣tation, was the Work of th Convocation sitting that Parlia∣ment-time? Before it indeed lay now th Matter of the Priests Marriage; Which they agreed to, almost three against one: And likewise of receiving the Sacrament in both Kinds; Which was al∣so agreed to, Nemine Contradiente. But not a word of any Dispu∣tation thn about the Real Presence. And yet 'tis strange, that he should with such Confidence put this Story upon th World, of four Months Disputation in the Parliament concerning th Real Presence; and that the Arch-bishop then was so resute for it. Which cannot be true neither on this Account, that Cranmer was a Year or two be∣fore this come off from that Opinion. He adds, That Cranmer stood resolutely in that first Parliament for a Real Presence against Zuinglia∣nism. But there was neither in that Parliament, nor in that Con∣vocation, a word of the Real Presence. And that Cranmer and Ridley did allow a Ral Presence, and would not endure the Sacrament should be contemptibly spoken of, as some now began to do. The Real Presence that Parsons here means, is the gross Corporal Presence, Flesh, Blood and Bone, as they used to say. This Real Presence Cranmer and Ridley did not allow of at this time of Day: Now they were better enlightned. But most true it is notwithstanding, that they could not endure to have the Sacrament contemptibly spoken of. He tells us Romantickly on the same Argument, That many Posts went to and fro, between P. Martyr and Cranmer, while the imaginary Disputation before-mentioned lasted, whether Lutheranism or Zuing∣lianism should be taken up for the Doctrine of the Church of England. For that he was come, in his Reading upon the Eleventh of the first Epi∣stle to the Corinthians, to those words, This is my Body, and did not know how to determine it, till it was resolved about. The Message re∣turned him was, That he should stay, and entertain himself in his Readings upon other Matters for a while. And so the poor Friar did, [as Parsons calls that Learned Man] with Admiration and Laughter of all his Scholars. Surely some of them had more Esteem and Reve∣rence for him. Standing upon those precedent words; Accepit Panem, &c. And Gratias dedit, &c. Fregit. Et dixit, Accipite & Man∣ducate, &c. Discoursing largely of every one of these Points. And surely they were words of sufficient weight to be stood upon, and Points to be discoursed largely of. And bearing one from the other that ensued, Hoc est Corpus meum. But when the Post at length came, that Zuinglianism must be defended, then stepped up P. Martyr boldly the next Day, and treated of This is my Body: Adding moreover, that he wondred how any Man could be of any other Opinion. The Re∣porters of this Story, Parsons makes to be Saunders, Allen and Sta∣pleton, and others that were present: Excellent Witnesses! P. Mar∣tyr is here represented as a Man of no Conscience or Honesty, but ready to say and teach whatsoever others bad him, be the Doctrine
right or wrong; and at the Beck of the State, to be a Lutheran or a Zuinglian. But if he were of such a versatile Mind, why did he leave his Country, his Relations, his Substance, his Honour, that he had there? Which he did because he could not comply with the Errors of the Church in which he lived. But all this fine pleasant Tale is spoiled, in case Martyr were not yet come to Oxford to be Reader there: For he came over into England but in the end of No∣vember 1548,Simleri Orat. in Obit. P. Mart. and was then sometime with the Arch-bishop before he went to Oxford. Which we may well conjecture was till the Winter was pretty well over; so that he could not well be there be∣fore the 14th of March was past.Pa. 107. The Author of the Athenae Oxo∣nienses conjectures, that he came to Oxon in February, or the begin∣ning of March; but that it was the beginning of the next Year that the King appointed him to read his Lecture. So that either he was not yet at Oxon, or if he were, he had not yet begun his Reading till the Parliament was over. And thus we have traced this Story, till it is quite vanished. Further still, he writes, That Cranmer wrote a Book for the Real Presence, and another against it afterwards. Which two Books Boner brought forth, and would have read them, when he was deposed by Cran∣mer and Ridley; or at leastwise certain Sentences thereof, that were contrary one to the other. If Cranmer wrote any Book for the Real Presence, it was in Luther's, not in the Popish Sense; and against that Sense indeed he wrote in his Book of the Sacrament. Nor did Boner bring any such Books forth at his Deposition, or Deprivation, nor offered to read them, nor any Sentences out of them, for ought I can find in any Historians, that speak of Boner's Business: And I think none do, but Fox, who hath not a word of it, though he hath given a large Narration of that whole Affair. Indeed Boner at his first ap∣pearance told the Arch-bishop, That he had written well on the Sacrament, and wondred that he did not more honour it. To which the Arch-bishop replied, (seeing him commend that which was against his own Opinion) That if he thought well of it, it was because he understood it not. Thus we may see how Parsons writ he cared not what; and took up any lying, flying Reports from his own Party, that might but serve his Turn. But observe how this Writer goes on with his Tale; But Cranmer blushing, suffered it not to be shewed, but said, he made no Book contrary to another. Then he needed not to have blushed. But if he did, it must be at the Im∣pudence of Boner, who carried himself in such a tumultuous bold manner throughout his whole Process, as though he had no Shame left. And lastly, (to extract no more Passages out of this Author) to prove that our Arch-bishop was for a Corporal Presence in the be∣ginning of King Edward, he saith, That in the first Year of that Reign he was a principal Cause of that first Statute, intituled, An Act against such Persons as shall unreverently speak against the Sacrament of the Bo∣dy and Blood of Christ, commonly called, The Sacrament of the Altar. And a very good Act it was: But it does not follow, that because the Arch-bishop was the Cause of this Act, that therefore he believed a gross Carnal Presence; the plain Design of the Act being occasioned
by certain Persons, who had contemned the whole Thing▪ for cer∣tain Abuses heretofore committed therein, (I use the very words of the Act) and had called it by vile and unseemly Words. And it was levelled against such as should deprave, despise or contemn the Blessed Sacrament. Nor is there any word in that Act used in favour of the Carnal Presence. For a Conclusion, let the Reader not hear me,Fox in behalf of Cranmer. Jo. Fox against Hierom. Oso∣rius, p. 338. but another speak for our Arch-bishop against one of these Calumniators, and he a Por∣tugal Bishop: After Cranmer by hearing of the Gospel, began to savour of Christian Profession, what Wickedness was ever repor∣ted of him? With what outrage of Lust was he enflamed? What Murders, what seditious Tumults, what secret Conspiracies, were ever seen, or suspected so much to proceed from him? Unless ye account him blame-worthy for this, that when King Henry, Fa∣ther to Mary, upon great Displeasure conceived, was for some se∣cret Causes determined to strike off her Head, this Reverend Arch-bishop did pacify the Wrath of the Father, and with mild continual Intercession, preserved the Life of the Daughter: Who for Life preserved, acquitted her Patron with Death. As concerning his Marriage, if you reproachfully impute that to Lust, which Paul doth dignify with so honourable a Title; I do answer, That he was the Husband of one Wife, with whom he continued many Years, more chastly and holily, than Osorius in that his stinking, sole and single Life, peradventure one Month, tho he flee never so often to his Catholick Confessions. And I see no Cause, why the Name of a Wife shall not be accounted in each respect as Holy, with the true Professors of the Gospel, as the Name of a Concubine with the Papists. Thus Fox. And so I have at last, by God's favourable Concurrence,The Conclu∣sion. finished this my Work: and have compiled an imperfect History, yet with the best Diligence I could, of this singular Arch-bishop and blessed Martyr; and in the conclusion, have briefly vindicated him from those many false Surmises and Imputations, that his implacable Ene∣mies of the Roman Faction have reported and published abroad a∣gainst him: Not contented with the shedding of his Blood, unless they stigmatized his Name and Memory, and formed the World in∣to a belief, that he was one of the vilest Wretches that lived, who in Reality and Truth, appeareth to have been one of the holiest Bi∣shops, and one of the best Men that Age produced. THE END.
THE APPENDIX TO THE MEMORIALS OF Archbishop Cranmer.
THE APPENDIX TO THE MEMORIALS OF Archbishop Cranmer. NUM. I. Account of Mr. Pool's Book by Dr. Cranmer. To the Ryght honorable, and my syngular good Lorde, my Lorde of Wylshire. IT may please your Lordeshipe to bee advertised, that the Kynge his grace, my Lady your wyfe,Sir W. H. MSS. my Lady Anne, your doughter be in good helth, whereof thankes be to God. As concernynge the Kinge hys cause, Mayster Raynolde Poole hath wrytten a booke moch contrary to the kinge hys purpose, wyth such wytte, that it ap∣pereth, that he myght be for hys wysedome of the cownsel to the kinge hys grace. And of such eloquence, that if it were set forth and knowne to the commen people, I suppose yt were not possible to persuade them to the contrary. The pryncypal intent whereof ys, that the kinge hys grace sholde be con∣tente to commyt hys grete cause to the jugement of the pope: where∣in me semeth he lacketh moch jugement. But he swadeth that with such goodly eloquence, both of words and sentence, that he were lyke to persuade many: but me hee persuadeth in that poynt no thynge at al. But in many other thynges he satysfyeth me very wel. The som wherof I shal shortly reherse. Furst, he sheweth the cause, wher∣fore he had never pleasure to intromytte hymself in this cause. And that was, the trouble, which was lyke to ensue to this realme therof by dyversitie of tytles. Wherof what hurte myght come, we have had exsample in our fathers dayes by the tytles of Lancaster and Yorke. And where os god hath gyven many noble gyfts unto the kinge hys grace, as wel of body and mynde, os also of fortune: yet this excedeth al
other, that in hym al tytles do mete and come togyder, and this Realme ys restored to tranquillitie and peace: so oweth he to provide that this londe fal not agayne to the forsaide mysery and troble, which may come aswel by the people within this realme, which thynke surely that they have an hayre lawful alady, with whom they al be wel contente, and wolde be sory to have any other. And yt wolde be harde to persuade thaym to take any other, levynge her: os also by the Emperour, whych ys a man of so grete power, the quene beying hys awnt, the Princes hys nece, whome he so moch doth, and ever hath favored. And where he harde reasons for the kynge hys party, that he was moved of god hys lawe, which doth straytly forbed, and that with many gret thretts, that no man shal mary hys brother hys wife. And os for the people, yt longeth not to thayr judgement, and yet yt ys to be thought, that thay wil be contente, whan thay shal knowe, that the awncyente Do∣ctores of the Chyrch, and the determinations of so many grete vniver∣sities be of the kynge hys sentence. And os concernynge the Empe∣rour, if he be so unryghtful, that he wyl mayntene an unjust cause, yet god wil never fayl thaym, that stonde opon his party, and for any thynge wyl not transgresse hys commawndments. And besyde that, we shal not lacke the ayde of the Frenshe kynge, whyche partely for the Lege, whych he hath made with us, and partly for the dyspleasure and olde grutch, which he bereth toward the Emperour, wolde be glad to have occasion to be avenged. Thies reasons he bryngeth for the kyngs party agaynst hys owne opynyon. To which he maketh answer in this maner. Fyrst, os towchynge the Lawe of god, he thynketh that yf the kinge were plea∣sed to take the contrary parte, he myght os wel justifie that, and have os good grownde of the scripture therfore, os for that parte which he now taketh. And yet if he thought the kyngs party never so juste, and that this his mariage were undowtedly agaynst godds pleasure, than he cowde not deny, but yt sholde be wel done for the kynge to refuse this mariage, and to take another wyfe: but that he sholde be a doar therin, and a setter forwarde therof, he cowde never fynde in hys harte. And yet he grawnteth, that he hath no good reason therfore, but only af∣fection, which he bereth, and of dewty oweth unto the kyngs parson. For in so doing he sholde not only wayke, ye and utterly take away the Princes Title, but also he must neds accuse the most, and cheife parte of al the kyngs lyfe hiderto, which hath bene so infortunate to lyve more than xx yers in a matrimony so shameful, so abominable, so bestial and agaynst nature, yf it be so os the books which do defend the kyngs par∣ty do say; that the abomination therof ys naturally wrytten and graven in every mans harte, so that none excusation can be made by ignorance. And thus to accuse the noble nature of the kyngs grace, and to take away the title of hys succession, he cowde never fynd in hys harte, were the kyngs cause never so good. Which he doth knowlege to be only affection. Now os concernynge the people, he thynketh not possible to satisfye thaym by lernynge or prechynge; but os thay now do begyn to hate preists, this shal make thaym rather to hate moch more both lerned men, and also the name of lernynge, and bryng them in abomi∣nation of every man. For what lovynge men towarde their prynce wolde gladly heare, that eyther thayr prynce sholde be so infortunate,
to lyve so many yers in matrimony so abominable, or that thay sholde be taken and cownted so bestial, to approve and take for lawful, and that so many yeres, a matrimony so unlawful; and so much agaynst nature, that every man in hys harte naturally doth abhorre yt. And that ys more, whan they heare this matrimony dyspraysed, and spoken agaynst, neyther by thayr own minds, nor by reasons that be made agaynst this matrimony, can thay be persuaded to grutge agaynst the matrimony, but for any thynge thay do grutge against the divorse. Wherin the people sholde shew thaym selfes no men, but bests. And that the people sholde be persuaded herto, he cannot thynke yt. And os for the autoritie of the Vniversities, he thynketh and sayeth, that many tymes thay be led by affections, which ys well known to every man, and wyssheth that thay never did erre in thayr determinations. Than he sheweth with how gret difficultie the Vniversities were brought to the kyngs party. And moreover agaynst the autoritie of the Vniversities, he setteth the autoritie of the kyngs grace fathr, and hys cowncel, the quenes father, and hys cowncel, and the pope and hys cowncel. Than he cometh agayn to the pope and themperour, and French kynge. And fyrst the Pope, how moch he ys adversary unto the kyngs purpose, he hath shewed diverse tokens alredy, and not without a cause. For yf he sholde consent to the kyngs purpose, he must neds do against hys predecessores, and also restrayne hys owne power more than yt hath bene in tyme past, which rather he wolde be glad to extend, and moreover he sholde set gret sedition in many realmes, os in Portugal, of which kynge themperour hath maried on suster, and the Duke of Savoy the other. Than he extolleth the power of themperour, and diminish the ayd of the Frensh kynge towarde us, sayinge that themperour without drawynge of any sworde, but only by forbyddynge the course of marchandise into Flawnders and Spayne, may put this realme into gret dammage and ruyne. And what yf he wil therto draw hys sworde, wherein ys so moch power, which beyng of moch lasse power than he ys now, subdued the Pope and the French kynge? And os for the French men, they never used to kepe leage with us but for thayr own advantage, and wee can never fynde in our harts to trust thaym. And yet yf now contrary to thayr olde nature thay kepe thayr leage, yet our nation shal thynk thaymselfes in miserable condi∣tion, yf thay shal be compelled to trust opon thayr ayde, which al∣wayes have be our mortal enemyes, and never we loved thaym, nor thay us. And yf the French men have any suspicion, that this new matrimony shal not continue, then we shal have no succur of thaym, but opon such conditions os shal be intolerable to this realme. And yf thay followynge thayr olde nature and custome, than do breake leage with us, than we shal loke for none other, but that Englonde shal be a prey betwene themperour and thaym. After all this he commeth to the poynte to save the kyngs honour, sayinge that the kynge stondeth evyn opon the brynke of the water, and yet he may save al hys honour; but yf he put furth hys fote but on steppe forwarde, all hys honour ys drowned. And the meanes which he hath devised to save the kyngs honour ys this. The reste of this mater I must leave to shewe your Lordshippe by mouth, whan I speake with you, which I purpose, god Willynge,
shal be to morow, yf the kyng's grace let me not. Now the berer maketh such hast, that I can wryte no more; but that I heare no worde from my benefice, nor Mayster Russel's servunte ys not yet re∣tourned ageyn, whereof I do not a lytle marveil. The kynge and my Lady Anne rode yesterday to Windsower, and this nyght they be loked for agayne at Hampton Courte: god be their guyde, and preserve your Lordshippe to hys most pleasure. From Hampton courte this xiij. day of June. Youre most humble beideman, Thomas Cranmer. NUM. II. Dr. Cranmer, Ambassador with the Emperor, his letter to the King. To the Kings Highness. Sir W. H. MSS.PLeasith it your Highnes to understande, that at my last sollicitacion unto Monsieur Grandeveile for an answer of the contracte of Mer∣chandize betwene the Merchaunts of your graces reaulme, and the Merchaunts of themperors Low-Countreys; the said Monsieur Grande∣veile shewed me, that forsomoch as the Diate concernynge the said Contracte was lately held in Flaundres, where the Quene of Hungary is Governatrice, themperor thought good to do nothynge therein with∣out her advice, but to make answere by her, rather than by me. Where∣fore it may please your grace no further to loke for answere of me her∣in, but of the Quene, unto whome the whole Answere is commytted. Morover, whan the said Monsieur Grandeveile enquered of me, if I had any answere of the aide and subsidy, which themperor desyered of your grace, I reported unto hym fully your graces answere accordyng unto myn instructions sent unto me by your graces servant William Pa∣get. Which answere he desyered me to delyver hym in wrytynge, that he myght referre the same truly unto themperor, and so I dyd. Never∣theles themperor, now at his departynge, hath had such importune busynes, that Monsieur Grandeveile assigned me to repaire unto thempe∣ror agayn at Lintz, for there, he said, I shal have an answere agayn in wrytynge. The French Ambassador, and I with al diligence do make preparacion to furnish our selfs of wagans, horses, shippes, tents, and other thynges necessary to our viage; but it wil be at the lest viij or x dayes before we can be redy to depart hens. Yet we trust to be at Lyntz before themperor; for he wil tary by the way at Pas∣saw x or xij dayes. As for the Turke, he resideth stil in Hungary, in the same place, en∣vironned opon al parties, whereof I wrote unto your Highnes in my last letters. And themperor departed from Abagh toward Vienna the
seconde day of this month by lande, not commynge by this towne: but the same day the kynge Ferdinando departed from this Towne by wa∣ter, and at Passaw xiiij myls hens thay shal mete, and so pase furth unto Lyntz, which is the mydds way from hens unto Vienna. And there themperor wil tary to counsel what he wil do: and there al the Am∣bassadours shal know his pleasure, as Monsieur Grandeveile shewed me. I have sent herewith unto your grace the copy of themperors Procla∣mation concernynge a general Councel, and a reformation to be had in Germany for the controversyes of the faith. Also I have sent the taxe of al the stats of thempire, how many Souldiers every man is lymitted unto, for the aide agaynst the Turk. Wherein your grace may per∣ceyve, that the greatest Prince in Germany (onely the Duke of Bur∣gondy and Austry except) is not appoynted above 120 horsemen and 554 fotemen. Thus our Lorde evermore have your highnes in his preservation and governance. From Regenspurgh the iiij. day of Sep∣tember. Your graces most humble subjecte, Chaplain, and beidman, Thomas Cranmer. NUM. III. A parcel of Iewels sent from Greenwich to Hampton Court to the King. To the receipt of which he set his hand. Henry R. SENT unto the King's Highnes fro Grenewiche to Hampton courte,Sir W. S. MSS. by Master Norrys the xxist day of Septembre in the xxiiijth year of his graces Reigne thies parcelles ensueing. Which parcellex his grace doth knoledge him self to have receyved by this present bylle, signed with his most gracieux hand the day and yere above expressed. Furste, One carkeyne of gold antique warke, having a shielde of gold, set with a great Rose, contenyng xij Dyamants. One fayer table Dyamant. One poynted Dyamant. One table Rubye. One table Emerawde. And iij fayer hinging perles. 2. Item, Another Carkeyne of golde of harts with ij hands holding a great owche of golde, set with a great table balasse. One pointed dya∣mant: Two table dyamants: Whereof one rising with Lozanges, and the other flat. And one other long lozanged diamant. And iiij perles, with one longe perle pendaunt. 3. Item, Another Carkeyne of golde enameled with blac and white, with an owche of golde enameled white and blew: Set with a great rockey Rubye: One rocky Emerawde: One pointed Dyamant. One table Dyamant. A harte of a Dyamant, rising ful of Lozanges. And one fayer hinging perle.
4. Item, Another Carkeyne of lynks of gold. The one enameled blac, the other gold: having an owche of golde, set with a great rockey ba∣lasse: two smal table Dyamants; and one Lozanged Dyamant. Five slight perles, and one long perle pendaunt therat. 5. Item, Another Carkeyne of gold, garnished thorowly with xxij co∣letts of dyamants, contening in al lxxvij diamant smal and great: and xliij perles, with an owche of Antique, set with xiiij dyamants, one rockey Rubye, and one rockey Emerawde; and a flat round hinging perle. 6. Item, Another Carkeyne of golde, enameled blac, with an owche, set with a fayer table balasse, and three smal tryangled dyamants, and five perles. 7. Item, A George on horse back; garnished with xvj smal Dyamants. And in the belly of the Dragon a rockey perle. 8. Item, Another Carkeyne of golde: al blac, having a George on horse∣back; garnished with xviij smal Dyamants. And in the belly of the Dragon a perle ragged. 9. Item, A cheyne of golde, of Spaynishe facion, enameled, white, red and black. NUM. IV. The King to Dr. Boner, his Majesty's Agent, to declare to the Pope his Appeal from him, and his Sentence. By the King. Henry R. TRusty and Welbeloved, we grete ye well. Signifying unto the same,Sir W. H. MSS. that we have appelled from the Popes's Sentence, lately gevyn against us; whiche Appele ye receiving herewith, with a Proxy devised for that intent, Our mind and pleasure is, that if it is thought to you good and beneficial, for conservation of the same, ye intimate the same to the Pope after the order and forme of Lawe, and according to our said proxy sent unto you. And if not, to advertise us of your mind and opynyon in that behalf. Geven under our Signet at our Castell of Windessour, the xviij day of August. To our Trusty and Welbeloved Mr. Doctor Bonner.
NUM. V. Cranmer's Protestation at his Consecration. IN Dei nomine Amen.Cranm. Reg. Coram vobis autentica persona & testibus fide dignis, hic presentibus, Ego Thomas in Cant. Archiepiscopum electus dico, allego, & in hijs Scriptis palam, publicè & expressè pro∣testor: Quod cum juramentum, sive juramenta ab Electis in Cant. Ar∣chiepiscopos summo Pontifici praestari solita, me ante meam Consecra∣tionem, aut tempore ejusdem pro forma potius quam pro esse, aut re obligatoria ad illam obtinendam oporteat; non est, nec erit meae Vo∣luntatis aut intentionis per hujusmodi juramentum vel juramenta, qua∣litercúnque verba in ipsis posita sonare videbuntur, me obligare ad ali∣quod ratione eorundem posthac dicend. faciend. aut attemptand. quod erit aut esse videbitur contra legem Dei, vel contra illustriss. Regem no∣strum Angliae, aut Remp. hujus sui Regni Angliae, legesve aut praeroga∣tivas ejusdem. Et quod non intendo per hujusmodi juramentum aut juramenta, quovis modo me obligare, quominus libere loqui, consulere & consentire valeam, in omnibus & singulis, Reformationem religio∣nis Christianae, Gubernationem Ecclesiae Anglicanae; aut Praerogativam Coronae ejusdem, Reipublicaeve commoditatem, quoquomodo concer∣nentibus, et ea ubi{que} exequi & reformare, quae mihi in Ecclesia Angli∣cana reformanda videbuntur. Et secundum hanc interpretationem & intellectum hunc, & non aliter, ne{que} alio modo, dicta juramenta me praestiturum protestor & profiteor. Protestor{que} insuper, quodcum{que} juramentum sit, quod meus Procurator summo Pontifici meo nomine antehac praestitit, quod non erat intentionis aut Voluntatis meae sibi ali∣quam dare potestatem, cujus Vigore aliquod juramentum meo nomine praestare potuerit contrarium aut repugnans juramento per me praestito, aut imposterum praestando praefato Illustriss▪ Angliae Regi. Et casu, quod aliquid tale contrarium aut repugnans juramentum meo nomine praestitit, Protestor, quod illud me inscio, & abs{que} mea authoritate praestitum, pro nullo & invalido esse volo. Quas Protestationes in om∣nibus clausulis & sententijs dictorum juramentorum repetitas & reitera∣tas volo. A quibus per aliquod meum factum vel dictum quovismodo recedere non intendo, nec recedam. Sed eas mihi semper salvas esse volo. NUM. VI. Cranmer's Oath taken at his Consecration to the Pope. EGO Thomas Electus Cantuariensis ab hac hora, ut antea,Cranm. Reg. fidelis & obediens ero B. Petro▪ Sanctae Apostolicae Romanae Ecclesiae, & Domino meo D. Clementi VII. suisque Successoribus canonicè intran∣tibus. Non ero in consilio aut consensu, vel facto, ut vitam perdant,
vel membrum, seu capiantur mala captione. Consilium verò quod mihi credituri sunt per se aut nuncios, ad eorum damnum, me sciente, nemini pandam. Papatum Romanum, & Regalia S. Petri adjutor eis ero, ad retinendum & defendendum, salvo meo ordine, contra omnem hominem. Legatum Sedis Apostolicae in eundo & redeundo honorifice tractabo, & in suis necessitatibus adjuvabo; Vocatus ad Synodum Ve∣niam, nisi praepeditus fuero Canonica praepeditione. Apostolo∣rum limina Romana Curia existente citra Alpes singulis annis, ultra vero montes singulis biennijs Visitabo, aut per-me, aut per meum nuntium, nisi Apostolica absolvat Licentia. Possessiones vero ad mensam mei Archiepiscopatus pertinentes non vendam, ne{que} donabo, ne{que} impignerabo, ne{que} de novo infeudabo, vel ali∣quo modo alienabo, inconsulto Romano Pontifice. Sic me Deus ad∣juvet, & haec Sancta Dei Evangelia. NUM. VII. Cranmer's Oath to the King for his Temporalties. I Thomas Cranmer renounce and utterly forsake al such clauses, words, sentences,Cleopatra, E. 6. and grants, which I have of the Popes Holines in his Bulls of the Archbishopric of Cant. that in any manner was, is or may be hurtful, or prejudicial to your highnes, your heires, Successors, Estate, or Dignity Royal. Knowing my self to take and hold the said Arch∣bishopric immediately, and only, of your Highnes, and of none other. Most lowly beseeching the same for restitution of the Temporalties of the said Archbishopric; Professing to be faithful, true and obedient subject to your said Highnes, your Heires and Successors, during my life. So help me God, and the holy Evangelists. NUM. VIII. The King's Proclamation for bringing in Seditious Books. IT set forth, that sundry contentions and sinister opinions had by wrong teaching and naughty printed Books encreased among his Subjects,Cleopatra, E. 5. contrary to the true faith and reverence, and due observation of the Sacraments and Sacramentals, rites and ceremonies heretofore used. And as the Books are blamed, so the additions and Annotations in the margents, the Prologues and Kalendars to them made by sundry strange persons, called Anabaptists and Sacramentaries, lately comen into the Realm, and by some other his Majesties Subjects. Wherby many of the Kings loving, but simple Subjects were induced arrogant∣ly and superstitiously to dispute in open places and tavernes upon Bap∣tism, and upon the holy Sacrament of the Altar, not only to their own
slander, but to the reproch of the whole realm, and his Graces high discontentation and displesure, with the danger of the encrease of the said enormities. Therfore the King did streitly charge and command by his present Proclamation, as wel al his subjects, as al others whatso∣ever resiant within his Realm, that from henceforth they observe and keep these Articles following. First, That no person shal without his Majesties special leave, trans∣port and bring from foreign parts, any Books printed in the English tongue, nor sel, give and publish such books, upon pain that the Offen∣ders forfeit al their goods and chattels, and have imprisonment during his Majesties plesure. Item, None to print any book in the English tongue, unless upon exa∣mination made by some of the privy Councel, or other appointed by his Highnes, and shal have Licence so to do. Nor shal print, or bring n any books of the holy scripture in the English tongue with any Anno∣tations in the Margin, or any Prologue, or Addition in the Kalendar or Table, except such annotations, &c. be first duely examined and al∣lowed by the Kings Highnes, or such of his Councel, as shal please his Majesty to assign therto: but only the plain Sentence and Text with a Table or Repertory, instructing the Reader to find readily the Chap∣ters contained in the said Book, and the effects thereof. Nor to print any Book of translations in the English tongue, unles the plain name of the translator therof be contained in the same book, or else that the Printer wil answer for the same, as for his own privy deed: and other∣wise to make the Translator the Printer to suffer imprisonment, and make a fine at the Kings Wil. Item, None using the occupation of printing, shal print or cause to be published any book of Scripture in the English tongue, unles his books be first viewed and examined by the King, or one of his Privy Councel, or one Bishop of the Realm, upon pain to loose and forfeit all their goods and chattels, and suffer imprisonment during plesure. Item, The King declared concerning Anabaptists and other Sacra∣mentaries lately comen into the realm, that he abhorred and detested their errors, and intended to procede against them, that were already apprehended, according to their merits; to thintent his subjects should take example by their punishments not to adhere to such false and dete∣stable opinions, but utterly to forsake and relinquish them. And that whersoever any of them be known, they be detected, and his Majesty or Councel be enformed with al convenient speed, with al maner▪ Abet∣ters and printers of the same opinion. And his Majesty charged the same Anabaptists and Sacramentaries not apprehended or known, that they within eight or ten dayes depart out of the Realm, upon pain of los of their life, and forfeiture of their goods. Item, Forasmuch as the holy Sacrament of the Altar is the very body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, and so hath and ought to be taken upon peril of damnation, his Majesty minded to continue his Subjects in this true and just Faith, and that they be not beguiled away from it, charged that none should henceforth reason or dispute upon the said blessed Sacrament, or of the Mysteries therof, upon pain of los of life and forfeiture of goods. Except to learned men in holy scri∣pture
instructed, and taught in the Universities, their Liberties and privileges in their schools and places accustomed concerning the same; and otherwise in communication without slaunder of any man, for the only confirmation and declaration of the truth therof. Item, And forasmuch as many brooked divers and many laudable ce∣remonies and rites heretofore used and accustomed in the Church of England, not yet abrogated by the Kings authority; Whereby arose different strifes and contentions; as for and concerning holy bread, holywater, processions, kneeling and creeping on Good Friday to the Cros, and Easter day, setting up lights before the Corpus Christi, bear∣ing of Candles on the day of Purification, Ceremonies used at the Pu∣rification of women delivered of child, and offering of their Chry∣somes, Keeping of the four offering dayes, Payment of tiths accord∣ing to the old custom of the Realm, and other such like ceremonies;  Majesty charged and commanded al his subjects to observe and keep them; so as they shal use and observe the same without supersti∣tion, and esteem them for good and lawful ceremonies, tokens and signes to put us in remembrance of things of high perfection, and none otherwise. And not to repose any trust of salvation in them: but take them for good Instructions, until such time as his M. change or abrogate any of them, as his Highnes upon reasonable consideration both may, and intendeth to do. Finally, Whereas a few Priests, as wel Religious as others, have ta∣ken Wives and married themselves, contrary to the wholsome moni∣tions of S. Paul to Timothy and Titus, and to the Corinthians, and con∣trary to the opinion of many of the old Fathers and Expositors of scri∣pture, not esteeming also the promise of chastity, which they made at the receiving of Holy Orders; his Highnes, minding in no wise, that the Generality of the Clergy should, with the example of such a few light persons, procede to mariage without a common consent of his H. and the Realm, doth streitly charge and command, that al such as have attempted mariage, as also such as wil presumptuously pro∣cede in the same, not to minister the Sacrament or other Ministery m∣stical, nor have any office, cure, privilege, profit or commodity, here∣tofore accustomed, and belonging to the Clergy of the Realm: But shal be utterly after such marriage expelled and deprived, and be held and reputed as Lay persons to al purposes and intents. And that such as after this Proclamation shall of presumptuous minds take wives and be maried, shal run into his Graces Indignation, and suffer further punishment and imprisonment at his Graces will and plesure.
NUM. IX. Bishop Fisher to Secretary Crumwel, declaring his willingness to swear to the Succession. AFTER my most humble commendations.Cotton Libr. Cleop. E. 6. p. 172. Whereas ye be con∣tent, that I shold write unto the Kings Highnes, in good faith I dread me, that I cannot be so circumspect in my writing, but that some word shal scape me, wherewith his Grace shalbe moved to some further displeasure against me, wherof I wold be very sorry. For as I wil answer before God, I wold not in any maner of point offend his Grace, my duty saved unto God, whom I must in every thing prefer. And for this consideration I am ful lothe, and ful of fear to write unto his Highnes in this matter. Nevertheless sithen I conceive, that it is your mind, that I shal so do, I will endeavour me to the best I can. But first here I must beseech you, good Master Secretary, to cal to your remembrance, that at my last being before you, and the other Commissioners, for taking of the othe concerning the Kings most no∣ble succession, I was content to be sworn unto that parcel concerning the Succession. And there I did rehearse this reason, which I said moved me. I doubted not, but that the Prince of any Realme, with the assent of his Nobles and Commons, might appoint for his Succes∣sion royal soche an order as was seen unto his Wisdom most according. And for this reason I said that I was content to be sworn unto that part of the othe as concerning the Succession. This is a very truth, as God help my soul at my most nede; albeit I refused to swear to some other parcels, because that my Conscience wolde not serve me so to do. NUM. X. Lee Bishop Elect of Litchfield and Coventry to Secretary Crum∣wel concerning Bp. Fisher. PLeasyth you to be adverted,Cott. Librar. Cleop. E. 6. p. 165. that I have been with my Lord of Ro∣chester, who is as ye left him: that is to say, ready to take his othe for the Succession, and to swear never to meddle more in dispu∣tation of the validity of the Matrimony, or invalidity, with the Lady Dowager; but that utterly to refuse. For as for the case of the prohi∣bition Levitical, his conscience is so knit, tha he cannot send it off from him, whatsoever betide him. And yet he wil, and doth profess his Allegiance to our Soveraign Lord, the King, during his life. Tru∣ly the man is nigh going, and doubtless cannot continue, unles the King and his Council be merciful unto him. For the body cannot bear the clothes on his back, as knoweth God. Who preserve you. In hast scribbled by your own most bounden. Roland Co. & Litch. electus & con∣firmatus.
NUM. XI. The Archbishop to Secretary Crumwel, in behalf of Bp. Fisher, and Sr. Thomas More. Right Worshipful Master Crumwel, Cotton Libr. Cleop. E. 6. p. 181.AFTER most hearty Commendations, &c. I doubt not but you do right wel remembre, that my Lord of Rochester and Master More were contented to be sworn to the Act of the Kings Succession, but not to the Preamble The Pre∣amble to this Act may be read in the History of the Reforma∣tion, Part I. p. 145. of the same. What was the cause of thair refusal thereof, I am uncertain, and they wold by no means express the same. Nevertheless it must nedis be, either the diminution of the authority of the Bushop of Rome, or ells the reprobation of the Kings first pretensed Matrimony. But if they do obstinately persist in thair opinions of the Preamble, yet, me semeth, it scholde not be refused, if they wil be sworne to the veray Act of Succession: so that they wilbe sworne to maintene the same against al powers and potentates. For hereby shalbe a great occasion to satisfy the Princess Dowager and the Lady Mary, which do think they sholde dampne thair sowles, if they sholde abandon and relinquish thair astates. And not only it sholde stop the mouths of thaym, but also of th' Emperor, and other thair friends, if thay geve as moche credence to my Lord of Rochester, and Master More spekyng and doinge against thaym, as they hitherto have done, and thought that al other sholde have done, whan they spake and did with thaym. And peradventure it sholde be a good quieta∣tion to many other within this reaulm, if such men sholde say, that the Succession, comprized within the said Act, is good and according to Gods lawes. For than I think there is not one within this reaulme, that would ones reclaim against it. And whereas divers persones, ei∣ther of a wilfulness, wil not, or of an indurate and invertible consci∣ence cannot, altre from thair opinions of the Kings first pretensed mariage (wherein they have ones said thair minds, and percase have a persuasion in thair heads, that if they sholde now vary therefrom, thair fame and estimation were distained for ever,) or ells of the au∣thority of the Busschope of Rome: yet if al the Reaulme with one ac∣cord wolde apprehend the said succession; in my judgment it is a thing to be amplected and imbraced. Which thing, although I trust surely in God, that it shalbe brought to pass, yet hereunto might not a little avayl the consent and othes of theis two persons, the Busschope of Ro∣chester, and Master More with thair adherents, or rather Confederates. And if the Kings pleasure so were, thair said othes might be suppres∣sed, but whan and whare his Highness might take some commodity by the publyshing of the same. Thus our Lord have you ever in his conservation. From my maner at Croyden the xvii day of April. Your own assured ever Thomas Cantuar.
NUM. XII. Nix Bishop of Norwich to Warham Archbishop of Cant. for suppressing such as read books, brought from beyond Sea. AFter most humble recommendations,Cleopatra, E. 5. I do your Grace to under∣stand, that I am accumbred with such as kepyth and readyth these arroneous books in English, and beleve and geve credence to the same, and techyth others, that they shold so do. My Lord, I have done that lyeth in me for the suppression of soch persons; but it passeth my power, or any spiritual man for to do it. For divers saith openly in my Diocess, that the Kinges grace wold, that they shold have the said arroneous books, and so maintaineth themselves of the King. Wherupon I desired my L. Abbot of Hyde to show this to the Kinges grace, beseching him to send his honorable Lettres, under his Seal, down to whom he please, in my Diocess. That they may show and publish, that it is not his pleasure, that soche bookes should be had or red; and also punish soch as saith so. I trust before this letter shal come unto you, my said L. Abbot hath done so. That said Abbot hath the names of some, that crakyth in the Kings name, that their false opinions shold go forth, and wil dy in the quarrel, that their un∣gracious opinions be true, and trustyth by Michaelmas day, there shal be more that shal beleve of thair opinion, than they that beleivyth the contrary▪ If I had known, that your Grace had been at London, I would have commaunded the said Abbot to have spoken with you. But your Grace may send for him, when ye please, and he shal show you my whole mynd in that matier; and how I thought best for the suppression of soch as holdyth these arroneous opinions. For if they continue any time, I thynk they shal undoe us all. The said Abbot departed from me on Monday last: and sith that tyme I have had much trouble and business with others in like matters: And as they say, that whersomever they go, they hear say, that the Kings pleasure is, the N. Testament in English shal go forth, and men sholde have it and read it. And from that opinion I can no wayes induce them. But I had greater authority to punish them, then I have. Wherfore I be∣seech your good Lordship, to advertise the Kinges grace, as I trust the said Abbot hath done, before this letter shal come unto your grace; that a remedy may be had. But now it may be done wel in my Diocess: for the Gentlemen and the Communalty be not greatly infected; But merchants, and soch that hath their abiding not far from the Sea. The said Abbot of Hyde can show you of a Curate, and well learned in my Diocess, that exhorted his Parishioners to believe contrary to the Catholic faith. There is a Colledg in Cambridg, called Gunnel haule From whence came Shaxton Bp. of Sarum, and Skip, Q. Annes Chaplain, and Bp. of Here∣ford., of the founda∣tn of a Bp. of Norwich. I hear of no clerk, that hath commen out lately of that Colledg, but savoryth of the frying pan, tho he speak never so holily. I beseech your grace to pardon me of my rude and tedious writing to you: the zeal and love that I owe to Almighty God
cawse me this to do. And thus Almighty God long preserve your Grace in good prosperity and health. At Hoxne the xiiijth. day of May, 1530. Your obediensary and dayly Orator. NUM. XIII. Archbishop Cranmer to King Henry, Complaining of a Prior in Canterbury, that had preached against him. Cleopatra, E. 6. p. 232.PLesyth it your Grace to be advertised, That wher as wel by your Graces special letters, dated the third day of Iune in the xxvijth. year of your Graces most noble reign, as also by mouth in Wynchester at Mich. last past, your Grace commanded al the Prelates of your Realm, that they with al acceleration and expedition shold do their di∣ligence every one in his Diocess, fully to persuade your people of the Bp. of Rome his authority, that it is but a false and injust Usurpation, and that your Grace of veray right and by Gods law is the Supreme Head of this Church of England, next immediately unto God: I to accomplish your Graces Commandment, incontinent upon my return from Wynchester, (knowing that al the Country about Otford and Knol, where my most abode was, were sufficiently instructed in those matters already) came up into these parts of East Kent onely, by preaching to persuade the people in the said two Articles, and in mine own church at Canterbury. Because I was informed, that that Towne in those two points was least perswaded of al my Diocess. I preach∣ed there two Sermons my self. And as it then chaunced Dr. Leighton was present at my first Sermon, being then your Graces Visitor. Of whom if it so please your Grace you may heare the report what I preached. The scope and effect of both my Sermons stood in three things. First, I declared, that the Bp. of Rome was not Gods Vicar in earth, as he was taken. And although it is so taught these three or four hun∣dred years, yet it is done by means of the Bp. of Rome, who compel∣led men by oaths so to teach, to the maintenance of his authority con∣trary to God's word. And here I declared by what means and craft the Bp. of R. obtained such usurped authority. Seconde, Bycause the See of R. was called Sancta Sedes Romana, and the Bp. was called Sanctissimus Papa; and mennys consciences peradventure could not be quiet to be separated from so holy a place, and from Gods most holy Vi∣car: I shewed the people, that this thing ought nothing to move theym. For it was but a Holines in name. For indeed there was no such holines at Rome. And hereupon I took occasion to declare his glory, and the Pomp of Rome, the Covetousnes, the unchast living, and the maintenance of al vices. Thirde, I spake against the Bp. of R. his lawes. Which he calleth Divinas Lges and Sacros Canones, and makes them equal with Gods Law. And here I declared, that many of the Laws were veray contrary. And some of theym, which
were good and laudable, yet they were not of such holines, as he would make theym; that is, to be taken as Gods laws, or to have re∣mission of sins by observing theym. And here I sayd, that so many of his laws as were good, men ought not to contemne or despise them, and wilfully to break theym. For those that be good your G. hath re∣ceived as laws of your Realm, until such time as others shold be made. And therfore as lawes of your realm, they must be observed, and not contempned. And here I spake as wel of the Ceremonies of the Church, as of the foresaid lawes; that they ought neither to be re∣jected or despised, nor yet to be observed with this opinion, that they of themselfes make men holy, or that they remit sins. For seeing, that our sins be remitted by the death of our Savior Christ Jesus, I sayd, it was too moch injury to Christ, to impute the remission of our sins to any Lawes or ceremonies of mans making. Nor the Laws and ceremonies of the Church at their first making were ordeined for that intent. But as the common lawes of your G's realm be not made to re∣mit sins, nor no man doth observe theym for that intent; but for a com∣mon commodity, and for a good order and quietnes to be observed among your Subjects; evyn so were the laws and ceremonies first in∣stituted in the Church for a good order, and for remembrances of ma∣ny good things, but not for remission of our sinns. And though it be good to observe theym wel for that intent they were first ordened; yet it is not good, but a contumely unto Christ to observe theym with this opinion, that they remit sins; or that the veray bare observation of theym, in it self, is a holines before God: Although they be remem∣brances of many holy things, or a disposition unto goodness. And evyn so do the lawes of your G's realm dispose men unto justice, unto peace, and other true and perfect holines. Wherfore I did conclude for a general rule, that the people ought to observe theym, as they do the laws of your G's realm, and with no more opinion of holines or re∣mission of sin, then the other common Laws of your G's realm. Though my two Sermons were long, yet I have written briefly un∣to your Highness the sum of theym both. And I was informed by sun∣dry reports, that the people were glad, that they heard so much as they did; until such time, as the Prior of the black frears at Canterbu∣ry preached a sermon, as it was thought and reported, clean contrary unto al the three things, which I had preached before. For as touch∣ing the first part, which I had preached against the erroneous doctrin of the Bp. of R. his power; which error was, that by God's Law he should be Gods Vicar here in earth; the Prior would not name the Bp. of R. but under color spake generally, That the Church of Christ never erred. And as touching the second part, where I spake of the Vices of the Bishops of R. And there to the Prior said, that he would not sclawnder the Bishops of Rome. And he said openly to me in a good Audience, that he knew no vices by none of the Bishops of Rome. And he said also openly, that I preached uncharitably, whan I said, that these many years, I had daily prayed unto God, that I might see the power of Rome destroyed: and that I thanked God, that I had now seen it in this realm. And yet in my sermon I declared the cause wherfore I so prayed. For I said, that I perceived the See of Rome work so many things contrary to Gods honor, and the wealth
of this realm, and I saw no hope of amendment, so long as that▪ See reigned over us. And for this cause onely I had prayed unto God con∣tinually, that we might be separated from that See: and for no private malice or displesure, that I had either to the Bp. or See of Rome. But this seemed an uncharitable prayer to the Prior, that the power of Rome should be destroyed. And as for the third part, where I preached against the Laws of the Bp. of Rome; that they ought not to be taken as Gods Lawes; nor to be esteemed so highly as he would have them: the Prior, craftily lea∣ving out the name of the Bp. of Rome, preached, that the Lawes of the Church be equal with Gods lawes. These things he preached as it is proved both by sufficient witnes, and also by his own confession. I leave the judgment hereof unto your G. and to your Councel, whether this were a defence of the Bp. of Rome, or not. And I onely, according to my bounden duty, have reported the truth of the Fact. But in mine opinion, if he had spoken nothing else; yet whosoever saith, that the Church never erred, maintaineth the Bp. of Rome his power. For if that were not erroneous, that was taught of his power, That he is Christs Vicar in earth, and by Gods law Head of al the World, spiritual and temporal, and that al people must believe that De necessitate Salutis, and that whosoever doth any thing against the See of Rome is an heretick: and that he hath authority also in Purga∣tory, with such other many false things, which were taught in times past to be Articles of our Faith: if these things were not erroneous, yea, and errors in the Faith, then must nedis your G's Laws be erro∣neous that pronounce the Bp. of Rome to be of no more power by Gods Law than other Bishops; and theym to be Traitors that defend the contrary. This is certain that whosoever saith, that the Church never erred, must either deny, that the church ever taught any such errors of the Bp. of Rome his power, and then they speak against that which al the world knoweth, and al books written of that matter these three or four hundred years do testifie; or else they must say, that the said errors be none errors, but truths. And then it is both treason and heresy. At my first Examination of him, which was before Christmas, he said, that he preached not against me, nor that I had preached any thing amiss. But now he saith, that I preached amiss in very many things, and that he purposely preached against me. And this he re∣porteth openly. By which words I am marvellously sclawndered in these parts. And for this cause I beseech your G. that I may not have the judgment of the cause: for so moch as he taketh me for a party: but that your G. would commit the hearing therof unto my L. Privy Seal: or else to associate unto me some other persons at your G's ple∣sure, that we may hear the case joyntly together. If this man, who hath so highly offended your G. and preached against me openly, being Ordinary and Metropolitane of this Pro∣vince: and that in soch matters as concerne the misliving and the laws of the Bp. of Rome; and that also within mine own church; if he, I say, be not looked upon, I leave unto your G's. prudence to expend what example this may be unto others with like colour to maintain the Bp. of Rome his authority: and also of what estimation I shal be repu∣ted
hereafter, and what credence shal be given unto my preaching, whatsoever I shal say hereafter. I beseech your G. to pardon me of my long and tedious writing. For I could not otherwise set the matter forth plaine. And I most heartily thank your G. for the Stag which your G. sent unto me from Wyndsor Forest. Which if your G. knew for how many causes it was welcome unto me, and how many ways it did me service, I am sure you would think it moch the better bestowed. Thus our Lord have you Highness alwayes in his preservation and governance. From Ford the xxvj day of August. Your Graces most humble Chaplain and bedisman, T. Cantuarien. NUM. XIV. The Archbishop to Mr. Secretary Crumwel, concerning his styling himself Primate of al England. RIght worshipful in my most harty wise I commend me unto you.Cleop. F. 1. p. 261. Most hartily thanking you for that you have signified unto me, by my Chaplain Mr. Champion, the complaint of the Bp. of Winche∣ster unto the Kings Highnes in two things concerning my Visitation. The one is, that in my style I am written Totius Angliae Primas, to the derogation and prejudice of the Kings high power and authority, being Supreme Head of the Church. The other is, that his Dioces not past five years agone was visited by my Predecessor, and must from henceforth pay the tenth part of the Spiritualties according to the Act granted in the last Sessions of Parlament. Wherfore he thinketh, that his Diocess should not be charged with my Visitation at this time. First, as concerning my style, Wherein I am named Totius Angliae Primas, I suppose that to make his cause good (which else indeed were naught) he doth mix it with the King's cause; (As ye know the man lacketh neither learning in the law, neither witty invention, ne craft to set forth his matters to the best) that he might appear not to maintain his own cause, but the Kings. Against whose Highnes he knoweth right wel, that I wil maintain no cause, but give place, and lay both my cause and my self at my Princes feet. But to be plain what I think of the Bp. of Winchester, I cannot persuade with my self, that he so much tendereth the Kings cause, as he doth his own, that I should not visit him. And that appeareth by the veray time. For if he cast no further then the defence of the Kings G's authority, or if he intend that at al, why moved he not the matier before he re∣ceived my Monition for my Visitation. Which was within four miles of Winchester delivered unto him the xxii. day of April last, as he came up to the Court. Moreover I do not a little mervayl, why he should now find fault rather then he did before, when he took the Bp.
of Rome as chief Head. For though the Bp. of R. was taken for Su∣preme Head, notwithstanding that, he had a great number of Pri∣mates under him. And by having his Primates under him, his Su∣preme authority was not less esteemed, but much the more▪ Why then may not the Kings Highnes, being Supreme Head, have Pri∣mates under him, without a diminishing, but with the augmenting of his said Supreme Authority. And of this I doubt not at all, but the Bp. of Winchester knoweth, as well as any man living, that in case this said style or title had been in any poynt impediment or hindrance to the Bp. of Rome's usurped authority, it would not have so long been unreformed as it hath been. For I doubt not, but all the Bushops of England would ever gladly have had the Archbushops both autho∣rity and title taken away, that they might have been equal together. Which well appeareth by the many contentions against the Archbu∣shops for jurisdiction in the Court of Rome. Which had be easily brought to pass, if the Bushops of R. had thought, the Archbushops titles and styles to be an erogation to their Supreme authority. Al this notwithstanding, if the Bushops of this realm pas no more of their names, styles and titles, then I do of mine, the Kings High∣nes shal soon order the matier betwixt us al. And if I saw, that my style were against the Kings authority (whereunto I am especially sworn,) I would sue my self unto his G. that I might leave it; and so would have done before this time. For I pray God never be merci∣ful unto me at the general judgment, if I perceive in my heart, that I set more by any title, name or style, that I write, then I do by the paring of an apple, further then it shal be to the setting forth of Gods word and will. Yet I wil not utterly excuse me herein. For God must be judge, who knoweth the bottome of my heart, and so do not I my self. But I speak for so much as I do feel in my heart. For many evil affections ly lurking there, and wil not lightly be espied. But yet I would not gladly leave any just thing at the pleasure and suite of the Bp. of Wynchester, he being none otherwise affectionate unto me, than he is. Even at the Beginning of Christs profession Diotrephes desired gerere primatum in Ecclesia, as saith S. Iohn in his last Epistle. And since he hath had mo successors than al the Apostles had. Of whom have come al these glorious titles, styles and pomps into the Church. But I would, that I and al my Brethren, the Bushops would leave al our stiles, and write the style of our Offices, calling our selves Apostolos Ie∣s Christi: so that we took not upon us the name vainly, but were so even indeed. So that we might order our Diocess in such sort, that nei∣ther paper, parchment, lead nor wax, but the very Christian Conver∣sation of the people might be the letters and seals of our offices. As the Corinthians were unto Paul, to whom he said, Literae nostrae & signa Apostolatus nostri vos estis. Now for the second, Where the Bp. of Winchester alledgeth the Vi∣sitation of my Predecessor, and the tenth part now to be payd to the King. Truth it is, that my Predecessor visited the Dioces of Winche∣ster after the decease of my L. Cardinal [Wolsey] as he did al other Diocesses Sede Vacante. But else I think, it was not visited by none of my Predecessors this forty years. And notwithstanding that, he him∣self,
not considering their charges at that time, charged them with a new Visitation within less then half a year after: and that against al right, as Dr. Incent hath reported to my Chancellor: the Clergy at that time paying to the King half of their benefices in five years. Which is the tenth part every year, as they payd before, and have payd since, and shal pay stil for ever by the last Act. But I am very glad, that he hath now some compassion of his Diocess, although at that time he had very smal, when he did visit them the same year, that my Predecessor did visit. And al other Bushops, whose course is to visit this year, kept their Visitations, where I did visit the last year, notwithstanding the tenth part to be paid to the Kings G. Howbeit I do not so in Winchester Dioces. For it is now the third year since that Diocess was Visited by any man. So that he hath the least cause to complain of any Bushop. For it is longer since his Dio∣ces was visited then the other. Therfore where he layeth, to aggra∣vate the matier, the charges of the late Act granted, it is no more against me then against al other Bushops, that do visit this year; nor maketh no more against me this year, then it made against me the last year, and shal do every year hereafter. For if they were true men in accounting and paying the Kings Subsidies, they are no more charged by this new Act, then they were for the space of ten years past, and shal be charged ever hereafter. And thus to conclude, if my said L. of Winchesters objections should be allowed this year, he might by such arguments both disallow al maner Visitations, that hath bee done these ten years past, and that ever shal be done hereafter. Now I pray you, good Master Secretary of your advise, whether I shal need to write unto the Kings Highnes herein. And thus our Lord have you ever in his preservation. At Otteford the 12 day of May. Your own ever assured Thomas Cantuar. NUM. XV. The Appeal of Stokesly Bishop of London to the King, against the Archbishops Visitation. Contra Visitationem Archiep. Cant. FIrst,Cleop. F. 2. p. 124. That the Archbp. of Canterbury in al his Monitions and Wri∣tings, sent to the Bp. Abbots, Prior and Archdeacon of London, concerning this his Visitation, called himself Apostolicae Sedis Legatum: and that therefore the Bp. of London, with the Chapter, did not only advertise the Archbp. therof by their Letters before the day of Visita∣tion: But also the same day of the Commencement threof in the Chapter house of Powles, the said Bp. and Chapter, before the deli∣very of the Certificate to the ABp. made there openly a rotestation,
reading it in writing, signifying, that they would neither accept him as such a Legate, or admit or obey his Visitation, jurisdiction, or any thing, that he would attempt by the pretext or color of that name of Legate, or otherwise, against the Crown of our Soveraign, his Rega∣lity, Statutes, or customes of his realm. And required the said Archbp. to command his Register there present to enact the said Prote∣station. Which he refused utterly to do; shewing himself not wil∣ling to admit the said Protestation. Item, That the Archbp. in his said Monition to the Bp. did expresly intimate and signify to him▪ that he would in his Visitation suspend al the jurisdiction of the Bp. the Dean and Archdeacons from the begin∣ning thereof to the ending. In such wise, that the Bp. nor his Offi∣cers, Dean nor Archdeacon, should or might at that time, (which he would not determine how long it should endure) use no jurisdiction, whatsoever causes or necessities should chance of correction, instituti∣ons of benefices, Confirmations of Election, Consecrations of Churches, Celebrations of Orders, or Probation of Testaments, with many other things mo appertaining ad forum contentiosum. But al and every of these the Archbp. and his [Officers] would have, and suffer none other to use and exercise the same, unto the end of his Visitation. Which he hath now continued until the first day of December: pre∣tending, that then he may likewise continue it other six months, and so forth without end at his plesure during his life, from time to time. So that by this means he only, and none other, should be Bp. but Titu∣laris, in all his Province during his life, but at his plesure. Which were an inconvenience intolerable, and such as never was read nor heard of, that ever any Metropolitan, private Legate or Bp. of Rome, in the most Tyranny had usurped the semblable. Item, That al men learned, and Books of the Canon Law doth ag∣gree, that no Metropolitan or Primate, may thus, by any law writ∣ten, suspend al the jurisdiction of the Bishops, for the time of their Visitations, or exercise the premises during the same Iure Metropoli∣tico. And this the Councel of the Archbishop doth not deny, nor cannot. Item, Where the said AB. doth pretend, that his Predecessors times past hath put in use and exercise al the premises: And so, though the Common law doth not favor him, yet he may lean to prescription: First, it is to be considered and remembred, that the suspension of al jurisdiction of al the Bishops in maner aforesaid seemeth to be against holy scripture, and the authority given unto them by God; and as it was said before, that Suspension were a thing pernitious, not read, nor heard of, to have bee attempted by the most tyranny of al the Bi∣shops of R., without the great offence of the Bishop. And as for the rest, considering, that none of his Predecessors this hundred years did visit thus his Province; and therfore no man Living can know this by experience, it had been necessary for the Archbp. to have shew∣ed books for the proof of these his sayings and pretences. Which he and his Officers, being therunto desired, as wel before the Visitation, as sithence, ever did refuse and deferr to do. Item, It is to be remembred, that in case it shal appear in any Book of the AB. that his Predecessors have attempted any of the Premisses;
First, that his Predecessors were Legates, and though they did visit jure Metropolitico, yet they might peradventure, as Legates, attempt some things, which they had had no right nor colour to do, if they had be only Metropolitans and Primates. Secondarily, In this behalf and case it is to be remembred, that many of those Archbps. of Canterbury, were not only Legates, but also Chancellors of England. By the which authority they peradventure did enforce and maintain many things at∣tempted against the Law, as the late Cardinal did. And therfore it is to be dissevered what they did as Legates, and what as Metropoli∣tans, and what by force after repealed, and what by right peaceably enjoyed. And not to now jure Metropolitico such things as were done by his Predecessors, as Legates: nor to chalenge prescripti∣on, now the authority of the See of Rome is repealed and here extin∣guished in such things, as were attempted only by the pretext of the authority of that See; or else after were appealed, repealed or resisted. Thirdly, In This cause it is to be remembred, that it appears by the ancient Registers of the Bishops, and their Churches, that when the Predecessors of the AB. did attempt any of these causes aforesaid, the Bishops and their Clergies did appeal to the See of Rome. And divers times they obtained sentences and executions against him: and some remained undecided by the reason of the death of the AB. or Bp. com∣plainant for remedy and redress of the same. In like maner as we, your faithful Subjects have now for this our grief appeled unto your Majesty. Item, It is to be considered, Whether any Metropolitan in other Christen realmes, being now Legate, doth exercise the premisses after the form now here pretended, in his Visitation. And in case they do not, as it is said they do not attempt any such things, but only, in their Visitations Provincial, useth that the Common Law giveth them, then here to be repealed and extinguished for ever. To the intent that the Bishops of R. hereafter shal have no color to maintain and justify, that they keep here yet, and continue the possession of their authority, and of our subjection by their Legate. Saying, that although the AB. doth relinquish the name of a Legate, yet nevertheless he exerciseth such jurisdiction as the Laws never gave to Metropolitans, nor no AB. in Christendome doth exercise (Legates of the See of R. only excepted.) And therfore it is to be provided, that no sparks remain, wherby he might suscitate any such flame, if the matter should come in question. Finally, It is to be remembred, that the Bishops, nor their Clergies do not refuse to accept and obey the Visitation of the AB. as Metro∣politan, and to pay to him proxies due and accustomed. But where the Bishops hath not only the common Laws, but also Bulls and Sen∣tences executed against his Predecessors, and that long before the ma∣king of the Statutes against Provisions, declaring what sums he shal not pass for the Proxies of their Churches, the Officers of the AB. demandeth much more: neither shewing the Law, (for there is none to bear them) nor yet precedent or example in any ancient books, wherby they might be satisfyed. Which done he should without dif∣ficulty or grudge, have forthwith al his Proxies upon the conclusion of his Visitation. Unto the which time it is not due in mony. Many
other things and considerations there be, to be alledged concerning the premisses: which may be spoken in time and place, as the debating of the matter shal require. And for a conclusion, it may please your Majesty to be advertised, that if my Lord of Cant. can shew by antient precedents, that any his Predecessors have used peaceably the premisses without interruption, and so have enjoyed the same, those precedents shewed and brought in presence, allowed also by your learned Councel in the lawes spiritual, to be precedents sufficient, and of authority in this behalf, We shal then immediately in al the premisses, obey the said ABp. without any further contradiction: In this our so doing, whether we offer him rea∣son or not, we refer us only unto your Majesty, and unto your graci∣ous judgment. Humbly beseeching the same, that for as much as al the Lawes be for us, and this hundred years past: and now also in our dayes we have not heard nor seen the contrary used to the said Lawes: We now most lowly, as your poor and true subjects, desire your Ma∣jesty, that with your gracious favour and license, we may use such de∣fence, as your Lawes, and your high Court of your Parlament, hath politicly provided for us, and other your Subjects. NUM. XVI. An Inventory of the Cathedral church of S. Swithins in Winche∣ster, as it was given in, by the Prior and Convent, to Crum∣well Secretary of State, and the Kings Vicar general over al Spiritual men. C C.C.C. MS. Miscel. G.And first of the things that are abroad in the Church. IMprimis, the nether part of the high Altar, being of plate of gold, garnished with stones. The front above being of brodering work and pearls, and above that a Table of Images of silver and gilt, gar∣nished with stones. Item, Above that Altar a great Cross, and an Image of plate of gold, garnished with stones. Item, Behind the high Altar S. Swithens shrine, being of plate silver and gilt, and garnished with stones. Item, In the body of the Church a great Cros, and an Image of Christ and Mary and Iohn, being of plate silver and partly gilt. Item, A cros of plate of silver and gilt with an Image over the Iron dore. And the two Images of Mary and Iohn are but Cop∣per gilt.
The Inventory of the Sextre. Iewels of Gold. Imprimis, There are in the Sextre five Crosses of gold, garnished with precious stones. And one of the five is but of plate of gold fixed upon Wood. Item, One shrine of plate of gold garnished with precious stones. Item, One little pair of Candlesticks of gold. Item, One little box of gold with his cover to bear the H. Sacrament. Item, Three chalices of gold, and one of them garnished with precious stone. Item, One little pax of gold. Item, One little sacring bel of Gold. Item, Four Pontifical rings of gold with precious stones. Item, One pectoral of gold set with stones. Item, One Pectoral, partly gold, partly silver, and gilt, set with stones. Item, Two Saints armes of plate of gold, garnished with stones. Item, S. Philips foot, covered with plate of gold, and with stones. Item, A book of the four Evangelists, written al with gold; and the utter side is of plate of gold. Iewels of Silver. Imprimis, One Table of our Lady, being of silver and gilt. Item, Nine crosses of silver and gilt, and one of Cristal. Item, One and twenty shrines, some al silver and gilt; and some part silver and gilt; and part copper and gilt; and some part silver and part ivory, and some copper and gilt, and some set with garnished stones. Item, Twelve chalices of silver and gilt, belonging to the Sextre, and to the Altars, and chauntries founded in the Church. Item, Four Paxes of silver and gilt belonging to the Sextre, and other Altars. Item, Six casts of Candlesticks belonging to the Sextre, and the Chauntries, being of silver and gilt. Item, One Candlestick of silver, belonging to S. Swithens shrine. Item, Six pair of Cruits of silver belonging to the Sextre and Chauntries. Item, Seven Censers of silver and gilt. Item, Two Sarys, one of silver and gilt, and the other only of silver. Item, Three pair of Basins of silver and gilt. Item, Two Ewers, one of them silver and gilt, and the other only silver. Item, Six Images of silver and gilt. Item, One and thirty Collars, six of them garnished with plate of silver, and gilt, and stones; the residue of brodering work and pearls. Item, Six pectorals of silver and gilt, garnished with stones. Item, Three pastoral staves of silver and gilt.
Item, One Pastoral staf of an Unicorns horn. Item, Three standing Mitres of silver and gilt, garnished with pearls and precious stones. Item, Ten old Mitres, garnished with pearls and stones, after the old fashion. Item, One Rectors staf of Unicorns horn. Item, Four Processional staves of plates of silver. Item, Four sacring bells of silver and gilt, belonging to the Sextre and Altars. Item, Nine pixes of Christal, partly garnished with silver and gilt. Item, Seven tables with Relicks fixed in them; and four of them are of plate of silver and gilt, and the three other of copper and gilt. Item, Five Saints heads, and four of them of plate of silver and gilt, and the first painted. Item, Three Saints armes, two of them covered with plate of silver and gilt, and the third is painted. Item, Seven books, the outer parts of them being plates of silver and gilt. Item, One Book of K. Henry the Sevenths foundation, covered with velvet, and garnished with bosses of silver and gilt. Copys. Imprimis, One principal Cope of needle work, wrought with gold and pearles. Item, One Chysible. Two Tymasyles, and parel of the Albes of the same work, of my L. Cardinal Beaufords gift. Item, Eight and twenty other Copys of divers other works and co∣lors, and divers mens gifts. Item, Forty two Copys of tisshew: the one half of them blew, and the other of red. Item, Twenty Copys of red bawdkyne, wrought with Connes▪ Item, Eight white Copys. Four of them of White Velvet, and the other four of White Damask, brodered with white red roses. Item, Eight and twenty Copys of White Bawdkyne, woven with copper gold. Item, Nine and twenty Copys of blew silk, woven with rayes of gold. Item, Thirty other Copys of divers colors and works; and many of them perished. Chysybils, Tynnikyls [Tunicles] and Stolys. Item, Imprimis, Eleven principal Chysybils with Tynnikyls, of di∣vers sorts, and suites. Item, Six and thirty old Chysybils of divers colors and works, and bene commonly used, and some of them perused. Item, Fourteen stolys of needle work.
Hangings for the Altars. Item, Eight divers hangings for the high Altar, some of them pre∣cious, and some of them of les value. Item, One and twenty pair of Hangings for the Altars of the Church. Vestments, Albes, &c. Item, Twelve Albes of silk. Item, Of linnin Albes, belonging to the Sextre and other Altars 326. Item, Vestments belonging to the Altars and Chauntries are of di∣vers Values and works, to the number of twenty six. Item, Corporows cases, and Corporaws thirty six. Item, Altar cloths of Diaper, and linnin One and twenty. Item, Mas books thirteen, belonging to the Sextre and Altars. The Inventary of our Ladies Chappel. Imprimis, Five little shrines of copper and guilt. Item, Three chalices of silver and gilt. Item, Two Paxes, the one of silver and gilt, and the other of silver. Item, Two pair of Beads, and silver and gilt, being but of ten stones a piece. Item, Three chappels of divers suites. Item, Two Copys of silk. Item, Thirteen Albes, and three of them white silk. Item, Three Collars for the three Altars of silk, garnished with plate of silver and gilt, and with stones. Item, Four Altar cloths of linnin. Item, Two Altars of silk for the Altar. The Inventory of the Priors house. Imprimis, Six salts, with three covers of silver and gilt. Item, Six spoons of silver and gilt. Item, Five and twenty other spoons of silver. Item, Three standing Cups; one plain, and other two swaged with their Covers of silver and gilt. Item, Seven bollis of silver and gilt with one Cover. Item, Six silver cupps with one Cover. Item, Four nuts with three covers. Item, Two Masers with one cover. Item, Two silver Basins with their Ewers. Item, Two Gallon pots of silver and gilt, to serve Peter and Paul. Item, Two smal silver pots. Item, Two chalices of silver and gilt.
The Inventary of the Subpriors house. Item, Two salts of silver and gilt with a Cover. Item, One little salt of silver with a Cover. Item, Three silver peeces. Item, Eighteen silver spoons. Item, Three old Masers perused. The Inventary of the Hordars house. Item, Two Salts of silver and gilt with a Cover. Item, One standing Nut with a Cover. Item, Three silver peeces. Item, Eighteen silver spoons. Item, Three old Masers perused. The Inventary of the Fratrie. Imprimis, One standing Cup of mother pearle, the foot and Cover being of silver and gilt. Item, Two great bollys of silver. Item, One standing Cup of silver and gilt with his Cover. Item, One standing Massar with a Cover of Wood. Item, Three great bollis of Wood with bonds of silver and gilt. Item, Seven and thirty silver spoons of divers fashions. Item, Four old Massars perused. NUM. XVII. A Reply to the Archbishop, against his Court of Audience. Cleopatra, F. 1. p. 88.TO the first, His Protestation sheweth no more, but that he is not to be suspected to keep that Court of his Audience by the authority of any Legacy from Rome, as by the name of Legate of Rome. But forasmuch as no ABp. within Christendom hath, nor never had, any authority to keep any such Court by the reason of the ABric, but only Legates of the See of Rome. Which Legates what vexations and oppressions they have done by the pretence thereof, not only to Or∣dinaries, but also to the Layfee, by calling of poor men from the fur∣thest parts of the realm to London for an halfpeny candle, or for a little opprobrious word, as was declared and proved plainly in this Parlia∣ment: Which was a great cause of making of a Statute to remedy that, before the Statute of the abolishment of the Bishops of Romes authority within this realm: Insomuch that this execution of Legacies in other jurisdictions and realms, hath been one of the greatest and in∣tolerablest usurpations of the Bp. of Rome these many years among the Commonalty, and therfore a thing most necessary of reformation: in
consideration of the premises no ABp. can exercise this authority, ex∣cept he implyeth to al the world (tho he speak it not, nor write it not) that he is a Legate of the See of Rome. And in case it shal please the Kings Grace to give like authority, notwithstanding so ma∣ny incommodities to his Graces Subjects by the use therof, and not one commodity at al to be abyden by, it should seem better to give it to some other by special Commission at his Grace's pleasure. Wherby it shal be known certainly to come from his Grace rather than to join it to the ABps See: Wherby the old poyson might stil lurk and break out one day again, if it should chance some to be ABp. of Cant. that would change their copy, as hath been in times past. And moreover, if his Grace should make his Legate, it should per∣adventure derogate the power of his Graces General Vicar. And if both should occupy, then shall the people so much the rather take oc∣casion to think and say, that his Graces Vicar exerciseth the power of a Legate by his Graces authority, and the ABp. of Canterbury, by au∣thority of the Bp. of Rome. And where the ABp. saith, that he seeth no cause, why he should not keep that Court, at the lest, by authority of the Act of Parla∣ment, as al others enjoy by that Act al things, that they had before from the See of Rome; it seems that he never read the said Act; nor yet can discern betwixt a thing absolute, that may endure without a Dependence, and an Advouson in gross, and a thing that standeth in a continual Dependence, as Service to the Seignory. For Exemptions and Dispensations, and such others be Absolutes, depending nothing of the Grantor after his Grant. But Legacies be but respectives: And as no longer Lord, no longer Service, so no longer Bp. of Rome Lord here, no longer his Vicar, which was but his Servant: as appeareth by the text of his Legacy▪ whereof these be the words in the Chapter, Quum non ignoretis De officio Legati, qui in Provincia sua vices nostras ge∣rere comprobatur. And the Act of Parlament which he allegeth is so plain to every Reader, that it cannot be drawn with twenty team of Oxen to stretch to the continuance of this Court of his Audience. It is in the xxjth. Chapter of the Session Anno xxv. and in the xxvjth. leafe in the latter end. The words therof there be these: Provided al∣wayes that this Act, or any thing therin contained shal not hereafter be taken, nor expounded, to the derogation, or taking away, of any Grants or Confirmations of any Liberties, Privileges or Jurisdicti∣ons of any Monasteries, Abbies, Priories, or other Houses or Places exempt; which before the making of this Act, have been obtained at the See of Rome, or by the authority thereof. Loo, this Act speaketh only of Exemptions, which is a thing absolute: and that on∣ly of Houses exempt, and of their Jurisdictions. Which might be suf∣fered upon their few Parochians and neibours; as Prebends have in their Cathedral churches. But this Act speaketh not of no jurisdicti∣on universal of Archbishops, Bishops, or other person. Legacy is of that other sort, and universal jurisdiction depending on him, that usurp∣ed an universal authority through the world. And considering, that the Bp. of Cant. beside al the Courts within his own Diocess, keepeth in London a Court at the Arches, sufficiently authorized to hear and to determine al causes and complaints apper∣taining
to a Metropolitane; why should he require this other Court of the Audience, to keep it in London, within the Church and jurisdi∣ction of another Bp. except he mnded to call other Bps. obedientially out of their jurisdiction, contrary to the Act? Or else at the lest, foras∣much as this Court is kept within the Church and jurisdiction of Lon∣don, and the Arches Court within the city, but not within the jurisdi∣ction, if he may not vex the Citizens and Diocesans of London at the Arches, without an Appele first from the Ordinary immediately, be∣cause of the Canon Lawes, yet he might pul them to his Audience at Pauls, as he did heretofore by his Legacy, and yet offend not that Act made anno xxiij. That no man shall be called out of his own Diocess. And where the ABp. saith, that the Kings Grace bad him continue that Court stil, it is to be marvelled, that he then hath not, in his Ci∣tations and other wrirings of that Court, expressed or signified the same, as he did cal himself in al his Writings Legatum Apostolicae Sedis long after that Act of the Abolishing. NUM. XVIII. Archbishop Cranmers order concerning the Proctors of the Court of Arches, shewn to be inconvenient, by a Paper presented to the Par∣lament, as followeth. Cleop. F. 1. p. 91.ALthough it be expedient, that every thing, which any way may be noyful unto the common wele, be duely reformed; yet is there nothing that should be rather looked upon for Reformation, than such abuses as may be occasion of not indifferent ministration of ju∣stice. Wherfore among so many things, as heretofore hath been wel and condignely reformed, touching other the Spiritualty or the Tem∣poralty, there is nothing that requireth speedyer Reformation, than a certain Ordinance Lately procured in the Court of the Arches at Lon∣don, by the means of the Proctors there, for the advancement of their singular wil only. By which may and do come divers abuses in the said Court, and occasion not indifferent ministration of justice, and chargeable and prolix process there. The effect whereof is this. The Proctors of the said Court of Arches hath of late, upon feign∣ed suggestion, surmised unto the most reverend Father in God, my Lord Archbp. of Canterbury, President and Head of the said Court, to have been for the common wele and ease of his Provincialls, indu∣ced his Grace to make such an Ordinance or Statute in the said Court of the Arches, That wher heretofore, there were in the same twenty or four and twenty Proctors, and my said Lords G. at his liberty al∣wayes to admit mo or fewer Proctors there, as should be seen expedi∣ent to his G. for the sufficient attending of the causes there depending for the time; there shuld be from thenceforth no mo admitted Proctors
there, until the said nombre of Proctors, than being there, were de∣creased, and come down to the nombre of Ten: and than the said nombre of Ten Proctors never after to be exceeded. And further∣more lest my said Lords G. might be advertised afterwards, upon bet∣ter causes and considerations, to dissolve the said Statute, as his Prede∣cessors did alike other Statutes, made in semblable cause long before: the said Proctors knowing, that his G. would, as alwayes did, apply himself to that thing that shuld be most profitable for the Common wele; and intending to take away that liberty from him, abusing also his G's benignity and good zeal, to the restraint of his liberties, and ulfilling of their covetous intent; incontinently upon the obtaining of the said Statute, procured the same to be confirmed by the Chapter and Convent of Christ's church in Canterbury. So that by reason of the same confirmation, my said Lords G. ne his Successors cannot, as the said Proctors do pretend (though they see never so good a cause ther∣to) infringe, ne dissolve the same. And so therby made in maner an Incorporation among them, tho they call it not so. Wherin be it considered, whether they have first offended the King's Laws, which do prohibit such Incorporations to be made without li∣cence had of the King's Highness first thereunto. And though all In∣corporations in any mystery or faculty be not lightly to be admitted, in this case, wherupon depends good or evil ministration of justice, most of al such Confederacies are to be eschued. Also the said Statute is divers wayes noyful to the Commonwele of this Royalm, and prejudicial to the King's G. Subjects in the same, and occasion of divers abuses in the said Court hereafter to be declared. But because the said Proctors are persuaded, that my said Lord of Can∣terbury cannot himself Dissolve the same, and seeing that no man wil lighty contend alone with al the said Proctors for the Dissolving there∣of, (For though it touch every man generally, no man singularly wil suppose the same to touch him so moche, that he should for the impug∣nation of the same put himself in business against so many and so rich a company, as the said Proctors be) it were not only expedient, but al∣so necessary, for the indifferent and speedy ministration of justice in the said Court, that his said unreasonable Statute were infringed and dis∣solved by the authority of this present Parliament, (where al other abuses and excesses noyeful to the Commonwele ought to be reform∣ed,) for these causes following. First, The said Statute is prejudicial unto the Commonwele, because it is occasion of prolix sutes and superfluous delayes in the said Court, else more necessary to be restrained than augmented. For the said nombre of Ten Proctors appointed by the said Statute is unsufficient for the speedy and diligent attending of mens causes in the said Court, tho al Ten were procuring there at once: as it is not like but that three or four of the same shal bee alwayes impotent or absent▪ For such they ac∣count also with the nombre of Ten. And besides that the same Ten or fewer, that shal be onely procuring, shal serve not onely for the said Court of the Arches, but also for my said Lord of Canterburies Audi∣ence (wherein be as many causes as in the Arches) and for the Consi∣story of the Bp. of London. For by the Statutes of both the same Courts
of Audience and Consistory, there is no man admitted to procure in the same, unless he be a Proctor admitted first in the Arches. So that so few Proctors, appoynted for so many causes as shal be under travayl in al the said Courts, can never be able to speed their business without great delayes taking. For heretofore when there were in the said Court twenty Proctors continually occupying, and more, it hath been seen, that divers of theym hath been than so overlayd with causes, that they were driven to take oft and many delayes and Prorogations ad idem, for to bring in their matiers, libells and plees. Than moche more must they do the same now being but Ten of theym. And most of al, when of the same Ten there shal be, (as like it is alwayes to be,) three or four absent or impotent, Undoubtedly they must needs use infinite delayes. Which had else rather more need to be restrained, then that any occasion shuld be yet given of more using the same. For by reason of the same the King's Subjects, called to the same Court, are put to great expences, tedious Labour, and loss of time. And therefore divers, that have good right to many things pleadable in the said Courts, had lever re∣nounce and forgoe their interest in the same, than enter so desperate a Sute in the said Courts therefore. Also mens causes cannot be diligently attended by so few Proctors. And men shalbe destitute of councel (whereof shuld be alwayes plen∣ty in every Court.) And through the negligence of the Proctors, that they must be than of, whan they shal have so much busines, divers good causes must needs perish, for lack of good looking unto; as likely may be: for the forgetting one houre, or mistaking of a word, doth in the said Courts other whiles marr the best matier. And it is impossible, that the said Ten Proctors only shal be able to apply accordingly al the causes, that shalbe depending in al the said Courts, as Proctors of duty shuld. For a Proctor's office is Laborious, and requireth much business. First, a Proctor must take sufficient instructions of his Clients, and keep every Court-day, remember eve∣ry hour, that is appointed him to do any thing at; solicite and instruct his Advocates; write and pen every Instrument that shalbe requisite to be made in the matiers. And whosoever of the Proctors, that shal be negligent or forgetful in doing any of these his matiers, must needs de∣lay. But so few Proctors as be appoynted by the said Statute are not able not only to do so in each matier, but also scant able to remember their Clients names, for so many that they shal than have. Each ma∣tier, if it were exactly applied, and men able so to do, would require a Proctor alone. But because every man is not able to find a Proctor for every one matier, it were best, next the same, that there were so many Proctors appoynted, as might most easily apply their causes, as they shuld. And though that were less profit to the said Proctors, whose wele is best, when they are most charged with busines: yet it shuld be more profit for the Common wele, whose interest were to have causes speedily and diligently applied in the said Courts. Also, the fewer that there be of the said Proctors, the sooner may they agree among theymselves to give delayes each to other: because that one may have the same leave, that he gave the other: as they do in termes to Prove. Where, to each of the three termes, which they
cal Terminos ad proband. a month would suffice, though they dwelled never so far from the Court within this Royalm; they take now by cross sufferance of each other of theym a quarter of a year commonly for each of the same three termes. Which were enough and too moche, though the parties dwelled in Paris. Which delayes though they be nothing profitable, ne commodious for the poor Suitors, be both profi∣table to the said Proctors; by reason that the causes are kept thereby the longer in their hands. And also commodious by reason, that they, being greatly occupied, should have the longer time to do their busi∣ness in. And for like consideration the said Proctors do omit commonly in every matier a certain oath ungeven, called Iuramentum Calumpniae, which is the best provision ordained in al the said Law of Civil and Ca∣non, for the restraint of unlawful Suites and prolix processes. The ef∣fect wherof is this. Both parties being in suite, or their Proctors, shal by the same oath swear, first the Plaintiff, That he believeth himself to have a just cause to sue; and the Defendant, a just cause to defend. Secondarily, That neitherof them shal use any unlawful delayes, where∣by justice may be deferred or letted. Thirdly, That either of theym, whan they shal be asked by the Judge, shal answer truly to every thing, that is asked of theym according to their belief. Fourthly, That there is nor shal be nothing geven, ne promised, to the Judge, or any other Officer, but only the Fees and duty permitted by the Law. And fiftly, That neither of them shal use, ne procure, any false witnes wittingly in the matier. Which Oath, if it were given in every matier, as it shuld be, there shuld not be so many wrongful causes attempted and kept in the said Courts, nor so many delayes, as in the same. But because that neither of both standeth with the profit of the said Proctors, by common assent and cross sufferance of each another of theym, they omit the same most commonly not only ungeven, but also not spoken of. And if they say, that they do so, because that oft accustoming of oaths maketh men to set less by an oath; Truth it is that it doth so. And therefore the said oath ought to be chiefly commended. For the geving of the same but once in any matier shuld excuse them from geving of many other oaths requisite. And where one shuld serve for al, better it were for avoyd∣ing of too oft swearing, that the same alone shuld be given, and al others omitted, than that it alone shuld be left, that al the other doth supply. Also, The said Statute of Ten Proctors may be occasion, that the same shal wax hault, arrogant, negligent, and loth to take paines, and excessive in taking, by reason that they shuld be so few. As we see experiently in al other faculties, where fewest Occupiers be of the same trust, they be most dangerous, and hardest to be gotten to do their faculties, and most excessive in taking for the same: as scarcity or ra∣rity of any thing else maketh the same dear. For whan there be few of a faculty, they know than that be they never so excessive in taking, or negligent in their doing, they shal be occupied wel enough: whan men can have no other choice but of a few, that be al alike agreed upon the price of every thing; as they may soon do, whan they be but a few. Where if they were many, al shuld be contrary.
Moreover, the said Statute of Ten Procters may be occasion, that justice shuld not indifferently procede in the said Courts for lack of lawful defence. As if the Juges of the said Courts, or any of theym, be affectionate in any matier depending before them (as it may be that the Juges there shal not be alwayes of such integrity as they be of, that be there now,) the said Proctors dare not be retained on his part, that the Juge doth not favor: or if they be retained, they dare not purpose [propose] their Client's best Interest and remedy, if the same do any thing offend the said Juges affection. By reason that the said Proctors be removeable from their Proctors offices at the said Juges plesure, and the same made so beneficial unto theym by reason of the said Statute. Than, whan the said Proctors shalbe in such fear of the said Juges, to speak in matier of Instance, where the Juge doth bear but a light af∣fection to another man: moch more wil they be so in cases of office, where the Juge is party himself, and hath his own matier in hand. And no mervail, if they dare not speak in such. For it hath not been sel∣dome seen, and heard there, that it hath been spoken unto such Pro∣ctors, as hath spoken any thing constantly, or freely, in their Clients causes, by the Juges aforesaid, Non es amicus Curiae: and that they were threatned of expulsion from their Offices, and put to silence. Yet no law forbiddeth the contrary, but that every man shuld have his lawful defence, yea, against the Juge himself. But if there were many Proctors in the said Courts, the Juges could not so lightly keep them al in such subjection and fear of theym. Nor than the said Proctors shuld not have so great cause to fear theym so moche, seeing their offices shuld not be so beneficial unto theym than. And less shuld they yet fear to purpose their Clients right duely, if it were ordeined, that the same Proctors shuld not be removeable from their Offices, at the said Juges plesure, (as heretofore they were; and now are) but only for certain great offences proved afore indif∣ferent Juges, to be committed by theym after their admission. And by reason, that the said Proctors be so abandonned unto the said Juges, where men had most need of trusty Councillors, there they be most de∣stitute of the same, as when the Juge is not indifferent. For the par∣tiality of a Juge is more to be feared, than the manifest malice of an Adversary. For the tone hurteth privily, and is able to execute his malice: and the tother doth apertly al that he goeth about. And a man may provide for the avoiding of the intent. And he is not so able to execute his purpose as the tother is. And though partiality of any Juge is to be greatly feared, yet most of al in the Courts spiritual: where al depends upon the Juges hands, and that one man's com∣monly. For which partiality the remedy of appeal was first invented. Which remedy, like as it was at the first most wholesomely provided for the avoyding of the iniquity of partial Juges; so it is now most wick∣edly abused for the maintenance of evil doers in their wrongful causes and avoyding of due execution of justice, by reason that they be infi∣nite: especially, after the Canon law. For by Civil, there is but ap∣pellation permitted; and that not without penalty on him that shal than appeal without cause: and that is more reasonable.
For like as it is dangerous to abide one mans jugement, so it is unrea∣sonable that a man should abide the jugements of never so many. And therfore it were very expedient, that the same Appeals were restrain∣ed somewhat. For of theym it is chiefly long, that matiers be in ma∣ner infinite in the said Courts. And that may be the better done, by rea∣son that there be two Legates within this Royalm. Which were so appoynted, because that they might determine al matiers spiritual within this Royalm, without moche recourse to Rome, being so far from this Country. To the foresaid inconveniences may come also, through the same sta∣tute, this abuse following: that is to wit, if there be a mightier or a richer man, that do sue a poorer man in the said Courts; the richer man may the sooner, by reason that there be so few Proctors, retain the most part and the best learned of theym. And the other Proctors, by reason that they shal be than so wealthy through their great occu∣pying, which they shal have, whan they be so few, wil rather set more by the same great mens favor, than the poor mans fee. And therfore wil ether refuse to be retained of the poor mans party; or whan they be retained they wil be slack in doing their duty, for fear of displeasing the same great men. Where if there were many Proctors, their Offi∣ces would not be excessive gainful, but that they set as moche by their fees, as by any mans plesure lightly. Also, the said Statute is a great discourage to young men to leave their Studies in the Law. For by the same the reward of Study is ta∣ken away, and possest by a few. And the fewer that be promoted for their Learning, the fewer wil study to attain the same. And to this, it may be occasion, that the said Proctors be not so wel learned, nor so diligent, whan they are so few, as they would be, if they were many. For whan there is choise enough of theym, they that are best learned, and most diligent shal be alwayes most resorted. And than shal they study every man to excel other in learning and di∣ligence, whan they se such chiefly resorted unto. And so no man wil la∣bour than to be a Proctor, unles he be wel learned, seeing that learned men shuld only have al the most resort. And they that be unlearned wil away, and provide theym Livings elsewhere, whan they see theym∣self nothing frequented with causes. Furthermore, the said Statute is plain contrary to their own law of Civil and Canon. For by the same it is permitted for every man to be Proctor for other; but only a few, which are especially and justly excepted by the same, as a Woman, a child, a madd man, and such other. And by the said statute it is prohibited, that no man shal pro∣cure in the said Court for other, but only a few, that are especially admitted therto, and that within a precise and incompetent nombre. The said Law doth except and repel very few; and that of theym that are not meet to procure: and the said statute doth yet admit fewer, and that of theym that are sufficiently qualified to procure. So that White and Black can be no more contrary together, than the said Law and Statute be each to other. And though any man would rather prefer the said Law before the said Statute, if he did but only consider, how that the Law is made so long ago by the concord and discrete opinion of so many great and wise
Clerks and holy men, and afterward approved by continual usage of divers countries, and long succession of time, and experiently known to be wholsomely ordeined for the common wele. And of the tother side, how that the said Statute is but lately made by the procurement of a few private persons for their singular advantage; approved by no tract of time to be profitable for the Common wele; but experiently known to be contrary. Yet beside that, if al that were set apart, the Law is grounded upon better reason, then the said Statute is. For see∣ing a Proctor represents him that he is Proctor for, and may make or marr his Clients matier by one word speaking wel or il; and that the office of a Proctor was first invented for men, that might or would not intend to their own business theymself; it were more consonant with reason, that a man were suffered to take to his Proctor such as he lusteth, and may best trust unto of his matier, than be driven to com∣mit the order of his cause, being mefortune of great weight, to such a one as he never knew, ne saw before. For whan a man is at his choise to choose him what Proctor he lust best, if his matier do delay through the default of his Proctor, than, he can blame no body but himself. For that that he would not take better heed, to whom he should have committed his matier unto. And whan a man is compelled to take one that he knows not, if his matier do than delay, he may put the blame therof to that Statute, that constrained him to take such a Proctor. Nevertheles though the tone of both those ways, that is the same that is taken by the same Law, be moche better than the tother; yet the mean way betwixt both (as of al other Extremes) were best. That is to say, that nother every man unlearned, or unexpert, shuld forthwith be admitted to procure for every man in the said Courts, lest of that there shuld be no good order, but a confuse tumult there: Nor yet that there shuld be so few admitted therunto, that they were not able, ne sufficient, for the due exercise of causes there depending. But most reasonable and highly expedient for the Common wele it is, that it were enacted by the authority of this present Parlament, that there should be as many of such as were sufficiently learned, and exercised in the experience and practise of the said Courts, admitted to procure there, as shuld be seen convenient to my said Lord of Canterbury his Grace, or other Presidents of the said Courts, for the due exercise and expedition of causes there depending; as it was used heretofore, til the obtaining of the said Statute, without prefixion of any precise nombre, which for no cause may be exceded. For how can a precise nombre of Proctors be prefixed, when the nombre of causes can never be ap∣poynted? For causes doth grow and encrease, as the nature of seasons and men doth require. And therfore it were expedient, that there were mo Proctors than shuld suffice admitted, than fewer. For better it were, that some of theym shuld lack causes, than causes shuld want theym. And that such ones, so admitted, shuld not be removeable from the same their Offices at the said Juges, or any other mans, plesure, as they were heretofore: but only for certain great offences proved to be committed by theym after their admission, and juged so to be of indifferent Juges, chosen to examine the same by the consent of the Proctors, that shalbe
accused therof. And because that the Proctors aforesaid are al sworn [at the] time of their admission, that they shal never after be against the Liberty, jurisdiction and prerogatives of the said Courts: but shal maintain and defend the same to their power: And that there may be in the said Courts otherwhiles such causes depending, as shuld ap∣pertaine to the Kings Gs. determination by his Royal Prerogative, or such other as may be there attempted against the Juges or Presidents of the said Courts: It were highly expedient as wel for the Conserva∣tion and soliciting of the Kings interest there, as for the faithful and bold assistence of Proctors there to the Kings Subjects, that were called thither at the instance of the said Juges, or their fautors, or any other person; That like as his Grace hath, in other his Courts temporal, his Solicitors and Atturneys, he shuld also have in his said Courts two Proctors, or so admitted by his G. and his councel, which shuld be sworn to promote and solicite his Gs. interest there, and to advertise the same of any thing, that shuld appertain to his Gs. prerogative, and to defend such of the Kings subjects, as shal desire their assistance, boldly and without fear or affection of the said Juges. And that the same Proctors so admitted be not removeable from the same their offi∣ces by any man, but the Kings G. or his Councel. Which so enacted and established shuld be the readiest means, that the foresaid abuses, with divers others here not rehearsed, caused through the occasion of the said statute, shuld be utterly taken away, and justice more plainly and speedily proceed in the said Courts, than heretofore hath been seen to do. And the Kings subjects called thither from al parts of England shuld have plenty of counsil, faithful assi∣stance in their matters, and speedy process in the same. Which ought to be tendred affectantly of every man, that regardeth the encrease of the Common wele, and true execution of justice. NUM. XIX. The Archbishop to the L. Crumwel giving him some account of his Visitation of his Diocess. THese shalbe to advertise your Lp. that since my last coming from London into Kent,Cleopatra, E. 5. p. 192. I have found the people of my Diocess very obstinately given to observe and keep with solemnity the hali dayes late∣ly abrogated. Wherupon I have punished divers of the Offendors; and to divers I have given gentle monitions to amend. But inasmuch as by examination I have perceived, that the people were partly ani∣mated therto by their Curates, I have given streit commandment and injunction unto al the Parsons and Vicars within my Diocess, upon paine of deprivation of their benefices, that they shal not only, on their behalf, cause the said hali dayes, so abrogated, from time to time not to be observed within their Cures: but also shal from henceforth pre∣sent to me such persons of their Parishes, as wil practise in word or deed contrary to that Ordinance or any other; which is, or hereafter
shalbee, set forth by the Kings Graces authority, for the redress or or∣dering of the doctrine or ceremonies of this Church of England. So that now I suppose through this means all disobedience, and contempt of the Kings Graces Acts and Ordinances in this behalf, shalbe clearly avoyded in my Diocess hereafter. Not doubting also, but if every Bp. in this realm had Commandment to do the same in their Diocess, it would avoyd both much disobedience and contention in this said realm. I would faine, that al the enmity and grudge of the people in this matter should be put from the King and his Councel; and that wee, who be Ordinaries, should take it upon us. Or else I fear lest a grudge against the Prince and his Council, in such causes of religion, should gender in many of the peoples hearts a faint subjection and obe∣dience. But, my Lord, if in the Court you do keep such hali dayes and fasting dayes as be abrogated,This was writ with the ABps own hand. Al the rest of the Letter was his Secretaries: when shal we persuade the people to cease from keeping of theym? For the Kings own House shalbe an example unto al the realm to break his own ordinances. Over this, whereas your Lp. hath twice written for this poor man William Gronnow the bearer hereof to my L. Deputy of Callis, for him to be restored to his room; as far as I understand, it prevayled nothing at al. For so he can get none answer of my L. Deputy. So tha the poor man dispaireth that your request shal do him any good. If your Lp. would be so good to him, as to obtain a bil signed by the Kings Grace to the Treasurers and Controlers of Callis for the time being, commanding theym to pay to the said W. Gronnow his accustomed Wa∣ges yearly, and to none other, your Lp. should not only not further trouble my L. Deputy any more, but also do a right meritorious deed. For if the poor man be put thus from his Living, he were but utterly undone. Thus, my Lord, right hartily fare you wel. At Ford the xxviij day of August. Your Lordships own ever T. Cantuariens. NUM. XX. Richard Grafton the Printer of the Bible to the Lord Crumwel, complaining of some that intended to print the Bible, and thereby to spoyl his Impression. ✚ 1537. Cleopatra, E. 5.MOST humbly beseeching your Lp. to understand, that accord∣ing as your Commission was, by my servant to send you certain Bibles, so have I now done, desiring your Lp. to accept them, as though
they were wel done. And whereas I writ unto your Lp. for a privy Seal to be a defence unto the enemies of this Bible, I understand that your Lps. mind is, that I shal not need it. But now, most gracious Lord, forasmuch as this work hath been brought forth to our most great and costly labors and charges: Which charges amount above the sum of five hundred pounds; and I have caused of these same to be printed to the sum of fifteen hundred books complete: Which now by reason that of many this work is highly commended; there are that wil and doth go about the printing of the same work again in a lesser letter: to the intente that they may sel their little books better cheap then I can sel these great; and so to make that I shal sel none at al, or else very few, to the utter undoing of me your Orator, and of all those my Creditors, that hath been my Comforters and helpers therin. And now this work, thus set forth with great study and labors, shal such persons, moved with a little covetousnes, to the undoing of others for their own private wealth, take as a thing done to their hands. In which half the charges shal not come to them, that hath done to your poor Orator. And yet shall not they do it as they find it, but falsify the text; that I dare say, look how many sentences are in the Bible, even so many faults and errors shalbe made therin. For their seeking is not to set it out to Gods glory, and to the edifying of Christs Congregation▪ but for covetousnes. And that may appear by the former Bibles, that they have set forth; which hath neither good paper, letters, ink, nor correction. And even so shal they corrupt this work, and wrap it up after their fashions, and then may they sel it for nought at their pleasures. Yea, and to make it more truer then it is, therfore Dutch men; living within this realm, go about the print∣ing of it: Which can neither speak good English, nor yet write none. And they wilbe both the Printers and Correctors therof. Because of a little covetousnes, they wil not bestow twenty or forty pounds to a Learned man to take pains in it, to have it wel done. It were therfore, as your Lp. doth evidently perceive, a thing un∣reasonable to permit, or suffer them, which now hath no such busines, to enter into the labors of them, that hath made both sore trouble and unreasonable charges. And the truth is this, that if it be printed by any other, before these be sold, which I think shal not be these three years at the least, that then am I, your poor Orator, undone. Therfore by your most godly favor, if I may obtain the Kings most gracious privilege, that none shal print them till these be sold, which at the least shall not be this three years, your Lordship shal not find me unthankful, but that to the uttermost of my power I wil consider it. And I dare say, that so wil my L▪ of Canterbury, with other my most special friends. And at the last God wil look upon your merciful heart, that considereth the undoing of a poor young man. For truly my whole Living lyeth hereupon. Which if I may have sale of them, not being hindred by any other men, it shalbe my making and wealth, and the contrary is my undoing. Therfore most humbly I beseech your Lp. to be my helper here, that I may obtain this my request. Or else, if by no means this privilege may be had, as I have no doubt through your help it shal; and seeing men are so desirous to be printing of it again, to my utter undoing as aforesaid: that yet forasmuch as it hath
pleased the Kings Highnes to Licence this work to go abroad; and that it is the most pure religion, that teacheth al true obedience, and reproveth al schisms and contentions: and the lack of this word of Almighty God, is the cause of al blindnes and superstition: It may therfore be commanded by your Lp. in the name of our most gracious Prince, that every Curate have one of them, that they may learn to know God, and to instruct their Parishens. Yea, and that every Ab∣by should have six, to be layd in six several places; and that the whole Covent, and the resorters therunto, may have occasion to look on the Lords Law. Yea, I would have none other, but they of the Papistical sort, should be compelled to have them. And then I know there should be ynow found in my L. of Londons Diocess to spend away a great part of them. And so should this be a godly act, worthy to be had in remembrance while the world doth stand. And I know, that a smal Commission wil cause my Lords of Cant. Salisbury and Worseter, to cause it to be done through their Diocesses▪ Yea, and this should cease the whole schism and contention, that is in the realm. Which is, some calling them of the Old, and some of the New. Now should we al follow one God, one Book, and one Learn∣ing. And this is hurtful to no man, but profitable to all men. I wil trouble your Lp. no lenger, for I am sorry I have troubled you so much. But to make an end I desire your most gracious answer by my servant. For the sickness is bryme about us, or would I wait upon your Lp. And because of coming to your Lp. I have not suffered my servant with me, since he came over. Thus for your continual preser∣vation, I, with al that truly love God, do most heartily pray, that you may overcome al you adversaries of the Papistical sort. Your Orator Rychard Grafton. NUM. XXI. Archbishop Cranmer to the King for a Suffragan of Dover. EXcellentiss. & potentiss. in Christo Principi & Dno. nostro Dn. Henrico Octavo Dei gra. Angliae & Fr. regi,ABp Cranm. Regist. Fidei Defensori, & Dno. Hiberniae, ac in terris Supremo Ecclesiae Angl. capiti, Vester hu∣milis Orator & Subditus Thomas permissione divina Cantuar. Archiepi∣scopus, totius Anglie Primas & Metropolit. Omnimod. Reverentiam, & Observantiam tanto principi debit. & condignas cum omni subjectionis honore. Ad sedem Episcopalem de Doveria infra Cantuar. Dioc. exi∣sten. Dilectos michi in Cto. Richardum Yngworth Priorem Domus sive Prioratus de Langley Regis, & Iohannem Codenham, Sacrae Theolog. Professores, juxta & secundum vim, formam & effectum Statuti Parla∣menti hujus inclyti regni vestri Angliae in hoc casu editi & provisi, ve∣strae Regiae Majestati per has literas meas nomino & praesento; ac ei∣dem Majestati vestrae humiliter supplico, quatenus alteri corum, (cui vestra Regia Majestas id munus conferend. praeoptaverit) titulum,
nomen, stylum{que} & dignitatem episcopalem ac Suffraganeam ad Se∣dem praedictam misericorditer conferre. Ipsumque mihi prefato Ar∣chiepiscopo infra cujus Dioc. & Provinciam Sedes antedicta consistit, per literas vestras Patentes regias intuitu charitatis punctare, michique mandare dignetur vestra regia Majestas, quatenus ipsum sic nomina∣tum & praesentatum, in Episcopum Suffraganeum Sedis praedict. juxta formam Statuti praedict. effectualiter consecrem & benedicam▪ caeteraque faciam & exequar in ea parte, quae ad effectum meum Ar∣chiepiscopale spectaverint, seu requisita fuerint in praemissis. Vivat denique & valeat in multos annos vestra regia Celsitudo praelibata in eo, per quem reges regnant, & Principes dominantur. Dat' apud Lambeth primo die mensis Decembr. Anno Domini millesimo quingentesimo tricesimo septimo: & regni vestri florentiss. vicesimo nono. NUM. XXII. The Archbishops letters of Commission to Richard Suffragan of Dover. THomas permissione divina Cant. Archiep. tot. Angl. Primas & Metropolitanus,ABp. Cranm. Regist. Venerabili confratri nostro Dom. Richardo Dei gra. Sedis Doveriae nostrae Diocesios Cant' Suffraganeo, Salutem, & fraternam in Domino charitatem. De tuis fidelitate & circumspe∣ctionis industria plenam in Domino fiduciam obtinentes, ad confirman∣dum sacri chrismatis unctione pueros quoscúnque infra civitatem & Diocesin nostras Cant', & jurisdictiones nostras, & ecclesiae nostrae Christ. Cant. immediatas, ac jurisdictionem nostram villae Calisiae, & mar∣chias ejusdem sub obedientia Excellentiss. Principis, & Domini nostri, Domini Hen. Oct. Dei gratia Angl. & Fr. regis, fidei Defensoris, & Domini Hib. ac in terris sub Christo Ecclesiae Anglic. Capitis Supremi ubilibet constitut. Necnon altaria, calices, Vestimenta, & alia Eccle∣siae ornamenta quaecunque & ea concernen. benedicend. locaque profana siquae inveneris, de quibus te inquirere Volumus, a divinorum celebra∣tione ultime suspendend, Ecclesias etiam & coemiteria sanguinis vel se∣minis effusione polluta forsan vel polluend. reconciliand. Ecclesias & altaria noviter aedificat. consecrand. Omnes ordines minores quibuscun∣que civitatis, Diocesios, & jurisdictionum nostrarum praedictarum ip∣sos ordines a te recipere volentib & ad hoc habilibus ad jurejurando de renuntiando Rom. Episcopo & ejus auctoritati ac de acceptando Regi∣am Majestatem pro Supremo Capite Ecclesiae Anglic. juxta Statuta hu∣jus regni in hac parte edita ab eisdem ordinand. & eorum quolibet per te primitus recepto, conferend. Ac etiam oleum sanctum chrismatis & sacrae unctionis consecrand. Caeteraque omnia & singula, quae ad offici∣um Pontificale in praemissis, vel aliquo praemissorum quovis modo per∣tinent, vel pertinere poterunt, faciend. exercend. & expediend. tibi te∣nore praesentium committimus vices nostras, & plenam in Domino po∣testatem. Téque quoad praemissa Suffraganeum nostrum ordinamus & praeficimus per praesentes; donec eas ad nos duxerimus revocand. Et ut officium tuum hujusmodi possis in praemissis liberius exercere,
Vniversis & singulis Decanis, Rectoribus, Vicarijs, Capellanis, Cu∣ratis, & non Curatis, Clericis & Apparitoribus quibuscunque in virtu∣te sacrae [suae] obedientiae firmiter tenore praesentium injungendo mandamus, quatenus tibi in praemissis & quolibet praemissorum sint obedientes, assistentes, & intendentes in omnibus, prout decet. In cu∣jus rei testimonium sigillum nostrum praesentibus est appensum. Dat. in Manerio nostro de Lamehith, Decimo die Decembr. Anno Domini mill▪ quin. xxxvij. & nostrae Consecrationis anno quinto. NUM. XXIII. A Declaration to be read by al Curates upon the publishing of the Bible in English. Cleopatra, E. 5. p. 327.WHeras it hath pleased the Kings Majesty, our most dread Sove∣reign, and Supreme Head under God of this Church of Eng∣land, for a Declaration of the great zeal he beareth to the setting forth of Gods word, and to the virtuous maintenance of the Common∣wealth, to permit and command the Bible, being translated into our Mother tongue, to be sincerely taught by us the Curates, and to be openly layd forth in every parish church: to the intent, that all his good subjects, as wel by reading therof, as by hearing the true explana∣tion of the same, may be able to learn their duties to Almighty God and his Majesty, and every of us charitably to use other: And then ap∣plying themselves to do according to that they shal hear and learn, may both speak and do christianly; and in al things, as it beseemeth christen men: Because his Highnes very much desireth, that this thing being by him most godly begun and set forward, may of al you be re∣ceived as is aforesaid; his Majesty hath willed and commanded this to be declared unto you, that his Graces pleasure and high command∣ment is, that in the reading and hearing therof, first most humbly and reverently using and addressing your selves unto it, you shal have al∣ways in your remembrance and memories, that al things contained in this book is the undoubted Wil, Law, and Commandment of Al∣mighty God, the only and streit means to know the goodnes and bene∣fits of God towards us, and the true duty of every christen man to serve him accordingly. And that therfore reading this book with such mind and firm faith as is aforesaid, you shal first endeavour your self to conform your own livings and conversation to the contents of the same. And so by your good and vertuous example to encourage your wives, children and servants, to live wel and christianly according to the rules therof. And if at any time by reading any doubt shal comen to any of you touching the sense and meaning of any part therof; that then, not gi∣ving too much to your own minds, fantasies and opinions; nor having therof any open reasoning in your open tavernes or alehouses, ye shal have recourse to such learned men, as be, or shalbe authorized to preach and declare the same. So that avoyding al contentions and dispu∣tation
in such alehouses and other places, unmeet for such conferences, and submitting your opinion to the judgments of such learned men as shalbe appointed in this behalf, his Grace may wel perceive, that you use this most high benefit quietly and charitably every one of you, to the edifying of himself, his wife and family, in al things answering to his Highnes good opinion conceived of you, in the advauncement of vertue, and suppressing of Vice; without failing to use such discrete quietnes, and sober moderation in the premisses, as is aforesaid; as you tender his Graces pleasure, and intend to avoyd his high indigna∣tion, and the peril and danger that may ensue to you and every of you for the contrary. And God save the King. NUM. XXIV. The Answer or Declaration of Richard Bishop of Chichester, in the presence of the Kings Majesty, against the sixth Reason or argument of John Lambert, concerning the most holy and blessed Sacrament of the Altar. THese are the words of his sixth Article.Cleopatra, E. 5. p. 371. Paul doth take it for a sore inconvenince, Deducere Christum ex alto, Rom. 10. And yet must the Priests do so, bringing his natural body into the Sacrament. Or else they cannot bring the same body into the Sacrament: Which I believe rather. The Answer of the Bishop. BY this reason you may evidently perceive the Vanity, and also the malice of this man. So that you may judg by what spirit he is led, to make such an argument against so high and precious a mystery as this is. What christen man is so ignorant, that knoweth not this to be evi∣dently true, that this most holy Sacrament hath not his Vertue of the Priest, which is a mortal man, and many times a sinner. For he is but a minister, and a very instrument, by whom God worketh. S. Chryso∣stome saith, that the minister is as it were the Pen, God is the hand. The grace, the vertue is of God. In the 27th. Hom. in the second Tome. So doth teach the Apostle to the Corinthians, in the third chapt. of the first Epistle. What is Apostle, saith he, What is Paul? Ministers of him, in whom ye believe; and as he hath given to every one. I have planted, saith S. Paul, Apollo hath watered: but God hath given the encrease. Wherfore neither he that planteth, nor he that watereth, is ought, but he that giveth the encrease. For men must esteem us as Ministers of Christ, saith he in the next chapter. By these words he proveth, that the minister gives no ef∣fect or virtue, but only God.
S. Augustin ad Cresconium Grammaticum saith also expresly, That if there be among good ministers one better then another, the Sacrament is no better given by the better; and it is no worse given by an evil man. There is for this purpose a goodly saying of Eusebius Emissenus, which was much persecuted by the Arians. These are his words. Invisibilis Sacerdos visibiles creaturas in substantiam corporis & sanguinis sui, verbi sui secreta potestate, convertit. No Christen man doubteth who is this invisible Priest; which is our Savior, the high Priest, the perpetual Priest, as the Apostle saith Ad Heb. 7. Which to our carnal eyes is invisible, and otherwise may not be seen, but by the eyes of our soul, and faith one∣ly. This invisible Priest, saith Eusebius, converteth and turneth the visible creatures of bread and wine not only into his body and bloud, but into the substance of his body and bloud. It is not then the Priest, that worketh this work, nor bringeth Christ out of heaven, as this man mockingly and scornfully writeth in this Article, but it is Christ himself. For as S. Austin saith, Idem est Mediator, qui offert, & qui offertur. And what spirit this man hath towards this most holy sacrament, you may wel conjecture, and evidently perceive his malignity, which not only gathereth a certain number of vain arguments together, to the number of eight; that it might appear to the simple ignorant peo∣ple, as though it were a great foundation, which he hath for his dete∣stable purpose: and yet as I say, they are al vain, and grounded only upon gross natural reason, which can in no wise attain to this high my∣stery: but also in so grave, weighty, and most reverend cause, as this is, he dallieth, mocketh and scorneth in this fond reason, without any reason; saying, that the Priest must bring the body of Christ out of heaven. But it is little to be weighed in this man, though that he scorn∣eth the ministration of the Priest, sith that he so depraveth his very Lord and Master. But in case that he should say, that he doth not scorn the ministrati∣on of the Priest, then must he needs be very ignorant, to suppose in any wise, that the Priest worketh any thing in this, or any other Sacra∣ment, more then as I have before said. In this argument also he alledgeth one part of scripture in the tenth chapter to the Romans, to blind also the simple people, that they should think al that he speaketh is the very scripture. And surely this place of scripture maketh evidently against him, and such as he is. For it is written against Infidels, such as wil not believe the word of God writ∣ten, but would yet have knowledge from heaven. And so the Apostle there maketh example of him, that would not believe that Christ is ascended, but notwithstanding the testimony of scripture, he demand∣eth, Quis ascendet in coelum? Hoc est, Christum de coelo deducere, saith the Apostle. Wherefore the Apostle monisheth every Christen man in this maner, Nè dixeris in corde tuo, Quis ascendet, &c. That is to say, Think not in thy mind, Have no such doubt to ask, Who ascended, or how: but believe the scripture. For as Moses in the 30th. Chap. of Deuteronomy saith, Thou shalt not need to seek into heaven for the knowledg of these things: it is not set, nor left in heaven; it is not above thee; it is not far from thee; but the Word of God is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, as it were, and ready at hand: Believe that, and do according to that.
For so it was answered to the rich man in the 16th. Chap. of Luke, Thy brethren have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. And, If they wil not hear nor believe them, they wil not believe any one, that shal come from hence. Whersore Chrysostom in the former tenth Chapter of Paul, teacheth even Christen men in these things of the Faith, in no wise to ask or search, how it may be; but leaving this infirmity and weaknes of our thoughts and reasons, let us receive with a certain undoubted faith the promises of God by his word. S. Cyprian also, in a work De coena Domini, hath these words, The fleshly man is not to be admitted to this feast of the Table of God. Whatso∣ever the fllesh and the bloud, that is to say, the natural reason of the mortal man, esteemeth or judgeth, needs must be excluded from this mystery. For it savoureth nothing to this matter, or in any wise helpeth, whatsoever the subtilty of mans wit attempteth to search. Such are wise men of this world, that whatsoever is above their wit, they think it otherwise then the truth. But the truth, saith he, cannot be comprised by mans wit, which is erroneous and many times deceived. Wherfore they that are faithful and poor in spirit, and not arrogant of their own wits, by their faith, do se perfectly this Sacrament. We have the expres words of Christ, Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body. The words are plain not only in Matthew, but the same plain words are in Luke and Mark, without any figurative speaking. Wher∣fore we may not add, diminish, change nor alter these words, that are so manifest and plain; but certainly believe these words to be true in the same sense, that they are clearly spoken, howsoever they are im∣possible to mans wit. For as it is impossible for God to make a ly, as the Apostle saith in the sixth Ad Heb. so every thing is possible to him, howsoever it is thought impossible to men. We must therfore leave al our carnal reasons, and only receive, with∣out any doubt, the teaching, the words, the promises of God, howso∣ever they seem impossible to our natural and fraile reason. Or else we should not believe the power of God to be so high and absolute as it is: to whom is nothing impossible. NUM. XXV. Tho. Cranmeri Archiep. Cant. Epist. super Controversia de coena Domini ortam. Illustri & erudito Viro Joachimo Vadiano, Consuli apud Sanctum Gal∣lum in Helvetia. TAndem a Negotijs Consilijsque publicis missionem, vel verius re∣spirationem nactus, & inter caeteros doctos viros,Ex Dudithi Orationib. & Opuscul quorum epi∣stolis responsa jam diu debueram, tibi quoque, Vadiane, Vir illustris doctissiméque, nunc demum vertente anno respondere incipiens, (ut∣pote cujus Literas superiore hyeme acceperim, una cum munere Litera∣rio,
Quod genus quidem soleo vel inter preciosissima numerare) il∣lud imprimis mecum reputare pudebundus occoepi, vererique, ne for∣te suspicionem, aut etiam opinionem mihi allquam sinistram apud ani∣mum tuum, silentio meo tam diuturno, contraxerim; qui sciam apud vulgus hominum fieri plerumque solere, cum hospes hospitem salutat, ut in primo maxime aditu responsum solicite exspectent. Quod si diffe∣ratur, ut superbiam aliquam vel neglectum sui, vel, ut minimum, oblivionem, intervenire suspicantur, qualémque in primo illo accessu invenere, talem in universam reliquam vitam erga se fore praejudicant. Cum qui cito respondet, libenter & gratanter id facere judicatur, eum∣que proinde humanum, facilem gratúmque interpretantur. Contra, qui tarde, fastuosus, difficilis, & incivilibus ac inamoenis moribus pre∣ditus existimatur. Vsque adeo bis facit, quod cito facit, quicquid quis cito facit. Verum ego de tua neutiquam vulgari prudentia, & huma∣nitate meliora mihi polliceor, confidóque te hanc meam non sponta∣neam tarditatem aut cessationem, sed necessariam dilationem benigne accepturum, eamque non tam moribus quam negotijs meis imputatu∣rum. Quae qualia & quanta fuerint, puto rumores ad vos usque jam∣pridem pertulisse, & ego de eisdem nonnihil ad Grynaeum meum, imo nostrum, scripsi, cum quo pro amicitiae jure omnia, sibi communia futura esse non ambigo. Ad illum igitur te remitto, siquid hac re offen∣deris, qui me tibi reddat excusatiorem. Tuam erga me Voluntatem & promptitudinem animi ad contrahen∣dam mecum Sanctiorem necessitudinem, in Literis tuis perspicio, & libens amplector osculórque. Virum enim dignum te judico, quem ego propter eximiam eruditionem, qua me quoque adjutum profecisse neu∣tiquam dissimulavero, & propter morum probitatem, multorum gra∣vissimorum virorum testimonijs comprobatam, omni amore, favore ac veneratione prosequar. Veruntamen ut animi mei sensum (sicuti in∣ter bonos viros fieri oportet) ingenue tibi profitear, argumentum quod tractas in sex illis libris Aphorismo∣rum, de consi∣deratione Eu∣charistiae., quos mihi dono dederas, in totum mihi dis∣plicet, vellémque vigilias tuas tantas felicius collocasses, & mecum jucundae amicitiae melioribus, aut certè minus improbatis, auspicijs fuisses usus. Nam ego nisi certiora afferri video, quam hactenus videre po∣tui, sententiae illius vestrae nec patronus nec astipulator esse volo. Et plane mihi vel ex eo maxime persuasum est, causam esse non bonam, quod eam viri tam ingeniosi, tam diserti, támque omnibus artibus & disciplinis instructi, non videamini satis validè tueri ac sustinere. Vidi pleraque omnia, quae vel ab Oecalampadio, vel a Zuinglio scripta sunt & edita, didicique omnium hominum omnia cum delectu esse Legen∣da. Et fortasse illud D. Hieronymi de Origene elogium in illos quóque non absurde aliquis detorserit, Vbi bene, nemo melius, &c. Nosti enim quod sequitur. Quatenus quidem Papisticos & Sophisticos errores & abusus indicare, convincere, corrigeréque sunt conati, Laudo & ap∣probo. Atque utinam intra fines illos constitissent, neque fruges una cum zizanijs conculcassent, hoc est, veterum doctorum, primorúmque in ecclesia Christi scriptorum authoritatem, una violassent. Nam ut in∣genia vestra quantumcunque versaveritis, mihi tamen certe nunquam approbaveritis, ne cuiquam, opinor, aequo Lectori, Veteres illos au∣thores in hac controversia pro vestra facere sententia. Fuistis nimirum in investigandis erroribus plus fatis curiosi, & dum omnia purgare stu∣detis,
illic quoque errorem subesse putavistis, ubi nullus fuit. Quando hic certe si error est, jam inde a primordio Ecclesiae, ab ipsis Patribus & viris Apostolicis, nobis fuit propinatus. Quod quis pius sustinuerit vel audire, nedum credere? Ut nquid interim dicam, quod bonus Do∣minus noster unice dilectam sponsam suam nunquam in tam pudenda caecitate tamdiu dereliquisset? Quamobrem quum haec, quam tene∣mus, Catholica fides de vera presentia corporis tam apertis ac manife∣stis scripturis fuerit Ecclesiae ab initio promulgata, & eadem postea, per primos Ecclesiasticos scriptores, fidelium auribus tam clare, tamque stu∣diose commendata, ne quaeso, ne mihi pergatis eam tam bene radica∣tam & suffultam velle amplius convellere aut subruere. Satis jam satis tentatum est hactenus. Et nisi super firmam petram fuisset firmiter aedificata, jam dudum cum magnae ruinae fragore cecidisset. Dici non potest, quantum haec tam cruenta controversia, cum per universum orbem Christianum, tum maxime apud nos, bene currenti verbo Evan∣gelij obstiterit. Vobis ipsis affert ingens periculum, & caeteris omnibus praebet non dicendum offendiculum. Quo circa si me audietis, hortor & suadeo, imo vos oro, obsecro, & visceribus Iesu Christi obtestor & adjuro, uti concordiam procedere & coire sinatis, in illam confirman∣dam totis viribus incumbatis, pacémque Dei tandem, quae superat omnem sensum, Ecclesijs permittatis, ut Evangelicam doctrinam unam, sanam, puram, & cum primitivae Ecclesiae disciplina consonam, junctis viribus quam maximè propagemus. Facile vel Turcas ad Evan∣gelij nostri obedientiam converterimus, modo intra nosmetipsos con∣sentiamus, & pia quadam conjuratione conspiremus. At si ad hunc modum pergimus ad invicem contendere, & commordere, timendum erit, ne (quod dicens abominor) juxta comminationem Apostolicam, ad invicem consumamur. Habes, Optime Vadiane, meam de tota controversia illa neutiquam fictam sententam, una cum admonitione libera ac fideli. Cui si ob∣temperaveris, non modo inter amicos, sed etiam vel inter amicissimos mihi nomen tuum ascripsero. Bene vale. T. Cantuariens. NUM. XXVI. Part of a Letter from a Member of Parlament, concerning the transactions of the House, about passing the Act of the Six Articles. AND also news here,Cleopatra, E. 5. I assure you never Prince shewed himself so wise a man, so wel learned, and so Catholic, as the King hath done in this Parlament. With my pen I cannot express his mervailous goodnes, which is come to such effect, that we shal have an Act of Parlament so spiritual, that I think none shal dare say, in the blessed Sa∣crament of the Altar doth remain either bread or wine after the Con∣secration: Nor, that a Priest may have a wife: Nor, that it is necessary [to receive] our Maker sub utraque specie: Nor▪ that private Masses
should not be used, as they have bee: Nor, that it is not necessary to have Auricular confession. And notwithstanding my L. of Canterbury, my L. of Ely, my L. of Salisbury, my L. of Worcester, Rochester, and St. Davyes, defended the contrary long time: Yet finally his High∣ness confounded them all with Gods learning. York, Durham, Winche∣ster and Carlile have shewed themselves honest and wel learned men. We of the Temporalty have be al of one opinion. And my L. Chan∣cellor, and my L. Privy Seal, as good as we can devise. My L. of Cant. and al his Bishops have given their opinion, and come in to us, save Salisbury, who yet continueth a leud fool. Finally, al in England have cause to thank God, and most heartily to rejoyce of the Kings most godly procedings. Without any name subscribed. NUM. XXVII. The Solution of some Bishop to certain Questions about the Sacra∣ments. The King's Ani∣madversions,Cleopatra, E. 5. p. 36. of his own hand. The Questions. The Answers. Why then should we cal them so? 1. What a Sa∣crament is? 1. Scripture useth the word, but it defineth it not. 2. What a Sa∣crament is by the antient Au∣thors? 2. In them is found no per∣fect definition, but a general Declaration of the word, as a token of a holy thing.   3. How many Sa∣craments be there by the Scripture? 3. So named onely Matri∣mony: in effect moo: and at the least seven, as we find the Scripture expounded. Why these Seven to have the name, more than al the rest? 4. How many Sa∣craments be there by the antient Au∣thors? 4. Authors use the word Sacrament to signify any My∣stery in the old or new Testa∣ment: But especially be no∣ted Baptism, Eucharist, Ma∣trimony, Chrism, Impositio ma∣nuum, Ordo. [Here is omitted Penance.]
Then why hath theChurch so long erred, to take upon them so to name them? 5. Whether this word Sacrament be, and ought to be, at∣tribute to the Se∣ven only? 5. The word bycause it is general is attribute to other than the Seven. But whether it ought especially to be ap∣plied to the Seven only, God knoweth, and hath not fully revealed it so as it hath been received. Whether the Se∣ven Sacraments be found in any of the old Authors, or not? The thing of al is found, but not named al Sacraments, as afore.   6. Whether the de∣terminate number of seven Sacraments be a doctrin either of the scripture, or the old Authors; and so to be taught? 6. The doctrine of Scri∣pture is to teach the thing, without numbring, or naming the name Sacrament, saving only Matrimony.Old Authors number not precisely. Twelve Articles of the Faith not numbred in Scripture, ne Ten Command∣ments, but rather one, Dile∣ctio, Seven petitions, Seven Deadly sinns. * Then Pe∣nance is chan∣ged to a new term, i. e. Abso∣lution. Of Pe∣nance I read, that without it, we cannot be sa∣ved after re∣lapse: but not so of Absoluti∣on. And Pe∣nance to sinners is commanded, but Absolution, yea, in open crimes, is left free to the Ask∣ers. † Laying of hands, being an old ceremony of the Church, is but a small proof of Con∣firmation. 7. What is found in scripture of the matter, nature, effect, and vertue of such as we cal the seven Sa∣craments. So although the name be not in Scripture, yet whe∣ther the thing be in Scripture, or no, and in what wise spoken. 7. First of Baptism mani∣festly Scripture speaketh. Se∣condly, Of the holy commu∣nion manifestly. Thirdly, Of Matrimony manifestly. 4. Of Absolution * manifestly. 5. Of Bishops, Priests and Deacons ordered per impositionem ma∣nuum cum Oratione expresly. 6. Laying † of the Hands of the Bp. after Baptism, which is a part of that is done in Confirmation, is grounded in Scripture. 7. Unction of the sick and prayer is grounded on scripture.
This answer is not direct: and yet it pro∣veth nother of the two poynts to be grounded in scripture. 8. Whether Con∣firmation cum Chris∣mate of them that be baptized be found in Scripture? 8. The thing of Confirma∣tion is found in scripture, though the name Confirmation is not there. Of Chrisma Scripture speak∣eth not expressly, but it hath been had in high veneration, and observed since the begin∣ning.   9. Whether the A∣postles lacking higher power, and not ha∣ving a Christen King among them, made Bishops by that neces∣sity, or by authority given them of God? 9. The calling, naming, appointment and preferment of one before another to be Bishop or Priest, had a neces∣sity to be done in that sort, a Prince wanting.   The Ordering appeareth taught by the holy Ghost in the Scripture per manuum im∣positionem cum oratione.   10. Whether Bps, or Priests were first: And if the Priests were first, then the Priest made the Bi∣shop? 10. Bishops, or not after.   11. Whether a Bi∣shop hath authority to make a Priest by the Scripture, or no: And whether any o∣ther, but only a Bp. may make a Priest, or no? 11. Scripture warranteth a Bp. (obeying high powers as the Prince christianed) to or∣der a Priest per manuum impo∣sitionem cum oratione. And so it hath been from the begin∣ning: of others scripture speaketh not.   12. Whether in the N. Testament be re∣quired any Consecra∣tion of a Bp. or Priest, or only appointing to the office be suffici∣ent? 12. Manuum Impositio cum oratione is required. Which is a Consecration. So as only Appointing is not sufficient.   13. Whether if it fortune a Prince Christian learned, to con∣quer certain Domi∣nions of Infidels, ha∣ving none but tempo∣ral learned men with him, it be defended by Gods law, that he and they may preach and teach the Word of God there, or no; and also make and in∣stitute Priests, or no? 13. It is to be thought, that God in such cases, assist∣ing the perfection of such an enterprize, would sometime teach and inspire the Con∣science of such a Prince, what he should and might do, more then is yet openly taught by the Scripture. Which in that case were a good warrant to follow. For a secret Vocati∣on supplieth where an open wanteth.
A reason: Necessity, in things absolutely necessary, containeth in it order, law and authority.   14. Whether it be forefended by Gods law, that if it so for∣tuned, that al the Bi∣shops and Priests of a realm were dead, and that the Word of God should remain there unpreached, the Sa∣crament of Baptism, and others, unmini∣stred, that the King of that Region should make Bps and Priests to supply the same, or no? 14. This Question is with∣out the compas of Scripture.   Since the beginning of Christs church when Christ himself made distinction of Ministers, the order hath a de∣termination from one to ano∣ther per manuum impositionem cum oratione. How it should begin again of another fashi∣on, where it faileth by a case, Scripture telleth not, ne Do∣ctors write of it, that I have read.   15. Whether a man be bound by autho∣rity of this Scripture Quorum remiseritis, &c. and such like, to confes his secret dead∣ly sins to a Priest, if he may have him, or no? 15. Bound ordinarily.   16. Whether a Bp. or a Priest may ex∣communicate? 16. They may, being be∣fore of their Prince authori∣zed to minister.   For what crime? For open, public, deadly sins.   And whether only by Gods Law. Of Excommunication by others we read not in the new Testament.   17. Whether Un∣ction of the sick with oyl to remit venial sins, as it is now used, be spoken of in the Scripture, or in any ancient authors. 17. The thing is in Scri∣pture, and in antient Authors, according wherunto the use should be.
How it is indeed used is a matter of fact, and not of learning. NUM. XXVIII. The judgment of another Bishop upon the aforesaid Questions. Cleop. E. 5.I. TO the first, Scripture sheweth not what it is, but useth the word Sacramentum in Latin for the word Mysterium in Greek. II. Sacrament by the Authors is, Sacrae rei Signum, or Visibile Signa∣culum, Sacrosanctum Signaculum. Visibile Verbum, Visibilis forma invisi∣bilis gratiae; and perfect definition we find none. III. In Scripture we find no determine number of Sacraments. IV. There be very many in the most general signification: and there is no precise or determinate number of Sacraments in the ancient au∣thors. The ABp. of Cant. Bp. Da∣vys.V. Not only to the Seven, but to many mo. We find in old Au∣thors Matrimony, holy Communion, Baptism, Confirmation, Or∣der, Penance and extreme Unction. It is doubted of the number of Sacraments. VI. As touching the determine number of Seven only, we find nei∣ther in the Scripture, ne antient authors, any such doctrine, that should be seven only. VII. Of Baptism Scripture speaketh, that by it sins be remitted. Of Eucharistia, that we be united by it to Christ, and receive spiritual nourishment to the comfort of our souls, and remission of our sins. Of Matrimony, that the act of it is made lawful, and without sin; and Grace given wherby to direct ordinately the lusts and appetites of the flesh. Of Penance, that by it we be restored again to the favor of God, from which we did fal by sin. Of Orders, that by it Grace is given to Ministers effectually in preaching of the word of God,Archb. Cant. and Ministration of the Sacraments. Of Confirmation, which is con∣tained in Scripture,ABp. Cant. Bp. Davyes. speaking De impositione manuum post baptisma, it appeareth by Scripture how therby encrease of grace is given. Of In∣unction of the sick,ABp. Cant. Bp. Davyes. Mr. Cocks. Scripture speaks, that by Unction of the sick, and prayer of the Priests, comfort is given to sick, and sins be forgi∣ven him. ABp. Cant. Bp. Davyes.VIII. Impositionem manuum post Baptisma, which we cal Confirmation, we read in the Scripture. But that it was done Chrismate, we find not in the scripture expressed. But in the old Authors we find, that Chrisma hath been used in the same Confirmation. ABp. Cant.IX. Making of Bps hath two parts. Appointment and Ordering Where is this distinction found? [The King's note.] Appointment; which the Apostles by necessity made by common ele∣ction, and sometime by their own several assignment, could not then
be done by Christen Princes. Because at that time they were not. And now at these dayes appertaineth to Christen Princes and Rulers Now▪ since you confess, that the Apollystys [Apostles] did occupate the one part, which you now confes be∣longeth to Princes, how can you prove, that Ordering is only committed to you Bishops? [The Kings Note.]. But in the ordering, wherin Grace is conferred (as afore) the Apostles did follow the rule taught by the holy Ghost, Per manuum impositionem cum Oratione, & jejuio Ubi hoc? [The Kings Note.] X. Christ made the Apostles first; which were of his making both Priests and Bps. But whether at one time some doubt.ABp. Cant. Bp. Davyes. Mr. Cocks. After that the Apostles made both Bps. and Priests. The names whereof in the Scri∣pture be confounded. XI. A Bp. having authority of the Christen Prince to give orders,ABp. Cant. may by his ministery given to him of God in Scripture ordain a Priest. And we read not, that any other, not being a Bp., hath since the begin∣ning of Christs church ordained a Priest. XII. Onely Appointment is not sufficient, but Consecration;ABp. Cant. Bp. Davyes. that is to say, Imposition of hands with fasting and prayer is also required. For so the Apostles used to order them that were appointed: and so have been used continually; and we have not read the contrary. XIII. In that necessity, the Prince and his learned men should preach and teach the word of God, and baptize. But as for making and constituting Priests, the Prince shal and may then do, as God shal then by inspiration teach him. Which God hath promised to do alwayes to his Church, in reveling and teaching every necessary knowledg, where any doubt requiring discussion doth arise. XIV. The answer to the other Question next before dissolveth this. XV. He that knoweth himself guilty of any secret deadly sins,ABp. Cant. must, if he will obtain the benefit of Absolution ministred by the Priest, confes the same secret sins unto him. Absolution to be ministred by a Priest▪ if a convenient Priest may be had, is necessary. York. Duresm. Carelyl. Corwen. Simon. Ogelthorp. Eggeworth. Day. Redman. Robynson. Wynchestre. Absolution by a Priest is the surest way, if he may be conveniently had. Cant. Hereford. Rochestre Davye. Westminst. Layton. Tresham. Cocks. Crayford. XVI. Bps and Priests, authorized by the Prince,ABp. Cant. Bp. Davyes. may excommuni∣cate by Gods Law, for public and open crimes. But that others then Bps and Priests may excommunicate, we have not read in scripture. Some Schoolmen say, that other, then Priests or Bps., deputed ther∣unto by the Church, may excommunicate. Because it is an Act ju∣risdictionis, and not ordinis. XVII. We find it spoken of in Scripture and in old Authors.ABp. Cant. Bp. Davyes.
NUM. XXIX. Archbishop Cranmer to Osiander concerning some abuses in Matri∣mony among the Germans. Doctissimo D. Andreae Osiandro, Concionatori Norenburgensi. Cleopatra, E. 5. p. 111.SAlve plurimum. Vix tribus abhinc diebus elapsis, Osiander dilectis∣sime, literas ad te scriptitabam, quas per subitum & sestinatum Tabellarij discessum coactus sum abbreviare. Imo abrumpere plane, praetermisso eo, quod & tunc quam maxime scriptum volui, & nunc otij plusculum nactus, nescio quam nervosè, verbosè certe decrevi pertractare. Res est, ut mihi quidem videtur, non parva, neque leni∣ter animadvertenda, ut quae ad omnium Evangelicam veritatem profi∣tentium sugillationem, ne dicam ignominiam, & culpam manifestè pertineat. Proinde te rogo, ut & scriptum hoc meum legas attentè, & tuum vicissim responsum super eo conficias accuratè, maturéque re∣mittas, quo habeam tandem quod respondeam ijs, qui me interrogant. Nosti enim, opinor, ut soleant homines hic omnium quae istic gerun∣tur, a me rationem exigere: alij quidem bono animo, & communis Evangelicae causae studio soliciti, nequid a vobis fieret, secus quam oporteret. Alijs autem malus est animus, mala mens. Nihil magis cupiunt, aut captant, quam ut justam aliquam, vos & vestra facta dictave reprehendendi, ansam undecúnque apprehendant; & gaudent si mihi in os subinde talia possint objicere. Quibus duobus inter se diversis homi∣num generibus respondeo Ego persaepe, quae vel ipse comminisci possum, vel quae ex scriptis vestris, sive in publicum emissis, sive ad me privatim missis, possimcolligere. Incidunt tamen persaepe nonnulla, quae nec negare possum, nec absque rubore fateri, quae denique quo pacto a vobis honestè aut pie fieri doceantur, rationem ullam saltem excogitare sufficientem nequeo. Nam ut interim de Usuris taceam, a vobis aut vestrum certe non∣nullis, ut apparet, approbatis, déque eo quod Magnatum filijs concubinas habendas permittitis, (videlicet ne per nuptias legitimas hereditates dispergantur) qui Concubinatum in Sacerdotibus tantopere aversati estis: quid poterit a Vobis in excusationem allegari pro eo, quod per∣mittitis, a divortio, utroque conjuge vivo, novas nuptias coire, & quod adhuc deterius est, etiam absque divortio uni plures permittitis uxores. Id quod & tute, si recte memini, in quibusdam tuis ad me literis apud vos factum disertè expressisti, addens Philippum ipsum sponsalibus po∣sterioribus, ut paranymphum credo atque auspicem, interfuisse. Quae ambo, tum ipsius conjugij rationi, quae non duo, sed unam car∣nem facit, tum etiam scripturis sunt expresse & manifeste contraria. Ut patet Matth. 19. Marc. 10. Luc. 16. Ro. 7. 1 Cor. 7. Quibus locis perspicuum fit ex Apostolorum, atque adeo Christi ipsius institutione, unum uni debere matrimonio conjungi, nec posse sic conjunctos postea, nisi interveniente morte alterutrius, denuo contrahere. Quod si respon∣deritis, hoc intelligi excepta causa fornicationis: An Uxoris adulteri∣um fuerit causa quur Philippus marito permiserit aliam superducere, vos melius nostis. Quod si fuerit, tunc objiciemus, ab ineunte hu∣cusque
ecclesia (cujus exemplis oportet scripturarum interpretationes conformari) nunquam quod scimus hoc sic suisse acceptum. Augu∣stinus, quid ipse de hoc senserit, imo quid ecclesia ante ipsum, & usque ad ipsum, clare docet, li. de adulterinis conjugijs, ad Pollentium. Quid igitur ad haec dicetis, Libenter vellem audire abs te quidem, si & ipse in eadem cum caeteris es sententia. Sin minus, per te saltem vellem cognoscere quid ab illis exploraveris ad talia responsum iri. Nam cum eorum nonnulli, ut audio, statuta nostra Parlamentaria censorie nimis, ac superciliosè: condempnent, quorum tamen gravissimas, justissimas∣que causas ac rationes ignorant, mirum est quod interim ipsi non ad∣vertant apud ipsos plurima designari, quae optimis atque gravissimis vi∣ris jure optimo displiceant. Scire atque aveo, an ista tanquam hone∣sta, & promiscue quibusvis Licita, ac Evangelicae veritati non repug∣nantia defendant: An secundum indulgentiam (ut dixit Apostolus) ad ea, dum à quibusdam fiunt, connivent, nequid gravius contingat, non idem omnibus itidémque permissuri. Illud prius, haud equidem credo illos esse facturos, nisi legis Machometanae potius quam Christianae assertores videri voluerint. Posterius hoc si faciunt, videant quomodo permittant, quae Christus, Apostoli, Evangelistae, atque adeo totius ecclesiae consensus districte ab initio, hu usque prohibuit. Quod si fortè dixerint, ea jam quoque tolerari posse, eo quod ante Christum natum fuerunt, vel approbata vel tolerata; tunc enimvero causam nobis reddant, cur non & caetera toleremus, qucunque tunc legimus pari jure usitata; aut definiant quaenam hujus generis, aut qua∣tenus erunt admittenda. Nam in Veteri Testamento expressum habe∣mus olim patrem concubuisse cum filiabus, ut Loth, Socerum cum nu∣ru, ut Iudam, patrem familias, nempe Abraham, cum ancilla pellice, conscia uxore, atque etiam id ultro suadente, nempe Sara, eundem ipsum uxorem suam, adhuc juvenculam, ac formosam, sororem nomi∣nasse, eámque Regibus, Pharaoni & Abimelech, ultro in concubitum per∣misisse. Praeterea, unum saepe hominem plures habuisse uxores, ut Ia∣cob & Mosen ipsum, legis latorem a Deo constitutum. Postremò, Prin∣cipes multos, eosque nec illaudatos, praeter uxorum numerosa contu∣bernia, Concub narum etiam greges aluisse: ut Davidem, Solomo∣nem, &c. Nec Assuero vitio datur, quod singulis paene noctibus concu∣binam novam asciverit. Et Hester foemina Laudatissima, utpote quam ad Salutem populi sui Deus excitavir, quum esset Iudaea, & legi Mosai∣cae obnoxia, Assueri Regis cubiculum ante nuptias intravit. Quid plu∣ribus opus, quum gravissimi autores Ambrosius & Augustimus, disertis verbis affirment, hic Poligamiam, ille concubinatum, peccato tum caruisse, quando nec contra morem, nec contra praeceptum fierent, quae nunc & legibus & moribus pronuntiant esse contraria. Talia, in∣quam, constat apud Veteres fuisse usitata, nec a bonis quidem viris tunc temporis improbata. Quae vel omnia probabunt novi isti homi∣nes, & rerum novarum intro ductores, vel aliqua, vel nulla. Quod si Nulla dicant nobis, cur ista admiserunt? Si Aliqua, quur non & reliqua? Et praescribant nobis regulam, qua sciamus, quae sunt admittenda, quae vero rejicienda. Si Omnia (in qua sententia videtur esse Bucerus) quaeso te, qualem verum faciem, quantumque a priore mutatam in ecclesia Videbimus? Quam erunt confusa, inversa atque praepostera omnia? Sed adhuc proprius urgebimus eos, interrogabimusque: An
non tantum quae sub lege facta sunt, sed etiam quae ante legem, & an non tantum, quae a Iudaeis, sed & quae a Gentibus fuerint usitata, velu∣ti jure postliminij, ad exemplum revocabunt? Etsi illa tantum quur non haec aeque atque illa? Presertim quae a Sanctioribus & Sapientiori∣bus viris, ut Socrate, Platone, Cicerone, &c. fuerint vel facta, vel appro∣bata. Quod si utraque concedent, concedant & nobis Britannis, more majorum nostrorum, denas, duodenasque uxores habere insimul com∣munes, & maximè fratres cum ratribus, parentes cum liberis. Quod aliquando in hac insula usitatum fuisse Caesar, non ignobilis author, te∣statur in Commentarijs. Concedant foeminis Christianis, quod Solon suis Atheniensibus concesserat, ut quae viros parum ad rem Veneream idoneos sortita fuissent, aliquem ex mariti propinquis impune admit∣terent. Concedunt quod Lycurgus coneessit Viris Lacedaemonijs, ut qui minus esset ad procreandam prolem idoneus, alteri cui vellet suam conjugem impregnandam daret, & prolem precariò sibi natam ut pro∣priam suo nomine nuncuparet. Aut denique quod Romanorum legibus permissum erat, ut qui satis liberorum procreasse, uxorem suam alteri commodaret prolem desideranti. Id quod & Cato vir gravissimus, sa∣pientissimusque habitus, Hortentio amico suo legitur fecisse. Talia cum probata fuerint antiquitus viris sapientissimis, ac Philosophorum legumque latorum optimis & sanctissimis, ut Platoni, Xenophonti, Ca∣toni, &c. quum eadem fuerint moribus recepta Hebraeorum, Graecorum, Latinorum (quorum populorum Respublicas & Politeias constat opti∣mè fuisse constitutas, & ab omnibus scriptoribus maximè celebratas) age, faciamus, & nos, si deo placet, similia, & Christianis fratribus permittamus facienda. Imo Christus Opt. Max. tam foeda, tamque in∣cestuosa connubiorum portenta a sua sancta ecclesia dignetur avertere, nunc & in diem Domini, Amen. Haec Ego ad te potissimum, Charissime Osiander, in presentia scri∣benda duxi propter eam, quae inter nos est, & jam diu fuit, summam ne∣cessitudinem & familiaritatem, quamvis putem, atque adeo certo sciam, te ab hujusmodi tam absurdis & moribus & opinionibus quàm alienis∣simum esse. Cum caeteris Vestratibus Doctoribus levior & minus arcta michi intercedit amicitia, cujus ipsius quoque fateor me multum paeniteret, si scirem hos esse fructus novi Evangelij ab ipsis tantopere jactitati, & a vobis quoque hactenus, ut putabamus, non temere ali∣qua ex parte probati. Bene vale. Dat Lambeth xxvij mo. Decembr. Tui Amantissimus, T. Cantuarien. NUM. XXX. The French Kings Licence to print the English Bible in Paris. FRanciscus, &c. Dilectis nobis Richardo Grafton & Edwardo Whit∣church,Cleopatra, E. 5. p. 326. Anglis, & Civibus Londini, Salutem. Quia fide digna te∣stimonia accepimus, quod carissimus frater noster Anglorum Rex,
Vobis cujus Subditi estis Sacram Bibliam tam Latinè quam Britannicè sive Anglicè imprimendi, & imprimi curandi, & in suum regnum ap∣portandi & transferendi, libertatem sufficientem & legitimam concesse∣rit: Et Vos, tum propter chartam, tum propter alias honestas consi∣derationes, animos vestros in hac parte justè moventes, dictam Bibliam sic imprimendam Parisijs infra hoc nostrum regnum curaveritis, ac in Angliam quamprimum transmittere intenderitis: NOS, ut haec vobis facere liceat potestatem facientes, vobis conjunctim & divisim, ac Pro∣curatoribus, Factoribus, & Agentibus vestris & cujuslibet vestrum, ut in regno nostro apud Chalcographum quemcúnque dictam Sacram Bibliam, tam Latina quam Anglicana lingua, tuto imprimere, & excu∣dere possitis, & possint: necnon excusa & impressa in Angliam dunta∣xat sine ulla perturbatione aut molestia vel impedimento quocúnque, transmittere & apportare: Dummodo quod sic imprimitis & excu∣ditis, sincerè & purè, quantum in Vobis erit, citra ullas privatas aut illegitimas opiniones, impressum & excusum fuerit: Et onera ac offi∣cia mercatoria nobis & ministris nostris, debite in hac parte extiterint persoluta; licentiam nostram impartimur & concedimus specialem per praesentes. Dat. &c. NUM. XXXI. Three Discourses of ABp. Cranmer, occasioned upon his review of the Kings Book, intitled, The Erudition of a Chri∣stian man. I. FAITH. THIS Book speaks of pure Christian Faith unfeigned, which is without colour, as wel in heart as in mouth. He,MSS. C. C. CC. Miscellan. D. that hath this Faith, converteth from his sin, repenteth him, that he like Fi∣lius prodigus, vainly consumed his Wil, Reason, Wits and other goods, which he received of the mere benefit of his heavenly father, to his said Fathers displesure: and applyeth himself wholy to pleas him again: and trusteth assuredly, that for Christs sake he wil, and doth remit his sins, withdraweth his indignation, delivereth him from his sin, from the power of the Infernal spirits, taketh him to his mer∣cy, and maketh him his own son, and his own heire. And he hath also the very Christian Hope, that after this life he shal reign ever with Christ in his kingdome. For S. Paul saith, Si filij sumus, & haeredes, haeredes quidem Dei, cohaeredes autem Christi. This is the very pure Chri∣stian Faith and Hope, which every good Christian man ought to pro∣fess, Believe, and Trust: and to say of himself even as Iob said, Scio quod Redemptor meus vivit, &c. And as for the other Faith, that the Good shal arise unto Glory, and the evil unto pain, or, that those that persevere in Gods precepts and laws, so long as they so do, they be the right Inheritors of his king∣dom,
this is not the commendation of a Christian his Faith, but a most certain proposition, which al the Devils believe most certainly. And yet they shal never have their sins forgiven by this Faith, nor be Inheritors of Gods kingdom. Because they lack the very Christian Faith: and not trusting to the goodness and mercy of God for their own offences. But they hate God, envy his glory, and be utterly in dispair. For the more large Declaration of the Christian Faith, it is to be considered, that there is a general Faith; which al that be christned, as wel good as evil, have. As to believe that God is; that he is the Maker and Creator of al things: and that Christ is the Savior and Redeemer of the world: and for his sake al penitent sinners shal have remission of their sins: And that there shal be a general resurrection at the end of this mortal World; At the which Christ shal judge al the Good to joy without end, and the Evil to pain without end; with such other like thyngs. And al these things the Devils also believe, and tremble for fear and grievousnes of Gods indignation and torments, which they shal endure, and ever shal do. But they have not the right christen Faith, that their own sins by Christs redemption be pardoned and forgiven; that themselves by Christ be delivered from Gods wrath, and be made his beloved children, and heires of his kingdom to come. The other Faith have al Devils and wicked christen people, that be his Members. But this pure christen Faith have none but those that truly belong to Christ, and be the very Members of his body, and endea∣vor themselves to persevere in his precepts and lawes: altho many pre∣tend to have the same pure Faith, which nevertheles have it not, but only in their mouths. For as there is a ly in the mouth, and a ly in the heart; even so there is a faith in the mouth, and a faith in the heart. Examine every man, if he Trust in God, and Love God above al things. And in word he wil answer, Yea. But examine every mans acts and deeds, and surely in a great number their acts and deeds condemn their words. For they walk after their own Wills and ple∣sures, and not after Gods commandments. And Christ himself saith, Qui diligit me, mandata mea servat. And S. Iohn saith, Qui dicit se nosse deum, & mandata ejus non custodit, mendax est. And therfore al those, that bridle not their own appetites, but follow them, and accom∣plish the wil of their own carnal minds, they trust in God, and trust God no further, then the lips. And if they persuade themselves, that they trust in God, and love God in their hearts, and be of any estima∣tion before God, then be they much deceived; and as S. Paul saith, they deceive their own hearts. Our own flesh and carnal mind is contra∣ry to the Spirit, and motion of God. And they, saith S. Paul, that belong unto Christ, do crucify their flesh with the affections and lusts therof. And contrary he saith, They that follow the lusts of the flesh shal not inhe∣rit the kingdom of God. These be very notable, and fearful sentences unto al such as be not repentant, but live after their own wills, and not after Gods wil: neither have the right faith, nor Love unto God, nor shal be inheriters of his kingdom. And though Christ hath payd a sufficient ransome for al the sins in the World, and is a sufficient Re∣deemer and Saviour of al the World; yet shal they have no part ther∣of.
For they belong not unto Christ, and Christ utterly refuseth them for his, which have Faith and Love only in their mouths, and have not the same engraven in their hearts, and expressed in their actions and deeds. And so he goes on more largely to illustrate this argument of the necessity of more than a mere faith in the mouth. Afterwards the Discourse thus procedes. If as treacle, kept only in the mouth, doth not remedy poyson in the whole body; but the treacle must enter down into the body; and then it altereth the whole body, and expells al venome and poyson: In like maner, he whose profession of his faith is only in his mouth, and altereth not his evil life, is not forgiven his sins; is not delivered from hel, nor from the power of Devils; is not made the son of God: but continueth stil in his poyson of sin, in the wrath and indignation of God, and in the damnation of the wicked in hell. But if the profession of our faith of the remission of our own sinns, enter within unto the deepness of our hearts, then it must needs kindle a warm fire of Love in our hearts towards God, and towards all others for the love of God; a fervent mind to seek and procure Gods honor, wil and pleasure in al things; a good wil and mind to help every man, and to do good unto them so far, as our Might, Wisdome, Learning, Counsil, Health, Strength, and al other gifts, which we have received of God, wil extend: And in summa, a firm intent and purpose to do al that is good, and leave al that is evil. This is the very right, pure, perfect, lovely, christian, hearty, and justifying Faith, which work∣eth by Love, as S. Paul saith, and suffereth no venome or poyson of sin to remain within the heart: (Acts 15. Fide Deus purificans corda.) But gendreth in the heart a hatred unto al sin, and makes a sinner clean a new man; and is the Faith which every christen man ought to pro∣fess in his Creed. And of this Faith runneth al our Paraphrasis upon the same. For as for the other fained, pretended, hypocritical and adul∣terate Faith in the mouth, it is but only a painted visor before men▪ but before God it is hollow within, dead, rotten, and nothing worth. II. JUSTIFICATION. AND for a further Declaration, to know how we obtain our Ju∣stification, it is expedient to consider first, how naughty and sinful we are al, that be of Adam's kindred: and contrariwise, what Mercifulnes is in God, which to al faithful and penitent sinners, par∣doneth al their offences for Christs sake. Of these two things no man is lightly ignorant, that ever hath heard of the fal of Adam, which was to the infection of al his posterity: and again, of the inexplicable mercy of our heavenly father, which sent his only begotten Son to suffer his most grievous passion for us, and shed his most precious blood, the price of our Redemption. But it is greatly to be wished and desired, that as al Christen men do know the same, so that every man might acknowledg himself a miserable sinner, not worthy to be called his son; and yet surely trust, that to him being repentant Gods mercy is ready to forgive. And he that seeth not these two things ve∣rified
in himself, can take no maner of emolument or profit, by know∣ledging and believing the said things to be verified in others. But we cannot satisfy our minds, settle our conscience, that these things be true, saving that we do evidently see, that Gods word so teacheth us. The Commandments of God lay our faults before our eyen; which putteth us in fear and dread, and maketh us se the wrath of God against our sins. As S. Paul saith, Per legem agnitio peccati. Et, Lex iram operatur. And maketh us sorry and repentant, that ever we should come into the displeasure of God, and the captivity of the Devil. The gracious and benign promises of God, by the mediation of Christ, showeth us, and that to our great relief and comfort, when∣soever we be repentant and return fully to God in our hearts, that we have forgiveness of our sins, be reconciled to God, and be accepted and reputed just and righteous in his sight, only by his grace and mercy, which he doth grant and give unto us for his dearly beloved Sons sake, Jesus Christ, who payd a sufficient ransome for our sins; whose bloud doth wash away the same; whose bitter and grievous passion is the only pacifying oblation, that putteth away from us the wrath of God his Father: Whose sanctified body, offered on the Cross, is the only Sacrifice of sweet and pleasant Savour, as S. Paul saith; that is to say, of such sweetnes and pleasantnes to the Father, that for the same he accepteth and reputeth of like sweetnes al them, that the same offer∣ing doth serve for. These benefits of God with innumerable others, whosoever extendeth and wel pondereth in his heart, and therby con∣ceiveth a firm trust and feeling of Gods mercy, wherof springeth in his heart a warm love, fervent heat of zeal towards God: It is not possible, but that he shal fal to work, and be ready to the performance of al such works, as he knoweth to be acceptable unto God. And these works only, which follow Justification, do please God; forasmuch as they procede from a heart endued with pure faith and love to God. But the works which we do before our Justification, be not allowed and accepted before God, although they appear never so great and glorious in the sight of men. For after our Justification only begin we to work, as the law of God requireth: then we shal do al good works willingly, although not so exactly as the Law requireth, by means of the infirmity of the flesh, nevertheles by the merits and benefits of Christ, we being sorry, that we cannot do al things no more exquisitely and duely, al our Works shalbe accepted and taken of God as most exquisite, pure and perfect. Now they that think they may come to Justification by performance of the Law, by their own deeds and merits, or by any other means, than is above rehearsed, they go from Christ, they renounce his grace. Evacuati estis a Christo, saith S. Paul, Gal. 5. Quicunque in lege justificamini; a gratia excidistis. They be not partakers of his justice, that he hath procured, or the merciful benefits that be given by him. For S. Paul saith, (a general rule for al them, that will seek such by-paths to obtain Justification,) Those, saith he, that wil not knowledg the justice, or righteousnes, which cometh by God, but go about to avaunce their own righteousnes, shal never come to that righteousnes, which we have by God, which is the righteousnes of Christ. By whom only al the Saints in Heaven, and al others that have been saved, have been reputed righteous, and
justified. So that to Christ our only Savior and Redeemer, of whose Righteousnes both their, and our Justification doth depend, is to be transcribed al the glory therof. III. FORGIVENES of Injuries. THese two may stand both wel together: that we as private per∣sons may forgive al such as have trespassed against us with al our heart, and yet that the public ministers of God may se a redres of the same trespasses that we have forgiven. For my forgivenes con∣cerns only mine own person, but I cannot forgive the punishment and correction, that by Gods ordinance is to be ministred by the superior power. For in so much as the same trespas, which I do forgive, may be the maintenance of vice, not only of the offendor, but also of others taking evil example therby, it lyes not in me to forgive the same. For so should I enterprize in the office of another, which by the ordinance of God be deputed to the same. Yea, and that such justice may be ministred to the abolishment of vice and sin, I may, yea and rather, as the cause shal require, I am bound to make relation to the superior powers, of the enormities and trespasses, done to me and others: and being sorry, that I should have cause so to do, seek the reforma∣tion of such evil doers, not as desirous of vengeance, but of the amend∣ment of their Lives. And yet I may not the more cruelly persecute the matter, because the offence is peradventure done towards me: but I am to handle it as if it were done to any other, only for the use of the extirpation of sin, the maintenance of justice and quietnes: Which may right wel stand with the ferventnes of charity, as the Scripture te∣stifieth. Non oderis fratrem tuum in corde tuo, sed publicè argue eum, ne habeas super illo peccatum. Levit 19. So that this may stand with cha∣rity, and also the forgiveness that Christ requireth of every one of us. And yet in this doing, I must forgive him with al my heart, as much as lyes in mee; I must be sorry, that sin should have so much rule in him; I must pray to God to give him repentance for his misdeeds; I must desire God, that for Christs sake he wil not impute the sin unto him, being truly repentant, and so to strengthen him in grace, that he fal not again so dangerously. I think I were no true christen man, if I should not thus do. And what other thing is this, than as much as lyeth in me, with al my heart to remit the trespas? But I may by the Lawes require al that is due unto me by right. And as for the punish∣ment and correction, it is not in my power to enterprize therin: but that only belongeth to the superior powers, to whom, if the grievous∣nes of the cause shal require by the Commandment, which willeth us to take away the evil from among us, we ought to shew the offences, and complain therof. For he would not that we should take away the evil, but after a just and lawful means, which is only, by the ordinance of God, to shew the same to the Superior Powers, that they may take an order in it, according to Gods judgment and justice.
NUM. XXXII. Other Discourses of Archbishop Cranmer. I. De Consolatione Christianorum contra metum mortis. Ex Doctoribus Ecclesiasticis. IF death of the body were to be feared, then theym, which have power to kil the body should we fear,MSS.C.C.C.C. Miscellan. D. lest they do their exercise over us, as they may at their pleasure. But our Saviour forbids us to fear them, because when they have killed the body, then they can do no more to us. Wherfore it is plain, that our Savior would not that we should fear death. To dy, saith S. Iohn Chrysostom, is to put off our old garments, and death is a pilgrimage of the spirit from the body: (He means, for a time) And a sleep, somewhat longer than the old custome. The fear of it, saith he, is nothing else, than the fear of Buggs, and a childish fear of that thing that cannot harm thee. Remember holy S. Ambrose's saying, which S. Augustin, lying on his death bed, ever had in his mouth, I do not fear to dy; for we have a good and merciful Lord and Master. Lactantius, the great learned man confirms the say∣ing of Cicero to be true, which said, that no man can be right wise, which feareth death, pain, banishment or poverty: and that he is the honest and vertuous man, which not regardeth what he suffers, but how wel he doth suffer. Sedulius, one of disciples, defineth death to be the gate, by the which lyeth the strait way unto reign and kingdom. Basilius, who as in name, so both in vertue and learning was great, thus he exhorteth us: O! man, saith he, shrink not to withstand your Adversaries, to suffer labors; abhor not death▪ for it destroyes not, nor makes not an end of you, but it is the beginning and occasion of life. Nor death is the destruction of al things, but a departing, and a translation unto honors. And S. Hierom, the strong and stout champion of Almighty God, saith, declaring this saying of holy Iob, the day of death is better than the day of birth; that is, saith he, because other [either] that by death it is declared what we are, or else because our Birth doth bind our liberty of the soul with the bo∣dy, and death do loose it. The holy Martyr Cyprian saith, he ought to fear death, that would not, nor hath no lust to go to Christ: and that he hath no wil to God, the which believeth not, that by death, he shal begin to reign with Christ, as it is written, The right wise man liveth by faith. Wherfore, saith he, do not ask that the Kingdom of God may come, if this earthly bondage do delight us, &c. With a great deal more: al upon allegations.
II. An Exhortation to take sicknes wel, and adversity patiently: drawn out of Cyprian. THis misliketh some men, that disease of sicknes cometh to the Christen, no less then to the Heathen. As who should say, that therfore the Christian believeth, because he should be quiet from danger of Adversity, and might have the fruition of this world at his own pleasure: and not because that after he hath suffered adversity here, he shalbe reserved for the joy to come, &c. III. An Exhortation to take the pain of sicknes patiently; Translated out of S. Augustin. Lib. 1. De Visitatione Infirmorum. THou wilt say, I love God: God grant, saith S. Augustin, that it be so indeed as thou promisest in words. The proof and trial of the love of God is the fulfilling of his Commandments, the fulfil∣ling of his works, willingly to love that God loveth, with a fervent desire to embrace that, the which God worketh. Then if thou lovest God, thou lovest that that God doth, and if thou love that that God doth, then thou lovest Gods disciplin. When thou art chastened, thou lovest Gods rod. Thou art pained with the cough, the lungs fail∣eth thee: thy stomack abhorres his meat: thou pinest away with a Consumption: thou tastest not thy drink: thou art vexed within thy body: thou art grieved with many sundry and divers kinds of diseases. But al these, if thou have an eye to perceive, if thou reckon God, al these, I say, are the gifts of God. Son, cast not away the discipline of the Father. There is no child, which the Father doth not cor∣rect, &c. NUM. XXXIII. Interrogatories for Dr. London. WHether he commanded Serles upon Palm-Sunday Even,MSS. C. C C C. intit. Synoda∣lia. to write such Articles or Sermons, as had been preached in Kent: [by those of the New learning: Which Serles would have to be done by the Countenance of Cranmer.] Whether Serles brought the Articles upon Palm-Sunday. Whether he required Serles to go with him to the Councel, to pre∣sent the said Articles, or else to subscribe them with his hand. And Serles refused so to do, because they were not proved by Witnesses, but only by hear-say. Whether he threatned Serles, because he would not set to his hand; notwithstanding that Serles knew them not, but by hear-say. How Dr. London did find out Serles; and how long he had enquired for him before he could find him.
Whether in the presence of Serles Dr. London did pen the Articles anew, otherwise then they were presented. Whether Serles said then to Dr. Willoughby, whom Dr. London had persuaded to go with him to the Councel; Beware what you do: for you shall never be able to prove of this sort, that Dr. London doth now pen them. Whether beside the Book subscribed by divers Prebendaries and others of Cant. Dr. London made another great book of many more articles. Where that book is, and of whom he had his Instructions. What matters he knew against the ABp. of Cant. or others in Kent, before Palm-Sunday last past, when he had Articles of Serles. And of whom he had such knowledg before the said day. Dr. Willoughbies Confession and Submission; as to his medling in the ABp. of Canterburies busines, under his own hand. HE declared, that he first met Serles at Dr. Londons house at Lon∣don, on Palm-Sunday, coming to London to speak with the Chamberlain of London. And then they opened the busines first to him. That he was not able to say any thing against any one person mentioned in these Articles, more then by hear-say. That he and Gardiner had been gathering of matter a quarter of a year before. That he knew nothing that they minded any thing towards his Grace, til he saw it in writing: By whom, and whose devise God, the Devil and they know; he knew nothing for his part. And that it was the most deceitful and disobedient country in the world. As concerning their preferment of their Articles at the Sessions, he knew nothing of that neither. Nor was in Kent at that time, nor knew of no Sessions, as God should be his help. Nor that he spake with any Justices of Peace in this matter; or that he was privy, that any of them did. That he told Mr. Moyle, and Mr. Thwaite [two eminent Justices] what Mr. Lon∣don said to him, that the Justices al would be shent, because they suf∣fered such preachings and contentions without doing any thing therin. That he only consented to bear the name of putting up of these mat∣ters [that is, of preferring the Articles to the Sessions.] He acknow∣ledged, that he said, he heard that it was in the Country in many pla∣ces: lying upon himself like a fool: and yet that he never came be∣fore the Councel, nor never minded. But to avoyd the suspition, he made much babling, bringing himself into much slander. And for this doing he submitted himself to God, and my Lords Grace. That, by his Father, [a sort of oath] he had no dealing with Pettit; nor any other Lawyer, or did know what they did, as to in∣dictment, or any other thing thereunto belonging: nor ever reasoned with Pettit about any such matter. What effect or head they intend∣ed to bring this matter unto, God knoweth: Most likely to subdue his Graces power. That they had good hope to have had other Commis∣sioners, than his Lordship. So London promised them at the beginning, or else they would not have medled so much, as they did: and espe∣cially
against his Grace. That as concerning their authority, he su∣spected they took it of Londons presumption, seeing him go forward against such men of Worship [meaning the late Indictments of so many eminent persons at Winsor] and of the rigor in handling and fetching up of Persons. Another Confession of Dr. Willoughby. MR. Serles manitimes resorted home to me, and stil lay upon me to put up Articles that he and they should devise, because I was the Kings Graces Chaplain. Wherupon I granted, so they might be proveable and true. And so it fortuned in Passion week, He and I on Friday in the same week rode to London, and on Saturday he had be with Dr. London, and put up his Articles, (nothing to my knowledg, that he had any) and promising him, that he would put them up him∣self. And on Palm-Sunday in the morning he sent for me, and pray∣ed me to go with him to Mr. London: and so I did. And there (wo worth them both, London and Serles, who is ordained to cause much trouble) He told London that I would put up the articles: and so asked me the Question. And I bad him read them, for I never saw them before, nor knew whether they were true or false: and so I told him. And Serles said, ye know, it is openly spoken. And I said, though I hear such things, I am not sure they be true: and also here is no re∣cord to affirm them true: Which methink were row [rough] mat∣ter, knowing neither party nor record. And therfore seeing Serles hath put them to you, let him present them himself. Then Mr. Lon∣don said, I have shewed them to part of the Councel already: and chid sore with Serles, saying, that he would shew the truth, who brought them. Then said Dr. London to me, pu ye them up, knowing such shameful Articles presented here before your own face, it shal be hard for you to byde the danger hereof, knowing the Kings wil is to have it so. And also fear not; for I have set such a spectacle before you at Winsor, in bringing to light abominable heresies: at the which the Kings Majesty was astonied, and wondred, angry both with the doers and bearers. And therfore if ye shrink herein, ye shal shew your self not to be herein the Kings true subject. Therfore seeing ye be his Chaplain, ye did him never such service, as ye may do herein, to pre∣sent them for your discharge. For now ye shal not be rid of them, and ye would. [Having heard them read, and so being privy to them.] And with this threatning and fear I was content. And so Dr. Lon∣don wrot them new, and added to them at his pleasure: wherwith both Serles and I were vexed. Meaning, as he said, to bring the mat∣ter into the Justices hond, and certain of the spiritualty; whose names Serles recited at his request: Saying to us, it would never be known to be our doing. And so was I fain to take the old Copy with me into Kent, to get them recorded. And he sent his Copy to my L. of Win∣chester. And so when I came down into Kent, remembring this Arti∣cle to be put up in my name, and neither had record, nor knew them
to be true, I came to the Prebend of Christschurch, and brought with me the Articles, being al of Serles hand, and gathering of him, and them among themselves: and bad me ask for one Salisbery that had the key of his chamber, for certain other writings, and copy al in one, and set their hands to them: and Mr. Gardiner to sign for himself, and Serles to boot. I could get neither writing nor sign. And so I went up again: and told London of it with a heavy heart. Then Mr. London told me, I should tel Mr. Moyle, that the Councel said to him▪ that the Justices of every shire should be shent, that such things should be, and not brought to knowledg. For if every Justice had done his duty, accord∣ing to the Kings Injunctions, such enormities need not to have been. And I told Mr. Moyle and Mr. Thwaites both, what I heard of London. Also Mr. London came to Mr. Moyles Lodging one day, and talked with him his mind, as may fortune he hath better in remembrance then I. But then I heard him tel Mr. Moyle, how he took up my L. of Cant. before the Councel. Then the next day I came to Mr. Moyle again; and because he heard, that the Councel should say so, and also had other Commandments for his discharge, sent certain letters to Mr. Thwaites, Mr. Walter Moyle, Mr. Green and Mr. Norton, to search out any Priest that lacked a crown with such Articles as the Country rumoured of. Wherupon each of them sent up some: And then the Prebendaries wrote up apace. And Mr. Moyle brought al that came to his hand to my L. of Cant. And therwith Mr. London was angry, and said he would mar al. Then I went down into Kent again, and brought up the Articles, wherin was matter against my L. of Cant. and received them of Mr. Gardiner on Good-Friday or Easter-Even. Mr. Shether copied them again. Which Articles they prayed me to carry to my L. of Winche∣ster. And I kept it, and let Dr. London see it. And he caused me to send it down to be signed with the hands of them. And so I did, and kept the Copy. And then, when I had it signed, I kept it stil, til their coming. And they took it of me, and carried it to the Councel them∣selves. And Dr. London had a copy of them, or else before. And they told me, they had great comfort of my L. of Winchester, and of Mr. Baker both Also Dr. London brought me by commandment of mine allegiance, to go with him to the Councel chamber door; meaning to have me in before the Councel. But he went in, and told them of my being there; giving me this lesson, that I should say. My Lords al; It is so, that the Kings Majesty and his Honourable Council hath been at great charges, and taken great paines, to set a good and a godly way among us. And for al that, in Kent among us we have the most enormous heresies, that may be. And because I heard of this graci∣ous tydings, that his wil and pleasure is, that every man in pain of his Allegiance to bring in what he knoweth, or else hereafter we know, and would not speak it, our damage would be thence. And because of this, I come for my discharge to shew this. But I came not in, nor spake with none: their busines was so much. Also the next day after Dr. London carried me to my L. Privy Seals chamber, and the Articles with us. But he had no leisure to se them.
Also the next day after that I had been with my L. Privy Seal, Dr. London carried me to my L. of Winchester. And there he was carried in to my Lords secret chamber: and tarried there an hour, and had his Articles new copied with him. And in the next day, in the morning betimes, I went there to speak with my L. of Winchester my self. And I spake with him, and prayed him, that the Articles that Mr. London brought, should not be put up in my name, for I knew not the matter; but in the names of them that sent them. And he said, he would. And another time I came to my L. of Winchester, and brought a roll from Mr. London: and then I prayed him again, that he would not put them up in my name, and had him recommended from Mr. Gardiner, that he would be good Lord to him for a busines of for he had taken great paines in this matter. But he made me no promise. And also my L. of Winch. bad me not fear to do my duty. And the matter were not to be byde by, the doers should bear the blame, and not the presenter. It is al our duties to stand in such things, as are contrary to the Kings Injunctions. And here is al that ever I did in this matter, as I can remember: and al the Council that ever I came before in this matter, or any other. But thus by the comforting in this matter of my L. of Winchester, and Dr. London's threatnings, have brought my self in great dangers with other mens matters Nothing of my self, that I can either se or prove, nor never did. But busied my self with other mens Articles: Yet had I never done it, and London had not been, that threat me to be no true subject. Wo worth them both, he and Serles: for by their false inventions I am shamed. If their Articles be false, punish the Inven∣tors with shame: for shameful matters, and many have been gather∣ed among them. Also Mr. London commanding both Serles and me, that in ony wise wee should get as much matter as could be devised: for it would be the goodliest deed, and the most bounden duty to our Prince, that ever we did. Also Mr. Shether sent his man to me on Sunday before Al-Solne day, bidding me in any wise not to be known of nothing: for that they had uttered nothing themselves. And that I should go to his brother Par∣son, and I should know more. But he was sworn not to write to me: but he had written to his brother al his mind; and of him I should knowal. For Mr. Dr. Cockes, and Mr. Hossy, as he thought, was sent to catch me. And therfore he sent his man to be afore. And if I did speak with them, I should say, that I received no letter, but of Cockson, which is dead. And this was but to bring me in danger, and skuse themselves. And if I come before the Councel, I will byde by al this: for it is true. But it is impossible for a man, to have eve∣ry day or time in remembrance, that hath been done or said in a year. But I put al to Gods grace, and the Kings, and to your Lordship. Also, I asked Shethers man, whether he had been with my L. of Winch. since the coming down of my Lords Grace. And he said, Yea: and told my Lord, how al was handled here among us. And my L. of Winch. answered and said, My Lord of Cant. could not kil them. Ther∣fore suffer. For al was against himself that he did. And he should se, what would come of it.
Also, at the coming up of the Prebendaries to London, Mr. Shether put the Articles and Writings to Mr. Ford, that married his Sister; that he should write them. Which was a great book of two dayes la∣bour. What was the Contents therof I know not. I think al the whole Articles compiled together. Also Mr. Dr. Thornton in the Ale [Alley] before my door in London, I desired him to speak to my L. of Cant. or some of his Officers, to instruct him, that I never put up Articles against any man in my life. And he bade me stick to it, and be not afraid. For he had spoken to the Councel his mind therin, as he was bound: and so be yee, being the Kings Chaplain: or else hereafter it would be laid to your charge. By me Iohn Willughby. Another Writing of Willoughby. ABout Avent Mr. Serles preached at home with me at Chillam, and there he talked of his trouble: Saying, he had put up certain Articles to the Kings Majesty: And yet they were so cloaked, that his Grace never saw them. Whereupon at his return he was layd in prison. And so he lay upon me, and moved me, to put up such Articles, as he and his company should devise. Whereupon I granted, so they might be true and proveable. So I heard no more of this, til Passion-Sunday. For that day he preached with me again. At which time he told me, he would to London that week, and so to Oxford. And I promised to ride with him. And so I did, meaning no more of this matter, than the child unborn. Mine errand was to speak with the Chamberlain of London. So on PalmSunday in the morning, he sent his man for me to come meet him in Pauls. And so I did meet him there. And so he prayed me to go to Dr. London with him. Which man I never saw before, of my faith. But he had been with him the night before, and put up his Articles: promising him, that he would go on Monday in the Morning with him to the Court, and put them up before the Coun∣cel; as Mr. Lond. said before his face. And in the morning he was clean changed; saying to Mr. London, that there was one Willoughby, that came to the Town with him, which had promised him, that when∣soever we wil bring our Articles unto him, he wil present them. And so Dr. London told me, that Serles said so unto him; and here∣upon he moved me. And I desired to hear them: And so they were read unto me. Which things methought were but trifles. And I said, they were of no effect, to present before the Councel: and also neither knew, nor could affirm none of them to be true: Saying, let Serles put them up, that brought them hither. For here is no record to affirm none of these to be true. Then said Serles, ye know that al the Coun∣try doth speak of these. And I said, though I did hear part of them, yet I am not able to say, that one of them is true. And because ye know them perfect, and the doers of them, and have also brought them hither, it is most meet for you to answer to them. And then
Mr. London said, that he had shewed them to part of the Councel, and to my L. of Winchester. For I see the Copy that was sent to my Lord, was of Londons own hand. For he that copied them out before us, was a Gentleman of my L. Winchesters, or to him belonging, Mr. Lon∣dons Copy lying before him. This appeareth, that this matter was consulted before: Serles can tel what the man was; (and so cannot I,) that did write them. But as I now remember, it was German. [that is, German Gardner.] By me Iohn Willoughby. Gardiners penitent letter unto the Archbishop. GEntle father. Whereas I have not born so good, so tender a heart towards you as a true child ought to bear, and as you never gave unto me occasion otherwise, but rather by benefits provoked me unto the contrary, I ask of you with as contrite a heart, as ever did David ask of God, mercy. And I desire you to remember the prodigal Child: Which although from his father swarving, yet into favour re∣ceived again, to receive me, although unkindly now by folly I did for∣sake you, and not born my heart so lovingly, so truly towards you, as in dutifulness I should have done. I am ful sorry for my fault. And yet, Good father, be you wel assured, as I opened my conscience unto you at my last communing with you, that I never did bear malice against you. But the greatest cause, that ever occupied my heart against you, and for the which I did bear my heart so little towards you, was, as God shall save the Soul of me, that I saw so little quiet∣ness among us, and so great jars in Christs religion: Supposing, that by your permission and sufferance, (which was not so, as I do now per∣ceive) That it did arise unto the great grief of my conscience. I con∣descended the sooner unto the making of the book against your Grace, when I was thereunto moved by that same suggester, Willoughby: Where and of whom he took occasion to bring his bills unto Canterbury, I know not. Good father, for my setting forth the same book, partly by me made, heartily confessing my rashness, and indeliberate doings, I ask of you mercy. Requiring of you, of your charity, to impute the great fault of it unto those, which ministred unto me occasion; and to remit unto me my lightnes. For of truth I was greatly seduced. Remember, Good father, that our Parent was seduced, and yet of God forgiven. Forgive me, Good father. By whom I was seduced, my Confession doth declare. And, Father, if it shall please you now, more of your goodness then of my deserving, (punishment and that sharp I have deserved) to forgive unto me this my fault and unkind∣ness: You shal never hereafter perceive in me, but that at al times I shal be as obedient, and as true unto you, as ever was child unto his natural father. If otherwise at any time you find of me, never trust me, never do for me; but utterly without al favor cast me into pain, as possible is for a wretch to suffer. Gentle Father, ponder my grief, which is at my heart not little. And through your good∣ness
remitting unto me my unkindness, and granting mercy with li∣berty, I desire your Grace to set me into ease, both of heart and body. I am yours, aud shal be yours; and that truly, while I live. God prosper your Grace per me William Gardiner. Good father, I have given my self unto you, heart, body and service; and you have taken me unto you. Now remember me, that I am your true servant. Another letter of Gardiner to the Archbishop. MOst Honourable Prelate. Due commendations premised, These be to give thanks unto your Grace, for that that you did yesterday, so favourably, as my sending for unto your presence: Whom I thought that I should never (pensiveness lay so sore at my heart) have seen again. And among al your Communications, that your Grace had unto me, I noted these words of highest comfort. Your Grace did note that I did cal you father in my Writings, you said unto me yester∣day, You cal me father: In good faith I wil be a Father unto you indeed. Words of high comfort unto me. Besides this, Most honorable Lord, you promised that I should have a book of al Articles layd in against me, to make answer unto them. I beseech your Grace that I may so have. For there is nothing that I have done or known to be done, but if I can cal it into remembrance, I wil truly open it. God prosper your Grace. By yours, and ever shal be, William Gardiner. Shethers letter of Submission to the Archbishop. MY duty always remembred unto your gracious Lordship. I most humbly beseech the same to have compassion upon me your prisoner. And for as much as I think, by the Articles, which Mr. Ioseph mentioned, that your Grace hath not only the Articles subscribed with the Witnes hands, but also other Articles: Which I noted since that time; as I heard by Mr. Gardiner, Coxton, Morice and others. So that your Gracious Lordship knoweth al, that ever I have heard. Pleaseth it your Lordship to understand, that many of those Articles last noted were of the Book, that was presented to my L. of Winchester, as unperfect and not proved: as indeed many could never be justified, as far as ever I heard. And therefore my L. of Winchester sent it again, as I have said in my first declaration. And it was never willed to be shewed as true. But, Gracious Lord, whether I have offended in that, that I noted those Articles, after that I was willed by Mr. Baker, to mark the chiefest fautors of new opinions, I refer
it to your gracious judgment: and whatsoever shal be thought (as nothing can be hid, nor I would should not, of any my life, from any of you both,) that I have offended in; I beseech you both of your mercy and favor, and to be good to me, Instantly and briefly (for I am loth to trouble you, or to seem to mistrust your goodness) desiring you to have in remembrance my weak nature, and the long and solato∣ry durance I have suffered, with grievous vexation of mind. And for refreshing thereof to Licence me to eat and drink at meals with company: and being so nigh my chamber, that I may remain in the same: to the intent I may pas the time with my own Books. Hear∣tily desiring your Good Lp. that notwithstanding any thing heretofore done, or how ever I have before wandred, not conformably to your gra∣cious advertisement or expectation: yet Gracious Lord, accept a poor heart, which would gladly be received into your fatherly favor again, to declare his faithful mind, he hath conceived towards your Goodness, upon such pity as your Gracious Lp. hath shewed, and I trust now wil, in his extreme need. Assuring your Grace that my whole confidence and only trust is reposed in your goodness only, and gentle Mr. Doctors;Dr. Legh. Whose native merciful hearts, as they have be declared oftentimes towards many, so I most meekly beseech you both mercifully to in∣terpretate my acts, and declare your pity in releasing my sorrows as shortly as shal seem convenient to your Wisdomes. For whom I wil not cease to be a perpetual Orator to Almighty God. I most heartily desire to know your Gracious pleasure in the premises, and especially whether your Lordship hath the Book subscribed with the Witness hands or no. For although that, in the Copy of my brothers book, it appeareth who hath subscribed to other Articles of Mr. Drom and Mr. Scory and others, which I do not remember. Your Gracious prisoner Edmond Shether. Milles letter of submission. MOst Reverend Father in God, My humble duty remembred unto your Grace. And I know right wel in that I subscribed unto certain articles (though unadvisedly) have shewed great unkindness unto your Grace in so doing. And again, for that have deserved little kindness at your Graces hand, and do now suffer cold imprisonment at your Graces pleasure. Which is very tedious painful unto me, and as I fear, great danger might ensue unto me, by augmenting that cold and cough, that I have taken before, and now increaseth. Besides the inward pensiveness of heart taken, for this my rash fact, at other mens light motion, as others of my company did: Which now I think lamenteth them much: yea so much, that at such time as I have been in company with them, I have heard them say, that they could not sleep, neither eat that thing, or drink, that did do them much good, as I am one of them. Wherefore, most gracious Lord, these premisses and others considered, by the which sickness of body may not the heart wast, this shal be to humbly beseech your Grace to mercifully intreat
me, and that now I may find some drop of mercy at your Graces hands, for this my imprisonment. Assuring your Grace that I shall take this punishment for my Learning; and not at any time hereafter to be so lightly allured at any mans motion to put so unadvisedly my hand, or consent to any such matter hereafter. Now, Gracious Lord, shew pity and mercy unto me, which I do ask of your Grace, and do heartily desire it with weeping ey, and sorrowful heart, as knoweth God. By your Iohn Myllys. NUM. XXXIV. A letter prepared for the King to sign, to ratify certain Ecclesiastical lawes. HENRICUS octavus Dei gratia, Angliae & Franciae Rex, Fidei Defensor, & Dorhinus Hiberniae, ac in terris Anglicanis sub Deo Caput supremum: Omnibus Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abba∣tibus, Clericis, Ducibus, Marchionibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus, Generosis, ac alijs cujuscunque generis hominibus, subditis & Legiis nostris, per Regnum nostrum, & Dominia nostra ubilibet commoran∣tibus, Salutem, & Evangelicae Veritatis incrementum. Cum VOS optimi cives mei mihique charissimi, me nunc unum atque solum hujus Regni Principem, in terrisque secundum Deum, hujus Ecclesiae Anglicanae unicum supremúmque Caput, quemadmo∣dum divini atque humani juris ratio postulat, potestatémque tam Ec∣clesiasticae quam Mundanae politiae mihi Majoribusque meis, ipso jure divino concessam (verum multis seculis unius Romani Episcopi mali∣tia, fraude, dolis atque astutia ereptam) ad Me & Successores meos pertinere una voce, uno omnium assensu agnoscitis, non possum in dies magis magisque, muneris atque officij mei rationem non habere, deque illustranda Dei gloria, de Christianae pietatis vera doctrina pro∣paganda, de imperij hujus incolumitate, & quiete tuenda, summa animi cura atque cogitatione non esse solicitus. Occurrant enim subin∣de animo meo verba illa, quae Sapientiae Cap. septimo habentur ad hunc modum: Audite Reges & intelligite, quoniam data est a Domino potestas Vobis, & Virtus ab Altissimo; qui interrogabit opera vestra, & scrutabitur cogitationes. Ad vos ergo, Reges, sunt hij Sermones mei, ut discatis Sapientiam, & ne excidatis. Qui enim custodit justitiam, justè judicabuntur, & qui didicerunt justa, invenient quid respondeant, &c. Hinc facile perspici potest exactissime a regibus potestatis suae redden∣dam esse rationem, illosque gravissimas manere poenas, si non, ut oportuit, in Rep. administranda sese gesserint. Quod si tanta cura, ac solicitudine quibuscunque regibus opus est, quam anxios igitur ac solicitos Christianos reges esse debere censendum est, quibus non politia modo Civilis, sed Ecclesiastica etiam potestas da∣ta est? Hos enim non tantum quae ad Humanam societatem pertinent, sed etiam quae divinae Christianaeque religioni maximè consentanea sunt,
curare necesse est. Praesentem hujus saeculi faelicitatem principes Chri∣stianos ita metiri convenit, ut hac potestate sua ad Dei cultum dilatan∣dum utantur, & in hoc incumbant, ut recta doctrina propagetur, or∣neturque Dei gloria. Cum igitur a Christianis Regibus justitiam in Imperio, pacis tuendae curam, pietatem, studium juvandae & ornandae religionis Christianae exigi animadverterem, nihil mihi potius esse debere judicabam, quàm ut omnes inirem rationes, quo minus in hoc meo regno haec a me desi∣derentur, & quo ad possem, muneri imposito satisfacerem. Hoc ut fa∣cilius, expeditiusque praestare valeam, non ignoratis vos, quantam cu∣ram adhibuerim in illis rebus promovendis tuendisque, quae huic nego∣tio maximè conducere, atque adjumento esse videbantur; quae contra impedire atque obesse visa sunt, quanto studio tollere ac delere conatus sm, assiduéque conor. Abunde enim vobis declaratum hactenus fuit, quam in hac nostra Britannia, multis retro saeculis, Episcopi Romani vis injusta, ac non ferenda, sacro sancto divino numini inimica fuit; quantopere religioni Christianae, verae doctrinae propagandae adversata est, quantum hujus Reip. pacem ac tranquillitatem saepissimè intertur∣bavit, potestatémque Regiam divinitus constitutam labefactando, de∣bitam omnium obedientiam, a vero ac justo Principis sui imperio, contra one jus divinum & humanum, ad se transferre ausus est. Hu∣jus potestatem huic cum divino munere sublatam esse manifestum est, & nequid superesset, quo non planè fractam illius vim esse constaret, leges omnes, decreta atque instituta, quae ab authore Episcopo Roma∣no profecto sunt, prorsus abroganda censuimus. Quorum loco, ut fa∣cilius imposterum Dei Opt. Max. gloria illustretur, & vera Philoso∣phia Christiana regnumque Christi vigere possit, & quo omnia decen∣ter & ordine in Christi hac ecclesia gerantur; en Vobis authoritate nostra editas leges damus, quas a Vobis omnibus suscipi, coli & observari volumus, & sub nostrae indignationis poena mandamus, ut vestra in Deum pietas, amor erga patriam, principemque Vestrum obedientia, non sine immensa divini Nominis gloria omnibus conspicua sit, ac vosmet∣ipsos non minus de vestris rationibus solicitos ostendatis, quam ego vestra causa de officio fuerim meo, stricte praecipientes, ut his nostris constitutionibus vos omnes & inguli, tam in judicijs, quam in gymna∣rijs utamini, severè prohibentes. ne quisquam vestrum alias, praeter has, & regni nostri leges admittere praesumat. Valete. NUM. XXXV. The Bishop of Winchester to Archbishop Cranmer: relating to the Reformation of Religion. AFter my duty remembred to your Grace.Foxij MSS. Your letters of the third came to my hands the of the same. And, upon the reading, and advised consideration of the mat∣ter in them, have thought requisite to answer unto them: and at length to open my mind frankly in some points of them. Tempering my words so, as I shal not be seen to have forgotten your place and
condition ne such familiarite, as hath been between your G. and me. The remembrance of which familiarite maketh me speke as frely, as on the other side your astate brydeleth me to be more moderate in speech, then sum matier I shal herafter speke of, wold ells suffre and permit. It greveth me moch to rede wryten from your G. in the begynning of your lettres, how the King our late Soveraign was seduced, and in that he knew by whom he was compassed in that I cal the Kings Maje∣sties Book. Which is not his Book, bicause I cal it so, but bicause it was indede so acknowledged by the hol Parliament, and acknowledg∣ed so by your G. thenn, and al his life; which, as you afterwards write, ye commaunded to be published and red in your Diocese, as his book: Against which by your G's spech ye commaunded Ioseph he shuld not prech. Al which I think your G. would not have doon, if ye had not thought the book to have conteyned truth. And in the truth can be no seducyng to it, as the Kings book conteyneth; but from it. Which if it had been so, I ought to think your G. would not for al the Princes christened, being so high a Bishop, as ye be, have yed unto. For Obedire oportet Do, magis quam hominibus. And therfore after your G. hath foure yere continually lyved in agrement of that doctrine under our late Soveraine Lord, now so sodenly after his death, to wryte to me, that his Highness was seduced, it is, I assure you, a very straunge spech. Which if your G. shuld bring in to open conten∣tion, as I know your G. of your Wisedome, wyl not; But in that case wyl I, as an old servaunt of my late Soverayne Much wanting. it self so many Calamities besides, wherof I have more laysor to think on, thenn your G. as my chance is now, which I reckon in this respect very good; After so many yeres Service and in such trouble without daunger passed over, to aryve in this haven of quyetnes without losse of any notable takel, as the Marryners say, (Which is a great matier as the wynds hath blowen) And if the present astate in this world wer to be considered, I have many times alleged for confirmation of thopinion of some in religion And the Protestants take it for a gret ar∣gument, to establish ther procedyngs, that themperor was ever letted, when he went about to enterprize any thing against them, as Bucer declareth at gret length in a letter written to the World. And whenne Sledanus was here in England, he told me the like at Windesore: and then Tanquam praedixit of the effect of certain eclypse: Adding▪ that I shuld see magnas mutationes. And so I have seen, and have heard mer∣velous chaunges synnes that; but otherwise than Sledanus toke it, and to destroy ther fancies, if that were to be regarded. But for my self, I have seen my Soveraine Lord, with whom I consented in opinion, make the honourable conquest of Bolen, and honorably in his life main∣teyne it. And after in honorable peace made, leave this world over soon to us: but that was due by him to be payd to naure, discharged it honoraly; buried honorably with sorrow and lamentation of his servants and subgetts; and my self his poor servant, with a litel fle∣byting
of this world, conveyed to an easy astte, without diminution of my reputation. And therfore whenne I hear fondly alleged, or rede more fondly wryten, the favor toto, that is by Bl, Ioye and Io∣seph, or such like, newly called the Word of God, to be embraced for preservation of the worldly astate, I se the clere contrary in experi∣ence, and conclude with my self, that it proveth nought before man; and take it before God to be abomination. Which causeth me to spend some of my laysor to wryte so long a letter to your G. who hath lesse laysor: Wyshing that our laysor, gret or litel, may be spent otherwyse then to trouble this Realm in the time of our Soveraine Lords Minority, with any novelte in mtiers of religion: being so many other matiers, which, for that I was so late a Counsellor, cannot out of my memo∣ry: Requiring the hol endeavour of such as have charge, and silence in the people, who shuld serve and obey, without quarelying among themself for matiers in religion. Specially considering it is agreed our late Soverain is receyved to goddes mercy. And though some wold say, he had [his errors] and saw not perfitely Gods truth: Yet for us, it were better to go to heven with oon yie after hym, thenne to travayle here for another yie with daungier to lose both. There was good humanite in him that said, Mlim errare cum Platone, quam cum alijs vera sentire. Which affection were to the world plausi∣ble towching our Soveraine Lord, that made us: But we christen men may not teach so, but esteme God above al, and his true divinite. In which case nevertheles, whenne the divinite pretended is so rejected of many, and utterly reproved: So doubted of many other, as it is su∣spected and confessed among us, it is not necessary. For our Soveraine Lord is gone from us to heaven, in his way. It is a mervelous matier what a certain loss it is aforehand to entre∣prize to serch, which among a very few hath the name of Divinite, and of al the rest is so named Heresie. as I wil not reherse. And this I write not, because your G. entendeth any such thing soo far. For I may not, and wil not so think of you. But this I take to be true, that the way of error is let in at a little gappe. The vehemence of novelty wil flow further thenne your G. wold admitte. And when men hear of new gere, every man maketh his request, sum new hose, sum new robes, sum newe cappes, sum new shirtes. Like as in religion we have seen attempted, where the people thought they might pre∣vayle. Which caused the commotion in Germany in bello civili Rustico∣rum, and hath made the same stir there now in bello civili Nobilium. It was a notable act of our late Soverain Lord, to reform and thenne moderate religion, as he did. Which he did not without al trouble. And how safe we be in religion, when al quietnes is acquired you Wisdome canne consider. Our late Soveraine Lord was wont to say, which I never forget, speaking of himself man had not looked to the Pacification. He saw men dsirous to set forth their own fancies, which he thought to have excluded by his Pacifi∣cation. If your G. would say to me now, that I wasted moch speche in vaine, and declared therby, I had to much laysor to write so moch in this ma∣tier, as though I feared that nedeth not to be feared: for your G. hath commaunded our late Soveraine Lords book The Erudi∣tion of a Chri∣stian man. to be redde, and mind∣eth
nothing now, but oonly Omylies, wherin your G. wold, I shuld write. Which to do wer neyther gret payne, ne hardnesse to me: and I might as soon wryte an Homilie, as these letters. As for the facilite of the matier of wryting, or wryting by not tra∣verse. But then I consider what contraversie may arise in wryting. As for example (for seing I have laysor to wryte, I wil forget what lay∣sor your G. hath to rede) if I should make an Homily De vita per∣fecta, I wolde note two parts, Oon of life, Another of perfiteness. For the grownde of the oon, I wolde take S Iohn, Misit Deus silium suum, ut vivamus per eum. And for the other, Estote perfecti, sicut pater vester, &c. In Declaration of Life, I wolde take occasion to speke of Faith the gift of entre to life, and of Charite the very gift of Life; which who hath not remaineth in dete. And therfore S. Iames said, Fides sine operibus mortua est. Not expounding that so, as though Faith without Charite were no Faith, as we say a dead man is no man. For I wolde wish the people in any wise to beware of that fashion of teaching, and such a sophistical understanding of S. Iames; and for detection therof, declare, that deth conteyneth not alwayes a denyal of the thing dead not to be, but oonly wher the name of the thing noted now dead, conteyned before in it a signification of life. As the word man signifyeth a body living: and thenne it is truly said, that a dead man is no man, no more thenne a paynted man. But Faith signifieth not alwayes a Life in it. For Devils have Faith without life. And when we speke of ded faith, it is like as when ye speke of a body indeed without life, but apt and mete to receyve life. As spawne is a body without life, and dead, but mete to receyve life with convenient circumstance. And then we say not, that a body dead is no body. And therfore we may not say, that a dead Faith is no Faith. After which understanding, we shuld make S. Iames to treate, whether no faith might justify a man, or no: Which were a cold matier. And yet so must we say, if we wil expound this saying, that a dead faith is no faith. And in this poynt I wold, in my Homily De Vita, be most ernest to shew, that in charity is life, wherunto Faith is thentre. Which faith without charite is not noo faith, but dead. And therfore God, that ge∣veth al life, geveth with faith charite: Wherof I wold make the moo words in the Homily, bicause the handling of S. Iames in the other sophistical interpretation is an entre to unwholsome doctrine. And if your G. wold say, What of this, or to what purpose shuld it be wry∣ten to you, that myndeth no such matier: Surely for nothing but bi∣cause I have plenty of leasour, and wryte as though I talked with you. And that not al in vaine, for that I have hertofor harde of other, whom I have harde moch glory in that exposition, to say S. Iames meaneth, that dead faith is no faith, even as a dead man is no man. Which, by my saye, is overfar out of the way: and yet myn Omylie might in such an Homiler, and company of Omylies, encontre with oon of the trade I have spoken of; and bring forth matier of contention and altercation, without al frute or edification. And thus much for example of trouble in Homylies: Which these five yeres have rested without any busines, and the people wel doon their dueties, I trust, to God in heven, and know wel, to ther Soverain Lord in yerth. And our Soverain Lord,
that governed them without these Omylies goen to heven, whether, I trust, we and the people shal go after, although we trouble them with noo Homilies. Which shal hardly be so accumulate ex diversis tractati∣bus, with diverse fashion of wryting, diverse phrase of speches, diverse conceits in teachings, diverse ends per case entended, as some wil construe. The rest is wanting. NUM. XXXVI. Gardiner Bishop of Winton to the Duke of Somerset, concerning the Book of Homilies and Erasmus Paraphrase, englished. AFter my most humble Commendations unto your Good Lp. with hearty thanks that it hath pleased you to be content to hear from me. Wherein now I have liberty to write at large to you.Cotton library. Vespas. D. 18. I cannot find the like gentleness in my body to spend so much time as I would. And therfore I shal now desire your G. to take in good part, tho I ga∣ther my matter in brief sentences. The Injunctions in this last Visitation contain a commandment to se taught, and learned two books. One of Homilies, that must be taught; another of Erasmus Paraphrasis, that the Priests must learn. These Books strive one against another directly. The Book of the Homilies teacheth Faith to exclude charity in the office of Justifica∣tion. Erasmus Paraphrasis teacheth Faith to have charity joyned with him in Justification. The Book of Homilies teacheth how men may swear. The Para∣phrasis teacheth the contrary very extremely. The Book of Homilies teacheth how Subjects owe tribute to their Prince, and obedience very wel. The Book of the Paraphrase in a place upon S. Poule violently, and against al truth, after it hath spoken of duties to Heathen Princes, knitteth the matter up untruly; that between the Christen men at Rome, to whom he writeth, which is a Lesson to al, there should be no debt, or right, but mutual charity, But these are not the words of Erasmus, but S. Paul. Rom. XIII.8 Which is a marvailous mat∣ter. The Book of Homilies in another place openeth the Gospel one way. The Paraphrase openeth it clean contrary. The matter is not great, but because there is contrariety. Now to consider each of the aforesaid Books. The Book of H. in the sermon of Salvation teacheth the clean contrary to the doctrin established by the Act of Parlament In the Book of The Eruditi∣on, &c.; even as contrary as [Includeth] is contray to [Excludeth.] For these be the words of the Doctrin established by Parlament; where in a certain place Faith doth not ex∣clude. The doctrin of the Parlament speaketh how they be joyned in Justification. The Homilies speak the vertues to be present in the man justified, and how Faith excludes them in the office of Justifica∣tion. Which can never be proved; and is in the mean time contrary to the Act.
The Book of H. hath in the H. of Salvation, how remission of sins is taken, accepted and allowed of God for our perfect Justification. The Doctrin of the Parlament teacheth Justification, for the fulness and perfection therof, to have more parts then Remission of sins, as in the same appeareth. And tho Remission of sins be a justification, yet it is not a full and perfect. The Book of H. numbreth the hallowing of bread, Palmes and Can∣dles among Papistical superstitions and abuses. The Doctrin of the Parlament willeth them to be reverendly used. And so do the Injuncti∣ons now set forth. Which made me think the Printer might thrust in an Homily of his own devise. The book of H. hath words of S. Chrsstom aledged untruly, and not after suh a sort, as might scape by over sight, but of purpose. As calling that Faith which Chrysostom calleth Hope. And in place of one Sentence putteth another, which should better serve the purpose of the Maker of the Homilies. Now if one would reason with me, that Chrysostom meant this, I would deny it him, as I may. But I may afrm, that Chrysostom saith Not. It is but a defamation of the trth: And under such a Princes name as our Soveraign Lord is, whose tongue, in this so pure innocency, hath not been defiled with any untruth; I assure you, I thought there was not so great hast in Homilies, but they might have tarried the printing even for that only cause. Truth is able to aintain it self, and needeth no help of untrue allegations. It serves only for enemies to take advantage. All which [i. e. Enemies] use to be crious to know what they may reprove. And now al the eyes and ears of the World be turned towards us. And as they shal have cause to talk honorably of your valiantness in the wars, so they talk otherwise of that, that is done in your absence, if any thing be amis. Now I shal shew your Grace what author Ersmus is, to be, by name and special Commandment, had in credit in this realm. If he be to be believed, the doctrin of Only Faith justifieth, is a very poson. And he writeth by expres termes, and calleth this another poon, to dny punishment in Purgatory after this life. And another poison, to deny the Invoction of Saints, and worshipping of them. And this he cal eth a poison, to say, We need no satisfactory works, for that were to mistrust Christ Erasmus in another place conferring the state of the Church in the beginning, and now, he concludeth, that if S. Paul were alive at this da, he would not improve [i. e. disallow] the pre∣sent state of the Church, but cry out of mens faults. This is Erasmus judgment in his Latter daes. His Work, the Paraphrasis, which should be authorized in the Realm: Which he wrot above six and twenty years ago, when his pen was wanton, the matter is so hauled, as being abroad in  were able to minister occasion to evil men to subvert, with religin, the policy and order of the Realm. These be the general words, the uttering whereof to your Grace in the place you occupy, were a great fault, unless I would shew ye good ground and truth, why to say so. And therefore I am glad I do rather write to you, then to have come and spake with you, because my words in number might fly away; whereas written words remain to be read again.
First, as concerning the Policy and state of the Realm, Whersoever Erasmus might take an occasion to speak his pleasure of Princes, he payeth home as roundly, as Bishops have been of late touched in pleas. And such places of Scripture as we have used to allege for the state of Princes, he wresteth and windeth them so, as if the people read them and believed him, they would afterward sma regard that allegation of them. And if Erasmus did truly, and that the Scripture bound him so to say, it were more tolerable, (For truth must have place) but when it is done in some place untruly, and in some plce wantonly, to check that estimate, it can be no good doctrin among people, that should obey. And this book of Paraphrasis is not like the other expositions of Scripture, where the Author speaketh in his own person. For Erasmus taketh upon him the Evangelists persons and Christs person, and enterpriseth to fit up Christs tale and his words. As for example where the Gospel rehear∣seth Christs speech, when he said, Give to the Emperor, that is the Emperors; (By which speech we gather and truly gather, that Christ confessed the Emperor to have a duty;) Erasmus writes it with an IF, after this sort. IF there be any thing due to them. Which condition Christ put not to it, but spake plainly, Give to Cesar the things which are Cesars, and unto God the things that are Gods. And I write the very words of the Paraphrasis, as they be in English, for I have the book with me. And so shal no man say, that I misreport the book. The words be these. Render therfore unto Cesar, if any things appertain unto Cesar. But first of al, render unto God the things, that appertain unto God. Meaning that it is no hurt unto Godlines, if a man being dedicate unto God, do give tribute unto a prophane prince, altho he ought it not. These be the words in the book ordered to be set forth. Wherin what needeth Eras∣mus to bring in doubt the duty, when God putteth no doubt at al. It were too long to write to your Grace every fault. This one I put for example, where Erasmus doth corrupt Christs words, with a condition, which Christ spake not. The other places of raylings would encumber your Grace overmuch. But as I write, your Grace shal find true, that whatsoever might be spoke to defame Princes government, is not left unspoken. Bishops be more gently handled. Erasmus maketh them very Kings of the Gospel, and calleth the true Kings of the World Profane Kings. Bishops have the sword▪ he saith, of God given, that is to say, the Gospel. Profane Princes, as he calleth them, have a sword commit∣ted unto them, and by Homer, he saith, be called Pastors of the people. This matter is within the compas of the Paraphrasis, if it be not left out; with a commendation also of Thomas Becket of Canterbury, in ex∣communicating the King of the realm, that then was, by implication, for the manor of Oxford, which the King, as he rehearseth, then withheld It may be the Translator would have left this out. But Erasmus pen in those dayes was very light. Moreover them, Erasmus teacheth, that between Christen men is no debt, or right, but Charity. It is a mervailous matter towards the dissolution of laws and duties. And therin Erasmus doth violate Gods scripture, and saith not true.
Thus far is the doctrin pernitious for common policy. Neverthe∣les if he had said true, let the truth prevail, but the truth is not so. As touching Religion in this work of Paraphrasis, it is so wantonly, (I beseech your Grace note my words) and therwith untruly handled, as if we should use to read it, there should ensue a marvelous confusi∣on. Some specialties I wil note, but not al. The Sacrament of the Altar is wantonly talked of by him, that as the word is now, the reading of him were the whole subversion. Erasmus in his latter dayes, hath for the Sacrament of the Altar spoken as reverently, and said as much for confirmation of it, as may be, and cryeth out of them, that would take him otherwise. But this in the end, when age had tempered him. In this Paraphrasis, which he wrot in his wanton age, the words and termes were able to subvert, if it were possible, as Christ saith, the elect. If this Paraphrasis go abroad, people shal be learned to cal the Sacra∣ment of the Altar holy bread, and a Symbol. At which new name many wil marvail. And they be wanton words spoken of Erasmus without necessity. By the doctrin of the Paraphrasis, whosoever had done away his wife for advotrie might mary again. By the Paraphrasis al men may mary, Bushops and Priests. Wherin Erasmus took his pleasure to un∣derstand S. Poul, as tho he should describe, of what quality Priests wives should be, Wherin he forgat himself. For S. Poul knew, that if a Bushop or Priest were once married, his Wise must pas with al her faults; and it would be too late to tel what she should be. For other∣wise then she is, she wil not be, neither for S. Poul, nor S. Peter. And if Bushops had that privilege, that they might change til they found such one, as Erasmus saith S. Poul would have them, their estate would be wonderfully envied. But S. Poul did not speak there of Bushops wiues. And so therin he doth violence to the Scriptures undoubtedly. Wherfore I write somewhat merrily to shew the absurdity of the thing. By the Paraphrasis the keeping of a Concubine is called but a light fault. And that were good for Lancashire. And Erasmus bringeth it so prettily, that a Ruler of a Country, if he be himself the servant of avarice or Ambition, should not browke with his brother, because be∣ing overcome by weaknes of flesh he useth a Concubine. Even thus it is Englished in the book that should go forth. And when to have a a Concubine, it is called a light fault, methinks if the maid can read, it may serve wel, lightly to persuade her. And yet if the man doth it, overcome by the weakness of his flesh, as the book termeth it, is made matter. Wherin Erasmus speaketh over lightly, to cal it a light fault. And the Translator in English wanted speech, when he turn∣ed it thus: That a man overcome with the weakness of his flesh should desire a Concubine. I am bold with his Grace, to joyne here Eras∣mus lightnes with the discretion of the Translator. If to keep a Con∣cubine shal by authority be called a light fault, the multitude of them may make the fault heavy. By the doctrin of the Paraphrasis, every man must come to the high prick of vertue, or to be extremely naught. Which differeth far from the teaching of the Homilies, and from the truth also.
The Paraphrasis teacheth thus truly; More glorious it is to dy for the Gospels sake. Which death, tho it shal be violent and sore; yet it shal not come before the day. Whensoever it cometh it shal not come without the providence of God. And by this it cometh to pas, that if ye endeavor to avoyd it, ye cannot. This is the doctrin which if it were taken for truth, might engender like obstinacy in many, as it hath of late in some. Erasmus teacheth here further, then he hath warrant by Scripture. The Paraphrasis in another place doth clearly violate the Text, and untruly handle it, in a matter of Tiths, which your Grace desireth, as appeareth by the Injunctions, to have truly payd. Wherin if Eras∣mus had said truth, let truth prevail; but when he handleth it untru∣ly, it is pity it should be suffered. Thus have I here reckoned your Grace some special faults, that be Erasmus own faults, with a great number, that I have not spoken of. And further your Grace shal understand, that he which hath taken the labors to translate Erasmus into English, hath offended sometimes, as appeareth plainly, by ignorance, and sometimes of purpose, to put in, leave out, and change, as hee thought best. Wherwith I wil not encumber your Grace, but assure you it is so. And therin I wil grant to your Grace, that for every ly, that I make unto your Grace, set on an hundred pound fine on my head; and let me ly here like a begger, until my revenues pay. My words remain in writing, and be against me matter of record. And so I yield to have me charged, as the Bp. of London was with offering the farm of his Bpric. Which matter I do remember, when I wrot this. I remit the Reader for the rest of this letter to Winchester's ninth letter in Foxes Acts: This former part of the letter, which is now exposed to view, having been by him omitted. NUM. XXXVII. Roger Ascham to Mr. Cecyl, giving him an account of a Dispu∣tation in S. John's College, Whether the Mass and the Lord's Supper bee al one. S.P. in Christo Iesu. Ornatissime Vir. Ante mensem, aut plus eo, disputatum fuit in hoc Collegio more nostro de Missa,MSS.SrW.H. ipsáne Coe∣na Dominica fuerit, nécne. Magna sane eruditione haec Questio tracta∣ta fuit a Thoma Levero, & Rog. Hutchinsono, quos opinor nosti. Sunt profecto docti viri. Quidam in Academia hanc rem aegrè tulerunt. Huc tandem res perducta est, vel ego potius pertractus fui hortatu communi multorum in nostro collegio, ut hanc ipsam quaestionem è domesticis parietibus in publicas scholas praeferrem, hoc animo & in∣stituto, ut disceremus libenter & sine rubore a doctis Viris, quid e fon∣tibus sacrae scripturae libari potuerit ad defendendam Missam; quae non
solum summum locum in religione & conscientijs hominum occupat, sed omne fidele propemodum ministerium Verbi Dei & Sacramento∣rum, ex usu & consuetudine Christianorum, abstulit. Rem quietissimè aggressi sumus, communia studia nos inter nos conferebamus, Scriptu∣ram Canonicam nobis proposuimus, cujus auctoritate totam hanc rem decidi cupiebamus: Veteres Canones ineuntis Ecclesiae, Concilia Pa∣trum, Decreta Pontificum, Judicia Doctorum, Quaestionistarum tur∣bam, Recentiores omnes, quos potuimus & Germanos & Romanos, ad hanc rem adhibuimus. Quidam in Academia publicis concionibus no∣tabant hoc factum nostrum, & tandem laborarunt, ut D. Madeûus Vicecancellarius, literis suis hanc Disputationem prohiberet. Nos li∣benter paruimus, ut par fuit; sed aegre tulimus disputandi facultatem nobis intercipi, concionandi vero copiam pro libidine alijs concedi. Audivimus Cantuariensem nobis iniquiorem fuisse. Nec mirum est, nam adversarij nostri, cogor invitus acerbiori voce uti, Prudentissime Vir, tragicis clamoribus hanc rem illi detulerunt. Quod factum illo∣rum majoríne malitia, aut imperitia institutum fuit dubitari potest. Thomas enim Aquinas probat Missam Dominicam coenam multis praero∣gativis superasse, & longissimè ab ea discrepasse multis notis; Sexu, Missare enim Mulieres non debent: a Coena tamen non excludantur: Aetate, Vitio Parentum, Luxatione Membrorum. Nam pueri, Nothi & Mutilati a Missae dignitate repelluntur, ad Coenae humilitatem reci∣piuntur: & multis alijs modis. Ut siquis affirmaret eandem esse Missam & Coenam, multo magis exclamarent. Sed quid dicam de hijs nostris? Nihil aliud, nisi quod Herodes tur∣batus est, & tota Hierosolyma cum eo. Dicunt nos esse praecipites. Certe nemo tam praeceps est, quin facile revocari possit; ut calcaribus poti∣us, quam habenis tota Cantabrigia egeat. Sed quod institui tibi narrare, quanquam disputatio nostra fuerit pro∣hibita, studia tamen nostra in eadem re quodammodo aucta sunt. Scripsimus enim fere justum librum de Missa, quem brevi offerre insti∣tuimus D. Protectori, nisi tibi & magistro Checo aliter visum fuerit. Quantum ad tractationem rei pertinet, vellem ut judicium tuum, non sermoni aliorum, sed ipsi rei reservare velis. Neque hoc dicimus, quia de nobis aliquid polliceri audemus, sed quia veremur, ne certi homines nimis studeant illud impedire quovis modo, quod ipsi non probant. Legimus sanctissimas confessiones Reginae nostrae cum tua eloquen∣tissima epistola. Utinam aliquid temporis tui ad excolendam Anglica∣nam linguam impartire velis, ut homines intelligerent & nostram lin∣guam omnes eloquentiae numeros facile admittere. Literae Magistri Checi ad Collegium nostrum fuerunt omnibus nobis gratissimae, ubi minimis verbis maxima benevolentia, & ejus & tua, comprehensa fuit. D. Protectoris literae ad Acad. a te scriptae mirificè nos omnes delecta∣runt. Commune votum est apud nos, ut Cantabrigia aliquando, imò brevissimè, sentiat Ioannem Checum Praepositum Regij Collegij. Epis∣copus ille Daius Cice∣strensis. nihil prodest studijs, vellem ut non obesset. Et hoc non dico ad aucupium cujusvis gratiae, sed ad Commodum totius Academiae. Plurima sunt, quae nos sic sentire cogunt, & plura tua Prudentia videt. Nos sic amici inter nos communicamus, fortasse non prudentissimè, Cautissimè tamen: & quod minimum est, valde amanter. Cogita
de hac re quid vis, promove tamen eam quantum potes. Nimis molestus su. Vale . Quinto Januarij, 1548. E Coll. D. Ioan. Cant. Dignitatis tuae Studiosiss. R. Aschamus. Ornatissimo Viro Magistro Gulielmo Cicello Supplicum libellorum Magistro. NUM. XXXVIII. The University of Cambridg to the Archbishop. ALiquid a te suppliciter petere, cum Tu omnia nobis lubenter tri∣buis, Doctissime Praesul, non inane & supervacaneum negotium,Aschamij Epp. sed gratae voluntatis debitum potius officium esse ducimus. Rogamus igitur te, ut in hoc Senatu vestro, privilegia nostra confirmentur. Quantum Reip. interest, ut doctrinae ratio haberetur, omnes fere intel∣ligunt: quantum verò purae Religionis interest, tu unus plus universis alijs animadvertis. Scis enim tu, quod annis abhinc quingentis, aut plus eo, cognitio literarum, Regum vitio, a quibus ali debuerat, e con∣spectu hominum sese abducere, & in tenebras relabi coepit. In qui∣bus temporibus sic caligine obductis, sic ignorantia involutis, Aper ille singularis de sylva supra modum depopulatus est vineam Iesu Christi: non proculcans solum Reges terrae, & imperium sibi collocans mundi; sed ita invasit erupitque in sanctam sedem, & Templum conscientiae, ut nulli sere nunc sint mores, nulla institutio vitae, nullus caeremonia∣rum ritus, nullum Ecclesiae Sacramentum, nullum Christi vestigium, quod non sit ejus aut fulmine prostratum, aut halitu foedatum; quod non sit (ut mitius, seu significantius cum Divo Paulo loquamur) pru∣dentia humanae  foedissimè corruptum, & constupratum. Haec nox disciplinarum, & ignoratio vocem Domini nobis abstulit, & humanae doctrinae imperium in illam libidinem evexit; ut pro vero cultu Dei, recto divinissimarum rerum usu, integra & pura vitae con∣suetudine, Hypocrisis, Idololatria, & Adulterium cervicibus hominum astutissimè imponeretur. Hanc inscientiae pestem libentius commemo∣ramus, quod nunc in magnam spem ducimur constituendae de integro dignitatis literarum, in ijs praesertim temporibus, cum omnia ad ve∣ram religionem illustrandam, a qua praeclara doctrina abesse certè non potest, mirificè comparata sunt. Et cum prudentia tua, ad verbum Dei restituendum, divinitus sit & nunc excitata, & diu reservata; non du∣bitamus, quin omnem operam & authoritatem tuam, ad salutem etiam literarum continendam collaturus sis: Commotus aliquid certè vel hac ratione, quod nulla hoc tempore literis vel insperata clades, vel ex∣pectata commoditas accidere potest, cujus tu non aut author ad mag∣nam commendationem; aut particeps ad aliquam reprehensionem, voce ac sermone omnium jactatus eris. D. Iesus, &c.
NUM. XXXIX. Richard Smith D. D. his Recantation of his Books. Becons Re∣ports.IN my book of Traditions I sayd and affirmed, that Christ and his Apostles taught and left to the Church many things, without wri∣ting, which we must both beleve stedfastly, and also fulfil obediently un∣der pain of Damnation ever to endure. Among the which I rehersed by name a great number to be obeyed, kept and followed: As the observa∣tion of Lent from flesh or wyne: the keeping of the Sacrament in the pix: the receiving it at the Priests hands: the hallowing of the Water in the Font: the thrice dipping of the child in the water at the chri∣ning: The putting on of the Chrysome: the consecration of the oyl: the anoynting of the christened child: the hallowing of the Altars: the praying toward the East: the censing of the Altar: the washing of the hands: the saying of Confiteor: the lifting up of the Sacrament at Mass: the making of holy water: that the twelve Apostles, every man a piece for his portion, made the Crede; and many mo beside these. And after like sort I spake of Canons, Decrees, and Ordinaun∣ces of Bishops and General Councels. I do now confes the said do∣ctrine, as concerning the observing of the said Traditions, to be false and tyrannical, and unjust, unlawful and untrue, burden of mens consciences, not fit to be taught, preached or defended. There be many things ascribed to the Apostles, and called Traditi∣ons, deduced from the time of the Apostles, and read in the name of old Authors, and set forth under the pretensed title of their name, which be both feigned, forged and nothing true, ful of superstition and untrueth, fayned by them, which would magnify their power and authority; as is the Epistles of Clemens, Anacletus, Evaristus, and Fa∣bians and other, which are set forth by the Bp. of Rome, and his com∣plices, which be forged, fayned and of no authority, nor to be bele∣ved, but counterfeited by them; who by the colour of antiquity would magnify that usurped power of the Bp. of Rome. And now concerning another book, which I made of the Sacrifice of the Mass. Wher the most chief and principal article of our faith, and most directly pertaining to the redemption of our sins, and to our Salvation, is; That our Savior Christ Iesu, by his most precious death, and effusion of his most precious blood upon the cros, did redeme mankind, taking away our sins, pacifying the indignation of his Fa∣ther, and cancelling the obligation, that was against us. In which Sacrifice-making unto his Father, our said Savior Jesus Christ, as S. Paul saith plainly to the Hebrews, was not a Priest after the order of Aaron, forasmuch as he was of another tribe: and also, that Priest∣hood was imperfect and unprofitable, bringing nothing to perfection. But our Savior Christ made his Sacrifice upon the Cross perfectly, abso∣lutely, and with the most highest perfection that could be, so much, that after that one oblation and sacrifice for sin, made by him but once only, neither he nor any other creature should at any time after, make
any mo oblations for the same. And for that S. Paul saith, he was called an eternal Priest after the order of Melchizedec, and not of Aaron. This faith ought every man and woman undoubtedly to beleve, and openly to profess upon pain of everlasting damnation; and also to dy in this profession, if case shal so require. The which most wholsome and most necessary doctrin of our Faith, I not diligently considering, as many times to right great Clerks and learned men in much writing in like matters it hath chaunced to say too far, the infirmity and weak∣ness of men being such, that seldome in many words error hath esca∣ped: So in my Book of the Sacrifice of the Mass, I did incircumspect∣ly and rashly write and set forth to the people, that Christ was not a Priest after the order of Melchizedec, when he offered himself upon, the cross to his Father for our sins, but was a Priest after the order of Aaron. And that when Christ did offer his own body to his father after the order of Melchizedec, to appease his wrath, it may not be under∣stand of the Sacrifice of the Cros, but of the Sacrifice, that Christ made at his Maundy in form of bread and wine. To the which in∣dede S. Pauls doctrin is contrary, both in other places, and in the Epistle Ad Hebraeos, very manifestly. Against whom, (who without doubt had the very Spirit of God) neither it becometh, nor I wil not willingy teach or defend any thing. Wherfore ye shal impute that, Good Audience, to the frailty of mans nature, and to my negligent marking, having at that time rather a respect to a fantasy, that I then had in my mind, than to the true and infallible doctrin of scri∣pture. And moreover, in the same my book I said not only, that the Sa∣crifice of the Mass is the self same substaunce of Christ, but also the self same oblation or offering of our Savior Christs very flesh and bloud, which himself once offered to his Father on the Cross to appease his wrath. And that the Priests do continually and daily in the Mass offer not only the self same body of Christ, but also to the same effect, that Christ did offer himself to his Father at his Maundy. Of the which words and doctrin, if they be not very warily and circumspectly read, and more favorably taken, then the words as they ly, may wel bear; it might be gathered, that Priests herein be equal with Christ. Priests of the order of Melchizedec, appeasing the wrath and indignation of the Father of heaven, crucifying, or offering Christ to the same effect, that Christ in his own person did upon the cross, is a blasphemy into∣lerable to be heard of Christen ears. For Christ, as S. Paul saith, was but once offered, once gave up himself for the Redemption of our sins on Good-Friday upon the Cross; nor never before, nor after was offered for us, but in a Sacrament, and as a commemoration of the same. And so of the Maundy or Supper of the Lord, Christ himself saith; Haec quotiescunque feceritis, in meam commemorationem facietis. Once he dyed for our sins, and once again he rose for our justification. He dyeth no more. And his Sacrifice was so good, so ful, so pleasaunt, so precious to God, that her neded no more oblations to appease God, not only for the sins past, but also for al the sins to the day of doom. There nede no more Sacrifices, no more Offerers, but as having a respect and a remembrance of that most holy, most perfect, and most entier Lamb, then and for ever offered up for us.
But these things aforesaid, I cannot deny, but they were spoken of me, and written. And as I do not now like them; so at he example of S. Austin and other good Doctors, I am not ashamed to retract them, and cal them again and condemn them. For when I followed mine own invention, not directed by Scripture, I began, as the nature of man is, to wander, and at the last went clean contrary to Gods Word. wherfore I heartily exhort every man, as touching matters of Faith, to found the same upon Gods certain, true and infallible word: lest by doing the contrary, they fal into Superstition, Idolatry, and other manifold errors, as my self, and many other have done. Wherfore these my two books, the one of the Sacrifice of the Mas, and the other of the Traditions unwritten, in those poynts before re∣hersed, and al other, wherin they be not ful consonant to Scripture, I forsake and renounce as false, erroneous, and against the true word of God; requiring thee, good Christian Reader, whosoever shal read them, to give no further credence to them, then I would my self. That is, not to take, as undoubted truth, all that is therin written, but as written of a man, that some time falleth: to be so far true, as they be consonant to Scripture: wher they be not against Scripture, to be humane persuasion, which may either be so, or not so, as the greater reason shal lead: where they be not consonant to Scripture, to be er∣roneous and false. And that I much lament and am sorry, that I wrote them in those poynts. And I desire every man, that hath any of the said books to beware of them, and to give no credence to them in al such things in them written, as be not consonant to the Scripture, as they wil avoyd occasion of error, and tender the truth of Gods word and his glory. To whom be laud, praise and honor. Amen. NUM. XL. Archbishop Cranmers Answers to the fifteen Articles of the Rebells Devon. Anno 1549. MSS.C.C.CC. Miscellan. D.WHen I first read your Requests, O ignorant men of Devonshire and Cornwal, straitwayes came to my mind a request, which Iames and Iohn made unto Christ: to whom Christ answered, You ask you wot not what. Even so thought I of you assoon as ever I heard your Articles, that you were deceived by some crafty Papist, which devised those Articles for you, to make you ask you wist not what. As for the Devisors of your Articles, if they understand them, I may not cal them ignorant persons, but, as they be indeed, most rank Papists, and wilful Traitors and Adversaries, both to God and our So∣veraign Lord the King, and to the whole realm. But I cannot be per∣suaded so to think of you, that in your hearts willingly you be Papists and Traitors: but that those that be such have craftily seduced you, being simple and unlearned people, to ask you wot not what. Wherfore, my duty unto God, and the pity that I have of your igno∣rance, move me now at this time to open plainly and particularly your
own Articles unto you, that you may understand them, and no longer be deceived. In your first Article you require, that al the General Councels and holy Decrees of our forefathers, may be observed and kept, and who∣soever shal againsay them to be holden as Hereticks. This you al ask, but what you ask I dare say very few, or none of you understand. For how many of you, I pray you, do know certainly which be called the General Councels, and holy Decrees of the Fathers, and what is in them contained. The holy Decrees as they cal them, be nothing else but the Laws and Ordinances of the Bp. of Rome. Wherof the most part be made for his own advancement, glory and lucre; and to make him and his Clergy Governors of the whole world; and to be exempted from al Princes Lawes, and to do what they list. And would you ask, if you knew what you asked, that we should put away the Lawes of our own realm, and be govern∣ed by the Bp. of Romes Lawes? If you mean this, then be you Traitors to the King, and enemies to your own realm. And if you mean it not, consider what persons they be, and how they have deceived you, that make you ask you wot not what. And as for the General Councels, you say you wil have them al kept: but you be not so destitute of al reason, that you would have spoken such words, if you had known what you had said. For a great number of the Councels repugn one against another. How should they then be al kept, when one is contrary to another, and the keeping of one is the breaking of another. And among your own Ar∣ticles you say, you wil have divers things observed, which be not only contrary to the General Councels, but also contrary to the Law of this realm, and also to Gods Laws, as it shal be plainly declared, when we come to the Articles. And al reason is contrary that you should have asked such things, if you had known what you had asked. I have this opinion of the great∣er number of you, that you would fain walk in the right way, if you could find it. And forasmuch as I perceive, that wicked and false guides, under pretence to bring you to the high way, have brought you clean out of it, my good wil shal be, seeing you so far wandring out of the way, and so blindfolded with il persuasions, that you can∣not see where you go, to open your eyes that you may see, and to set you again into the right way. And when your eyes be so opened, that you may se, and the right way shewed unto you, wherin you should walk; then if you wil stil wink, and not see, and run headlong in error, and not come to the right way, you may no longer be called simple and ignorant people, but perverse, froward and wicked Papists and Traitors, Enemies to God and your own realm. But now I wil come to your Articles, particularly opening every one of them by himself, that you may se the bowels therof, and what is contained in the same. That when you shal understand the whole, you may judge whether you knew before what you asked, or you were deceived by subtil and wily Papistical Traitors.
I. Your first Article is this▪ WEE wil have al the General Councels, and holy Decrees of our forefathers observed, kept and performed: and whosoever shal againsay them, we hold them as Hereticks. First, to begin with the manner of your phrase. Is this the fashion of Subjects to speak unto their Prince; We wil have? Wa this ma∣ner of speech at any time used of the Subjects to their Prince, since the beginning of the world? Have not al true Subjects ever used to their Soveraign Lord this form of speaking, Most humbly beseecheth your faithful and obedient Subjects. Altho the Papists have abused your ignorance in propounding such Articles, which you understand not, yet you should not have suffered your selves so much to be led by the nose, and bridled by them, that you should clearly forget your duty of Allegiance unto your Soveraign Lord, saying unto him, This we wil have; and that saying with armour upon your backs and swords in your hands. Would any of you, that be Householders, be content, that your servants should come upon you with harness unto their backs, and swords in their hands, and say unto you, This we wil have? If then you would abhor and detest this in your servants towards your selves, how can you allow your fact? With what conscience can you, being but subjects, do to your King that thing, which you would con∣demne in your servants towards your selves? But answer me this, Be you Subjects or no? If you be Subjects, then I admonish you, as S. Paul taught Titus, saying, Warn them to be subject to Princes, and Rulers, obeying them at a word. But tel me again▪ Pertaineth this to subjection and obedience to say, This we wil have? S. Peter saith, Be subject unto Kings, as unto chief heads, and to other Rulers sent by them. For so is the Wil of God. Gods wil is, that you should be rued by your Prin∣ces. But whether is this to be ruled by your King, or to rule your King, to say, Thus we wil have the Realm governed? Your Servants be by the Scripture commanded, as they fear God, to be obedient to their Masters, whether their Masters be good or evil. And can you think it meet and lawful for you to disobey your undoubted King; being a Prince most innocent, most godly, and most careful for your sorrow and wealth? If any thing can declare disobedience, what can declare it more then Subjects to come with force of armes to their natural King and Prince, and say, This we wil have? But now leaving your rude and unhansome maner of speech to your most Soveraign Lord, I wil come to the point, and joyn with you in the effect of your first Article. You say, you wil have al the holy Decrees observed and kept. But do you know what they bee? The holy Decrees, as I told you before, be called the Bp. of Romes ordi∣nances and lawes. Which how holy and godly soever they be called, they be indeed so wicked, so ungodly, so ul of tyranny and so partial, that since the beginning of the world, were never devised or invented the like. I shal reherse a certain of them, that your selves may see, how holy they be, and may say your minds, whether you would have them kept or no. And at the hearing of them, if you shal not think
them meet to be kept here in this realm, then you may see how they deceived you, that moved you to ask this Article. And if you like them and would have them kept, after you know what they be, then I say assuredly, that you be not only wicked Papists, but also Heretics, and most hainous Traitors to the King and this his realm. And yet how an absolute Papist varieth from an Heretick or Traitor, I know not: but that a Papist is also both a Heretic and a Traitor withal. One Decree saith, That whosoever doth not acknowledg himself to be un∣der the obedience of the Bp. of Rome is an Heretic. Now answer me to this Question, Whether be you under the obedience of the Bp. of Rome, or not? If you say, that you be under his obedience, then be you Traytors by the laws of this realm. And if you deny it, then be you Heretics by this Decree. And shift is there none to save you from treason, but to renounce this Decree, that commandeth you to be un∣der the Bp. of Rome: and so to confes contrary to your own first Arti∣cle, That al Decrees are not to be kept. Yet a great many other Decrees be as evil, and worse than this. One saith, That al Princes lawes, which be against a Decree of the Bp. of Rome, be void, and of no strength. Another Decree saith, That al the Decrees of the Bp. of Rome ought for ever to be kept of al men, as Gods word. Another Decree there is, That whosoever receiveth not the law of the Bp. of Rome, availeth neither him the Catholick faith, nor the four Evangelists. For his sin shal never be forgiven. Yet is there a worse, and more detestable decree, That al Kings and Princes that suffer the Bp. of Romes Decrees to be broken in any point, are to be taken as Infidels. Another is there also, That the Bp. of Rome is bound to no maner of Decrees, but he may constrain al other persons, both Spiritual and Temporal, to receive al his Decrees, and Canons. Another is yet more devilish, then any before rehersed, That altho the Bp. of Rome neither regard his own Salvation, nor no mans else, but put down with himself headlong innu∣merable people by heaps unto hell, yet may no mortal man presume to reprove him therfore. But what should I tarry, and make you weary in re∣hersing a number? For a thousand other like Canons and Decrees there be, to the Advancement of the Bp. of Rome his usurped power and authority. I cannot think of you, that you be so far from al godliness, from al wit and Discretion, that you would have these Decrees observed with∣in this Realm, which be so blasphemous to God, so injurious to al Princes and Realms, and so far from al equity and reason. But here you may easily perceive, what wily foxes you met withal, which per∣suaded you to arme your selves, to make sedition in your own Country, to stand against your Princes, and the laws of your Realm, for such Articles as you understand not, and to ask you wist not what. For I dare say for you, that the subtil Papists, when they moved you to stand in this Article, that al the holy Decrees should be observed, they shewed you nothing of these Decrees, that they would have taken for holy Decrees. For if they had, they knew right wel, that you would never have consented unto this Article; but would have taken them for Traitors, that first moved you thereto.
For now shal I shew you, what miserable case you should bring your selves unto, if the Kings Majesty should assent unto this first Ar∣ticle, that al the Decrees should be kept and observed. For among other partial Decrees made in favor of the Clergy, this is one, That none of the Clergy shal be called, or sued before any Temporal Iudge, for any maner of cause, either for debt, suit of lands, fellony, mur∣ther, or for any other cause or crime: Nor shal have any other Iudge, but his Bp. only. Another is, That a Spiritual man may sue a Tem∣poral man before a Temporal or Spiritual Iudge at his plesure: but a Temporal man cannot sue a Spiritual, but only before his Ordinary. I cannot deny, but these been good and beneficial laws for the liberty of the Clergy. But for your own part, I suppose you do not think it any indifferent Law, that a Priest shal sue you where he list with the li∣cence of his Ordinary; and you shal sue him for no maner of cause, but only before his own Ordinary. Or if a Priest had slain one of your sons or brether, that you should have no remedy against him, but only before the Bp. What mean those Papistical priests, that stirred you to ask, and wil, such decrees and lawes to be observed in this realm, but covertly and craftily to bring you under their subjection: And that you your selves ignorantly asking you wist not what, should put your own heads under their girdles? For surely if you had known these Decrees, when you consented to this Article, you would have torn the Article in pieces, and they that moved you therto also. For these Decrees e not only partial, and against al equity and reason, made only for the favor of the Clergy, and the suppression of the Laity; but also they be, and ever have e, clearly contrary to the Lawes and customes of this Realm. And yet by this Article you wil have the old antient Laws and customes of this realm (which have ever been used in al Kings times hitherto) to be void and to cease, and these Decrees to come in their place, and be ob∣served of al men, and againsaid of no man. For whosoever speaketh against them, you wil hold them for Heretics. And in so saying, look what sentence you give of your selves, altho your Article say it, yet I am sure you be not so much enemies to your own Realm, that you would have the old antient Laws and Customs of this Realm (for the defence whereof al the Noble Kings of this Realm have so valiantly and so justly stand against the Bishops of Rome) now to be taken away and give place unto Romish Decrees. And then by your own Article you hold and condemn your selves to be Heretics. How be you bewitched by these false Papists? Why do you suffer them thus to abuse you by their subtilty, to make you condemn your selves of Heresy? Why do you not send them unto the Kings Ma∣jesty, like errant Traitors, as indeed they be, Saying unto him, Most mighty Prince, and most drad Soveraign Lord, we present here unto you most heinous Traitors against your Majesty and realm, and greatest Dissemblers and falsest Deceivers of us, your Simple and ignorant people, and yet in our own hearts your true and faithful Subjects. We have erred, We have grievously offended your Ma∣jesty: but by ignorance, being so seduced, and provoked by the crafty persuasions of these most hainous Traitors, that we wist not what we did. But pardon us, Soveraign Lord, have pity upon
our Simplicity and ignorance: and these abominable Traitors pu∣nish, according to their deservings. Have mercy, most merciful Prince, of us, your poor flock, which were ignorantly led out of the way, and strike with the Swords those malicious guides, that purposely would have led us to our utter destruction. If you did thus, then would you do the parts of true faithful and loyal Subjects, and should declare to the world, that al that you have hitherto done was done by error and ignorance. And I would nothing doubt of the Kings Majestie his Clemency and Mercy towards you. But yet, to the intent that you may further know how unreasonable your first Article is, I wil yet reherse another sort of the holy Lawes and Decrees. One is, That no Lay man may have a Benefice to farm. Another is, That none of the Clergy may give any thing to the relief of the commonweal, and necessity of their own realm, without the consent of the Bp. of Rome. Another is, That no Lay man may meddle with election, or any other thing, that pertaineth unto any of the Clergy. Another is, That none of the Clergy ought to give any oath of fidelity to their Princes, except they have temporal lands of them. Another is, That Princes ought to obey the Bps, and the Decrees of the Church, and to submit their Heads unto their Bps, and not to be judges over the Bps. Another is, Whoso∣ever offendeth the Liberties of the Church, or doth break any Interdiction that cometh from Rome, or conspireth against the Person or Estate of the Bp. or See of Rome, or by any maner offendeth, disobeyeth, or rebelleth against the same Bp. or See, or that killeth a Priest, or offendeth personally against a Bp. or other Prelate, or invadeth, spoileth, withholdeth, or wast∣eth Lands belonging to the Church of Rome, or to any other Church, imme∣diately subject unto Rome, or whosoever invadeth any Pilgrims, that go to Rome, or any Suitors to the Court of Rome, or that let the devolution of causes unto that Court, or that put any new charges or impositions, real or personal, upon a Church, or ecclesiastical person; and generally, All others that offend in the cases contained in the Bul, which is usually published by the Bps. of Rome upon Maunday thursday; Al these can be assoiled by no Priest, Bp, Archbp, nor by none other, but only by the Bp. of Rome, or by his express Licence. These with an infinite number of like sort, be the godly and holy Decrees, which you long so sore for, and so much desire. Now would I know, whether you think, that these decrees were made for the common wealth of al realmes, or only for the private weal of the Bp. of Rome, and of his Bps. and Clergy? And whether you like and long for these laws; or now, at the hearing of them, your longing is done? If you like them, Wel, for my part, I would you had them practised among you for a while, so that the rest of the Realm were not troubled, neither with you, nor with your Decrees, unles you repented your selves of your foolish demands. I think within a year you would kneel on your knees to the Kings Majestie, desiring him to take from your necks the yokes and halters, which you had made for your selves. But to conclude the sum of the first Article in few words. It is nothing else but a clear subversion of the whole State and Lawes of this realm; and to make this Realm to be whole governed by Romish
Lawes, and to crown the Idol and Antichrist of Rome, king of this realm, and to make our most undoubted and natural King his vile Sub∣ject and slave. Oh! what was in your minds to ask such a thing, and so presumptuously to say, that you wil have it? I trust there be not in you so much malice and devilishness, as the Article containeth: but that you were craftily subornate by subtil Papists to ask and demand you wist not what. If you had asked, that the Word of God might be duly observed and kept every where within this Realm: And whosoever would gainsay Gods word, to be holden as a Heretic: If you had declared your selves to be godly men; al that be godly would have commended and furthered your requests. But forasmuch as you ask Romish Ca∣nons and Decrees to be observed and kept here in England, and whoso∣ever shal againsay them, to be holdon as hereticks, there is neither godly, nor truly English man, that will allow you, or consent to your Articles. But clean contrary to your Articles, a great number of godly persons within this realm, for the very love that they have to God, that his Name may be glorified above al things, be daily humble Suitors to the Kings Majesty, that he following the steps of his Father, wil study, and travail to weed out of this his Realm, al Popish De∣crees, Lawes and Canons, and whatsoever else is contrary to Gods word: and that the speakers against Gods word may be taken, as they be indeed, for Heretics. And is any of you so far from reason, that he thinketh the Kings Majesty ought to hearken to you, that by force and stubbornness say, you wil have Romish Laws and Decrees kept in this realm, and to turn his ears from them, that with al humility be suitors for Gods Word? But now wil I come to your other Articles, wherein I wil be brief, forasmuch as in the first I have been long and tedious. II. Your second Article is this, WEE wil have the Law of our Soveraign Lord K. Henry VIII▪ concerning the six Articles, to be used again, as in his time they were. Letting pas your rude stile, nothing becoming Subjects, to say, You wil have, First, I examine you of the cause of your wilful wil, wherefore you wil have these six Articles, which never were laws in no region, but this: nor in this realm also, until the 31st. year of King Henry VIII. And in some things so enforced by the evil Counsil of cer∣tain Papists against the truth, and common judgment, both of Divines and Lawyers, that if the Kings Majesty himself had not come perso∣nally into the Parlament house, those lawes had never passed. And yet within a year or little more, the same most noble Prince was faine to temper his said lawes, and moderate them in divers points. So that the statute of six Articles continued in his force little above the space of one year. Is this then so great a matter to make these uproars, and to
arise against the whole realm? Wil you take away the present laws of this Realm, which be and ever have been, the laws of al other Countreis also, and set up new Lawes, which never were, but in this Realm only, and were here in force not fully thirteen months? And how chanceth it, that you be so earnest in this Article, which is di∣rectly contrary to your first Article, but you know not what neither of the Articles meaneth; but be persuaded by Papists to ask you wot not what? But now here is the repugnance of the two Arti∣cles: By your First you wil have al General Councels and Decrees observed and kept; and by your Second Article you wil have the six Articles used again. Then let us compare the general Councels and Decrees with the Six Articles; and you shal see them aggree as wel together, as black and white. First, it is contained in the Canons of the Apostles, that a priest un∣der no pretence of holines may put away his wife; and, if he do, he shal be excommunicate. And the six Articles say, that if any Priest put not away his wife, he shal be taken for a Felon. If he keep her not til, he must be excommunicate by the Canon of the Apostles. And if he keep her stil, he must suffer death by the six Articles. You be cunning men, if you can set these together. Also, the Councel of Nice, which was the chief of al the General Councels, and was celebrated more then twelve hundred years past, decreed clean contrary to the six Articles. For where the six Articles command al Priests to be sepa∣rate from their wives, Nicen Councel determined clean contrary, that they should not be separated, confessing such copulation to be holy and godly. And the Councel of Gangrense, which was about the same time, so much allowed the marriage of priests, that they ac∣cursed them that would abstain from the Ministration of priests, be∣cause they were married. These Councels vary so far from the six Ar∣ticles, that either you must put the General Councels out of your Book, or else the six Articles. Likewise, concerning Private Masses, the law of six Articles far differeth from the Canon of the Apostles, and from the Councels, Nicen and Antioch, as shal be declared in the next Artice. Other things there be divers also in the six Articles, which cannot stand with sundry old Canons, Decrees and Councels. So that if you wil stand to the Canons, Decrees and Councels, you must of force be constrained utterly to put out of your book your second Article, which requireth the usage of the Six Articles. But now for shortnes of time I wil come to your third Article: Which is this, III. The third Article. WE wil have the Mass in Latine, as was before, and celebrated by the Priest, without any man or woman communicating with him. Forasmuch as there is nothing with you, but Wil, let your wil be conferred with reason and Gods word; and then you shal se how far your Wil differeth from them both: First as touching the Latine Mas∣ses, Whatsoever the Priest saith in the old Masses, whether he pray
and ask any thing of God, or give thanks to God, or make the true Profession of the Faith, or whatsoever he doth besides, al he doth in your persons and in your names; and you answer unto that which he saith, sometimes Amen, sometimes Et cum spiritu tuo; and sometimes other things, as the matter serveth. For al the whole that is done should be the act of the people, and pertain to the people, as wel as to the priest. And standeth it with reason, that the Priest should speak for you, and in your name, and you answer him again in your own per∣sons; and yet you understand never a word, neither what he saith, nor what you say your selves? The Priest prayeth to God for you, and you answer Amen you wot not whereto. Is there any reason here∣in? Wil you not understand what the Priest prayeth for you? What thanks he giveth for you, What he asketh for you? Wil you neither understand what he saith, nor let your hearts understand what your own tongues answer? Then must you needs confes your selves to be such people as Christ spake of, When he said, These people honor me with their lips, but their hearts be far from me. Had you rather be like Pyes or Parrots, that be taught to speak, and yet understand not one word what they say, then be true christen men, that pray unto God in heart and in faith? The Priest is your Proctor and Atturney, to plead your cause, and to speak for you al; and had you rather not know, then know what he saith for you? I have heard Sutors murmur at the bar, because their Atturneyes have pleaded their cases in the French tongue, which they understood not. Why then be you offended, that the Priests, which plead your cause before God, should speak such lan∣guage, as you may understand? If you were before the Kings High∣nes, and should chuse one to speak for you al, I am sure you would not chuse one, that should speak Greek or Hebrew, French or Italian; no, nor one, that should speak Latine neither. But you would be glad to provide such one, as should speak your own language, and speak so loud, that you might both hear him, and understand him: that you might allow or disallow that that he said in your Names. Why do you then refuse to do the like unto God? When the Priest desireth any thing of God for you, or giveth thanks for you, how can you in your heart confirm his Sayings, when you know not one word what he saith? For the heart is not moved with words, that be not understand. But if reason wil not persuade you, I wil prove what Gods word will do unto you. S. Paul, in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, saith, that whosoever shal speak to the people in the Church to their edifica∣tion, must speak such language as the people may understand: or else he willeth him to hold his peace, and speak softly to himself and to God. For he which speaketh in a strange language, which the people understand not, doth not edify them, as S. Paul saith. And he giveth an example of the trumpet in the field, which when it giveth such a sound, that the Soldier understandeth, it availeth much. For every Soldier therby knoweth what to do. But if such a blast be blowen, as no man understandeth, then the blast is utterly in vain. For no man knoweth therby, whether the horsemen shal make them ready, or leap upon horseback, or go to their standard. Or whether the footmen shall make them ready, or set themselves in array, or set upon the
enemy, or retyre to the standard. Even so should the Priests be Gods trump in in his Church. So that if he blow such a certain blast, that the people may understand, they be much edified therby. But if he give such a sound, as is to the people unknown, it is clearly in vain, saith S. Paul. For he speakes to the air, but no man is the better or edi∣fied therby; Nor knoweth what he should do by that he heareth. Fur∣thermore in the same place S. Paul saith, That if a man giveth thanks to God in a language to the people unknown, how can they say Amen to that they understand not? He doth wel in giving thanks to God; but that nothing availeth or edifieth the people, that know not what he saith. And S Paul in one brief sentence concludeth his whole Disputation of that matter: Saying, I had rather have five words spoken in the Church to the instruction and edifying of the people, then ten thou∣sand in a language unknown, that edifieth not. And for this purpose al∣ledgeth the Prophet Esay. Who saith, that God wil speak to his people in other tongues, and in other languages. Meaning therby that he would speak to every country in their own language. So have the Greeks the Mass in the Greek tongue, the Syrians in the Syry tongue, the Armeni∣ans in their tongue, and the Indians in their own tongue. And be you so much addict to the Romish tongue, which is the Latine tongue, that you wil have your Mas in none other language, but the Romish lan∣guage? Christ himself used among the Iews the Iews language: and willed his Apostles to do the like in every country, whersoever they came. And be you such enemies to your own country, that you wil not suffer us to laud God, to thank him, and to use his Sacraments in our own tongue: but wil inforce us contrary, as wel to al reason, as to the word of God? So many as be godly, or have reason, wil be satisfied with this. But the mere Papists wil be satisfied with nothing. Wherfore I wil no on∣ger tary to satisfy them, that never wil be satisfied, but wil procede to the second part of this Article, wherin you say, that you wil have neither men nor women communicate with the Priest. Alas! good simple souls, how be you blinded with the Papists? How contrary be your Articles one to another? You say in your first Article, that you wil have al General Councels and Decrees observed, and now you go from them your selves. You say, you wil have no body to com∣municate with the Priest. Hear then what divers Canons, Decrees and general Councels say clean against you. There is one Decree which saith thus, When the Consecration is done, let al the people receive the Com∣munion, except they wil be put out of the Church. And in the Canons of the Apostles, in the eighth Chapter, is contained, That whensoever there is any Mas, or Communion, if any Bp., Priest, Deacon, or any other of the Clergy, being there present, do not communicate, (except he can shew some reasonable cause to the contrary) he shal be put out of the Communion, as one that giveth occasion to the people to think evil of the Ministers. And in the ninth Chapter of the same Canons of the Apostles, and in the General Council held at Antioch, is thus written, That al christen people, that come into the Church, and hear the holy Scriptures read, and after wil not tarry to pray, and to receive the holy Communion, with the rest of the people: but for some misordering of themselves, wil abstain therfrom, let them be put out of the Church, until by humble knowledging of their fault,
and by the fruits of Penance, and prayers, they obtain pardon and forgive∣nes. And the Councel Nicene also sheweth the order, how men should sit in receiving the Communion, and who should receive first. Al these Decrees and general Councels utterly condemn your third Article, wherein you wil, That the Priest shal receive the Communion alone without any man or woman communicating with him. And the whole Church of Christ also, both Greeks and Latines, many hundred years after Christ, and the Apostles, do al condemn this your Article: Which ever received the Communion in flocks and numbers together, and not the Priest alone. And besides this, the very words of the Mas, as it is called, shew plainly, that it is ordained not only for the Priest, but for others also to communicate with the Priest. For in the very Canon, which they so much extol, and which is so holy, that no man may know what it is (and therfore is read so softly, that no man can hear it) in that same Canon, I say, is a prayer concerning this; that not only the Priest, but also as many beside, as communicate with him, may be fulfilled with grace and heavenly benediction. How aggreeth this prayer with your Article, wherein you say, that neither man nor woman shal commu∣nicate with the priest? In another place also of the said Canon, the priest prayeth for himself, and for al that receive the communion with him, that it may be a preparation for them unto everlasting life. Which prayer were but a very fond prayer, and a very mocking with God, if no body should communicate with the priest. And the Commu∣nion concludes with two prayers in the name of the priest, and them that communicate with him, wherin they pray thus: O Lord, that thing which we have taken in our mouth, let us take it also with pure minds, that this Communion may purge us from our sins, and make us partakers of heavenly remedy. And besides al this, there be an infinite sort of postcommons in the Mas-books. Which al do evi∣dently shew, that in the Masses, the people did communicate with the priest. And altho I would exhort every good christen man often to receive the holy Communion: yet I do not recite al these things to the intent, that I would in this corrupt world, (when men live so ungodly as they do) that the old Canons should be restored again, which com∣mand every man present to receive the Communion with the priest. Which Canons, if they were now used, I fear that many would re∣ceive it unworthily. But I speak them to condemn your Articles, which would have no body, neither man nor woman, to be commu∣nicated with the priest. Which your Article condemneth the old Decrees, Canons and General Councels, condemneth al the old pri∣mitive church, al the old, antient, holy Doctors, and Martyrs, and al the formes and maner of Masses, that ever were made, both new and old. Therfore eat again this Article, if you wil not be condemn∣ed of the whole world, and of your selves also by your first Article: Wherin you wil al Decrees, and general Councels to be observed. But forasmuch as I have been so tedious in this Article, I wil endeavour my self to be shorter in the next.
IV. Your fourth Article is this, WE wil have the Sacrament hang over the high Altar, and there to be worshipped, as it was wont to be; and they which wil not therto consent, we wil have them dy like Heretics against the holy Catholic faith. What say you, O ignorant people in things pertaining to God? Is this the holy Catholic faith, that the Sacrament should be hanged over the Altar and worshipped? And be they Heretics, that wil not con∣sent therto? I pray you, who made this Faith? Any other, but the Bishops of Rome? And that after more then a thousand years after the Faith of Christ was ful and perfect. Innocent III. about 1215 years after Christ, did ordain, that the Sacrament and Chrism should be kept under lock and key. But yet no motion he made of hanging the Sacra∣ment over the high Altar, nor of the worshiping of it. After him came Honorius III. and he added further, commanding that the Sa∣crament should be devoutly kept in a clean place, and sealed, and that the priest should often teach the people reverendly to bow down to the host, when it is lifted up in the Mass time, and when the priests should cary it to the sick folkes. And altho this Honorius added the worship∣ping of the Sacrament, yet he made no mention of the hanging therof over the high Altar, as your Article proporteth. Nor how long after, or by what means, that came first up into this realm, I think no man can tel. And in Italy it is not yet used until this day. And in the be∣ginning of the Church it was not only not used to be hanged up, but also it was utterly forbid to be kept. And wil you have al them that wil not consent to your Article, to dy like heretics, that hold against the Catholic faith? Were the Apo∣stles and Evangelists heretics? Were the Martyrs and Confessors here∣tics? Were al the old Doctors of the Church heretics? Were al chri∣sten people heretics, until within three or four hundred years last past, that the Bishops of Rome taught them what they should do and be∣lieve? All they before rehearsed neither hanged the Sacrament over the Altar, nor worshiped it, nor not one of them al spake any one word, either of the hanging up, or worshiping of the Sacrament. Mary, they speak very much of the worshiping of Christ himself, setting in heaven at the right hand of his Father. And no man doth duely re∣ceive the Sacrament, except he so, after that maner, do worship Christ, whom he spiritually receiveth, spiritually feedeth and nou∣risheth upon, and by whom spiritually he liveth, and continueth that life that is towards God. And this the Sacrament teacheth us. Now to knit up this Article shortly. Here is the issue of this mat∣ter: that you must either condemn of heresy the Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Doctors, and al the holy Church of Christ, until the time of Innocentius and Honorius, because they hanged not the Sacrament over the Altar to be worshiped; or else you must be condemned your selves by your own Article, to dy like heretics against the holy Catho∣lic faith. Now to your fifth Article.
V. Your fifth Article is this, WE wil have the Sacrament of the Altar but at Easter delivered to the Lay-people; and then but in one kind. Methinks you be like a man, that were brought up in a dark dunge∣on, that never saw light, nor knew nothing that is abroad in the world. And if a friend of his pitying his ignorance and state, would bring him out of his dungeon, that he might se the light and come to knowledg, he being from his youth used to darknes, could not abide the light, but would wilfully shut his eyes, and be offended both with the light, and with his friend also. A most godly Prince of famous memory K. Hen∣ry VIII. our late Soveraign Lord, pitying to se his Subjects many years so brought up in darknes, and ignorance of God, by the erroneous do∣ctrines and superstitions of the Bp. of Rome, with the counsil of al his Nobles and learned men, studied by al means, and that to his no little danger and charges, to bring you out of your said ignorance and dark∣nes unto the true light, and knowledg of Gods word. And our most dread Soveraign Lord, that now is, succeding his father, as wel in this godly intent, as in his realmes and dominions, hath with no less care and diligence, studied to perform his fathers godly intent and purpose. And you like men, that wilfully shut their own eyes, refuse to receive the light, saying you wil remain in your darknes. Or rather you be like men, that be so far wandred out of the right way, that they can never come to it again without good and expert guides: and yet when the guides would tel you the truth, they would not be ordered by them, but would say unto them, Wee wil have, and follow our own wayes. And that you may understand how far you be wandred from the ight way in this one Article, wherin you wil have the Sacrament of the Altar delivered to the Lay-people but once in the year, and then but under one kind, be you assured, that there was never such law, nor such request made among christen people, until this day. What injury do you to many godly persons, which would devoutly receive it many times, and you command the priest to deliver it them but at Easter. Al learned men and godly have exhorted christen people, (al∣tho they have not commanded them) often to receive the Communi∣on. And in the Apostles time, the people at Ierusalem received it every day, as it appeares by the manifest word of the Scripture. And after, they received it in some places every day: In some places four times in the week: in some three times: some twice: commonly eve∣ry where at the least once in the week. In the beginning, when men were most godly and fervent in the holy Spirit, then they received the Communion daily. But when the Spirit of God began to be more cold in mens hearts, and they waxed more worldly than godly, then their desire was not so hot to receive the Communion, as it was before. And ever from time to time, as the world waxed more wicked, the more the people withdrew themselves from the holy Communion. For it was so holy a thing; and the threatnings of God be so sore against them, that come therto unworthily, that an ungodly man ab∣horreth it, and not without cause dare in no wise approch therunto.
But to them that live godly, it is the greatest comfort, that in this world can be imagined. And the more godly a man is, the more sweet∣nes and spiritual plesure and desire he shal have, often to receive it. And wil you be so ungodly, to command the Priest, that he shal not deliver it to him, but at Easter: and then but only in one kind? When Christ ordained both the kinds, as wel for the Lay-men, as for the Priests: and that to be eaten and drunken at al times. What enemies be you to al Lay-men, and to your selves also, to re∣fuse to drink of Christs cup, which he commanded al men to drink upon, saying, Take and divide this among you; and, Drink ye al of it? But need any more be brought for the reproving of this Article, then your own first Article, where you wil have kept al Decrees and Coun∣cels. Now in the Decrees De Consecrat. Di. 2. there is one Decree that commandeth al men to receive the Communion at the least thrice in the year, at Easter, Whitsuntide, and Christmas. Another command∣eth every man to receive the same upon Shere-thursday. The Councel Agathense saith, that al Lay-men which receive not the Communion at Christmas, Easter, Whitsuntide, shal not be taken for Catholics. And the Decree of Gelasius, that the receiving under one kind is great Sa∣crilege. Then by your first Article you do not only condemn your fift Article, but also you shew your selves not to be Catholics, except you receive the Communion at the least three times in the year: and that under both kinds. Which is clean repugnant to this Article. And yet I pray God, you receive it worthily once in your life; which you shal never do, except you wonderfully repent this your misbehaviour: and al your life time study to amend and redress that you have now offend∣ed. Now to your sixt Article. VI. Your Sixt Article is this. WEE wil that our Curates shal minister the Sacrament of Baptism at al times, as wel in the week day, as on the holy day. Who letteth your Ministers to baptize your child every day, if any case of necessity so do require? But commonly it is more convenient, that Baptism should not be ministred, but upon the holy day, when the most number of people be together. As wel for that the whole church there present may rejoice together of the receiving of new members of Christ into the same church, as also, that al men, being present, may remember, and the better know what they promised themselves by their Godfathers and Godmothers in their own baptis; and be the more earnestly stirred in their hearts to perform the same: And also, may altogether pray for them, that be baptized, that they may have grace to perform their Profession. S. Greg. Nazienz. as great a Clerk as ever was in Christs church, and Master to S. Hierom, coun∣selled, that children should not be christened, until they came to three years of age, or thereabouts, except they were in danger of life. And it was thought sufficient to our forefathers to be done two times in the year, at Easter and Whitsuntide, as it appeareth by divers of their Coun∣cels
and Decrees.DeConser. di 4. Non ratione, Domino proprie. Siquts. De Ca∣techumenis, Si∣qui, Vencrabilis, Baptizand. Which forbid Baptism to be ministred at any other time than Easter and Whitsuntide, except in case of necessity. And there remained lately divers signes and tokens thereof. For every Ea∣ster and Whitsun-even, until this time, the Fonts were hallowed in every church, and many Collects and other prayers were read for them that were baptized. But alas! in vain, and as it were a mocking with God. For at those times, except it were by chance, none were bapti∣zed, but al were baptized before. For as Vigils, otherwise called Watch∣ings, remain in the Calendars upon certain Saints Evens, because in old times the people watched al those nights; and Vigilantius, because he speaketh against these Watchings, was condemned of heresy; but now these many years those Vigils remained in vain in the books, for no man did watch; Even so until this day, the order and form of chri∣stening was read and kept every year at Easter and Whitsuntide, but none was then christened. Wherin it appeareth how far we be swerved from our forefathers. And, to conclude this Article shortly, If you wil needs have Bap∣tism ministred no more at one time than another, then must you needs renounce your first Article; Which willeth the Councels and Decrees of the forefathers to be observed and kept. And this briefly sufficeth for the sixt Article. VII. Your Seventh Article is this. WEE wil have holy bread and holy water every Sunday, Palmes and ashes at the time accustomed; Images to be set up again in every Church; and al other antient, old Ceremonies used heretofore by our Mother holy Church. Oh! Superstition and Idolatry, how they prevaile among you? The very true, heavenly bread of life, the food of everlasting life, of∣fered unto you in the Sacrament of the holy Communion, you refuse to eat, but only at Easter. And the Cup of the most holy bloud, where∣with you were redeemed and washed from your sins, you refuse utter∣ly to drink of at any time. And yet in the sted o these you wil eat often of the unsavoury and poisoned bread of the Bishop of Rome, and drink of his stinking puddles, which he nameth Holy bread and Holy water. Consider, oh! ignorant people, the authors and intents of the makers of them both. The water of Baptism, and the holy bread and wine of the holy Communion, none other person did ordain, but Christ himse f. The other that is called Holy bread, Holy water, Holy ashes, Holy Palmes, and al other like ceremonies, ordained the Bps. of Rome; Adversaries to , and therfore righty called Anti∣christ. And Christ ordained his Bread and his Wine and his Water to our great comfort, to instruct us and teach us what things we have on∣ly by him. But Antichrist on the other side hath set up his Superstiti∣ons, under the name of Holines, to none other intent, but as the Devil secketh al means to draw us from Christ, so doth Antichrist avance his holy Superstitions, to the intent that we shoud take him in the
sted of Christ, and believe that we have by him such things, as we have only by Christ. That is to say, Spiritual food, Remission of our sins and Salvation. First, Our Savior Christ ordained the Water of Baptism to signify unto us, that as the Water washeth our bodies outward y, so be we spi∣ritually within washed by Christ from al our sins. And as the Water is ca led Water of Regeneration, or New birth, so it declareth unto us, that through Christ we be born anew, and begin a New life to∣wards God: and that Christ is the beginning of this New life. And as the body that is new born, altho it have life within it, yet can it not continue in the spiritual life towards God, except we be continually nourished with spiritual food. And that spiritual food is Christ also. For as he is the first beginning of our spiritual life, so is he the Conti∣nuance and ending therof. And for this cause did Christ ordain in the holy Communion, to be eaten bread, and drunken wine, that we should surely believe, that as our bodies be fed with bread and wine in these holy mysteries, so be we out of doubt, that our souls be fed spiritually with the lively food of Christs body and blood; wherby we have remission of our sins and salvation. But the Bp. of Rome invent∣ed new devises of his own making, and by them promised remission of sins and salvation, that he might be set up and honored for a Savior equal to Christ. And so to be esteemed above al creatures, and to set in the Temple of God, that is in the Church of Christ, as he were God. And to bring this to pas he hath horribly abused holy Scriptures, al∣tering them to his purpose in the sted of Christs most holy bloud, put∣ting in his holy Water. As it appeareth evidently in this Sentence of S. Paul written in the ninth Chap. of the Hebrewes: If the bloud of Oxen and Goats, saith S. Paul, and the ashes of a yong Cow purified the un∣clean, as touching the purifying of the flesh, how much more the bloud of Christ (which through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot unto God) shal purge your consciences from dead works, for to serve the Living God. And for this cause he is the Mediator of the New covenant. Consider wel this sentence of Paul, and you shal find two purifyings one of the body, and another of the Soul, or Conscience. You shal find also two Mediators; One was the Priest of Moses law, and the other is Christ. The Priests of the old Law, with the bloud of Oxen and Goats, and other their Sacrifices, purged only the bodies of them that were defiled, but the Soul, or Conscience, they could not help. But our Savior Christ by his own bloud purged both body an soul. And for that cause he, and none other, is the Mediator of the New Cove∣nant. But the Bp. of Rome, to make himself also a Mediator with Christ, hath taken upon him to purify the soul and conscience with holy water, holy salt, and other his holy creatures of his own devi∣sing, to the intolerable injury of Christs blood, which only hth the effect. And to bring this to pass, hee hath most shamefully changed the words of the Scripture, and wrested them to his purpose: Some words putting out, and only in the sted of Christs bloud, putting in his own holy water and salt. For wheras S. Paul, if the blood of Oxen and Goats, and the ashes of a Cow purified the unclean, as touching the pu∣rifying of the flesh: here the Bp. of Rome leaveth out these words, As
touching the purifying of the flesh. And where S. Paul, extolling the effect of Christs bloud in comparison of the bloud of Oxen and Goats, saith, How much more the bloud of Christ, which through the eternal spirit offered himself, being without spot, unto God, shal purge your consciences: Here the Bp. of Rome, extolling his water and salt puts out Christs bloud, and in the place thereof puts his holy water and salt; saying, How much more water, which is sprinkled with salt, and hallowed with godly prayers, shal sanctify and purify the people. Oh! intolerable blasphemy against the most precious bloud of Christ! Oh! shameles audacity and bold∣nes, so to corrupt and pervert Gods holy word! If he by his holy wa∣ter presume to purify our souls, as Christ did by his bloud, what is that else, but to make himself equal, and another Mediator with Christ? And what is it, to Tread under foot the Son of God, and to make the bloud of the N. Testament (wherby he was Sanctified) like other common things, and to dishonor the spirit of grace, if this be not? And yet not contented with this blaspheming the bloud of Christ, he preferreth his holy creatures far above the bloud of Christ, promi∣sing by them many benefits, which by the bloud of Christ be not pro∣mised. For in the same place he promiseth by his holy ceremonies to take away from us dearth and scarcity of al worldly things, and to multiply and encrease us with the same. Also to defend us from the assaults of the Devil, and al his deceits, and to give us health both of body and soul. But al men se him so shamefully to ly in these worldly things, that no man, that wise is, wil trust him in the rest. Nor no man, that is godly, wil desire such things to remain stil, which so much have deceived simple people, and dishonored God, and been contumelious to the bloud of Christ. But now to your Images, which, you say, you wil have set up again in every Church. What moved you to require this Article, but only Ignorance? For if you had known the Laws of God, and the use of godly religion, as wel before the Incarnation of Christ, as four or five hundred years next after, and by whom Images were at first brought into Christs church, and how much Idolatry was every where committed by the means of the same, it could not have been, that ever you would have desired this Article, except you had more affecti∣on to Idolatry, then to true religion. For Almighty God, among the ten Commandments rehearsed this for the Second, as one of the chief, Thou shalt not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likenes of any thing, that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, nor in the water under the earth. Thou shalt not bow to them, nor worship them. This Commandment was diligently kept in the old Testament, so long as the people pleased God. For in their Tabernacle was not one image, less nor more, that the people might se. Although upon the Propitia∣tory were two Cherubins of gold by the Commandment of God. And that was in such a place, as the people never came near, nor saw. But when the people forgetting this Commandment, began to make images, and to set them up in the place of Adoration, by and by they provoked Gods indignation against them, and were grievously punished therfore. The Church of Christ likewise in the N. Testament, for the space of four or five hundred years after Christ's Ascension, utterly refused to have Images in the Church, a place of Adoration. As it may plainly
appear by al the old, antient Authors, that lived and wrot in that time. In so much, that above four hundred years after Christ, when some Superstitious, and ignorant people, in some places, began to bring painted images, not into the Church, but to the Church doores, the great Clerk Epiphanius, Bp. of Cyprus, finding such a painted Image of Christ, or some other Saint, hanging at the Church door, in a Town called Anablatha, he cutt it in pieces, saying, that it was against the authority of scripture, that in the Church of Christ should hang the Image of a man. And the same Epiphanius wrot unto the Bp. of Ie∣rusalem, that he should command the Priests, that in no wise they shou'd suffer such Images to be hanged in the church of Christ, which were contrary to our religion. But peradventure you wil mervail, and ask me the question, how it was brought to pas, that of late years al Churches were so ful of Ima∣ges, and so much offering, and pilgrimages done unto them, if it were against the Commandment of God, against the usage of al god∣ly people in the O. Testament, and also against the custom of Christs church in the N. Testament, so long as it was pure and holy, and kept from Idolatry? Who was able to bring this to effect, contrary both to Gods expres Commandment, and the custom of al godly people from the beginning of the world, until four or five hundred years after Christ? No man surely could have wrought this thing so much con∣trary to God, but Antichrist himself, that is to say, the Bp. of Rome. To whom God hath given great power to work wonders, to bring into error those that wil not believe the truth. But by what means did he compas this matter? By such means as were most meet for him∣self, and as he hath commonly practised in al other matters: that is to say, by Sedition and Murder, by Confederacies and Persecutions, by raising the Sons against their Fathers, the childre against their mother, and the Subjects against their Ruers; by deposing of Emperors and Princes, and murdering of learned men, Saints and Martyrs. For thus he wrought against the Emperor of the East parties from Grego∣ry II. his time, until Gregory III. who at length, after this condition had endured above five hundred years, in a Councel held at Lions, by feigned promises, persuaded the Emperor of the East to condescend to his purpose, as wel to receive Images into the churches, as to other his requests. But nevertheles the Bp. of Rome failed of his purpose. For yet to this day the Christen men in the East do not allow images to stand in their churches; neither the Greeks; nor the Armenians, nor the Indians, nor none other christen men. And that more is, Search al the world through out, of what religion soever they be, whether they be Iews, Turks, Saracens, Tartaries, or Christen people; and you shal not find an image in none of their churches, but that was brought in by the Bp. of Rome, and where the Bp. of Rome is, or with in these forty years was, taken for the head of the Church, and Christ's Vicar in earth. And at the beginning the Bps. of Rome, to cloak their Idolatry, pre∣tended to have Images set up, only for a remembrance to Lay men, and to be, as it were, Lay mens books. But after, they defined plain∣ly, that these should be worshipped. And so it encreased at length, that Images were kneeled unto, offered unto, prayed unto, sought
unto; Incensed, and Pilgrimages done unto them, and al maner of superstition and idolatry that could be devised. Almighty God know∣eth our corrupt nature better, then we do our selves. He knoweth wel the inclinations of Man, how much he is given to worship crea∣tures, and the work of his own hands: and especially fond Women, which commonly follow superstition rather then true religion. And therfore he utterly forbad the people the use of graven images; espe∣cially in places dedicated to the honor of God, knowing assuredly, that of the having would follow the worshipping them. Now, thanks be to God, in this Realm, we be clearly delivered from that kind of idolatry (which most highly offended God,) and we do according to the Councel Elebertyne, which ordained, that no Images should be in Churches. And this is so antient, that it was about the same year, that Nicene Councel was. What should hen move you to ask again your Images in the Church, being not only against Gods commandments, and the use of Gods Church evermore, since the beginning of the world, when it was pure from idoatry; but also being chargeable to the realm, and great occasion of hainous idolatry; But that some Papistical and covetous priests have persuaded you hereto? Which care neither for Gods honor, nor your dam∣nation: so that they may have any commodity or profit therby. I have been very long in this Article, and yet the matter is so large, that it requireth much more to be spoken therin, which for shortnes of time I am constrained to leave, until a more occasion: and so come to your eigth Article. VIII. Your Eighth Article is this. WE wil not receive the new Service, because it is but like a Christmas game: but we wil have our old Service of Mattins, Mass, Even∣song, and Procession in Latine, as it was before. And so ne the Cornish men, whrof certain of us understand no English, utterly refuse this new English. As concerning the having of the Service in the Latine tongue, is sufficiently spoken of in the answer to the third Article. But I would gladly know the reason, why the Cornish men refuse utterly the New English, as you cal it, because certain of you understand it not: and yet you wil have the Service in Latin, which almost none of you un∣derstand. If this be a sufficient cause for Cornwal to refuse the English Service, because some of you understand none English, a much greaer cause have they, both of Cornwal and Devonshire, to refuse utterly the late Service; for as much as fewer of them know the Latine tongue, then they of Cornwal the English tongue. But where you say, that you wil have the old Service, because the new is like a Christmas game, you declare your selves what spirit you be ed withal, or rather what spi∣rit leadeth them, that persuaded you, that the Word of God is but like a Christmas game. It is more like a game and a fond play to be laughed at of al men, to hear the Priest speak aloud to the people in Latine, and the people listen with their ears to hear; and some walking up and down in the Church, some saying other prayers in Latin, and none under∣standeth
other. Neither the Priest nor his parish wot what they say. And many times the thing that the Priest saith in Latine is so fond of it self, that it is more like a play, then a godly prayer. But in the English Service appointed to be read, there is nothing else but the eternal word of God. The New and the Old Testament is read, that hath power to save your Souls: Which, as S. Paul saith, is the power of God to the Salvation of all that believe: The clear light to our eyes, without the which we cannot see; and a Lanthorn unto our feet, without which we should tumble in darknes. It is in it self the Wisdome of God, and yet to the Jews it is a stumbing block, and to the Gentiles it is but foolishnes▪ But to such as be called of God, whether they be Iewes or Gentiles, it is the Power of God and the Wisdom of God. Then unto you if it be but foolishness and a Christmas Game, you may discern your selves what miserable state you be in, and how far you be from God. For S. Paul saith plainly, that the Word of God is foolish∣nes only to them that perish: but to them that shal be saved it is Gods might and power. To some it is a lively savor unto life; and to some it is a deadly savor unto death. If i be to you but a Christmas game, it is then a Savor of death unto death. And surely persuade your selves, that you be not led by the spirit of God, so long as the word of God Savoureth no better unto you, but seemeth unto you a Christmas pastime, and foolishnes. And therfore the old Service pleaseth you better. Which in many things is so foolish and so ungodly, that it seems rather to be old wives tales and lies, then to sound to any godli∣nes. The Devil is a lyar, and the Author of lyes: and they may think themselves governed rather of his spirit, then of God, when lyes delight more, then Gods most true word. But this I judge rather of your Leaders then of your selves; who by ignorance be carried away by others, you wot not whether. For when the Service was in the Latine tongue, which you understood not, they might read to you truth or fables, godly or ungodly things, as they pleased: But you could not judge that you understood not. And what was the cause why S. Paul would have such languages spoken in the Church as that people might understand? That they might learn and be edified therby, and judge of that which should be spoken, whe∣ther it were according to Gods word, or not. But forasmuch as you understand not the old Latine Service, I shal rehearse some things in English, that were wont to be read in Latine, that when you understand them, you may judge them, whether they seem to be true tales, or fables: and whether they, or Gods word seem to be more like playes and Christmas games. The Devil entred into a certain person; in whose mouth S. Martin put his finger. And because the Devil could not get out at his mouth, the man blew him, or cacked him out behind. This was one of the tales, that was wont to be read in the Latine service, that you wil needs have again. As tho the Devil had a body, and that so crass, that he could not pas out by the smal pores of the flesh, but must needs have a wide hole to go out at. Is this a grave and godly matter to be read in the Church, or rather a foolish Christmas tale, or an old wives fable, worthy to be laughed at and scorned of every man, that hath either wit or godly judgment? Yet more foolish, erroneous and superstitious things be
read in the feasts of S. Blase, S. Valentine, S. Margaret, S. Peter, of the Visitation of our Lady, and the Conception, of the Transfiguration of Christ, and in the feast of Corpus Christi; and a great number mo. Wherof some be most vain fables, some very superstitious, some di∣rectly against Gods word, and the Lawes of this realm: and altoge∣ther be ful of error and superstition. But as Christ commonly excu∣sed the simple people, because of their ignorance, and justly condemn∣ed the Scribes and Pharisees, which, by their crafty persuasions, led the people out of the right way: So I think not you so much to be blamed, as those Pharisees and Papistical Priests, which, abusing your simpli∣city, caused you to ask you wist not what, desiring rather to drink of the dregs of corrupt error, which you know not, then of the pure and sweet wine of Gods word, which you may and ought to under∣stand. But now have I sufficiently spoke of your eighth Article: I wil go forward unto the ninth. IX. Your ninth Article is this, WE wil have every preacher in his Sermon, and every Priest at the Mass, pray especially by name for the souls in Purgatory, as our forefathers did. To reason with you by learning, which be unlearned, it were but folly; Therfore I wil convince your Article with very reason. First, Tell me I pray, if you can, whether there be a Purgatory, or no: and Where or What it is. And if you cannot tel, then I may tel you, that you ask you wot not what. The Scripture maketh mention of two places, where the Dead be received after this life. Viz. of Heaven, and of Hel: but of Purgatory is not one word spoken. Purgatory was wont to be called a Fire, as hot as Hel, but not so long during. But now the Defenders of Purgatory within this Realm, be ashamed so to say: Nevertheles they say, it is a third place. Where or What it is, they confes themselves they can no tel. And of Gods word they have nothing to shew neither, Where it is, nor What it is, nor That it is. But al is fained of their own brains without authority of Scripture. I would ask of them then, Wherfore it is, and to what use it serveth. For if it be to none use, then it is a thing frustrate and in vain. Mary, say they, it is a place of punishment, wherby they be purged from their sins, that depart out of this life, not fully purged before. I can∣not tel, whether this saying be more foolish, or more contumelious to Christ. For what can be more foolish, then to say, that paines can wash sins out of the Soul. I do not deny but that corrections and pu∣nishments in this life, is a calling of men to repentance and amend∣ment; and so to be purged by the bloud of Christ. But correction without repentance can nothing avail: and they that be dead be past the time of repentance; and so no correction or torments in Purga∣tory can avail them. And what a contumely and injury is this to Christ, to affirm that al have not ful and perfect purgation by his
bloud, that dy in his faith? Is not al our trust in the bloud of Christ, that we be cleansed, purged and washed therby? And wil you have us now to forsake our faith in Christ, and bring us to the Popes Purga∣tory, to be washed theri: Thinking that Christs bloud is an im∣perfect Lee or Sope, that washeth not clean? If he shal dy without mercy, that treads Christs bloud under his feet, what is treading of his bloud under our feet, if this be not? But if according to the Catholic faith, which the holy Scripture teacheth, and the Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs confirmed with their bloud, al the faithful, that dy in the Lord, be pardoned of al their offences by Christ, and their sins be clearly spunged and washed away by his bloud, shal they after, be cast into another strong and grievous prison of Purgatory, there to be punished again for that which was pardoned before? God hath pro∣mised by his word, that the Souls of the Iews be in Gods hand, and no pain shal touch them: And again he saith, Blessed be they that dy in the Lord. For the spirit of God saith, that from henceforth they shal rest from their pains. And Christ himself saith, He that believeth in him, that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shal not come to judgment, but shal pas from death unto life. And is God no truer of his promises, but to punish that, which he promiseth to pardon? Consider the matter by your own cases. If the Kings Majesty should pardon your offences; and after, would cast you into prison, would you think that he had wel observed his promis? For what is, to pardon your offences, but to pardon the punishment for the same? If the King would pardon you, would you take that for a pardon? Would you not alledg your Pardon, and say, that you ought not to be punished? Who can then, that hath but a crum of reason in his head, imagin of God, that he wil, after our death, punish those things that he pardoned in our life time? Truth it is, that Scripture maketh mention of Paradise and Abrahams bosome after this life; but those be places of joy and conso∣lation, not of pain and torments. But yet I know what subtil Sophi∣sters use to mutter in mens ears to deceive them withal. David, say they, with many other, were pardoned of their offences, and yet were they sore punished after, for the same, of God. And some of them, so long as they lived. Wel, be it were so. Yet after their lives, they were not punished in Purgatory therfore. But the end of their lives was the end of their punishment. And likewise it is of Original sin after Baptism, which altho it be pardoned, yet after paines therof continue so long as we live. But this punishment in this life time is not to revenge our Original sin, which is pardoned in Baptism; but to make us humble, penitent, obedient to God, fearful to offend, to know our selves, and ever to stand in fear and aw; as if a Father, that hath beaten a wilful child for his faults, should hang the rod con∣tinually at the childs girdle, it should be no smal pain and grief to the child, ever hanging by his side. And yet the father doth it not to beat the child for that which is past and forgiven; but to make him be∣ware hereafter, that he offend not again, and to be gentle, tractable, obedient and loth to do any thing amiss. But after this life there is no such cause of punishment: Where no rod nor whip can force any man to go any faster or further, being already at the end of his journey.
Likewise a Master, that hath an unthrifty Servant, which out of his Masters sight doth nothing but riot and disorder himself, if he forgive his Servant, and for the love he beareth to him, and the desire he hath to se him corrected and reformed, he wil command him never to be out of his sight: This Command, altho indeed it be a great pain to the Servant, yet the Master doth it not to punish those faults, which before he had pardoned and forgiven, but to keep him in stay, that he fal no mo to like disorder. But these examples and cass of punish∣ment here in this life, can in no wise be wrested and drawn to the life to come. And so in no wise can serve for Purgatory. And furthermore, Seeing that the Scriptures so often and so dili∣gently teach us, almost in every place, to relieve al them that be in necessity, to feed the hungry, to cloth the naked, to visit the sick and the prisoner, to comfort the sorrowful; and so to al others that have need of our help: and the same in no place make mention, either of such pains in Purgatory, or what comfort we may do them; it is cer∣tain that the same is feigned for lucre, and not grounded upon Gods word. For else the Scripture in some place would have told us plainly what case they stood in that be in Purgatory, and what relief and help we might do unto them. But as for such as Gods word speaketh not one word of neither of them both, my counsil shal be, that you keep not the Bp. of Romes Decrees, that you may come to Purgatory, but keep Gods laws, that you may come to heaven. Or else I pro∣mise you assured y, that you shal never escape Hel. Now to your next Article. X. Your tenth Article is this. WE wil have the Bible, and al Books of Scripture in English, to be called in again. For we be informed, that otherwise the Clergy shal not of long time confound the Heretics. Alas! it grieveth me to hear your Articles: and much I rue and lament your ignorance: praying God most earnestly once to lighten your eyes, that you may see the truth. What christen heart would not be grieved to se you so ignorant, (for willingly and wilfully, I trust, you do it not) that you refuse Christ, and joyne your selves with Antichrist. You refuse the holy Bible, and al holy Scriptures so much, that you wil have them called in again; and the Bp. of Romes Decrees you wil have advanced and observed. I may wel say to you as Christ said to Peter, Turne back again, for you savor not godly things. As many of you as understand no Latine cannot know Gods word, but in English, except it be the Cornish men, which cannot under∣stand likewise none, but their own speech. Then you must be content to have it in English, which you know, or else you must confes, that you refuse utterly the knowledg therof. And wherfore did the Holy Ghost come down in fiery tongues, and gave them knowledge of al languages, but that al Nations might hear, speak and learn Gods word in their Mother tongue? And can you name me any Christens
in al the world, but they have, and ever had Gods word in their own tongue? and the Jews, to whom God gave his Scriptures in the He∣brew tongue, after their long captivity among the Chaldees, so that mo of them knew the Chaldee rather then the Hebrew tongue, they caused the Scripture to be turned into the Chaldee tongue, that they might un∣derstand it: Which until this day is called Targum. And Ptolomy, King of Egypt caused Sixty [Seventy] of the greatest Clerks, that might be gotten, to translate the Scripture out of Hebrew into Greek. And until this day the Greeks have it in the Greek tongue; the Latines in the Latine tongue, and al other Nations in their own tongue. And wil you have God further from us, then from al other countries: that he shal speak to every man in his own language, that he understand∣eth, and was born in, and to us shal speak a strange language, that we understand not? And wil you, that al other Realmes shal lad God in their own speech, and we shal say to him we know not what? Altho you savor so little of godlines, that you ist not to read his word your selves, you ought not to be so malicious and envious, to let them that be more godly, and would gladly read it to their comfort and edification. And if there be an English Heretic, how wil you have him confuted, but in English? And wherby else, but by Gods word? Then it followeth, that to confute English Heretics, we must have Gods word in English, as al other Nations have it in their own native language. S. Paul to the Ephesians teacheth al men, as wel Lay-men, as priests, to arme themselves, and to fight against al Adversaries with Gods word: Without the which we cannot be able to prevail, neither against subtil Heretics, puissant Devils, this deceitful world; nor our own sinful flesh. And therfore until Gods word came to light, the Bp of Rome, under the Prince of darknes, rained quietly in the world: and his Heresies were received and allowed for the true Catholic aih. And it can none otherwise be, but that Heresies must reign, where the ight of Gods word driveth not away our darknes. IX. Your Eleventh Article is this, WE wil have Dr. Moreman and Dr. Crispin, which hold our opini∣ons, to be safely sent unto us; and to them we require the Kings Majsty to give some certain Livings, to preach among us our Catholic faith. If you be of Moremans and Crispins faith, I like you much the worse. For like Lettice, like lipps. And to declare you plainly the qua∣liti s s of Crispin and Moreman, and how unmeet men they be to be your Teachers, they be persons very ignorant in Gods word; and yet ther∣to very wilful, crafty, and ful of dissimulation. For if they were pro∣foundly learned, and of sincere judgments, as they be not, they might be godly Teachers of you. Or if they were not toto wilful, and stand∣ing wholy in their own cenceits, they might learn, and be taught of others. But they be so wilful, that they wil not learn, and so igno∣rant, that they cannot teach, and so ful of craft and hypocrisy, that
they be able to deceive you al, and to lead you into error after them∣selves. So that if you ask them, you ask your own poyson. Now if a man were in such a sicknes, that he longed for poyson (as many di∣seases desire things most noyul unto them) yet it were not the part of a good Physician to give it unto them. No more is it the office of a most godly Prince, to give you such Teachers, altho you long never so sore for them, as he knoweth would corrupt you; feeding you ra∣ther with sower and unwholsome leaven of Romish Pharisaical doctrin, then with the sweet, pure and wholsome bread of Gods heavenly word. Where you would have Gods word in English destroyed, and Crispin and Moreman delivered unto you, you do even as the people of the Iews did; who cryed out, that Christ might be crucified, and that Barabbas, the strong thief, might be delivered unto them. XII. Your Twelfth Article is this, WE think it very meet, because the L. Cardinal Pole is of the Kings bloud, that he should not only have his pardon, but also be sent for to Rome, and promoted to be of the Kings Councel. In this Article I wil answer no more but this, if ever any Cardinal or Legate were beneficial unto this Realm, we may have some hope of some other to follow his steps. But if al that ever were in this Realm were pernitious and hurtful unto the same, I know not why we should be with child to long for any mo. For by the experience of them, that have been heretofore, we may conjecture of them, that be to come. And I fear me, that Cardinal Pole would follow rather the old race of the rest, than to begin a better of himself. Surely I have read a book of his making, which whosoever shal read, if he have a true heart to our late Soveraign Lord K. Henry VIII. or to this realm, he wil judge Cardinal Pole neither worthy to dwel in this realm, nor yet to live. For he doth extend al his wits and eloquence in that book to persuade the Bp. of Rome, the Emperor, the French King, and al other Princes, to invade this realm by force. And sure I am, that if you have him, you must have the Bp. of Rome also. For the Cardinal cannot be a Subject, but where the other is his Head. This sufficeth briefly to this Article. XIII. Your Thirteenth Article is this, WE wil that no Gentleman shal have any mo servants then one, to wait upon him, except he may dispend one hundred mark land. And for every hundred mark we think it reasonable he should have a man. Yet have you not foreseen one thing, You Wise Disposers of the Common wealth. For if a Gentleman of an hundred mark land▪ (who by your order must have but one servant, except he might spend
two hundred marks) should send that one servant to London, you have not provided who shal wait upon him, until his servant come home again. Nor you have not provided, where every Gentleman may have one servant, that can do al things necessary for him. I fear me the most part of you, that devised this Article (whom I take to be Loi∣terers and idle unthrifts) if they should serve a gentleman, he should be faine to do al things himself, for any thing that you could, or would do for him. For one thing methink very strange; for where much complaint is made of divers Gentlemen, because they keep not Hou∣ses, you provide by your order, that no Gentleman shal keep house; but al shal sojourn with other men. For who can keep a household with one servant, or with two servants, after the rate of two hundred mark, or with three after the rate of three hundred, and so upward? For here it seems you be very desirous to make Gentlemen rich. For after this proportion every Gentleman may lay up clearly in his Coffers at the least one half of his yearly revenues, and much more. But it was not for good mind, that you bare to the Gentlemen, that you devised this Article; but it appeareth plainly, that you devised it to diminish their strength, and to take away their friends, that you might command Gentlemen at your pleasures. But you be much de∣ceived in your account. For altho by your appointment they lacked household servants, yet shal they not lack Tenants and Farmers. Which, if they do their duties, wil be as assured to their Lords, as their own household servants. For of these lands, which they have or hold of their Lords, they have their whole Livings for themselves, their wives, children and servants. And for al these they attend their own busines, and wait not upon their Lords, but when they be called therto. But the household servant, leaving al his own busines, waiteth daily and continually upon his Masters service: and for the same hath no more but meat and drink and apparel for himself only. So that al Te∣nants and Farmers, which know their duties, and be kind to their Lords, wil dy and live with them, no les then their own Household Servants. Therefore I would wish you to put this fantasie out of your heads, and this Article out of your book, as wel for the unreasonable∣nes, as for the ungodlines thereof. For was it ever seen in any country since the world began, that Commons did appoint the Nobles, and Gentlemen, the number of their Servants? Standeth it with any reason to turn upside down the good order of the whole world, that is every where, and ever hath been? That is to say, The Commoners to be governed by the Nobles, and the Servants by their Masters. Wil you now have the Subjects to govern their King, the Vilains to rule the Gentlemen, and the Ser∣vants their Masters? If men would suffer this, God wil not; but wil take vengeance on al them, that wil break his order; as he did of Da∣than and Abiram: altho for a time he be a God of much sufferance, and hideth his indignation under his mercy; That the evil of them∣selves may repent, and se their own folly.
XIV. Your fourteenth Article is this, WEE wil that the half part of the Abby lands, and Chantry lands in every mans possession, howsoever he came by them, be given again to two places, where two of the chief Abbies were within every County. Where such half part shal bee taken out; and there to be established a place for devout persons, which shal pray for the King and the Common wealth. And to the same we wil have al the Almes of the Church box given for these seven years. At the beginning you petended, that you meant nothing against the Kings Majesty, but now you open your selves plainly to the world, that you go about to pluck the Crown from his head: and against al justice and equity, not only to take from him such lands as be annexed unto his Crown, and be parcel of the same: but also against al right and reason, to take from al other men such lands, as they came to by most just title, by gift, by sale, by exchange, or otherwise. There is no respect, nor difference had among you, whether they come to them by right, or by wrong. Be you so blind, that you cannot see how justly you proceed, to take the sword in your hand against your prince, and to dispossesse just Inheritors without any cause? Christ would not take upon him to judg the right and title of lands betwixt two bre∣thren; and you arrogantly presume, not only to judg, but unjustly to take away al mens right titles; yea, even from the King himself. And do you not tremble for fear, that the Vengeance of God shal fal upon you, before you have grace to repent? And yet you, not contented with this your Rebellion, would have your shameful act celebrated with a perpetual memory; as it were to boast and glory of your ini∣quity. For in memory of your fact, you would have established in every country two places to pray for the King, and the Common∣wealth: Wherby your abominable behaviour at this present may ne∣ver be forgotten, but be remembred unto the worlds end. That when the Kings Majesty was in Wars with Scotland and France, you, under pretence of the Common wealth, rebelled, and made so great sediti∣on against him within his own realm, as never before was heard of. And therfore you must be prayed for for ever, in every County of this realm. It were more fit for you to make humble Supplication upon your knees to the Kings Majesty, desiring him not only to forgive you this fault, but also that the same may never be put in Chronicle nor wri∣ting; and that neither shew nor mention may remain to your posteri∣ty, that ever subjects were so unkind to their Prince, and so ungraci∣ous toward God; that contrary to Gods word they should so use them∣selves against their Soveraign Lord and King. And this I assure you of, that if al the whole world should pray for you until Doomsday, their prayers should no more avail you, then they should avail the Devils in hel, if they prayed for them; unles you be so penitent and sory for your disobedience, that you wil ever hereafter, so long as you live, study to redubbe and recompence the same with al true and faithful obedience: and not only your selves, but also procuring al other, so
much as lyeth in you. And so much detesting such uproars and sedi∣tions, that if you se any man towards any such things, you wil to your power resist him, and open him unto such Governors and Rulers, as may straitway repres the same. As for your last Article, thanks be to God, it needs not to be answered, which is this, Your last Article is this, FOR the particular griefes of our Country, we wil have them so ordered, as Humfrey Arundel and Henry Bray, the Kings Maior of Bodman, shal inform the Kings Majesty, if they may have salve Conduct in the Kings great Seal to pas und repas with an Herald of Armes. Who ever heard such arrogancy in Subjects, to require and wil of their Princes, that their own particular causes may be ordered, neither according to reason, nor the lawes of the Realm, but according to the Information of two most hainous Traitors? Was it ever heard before this time, that information should be a judgment, altho the Informers were of never so great credit? And wil you have suffice the informa∣tion of two villanous Papistical Traitors? You wil deprive the King of his lands, pertaining to his Crown, and other men of their just pos∣sessions and inheritances, and judg your own causes, as you list your selves. And what can you be called then, but most wicked judges and most errant Traitors: Except only Ignorance or Force may excuse you▪ that either you were constrained by your Capitains against your wills, or deceived by blind Priests, and other crafty persuaders, to ask you wist not what. How much then ought you to detest and abhor such men hereafter, and to beware of al such like, as long as you live: and to give most humble and hearty thanks unto God, who hath made an end of this Article, and brought Arundel and Bray to that they have deserved; that is, perpetual shame, confusion, and death? Yet I beseech God so to extend his grace unto them, that they may dy wel, which have lived il, Amen. NUM. XLI. The Archbishops notes for an Homily against the Rebellion. Sentences of the Scripture against Sedition. 1 Cor. 3. CUM sit inter vos zelus & contentio, nonne carnales estis,Ex MSS. C.C.C.C. Miscellan. D. & sicut homines ambulatis? Et 1 Cor. 6. Quare non magis injuriam accipitis? Quare non magis fraudem patimini? Iac. 3. Si zelum amarum habetis, & contentiones sint in cordibus vestris, &c. non est ista Sapientia desursum, descendens a Patre Lu∣minum,
sed terrena, animalis, Diabolica. Ubi enim zelus & conten∣tio, ibi inconstantia, & omne opus malum, &c. Et Cap. 4. Unde bella & lites inter vos? Nonne ex concupiscentijs ve∣stris, quae m ilitant in membris vestris. How God hath plagued Sedition in time past. Num. 18. Dathan and Abiram, for ther sedition against Moses and Aaron, did miserably perish by Gods just judgment, the earth opening and swallowing them down quick. 2 Reg. 15. & 18. Absalom moving Sedition against David, did mi∣serably perish likewise. 2 Reg. 20. Seba for his Sedition against David lost his head. 3 Reg. 1. & 2. Adonias also for his Sedition against Solomon was slain. Acts 8. Iudas and Theudas for their Sedition were justly slain. Acts 21. An Egyptian likewise, which moved the people of Israel to Sedition, received that he deserved. Tumults in England. Iack Cade. Iack Straw. In Germany for their Sedition were slain almost in one month about two hundred thousand. The Sword by Gods word pertaineth not to Subjects, but only to Magistrates. Tho the Magistrates be evil, and very tyrants against the Common∣wealth, and enemies to Christs religion, yet yee Subjects must obey in all worldly things, as the Christians do under the Turk; and ought so to do as long as he commandeth them not to do against God. How ungodly then is it for our Subjects to take the Sword, where there reigneth a most Christian prince, most desirous to reform al griefs? Subjects ought to make humble suit to their Prince for Reformation of al injuries, and not to come with force. The Sword of the Subjects at this present cometh not of God, nor for the Common wealth of the Realm: but of the Devil, and destroy∣eth the Commonweale. First, For that it is against the word of God. Secondly, For that they rise so many lies; whereof the Devil is ever the Author. Quia mendax est, & Pater ejus. Thirdly, For that they spoile and rob men, and command every man to come to them, and to send to them what they please. Fourthly, For that they let the harvest: Which is the chief susten∣tation of our life: and God of his goodness hath sent it abundantly. And they by their folly do cause it to be lost and abandoned. Fiftly, For that they be led by rage and fury, without reason; have no respect neither of the Kings Authority, nor of the Papists in the West Country: nor of our affaires in France, nor Scotland. Which by their Sedition is so much hindred, that there could not be imagined so great a dammage to the Realm.
Sixtly, That they give Commandment in the Kings name, and in pain of death, having none authority so to do. Ever against God the Devil hath raised Sedition. As appeareth by the Sedition of Dathan and Abiram; and al the murmurations of the children of Israel against Moses and Aaron. Also, of the conspiracy against Zorobabel in the reedifying of the Temple. Also, against Christ and his Apostles, in sundry parts of the World. Also, In Ger∣many lately: and now among us. For the Devil can abide no right re∣formation in religion. Civil war is the greatest scourge, that can be, and most certain ar∣gument of Gods indignation against us for our ingratitude: that we either wil not receive his true word, or that they, which receive the same, dishonor God in their living▪ when they pretend to honor him with their mouths. Which ingratitude and contumely God can in no wise bear at our hands. The Remedies to avert Gods Indignation from us is to receive his Word, and to live according therunto: Returning unto God with prayer and penance. Or else surely more grievous afflictions shal follow; if more grievous may be, then Civil wars among our selves. The chief Authors of al these tumults be idle and naughty people. Which nothing have, nor nothing or little wil labor to have: that wil riot in expending, but not labor in getting. And these tumults first were excitated by the Papists, and others, which came from the Western Camp. To the intent that by sowing division among our selves, we should not be able to impeach them. NUM. XLII. The Lady Mary to the Councel, justifying her self for using the Mass, in K. Edwards Minority. IT is no smal greyf to me to parceyve, that they, whom the Kings Majesty my father,Sr. W.H.MSS. (whose Soule god pardon) made in thys worlde of nothing, in respecte of that they be come to now; and at hys last ende put in trust to se hys Wyll perfourmed, wherunto they were al sworne upon a boke; it gryeveth me I say, for the Love I beare to theym, to se bothe howe they break his wyll, and what usur∣ped power they take upon theym, in making (as they cal it) lawes both cleane contrarye to hys procedynges and wyll, and also ageyust the coustome of al Crystendome, and (in my conscyence) ageynst the lawe of god and hys chyrche. Which passeth al the reste. But thoughe you among you have forgotten the Kyng my father, yet both gods commandment and nature wyll not suffre me to do so. Wher∣fore, with gods helpe, I wyll remayne an obedyent chylde to hys
lawes, as he left theym, tylle suche tyme as the Kynges majeste my brother, shal have parfayt yers of discrecyon to order the power that god hath sent hym, and to be a Judge in theyse matters hymself. And I doubte not but he shal then accept my so doing better then theyrs, which have taken a pece of his power upon them in his mynoryte. I do not a little mervayle, that you can find fawte with me for ob∣serving of that lawe which was allowed by him, that was a kyng, not only of power, but also of knowledge, how to order his power. To which lawes al you consented, and seemed at that tyme to the out∣ward appearance very wel to lyke the same. And more immediately when the Kyng reasons to have his proceedyngs ob∣served. Wherfore I do wonder that you can fynde fawte with me, and non al thys whyle with some amongst your selves, for runnyng halfe a year before that, which you now call a lawe: ye, and before the byshopps cam together. Wherin me thynketh you do me very myche wronge, if I should not have as mych preemynence to conty∣new in kepyng a ful authorysed Lawe made without parcyalyte, they had, both to break the lawe, which at that tyme your selves must nedes confesse was of ful power and strengthe, and to use alteracy∣ons of theyr own invencyon contrary both to that, ye, and to your new Lawe, as you call it. NUM. XLIII. The Archbishops letter to Martin Bucer, inviting him over into England. GRatiam & pacem Dei in Christo. Legi tuas literas ad Iohannem Halesium,Buceri Scripta Angli. in quibus tristissimos Germaniae casus commemorans, te in tua urbe verbi ministerio vix diutius praeesse posse scribis. Ge∣mens igitur Prophetae illud exclamavi, Mirifica misericordias tuas, qui Salvos facis sperantes in te a resistentibus dexterae tuae. Nec dubito quin Deus hoc & similes piorum gemitus exauditurus sit: & veram doctrinam, quae hactenus in vestris Ecclesijs syncere propagata est, & conservaturus & defensurus sit, adversus omnes diaboli & mundi furo∣res. Interim Saevientibus fluctuum procellis, in portus confugiendum est ijs, qui vela in altum tendere non possunt. Tibi igitur, mi Bucere, portus longe tutissimus erit nostrum regnum, in quo Dei beneficio, se∣mina verae doctrinae feliciter spargi caeperunt, Veni igitur ad nos; & te nobis operarium praesta in messe Domini. Non minus proderis Ca∣tholicae Dei Ecclesiae cum apud nos fueris, quam si pristinas sedes reti∣neres. Adde, quod adflictae patriae vulnera absens melius sanare po∣teris, quam nunc possis praesens. Omni igitur semota cunctatione, quamprimum ad nos venias. Ostendemus nobis praesentia Buceri ni∣hil gratius aut jucundius esse posse. Sed cave ne quid ex itinere incom∣modi accipias. Nosti quos habeas vitae insectatores▪ eorum mani∣bus
ne te commiseris. Est istic mercator quidam Anglus Richardus Hils, Vir pius & summa fidelitate praeditus, cum quo de tota itineris ratione te conferre velim. Praeterea, Deum aeternum Patrem Domi∣ni nostri Iesu Christi, toto pectore oro, ut in ira misericordiae recorde∣tur & afflictae Ecclesiae calamitates respiciat, & lucem verae doctrinae apud nos magis magisque accendat. Apud vos vero jam multos annos praeclarè lucentem, non extingui patiatur. Is te quoque, mi Bucere, regat, & servet & incolumem ad nos traducat. Bene & feliciter Vale. Londini, 2 Octob. Anno 1548. Tui ad nos accessus cupientissimus, Thomas Cranmerus Archiep. Cantuar. NUM. XLIV. A Catalogue of Books published by Paulus Fagius. In Folio. LExicon Chaldaicum, authore Elija Levita; quo nullum hactenus a quoquam absolutius editum est. Omnibus Hebraicae Linguae Studiosis in primis & utile & necessarium. Cum praefatione triplici, una Hebraica ipsius Authoris Eliae, a Paulo Fagio Latine reddita. Re∣liquis duabus Latinis ab eodem praefixis; Una ad Lectorem. Altera ad D. Wolfg. Capitonem. Saepher Tehillim: hoc est, Psalterium, cum Commentario R. Da∣vid Kimhi, Hebraicè excusum Isnae, Anno minoris Supputationis a Creatione mundi. Commentarium Hebraicum R. David Kimhi in 10 primos Psalmos Davidicos, cum versione Latina è regione: pro exercitamento omni∣bus Hebraicae linguae studiosis: quibus ad legenda Hebraeorum Com∣mentaria animus est. Per Paulum fagium. Thargum: Hoc est, Paraphrasis Onkeli Chaldaica in sacra Biblia, ex Chaldaeo in Latinum versa: additis in singula ferè Capita succinctis Annotationibus. Authore Paulo Fagio. Pentateuchus, sive V. libri Moysis. Consilium & utilitatem editionis hujus Chaldaicae ex praefati∣one ad Lectorem intelligere poteris. Collatio praecipuarum, quae in usu sunt, Translationum V. Testa∣menti, in praecipuos S. Scripturae locos: In quibus cum Interpretum, tum Commentatorum mira est varietas. Ex qua non tam ipsas varia∣tionis causas, quam quis Interpretum, ac Expositorum, cum Vete∣rum, tum Recentiorum, vel a scopo veritatis, longius aberrarit, vel ad illum proprius accesserit; ex ipsa Veritate Hebraica pulchrè cog∣noscere licebit. Authore Paulo Fagio. Opus inabsolutum, partim propter illorum temporum difficultates; partim propter exilium, & obitum praematurum optimi atque do∣ctissimi viri paulo post subsequentem.
In Quarto. OPusculum recens Hebraicum, a Doctissimo Hebraeo Elija Levita Germano, grammatice elaboratum. Cui titulum fecit, Thisbi∣tes. In quo DCCXII. vocum, quae sunt partim Hebraicae, Chal∣daicae, Arabicae, Graecae & Latinae; quaeque in Dictionarijs non facile inveniuntur; & a Rabbinis tamen Hebraeorum in scriptis suis passim usurpantur, Origo, Eymon & verus uss doctè ostenditur, atque ex∣plicatur, Per Paul. Fagium, in gratiam Studiosorum Linguae Sanctae, Latinitate donatum. Sententiae verè elegantes, piae miréque cum ad linguam discen∣dam, tum animum pietate excolendum utiles, veterum Sapientum Hebraeorum, Quas Pirke Avoth, id est, Capitula, aut, si mavis, Apoththegmata, Patrum nominant; in Latinum versae, Scholijsque illustratae, Per Paulum Fagium. Exegesis, sive expositio, dictionum Hebraicarum literalis & simplex, in quatuor Capita Geneseos, pro Studiosis linguae Hebraicae. Cujus∣dam Scriptum Iudaei, ad Christianismum conversi ante annos CC. In quo obiter ostendit causas aliquot, propter quas multi Iudaei, etiam si veritatem agnoscant, ad fidem tamen nostram accedere verentur. Sententiae Morales, ordine Alphabeti, Ben Syrae, Vetustissimi auto∣ris Hebraei, qui a Iudaeis Nepos Hieremiae Prophetae fuisse creditur: Cum succincto Commentariolo, Hebraicè & Latinè. Tobias Hebraice; ut is adhuc hòdie apud Judaeos in venitur. Omnia ex Hebraeo in Latinum translata, in gratiam studiosorum linguae Sanctae. Saepher Aemuna, id est, Liber Fidei, Hebraice impressus Isnae, Anno CCCII. minoris Supputationis a Creatione Mundi. Liber Fidei, pretiosus, bonus & jucundus, quem edidit Vir quidam Israelites sapiens & prudens, ante multos annos, ad docendum & com∣probandum in ea argumentis sufficientibus & evidentibus, quod Fides Christianorum, quem habent in Deum Patrem, Filium & Sp. Sanctum, atque alia, perfecta, recta, & indubitata sit, Collocata super funda∣mentum legis, Prophetarum & Hagiographorum. Ideo vocavit no∣men ejus Saepher aemuna, i. e. Liber fidei, seu veritatis; ad illuminan∣dum in eo oculos caecorum, & ad ducendum in viam rectam errantes. Translatus ex lingua Hebraea in linguam Latinam. Opera Pauli Fagij. Precationes Hebraicae, quibus in Solennioribus festis Judaei cum mensae accumbunt, adhuc hodie utuntur: & quo modo, ordine & ritu dicant. Ex quo videre licet vestigia quaeam ritus veteris populi, quem & Christus Salvator in S S. coena sua, uti eam Evangelistae, praesertim Lucas, describunt, in quibusdam observavit. Parvus Tractatulus ex libello Hebraico excerptus, cui nomen est Saepher aemuna, id est, Liber fidei, Judaei cujusdem ad Christianismum conversi ante annos CC. In quo obiter ostendit causas aliquot▪ propter quas multi Iudaei, etiam si veritatem agnoscant, ad fidem nostram ac∣cedere verentur. Per. P. Fagium translatus. Saepher Midoth, id est, Liber Virtutum Germanicè compositus, He∣braicis tamen characteribus exaratus.
Grammatica Heliae Levitae Hebraicè, excusa Isnae. Compendiaria Isagoge in Linguam Hebraeam, Autore Paulo Fagio. Prima quatuor capita Geneseos Hebraicè, cum versione Germanica è regione, Hebraicis tamen characteribus exarata, Eaque juxta usita∣tam Judaeorum interpretationem, ad verbum translata, una cum succinctis in fine adjectis Scholijs, & ratione legendi Hebraeo-ger∣manica. Tredecim fundamenta fidei Judaeorum: Quae composuit R. Mosche filius Majemon. Hebraicè excusa, absque ulla vel loci vel temporis notatione praefixa, aut Subscripta. In Octavo. NOmenclatura Hebraica, authore Helia Levita Germano Gram∣matico. In gratiam omnium Tyronum ac Studiosorum linguae Sanctae. [NUM. XLIV.] Dr. Cox, the Chancellor of the University of Oxford, his Oration at the Conclusion of Peter Martyrs Disputation. VIRI Oxonienses, peregimus quatuor dimidiatos dies in excuti∣endis duabus quaestionibus, de Transubstantiatione scilicet,P. Martyri O∣pera. & Re∣ali Praesentia corporis Christi in Sacramento. Magno fuit nobis ob∣lectamento haec Disputatio: atque utinam per tempus licuisset om∣nia quae hic dicipossent, audivisse. Quod optabamus, id successit; ut quieta esset Disputatio. Auditores ita etiam Sedati, Spero Veritatis imbibendae avidi. Qui fabulam peragebant, & utrinque disserebant, suo officio diligentissimè perfuncti sunt, nec meritis laudibus frau∣dandi. Viri Nostri, hoc est, Angli & Oxonienses, praeterquam quod Conscientiae suae negotium egerunt, etiam haud minimum decus huic Academiae attulerunt, quod in tanta causa non subterfugerint, quo mi∣nus palam testarentur, pro eruditionis suae modulo, & dono a Dei be∣nignitate sibi impartito, & quid animi in hisce controversijs haberent, & quibus rationibus & authoritatibus huc perpellerentur. Pulcherri∣mè sane sibi datam provinciam obierunt. Caeteri verò docti & boni viri, qui in ijs tantis rebus tacuerunt, nescio quo pacto, suo Silentio negationis notam sibi inusserunt. Petrus autem, & meritò Petrus, propter constantiae suae firmitatem; Martyr & meritò Martyr, propter innumera, quae nunquam non profert, de veritate testimonia, multam apud nos, & apud pios omnes inire debet hoc tempore gratiam. Primùm, quod immensos Labores exantlarit, in substinendo Disputationum one∣re. Nam si ne Hercules quidem contra duos, quid Petrus solus contra quoscunque. Deinde quod Disputationem instituerit, vanos vano∣um hominum sermones repressit, qui de eo invidiosa atque odiosa sparserant: nimirum aut nolle, aut non audere sua defendere. Po∣stremò, quod summorum Magistratuum, atque adeo Regiae Majestatis,
expectationi optimè responderit, dum non solum Christi doctrinam, ex ipsis vivis fontibus Dei propinaverit Academiae, sed neque quenquam (quantum in ipso situm fuit) fontes aut turbare, aut obstruere permi∣serit. Auscultavimus nos hanc Christianam velitationem, quae veritatis in∣dagandae atque investigandae causa, est suscepta. Qui quidem status, in omni disputatione, tanquam unicus scopus, ad quem omnes colliment, perpetuus esse debet. Hanc scrutari oportet omnes, quibus sincera reli∣gio cordi est. Quid enim aliud vult, Scrutamini Scripturas, nisi ex scri∣pturis veritatem indagate? Caeterum de hisce controversijs sententiam ferre, & litem prorsus dirimere, modò non decrevimus. Tum autem decernetur, cum Regiae Majestati, & Ecclesiae Anglicanae Proceribus vi∣sum fuerit. Quod si ego, quem vestrum Cancellarium pro vestra humanitate adlegistis, aliam nunc personam non gererem (Aliam enim Regia au∣thoritas jam mihi imposuit) optatissimè vellem in his propositionibus Fidei meae rationem reddere. Non enim me pudet Evangelij Christi, neque veritatis, quae ex verbo ejus omnibus lucet: Quod quidem aliàs, cum dabitur opportunitas, facere non detrectabo. Intera vero, Vos, peregrinos & alienigenas, siqui sunt modo exhortor, ut domum ve∣stram revertamini. Nolite perpetuo peregrinari in Patribus & Conci∣lijs, tanquam in patria vestra. Nolite existimare illa esse vestra princi∣pia. Nolite hallucinari in probabilibus humanae sapientiae verbis. Quae∣nam principia habuerunt Patres? Quae Concilia? Quàm turpiter in multis lapsi sunt Patres? Quàm faedè errarunt Concilia? Errorum hic nolo meminisse, nolo hanc movere camarinam. Et tamen Patres atque Concilia debent esse Principia Disputationum? Fuerunt antehac Haere∣tici, qui negarunt, vel partem, vel totam scripturam. Sunt & hodie Libertini, qui eadem insania laborant▪ ij nosra Christianorum princi∣pia negant, & conculcant. Qui verbum Dei in altissima specula consti∣tuunt, & in summa veneratione habent, hincque tantùm vitam & salu∣tem petunt, principia tenent firmissima, solidissima, atque sanctissima. Interim tamen Ecclesia, & piorum Patrum saluberrima testimonia non rejiciunt, imò amplectuntur, & venerantur, tanquam radios Sp. sancti, caliginem oculorum nostrorum aliquo pacto illustrantes. Quare, obsecro, per vestram salutem, & per Dei misericordiam, tam Juvenes, quam Senes, ut duo praestare velitis. Prius, ut nunc de∣mum ponatis illas controversias, quae Ecclesiam Christi multis Saeculis inutili concertatione turbarunt, & dilacerarunt, de Transubstantiatione, & nescio qua carnali Praesentia. Nullus est rixandi finis. Hae sunt Dia∣boli paedicae, quibus nos perpetuò involvit, & a vera pietate remoratur. Nos vero uti pios decet Christianos, illud imprimis imò in universum spectemus, quid Christus fecerit, quid nobis faciendum praeceperit. Cogi∣temus sacrosancta & tremenda illa Christi mysteria esse, illa subinde ad salutem nostram usurpemus, ad illa cum timore & tremore accedamus; ne unquam indign veniamus, & ad judicium & condemnationem nostri accipiamus. Alterum est, ut ad Verbi Dei studium concedatis. Ad hunc scopum omnia Vestra rela dirigatis: huc omnia studia referatis; sive phi∣losophica, sive Mathematica, sive rationes Medicas, sive quaecunque alia, huic, tanquam Reginae, ancillentur. Hinc omnem fidem petite: Hinc religio stabiliatur atque solidetur. Coelum & terra transibunt, Ver∣bum
autem Domini manet in aeternum. Hoc, tanquam Lydio lapide, omnes controversiae examinentur, atque definiantur. Porro, unum est, quod Vos omnes admonere debemus, nimirum, ut vale dictis universis nugis Papisticis, superstitionibus, & simulato Dei cultu, veritati disquirendae diligentem operam detis, aut saltem, ne im∣pedimento sitis, quo minus veritatis studiosi in negotio pietatis progre∣diantur. Scimus enim, & compertum habemus, nonnullos nimis esse inquietos, & turbidos, & praepostero zelo incitatos, ad remorandum Veritatis progressum. Scimus aliquos patris sui exemplum perniciosè sequi, dum discordiarum semina passim spargunt, mendacia fingunt. Scimus falsos & odiosos rumores circumferri. Scimus homines vanos maledictis agere, cum non possint veris promovere causam suam. Ita irritabilis est mala consuetudo contra Veritatem. Verùm, ut finem faciam, si ullo veritatis amore afficimini, sedatis animis illam exquirite, ardentibus precibus a Deo Opt. Max. illam postulate; amica & candida collatione illam eruite; ferveat in vobis Christiana charitas. Infirmum in fide, assumite. Debent enim, inquit Paulus, sirmiores imbecillitates infirmorum sustinere, & non sibi placere. Vnusquisque proximo suo placeat in bonam aedificationem. Cavete Satanae technas, qui vobis insidiatur, ne acquiescatis Sermonibus Domini nostri Ies Christi; ut deliretis circa quaestiones & pugnas verborum; ex guibus oriuntur invidiae, contentiones, blasphemiae, suspiciones malae, &c. Possumus ex authoritate vobis imperare, & pervicacibus meritum sup∣plicium comminari, malumus tamen pro dilectione nostra erga vos, rogare & exhortari. Quare siqua consolatio in Christo, siquod solatium dilectionis, siqua societas spiritus, siqua viscera miserationis, implete gaudi∣um nostrum. Gaudium nostrum est, quod videmus multos in hac Academia in bonis literis & pietate insigniter adolescere. Gaudium nostrum est, quod videmus Vos adeo modestos & ad imperium para∣tos. Implete ergo gaudium nostrum, hoc est, Veritatem multis jam seculis, veluti in specu Trophonij, dilitescentem, eruite. Veritatem adeptam, sincera fide, excipite. Exceptam autem probis moribus exornate. Sic lucebit Lux vestra coram hominibus, ut videant opera vestra bona, & glorificent Patrem vestrum, qui est in coelis. Cui omnis gloria in secula. Amen. Dixi. NUM. XLV. Dr. Treshams Epistle to his Relation of the Disputation between himself and Peter Martyr, at Oxford. Praeclarissimis Viris & eisdem Heroibus longè honoratissimis Regiae Maje∣statis Consiliarijs, Gulielmus Treshamus, Theologiae Doctor, Sa∣lutem & faustum rebus regendis successum. VEritas ut cunctis rebus mira dignitatis eminentia praepollet,Foxij MSS. (Pru∣dentissimi ac multò excellentissimi viri) utpote quae suos culto∣res verè liberos efficit, summáque ac nunquam intermoritura donat in∣genuitate,
ita nos illam in omnibus & super omnia praeferre, venerari, sequi, ac integram & illaesam omni empore servare pro virili oportet. Quod cum ita sit, cumque perspexissem illam a temerario quodam, & plane deploratae salutis homine indignissimè tractatam, ac summis af∣fectam injurijs, non solum ejusdem defendendam causam libenter (ut par erat) suscepi; sed & machinas adversarij, quas in ipsam expug∣nandam paraverat, evertere ac prorss confringere sedulò molitus sum: & nisi vehementer fallor, quod in ea parte contendebam praesti∣ti. Verumenimvero, ne vestrae Celsitudini admodum prolixus videar, ut quem ego hoc loco per veritatis hostem innuo, designem, Senex quidam delirus est, subversus, impudens, errorum magister insignis, Petrus Martyr Vermilius. Is è patria sua primum fugam saciens ad Ger∣manos, dum apud illos vigeret haeretica pravitas, se contulit, certe ut libidini licentiùs indulgeret, & suo potiretur adulterio. Caeterùm restau∣rata illic per Carolum Caesarem religione, ad nos statim transvolavit. Postremo Oxoniam veniens summa vitae integritate ad tempus simulata, tandem occasionem (ut putabat) nactus opportunam, virulenta pe∣stilentis doctrinae Seminaria proposuit. A quibus cum plurimi pluri∣mùm abhorrerent, Richardus Smythus, Theologiae apud Oxonienses Professor, malum hunc Seminatorem publicè repehendit, & ejusdem impia dogmata improbaturus audacem hunc Athletam ad concertan∣dum provocavit. Unà in scholis convenerant, tempus dabatur ido∣neum: ingens Auditorum turba confluxerat. Urgebat ad luctum Smy∣thus. Non audet Psudomartyr congredi. Rem prorsus rejicere pudui, disputare vero piguit. Hinc ad cavilla itum astutè est. Ac primum questiones non nisi suo modo proponi voluit; concessit Smythus. Tum vero Petrus decem dies sibi dari petit, quibus se contra Smythum ad cer∣tamen armar possit. Quae enim prius ad decem menses palam docuerat, & argumentis confirmare in publicis praelectionibus conatus est, jam respondere volenti Smytho, & partem adversam etiam imparato defen∣dere cupienti, eadem disputando tueri veritus denegavit, neque quic∣quam penitus agi volebat, nisi decem dies, quibus sese pararet conce∣derentur. Dabantur tandem; Sed Smytho, qui dolum tum olfecerat, rem aegrè ferente. Deinde nominantur judices utriúsque consensu. Dies disputationi praescriptus. Interim Petri, aut certè cujuspiam ejus asse∣clarum (ut conjicere licet) industriâ, apud magistratus suggestionibus minus sinceris actum est, ut ejusmodi disputationes non haberentur. Qua Petri arte totum eludebatur negotium. Postea vero elapsis jam aliquot mensibus, ubi aberant Praelectores, nec quisquam de Disputationibus cogitabat, egregius iste pugil pro∣rumpit subitò, & ad certamen provocat. Quaestiones priores palam di∣sputare vult, arbitratus tum neminem adesse, qui negotium contra eum susciperet. Quo tempore quia adversus illum stare volui, cum cae∣teri, me multò validiores, haud idem eo saltem tempore faciendum putarent, in me prae caeteris excandescit, in me durius invehitur, mor∣dáxque caninos infigit dentes, ac, quantum potest, infamat, editóque libello proponit, quasi in multis ab eo inter disputandum superatum. Quae cum conspicarer, maximè autem, cum causam Dei erroribus & mendacijs Petri scandalizari viderem; existimavi operae pretium, & perquam necessarium facturum me, si ab hujusmodi contumelijs & Christi causam & meipsum pro viribus desenderem, ac scriptis decla∣rarem,
quàm sit hic in scribendo falsarius, quàm malè intellectis ab∣utatur scripturis, quàm Patres invitos ad suum institutum trahat, quàm suis facile percutiatur & confodiatur telis, quàm debilibus dum sua roborare vult, innitatur principijs, quàm absurda nonnunquam fateri non vereatur, quámque passim peccet omittendo quae dicta, & quae non erant dicta adjiciendo; quo videlicet lectores Christiani veritatem sine fucis percipientes ab hac peste caveant, nec quicquam adhibeant fidei, cernentes illum errorum spiritu impulsum, ut nos Deo permittente, velut triticum cribraret, utque qui probati sint manifesti fiant. Quamobrem hic mearum partium esse judicavi, primùm, ut rem omnem quo ordine diebus illis, quibus cum eo agebam, gesta fuerit plane & simpliciter legentibus ob oculos ponerem, nec quippiam pror∣sus meis insererem, nisi quod exemplaribus notariorum, vel ipsius Petri libello expressè contineretur. Deindè, quoad illam partem disputatio∣num, quae inter illum & me ultro citróque habita est, annotationes quasdam elucubravi, quibus ea omnia quae in illum jam dixi, vera esse contester. Quod siquis roget, Quorsum ista? aut quid opus nova scri∣bere? Cur non ista inter disceptandum potius deprompta sunt, & in adversarium congesta? Dicam cum Augustino, neque sum Angelus, neque Propheta, ut qui omnia ex tempore proferre atque regerere poteram. Praetereà, in disputationibus ipsis non erant hujusmodi inver∣siones, non adjectiones novae, non omissiones, non tot ab illo insertae, ut nunc sunt, falsae sententiae. Sed nec ullae prorsus tum erant calumniosè annotationes in margine scriptae. Quae omnia detegere palmque face∣re pernecessarium duxi. Sed & ipse Petrus antagonistas suos, quos pro libidine vocat Malevolos, ad scribendum provocat, ac pollicetur hoc si fecerint, quemadmodum tunc ausus fuit viva voce congredi; ita & nunc se comparare ad ea quae scripserint, ut respondeat. Has itaque Lucubrationes vobis (insignissimi Heroes) quos Chri∣stus praecipuos sub potentissimo Rege nostro Edovardo Reipub. judices constituit, exhibendas esse censui; nihil prorsus ambigens eam esse vestram in omnes veritatis studiosos benignitatem, eam aequitatem, eam veri judicij certitudinem, ut sine omni personarum acceptione ju∣stam causae conditionem velitis semper attendere, & neque ad dextram neque ad sinistram ulla occasione ducti, quovismodo a veritate decli∣nare: non ignorantes in illum finem vobis concessam esse potestatem, tum a summo judice Deo, tum ab ipsa Regia majestate, apud quam pro vestra in Cristum charitate agere dignemini, quo mihi indigenae, ac genuino Regis nostri subdito Christi causam, quoad possum, cu∣ranti tantum in evulgando hoc disputationum ac annotationum Volu∣mine efficere liceat, quantum Petro Martyri, extraneo, veritatis adver∣sario, audere hactenus fuerit impunè permissum. Rem sanè justam, ni fallor, postulo. Neque profectò in scriptis his est, unde pius quispiam offendatur. In impios autem ut duriùs agamus exposcit veritatis ra∣tio, quae nequaquam charitati refragatur. Duriùs enim contra errones obstinatos egerunt Patres, nec illis unquam pepercerunt, quin veluti Christi hostes verbis factisque contemnerent, atque acerbissimis repre∣hensionibus persequerentur. Iohannes Baptista Pharisaeos incredulos viperarum vocavit progenies. Christus ipse malos illos Iudaeos menda∣ces appellavit, & diaboli filios. Sed & Petrum ipsum a morte obeunda dehortantem, minúsque in hoc sapientem quae Dei sunt, Satanam
taxando nuncupavit. Unde certò edocemur nos posse, citra charitatis praejudicium, adversarios in causis religionis severis ac mordacibus verbis impetere atque perstringere. Denique, haud temerè hoc quicquid est opusculi evulgo, sed summae vestrae prudentiae & eximio candori, qui illi, regum omnium pulcher∣rimo flori jam sese auspicatissimè diffundenti, a consilijs estis, humilis suppléxque ipsum offero, obnixè vos exoratos habens, ut cum privile∣gio ad Christi honorem ac multorum utilitatem divulgetur. Id quod vestrae Dominationes ab illa lucis aurora, nimirum Serenissimo Rege nostro Edovardo, jam a paterno somno orbem illustri virtutum omnium lumine spargente, facile spero obtinebunt, & cum gratia consequentur. Hanc auroram splendidissimam felicissimè procedere atque in perfe∣ctum diem crescere, optimaque Optimi patris vestigia imitari, faciat Deus Opt. Max. qui & illum unicum nostrum decus & praesidium, Vósque sub ipso Moderatores Reip. primarios, aliosque illius studiosos universos diuturnissimè incolumes servet. NUM. XLVI. The sentencious sayinges of Master Martin Bucer upon the Lordes Supper. Fxij MSS.1. SO playnely, so faythfully, and also so warely, as can be possyble, we ought to speake of the mysteryes of the holy supper, even as we ought to do of all other Christes mysteryes; to thende, that the Children of God may most clearely perseyve what Christ doth meane, and the Adversaryes to have as small occasion as can be, eyther to per∣vert or els to darke and make dymme the truth of Christ. 2. These thinges we cannot better attaine, then by the godly and right expoundyng of the wordes of the holy ghost, not allowing any false sygnyfications of them, both certaynly affirmyng the thinges whiche be agreeable unto this mystery, and also denying the thinges whiche be contrarye ther unto. 3. We must certaynely acknowledge that the holy ghost most clear∣ly, most faythfully and most warely, hath dyscrybed all the sacraments of our salvation. 4. But the holy ghost by Christes own mouth, by the mouth of the Apostles, and by the scripture, delyvereth unto us the sacrament of the Lordes Supper, even as he doth all other Sacramentes, by the words and fourme of delyveryng, gevying and receyving. 5. And three thinges acknowledgeth hearein to be geven and taken, bread and wyne, beyng the signes of the body and bloud of the Lord, and assurance of the new testament and remyssion of our synnes.
6. For when he had taken bread and wyne, and geven thanckes, he gave them to hys dyscyples to be eaten and drunken, and said more∣over, that by these sygnes he gave therin his body that was offered for us, and lykewise his bloud, which was shed for us, saying also, that by this bloude the new testament of grace was assured, and the for∣geuenes of synnes purchased. 7. And he defyneth or describeth the right use and receyving of this Sacrament to be that partaking of the body and bloud of Christ, wherby we beyng many, are one bread and one body (as many of us as be partakers of one Bread and one Cup of the Lord.) This body doubtles is that body wherof Christ is the head, and into the which we are baptised. For by the regeneration we are made members of his body, fleshe of his flesh, bone of his bones, and so we be one flesh with him, 1 Cor. 12. Ephes. 5. 8. That fellowship which we have with the father and the sonne, and with all the sayntes, wherof S. Iohn speaketh, 1 Iohn, 1 chap. of his epistle, is geven and taken in the Lords supper rightly admynistred and receyved. That unity also which we have with the father, and the sonne, and with all the saints, for the which the Lord prayed, Iohn 17. by the which Christ is in us, as the Father is in him, and we in theym, (I meane in the father and the sonne) is geven and re∣ceyved in the same supper rightly administred, wherof the Lord also speaketh: he that eateth my flesh, and drincketh my bloud dwelleth in me, and I in him. John 6. 9. This is the partaking and the unity of an heavenlye regeneration, of a new creature, of the high mystery of God, which cannot be un∣derstand and knowen, but by fayth, even as fayth is perceyved and felt by his effectes, as by judgement, wyll, and by the new heavenly and godly workes. 10. All sensyble and worldly imagynations, all fansying of joyned or contynuall places, are to be put away from this partycipation and unytie, which in the word of God is knowen to be mervelous, and with reverence to be pondered and dyscussed by the new mans lyvyng, as by his effectes. 11. The Holy Ghost thought it not inough to declare unto us, how that we be endued wyth the spirit of Christ by his merites, but he doth publish also that we do lyve by his intercession and working. He furthermore assureth us that we have him with us, that he dwelleth in our hartes, and that we receyve him in the holy supper. These be the thinges which we ought to tell openly and to fortefye. 12. These are Metaphors and borowed speeches, lyke as other wherby we expounde the matters of regeneration. For unto such mat∣ters as the naturall man perceyveth not, can no proper names by geven, but suche translation of worles as the Holy Ghost doth use, and ther cannot be devysed more proper, more mete for the purpose, nor more famouse wordes then they are.
13. It is not mete therfore that we should attempt to expound these Metaphors with our own proper wordes, wherof we be all together destytute in matters of regeneration, neyther is it convenyent that we should deface theyr perfection wyth more slender Metaphors, and wyth such geare as be of kinred to our natural reason. 14. We must beware that with no superstitious, stately eloquence, we do make darke the brightnes of the Lordes commandement, unto such as have their eyes lightened on every syde by fayth. We must in lyke maner take heede we demynysh not the force and majesty of Christes sacraments set furth by the Holy Ghost, rather of us to be be∣leved, then by our naturall reason to be out-searched, as by the exposi∣tion rather proceding of our owne imagynations, then of the very word of God, and of the nature of his sacraments. 15. The Word is made flesh, that their myght be both God and man in one substaunce, and such as was a very earthely man, which dy∣ed, rose againe from the dead, ascended into heaven, remayneth in the heavens, and sytteth on the right hand of the father, which governeth and fulfylleth all things, and in the syght of all the world he shall come agayne in the clowdes to judge the quycke and the dead. And they all must nedes receyve their owne bodies againe. All these things truly do so farre passe the reache of mans wyt, that of necessitye we must lay hold of them by fayth. 16. Fayth, bycause she is practysed and fortyfyed in the dayly use of these things, causeth them clearely and manyfestly to appeare, even as she doth make all the other misteries of Chryst, to such as doth perfect∣ly beleve. Which thinges should be made darke unto us, if we would suffer our selves to make inquirye of them according to the trade of our own reason, following her natural princyples. 17. Christ our Lord is for ever both God and man, he is the head of all the sayntes, and the first begotten among the children of God. Wherfore we must so marke with our myndes, and expres in wordes the propertyes of the natures, that by no maner of imagynations we se∣parate the unity of substaunce. 18. There is nothing better agreeth with it selfe, then doth the word of God, so that what so ever the scripture speaketh of Christes beyng among us, of the receyvyng of him, of his aby ding, and dwel∣ling in us, and eatyng of him, agreeth all together, and is consonant with these evydent scriptures, openly declaring that he hath forsaken the world, that he is in heaven, yea and that he hath a very body, and therfore lymited and bounden in one place. 19. When we therfore entreate of the mistery, eyther of the sup∣per of the Lord, or of Christes plaine presence with us (for why should we not say that he is present, which dwelleth in us, and is in the mydst of us) it is to no purpose to lay agaynst the presence of him such places of scripture, as declare Christ to have departed from this
world, to be in heaven, and to be very man, havyng a very body, and therfore such a body as is bounded in a place, which may not be placed in all or many places at one tyme. 20. For Christes presence, whether it be offered or declared, eyther in the word onely or els in the sacramentes, is no presence of place, ney∣ther of sensies nor of reason, nor yet no yearthly presence, but it is a spiritual presence, a presence of faith, and an heavenly presence. For as much as we are conveyde into heaven by faith, beyng placed in Christ. So that we lay hold upon him and embrace him in his heavenly majestye, all be it he be here offered and declared after a sorte unto us in the glasse, and darke speaking of sensyble wordes and sacramentes. 21. The Antichristes make the simple people to beleve by these wordes, that we receyve and have Christ here present after some world∣ly fashion, that is to say, eyther inclosed with the bread and wine, or els that he is present under their accydences, so that ther he ought to be honoured and worshipped. 22. Let them therfore that be apt to learne, be taught that ther is no presence of Christ in the supper, but onely in the lawful use therof, and such as is obtayned and gotten by fayth onely. As for the other sort, byd them adew as the blynde guydes of the blynde, and that plantyng which our heavenly Father hath not planted. For such as heare not Gods word, are not borne of God. 23. We must tourne away from their disceytes and craftes, from which we ought verely to withdraw our selves, howbeit they cannot be avoyded other wayes then by the true expounding of Gods word, yea and that but only of them, whom the Lord himself hath taught by the ministration he hath committed to us. 24. The good men moreover hearing, that Christ in the sacramente is presently geven, receyved and had, do imagyne a certaine presence of place, and many tymes they fantsye also, that God himself is bound∣ed in a place, havyng a body, even as he were a man. 25. They must therfore be contynually taught that these heavenly misteries do passe all mens capasityes, and that they must be percey∣ved and knowen in the only word of God, so that all worldly fasions must be far from our mindes, because the word of God declareth Christ to be a very man, havyng the bodye of a man, in the which body he departed this world, and was caried into heaven, he may not therfore by no worldly maner be sought for in this world, but after such sort as he offereth himselfe, beyng in heaven, to be received of us. Which things are not knowen by sense and reason, but by faith. 26. As for these heavens, because they be above all the heavens, I dare not by the predicamente of our reason discusse what they be, but by the wordes of the scripture. But th scripture discribeth them not by the distaunce of places, but by the majestye of God and his blessednes,
openly declaring, that such heavenly blys hath not come into the hart of man. 27. I do not perceyve what further knowledge the holy fathers would geve, writing of the proper place of Christes body in heaven, but that we should observe the propertye of both the natures in Christ. So that as it is the propertye of the godly nature to be in every place, and to fulfyll all things, even by his substance; so it is the propertye of the nature of man, to be lymited in place and state, not to be spread abroade in many or in all places at once. These things agree with the scripture, albeit we place not Christes body in heaven after the maner of the fourth booke of Aristotle's Naturalls. Yea, let us hardly kepe our selves in such things that the scripture do speake of the heavens, and of Christes sytting in heaven. 28. I have a conscience in so high misteries, to allow such kinde of speaking as is not taught in the scripture, though such be much used, yea and that by the authority of the holy fathers, for to what point, through such speakyng, the devyll and antychrist hath brought us, we all lamentably complayne. 29. Wherfore with reverence, and in a true meanyng, I wyll un∣derstand the sayinges of the holy fathers as touching the mutation of the sygnes. I wyll never graunt their sayings so to be taken, as to mutch straunge from gods worde, and after such sort as men myght now a daies be overthrowen with Antichristes doctrine into the idolatrye, which of all other is most detestable. 30. So likewyse if any thing may be found, that the holy fathers have wrytten of Christ placed in heaven, more then the scripture doth certaynely teach, I wyll not without reverence refuse it, nor yet wyth any man contend therin, for I have nothing to say that such writyng is contrary to any place of scripture. I do but only desyre that no neces∣sary doctrine be made therof, and that I may be suffered to abyde in the playnes of Gods written word. 31. But they will say, that a man well expert in saith, when he hear∣eth that Christ is present in the holy supper, and is geven, receyved, and had with the bread, cannot refraine but imagine such a presence of Christ in the bread as is there placed, or els like to such a thing as hath a place. 32. I cannot se how the wordes of the Holy Ghost ought to be re∣fourmed, because of the weakenes of our understanding, either that we should allow such utteraunce of wordes, wherby it might appeare that the Holy Ghost had not uttered the matter circumspectly and strongly inough, yea and that most aptly and effectually, as well to the edefying of faith, as to the putting away of all errours. 33. These now be the wordes of Christ: Where two or three be ga∣thered in my name, ther am I in the mydst of them. In the name of Christ
we assemble together at the Lords Supper rightly ministred. In the world we be, yea and somewhere placed, and whersoever we be, Christ is among us, which notwithstanding is not in the world, and also dwelleth in our hartes. But we cannot perseve nor attaine it, ney∣ther by our sense nor by reason, but by faith. For how can the head be away from his body? Wherfore I defyne or determine Christes presence, howsoever we perceive it, either by the sacraments or by the word of the gospell, to be onely the attainyng and perceyving of the commodi∣ties we have by Christ both God and man, which is our head raignyng in heaven, dwelling and lyving in us. Which presence we have by no worldly meanes but we have it by faith and take the fruit therof when it is offered us in the word, and in the sacraments. But the force therof we feele in all our parties and powers, what tyme by the spirit of Christ they be sanctifyed and renewed unto obedience and godly lyfe. 34. He is called present by some knowledge of perceyvyng him, even as one may be called present with an other, and so we do say, that they be here present, whom we know by hearing or by syght to be pre∣sent, but now the thing which we know by faith, is much more cer∣taine then any thing we can know by sence or reason. Why may not we then say that Christ our head is present with his members, when we know by faith that he both liveth and dwelleth in us? 35. They say, that the holy fathers expound the scriptures record∣ing the Lords presence, that Christ by his Godhead, by his majesty, and by his providence, is present with us, yet lyving in this world. Truth it is, but the Lord saith: I am with you unto the worldes end; and Paule affirmeth, that Christ lyveth and dwelleth in our hartes. Yea and the holy fathers themselves declare, that we have Christ present in the sa∣crament of baptisme, and in the meate and drink of the aulter, which call that presence carnall that is knowen by our senses, and is set over against the presence which we have by faith. 36. Faith truly embraceth Christ both God and man, and kepeth him present: which by his Godhead is not onely present in the congre∣gation of his saintes and in his members, but is also present in every place. But some cannot be contented, unles we graunt that we have his body and bloud really, carnally and substantially present in the supper. 37. Wyse and good men will eschew all uncertaine wordes in every talk and speaking, how much more are they to be avoyded in Christes sacramentes? Moreover, in the treatyse of Christes sacraments we may justly refuse such straunge wordes as be not used in the scripture, un∣les they may be perfectly applied for the declaration of Christes truth. For such uncertaine wordes doth more darken the true doctrine, and therfore we must not medle with them, except ther be some conside∣ration of the using of them.
38. I would wysh these wordes realiter and substantialiter to be alto∣gether refused, neither to be allowed in reasonyng to or fro, because we shall seme to graunt their contraries, and to say that Christ is re∣ceyved counterfetlye and accydenly, if we deny him to be received in the supper really and substantiallye. 39. If the matter so require that these words be brought into re∣sonyng, I would, for the maintenance of Christes truth against the adver∣saries, among the children of God, defyne these wordes realiter and sub∣stantialiter, as if one would understand by the presence of the Lord really and substantially, that he is received verely in dede by faith, and his substaunce is geven in the sacrament; but if he would enterlace any worldly presence with these words, I will deny it, because the Lord is departed this world. 40. I can never admyt or allow these words carnally and naturally, because they bring in a meanyng that he is receyved with our sences. 41. Hereby I thinke it evydent, agreeable to the holy scripture, and according to the reverence we owe to God and his scripture, and to∣ward the auncient church, that we should frame our selves to the words of the Lord, of his Apostles, and of the auncient Church, and to say that ther is geven and receyved the body and bloud of the Lord, that is to say, very Christ himselfe both God and man, but he is geven with the word and the signes, but received with true faith, and that he is geven and received to the end that we may move and lyve more par∣fectly in him, and he in us. 42. And I thinke it an easy thing to make answer, when they say that the thing which is already, cannot be received, and that he which cometh to the Lords supper, and hath not Christ in himselfe, receiveth not Christ there, but he receiveth death. Truly Christ must be geven and received of us, tyll nothing of ours be left in us, but he all thing in us, and we wholly in him, and no part in our selfe. And we say that the partaking of Christ, which we have in baptisme, is strengthened and augmented in the Lordes supper. But ye will say the same is done, what time the gospell being read, or heard, is received by faith. So it is indede, neither hath the Lords supper, or geveth, any other thing els, but that he hath left therin things visible, for the visible words of Christ be applied therin. And they are not without force and effect to the saintes, because they be applied by the Lords ordinaunce, all whose words and ordinaunce, have lye and spirite. 43. Wherfore I trust, that hereby men may perceive what I beleve as conserning the gevyng, ministring, receyving, and partaking of the Lords body and bloud in the supper, which doth agree right well with the scripture and with the doctrine of the auncient church. So that af∣ter this manner I acknowledge Christ, that is to say the partaking of his salvation to be geven and taken in the hoy supper.
44. If I be enquired, who geveth and ministreth the Lords body, I mean the lyvely participation of these things and of Christ wholly, I say, that Christ which is in the midst of his, whose words these be, Take and Eate, is the chiefe and principal gever of his own selfe, and the minister doth lyke service to him herein when he geveth himselfe, even as he doth when he geveth himselfe in the preaching of the go∣spell, and in Baptisme. And for this ministration sake, Paule justly doth write, how he by the gospell had begotten the Corinthes unto the Lord, and had written Christ in their harts, and that he had traveled in birth of the Galathians. 45. As touching the use of bread and wyne herein, If I be demaun∣ded, I will answer that they be signes exhibityve, that is to say, such signes as do geve the things signifyed, by the which sygnes the Lord doth geve himselfe, being the celestial bread of everlasting life, after the same maner as he gave his disciples the Holy Ghost by the signe of breathing of his mouthe, and likewise as by the laying on of his hands, he gave both bodelye health and ghostly health▪ Lyke as he gave syght by the clay made of his spittle, and as he did give circumcicion of the flesh, and in such sort as he geveth regeneration by baptisme. 46. We have an everlasting lyfe through the faith we have in the love that God the father hath toward us. This faith hereunto leaneth, is preserved and encreased. For as much as Christ, Gods sonne, giveth him∣selfe with all his merites unto us, lyveth in us, delyvering us from our synnes, shall raise us from the dead, and bring us to a parfyt heavenly and blessed lyfe. For this cause, that is to say, for the nourishment of thys faith, it was the Lords pleasure to use herein the signes of mate and drincke, and geve his fleshe spiritually to be eaten by the signe of bread, to be eaten bodely; and his bloud spiritually to be dronke, by the signe of wine to be dronken bodely, and so (as it is before said) he geveth in the supper the same partaking of himselfe by the signes, and by his words, which in the sixt of Iohn by words onley he hath set out. 47. If I be demaunded, what maner of joynyng may be betwyxt the glorified body of Christ and ther determinately placed, and the cor∣ruptible bread here in earth, conteined in a sensyble place; I answer, even such as is betwyxt the regeneration and the dipping in the water, and as is betwyxt the Holy Ghost, and the breath of Christes mouth, which I do call the joyning in the covenant. For so mutch as they that with a true and lyvely faith be partakers of these signes bodely, spiri∣tually receive in dede an assuraunce, with an encrease of the partaking of the Lords body and bloud. So they be members of Christ, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones, and therby they grow more and more into the perfection of the same. 48. Whosoever therfore maketh these signes of Christes presence beside the use that the Lord hath appointed them unto, (which is to be eaten and dronken in this sacrament,) bringeth men into abhominable rage and madnes to set up idolatry. Neither receiveth he any thing at
all of that food which the Lord geveth to his, that taketh in hand to eate and drincke these sacraments without a lyvely fayth in Christ, but receyveth death and dampnation to himselfe. 49. Such as be altogether ungodly, say I, that in the holy supper they receive nothing of Christ: such as have faith, and yet make no diffe∣rence of this meate (as certain of the Corinthes, which were blamed of the Apostle dyd,) as I cannot deny them to receive Christ in the supper through the faith which they have, even so I will not say that they have eaten Christ. If so be that they do not rightly practyse their faith by the religious dyfference-making of so high misteries, which is the spe∣cial eatyng of this meate. For such are lyke unto them which taking meate in their mouthes, eyther chew it not, or els, let it not downe, or when it is letten down, digest it not, so that in a little while, or soone after, they vomit it up againe. 50. If I be enquired as concerning the Lords words (This is my body) what thing is demonstrate or shewed here, I say, that to the sences it is bread, but to the mynde or understanding, it is the Lords body, even as in all speeches wherin insensible things are exhibited or geven by sensible signes. So that the meanyng is, the thing which by this signe I geve unto you, is my body which is delyvered for you. As the Holy Ghost speaketh of the circumcicion, saying, This is my Covenaunt, that is to say,Gen. 17. the thing that by this signe I ordeine unto you, is my co∣venaunt to be observed betwixt me and you, &c. After such sort are we wont to speake of the signes which do signifye or betoken a thing, albeit they do not exhibit the thing they betoken, as when we do say of the Emperours image, This is themperour that subdued Fraunce, that is to say he is represented by this image. 51. I object or say against transubstantiation: This cup is the new testament; This, that is to say, Circumcicion, is my covenaunt, and, the word is made flesh, we may not conclude and determyne either the Cup or the circumcicion to be chaunged into a covenaunt, and the Word to be chaunged into flesh. We may not therfore determyne and conclude by these wordes of the Lord, which in gevying of bread did say; Take, this is my body, that there is a chaunge of the bread into the Lords body. For there is no maner of such speaking, no not in all the scripture, that do shewe such an alteration called a Transubstantiation, as the papistes do imagine. For wythout sure auctoritie of the scripture, no Article of the faith may be ordeyned. 52. And so I thinke it evident, that three thinges are geven and recei∣ved in the Lords supper of them that rightly communicate at the Lords table. First bread and wine, nothing in themselfe chaunged, but that they are, by the wordes and the ordinaunce of the Lord, made all one∣ly the sygnes. Secondly, the selfe body and bloud of the Lord, that by these we maye the more parfectly communicate in the participation of the regeneration, or rather, to have the more parfyt partaking of these, or else, that they may be of more perfection in us. Thirdly, the esta∣blishing of the new Testament of the forgevenes of synnes, or of us by election to be made the sonnes of God.
53. I call the signs, after the mind of Ireneus, an earthly thing. The partaking of the Lord to be as the effect therof, I call the establishing of the new testament the heavenly thing, and therefore to be laid hold upon only by faith, and not to be wrapped in with any worldly imaginations. 54. And forasmuch as in the supper, we be not all only admonished of one Christ, and of the partaking of him, but also we do receive him, I had leaver yet say, according to the Lords words: Take and eate, &c. that in the bread and the wyne, the body and bloud is geven, and that they signify the Lord. So that the bread here, is as well a sign of the Lords body exhibitive, I mean, which geveth the thing signifyed, as to be but a bare signe. Wherfore certain of the fathers have well used herein the word of Representing. For truly I think we must most chiefly expres the thing that is here most principal. For this word Acci∣pite, is all together a word of gevyng or delyvering. The Lord geve us grace that we may all speake one thing to the edyfying of the faith among us. Amen. Subscribed. Martin. Bucerus D. Professor. Theologiae Cantabrigiae. NUM. XLVII. Bishop Hoper to the Clergy of his Diocess of Glocester. To the glory of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. FOrasmuch as of all Charges and Vocations, the Charge of such as be appointed to the ministry and function of the Church is the great∣est; it is to be provided and foreseen,E MSto. pri∣vato. that such as be called and appoin∣ted to such Vocation and Office, be such as can satisfy the said Office. Which may be done as S. Paul saith, two manner of wayes. The one if they be of sound doctrine, apt to teach, and to exhort after know∣ledg, and able to withstand, and confute the evil sayers. The other, if their Life and maners be unculpable, and cannot justly be blamed: Which consisteth in this; if the minister be sober, modest, keeping hospitality, honest, religious, chast; not dissolute, angry, nor given to much wine, no fighter, no covetous man, such as governeth wel his own house, and giveth an example of vertue and honesty unto others. For as the godly life and conversation of the Parson, or Doctor, doth no less avayle in the reformation of others, then the doctrin it self; so likewise they, who have no respect nor regard what evil, mischievous and devilish example of life outwardly appeareth to be in them, can∣not have in them any just authority to reform or correct the faults of
others. For by what just means canst thou reprehend and blame any other in that fault, wherin thou thy self art to be blamed? Or by what occasion canst thou preach chastity, or desire to have the same in ano∣ther man, when as thou thy self, despising both God and holy matri∣mony, dost other nourish or keep a whore, or concubine at home in thy house, or else must defile other mens beds? Nother is he any thing les to be ashamed, that wil persuade others to Live in sobriety, he him∣self being drunk. Wherfore what authority shal he obtain or get unto himelf and his ministery, which is daily seen and marked of men, to be a common haunter of Alehouses and tavernes, of whores, cards, dice and such like. Hereby shal you perceive and know, how that the old Priests and pastors of Christs church did by their truth and gravity, subjugate and bring under the hardnecked and stif, stubborn Ethnicks, and caused them to have the same in fear. In so much that the wicked Emperor Iulian caused the priests of the Pagans to order their lives according to the lives of the others. But look what authority and reverence the old severity and gravenes of the Pastors and Priests did bring unto them at that time, even as much shame and contempt (or else a great deal more, as I fear) doth the Letcery, Covetousnes, Ambition, Simony, and such other corrupt maners, bring unto most priests, pastors and ministers, that be now in our dayes, of al men. Wherfore I being not forgetful of my office, and duty towards God, my Prince, and you, do desire and beseech al you, for Christs sake, who commanded that your Light should so shine before men, that they seing and perceiv∣ing the same, might glorify the father, which is in heaven, Give your diligence, Welbeloved brethren, together with me, so that the dignity and majesty of the order of Priests, being fallen in de∣cay, may not only be be restored again, but that first and principally the true and pure worshipping of God may be restored; and that so many souls being committed to my faith and yours, may, by our wholsome doctrin and cleannes of conversation, be moved unto the true study of perfect charity, and called back from al error and igno∣rance; and finally, to be reduced and brought unto the high Bp. and Pastor of Souls, Iesus Christ, and to the intent yee may the more easily perform the same, I have, according to the talent and gift given me of the Lord, collected and gathered out of Gods holy word, a few Articles: Which I trust shal much profit and do yee good. And if that any thing shal be now wanting or lacking, I trust by the help of your prayers and good counsil, they shal be shortly hereafter perform∣ed. Let every one of you therfore take good heed to approve your selves faithful and wise ministers of Christ. So that when I shal come to visit the Parishioners committed to my Cure, and come from God and the Kings Majesty, yee be able not only to make answer unto me in that behalf, but also unto our Lord Iesus Christ, judge both of the quick and the dead, and a very streit revenger of his church. Thus fare you wel unto the day of my coming unto you.
NUM. XLVIII. Hoper, Bishop of Glocester, to Sr. William Cecyll Secretary of State. THE grace of God be with you, Amen. Syns my commyng down, I have byn at Worcestre, gentle Mr. Secreatori,Sr. W.H.MSS. and thought not to have departid thense, til I had set thinges in a good or∣der, as nere as I could. But the negligence and ungodly behaviour of the ministers in Gloucestershire compellyd me to retourne, except I shuld leave them behynd as far out of order, as I should fynd the other, to whom I am going unto. I have spoken with the greatest part of the Ministers, and I trust within these six dayes to end for this time with them al. For the love of God cause the Articles, that the Kings majesty spake of, when we toke our othes, to be set forth by his autorite. I dout not but they shal do mouch good. For I wil cause every minister to confesse them openly before there Parisheners. For subscribing privatly in the paper, I perceave, little avaylyeth. For notwithstanding that, they speak as ivel of godd faith, as ever they did before they subscribyd. I left not the Ministers of Gloucestershire so farre foreward, when I went to London, but I found the greatist part of them as farre backward at my commyng home. I have a great hope of the people. God send good Justices, and faythful ministers in the Church, and al wil be wel. For lack of hede Corne so passith from hens by water, that I fere mouch we shal have great scarsite this yere. Doubtles men that be put in trust, do not there dewties. The Statute of Regrators is so usid, that in many quarters of these partes it wil do little good: and in some parts, where as licence by the Justices wil not be grauntyd, the people are mouche offendid, that they shuld not, as we as other, bagge as they were wount to do. God be praisid yet al things be quiet, and I trust so wil contynew. Thus desiring God to contynew you long in health to his pleasure, fare ye wel: and for gods sake do one yre, as ye may be hable to do ano∣ther. Your health is not the surest: favour i as ye may; and charge it not to farre. Ye be wyse and comfortable for others; be so for your self also. I pray you let god be the end, where unto ye mark in al your doyngs. And if they for lack of knowledge then happen otherwyse then ye would, the thing ye soughte shal partly excuse your ignorancie, that may happ to mysse men in weighty afferes. If ye se the meanes godd, and yet ivel follow of them, content your self with patience. For the second cause, when god wil, be it never so like to bring forth the effect, mysseth her purpose: as ye know by Wise mens counsells, that rulyd in Commune wealthes before you. God geve his grace to loke alwayes upon hym, and then with mercy let hym do his holy wil. Glouc. 6. Julij, 1552. Yours with my dayly prayer Iohn Hoper, Busshop of Worcestre. To the Rt. Honorable my singular frynd Sr. William Cecill Kt. one of the Kings Majesties chiefest Secretories.
Another of the same Bishop to the same Person. Sr. W.H.MSS.THE grace of God be with you for ever, Amen. I have wroten herewith long letters to the Councel; yet not so long as the matter conteynyd in them doothe requyre. I trust it wil be your chaunce to read them, that the mater may be the better understand. Ye know I am but an ivel Secretarie, Do the best ye can they may be wel taken. It is truth that I write, and goddes cause. Let god do as his blessid pleasure is with it. I have send the maters, that these two Canons, Iohnsonne, and Ioyliffe dislyke, in writing. Where by ye may understand what is said of both pares. The Disputation Mr. Harley can make trew relation of, and how unreverently and proudely Ioylyffe usyd both hym and me. For as mouch as my jurisdiction cessith until the Letters patent be past for both churches, these shal be to praye you to optayne the Kings Majesties letters for my warrant in the mean tyme. For in case I do not at this tyme take accompt of the clergy in Worcestre and Glocestre∣shire, how they have profityd syns my last examining of them, it wil not be wel. Also souch as I have made superintendents in Gloucestre∣shire, if I commend not my self, presently, there wel doings, and se what is ivel donne, I shal not see the goodd I loke for. Ah! Mr. Se∣cretarye, that there were goodd men in the Cathedral churches! god then shuld have mouche more honour then he hath, the Kings Ma∣jesty more obedience, and the poore people better knowledg. But the realme wantith light in souche churches, where as of right it owght most to be. I suppose ye had hard, that there shuld be a great spoyle made of this church hyre. For what can be so wel donne, that men of light conscience cannot make, by suggestion, to appere ivel? Doutles the things donne be no more then the express words of the Kings Majesties Injunctions, commandyd to be donn. And I darre saye, there is not for a Churche to preach Goddes word in, and to my∣nyster his holy Sacraments, more godly within this realm. But, Mr. Secretarie, I see mouche myschefe in mens hartes by many tokens, and souch as speak very fere meanith crauftely, and nothing less then they speake. I have to good experience of it. Thus god geve us wysdome and strength, wyselye and stronglye to serve in our Vocations. There is none that eatith there bread in the swet of there face, but souch as serve in public Vocation. Yours is wounderful, but myne passith. Now I perceave private labours be but playes, nor private trobles but ease and quietnys. God be our help, Amen. I pray you send me my jurisdiction assone as may be. Worcestre, 25 Octobris, 1552. Yours, and so wil be whylles I live, with my prayer Iohn Hoper, bushope of Worcestre. Postscript. When that I perceavyd my request for jurisdiction made before unto you, upon further deliberation I thought it good to unre∣quest that againe; praying you to make no mention of it: and therupon
wrote the letters to the Councel anew. The cause is, I send for a President, to se the jurisdiction, how it is gyven in the like state as I am. Which pleasith me not. Therefore, goodd Mr. Secretarye, let it pass til I write unto you again. NUM. XLIX. A Popish Rhime fastned upon a Pulpit in K. Edwards reigne. THis pulpit was not here set, For knaves to prate in and rayl. But if no man may them let, Mischef wil come of them, no fail. If God do permit them for a tyme To brabble and ly at their wyl, Yet I trust or that be prime. At their fal to laughe my fill. Two of the knaves already we had, The third is comyng as I under∣stand, In al the yerth ther is none so bad, I pray God soon ryd them out of this land. Prowder knaves was ther never none,Foxij. M.S.S. So false they are, that no man may them trust. But if God do not send help sone, They wil lay al in the dust. Al christen men at us now laugh and scorne, To se how they be taking of hie and lowe, But the child that is yet unborn Shal them curse al on a rowe. Now God sped thee wel, And I wil no more mell. The Answer to the Enemy. A rope is a fytt reward for such rysshe repers, As have strowed this Church ageinst the Kings prechers. THE Pulpits are now replenished with them that prech the truthe, And Popish traitors banished, which seemed to you great ruthe. But yf you and the Freers were clean owt of this land, This realme to the last years, ful firme and sure should stand. When such as with you trust shal al ly in the dust, And ryse thereout agayne unto perpetual payne, With them that laugh and scorne eyther at hye or lowe, Had better not been borne such evil seeds to sowe. Yee pray God spede them wel, and ye wil no more mell; Forsothe ye have said wel; But if ye may be knowen, Ye are like for to be taken, and quartered like a baken, And of your frends forsaken, for these sedis ye have sowen.
Like as the last yere Traitors were knowen, By standing in the felds with weapon and swordes, So this year their treason is sowen, In traiterous bills and railing words. Some of their carcases standith on the gates, And their heads most fyttely on London bridge. Therefore, ye Traytors, beware your pates, For yf ye be founde, the same way must ye tridge. God save the Kings Majestie long for to reigne, To suppresse al rebells, and truthe to maynteyne. An old Song of John Nobody I. IN December, when the dayes draw to be be short,Privati MS. After November, when the nights wax noysome and Long; As I past by a place privily at a port, I saw one sit by himself making a song. His last talk of trifles, who told with his tongue, That few were fast i'th' faith, I feyned that freake, Whether he wanted wit, or some had done him wrong. He said, he was little Iohn Nobody, that durst not speak. II. Iohn Nobody, quoth I, What news? thou soon note and tell, What maner men thou mean, that are so mad. He said, These gay gallants, that wil construe the gospel, As Solomon the sage with sem∣blance ful sad, To discus divinity they nought adread. More meet it were for them to milk kye at a fleyke. Thou lyest, quoth I, thou Losel, like a leud lad. He said, he was little Iohn Nobody, that durst not speak. III. Its meet for every man on this matter to talk, And the glorious gospel ghostly to have in mind, It is sothe said that Sect, but much unseemly scalk, As boyes babble in books, that in Scripture are blind: Yet to their fancy soon a cause wil find. As to live in lust, in lechery to leyke. Such Caitives count to be come of Cains kind. But that I little Iohn Nobody durst not speak. IV. For our Reverend Father hath set forth an order, Our service to be said in our Seignours tongue: As Solomon the sage set forth the Scripture, Our suffrages, and service with many a sweet song, With Homilies and godly books us among. That no stiff, stubborn stomacks we should freyke. But wretches nere worse to do poor men wrong. But that I little Iohn Nobody dare not speak.
V. For Bribery was never so great, since born was our Lord, And Whoredom was never les ha∣ted, sith Christ harrowed Hel: And poor men are so sore punished commonly through the world. Thus would it grieve any one, that good is, to hear tel. For al the homilies and good books, yet their hearts be so quel, That if a man do amiss with mis∣chefe they wil him wreake. The fashion of these new fellows, it is so vile and fell, But that I little Iohn Nobody dare not speake. VI. Thus to live after their lust, that life would they have, And in letchery to lyke al their long life; For al the preaching of Paul, yet many a proud knave Wil move mischiefe in their mind both to maid and wife; To bring them in advoutry, or else they wil strife, And in brawling about baudery, Gods Commandments break. But of these frantic il fellowes few of them do thrife. Though I little Iohn Nobody dare not speak. VII. If thou company with them they wil currishly carp, and not care, According to their foolish fantacy, but fast wil they naught. Prayer with them is but prating; Therefore they it forbear. Both Almes deeds, and holiness, they hate it in their thought. Therefore pray we to that Prince, that with his bloud us bought: That he wil mend that is amiss. For many a man ful freyke Is sorry for these Sects, though they say little or nought, And that I little Iohn Nobody dare not once speake. VIII. Thus in no place this Nobody in no time I met, Where no man then nought was, nor nothing did appear; Though the sound of a Syna∣gogue for sorrow I swett, That Hercules through the eccho did cause me to hear. Then I drew me down into a dale, wheras the dumb deer, Did shiver for a shower, but I shunted from a freyke For I would no wight in this world wist who I were, But little Iohn Nobody, that dare not once speake. NUM. L. John a Lasco's Letter from Embden, signifying the dangerous condition they were in, and the Persecutions they expected. Clarissimo viro Domino Sicilio, a consilijs & libellis spplicibus Illustris∣simi Domini Protectoris: Domino & fratri meo observandissimo. S. Cum mihi ad alios scribendum istuc esset, facere non potui quin ad te quoque scriberem, Vir Clarissime, memor videlicet illius,Sr. W. H. M.S.S. quòd te mihi istic delegerim, cui mea omnia nota prae alijs esse velim. Volui
itaque tibi de meo huc reditu significare: nempe me felicissimo iti∣nere, gratia Domino, usum: & me ex Anglia in Frisiam Orientalem, intra triduum, trajecisse. Navis praesectum a Domino Protectore no∣bis additum habebamus, virum optimum & fidelissimum: qui Domi∣num Comitem Bremam usque est sequutus, ut certi aliquid, opinor, ab illo vobis adferat. Ego quae scio ad Dominum Cantuariensem omnia perscripsi, ut Illustriimo Domino Protectori exponat: quae tibi quo∣que incognita non fore puto. Scripturus alioqui eadem ad te omnia, si non id parum necessarium, adeoque & supervacaneum esse judicarem. Nos hic crucem certissimam expectamus, & ad eam perferendam mu∣tuo nos in Domino cohortamur, cum invocatione nominis sancti sui: ut per patientiam & fidem, ferendo, superemus omnia, quaeúnque in nos permittere ille volet, ad nominis sui gloriam, & nostri probationem. Certi illum curam nostri habere, & ita potentem esse, ut mnes omni∣um hostium phalanges, quicunque sint tandem illi, unico oris sui ver∣bo sternat momento uno: & rursum ita bonm, ut ne pilum quidem temerè e nostro capite detrahi patiatur, etiamsi nos totus mundus im∣petere conetur. Támque nobis malè velle non possit unquam, quàm mater infanti suo, quàm denique oculi quisque sui pupillae mal velle non potest: imo vero, quàm non potest non esse perpetuò Deus, Lau∣dandus in omnibus quaecúnque in nos permittit: cum nihil in nos alio∣qui nisi nostro ipsorum bono, inque nostram adeo salutem, permittat. Huic igitur nos totos committimus, & cum omni tolerantia expecta∣mus quicquid in nos permittere ille velit. Si nos inc pelli contingat, scis quinam sit animus meus. Quòd si quid tu interea de mea istic vo∣catione intellexisti, quemadmodum ad te ex Iermouth scripseram, aut siquid te adhuc intelligere posse putas, quaeso te, Vir integerrime, ut mihi per amicum hunc & fratrem meum, Robertum Legatum, genti∣lem vestrum, civem nostrum, significare velis. Germania ferè tota, praeter Saxonicas, (quas vocant) & Maritimas civitates, ac Princi∣pes aliquot, Interimizat. Helvetij legatos Caesaris, qui ad repetendum Ducatum Sabaudiae venerant, finibus suis non auditos, ut dicitur, ex∣cedere jusserunt. De me plura hic Robertus noster, Vale. Uxorem tu∣am, Dominum Czechum nostrum, Dominum Morosinum diligenter sal∣vere jubeo: méque vobis omnibus totum ex animo commendo. Rap∣tim. Aemdae, nona Aprilis, Anno 1549. Tui studiosissimus, Joannes à Lasco, manu propria. Cuperem scire num fructus aliquid attulerit, mea illa nondum absoluta ad herum tuum admonitio, quam tibi a Domino Florentio nomine meo traditum esse non diffido: & num putes illam mihi porro absolvendam esse. Doctori Turnro multam ex me sa∣lutem dicito, quaeso.
NUM. LI. A Lasco's request, that those of his church might have a Warrant from the Kings Councel, that they might not be disturbed for not coming to their parish churches. Clarissimo Viro Domino Guilhelmo Cecilio, Secretario Regio dignissimo ad manus. RUrsum perturbantur quidam è nostra Ecclesia tam in majore,Sr. W. H. MSS. quam in minore Sudwerk, Vir clarissime, & carceres illis inten∣tantur, nisi ad suas paroecias veniant. Faciunt autem id non Pastores ipsi, sd aediles; qui Praefecti Ecclesiarum vocantur. Qua de re cum Domino Reverendissimo Cancellario heri egi. Et ille jussit, ut cum tua humanitate agerem, ut ipso praesente in Senatu hodie a prandio res per tuam humanitatem proponeretur: pollicitusque est, se nobis adju∣mento esse futurum in Senatu, ut mandatum in scripto ad omnes Pa∣roecos & Ecclesiarum praefectos in Sudwerk & sancta Catharina obtinea∣mus, ne nostri ab illis deinceps, hac in parte, molestentur. Sed ejus∣modi mandatum obtineri oporteret, quod per nos illis offerri, qui no∣stros molestant, & demum per nos etiam adservari possit: ne deinceps novis rursum mandatis impetrandis (si forte ita incidat) molesti sem∣per & Senatui ipsi Regio, & tuae humanitati esse cogamur. Venturus eram ipse ad tuam humanitatem, sed per gravissimum capitis dolorem profectò non licuit. Mitto tamen ad tuam humanitatem hunc fratrem nostrum, qui est unus è Senioribus nostrae Ecclesiae. Oróque ut illum benigne audiat & absolvat. Commendo me diligentissime humani∣tati tuae. Tuae prestantiae addictissimus, Joannes à Lasco, manu propria. [Novemb. 1552.] NUM. LII. Michael Angelo, Preacher to the Italian Congregation, his com∣plaint against some of his flock, with a list of their Names. Clarissimo Domino Sycilio, Serenissimi Regis Angliae, &c. a Secretis; Michael Angelus Florius Florentinus, Italorum Concionator. S. D. CUM dieus elapsis meam tibi enarrarem inopiam & necessitatem,Sr. W. H. MSS. ac meorum Italorum impietatem, mihi imposuisti, ut eorum Ita∣lorum nomina, quos opus erat ut convenires, tibi significarem, & id∣circo
in calce harum mearum reperies, & cum absque interturbatione seriorum negotiorum tuorum hos omnes, unà vel separatim, convenire poteris, mihi non exiguum praestabis favorem, ut te facturum spero. Hi omnes polliciti sunt Reverendissimo Cantuariensi, mihi omnia neces∣saria providere, & ab eis de mense Ianuarij accepi tantum, quinque libras. At postquam viderunt & audierunt me tam aperto Marte ad∣versus Papae dogmata, hypocrisim & tyrannidem concionantem, ac eorum incredulitatem & duritiam cordis arguentem, me omnino dese∣ruerunt. Sed hoc fere nihil est. Non enim ipsi impudentes erubescunt ore vipereo mihi & evangelio Christi (quod sincére annuntio) detra∣here; Et, quo ausu nescio, (cum omnes habeant privilegia Libertatis, quemadmodum veri & naturales Angli, & juraverint eamet servare mandata, quae servare tenentur Angli omnes,) quotidie audiunt Missas; quas si audirent Angli, paenas luerent. Et cur isti, ut merentur, non corriguntur? Et si ipsi quotidie nova privilegia, & novas immunitates a Serenissimo Rege petere non verentur, & nonnunquam obtinent, cur illis non praecipitur, ut faveant Evangelio, & abrenuntient Papae, & dogmatibus ejus? In Scriptura divina jubentur rebelles Deo, legibus, & judicibus sanctis, interfici sine misericordia: ut patet Deut. 13. & 17. Eliseus ille tam Deo gratus Propheta, jubente ipso Deo, inunxit Iehu in regem ad hoc, ut & domum Achabi prorsus extirparet, ac Sacerdotes omnes Baal interficeret. Jure igitur optimo possunt & debent hii om∣nes, cum adversentur & Evangelio, & hujus tam Sancti Regis sanctio∣nibus, nempe pijs. Tuae prudentiae & pietati hoc meum negotium committendum jure existimavi, cum sis verè unus ex his, quibus ait Dominus & Servator noster Christus, Elegi vos de mundo, ut eatis, & fructum afferatis, & fructus vester maneat. Certus igitur sum, quod nihil eorum omittes, quae ad Dei gloriam, Evangelij laudem, & meam Salutem pertinere agnosces. Vale. Italorum Nomina, D. Carolus Rinuccinus. Florentini omnes. D. Guido Cavalcanti. Florentini omnes. D. Batista Cavalcanti. Florentini omnes. D. Bartholomeus Fortini. Florentini omnes. D. Azalinus Selvagus. Ianuens. D. Benedictus Spinola. Ianuens. D. Antonius Bruschetto. Ianuens. D. Christoforus Mediolanensis. D. Batista Burrone, Mediolanensis. D. Marcus Antonius Erizo. Veneti. D. Evangelista Fonte. Veneti. D. Petrus Ciampante. Lucensis. D. Nicolaus de Nale. Ragusienses. D. Andreas de Resti. Ragusienses.
NUM. LIII. Michael Angelo endeavours to appease the Secretary, greatly of∣fended with him for a gross miscarriage. Clarissimo Viro, ordinis equestris, Domino Gulielmo Sycilio, Serenissimi Regis Angliae, &c. a Secretis, Michael Angelus Florius, S. P. D. SUbodoratus hisce diebus elapsis miram illam tuam charltatem,Sr. W. H. MSS. qua me piè complecti solebas, magnitudine Labis, qua nunc me com∣maculari contingit, victam fuisse; téque adversus me ita excanduisse, ut me scelerosis omnibus indignitate excellere judicares. Quae cum ani∣mo mecum volutare cepissem, arbitrabar consultum fore, si ad te scri∣berem, rémque omnem, ut se habet, non ut quorunque impudentium lutulenta ora evomere ausa sunt, panderem. Sed pendebat animus, & in diversa trahebatur. Nam verebar nè vehementius in me sevires, audito meo nomine, quod tam paeminosum apud te factum est. Ve∣rum cum rem altius mecum perpenderim, prorsus mutavi Sententiam, tum quia misantropos non es, tum etiam quia ea opinio, quam de tua pietate, prudentia, doctrina & mansuetudine concepi hactenus, falsa non me Lactavit spe. Iccirco his meis ad te litteris provolare audeo, faterique te non injuria me scelerosum vocitasse, quia exsurgentibus quibusdam nebulis de limosa concupiscentia carnis meae, & obnubilan∣tibus cor meum, per abrupta cupiditatum cecidi, ac praeceps cecidi in caenum, voraginem & gurgitem libidinis & immunditiae carnis, relicto deo, cujus ira invaluit super me. Sed ut memineris, obsecro, Am∣plissime Domine, me ex eodem Adamo genitum, ex quo David, ac ple∣rique electi Dei, qui ejusdem criminibus obnoxij fuëre. Ex humo, non ex suamet substantia, ut quidam falso opinati sunt, Deus homi∣nem condidit, non ex durissimo Lapide aut chalybe. Quod quidem si perspectabis illum procliviorem aptiorémque ad malum reddidit. Si enim naturam nostram humanam sic Deus condidisset (quod impossi∣bile est) ut nunquam peccasset, melior ipso Deo fuisset, (quod absit:) quia natura quae potest peccare, sicut & non peccare, si semper vinceret, illi naturae preponenda esset, quae ideo non peccat, quia impassibilis est. Age dic, ex terrae limo conditus quis non peccat? Et si bonos omnes suos esse velit Deus, non tamen illis potestatem peccandi adimit. Et quisquis naturam nostram quam diligentissimè inspexerit, cum Christo filio dei fatebitur, Neminem praeter unum Deum bonum. In me igitur in hujus criminis fecem prolapso naturam, Amplissime Domine, attende, in te vero, & in alijs ab hac peccati sorde mundis, gratiam Dei, non naturae virtutem, Laudato. Qui peccantes omnes odisse quaerit, ne∣que profecto seipsum diligit. Et si quoscúnque reos mortis damnari contendit, neminem vivere patietur. Quis unquam electorum dei tam mundus ab omni Labecula criminis fuit, cui non opus fuerit quotidie rogare patrem, ut illi sua remittat debita? Nonne omnes habent, quod plangant, & reprehensione conscientiae, & mobilitate peccatricis natu∣rae? Et sicut unicuíque propter sua peccata Dei misericordia est neces∣saria, ita uniuscujúsque proprium est errantium omnium misereri.
Haec perspicua comperies in unigeniti filij dei illo recto sanctoque ju∣dicio, ab eo a Phariseis petito adversus mulierem in adulterio deprehen∣sam; qui & legem adulteram damnantem comprobavit, & judices cae∣terósque omnes terrendo ad misericordiam revocavit. Quaerit Deus Opt. Max., ut regna subvertantur erroris, non errantes ipsi, & eos ubique jubet spiritu mansuetudinis instaurendos esse, non odio & per∣secutione perdendos. Qui igitur vehementi errantes prosequitur odio, eos perdere, non sanare conatur. Sed video hic te corrugare frontem audióque dicere, Num frustra instituta sunt potestas regis, vis gladij cognitoris, ungulae carnificis, arma militis, disciplina dominantis, & severitas boni patris? Non utique, sed habent ista omnia modos suos causas, rationes & utilitates. Non enim ordinationibus hisce humana∣rum rerum adversatur remissio, nec contrariatur indulgentia. Quod si fieri contingeret, nobis non attulisset Christus suae dulcedinem gratiae, nec tam pijs elogijs mansuetudinem commendasse, sed veteris Testa∣menti severiorem legis vindictam comprobasset. Sed quid audeo do∣cere Minervam, & noctuas ferre Athenaes? Nonne haec omnia in sacris didicisti litteris? Nonne fides, nonne pietas, non haec tandem ipse te deus edocuit, cum te viti, quae est vita nostra, Christo Iesu Servatori nostro inseruit? Moses, cui legitur facie ad faciem dominus esse locu∣tus, missus ad gentes, & ad fratres suos, ire nolebat, & ad aquas con∣tradictionis quàm graviter deum offenderit, Dei ipsius testimonio, no∣vimus omnes. Aaron, Dei Altissimi Sacerdos idololatriae Israelitarum consentiens, ex auro & monilibus faeminarum eorum vitulum fabrica∣vit; illi aram extruxit, ac holocausta immolavit: cui sane facinori simile nec oculus mortalium vidit, nec auris audivit. Ionas propheta praeceptum sibi, ut Ninivitis praedicaret, irrupit, ut ad alium locum pergeret, quo missus non fuerat. David rex & propheta, vir utique se∣cundum cor dei, plus aequo Veneri indulgens, uxorem rapuit alienam, & virum illius interfici curavit. Simon Petrus, cui Dominus pollicitus erat claves regni coelorum, cum juramento ipsum dominum suum ne∣gavit. Nec tamen ille pijssimus Deus terrae chasmata aperiri jussit, ut vivi absorberentur hi qui legem suam violaverunt: ut suo exemplo doceret omnes, rigorem judicij pietate & clementia frangere. De fervescat igitur minax tua illa indignatio & formidabilis ira ad∣versus me, demitte furorem, Vir integerrime, misericorditer me pro∣lapsum corripe, & cum dilectione saluti meae consule, & prospice. Cu∣jus auxilio, consilio, & favore nitar, si tu, qui omnium sacra ancho∣ra es, (& numinis loco te habent omnes,) me prorsus tuo destituas auxilio? Quo fugiam extra regnum istud, ut vitare possim, quia aut carne mea & sanguine meo satientur hostium evangelij dentes & ora, aut veritatem illius ipse negare cogar? Non veluti primi parentis Ada∣mi est hoc peccatum meum, ut non vetustate, prudentia & pietate san∣ctorum dei deleri possit. Cave, obsecro, ne Satanas, per imaginem quasi justae severitatis, crudelem hanc tibi adversus me suadeat saevitiam. Clamabis fortassis, me indignum esse hoc tuo favore & auxilio. Fateor, sed recorderis, rogo, Deum indignos justificare & servare. Pietas igitur commoveat te, ut velis mihi famulo tuo pereunti opitulari, cujus salus tibi in manu est. Vale, & bene fortunet Christus opt. Max. quod in ma∣nibus est, X Kal. Februarij.
NUM. LIV. That the Secretary would pocure the Kings letters Patents for a French protestant, to set up a French printing press. Clarissimo Viro Domino Guilhelmo Cecilio, Regiae Majestatis Secretario dignissimo, Domino & fautori observantissimo. TAmetsi ejusmodi nunc sit valetudo mea in eo luctu meo,Sir W. H. M.SS. in quo me Dominus, adempta mihi altera mei parte, uxore inquam mea, constituit, ut neque mihi liceat, neque etiam magnopere libeat multa ad multos scribere, Vir Clarissime; tamen fratribus & amicis id a me postulantibus negare non potui, ut in fratris hujus gratiam, qui has perfert, paucis te, pro tua in me benevolentia, meáque in te ob∣servantia, interpellarem. Est vir pius & verae religionis studiosus totius Ecclesiae nostrae Gallicae testimonio; cuperétque instituere typographi∣cam Gallicam, in usum earum insularum, quae subsunt Majestati Re∣giae. Ut Anglica, quae ad religionem pertinent, omnia, Gallicè versa, pro insulis illis excudat. Hac itaque in parte tuo patrocinio juvari postu∣lat; & a me petijt, ut se tuae humanitati commendarem, ut tuis auspi∣cijs diploma Regium in eum usum obtinere possit. Te igitur oro, Vir praestantissime, ut illi hac in parte tua autoritate adesse velis; cum meâ, tum verò multo magis promovendae religionis causa. Plura non permittit valetudo. Commendo me tuae humanitati officiosissimè. Londini, 24 Augusti. 1552. Tuae humanitati addictissimus, Joannes a Lasco. NUM. LV. Valerandus Pollanus Superintendent of the Strangers church at Glastenbury, concerning the state of the strangers Weavers, fixed there. Verè Nobili Viro ac D. D. Gulielmo Cecilio, Equiti aur ato, Regij Consi∣lij Secretario, D. ac patrono suo colendissimo. S. P. Cum his Petrus Wolfus, vir honestus ad vos proficisceretur,Sir W. H. M.S.S. putavi non aegrè laturam D. T. si de rebus nostris pauca signifi∣carem. Alteras literas, quae ad Cornishium & reliquos procuratores pertinebant, hodie propter absentiam Cornishij tradidi Regio ministro M. Poais cum Fermario Hyeto, praefecto hujus oppidi, & alijs Officia∣rijs, praesente D. Clerc, generoso, qui est unus ex ijs, qui praesunt (ut dicunt) Iustices of paix. Atque hic generosus, cum Latinè & Gallicè
nosset, pro sua humanitate interpretem egit, tum mei libelli supplicis exhibiti DD. Consiliarijs; tum nostri pacti cum D. Duce Somerseti. Viderunt itaque consentire per omnia; & id D D. Consiliarijs signi∣ficant per literas; atque illud etiam, quantas commoditates ex his ho∣minibus sperent. Has literas ipse mecum feram, cum literis eorum qui praesunt rationibus hujus oppidi, quos expectamus ad proximum diem Iovis. Interea id te scire volui, ut pro tua pietate memor sis horum hominum, quibus non video qua ratione impresentiarum possit prospi∣ci, quod pascua attinet, nisi Damarium nobis concedatur utendum fru∣endum, cum hortorum parte aliqua, tantisper dum alia pascua tradan∣tur. Atque ita decreverat D. Dux, imo etiam fecisset jam, nisi Cor∣nisbius ille nobis praeripuisset turpissima fraude, cum sciret D. Ducem aliter decrevisse ante mortem D. Spelt. Rogamus igitur T. D. per Christum, ut hujus memor, si quisquam agat apud D D. Consiliarios de pascuis aut de hoc Damario, imprimis horum hominum rationem haberi cures. Quod si feceris, dignum tua pietate facies, & nos tibi aeternum devinxeris. Praeterea id T. D. scire cupio, quam turpiter Cornishius nostris insidiatus sit statim post meum hinc discessum, cujus tamen hortatu ego istuc profectus eram. Venit, atque affirmans se habere literas a DD. Consiliarijs, primum blandis verbis, deinde minis nostros cogebat, ut sibi pannos, quos haberent confectos, darent. Ipse vero ex me audierat oppigneratos omnes. Et ut non fuissent mihi quod hic moliebatur. Rogamus itaque ne huic quidquam posthac committatur nostrarum rerum: cum neque nos, nec quod justum est, aut aequum, amare possit. Haec vera esse ex hoc homine, & ipso M. Poais melius possit T. D. cognoscere. Hic Petrus Wolfus, Brabantus, multa passus est, & est homo dignus, cui boni faveant. Puto eum T. D. quoque notum. Rogo illum adjuva∣res. Condonabit T. D. quod tam familiariter agam, tamque inornatè. Sed ornare res ipsa negat, nec fert festinus nuncij abitus. Ego T. D. me & meae ecclesiae causam commendo. Dominus Iesus T. D. servet, ac augeat. Glasconij, 3 Novemb. 1551. T. D. observantissimus Valerandus Pollanus, Superintendens peregrinorum ecclesiae Glascon.
NUM. LVI. The Superintendent earnestly desires, that one Cornish might not bee set over the Strangers there, who had already dealt so illy with them. Verè nobili Viro ac Domino D. Gulielmo Cecillo, Equiti aurato meritis∣simo, Supremi Consilij Regij Secretario, Domino, ac patrono colendissimo. In Aula. S. P. Etsi mihi non dubium est.Sr. W. H. MSS. T. D. probè memorem esse sermonis nostri postremi de Cornishio, ac deinceps ejusdem per literas com∣monefecerim: de eadem re tamen iterum & tertiò appellare nec pu∣det, nec piget, quoniam ita res exigit. Obsecro, per Christum, nec id molestè feras, neque rem istam parvè estimes. Cum enim, qui praeesse debent alijs, ipsos integros ac justos imprimis esse oporteat; tum qui hominibus istis optimis, ac propter Christum tantùm extorribus praefuturi sunt, eos ipsos sanè quàm integerrimos ac justissimos esse oportet: ni perire honestissimos viros velitis, atque aliò avertere maxima commoda, quae ab ipsis ad Rempub perventura erant. In Cornishio porr, nunquam hi nostri homines, textores, inquam, illi peregrini, vel hilum integritatis & justitiae, vel candoris deprehende∣runt, aut experti sunt▪ Quapropter illorum precibus solicitatus, T. D. supplex oro, Velis ita causam ipsorum D D. Consiliarijs exponere ac commendare, nè Cornishius, quod jam ab ipsis contendit, assequatur, ut hominibus istis praeficiatur. Mirari satis non possumus, quânam fronte id jam audeat, posteaquam adeò nuper turpissimam suam perfidiam ac malevolentiam prodiderit: nec ignorent, quàm aegrè illum feramus omnes, qui etiam idem quod nunc petimus, a D. Duce postulaturi eramus. Causam autem, & caetera, quae ad hanc rem pertinebunt, ne diutius T. D. meis literis obtundam, ex hoc tabellario, M. Stephano Le Provost, qui est Diaconus meus in ministerio Ecclesiae, plenius cogno∣sces. Obsecro per Christum ut id velis, atque illi fidem habeas. Omnes nostri, qui T. D. pietatem ac fidem saepius laudari audie∣runt, se totos ac sua omnia tibi commendant. Nec dubito fore com∣mendatissimos, quos Christus ipse commendat. Itaque desino. Dominus Iesus T. D. suo spiritu semper magis magísque augeat, ac bonis omni∣bus exornat▪ Glasconij Somerset. 9 Novemb. Anno 1551. T. D. observantissimus Clientulus, Valerandus Pollanus, Superintendens ecclesiae peregr. Glascon.
NUM. LVII. Some account of the present settlement of their affaires. Ornatissimo Viro, ac D. D. Gulielmo Cicello, equiti aurato, Senatus Regij Secretioris Secretario, Domino & patrono Colendissimo. Sr. W. H. MSS.S. P. Quid in negotio bonorum virorum decreverint rationum praesi∣des, etsi ab ipsis non dubito te intellecturum; nolui tamen com∣mittere, ut hac in parte dignam tua benevolentia observantiam in me desiderares. Res porro sic habet. Optimus hic Vir ac verè gene∣rosus D. Dyer, ut est verae pietatis amantissimus, ita sanè nostram causam, quantum potuit, juvit & promovit. Nihil tamen impetra∣tum est, praeterquam quod nostrisfacta est potestas in Damarium du∣cendi vaccas, donec de pascuis satis sit factum D. Ducis pacto. Tri∣ginta etiam domos jusserunt quamprimum instaurari; ac pecuniam numerarunt, qua aes alienum dissolveremus, contractum hoc toto tem∣pore, quo tam parcè a D. Ducis ministris numeratum fuit. Sed in tempus futurum parum liberaliter prospectum est. Vix enim ad bi∣mestre tantum constituerunt, quantum satis sit ad quinque hebdoma∣das. Omitto quod cum jam lanae desint, nec quidquam numerarunt hac causa, in brevi nostris hominibus ne cessandum sit, non parum me∣tuendum sit. Crowchius obtulit suas: Sed pretio iniquiore, quam possimus sustinere. Nam multo aequiore possumus a nostris vicinis emere, puta 24 s. quod ille 32 s. aestimat. Ita nos affligit, & hactenus afflixit penuria pecuniae. Unica spes reliqua est in D. Dyer, quem longè aequiorem expectamus, modo ad nostrorum usum Lanae ipsius sint accommodae. Nam praeter pretij moderationem; illud etiam ad∣dit, quod longum Solutionis tempus nullo foenore compensari velit. Dominus illi rependat. Utinam huic bono & pio viro D D. Consiliarij pios homines potius commendasent. Nimis enim metuo, ne cupidi∣tas Cornishij insatiabilis nostris fraudi sit. Nam quod Damarij partem retinet, ac usum communem cum nostris, id nullo jure ac nulla causa, vel in speciem honesta, facit: cum sciat vix satis esse ad alenda 30 pa∣ria vaccarum. Et cum sibi peteret a D. Duce, non ignoraverit antea D. Ducem nostris decrevisse, id quod tamen (parum religiosè) ne∣gavit. Sed testati sunt Crowchius, Robertus Hyet, & Richardus Pouais ita habere. Proinde non possumus in eo acquiescere, nisi totum Da∣marium nostris hominibus liberum sit, tandiu fruendum, donec singu∣lis tradantur quinque Acrae prati, vel quantum satis erit ad alendam duas vaccas per integrum annum, sicuti pacto D. Ducis constat. Sed de hoc & alijs plura & certiora, cum venero. Tantum hoc oro T. D. nè sinas offendi D D. Consiliarios magnitudine sumptuum in domuum instaurationem. Nam ea res nihil hactenus ad me pertinebat. Certè magnae erant hic ruinae. Sed mirari satis non possum tantos sumptus esse, cum tam parum sit praestitum, id quod ipsi D. Praesides suis oculis viderunt. Nostri hinc multum damni acceperunt. Nam cum angustissimè habitarent, non poterant Anglas ad nendum, Anglos ad alia sua artificia, commodè ad se recipere. Ipsimet non poterant
tantum operae praestare, quantum alioqui fecissent. Hincque adeo cum vivendum interea esset, contraxerunt aes alienum Ducis, super quam sperassent, majus. In quo sanè opus erit V. aequitate, nè istis homi∣nibus tam multa debita imputentur, quandoquidem non ipsorum culpa factum est, sed negligentiâ Ministrorum D. Ducis. Boni enim viri nihil magis metuunt quam aes alienum. Quod si semel, cum domi∣bus & pratis promissis, numeraretur quantum opus est ad hanc susce∣ptionem totam, extra omnem metum esset, quin facile possent omni aere alieno Ducis sese liberare. De me etiam nihil est constitutum, qui 15 mensibus sumptus incre∣dibiles, & labores incomparabiles pertuli, nec obolum accepi. Est enim mihi familia ampla, quae vix etiam satisfacit negotijs istorum ho∣minum; quorum causa multae ac variae profectiones hoc anno susci∣piendae fuerunt. Si possem impetrare quinquaginta libras stipendij, ego pro omnibus sumptibus, & laboribus praeteritis, contentus essem. Nam nè parum esset negotij, jam etiam imposuerunt inspectionem operarum in domuum instaurationem. Sed spero T. D. hac in parte fa∣vorem suum non denegaturam apud D D. Consiliarios. Quod si sentiam, nihil vereor quin totum hoc institutum nobis sit futurum Laudi, propter maximas commoditates, quas huic regno sentient evenisse intra triennium, Domino Iesu benè secundante, uti hactenus caepit. Is T. D. omni felicitate sua beet. Glasconij 27. Novemb. 1551. T. D. addictissimus Clientulus, Valerandus Pollanus. Condonet mihi T. D. quod tam inconditè scribam. Non va∣cat aliter, per tam multas oc∣cupationes; uti testis erit hic generosus Dom. meae diligen∣tiae & sedulitatis, tum in Ec∣clesiasticis, tum in oeconomi∣cis nostrorum rebus procu∣randis. NUM. LVIII. Mr. Calvins advise for the rectifying some abuses in our Church▪ and University, relating to the alienation and misuse of their Revenues. A Monseigneur, Monseigneur Le Duc de Sommerset. MOnseigneur, Je ne vous scaurois assez remercier du receueil tant humain, que mon homme a trouve envers vous:Sr. W. H. MSS. non seu∣lement a ce qu'il vous a pleu prendre la poine d'offrir mes Livres au Roy; mais de tout le reste, en quoy vous pouviez declairer une sin∣guliere affection d'amitie, que de vostre grace vous aviez desia assez monstree cy devant. Quant a L'enfant que vous avez receu a vostre Service, je n'eusse poynt prins la hardiesse de vous en escrire; si non
que j'eusse pense, qu'il avoit adresse de plus grand bien comme a ussion s'y attendoit. Mais d'aultant plus en suis je bligé a vous, quant je voy que ma faveur a valu quelque chose en cest endroict. Mais pource que tout ce, que j'eu scaurois escire seroit bien maigre au pris de ce que est en mon coeur, & aussi que vos bienfaictz meritent j'ayme mieulx me depporter de vous en faire plus long propos. Seulement je vous priè, Monseigneur, de me tenir tellement du tout vostre, que si j'avois moien de vousfaire de bons Services, il ne tiendroit pas a m'y employer, que vous n'eussiez approbation d'un meilleur vuloir, que je ne le puis exprimer. Je vous eusse faict ces excuses plus tost▪ ou bien remerciemens, sil vous plaist les tenir pour telz: n'eust esté le desir que ce gentilhomme avoit de vous presenter mes letteres. En quoy aussi j'appercois l'amitie que vous plaist monstrer envers moy, quant ceux qui meritent bien d'avoir acces envers vous, esperent estre tres bien venus par le moien de mes lettrez Cependant, Monseigneur, je ne cesseray de vous recommander ce qui vous est de soy assez cher & precieux: cest que vous procuriez tous jours, & mettiez poine, que Dieu soit droictement honore & servy. Sur tout qu'il se dresse meilleur ordre en l'eglise, qu'il ny est pas encore. Car a ce qu'on dit, il a graud faulte de doctrine pour le simple peuple. Combien qu'il ne soit pas ayse de recouvrer gens pro∣pres & idoines pour f ire ceste ofice; toutefois a ce que j'entens, il y a deux grandz empeschemens, ausquelz il seroit necessaire de proveoir. L'un est, que les revenus des Universitez, qui ont esté fondez pour nourrir les escholiers, sont mal d stribuez en partie. Car plusieurs sont nourris de bourses, qui font profession manifeste de resister a l'evangile. Tant s'en fault, quilz donnent esperance de maintenir ce qui aura esté la edifie a grande poine & travail. Le second mal est, que le revenu des Cures est distraict, & dissipe: en sorte qu'il n'y a point pour nourris gens de bien, qui seroient pro∣pres a faire l'office de vrays pasteurs. Et par ce moien on y mest pre∣stres ignorans, qui emprte une grande confusion. Car la qualité des personnes engendre un grand mespris de la parole de Dieu. Et puis quant ilz auroient toute l'authorite du monde, il ne leur chault guere de s'acquiter. Je vous prie doncque, Monseigneur, pour faire tousiours advancer en mieulx la reformation, & luy donner fermité permanente a ce qu'elle tienne: qu'il vous plaise employer toutes vos forces a la correction de cest abus. Je croy bien, qu'il n'a pas tenu a Vous, que les choses n'ayent esté mieux reglees de prime face. Mais puis qu'il est bien difficile d'avoir du primier coup, un estat si bien dresse qu'il seroit a desirer, il reste de tousiours insister pour parfaire avec le temps ce que est bien commencé. Il ne doit pas faire mal a ceux qui tirent aujourdhuy profit du bien des eglises, que les pasteurs ayent nourriture sufisante: veu que chascun se doit efforcer de les nourrir du sien propre, quant ilz n'au∣roient poin de quoy du publicq. Mesme ce sera leur profit de s'en ac∣quiter. Car ilz ne peuvent pas prosperer en fraudant le peuple de Dieu de la pasture spirituelle, en ce qu'ilz privent les eglises de bons pasteurs. Et de vostre part, Monseigneur, je ne doubte pas, quant vous aurez fidelement traivaille a reduire ces choses en ordre, que Dieu ne multiplie d'aultant pus ses benedictions en vous. Mais
pour ce que je me tiens asseure, que vous estes si bien affectionné de vous mesme, qu'il nest ja besoing en faire plus longue exhortation, je feray fin: apres avoir supplie nostre bon Dieu, qu'il luy plaise vous conduire tousiours par son esprit, vous augmenter en tout bien, & faire que son nom soit de plus en plus glorifie par vous. Ainsi, Monseigneur, je me recommande bien humblement a vostre bonne grace. De Genesve, ce 25 de Juillet, 1551. Vostre tres humble Serviteur, Jehan Calvin. NUM. LIX. Sir John Cheke to Dr. Parker, upon the Death of Martin Bucer. I Have delivered the Universities Letters to the Kings Majesty,MSS. C.C.C.C, Vol. intit. Epist. Viror. illustr. and spoken with the Lords of the Councel, and with my L. of Cant. for Mrs. Bucer. I doubt not but she shal be wel and worthily consider∣ed. The University hath not done so great honor to Mr. Bucer, as cre∣dit and worship to themselves. The which if they would continue in, as they cease not to complain, they might be a great deal better pro∣vided for, then they think they be. But now complaining outright of al other men, and mending little in themselves, make their friends rather for duty towards learning, then for a deser of the Students, show their good wils to the University. Howbeit if they would have sought either to recover, or to increase the good opinion of men, they could not have devised wherin by more duty they might worthily be commended, then in following so noble a man with such testimo∣nie of honor, as the child ought to his father, and the Lower to his Su∣perior. And altho I doubt not, but the Kings Majesty wil provide some grave learned man to maintain Gods true learning in his Univer∣sity, yet I think not of al learned men, in al points, yee shal receive Mr. Bucers like; whether we consider his deepnes of knowledg, his earnestnes in religion, his fatherliness in life, his authority in know∣ledg. But what do I commend you to Mr. Bucer, who knew him bet∣ter, and can praise, whom ye knew, trulier? I would wish, that that is wanting now by Mr. Bucers death, they would by diligence and wisdome fulfil in themselves: and that they herein praised in others labour to obtain themselves. Wherof I think ye be a good stay to some unbrideled young men, who have more knowledg in the tongues, then experience what is comely, or fit for their life to come. I pray you, let Mr. Bucers books and scroles unwritten be sent up and saved for the Kings Majesty: that he choosing such as shal like him best, may return the other without delay: Except Mrs. Bucer think some other better thing to be done with them, or she should think she
should have loss by them, if they should not be in her ordering. I do not, Mr. Parker, forget your friendship shewed to me aforetime; and am sorry no occasion serveth me to shew my good wil. But assure your selfe, that as it lyeth long and taketh deep root in me, so shal the time come, I trust, wherin ye shal understand the fruit therof the better to endure and surelier to take place. Which may as wel shortly be, as be deferred. But good occasion is al. The Lord keep you, and grant the Vniversity so much encrease of godlines and learning, as these causes may compel unwilling men to be ashamed not to do for them. From Westmester, 1551. Mar. 9. Your assured, Joan Cheke. NUM. LX. Peter Martyr to Bucer, concerning the Oxford Act, An∣no 1550. Quibus artibus instituerint Disputationem Theologicam in Comitiis Oxo∣niensibus. S. D. AD tuas prolixas literas, mihique eo nomine suavissimas, brevi hac mea Epistola rescribo:Ex Bibliothe. C.C.C.C. partim, quod Tabellarius citius re∣ditum aggressus est, quàm ego speraveram; partim, quod res, de qua me vis cogitare, non est praecipitanda, sed potius quàm diligentissimo examine opus habet. Curabo itaque ut quàm primum, si certus homo, cui rectè possim literas dare, se offerret, quid ea de re sentio, rescri∣bam. Gaudeo itaque vehementer Disputationes istas hunc habuisse suc∣cessum, quem sua Providentia Deus illas habere voluit. Vix enim mi∣hi polliceor, cum non adessent Visitatores, aut ulli graves Judices po∣tuisse magnum fructum, ex illis, vel ad Scholam, vel ad Ecclesiam re∣dire. Non quasi de viribus, donísque tibi divinitus collatis, quicquam dubitem, aut bonitati causae diffidem, sed quod istorum consilium vi∣deam. Satis est illis pugnâsse. Qui postea mendacia spargunt. Nun∣quam desunt. Et Diabolus omnia curat efferri, & per sua membra ho∣norificentissimè amplificari. Quare non miror, si Christus ab initio dis∣putationes Apostolicas miraculis confirmavit. Utinam quandoque dig∣net istos obfirmatos, suaque cordis duritie gehennae addictos, eâdem potentiâ coercere, qua per Paulum Elymam Magum repressit: quando non possunt alia ratione adduci, ut veritatem, instar Magorum Phara∣onis, non oppugnent, & suis praestigijs offuscare nitantur. Quid mihi acciderit, in nostris Comitijs, paucis accipe. Sunt crea∣ti Baccalaurei Theologioe, quos ego de more▪ praesentavi: Cumque illis, ut fit, disputandum esset publicè, Respondentem Papistam con∣stituerunt.
Opponentes item Papistas, quaestionemque disputandam, maximo silentio suppresserunt: cum soli eam inter se communicassent. Totámque id fiebat, ne illam ego possim cognoscere. Cumque ad eam publicandam exstimularentur, dicebant, ad me non pertinere: Satis esse, ut eam disputaturi inter se nossent. Denique pridie ejus diei, quo disputandum erat post meridiem secunda hora, ut arbitror, questio∣nem publicarunt, & ad valvas Templi affixerunt. Volebant autem de∣fendere suam beatam Transubstantiationem, atque corporis Christi im∣panationem. Utque me Arbitrum recluderent, alium, ut loquuntur, patrem sibi deligunt Doctorem Chedzeum. Ibi Opponentes omnia mea produxissent argumenta. Respondens, ut visum esset, diluisse. Oppo∣nentes se dixissent esse contentos allata solutione. Pater loco meo suppositus omnia vehementer approbasset. Mihi vero ea die aut nul∣lus locus dicendi datus esset: (Nam postremae omnium ad noctem istae disputationes habendae erant, postquam Jurisperiti suas partes egis∣sent: Nam illi Doctorem ea die inaugurabant:) Aut siquid mihi di∣cere licuisset, in ipsa fermè nocte dicendum erat, omnibus jam Audi∣toribus, & fessis & abeuntibus. Comitia soluta fuissent, & undique vi∣ctoriam conclamassent, quasi suam causam Oxonij pulcherrimè defen∣dissent. Futque tanta hominum turba in his Comitijs, ut vix credi possit. Quotquot enim poterant, undique literis acciverant. Aderant inter alios Capellanus, ut vocant, Wintoniensis, Doctor Seton, & Capel∣lanus Episcopî Dunelmensis. Istae sunt Adversariorum technae. His fraudibus pugnare volunt. Sed nescio quo modo, ex insperato noster Vicecancellarius, sive quod timuerit aliquam turbam sive aliqua alia de causa, quae me latet, inter∣dixit, ne illa die Theologi disputarent. Ego aderam paratus in arena consilium capere, fretus Domini auxilio, quod in eo articulo maximae necessitatis, & os & linguam esset daturus. Haec ideo scripsi, ut nostrorum Antagonistarum artes intelligas, & nequid ab ijs simplici animo fieri credas. Fuit eo tempore hic mecum vester Vicecancellarius afflicta valetu∣dine: visus tamen est nonnihil recreari. De te multum locuti sumus:G. Haddon. & ille inter alia sibi pollicebatur, quod si per valetudinem ei licuisset Cantabrigiae esse, cum illa inter te & Yungum acciderunt, potuisset illum hominem facile ad modestius agendum adducere. Cupio illum restitu∣tum, cum tibi, ut video, optimè velit, & Religionem candide am∣plectatur. Uxor mea, Deo gratia, convaluit, quod mihi & commo∣dum est & jucundissimum; & quod ita tibi sit gratum, ut scribis, in∣gentes ago gratias. Agnetem tuam, Nicolaúmque salutes, & tuum illum Socium, qui nobiscum fuit, meo, uxoris, & Iulij nomine, qui omnes, unà cum Domino Subdecano, & Domino Carowo, te cumprimis mag∣na salute impertiunt. 20 Septembr. 1550. Oxonij. Tuus in Christo, Petrus Martyr.
NUM. LXI. Peter Martyr to Bucer, Concerning their review of the book of Common-Prayer. Censura a libri Communium Precum. Ex Bibliothec. C.C.C C.S. D. Hoc tempore nil mihi potuit, aut optatius aut jucundius, eve∣nire, quàm ut censuram tuam viderem librorum sacrorum. Quare, quod eam ad me dignatus sis mittere, gratias immortales ago. Jam rogatus sueram, ut ipse quoque annotarem, quodnam mihi de eo videretur. Et cum, propter ignotam mihi linguam, fuisset data Versio D. Cheeki legenda, ut potui de ea colligere, annotavi quae digna correctione visa erant. Sed quia in versione mihi tradita, complura de∣erant, ideò multa praeterij, de quibus in meis Annotationibus nihil dixi. Haec deinde cum de tuo scripto deprehendissem, in ejusmodi li∣bro contineri, mihi doluit; quod jam ante duos aut tres dies meam Censuram Reverendissimo, qui me pro ea urgebat, attulissem. Caete∣rùm hoc demum remedium adhibui: Quae de tuo scripto cognovi de∣fuisse in meo libro, summatim collegi: & cum eadem, quae tu repre∣hendisti, mihi quoque non ferenda viderentur, ea in breves articulos redegi: exposuique Reverendissimo, qui jam sciebat haec ad D. Epi∣scopum Eliensem te scripsisse, me in his omnibus capitibus, quae illi of∣ferebam, in articulis notata, consentire tecum, ut mutarentur. In prioribus autem Adnotationibus omnia fermè, quae te offende∣runt, a me fuerant adnotata. Exemplum quidem ad te nunc mitte∣rem: sed non habeo ita descriptum, ut illud possis legere. Tantùm sum miratus, quomodo praeterieris de Communione aegrotorum id re∣prehendere, quod statutum est, si eo die fiat, quo in Dominico habe∣tur coena Domini, tum Minister partem ciborum secum deferat. Atque ita Communionem in domo Aegrotantis administret. Qua in re id me offendit, quòd ibi non repetunt, quae praecipuè ad coenam Domini per∣tinent; cumque, ut tu quoque sentis, arbitror, verba coenae magis ad homines, quam aut ad panem, aut ad vinum pertinere. Monui omni∣no mihi videri, ut coram aegroto, & simul cum eo communicantibus, omnia, quae ad coenam Domini necessariò requiruntur, & dicantur, & agantur. Et sane mirandum est, quomodo ea, conspectu aegroti, verba dicere graventur, cui maximè utilia sunt, cum inutiliter eadem repetere velint, quando inter communicandum in Templo vinum in poculo deficere contigerit, cum homines qui adsunt, & sacramenta sumunt, illa jam audiverint. Haec sunt, quae putavi alicujus momenti, & cur omiseris, non satis intelligo. In omnibus autem, quae censuisti emendanda, tuae sententiae scripsi. Et gratias Deo ago, qui occasionem suppeditavit, ut de his omnibus Episcopi per nos admonerentur. Con∣clusum jam est in hoc eorum Colloquio, quemadmodum mihi retulit Reverendissimus, ut multa immutentur. Sed quaenam illa sint, quae consenserint emendanda, neque ipse mihi exposuit, neque ego de illo quaerere ausus sum. Verum hoc non me parum recreat, quod mihi, D. Checus indicavit; si noluerint ipsi, ait, efficere, ut quae mutanda
sint mutentur, Rex per seipsum id saciet; & cum ad Parliamentum ventum suerit, ipse suae Majestatis authoritatem interponet. De Wintoniensi jam actio quarta in judicio habita est; neque dum respondet, alio spectat, quam ut se a Contumacia purget. Verba ejus a Papisticis hominibus, ut docta & acuta praedicantur: a veris autem & sanis judicibus, vafra, subdola, alien a causa, &, ut uno verbo di∣cam, sophistica. Quod mihi etiam it verisimile, cum illum in rebus Theologicis non aliter agere animadverterim. Verum quicquld sit, causa omninò existimatur casurus. Quae de Hoppero ad me scribis, non potuerunt non videri mira. Cer∣tè illis auditis obstupui Sed bene habet, quod Episcopi meas literas vi∣derunt, unde invidia ego quidem sum liberatus. Et illius causa sic ja∣cet, ut me ioribus & pijs nequaquam probetur. Dolet, dolet inquam, mihi gravissimè talia inter Evangelij professores contingere. Ille toto hoc tempore, cum illi sit interdicta concio, non videtur posse quiescere; suae sidei confessionem edidit, qua rursus multorum animos exacerba∣vit. Deinde queritur de Consiliarijs, & fortasse, quod mihi non re∣fertur, de nobis. Deus selicem Catastrophen non laetis actibus imponat. Doctor Smithus, quondam Oxonij Professor▪ qui me de votis Mona∣sticis praeterita jam aestate lacessivit, nunc librum, Anglicè scripum, contra Dominum Cantuariensem edidi de re Sacramentari. De quo, cum lingua mihi sit ignota, nequeo judicare. Sed tamen sensum ejus, & ineptias, brevi cognoscam. Nam scribit se etiam sub prelo habere, qua contra me de eadem re composuit. Quanquam haec ego vel parum vel nih moor, cum a Satanae atque Papae Mancipijs nihil nisi mendacia expectem. Peccata nostra me terrent, atque pertenuis Evangelij fru∣ctus: Necnon ex altera parte Caesaris Successus, quem Severissimam Dei virgam esse video. Et inter haec mala nostris Peregrinorum eccle∣sijs vacat nugari. Est enim inter illas de Templo a Rege concesso exorta magna con∣tentio: adeoque sunt animi eorum implacabiles, & eò exarserunt, ut eorum dissidium per Concilium Regium sit dirimendum. Precor De∣u ut res non malè juxta merita cadat. Multo antea voluissem discedere: sed hodie tandem abeundi faculta∣tem impetravi. Scriptum tuum Petro Alexandro tradam, ut id tibi, cum ipsum perlegerit, remittat. Tibi vero interim, & omnibus tuis, cuncta salutaria & felicia precor, unà cum Iulio, qui vos plurimum salvere jubet. 10 Jan. 1551. Ad Lambeth. Tuus in Christo, Petrus Martyr. Clarissimo & eruditissimo D.D. Martino Bucero, Theologae Professori regio, mihi plurimum observando, Canta∣brigiae.
NUM. LXII. The Archbishops letter to procure Wolf, the Printer, a licence to publish his Book. Sr. W. H. MSS.AFter my veray hertie commendations. Thies be to signify unto you, that Rayner Wolf, at my desire, hath fully fynyshed the printing of my Book, for answer to the late Bishop of Winchesters, written against myn of the Doctrine of the Sacrament. And foras∣muche as both printing and selling of any matiers in thenglishe tounge is prohibited by a Proclamation set furthe, onles the same matier be first allowed by the Kings Majestie, or vi. of his Majesties privey Coun∣sail, as you shal more plainly perceyve by the Proclamation, which herewith I send unto you: Therfor I hertily pray you to be a Sutor to the kings Majestie, or to the privye Counsail, that Mr. Rayner may have licence for the printing and selling of my said Book accordingly. And the same so obtained to send me with convenient spede. For in the begynning of the Terme I thinck it wer veray necessary to be set furthe, for the contentation of many, which have had long expectati∣on of the same. Assone as I shal receyve advertisement, whan the Kings Majestie wil be at Hampton courte, I wil come thither to see his Grace, and do my duty towards the same. Thus fare ye hertily wel. From my Mannour at Croydon, the xxix. of September, 1551. Your Lovynge Frende, T. Cant. To my veray lovynge freendes, Mr. Cecill, one of the Kings Majesties two principal Secretaries. Or to Mr. Cheeke. NUM. LXIII. Articles, wherunto Wylliam Phelps, Pastor and Curate of Ceci∣ter, upon good advisement and deliberation, after better knowledg geven by Gods grace and goodnes unto him, hath subscribed, con∣sented and aggreed, willingly without force, compulsion, and all maner of impulsion; and is willing and desirous to set forth the same to his parishoners, for the better edifying of them, and de¦claration of his new aggreement to Gods verite and holy word. Foxij MSS.FIrst, That the holy word of God doth acknowledg, confess, main∣taine, avouch, hold and defend, that in the holy Sacrament and Communion of Christs precious body and bloud, the very substance, matter, nature and condition of bread and wine, do remain after the
words (as they be commonly called) of Consecration, as verily and truly as they were in substance and matter bread and wine before: Although that the use of the bread and wine in the Sacrament be changed▪ For whereas before it was common bread and common wine, nw by the virtue of Gods word it is made the Sacrament of the precious body and bloud of Christ, and a Seal, confirmation, and augmentation of Gods mercy and gracious promise to al men, that receive it in the Faith of Christ Jesu, with hatred of sin, and intent, purpose and mind to live always a vertuous life. And that is the very Transubstantiation and change▪ that God delighteth in, in the use of the Sacraments, most, that we should earnestly and from the bottome of our hearts, be converted into Christ, and Christs holy command∣ments, to live a christen life, and to dy from sin, as he gave us exam∣ple, both by his life and doctrin; and meaneth not, that the bread and wine should in substance be turned or converted into the substance of his body and bloud, or that the substance of the bread should be taken away, and in the place therof to be the substance, matter, and cor∣poral presence of Christs corporal, holy, humane and natural body. Item, That the same holy word of God doth confess, hold, defend, acknowledg and maintain, that the very natural, substantial, real and corporal body of Christ, concerning his humanity, is only and soly in heaven, and not in the Sacrament and Communion of his precious body and bloud. But whosoever worthily with true repentance, and lively faith in the promise of God, receiveth that holy Sacrament, re∣ceiveth Sacramentally by faith al the mercies, riches, merits and de∣servings, that Christ hath deserved and paid for, in his holy bloud and passion. And that is to eat Christ and to drink Christ in the holy Sa∣crament, to confirm and Seal Sacramentally, in our Souls, Gods pro∣mises of eternal Salvation: that Christ deserved for us, not in, or by, his body eaten, but by, and for, his body slain and killed upon the Cross for our Sinns: as S. Paul saith Col. 1. Eph. 1.3. Ebru. 2.7, 8, 9, 10. As for eating of his flesh, and drinking of his bloud, really, corpo∣rally, materially and substantially, it is but a carnal and gross opinion of man, besides and contrary to the word of God, and the articles of our faith, and christen religion: that affirmeth his corporal depar∣ture from thearth, placeth it in heaven above at the right hand of God the father Almighty, and keepeth, retaineth, holdeth and preserveth the same corporal body of Christ there, til the general day of judg∣ment, as the word declareth: From thence he shal come to judge the quick and the dead. And that heretofore I have been in the contrary opinion, and be∣lieved my self, and also have taught other to believe the same, that there remained no substance of bread and wine in the Sacrament, but the very self same body and bloud of Christ Jesu, that was born of the blessed Virgin Mary, and hanged upon the Cross, I am with al my heart sorry for mine error, and false opinion, detesting and forsaking the same from the bottome of my heart, and desire God most heartily in, and for, the merits of his dear sons passion, to forgive me, and al them that have erred in the same false opinion by and through my means: Praying them in the tender compassion and great mercies of
God, now to follow me in truth, verite and singleness of Gods most true word, as they were contented to follow me in error, superstition and blindness, and be no more ashamed to turn to the truth, then they were ready to be corrupted by falshood. If the holy Apostle S. Paul, and the great Clerk, S. Augustine, with many mo Noble and vertuous members of Christs church, were not ashamed to returne, acknow∣ledge and confess, their error and evil opinions; what am I, miserable creature of the world, inferior unto them both in knowledg, holines and learning, that should be ashamed to do the same? Nay I do in this part thank God, and rejoyce from the bottome of my heart, that God hath revealed unto me the truth of his word, and geven me leave to live so long to acknowledg my fault, and error: and do here before you protest, that from henceforth I will, with al diligence and labor, study to set forth this mine amended knowledg, and reconciled truth, as long as I live, by the help of God in the holy Ghost, through the merits of Jesus Christ, our only Mediator and Advocate. To whom be al honor for ever and ever, Amen. Subscribed and confirmed 29 of April 1551. in the presence of John Bp. of Gloucester, and divers other ther present. NUM. LXIV. The Archbishop to the Lords of the Councel concerning the Book of Articles of Religion. AFter my veray humble recommendations unto your good Lordeships:Sr. W. H. MSS. I have sent unto the same the boke of Articles, which yesterday I receyved from your Lordeships. I have sent also a Cedule inclosed, declarynge briefly my minde upon the said boke: besechynge your Lordeshipps to be means unto the Kyngs Majestie, that al the Bushops may have authority from hym, to cause all their Prechers, Archdecons, Deans, Prebendaries, Parsons, Vicars, Cu∣rates, with al their Clergie, to subscribe to the said articles. And than I trust, that such a concorde and quyetness in religion shal shortely follow therof, as ells is not to be loked for many years. God shal therby be glorified, his truth shal be avaunced, and your Lordeships shal be rewarded of hym, as the setters forward of his true word and gospel. Unto whom is my dayly prayer, without ceasynge, to pre∣serve the Kynges Majestie, with al your honorable Lordeships. From my house at Forde the 24 of this present month of November. Your Lordeshipps ever to commaunde T. Cant. To my veray good Lordes of the Kinges Majestie his most ho∣nor able Councel.
NUM. LXV. The Archbishop nominates certain persons for an Irish Arch∣bishoprick. To my veray Lovinge friende Sir William Cecyl Knight, one of the Kinges Majesties principal Secretaries. THough in England there be many meete men for the Arch∣bushopricks of Ireland, yet I knowe veraye fewe,Sir W. H. MSS. that wil gladlie be perswaded to go thither. Nevertheless I have sent unto you the names of iiij. Viz. Mr. Whiteheade of Hadley, Mr. Tourner of Caun∣turbury, Sir Thomas Rosse, and Sir Robert Wisdome. Which being or∣dinarily called, I thincke for conscience sake, wil not refuse to be∣stowe the talent committed unto theim, wheresoever it shal please the Kinges Majestie to appoincte theim. Among whom I take Mr. Whiteheade for his good knowledge, special honestie, fervent zeale, and politick wisdome, to be most meete. And next him Mr. Tourner, who, besides that hee is merry and witty withal, nihil appe∣tit, nihil ardet, nihil somniat, nisi Iesum Christum; and in the lively preach∣ing of him and his wourde declareth such diligence, faithfulness and wisdom, as for the same deservithe much commendation. There is also one Mr. Whitacre, a man both wise and wel learned, Chaplain to the Bushopp of Winchester, veray meet for that office, if he might be perswaded to take it upon him. I pray you commend me unto Mr. Cheke, and declare unto him, that myn ague, whither it were a quotidian, or a double tertian (wherof my Physitions doubted) hath left me these two dayes, and so I trust I am quite thereof: Notwithstanding my water keapithe stil an high colour. Now the most daunger is, that if it come againe this night, it is like to tourne to a quartane. However the matter chaunce, the most grief to me is, that I cannot proceade in such matters as I have in hande, according to my wil and desire. This Terrenum Domicilium is such an obstacle to all good purposes. Forasmuche as I perceave that the Kings Majesties progress is altered, I pray you send me the gests of the latter end of his Progress, from this time unto the end, that I may from time to time know where his Majestie shal bee; whom I beseeche Almighty god to preserve and prosper in al his affairs, with his most honorable Councel, and al his courte. From my man∣nor of Croydon, the xxvth. of August 1552. Your own assured T. Cant.
NUM. LXVI. That Mr. Turner, intended for the Archbishopric of Armagh, was come up to court. To my lovynge frende Sir William Cecyl Knight, one of the Kyngs Majestie his principal Secretary. Sir W. H. MSS.AFter my veray harty recommendations, Now at the last agaynst his wil, Turner is come up unto the courte. He preched twise in the campe, that was by Canterbury: for the which the rebells wolde have hanged hym; and he semed than more glad to go to hangynge, than he doth now to go to Armachane, he alleged so many excuses, but the chiefe is this, that he shal prech to the walls and stalls, for the peple understande no English. I beare him in hande Yes; and yet I dowte whether they speak English in the dioces of Armachane. But if they do not, then I say, that if he wil take the paine to lerne the Irish tonge (which with diligence he may do in a yeare or two) than both his personne and doctrine shal be more acceptable not only unto his dioces, but also thorowe out al Ireland. I commytt hym to your cure praying you to help hym to have as redy a dispach as may be, for he hath but a little money. I have sent the boke of Articles for Religion unto Mr. Cheke, set in a bettre order, than it was, and the titles upon every matier, addynge therto that which lacked. I pray you considre wel the articles with Mr. Cheke, and whether you thynke best to move the kyngs majestie therin bifore my commynge; I referre that unto your two wisdomes. I pray you let me have your advise unto whom I myght best write concernynge Rayner Wolfe; for I wot not to whom I myght write, but to my Lorde of Northumberlande. The everlyvynge god ever preserve you in this life, and in the life to come. From Croydon the xixth. of September. [Anno 1552.] Your assured frende, T. Cant.
NUM. LXVII. Wherein the Archbishop justifies himself and the rest of the Bishops against the charge of Covetousnes. To my Lovyng frende Sir William Cycil, one of the Kyngs Majesties principal Secretaries. AFter my most harty commendations and thanks,Sr. W.H.MSS. as wel for your gentyl Letters, as for the copy of the Pacification, and for your good remembrance of the two matters, which I desiered you not to forget, the one concernynge the B. of Colens lettres, and the other, Mr. Mowse: for whom eft-sonnes I gyve you my most harty thanks. As for your Admonition, I take it most thankfully, as I have ever been most glad to bee admonished by my frendes, accomptynge no man so folish as he that wil not heare frendely admonishments. But as for the sayinge of S. Paul, Qui volunt ditescere, incidunt in tentationem, I feare it not halfe so moche, as I do starke beggery. For I toke not halfe so moche care for my lyvynge, whan I was a Scholer of Cam∣brige, as I do at this present. For altho I have now moch more reve∣newe, yet I have moch more to do withal; and have more care to lyve now as an Archbuschope, than I had at that time to lyve like a scholer. I have not so moch as I had within tenne yeares passed by CL l. of cer∣ten rent, beside casualties. I pay duble for every thynge that I bye. If a good Auditor have this accoumpt, he shal fynde no grete surplu∣sage to waxe rich upon. And if I knew any B. that were covetous, I wolde surely admo∣nyshe hym, but I knowe none, but al beggers, except it be one, and yet I dare wel say, hee is not veray rich. If you know any, I besech you to advertise me, for peradventure I may advertise hym bettre than you. To be shorte, I am not so doted, to set my mynde upon thynges here, which neither I can cary away with me, nor tary longe with them. If tyme wold have served, I wolde have written of other thynges unto you, but your servant makynge hast, compelleth me heare to cut of the threde; besechynge almyghty god to preserve the Kynges Majestie with al his councel and familie, and send him wel to returne from his progresse. From my Manor of Croydon the xxj. of Iuly. Your own ever, T. Cant.
NUMB. LXVIII. Purchases made by the Archbishop. Extracted out of K. Edwards Book of Sales. Anno Regni Regis Edwardi Sexti primo. The name of the Purchaser. The some of Mo∣ney for the purchase. The Lands. The yerely value of the landes. The rent reser∣ved. The tyme of the issues. The Teste of the Patent. Thomas Ar∣chiepiscopus Can∣tuar. In consider. pro∣mis. Dom. R. H. VIII. & perform. Test. sui, ac in es∣camb. Maner. & Parc. de Mayfeld in Com. Sussex. ac di∣vers. al terr. & ten. in Com. Midd. Hertf. Kant. Buck. & Ebor. ac pro summa Rect. de Whalley, Black∣borne & Rachdale in Com. Lanc. nuper Monastio sive Abbie de Whalley in eodem Com. Lancastr. modo dissolut. dudum spectan. & pertinent. ac divers. al. terr. & ten. in Com. Lanc. Kant. Surr. Lon∣don, Bangor, &c. CCCClxxix1. 2d. ob. lv1. xiiijs. vj d. q. A festo S. Mi∣chael. Arch. Ao. xxxvijo. H. viijui.           Test. xxxjo. die Augusti. Thomas Cran∣mer Archiepisco∣pus Cantuar. v c. iiijl. viij s. iiijd. Maner. de Sleford in Com. Lincoln, & maner. de Middle∣ton Cheny in Com. Northam. ac divers. al. terr. & ten. in Com. Northam. & Lincoln. xl. vjs. iiij d. xv l. Nichil. A festo Annunc. B. Marie Virgin. ultimo praedicto.       iiij l. xvs. viij d.       Thomas Ar∣chiepiscopus Can∣tuar. iiijc. xxixl. xiiijs.ijd. Et in complement. Testi Dom. Regis H. VIII. & in con∣sider. Servicij. Scit. nuper Prioratus de Ar∣thington in Com. Ebor. ac di∣versa alia Maneria terr. & ten. in Com. Ebor. Not. & Kant. v l. viijs. iiij d. lj l. xvijs. iiij d. xv l. vijl. xs. x l. xvj s. j d. ob. xijs. vj l. j d. xxxiij s. iiij d. xvjs. viijd. A festo S. Mi∣chaelis Arch. ulti∣mo praeterito. Test. vjto. die Ju∣nij.
[NUM. LXVIII.] An Instrument of the Councel, swearing and subscribing to the Suc∣cession, as limited by the King. EDWARD. WEE whose Names be underwritten,MSS. D. Wil. Petyt. having heretofore mani∣times heard the Kings Majesty, our most gracious Sovereign Lords earnest desire and express Commandment, touching the Limita∣tion of the Succession in the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and others his Majesties Realmes and Dominions; and having seen his Majesties own Devise touching the said Succession, first wholly written with his most Gracious hand, and after Copied out in his Majesties presence, by his most high Commandment, and Confirmed with the Subscripti∣on of his Majesties own Hand: and by his Highnes delivered to cer∣tain Judges, and other learned men to be written in sul Order: DO, by his Majesties special and absolute Commandment, eftsoons given us, aggree, and by these Presents signed with our hands, and sealed with our Seales, promise by our Oaths and Honors to observe, fully perform and keep al and every Article, Branch and Matter contained in the said Writing, delivered to the Judges and others, and subscribed with his Majesties hand in six several places; and al such other matters, as his Majesty by his Last Wil shal appoint, declare, or command, touching, or concerning the Limitation of the Succession of his said Imperial Crown. And WEE do further promise, by his Majesties said Com∣mandment, never to vary or swarve, during our lives, from his said Li∣mitation of his Succession: But the same shal to the uttermost of our powers Defend and Maintaine. And if any of us, or any other, shal at any time hereafter (which God forbid) vary from this Aggrement or any part therof, We and Every of us, do assent to ake, use and re∣pute him for a Breaker of the common Concord, Peace and Unity of this Realm, and to do our utmost to se him or them so varying or swerving, punished with most sharp punishment, according to their deserts. T. Cant. T. Ely. Wynchester. Northumberland. I. Bedford. I. Suffolk. W. Northampt. F. Shrewsbury. F. Huntyngdon. PEMBROKE. E. Clynton. T. Darcy. G. Cobham. T. Cheyne. R. Ryche. Iohn Gate. William Petres. Ioan Cheek. W. Cecyll. Edward Mountagu. Iohn Bakere. Edward Gryffyn. Iohn Lucas. Iohn Gosnald. These are the Names, with which this Instrument is signed: but there be no Seals.
The Kings own Writing, directing the Succession. My Devise for the Succession. MSS. D. Wil. Petyt.FOR lack of issue for my Body, to the L. Fraunceses heir Masles, if she have any such issue before my Death. To the Lady Iane, and her Heir Masles. To the Lady Katerins Heir Masles. To the Lady Maryes heir Masles. To the Heires Masles of the Daughters, which she shal have hereafter. Then to the Lady Margarets heires Masles. For lack of such issue to the Heire Masles of the Lady Ianes Daughters. To the heir masles of the Lady Katerins Daughters, and so forth til you come to the Lady Margarets daughters heires masles. If after my Death, their Masle be entred into eighteen years old, then he to have the whole Rule and Governance therof. But if he be under 18, then his Mother to be Governess, til he enter 18 years old. But to do nothing without the Advice and Aggrement of Six, Par∣cel of a Councel to be pointed by my last Wil, to the number of Twenty. If their Mother dy before their Entry into Eighteen, the Realm to be governed by the Councel. Provided, that after he be 14 years, al great matters of Importance be opened to him. NUM. LXIX. A Letter of Q. Jane's Councel to the Lord Rich, L. Lieutenant of the County of Essex. AFter our right hartie commendations to your Lp. Although the matter conteined in your letters of therle of Oxfords departing to the Ladi Mari,Sr. W.H.MSS. be grevous unto us for divers respects, yet we must neades give your Lp. our hartie thankes for your redi advertisement therof. Requiring your Lp. nevertheless like a Noble man to re∣main in that promise and steedfastnes to our Sovereign Lady Queen Ianes Service, as ye shal find us redi and firm with al our force to the same. Which neither with honor, nor with saftie, nor yet with du∣ty we mai now forsaake. From the Toure of London, the xixth. of Iu∣lie, 1553. Your L. assured loving freends, T. Cant. T. Ely, Canc. I. Suffolk. Pembroke. William Paget. Winchester. Arundel. T. Darcy. T. Cheyne. W. Petre S. Io. Bakere. I. Bedford. F. Shrewsbury. Rychard Cotton. Io. Cheek. Robert Bowes.
NUM. LXX. Queen Jane to Sir John Bridges, and Sir Nicolas Poyntz, to raise forces against a rising in Bucks. IANE the Queen, TRusty and Welbeloved, we grete you wel.Foxij. MSS. Because we doubt not, but this our most lawful possession of the Crown, with the free consent of the Nobility of our realm, and other the States of the same, is both plainly known and accepted of you, as our most loving subjects: Therfore we do not reiterate the same, but now most ear∣nestly wil and require, and by authority hereof warrant you, to assem∣ble, muster and levy al the power that you can possible make, either of your servants, Tenants, officers or freends, as wel horsemen as footmen, reserving to our trusty and right wel beloved Cousins, the Erles of Arundel and Penbroke, their tenants, servants, and officers: and with the same to repair with al possible speed towards Buckingham∣shire, for the repression and subduing of certain tumults and rebellions moved there against us and our Crown, by certain seditious men. For the rpression wherof we have given ordre to divers others our good subjects, and gentlemen of such degree as you are, to repair in like maner to the ame parties. So as we nothing doubt but upon the access of such our loving subjects as be appointed for that purpose, to the place where this Seditious people yet remaine, the same shal eyther lack harts to abyde in their malicious purpose, or ells receive such pu∣nishment and execution, as they deserve, seking the destruction of their native country, and the subversion of al men in their degrees by rebellion of the base multitude. Whose rage being stirred, as of late years hath been seen, must needs be the confusion of thole common weale. Wherfore our special trust is, in your courage, wisdome and fidelities in this matter to advaunce your self both with power and speed to this enterprise in such sort, as by our Nobility and Councel shalbe also prescribed unto you. And for the sustentation of your char∣ges in this behalf, our said Councel by our Commandment do furth∣with give order, to your satisfaction: as by their letters also shal ap∣pear unto you. And besides that, we do assure you of our special con∣sideration of this your service to us, our Crowne, and expresly to the preservation of this our Realm and commonweale. Yeven under our signet at our Toure of London, the xviij. day of Iuly, the first year of our reigne.
NUM. LXXI. The Councellors of Q. Jane, their letter to the Lady Mary, acknow∣ledging her Queen. Sir W.H.MSS.OUR bownden duties most humbly remembred to your most ex∣cellent Majesty. It may like the same to understand, that We, your most humble, faythful and obedient Subjects, having alwayes (God we take to witnes) remayned your Highnes true and humble Subjects in our harts, ever sythens the death of our late Soveraign Lord and Master, your Highnes brother, whom God pardon; And seeing hitherto no possibilite to utter our determination herein, without great destruction and bludshed, both of our selves and others, tl this time; Have this day proclaimed, in your city of London, your Majesty to be our true natural Soveraign Liege Lady, and Queen, Most humbly be∣seeching your Majesty to pardon and remit our former infirmities, and most graciously taccept our meanings; which have byn ever to serve your Highnes truly: And so shal remain in al our powers and forces to theffusion of our bludds: as thies bearers, our very good Lords, therle of Arundel, and L. Paget can, and be redy more particularly to declare. To whom it may please your Excellent Majesty to give firme credence. And thus we do, and shal daily pray to Almighty God for the preservation of your most royal person long to reign over us. From your Majesties city of London this day of Iuly, the first year of your most prosperous Reygne. Thus endorsed by the hand of Sir Will. Cecyl. Copy of the letter to the Quene from Baynards Castle, 20 July 1553. NUM. LXXII. The Archbishop to Mrs. Wilkinson, persuading her to fly. Foxes Acts.THE true Comforter in all distress is only God, through his son Iesus Christ. And whosoever hath him, hath compay enough, although he were in a wildernes al alone. And he that hath twenty thousand in his company, if God be absent, is in a miserable wilder∣ness and desolation. In him is al comfort▪ and without him is none. Wherefore I beseech you, seek your dwelling there, whereas you may truly and rightly serve God, and dwel in him, and have him ever dwel∣ling in you. What can be so heavy a burden as an unquiet conscience, to be in such a place as a man cannot be suffered to serve God in Christs religion? If you be loth to depart from your kin and friends, remem∣ber,Mar. 3: that Christ calleth them his mother, sisters and brothers, that do
his fathers wil. Where we find therfore God truly honored according to his wil, there we can lack neither friend, nor kin. If you be loth to depart for slandering Gods word, remember, that Christ, when his houre was not yet come,Joh. 4. departed out of his coun∣trey into Samaria, to avoyd the malice of the Scribes and Pharisees; and commanded his Apostles, that if they were pursued in one place,Mat. 10. they should fly to another. And was not Paul let down by a basket out at a window, to avoid the persecution of Aretas?2 Cor. 1. And what wisdome and policy he used from time to time to escape the malice of his ene∣mies, the Acts of the Apostles do declare. And after the same sort did the other Apostles. Albeit, when it came to such a point, that they could no longer escape danger of the persecutors of Gods true religi∣on, then they shewed themselves, that their flying before came not of fear, but of godly wisdome, to do more good, and that they would not rashly, without urgent necessity offer themselves to death: Which had been but a temptation of God. Yea, when they were apprehend∣ed, and could no longer avoid, then they stood boldly to the profession of Christ: Then they shewed, how little they passed of death: How much they feared God more then men: How much they loved and preferred the eternal life to come, above this short and miserable life. Wherefore I exhort you as wel by Christs commandment, as by the example of him and his Apostles, to withdraw your self from the ma∣lice of yours and Gods enemies, into some place where God is most purely served. Which is no slandering of the truth, but a preserving of your self to God and the truth, and to the society and comfort of Christs little flock. And that you wil do, do it with speed, lest by your own folly you fal into the persecutors hands. And the Lord send his holy spirit to lead and guide you, whersoever you go. And al that be godly wil say, Amen. NUM. LXXIII. The words and sayings of John Duke of Northumberland, spoken by him unto the people at the Towerhill of London, on Tuesday in the forenoon, being the 22d. day of August immedi∣atly before his death; as hereafter followeth. GOod people, I am come hither for to dy this day; for the which al you are come hither to see.Titus. B. ▪ And that although this is most horrible and detestable▪ yet justly have I deserved the same; for that I have been most grievous sinner unto Almighty God, and to al the whole world, and to the Queens grace: In as much as I did presume of my self in the plain field to bear armor against her Grace. Wherfore I do acknowledg that I have offended her lawes; and that justly she
might have put me to death, without any Law, had she so pleased. But of her most clemency hath weighed my death by a law, which justly hath condemned me. But the more, I trust, for my Salvation, and the more better for me; to consider the greatnes of my sins. And therfore the better for my Salvation. And forasmuch as I am permitted to speak my conscience, this I do protest before God, the World, and al you, that this my death hath not been altogether of mine own procuring, but hath been in∣censed by others; Whom I pray God to pardon, For I wil not name, nor accuse any man here. And now I shal shew how I have been of a long time led by false Teachers, somewhat before the death of K. Henry VIII. and ever since: Which is a great part of this my death. Wherfore, good people, beware, and take heed, that you be not led and deceived by these se∣ditious and leud Preachers, that have opened the Book, and know not how to shut it. But return home again to your true religion, and Catholick faith, which hath been taught you of old. For since the time, that this new teaching hath come among us, God hath given us over unto our selves, and hath plagued us sundry and many wayes, with wars, commotions, tumults, rebellions, pestilence and famine: besides many more great and grievous pagues; to the great decay of our common wealth. Wherfore, Good people, be obedient unto the Queen her lawes, and be content to receive again the true Catholic faith; from which of long time you have been led. Examples we have of Germany: Which in like manner being led and seduced, how are they now brought to ruine, as wel it is known to the world. And also we are taught by our Creed, in the latter part of the same: Where it is said, We believe in the holy Ghost, the holy Catholick faith, the Com∣munion of Saints. Thus you may see the Articles of our belief do teach us the true faith Catholic. This is my very faith and belief. And these were in my heart, as my Lord Bp. [Hethe of Worcester] can testify. Neither was I commanded thus to speak, but even of mine own free wil. And then he went to his prayers, and dyed.
NUM. LXXIV. Archbishop Cranmers Letter to the Queen, sueing for his pardon in the Lady Janes business. MOst Lamentably mourning and moaning himself unto your Highnes, Thomas Cranmer,Letters of the Martyrs. although unworthy either to write or speak unto your Highnes, yet having no person, that I know to be mediator for me, and knowing your pitiful ears ready to hear al pitiful complaints, and seeing so many to have felt your aboundant clemency in like case, Am now constrained most lamentably, and with most penitent and sorrowful heart, to ask mercy and pardon for my heinous folly and offence, in consenting and following the Testa∣ment and last Will of our late Soveraign Lord K. Edward VI. your Graces brother; Which, wel God he knoweth, I never liked; nor any thing grieved me so much that your Graces brother did. And if by any means it had been in me to have letted the making of that Wil, I would have done it. And what I said therin, as wel to the Councel, as to himself, divers of your Majesties Councel can report: but none so wel as the Marquess of Northampton, and the L. Darcy, then Lord Chamberlain to the Kings Majesty. Which two were pre∣sent at the Communication between the Kings Majesty and me. I desired to talk with the Kings Majesty alone, but I could not be suf∣fered: and so I failed of my purpose. For if I might have commoned with the King alone, and at good leisure, my trust was, that I should have altered him from his purpose, but they being present my labor was in vain. Then, when I could not dissuade him from the said Will; and both he and his Privy Councel also, informed me that the Judges, and his learned Counsil said, that the Act of entayling the Crown, made by his Father, could not be prejudicial to him: but that he being in possession of the Crown, might make his Wil therof; This seemed very strange unto me. But being the sentence of the Judges, and other his learned Counsil in the Lawes of this realm, (as both he and his Counsil informed me) methought it became not me, being unlearned in the Law to stand against my Prince therin. And so at length I was required by the Kings Majesty himself to set to my hand to his Wil; Saying, that he trusted, that I alone would not be more repugnant to his Wil then the rest of the Councel were. Which words surely grieved my heart very sore: And so I granted him to subscribe his Wil, and to follow the same. Which when I had set my hand unto, I did it unfainedly and without dissimulation. For the which I submit my self most humbly unto your Majesty, acknowledging mine offence with most grievous and sorrowful heart, and beseeching your mercy and pardon. Which my heart giveth me shal not be denyed unto me, being granted before to so many; Which travailed not so much to dissuade both the King and his Councel, as I did.
And wheras it is contained in two Acts of Parlament, as I under∣stand, that I with the Duke of Northumberland, should devise and compass the deprivation of your Majesty from your royal Crown, surely it is untrue. For the Duke never opened his mouth to me, to move me any such matter. Nor his heart was not such toward me, (seeking long time my destruction) that he would ever trust me in such a matter, or think that I would be persuaded by him. It was other of the Councel that moved me, and the King himself, the Duke of Northumberland not being present. Neither before, neither after, had I ever any privy communication with the Duke of that matter, saving that openly at the Councel table, the Duke said unto me, that it be∣came not me to say to the King, as I did, when I went about to dis∣suade him from his said Will. Now as concerning the state of religion, as it is used in this realm of England at this present, if it please your Highnes to licence me, I would gladly write my mind unto your Majesty. I wil never, God willing, be author of Sedition, to move Subjects from the obedience of their Heads and Rulers: Which is an offence most detestable. If I have uttered my mind to your Majesty, being a Christian Queen and Governor of this Realm, (of whom I am most assuredly persuaded, that your gracious intent is, above al other regards, to prefer Gods true word, his honor and glory) if I have uttered, I say, my mind unto your Majesty, then I shal think my self discharged. For it lyes not in me, but in your Grace only, to se the Reformation of things, that be amisse. To private subjects it appertaineth not to reform things, but quietly to suffer that they cannot amend. Yet never∣theles to shew your Majesty my mind in things appertaining unto God, methink it my duty, knowing that I do, and considering the place which in time past I have occupied. Yet wil I not presume therunto without your Graces plesure first known, and your Licence obtained. Wherof I most humbly prostrate to the ground, do beseech your Majesty, and I shal not cease daily to pray to Almighty God for the good preservation of your Majesty from al Enemies bodi∣ly and ghostly, and for the encrease of al goodnes heavenly and earth∣ly, during my life, as I do and wil do, whatsoever become of me. NUM. LXXV. Cardinal Poles Instructions for his Messenger to the Queen. Instructions for Master Thomas Goldwel. Cotton Library, Titus B. 2.MAster Goldwel. After ye have made my most humble Saluta∣tions, with al due reverence to the Queens Highnes on my behalf, and presented my Letters to the same, then pleasing her Grace to hear your Commission given by me, and to understand the cause why I do send you to her, ye may expound the same in that form that followeth.
First of al, Seeing that the whole cause of my sending you to her Highnes at this time is grounded upon the request, that her Grace maketh unto me in her letters sent me these dayes past from the Empe∣rors court, dated in London the xxviij. of October, in the Latine tongue: Wherunto her G. doth demand answer of me in two points: One is, touching the difficulty she feareth, by signes she seeth already, touching the renouncing of the title of the Supremacy of the Church in her Realmes, when it shal be put forth in the Parlament: Which signes be, that wheras her Majesty already hath caused to be put forth to the Parlament the abolishing of those lawes, which concerned the annul∣lation of the Legitimate matrimony of the gracious Lady, the Queen Mother to her G. the same passing the Upper house, and put forth to the Lower, albeit in the effect they would not refuse to aggree to al that might make to the establishing of the right of her G. to the Crown, yet they did not gladly hear of the abolishing especially of that law, that gave that title, of the Supremacy of the Church in the Realm, to the Crown: Suspecting that to be an introduction of the Popes au∣thority into the Realm: Which they cannot gladly hear of. And for this cause cannot gladly hear of my Legation in the Popes Name: Wherupon her G. in the same letters doth exhort me to stay my voyage until a more opportune time: And asketh my counsil, in case the lower House make resistance in the renouncing of the title of Supre∣macy, what her G. were best to do, and what course she had best to take: One other poynt is, that her G. desireth in the same letter to be cer∣tified by me, how it came to pass, that a Commission given by her to Mr. Francisco Commendone in secret, was published in the Consistory; as her Graces Ambassador resident in Venice, doth certify her: These be the two points, wherin her G. requireth my answer: And for to obey her demand, which to me is a Commandment, I do send you, not only to present my letters, but also my mouth, and with these present Instructions, for more satisfaction of her G. in al points. As touching the first point, which is of most weight, and so great touching the honor and wealth of her G. both spiritual and temporal, as none can be more; ye shal shew her G. that my first advise and counsil shal be, to obtain of God by prayer, that which I pray him to give me writing this; Which is, to have Spiritum Consilij & Forti∣tudinis. And this her G. must now pray for; that as in the attaining the Crown, his high providence shewed by manifest tokens to have given her these two graces; so in the maintaining therof, he wil con∣firm these two gifts in her mind. Her Highnes knowes, if she had relented at that time for any peril, when that both mans counsil and force were against her, she had lost. So if she for any fear do relent, and do not renounce the title of Supremacy, which took the name of Princess and Right heire from her; she cannot maintain that she hath gotten already by the spirit of Council and Fortitude. So that my first counsil is this, that obtaining by prayer these two gifts, which her G. had at that time, to shew her self no less ardent in the leaving of the title of Supremity, for to maintain her right, then the King her father was in the acquisition therof, to the privation of her right.
Which so much more she ought to do, and be more fervent in this, then her Father was in that; Because that was done against al law both of God and man; and this that her Majesty doth now, shewing her self most fervent herein, doth fulfil both Gods law and mans. And that is her very duty, if she should loose both state and life withal. As she hath known she ought to do, by the example of the best men of her realm. Which for this cause, resisting the Kings unlawful lawes, lost both. And now the goodnes of God putting no such hard conditions to her G. nor laying afore her eyes only Praemia futura with loss of temporal, as he did to those men, but praemia coelestia with terrena joyned together: That serving to the honor of God, which is in this poynt to render the title of Supremacy of the church in earth, to whom God hath given it, she doth establish her own Crown withal: If now she should relent herein for any fear of men, being brought to that state, that other men should rather fear her then she them, espe∣cially in so good a cause; this afore God and men were most perpe∣tually to be blamed. Wherfore what my Counsil is herein, on this maner now rehersed, you may inform her Highnes. Now to come to the execution of the thing. After her G. is deter∣mined to have it done, casting away al fear, the same stondeth to have it put forth, and causing it to pass by the Parlament; this is ano∣ther council necessarily to be pondered; Consisting the whole after my opinion in the proponement of the person, that hath to put forth the same, that with les difficulty, and more favour it may pass. Here ye may say, that I much pondering the same, and consi∣dering, that it must be a person of Authority, that should propone the same, if it should take effect; When I look in my mind upon al them I know of the Lords both Spiritual and Temporal, and persons of the Lower House, that might have authority; I do see none, but that other he hath defended the contrary cause by his Sentence and writing, as the Spiritual men have done; which taketh away a great part of authority to persuade others, when men heareth them accept∣ing that matter, that aforetime they have oppugned: Or else to speak of the Temporal Lords, or others, being al intangled with private profit, enjoying goods of the Church by rejecting the authority of the same, they cannot speak with that freenes of spirit, as such a matter requireth. Wherfore yee may conclude with her G. mine opinion herein; that after long consideration hereof, I see no person but one, that is able, with authority and also favour, to propone this matter. And that person is her G. her self. God having brought it to her hand alone: She being in this matter, and al other immaculate, and with∣out blot, ordered of God to defend his cause, and her own withal. And this, ye may say, the Counsil that it pleased God to put in my mind is, that her G. do in this case as I remember the Emperor did in his own case, passing by Rome, wheras his mind was to justify his quarrel touching the war betwixt him and the French king afore the Pope and the Cardinals. When doubting if onye other person should propose the same, it might have contradiction of that party that did favor France, he determined without any conference either with his Councel or others, to put forth the matter himself. And so when
nother the Pope, nor no other looked for any such thing, his Holi∣nes and the Cardinals being now congregate, he entred in among them in the Consistory, and made a long Oration, in justifying his cause, and obtained that he would without any resistance. Underneath this maner my poor advise should be, that her Majesty should personally come into the Parlament, and put forth the same her self, and I dare be bold to say, what for her authority, and the justnes and the equity of the cause it self, she shal have no contradicti∣on. And if need were also to shew her self to the Lower house, the thing it self so neer toucheth her wealth, both godly and temporally, that it would be taken rather cum applausu, then otherwise. Further, and jointly with this, it shal be necessary her highnes make mention of the Popes Legate, in my person, to be admitted and sent for. Wherin her G. hath this first to entreat, that the law of my banishment may be abolished, and I restored to name and bloud. And herein her G. doth know what extreme injustice hath been done to me, and al our house: And touching my person, what ever was done that could be layd against me, why I should be ashamed, which never thought nor did in that cause I was banished for: but that wherby I deserved rather great reward then any pain, being so given with heart and mind to the Kings honor, and wealth both of him and his realm, that with no reward that was offered me great, the King himself could not persuade me to do, or sentence any thing against his honor and the wealth of the realm, and to his damnation. Here is al the cause why I suffered banishment, with so great loss of those kinsfolks, that were dearer to me then my life. And this being done by consent of the Parlament, though, I doubt not, against their mind, the Parlament is bound afore God and man, to revoke me again, and especially now coming with extraordinary Commission, that bringeth the establishment of your Graces Crown, to the comfort of the whole realm, both temporally and spiritually. And this her G. may boldly say of al the time of my exile, wherin God hath given me honor more then I did require, or would have had, if it had layn in my own choise, and goods sufficient to main∣tain my state, if ever it should be found, that for any respect of per∣sons, for ambition, pleasure or lucre, I swarved from that I judged the honor of God, and, in matters of my Country, from the wealth therof; I am content not only to be excepted at this time, but perpe∣tually to be banished. But if they prove al the contrary, and that with the King your Father, not only as a faithful subject, but with that love also, that no servant could shew to his master more, nor son to his father, I shewed ever to exteame more his honor and wealth, then mine own goods or Country, and never procured other then the wealth of the same; then let them believe now, that I never would come unto them after so many years absence, your G. bearing the crown, with other Commission than that I know surely should be to the honor, comfort and wealth of your G. and the whole Country. And so touching this point of my counsil, that her G. requireth of me, here ye have explicated how the whole matter, wherin my coun∣sil is required, may be concluded. For otherwise at this time I se not what might be taken, nor can imagine no other so good▪ as this way;
Which me seemeth God hath ordered should be taken and preferred above al other. After this, ye shal shew her G. if this way be not followed, or de∣ferred, what I most fear: And this is first, that the Popes Holines being already persuaded to graunt to the stay of my journey, contrary to his first Commission, when her G. shewed more fervency to receive the obedience of the Church, that the next Commission I shal have shal be to return back into Italy again. And the cause why I fear this is, that the Pope shal think by offering to her G. and the Realm, al those graces, that do pertain to the reconciliation of both to the church, when he seeth it is not accepted with that promptnes it is offered, he shal think that both afore God and man, he hath satisfied al that could be requi∣red of him, touching the demonstration of his paternal affection to her G. and the realm. In the which the College of Cardinals perad∣venture wil judge, that his Sanctity hath been over much bountiful, especially when they hear of this my staying being made without their consent: Which they wil ever take for a great indignity, hearing no greater, nor more urgent cause therof, then hitherto hath been shew∣ed; and knowing how her G. cannot maintain her Right, nether afore God nor man, without having recourse to his Holines, and to the See Apostolic, and of whose Authority and Dispensation the whole right of her cause doth depend: as some of them then would have had his Holines at the beginning not to have sent his Legate, until he had been required, and much more now, after he hath sent, and he not ac∣cepted, they wil al be of opinion, that he shal be revoked. And then what peril both her G. and the whole realm standeth in, by the reason of the Schism yet remaining, it is manifest of it self. And yet this is not al my fear of my revocation, but that which may follow, that I fear more. Which is this: that wheras now if I had been accepted with that promptnes and sincere affect, as I was sent of the Popes Holines, and that I brought with me, my Person I trust should have brought more comfort to her Highnes, and the rest of the Country then any stranger; as the Popes Holines thought, when he made me Legate; so now on the contrary, for the self same circum∣stances and causes, that pertain to my Person, not being accepted, it shal more aggravate the cause, at all times, that the Realm hereafter should require to be absolved of the Schism, and al other that would seek to prevail against her Graces title, by the reason of the Schism, for the self cause, that I was not accepted, returning again to Rome, would take this for a great proof of the obstinate enduring in the same, which al divine lawes doth most condemn. So that my Person, I desi∣ring nothing more then to bring comfort to her and the realm, not ac∣cepted, shal be cause of more discomfort, which as I say God of his mercy forbid. Expounded under this maner my fear, which stondeth in my revocation, not for my self, but for the domage that may come to her Majesty and the realm therby; (the same being very likely, if my stay be deferred ony longer space; knowing that his Holines and the College wil not suffer such indignity:) then you may declare with∣al the remedies, that I thought best to be used at this time to avoyd this inconveniency.
And herein you may shew, how the first Remedy is, that the Pope and the College of Cardinals be wel persuaded, that my stay here is but for a smal time, and for to bring a more sure conclusion, and to make the way more plain, as I have caused the Popes Holines to be informed by a servant of mine sent by post, shewing the tenor of the bil her G. wrote Herrye my servant. Wherin was conteined that her Highnes shortly trusted that the matters of the Parlament should have that conclusion, that I most desired. And upon this hope that messenger had to shew his Holines, that I had sent my stuf afore, to∣wards Flaunders: and now also for confirmation of that hope I have sent a part of my company afore to tarry me there. So that this you may say is the first remedy I can find to keep the Pope and the College in hope of a brave and good resolution. One other chief Remedy is, because I perceive the Emperors Maje∣styes Counsil hath ever been, that her G. in matters of religion, and in the renouncing the title of the Supremacy, should procede with great moderation, and not to be hasty therin, until other matters tem∣poral were better settled; for this cause, beside that what I could do by letters, if it were possible, as much as was in me, to remove his Majesty from the opinion, that dilation in this matter would be profita∣ble to her Highnes, or the realm; as she may perceive by the copy of my letters, written to the Emperor, sent by Hrry Pyninge: I have likewise persuaded his Majesties Confessor, whom I found here a man of great sanctity, and learning, that for the love he beareth towards his Majesty touching his souls wealth, and honor of the world beside, and affection to her G. that he would personally repair himself to his Majesty, and by al means possible attempt to remove this worldly fear. And herein I have given him Instructions, wherof you have the Copy with you, that you may shew the same to her Highnes. The third Remedy is, that I attempt now, by sending you to her Majesty, that she may be wel informed of the peril; which in mine opinion is now more great, then when the Duke of Northumberland did set against her. And the same must be overcome with the means that her G then had the victory. Which was by putting her hope and trust wholy in God, and in the justice of her cause, casting away al fear worldly. Which doing, her Highnes may be sure her cause per∣taining to the honor of God, and wealth of his Church, for the which his Son dyed for, that is Lord of al, she shal find les difficulty, and much readier help, then she can now imagine. And this now shal be sufficient you inform her G. touching the matter, wherin it hath plea∣sed her to ask my advise and counsil. Touching the other matter, wherin her Highnes seemeth to be of∣fended for the relation made openly in the Consistory by Master Fran∣cesco Commendone, of those things, which her Majesty had told him in secret. Of this you may say, her G. being enformed of the truth hath more cause to accept that which was done most gratefully, then in ony part to be offended therewith. And the truth is this, he did not open any thing that was told him in secret, nor did not make his rela∣tion as I thought my self he had done at the beginning, as of things heard of her G.'s mouth, but that he had heard of other Catholics and devout persons, that knew her G.'s mind. Which was in general
of the devout mind that her Majesty bore to God and the Church; and of that particular point, that she would have had shewed only the Popes Holines, nothing was spoken. And al this done to confirm the Cardinals minds touching the approbation of that the Pope had done, in making so suddenly his Legate, afore any information was given what mind her G. bore to the obedience of the Church: Which some did not approve at the first. And after this relation made by Master Francesco, that had been in England, al were wel satisfied. So that al turned to the honor of her M. and to corroborate al that was done to her service. And that she may the surelier be advertised how all things passed in this matter, I have caused to be copied one part of a letter, which the Popes Holines wrote unto me upon this Act; and the same you may shew unto her Grace. And because I do know what great service it might be to her G. to be truly informed in al parts that pertaineth to the return of true obedi∣ence to the Church, both touching the time and maner, and the con∣sequence therof; and to discern the crafts and wiles, that the enemy of mankind ever useth to make it seem true obedience, when it is not: wherupon dependeth the whole ground of the maintenance of the State, that God hath given her G.: And how few there be in the realm, (al being maculate therin,) that can or wil indeavour themself, to expli∣cate the peril, and shew the remedy: therfore considering that I in person cannot come so soon to give her Highnes information, as I know the necessity of the matters to be concluded doth require; you may shew her M. that among those Gentlemen of my company, whom I have sent afore to Flaunders, there to remain, there be two, of whom if it wil please the same to take information of, and as her G. findeth it, to the honor of God and wealth of the realm, in this first setling of the obedience of the church, so to execute the same; I would think that her G. should be well satisfied, and satisfy al good men withal; these being men of that quality that ye know; which have godly pru∣dence, and humane, joyned both together. Of the which one I know by long experience, that hath bin many years so conversant with me, as no man more familiar. Of whom I have ever judged my self to have that treasure, that few great Princes hath the like. And of the other to have as great pleasure for the time he is content to serve me. But whether her Highnes wil serve her self to be informed of them in this first settling of her State, this is in her G.'s pleasure. This only I would desire her M. willing the same, if they should come, that they might come to be known to come from me, for the causes that I have shewed you. Further, your Commission here be to expound to her Highnes my whole mind and sentence, touching the demand it pleased her G. to make in her gracious Letters dated the xxviij. of Ianuary, concerning those persons, whom for the good opinion her G. had of their Vertue, Learning, and Catholic good mind, she intended to make Bps, how that they may be provided for, without derogation to the authority of the See Apostolic, her G. not intending further to extend the powers of the Crown regal, then it was customable in use afore the Schism en∣tered. In this poynt, wherin her G. demaundeth mine answer, you
shal make the same conformable to that which, by long and often con∣ference with me, ye know to be mine utter sentence. Wherin yee need not to have any further explication by writing. Besides this, touching the two Acts of Parlament; one of the legiti∣mation of the Matrimony betwixt the most gracious Queen her Mo∣ther, and the King her Father; the other of the Sacraments to be used under the maner, that they were used the last year of K. Hen∣ry VIII. her G.'s father: Which both it pleased her M. of her good∣nes to send unto me, for my satisfaction of mind, to know how they were passed by consent of the Parlament; you may shew her G. that these two, perfectly inacted and concluded, be those in truth, that of al Acts that could be made to my comfort, none could bring me more satisfaction. Wherof the only cause is, that I know nothing can pass by the Parlament more to the establishment of her Highnes State, both afore God and man, then the sure establishing of these two. And for this cause whatsoever lacketh to the establishing therof, me seemeth, I am bound to utter plainly to her G. and truly to say what doth not satisfy me in those Acts; my whole satisfaction depending of the fruit, that may redound to her G. and the realm, when they shal be perfectly concluded. And therfore herein you shal not let pass to enform her G. pleasing the same to give you benign audience, as wel wherin they were not to my utter satisfaction, as also wherin they satisfied me, and brought me some comfort. And first of al, how the former Act of the ratifying of the Matri∣mony seemed unto me much defectuous; in that the Parlament, ta∣king for chief groud, the Wisdome and Goodnes of the Parents of both parties in making the Matrimony, doth not follow that wisdome in the conclusion and establishing of the same. Their wisdome in ma∣king it was▪ that they thought not sufficient to conclude the Matri∣mony, notwithstanding the consent of the parties, unles by the Popes dispensation and authority of the See Apostolic, the impediments of conjunction, named in the lawes of the Church, were taken away, and it so made legitimate. And hereof the Act of Parlament, that would justify the same, with derogation of another Act, made to the condemnation of that Matrimony, maketh no mention. Which me seemeth as great a defect, as if one should take a cause to defend, which hath divers causes al concurrent to one effect, wherof the one dependeth upon the other, and one being principal of al the other, and would in defence therof name the other causes, and leave out the principal. For so it is in the case of the Matrimony: the consent of the parties and parents depended upon the Dispensation of the church, and the See of Rome: Without the which the wisdom of the Parents did not think it could be wel justified, as the effect did shew, in de∣manding the same: and this is that which now is left out in the justi∣fication, that the Parents have made, alledging the wisdome of the two Parents, the Kings of England and of Spain. And if it be here said, as I understand some do say, that the Dispen∣sation was asked of those Princes, not because it was so necessary, that the marriage could not be justified without that, but as they say ad ma∣jorem cautelam: how this answer cannot stand to that effect, I have so sufficiently informed you, that you of your self I doubt not, without
further declaration by writing can expound the same. Therfore lea∣ving that to your memory and capacity, to fly multiplication o wri∣ting, this only I wil put you in remembrance of, that if the Dispen∣sation of the Pope in that matter was asked of those two Princes ad majorem cautelam, which was to stop al mens mouths, making pretence of justice, that might have been brought forth, or objected, against the Matrimony, unles this Dispensation had been obtained; at the least for this cause in this Act should also have been made mention of the Dispensation, following the wisdome of those Princes ad majorem cautelam; being now more fear of pretenced justice against the Matri∣mony, as the effect hath, and doth shew, then ever could be imagi∣ned by the wit of those Princes, when they obtained first the Dispen∣sation. As touching the other Act of the Confirmation of the Sacraments, ye shal shew also wherin it seems to me defective. Which is, that wheras the ground of the making therof, as the Act doth express, is taken to redress the temerity of them, who, being affected to nuelty of opinion, did other take them away, or abuse the administration of them, against the antient and laudable custom of the Catholick church; This being a very necessary and pious cause to make that Act; in the prosecuting and concluding of the same I find this great defect, that never being approbate by the Church, that those persons which re∣main in Schisma, should have the right use of the Sacraments; but rather to such is interdict the use of them. This Act maketh the gate open to them, that be not yet entred into the Unity of the Church; to the use of the Sacraments, declaring it self how they should be m∣nistred, with relation to the time and year of that King; and nameing him; that is known to be the chief author of the Schism. What de∣fect this is it seemeth manifest of it self. This shewed, wherin both these Acts were defectuous, and therby not bringing me ful comfort, ye shal then expound wherin, at the rea∣ding of them, I took some comfort. Which was that the conclusion of both was passed, graunted and inacted by the Parlament. So that touch∣ing the effect, there could be no difficulty hereafter in the Parlament, the same being now bound to the approving and observance of their own Act. And wherin they were defectuous, this ought to be supplyed by the Princes Authority, that is to say, by her G.'s authority, as right Queen. To whom it appertaineth, as chief head of the Parlament, and of the whole realm withal, in al Acts, that the Parlament doth determe, both to interpret that that is obscure, and to supply and make perfect that which is defectuous, as wel in the time of the Parlment, as when it is dissolved. So that now these both Acts, being past by the Parlament, they are brought to her G.'s hand to interpret and supply, as it shal be judged by her G.'s wisdom, how they may best take effect. And to do the same other out of the time of Parlament, or in another Parlament, binding them, by their own decre, ratifying the mariage, and the use of the Sacraments, according to the form of the Catholic church, to admit the authority of the See of Rome. Which not ad∣mitted, nother the one Act, nor the other can take effect: And ad∣mitting and establishing of the same both those Acts, by this one rea∣son, (wherin is comprized the reduction of the realm to the unity of the Church) shal be established and made perfect.
For conclusion of al this, ye shal inform her G. that as I consider daily the wonderful goodnes of God to her Highnes with al paternal care of her soul, person and estate, and his so manifest protection eve∣ry day, and by so many ways calling her G. to establish this unity of the Church in the realm, wherof the breaking hath been cause of so great misery, in the realm, both spiritual and temporal, with travail temporal of her M. and utter jeopardy of loosing her State: So also I do consider what wayes the enemy of mankind Satan, Qui expetivit cribrare cclesiam tanquam triticum, hath used, and continually usth to let, that her G. cannot put in execution that wherunto God continual∣ly doth cal her. I dare be bold to say in this particular case, that that the Apostle saith generally, speaking of Satans malice, Non ignoramus cogitationes ejus. And so herein I do se how by al means he doth tempt to make her G. fal from that simplicity, Quae est in Christo Iesu, the which God hath ever hitherto maintained in her. And this I having noted of the speci∣al goodnes of God towards her, how al the rest falling from the unity of the church at the time of her Fathers reign, when she was in most trouble and travail, yet her Highnes never committed any thing that was prejudice to the same, being protected of God in that simplicity, and bringing that mind with her to the Crown: Satan knowing that by open tempting her to do against that, by way of commission, he should not prevail to make her to fal by this other way of omission; wherby his malice trusteth, that commission shall follow. Against the which, albeit my very trust is, the prayer of the Church at this time for his grace shal defend her; yet until I se by herG.'s goodnes so necessa∣ry and godly Act of the reduction of the Realm to the perfect obedi∣ence of the Church concluded, I cannot be without some fear: and therfore be more solicitous in advertiseing her M. of the great peril, wherof few or none do, or wil, speak unto her. And not only to ad∣vertise her G. but withal to shew the remedy; wherof you being sufficiently informed, this shal be the end of my Commission by wri∣ting: Praying Almighty God to inspire her Highnes to accept your sayings on my behalf, as he hath inspired me with al sincere affection by such means to utter the same. NUM. LXXV. † The Form of the Restitution of a maried Priest. DECIMO octavo die mensis Octobr. Anno Dom. 1554. in Aedi∣bus solitae Residentiae Magistri Anthonij Huse, Armigeri,Regist. Eccles. Christ. Cat. in Oc∣cidentali angulo Vici nuncupati Pater Noster Row, Civitatis London. notoriè situatis▪ Coram venerabili viro Magistro Henrico Harvy, LL. D. Vicario in Spiritualibus Generali, &c. in presentia mei Ioannis In∣cent, Notarij publici propter absentiam Magistri Anthonij Huse, Regi∣strarij, &c. assumpti, &c. comparuit personaliter Robertus Vevian Presbyter, nuper Rector Ecclesiae parochialis de Hever, Decanat.
de Shoreham, Ecclesiae Christi Cantuariensis jurisdictionis immediatae, ac quandam professionem in Scriptis redactam & conceptam fecit, & publicè legebat, sub eo qui sequitur Verborum tenore. Wheras I Robert Vvian, Clerk, late Parson of Hver in the Coun∣ty of Kent, being of the peculiar jurisdiction of the Church of Cantr∣bury, being ordered a Prest about xxvij yeres past, having ministred as a Prest in al kind of Prestly function and ministration of  and Sacramentalls, as to the office of a Prest appertaineth; have i  that time, contrary to the State of myne Orders, Decrees of the Church, and laudable Customes of the same, marryed one Agnes Stan∣ton, being a single or solute Woman, and with her in one House, as man and wie▪ have cohabited and dwellid, to the offence of my Christen brethren, and breh of the Unity of Christs said Church: I the said Robert do now lament and bewail my lief past, and thoffence by me committed: Intending firmly by Godds gace hereafter to lead a pure, chast and continent lief, according to such grace as Alighty God of his mercy, upon my humble petition and prayer, shal grant me: And do here before you, my competent Judge and Ordinary, most humbly require absolution of and from al such Censures and pains of the Lawes, as by my said offence, and ungodly behaviour I have incurrid and deservid; Promising firmly, and solemnly professing e∣fore you in this present Writing never to return to the said Agnes Stan∣ton, as to my wief or Concubyne: but from hensefourth to absteyne from her, and to keep miself sole, pure and chast from al carnal affe∣ctions and copulations; especially from her, and also from al other women, according to the Laws and Constitutions of our Moher, the Catholick church, and as my order also requireth. In witnes of this myne advised and deliberate minde, promise and profession I have to the same in this writing subscribed my name ith myne own hand. Yeven the 18th. day of October in the year of our Lord God 554, &c. Per me Robertum Vevian. Qua quidem Professione per praenominatum Robertum Vevian pub∣licè lecta, & manu suâ propriâ subscripta, ac praestito juramento, &c. de parendo juri, & stando mandatis Ecclesiae, Dominus ad humilem ejus petitionem, absolvit eum a sententia Excommunicationis & alijs Censuris & poenis juris per ipsum, ex causis superius expressatis, incur∣sis, & eum Sacramentis Ecclesiae, ac Officio suo Presbyterali, & inte∣grae functioni ejusdem restituit & redintegravit; & decrevit sibi literas Testimoniales, &c. Restitutio Ioannis Browne, Rectoris de Wymbaldowne in Decanata de Croyden. Restitutio Hnrici William, Presbyteri. Restitutio Petri Williamson, Presbyteri. These are al in the same Form with the above written, only Mutatis mu∣tandis. And no more are Registred but these.
NUM. LXXVI. John Fox his letter to the Parlament, against reviving the Act of the six Articles. FRequens hic per omnium ora ac aures jactatur non suspicio modo,Foxij. MSS. sed coans certissimáqe praedicatio, id Vos Summi, sanctissi∣mique Patres, moliri▪ u sanguinariae leges illae sex Articulorum titulo inscriptae▪ quondam benè sopitae, nunc demum, velut ex Orco revo∣centur ad Superos. Quod si verum sit, quàm vobis plausibile, ac qui∣budam sit graum, ignoro, cerè quàm Reip▪ sunestum ac omino∣sum sit futuum,  jam pridem declara publicus maeror, tristissi∣ma rerum ere humanarum, ac Luctuos facies, optimi cujusque ge∣mitus; ne tacita solum suspiria, sed ubertim ex doloris acerbitate prorumpentes Lachrymae, quotidiana bonorum fuga, totius deni∣qu Rep. (si tamen Resp. aliqua sit) squalor: ut interim taceam Conscientiam occula judicia ac vulnera, in omnibus ferè horror, in nonnullis etiam funera ac mortes ex rerum perturbatione contractae. Quae si calamiates, tot tantaeque quidem illae, quantas vix in ulla un∣quam Rep. conspeximus, ex concepta rerum imagine aque recorda∣tione duntaxat ipsa, cives adeo perstringunt vestros, quid vos futu∣rum tandem existimati, suspiciendi Domini, exhibitis jam rebus ipsis, ubi n exhibendis tanta sit trepidatio; Ubi into erabilis ipse Legum ri∣gor▪ & acutissima acies cervicibus jam incumbit civium: Ubi tot millia hominu non vitae libertatem, quam jam amiserunt, sed vitam ipsam cogentur deserere? Nec jam vita, sed & conscientia etiam erepta homnibus: nec Deo quidem supplicare licebit pro arbitratu suo, sed ad libidinem pucorum. Quae quum ita sint, vel deteriora etiam, quàm a me referri queant, considerabit prudentia vestra, quae documntis nostris non eget, sed pro communi salute rerum, consilia vestra potissimum flectenda sunt. Haec etenim jam ipsa agunur tempora, quibus vobis jam in manu situm est▪ felices nos velitis, an perditos. Si tam vilem habeatis ci∣vium vestrorum Sanguinem, si nihil vos moveant tot hominum gemi∣tus, querlae, lcrymae, bonorum miseriae, si parum sit vobis una ab ijsdem legibus accepta clades; Age dnuo, revoctur Trojanus equus in urem, quo soli, ve cum paucs, rgnum hoc possideatis. Sin vero ulla subit animos vestros Reip. charitas, si quod patriae studium ma∣neat, siquid preces nostrae siquid bonorum supplices manus, siquid denique Reip, siquid ecclesiae Christianae (quam advolutam genubus vestris existimetis) fle ilis qerela vaeat; efficite modo, pii Proceres, pro summa pietate, ut pluris  apud vos salutis publicae conservatio, quam privata quorundam licitaio; Nec quid possi pro imperio au∣thoritas, sed quid aqitas potius Civibus deeat vestra, velitis con∣siderare. Nihil enim in mni officiorum genere fieri aequius arbitor, quam ut quorum os Pari Patrs conscripsit ipsa, eos in filiorum loco asci∣tos tue mini: quique sam ad Vos omnem reverentiam, ac dignitatis authoritatem transferunt, ijdem a Vobis salutis ac tranquillitatis vi∣cissim
accipiant suae incolumitatem. Quod si communis Patriae re∣spectus vos minus attingat, at quod vobis ipsis dignum, quod generosa ac heroica sanguinis vestri nobilitas, tacito quodam sensu vobis sugge∣rat, attendite. Nam quum inter humanos omnes affectus, nil sit tam hominis proprium, quam clementia, qua divinae Naturae imaginem maximè referre vel infimi etiam videntur homines; quid tum a vobis expectari convenit, Illustrissimi Heröes, qui quo sublimiorem honoris in his terris gradum sortiti estis, hoc expressius supremo huic imagi∣nis divinae archetypo respondere omnibus modis decet? Porrò, habetis ad hoc Reginam, ut Nobilissimam, ita ad sana & sa∣lubria quaeque obsequacem Principem. Habetis & Cancellarium, ut doctrina praestabilem, ita natura non improbum, siquorum absint con∣silia. Verum ut inter Animantium genera, quaedam noxia, alia ad hominis usum, creata existunt: rursus sunt, quae in hoc tantum dicas nata, ut reliquis molestiam ac perniciem moliantur: Sic in humanis rebus, nulla Resp. nec vitae genus est, quod suas non habet vomicas, & . Atque hi sunt potissimum, qui religione praeposteri, natura saevi, alteri Ecclesiae, alteri Reip. exitiales existunt. Quibus cum benè esse non possit, nisi perturbatis rebus, turbam, quantum queant, intendunt ad saevitiam. Mitissimos Principum animos, hoc est. Reip. fontes, vitiant, consilia instillant, non quae honesto, sed quae ventri suo, ac quaestui serviant: Simile quiddam exercentes in hu∣manis rebus, quale Ate tribuit Homerica narratio. Deinde quum tutius laedunt sub umbra Nobilitatis, ac se occultant, quo siquid adveniat adversi, illos postremo feriat: siquid boni sit, ipsi pri∣mi sint ad carpendam messem. Et quoniam juxta imperitorum le∣gem, nihil his recte fieri videtur, nisi quod ipsi faciunt, ad arbitratum suum universam religionem, cum ipsa Scriptura, corrigendam putant, Quicquid ipsis non placet haereticum est. Nil sibi placere potest, quod non illico alba amussis sit quantum libet a scopo alienum. NUM. LXXVII. An instrument of the University of Cambridg, appointing certain of their members to repair to Oxford, to dispute with Cranmer, Ridley and Latimer there. Procuratorium Academiae Cantabrig. Foxij MSS.UNiversis Christi fidelibus praesentes literas visuris, lecturis & au∣dituris, & quos infrascripta tangunt, seu quovis modo tangere poterunt; Nos Vicecancellarius Senatusque tam Regentium quam non Regentium almae Academiae Cantabrigien. Salutem, & dilecti∣onem in Christo Ihesu. Cum jampridem ex parte Sacrae Synodi, sive Convocationis praelatorum & cleri Cant. provinciae, aucthoritate & mandato Sereniss. & religiosiss. Dominae nostrae Reginae Mariae convo∣catae, Nobis in Senatu nostro ad effectum infrascriptum in simul
congregatis exhibiti fuerint quidam Articuli tenoris infrascripti, Viz. In Sacramento Altaris virtute verbi divini a sacerdote prolati praesens est realiter, sub speciebus panis & vini, naturale corpus Christi, conceptum de Virgine Maria: Item, naturalis ejusdem Sanguis. Post Consecrationem non remanet Substantia panis & vini, neque alia ulla Substantia, nisi Substantia Christi, Dei & hominis. In Missa est vivisicum ecclesiae Sacrificium, pro peccatis tam vivorum quam mortuorum propitiabile: Simulque requisiti fuerimus, eosdem Articulos matura deliberatione legere, expendere & considerare: Et si sanam, veram & Catholicam doctrinam contineant, eosdem approbare velimus: Nos in Senatu nostro, sic ut praefertur, convenientes, perlectosque nobis Articulos, & contenta in ijsdem, quanta decebat in re tam gravi maturitate & de∣liberatione, perpendentes & librantes, quandoquidem ipsos, & con∣tenta in ijsdem, cum Catholica virtute & fide orthodoxa per omnia con∣venire animadvertimus, eosdem unanimi consensu nostro atque assensu, ut veros, catholicos, orthodoxos, ac veritati & doctrinae ca∣tholicae, ac aperto Dei verbo consentientibus, veterum orthodoxorum patrum testimonijs, Generaliumque Consiliorum authoritatibus per omnia innitentes & congruentes, tam consentientibus animis compro∣bavimus, ut nostrâ plurimum interesse arbitrati sumus doctrinam articulorum hujusmodi contra omnes illius oppugnatores defendere & tueri. Intelligentes itaque tam facti notorietate, quàm famae publicae rela∣tione, esse nonnullos perditionis & iniquitatis filios, seditiosos erro∣rum innovatores, & ecclesiae Christi hostes, qui hujusmodi sacram, Catholicam & orthodoxam doctrinam, ac ecclesiae unitatem modis om∣nibus perturbare, dilacerare, infestare, affligere & evertere satagunt, & conantur, quorum praecipui authores & Antisignani nominatim sunt, D. Thomas Cranmerus, nuper Cantuar. Archiepiscopus, Nicolaus Ridleius, nuper Roffensis, & Hugo Latimerus, jam olim Wigorn. Epis∣copi, Acaemiae nostrae Cantabrig. quondam alumni, modo apud incly∣tam Universitatem Oxoniensem existentes, nostrarum partium esse duxi∣mus, non modo veritatem Catholicam praedictam verbo & scriptis com∣probare, ac mundo palam facere, verum etiam eandem nedum con∣tra eosdem principales adversarios, sed & contra omnes alios ecclesiae hostes & veritatis Christi oppugnatores, pro virili nostra, manifesto Dei verbo, Sanctorumque patrum testimonijs, defendere, tueri & pro∣pugnare. Ac proinde quo veritas magis elucescat, quosdam pios & eruditos viros ex eadem nostra Universitate ad hoc muneris publico om∣nium nostrûm nomine obeundum, Viz. D. Iohannem Yong, Vicecan∣cellarium nostrum, Gulielmum Glyn, Richardum Atkynson, Cuthbertum Scot, Thomam Watson, Albanum Langdale, & Thomam Sedgwyke, Theologiae Professores, conjunctim & divisim selegimus, nominavi∣mus, & deputavimus: Dantes & concedentes eisdem, prout, & te∣nore praesentium sic damus & concedimus, conjunctim, ut praefertur, & divisim, plenariam potestatem, aucthoritatem & facultatem, vice & nominibus omnium nostrum, Almam academiam Oxon. quibuscun∣que diebus eis visum fuerit, petendi & proficiscendi. Ac si quidem libera eis, pro more, aucthoritate Universitatis Oxon. in hac parte dabitur venia & facultas, cum dictis dominis, Cranmero, Ridleio, &
Latimero, caeterisque ejusdem farinae monstris palam & publicè, sive privatim, congrediendi, hijsque de rebus disserendi, disputandi & ar∣gumentandi, sanamque doctrinam praedictam contra eos patrocinandi, & propugnandi, adversariosque praedictos, & eorum perversas opinio∣nes, & sententias, atque haeretica dogmata refellendi, refutandi, & convincendi, Eosque ad resipiscentiam modis omnibus quibus pote∣rint, hortandi, reducendi & persuadendi: Caeteraque omnia & singu∣la faciendi, exercendi & expediendi; quo hujusmodi negotij qualitas & natura de se exigunt & requirunt, Promittentes nos ratum, gra∣tum, & firmum perpetuò habituros totum id, & quicquid ab eisdem eru∣ditis viris nomine & vice nominis in praemissis, aut eorum aliquo actum aut gestum fuerit. In quorum omnium & singulorum fidem & testimonium praemissorum, has nostras Commissionis, & Deputationis literas nostro communi sigillo communiri fecimus. Datum e Senatu nostro Cant. x die mensis Aprilis, anno verbi incarnati supra Millesi∣mum quingentesimum quinquagesimo quarto. NUM. LXXVIII. The University of Cambridg to that of Oxford, relating to the former matter. Reverendis in Christo viris D. Vicecancellario Oxoniensi, & universis Doctoribus illius Academiae, atque Magistris Regentibus & non Regentibus. GRavi nuper & turbulenta tempestate, sicut vos scitis & experti estis,Foxij. MSS. Reverendi in Christo fratres, Ecclesiae nostr horribiliter jactatae sunt. Tetra etenim seditosi erroris, & protervae atque obsti∣natae haeresios pestis ac lues omnes Angliae oras pergasata, ipsas etiam Academias corripuit, atque gravissimè & periculosissimè insestavit. Christi pura & orthodoxa religio, mendacibus Sectariorum commentis & prodigiosis subinde pullulantium falsarum doctrinarum monstris miserè deformata & dilacerata, jacuit. Jam tamen singulari Numinis beneficio, & D. nostri Iesu Christi atque illius Sacri Spiritus afflatu, serenior aura & placida atque amaena amabilis concordiae tranquillitas affulgere occaepit. Gratias proinde indesinenter agere debemus coe∣lesti patri, qui propter suam misericordiam Ecclesijs nostris, magna persecutionis violentia afflictatis, optabilem & serenum statum resti∣tuerit. Qui per optimam & religiosissimam Reginam religionis Catho∣licae integritatem, quae corruptorum maliciosa improbitate paenè ex∣tincta fuerat, restauravit, atque Academijs nostris antiquam suam li∣bertatem, quae nephandorum tyrannide opprimebatur, reddidit. Nostrarum verò partium esse ducimus tantam & tam illustrem Dei erga nos beneficentia agnoscere & confiteri; atque etiam eundem Deum & propitium nostrum Dominum, assiduis precibus interpellare, ut haec quae jam restaurata est religionis orthodoxa & pura integritas, in dies magis ac magis augeatur; atque ea quae jam conciliata est
pax & concordia firmius & solidius coalescat. Hoc etenim est quod vas electionis, & Christi Apostolus Paulus, hortatur, & admonet, di∣cens, Cum patientia supportate Vos invicem, soliciti servare unitatem spiri∣tus in vinculo pacis. Vnum corpus, Vnus spiritus; sicut & vocati estis in una spe Vocationis vestrae. Vnus dominus, Vna fides, Vnum baptisma, Vnus Deus & pater omnium; qui est per omnia, & super omnia, & in om∣nibus vobis. Nos poinde eandem spiritus unitatem, cum Catholica Christi ec∣clesia, retinentes articulos, de quibus postrema Synodo Londoniensi inter ecclesiarum nostrarum proceres conveniebat, unanimi consensu comprobantes, atque veram, sanam, & Catholicam doctrinam ijsdem exprimi & explicari agnoscentes, optamus lupos omnes, qui Christi ovile dissipare, & simplices oviculas seducere conantur, ab ecclesiae castris procul abarceri. Dilectos itaque nobis, & eruditos viros D. Io. Yong, Vicecancellarium nostrum, D. Gulielmum Glyn, Richardum At∣kynson, Cuthbertum Scot, Thomam Watson, Albanum Langdale, & Tho∣mam Segiswyck, Theologioe Professores, atque Catholicae fidei & Acade∣miae nostrae Alumnos, ad vos legare destinavimus: Non quod doctrinam articulorum, in questionem & disputationem vocent, quam nos omni ambiguitate seposita, veram & orthodoxam esse agnoscimus; utpote quae & aperto Dei verbo & consentientibus patrum testimonijs, & gene∣ralium Conciliorum aucthoritate, fulciatur & confirmata sit; sed ut nostro omnium nomine sanae doctrinae unà vobiscum patrocinentur, atque orthodoxam fidem propugnent, & eos qui eidem adversantur, convincant, & hereticae atque perversae sententiae authores refellant & refutent. Quales apud vos esse credimus Thomam Cranmerum, N. Rid∣ley, & Hug. Latimerum, nuper Episcopos, & Academiae nostrae, atque Christi ecclesiae filios obedientes; nunc vero, sicut quidam referunt; quod nos dolentes scribimus, falsae & corruptae doctrinae contumaces patronos. Quorum Nos miserandum statum multum deploramus, mentem illis meliorem precantes, quo mutata sententia per resipiscen∣tiam in matris Ecclesiae sinum simul sese recipiant. Quam quisquis non habuerit suam Matrem, is Deum Patrem habere non poterit. Ut ergo vos intelligeretis, quae nostra esset his de causis sententia, pios & eru∣ditos hos viros ad vos publica authoritate nostra mittimus, atque has literas communi nostro sigillo sigillari fecimus. Christus Iesus vos vestrámque illustrem Academiam pietate & bonis literis florentem, ad verae religionis augmentum, & corruptae errorum profligationem per∣petuo conservet, E senatu nostro 10 Aprilis 1554. Vestrum omnium in Christo aman∣tissimi, Vicecancellarius & Re∣gent. & non Regent. Senatus Cantabr. Concordat cum originalibus literis missivis & procuratorijs.
NUM. LXXIX. Cranmer's Letter to the Queens Council after his Disputation at Oxon. oxes Acts.IN right humble wise sheweth unto your honorable Lordships, Tho∣mas Cranmer, late Archbishop of Canterbury, Beseeching the same to be a means for me unto the Queens highnes for her mercy and par∣don. Some of you know by what means I was brought and trained un∣to the Wil of our late Soveraign Lord K. Edward VI. and what I spake against the same; Wherein I refer me to the reports of your Honors and Worships. Furthermore, this is to signify to your Lordships, that upon Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday last past, were open Disputati∣ons here in Oxford, against me, Mr. Ridley, and Mr. Latimer, in three matters concerning the Sacrament. First, of the Real presence. Se∣condly, Of Transubstantiation. And thirdly, Of the Sacrifice of the Mas. Upon Monday against me: Upon Tuesday against D. Ridley; and upon Wednesday against Mr. Latimer. How the other two were order∣ed I know not; for we were separated: So that none of us knoweth what the other said; nor how they were ordered. But as concerning my self I can report. D. Chadsey was appointed to dispute against me. But the Disputation was so confused, that I never knew the like: every man bringing forth what him liked, without order. And such hast was made, that no answer could be suffered to be taken fully to any argument, before another brought a new argument. And in such weighty matters, the Disputation must needs be ended in one day, which can scantly be ended in three months. And when we had an∣swered them, they would not appoint us one day to bring sorth our proofes, that they might answer us: being required by me therunto. Wheras I my self have more to say, then can be wel discussed, as I suppose, in twenty dayes. The means to resolve the truth had been to have suffered us to answer fully to al that they could say; and then they again to answer us fully to al, that we can say. But why they would not answer us, what other cause can there be, but that either they feared their matter, or that they were not able to answer us? Or else for some consideration they made such hast, not to seek the truth, but to condemne us: That it must be don in post hast, before the mat∣ters could be throughly heard. For in al hast we were al three con∣demned of heresy. Thus much I thought good to signify to your Lordships, that you may know the indifferent handling of matters: Leaving the judgment therof unto your Wisdomes. And I beseech your Lordships to remember me, a poor prisoner, unto the Queens Majesty; and I shal pray, as I do daily, unto God, for the long pre∣servation of your good Lordships in al godlines and felicitie. April 23.
NUM. LXXX. The Lord Legates Commission to the Dean and Chapter of Canter∣bury, deputing them to Absolve and Dispense with the Clergy, in his stead; and absolve the Laity. Commissio Domini Reginaldi Poli Legati de Latere. REginaldus miseratione divina Sanctae Mariae de Cosmeden Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae Diaconus Cardinalis Polus nuncupatus Sanctis∣simi D. N. Papae & Sedis Apostolicae,Registr Ec∣cles. Cant. ad Serenissimos Philippum & Ma∣riam Angliae Reges, & universum Angliae regnum, de Latere Legatus, Venerabilibus ac nobis in Christo dilectis DECANO & CAPITULO Ecclesiae Metropolitices Christi Cant. ad quos omnis & omnimoda juris∣dictio Spiritualis & Ecclesiastica, quae ad Archiepiscopum Cant. sede plena pertinuit, ipsa Sede jam vacante, notorie dinoscitur pertinere, seu eorum in Spiritualibus Vicario Generali, Salutem in Domino sem∣piternam. Cum Sanctissimus in Christo Pater Dominus noster Domi∣nus JULIUS providentia divina Papa tertius, inter alias facultates, pro hujus regni omniumque personarum in ea existentium Sanctae Ecclesiae reconciliatione facienda, necessarias nobis in hac nostra Legatione con∣cessas, hanc specialiter indulserit, ut quoscumque in haeresium & schis∣matis errores lapsos, ab eis & a quibuscúnque censuris & poenis propterea incursis, absolvere, & cum eis super irregularitate prae∣missorum occasione contracta Dispensare, & alia multa adhaec necessa∣ria seu quomodolibet opportuna facere: Et hoc idem munus Catholi∣cis locorum Ordinarijs & alijs personis Deum timentibus, fide insigni∣bus, & literarum scientia praeditis demandare possumus, prout in ejus literis tam sub plumbo, quam in forma Brevis, expeditis plenius con∣tinetur: CUMque de benignitate, & Serenissimorum Regum pietate, Reg∣num hoc universaliter, & omnes Domini Spirituales & Temporales, aliaeque personae Communitatum in eo, quod proximè celebratum est, Parliamento congregatae, singulariter primùm, & deinde universum corpus Cleri provinciae Cantuariensis, & omnes ferè personae singulares dictum corpus repraesentantes, coram nobis existentes, aliaeque plerae∣que fuerint sanctae ecclesiae Catholicae per nos ipsos reconciliatae: Spe∣remúsque fore, ut omnes aliae, quae reconciliatae adhuc non sunt, re∣conciliatae fuerint: Difficiléque & potius impossibile sit, ut tam numerosa multitudo per manus nostras reconcilietur: Ideo vices nostras in hoc, locorum Ordinarijs & alijs Personis, ut supra qualificatis delegandas duximus: CIRCUMSPECTIONI igitur vestrae, de cujus probitate & chari∣tatis zelo plenam in Domino fiduciam obtinemus, Authoritate Aposto∣licâ nobis per Literas ejusdem Sanctissimi D. N. Papae, & per nos vobis nunc impensâ, omnes & singulas utriusque Sexus, tam laicas quam ec∣clesiasticas singulares, & quorumvis ordinum Regulares vestrae civitatis, & Dioceseos, personas, in quibusvis etiam sacris ordinibus constitutas, cujuscumque etiam status & qualitatis existant, etiamsi Capitulum,
Collegium, Universitas, seu Communitas fuerit, quarumvis haeresi∣um & novarum Sectarum professores, aut in eis culpabiles, vel suspe∣ctas, ac credentes, receptatores & fautores ipsorum, suos errores ag∣noscentes, ac de illis dolentes, & ad orthodoxam fidem recipi humi∣liter postulantes, cognita in ipsis vera & non ficta aut simulata poeni∣tentia, ab omnibus & singulis haeresium & schismatis, & ab orthodoxa fide Apostasiarum & blasphemiarum & aliorum quorumcúnque simi∣lium errorum, etiam sub generali sermone non venientium, peccatis, criminibus, excessibus & delictis, (de quibus tamen inquisiti vel ac∣cusati seu condemnati non fuerint) & quibúsvis excommunicationis, suspensionis, & interdictionum, & alijs ecclesiasticis & temporalibus sententijs, censuris & poenis in eas praemissorum & infra scriptorum oc∣casione ac jure, vel ab homine latis, vel promulgatis, etiamsi eis pluri∣bus annis insorduerint, & earum Absolutio dictae Sedi, etiam per lite∣ras in die coenae Domini legi consuetas, reservata existat; In utroque Conscientiae scil. & contentioso foro, eos vero qui jam inquisiti vel ac∣cusati aut condemnati fuerint, vel ut praefertur ad cor revertentes, in foro conscientiae tantum, plenariè absolventes & Liberantes. NECNON cum eis super irregularitate per eos occasione prae∣missorum contractâ, etiam quia sic Legati. Missas & alia divina officia, etiam contra ritus & ceremonias hactenus probatas & usitatas, celbra∣verint, aut illis alias se immiscuerint, contracta: Quodque irregula∣ritate & alijs praemissis non obstantibus in suis ordinibus, etiam ab hae∣reticis & schismaticis Episcopis, etiam minus ritè, dummodo in eo∣rum collatione Ecclesiastica forma & intentio sit servata, per eos suscep∣tis, & in eorum susceptione etiam juramentum contra Papatum Roma∣num praestiterint, etiam in Altaris ministerio ministrare, ac quaecúnque quotcúnque ac qualiacúnque etiam curata, invicem tamen se compa∣tientia beneficia Secularia vel Regularia (dignitatibus in Collegiatis ec∣clejs principalibus & in Cathedralibus, etiam Metropolitanis post Pontificalem majoribus exceptis) etiam Schismaticis Episcopis, seu aljs Collatoribus, etiam laicalis potestatis praetextu habita, authori∣tate Apostolica retinere, dummodo alteri jus quaesitum non sit, & non promotos ad omnes etiam sacros & presbyteratus ordines a suis Ordi∣narijs, si digni & idonei reperti fuerint; rite & legitimè promoveri, ac beneficia ecclesiastica, etiam curata, si eis alias canonicè conferantur, recipere & retinere valeant, qualitate temporis, ministrorum defectu, & ecclesiae necessitatibus utilitatibúsque ita poscentibus, DISPEN∣SANDI & indulgendi, & omnem inhabilitatis & infamiae maculam sive notam ex praemissis quomodolibet insurgentem, penitus & omnino abolendi, necnon in pristinum, & eum, in quo ante praemissa quomo∣dolibet erant, statum; ita ut & omnibus & singulis gratijs, privilegijs, favoribus & indultis, quibus caeteri Christi fideles gaudent, & gaudere quomodolibet possunt, uti & gaudere valeant; in omnibus, & pr omnia, perinde ac si a fide Catholica nunquam in aliquo defecissent, restituen∣di, reponendi, & redintegrandi, ac eis (dummodo corde contriti) sua errata & excessus circumspectioni vestrae, seu alicui alteri per eos eligendo Catholico Confessori sacramentaliter confiteantur, & paeniten∣tiam Salutarem eis pro praemissis injungendam omnino adimpleant, omnem publicam confessionem, abjuratio nem, reconciliationem, & paenitentiam juxta debitas arbitrio vestro moderandi, & in totum re∣mittendi:
Necnon quoscunque REGULARES & Religiosos, ex∣tra eorum regularia loca, absque sedis Apostolicae licentia, vagantes, ab Apostasiae reatu, alijsque censuris, & paenis ecclesiasticis per eos propterea, etiam juxta suorum ordinum instituta, incursis, injuncta eis pro modo culpae paenitentia salutari, pariter absolvendi, & super quacunque irregularitate propterea per eos contracta, aut cum eis, ut alicui curato beneficio de illius obtinentis consensu, in habitu clerici saecularis, habitum suum regularem sub honesta toga Presbyteri saecu∣laris deferendo, deservire, & extra eadem loca regularia remanere, ad beneplacitum nostrum, libere & licite possunt, eadem autoritate Apo∣stolica, ob defectum ministrorum, & alias praedictas causas, Dispen∣sandi; AC QUOSCUNque qui in sacris ordinibus constituti, Matri∣monia, etiam cum viduis & corruptis mulieribus de facto contraxerint, postquam mulieres sic copulatas rejecerint, illisque abjuraverint, ab hu∣jusmodi excessibus & excommunicationis sententia interposita, eos pro modo culpae paenitentia salutari in forma ecclesiae consueta, absolvendi, ac cum eis, postquam paenitentiam peregerint, & continenter & lau∣dabiliter vivere cogniti fuerint, super bigamia propterea per eos con∣tracta, ita ut ea non obstante, in quibusvis susceptis & suscipiendis or∣dinibus, etiam in Altaris ministerio ministrare, ac alicui beneficio ec∣clesiastico, de illius obtinentis consensu, deservire, extra tamen Dio∣cesin, in qua fuerint copulati, eisdem de causis dispensando. Necnon parochalium Ecclesiarum tuae Diocesios Rectores sive Curatos, de quo∣rum fide, probitate, circumspectione, & charitatis zelo plena fiducia conspici potest, ad quarumcúnque utriúsque sexus suae parochiae, per∣sonarum laicarum tantum, absolutionem, & ecclesiae Catholicae recon∣ciliationem (ut praefertur) autoritate Apostolica faciendam: Et siqui ex Curatis praedictis ad id idonei non fuerint, in eorum defectum alias idoneas & sufficientes personas, quae eorum vices suppleant, nominan∣di & deputandi: Quos sic per vos nominatos & deputatos in locum no∣strum, in praemissis absolutionibus & reconciliationibus, substituimus: Praemissis, ac Regula de insordescentibus edita, & quibusvis alijs con∣stitutionibus & ordinationibus Apostolicis, & omnibus illis, quae in li∣teris praedictis Sanctitas sua voluit non obstare, contrarijs non obstanti∣bus quibuscunque praesentibus in praeteritis casibus locum habentibus, & ad beneplacitum nostrum duraturis. Datum Lambethi prope Lon∣dinum, Wintoniensis Diocaesis, Anno a Nativitate Domini MDLV. idi∣bus Februarij, Pontificatus Sanctissimi in Christo Patris & Domini nostri Domini Iulij divina providentia Papae tertij anno 5to. Reg. Car. Polus Leg.
NUM. LXXXI. The Lord Legates Instructions to the Bishops, in the performing of his orders about absolving their Clergy and Laity. SInguli Domini Episcopi, necnon Officiales Ecclesiarum, quae nunc vacant,Registr. Ec∣cles. Cant. pro executione eorum, quae a Reverendissimo Domino Legato sunt eis demandata, ordinem qui infrascriptus est, poterunt observare. Primùm, Vocatum ad se totum singularum civitatum, quibus singuli praesunt, Clerum, de h ijs quae sequuntur, instruere pro∣curabunt. De paterno amore & charitate, quam Sanctissimus D. N. Iulius Papa tertius erga Nationem Anglicam declaravit, qui ut primum cog∣novit Serenissimam Mariam Reginam fuisse declaratam, Reverendissi∣mum Dominum Reginaldum Cardinalem Polum de suo Latere, ad has partes Legatum misit, ut Regnum hoc, tot jam annos ab Ecclesia Catho∣lica separatum, ad ejus unionem reducere, & in errores lapsos conso∣lari, atque in Dei gratiam restituere studeret. De ejusdem Domini Legati adventu; quanta laetitia atque honore is acceptus fuit, tum a Sereniss. Regibus, tum ab alijs omnibus. De hijs quae in proximo Parliamento acta & conclusa sunt. Scil. De omnibus Dominis de Parliamento, & universo regno a schismate & censuris incursis absolutis, & Ecclesiae Catholicae reconciliatis. De dam legibus, quae contra authoritatem Sedis Apostolicae & Romani Pontificis fuerunt per Henricum VIII. & Edwardum VI. latae & promul∣gatae, revocatis & abolitis. De restituta Sanctiss. N. D. Papae & Ecclesiae Romanae eadem obedientia, quae ante hoc perniciosissimum schisma praestabatur. De authoritate Episcopis restituta; & maximè ut possint contra hae∣reticos & schismaticos procedere, & eos juxt a canonicos Sanctiones co∣ercere & punire. Hijs ita expositis, veniant ad facultates sibi ab eodem Reverendiss. D. Legato concessas, quae recitentur: Et hic omnes, qui in schisma & alios errores lapsi sunt, invitentur ad Absolutionem & conciliationem humiliter ex toto corde petendam, necnon & Dispensationes, tam su∣per ordinibus, quam super beneficijs necessarias & opportunas postu∣landas. Praefigatur Dies, intra quem dicti de clero humiles & paeni∣tentes compareant ad petendam suppliciter absolutionem, reconcilia∣tionem & dispensationes praedictas. Idem vero Domini Episcopi, postquam illi omnibus erroribus suis renunciaverint, & promiserint sacramentaliter ipsis, aut alteri Sacer∣doti Catholico, confessuros esse errores suos & paenitentiam sibi adinjun∣gendam impleturos eos, absolvent, & Ecclesiae reconciliabunt, & cum ipsis juxta formam facultatum, pro petentium necessitatibus, prout sibi visum fuerit, dispensabunt: adhibendo semper convenientem di∣stinctionem inter eos, qui solum in schisma & hereses inciderunt, & eos, qui etiam eos publicè docuerunt, & alios ad peccandum addux∣erunt.
Eodem die constituetur dies festus & solennis, in quo, adstante in Ecclesia populi multitudine, Domini Episcopi, & omnes Curati in ecclesijs suis omnia eadem, quae clero jam exposita fuerunt, Populo quoque insinuabunt, & omnes invitabunt, paternè & cum omni affectu, ut agnitis erroribus suis ad Ecclesiae Catholicae gremium re∣vertantur, promittendo fore, ut omnibus praeterita crimina omnia condonentur, & remittantur, modo eos ex animo illorum paeniteat, & illis renuncient. Praesigatur autem terminus, ut putà tota Pascatis Octava, intra quem terminum omnes Ecclesiae reconcilientur. Alioqui eo lapso contra ipsos, & eos etiam, qui post reconciliationem ad vomitum re∣versi fuerint, severissimè procederetur. Dicatur de facultate concessa a Reverendiss. Domino Legato Episcopis & alijs, ut absolvere possint omnes quicúnque ad cor reversi fuerint. Iidem Domini Episcopi & Officiales nominabunt & deputabunt Ecclesiarum parochialium Rectores, seu alias Personas idoneas, quae Laicos ab haeresi & Schismate, & quibuscúnque censuris absolvant juxta facultatum formam & tenorem, data per Episcopos formula, qua in absolutione & reconciliatione uti debeant. Eadem poterunt cum Clero totius Diocesios observari prout com∣modius visum fuerit. Domini Episcopi & Officiales praefati, necnon omnes Curati seu alij ad id deputati, habeant librum, in quo nomen & cognomen, & parochia omnium reconciliatorum inscribantur, ut postea sciatur, qui fuerint reconciliati, & qui non. Idem Domini Episcopi & Officiales Octava Pascatis elapsa, pote∣rint facere Visitationem Civitatis primo, dein Dioceseos; Et siqui non fuerint reconciliati, poterint ad se eos vocare, & cognoscere causas, propter quas ab erroribus suis nolunt recedere. Et si in eis obstinatè perseverarint, tum contra eos procedent. In hac facienda Visitatione attendant diligenter, quae in hoc brevi compendio sunt notata, & maximè faciant, ut omnes Ecclesiasticae personae ostendant titulos suorum Ordinum & Beneficiorum; ut si in ijs aliquis alius defectus notetur, illis provideant, & omni studio pro∣curent, ut errores, quibus Dioceses eorum sint infectae, extirpentur, & veritas fidei tum in concionibus, tum in confessionibus doceatur, de∣putando personas idoneas ad conciones faciendas, & confessiones audi∣endas. Id etiam curent, ut sacrorum Canonum instituta in omnibus observentur, & nomen Divi Thomae Martyris, necnon sanctiss. Domini nostri Papae ex libris dispunctum, in illis restituatur, & pro eo secun∣dum morem ecclesiae, ut ante Schisma fiebat, oretur. In publicationibus hujusmodi erit ante omnia commemoratio mise∣riarum, & infelicitatis praeteritorum temporum; & magnae Gratiae, quam nunc Deus pro misericordia populo huic exhibuit: hortando omnes ad haec grato animo cognoscenda, & infinitas gratias Divinae ip∣sius bonitati assiduè agendas. Hortandi sunt etiam omnes, ut devotè orent Deum pro salute & fe∣lici statu horum Serenissimorum & de hoc regno optimè meritorum, ac merentium Regum, & specialiter pro felici partu Sereniss. & pijssimae reginae.
Formula Absolutionis. Dominus noster Jhesus Christus, summus Pontifex per suam pijssi∣mam misericordiam, & clementiam Vos cruore suo preciosissimo re∣demptos, de ineffabili sua pietate, ab omnibus peccatis per vos commis∣sis, misericorditer absolvat. Et ego authoritate Apostolorum Divi Pe∣tri & Pauli, ac Sedis Apostolicae mihi commissa, Vos & Vestrûm quemlibet ab omnibus peccatis, criminibus, excessibus, & delictis, at∣que ab omni Haeresi, Schismate, Apostasia, irregularitate, & quocun∣que errore vestris; necnon a juramento contra Papatum Romanum per vos praestito; & a quibuscunque excommunicationis, suspensionis, & interdictionum & alijs sententijs, censuris & poenis ecclesiasticis a jure vel ab homine latis, per vos ratione praemissorum incursis & contractis, absolvo, ac communioni fidelium, & S. Sanctis Dei ecclesiae Sacra∣mentis restituo, reduco & redintegro. In nomine Patris & Filij & Sp. Sancti. Amen. NUM. LXXXII. An Italian to his friend, concerning Car. Pole. NOnne solitus fuisti affirmare, Cardinalem illum tuum Polum opti∣mè nosse justificationem sola fide in Christum?Ex Balaei Cen∣tijs. mirificè cupere promotam doctrinam nostram, quam mundus odit? Expectare autem tempus atque occasionem, qua se patefaciat? Certe audivi ego te centies omnia haec affirmantem, atque audierunt quotquot erant tibi aliqua necessitate conjuncti, & gustarunt bonum Dei ver∣bum. Quum aliquis eorum aliquando quereretur, diceretque se non posse ferre Polum ita esse addictum Papis, atque ita palam, & tam ma∣lo exemplo consentire quotidie Missis, atque alijs illicitis cultibus, tu solebas prodire & affirmare, illam esse dissimulationem ad tempus, sed patefacturum se brevi, magno cum fructu Ecclesiarum Dei. Annon desines nunc ita de illo sentire ac loqui? Non objicies patrocinium tam injustae causae? Non fateberis una nobiscum, Polum tuum aut veritatis & pietatis studium abjecisse, & peccare in Sp. Sanctum ad mortem, aut nunquam serio in religione egisse? Ea vero colloquia, quae apud eum aliquando instituebantur de Christo, de Evangelio, de viva fide & de justificatione, huc spectasse, ut nobis tandem pulchrè imponeret? O miserum illum, & infelicem! Proh! quam atrociter laesit aeternam Dei, Christi & Sp. Sancti majestatem, atque omnes piorum Eccle∣sias? Nam in regno Angliae docebatur, & summa cum laetitia audie∣batur, Justificatio sola fide in Christum▪ satisfactio peccatorum per Christum, certitudo salutis nostrae per Christum, vera paenitentia, vera absolutio, verus ac legitimus usus Sacramentorum, atque aliae hujusmodi doctrinae, omnino conformes propheticis, Evangelicis, Apo∣stolicisque oraculis, atque usui veteris Catholicae ecclesiae, ita ut essent inde sublati, extirpatique illi soedissimi abusus, abominabilesque super∣stitiones
atque idolomaniae, quae scatent, regnántque in Papatu. Cum vero ageretur de his faecibus rursus in illud regnum inve∣hendis, divinis vero doctrinis abolendis, Polus tuus obtulit hic suam operam, quia speravit se autoritate & gratia plurimum illic valitu∣rum. Ac statim regnum ingressus est, praecedente scilicet idolo cru∣cis & cum omni illa pompa atque abominatione, qua Legati Anti∣christi uti solent. Populo vero imperavit in palatium convenire, genua flectere ante se. (quin & Rex & Regina unà procubuerunt in genua, nec puduit illum Antichristi Vicarium id sustinere.) Ubi au∣tem populum admonuit hactenus a vera fide deviasse, atque haereticum suisse, addidit se absolutionem Papalem velle impartiri, eumque San∣ctae Rom. Ecclesiae reconciliare: & confestim erecta manu, crucéque illata, populum ipsum absolvit, id est, arripuit atque avulsit, (quan∣tum in se quidem fuit) a studio verae pietatis, ac ipsiusmet veritatis. Arripuit, inquam, atque avulsit è sinu atque custodia ipsius veri pa∣storis Dom. nostri Iesu Christi, projecitque rectè in sentinam pristino∣rum abusuum atque errorum, & sub meram tyrannidem Antichristi insigni proditione posuit. Quid potest sceleratius, quid horribilius excogitari? Praesertim de homine, qui favere nostrae causae aliquando visus est. Annon agnosces nunc, quem virum tandiu & tantopere, colueris, & paene ut divinum aliquod numen adoraveris? Annon de∣sines tandem? Quum tuus ille amicus nuper sub nomine Athanasij edidisset scho∣lia in orationem ipsius Poli, in qua Evangelium vocaret Semen Tur∣cicum, Principes vero Germaniae Turcas, tu mirè tergiversationibus Car∣dinalem desendebas; indignissimum putabas, qui ita vexaretur: quin jurabas, eum longe aliter nunc sentire, quicquid aliquando sensisse vi∣sus fuerit. At quo pacto poteris excusare, quod nunc in Anglia gessit? Adde multorum literis nuntiari, restitutam illic fuisse statuam divo (ut ipsi inquiunt) Thomae Cantuariensi, proditori olim sui regis pessimo. Proh Deum immortalem! hocne etiam tuus Polus potest pati? Sed Dei beneficio factum esse audio, ut nunc caput illi imagini amputatum sit, & corpus in partes disceptum. Quin adde, agi nunc in misera illa Anglia de lupanaribus etiam re∣stituendis. Sed quidni? Quemadmodum enim umbra corpus, sic prostibula ac reliquae faeditates ac vitia, in primis vero idola, Papa∣tum consequuntur. Sed audi reliqua, audi quae filius Dei non po∣terat legere, quin adhuc magis perhorrescat, ac intimis medullis contremiscat. Thomas Archiepiscopus Cantuariae, una cum tribus quatuorve alijs Episcopis vere pijs ac Sanctis, qui justificationem vera fide in Christum, gratuitamque peccatorum remissionem do∣cuerat, exutus archiepiscopatu, & deterrimos carceres conjectus, vitam degens in tenebris, in squallore, in egestate, singulis horis gladium carnificis expectans, tum demum igne absumptus est, ty∣rannide certe in audita. Ioannes Hopperus Vuigorniensis Episcopus, & D. Ioannes Rogers, & Doctor Rolandus Taylerus, ueri martyres Christi, passi sunt ignes constantissimè. Contra Stephanus Gardinerus falso episcopus Vuintoniensis (nam Io∣annes Ponetus verus illius ecclesiae pastor, & verus Servus Iesu Christi exulat) cum octo aut decem alijs Episcopis impijs & sanguinarijs, qui Evangelium atque ipsissimum Christum fuerant acerrimè inse∣ctati,
nunc sub Cardinali tuo Polo, in summo splendore, summisque divitijs & luxibus illic regnant. Ecce itaque Christum in vinculis, omni infamiae ac tormentorum genere confectum, exutum vestibus, & tanquam ovem ductam ad macellum. Et vicissim ecce Barab∣bam latronem, alijsque tragicis facinoribus coopertum, liberatum, exultantem, & ferocientem. Atque ecce milites dividentes inter se spolia Christi. Ecce, inquam, ecce, ut videmus, accidere membris eademmet, quae capiti nostro Christo acciderunt. Necesse enim est ut simus conformes imagini ejus. In summa. Tuus Cardinalis regnat & triumphat, fruiturque ho∣noribus fere Papalibus, fruitur actione gratiarum, gratulatione ac gloria ex tota Rom. curia, atque ex omni regno hypocritarum: denique fruitur spe potiundi Pontificatus. Verum go illi vicis∣sim nuntio, omnes eos qui spiritum Dei sentiunt, (atque hi sunt nostra aetate plures, quam ille forte putet, & quotidie crescit nu∣merus) cogi pejus de illo sentire, ac loqui, quam aut de ipso Iu∣lio III. aut de quovis alio dissolutiore & sceleratiore Cardinale. Quandoquidem tum Antichristus ille, tum reliqui ex Cardinalium grege, aut potius armento, palam aque aperte nobiscum pugna∣runt: & nunc imprimis pugnant; Quia victoria Poli eos reddit insolentiores. Polus vero insidijs, ac sub praetextu pietatis: Quam∣obrem cum hac aetate, ac in reliqua posteritate, rasi & uncti, at∣que id genus hypocritarum encomijs ac laudius illum onerabunt, celebrabúntque, omnes piorum ecclesiae non poterunt non queri, se tam indigne suisse delusas ab eo. Quamquam esset id Polo ut∣cunque serendum, si nullam aliam poenam experturus esset, prae∣ter dedecoris atque infamiae sempiternae. Alia enim eum manet multo gravior. O! iterum illum miserum, infelicémque: Nam non multo post justissimi Dei nostri ita & vindicta aget, aget il∣lum praecipitem in profndum abyssi; ubi cum Diaolo atque angelis ejus, sempiterno igne cruciabitur. Illud vero hic addere opus est. Nam sedes illa Rom. stultè sibi persuasit fore, ut nunc tota Germania redeat ad ejus obedientiam; scilicet, quia videt Anglian utcunque redijsse: partim circumven∣tam multis fallacijs dolisque, partim apertè vi coactam. Quare cum audierit Comitia Augustae celebrari, ex toto Cardinalium gre∣ge selegit Moronum, quem mitteret eo legatum, hominem, qui in agnoscenda & persequenda veritate persimilis est Card. Polo. Ab eo itaque expectandae unt similes fallaciae, similis hypocrisis, atque impietas: ut non lac lacti magis simile sit: qui unum vi∣det, alterum videt.
NUM. LXXXIII. Bradford to Cranmer, Ridley and Latimer, concerning the Freewillers, about 1554. To my dear Fathers, Dr. Cranmer, Dr. Ridley, Dr. Latimer, Priso∣ners in Oxford, for the testimony of the Lord Jesus, and his holy gospel. ALmighty God, our heavenly father more and more kindle your hearts and affections with his love:Martyrs Let∣ters. that our greatest cros may be to be absent from him, and strangers from our home, and that we may godly contend more and more to please him, Amen, &c. As for your parts, in that it is commonly thought, your staff stand∣eth next the door, ee have the more cause to rejoyce, and be glad, as they which shal come to their fellowes under the Altar. To the which Society God with you bring me also, in his mercy, when it shall be his good plesure. I have received many good things from you, my good Lord, Master and dear Father, N. Ridley; Fruits I mean, of your good labours. Al which I send unto you again by this bringer [Augustin Benher] one thing except, which he can tell, I do keep upon your further plesure to be known therin. And herewithal I send unto you a little treatise, which I have made, that you might peruse the same: and not only you, but also ye, my other most dear and reverend Fathers in the Lord for ever, to give your Approbation, as ye may think good. Al the prisoners here about in maner have seen it, and read it: and as therin they aggre with me, nay rather with the truth, so they are ready and wil be, to signify it, as they shal se you give them example. The matter may be thought not so necessary, as I seem to make it. But yet if ye knew the great evil, that is like hereafter to come to the posterity by these men, as partly this bringer can signify unto you; Surely then could ye not but be most willing to put hereto your helping hands. The which thing that I might the more occasion you to per∣ceive, I have sent you here a writing of Harry Harts own hand: Wherby ye may see, how Christs glory and grace is like to loose much light, if your sheep quondam be not something holpen by them that love God, and are able to prove, that al good is to be attributed only and wholly to Gods grace and mercy in Christ without other respects of worthines then Christs merits. The effects of salvation they so mingle and confound with the cause, that if it be not seen to, more hurt will come by them, than ever came by the Papists: in as much as their life commendeth them to the world more then the Papists. God is my witnes, that I write not this, but because I would Gods glory, and the good of his peope. In Free wil they are plain Papists, yea, Pelagians. And ye know that Modicum fermenti totam Massam corrumpit. They utterly contemn al learning. But hereof shal this bringer show you more. As to the chief captains therefore of Christs church here, I complain of it unto you: as truly I must do of you even
unto God in the last day, if ye wil not, as ye can, help something, Vt veritas doctrinae maneat apud posteros, in this behalf; as ye have done on the behalf of matters expugned by the Papists. God for his mercy in Christ guide you, Most dearly beloved Fathers, with his holy Spi∣rit here, and in al other things, as most may make to his glory, and the commodity of the Church, Amen. Al here, God therfore be praised, prepare themselves willingly to pledg our Captain Christ, even when he wil, and how he wil. By your good prayers we shal al fare the better; and therefore we al pray you to cry to God for us, as we, God willing, do and wil remember you. My brethren here with me have thought it their duty to signify this need to be no less, then I make it, to prevent the plantations, which may take root by these men. Yours in the Lord, Robert Ferrar Rowland Taylor Iohn Bradford. Iohn Philpot. NUM. LXXXIV. The Prisoners for the Gospel, their Declaration concerning K. Ed∣ward his Reformation. To the King and Queens most excellent Majesties, with their most honorable high court of Parlament. WE poor Prisoners for Christs religion, require your Honours, in our dear Saviour Christs name,Foxij MSS. earnestly now to repent, for that you have consented of late to the unplaceing of so many godly lawes, set furth touching the true religion of Christ before, by two most Noble Kings, being Father and brother to the Queens Highnes, and aggreed upon by al your consents; not without your great and many deliberations, free and open disputations, costs and paines taking in that behalf, neither without great Consultations, and conclusions, had by the greatest learned men in the realm, at Windsor, Cambridg and Oxford, neither without the most willing consent, and allowing of the same by the whole Realm throughly: So that there was not one Parish in al England, that ever desired again to have the Romish Superstitions and vaine Service, which is now by the Popish, proud, covetous clergy placed again, in contempt not only of God, al Hea∣ven, and al the holy ghostes lessons in the blessed Bible: but also against the honors of the said two most noble Kings, against your own Country, fore aggreements, and against al the godly consciences with∣in this realm of England, and elsewhere. By reason wherof Gods great plagues must needs follow, and great unquietnes of consciences; besides al other persecutions and vexations of bodies and goods, must
needs ensue. Moreover we certify your honours, that since your said unplaceing of Christs true religion, and true service, and placing in the room therof Antichrist Romish Superstition, heresy and idolatry, al the true preachers have been removed, and punished, and that with such open robbery, and cruelty, as in Turky was never used, ei∣ther to their own Countrimen, or to their mortal enemies. This therfore our humble suit is now to your honourable estates, to desire the same, for al the mercies sake of our dear and only Savior Ie∣sus Christ, and for the duty you owe to your native Country, and to your own souls, earnestly to consider from what light to what dark∣nes this realm is now brought, and that in the weightiest, chief and principal matter of Salvation, of al our souls and bodies everlasting, and for ever more. And even so we desire you at this your assembly, to seek some effectual reformation for the afore written most horrible deformation in this church of England. And touching your selves we desire you in like maner, that we may be called before your Honors; and if we be not able both to prove and approve by the Catholic and Canonical rules of Christs true religion, the church Homilies and Ser∣vice set furth in the most innocent K. Edwards days; and also to dis∣allow and reprove, by the same authorities, the Service now set furth, since his departing; then we offer our bodies, either to be immediately burned, or else to suffer whatsoever other painful and shameful death, that it shal please the King and Queens Majesties to appoint. And we think this trial and probation may be now best, either in the plain English tongue by Writing, or otherwise by disputation in the same tongue. Our Lord for his great mercy sake grant unto you al the con∣tinual assistance of his good and holy Spirit. Amen. NUM. LXXXV. John Fox to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Queen Maries time: relating to the persecution. UT singularis vigilantia vestra cum pari conjuncta prudentia, neuti∣quam eget consilijs aut documentis meis,Foxij. MSS. Proceres & Patres inspi∣ciendi, ita nihil vicissim a pudore ac verecundia mea alienius esse possit, quàm summates viros ulla in re interpellare literis. Atutinam hunc naturae affectum, ut hactenus, perpetuò tueri liceret. Nunc vero ubi in eas difficultates, ceu inter Symplegadas, incidimus, ut neque ob∣ticescere sine impietate, nec loqui sine periculo liceat, considerabit, opinor, prudentia vestra non tam quid me deceat, quam quid officij exigat ratio. Quóque gravior sit ad scribendum causa, hoc faciliorem spero impetrabit veniam audacia. Equidem nihil addubito, quin exi∣mia authoritas vestra divinae cujusdam potentiae vicariam nobis imagi∣nem representat in terris, semper & egit sedulo, & actura est, ut cum dignitate vestra, simul publica totius ditionis vestrae tranquillitas salús∣que contineatur. Quid enim aliud vel ab amplissimo hoc loco expe∣ctare, vel de singulari vigilantia vestra suspicari convenit, quam a vo∣bis,
qui Patres sitis Rep. paratissim fore omnia, sicubi vel au∣xilij fidem, vel juvandi voluntatem res communis desiderabit, ut neque facultati vestrae quicquam adjici, nec in voluntate quicquam desiderari poterit Atque enimvero si in ijs duntaxat sita esset Reip. administratio, quae per se satis possent humanae prudentiae praesidia moderari, niis insanire videretur, qui vos monendo in∣stituere, hoc est Solem meridianum luce ascititia illustrare spera∣ret. Quanquam n id quidem sapientia, opinor, vestra postula∣bit sibi, hujusmodi censeri vos, qui non communi conditione nati cum caeteris▪ pariter cum reliquis mortalibus, etsi minus fortas∣se, at nonnunquam tamen, labi atque exorbitare possitis: Etiamsi humana forent maxime, atque intra proprij ingenij vires clausa, quae ageretis. Nunc vero cum omnis Reip. gubernatio divin sit, magnaque ejus pars in religionis versetur tractatione, longe supra humanum captum ardua, ut alteram partem vobis lubenter tribuimus, ita in altera societatem aliquam consilij haud omnino estis, opinor, asper∣naturi: praesertim cum id non tam siducia arrogantiae aliqua sa∣cimus, quam temporis atque officij necessitate impulsi. Quis enim, vos obtestor, Gravissimi Patres, ferat; quis non deploret; Quem non ad gemitus, ad lacrymas pertrahat, tametsi Angliam nunquam viderit, tantum in Anglia fundi Christiani Sanguinis; tot cives ingenuos, tot liberales & innocentes promiscuè cum soe∣minis viros, capite ac fortunis quotidie periclitari, caedi, exui, la∣niari; prope sine modo & numero? Quod si Barbari ex ultima Turcia barbarosa, aut exterae nationis ferus hostis aliunde irrum∣pens in Angliam, tantam hanc gentis nostrae stragem designasset, haud minor fortasse calamitas, aut minor prosectó esset queremo∣nia. Saevitiam etsi omnino per se graven, nationis tamen mi∣nueret distinctio. Nunc quorum saluti apud vos potissimum esse perfugium conveniebat, osdem vos ipsi capi, exagitari, discerpi, dilacerari, Angli Anglos, Magistratus subditos, Christiani Christia∣nos, cernitis & toleratis. Quique nuper sub Edwardi auspicatissimi Principis divino imperio florentissima tranquillitate, cum domum vitae non securitate modo, sed voluptate etiam utebantur, nunc ij∣dem invertente se rerum humanarum scena, miseris cruciati∣bus vitam, quam tueri nequeunt, deserere coguntur; non quia vi∣ta aut mores mutati ipsorum, sed quia duntaxat tempora mutata sunt. Et ubi interim  illa Paulina, ubi Clementia vestra, Mi∣tissimi proceres, ubi inveterata illa semperque laudata etiam erga hostes, Anglorum pietas, si in vestros tam esseri tamque exitiales esse velitis? Scio ingeniorum immensam ac infinitam prope varie∣tatem esse in mundo; apud homines haud secus quam apud bel∣luas. Quidam natura mitiores. Contra sunt, quos natos saevitiae dixeris, ac truculentiae. Alij consuetudine prava hoc vitio dele∣ctantur, Nonnulli rursus ab alijs, ceu contagium, accipiunt. Ve∣rum utcunqe alijs aliud natura insevit, certe nihil viris genero∣sis tam proprium ac genuinum, nihil naturae ipsorum (si naturae tueri velint) quadrans magis, quam generosa quaedam indoles ac morum ingenuitas: Quae prosit omnibus, officiat nemini, nisi la∣cessita
forte. Ac ne tum quidem, nisi coacta magis, quàm sua sponte: idque magis Reip. ratione, quàm sua saevitia: ac ne tum quidem sui oblivisci potest generosa pietas, semper ad salutem miserorum, quàm perniciem intentior; excusans, patrocinans, sublevans, relinquens, quo misericordiae cognoscentiae esse locus possit. Ecquae haec nunc tanta hominum, ne dicam, an temporum de∣generatio, in viros, non improbos modo, sed innocenti ac inculpa∣ta vita, a quibus nemo unquam laesus vestrum, aut lacessitus sit, publice simul ac privatim bonos, sic inardescere saevitiam quorun∣dam, ut nulla sit hostium natio tam barbara, ubi non tutius con∣quiescant, quàm apud suos? Quondam apud priscos Romanos plus∣quam sontium censebatur, quod civem in discrimen adduceret ca∣pitis; ubi & octo erant suppliciarum genera▪ quorum mors, ut ul∣tima, ita nisi clarissima, non indicebatur: Qid quod ne tum quidem deerant etiam vitae defensores, ac libera apud populum actio. Ex quo effectum est, ut eloquentiae studium tanto in ho∣nore ac usu apud omnes esse, ut urbem prope universam ad sui contenionem excitaret. Tantus in gentilitio populo patriae amor, ac salutis cura, apud patricios vigebat viros, quorum omnis fere laus in conservandis quamplurimis cerneretur. Atque istos non∣dum ulla religionis inbuerat gratia, tantum natura ipsa, ac litera∣rum humanias ad tantam excolere potuit civilitatem. Et ô bru∣torum jamdudum in Anglia extinctum genus, quod apud Ethni∣cos natura, quod literae valuerunt civiles, non idem valebit pietas, non Evangelij vig r, non a Christo inculcata toties impetrabit charitas; quin ob quamlibet levem causam, aut nullam potius, ad paenas rapiuntur, adeo frigescente ubique charitate, ut haud sciam, an hoc ipsum capitale futurum sit, quod pro afflictis fratribus mu∣tire audeam; imque in hac re eveniat mihi, quod Iustino olim, pro Christianis , qui dum pro Martyribus deprecatur, fit & ipse Martyr.
NUM. LXXXVI. Dr. Ridley late Bishop of London to West, formerly his Steward, who had complyed with the Romish religion. Foxij. MSS.I Wish you grace in God, and love of the trueth. Without the which truly established in mans heart by the mighty hand of Almighty God, it is no more possible to stand by the truth in Christs cause, in the time of tribulation, then it is for wax to abide the heat of the fire. Sir, know you this, that I am (blessed be God) persuaded that this world is but transitory, as S. Iohn saith, Mundus transit & concu∣piscentia ejus.1 Ian. 2. I am persuaded Christs words to be true, Qui me confes∣sus fuerit coram hominibus, I wil confes him before my father, which is in heaven.Matt. 10. And I believe that no earthly creature shal be saved, whom the Redeemer and Savior of the world shal before his Father deny. This the Lord grant that it may be so grafted, established, and fixed in my heart, that neither things present, or to come, high or low, life or death, be able to remove. It is a godly wish that yee wish me depely to considre things pertei∣nyng to Gods honor and glory. But if ye had wished also, that neither fear of death, or hope of worldly prosperity shuld let me to maintein gods word, and his truth, which is his glory and true honour, it wold have liked me very wel. You desire me for Gods sake to remembre my self. Indeed, Sir, now it is time for me so to do. For so far as I can perceyve, it standeth me of no les daunger, then of the los both of body and soule: And I trow, then it is time for a man to awake, if any thing wil awake him. He that wil not fear him, that threatneth to cast body and soule into ever∣lasting fire, whom wil he fear? Oh Lord, fasten thou together our frayl flesh, that we never swarve from thy Lawes. You say, you have made much sute for me. Sir, God gaunt, that you have not, in sueing for my worldly deliverace, empaired or hin∣dred the furtheraunce of Gods word and his ruth. You have knowen me long indede, in the which time it hath chaun∣ced me to mislyke some things. It is true, I graunte. For sodeine chaunges without substantial aud necessary causes, and the heady set∣ting furth of extremities, I did never love. Confession to the minister, which is able to instruct, correct, comfort, and enform the weak and ignorant consciences, I have ever thought might do much good in Christs Congregation. And so I assure you I do think, even at this day. My doctrin and my preaching, you say, you have heard oft: and after your judgment, have thought it godly, saving of the Sacrament. Which thing, although it was of me reverendly handled, and a great deal better than of the rest, as you say, yet in the margent you write (warily, and in this world wysely) thus: And yet methought, not al soundly. Wel, Sir, but I see so many chaunges in the world, and so much alteration, or els at this your saying, I wold not a litle mervayl.
I have taken you for my trustie freynd, and a man, whom I fanta∣sied for plainness and faithfulnes, as much, I ensure you, as for your learning. And have you kept this so close in your heart from me unto this day? Sir, I considre mo things than one; and wil not say al that I think. But what need you to care what I thynke, for any thing that I shal be able to do unto you either good or harm? You geve me good lessons, to stand in nothing against my learning, and to beware of vain glory. Truly, Sir, herein I like your counsel very wel; and by Gods grace I intend to follow it unto my lyves end. To write to them whom you name, I cannot se what it wil avayle me. For this I wold now have you know it, I esteme nothing avayla∣be for me, which also wil not set furth the glory of God. And now because I perceive you have an entyre zeal and desire of my deliverance out of this captivitie, and worldly misery; if I shuld not bear you a good heart in God again, methynk I were to blame. Sir, how nigh the day of my dissolution and departure hence out of this world is at hand, I cannot tel. The Lords wil be fulfilled. How soon soever it shal come, I know the Lords words must be verified on me, that I shal appear before the uncorrupt Judge, and be countable to him of al my former lyfe. Although the hope of his mercy is my shote ankor of eternal Salvation; yet am I persuaded, that whosoever wit∣tingly neglecteth and regardeth not to clear his conscience, he cannot have peace with God, nor a lyvely faith in his mercy. Conscience moveth me, considering you were one of my family and of my house∣hold, (of whom then I thynke I had a special cure, and of all them which were in my house, which indede ought to have been an exam∣ple of godlines to al the rest of my cure, not only in godly life, but also in promoting of Gods word, to thuttermost of their power: But now alas! when the trial doth separate the corn from the chaff, how smal a deyl it is God knoweth, which the wynde doth not blow away:) This conscience, I say, doth move me to have fear, lest the lightnes of my family shal be layd unto me, for lack of more earnest and dili∣gent instructions, which shuld have been doon. But blessed be God, which hath geven me grace to se my default, and to lament it from the bottome of my heart, before my departure hence. This Conscience also doth move me now to require both you, and my freynd Dr. Har∣vy, to remembre your promises made to me in time past, of the pure setting furth and preaching of Gods word and his truth. These pro∣mises, although you shal not nede to fear to be charged with them of me hereafter before the world; Yet look for none other, I exhort you as my freynds, but to be charged with them at Gods hand. This Conscience, and the love that I bear unto you, byddeth me now say to you both in Gods name; Fear God, and love not the world; for God is able to cast both body and soul into hel fire. Cum exarserit in brevi ira ejus, beati omnes, saith the Psalme, qui confidunt in eo. And the saying of S. Iohn is true, Quicquid est in mundo,Psal. 2. veluti concupiscentia carnis, & concupiscentia oculorum, & fastus vitae,1 Joan. 2. non ex patre, sed ex mundo est. Et mundus transit, & concupiscentia ejus. Qui autem facit voluntatem Dei manet in aeternum. If these gifts of grace, which undoubtedly are necessarily required unto eternal salvation, were truly and unfeignedly grafted, and firmely stablished in mens
hearts, they wold not be so light, so sodaynly to shrink from the main∣tenance and confession of the truth, as it is now, alas! seen so mani∣festly, of so many in these dayes. But here peradventure ye wold know of me, what is the truth. Sir, Gods word is the truth, as S. Iohn saith, and it is even the same that was heretofore. For albeit man doth vary and chaunge, as the Moon, yet Gods word is stable and abydeth for evermore. And of Christ it is truly said,Heb. 13. Christus heri & hodie, idem etiam in secula. When I was in office, al, that were esteemed for learned men in Gods word, aggreed this to be a truth in Gods word written: that the Common prayers of the Church shuld be had in the common tongue. You know I have conferred with many, and I ensure you, I never found man, so far as I do remembre, neyther old nor new▪ Go∣speller or Papist, of what judgmnt soever he was, in this thing to be of a contrary opinion. If then it were a truth of Gods word, think you, that the Alteration of the world can make it now an untruth? If it cannot, why do men, so many, shrink from the confession and maintenance of this truth, once received of us al? For what is it, I pray you, else to confes or deny Christ in this world, but to confes and maintain the truth taught in Gods word, nor for any worldly respect to shrynke from the same? This one have I brought but for an exam∣ple. Other things be in like case, which now particularly I nede not to rehearse. For he that wil forsake wittingly, eyther for fear or gain of the world, any one open truth of Gods word, if he be strayned, he wil assuredly forsake God and al his truth, rather then he wil endaun∣ger hymself eyther to loose, or to leave that he loveth indede better, then he doth God and the truth of his word. I lyke therin very wel, your plain speaking, wherin you say, I must eyther aggree or dy: and I thynk you mean of the bodily death, which is common both to good and bad. Sir, I know I must dy, whether I aggree, or no. But what folly were it then to make such an aggree∣ment, by the which I could never escape this death; which is so com∣mon to al; and also I might incur the guilt of eternal death and dam∣nation? Lord graunt, that I may utterly abhor and detest this damnable ag∣greement so long as I lyve. And because I dare say, you wrot of frendship to me this short er∣nest advertisement, and I think verily wyshing me to lyve, and not to dy: Therfore bearing you in my hear no less love in God, then you do me in the world; I say to you In verbo Domini, that except you, (and this I say to you I say to al my frends and lovers in God) except ye con∣fes and mainteyn, to your power and knowledg, thyngs which be grounded upon Gods word, but wil eyther for fear, or gayn of the world, shrynke and play the Apostata, indede you shal dy the death. You understand what I mean. And I beseech you, and al my true freynds and lovers in God, remembre what I say. For this peradven∣ture
may be the last time, that ever I shal write to you. From Bocardo in Oxenford, theighth day of April, Anno 1554. Yours in Christ, Nicolas Rydley. NUM. LXXXVII. John Hopton Bishop of Norwich, to the Earl of Sussex, giving account of the joy conceived, and Te Deum sung, for the newes of the Queens being brought to bed of a Noble Prince. RIght honorable, and my singular good Lord. After mine humble commendations,Cotton Library, Titus. B. 2. with like thanks for your honorable and gentle letters sent to me, touching the behaviour of the Curate of Bokenham, and the reformation of other enormities there; It may please you to understand, that I did send immediatly for the said Curate, and the Church-wardens and the Quest-men there. And upon their appear∣ance with twelve or fourteen of the most substantial men of the parish, and upon due examination, I could perceive none other thing, but al things to be wel, and decently ordered, and provided for at this holy time of Easter, contrary to the information given to your good Lord∣ship. And if there had been any thing amiss, they should have been punished according to their demerits. Beseeching your good Lordship, if any further knowledg come to you, either for that Town, or any other, concerning the Reformation of my jurisdiction, or the negli∣gence of mine Officers, that I may be advertised therof, and have your favorable ayd and assistance. And I shal do the best I can for my discharge. And wher it pleased your honorable Lordship to wil me to take a dinner, or a supper with you in the time of my Visitation, I humbly thank you therfore most heartily. Beseeching your Lordship, when occasion shal serve you to visit this city, that ye wil vouchsafe to take this my poor house at your commandment; wherunto your Lordship shalbe as welcome as unto your own. Further, I understand that Mr. Mayor here hath certified your Lord∣ship of the sudden good news brought to us by one of the city, of the Queens highnes most joyful deliverance of a Noble Prince. Wher∣upon to laud God Te Deum was solemnly songen in the Cathedral church, and other places of the city, with wonderful joy and much gladnes of al people throughout the whole city, and the country ther∣abouts. And if ye have any further knowledg therof, I beseech your honorable Lordship, that I may be partaker of the same by this bringer, my servant, whom I send purposely therfore, as knoweth the Holy
Ghost; who preserve your Lordship in continual health and honor. At Norwich, the thred of May 1555. Your Lordships assuredly, Iohn Norwich. Postscripta. I received even now knowledg from a friend of mine of two witnesses more of the good and joyful newes above written, as this said bringer can declare to your good Lordship. Iohn Norwich. NUM. LXXXVIII. A Proposition in the Convocation against Residence. With Reasons for the said Proposition; and Remedies against Non-residence. Decretum perpetuae Residentiae juxta Canonum Sanctiones optant pij, sed mul∣ta sunt,C. C. C C. Libr. Synoda∣lia. quae hodie impediunt, quo minus suum effectum juxta bonorum virorum vota consequatur. The Reasons. I. THE Statutes of the Kingdome, not disallowed, as we hear, by the Pope, do permit to the Barons, and other great men of the kingdome, a certain number of Priests, having cure of souls. II. Not only the Statutes of the kingdom, but the Canons do per∣mit Bishops a certain number of fellow workers, to assist them. III. Bishops and Prelates, who by reason of their great learning, prudence, integrity of life, and high faith, are chosen to be the Kings Counsillors, and whose counsils are very necessary for the restoring of religion, ought not, as it seems, to be compelled to perpetual Re∣sidence. IV. When the Barons and other great men may be retained in the orthodox faith, by the doctrin, honesty, age and frequent exhortations of Reverend men, it seems not convenient, that such men should be driven from them; provided they do reside a good part of the year upon their Churches. V. Since the Dispensation of two or three benefices hath been grant∣ed by former Princes to some Priests, for the merit of their life and maners, they cannot without injury be deprived of them; Nor yet can they in al respects reside personally and perpetually.
VI. When many have designed their sons for the Universities, and have been at no smal charges to give them learning, because they have entertained good hope, that they might hereafter be assistant to their friends and relations: this hope being gone, their care about this matter wil also grow cold, otherwise of it self cold enough. For as he said, Where there is no honor, there is no Art. VII. The houses of the Rectories in many places are either ruined, or none at al, or let out by Indentures. Going to the Court of Rome. Going to a General Councel. Going to a Synod, or Parlament. Violent detaining. Remedies. That there be a les number of those that follow the Court, who heap up benefices upon benefices. That they who have many Benefices, reside a certain time upon each. That a way be found, wherby such as live in Towns and Cities may be forced to pay Personal tiths. Which being now almost quite taken a way, the Benefices in such places are in a great part lessened. When some of the Bishops, by reason of the slendernes of their pos∣sessions, cannot afford Stipends to the Priests, their fellow laborers, that they who serve them reside for a certain time of the year in their own parishes. That Rectors, who heretofore have payd pensions to Monasteries in ready mony, be not now compelled to pay the same in bread-corn to Lay-proprietors. That in Woody places, where the custome hath alwayes obtained, tith may be payd of Sylvae caeduae [that is, Wood that is cut to grow again,] especially when there is a great scarcity of corn in such places. Parishes are not divided jure divino. Whence followeth, that as many Benefices may be layd into one, so one, by reason of the great∣nes of it, may be divided into two.
NUM. LXXXIX. Pole Cardinal Legate, to Archbishop Cranmer, in answer to the Letter he had sent to the Queen. ALmighty God the Father, by the grace of his only son, god and man,Foxij MSS. that dyed for our sins, may geve yow trew and perfect repentance. This I daylie pray for my self being a Synner: but I thank God never obstinate synner. And the same grace the more ear∣nestly I do pray for to be geven to them that be obstinate, the more neade they have thereof, being otherwise past al mannes cure, and admonition to save them. As your open sayings, in open audience, doyth show of yow. Which hath cawsed, that those judges, that hath syt apon the examination of your greviouse fautes, seing no lykelod of ony repentaunce in yow, hath utterlie cast awaye al hope of your recoverie: Whereof doith follow the most horrible sentence of condempnation, both of your body and soule, both your temporal death and eternal. Which is to me so great an horrour to here, that if there were ony way, or mean, or fashion, that I might fynd to re∣move you from errour, bryngeng yow to the knowledge of the truth, for your Salvation: This I testifie to you afore God, apon the Salvati∣on of myne owne sowle, that I would rather chuse to be that meane, that yow might receive this benefyt by me, then to receive the great∣est benefyt for my self, that can be geven under heaven in this world: I easteme so moch the salvation of one sowle. And becawse it happened to me to see your private lettres directed to the Qwenes Highnes, sent by the same unto me, wherein you utter and express such appearaunt reasons, that cause yow to swarve from the rest of the Church, in these Articles of the authoritie of the Pope, and of the Sacrament of the aulter, Concluding with these words, That if ony man can show yow by reason, that the authoritie of the Pope be not prejudicyal to the wealth of the realm, or that your doctrine in the Sacrement be erroneous, then you wold never be so perverse to stond wylfullie in your own opinion: but shal with al humilitie submytt your self to the truthe in al things, and gladly em∣brace the same: Thise your words, written in that lettre, geveth me some occasion, desyring your wealth, not utterly to dispayr there∣of; but to attempt to recover yow by the same way, that yow open unto me: Which is, by reason to show yow the error of your opini∣on, and withal the light of the treuthe in both causes. But whither this may healp yow indede, or bring you to revoke the same, with trew repentaunce, this I know not; and I fear moche the contrarie. For that I see the ground and begynning, how you fel into errour in both thise articles, not to be of that sort, that maketh men common∣ly to fall into errours and heresies. Which sort and way is by medling with your wyt and discourse natural, to examen the Articles of the faith▪ Makeing your reason judge thereof, which ought to bee judged and ruled by the tradition of the faith. Which abuse causeth men dayly to fall into errours and heresies. And the same also is in yow,
and is joyned with that yow have done. But here standeth not the grownde of your errour, nor yet in this other common maner of faulling from the trouthe, which S. Paul noteth in the Gentiles, and is in al me commonlie that followeth their sensual appetites, Qui veri∣tatem Di in injustitia detinent: Which thing also hath been occasion of your rrour. But yet not this is the very grownde thereof, but a fur∣ther sawte: that you geveng your othe to the truthe, yow mocked with the same, as the Iewes mocked with Christ, when thei saluted him saing, Ave Rex Iudaeorum, and afterwards did crucifie hym. For so did yow to the Vicar of Christ, Knowledgeng the Pope of Rome by the words of your othe, to be so, and in mynde entendeng to cruci∣fie the same authoritie. Whereof came the plague of deape igno∣raunce and blyndnes unto yow. Which is now that bringeth you to this greivous peryl, to perish both bodie and sowle. From which pe∣ril no reason can deliver yow. But yow discovereng your self, touching the entrie, when yow shuld make the customable othe of al legitimate Busshops in Christen∣dom, which is the dore for you to entre to the service of God, in the highest spiritual office withyn this realme, and seeing you made the same but for a countenaunce, nothing meaneng to observe that yow promised by the othe; this is a dore, that every thieffe may entre bye. This is not the dore that thei entre by, that mean earnestlie the service of God. Wherein the Prophets sentence is playne, askeng this que∣stion, Quis ascendet in montem Domini? aut quis stabit in loco sancto ejus? And then answering to the same sayeng, Innocens manibus, & mundo corde, qui non accepit in vano animam suam, nec juravit in dolo proximo suo. Haec est generatio quaerentium Dominum, quaerentium faciem Dei Iacob. So that yow now entryng to the mownteyne of God, which was to that high Archbushoprick, and to the Primacie in the realme, by a cleane contrary way, which is, as yow confesse your self by a fayned othe, by fraud, and dissimulation, what more playne sentence can be against yow, if yow have a thousand reformations in your mynde, then that al this doith not make, that this shuld be the way to the trew service of god, nor that yow, useng a false othe, shuld be of that generation, which with their hart sought god, but utterlye con∣cludeth against yow, that if those that absteine from al deceit with their neighbour, speciallie in othe, be blessed of God, he that confes∣seth to have used such dissimulation in his othe, not with one neigh∣bour or twayne, but with the hole realme, with the hole church, what can he receve, but the malediction of god? What can more evident∣lie show that man to be none of that generation that seketh god? As if there were none other proffe, that followed in your acts, such a de∣ceitful and shameful entrie, doith manifestly declare; and most of al, one of the furst acts yow did after this. Which was to pluck the rest of the realme (of whom yow had chief cure) out of the House of God, bryngeng them furthwyth into the Schisme. And that we see now, that the hole realm by the high mercy of God, beyng brought into the House of God agayn, there to receive his grace and benediction: and this to be done by those princes, and those ministers, Qui non acceperunt in vano animam suam, nec jur ave∣runt in dolo proximo suo: your person yet remayneng without, depri∣ved
of the grace graunted to them, what doith this showe, but that it is the just sentence of god against yow, for your deceitful entrie into his service; and the mercy of God toward them, that not wyllenglie went furth; but by your traiterous means were thrust out? So that here now I have told yow, whither yow heare me, or no, the very cause of your blyndnes and ignoraunce: Which is the ven∣geaunce of god against yow, for your dissimulation and perjurie, to him and to the hole church, at your enteng to the high service thereof. Wherby yow have deserved to be cast out of the howse of god, which is the church, in tenebras exteriores, ubi est fletus, & stri∣dor dentium. Which is the place and state, wherein I see ow now lye; and the same I saw so evidently in your lettres, from the begyn∣neng to the eand, as nothing can be more playne: yow showeng your self in the same to be so ignoraunt, that you know not those things, which be evident to every man: which everie man, that hath any exteriour light, by experience and knowledge of things past, doith know— Here much is wanting. that be once of the church as dead bodies, when the spirit is out. But to al that be within the body of the Church, this geveth comfort and liffe, as the spirit doith to the bodie. And this shal be sufficient to say for everie mans information of the truthe in this matter, that will beleave, other that old or late experience, or the contynual doctryne of the hole church, hath taught in everye christen realm. Whereof none ever found this fawte, that the Popes Lawes Spiritual were not to be exercised, because the same could not aggree with their politick lawes: but rather found fawte, when the Pope himself, or his Mini∣sters▪ did let the course of those lawes, which aggreed with everie politick body, as the Sowle of man with al complexions, and forme of body. And when they were stopped, then semed to be stopped the breath and liffe of justice, as no realme can gyve, as I sayd afore, greater or surer testimonye than ours. For when the authoritie and lawes of the Pope did flourish in the realm, al justice florished wythal; and that stopped and cast out, as it was thise latter yeares, al good justice, and civil maner of lyvyng was stopped and cast furth withal. So that when you came furst to mervayle of a thing never seen, nor harde of afore in this realm that a Busshop, made by the Popes au∣thority, shuld not be deposed, without his authoritie, what doith this show, but a deap blyndnes and ignoraunce of the use of the law in this realme, ever continual, and never broken of ony just prynce, un∣tyl yow your self were made Busshop: Which healped them to break al good lawes and customes of the realme; and then afterward to make this for a great reason, that the Popes lawes shuld not be now agayn admytted, for then yow say, al the hole realm that cast out his authoritie, must nedes knowledg themself accursed: Which god, yow say, forefend. And this yow show yow cannot abyde, for no∣thing by ony maner that the realme shuld knowledg themself accur∣sed: Which they cannot, yow say, avoide, if thei admyt the Popes
law, as good. This word yow shuld have sayd afore the realm had cast furth the Pope's authoritie, for to have leted them from their faull into the curse; and this had bene the very part of a good Bus∣shop. But after that thei were faullen from the lawes, which thei had admytted afore, and therby ronne into the curse, (which you say cannot be avoyed of them that hath ones admytted them) Then I with al good and catholick men, do say, god oreend, they after this shuld not knowledg their state to be accursed. Which if thei dyd not, thei could never be absolved from the curse. And he that forbeddeth now the knowledge of the same▪ doith in effect procure, that being ac∣cursed indede, thei remayne ever accursed. This is your monstrous and blynde love yow pretend to bear to the realme, being accursed your self, and blynded in the knowledg of your state, to have the hole realm remayne styl accursed. But the true affection thise two Catho∣lick princes beare to the realm, with the bloode of those that resisted th swarveng from the Popes authoritie, hath obteyned of the high mercy of God, that the hole realme hath with repentaunce knowledg∣ed their evel state thei stode in, syneth the leaveng of the authoritie of the Pope in the realme, and with repealing of those lawes, made con∣trary, have asked absolution, and received it, and be delivered of al curse, received into the grace of go, and brought into the churches lapp again: thei onelie left out, that doith refuse this grace, and hath not so moche grace to accept it. Whereof if ony should be deprived, none hath deserved it more by the just wrath of God to be deprived, then he that was chief doer, to make the realm lese it, as yow; by showeng your self in this to be the verie membre of Satan, both then, but most of al now. Which deprived of grace of repentaunce hym∣self, wold draw al other to his dampnation, and dissuadeth al retorne to grace. This your charitie yow now show to your contrie, which, as I said hitherto, is very vengeaunce of God toward yow. Of the which this great blyndnes gyveth a great testimonie, that yow show in your let∣tre, writeng of thise thynges, as though yow had never knowledge what had been done in the realme afore your tyme, nor what was the state of your time, nor yet what is the state of the realm at this pre∣sent, bryngeng for a great inconvenient, that if the Parlament shuld accept the lawes of the Pope, thei shuld be constrayned to repeal those that were done against his lawes and authoritie: As though this were not so done already. And showeng so great ignoraunce, both touch∣ing the doctrine of the church, and in this oyncte touching the Popes authoritie, and the experience of the custome of the realm, yet yow conclude, that ignoraunce might excuse other men, how prejudicyal the canon lawes be to the wealth of the realm, if thei wold accept the same. But you cannot be excused by ignoraunce. And seeing in this the very trouthe, that ignoraunce cannot excuse yow, as in trouthe it cannot, being of that kynde it is. But if that do not excuse you, then malice doith condempne yow: Which is the very cause to bring you to ignoraunce inexcusable, both in this poincte of the authoritie of the Pope, as in the doctrine of the Sacrement: Wherin it is no lesse mon∣strous. And this yow show most, where yow think to speak with lesse obstinacy. As where yow say, that if thei that follow the Popes
doctrine herei, could bryng in but one old auncyent Doctor of the Church of their opinion, you have offred afore, as yow offer yet, to gve place unto them, and to consent to the same. What a proffe is this to show your profound blyndnes? If there be no let but this, be∣cause yow see not of the old Doctors, at the least one, that were against yowr opinion, in the defence of the Popes doctrine, other men seeing so many, and not one auncient approved doctor that ever dissented, what a wonderful blyndnes is this, not to see one against yow? For this is playne, when the Pope showeth his sence and do∣ctrine in this Article, he doith not speak thereof, as of an Article, that he himself hath newly found, nor yet ony of his predecessours, but that al hath uniformally received one of another of their fathers, unto the Apostles tyme, and they of Christ. Which argument is so strong, so evident to the condempnation of your opinion, and confir∣matyon of the Popes, that manie sage and learned men writing against the opinion yow follow, being diverse sortes of arguments to confound the same, set apart al form of reasoneng, and onelie stick upon the testimony and uniforme consent of al the old Doctors of the Church to this day. Which testimonies be so meny, that they fyll up great books; as amongst other, my Lord of Durham at this present, in his book written of this matter, taketh this way, to ground hymself most apon, the perpetual consent of the old Doctors, continuing unto this age: and al against your opinion. Which book is abrode, and hath been seen of yow. Then if yee wil think him of so smal judgment or knowledge, that in such a nombre as he bringeth, there is not one, that maketh to his purpose, but al for your purpose, whom he entendeth to oppugne, other this must prove a wonderful blyndnes in hym, and not in hym alone, but in so menie learned men, that taketh the same way; or ells in yow▪ that amongst so menye testimonies, som more clerer then som, not to see so moche as one alone: this is an evydent proff, that yee be stark blynd. For if yee were not, if it were but one brought furth unto yow, as is mentioned in that book, the condempnation of Berengarius, that was of your opinion; and that done by a General Councel of all the Nations in Chrystendom; growndeng it self upon the uniform doctrine of their forefathers; Were not this enough, yf yow had yies to see, to show that more then one old Doctor were of the Popes doctrin? And if this be not sufficyent proff unto yow, the same being enough to Berengarius hymself, which was converted ther∣by, and persuaded to recant his opinion; what doth this show, but that he was not utterly blynded, but that he saw some testimonie against hym, yow utterly to have lost al syght, that se not so moch as one. But of this your monstrous blyndnes I mervell the less, the more I see the same to procede of the very justice and wrath of God against yow; with whom yow mocking on that maner as yow showed in co∣myng in such a high place, in service of the church, as was to be Archbishop and Primate of the Realm, as to swere in dolo, not onlye Proximo, but Vniversae Ecclesiae: Wylleng afterward to pervert the old order of the churche, which yow called a Reformation, me se∣meth to here the very words and curse of S. Paul, that lighted upon
the false Prophet Bariesu, letting the coorse of the doctrine Evange∣lical preached by hym, when he then curseng hym, said, O! plene omni malo, & omni fallaciâ, fili diaboli, inimice omnis justitiae, non desi∣nis pervertere vias Domini rectas? Et ecce nunc manus Domini super te, & eris caecus, non videns solem, usque ad tempus. The effect of this I do see hath lighted upon yow; for entreng by deceit to be a chieff Do∣ctour in the church, perverteng Vias Domini rectas, to be blynded, I pray God it be but ad tempus. But hitherto I have not known a more deaper blyndnes. And if that was ponnyshment of that false prophet, to lese his corporal syght for a tyme, that being an infidelle, for very ignoraunce did put obstacle to the very trew doctrine of the faith never hard of afore, to be blynded corporallie for a tyme, yow that first knew the doctrine, and preached the same, which afterward yow do pervert, if yow were stricken with a gretter, and more nota∣ble blyndnes, the which yow show now, this is evident to come of the verie hond of god, which mans hond cannot heale, but only the hond of god, that justlie ponnyshed yow therewithal. And the sorer and more desperate cure is of this your blyndnes, the more yow acquyett your self therein: as though yow had a great gift of light above al other. For so yow show in your lettres, persuadeng your self to have found a way in teacheng the doctrine of the Sacrament of the aulter, that other hath not seen: Which is to take away the absurdity both to the sence and reason of man, that is in the catholick doctrine, touch∣eng the Sacrement of the aulter, as yow say, in that forme of bread and wyne, to be the verie trew real presence of the body of Christ, and that it is his body and bloode that is showed in the forme of bread and wyne, what reason wil admytt this? What sence? And how moche probable were this, if this doctrine were taught, as yow teach it, to say, that yow see in the forme of bread and wyne, is a figure on∣ly of the body of Christ that is in heaven; whom in spirit in that fi∣gure yow do honour. This maner no doubt were more probable say∣eng to the ears of men that judge things, other by reason or by sence. But the more probable it is, the more false it is, the great Sophister and father of al lyes ever deceaving us by probabilitie of reason, pro∣ponyng ever that which is more aggreable to the sence, But the trew doctrine of Christ is taught by another way. Here is another deficiency. being faullen therein not so moche for fawte or abuse of reason, as by malice against reason And such, I say, no hand can cure, no reason, no discourse; but onlie that it please the high mercy of god, that doith chastise your malicious handleng of the truth, with such ignoraunce and darknes, to withdraw his hond of vengeaunce apon yow: for otherwise you heareng reason, and seeing some light thereof, yet yow have not so moche grace, as to receive it, nor follow it. This is the thing I greatlie fear in yow, haveng knowledge of your procedyng syneth your furst notable errour in rejecteng the doctryne of the Popes Supremiie, and afterward of the Sacrement; which as I said afore, was not after the common maner of faulleng, as other
did, by curiositie, or by frailtie, but by deliberate malice, to forsake the trouthe in both poinctes, to satisfie your carnal appetites, to the which yow dissembleng furst, and mockeng with the treuthe, and af∣terward openlie forsakeng the same, did serve you. Which as yet yow do not knowledg: and this must be the first things, that you shuld knowledg, makeng open confession with repentaunce thereof, if yow shal ever come to receive ony fructe of the mercy of god. So that if I now, that desire your recover, shuld go about by way of discourse, or argument, to bryng yow from your errour to the truth, this must be the furst poyncte, to show how you fell into the same darkness, to the entent that God so moche remytteng his hond of justice, that yow may se your abhomination in abuseng the truth, you might knowledge by feare the justice of god, in letteng yow faul into so great darkness; and by the hope of his infinite mercy caull to hym for grace to be restored to some lyght of his infallible veritie. And this I with al my heart prayeng for yow, in the mean season, un∣tyl God give yow the grace to do the same for your self, shal withal open unto yow the maner of your faulle. Touching your furst Article of the Popes authoritie, which I nede not open ony further then you have opened your self, nor cannot bet∣ter express it, then you have set it furth, I haveng no knowledge thereof, but by your own sayng and wryting, for defence of perjurie objected to yow. And now mark yow wel, if yow have any sence of knowledge left unto yow to see your self and your own dedes, if ever there were hard such kynd of a defence, in ony perjurie of onie man, that had left hym onye light of reason, or knowledge of justice. Which for to know, furst yow must be put in remembrance of the kynde of your othe, and the maner of makeng thereof. The kynd was such, that it was no new othe, but the very same, that al Arch∣busshops of Canterburie, which be Primates of this realme, al Arch∣busshops, and Busshops, in every christen realme, doith accustomable make to the Popes holines, as to the Vicar of Christ in earth, swear∣ing to hym obedience: Such was your othe. And as touching the maner of makeng of it, none could be more solempne; being made in the hond of a Busshop, with the testimonye and assistence of other Busshops, openly in the Church, in the presence of as moche people as the church could hold; at such tyme as yow arraid with the sa∣cred vesture of a Busshop, cam afore the aultre to be consecrated Archbusshop. Al this yow cannott, nor do not denye; nor yet that after al this solempne and open othe, yow did directlie and openlie against the same. Which must necessarilie condempne yow of per∣jurie. But this necessarie consequence yow denie; granteng notwithstond∣yng to have done contrary to the oth. But yow say for your defence, that where yow went to make the othe, even then yow never thought to observe it. And least this shuld be an inconvenient, and a thing moche dommagious unto your fame and eastimation▪ if it were not wel known, that you swore one thing in the most solempne fshion yow could, and ment another, here yow bring such a testimony by wryting, yow bryng furth a previe Protestation, made with previe witnesses, haveng the hond and signe of the Notarie, to prove that
when yow went to make that solempne othe yow were nothing mynd∣ed to observe it. Which former Protestation, whereto doith it serve, but to testify a doble perjurie, which is to be forsworne afore yow did swere. Other perjurers be wont to break their oth after they have sworne, yow brake it afore. Quis sapiens & intelliget haec, & intelli∣get malitiam Satanae? And a wonderful aggravation of the wrath of God towards yow. But let the malice of Sathan be furst considered, in deludeng yow, when yow thought to delude other. This delusion was this: That because it had bene hard some Protestations to be made, also of some good men, in a case, when thei not beyng at their own choise and li∣bertie, when per vim & metum, qui aliquando cadit in constantem vi∣rum, they be made to swere to that, which afterward they have done contrarie to their former oth: In which case a Protestation, excu∣seng the Wil, and alledgeng the feare, hath some colour of defence: This, I say, yow hearyng, and Sthan puttyng yow in remembrance hereof, with the similitude of this deluded yow; Makeng yow be∣leve, that such a kynd of Protestation might serve for a premeditate perjurie. Wherunto yow were not driven, nother vi, nor metu, as yow were not in this your case: except yow caul that a just fear, that yow dyd se, if yow did not sweare, you could not satisfie your am∣bition and covetousnes, in haveng the Busshoprick. For so it was, Leave yow thise two affections, care yee not for to be made Busshop, and who dyd constrayne yow to sweare? Were yee not by that refuse quite delivered of al necessitie to sweare? This also ye cannot denye. Whereunto therefore serveth your Protestation made by the hand of a Notarie, but to make your previe perjurie more notoriouslie known, but to make it known to the world, that yow entreng to the rule of a part of the flock of Christ, yow entred not in by the dore; and not entreng by the dore, but aliunde, what comfort could your flock loke for to have by yow? But that which Christ saith to follow of those, Qui non intrant per ostium, ed aliunde, to be stealers and thieffs, Qui non intrant nisi ut mactent, & perdant; as the effect hath shewed by yow. But here yow deceive your self again, and wold deceive other, makeng your defence of your simulate oth, that yow dyd the same so, for the more service of God, haveng in your mynd then to reform the church, to the which being no way, but to make that oth for a countenance; this yow thought for such a purpose might be accepta∣ble afore god: and also entreng by the authoritie of the Pope, called by hym, that had authoritie to name yow: then yow think it cannot be justlie of onie man objected unto yow, that yow did not entre by the dore. And this trulie if you could have kept your own counsil, toucheng me, I durst not object the same unto yow, seeyng nothing outwardlie, but as that yow were lawfullie called and institute Busshop. And of your inward I wod not make my self judge. More wanting here. and see, as is the furst poyncte in your lettres; Where yow make a
great mervayle, sayng it to be a thing, that was never seen in the realme, that to condempne any subject thereof, justice shuld be sought of a forreyn power, as is the Popes. How this is to be called a For∣reyn power, I wil declare afterward. For this I do not mervel, if yow do not wel know, not being so open to them that lacketh spiri∣tual doctrine, nor of that ignoraunce I do not speak now, but of that outward light and knowledge, which is open to every man by experi∣ence. The which yow not knoweng, it may be wel said, yow be cast In tenebras exteriores, and that yow have lost both interiour and exte∣riour knowledge of things. For so yow show in this case, where yow say, it was never seen in the realm, that to condemne ony subject there∣of to death, shuld be required ony other sentence, then that comyth from the Imperial Crowne of the realm, and their temporal lawes. Wherein that which I note furst is this, that in that place yow seme to lament, that being condempned alredie, as yow say, by the lawes of the realme, of high treason, this dilation is geven to your death, not to suffre, afore al such things as be layd to your charge, were furst known at Rome, this being natural unto al that be in jeopardie of liffe, if they cannot hope by ony just deeance to extue the same, at the least to have tyme al desire: followeng that proverb, In space comyth grace. The which natural affect being extinct in yow, this followeth withal, natural knowledge to be extinct, as in the proheme of your lettre is more declared. And now to come neerer to that yow say was never seen, that onye subject to be condempned, had nede of ony outward Iustice, calleng owtward justice, the Canon lawes, that come from the Pope. To this I say, the experience and use of the lawes, and justice in this realme, doith show clene contrarie to your mervel, that it was never seen in the realm, afore the tyme of your malicious oth, that there was ever ony man condempned for the crime of heresies, by the mere justice that comyth from the temporal lawes, but al were first declared to be such by the spiritual lawes of the Canons, which yow call forreyne lawes. And this beside I say, afore that same tyme, of al other crimes, as treason and other, there was never spiritual man put to execution, accordeng to the ordre of the lawes of the realm, but he were furst by the Canon Laws condempned, disgraded, and then gyven to the tem∣poral hondes. Wherof there be as menye examples, afore the tyme of breakeng the old ordre of the realm thise last years, as hath bene delinquents. Let al the records be sene; and speciallie this is notable of the Busshop of — which being emprisoned here for high trea∣son, the king wold not procede to his condempnation and ponnish∣ment, afore he had the Popes bull geveng hym. And this is the trade of justice, which the King and Qwene use with yow at this tyme, beyng condempned of treason, being consecrate Busshop, to have the Popes sentence from Rome afore yow suffre: Which maner of proceding, you say, was never afore in the Realm: and the practise and experience in like cases doith show never to have bene otherwise, afore the tyme of your notable perjurie. And so Ca∣tholick Kings, as it pertayneth to the privilege of the See of Rome, when they be crowned, doith sweare.
And now look what ignorance is this, to think that the like was ne∣ver sene in the realme, when it was never seen otherwise, amongst those princes, that were counted to be in the obedience of the Lawes of Christ, and of the Church. But now to come to that yow speak of, the Popes law and power: Which after a seditious maner of speakeng, yow call A forreyne power, this stondeth under such a fashion, if God leave yow so moch sence to understond what I say, that the Popes power can no more be called Forreyn power, comyng not of man alone, but of hym that is god and man, that was secundus hom, de coelo coelestis, then may be called a Forreyn power, that the sowle of man comyng from heaven, hath in the body generate in earth. And so it is in the poitick body of this realme, ruled with politick lawes, founded by mns reason, that be called Temporal lawes: To them comyng the Popes laws spiritual doith no other, but that the sowle in the body, to gyve liffe to the same; to confirme and strengthen the same. And this is it the Aun∣gel speakeng in Christes conception, and declareng what his authoritie shuld be, signifyed, saing, he shuld sytt Super Domum Davyd, which was a temporal reigne, ut confirmet illud & corroboret. And so doith the spiritual lawes, procedynge of his Spirit: As be the lawes of the Church, and canon lawes. Which wheresoever thei be wel observed, doith this effect, ever to confirme and stablish the temporal lawes of the realm, as no realm hath had more experience then this, ever sneth the tyme they received the faith, and obedience of the Pope; from whom came theyr doctrine of the faith. There was never notable trou∣ble in the realm of ony kynd, if it dured ony space, but it was ever lightly eased, and the realm established by some Legate sent from the Pope and the See of Rome, following the prescript of the Canons, and the Spiritual Law: Without the which no realme can wel be govern∣ed, but al be like to the Thornbush: Whereof it is written In libro Iudi∣cum, when the Sichimites had chosen a Tyrannie over them, against the law of God, then it was prophesied unto them, what shuld come thereof, which was that fire shuld come furth of that thorne, which was their King, that shuld devoure the people, and from the people, to burne hym, as it was, and ever shal be, where mere temporal lawes, without spiri∣tual, doith rule. Which state may be compared to be like such a thorne, whereof fire doith come furth, to the destruction, both of the governour and the people. And how the lawes of the realme might be wel likened to such a thorne, after that the spiritual authoritie was cast furth, the destruction of such a sort of men, of al degrees, both great and smal, the great spoyles that were taken, may geve sufficient proff to al them, that hath ony sence, or remembraunce of things so lately done. And now comyng again to the spiritual authoritie and Law, to joyn it self with the Temporal, this is like to the fyer that Moyes saw In ru∣bo: which gave liht, and dyd not burne, nor never doith, when it is wel used. And if it be not wel used, the faute is in the persons, and not in the thing; as the faute is not in the Temporal lawes, when the Prynce doith abuse them; howbeit of their nature they be tan∣quam sinae, as was also Moyes law, sharp to which was mitigate; and so shal be in every when they be
joyned with the spirituall ought not to be called For∣reyne Lawes More here wanting. Non in probabilibus humanae sapientiae verbis, ne evacuetur crux Christi: As it shuld be in this case. For if this probabilitie were followed, the sklaunder of the cross shold be voyd. For this were no sklaunder to the Iewes to hear Christ honoured in a figure, thei being ever used to the same. Nor it wold seem so moch folyshe to the Gentiles and infi∣delles, after we had accepted Christ for God, to honour him in a figu∣rative maner. But this being the counsel of Christ to utter his great misterie in forme that he should have it sklander to both the Iews, that seke signes, and were used to be taught by figures; and also the Gentiles, that styck upon the judgment of reason; The more proba∣ble you make it, the further you swarve from the trew doctrin of Christ, and verie trew maner to teach it. And here may no new maner be taught. What a haynous pride is this, this doctrine passeng a thousand yeare, and as menye hundred beside, as hath bene syneth this Sacrement was instituted, by the myddest of the Iewes and Gen∣tiles, with this sklaunder and appearaunce of folyshnes, never being foun fawtie in ony one of the Busshops and preachers of the word of God, that they confessed the real presence of the body of Christ in the Sacrement of the aulter: but al found fautie and condemned of heresie, which denyed the same. And ever the doctrine of the presence prevayling and triumpheng above mans reason, or sence, may be capace of the same. Which both God wil have mortified and dye utterlie, when this mistery and meate of lise is spoken and taken. For as that was the beginneng of the destruction of man, when fol∣loweng the probabilitie of reason, he wold feade hymself with meate prohibite unto hym; So the counsil of God hath ordeyned, this to be the begynneng of the liffe of man, to take a sensible meat, wherein nother reason nor sense can find ony probabilitie, or make any judg∣ment thereof. But because I have entreated this part more largely in another epistle, that I send unto yow, wherein I show that stondeng, as yow do, without repentance of the maner of your entrie to the service of the church, yow could never be nother good schoar of this doctrine, and moche less a Master, I wil now procede no further to reason with you herein, knoweng al to be in vaine, and no healp nor meane to recover yow, but only prayer. Which with al my hart, as I wold for mine own sowle, I wyl not fayle to use for yow, to hym, whom yow have so greatlie offended, as I never redd of ony Busshop, that ever was in the church. But the founteyne of his mercie is never clo∣sed to them that wyl cal for it; as myne own entier prayer is to the infinite mercy of God, that yow may have the grace so to do: send∣eng yow for obteynyng of that, his holy Spiri, Qui condemnat mun∣dum de peccato, de judicio, & de justitia: that seeing furst your sore con∣dempnation, yow maye therewith be sturred, with al humilitie and
contrite hart, to demaund some comfort: Which cannot be hoped of without your former condempnation of your self. Wherunto to bryng yow, it hath cawsed me by wryting to set furth so earnestly some part of your grievous offences afore yow: Wylleng yow no less comfort, then I wold to myne own sowle. And the same I say, concludeng and eandeng, as I began: It may please the paternal love, that God beareth unto al synners, for his sake, that being his only Son, God and man, dyed to pay their ransome, for to forgeve yow, and to deliver yow ex Ore Leonis, which hath so devowred yow, that if you be not plucked out as theProphet Amos saith of Israel, Quomodo si eruat Pastor duo crura, aut extremum auriculae: I say if you be not plucked out by the eare, yow be utterlie undone both bo∣dy and sowle. Which yet again, and ever, the infinite mercy of God may defeande yow from. Wrytten in the coorte at St. Iames, the vj. of Novembre. 1555. Yowr very trew coumfortore in God, yow not refuseng hys grace, R. Pole. Car. Leg. NUM. XC. Archbishop Parker to the Secretary, desiring the Councels letters, in order to his discovering of certain Writings of Archbishop Cranmer. SYR, Being here, and wold be loth to be idle;Sir W. H. MSS. and thereupon ha∣vyng consideration as wel of these quarters, for the common quyet among the people, as respecting the common service of the better sort toward the Q. Highnes, and her affairs; I fynd them al in so good order, that I do rejoyce therin. As for my ecclesiastical persons, I deal with them indifferently, that I fynd also obedience in them. Now, Sir, with spying and serching, I have found out bi very cre∣dible enformation, among other things, in whose hondes the grete notable wryten bokes of my predecessour, Dr. Cranmer, shuld re∣mayne: the partyes yet denying the same; and therupon despayre to discover them, except I maye be ayded bi the Councells letters, to optayne them. I pray your honor to procure ther letters, to autho∣rise me to enquire and serch for such Monuments by al wayes, as bi mi pore discretion shal be thought good: whether it be bi deferryng an othe to the parties, or veweng ther studies, &c. This opportuny∣tie of enformation being suche, I wold wyshe, I coud recover these bokes to be afterward at the Q. Commandment. I wold as moche rejoyce, whyle I am in the countreye, to wynne them, as I wold to
restore an old Chancel to reparation. Because I am not acqueynted with the stile of the Councels letters in this case, I send you no mi∣nute: trusting that your goodnes wil think the lauber wel bestowed, to cause the clarke of the Councel to devise the forme. And thus hearyng of the liklywood of the plage to be in begynnyng in some placys hereabout; and yet myn own house, thanks be to God, in good quyet, I wyshe the Q. famylye to be defended by gods honde. At my house from Bekesborne this 22. of August.An. 1563. Your honors assured, Matthue Cant. To the Right honorable Sir William Cecyl, Knight, Principal Secre∣tary to the Q. Majestie. At the Court. NUM. XCI. Dr. William Mowse, Master of Trinity Hal in Cambridg, his letter of thanks to Secretary Cecyl. Ornatissimo Equiti Glielmo Cecillio, Rgio Scretario. QUOD nullam adhuc grati animi significationem ob acceptum benesicium fecerim,Sr. W. H. MSS. vereor nequid de me mali suspiceris. Nm cum anta u in me fuit benevolentia, quantam in nemine aduc sen∣si, valdè dubito, nè magnitudo tuorum in me meri orum, id quod ne∣gligentiae crimen vix effugere possit, in majoris sceleris periculum vo∣let. Nam ut in omnibus rebus naturaliter evenire videmus. ut quae∣que res sit affecta, ità plerúque se statim ostendat▪ sic a gratis animis, beneficij accepti aliqua significatio haud mulò post sbsequi debeat. Prasertim si hujusmodi sit, in quo singularis benevolentiae insigne argu∣mentum extitit. Nam cujus animus in recei beneficio languescit, illum dturnam beneficij memoriam retinre no est verisimie. Haec me valde perturbant, & eò magis, quod ab hoc vitio qàm longissimè abesse desidero, cujus suspicione meâ culpâ non omninò careo. Ut enim aliae meae res sese habeant, optimorum virorum gratiâ multum adjutus sum: ut omittam singularem Cantuariensis munificentiam, quam in me multis annis sine ullo meo merito exercuit. Chaeci vero tam egregius animus & constans voluntas in me suit, cum id nec ullâ officiorum necessitudine, nec familiaritatis conjunctione effectum sit, an ejus virtuti & singulari humanitati id tribuere debem, aut deorum voluntati, & meae fortunae, non facilè dicere possum. Sed de tua be∣nevolentia quid dicam, quâ omnes meas fortunas & amicorum studia complexus es? Nam quod illi mihi cupieban, id tu solus, reluctan∣tibus inimicis, confecisti. Quare sicut in beneficio conserendo prin∣ceps
fuisti, ita & ego illud totum tibi praecipuè acceptum referre de∣berem. Et licet id proprio quoque tempore pro beneficij magnitudi∣ne significatum non sit, jucundam tamen tui ecordationem semper habui. Nec minus laboravi quâ potissimum ratione meipsum saltem voluntate ipsâ, gratum ostenderem. Nam liberum amoris & officij mei iter conditionis humilitas & exiguae facultates interrumpunt. Tum ipsa scholasticorum officia, quae in crebris literis consistere so∣lent, nec isti meae aetati, nec huic studiorum rationi satis conveniunt, cum illae gratiores esse soleant, quae a pueris, atque ijs eloquentibus, perveniunt. Ut nè addam tuas gravissimas occupationes, quas meis nugis perturbare plusquam scelestum ducerem. Quare quod tua in∣tegritas pro tot beneficijs a me exigebat, id sedulo praestabo, ut quibus muneribus tuá operâ praesum, in his me probè exercendo tuae de me opinioni satisfaciam. Vale, 20 februarij. Cantabrigiae. Tuae humanitati devinctissimus, Gulielmus Mowseus. NUM. XCII. Justus Jonas to Secretary Cecyl concerning the Miseries of Ger∣many, occasioned by the Interim: and that hee might receive the kings intended munificence. Clarissimo Viro Domino Sycilio, &c. domino meo observando ad manus proprias dentur. S. D. P. Quanta sit tua erga miseros, in omni genere officij, pietas, equidem ante hoc tempus non ignorabam: Sed certè,SirW.H.MSS. ut quem∣admodum sentio, Loquar, nunquam tantam esse putavi, quantam hodie expertus sum. Me enim miseris annumerare non vereor, si∣quidem varij fortunae casus graviter me afflixerint. Hoc intelligere si voles, audias quaeso pauca quaedam verba ex Parentis ad me epistola bonâ fide recitata. Vtinam, inquit, coram tibi, mi fili, exponere possem afflictum staetum rerum cum publicarum, tum privatarum . Mallem tibi tam magno spatio montium & marium a nobis dissito scribere laeta , sed difficultates assiduè adhuc crescunt; & propter non receptum Librum Interim, cogar forsan iterum aliquo migrare. Potes cogitare quam difficile & molstum futurum sit , &c. Hactenus Pater. Hoc tam triste exordium qualis secuta sit narratio ipse cogitare poteris. Equidem haec scribens chartam lacrymis madefeci. Subibat enim longè tristissima paternarum calamitatum recordatio; quarum siqua pars in filium redundat, ut certè redundat, quis miretur, si me miserum dixero? Apud te praesertim, cui tanquam medico causam morbi reticere vix benè possum. Cum itaque illis vel asperiratibus re∣rum, vel injurijs temporum, eò usque dejectus sim, ut aliorum be∣nignitate
casus meos sustentare cogar; non putavi Regiae Majestatis munificentiam, quâ nescio quos meos Labores benignè potius, quam merito remunerari constituit, hoc tempore negligendam esse. Si fortè eam spem avidius prosequi videor, non cupiditati, sed ne∣cessitati id ascribes mee. Festino enim ut ante hyemem in Galliam re∣vertar, eaúmque rerum cognitione me instruam, quarum mihi olim in Anglia usus esse posset. Hanc enim patriam non minus diligo, quam sin ea natus essem. Cúmque de studiorum meorum fine cogito, non minus Angliam, quam Germaniam, mihi propono. Quidquid igitur Regia Majestas hoc tempore in me contulerit, id mihi loco arctissimi vinculi erit, quo me in totam reliquam vitam huic regno obligatum arbitrabor. Benè & faeliciter Vale. Tuae dominationis dditissimus, Justus Jonas Junior. NUM. XCIII. Miles Wilson to Secretary Cecyl, Lamenting the Spoiles of the Revenues of Schooles, Benefices, and Hospitals. To which are added his Arguments against this Sacrilege. Ornatissimo, Clarissimóque Viro, Gulielmo Cecilio, Regio Consiliario prudetissimo, & Literarum Patrono maximo. Sr. W. H. MSS.CUM in Aula nuper essem, Vir Ornatissime, & Sermones cum tua Dominatione sererem de multis varijsque rebus, partim ad Christi religionem propagandam, partim ad Remp. conservandam ac augendam, imprimis pertinentibus; tradidi (ut scis) tibi lectitan∣dam Orationem quandam de rebus ecclesiae non diripiendis, a me su∣perioribus hisce diebus confectam, & in publicis Academiae Scholis re∣citatam, in praesentem causae defensionem, quae jam tum tractabatur in publica disceptatione. Sed cum animadverterem te hominem in gra∣vissimis Reip. negotijs semper occupatissimum, nec tum satis quietum fuisse ad meum perlegendum opus, paulo longius quam pro tantillo spacio temporis cúmque te percupidum esse intelli∣gebam audiendi & videndi quid de tam inusitato argumento ex sacris scripturis proferri potuisset; existimabam me & te tuo paululum posse levare onere; & etiam ea tecum communicare, quorum particeps fieri vehementer cupidus mihi videbare, si ea in angustas, & concisas ar∣gumentandi formas conjicerem, quae ibi fusius, ac liberiore Orationis cursu jam tum prosequebar. Itaque ex eo tempore ratiocinia nonnul∣la & syllogismos contexui, qui & ad urgendum aptiores, & ad recor∣dandum faciliores, & ad permovendum commodiores existunt, quam laxum quoddam & solutum illud Orationis genus: Ut si illa superio∣ra, propter eorum longitudinem, & infinitas tuas occupationes legere
non liceret, saltem haec brevia dialecticorum consectaria, quae sequun∣tur, cum vacr, inspectares. Cujus mei laboris me fructum satis magnum perepise arbitrabor, si tantum apud T. D. effecerint, ut quae Scholae percelebres sint nuper dirutae, in Academiae ruinam maximam, hae tuo labore extrui mandentur: Ut quae Sacerdotia sunt miserè despolia∣ta per avaros patronos, ad acerbissimum ecclesiae vulnus, ea resti∣tuantur in integum ad incredibile Reip. decus; Ut quae Hospitia de∣lumbata ferint perditè, ac exirpata funditus, per importunitatem non ferendam cupidorum hominum, ea, quantum fieri potest, per te adjuventur apud Concilium Regium, quo ad pristinum redeant sttum, nempe in subsidum verè pauperum. Valeant enim, valeant Academiae, per exigue nunc certè, sed bre∣vi futuae nullae, si earum nutrices, Scholae, negligantur, Seminarium & seges florentis Academiae. Ut enim mare cito exarescit non influen∣ti us undiquaque rivulis ac suminibus; sic absorbebuntur statim Academiae, & in nihilum recident, si ex scholis aditus illis praecludan∣tur, sic ut ilinc ad Academias nullus, aut quam paucissimi commeant. Doctrina omnis generis conticescet, Papismi egnum, & plusquam Gothicus barbarisms omnia pervadet loca; si non eruditis mlius, quam jam est, consulatur, si proemia eruditionis, Rectoriae, Prae bendae, & omnia auserantur. An dimicabit miles, stipendium si ne∣getur? An tellurem proscindet aut bos▪ aut arator, si pabulum illis non satis abunde praebeatur? An trajiciet mare mercator spe questus omni sblatâ? An terra profundet herbas, imbribus non depluta? An molendinum molare possit, si alveum interturbes, & aliorsum cursum ejus vertas? Nequaquam certè. Sic neque quisquam acrioribus stu∣dijs doctrinae operam navabit, nisi ager suus aliquo quasi rore amoeno irrigetur & proemijs ac muneribus conignis feriatur. Si exempla quaeras Sholarum eversarum, Rectoriarum delumbata∣rum, Hospitiorum excisorum, petas exempl licet affatim horum ne∣fandorum sacrilegiorum, vel a summo Angliae Cancelario; cui, te absente, consarcinata multa obtuli; vel ab Episcopo Eboracensi, apud quem etiam ista omnia diligentissimè explorata deposui. T. D. novit oppidum, had procul a nobis dissitum, nomine Childerly; hic una generos Domu, sed hic multum degener, (quae est Magistri Cuttes) exedit universum oppidum, nè unâ quidem domunculâ relictâ, ex∣ceptâ suâ Domo; hic qia desunt homines, quos Templum capiat, re∣cipiuntur qui, quos pro hominibus Templum pro Stabulo contineat: Et qua triricum Domini non est quod in tectum recipiatur, i. Ho∣mines Christiani, recipitur hordeum & avena, & stramentum omnis generis. Sic oves Christi minuuntur, sic pecudes augentur, sic perit bonus pastor, & pastoris Virtus: sic Templum partim fit horreum pro frugibus condendis, partim vero stabulum pro custodiendis equis. Argumenta hic subjungo, quae prius pollicitus fueram. Longior sum quàm vellem; sed magnitudo causarum, & zelus huc me vel in∣vitum produxit. Quare ignoscet, spero, T. D. cui omnia prosper∣rima in Domino precor. 3 Februarij 1552. Tuae dignitatis studiosissimu, Milo Wilsonus.
Argumenta, quibus ostenditur; Impium esse Bona ecclesiae ab eccle∣sijs divelli. I. Quicquid Domino consecratum est in usum sacratissimi sui ministe∣rij, sive homo, sive animal, sive ager fuerit, nec vendi potest, nec re∣dimi a quoquam.Levit. 27. 27. Levitici. Bona ecclesiastica, ut aurum, argentum, aedes, praedia, Domino consecrantur in usum sacri ministerij. Ergo bona ecclesiastica nec vendi, nec coemi possunt. Et per con∣sequens, nec auferri, nec mutari debent. Minor Liquet. Nunquam enim agrorum possessores agris suis & bo∣nis ecclesias dotassent, suos exhaeredando, nisi ut ministris Dei abundè prospiceretur, in ministerium suum probè incumbentibus. Ac 2do, communia facientes omnia. II. Quod nostrum non est abripere, nefas est, & contra justitiam om∣nem, quae est virtus sua cuique tribuens. Bona ecclesiae, nostra non sunt: nullius sunt, quia Christi, cui dicata & donata sunt. Ergo iniquum est bona ecclesiae diripere quovis modo. Levit. 27.Probatur Minor tum lege divinâ, tum Imperatoriâ. Quicquid enim fuerit consecratum sanctum sanctorum erit Domino. Domino dicabitur, & non redimetur. Et jure civili, Quae domini juris sunt, ea in nullius bo∣nis computanda sunt. III. Quod cum lege naturae pugnat, Legitimum non est. Divellere terras Sacerdotum cum lege naturae pugnat. Ergo eas divellere Legitimum non est. Minoris probatio. Gen. 47.Pharao, sub lege naturali vivens, non patiebatur terras & possessi∣ones suis adimi sacerdotibus, aut allevari pretio ullo: Sentiens, secun∣dùm naturam, id maximè esse, ut indè viverent undè laborarent. Prae∣tereà, ex horreis publicis gratuitò aluit sacerdotes, cum suae res parum sufficerent sibi. Et cum omnem terram Aegypti quintas pendere coegit Ioseph, unicas Sacerdotum terras exemit, quas liberandas censuit om∣ni dura conditione. IV. Nemo civis bonus est, qui ex communibus privata facit, qui non magis communitati studet, quam proprijs adaugendis commodis. Qui opes ecclesiasticas, & praedia sacra distrahunt, ex communi∣bus privata faciunt, sua commoda quaerunt, publicum negligunt bonum. Ergo qui ecclesiae bona abstrahunt civium bonorum numero ponendi non sunt, sed civitatis eversores, & Reip. putandi sunt. V. In omni bene administrata Rep. semper summa cura fuit religionis conservandae, & bonarum artium. Direptio bonorum ecclesiae, & religionem quatefacit, imo demoli∣tur, & artes bonas vigere impedit.
Ergo direptio opum ecclesiasticarum in benè temperata Rep. con∣sistere nequit. Minor ostenditur. Quod nullus in vinea Domini opus faciet, por∣tans pondus & aestum diei, nec in praemijs hujuscemodi aetatem suam conteret, nisi praemio ad laborem aliquo concitetur: Nullus artes con∣sectabitur ingenuas, sublatis illis praesidijs unde sustentarentur: Honos enim alit artes. Nec triturabit bos, si obligetur os; nec pastor pascet oves, si de lacte non bibat; nec militabit miles, si stipendium sub∣traxeris; nec in vinea faciet opus, qui de denario non conducitur. VI. Si conferatur nostra Resp. cum Iudaeorum, quae per Dominum no∣strum instituta est, minus reperietur nostris ministris dari, quam V. Testamenti Levitis fuerat deputatum. Nam Numerorum 3. Levi∣tarum Viginti duo millia tantum recensentur, qui Tabernaculo Do∣mini tum temporis inserviebant. Et hic exiguus numerus vniversas per omnem Iudaeam decimas, primitias, oblationes recepit in viaticum & victum suum, cum 48 urbibus, atque suis suburbanis Locis ad tria circumcirca milliaria. At nostrorum ministrorum numerus quadruplo major est, ut appa∣ret ex parochiarum limitatione & numero. Quid per hanc notam, Quaere. So enim cum duobus Templa vulgariter connumerantur hic in Aglia, & duo ad minimum in singulis sacerdotes sunt, omnibus simul collatis. Ergo cum solum decimas recipiant sacerdotes Anglicani, idque im∣minutas, & delumbatas valdè, non detractio, sed additio potius fa∣cienda esset, si par ratio utrobique retineretur. VII. Nulla pauperum bona eripienda sunt. Pauperibus enim Paulus ubique Collectiones facit. Bona ecclesiae sunt bona Pauperum. Ergo bona ecclesiae eripienda non sunt. VIII. Si diripere aliquid privato sit impium, si commune civitatis aera∣rium expilare sit nefarium, unde robur & praesidium urbis pendeat; quanto magis scelestum & iniquum erit Capitis nostri Christi bona di∣vellere, & ministris ecclesiae opes despoliare, quae sunt nervi religionis, & spiritualis regni Chrsti. At privato detrahere, impium est, & gazas urbis exinanire scelera∣tum, mortéque plectendum in omni ben temperata Republica. Ergo scelere carere non potest, publica ecclesiae & Christi Capitis bona ad istum modum miserè dilacerare. IX. Qui vendentes in templo & ementes ejecit, ipsum Templum, & omnia in Templo ad vendendum proponentes, impunitos, opinor, nunquam permitter. At cum flagello in Templo vendentes & ementes ejecit Christus, magno percitus furore. Ergo non connivebit ad eos, qui omnia diruunt, & ex domo Ora∣tionis speluncam Latronum faciunt. X. Quaecúnque ad Sabbatum rite sanctificandum & celebrandum spe∣ctant, conservanda & retinenda sunt. Est enim pars Decalogi Sabbati Sanctificatio.
Bona ecclesiae ad Sabbatum rite sanctificandum pertinent. Ergo bona ecclesiae integra conservanda sunt. Minor sic proba∣tur. Sabbatum rite celebratur Evangelij praedicatione, Sacramentorum administratione, Precum profusione, & pro pauperibus diligenti pro∣visione. Sed ecclesiastica bona & verbi praedicationem fovent, & sacramento∣rum administrationem alunt, & pauperes in ecclesia sublevant: dum eos sustentent ministros, qui & haec peragunt officia, & indigentibus necessaria subministrent. Ergo bona ecclesiae pernecessaria sunt ad festum rite sanctificandum. XI. Unicuíque ad perfectionem contendendum est. Estote enim perfecti, sicut pater Vester coelestis perfectus est. At Christianae perfectionis est vendere quae habemus omnia, & pau∣peribus dispertire. Nam, si vis perfectus esse, Vade & vende omnia, quae habes, & pauperibus dato. Ergo de Christo & ecclesia nihil detrahendum, sed pauperibus potius indies adjiciendum erit. XII. Bonum quò communius, eò melius. Quò multiplicatius eò lau∣datius. Sed pastores ecclesiae & Episcopi, bonum est. Ergo augendus eorum numerus, non minuendus existit. Ergo, quò plures Episcopi eo rectius est; & per consequens plures constituendi, potius quam deponendi, & abjiciendi, qui nunc constituti sunt. Major Liquet, Minor sole clarior est. Nam siquis episcopatum appe∣tit, bonum opus desiderat. Certè episcopus esse non potest non esse bonum. XIII. Balthazar graviter punctus est ob vasorum Deo consecratorum di∣reptionem & profanum eorum usum.Dan. 5. Achan insigniter plectebatur ob sacrilegam distractionem. Josue 7. 2 Macch. 5.Antiochus horribili mortis genere perit, ob impiam sacrorum diri∣piendi voluntatem, & conatum. Lysimachus Lapidibus obruitur propter consimile facinus. 3 Macch. 9. 3 Macch. 4.Heliodorus gravissimis vulneribus conficitur a Deo, quod sacra tem∣pli vasa abducere conaretur. Et sic de universo numero Sacrilegorum dici potest. Ergo omnes, qui Sacrata Deo divellunt, gravissimas paenas expe∣ctent oportet. XIV. Sic Divus Paulus ratiocinatur. Sub spe debet is, qui arat, arare; & qui triturat sub spe,1 Cor. 9. spei suae particeps esse debebit. Ergo qui in agro Evangelico arat, & qui in area Domini sedulò triturat, sub spe percipiendorum fructuum, & arare & triturare debent. At quae relinquitur spes, cum aufertur res? XV. Quin on seminant spiritualia, carnalia ne metant. Laici Spiritualia non seminant. Quippe quia nec verbum annunciant, nec Sacramenta administrant.
Ergo Laici non debent metere carnalia. Iniquum est, ut indè quis vivar, undè non Laboret. Et Panlus dicit, Qui non laborat, non man∣ducet. XVI. Dignus est operarius mercede suâ. Ergo qui non operatur, dignus non est. Et per consequens,Mat. 10. neganda esset merces non omninò ope∣ranti. Sic pellantur omnes inutiles uci, sive Laici sive Clerici extite∣rint, qui alienis insidiantur Laboribus; quique mel exugunt omne, parùm aut nihil mellis relinquentes hijs, qui verè apes sunt, valdéqué laboriosae. XVII. Dominus ordinavit, ut qui Evangelium annuntiant, ex Evangelio vivant. Ergo è contrario, de Evangelio nè victitent, qui Evangelium aut no∣lunt, aut non possunt denutiare. XVIII. Paulus inter Ecclesiasticos ita se gerebat, ut gratis panem a neminè acciperet: sed cum labore & sudore nocte diéque faciebat opus, nè cuiquam eorum oneri foret. Praecepit item illis, Vt siquis nollet opera∣ri, is nec ederet. Ergo quâ conscientiâ de ecclesiasticis bonis vivere illi possunt, de Prebendarum fructibus, de Rectorijs, de hospitijs, de Episcoporum patrimonijs, & reliquis ecclesiae proventibus, qui nullo ministerio ec∣clesiastico inserviunt, nec praedicando evangelium, nec sacramenta ex∣hibendo, nec ecclesiasticam disciplinam, ut par est, exercendo? XIX, Qui praesunt Presbyteri, duplici honore digni sunt; maximè qui Labo∣rant in verbo & doctrina. Qui duplex honos duplicatum designat sub∣sidium; & ut putavit Theophilactus, abundans, praeter stipendium commune Ergo tribuatur hic duplex honos sedulis ministris; nec ita minuan∣tur quotidie victus eorum, ut sibi & suis parùm sufficiant in propria vo∣catione, & munijs obeundis. XX. Quae sunt militibus stipendia, ea sunt bona ecclesiae & earum mi∣nistris. Sed militibus stipendia detrahere iniquum est. Ergo iniquum bona ecclesiae. XXI. Vinitori fructum & vinum, Opilioni lac, Agricolae fruges, eripere non licet. Sed quod Vinitori vinum, Opilioni Lac, Agricolae fruges, id ecclesijs opes suae. Eas ergo subducere, & hijs vitae adjumentis fraudare Verbi mini∣stros, nullam profectò habet aequitatem. XXII. Ministris ecclesiae omnia ad vivendum necessaria suppeditanda sunt. Necessaria autem definio, quae sibi, uxori, liberis,Deut. 25. 1 Cor. 7. 1 Tim. 3. familiae satis sunt; quaeque hospitalitati servandae & exhibendae sufficiunt pere∣grinis, egentibus, mancis, claudis, coecis, decrepitis, orphanis & viduis. Ergo bona ecclesijs aliquando deputata, adimenda non sunt: ne
fortè his singulis satis relinquatur, & ita necessarijs vitae praesidijs de∣spolientur hi, quos Spiritus Sanctus praecepit, ut de ecclesia vi∣verent. XXIII. Qui ecclesiae bona spoliant, hij ministros verbi & Dei spoliant. Qui ministros Dei spoliant, hij Christum ipsum despoliant. Nam quod uni horum feceritis, & mihi feceritis. Ergo ecclesiae bona diripere est Christum ipsum, & ejus ministros victu suo defraudare; & Christi tunicam ac patrimonium in partes dissecare. Quod quam horribile sit sacrilegij genus, omnes pij norunt. XXIV. Irritum esse non debet, quod testator piè, & secundùm scripturas testamento suo condidit.Gal. 4. At multi pij morientes testamentis legave∣runt sua bona ecclesijs, in ea rum necessarios usus. Ergo impium est, hoc spernere testamentum, vel frustrari quovis modo, sic ut surripiatur avarè, quod munificè, quod sanctè praebitum fuerat. XXV. In nascenti ecclesia Christi, Apostolorum in temporibus, pij terras & possessiones & omnia vendiderant,Acts 2. ut pauperibus, & publicantibus evangelium abundè prospiceretur. Ergo jamdiu donata, & ad longum tempus confirmata ecclesijs, in hos ipsos usus, nec vi nec dolo rapienda sunt; ut conferantur in eos, qui nec paupertate ulla premuntur, nec ullo ministerio sacro ecclesijs deserviunt. XXVI. Quod vel promittitur, vel destinatur in usum ecclesiae, subtrahendum non est,Act. 5. nec callidè submovendum. Id quod probatur ex Anania & Sapphira. Duo horrenda exempla. At bona ecclesiarum destinantur in maximè necessarios usus, in sustentationem pauperum, & in subsidium Ministrorum. Ergo, non astu, non vi avellenda sunt dicta ecclesiae bona: nè fortè id avellentibus accidat, quod Ananiae & Sapphirae supra eveniebat. XXVII. Qui templum Ierosolymitanum spoliebant, poenas Sacrilegij gravissimas luebant:2 Macc. 1.3, 9. Certè qui Christianorum templa diruunt, ac despoliant, & ex illis, ut scopis, omnia everrunt, impunè nunquam, opinor, ferent. XXVIII. Est in hijs abusus. Reformentur ergo. Alunt Superstitionem. Nu∣trian tergo exin veram & sinceram Christi religionem. Indignis tri∣buuntur ecclesiae praedia. Ergo dignioribus concedantur. Fuci pellan∣tur, telluris inutile pondus. XXIX. Homicidae putantur, qui violentas manus injiciunt in alienum cor∣pus, & illi vitam corporis eripiunt. Ergo erunt multò magis, qui pabulo coelestis doctrinae animas pio∣rum orbant, atque destituunt, sic ut aeternum pereant. Quod Laici faciunt, qui victus ministrorum sibi rapiunt, qui soli illos rore coe∣lestis verbi pascerent. Et ità impediunt, ne possint hoc facere. XXX.
Sacerdotes Iudaeorum impij, qui in nece domini consenserant, pre∣tium Sanguinis recipere nolebant, in eos per Iudam rejectum; Sed eo mercandum decernunt agrum in sepulturam peregrinorum. Ergo Nostri Scribis & Pharisaeis deteriores sunt, qui patrimonium Crucifixi, i. Christi tunicam, etiam non oblatam, sibi auferunt, & quoque jure quaque injuriâ sibi attrahant. Nullum Sacrilegum impunitum sinet Deus. XXXI. Bona ecclesijs divellere Sacrilegum est. Ergo haec ecclesiae bona diripere, ultionem Dei gravem comme∣retur. Minoris probatio. Omnis ablatio Sacri de Sacro Sacrilegum est. A definitione. Diripere bona ecclesiae est rem Sacram de Sacro auferre. Ergo bona ecclesiae divellere Sacrilegum est. NUM XCIV. Peter Martyr to procure a license from the Court for one of his Au∣ditors, who desired to preach. Verè fidelissimo Christi Ministro Domino Jacobo Haddono, has tradas, Londini. S. D. In Collegio Magdalenae, Haddone in Christo charissime,SirW.H.MSS. cui fra∣ter tuus praesidet, est pius & probus Vir, qui Hugo Kirke appel∣latur, Magister artium, inter suos bonae famae, atque studio Evange∣lij Christi (quantum judicare licet) vehementer incensus. Proindè incitatur (ut mihi persuadeo) spiritu Dei, ad praedicandum; quo sanam doctrinam, cujus est Sectator non ignavus, ovibus ecclesiae com∣municet; quae in nostris his regionibus, rarò, & paucis in locis, quem∣admodum oporteret, pascuntur. De universo autem isto negotio, puto illum egisse tecum, quantum ex ejus verbis colligo. Cum ita∣que me rogaverit, ut ad te scriberem, id libenti animo facio. Et ei, quod possum, fero testimonium; quoad mores benè audit, sacrarum litterarum est admodum studiosus, mihi docenti semper adest, & sa∣cram profitetur doctrinam. Quae de eo bonâ fide possum dicere, haec habeo. De quo etiam potes, si visum fuerit, fratrem interrogare, qui jam hinc discessit, & ad negotia sui Collegij procuranda est profectus. Quod mihi (ut verum fatear) parùm est gratum. Nam illius con∣versatione piâ, jucundâ & eruditâ, plurimùm delector. Sperabam fore, ut te hic quandoque, vel saltem ad aliquot dies, haberemus: at nunc quod sperandum sit non video. Equidem licet adversa valetu∣dine aliquandiu laboraverim, nunc tamen dei gratiâ sum restitutus. Piam vero, & mihi nunc maximè necessariam conjugem (ut audivis∣se te non dubito,) ad Dominum praemisi. Quod ideo scribo, ut deum roges, quod mihi nunc, dum vivo solus, ac tali adjutorio destitutus,
suum conduplicet auxilium. Vale & Christo faelix vivito. 18 Aprilis. Oxonij.An. 1553. Tuus in Domino, P. Martyr. NUM. XCV. That one who officiated in Dr. Weston's place, might receive the Stipend detained from him. Clarissimo Viro Domino Guglielmo Sicello, Majestatis Regiae Secretario, ac Equiti Honestissimo. In Aula. sr. W.H. MSS.S. D. Quoniam, Vir Clarissime, cum tuam pietatem, tum erudi∣tionem habeo compertissimam, ideo ad te de hoc pio & erudito Christi Ministro, quo familiarissimè utor, scribendum esse censui. Ita sanè res ejus habet: Sacras litteras a duobus propemodum annis, Oxo∣nij, pomeridiano tempore publicè profitetur, eo plane loco, quo Do∣ctor Westonus olim docere, magno religionis dispendio, conueverat. Cúmque is religiosè atque accuratè commisso sibi fungatur munere, stipendium, quod sibi pro universo tempore, quo laboravit in vinea domini debetur, nunquam adipisci potuit: Siquidem id Westonus co∣natur sibi vendicare. Quod ut sit justum vel aequum, tu quaeso apud quem justitia & aequitas plurimùm valent, apud temetipsum expendi∣to. Ille hic non est, officio suo non fungitur; neque si adesset, & do∣ceret, posset auditoribus nisi quam pessimè consulere, cum religioni puriori tantoperè adversetur. Iste vero loco ejus est legitimè surroga∣tus, adest, susceptum munus obit sedulò; atque cum meus discipu∣lus & adhuc sit, & fuerit, veraeque religionis studiossimus, quoad piam doctrinam mecum omninò consentit. Haec, scio, si apud te co∣gitaveris, facilè adducent, ut quem tibi commendo, & favore & auxi∣lio non indignum putes. Cui existimationi justissimae, ipse meas addo preces, quibus etiam atque etiam rogo, ut in ejus negotio ipsum juves. Quod si feceris, non modo erit acceptum Deo, sed ecclesiae quoque non parùm conducet. Etenim illi vehementer expedit, ut & laborantibus in verbo evangelij stipendia non negentur; & juvenes aliqui tandem excitentur, qui loco Seniorum juventutem sanâ doctrinâ imbuant. De meis autem rebus non scribam multis, cum te audivisse non du∣bitem, piam dulcissimámque conjugem in Domino quievisse, quae san∣ctissimè atque incredibili pietate migrando ad Dominum, ut me in luctu reliquit, quem doctrinâ coelesti & mitigo, & indies magis leni∣am, ità oppressum gravissimo corporis morbo deseruit. Quare tum corpus, tum animus codem tempore vexatus est acerbissimè: cúmque adhuc non convaluerim, sed tamen aliquanto melius habeam; non ta∣men quantum satis esse possit ad meum obeundum munus, te rogo, Vir Optime, ut precibus tuis coneris impetrare mihi a Deo, vel absolu∣tionem
ab hujus vitae molestijs, vel saltem Vitam, quâ scholae & eccle∣siae prodesse valeam; quandoquidem ità vivere, ut sim utilis nemini, propemodum intolerabile judico. Idémque oro, ut tua lectissima con∣jux, quam plurimùm abs te salutari mihi cupio, suis castissimis votis a Christo mihi concedi postulet. Vale atque deo vivas faelix, méque in Christo, ut facis, ama. Oxonij, Martij 7. 1552. Tuus ex animo quantus est, Pet. Martyr. NUM. XCVI. John Sleidan to Cecyl. Advises of the state of affaires in Germany. Magnifico Viro, Domino Caecilio, Equiti, & Serenissimi Regis Angliae Secretario. QUAS Aprili mense tibi scripsi, Vir ornatissime,Sir W. H. MSS.  te pridem accepisse puto. Vellem quidem ex tuis hoc ipsum certo cog∣noscere. Fuit hic nobiscum superioribus diebus Serenissimi vestri Re∣gis orator, D. Picorinus, expatiatus huc è vicinis castris cum Veneto & Ferrar, legatis. Galliae Rex, post occupatam Lotharingiam & Me∣tim urbem venit Zaberniam, quod est quatuor hinc milliaribus, Episco∣pi ditionis oppidum. Ibi habito delectu, petivit Haganoam, illinc Weissenburgum; quo in oppido litteris acceptis a Mauritio, castra mo∣vit ad xiii diem hujus mensis, & partitis copijs retrocessit. Ejus rei quae sit causa nondum constat. Electores etiam principes quatuor, ij qui Rhenum accolunt, Wormaciâ suos ad ipsum miserunt legatos, de∣precandi opinor causa. Basilienses quoque nuper ipsum adierunt Zaber∣niae, & pro finitimis locis intercesserunt. Nunc autem omnes Helve∣tiorum pagi, communi missa legatione, idem faciunt. Nam haec nostra regio frumentum eis abundè subministrat quotannis; eáque como∣ditate nolunt se spoliari: & hoc ipso die, opinor, eos compellare Re∣gem: Nam ante biduum hâc transierunt. A nostra civitate Rex alimoniam flagitavit; bis fuimus ea de re in castris, primùm apud Sarburgum, dein Zaburniae. Pabulatores multum sanè incommoda∣runt agricolis, qui propè omnes tamen in urbem confugerant. Cujus∣modi sint urbis nostrae muniiones, audisse vos non dubito. Verunta∣men hoc ipso tempore novum opus instituimus, utilissimum Reip. futurum. Vlmam frustra obsederunt principes, ac miserè vastatis cir∣cùm agris, alia quoque loca tentarunt. Mauritius fuit cum rege Fer∣dinando. Redijt quidem ad castra Sociorum; sed ad xxvi diem hujus mensis erit rursus cum Ferdinando. Nam is intercedit, & ad Caesarem profectus esse dicitur, Aenipontem, ut certi aliquid statui posset. Quod si fiat, magna pars consiliorum regis mutabitur & intercidet. Caesar comparat exercitum, & erit bellum haud dubiè valdè atrox. Conci∣lij
nulla jam fit mentio, & silent inter arma leges. Pacem Iulius ter∣ius fecit cum Gallo, & Mirandulae solvit obsidionem, & arctius quo∣que soedus cum eo fecisse dicitur. Per Neapolim quoque gravis est pro∣regi simultas cum Salernitano, qui & Venetias confugit. Ferdinan∣dum aiunt ratas habere, quas cum Mauritio tractavit pacis conditio∣nes; ideoque profectum àd sratrem, ut & ipsi persuadeat. Conditio∣nes autem illae cujusmodi sint, nondum planè constat. Hoc solum fertur, eas ad Germaniam tum dignitatem, tum libertatem pristinam omninò spectare. Deus benè fortunet. Albertus Marchio bellum facit Norenburgensibus. De rebus Turcicis nihil habemus comperti. Gallus in Lotharingiam redit, ut exercitum Belgicum retundat. Haec sunt, de quibus ad vestram Magnif. in hoc tempore scriben∣dum duxi, tum meo, tum Soceri nomine, Quaeso, ut tandem de meo negotio aliquid cognoscam; quod ut commendatum habeas, & Re∣ver. Domino Primati commendes, plurimum oro. Vale, Argent. 18 Maij, 1552. Tuae Magn. deditissimus, Jo. Sleid. Sal. Literas hucusque distuli, expectans occasionem mittendi. Rex benignè respondet Helveticis legatis, & Lucemburgum dicitur pe∣tere. Expectamus quae sit futura actio ad 26 hujus mensis. Gallus re∣spondet Electorum principum legatis, perfecisse jam se quod voluit: nempe captivos principes liberatum iri, & se, qui jam satis gloriae con∣secutus sit, redire domum. Ita respondet xiii hujus, quo die castra movit. Iterum vale. Dat. 24 Maij, 1552. NUM. XCVII. More advices from Germany. Desires a Patent for his stipend grant∣ed him by K. Edward VI. Domino Gulielmo Caecilio, Regio Secretario, &c. Sr. W. H. MSS.SAL. Literae meae diutius hic haeserunt, quam putaram. Ecce, dum omnes erecti sumus, & avidè expectamus vicesimum sextum diem Maij, quo die alter erat futurus conventus Ferdinandi & Mauritij, nun∣cius adfertur, Mauritium profligâsse quasdam copias Caesaris. Id autem accidit in Alpibus. Est oppidum ijs locis, Rutam vocant; ibi futurus erat delectus militum, qui pro Caesare cogebantur. Mauritius autem antevertit, & novem signa profligavit: deinde celeriter progressus, aditum quendam in angustijs Alpium, & arcem ibi positam, Erenbur∣gum cepit. uit hoc decimâ nona die Maij. Caesar eo accepto nuncio sta∣tim Aeniponte discessit; quod oppidum ab arce illa distat iter bidui. Erat cum eo Ferdinandus, qui transactionis futurae causâ illuc vene∣rat,
ut alteris literis significavi. Simul ergo discesserunt, ingressi iter Tridentum versus: nam in Italiam Caesar cogitabat. Sed aiunt eum monitu fratris Ferdinandi, mutato consilio profectum esse in Austriam. An Mauritius eum insequatur, nondum planè constat. Est infra Aeni∣pontem alter aditus, positus in augustijs, Kopfsteinum vocant. Hunc quoque si teneat ille, vix ullum ex Italia militem sit habiturus Caesar. Hic nunc est rerum status: caetera brevi cognoscemus. Tunc ad te, plura. Sed, oro, cognoscam ex tuis literis, num meas accipias; & de meo stipendio fac aliquid boni cognoscam. Vale. dat. xxx Maij, 1552. Io. Sleid. Reverendissimo D. Cantuariensi cupo imprimis commendari. Facito, quaeso, ut Diploma mihi conficiatur ejus, quod Sereniss. Rex mihi constituit, stipendij, & ut solvatur quod jam praeterijt. Per Richar∣dum Hils mercatorem vestratem rectè curabitis. D. Checum, oro, plu∣rimum ex me salutes. Haec ubi scripsi, literae mihi adferuntur a Socero. Commendat se vobis omnibus plurimum. Jubet ut ego vobis subindè scribam, eò quod ipsi non sit integrum ex ijs locis. Est autem in finibus Lotha∣ringiae. Exercitus Gallicus tripartitus, Walderfingi, oppidi Lotharingiae, ad Saram flumen, convênit omnis 23 die Maij; & quatriduo post in∣gressus iter petijt rectâ Lucemburgicam regionem, trajecto flumine Mo∣sellâ. Quâcunque eunt ijs locis, omnia devastantur incendijs & direp∣tionibus. Is fuit ibi rerum status 28 die Maij, quo die Socer mihi scripsit. NUM. XCVIII. Intelligences concerning the motions of the Emperor, and the state of the Protestant Princes. Magnifico Viro, D. Gulielmo Caecilio, Sereniss. Angliae Regis Se∣cretario. SAL. Motum hujus anni perscripsi, Magnifice Domine,SirW. H. MSS. ad initium usque Septemb. & Serenissimum Regem paucos intra dies accep∣turum spero. Fortasse priusquam hae tibi reddantur, acceperit. Po∣stremum est, de capto rursum Lantgravio: sed is denuo dimissus, jam est domi. Calendis Septembris Caesar Augusta discedens, Ioannem Fri∣dericum, Saxoniae Ducem, amplissimis verbis & amanter admodum di∣misit, prolixè de sua benevolentia illi pollicitus; & religionem ei suam permisit. Ille postridie domum redijt. Mauritius in Hungariam itu∣rus ex pacto, copias suas Doneverdâ misit Ratisbonam, xxii. die Au∣gusti; ipse domum recurrit, paulo post rediturus ad exercitum. An redierit, adhuc quidem ignoratur. Albertus Marchio Brandeburg.
28 Augusti Trevirim urbem ad Msllam flumen occupavit. Mansit ibi dies octo; post, Lotharingiam petivit, relictis Treviri praesidio xii signis: & xiii die Septembr. prope Sircum oppidum trajecit Mosel∣lam, & in Lucemburgicum agrum invasit. Caesar Augustae treis quidem concionatores abrogavit, ob singularia quaedam dogmata, sicut fer∣tur: sed reliquis tamen permisit, ut secundum Augustaae Confessionis, quondam exhibitae, formulam doceant, & Sacramentis utantur .xv die Septembr. Caesar cum exercitu venit in nostros fines, & in vico quodam, milliare unum ab urbe, permansit in quintum diem: tunc demum im∣pedimentis omnibus Rheno transmissis, in quo magna fuit difficultas, plurimúmque laboris & exercitu jusso progredi praeter urbem, ipse cum paucis quibusdam heri ingressus est, & sumpto prandio discessit. Sunt in ejus exercitu praeter Grmanos, Itali, Hispani▪ Bohemi, qui sanè plurimum damni dederunt miseris agricolis. Caesar omnino putatur iturus Metim, ut recuperet; Galli strenu illam muniunt, & alimo∣niam omnem totius agri convehunt eò. His rebus omnibus pracest Guisius. Fuit hic nobiscum D. Morissinus, & Aschamus. Oratores omnes Cae∣sar jussit ire Spiram. De Hungaria nihil habemus. Haec sunt, Magni∣fice D. quae tibi scribenda putavi: Quanquam fortassis aliunde habeo. Quod reliquum est, ut per eum, quem Socer meus ad vos mittit, de mea conditione certi quid cognoscam, & ut causam ipse promoveas meam, plurimum oro. Videlicet ut Diploma conficiatur, mittatur, & anni jam exacti, vel sesquianni potiùs, solvatur pensio. Quicquid unquam in tui gratia potero, faciam. Jamdiu Saxum hoc volvo. Vale. Argent. xx. Septemb. 1552. Io. Sleidanus. Ioannes Marchio Brandeburgicus adducit Caesari ad duo millia equitum, religio∣ni est addictissimus. Nec aliter etiam militat, quam ut hoc ei sit liberum. NUM. XCIX. Advises of the State of the Empire. Magnifico & spectabili viro D. Gulielmo Caecilio, Equiti, Sereniss. Re∣gis Angliae Secretario, Domino suo multùm colendo. Sir W. H. MSS.SAL. xx die Septemb. ad te scripsi, Vir ornatissime. Quod Albertus egerit apud Treviros, jampridem audistis. Octobris die xxii re∣conciliatus est Caesari per Ducem Albanum. Impunè fecerit omnia, & militabit Caesari, quocúnque loco jusserit. Pacta, cum Bambergico & Wrcibergensi Episcopo sacta, erunt rata. Caesar in gratiam recipit Aetingenses Comites, & Mansfeldios, patrem atque filium. Novem∣bris die quart cepit Aumalium Albertus, Guisij fratrem, caeso illius at∣que
fugato equitatu. Curatum ipsum ex vulnere nuper misit in suam quandam arcem, ad Bohemiae fines. Caesar in castra venit xx Novemb. Interea muri pars magna dejecta, sed oppositum est Vallum, & prae∣sidiarij crebras faciunt eruptiones. Caesarem aiunt nolle obsidionem sol∣vere, neque discedere priusquam urbem receperit. Guisius fuit hacte∣nus in urbe cum Nmorensi principe, cum Roschsurio, & Petro Stroza; num adhuc sint, ignoramus. Nar superioribus diebus eruptione factâ in Alberti castra, qui tum fortè quosdam ad prandium invitaverat, xviii equites dicuntur ex urbe evasisse in Galliam. Tormentorum & oppugnationis fragor non solùm hic exauditur, quod tridi viâ distat, verum quatuor etiam trans Rhenum milliaribus & eò ampliùs. Cuni∣culis opinor jam tentari urbem. Mauritius ex Hungaria domum redijt▪ dimissis copijs; Turcae domum & ipsi reverterunt: si non impetren∣tur induciae, magnus indè motus expectatur. Castaldus dicitur bonam operam ijs locis navare Ferdinando Regi. Nostrates Episcopi sollici∣tant nova foedera, quandoquidem vident, & experiuntur, quid sit periculi. E Saxonia mittuntur aliquot verbi doctores Augustam. Mansfeldicus bellum fecerat Henrico Brunsvicensi: num sit composita res, ignoramus. Is nunc est rerum status, nec aliud habeo quod scribam. A vobis nihil responderi mihi miror, neque scio quid expectare de∣beam. Oro te, Magnifice Domine, age causam cum Reverendissi∣mo Cantuariensi. Equidem totus pergo in opere illo, & diligenter om∣nia conquiro. Dedi vobis occasiones & ansas, quibus apprehensis ne∣gotium nostrum conficeretis apud Sereniss. Regem. Haec autem mo∣ra valde me coquit. Utinam aliquid saltem rescriberetis. Vale. xvii De∣cembr. M. D. LII. Argent. Magnificentiae tuae deditiss. Jo. Sleid. Commendes me velim D. Rever. Cant. & D. Checo. Cuperem habere Seriem actionis, quae Regi Henrico fuit cum Cle∣mente Septimo, priusquam ab eo se suumque regnum in libertatem as∣seruit. Nam & haec erunt inserenda suo loco.
NUM. C. Concerning his Commentaries, which he had sent to K. Edward. Desires Sr. William Cecyl to send him an exact information of the business between K. Henry and Pope Clement. His resolution of continuing his Commentaries, and of writing the History of the Councel of Trent. Magnificis & spectatissimis Viris, D. D. Joanni Chaeco, & Gulielmo Caecilio, Dominis suis plurimum observandis. SAL. Autumno superiori misi Sereniss. Regi belli Germanici Com∣mentarios,Sr. W.H.MSS. ad illud usque tempus conscriptos; & perjucundum mihi fuit, ex tuis literis, D. Caecili, cognoscere, non ei displicere ge∣nus hoc scribendi: vobis etiam illud probari, gaudeo, Viris doctissi∣mis, & acri judicio praeditis. Itaque rectè me facturum putavi, si Concilij Tridentini totam actionem, cujus etiam ego pars aliqua fui, regis causâ potissimùm conscriberem; ut cujusmodi sit Conciliorum forma perspiciat; deinde, ut de reliqua historia restauratae religionis, quam conscribo, judicium faciat. Nam inde ab anno salutis M.D.XVII. quo quidem anno fecit doctrinae suae Lutherus initium, rem omnem or∣dine deduxi ad annum usque M.D.XXXVI. & quod superest, eo∣dem filo contexam, Dei beneficio. Sum autem in eo jam totus, & huic me rei soli trado, neque desistam, adjuvante Deo, priusquam perfece∣ro. Quale sit auem futurum opus, & quam utile non huic aetati mo∣dò, sed etiam toti posteritati, malo vos judicare, vestríque similes, quam me prolixius de eo loqui. Mense Decembri petebam abs te, D. Caecili, per literas, ut actio∣nem omnem, quae fuit Henrico Regi piae memoriae cum Clemente VII. quando se suùmque regnum in libertatem asseruit, mihi curares. Ha∣beo quidem ejus rei quaedam, sed non tam exactè, neque certò, quàm velim. Cupio enm propriè & quam verissimè omnia describere. Quod quidem in ijs Commentarijs, quos jam mitto, quique sunt fu∣turi pars operis, animadvertere vos posse puto. Magni ergo benesicij loco mihi erit, si in eo mihi gratificaberis. Est enim locus illustris at∣que memorabilis, & omnino dignus de quo posteri cognoscant. Si∣quid praeterea sit apud vos hujus generis, unà velim transmitti. Quod superest, notum est vobis, Magnifici & Clarissimi Viri, tibi cumpri∣mis, D. Chaece, quemadmodum Sereniss. Rex, ante biennium, nempe anno M. D. LI. sub finem Martij, stipendium mihi constituit annuum absenti, Coron. aureos ducentos; uti Reverendissimus D. Cantuariensis, tunc temporis abituro Socero meo, domúmque redituro, Doctori Brunoni, nomine regis confirmavit. Et quoniam ejus pecuniae nihil adhuc accepi, plurimùm vos oro, quod antehac quoque seci non se∣mel, deis operam, ut tandem solvatur. Possem equidem alia facere negotia magno meo cum emolumento, sicut alij plaerique, sed ad hunc laborem divinitus me vocatum esse judico, nec animo possum esse quie∣to, donec ad hoc usque tempus perduxero. Quo magis etiam spero,
Vos, qui pro vestra humanitate atque prudentia rectè omnia intelli∣gitis, in oc esse elaboraturos, ut de biennio jam exacto, mihi nunc satisfit, & in posterum caveatur, quò videlicet tanto commodius at∣que liberius huic rei vacare possim. Quanti enim hic labor mihi con∣stet, vobis aestimandum relinquo. Pertinet autem ad reges, ut ejus∣modi labores, qui sunt & literis ornamento & religioni, & utiles Reip∣foueant. Siquid est omnium rerum, in quo vicissim ego vobis inser∣vire queam, & gratificari, paratum me semper habebitis. Veruntamen, ut hoc meum scriptum de Concilio, diligenter asser∣vetur in bibliotheca regis, nec in aliorum manus perveniat, nec ulli detur ejus exemplum, vehementer vos oro. Nam mea plurimum re∣fert, ne spargatur: & est solùm, ut ante quoque dixi, particula quae∣dam operis futuri. De statu rerum nostratium, scire vos arbitror. Galli, sub finem Ja∣nuarij, libros de religione scriptos a nostris hominibus, ubi per mona∣chos conquisivissent in aedibus, publicè per Carnificem exusserunt Meti. Postridie discessit Guisius, inque Galliam redijt. Luneburgi fuit multo∣rum principum atque civitatum Saxoniae Conventus. Nuper etiam Pa∣latinus Elector, Bavarus, Clivensis, atque Wirtembergicus convenerunt Wimpffae. Brevi cognoscemus quid sit. Princeps Vrbinas dicitur esse factus minister Iulij tertij. Transylvani pacem feceruut cum Turca, de voluntate Ferdinandi Regis, ut scribitur, & annuum ei pendunt vecti∣gal. Augusta Vindelicorum tenetur adhuc praesidio, quod Caesar ante sextum mensem ibi reliquit. Videtur aliquis ibi motus impendere: Nec enim omnes praesentem statum ferre possunt. Volratus Comes Mansfeldius habet adhuc exercitum, neque certò scitur, in quem usum. Sed non diu latere potest quicquid est. Quod reliquum est, ut laetum atque jucundum a vobis nuncium accipiam, imprimis opto. Deus vos servet. Argentorati. Idibus Martij. M. D. LIII. Oro vos plurimum, ut has meas literas atque scriptum Sereniss. Re∣gi exhibeatis cum nostri commendatione. Habetis opportunissimam negotij mei conficiundi occasionem. Obsecro, perficite, ne mihi sit opus in posterum eâdem de re scribere. Vestri observantissimus, Ioan. Sleidanus. Li. Richardo Hils, mercatori Londinensi, qui nobiscum aliquando ha∣bitavit, licebit dare quicquid mihi debetur. Cupio autem, atque etiam oro, ut per eum, qui has reddit, Soceri mei famulum, mihi respondeatis. Conjunctim vobis scribo, quia summam inter vos esse animorum conjunctionem accipio, ut judicij similitudinem Mauritius Elector dicitur sollicitare, ut exercitum Mansfeldicum ad se traducat, & coquere nova consilia.
NUM. CI. Concerning the Affairs of Germany; and particularly of the Councel of Trent. Ornatissimo Viro D. Gulielmo Caecilio, Serenissimi Regis Angliae Se∣cretario. SirW.H.MSS.SAL. De rebus actis Tridenti, non dubito quin ex Aschami Rogeri literis, ad quem scripsi, cognôris, Vir Ornatiss. Post impetra∣tam fidem publicam, quod fuit sub finem Januarij, Dux Mauricius putabatur omnino missurus esse Philippum & alios. Norenbergam enim usque praemiserat. Sed cum aliquandiu fuissent ibi commorati, sub finem Februarij revocavit eos, ad maturitatem jam prope deductis belli consilijs & apparatu. Dux Christophorus autem Wirtembergicus, qui doctrinae Confessionem exhibuerat antea per Legatos Tridenti, Brentium eò misit cum tribus collegis, quibus se conjunxerant duo no∣strae civitatis Theologi; & hi quidem Tridentum venerunt, ad xviii diem Martij. In alterum diem fuerat indicta, quam vocant, sessio. Sed nihil tum fuit actum: eaque sessio fuit ad Calend. usque Maij proro∣gata. Postquam ergo Legati Wirtembergici, qui nuper eò venerant re∣centes, & ego, nostrae Reip. nomine, Theologos nostros, apud Caesaris treis Oratores ibi, certis legibus, ad futuram actionem obtulimus & admisimus: Ego, qui jam in quintum mensem ibi fueram, sub finem Martij discessi, & ad xii Aprilis huc redij. Priusquam abirem, de vo∣luntate Sociorum egeram diligenter apud alterum Caesaris Oratorem, de modo processus, & urgebam ut Theologi nostri publicè audirentur, aut super articulis ibi definitis, aut super capitibus doctrinae, juxta se∣riem Confessionis exhibitae. Hoc autem invitissimi faciunt; neque publicum ipsis auditorium, opinor, facilè concedent. In quo qui∣dem si perseverent, tum nostri discedent. Et hic quidem fuit, me discedente, rerum status. Qui sunt ibi doctiores, Brentium norunt ex scriptis, & ipsius expetunt colloquia. Sunt ibi Hispani Episcopi xxv, Itali totidem aut plures: & hi quidem actionis atque morae pertaesi, spectabant abitionem; illi verò, Caesaris authoritate, qui caetum illum dissolvi non temerè patitur, continentur. Jam Episcopi nostrates om∣nes abierant, praeter Curiensem & Constantiensem, qui tamen & ipse paucis post me diebus dicebatur esse discessurus. Videt Caesar, quam non facilè recolligi possit ejusmodi caetus post∣hâc, si nunc eum dissipri contingat: ideóque tantopere studuit hacte∣nus eum continere. Digressus, cum venissem Aenipontem, D. Legatum Morisinum Halae conveni Calendis Aprilis. Postridiè continuato iti∣nere intelligebam obsideri Augustam Vindelicorum ab duce Mauricio, fi∣lijsque Lantgravij, & Alberto Brandeburgico. Biduo pòst occurrit mihi in via D. Morisini Conjux, quae per Augustam huc profectura, cum difficilem fore transitum audisset, ad maritum redibat. Eodem die deditionem fecerunt Augustani, qui fuit hujus mensis dies quartus. Erant in urbe tria peditum signa, ductore Walthero Hirbeincio: qui
omnes liberaliter, nullâ devincti lege dimissi fuerunt. Postridiè sunt urbem ingressi principes, qui veteri restituto Senatu & tribubus, uti in reliquis etiam oppidis fecerant, & constitutâ novâ Rep▪ & tormen∣tis tum Civitatis, tum Caesaris, quae sunt ibi plurima, perquisitis, die Aprilis septimo discesserunt. Quibus autem conditionibus pacti sunt cum Oppidanis, adhuc quidem ignoro. Fuggerus Antonius pridie de∣ditionis excesserat urbe, & quatuor ab Aeniponte milliaribus, mane mi∣hi occurrit, tribus tantum comitatus. Vlma post iter feci, qui tun praesidium habebant, tria signa peditum, & videbantur ad defensionem omnino spectare. Postridiè quam illinc abij, nempe octavâ hujus men∣sis die, Principes, Mauricius, Lantgravij filius, & Megelburgins, datis ad eos literis, commeatum & alimoniam, & alia quaedam, ab ipsis petebant. Eas ad literas cum nihil illi responderent, Principes unde∣cimâ hujus denuò scripserunt, séque ipsos appropinquaturos nuncia∣bant; & hoc ipso tempore oppidum obsident. Est autem ea civitas valdè locuples, & quia magnam obtinent circùm ditionem, arces, ca∣stella, oppidula, praedia, vix opinor tolerabunt obsidionem. Proximus est impressioni Dux Wirtembergicus, qui sanè pacem libenter coleret, si per tempora liceret: ab eo rectum est iter ad nos. Altera ipsorum pars exercitus petit Alpes, credo, ut aditus occupent, nequis externus miles egredi possit. His copijs, opinor, praeest Albertus Brandeburgicus una cum Hedeckio. Quid Caesar agat, aut ubi sit, nescimus. Ego cum essem Aeniponti, nihil quicquam vidi apparatus; maguúmque tum erat ibi silentium in aula, magnáque solitudo, nisi quod eo ipso die nonnullis fuit datum negotium conscribendi copias. Dubium tamen non est, quin Italum & Hispanum militem Caesar evocarit. Electores Rhenani suos habent apud principes Legatos de pace: sed plaerique putant difficillimam esse fu∣turam tractationem. Aeniponte mihi dicebatur, Caesarem in hoc esse to∣tum, ut Mauricium placaret. Et hic quidem paroxysmus nobis immi∣net ab oriente sole: jam vero ab occidente multò ferè terribilior instat. Nam Metim urbem Gallus tenet, & per vicinum nobis agrum iter fa∣ciens, volet etiam hanc nostram urbem fortassis videre, multúmque hoc ad suam gloriam pertinere putabit, eoúsque signa promovisse. Quod si alter exercitus, occupata Vlma, caeterisque domitis, ad nos etiam propius accedet, vides in quantis simus augustijs. O! quis erit hujus tragediae tandem exitus? Gorziam oppidum & Abbatiam prae∣divitem Galli, ante diem octavum, vi ceperunt, diripuerunt, incen∣derunt, opinor, praefecto Hispano, cum 38 militibus, suspenso. Theo∣nis villa, Lucmburgice ditionis oppidum munitum, quatuor à Meti milliaribus, ad Mosellam flumen habet equitum peditumque praesi∣dia, & nuper emissis faeminis atque pueris, obsidionem tolerabit. Eo enim capto oppido, nihil ferè est ijs locis, quod vim ullam majorem diu sustinere possit. Haec est rerum apud nos facies. Vos multò faeliciores, qui festinam pacem colitis in pulcherrima regione. Socer meus, quem nosti, datis ad me literis (nam est in agro Metensibus vicino) multam tibi salutem nunciat, séque diligenter vobis omnibus commendat, & jussit ut haec, tam suo quam meo etiam nomine, tibi scriberem, quandoquidem ex ijs locis, ubi nunc est, & in hac temporum asperitate, non ita commodè potest ipse ad vos dare literas. Quod cum ità sit, nolui hoc officium
praetermittere, ut de ipsius apud vos observantia studióque perpetuo cognosci posset. Quanquam & ipse, pro meo in vos affectu, mea spon∣te scripturus eram: & spero vos in optimam partem haec accepturos esse, quae fortasse jam aliundè etiam accepistis. Attamen quia rebus ipsemet tractandis interfui Tridenti, puto vobis tanto futuram esse gra∣tiorem hanc qualemcúnque narrationem. Quod superest, ut meum negotium, quod aliquot nunc annis agitatur, & de quo Reverendiss. D. Cantuariensis, anno superiori, Socero meo certum quid dixit, pro∣moveas, Vir ornatissime, etiam atque etiam rogo. Sereniss. Rex con∣stituit mihi, sicut Cantuariensis dixit Socero, annuos ducentos absenti. Ut ejus rei conficiatur Diploma magnoperè peo, sicut hactenus, eám∣que mihi pecuniam dependi flagito. Scis rem omnem haud dubiè, aio∣qui prolixior essem: & priusquam irem Tridentum, scripsi eâ de re D. Chaeco, sicut etiam Reverendiss. D. Cantuariensi. Nihil hactenus mi∣hi responsum est à vobis: quo magis peto, ut per te certi aliquid cog∣noscam. In eo feceris & Socero mihique gratissimum. Vale. Argent. xviii. April. 1552. Ioan. Sleidanus, Licent. Has literas oro communices Reverendissimo D. Cantuar. Nam sic scribo ad ipsum. Per Richardum Hillis mercatorem vestratem rectè poteritis ad nos, nisi alia sit ratio commodior. Clarissimo Viro D. Che∣co plurimùm & officiosè me commendo. NUM. CII. Martin Bucer to the Secretary, for the speeding of Sleidan's business. Summâ dignitate viro, & pietate praecellenti D. Sicilio, Regiae Majestatis a Secretis, Domino ac Patrono suo summoperè colendo. S. P. Vir Clarissime, Accipies hic meas literas, quamlibet aegrè dictatas,Sr. W. H. MSS. ad summè doctum & pium Medicum D. Ioannem Quer∣cetanum. Sed te per Christum rogo, nosti supplicationem nostram pro Sleydano, si possis ullâ ratione impetrare, dari responsum, in utram placeat partem. Nosti hoc decere administrationem Regni, & ceteris, & Religionis beneficio tantoperè ornatam. Dominus prosequatur te, tuósque omnes beneficentiâ cumulatissimâ. Cantabrigiae, 18 Feb. M.D.LI. Clarissimae Dominationi tuae de∣ditissimus in Domino, M. Bucerus.
NUM. CIII. Ralph Morice, the Archbishops Secretary, his Supplication to Queen Elizabeth, for Prior Wilbore's Pension, lately de∣ceased. To the Quenys most excellent Majestie. IN his most humble wise,Sr. W.H.MSS. shewith and declarith unto your most exellent Majestie your highnes humble subject and Orator Raphe Morice, sometime servant unto that worthie Prelate of godly memo∣rie, Tho. Cranmer, late Archbishop of Canterburye. That whereas your highnes said Orator for the space of 20 yeres and above, being reteynid in service with the said most Reverend father, in the rowme of a Secretary, bestowed and spent both his time, youthe and prospe∣ritye of his life, not so much in writing of the private busynes of the said most Reverend father▪ as in travailing with his pen aboughte the serious affaires of the Prince and the Realme, commyted unto him by those most noble and wurthie princes, K. Henry the eighth, and K. Edward the Sixth, your Mjesties dere father and brother, concern∣yng aswel the writyng of those great and weightie Matrimonyal cau∣ses of your highnes said dere Father, (the good effecte, successe and benefit wherof to Godds gory, this hole realme with the Subjects therof, in your highnes most noble and royal personage, do now most happilie enjoye,) As also aboute thexstirpation of the Bishop of Rome his usurped power and authoritie, the reformation of corrupte religion, and Ecclesiastical Lawes, thalteration of Divine Service, and of divers and sundry conferences of lernd men, for thestablishing and advancement of sincere religion, with such like. Wherin your highness said Orator most painfullie was occupied in writing of no small Volumes, from tyme to tyme. As in that behalf divers lernid men now lyving can testiie; namely Dr. Hethe, Dr. Thirleby, the Bishopes of Elie, Chichester and Heriford. And for that the said most Reverend Father was myndeful and desirous some deale to recompence the payneful service of your said Orator, he of his own mere motion and good disposition procurid for your highnes said Orator, a lease of the parsonage of Ospringe within the Count of Kent, ympropriated unto the Colledge of S. Iohns in Cambridge: which to∣wardes the mayntenance of your said Orators lyving was better than 40 markes by the yere de claro, when Wheat was but a Noble the quarter. Which lease of the said parsonage being so grauntid, and re∣die to be sealid by the Master and felowes of the same Colledge, one Hkyns of the Garde, by his y mportunate sute, made unto your highnes said dere father the Kinges Majestie, so wan his highnes fa∣vou therin, that his Majestie obteynyd the said Lease to be sealid to the use of the said Hkyns. His Majestie nevertheles promising unto D. Day, then Master of the said Colledge, and sone after unto the said
most Reverend, that his highnes wolde otherwise recompense your said Orator for the same with like valewe or better: as the said Haw∣kyns now lyving can testifie the same. This notwithstanding, most dere Soveraigne Lady, Almighty God preventing the time of any such recompence by calling your highnes said father unto his mercy, your highnes said Orator remayneth as yet unrecompenced to his great hinderaunce, and ympoverishmente. For now being declyned unto age, and having 4 daughters left by thair mother marriageable, your said Orator is neither of habilitie to bestow them according to his vocation, as he might have done, yf that small lyving so prpa∣red for him might have remayned to his use; Nor hymself to lyve withouten danger, onles your Majestie, of your benigne great good∣nes, do extende your highnes liberalitie, aide and succour unto hym. And for that your highnes said Orator doeth understand, that one Mr. Wilbore, sometyme Prior of the Monasterie of S. Austens, de∣parted this transitorie life before Mighilmas last past, who hath a yere∣lie pension of your Majestie of now by reason of his death in your gracious disposition, It may please your highness in conside∣ration of the premisses, and for that it is reported, that your said most noble, and dere father provided and willed in his last testamente, that such of his subjects, as by his highnes did susteyne any maner of damage or hinderaunce sholde be satisfied for the same; to be so good and gracious Soveraigne Lady unto your said Orator, in the fur∣theraunce of his said poor daughters marieges, as to graunte unto hym the said pension during his life, with tharrerages of this last half yere deu at the said feast of S. Michel tharchangel last past. In accom∣plishing wherof your highnes shal not only do a right charitable and a meritorious deed, but also therbie throughlie satisfie and recompence your said Orator for the said lease so surrendred at the request of your highnes said dere father. Although the said Orator hath lost in forbear∣ing of the same above M. mark for the space of these eighteen yeres and above, corn being at such a price as it hath byn: And finallie bynde both hym and al his, during thair lyves, dailie to pray unto Al∣mighty God for the most prosperous estate of your Majestie in moche honour and felicitie to indure.
NUM. CIV. A Prologue or Preface, made by THOMAS CRANMER, Late Archbishop of Canterbury, to the holy Bible. COncerning two sundry sorts of people, it seemeth much necessa∣ry, that something bee said in the entrie of this Book, by way of a Preface or Prologue: Wherby hereafter it may bee both the better accepted of th m, which hitherto could not wel bear it, and also the better used of them, which heretofore have misused it. For truly some there are, that be too slow, and need the spurr; some other seem too qick, and need more of the bridle. Some loose their game by shor shooting, some by overshooting. Some walk too much on the left hand: some too much on the right. In the former sort be al they, that refuse to read, or to hear read the Scripture in the vulgar tongue, much worse they that let also, or discourage the other from the reading, or hearing thereof. In the Latter sort bee they, which by their inordinate reading, undiscrete speaking, contentious dispu∣ting, or otherwise by their licentious Living, slander and hinder the word of God most of al other, wherof they would seem to bee gretest furtherers. These two sorts, albeit they bee most far unlike the one to the other, yet they both deserve in effect like reproch. Nei∣ther can I well tel, whether of them I may judg the more offendor, him that doth obstinately refuse so godly and goodly knowledg, or him, that so ungodly, and so ungoodly doth abuse the same. And as touching the former, I would mervail much hat any man should bee so mad, as to refuse in darkness, Light; in hunger, Food; in cold, Fire. For the word of God is Light. Lucerna pedibus meis Verbum tuum. Thy Word is a Lanthorn unto my feet. It is food.Psal. 119. a. Non in solo pne vivit homo, sed in omni verbo Dei.Mat. 4. a. Man shal not live by bread onely, bt by ever word of God. It is fire. Ignem veni mittere in terram, & quid vlo, nisi ut ardeat. I am come to send fire on the earth,Luke 12. . and what is my desire, but that it be kindled? I would mervail, I say, at this, save that I consder, how much custome and usage may do. So that if there were a people as some write De Cymmerijs, which never saw the sun, by reason that they be siuated far toward the North-Pole, and be enclosed and overshadowed with high mountaines; it is credible and like enough, that if by the power and will of God the mountains should sink down and give place, that the light of the Sun might have entraunce to them, at the first some of them would bee offended therewith. And the old Proverb affirmeth, that after tillage of corn was first found, many delighted more to feed of mast and acornes. wherewith they had been accustomed, then to eat bread made of good corn. Such is the nature of custome, that it causeth us to bear all things well and easily, wherewith we have been accustomed and to bee offended with all things thereunto contrary. And therefore I can well think them worthy pardon, which at the coming abroad of Scripture doubted and drew back. But such as wil persist stil in their wilfulness, I must needs judg not only foolish, froward and obstinate, but also peevish, perverse and indurate.
And yet if the matter should bee tryed by Custome, wee might also too alledge custome for the reading of the Scripture in the Vulgar tongue, and prescribe the more auntient custome. For it is not much above one hundred years agoe, since Scripture hath not ben ac∣customed to bee read in the vulgar tongue within this realm: and ma∣ny hundred years before that, it was translated and read in the Saxons tongue, which at that time was our mother tongue: whereof there remain yet divers copies, found lately in old Abbies, of such antique maner of writing, and speaking, that few men now been able to read and understand them. And when this language waned old, and out of common usage because folk should not lack the fruit of reading, it was again translated into the newer Language, whereof yet also many copies remain, and bee daily found. But now to let pass custome, and to weigh, as wise men ever should, the thing in his own nature. Let us here discuss, what it availeth, Scriptue to bee had and read of the Lay and Vulgar people. And to this question I intend here to say nothing, but that was spoken and written by the noble Doctor, and most moral Divine, S. Iohn Chrysostome,S. Chrysostom. in his third Sermon De Lazaro; albeit I wil be something shorter, and gather the matter into fewer words, and less room then he doth there, because I would not bee tedious. Hee exhorteth there his Audience, that every men should read by himself at home in the mean dayes and time, between Sermon and Sermon, to the intent they might both more profoundly fix in their minds and memories that hee had said before upon such texts, whereupon he had already preached; and also that they might have their minds the more ready and better prepared to receive and perceive that which he should say from thenceforth in his Sermons, upon such texts as hee had not yet declared and preached upon. Therefore, saith he there, My com∣mon usage is to give you warning before, what matter I intend after to entreat upon, that you your selves, in the mean dayes, may take the book in hand▪ read, weigh and perceive the sum and effect of the matter, and mark what hath been declared, and what remaineth yet to bee declared: So that thereby your mind may be the more furnisht to hear the rest that shal bee said. And that I exhort you, saith hee, and ever have and wil exhort you, that you not only here in the Church, give ear to that that is said by the Preacher; but that also, when yee bee at home in your houses, yee apply your selves, from time to time, to the reading of holy Scriptures. Which thing also I never li to beat into the ears of them that bee my familiars, and with whom I have private acquaintance and conversation. Let no man make ex∣cuse and say, saith hee, I am busied about matters of the common∣wealth, I bear this office or that; I am a crafts man, I must apply mine occupation: I have a wife, my children must be fed, my house∣hold must be provided for. Briefly, I am a man of the world, it is not for mee to read the Scriptures, that belongeth to them that have bidden the world farewel, which live in solitarines and contemplation, and have been brought up and continually nursilled in Learning and religion. To this answering, What sayest thou Man, saith hee, is it not for thee to study and to read the Scripture, because thou art encumbred and
distract with cares and business? So much the more is it behoofful for thee to have defence of Scriptures, how much thou art the more di∣stressed in worldly dangers. They, that bee free and far from trou∣ble and intermedling of worldly things, Live in safeguard, and tran∣quillity, and in the calm, and within a sure haven. Thou art in the midst of the Sea of worldly wickednes, and therefore thou needest the more of ghostly succour and comfort. They sit far from the strokes of battaile, and far out of gun-shot, and therfore they bee but seldome wounded. Thou that standest in the forefront of the Host, and nighest to thine enemies, must needs take now and then many strokes, and bee grievously wounded, and therefore thou hast most need to have thy remedies and medicines at hand. Thy Wife provoketh thee to anger, thy Child giveth thee occasion to take sorrowand pensiveness, thine enemies ly in wait for thee, thy friend as thou takest him, Sometime envieth thee, thy neighbour misreporteth thee, or piketh quarrels against thee, thy Mate or partner undermineth thee; thy Lord, Judge or Justice, threatneth thee; Poverty is painful unto thee; the loss of thy dear and welbeloved causeth thee to mourn; Prosperity exalteth thee, Ad∣versity bringeth thee low: Briefly, so divers and so manifold occasions of cares, tribulations and temptations, beset thee and besiege thee round about. Where canst thou have armour, or fortress, against thine assaults? Where canst thou have salves for thy sores, but of holy Scripture? Thy flesh must needs be prone and subject to fleshly lusts, which daily walkest and art conversant among women, seest their beautyes set forth to the ey, hearest their nice and wanton words, smellest their balm, civet and musk, with other like provocations and stirrings; Except thou hast in a readiness, wherewith to suppress and avoyd them, which cannot elsewhere bee had, but onely out of the holy Scriptures. Let us read and seek all remedies that wee can, and all shall bee little enough. How shal wee then do, if wee suffer and take daily wounds, and when wee have done, wil sit still and search for no medicines? Dost thou not mark and consider how the Smith, Mason or Carpenter, or any other handy craftes man, what need soever hee bee in, what other shift hee make, hee will not sell nor lay to pledg the tools of his occupation. For then how should hee work his feat, or get his living thereby? Of like mind and affection ought wee to bee towards holy Scripture. For as mallets, hammers, sawes, chesells, axes and hatchets bee the tools of their occupation; So bee the Books of the Prophets and Apostles, and all holy Writers inspired by the holy Ghost, the instruments of our Salvation. Wherefore let us not stick to buy and provide us the Bible, that is to say, the Books of holy Scripture, and let us think that to bee a better jewel in our house, then either gold or silver. For like as thieves bee loth to assault an house, where they know to bee good armour and artillery, so wheresoever these holy and ghostly books be occupied, there neither the Devil, nor none of his Angels dare come neer. And they that oc∣cupy them bee in much safeguard, and have a great consolation, and bee the readier unto all goodness, the slower unto all evil. And if they have done any thing amiss, anon, even by the sight of the books, their consciences bee admonished, and they wax sorry and ashamed of the fact. Peradventure they wil say unto mee, How and if wee un∣derstand
not that wee read, that is contained in the Books? What then? suppose thou understand not the deep and profound Mysteries of Scripture, yet can it not bee, but that much fruit and holines must come and grow unto thee by the reading. For it cannot bee, that thou shouldest bee ignorant in al things alike. For the holy Ghost hath so ordered and attempered the Scriptures, that in them, as wel Publi∣cans, fishers and sheepherds may find their edification, as great Doctors their erudition. For those books were not made to vain glory, like as were the Writings of the Gentile Philosophers, and Rhetori∣cians, to the intent the makers should bee had in admiration for their high stiles, and obscure manner of writing; wherof nothing can bee understanded without a Master, or an Expositor. But the Apostles and Prophets wrot their books so, that their special intent and purpose might bee understanded and perceived of every reader: which was nothing but the edification or amendment of the life of them that read or hear it. Who is it, that reading, or hearing read in the Gospel, Blessed are they, that bee meek; Blessed are they, that bee merciful: Blessed are they, that bee of clean heart, and such other like places, can perceive nothing, except hee have a Master to teach him what it meaneth? Likewise the signs and miracles with al other histories of the doings of Christ, or his Apostles, who is there of so simple wit and capacity, but hee may bee able to perceive and under∣stand them? These bee but excuses and clokes for the rain, and co∣verings of their own idle slothfulnes. But still ye wil say, I cannot understand it. What mervail? How shouldest thou understand, if thou wilt not read nor look upon it? Take the books into thine hands, read the whole story, and that thou understandest, keep it well in me∣mory: that thou understandest not, read it again and again. If thou can neither so come by it, counsail with some other that is better Learned. Go to thy Curate and Preacher, shew thy self to bee desi∣rous to know and learn. And I doubt not but God seeing thy dili∣gence and readines, if no man else teach thee, wil himself vouchsafe with his holy Spirit to illuminate thee, and to open unto thee that which was locked from thee. Remember the Eunuch of Candace Queen of Ethiopia: which albeit hee was a man of a wild and barbarous coun∣try, and one occupied with worldly cares and busines, yet riding in his charet, hee was reading the Scripture. Now consider, if this man, passing in his journey, was so diligent as to read the Scripture, what thinkest thou of like was hee wont to do sitting at home? Again, hee letteth not to read, albeit he did not understand: What did hee then trowest thou after that, when hee had learned and gotten under∣standing? For that thou mayest wel know that he understood not what hee read, harken what Philip saith there unto him. Vnder∣standest thou what thou readest? And hee nothing ashamed to confess his ignornce, answered, How should I understand, having no body to shew mee theway? Loe! when hee lacked one to shew him the way, and to expound to him the scripture, yet did hee read. And therefore God the rather provided for him a guide of the way, that taught him to understand it. God perceived his willing and toward mind, and therfore hee sent him a Teacher by and by. Therfore let no man be negigent about his own health and salvation. Though thou have not
Philip alwayes, when thou wouldest, the holy Ghost, which then moved and stired up Philip, will bee ready and not fail thee, if thou do thy diligence accordingly. All these things bee written for us, for our edification and amendment, which bee born towards the latter end of the world. The reading of the Scriptures is a great and strong bulwark or fortress against sin: the ignorance of the same is a greater ruine and destruction of them that wil not know it. That is the thing that bringeth in heresie; that is it that causeth all corrupt and perverse Living; that is it, that bringeth all things out of good order. Hitherto al that I have said, I have taken and gathered out of the foresaid sermon of this holy Doctor S. Iohn Chysostom. Now if I should in like manner bring sorth what the self same Doctor speaketh in other places, and what other Doctors and Writers say concerning the same purpose, I might seem to you to write another Bible, raher then to make a Preface to the Bible. Wherfore in few words to compre∣hend the largeness and utility of the Scripture, how it containeth fruitful instruction and erudition for every man, if any thing be ne∣cessary to be Learned, of the holy Scripture we may learn it. If falshood shall be reproved, thereof wee may gather wherewithal. If any thing bee to bee corrected and amended; if there need any exhor∣tation or consolation, of the Scripture wee may wel learn. In the Scriptures bee the fat pastures of the Soul; therein is no venomous meat, no unwholsome thing: they bee the very dainty and pure feed∣ing. Hee that is ignorant, shal find there what hee should learn. Hee that is a perverse sinner, shal there find his Damnation to make him to tremble for fear. Hee that laboureth to serve God, shal find there his Glory, and the promissions of eternal life, exhorting him more diligently to labour. Herein may Princes learn how to govern their Subjects: Subjects obedience, Love and dread to their Princes. Husbands how they should behave them unto their Wives, how to educate their Children and Servants. And contrary the Wives, Children and Servants, may know their dutie to their Husbands, Pa∣rents, and Masters. Here may al maner of persons, men, women, young, old, learned, unlearned, rich, poor, priests, Laymen, Lords, Laies, officers, tenants, and mean men, Virgins, Wives, Widdowes, Lawiers, Merchants, Artificers, Husbandmen, and al manner of persons of what estate or condition soever they bee, may in this book learn all things what they ought to believe, what they ought to do, and what they should not do, as wel concerning Almighty God, as also concerning themselves and al other. Briefly, to the read∣ing of the Scripture none can bee enemy, but that either bee so sick, that they Love not to hear of any medicine; or else that bee so igno∣rant, that they know not Scripture to bee the most healthful medicine. Therefore as touching this former part, I wil hear conclude, and take it for conclusion, sufficiently determined and appoynted,The conclu∣sion of the former part. that it is convenient and good the Scriptures to bee read of al sorts and kinds of people, and in the vulgar tongue, without further allegations and probations for the same; which shal not need, since that this one place of Iohn Chrysostom is enough, and sufficient to persuade al them,
that bee not frowardly and perversely set in their own wilful opinion. Specially now that the Kings Highnes, being Supreme Head next under Christ of this church of England,The Kings Highness hath allowed the Scripture as necessary for us. hath approved with his Royal assent the setting forth hereof. Which onely to al true and obedient. Subjects ought to bee a sufficient reason for the allowance of the same, without further delay, reclamation or resistance, although there were no preface, or other reason herein expressed. Therefore now to come to the second, and latter part of my purpose. Here is nothing so good in this world, but it may bee abused, and turned from unhurtfull and wholsome, to hurtful and noisome. What is there above better then the Sun, the Moon and the Stars? Yet was there, that took occasion, by the great beauty and vertue of them, to dishonour God, and to defile themselves with idolatry, giving the honour of the Living God, and Creator of al things, to such things as hee had created. What is there here beneath better then fire, Water, meats, drinks, mettals of gold, silver, iron and steel? Yet wee see daily great harm and much mischief done by every one of these, as wel for lack of wisdome and providence of them that suffer evil, as by the malice of them that work the evill. Thus to them that bee evil of themselves, every thing setteth forward, and en∣creaseth their evil: bee it of his own nature a thing never so good. Like as contrarily, to them that study and endeavour themselves to goodnes, every thing prevaileth them, and profiteth unto good; bee it of his own nature a thing never so bad. As S. Paul saith, Hijs, qui diligunt Deum, omnia cooperantur in bonum. All things do bring good success to such as do love God. Even as out of most venimous wormes is made Triacle, the most sovereign medicine for the preservation of mans health in time of danger. Wherefore I would advise you all, that come to the reading or hearing of this Book, which is the word of God, the most precious jewel, and most holy Relique, that re∣maineth upon earth, that yee bring with you the fear of God, and that yee do it with al reverence, and use your knowledg thereof not to vain glory of frivolous disputation; but to the honour of God, encrease of vertue, and edification both of your selves and other. And to the intent that my words may bee the more regarded, I wil use in this part the authority of S. Gregory Nazienzen, like as in the other I did of S. Iohn Chrsostom. It appeareth, that in his time there were some, as I fear mee there bee also now at these dayes a great number, which were idle bablers and talkers of the Scripture out of season, and all good order, and without any encrease of virtue, or example of good living. To them hee writeth al his first book De Theologia. Whereore I shal briefly gather the whole effect, and recie it here unto you. There bee some, saith hee, whose not onely ears and tongues, but also their fists bee whetted, and ready bent al to conten∣tion and unprofitable disputation, whom I would wish, as they bee vehement and earnest to reason the matter with tongue, so they were al Ready and practive to do good deeds. But forasmuch as they, sub∣verting the order of al godlines, have respect onely to this thing, how they may bind and loose subtil questions, so that now every maket∣place, every alehouse and tavern, every feasthouse, briefly, every company of men, every assembly of women, is filled with such talk:
Since the matter is so, saith hee, and that our saith and holy religion of Christ beginneth to wax nothing else, but as it were a Sophistrie, or a talking craft, I can no less do, but say something thereunto. It is not fit, saith hee, for every man to dispute the high questions of divinity▪ neither is it to bee done at al times, neither in every audience must wee discuss every doubt: but wee must know When, to Whom, and How far wee ought to enter into such matters. First it is not for every man, but it is for such as bee of exact, and exqusite judgments, and such as have spent their time before in study and contemplation; and such as before have cleansed themselves as wel in soul as body, or at the least endeavoured themselves to bee made clean. For it is dangerous, saith hee, for the unclean to touch that which is most clean: like as the sore ey taketh harm by looking upon the Sun. Secondarily, Not at al times, but when wee bee reposed, and at rest from al outward dreggs and trouble; and when that our heads bee not encumbred with other worldly and wandring imaginations. As if a man should mingle balm and dirt together. For hee that shal judg and determine such matters and doubts of Scriptures, must take his time, when hee may apply his wits thereunto, that hee may thereby the better see and discern what is truth. Thirdly, When and in what audience? There, and among those, that have been studious to Learn. And not among such as have plesure to trifle with such matters, as with other things of pastime. Which repute for their chief delicates the disputation of high questi∣ons, to shew their Wits, Learning and eloquence in reasoning of high matters. Fourthly, It is to bee considered how far to wade in such matters of difficulty. No further, saith hee, but as every mans own capacity will serve him; and again no further, then the weakness or intelli∣gence of the other audience may bear. For like as too great noise hurt∣eth the ear, too much meat hurteth the mans body, heavy burthens hurt the bearers of them, too much rain doth more hurt then good to the ground; Briefly, in al things, too much is noyous: even so weak wits and weak consciences may soon be oppressed with over hard questions. I say not this to dissuade men from the knowledge of God, and reading, or studying of the Scripture. For I say, that it is as necessary for the life of mans Soul, as for the body to breath. And if it were possible so to Live, I would think it good for a man to spend al his life in that, and to do none other thing. I commend the Law, which biddeth to meditate and study the Scriptures alway, both night and day; and sermons and preachings to bee made, both morning, noon and eventide; and God to bee lauded and blessed in al times, to bedward, from bed, in our journeyes and all our other works. I for∣bid not to read, but I forbid to reason. Neither forbid I to reason so far as is good and godly: but I allow not that is done out of season, and out of mesure and good order. A man may eat too much of hony, bee it never so sweet; and there is time for every thing; and that thing, that is good, is not good, if it bee ungodly don. Even as a flower in winter is out of season; and as a womans apparel becometh not a man, neither contrarily, the mans the woman: neither is weep∣ing
convenient at a Bridall, neither laughing at a Buriall. Now if wee can observe and keep that is comely and timely in al other things, shal wee not then the rather do the same in the holy Scriptures? Let us not run forth, as it were wild horses, that can suffer neither bridle in their mouths, nor sitter on their backs Let us keep us in our bounds, and neither let us go too far on the one side, lest we return into Egypt, neither too far over the other, lest wee bee carried a way to Babylon. Let us not sing the song of our Lord in a strange land: that is to say, Let us not dispute the word of God at al adventures, as wel where it is not to bee reasoned, as where it is: and as wel in the ears of them that bee not fit therefore, as of them that bee. If wee can in no wise forbear, but that we must needs dispute, let us for∣bear thus much at the least, to do it out of time and place convenient. And let us entreat of those things, which bee holy, holily; and upon those things that bee mystical, mystically, and not to utter the divine Mysteries in the ears unworthy to hear them: but let us know what is comely, as wel in our silence and talking, as in our garments wearing, in our feeding, in our gesture, in our going, in al our other behaving. This contention and debate about Scripture and doubts thereof (spe∣cially when such as do pretend to ee the savourers and students thereof, cannot agree within themselves,) doth most hurt to our selves, and to the furthering of the cause and quarrels, that wee would not have furthered above al other things. And wee in this, saith hee, bee not unlike to them that being mad set their own houses on fire, and tha slay their own children, or beat their own parents. I mervail much saith hee, to recount whereof cometh all this desire of vain glory whereof cometh al this tongue-itch, that wee have so much delight to talk and clatter? And wherein is our communication? Not in the commendation of vertuous and good deeds, of hospitalit, of love between Christian brother and brother, of love between man and wife, of Virginity and chastity, and of almes towards the poor: not in Psalmes and godly songs, not in lamenting for our sins, no in the repressing the affections of the boy, not in prayers to God. We talk of Scripture, but in the mean time we subdue not our flesh by fasting, watching and weeping: we make not this life a meditation of death: wee do not strive to bee Lords over our appetites and affections: wee go not about to put down our proud and high minds, to abate our fumish and rancorous stomacks, to restrain our lusts and bodily de∣lectations, our undiscrete sorrows, our lascivious mirth, our inordi∣nate looking, our insatiable hearing of vanities, our speking with∣out mesure, our inconvenient thoughts; and briefly, to reform our life and manners. But al our holines consists in Talking. And wee pardon each other from al good living,, so that wee may stick fast to∣gether in argumentation; as though there were no mo wayes to heaven but this alone, the way of speculation and knowledg, (as they take it,) but in very deed it is rather the way of superfluous conten∣tion and sophistication. Hitherto have I recited the mind of Gregory Nazianzen in that book, which I spake of before. The same Aucthor saith also in another place, that the Learning of a Christian man ought to begin of the fear of God, to end in matters of high speculation: and not con∣trarily
to begin with speculation, and to end in fear. For Speculation, saith hee, either high cunning or knowledg, if it be not stayd with the bridle of ea: to oend God, is daungerous, and enough to tumble a man  down the hill. Therefore, saith hee, the fear of God must be the first beginning, and as it were an A. B. C. or an intro∣duction to all them, that shall enter into the very true and most fruit∣ful knowledg of holy Scriptures. Whereas is the fear of God, there is, saith ee, te keeping of the Commandments, there is the cleans∣ing of the flesh. Which flesh is a cloud before the Souls ey, and suf∣fereth i not purely to see the beam of heavenly light. Whereas is the cleansing of the flesh, there is the illumination of the holy Ghost, the end of al our dires and the very light, whereby the verity of Scriptures is sen and perceived. This is the mind and almost the words of Gregory Nziazen, Doctor of the Grek Church; of whom S. Ierome saith, that unto his time the Ltine church had no Writer able to bee compared, and to make an even match with him. Therefore to conclude this Latter part, Every man,The conclu∣sion of the latter part. that cometh to the reading of this hol book, ought to bring with him first and fore∣most this feat of Almighty God: and then next, a firm and stable pur∣pose to reform his own self according thereunto: and so to continue, proceed and prosper from te to time; shewing himself to bee a sober and fruitful hearer and learner. Which if hee do, hee shall prove at length wel able to teach, though not with his mouth, yet with his Living and good example: which is sure the most lively and affectuous form and manner of teaching. Hee that otherwise inter∣medleth with this book, et him be assured, that once hee shal make account therefore, when hee shal have said to him, as it is written in the Prophet David, Peccatori dicit Deus, &c. Vnto the ungodly said God,Psal. 50. why dost thou preach my Laes, and takest my Testament in thy mouth? Whereas  to bee reformed, and hast been partakers with adulte∣rers. Tho hast lt thy mouth speak wickedness, and with thy tongue thou hast set forth decpt. Thou sattest and spakest against thy brother, and hast slandered thine own Mothers son. These things hast thou done, and I held my tongue, and thou thoughtest wickedly, that I am even such an one as thee self, but I wil reprove thee, and set before thee the things that thou hast done. O consider this yee that forget God, lest I pluck you away, and there bee none to deliver you. Whoso offereth mee thanks and praise, hee honour∣e mee, and to him that ordereth his conversation right, wil I shew the Salvation of God. Praise bee to God.
NUM. CV. Bucer and others Learned strangers from Lambeth to Cecyl, to pre∣fer the Petition of some poor French Protestants to the Protector. Clarissimo Viro, Domino Sicilio, illustrissimi Principis Protectoris Angliae, à Secretis, Domino & amico summopere Colendo, & Charissimo. GRatiam & benedictionem Domini nostri Iesu Christi, augeri tibi precamur,Sir W. H. MSS. Vir ornatissime & religiosissime. Cum summa fide & studio ministrare oporteat Christo Domino nostro afflicto in membris suis, & nostris, non debuimus officium nostrum negare ijs captivis Domini, quorum caussam exponent hi Ecclesiae Gallicanae Ministri, Collegae nostri, & his ipsis fratribus & collegis nostris, ut utrósque tuae charitati commndaremus, id T.D. à nobis boni consulet. Veniunt vero ad te hi Collegae nostri, jussu Reverendissimi Domini, ac Patroni nostri, Archpiscopi Cantuariensis, rogatum, ut Captivorum illorum Supplicationen velis offerre Illustrissimo Principi, D. Protectori, ad∣juncta tua commendatione; fidèmque facint, eos, quorum offerunt Supplicationem, nulla alia, quam Religionis cussa, patriam suam de∣serere coactos, in hoc regnum venisse, tanquam ad Christi asylum. Quod cum ita habere propter testium sanctiratem, nihil dubitemus, D. T. quantum licet oramus, ut caussam horum Captivorum Christi apud Illustriss. Principem, D Protectorem, diligenter agas, & nostras quoque illius Celsitudini supplices preces, ad eam caussam offerre non graveris. Quod Christus Dominus tibi cumulatè rependet. Cui Illustrissimum Principem D. Protectorem, teque & tuos omnes etiam atque etiam commendamus. Lambethi XIII Augusti, Anno MDXLIX. Tui in Domino Martinus Bucerus. Pet. Martyr. Petrus Alexander. Paulus Fagius. These Letters following, tho they have no particular Reference, yet being made use of in the former Memorials, I have thought fit to publish them with the rest. NUM. CVI. The Archbishop to the Secretary, concerning a French man, that desired a Patent to translate the Common prayer into French, and print it. To my veray lovinge freunde Sir William Cecill, Knight, one of the Kings Majesties principal Secretaries. AFter my verai hartie commendations. I thancke youe for your newes,Sir W.H.MSS. but speciallie for that ye advertise me, that the Kinges Majestie is in good health, wherin I beseche God long to continue his highness, as he hath twise (as I trust) restored me to the same.
It seamithe by your letters, that a peace should be concluded betwixt themperor and Duke Morrise, which whither it bee accordinge to thaticles, that afore ye sent unto me, or otherwise, I woulde gladlie understande. The commoditie that might arrise by printinge the boke of Common praier, and administration of Sacraments in the French tongue, (if any bee) I reckon it were meete that it shoulde come to theim, which have already taken pains in translatinge th same. Which was first done by Sir Hugh Paullets commaundement, and overseen by my L. Chauncellor, and other at his appoinitement: an now altered accordinge to that which must bee put in execution at the feast of All Saints next, at the appoinctment of my L. Chauncellor, by a learned Frenche man, a Doctor in Divinitie. And therfore need∣less of anny other to bee travailed in. Aug. 26. 1552. NUM. CVII. Mention of Letters sent by him to the Duke of Northumberland, excusing his not proceeding in a Commission. His reflexion upon the Newes. To my Lovenge frende Sir William Cecil, Knight, and Secretary to the kyngs Majestie. AFter my veray harty recommendations,Sr. W.H.MSS. and no lesse thanks for your frendly letters, and advertisements Be you assured that I take the same in such parte, and to procede of such a frendly mynde, as I have ever loked for at your hands. Wherof I shal not be unmyndeful, if occasion hereafter, shal serve to requite the same. I have written lettres unto my Lorde of Northumberlande, declarynge unto hym the cause of my staye in the Commission; which is bicause, that al the gentylmen and Justices of the peace of Kent, which be in commission with me, be now at London. Bifore whose comynge home, if I sholde procede without them, I myght perchaunce travel in vayne, and take more payne, than I sholde do good. I have written also unto hym in the favour of Michael Angelo: whose cause I pray you to helpe so moche as lieth in you. The Sophy and the Turke, themperor and the French kynge (not moch better in religion than they) rollynge the stone, or turnynge the whele of fortune up and downe, I pray God send us peace, and quyetnes with al realmes, as wel as among our selfes; and to preserve the Kyngs majestie with al his councill. Thus fare you wel. From my howse of Forde the xx day of November, Anno 1552. Your assured. T. Cant.
NUM. CVIII. Signifying his desire to have the good will of the Lord Warden, his neighbour. To my lovyng frende Sir William Cecill Knyght, Secretary to the Kings Majestie. Yeve thies, AFter my harty commendations and thanks for your letters; ther is no man more loth to be in contention with any man,Sr. W. H. MSS. than I am, specially with my Lorde Warden, my nere neighbour, dwellynge both in one contray, and whose familier and entier frendeshippe I most desier, for the quyetnes of the hole contray. For the example of the rulers and heades wil the people and membres followe And as towchynge learn∣ed men, I shal sende you my mynde with as moch expedition as I can, which by this poste I can not do, evyn in the colde snowe sittynge opon coles untyl he be gone. But hartely fare you wel in the Lorde Iesus. From Forde, the last day of November. Your Lovynge frende T. Cant. NUM. CIX. Desiring Cecyl to enform him of the cause of Chekes indictment. To my very Lovynge frende Sir William Cecyl Knight. AFter my very harty recommendtions; Yester nyght I harde re∣ported,Sir W. H. MSS. that Mr. Cheke is indited: I pray you hartely, if you know any thynge therof, to sende me knowledge, and wheruppon he is indited. I had grete trust, that he sholde be one of them, that sholde fele the Queens grete mercie and pardon, as one who hath been none of the grete doers in this matier agaynst her: and my trust is not yet gone, excepte it be for his ernestnes in religion. For the which if he suffre, blssed is he of god, that suffreth for his sake, howsoever the worlde juge of hym. For what ought we to care for the jugement of the worlde, whan god absolveth us? But alas, if any means cowde be made for hym, or for my Lorde Russel, it were not to be omitted, nor in any wise neglected. But I am utterly destitute both of counseil in this matter, and of power, being in the same condemnation that they be. But that onely thynge which I can do, I shal not ceasse to do, and that is only to pray from theym, and for my selfe, with al other, that be now in adversity. Whan I saw you at the coure, I wolde fayne have talked with you, but I durst not: nevertheless if you cowde fynde a tyme to come over to me, I wolde gladly commen with you. Thus fare you hartely well, with my Lady your wife. From Lamhith this 14 day of this month of August. Your own assured T. Cant. FINIS.
READER, MY Reverend Friend Mr. Wharton, as he formerly Encouraged and Assisted me in the Foregoing History, hath also further obliged me by the Perusal of it, and by communicating to me his Ingenious and Learned Observations and Animadversions thereupon; which do highly deserve to be made more Publick; and therefore are here gladly added by me (together with his Letter) as a Supple∣ment to my Book for the Reader's Benefit. To the Reverend Mr. STRYPE. SIR, AT the Desire of Mr. Chiswell, our Common Friend, I have perused your Memorials of Archbishop Cranmer, not without great Sa∣tisfaction; being much pleased to see the Actions of that Excel∣lent Prelate, and the Affairs of the Reformation of our Church, happily begun and carried on in his Time, and by his Conduct, disposed in so clear a Method. I have not been able to make my Observations upon it with that Exactness and Fulness which I desired, and you may perhaps expect; being at this time placed at a very great distance from all my Papers and Collections, and not enjoying the use even of such Printed Books, as would be necessary to this Design: So that I have been forced to pass by very many Places of your History, wherein I have suspected some Error to have been committed, but could not either confirm or remove my Suspicion, for want of farther present Evidence. However, I have noted several Places, which at first Reading appeared Suspicious, and after farther Consideration, were judged Erroneous by me; altho even in some of those Places I have only Pointed at the Error, not being able always to rectify it, without the Assistance of Books and Papers, whereof I am now wholly destitute. Be pleased to accept of my Performance herein with that Candor, wherewith I read your Book, and made the following Observations; since I willingly profess, That the commis∣sion of Errors in writing any History, especially of times past, being altoge∣ther unavoidable, ought not to detract from the Credit of the History, or Merit of the Historian; unless it be accompanied with Immoderate Osten∣tation, or Vnhandsome Reflections upon the Errors of others; from which Imputation, that Indifference and Candor which appear throughout your whole Work, wholly exempt you; altho no History of those Matters or Times, which I have seen, be wrote with equal Exactness. PAGE 16. Line 4. It is the sense of an Ingenious and Learned Friend of mine, That the pretended Martyr Thomas Becket, tho he died in Vindication of the Privileges of the Church, yet he was the First Betrayer of the Rights of his See; viz. of Canterbury. He made the greatest Breach upon the Authority of the Primacy of Canterbury, by resigning the Archbishoprick into the Pope's
hands, and receiving it again from him as the Pope's Donation.] Thomas Becket was not the First nor the Chief Betrayer of the Rights of the See of Can∣terbury. The first and greatest Breach upon the Authority of the Primacy of that See, was made by his Predecessor William de Corboil, Thirty seven years before; who after he had been fully Invested in the Archbishoprick of Canterbury by due Authority, solicited and accepted the Bulls of Pope Honorius, conferring it upon him as by Papal Gift, and other Bulls constituting him the Pope's Legate in Eng∣land; whereby he subjected his own See, and the Church of England, to the Au∣thority of the See of Rome, which were before wholly independent of it. Page 21. line 21. The Twelfth Article of Cranmer's Judgment of the Un∣lawfulness of K. Henry's Marriage, is this, We think that the pretended Matrimony of K. Henry, &c. hath been and is none at all.] You will please to consider, whether the Latin words, fuisse & esse nullum, should not have been rather translated, hath been and is null; which is the Canonical Term expressing Voidance in Law. Page 23. line 44. Licenses were granted this year, 1533, to the Lady Guil∣ford, and the Marchioness of Dorset, to have the Eucharist, &c. ministred to them in their private Chappels; whether indulged to them by the Archbishop, the rather to free them from danger for not frequenting their Parish-Churches, and for the avoiding the Superstitious and Idolatrous Worship there perform∣ed, &c. or only for the Convenience of those Ladies, the Reader hath liberty to judge.] The Archbishop cannot be hence supposed to have countenanced any Separation from the Parochial Worship of that time, or to have insinuated his Judgment of the Danger, Superstition, or Idolatry of the Publick Worship then used; since such Licenses were customary acts, very frequent before and at that time. Many hundreds of them may be found among the Faculties granted by the Predecessors of this Archbishop more than Two hundred years upwards. Private Oratories were then more used, and Domestick Chaplains entertained in much greater number than in latter times: Yet none then presumed to make use of either, without License first obtained of their Diocesans: Which Discipline was formerly observed by all strictly, and continued in great measure till the time of Archbishop Abbot, altho now little regarded. So that hereby Archbishop Cranmer gave no occasion for any such Conjecture as is here made, any more than Archbishop Parker did, when he granted a like License to his own Wife, al∣tho she was no Puritan, or Separatist from the Established Worship. Page 25. line 40. This year, 1534, all the Learned and Spiritual men in England, subscribed to it with their Hands, That the Pope hath no Jurisdiction in this Kingdom. The Archbishop's Church in Canterbury began; for the Prior and Convent thereof solemnly subscribed an Instrument for abolishing the Pope's Supremacy, &c. The Original whereof is in a Volume of the Cotton Library] The Right Reverend the Bishop of Salisbury in his History of the Reformation, gi∣veth two or three such Instruments of the Subscription of so many particular Con∣vents, and supposeth that no more remain, but that all the rest were in the Reign of Queen Mary destroyed by Bp. Bonner, by Virtue of a Commission granted to him for razing of Scandalous Records. In truth, all those Instruments do yet re∣main, and are a most Authentick Justification of the Proceedings of the King in abolishing the Papal Supremacy. The Originals of them do yet remain in their proper place, the King's Exchequer, into which they were at first returned, and where they have been hitherto kept. There are in my hands no less than One hundred seventy five such Instruments, transcribed long since from thence, contain∣ing the Subscriptions of all the Bishops, Chapters, Monastries, Colleges, Hospitals, &c. of Thirteen Diocesses. The Subscriptions of those of the other Nine Diocesses are to my certain knowledge yet remaining in another place, but I have not yet gained Copies of them: Some of these Instruments have been transcribed into the Volume of the Cotton Library here mentioned; but that is only a Transcript, containeth not the Originals, as is here supposed. Nor did the Church of Canter∣bury begin the Subscription; for however the Instrument of that Church may be
placed first, upon account of the Preeminence of it, the Instruments of several Religious Houses, even in that Diocess, are dated before it. Page 29. line 31. Nix Bishop of Norwich died two years after, September 1534. and came in to be Bishop in the year 1500.] He died in the middle of Ianuary, 1535/6; and was Consecrated Bishop in April, 1501. Page 32. line 6. ab imo. The Archbishop began his Provincial Visitation Iure Metropolitico, the last year, 1534. It was somewhat extraordinary, for such a Vi∣sitation had not been in an hundred years before. —The Diocess of Winchester having been visited but five years ago▪ by his Predecessor Warham.] The Arch∣bishop in his Letter in answer to the Bishop of Winchester, in the Appendix, Pag. 21. saith truly, That the Diocess of Winchester was visited by his Predecessor Warham the third year before this. But when he addeth, That else it had not been visited by any of his Predecessors these forty years, he is to be understood cautiously. For altho perhaps it had not been visited by any Archbishop since the death of Bishop Langton, which was in the year 1493, yet it had been visited Metropolitico by the Chapter of Canterbury, in the beginning of the year 1501. Again, when it is said from Bishop Stoksly's Letter in the Appendix, page 22. That such a Pro∣vincial Visitation had not been held by any of the Archbishop's Predecessors in an hundred years before; this also is to be understood dextrously. For men in their Juridical Answers are wont to alledge any thing which may seem to make for their Cause, little regarding whether it be exactly true or no. It is true, the Archbishops of Canterbury had not for so long a time undertaken or performed a Metropolitical Visitation of their whole Province at one time; but they had often within that time visited particular Diocesses Iure Metropolitico; which was a suffi∣cient President to the Cause then in hand. Page 36. line 32. Suffragan Bishops were not unusual in the Realm. — To give some Instances of them. —Certain bearing the Title of Bishops of Sidon, assisted the Archbishops of Canterbury; one of these was named Thomas Wellys, Prior of St. Gregories by Canterbury; he being Archbishop Warham's Chaplain, was sent by him, &c. —There was afterwards one Christopher, that bore that Title, and assisted Archbishop Cranmer about these times (1535.) in Ordinations. And another Thomas, intituled of Sidon, succeeded.] It should seem to be here supposed, That the Suffragans of the Diocess of Canterbury did then commonly take their Titles from Sidon; whereas indeed none of them, (save that Thomas Wellys here mentioned) was intituled from thence. As for Chri∣stopher, he was not Suffragan to the Archbishops of Canterbury; and that other Thomas of Sidon was in Cranmer's time Suffragan to the Bishops of London. That Thomas Wellys moreover, who was Prior of St. Gregories, and Titular Bishop of Sidon, was not Chaplain to Archbishop Warham; for Archbishops never enter∣tained Regulars in the quality of Chaplains. Archbishop Warham had indeed a Chaplain of that name, but he was neither Prior nor Bishop, but a Secular, Do∣ctor of Divinity, and Rector of Chartham near Canterbury. Ibid. line 47. Long before these, I find one William Botlesham Episcopus Nava∣tensis, Anno 1382. at the Convocation in London, summoned against the Wick∣livites.] If this were a Titular Bishop only, he had nothing to do in the Con∣vocation, nor any Right to be summoned to it. That Willelmus Botlesham, Episcopus Navatensis, was in truth no other than Willelmus Episcopus Landavensis, Bishop of Landaff, whose Title of Landavensis the Ignorance or Mistake of the Scribe chan∣ged into Navatensis. By a like mistake, very frequent in our Ancient Records, the Bishop of Lincoln, Lincolniensis, is corruptly stiled Nicoliensis. Page 37. line 6. Iohn Thornden, who was often Commissary of Oxon, while Archbishop Warham was Chancellor of that University, was stiled Episcopus Sy∣rinensis.] His Name was Iohn Thornton. Many years after him, Richard Thornden was Suffragan Bishop in the Diocess of Canterbury. In Thornton endeth the Cata∣logue
of Suffragan Bishops, which you could find, Consecrated before the time of Archbishop Cranmer, being in all seven. If it pleaseth God to permit me to to finish my Angli Sacra, I shall exhibit a perfect Succession of Suffragan Bishops in almost all the Diocesses of England, for about Two hundred years before the Reformation. Ibid. line 8. And hereafter we shall meet with a Bishop of Hippolitanum, who assisted Archbishop Cranmer at his Ordinations.] It will be hard to find such a City as Hyppolitanum in the world. We had in England many Suffragan Bishops, who successively assumed the Title of Bishops of Hippo, the See of the Great St. Austin. These were wont to stile themselves Hipponenses; but some of them, not being so good Grammarians, took the Stile of Ypolitanenses, and Hippolita∣nenses▪ which latter Appellation might give occasion to the mistake concerning a Bishop of Hippolitanum. Page 38. line 3. ab imo. The King sent to the Archbishop to make Thomas Mannyng Suffragan of Gipwich, who was accordingly Consecrated by the Arch∣bishop.] This Gipwich is no other than Ipswich, the chief Town of Suffolk, in Latin called Gipsvicum, and Gipwicum; from which place Mannyng at his Prmo∣tion to the Office of a Suffragan Bishop, took his Title. Page 41. line 3. This choice Treasure (the Original Book, containing the Subscription of the Members of the Convocation to certain Articles of Religion) Sir Robert Cotton afterwards procured. — And at the bottom of the first Page is written Robertus Cotton Bruces, by Sir Robert's own hand, signifying his Value of this Monument.] Sir Robert did not by that Subscription of his Name testify any extraordinary Value of this Volume; for he wrote the same words at the bottom of the first Page of all, or almost all, the Manuscript Volumes of his Library. Page 50. line 26. Iune — Anno 1536. William Rugg was Consecrated Bi∣shop of Norwich. His Consecration is omitted in the Register. Probably he was consecrated with Sampson Bishop of Chicester, who was Confirmed Iune 10th.] Rugg could not be Consecrated in Iune, for he was not Confirmed till the 28th. of that Month; and the first Sunday after that day, was Iuly 2d. Bishops were wont to be Consecrated on the next Sunday after their Confirmation. So that it is most likely Sampson was Consecrated Iune 11th▪; and Rugg, together with Warton of St. Asaph, on Iuly 2d. Page 61. line 18. ab imo. Iune 24. Anno 1537. Iohn Bird was Consecrated Suffragan of the See of Penrith in Landaff Diocess; and Lewis Thomas Suffragan Bishop of the See of Salop.] It should have been said, that Bird was Conse∣crated Suffragan of the Diocess of Landaff, with the Title of Bishop of Penrith; Bishop of Shrewsbury (not Salop); for Penrith is no more in Landaff Diocess, than Shrewsbury is in that of St. Asaph. But it may be observed, That in the first Act of Parliament made in this Reign touching Suffragan Bishops, certain Titles were appointed, to which the said Suffragans should be Consecrated, taken from several of the chief Towns in England; but it was not required, that the Suffra∣gan of any particular Diocess should take his Title from some Town in that Dio∣cess, but was left at liberty to take it from any Town mentioned in that Act. Which was accordingly practised indifferently till the Promulgation of the second Act concerning Suffragans. Ibid. line 2. It was now forbidden by the Parliament, that the Feast of St. Tho∣mas a Becket, the pretended Martyr, should be celebrated any more. He is also stiled Thomas a Becket, Page 70. line 21. & 28. Page 92. line 4. &c.] This is a small Error; but being so often repeated, deserveth to be observed and corrected. The Name of that Archbishop was Thomas Becket; nor can it otherwise be found
to have been written in any Authentick History, Record, Kalendar, or other Book. If the Vulgar did formerly, as it doth now, call him Thomas a Becket, their Mi∣stake is not to be followed by Learned men. Page 62. line 8. The Reason why Archbishop Cranmer all this while, that is from the first making the Act concerning Suffragans in the year 1534, to this time (1537.) had nominated none for Suffragan to this See (Dover) till now (when he nominated and consecrated Richard Yngworth in December) might be, because there seemed to be a Suffragan already, even the same that had been in the time of Archbishop Warham, namely, Iohn Thornton▪ Prior of Dover, who was one of the Witnesses appointed by that Archbishop to certify what was found and seen at the opening of St. Dunstan's Tomb. Richard Thornden seems to have succeeded Yngworth in this Office.] St. Dunstan's Tomb was opened in April 1508, and Thornden died not till the last year of Queen Mary: So that if to Thern∣ton succeeded Yngworth, and to Yngworth succeeded Thornden▪ there will be no room for any of those three Bishops of Sidon, who were before in this History (pag. 36.) said to have assisted the Archbishops Warham and Cranmer in the Quality of Suf∣fragan Bishops. For the very first of them, Thomas Wellys, was Suffragan Bishop after the year 1508. I know not when he was made Suffragan, or when he died, but I am certain that he survived the year 1511. As for Christopher, and the other, Thomas, Bishops of Sidon, they indeed were not the peculiar Suffragans of the Archbishops of Canterbury, as I before said. Page 63. line 28. March 24. 1537. Henry Holbeach was Consecrated Suffragan Bishop of Bristow in the Bishop of London's Chappel in the said Bishop's House, scituate in Lambeth-Marsh, by the said Bishop, &c.] The Bishops of London ne∣ver had any House scituate in Lambeth-Marsh, but the Bishops of Rochester at that time had; which House was soon after conveyed from the See of Rochester to the Crown; and afterwards from the Crown by exchange to the See of Carlisle, to which it now belongeth. Page 86. line 22. ab imo. In this Consecration (of Bonner Bishop of London, Anno 1540.) the Prior and Chapter of Canterbury insisted, it seems, upon an Ancient Privilege of their Church, which I do not find in this Register (that of Archbishop Cranmer) they had at other Consecrations done; namely, that the Consecration should be celebrated at the Church of Canterbury, and at no other Church or Oratory, without their allowance. And so in a formal Instrument they gave their License and Consent. — The renewing of this their old pretended Privilege, looked like some Check to the Archbishop, and as tho they required of him a sort of Dependance on them now more than before; and it shewed some secret Ill-will towards him.] This Privilege was first granted to the Prior and Chapter of Canterbury by Thomas Becket, but afterwards more am∣ply confirmed to them by St. Edmund the Archbishop, in the year 1235; from which time to the present year 1540▪ I dare confidently ver▪ That no Bishop of the Province of Canterbury had been Consecrated by the Archbishops or by any other by their Commission, in any Church or Place without the Metropolitical Church of Canterbury, without License first desired and obtained in writing from the Chapter of Canterbury under their Seal; if we except only two or three Ca∣ses between the years 1235, and 1300; which were the occasions of great Con∣troversies between the Archbishops Consecrating, and the Bishops Consecrated, on the one part, and the Chapter of Canterbury on the other part; which yet always ended to the advantage of the Chapter, and the farther Confirmation of their Privilege herein. If these Licenses be not registred in the Archbishops Re∣gisters, it is not to be wondred at; it being not their concern to cause those things to be enregistred, which were not essential to the Confirmation or Conse∣cration of the Bishops of their Province, but related merely to the Privileges of the Chapter of Canterbury. But they are all enregistred, and may be found in the Registers of that Chapter. If therefore the Prior and Convent of Canterbury did at this time require Boner to take out such a License before his Consecration,
they thereby gave no more evidence of any sinister Design or Ill-will against the Archbishop, than they had done at any time before to him or any of his Prede∣cessors for 300 years, whensoever any Bishop of the Province was to be Conse∣crated out of their Church. Page 95. line 18. Robert King, Titular Bishop Reonen, Suffragan to the Bishop of Lincoln, was this year (1541.) Consecrated Bishop of Oxford. The Date, or his Consecrators, I cannot assign, the Act being omitted in the Archbishop's Register.] Whensoever a Suffragan Bishop was promoted to any real Bishoprick, he had no need of any new Consecration, the Character and Order of Bishop having been all along as full, valid, and effectual in him, as in any Bishop what∣soever. So that in such a Promotion no other Form was observed, than in the Translation of any Bishop from one Diocess to another; viz. Election and Con∣firmation. But in this case not so much as that was necessary; for the Bishoprick of Oxford being then newly erected, King the first Bishop of it was to be put in Possession of it, not by any Act of the Archbishop's, but by Letters Patents of the King the Founder of it; which Letters were not issued out until the first day of September in the following year. Page 111. line 13. The names of the chief Actors (of a Conspiracy against the Archbishop) were Thornden, who lived in the Archbishop's Family, and eat at his Table, and with whom he used to converse most familiarly. So also Pag. 121. line 12. Thornton who was Suffragan of Dover, the Archbishop made Prebenda∣ry of his Church, and whom he always set at his own Mess. Page 120. line 5. Dr. Thornton, who was very great with the Archbishop, but secretly false to him. Page 304. line 7. ab imo. This had the Suffragan of Dover, Dr. Thornton done.] In these and other Passages of this History, the Names and Persons of Dr. Thorn∣ton and Dr. Thornden, both Suffragans of the Diocess of Canterbury, are confound∣ed. Iohn Thornton, Prior of Dover, was Suffragan to Archbishop Warham, and died in his time. Richard Thornden was Monk of Christ-Church, Canterbury, and at the dissolution of that Monastery in 1539, or 1540, and Conversion of it into a College of Secular Canons, was constituted the first Prebendary of it, and soon after made Suffragan of the Diocess, with the Title of Bishop of Dover; in which Office he continued till his death, ultimo Mari. He never lived in the Archbi∣shop's Family, but in the Monastery till the Dissolution of it; and after that con∣stantly resided upon his Prebend and other Benefices which he held in the Diocess. You might perhaps find it noted, That the Archbishop always set him at his own Mess; which might give you occasion to think that he sometimes lived in the Archbishop's Family; whereas indeed no more was meant thereby, than that the Archbishop was wont to shew to him extraordinary Respect, whensoever he at∣tended him; for in those days Suffragan Bishops, however usual, were treated with Contempt enough, not wont to be admitted to dine at the Archbishops own Table in the Hall of the Archbishop's Palace. There were generally three Tables spread in the Archbishops Hall, and served at the same time: The Archbishops Table, at which ordinarily sate none but Peers of the Realm, Privy-Counsellors, and Gentlemen of the greatest Quality. The Almoners Table, at which sate the Chaplains, and all Guests of the Clergy beneath Diocesan Bishops, and Abbots. The Stewards Table, at which sate all other Gentlemen. The Suffragan Bishops then were wont to fit at the Almoners Table; and the Archbishop in admitting his Suffragan Thornden to his own Table, did him an unusual Honour; which was therefore noted to aggravate the Ingratitude of the man, conspiring against the Archbishop. Page 126. line 13. About this time (1544.) it was, I conjecture, that the King changed the Archbishop's Coat of Arms; for unto the year 1543, he bore his Paternal Coat of Three Cranes Sable, as I find by a Date set under his Arms, yet remaining in a Window in Lambeth-House.] Those Arms of Arch∣bishop Cranmer, here mentioned to remain in a Window in Lambeth-House, toge∣ther with the Arms of the other Archbishops succeeding to him since the Refor∣mation,
and placed in the same Window, were painted at the cost of, and set up by my Lord Archbishop Sancroft, not many years since. Page 141. med. One of the very first things that was done in K. Edward's Reign, in relation to the Church, was, That the Bishops, &c. should be made to depend intirely upon the King and his Council, &c.; and should take Commissi∣ons from him for the exercise of their Office and Jurisdiction, and those to last only during the King's Pleasure.—In this I suppose the Archbishop had his hand. — And therefore he began this Matter with himself,—Petitioning for such a Commission, —which was granted to him, Feb. 7. 1546.] This Matter was not now first begun or done. The Archbishop and all the Bishops of England had taken Commissions from K. Henry in the very same Form, mutatis mu∣tandis, in the year 1535. Page 161. med. An English Exile, naming himself E. P. in Q. Mary's days published again the Archbishop's Book against Vnwritten Verities, and prefixed to it a Preface of his own, — I will add one Passage taken out of this Book, about the middle, whereby it may be seen what a Clergy was now in England. He makes a heavy Complaint against the frequent practice of beastly sins in the Priests, Adultery, Sodomy, &c. and that they never were punished. And in my memory, (as he proceeds) which is above thirty years, and also by the information of others that be twenty years older than I, I could never learn that one Priest was punished] These Exiles are a sort of men who generally write with Passion and Prejudice against their own Countrey; so that ordinarily little more credit is to be given to their Information, than to the Intelligence of Deserters from an Army. I am sure he hath shamefully belied the Clergy of England in accusing them of the fre∣quent practice of such beastly sins, and then affirming that he could never learn that one Priest was punished for it in the space of fifty years before that time. It is true, that Crimes of Incontinence, as such, especially in the Clergy, were then cognoscible and punishable only by the Ecclesiastical Law, and in the Spiritual Courts; but Rapes were, then as well as now, in Clergy-men as well as Lay-men, tryable and punishable at Common-Law. And of this the Laity took such ma∣licious advantage, immediately before the Reformation, that they were wont to pretend all Acts, and even Indications of Incontinence in Clergy-men, to be so many Rapes, and to Indict them as such: Insomuch, that scarce any Assizes or Sessions passed at that time, wherein several Clergy-men were not Indicted of Rapes, and a Jury of Lay-men Impannell'd to Try them, who would be sure not to be guilty of shewing over-much favour to them in their Verdicts. Neither was the Ecclesiastical Authority then so remiss (as is pretended) as not to have pu∣nished any one Priest for Incontinence within the space of fifty years before: If I had my Papers by me, I could produce Examples of many Incontinent Clergy-men punished and deprived by their Ordinaries within that time. About this very time wherein this Preface was wrote, Dr. Weston, altho otherwise a man of great Note and Interest among the Popish Party, was deprived of the Deanry of Wind∣sor, for a single Act of Incontinence, and about twenty years before this, Stokesly Bishop of London is by Iohn Bale reported to have deprived Iohn Lord Abbot of Colchester for an horrible Act of Incontinence. Indeed I know Bale to have been so great a Lyar, that I am not willing to take any thing of that kind upon his Cre∣dit; however, his Testimony may serve well enough against such another foul-mouth'd Writer as this E. P. seems to have been. Ibid. line 11. ab imo. The Archbishop supplied the City of Canterbury with store of Excellent Learned Preachers, Turner, the two Ridleys, Becon, &c.] Turner ne∣ver was Preacher in Ordinary at Canterbury, but at Chartham near Canterbury. He is said indeed afterwards in this History to have been one of the Six Preachers of the Church of Canterbury; which may be true; yet to Preach there three or four Sermons in a year upon so many Holidays, is not a sufficient ground to say, that that City was supplied with such or such Preachers.
Page 164. in imo. The University of Cambridge laboured under great suspicions of being spoiled of its Revenues; she having observed how those of her Sister the Church were daily invaded by Secular hands.] The University hath ever been so dutiful, as to own the Church to be her Mother. Page 183. line 10. ab imo. Farrar was Consecrated Bishop of St. Davids, by Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, endued with his Pontificals. The latter words are a Translation of Pontificalibus indutus, which signifies no other than being Invested or Attired in his Episcopal Habit. Page 184. med. Bishop Farrar hearing of great Corruption among those be∣longing to the Chapter of the Church of Carmarthen, and chiefly Thomas Young, Chanter, after Archbishop of York, &c.] I suppose the Chapter of the Church of St. Davids is here meant; for there was no such Church at Carmarthen; and Young was at this time Precentor of St. Davids. Page 208. line 13. ab imo. Bishop Ridley, at his entrance upon the See of Lon∣don, was exceeding wary not to do his Predecessor Bonner the least injury, but ra∣ther did many kindnesses to his Mother, Servants, and Relations; he continued Bonner's Receiver, one Staunton, in his Place.] In this last case Ridley could not give any evidence of Kindness or Unkindness; for Staunton held his Place of Receiver by Patent for life. Page 224. med. The Council sitting at Greenwich, the Bishop's (Gardiner of Winchester) Servants came, and desired that certain of them might be sworn upon certain Articles for Witness on his behalf. And if they might not be sworn, &c. And they were allowed.] From this relation any Reader would imagine, That the Bishop's Servants desired that themselves might be sworn in behalf of their Lord and Master; whereas in the Council-Book (from whence this Matter is reported) it is plain, that they desired that some of the Privy-Counsellors might be sworn, or at least be obliged to declare upon their Honour what they knew of the matter then in question, in favour of the Bishop. Page 267. line 21. This Scory (Bishop Elect of Rochester) was at first preferred by the Archbishop to be one of the Six Preachers at Canterbury, and always con∣tinued firm for the Purity of Religion, and endured Trouble for it.—He was a Married man, and so deprived at the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign, fled beyond Sea, &c.] Scory was so far from continuing always firm to the Pu∣rity of Religion, that in the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign he reconciled himself to the See of Rome, submitted himself to Bishop Bonner, made a formal Recantation, and did open Penance for his Marriage; however, afterwards he resumed his former Principles, when he had got beyond Sea. Page 270. line 17. ab imo. All this I have related of this Divine (Dr. Iohn Redman, who died in 1551.) that I may in some measure preserve the Memory of one of the Learnedest men of his time; and lay up the Dying Words of a Papist, signifying so plainly his dislike and disallowance of many of their Doctrines.] I cannot imagine why Dr. Redman should be accounted or called a Papist at the time of his Death, who had all along lived and then died in the Communion of the Establish'd Church, and had but little before joined with the Archbishop and other Bishops and Divines, in compiling the Book of Common-Prayer. If because he had once held the Popish Doctrines con∣cerning Justification, the Sacrament of the Altar, &c. with equal and for the same reason Cranmer himself, and all the Bishops and Eminent Divines of that time may be called Papists: Or if it was because he judged it unlawful for any Priest to marry a second time (as is related page 157.) he therein followed the Canons and received Doctrines of the Ancient Church, and hath many Learned and Worthy Divines of our own Time and Church concurring with him in the same Opinion.
Page 274. line 5. ab imo. The other was Richard Turner, in former time Cu∣rate of Chartham in Kent, and commonly called Turner of Canterbury, living in the Family of Mr. Morice the Archbishop's Secretary, who held the Impropria∣tion of that Parsonage, and had presented this man to the Vicarage.] It would be very ill for me, if the Parsonage of Chartham were Impropriate: It never yet was, and, as I hope, never shall be in the Possssion of any Lay-man, Mr. Morice only held it at that time by Lease of Richardson, the Rector of it, with obligation to provide and pay a Curate, which was this Turner. Page 275. med. And this I judge to be that Turner whom the Archbishop no∣minated for Ireland (to the Archbishoprick of Armagh), having lived long in his Diocess, and so well known to him, and whom he had, I suppose, removed to Canterbury, to a Prebend, or some other Preferment there.] He never was Prebendary of Canterbury. Page 279. line 5. ab imo. While King Edward was in his Progress, 1552. some about his Person, to make the better way for their Sacrilegious Designs, and to make the King the more inclinable to lay hands on the Episcopal Demeans, or at least to clip and pare them, buzzed about Rumors. &c.—This Sir William Ce∣cyl, the Secretary, who was now with the King, laboured to hinder; for he was a very great Favourer, as of the Reformed Clergy, so of their Estate and Ho∣nours.] He gave but bad evidence of such Favour to the Clergy and Estate of the Church, when many years after this (the Revenue of the Church being then also much more diminished than it was at the time of this Design) he tore away from the Bishoprick of Peterborough the far better part of the Lands and Revenues wherewith it had been endowed; which he effected by procuring Bi∣shop Scamler to be translated from thence to Norwich; which Translation, by the baseness of that Bishop, conspiring with the sacrilegious greediness of two Po∣tent Courtiers, was the ruin of both those Bishopricks. Page 307. line 10. So on the day appointed, Aug. 27. 1553. the Archbishop, together with Sir Thomas Smith, K. Edward's Secretary, and Dr. May, came be∣fore the Queen's Commissioners; and the Archbishop brought in his Inventory. We are let to guess what he was now cited for. I suppose it was to lay to his chage Heresy and his Marriage.] It was undoubtedly to charge him with Treason, for what he had done in the business of Queen Ia; which the appea∣rance o Smith and May at the same time with him confirmeth. It was too early yet o object to him either Heresy or Marriage. Page 310. line 7. Cuthhert Bishop of Durham, formerly dprived, was resto∣red. Edmond Boner Bishop of London restored, Nicolas Ridley being removed from the said See, and cast into Prison, &c.] These words are said to be verbatim de∣scribed out of the Register of the Church of Canterbury. I know not, Sir, whe∣ther you inspected that Register with your own eyes; but I assure you, that Re∣gister relateth the matter otherwise; viz. that Boner was restored to the See of London, then Canonically void by the Translation of Ridley the Bishop of it to the See of Durham (made in the very end of K. Edward's Reign); and that Tun∣stall was restored to Durham, void by the Deprivation of Ridley, deprived there∣of for Heresy and Sedition. Ibid. line 13. How they proceeded with the Clergy in general for being mar∣ried, may be measured, &c. —Some were deprived, never convict nor called (I use the words of an Author that then lived, Dr. Parker.)—Some induced to resign upon promise of Pension; and the Promise as yet never performed.] Over-against these latter words, are placed in the Margent the Names of Dr. Ponet, Tayler, Parker. Of Ponet and Tayler it had been said immediately before, in this and the foregoing Page, that they were deprived of their Bishopricks. If then they were deprived, they were not induced to resign upon Promise of Pension. Of Poinet particularly it was re∣lated from the Register of Canterbury, that he was ejected, and imprisoned, and depri∣ved
of Episcopacy for being Married. I suppose the words of the Register are privatus Episcopatu, which ought to be rendred, deprived of his Bishoprick (viz. of Win∣chester), not of Episcopacy; for the Order is indelible, and so allowed to be by those who deprived him. The Causes of Tayler's Deprivation are reported from the same Register; but Marriage is not mentioned among them. Nay, we are as∣sured by undoubted Testimony (vide supra, Page 156.) That he never was married. Farther, this Account, said to be taken from the Words of Dr. Parker, is not his, but they are the words of the Anonymous Large Defence of Priests Marriage, published by him. Pag. 318. med. In the first year of Queen Mary▪ a very soul Scandal was blown about of her, That she was with Child by Bishop Gardiner; however it was raised, whether of her Enemies, to render her odicus; or of some Zea∣lots of Popish Religion, to shew the desire they had of her matching with him.] It will be very difficult to persuade the world, that any Zealots of the Popish Religion, who are so prejudiced against the Marriage of the Clergy, should desire the Marriage of a Queen, whom they loved so much, with a Bishop of their own Communion, whom they no less admired. Page 324. line 2. Cardinal Pole, in answer to both Queen Mary's Letters, thought fit to send his mind at large by his Messenger Thomas Goldwell, who was once, if I mistake not, Prior of the Church of Canterbury, but long since fled out of England, and lived with Pole, and by the Queen afterwards prefer∣red to the Bishoprick of S. Asaph.] The Prior of Canterbury, and Bishop of St. Asaph, had nothing common but their Names. The one was a Regular, the other a Secular. The first, Doctor of Divinity before the other was born, and dead before the other was made Bishop. Page 328. line 4. ab imo. This is some account of the Church of Canter∣bury's doings, in pursuance of the Queen's Instructions before-mention∣ed, viz. against the Married Clergy.] This account relateth only the Pro∣ceedings of that Chapter against the Married Clergy, Members of the Cathedral Church, or Incumbents within the Deanry of the Arches. The same Register of that Church (from whence this account is taken) relateth at large their Pro∣ceedings against all the Married Clergy within the whole Diocess of Canterbury, and in the other Danries of the peculiar Jurisdiction of that See. Page 329. line 11. Bernard Ochin, Prebndary of Canterbury. So also pag. 400, &c.] His Name was Bernardinus; a man sufficiently known. Page 331. line 9. ab imo. The other thing thought hard concerning these Or∣ders taken with the Married Clergy, was, that after these poor men had thus done their Penances, the Imposers of these Penalties were not so good as they pretended they would be, &c. towards them, not restoring them to their Mini∣stration.] This is not universally true. All Secular Married Clergy-men, who desired it, were restored after such Penance undergone, unless some other great Demerit intervened. But no Regulars could obtain that favour; Marriage in them being accounted Apostacy from their Vow and Order. Page 331. line 12. The said Poinet, late Bishop of Winchester, but now an Exile, very learnedly answered this Book (of Dr. Martin against Priests Marriage) in two several Treatises.—The second Treatise he lived not to finish; but the Copy falling into the hands of Matthew Parker, Archbishop of Canterbury, he published it in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, with very large and excellent Additions of his own. The same Book is ascribed to Poinet, infra, lin. 39. with some doubt, pag. 330. med. page 53, 69, &c.] This Book was most certainly none of Poinet's; for the Author of it saith of himself more than once, that he was a Layman; had designed indeed to enter into Holy Orders, but was pre∣vented by the Death of K. Edward, and the Iniquity of the Times succeeding to
it. He lived in or about either Norwich or Lincoln; and died before the end of Q. Mary's Reign. Archbishop Parker in Publishing it, did not adjoin his own Ad∣ditions to all the Printed Copies, but only to a few of them. Page 369. line 3. &c. Latimer's Character is best taken from them who best knew him, and lived in his time. One of these (Thomas Becon) thus speaks of him, while he was yet alive, in the beginning of K. Edward. — Latimer was very famous for the Sincerity and Goodness of his Evangelical Doctrine; which since the beginning of his Preaching had in all points been so conformable to the teaching of Christ and his Apostles. —His Fame began to grow apace, while he was at Cam∣bridge, some years before 1530. doing abundance of good there among the Student by his Sermons. —Before them he did by invincible Arguments, &c. prove, That the Holy Screptures ought to be read in the English Tongue of all Christen People, whether they were Priests or Laymen, &c.] Good Mr. Becon did herein either want true in∣formation, or hath imposed upon his Readers. Latimer was so far from maintain∣ing this Doctrine ever since the beginning of his Preaching, that he was one of those Divines, who (being deputed by the University of Cambridge) joined with Archbishop Warham, and other Bishops and Divines, in Condemning all English Translations of the Scripture; and solemnly subscribed this Determination, The Publication of the H. Scripture in the Vulgar Tongue, is not necessary to Christians; and the King's Majesty and the Bishops do well in forbidding to the people the common use of the H. Scripture in the English Tongue. This was done in the year 1530. Page 383. line 16. ab imo. The Queen would not alter her Determination to have Archbishop Cranmer burnt, by the Instigation, as I suppose, of Pole the Legate.] I would not have remittted you to so obscure an Author as Anthony Harmer, if your self had not mentioned him in your Preface. He hath offered some Reasons (in his Specimen, page 144.) not altogether contemptible, to clear Cardinal Pole from this Imputation. I am so charitable, as to be willing at least to assent to his Reasons; your self can better judge of the Validity of them. Page 398. line 9. Among Archbishop Cranmer's Writings are reckoned (from Bale) Letters to Learned Men, one Book; and thereto is added, This I cannot hear any tidings of.] The Archbishop's Letters to Learned men never were either by himself or others collected into one or more Books, especially at that time. But it was Bale's foolish way, to account to every great man whom he hath placed in his Rhapsody of Writers, One Book of Epistles. Epist. Dedicat. page 3. The Judgment of Archbishop Arundel was for the Translation of the Scriptures into the Vulgar Tongue, and for the Laity's use thereof. For he preaching the Funeral Sermon of Queen Anne in 1392. com∣mended her particularly for her Study of the Holy Scriptures, — as I find by an Ancient MS. Fragment, formerly belonging to the Church of Worcester, &c.] This MS. Fragment hath been often published. And Arundel, when he preached this Sermon, was not Archbishop of Canterbury, nor one of Cranmer's Predecessors, as is here supposed. But after all, the Judgment of Archbishop Arundel in this Case is better declared by an Authentick Decree, than by a Rhetorical Passage in a Ser∣mon, wherein he was obliged to commend the Deceased Queen. He was so far then from favouring the Translation of the Scriptures into the Vulgar Tongue, or the use of them by the Laity, that in the year 1408, he made this famous De∣cree in the Synod of Oxford, Periculosa res est, &c. It is a dangerous thing to translate the H. Scripture.—We decree therefore and ordain, That henceforth no man by his own authority translate any Book of H. Scripture into the English or any other Tongue, by way of Book, Libel, or Treatise; and that no such Book or Translation be read by any one, upon pain of the higher Excommunication. I might also observe to you, That the Case of Archbishop Chichely, which you had mentioned immediately before this, is mi∣staken, he doing therein nothing more than what was usual; as also the Case of Archbishop Islip, who decreed in the Case by you mentioned, nothing but what was consonant to the Rules of Canon Law, and the Papal Definitions; it being
a Rule in both, that Simplex Votum impedit matrimonium contrahendum, sed non dirimit contractum. But I fear I have been too long already. I will only put you farther in mind, that when in the following Pages you compare the Archbishops of Can∣terbury preceding to, and succeeding the Reformation, and accuse the former to have minded chiefly great Worldly Pomp and Appearance; but praise the latter for regarding littl or nothing the vain shews of exterior Grandeur and Glory; the Compa∣rison is not altogether just: For Parker and Whitgift (whom you chuse to instance in) lived in as great State, Pomp, and Magnificence, and were attended with as large a Retinue, as most of their Predecessors. And that in your Preface, page 7. instead of an Augustine Monk of Canterbury, should be substituted, a Monk of St. Au∣gustines in Canterbury. And lastly, That Page 11. Edward Howes should (if I mi∣stake not) be changed into Edmund Howes. These, Sir, are the only Errors which I have discovered in your Hi∣story. That the Observation of them may in any measure contribute to the Illustration of your Work, (as I doubt not but your Work will highly con∣tribute to the Information of the Curious, and the Iustification of our Re∣formation) is the Hearty Desire of, SIR, Your most Humble Servant, HEN. WHARTON. Novemb. 13. 1693.
A TABLE OF THE Letters, Instruments, Records, &c. Made use of in this History, and contained in the Appendix to the Memorials of Archbishop CRANMER. With the NUMBER and PAGE under which each may be found, and the PLACE whence Transcribed.   Number. Page. Place. AN Account of Mr. Pole's Book by Dr. Cran∣mer. I. 3 Sir W.H.MSS. Dr. Cranmer, Ambassador with the Emperor, his letter to the King. II. 6 Ibid. A Parcell of Iewels sent from Greenwich to Hampton court to the King. To the receipt of which he set his hand. III. 7 Ibid. The King to Dr. Boner, his Majesties Agent, to declare to the Pope his Appeal from him and his Sentence. IV. 8 Ibid. Cranmer's Protestation at his Consecration. V. 9 Cranm. Reg. Cranmer's Oath taken to the Pope at his Conse∣cration VI. ib. Ibid. Cranmer's Oath to the King for his Tempo∣ralties. VII. 10 Cleop. E. 6. The King's Proclamation for bringing in Sedi∣tious Books. VIII. ib. Cleop. E. 5. Bishop Fisher to Secretary Crumwel, declaring his willingness to swear to the Succession. IX. 13 Cleop. E. 6. Lee Bishop Elect of Litchfield and Coventry, to secretary Crumwel, concerning Bishop Fisher. X. ib. Ibid. The Archbishop to Secretary Crumwel, in behalf of Bishop Fisher, and Sir Thomas More. XI. 14 Ibid. Nix Bishop of Norwich, to Warham Archbishop of Canterbury, for suppressing such as read books brought from beyond Sea. XII. 15 Cleop. E. 5. Archbishop Cranmer to K. Henry, complaining of a Prior in Canterbury, that had preached against him. XIII. 16 Cleop. E. 6.
Cleop. F. 1. The Archbishop to Mr. Secretary Crumwel, con∣cerning his stiling himself Primate of all England. XIV. 19 Cleop. F. 2. The Appeal of Stokesly Bishop of London to the King, against the Archbishop's Visitation. XV. 21 MSS.C.C.C.C. An Inventory of the Cathedral Church of St. Swi∣thins in Winchester, as it was given in by the Prior and Convent, to Crumwel, Secretary of State, and the King's Vicar-General. XVI. 24 Cleop. F. 1. A Reply to the Archbishop, against his Court of Audience. XVII. 28 Ibid. Archbishop Cranmer's Order concerning the Pro∣ctors of the Court of Arches, shewn to be incon∣venient, by a Paper presented to the Parlament. XVIII. 30 Cleop. E. 5. The Archbishop to the L. Crumwel, giving him some account of his Visitation of his Diocess. XIX. 37 Ibid. Richard Grafton, the Printer of the Bible, to the L. Crumwel, complaining of some that intend∣ed to Print the Bible, and therby to spoile his Impression. XX. 38 Cranm. Reg. Archbishop Cranmer to the King, for a Suffragan of Dover. XXI. 40 Ibid. The Archbishop's Letters of Commission to Ri∣chard Suffragan of Dover. XXII. 41 Cleop. E. 5. A Declaration to be read by al Curates upon the Publishing of the Bible in English. XXIII. 42 Ibid. The Answer, or Declaration of Richard Bishop of Chichester, in the presence of the Kings Majesty, against the sixth Reason or Argument of John Lambert, concerning the most holy and blessed Sacrament of the Altar. XXIV. 43 Ex Dudith Or. & Opuse. Tho. Cranmeri Archiep. Cant. Epistola, super Controversiam de coena Domini ortam. XXV. 45 Cleop. E. 5. Part of a Letter from a Member of Parlament, concerning the Transactions of the House, about pssing the Act of the Six Articles. XXVI. 47 Ibid. The Solution of some Bishop to certain Questions about the Sacraments. XXVII. 48 Ibid. The Iudgment of another Bishop upon the afore∣said Questions. XXVIII. 52 Ibid▪ Archbishop Cranmer to Osiander, concerning some abuses in Matrimony among the Germans. XXIX. 54 Ibid. The French Kings Licence to print the English Bible in Paris. XXX. 56 MSS.C C C.C. Three Discourses of Archbishop Cranmer, occa∣sioned upon his review of the Kings Book, in∣titled, The Erudition of a Christian man. XXXI. 57 Ibid▪ Other Discourses of Archbishop Cranmer. XXXII. 62 Ibid. Interrogatories for Dr. London. Dr. Willough∣bies Confession, &c. XXXIII. 63
A Letter prepared for the King to sign, to ratify certain Ecclesiastical Laws. XXXIV. 72   The Bishop of Winchester to Archbishop Cran∣mer, relating to the Reformation of Religion. XXXV. 73 Foxij MSS. The said Bishop to the Duke of Somerset, con∣cerning the Book of Homilies, and Erasmus Paraphrase Englished. XXXVI. 77 Vespas. D. 18. Roger Ascham to Mr. Cecyl, Giving him an acount of a Disputation in S. John's College, Whether the Mass and the Lords Supper be al one. XXXVII. 81 MSS. SirW.H. The Vniversity of Cambridg to the Archbishop. XXXVIII. 83 Ascham. Ep. Richard Smith D. D. his Recantation of his Books. XXXIX. 84 Becon's Rep. Archbishop Cranmer's Answers to the fifteen Ar∣ticles of the Rebels in Devon, Anno 1549. XL. 86 MSS.C.C.C.C. The Archbishops Notes for an Homily against the Rebellion. XLI. 113 Ibid. The Lady Mary to the Councel; Iustifying her self for using the Mass in K. Edwards Minority. XLII. 115 Sir W.H.MSS. The Archbishops Letter to Martin Bucer; Invi∣ting him over into England. XLIII. 116 Buceri Script. Aug. A Catalogue of Books published by Paulus Fagius. XLIV. 117   Dr. Cox, the Chancellor of the Vniversity of Ox∣ford, his Oration at the Conclusion of Peter Martyr's Disputation. [XLIV.] 119 P. Mart. O∣pera. Dr. Treshams Epistle before his Relation of the Disputation between himself and Peter Mar∣tyr, at Oxford. XLV. 121 Foxij MSS. The Sententious Sayings of Master Martin Bu∣cer upon the Lords Supper. XLVI. 124 Ibid. Bishop Hoper to the Clergy of his Diocess of Glocester. XLVII. 133 MS. Privat. Hoper Bishop of Glocester to Sir William Ce∣cyl, Secretary of State. XLVIII. 135 MSS.SirW.H. Another of the same Bishop to the same Person.   136 Ibid. A Popish Rhime fastned upon a Pulpit in K. Ed∣wards reigne. XLIX. 137 Foxij MSS. An Answer to it.   Ibid. Ibid. An old Song of John Nobody.   138 Privat. MS. John a Lasco's Letter from Embden, signifying the dangerous condition they were in, and the Persecutions they expected. L. 139 Sir W.H.MSS. A Lasco's request, that those of his Church might have a Warrant from the Kings Councel, that they might not be disturbed for not coming to their Parish-churches. LI. 141 Ibid. Michael Angelo, Preacher to the Italian Congre∣gation, his complaint against some of his Flock. With a List of their Names. LII. Ibid. Ibid.
Place.   Number. Page. Sir W.H. MSS. Michael Angelo endeavours to appease the Se∣cretary, greatly offended with him for a gross miscarriage. LIII. 143 Ibid. A Lasco to the Secretary to procure the Kings Letters Patents for a French Protestant, to set up a French Printing Press. LIV. 145 Ibid. Valerandus Pollanus, Superintendent of the Strangers Church at Glastenbury, to the Se∣cretary, concerning the State of the Strangers Weavers fixed there. LV. 145 Ibid. The Superintendent to the same, earnestly desiring, that one Cornish might not be set over the stran∣gers there, who had already dealt illy with them. LVI. 147 Ibid. The Superintendent to the same. Giving some ac∣count of the present settlement of their affairs. LVII. 148 Ibid. Mr. John Calvin to the Duke of Somerset, His advise for the rectifying some Abuses in our Church and University; Relating to the Alie∣nation or Misuse of their Revenues. LVIII. 149 MSS. CC.CC. Sir John Cheke to Dr. Parker, Vpon the death of Martin Bucer. LIX. 151 Ibid. Peter Martyr to Bucer, Concerning the Oxford Act, Anno 1550. LX. 152 Ibid. Peter Martyr to Bucer, Concerning their Review of the Book of Common Prayr. LXI. 154 MSS. SirW.H. The Archbishops Letter, to procure Wolf, the Printer, a licence to publish his ook. LXII. 156 Foxij MSS. Articles, whereunto William Phelps, Pastor and Curate of Ciciter, upon good advisement and deliberation, after better knowledg given by Gods grace, hath subscribed. LXIII. Ibid. MSS. SirW.H. The Archbishop to the Lords of the Councel, con∣cerning the Book of Articles of Religion. LXIV. 158 Ibid. The Archbishop nominates certain Persons for an Irish Archbishoprick. LXV. 159 Ibid. The Archbishop to Sir Will. Cecyl, that Mr. Tur∣ner, intended for the Archbishopric of Armagh, was come up to Court. LXVI. 160 Ibid. The Archbishop to the same. Wherin he justifies himself and the rest of the Bishops aainst the charge of Covetousness. LXVII. 161 Ibid. Purchases made by the Archbishop. Extracted out of K. Edwards Book of Sales. LXVIII. 162 MSS. D. Wil. Petyt. An Instrument of the Council, Swearing and sub∣scribing to the Succession, as limited by the King. [LXVIII.] 163 Ibid. The Kings own Writing, directing the Succession.   164 MSS. SirW.H. A Letter of Q. Janes Council to the L. Rich, L. Lieutenant of the County of Essex. LXIX. 164 Foxij MSS. Q. Jane to Sir John Bridges, and Sir Nicolas Poyntz, to raise forces against a Rising in Bucks. LXX. 165
Number. Page. Place. The Counsillors of Q. Jane their Letter to the Lady Mary, acknowledging her Queen. LXXI. 166 MSS. Sir W.H. The Archbishop to Mrs. Wilkinson, persuading her to flee. LXXII. Ibid. Foxes Acts. The Words and Sayings of John Duke of Nor∣thumberland, spoken by him unto the people at the Tower Hil of London, on Tuesday in the forenoon, being 22th. of August, immediate∣ly before his Death. LXXIII. 167 Titus B. 2. Archbishop Cranmers Letter to the Queen, suing for his Pardon in the Lady Janes business. LXXIV. 169 Letters of the Mrt. Cardinal Poles Instructions for his Messenger to Queen Mary. LXXV. 170 Titus B. 2. The Form of the Restitution of a married Priest. LXXV †. 179 Regist. Eccl. Christ. Cant. John Foxes Letter to the Parlament, against re∣viving the Act of the Six Articles. LXXVI. 181 Foxij MSS. An Instrument of the Vniversity of Cambridg, appointing certain of their Members to repair to Oxford, to dispute with Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer there. LXXVII. 182 Ibid. The Vniversity of Cambridge to that of Oxford, relating to the former matter. LXXVIII. 184 Ibid. Cranmers Letter to the Queens Council after his Disputation at Oxon. LXXIX. 186 Foxes Acts. The Lord Legates Commission to the Dean and Chapter of Canterbury, Deputing them to Absolve and Dispense with the Clergy in his stead; and Absolve the Laity. LXXX. 187 Registr. Eccl. Cant. The Lord Legates Instructions to the Bishops, in the performing of his Orders about Absolving their Clergy and Laity. LXXXI. 190 Ibid. An Italian to his Friend concerning Cardinal Pole. LXXXII. 192 Balci Cent. Bradford to Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer, concerning the Freewillers, about 1554. LXXXIII. 195 Martyrs Let∣ters. The Prisoners for the Gospel, their Declaration concerning K Edward his Reformation. LXXXIV. 196 Foxij MSS. John Fox to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Q. Maries time, relating to the Persecution. LXXXV. 197 Ibid. Dr. Ridley, late Bihop of London, to West, formerly his Steward; who had complied with the Romish Religion. LXXXVI. 200 Ibid. John Hopton, Bishop of Norwich, to the Earl of Sussex; giving account of the joy concei∣ved, and Te Deum sung, for the News of the Queens being brought to bed of a Noble Prince. LXXXVII. 203 Tit. B. 2. A Proposition in the Convocation against Resi∣dence. With reasons for the said Propositions, and Remedies against Non-Residence. LXXXVIII. 204 C. C. C. C. MSS. Pole Cardinal Legate, to Archbishop Cranmer; in answer to the Letter he had sent to the Queen. LXXXIX. 206 Foxij MSS.
Place.   Number. Page. MSS Sir W H Archbishop Parker to the Secretary, desiring the Councels Letters, in order to his discovering certain Writings of Archbishop Cranmer. XC. 217 Ibid. Dr. William Mouse, Master of Trinity Hal in Cambridg, his Letter of Thanks to Secretary Cecyl. XCI. 218 Ibid. Justus Jonas to Secretary Cecyl, Concerning the Miseries of Germany, occasioned by the Inte∣rim; and that he might receive the Kings in∣tended Muniicence. XCII. 29 Ibid. Miles Wilson to Secretary Cecyl, lamenting the Spoiles of Schools, Benefices and Hospi∣tals. To which are added his Arguments against this Sacrilege. XCIII. 220 Ibid. Peter Martyr to James Haddon, To procure a Licence from the Court for one of his Auditrs, named Hugh Kirk of Magdalen College Oxon, to preach. XCIV. 227 Ibid. Peter Martyr to Secretary Cecyl, That one who officiated in Dr. Westons place, might receive the Stipend detained from him. XCV. 228 Ibid. John Sleidan to Secretary Cecyl. Advices of the State of Affairs in Germany. XCVI. 229 Ibid. Sleidan to the same. More Advices from Germa∣ny. Desires a Patent for his Stipend granted him by K. Edward VI. XCVII. 230 Ibid. Sleidan to the same. Intelligences concerning the Motions of the Emperor, and the State of the Protestant Princes. XCVIII. 231 Ibid. Sleidan to the same. Advices of the State of the Empire. XCIX. 232 Ibid. Sleidan to Sir John Cheke and Sir William Ce∣cyl; Concerning his Commentaries, which he had sent to K. Edward. Desires them to send him an exact Information of the Business be∣tween K. Henry and Pope Clement. His reso∣lution of continuing his Commentaries, and of Writing the History of the Council of Trent. C. 234 Ibid. Sleidan to Sir William Cecyl; Concerning the Affairs of Germany, and particularly of the Council of Trent. CI. 236 Ibid. artin Bucer to the Secretary, for the speeding of Sleidans business. CII. 238 Ibid. Ralph Morice, the Archbishops Secretary, his supplication to Q. Elizabeth for Prior Wil∣bore's Pension, lately deceased. CIII. 239   A Prologue or Preface made by Thomas Cran∣mer late Archbishop of Canterbury, to the Holy Bible. CIV. 241
Number. Page. Place. Bucer, and other Learned Strangers from Lam∣beth, to Cecyl; To prefer the Petition of some poor French Protestants to the Protector. CV. 250 MSS. Sir W.H. The Archbishop to the Secretary, Concerning a French man, that desired a Patent to translate the Common prayer into French, and print it. CVI. Ibid. Ibid. The Archbishop to the same. Mention of Letters sent by the Archbishop to the Duke of Nor∣thumberland, Excusing his not proceding in a Commission. His Reflexion upon the News. CVII. 251 Ibid. The Archbishop to the same: Signifying his Desire to have the good Wil of the Lord Warden, his Neighbour. CVIII. 252 Ibid. The Archbishop to the same: Desiring Cecyl to enform him of the Cause of Chekes Indict∣ment. CIX. Ibid. Ibid. The End of the Table of Letters, &c.
BOOKS Printed for RICHARD CHISWELL. CEnsura Celebriorum Authorum; sive Tractatus in quo Varia Virorum Doctorum de Claris. Cujusque Seculi Scriptoribus Iudicia Traduntur. Unde Facilimo Negotio Lector Dignoscere qucat quid in sin∣gulis quibusque Istorum Authorum Maxime Memorabile sit & quonam in pretio apud Eruditos seniper Ha∣biti Fuerunt. Opera Thomae Pope-Blunt, Baroniti. Fol. V. Cl. Gulielmi Camdeni, & Illustrium Vrorum ad G. Camdenum Epistole, cum Appendice Varii Argumenti. Accesserunt Annalitita Regni Regis Jacobi I. Apparatus. & Commentarius de Anti∣quitate, Dignitate, & Officio Comitis Marescali Angliae. Praemittitur G Camdeni Vita. Scriptore Thoma mitho, S.T.D. Ecclesiae Anglicanae Presbytero. 4to. Some Remarks upon the Ecclesiastical History of the Ancient Churches of Piedmont. By Peter Allix, D D Treasurer of Sarum. 4to. — his Remarks upon the Ecclesiastical istory of the Ancient Churches of the Al∣bigenses. 4to. A Vindication of Their Majesties Authority to fill the Sees of the Deprived Bishops, in a Letter occasioned by Dr. B —'s Refusal of the Bishoprick of Bath and Wells. 4to. A Discourse concerning the Unreasonableness of a New Separation on Account of the Oths to the Present Government. With an Answer to the History of Passive Obedience, so far as relates to them. 4to. A Vindication of the said Discourse concerning the Unrenablenss of a New Separati∣on, from the Exceptions made against it in a Tract called, [A Brief Answer to the said Di∣scourse, &c] 4to. Geologia: Or  Discourse concerning the Earth before the Deluge; wherein the Form and Properties ascribed to it, in a Book, entituled [The Theory of the Earth], are expected against; and it is made appear, That the Dissolution of that Earth was not the Cause of the Universal Flood. Also a new Explication of that Flood is attempted. By Erasmus Warren, Rector of Worlington in Suffolk. 4to. The Present State of Germany. By a Person of Quality. 8vo. Memoirs relating to the Royal Navy of England for Ten Years, determined December 1688. By Samuel Ppys, Esq 8vo. Memoirs of what past in Christendom, from the War begun 1672. to the Peace conclu∣ded, 1679. 8vo. Disquisitiones Critic de Variis per Diversa Loa & tempora Bibliorum Editionibus. Quibus Acce∣dt Castigatines Theologi Cujusdam Parificusis ad Opasculum Is. Vossii de Sybillinis Oraculis, & Ejus∣dm Responsiem ad Objectiones npere Critica Sacra. 4to. Agla Sacra, sive Collectio Historiarum Auquits Scriptarum de Archicpiscopis & Episcopis Angliae a prima Fidi Christianae susceptione ad Annum 1540. in Duobus Volaminbus per Henricum Whar∣tonum Fol. Jacobi Usserii Armachani Archipiscopi Historia Dogmatica Controversiae inter Orthodoxos & Pon∣tificios de scripturis & Socris Vernaculis; nunc Primn Edita Accsserunt jsdem Dissertationes due de Pseudo-Dionysii scriptis, & de Epistola ad Lacdicos antac mediae. Discripsis, Digssit, & noris at∣qe Alavio Lopleavit Henricus Wharton, A. M. Rev in Christo Pat. ac Dom. Archiepisc. Can∣ a sacris Domestics. 4to. 1690. Siptorum Eclesiasticorum Historia Literaria a Christo nato uque ad sndran xiv. facili methodo  de Vito Illor as Reus G. siis, de , Dogmatibus, Elogio, Stylo; de Scriptis Ge∣is,  Supposittiis, meditis, Deperduis, Fragmentis; Deque Varsis Oprion Editimubus per∣speue Agitur. Accdunt Scriptores Gentiles, Christae Religionis Oppugnatores; & Cujusvis Seculi Brevarian, Inserusitr sais Lo is Vtvm aliquot Opuscula & Fragmenta, tum Graec an Lativa . Praenussa demque Prolegomena, qbu plurima ad Antiqtatis Ecclesiasticae Studium . Opu indicibus necesarus Istructum, Authore Gulielmo Cave, SS. Theol Pro∣j. . Canonio Windesoensi Accedit ab Alia manu Appndix ab meunte Secula xiv. ad Annum usque MDXVII. Fol. Rusworth's Historical Collections. The Third Part in Two Volumes. Containing the Principal Mtters which happened from the Meeting of the Parliament, Nov. 3. 1640. to the end of the Year 1644. Wherein is a particular Account of the Rise and Progress of the Ci∣vil War to that Period. Fol. A Discourse of the Pastoral Cre. By Gilbert Burnt, Lord Bishop of Sarum, 1692. Dr.  Conant's Sermons. 1693. A Discourse of the Government of the Though By Geo. Tully Sub-Dean of. York, 8vo, 1694. Origo : Or a Treatise of the Origine of Laws, and their Obliging Power; as also o their great Variety; and why some Laws are immutable, and some not, but may suffer change, or cease to be, or be suspended or abrogated. In Seven Books. By George Dawson. Fol. 1694.
