W41 13091471 97365
A DISCOƲERIE OF THE BEASTS. Being AN EXPOSITION OF THE XIII. Chapter of the Revelation of JESUS CHRIST. Wherein All true Christians (yet in Babylon) are admonished to come out: And the Anti-christians fore-told what their plagues will be. By I. W. Revel. 16. 15. Behold, I come as a thiefe, blessed is he that watcheth and keepeth his garments, lest he walke naked and they see his shame. Printed in the year M. DC. XLI.
CHRISTIAN READER. AMong the many excellent helps which the Lord at this present time hath given unto his Elect, for to discover the Mystery of Iniquity: and to direct them in the way which Ieadeth to eternall life, this little Treatise is a choice and chiefe one. Thou art therefore desired to peruse the same with an understan∣ding and impartiall heart: and so doing I doubt not (through Gods blessing on they labor) but thou shalt reap much comfort and good thereby. I have set it forth for the publike good, and do desire the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, that it may prove so every where: even a means to raze down the false Chur∣ches, and to help forward the buildlng up of Gods House. And so prayes he who is thine, if thou be Christs, I C.
AN INTERPRETATION OF THE XIII. CHAPTER OF THE REƲELATION OF JESUS CHRIST. THe Eternall (whose power is over all) from the begin∣ning hath put enmitie be∣tween the Serpent and the Woman,Gent. 3 15. and between the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the Serpent, whereupon it hath come to passe in all ages, that the seed of the woman hath laboured to break the Serpents head; that is, to destroy his
works, tread him under foot, and triumph in victory over him: He on the contrarie hath laboured as earnestly to resist God; to deceive the Nations, and to bring all into condemnation and destruction with with himself. And amongst the manifold waies and means, which Satan hath devi∣sed and practised, to manifest his malice a∣gainst God and his Saints, none hath been more dangerous, nor more availeable to further iniquity, and cause destruction; then the Antichristian generation, which under the title of the Church and Spouse of Christ, and Ministers of the Gospell, have corrupted the earth, and brought the Nations into miserable bondage and sla∣verie. In this 13 Chapter is declared the state, policy, and proceeding of the Antichristi∣an Dominion and Kingdom, as the same was signified and foreshewed to Iohn the servant of Jesus Christ, in a threefold forme, First, by a Beast rising up out of the Sea, having 7 heads, and 10 hors, ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Secondly, by a Beast comming up out of the earth, having two hoes like
the Lamb, but spake like the Dragon, vers. 11, 12, 13, 14, Thirdly, by an image of the first beast, which the second beast caused them that dwelt on the earth to make, as in vers. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. As the Dominion of the Medes, Persi∣ans and Grecians (which persecuted and destroyed the holy people of God, the Iews) were signified and foreshewed to Daniel in a vision, under the formes of se∣verall beasts, according to the qualities of those Dominions; so here the Antichristi∣an dominion which persecuted the Chur∣ches and people of Christ, was foreshew∣ed to Iohn under the formes of such Beasts as are here described, whereby we may learne that as reason and judgement is not to be expected in a beast, so equitie and right is not to be expected in this domi∣nion, but the contrarie. Concerning the first of these beasts, John sayth. That as I stood upon the sea sand. I saw a beast rise up out of the sea hauing seven heads and 10 hornes, and upon his hornes 10. Crownes: and upon his heads the names of blas∣phemy. And the beast which I saw was like unto a Leopard, and his feet as the feet of a
Beare, and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion. and the dragon gaue him his power, and his seat, and great authoritie. That by this first beast was signified and represented some state of people and body politique, I presume no reasonable man exercised in the Scriptures will deny, be∣cause (as it hath been sayd) it is there to be seene that such states and dominions as God hath used as rods and scourges to chastise and correct his Church and people withall, have been represented by beasts. States and dominions they are of two sorts, either Ecclesiastical or Civil, but of which sort the State here meant is, there hath been and is great opposition. Many understand it to be the Romane Empire, to which I cannot consent, because the Romane Em∣pire is ordeyned of God, and is therefore a lawfull Dominion, But the Dominion here represented, is sayd to be from the dragon that old serpent the Deuill, who is sayd to giue his power and his throne and great au∣thoritie unto it, and therefore unlawfull: neither can I conceave it to be any other ciuil dominion for the same reason. But to be short I vnderstand it to be an Ecclesia∣sticall State or Dominion, and in perticular
that Dominion which is called the Catho∣like Church representatiue, consisting of the Prelacy and Preisthood of many Nations, as Patriarches, Cardinalls, Archbishops, Bi∣shops, with divers other elected persons, who being called and gathered into Coun∣sells or Synods, (usually called generall Counsells) did usurpe and take on them the office of Iesus Christ in making lawes and Canons, erecting Courts, instituting of∣fices and officers in matters of Religion, as for the government of the Church and for the worship of God) to be of all men observed and obeyed. These generall Counsels (or as the Catholicks call it) the Catholicke Church representatiue, haue challenged and exercised spirituall autho∣ritie and dominion, According to the text, ouer all kindreds tongus and nations. By their laws and canons they guided and go∣verned them as one uniuersall or Catho∣licke Church, & made them also to observe their decrees and commaundements for do∣ctrine, this thay haue done both before and also since the Pope was exalted to his dig∣nitie, as all histories of the Church do testify, So that it hath been and is a great question among the Catholicks whither
the authoritie of the Pope, or the Catho∣lick Church in cases of Religion be the greater. And whereas it is said in the 12. verse that the second beast exercised all the power of the first Beast before him, there∣by is confirmed the trueth of this expositi∣on. For the second Beast being the Pope as hereafter is shewed (hath exercised the whole power of the Catholick Church or generall counsels, and not of any other state or Dominion. Further that this is the first beast here pre∣sented that which followeth (through Gods helpe) shall make manifest and apparant. But before I doe proceed I desire the rea∣der to observe that I do not condemne all vse of counsells and Synods, but doe hold that divers churches may lawfully be as∣sembled together, to consult and advise of matters concerning Religion, and the wor∣ship of God, for their instruction & infor∣mation of their Iudgements, and so a good and holy vse may be thereof. But that any counsells haue such power over the church of Christ, as to impose vpon them their cômandements for doctrine, and usurp the goverment of the Churches, and to rule and reigne over them by their lawes and Ca∣nons,
and prescribe rules and formes how God will be worshipped, as these generall counsells haue done, that I doe deny, as be∣ing contrarie to the perfecton of the holy Scriptures and the practise of the Apostles and Elders of the-Church of Ierusalem,2 Tim. 3.17 Deut. 4.2 Reve. 22, 18 Act. 5, 10, who being assembled together did professe it to be a tempting of God to lay such a yok on the disciples necks, as the observing of the Iewish ceremonies, which being vnlaw∣full to do, it is uuch more vnlawfull to de∣vise and impose any other. And therefore the sayd assembly of the Apostles & Elders concluded to lay no greater burden vpon the disciples, then to abstaine from such ne∣cessary things as either were simply evil in them selues, as fornication,Act. 15, 8 19, &c. or else euill in respect of offence, as meate offered to Idols, blood and things strangled. Now to proceed. first it is said of this Beast. That hee did rise up out of the sea, By his rising vp was foreshewd that the Antichristian policie should arise from a poore and meane estate to great riches and honour in the world, which we and for∣mer generations have seene to the utter∣most fulfilled. For dayes there were when the Churches of Christ both Ministers and
people were hated, despised, and perse∣cuted in the world; spoiled of their goods, made gazing stocks and wonders, and af∣flicted with all kinde of cruelty, as histo∣ries both sacred and humane do abundant∣ly specifie and declare. The Apostle Paul saith of himself and his fellow-bretheren the Ministers of the Gospell, that they were as men appointed to death: and in the account of the world, as the filth, re∣fuse, and of-scouring of all things. But since this beastly generation hath succee∣ded the Church, and under the titles of Ministers of the Gospell, and the Bishops ouer Gods people, have found meanes by little and little to rise up, and to exalt themselves over the Nations, and to bring the multitudes, and peoples, and Nations, and Tongues, under their Iurisdiction, rule and Dominion,Rev 18 3 2 Thes. 2. 7. and they have so risen up, that they are become the great men of the earth, and are waxed rich through the a∣bundance of their delicacies. This my∣sterie of iniquity was working in the Apo∣stles time, for there were then crept into the Church those that desired worldly pompe and promotion, and were not con∣tented with the portion of the Lords He∣ritage,
but their ambitious desires could not then be satisfied, there was a let in the way that hindered it, which lets being re∣moved, their purposes (soone after) took effect, fitly therefore is this generation said to rise up (in respect of those whose suc∣cessours they boast themselves to be.) The former hold no certaine dwelling places, but were exposed to hunger, thirst, cold, nakednesse, buffetings, &c. But these lat∣ter have their Lordly Houses, warlike Castles, and Princelike Palaces, they have their Rents, Revenues, and abundance of riches, in great excesse, they are pompously arrayed in stately Robes and rich apparell, they rule like Lords over the people, and have power to aflict all that will not beare the yoke of their Dominion, thus is this generation risen vp and exalted as all may see that list to minde it. The Place from whence this Beast is said to rise up, is the sea, The naturall sea wee know is the gathering together of many waters, Gen. 1.9. 10. A Like thing must that be out of which this beast was to rise, But in the 17. Chapter. Multi∣tudes, and nations, peoples, and Tongues, are resembled by waters, therefore the
gathering together of such into one body politike, may rightly be resembled by the Sea. Thus then the truth standeth, By the rising up of this Beast out of the Sea, was foreshewed, that those many waters (that is, the people, and multitudes, and Nati∣ons, and Tongues, not onely under the Romane Empire: but most nations and people of the World) being gathered into one Sea, or Ecclesiasticall State, should breed and bring forth this Monster. For they being of two contrary sorts, the seed of the Serpent, and the seed of the Woman, Children of the Kingdom, and children of the wicked; unto the one sort the Word of God (in the administra∣tion thereof) is the savour of life unto life, unto the other sort it is the savour of death unto death. The one sort feare God, and will obey him rather then man; The other feare and reverence the arme of flesh, more then they do the living God. These (as light and darknesse) being contrary one to another; the one being of Christ, the o∣ther of Belial; how therefore should they in things concerning God and Christ, Faith and Religion, agree together? Those which be of God, cannot but
witnesse against those that be of the world, because their deeds are evill. Those which are of the world, are heady, high-minded, proud boasters, wise in their own conceit, and therefore scorne to be rebu∣ked, and hate to be reformed. These be∣ing together in the world as Wheat and Tares in one field; and as Sheep and Goats in one Flock; the true end of the admi∣nistration of the Word of God had been to call and separate the one from the o∣ther, the precious from the vile, beleevers from infidels. But notwithstanding, this generation thought it to be wisdom to take a contrary course, namely, to bring all people of all sorts to be one Church, and likewise unto uniformity in Religion. And because it could not be effected by the Word of God (that sword of the Spi∣rit) they procured the help of worldly governours to bring it to passe by their power and command. By which device and policie these many waters, that is, the Nations and people have been gathered into one Church, and Ecclesiasticall body politike, here represented by the Sea, and have been brought to use all one order or worship, service, and government.
But this conformitie not being procu∣red through love, but constrained by feare, was but an humane devise, and worldly po∣licy, and no divine Institution, and there∣fore could not be upholden, maintained, and continued by the Word of God, and the administration of a serviceable Mini∣stery; but by the over-ruling power of a Lordly Prelacie, whereupon it was thought meet that Synods or Counsels of the chiefest of the Prelates and Cleargie of divers Dominions should be gathered together to make Laws and Canons, which all men should be constrained by penall Laws to observe and yeeld obedience un∣to, and so peace and unitie might be pre∣served and kept amongst them. And in short time it came to passe, that whatso∣ever these Synods or Counsels did agree upon, and set down, (how false soever) was to be held Canonicall, and those that contradicted the same, were therefore cast out and condemned as Heretikes. This was the manner and the occa∣sion of the rising of this Beast out of this turbulent Sea. And here by the way observe, 1.17 That every good giving, and per∣fect gift is from above, from the Father of
lights: But this Beast is from the Sea be∣neath, not from above, and therefore not belonging to the kingdome of Christ, But an adversary and enimie thereof. Of this Beast it is said, that he had 7, heads, a thing which is monstrous in nature, And therefore by this wasforeshewed that the dominion represented by this beast should be a monstrous dominion. Concerning these heads, let this be considered, That the whole state or socie∣ty of the Antichristian Sea, is of two sorts of people; the one sort they call the Cleargie, the other sort the Layetie. Of these; the Cleargie are as heads and guides to direct and go before, and the Laietie as the body, or rather the tayle, to follow after. Again, by the same policy, their Cleargie are sorted into seven orders or degrees, namely (to speake in their lan∣guage) 1. Iamtores sets ostiarij. 2. Lecta∣res. 3. Exorcistie, 4. Acolithi. 5. Sub∣diaconi. 6. Diaconi. 7. Sacerdotes. These are the seven orders of the Antichristian Cleargie. As for Popes, Cardinals, Pa∣triarches, Arch-bishops, Bishops, Arch∣deacous, &c. they are titles of Dignity, and not of order. For the Pope is but a
Priest concerning his orders, and when he stands at the Altar and faith Masse, he doth that as Priest, and not as a Pope, and so of all other degrees. This considered, it may well bee said of the Anti-christian Syna∣gogue and State, that it is as a Monster with seven heads. As for the Ministers which God hath ordained to be in his Church, they are first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly Teachers, &c. 1 Cor. 12.28, &c. See also, Rom. 12.6, 7, 1. & Eph. 4, 11, 12, 13. And these onely were given for the gathering together of the Saints, for the work of the Ministery, and for the edification of the body of Christ. Not some to have a bunch of Keys, with a charge of the doors of this or that Temple or Ca∣thedrall Church; Another to have a book to read to the people things which neither he nor they did understand. A third to have a Book of Conjurations or Charmes, with charge to read them, or say by heart, to such as were distracted of their wits, or possessed with Divels, and to put their hands upon them. A fourth, to have a Ta∣per or Wax-candle, with a Candlestick to carry before the Priests and Deacons, in doing their service.
A fift, to recive of the people obla∣tions and offerings, and to deliver them to the Deacon to carry to the Altar, to read the Epistle, and to stand by the Preist while he was saying the Masse, A sixth to be the Bishops spie and in∣telligencer to informe him of such as be irregular, and observe not their orders, to read the Gospell, attend the Priest at the Altar, &c. A seventh, to consecrate the Hoast, as they call it, and then to offer it as a sacri∣fice propitiatory for the quick and dead. These are not they which God hath gi∣ven to be in the Church; But these are they whereof the Antichristian Cleargie consisteth, for whosoever is one of that Cleargie, is one of these seven orders, be he Pope, Prelate, or else whatsoever, and to note and foreshew this point of policy, this Beast which IOHN saw had seven heads. If any shall thinke this to be a vaine, frivolous, and strange interpretation to understand, by the seven heads of the Beast, these seven order of the Cleargie, as thinking those heads to betoken things
of greater note and importance: Let such consider, what account and reckoning is made of such persons as have received the Sacraments of Orders, and holy ton∣sure in the kingdome of the Beast, and they shall finde the interpretation not im∣pertinent, but very agreeable. For a time there was since the writing of this pro∣phesie,Vide Con∣cil, Matis∣conen, se∣cundum. Can. 9.10 when the meanest shrimp that was within these holy Orders (as they call them) was held to be of that dignity, that the chiefest and worthiest secular Iudge in a Kingdom was held unwor∣thy to judge or censure them for any trespasse or fact, how notorious, wick∣ed, and manifest soever, because they had received holy Tonsure, and were thereby consecrated and set apart unto God, to be his portion and heritage, and to pray for the people, and therefore were ex∣empted from all secular jurisdiction and power, such was their dignity accounted to be, and still is, where that kingdom pre∣vaileth, and hath the dominion: yea, ever in this Land that quarrell hath cost the King his Crown: as it is to be seene in the Histories of the Reign of King IOHN and not his Crown onely, but his life
also. Now if the meanest of them be above the dominion of any King or se∣cular Iudge, and secular Iudges be the heads of the people, whom God hath appointed to beare rule over them, well may these be said to be as heads in the kingdom of the Beast, wherein these shavelings are holden to be so holy and high in dignity and degree. As this Beast which Iohn saw had seven heads, so likewise it had ten hornes, whereby was foreshewed, that as the Kings of the Medes and Persians were shewed and represented to Daniel, by the two hornes of the Beast which he saw in his vision, so the Kings of many Kingdomes should be as garders and defenders of the Antichristian king∣dom and state. And that this Scripture hath been ful∣filled to the uttermost by the Kings of the Nations, is so manifest, that none can be ignorant of it, that are of judge∣ment and experience. And it was just with the Lord to make the Kings of the earth vassals to this Beast, because they re∣ceived not the love of the truth, but took pleasure in urighteousnesse; they would
not forsake their sins to live godlily, righteously, and soberly (as all must do, that will attaine salvation) but they would live after their lusts, and for their sins they would make satisfaction by building of Churches and Monasteries, &c. and endowing them with Lands, Rents, and other Revenews, by means whereof those which traded like Merchants in those ma∣ny waters, the kingdom of the Beast grew rich and wealthy, and became the great men of the earth. Furthermore, John faith of the Beast that he saw, that it was like a Leopard, &c. By the resemblance and likenesse of a Leopard was signified that this Beast should be foule and full of spots, as is shewed in the 18 Chapter: Babylon is become the habitation of Divels, and the hold of foule spirits, and the Cage of every unclean and hatefull Bird. The filthinesse of this Beast is apparant, in that he doth by force and Armes compell all sorts of wicked and ungodly people to be of his society, and refuseth none but the godly, therefore fitly was he thus prefigured. Secondly, by the quallity and disposi∣tion of the Leopard, was signified that
this Generation should be subtile and crafty in getting their prey. They boast themselves to be the Church and Spouse of Christ; but if it be so, whence then had they that infinite store and abundance of worldly wealth and riches, wherewith they exceed in deliciousnesse of living? This was not the condition of Christ and his Disciples, the Lord himselfe had not whereon to lay his head, but in that respect was more destitute then Foxes which have holes, and then Birds which have nests: his Disciples wanted gold and silver, and had no certaine dwelling place; whence therefore had this Ge∣neration their Lands, Livings, and Lordships? Their Castles, Mannors, Houses, and Princely Palaces? It will be said of the donation and gift of Em∣perours, Kings, and other great States, and of the charitable devotion of all sorte of people: But how were people brought to be so full handed to this generation? To bring this about, much slight, craft, and nimblenesse of with was used; first, people were made to believe, that what they gave to the Church, was to the maintenance of the Ministery of the
Gospell, and for the comfort and reliefe of the poore, and therefore should be a sacrifice so well pleasing to God, and me∣ritorious, as that it should receive great reward at his hands, herewith the mindes of religious and devout people was so much moved, that they thought nothing too much to give to the Church, by means whereof Churches began to grow rich. Secondly, people were made to believe that the worshiping of Images and Re∣licks of Saints, and building of Churches, Chappels, Oratories, &c. and endowing them with Lands, Tenements, Parsonage and Vicarage houses, &c. was an effe∣ctuall way to have favour with the Saints, and to procure their praiers and interces∣sion for them: By these and such like means this wylie and crafty generation deluded the people, and made themselves rich, and robbed Christ of his honour, who onely is our Advocate to God. And furthermore, they gathered in heaps of wealth, by Masses, Pilgrimages, Pursse-penance, Offerings, and such like Merchandises, wherein their subtilty and craft was prefigured by a Leopard; a Beast subtile by nature, whose pro∣perty
is to lie in waite for her prey, and slilie to catch it as the Cat doth the Mous and in that respect doth well resemble the Antichristian Clergie, that subtill genera∣tion. But further it is added, that the feete of this Beast were as the feete of a Beare. The Leopard is more nimble to catch then the Beare, but the Beare is more strong and eager to hold fast that which he hath seased vpon, then is the Leopard▪ both these properties this generation hath, nimble to catch and greedy to hold, they catch by slight, But hold by force. and therefore in catching resemble the Leo∣pard, but in fast holding the feete of a Beare. To this it is added, that the mouth of this Beast was as the mouth of a Lion. And by this another propertie of the Anti∣christian Clergie was foreshewed, for as the Lion when he hath taken his prey roa∣reth vpon it, at whose roaring the Beasts tremble: So this generation being thus exalted and made rich, and have gotten their prey, they terrifie the small Beasts of the Forrests, roaring with curses, and excommunications against, be he Prince
or Pesant, that shall presume to part stakes with them, or meddle with their prey, or diminish their portion, but an Egge or an Onion. That these be the properties of this Generation needs no proof, it is ma∣nifest by daily experience. Here therefore we may learne what to esteem and judge of the Antichristian Cleargie, together with those Multi∣tudes, People, Nations, and Tongues, out of which they have sprung, and over which they are set and supported; name∣ly, that they are a monstrous and beastly Generation, excelling in craft, cove∣tousnesse, pride, cruelty, and all ini∣quity; and therefore not to be esteemed, as they boast themselves to be a holy Catholike Church, and Spouse of Christ, which cannot erre, &c. And by this we may see how lamentably the Nations have been deluded and led into errour and ungodlinesse, by their guides and leaders. Now it followeth, that unto this Mon∣ster the Dragon gave his power, and his Throne, and great authority. Here is declared of whom the Prelates and Clergie have received their spirituall Lordships, power, authority, and juris∣diction,
to devise and make spirituall Laws and Canons, to erect spirituall Courts, and create Officers to beare rule, and exercise dominion over the Nations, even from the Divell: they have not any lawfull authority from God, but an usur∣ped authority from the Divell, whose instruments they are, to advance his kingdom, and to persecute the Saints, which obey God rather then men, And here we may observe that they are rightly called spirtuall Lords, be∣cause originally they proceed from that prince that ruleth in the aire, the spirit that worketh in the children of unbeliefe▪ but withall, in stead of spirituall Lords, Laws, Courts and Officers, call them spirituall wickednesses, and so we give them their right titles: and being such, if we will fight the good fight of faith, we must by witnessing what they be, wrastle against them, and not submit unto them, but stand fast in that liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free, and not be intangled with any yoke of bon∣dage: and that we may wrastle and pre∣vaile, we must take unto us the whole Ar∣mour of God, Ephes. 6.
Further, Iohn saith, that he saw one of the heads of the Beast as it were wounded to death, and his deadly wound was healed, and all the world wondred after the Beast. By this Head, which was as it were wounded to death, was signified the re∣viving of Priesthood, the mysterie whereof, in few words, is this. The wor∣kers of iniquity in this Antichristian king∣dom, having ordained this order of mini∣stery, called Priesthood (whether it were in imitation of the Iews, or Heathen, it is doubt∣full) but certain it is, that because it wan∣ted externall sacrifices, it came short both of the Iewish Priesthood, and also of the Hea∣then, so that it was a lame and wounded Priesthood, and was not respected. In time it came to passe that they found out a sa∣crifice (as is to bee seene in their Masse-book) which was the transubstantiating of Bread into Wine, into the very Body and Blood of Christ, really and substan∣tially (as they use to speak and teach) and being so transubstantiated to offer it up unto God, a sacrifice propitiatory both for quick and dead. Thus the wounded head of Priesthood was cured and revi∣ved, and so became the worlds wonder,
as now it followeth to be declared, accor∣ding as Iohn here witnesseth: And all the world wondred after the Beast. That is, the people of the Na∣tions having this Priesthood set over them, and commended unto them to be of such power and dignity, as that they could make them a visible God, not one∣ly to behold with their eyes, and look upon, but also to eate, and that their Maker and Redeemer, to their everla∣sting salvation: And being so effectu∣ally deluded, as that they beleeved these lies, hereupon they wondred, and fol∣lowed the Beast. Well might they wonder to see bread, and taste bread, where was no bread; and to see wine, and taste wine, where was no wine (for so were they made to believe) and to eate flesh, and drink bloud, and yet neither to see nor take flesh nor bloud: this was a wonder to wonder at; and who would not follow him for a guide, that had power to worke such wonders? But they did not onely follow the Beast, as the Iews did Christ, when they saw his miracles, But they worshipped the Dragon which gave power unto the Beast, and
they worshipped the Beast, saying, who is like unto the Beast? Who is able to make warre with him? To worship, is to heare and obey; and by worshipping the Dragon was shewed, that they wholly addicted themselves to be directed and ruled by the Beast, whom the Dragon used as his instrument to work his will, and to whom he had given authority and power to that end: thus originally they worshiped the Divell. Secondly, they worshipped the Beast, as being the instrument of the Di∣vell, and they became subjects in all things obedient unto the Beast, as being of such holinesse and truth, as that it could not erre, nor deceive others, and of such pow∣er, as what they loosed on earth, was loosed in heaven; and what they bound in earth, was bound in heaven; and therefore such a power as had no match or peere, so that they boasted and said of it, Who is like un∣to the Beast? As David considering the power and wonderfull workes of God, saith; Who is like unto the Lord? So do the Nations boast of this Beast, saying: Who is like unto the Beast? And further they said of him, Who is able to make warre with him? As if they should say,
This our holy Mother hath power to ex∣communicate, and deliver to Satan, all (of what estate, condition, degree, soever they be) that will not heare her voice, beare her yoke, and be ruled by her: Who therefore is able to make war with her? that is, make his party good against this our holy Mother. Of such admiration was this Beast in the earth; thus hath the world thought, and spoken of her. And moreover, there was given unto this Beast a mouth, speaking great things, and blasphemies, and power was given him to make 42 moneths. As the mouth is the means and instru∣ment whereby men do declare their mindes, so this Beast had a mouth to de∣clare and utter her minde; by which mouth was signified a ministery of false prophets, and lying spirits, namely, Do∣ctours, School-men, Monkes, Fryers, and all sorts of their Preachers, who teach for doctrines the commandements of the Beast, and declare and utter the minde and will of the Beast, as being equall to Gods Word, this their Canons, Laws, Books and Monuments, do mani∣festly witnesse.
The effect of that which this mouth ut∣tereth, is noted to be great things, and blasphemies. They boast of this Beast, that she is the holy Catholike Church Militant, the Mother of all rrue belee∣vers: the chaste Spouse of Christ, the Pillar and ground of Truth, that it can∣not erre, &c. And that all which will have God to be their Father, must have her to be their Mother. Finally, that out of her lap and communion, there is no salvation. These and many other such great things speaketh the mouth of this Beast, which are indeed great things, and being so spoken, are great blasphemies. For is it not great blasphemie to call that Holy, which is most abominable? To call her the Mother of all true Beleevers, which is the mother of fornications, and of all abominations? To call that the Pillar and ground of Truth, which hath corrupted the earth with her errours and fornications, and caused all Nations to drink of the wine of the wrath thereof? To say there is no salvation but in her fellowship, whose end and judgement is to go to destruction? Beware of false Prophets, and teachers of lies, for such
are the mouth of this Beast. And it is further to be minded, that it is said of this Beast, that the mouth which she had, was given her; for had this Beast no more to maintaine this mouth, then she hath of her own by discent and heritage, she could not have so many to speak for her as she hath: But Emperous and Kings, Princes and Nobles, and other great sin∣ners, became benefactours to this Beast, giving unto her Lands and Tenements, Rents and Revenews, to maintaine this mouth to utter great things, and blasphe∣mies, and more then this, Power was given him to act, or make, two and forty moneths. For the better understanding of this point, let this be considered: In the Anti∣christian kingdom they have a rule how to proceed in every cause, but not given them of God, but of their own making, which they commonly call the Canon Law; concerning which Law, here we may learne by whom it was made, and how long it was in making. These Ma∣kets usurp the name of the Church of Christ, but the true Church is the King∣dom of Christ, and being the Kingdom of Christ, it hath him onely for Law∣giver,
they therefore which under the ti∣tle of the Church presume to make laws, are fitly and worthily resembled by a beast, for what is more vnreasonable then for those whose greatest dignity, glory and happines, consisteth in hearing, obeying, and administring of gods word, to fall from this, and Lucifer-like to exalt and oppose themselves against their Maker, as though they were wiser and iuster then God: and to adde unto his Testament Which is suficient to instruct us in all Wis∣dom, and to make the man of God per∣fect in every good worke: and to take from the same Testament at their pleasure which is not lawfull to do to any mans Testament, without great offence and in∣iustice, as the Apostle sheweth, Ga. 3.15 yet thit is the way wherein those great doers, the authors of the Canon Law haue walked. It is said of those Actors, that Power was given them, &c. Where first we may observ, that of themselves they had not this power, for then it could not haue beene said to be given them, but given them it was; it is therefore to be conside∣red, Who was the giver: Not Christ he gave his disciples no power to make Laws,
but gave them charge to teath belivers to observe all things whatsoever he had com∣manded them, it is certain therefore that this power was given them, not by God but by men: namely by Kings and Princes, for the states and degrees of men conside∣red, it is plaine, that none can give power to make Lawes but such as be Soveraignes; by such therefore this power to make Lawes was given unto this Beast. But what should move Soveraignes to give power to Bishops and Ministers to make Lawes for the Church? Nothing verily but blind devotion; for they being ignorant of God and of his Word, thought it the best way to keep peace and vnity in the Church. Whereas indeed it was the cause of strife and dissention, and at length by that meanes iniquity was established for a Law, and Gods Word wholy reiected and cast aside as vnmeet for Lay men to vse. Now as in all lawfull proceedings, Prin∣ces are Gods ministers, in Gods stead vnto their subiects and people, so in giuing this power to this Beast, they are the Dragons ministers, and instruments. Whereas it is said that power was given unto the Beast to make, but it is not noted what should
be made, it argueth that the things made are of that nature and qualitie that they are not worthy of any name, the makers them∣selves use to call their Acts, Canons, Consti∣tutions and Lawes, but falfly, for if they were such indeed, then men might have some good vse of them, but that no man can have, therefore it is but falshood and deceit so to name them: It is like the cal∣ing of one carved Image, S. Peter, another S, Paul, another S. Iohn &c. that is to name things that they be not, and that is to lie. In that it is said, that power was given unto the beast to make 12. Moneths, It sheweth that the Beasts time is limited, and seeing that the time is limited, we must finde that the time of making of the Ca∣tholike Church agreeth with this stint, be∣fore we can be sure that it is the Beast, here represented, wherefore consider that the ecclesiastical state began to make about the yeare of our Lord, 304. (the Ancyran coun∣sell being the first, whose constitutions tooke the effect and force of Law, (And made not an end of making vntill the year 1564. the Counsell of Trent being the last wherein the Beast acted the last act of this
making, and fulfilled the measure of that iniquitie, and therefore is now to receaue judgment & condemnation from the Lord, as is hereafter in this prophesie declared, So that if we account a yeare for a day, and thirtie dayes for a month, it will amount to 1260, dayes which is the just sum of 42. moneths, that this Beast was a making, which is a strong argument, that by this Beast was signified the ecclesiasticall estate or Catholicke Church, as is shewed before, page 2. Further it is said of the Beast, that he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven. In that this Beast, by the ministery of false Prophets and Teachers, as by her mouth hath seduced the Nations, and made them believe, That God by the ministery of his holy Apostles and Pro∣phets, hath not left us a sure rule suf∣ficient rule of faith, in the holy Scrip∣tures, but that the want thereof must be supplied with unwritten verities, the wri∣tings of Ancient Fathers, determinations of Counsels, and the Popes Decretals, o∣therwise all people would run into confu∣sion,
it may truly be said, that she hath opened her mouth untoblasphemy against God, First the eternall who hath created all things, and for whose wills sake all things are and were created, To be but a rude and grosse beginner of a worke, which he hath left and given up for vaine man to finish and make perfect. Second∣ly, if there be particular laws left out of the Scriptures, for want of which all peo∣ple would run into confusion, then God hath not shewed himselfe to be a God of order. Thirdly, the World of God is not sufficient to make the man of God perfect, in every good work, as the Apo∣stles saith. But thus to think, is a horrible errour. Thus to speak, is wicked blas∣phemy, and thus to teach, is hellish ini∣quity. For how will it stand with the glory of God, and of our Lord Iesus Christ, not to give unto his people a per∣fect Law, and sure Testimony, where∣unto they might trust, and wherein they might rest and live by faith, but must de∣pend upon other men, to see as it were with their eyes, & not with their own, and so hold their faith, in respect of other mens persons, to belieue as they believe, &c.
as though Gods people (their Leaders ex∣cepted) were not reasonable creatures, but as beasts without understanding: But blessed be our God, we have a sure Word of the Prophets, which is as a light shi∣ning in a darke place, whereunto we shall do well if we take heed. Gods people have no need of unwritten verities, mens precepts and traditions; They have surer Lights to walk by, then the writings of the School-men, and other Writers of ancient times; They have surer Rules, and righter Testimonies, wherby to decide and end controversies and doubts, then the deter∣mination of Counsels, and Popes decrees, and they which speak to the contrary, open their mouth to balspheme against God. Concerning blaspheming the Name of God, amongst other attributes or titles whereby he is set forth unto us, he is cal∣led the Holy one of Israel, and the High Priest in Israel did beare this inscription upon his forehead graven in gold, Holi∣nesse to the Lord. First, therefore we may truly and boldly say of the Lord, that Holy is his Name. Secondly, we may likewise truly and boldly affirme, that to give the title of Holinesse unto any unholy prophane
and abominable thing, is to blaspheme the name of God: But thus the Beast hath done many and sundry waies. They ascribe Holinesse unto their Antichristian orders, and Priesthood to their Idolatrous Masse, to their exorcised or conjured Bread, Wa∣ter, Oyle, Tapers, Ashes, Vestures, Ves∣sels, and many other implements in and by al which they blaspheme the name of God. And as they blaspheme the Name of God; So likewise the blaspheme his Ta∣bernacle, That is to say, the true visible Church of Christ under the Gospel, which is the place of Gods, presence, which he hath chosen to put his Name there, where two or three, or more are gathered toge∣ther in the Name of Christ, there is Christ present, and where Christ is present, there hath God put his Name, there he is to be sought, and there he may be found, and there is his Tabernacle. To come toge∣ther in the Name of Christ, is when Gods people joyne themselves together in a spirituall body politike, separated from the common multitudes of known unbeleevers, to the end to meet toge∣ther for the mutuall edification and comfort one of another, by doctrine,
breaking of bread, and prayer, and to practise all other Ordinances of Christ set down in his Testament, as they shall haue occasion: and to Companies of Beleevers, having such fellowship and communion one with another, the title of the Churches of Christ doth (in our use of speech) properly and of right belong: but for beleevers to do this apart by themselves, is adjudged contempt of authority, factious, novelty, making of Conventicles, and unlawfull Assemblies, dangerous to the State, and not to be suffered in any Kingdom or Common∣wealth, and so they blaspheme the Ta∣bernacle of God in a high degree, as if Gods people were a company of un∣godly rebels, and wicked conspiratours; but the righteous Lord will in due time visit his people, and rebuke his enemies. And on the other side, for Gods peo∣ple now to deny the kingdom of the Beast; that is, (as they call it) the holy Catholike Church Militant, to be the true Church of Christ; To refuse to partake and communicate with them in their abo∣minations, delusions, and unlawful works of darknes, is adjudged disobedience, schisme
and contempt of the power and authorty of the Church; To speak against their proceedings, sedition, disturbance of the peace of the Church, heresie, impiety, and what not? Thus they adorne the Harlot, which corrupteth the earth with her for∣nications, with the title of the Church, and Spouse of Christ, and Tabernacle of God, and so blaspheme the Tabernecle of God, as if it were not a communion of Saints, by calling and profession, but an ha∣bitation of Divels, an hold of foule Spirits, and a Cage of every unclean and hatefull Bird. Further, it is said of the Beast, that it did blaspheme those that dwelt in heaven, that is, the Saints departed this life. Those that dwell in heaven, are then blasphemed, when it is said of them, that they take it as an honour done unto them, when we make them our Patrons, build them Temples, set up their Images, offer and pray unto them, and make them Medi∣atours between Christ and us, for by this they are made, not onely Idols, but also fa∣vourers and chief maintainers of Idolatry: They are also blasphemed when the do∣ctrine which they taught and practised, is
condemned for heresie, or when erronious doctrines, vaine traditions, superstitious rites, ceremonies and customes are fathered upon them, as received from them by Tra∣dition, as unwritten verities, but the world hath been brought to believe that Saints in heaven might by these means be as it were bought and sould, between Priest and people, wherein they have been high∣ly blasphemed. Moreover, it is said, that it was given to the Beast to make warre with the Saints, and to overcome them: and power was given him over all Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations. Warre is made with the Saints, when they are accused to Rulers and Governors, to be Heretikes Schismaticks, wicked and ungodly persons; and they may then be said to be overcome, whem their accusers are justified, and they condemned, accor∣ding to this, this Scripture hath been ful∣filled and verified. Great and of long continuance have been the warres which the Beast hath made with the Saints, and many have been the victories of this kinde which the Beast hath had against them, as the Histories, and other records of the Na∣tions do plentifully witnes.
It was given to the Beast to make warre with the Saints, when Rulers and Governours gave way to the Beast to de∣vise and make laws at their own pleasure, concerning Religion, and the worship of God, and then to condemne for Delin∣quents, and evill doers, all that would not observe those Laws. How free and forward Rulers and Governours have been to give such power unto the Beast, they themselves have felt by long and wofull experience: for much woe hath the Beast wrought (not to the poore and meaner sort of the Saints onely, but) even to Emperours and Kings, and all degrees of people, and therefore it is said in the words follow∣ing, that power was given unto this Beast over every Kindred, Tongue and Nation: So that the exaltation thereof was such, as to be a Father above all fathers to every Kindred; a Lord above all Lords to every Tongue; a King above all Kings to every Nation. Thus was this Beast exalted and sate as a Queen triumphing over them, having all of all degrees brought in bondage unto her Dominion, which was a just recompence upon their heads,
that gave such power unto this Beast: yet see how the world was herein deluded, they were not captives against their wills, but in blind devotion, had this Beast in most high reverence, as being a devine power ordained and given by God, and not from the Dragon, Thus did the Lord give them over to be deluded by this Beast, as a just reward of their vngodlynes, in that they receaued not the loue of the truth, but tooke pleasure in vnrighteousnesse. Further it is declared in the words fol∣lowing, That all that dwell vpon the earth must worship him, (that is the Beast) whose, names are not written in the booke of the life of the Lamb slayne from the foundation of the World. by those that dwell on the earth is ment those that have set their habitation there, and choose rather to enioy the pro∣speritie of the world and plesures of sinne, together with the Beast, then to sufffer affliction for the truth, and for witnessing against the Beast: these are they that wor∣ship him, that is, receaue their precepts and rules, for their doctrine and whole∣some instuction, and observe their ordi∣nances and Lawes as perfect rules of eqi∣tie
and righteousnesse, casting the word of God declared in the holy scriptures, be hind their backes, and treading his Ordi∣nances vnder their feete, making farre more conscience not to eate an Egge on Friday, then to steale, or to commit adul∣terie, But of such it is said, that their na∣mes are not written in the Booke of life of the Lamb which was slaine from the be∣ginning of the world: That is, they are not of the number of Gods Elect and Choosen in Christ, and given vnto him for his por∣tion and heritage, whose condition is to be hated, despised, persecuted, and afflicted in the world, for righteousnes sake, in whom the Lamb Christ Jesus, as in his members hath been slaine since the begin∣ning of the world: which condition, those which cannot brook and endure, but count it a pleasure to live deliciously for a season, and take delight to enjoy the pleasures of sin, may thereby be discri∣bed, not to have their names written in the Book of life. Concerning these things it is added, If any man have an eare, let him heare, As if it should be said, few there be which have an eare to heare these things:
For who can indure to heare that Catho∣like Church, which they account to be spirituall, holy, and heavenly, to bee compared to a Beast, ugly in forme, and horrible and monstrous in nature; Who can endure to heare that Power, that Throne, and that authority, which they believe to be of God, to be said and affir∣med to be of the Dragon, that old Ser∣pent, the Divell, and Satan? Who will believe that a righteous God would give way to his enemies, the workers of ini∣quity, so farre to prevaile, and so long time, as for many hundred years toge∣ther to delude the Nations, to bring them into bondage, and to keepe them in slavery? And that a few poore despi∣sed people, of no reckoning in the world, here one, and there another, should see more, and be wiser then all the great Clarkes, wise Counsellours, mighty Princes, and all the Nobles of the earth? Who (I say) hath an eare to heare these things, and not be moved to fret in him∣selfe, and to gnash his teeth at the hea∣ring of them? Yet notwithstanding all this, and more, let him that hath an eare heare, for times
and seasons will change: a time will come (as the verse following doth de∣clare) when these great workers of ini∣quity shall be subdued and trodden under foot. He that leadeth into captivitie,Ver. 20, shall go into captivitie, he that killeth with the sword must be killed with the sword, here is the pa∣tience and faith of the Saints. Here is shewed the justice of God, who will recompence unto the wicked, according to the works of their hands, as they have measured unto others, it shall be measured unto them again; they shall reap the fruit of their unrighteousnesse to the full: Therefore the Saints and Servants of God should here learne with patience to beare the Crosse, because the Lord will take their parts, and avenge their blood upon their enemies, and those which with patience rest upon the Lord. are here recorded for Saints. Here is the patience and faith of the Saints. As if it were said, those which patiently in∣dure affliction for the truth, and com∣mit their cause unto God, resting faith∣fully upon him, are thereby tryed and made manifest to the world, to bee the
Saints and Servants of God, that in sure hope of a time of refreshing, chuse to endure captivity and the sword, rather then they will (to have peace with the world) together with the world worship the Beast. Thus much concerning the first part of this Chapter, and of that power and promotion which the Prelates and Clear∣gie crope up unto before the exaltation and supremacy of the Pope. The my∣sterie of whose iniquitie is next to be considered; To God be glorie for euer.
THE SECOND PART OF the XIII. Chapter of the Revelation, beginning at the XI. verse. VERSE XI. And I heheld another Beast comming up out of the earth, and he had two hornes like a Lamb, and he spake as a Dra∣gon. AS in the former part of this Chapter, the Prelacy and Clergie in generall, who under the title of the Catholike Church Militant, exalted themselves to worke iniquity, and bring the Nations in∣to captivity and bondage to their tradi∣tions, were resembled by a seven-headed Beast: so here after much striving amongst themselves who should be the chiefe and greatest, not being content with former riches, honour, aad earthly promotion, but aspiring higher, at last the Prelate of Rome in particular, attained to this title and dignity, to be Christs Vicar, Peters Successour, and universall Bishop; and under that Title pretended a fulnesse of
power and supremacie over all persons and causes, and therefore is here resembled and fore shewed by a Beast, &c. First whereas it is said of this Beast that it came out of the earth, thereby is signifi∣ed, that the high degree and dignitie wherevnto the Prelates of Rome have aspired, and exalted themselves, is not from heaven, it is from the earth, earthly; it is a plant which our heavenly Father hath not planted, and therefore shall in the end be rooted out. Concerning the comming up of this Beast, it is to be minded, that the Mini∣sters of the Word of God (of which ranke of men this Beast boasteth himselfe to be the chiefe) if they were in their right kinde, should be as the Stars of Heaven, lights and guides unto others: But at the opening of the sixth Seale, Iohn saw the Starres fall from Heaven to the Earth, as a fig-tree casteth her greene figges when she is shaken of a mighty winde; whereby was signified, that the Ministers of the Word of God would in time degenerate and goe out of kinde; they would, contrary to the Apostles rule, set their affections on
earthly things, they would for filthy lu∣cre make Merchandize of the people, and Word of God; they would gather riches, and grow wealthy by the wages of un∣righteousnesse, and so become the great men of the earth: all which is fulfilled and come to passe, as all may see that are not willingly blinde. Among the rest of the fallen Starres, to one was given the Key of the bottomlesse pit, Rev. 9, 1. whereby was signified that power and preheminence should be given to one of the fallen Stars above the rest: which thing was effected & came to passe, when Phocas being Emperour, he promo∣ted Boniface, then Prelate of Rome, to be universall Bishop, and to have power and jurisdiction over all other Bishops. Which thing when Phocas had done, this Abaddon King of Locusts, with the rest of the brood of the bottomlesse pit that succeded him, who had the opening and shutting of Pur∣gatory at their pleasure, so prevailed in time, that they exalted themselves above Emperours and Kings, which thing they could never have done, had they not first besotted the Nations in blinde devotion to impoverish themselves to feed these
Locusts, under the Title of the Church, and in hope of meriting thereby, and to be released from their sins, and from the supposed paines of Purgatory: For had the Pope, that Prelate of Rome, been as destitute of worldly wealth, and as well furnished with spirituall grace, as Peter and Iohn were, when they went up into the Temple to pray, and healed the lame man, he had never set his foot upon the Emperours neck. For as much therefore as the Romish Prelate from a meane and lowly estate and degree in the world, hath crept up and been exalted above Kings and Emperours: and see∣ing worldly wealth and riches have been the means whereby he hath got the preheminence, very significantly was this upstart resembled and prefigu∣red, by a Beast comming up out of the earth. Againe, it is said of this Beast, that it had two Horns like the Lamb: By Hornes in the Scripture is usu∣ally signified power and authoritie, and by the Lamb is meant CHRIST IESUS, who had all power in Heaven and earth given to him, Mat. 28.18. So
that hereby was shewed, that the Prelate of Rome would challenge and usurpe great power and authority, which he perswa∣deth the world doth belong unto him, as being Christs Vicar, and under this pre∣tence usurpeth a twofold power and juris∣diction, both Civill and Ecclesiasticall, not in earth onely, but in Heaven also; what he bindeth in earth, is bound in Heaven, and whom he will, he can release from the paines of Purgatory, and place them in Heaven: Therefore in token of this his power, he is armed with two Swords, which thing was plainely signified by the two Hornes which he had, like the Lamb. But though the Beast would be the Lambs equall, and resemble him in pow∣er, yet his voice bewrayes him to be but a counterfeit, and a dissembling hy∣pocrite: he speakes like the Dragon, he pretendeth property to that which is not his own, and exalteth himselfe against those, unto whom he should submit and give honour: Even as the Dra∣gon said of the Kingdomes of the world;Luk. 4.6. All these are in my power, I give them to whom I will? So likewise saith this Beast his Vicar, the Prelate of Rome:
The Empire and Kingdoms of the earth are in my power, and at my disposition, and to me it belongeth to depose and set up Emperours and Kings at my pleasure, as shall be behovefull for the peace of the Church. And thus may the Beast in this be known by his voice, likewise in divers other particular blasphemous speeches and divelish doctrines. Further, it is said of this Beast, That he exerciseth all the power of the first Beast be∣fore him, and causeth the earth, and them which dwell therein, to worship the first Beast, whose deadly wound was healed. In that this beast is said to exercise, All the power of the first Beast before him, therby was signified, That what the first beast could do by her motherly authority and power, under the usurped title and name of the holy Church, the same could this beast do, by the authority and power of his father∣hood, under the title & pretence of Christs Vicar, & Peters successor, universal Bishop, &c. But that this Beast may yet further be discerned, it is said of him, That he caused the earth, and those which dwell therein, to wor∣ship the first Beast, &c. By causing the earth to worship the first Beast, was foreshewed, that the Pope would exact
of the earth the tenth part of the fruits thereof, for the maintenance of the holy Church, and this is indeed to worship: For as the paying of Tithes in the time of the Law, was a part of the true out∣ward worship of God, so this is the worship of the Beast. And further, by causing the Inhabitants of the earth also to worship the first Beast, was shewed that he would carefully see due homage, service, and obedience to be yeelded and performed to the holy Church: so that though the Prelate of Rome, as a son of Perdition, did exalt himselfe above mea∣sure, yet still doth he maintaine the power and dignity of the Catholike Church; the estimation of her Motherhood must still be maintained, her voice must still be heard and obeyed; not to come when she calls, is contumacy and contempt, not to be indured; they that dare so far to de∣spise her authority, as not to obey her Paritors Processe, are by her doom to be accounted cursed children, and worthy of no lesse censure and punishment, then to be struck with that terrible Thunderbolt of her Excommunication, the violence whereof is such, as who can indure it?
Who will not rather ride, run, dance at∣tendance, crouch, kneele, pay, pray, or do any thing else, which Master Officiall or his Register will enjoyne them, then un∣dergo so heavie a burthen, as the censure of Excommunication? Thus will the Pope have the magnificence of this Diana to be maintained; The earth and those which dwell in it must yeeld unto her the Tithe of all their increase, as also Mortu∣aries, Offerings, and many other Church duties, which she requireth of them; for she is a Goddesse, and must be worship∣ed. And this diminisheth the Popes glory never a jot, the two estates of the Whore, and false Prophet, can well agree and stand together, as Father and Mother in one Family, and therefore the second Beast, as Father of all, will have the first Beast worshipped; that is, obeyed and maintained in glory, as Mother of all. And further observe, in that the Pope hath execu∣ted all authority of the Catholike Church, thereby is confirmed the truth of the expo∣sition, that the first Beast was the Catholike Church, and the second Beast the Pope, as hath been before observed. And he doth great wonders, so that he ma∣keth
fire to come down from Heaven on earth in the sight of men. First, by the wonders which he did, was foreshewed what wonderfull things the Prelate of Rome, that false Prophet should bring to passe; as namely, under the title of the servant of the servants of God, (which indeed all Ministers of the Word, and other Church Officers ought to be) to creep up and exalt himselfe above Em∣perours and Kings, and all other estates in the earth, which being considered, is indeed a thing wonderfull: for first, the Prelacy and Cleargie, in respect of the pretended holinesse of their Orders, were exempted and freed from being subject to any secular jurisdiction and power,Vide Con∣siliū Ma∣tis, Can. 9.10. the meanest of them might not bee produced before any secular Judge, for any crime or offence how hainous soever, yet unto this Beast, they must be obedient in all things, as servants to their Lord; upon him they must de∣pend with all observation, as children up∣on their fathers: And as for Emperours and Kings, and other worldly States, it is plaine to be seen, that though they stand highly upon their titles and dignities, not
to have them impaired, or in any thing di∣minished, which is a thing which they will withstand, to the shedding of abun∣dance of blood; yet to be made such vas∣sals to this Beast, as to hold his stirrop, to lead his Horse by the bridle, to kisse his feet, they thought it no abasement, but an honour: And notwithstanding, that very many of that beastly ranke have been no∣torious wicked men, and abominable li∣vers, yet have they the craft so to delude and besot all people, of all degrees in the world, as to bring them to believe that the truth is so infallibly annexed to that seat of the Beast, that it is not possible for him to erre in judgement; yea, he made the world to believe it as an Article of faith, that his determination and judge∣ment of any controversie, or point of do∣ctrine, is a more indifficient and infallible rule of faith then is the holy Scriptures: That these and the like grosse doctrines is beleeved and received, are great wonders. Further, He maketh fire to come down from Heaven on the earth, in the sight of men, &c. By fire in this place was foreshewed the
punishment which should be inflicted on the Saints, which was burning with fire: And in that the fire was said to come from Heaven,Psal. 82.6 wherby was foreshewed, that the Iudges of the earth, Who are called gods, and their seats as the Throne of God in Heaven, should be so corrupted by the Pope, as that they should believe the Saints and Servants pf God, which refused to obey the Pope and his Laws, to be therefore Heretikes, Schismatikes, refra∣ctary, rebellious and disobedient persons, and therefore should condemne them to be burnt to death: This they have done, thinking they did God there in good ser∣vice, and that it was the just judgement of God upon them. Thus he made fire to come down from heauen: For true it is, that the judgements rightly pronounced by the lawfull Magistrates, are the Iudge∣ments of God, and their punishments, Gods punishments, and therefore it is that Magistrates are called Gods: but seeing Magistrates have been thus corrupted by the Pope, and made to pronounce unrigh∣teous and unjust judgements, we are to e∣steem them as the judgements of the Dra∣gon; and yet neverthelesse their autho∣rity
and power lawfull, and ordained of God. Thus the Beast deceiveth them that dwell on the earth, by means of those Miracles (falfly so called) which he had power to do in the sight of the Beast, as is shewed in the verse following.Vers, 14. And he deceiveth them that dwell on the earth, by the meanes of those Miracles which he had power to doe in the sight of the Beast. Those which the Beast deceiveth, are said to dwell on the earth; that is, have their affections set upon earthly things, and not upon heavenly, so that they will not for love of the truth forsake their earthly possessions and pleasures: these are they which are deceived by these ly∣ing wonders of this Beast; but those that are strangers and Pilgrims in this world, whose affections are set upon heavenly things, and not upon earthly, these are not deceived, nor deluded by him: these making tryall of him by Gods Word, have found him to be a lyer and a deceiver, and believe him not, but taking their lives in their hands, witnesse against him to the death; that his power and wor∣king is of Satan, and that his wonders are lyes.
And Whereas it is said, that he had power to do these Miracles in the sight of the Beast: thereby is confirmed and made manifest, that which before is shewed, to wit, that this son of Perdition, the chiefe Darling of his holy Catholike Mo∣ther, is present with her, and in her bo∣some, and for her sake, and in her behalfe exerciseth his power, she retaineth still her former authority, without any dimi∣nishing thereof, as is euident unto all that are acquainted with the acts of that Church. Thus much for the second part of this Chapter.
THE THIRD PART OF the XIII. Chapter of the REVELATION. Wherein is foreshewed a third Beast, which was set up by the commande∣ment of this second Beast the Pope, who said to them that dwelt on the earth, that they should make an Image to the Beast which had the wound with a sword, and did live. HEre we may see that the Pope by his commaunding power was the cause of setting up this Image, and for the better and more cleare vnderstanding. what this Image is, Let us a litle consider the patter∣ne, whose Image and liknes it beareth, namely the first Beast. The first Beast as hath beene shewed, was the representative body of the Catholick Church Militant, consisting of the select Prelacy and Preisthood of sundry Nations, gathered together into one counsell or Synode, with authoritie to make Lawes, and canons for the vniversall Church, to be observed uniformely of all Nations under
pretence of the insufficiency of the Scrip∣ture for the goverment of the Church, and the worship of God, in like manner the Pope, (in his wisdome seeing it necessary for the good goverment, maintenance, and upholding of his kingdome, and the roo∣ting out of Heretickes, and seditious per∣sons, (as they call them which daily increa∣sed in every countrie) did ordeyne and command,Vide con∣cilium La∣teran se∣cundum, Can, 6. that in every province there should yerely be held and kept a provinci∣all counsell or Synode consisting of the Prelats and many other selected persons which should look to those matters, to which Synode he also gave power to make Lawes atd ordinances, to which the people should be conformable and obedi∣ent: This is the Image which he caused the dwellers on the earth to make of the Beast, which had the wound with a sword and did live. Further it is said,Vers. 15. Ʋerse. 15. And power was given him to give life unto the Image of this Beast, that the Image of the Beast should both speake, and cause that as many as would not worship the Image of the Beast, should be killed. In this Verse we may observe: first, that
a gift was given to the Pope to bestow upon this Image: Secondly, what this gift was, viz. to give life or breath to the Image: thirdly, the end and effects of the gift, which was, that the Beast should speak, and cause that as many as would not worship the Beast should be killed: As there was given by the Dragon to the first Beast, great power and authority, and also a mouth to speak blasphemies, and to make war with the Saints, in like manner by the same Dragon was this gift given to the Pope, to give life or breath to this Image: By life is here meant authority, which is, the life of a Synod, without which it is of no force, and so this Image should have been no more then a very Image or pi∣cture, and set up to no purpose, but the Pope having received it, gave autho∣rity to the Image that he should speak, that is, make and set forth Canons and Laws; for to speak is so understood: as for example: A King is said to speak to his subjects when he setteth forth his Laws and Proclamations: so this Beast having made Canons and Decrees, speaketh to her vassals and subjects by them.
Moreover, the Image caused, that as many as would not worship him, should be killed: Here the pride and cruelty of this Image is set forth, to be answerable to the first Beast, and therefore rightly is he called her Image: for as the first Beast made war with the Saints, and overcame them, all that dwelled on the earth worshiped him, &c. so whosoever would not worship this I∣mage; that is, heare his voice, and keep his commandements, there was no way for him but death. All the worship that the Lord requireth of his servants,Deut. 10.12, 13. is, That they feare him, walk in all his waies, love him, and serve him with all their hearts, & with all their soules to keep the Commandements of the Lord, and his Ordinances, And this is indeed the true worship of God. In like maner, this Image will be worshiped, his Laws must be observed, and his Canons obeyed without examining and trying of them, be they never so unholy and unjust: They that do not observe and obey them, be they never so upright and holy men, they shall be thereby indited, arraigned, judged, and condemned to death, as being in their estimation, Heretikes, Schismatikes, diso∣bedient and rebellious persons, contemners
of God, and of the Church, yea, as the filth and of-scowring of the world, and un∣worthy of the society of men. And he causeth all both small and great, rich and poore, free and bond, to receive a Marke in their right hand, and in their foreheads. This Image challenging worship to be performed unto him, of all people of all sorts and degrees, according to the autho∣rity given him by the Pope, was by some contradicted and despised, wherefore the Image in policy, for the better triall of those that were his trusty subjects and slaves, ordained that all his Ministers should receive a Marke, at the re∣ceiving whereof, they should vow and sweare to be of his Dominion, and un∣der his Banner, to fight against Christ and his Saints, What this Marke is, and what is the maner of giving and receiving of it, is now to be declared.For proofe of this, look no further then in the 36 Canon of the Church of England, An. 1603 The Prelacy and Clergie being as hath been before shewed, assembled with au∣thority to make laws, did ordain that every Bishop in his Diocesse should carefully observe that none should preach or execut the functiō of a parish Parson, Vicar or Cu∣rate, in any Parish, but he that would swear
to observe their Lawes and Canons, and there∣upon should receaue the letters of orders of the Bishop of the Diocesse, which let∣ters of orders signed and sealed by the Bishop, is the Marke of the Beast here mentioned, and doth testifie in the behalfe of the bearer thereof that he is their sworne servant, under holy orders, either a Priest, a Deacon, or a half priest, &c. and that he is a man found capable & meete for the cure and charge of soules, and therefore to what parish soever these tried lads are sent to doe service, upon sight of this marke, they must be receaued without ony oposition, upon penaltie of the law upon those that shall refuse them. Here may be obiected, that this marke is only receaued by the Clergie, and not by the people of all sorts, rich and poore, bond and free, according to the text. I an∣swer, that all persons which receaue the false Preists doe likewise receiue, and sub∣mit to that authoritie which sent them, and also the marke by which they are sent, as is-evident, when a Priest cometh to take pos∣session of a parish to which he is apointed by the Bishop; he is not receaued upon his word, nor because he tolleth the bell, and
and putteh on the Surplice, and useth other Cerimonies enioyned him by the Prelate: But shewing the foresaid Marke of the Beast, they receaue both him and it, and communicate with him: thus all both smal and great, rich and poore, bond and free, that submit unto their apointed Preist, re∣ceaue a marke in their foreheads, by re∣ceaving and submitting to him. For as our sauiour Christ faith of his Apostles and Mi∣nistors, He that receaueth you, receaueth mee, and he that Heareth you heareth me.Luke 16. Iohn 20. So those that receaue, heare, and ioyne in fellowship with these false Ministers, doe heare, re∣ceiue, and joyne to the false power which sent them, and the marke by which they are sent: whereas it is said that they receaved the marke in their foreheads, or right hand, thereby was shewed that this marke should be an aparent testimony that they were servants of the beast, and that they were of that band which had ioyned hands, & made a league to walke in the wayes of destru∣ction. Further, it is said; Vers. 17. And that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the marke of the Beast, or the nae of the
Beast, or the number of his name, Here is propounded three conditions, and whosoever had not one of them, thereby to be known to be of that King∣dom, might not buy or sell, or have any thing to do amongst them. For the better understanding hereof, let us minde, that although these three Beasts in respect of their severall power and jurisdiction did differ one from another, the Catholike Church being the chief, and the Pope in∣feriour to her, and the Image of the Beast as it were a servant or handmaid, inferiour to them both, yet notwithstanding they were one body, being joyned and knit to∣gether by the power of the Dragon, and have so farre prevailed over the Nations, as that they have brought all, both small and great, rich and poore, bond and free, to bee in subjection to their Kingdome, which beareth the name of the holy Catholike Church, or Sea of ROME, 14.8 1. but the Holy Ghost cal∣leth it BABILON THE GREAT CITIE: for as the materiall Babylon was a City which dwelled upon many waters, which caused her to abound in riches and treasure: so this mysticall Baby∣lon,
this great Citie of Rome, I meane the Ecclesiasticall State, is said also to sit upon many waters, which the Holy Ghost expoundeth to the People and Nations, as in the seventeenth Chapter, and 15, verse: The Waters on which the Whore sit∣teth, are Peoples and Multitudes, and Na∣tions and Tongues: And these Waters have been the means of the flowing and in∣creasing of the wealth and riches of this Citie, so that their Merchants, that is, the Prelates have grown rich, and become the great men of the earth, by trafficking in them; also the Ship-masters (which are the Parish Priests) and all Ship-men and mariners (which are the inferi∣our guides, and Ecclesiasticall Offi∣cers) have gathered crums, and wax∣ed rich thereby, and therefore at the destruction of this great Citie shall stand a farre off and shall howle to see the desolation thereof, and their owne gaine taken away, for from thence-forth no man will buy their commodities any more. Here note, that these foresaid spirituall persons are the sellers, and the Lay-people are the buyers, and the wares which are bought & sold in this kingdom
called spirituall, as pardons for sin, and in∣dulgences of divers sorts, which is a spe∣ciall commodity, and bringeth in abun∣dance of treasure, also their Pistling, Gospelling, Chanting, Homeling, Massing, which must be maintained with the Tithes, or Tenth of all things, which they usually call the maintenance of the Mini∣stery; Also the Sacrifices (unacceptable to God, and well-pleasing to the Divell) which are daily offered at their Altars, and at divers Images of Saints; also the body of their Maker and Saviour: besides Mar∣rying, Baptizing of Children, Churching of Women; Houseling the sick, burying the dead; these and many such like, are the spirituall Wares sold in this King∣dom, which have particular prizes set on them: Now so it is, that these wares are priviledged, that none may either buy or sell them, save he that hath the Marke of the Beast, or the name of the Beast, or the num∣ber of his name. What the Marke of the Beast is, hath been before shewed: Se∣condly, the name of the Beast is to be con∣sidered, For the manifestation whereof let us consider and minde, that those which did preach and professe Christ and
his doctrine, are said to have and to eare his Name. The Lord Christ Iesus said unto Ananias in a Vision concerning Paul, That he was a chosen Vessell to beare his Name before the Gentiles, and Kings,Acts 9.15. and the Children of Israel. By the Name of the Lord, here was meant that Paul should preach the doctrine of Christ, and those that beleeved by his Preaching, were said to believe in the Name of Christ, and were therefore baptized into his Name, and cal∣led Christians.Acts 11.26. The Disciples were first called Christians in Antioch. Also the Dis∣ciples and followers of Christ are said to have the Lambs Fathers Name written in their foreheads: According to this is the meaning of the name of the Beast, which the holy Ghost setteth down in a mysterie in the 17 Chapter, and 5 verse, Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots, the abomi∣nations of the earth: But the Papists call it not Babylon the Great, but the great uni∣versall or Catholike Church; not the Mo∣ther of Harlots, but the Mother of all true Beleevers; not the Mother of all abomi∣nations of the earth, but the Pillar and ground of Truth, that cannot erre: This is the difference betwixt the name which
God giveth them, and which they take and attribute unto themselves: But let them speak the best of themselves, and let us consider and answer them in their own language, they call themselves the Catho∣like Church, and their professed vassals and subjects are therefore called Catho∣likes, and whatsoever they be, that do ei∣ther preach or professe the Catholike faith, that is, beleeve as this Catholike Church beleeveth, that it is Mother of all true Beleevers, that it cannot erre, &c. they are Catholikes, such persons wheresoever they live, if they thus believe (although they never received the marke of the Beast, nor can receive it) yet this profes∣sion is enough to intitle them in the right of buying or selling these foresaid wares, such persons have the name of the Beast, and therefore they may buy pardons of the forgivenesse of part, or all their sins, and use any of these things which they suppose necessary for their souls health: (but indeed destruction) yea, after their death they may, for a summe of money given to the foresaid Mer∣chants by their charitable Successours, be released out of Purgatory: thus, by
their own discription we have found out the name of the Beast, and who they are that have received it. The third condition is the number of his name, as the Beast had one generall name which is the Catholike Church) whereby he was known from all other States and Kingdoms in the world, so it hath a number of names belonging to the particular parts and members thereof, to distingnish one from another, as in the 17. Chapter, and third verse, The Beast was full of names of blasphemy. As the true Church, which is that body whereof Christ Iesus onely is the Head, is compleat and furnished, when it is coupled and knit together by every joynt and member, which Christ Iesus hath given for the furniture thereof; namely, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastours and Teachers: So this false Church being fur∣nished with those parts and members which that great red Dragon hath inven∣ted and set up, under the title of Ministers of Christ, to work upon the children of disobedience; namely, the Pope, Patri∣arches, Cardinals, Arch-bishops, Bishops, Deanes, Arch-deacons, Abots, Priors, Prebends
Canons, Chancellers, Commissioners, Registers, Doctours, with the rest of the selected Sy∣nod or Counsell: so (I say) this Church or Beast, being furnished with these mem∣bers, are the full number of his name; that is, they are the number of whom the Ca∣tholike Church consisteth, and from them all inferiour power and offices of Ministry, as Monks, Friers, Parsons, Vicars, Curats: and Jesuits are derived. This I understand to be the number of his name, and this ex∣position agreeth with that in the verse following, where it is said, let him that hath understanding count the number of the Beast, what can be understood but the Number of the particular parts whereof he consisteth? And where it is said, For it is the number of a man. What can be un∣derstood but that it beareth the resem∣blance and likenesse of a man? as follow∣eth to be declared. Thus we see who may buy and sell in this Kingdom, and who may not. Here is wisdom; let him that hath under∣standing count the number of the Beast, for it is the number of a man, and his number is 666. Here is shewed, first, what is required
in searching out this mystery, and that is wisdom and understanding, not such as is from beneath, but from above, which commeth down from the Father of lights, from whom commeth every good and perfect gift, he it is that giveth wisdome to the simple, and the understanding of his secrets to those that feare him; which should teach those that desire to know the Mysteries of his will, to labour to be such as to whom he hath promised to reveale them, then whatsoever we aske, we shall receive of him, for to such he giveth libe∣rally, and upbraideth not. Secondly, here is shewed a direction how to imploy a mans wisdom in finding out this Mysterie, and that is, by counting or reckoning the number of this Beast. Thirdly, a reason why the number of the Beast is to be counted, Because it is the number of a man; that is, it agreeth with, and is answerable to the parts of a man, and so is the more easily to be found: for as we know the true Church of Christ is compared in the Scriptures to the naturall body of a man, as in 1 Cor. 12.12. For as the body is one, and hath many members, and all the members of that one body being many
are one body, so also is Christ Jesus: And in the 27. verse, the Apostle speaking of the Church of Corinth, he saith: Yee are the body of Christ, and members in particular, &c. So in the Ephes. 1.22, 23. Christ is given to be Head over all things, to the Church which is his Body. Thus as the true Church is called and compared to a body; so the Catholikes affirme, that they onely are that Church, and that Body, and that the par∣ticular parts and members of their Church are the full number thereof. Now whereas they say they are the Church, let us say they are the Beast. And whereas they say, their particular parts and members make up the number of the Church, let us say their par∣ticular parts & members make up the num∣ber of the Beast, and so we finde the true interpretation of this Scripture. Further, here is set down the number of the Beast, which is 666. By this num∣ber I do not understand any set number, and that the parts and members of the Beast are no more nor lesse, but thereby I understand is meant a full and com∣pleat number, as before was shewed: As all the parts and members of a man joyned together make a whole per∣fect
man, so do the particular parts and members of the Beast make a perfect and entire Beast. Thus briefly, according to the ability which God hath given me, I have gone over this Chapter, wherein is briefly set forth the workers of iniquity, which have done, and yet still do pre∣vaile over Gods people, under the title of Ministers of the Gospell, and Church of Christ, as they were represented un∣der the forme of three severall Beasts: The first Beast representing the Gene∣rall Counsels, or (as the Papists call it) the Catholike Church. The second Beast representing the POPE. And the third Beast, the PROVINCIAL COUNCELS, which were established by the Pope. The which three Beasts bearing rule and Dominion in these times whereinto we are fallen, and being enemies and op∣posers of Christ and his Kingdom, it doth behoove us to know them, to the end that wee may eschew them and their evill wayes, and seek after the truth, making strait steps unto the Kingdom of God. Now, that we our selves may make parti∣cular
use hereof, it is necessary for us to examine the Nationall Synod, or Convo∣cation, consisting of the Prelacy and Cler∣gie of the Land, who whilst they remai∣ned under the yoke and bondage of the Church of Rome, and whilst they exerci∣sed their power, which was first given them by the Pope, for, and in the behalfe of that Church and Dominion, they were the very Image of the first Beast before mentioned: But being now separated from the Pope, and Church of Rome, they think (as it should seem) that their spiritu∣all Pontificall power and authority which they exercise is lawfull and warrantable, and to be submitted unto: They being gathered together, boast themselves to be the representative body of the Church of England, and the true Church of Christ, and that they have power to make Laws and Canons for Government thereof, and for the worship of God, which all men ought to yeeld obedience unto, as appea∣reth by divers of their Bookes of Ca∣nons. But we are not to take this upon their word, but to make triall thereof by the Word of God, whether it be true or false.
If the Word of God did give them such power and authority, then indeed we were bound in conscience to yeeld already obe∣dience to their Lawes and Canons: But the most wise God, and Disposer of all things, who knoweth the vanity of mens mindes, would not have his people to hold their faith in respect of mens persons, and at their pleasure to alter and change the same, and therefore did not give to any of his Ministers power to make Laws in matters of Religion, and for the worship of God, but gave them power onely to teach the Nations to observe the things which he had commanded them, as in the 28. of Mathew, the 19. and 20. verses. And the Apostle Paul biddeth the Corin∣thians, 1 Cor. 11.1. to be followers of him, as he followed Christ, And in the same Chapter he also saith, That which he had re∣ceived of the Lord, he delivered unto them.Acts 15. Also the Assembly of the apostles and El∣ders of the Church of Ierusalem, they would not impose any yoke of bondage upon the Churches of Christ, but held it to be a tempting of God so to do, as before hath been shewed: And this agreeth with that in Deut. 12.32. Whatsoever I com∣mand
you, take heed you do it; Thou shalt put nothing thereto, nor take ought therefrom: By which Scriptures it is plain, that the chief∣est Ministers of the Gospell had no such power as these Prelates presume to have, as we shall finde, by examining their par∣ticular Canons and Constitutions, of which for examples, I will onely note some few of their late and best reformed Book, made Anno, 1603. in the first year of the Kings Majesties reign, by which it will be apparant, that they passe the bounds of the Subjects of Christ, and that they have no power from him to make such Laws; but by so doing, they usurp the place of God to reign in mens consciences, for unto him onely it doth belong to make Laws in matters of Religion, and for the worship of God, to which, men are onely bound to yeeld obedience, without adding, or detracting, and that for this their pre∣sumption, they are liable to the curse of God, being indeed the Image of the Beast here spoken of, that is originally sprung from the Dragon, and hath received power of Law-making from him. Concerning the first and second Canons, wherein they pretend their zeal for the abolishing of all
forraign power repugnant to the jurisdi∣ction of the Kings Majestie over the Ec∣clesiasticall estate, he being the highest power under God, to whom all men owe most loyall obedience; and that his Ma∣jestie hath the like authority in Causes Ec∣clesiasticall, as the godly Kings had a∣mongst the Iews. To these I do most willingly assent and agree: And further do desire, that (as the Pope) so the Pre∣lacy, with all their Antichristian Adhe∣rents which usurp spirituall power and su∣periority, above the Majestie of Christ Iesus, being a strange and forraigne gene∣ration, brought in and established in this Land by the Pope of Rome, may also be abolished and cast out after him: for by them the Pope lives in hope hereafter to be served, as he hath been heretofore, to the great vexation of the Kings and Prin∣ces of this Land, yea to the losse of their Crown and lives. But to be short, I will proceed to men∣tion some few of their Canons, whereby iniquity is established for a Law, and their beastlinesse discovered. In the third Ca∣non it is enacted, that whosoever shall af∣firme the Church of England, by Law esta∣blished,
not to be a true and Apostolicall Church, teaching and maintaining the doctrine of the Apostles, that person shall bee excommunicated, ipso facto. That there are some, yea many doctrines of the Apostles maintained in the Church of England, I do not deny; so there are in the Church of Rome: But that the Ec∣clesiasticall state, or spirituall body poli∣tike, which is called the Church of Eng∣land, which consisteth of Arch-bishops, Diocesan Lord-bishops, Suffragans, Deanes, Arch-deacons, Prebends, Canons, Chancellours, Commissaries, with the rest of the Clergie, as heads and guides of that body to go before, and the whole multitude of the Layitie (as they call it) which is as the Tayle to follow those Heads, that this politicall Body is the Spouse and Church of Christ, as they affirme in their seventh, eighth, and ninth Canons, that I do deny: For first, if it were true, that they are the Ministers of Christ, which is his Church, we should finde warrant for them in his Testament, wherein is set down the Ministers which he hath set in the Church: namely, A∣postles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors,
and Teachers; and also their office and administration: But in all the New Te∣stament, no Arch-bishops nor Lord-bi∣shops, no Deanes nor Arch-deacons, Prebends, Priests nor Canons, no Chan∣cellours, nor Commissaries, and other their Court-officers, nor any such admi∣nistration, as they challenge and execute, can there be found, they are a strange ge∣neration that is risen up out of the earth, for earthly-minded and vaine men have invented them, and therefore the body which consisteth of them cannot of right bee acknowledged to bee the Body of Christ, whose Ministers in respect that they are called according to the Com∣mandement of Christ, are from Heaven: But it is indeed the Image of the first Beast, whose mouth was as the mouth of a Lyon, his body like a Leopard, and his feet as the feet of a Beare, an ugly compounded and deformed mon∣ster. And as their names are strange, and different from the Ministers of Christ, so is their practise contrary: they are not servants to the Flock and Church of Christ, and helpers of their joy, but they are authours of their woe, challendg∣ing
and exercising Lordship and Domini∣on over their faith; for in stead of a due administration of the Word of God, they have mingled a cup of fornication for the people to drink, that is, devised a forme of Book-worship, with Orders, Rites and Ceremonies, which they have imposed on the people, under the title of Di∣vine Service, and which they must observe without adding thereto, or taking any thing from it, as in the 4, 6, 7, 8, and 14. Canons. Further, they are not painefull Preachers, but lazy Lords; they are not followers of Christ and of his Word, but are contemners thereof, casting it behinde their backs, and will not be re∣formed, nor ruled by it, they are Law∣makers much like Nebuchadnezzar, for as he would destroy all that would not worship his golden Image; So who∣soever doth refuse to yeeld obedi∣ence to their Lawes, shall bee most severely punished, as is plaine by di∣vers penalties annexed to their Ca∣nons. In consecrating and ordaining Priests, they are like to Ieroboam, for as he conse∣crated
whom he would of the basest of the people, to be the Priests of the high places which he had set up, so do they ordaine for the most part ignorant fel∣lows to be their Parish Priests and in∣feriour Ministers: wherein though they do most absurdly, yet will they not bee contradicted, as we may see by the 57 Canon, where it is said, whosoever shall refuse to communicate with a dumb and un∣preaching Minister, Let him be excommu∣nicated. And although their owne Do∣ctours complaine and cry out against it, yet they will not amend: amongst the rest it is worthy to be observed what their own great Champion profound Master Hooper faith, viz. That both Arguments from light of nature, Laws and Statutes of Scripture, the Canons that are taken out of ancient Synods, the decrees and constitutions of sincerest times, the sentences of all antiquity, and in a word, every mans consent and consci∣ence, is against ignorance, in them that have the cure and charge of soules. If it be so how un∣reasonable and beastly is it for the Prelates to ordain, allow, and approve of such for the Ministers of Christ, of which there are many hundreds in the Land, whom
the Prelates are not ashamed to forbid to expound the Scriptures, as in the 49 Canon, where it is said, that some of their Parish Priests shall not take upon them to expound in their cure, or else-where, any Scripture, or matter, or doctrine, but shall onely study to read, &c. It is greatly to be wondred at, that so many grave heads as were gathered together, and sate consulting about these matters, should breed and bring forth such absurd and impious Canons. If there were nothing else, this allowance of dumb Ministers, is sufficient to shew the vanity of their mindes, and the darknesse of their foolish hearts: So that wee may truely say of them, that when they professed them∣selves to be most wise, by exalting, and making themselves equall with God, in making Laws for the government of his House, the Church, even then they became most foolish, and voide of judge∣ment. As for the best sort of their Parish Priests, which are men of learning, and gifts; they must also be confined within their limits, they must worship God ac∣cording to the rules prescribed them, by
these their spirituall Fathers, as in the 38 Canon. If any Minister shall omit to use the forme of prayer, or any of the Orders or Ceremo∣nies prescribed in the Communion Book, let him be suspended, and if he do not conforme within the space of a moneth, let him be depo∣sed. The absurdities and blasphemies contained in that Comon Prayer-book, are many; which having been discovered and laid open by divers Treatises already published in print, I will omit, onely this I will adde, that in the imposing of that Service Booke, or any other, this great iniquity is committed by the impo∣sers thereof; That they do exalt them∣selves both against Christ, who is ascen∣ded into Heaven, and hath given gifts to his Ministers,Ephes. 4.1, 11, 12. for the gathering together of the Saints, for the worke of the ministery, and for the edification of the Church, his Bo∣dy; and also they exalt themselves against the Holy Ghost, who onely hath power to help our infirmities,Rom, 8.26. and to furnish men with gifts, to worship God aright. Fur∣ther, their Preachers may not teach a∣gainst their corrupt Church state and Mi∣nistry, though they know it to bee Anti∣christian,
nor against the forme of wor∣ship prescribed in the said Common-pray∣er Book, nor against the ceremonies, nor the Government of the Church of England by Arch-bishops, Bishops, Deanes, Arch∣deacons, and the rest that beare office in the same, nor against the manner and form of making and consecrating Bishops, Priests, or Deacons, nor against the Laws and Ordinances Ecclesiasticall, established in the said Church, whosoever transgres∣seth in these things, shall be excommuni∣cated, ipso facto, as is plaine in the 4, 6, 7, 8, and 54. Canons. Thus by excommunica∣ting and cursing, they labour to maintaine and defend their corruptions, but not one jott of Scripture dare they shew, and no marvaile; seeing the whole Scriptures are against mens inventions and traditions, of which nature these abuses are, being left here by the Pope, and retained and renew∣ed by his Prelates. As they may not teach against these things, so on the contrary, they may not teach the true and right way which Christ hath prescribed in his Testa∣ment, how we must worship God, nor how the true Church of Christ ought to be gathered and constituted, the Ministers
thereof ordained, nor the manner how it ought to be governed, as appeareth in the 9.10, 11. and 12. Canons. By which we may see in what bondage their Preach∣ers are kept, they must hide their Ta∣lent in the earth, and put their candle under a Bushed, lest men by the light thereof should come to the knowledge of the truth and believe it. Also it is to be ob∣served as a generall rule, that none, good or bad, learned or unlearned, can be suffe∣red to receive their Orders of Priesthood or Deaconship, or be admitted to preach, or execute a Ministery in their Parish Churches, unlesse they sweare to conforme to the worship and ceremonies prescribed by these Prelates, and also submit to their Anti-christian rule and govern∣ment, which they challenge to them∣selves, as being Lords over all: Thus by swearing they make their inferiour Priests to sell themselves to worke wickednesse, which trick they have cunningly devised to bring the Land in subjection to these Antichristian yoke: And upon the taking of this Oath, they re∣ceive the Prelates Marke, which is cal∣led in this Chapter, the Marke of the Beast:
which is understood to be the Letters of Orders under the Prelates hand and Seale, to testifie that they are made Priests or Deacons, according to the Order and Ca∣nons prescribed in that behalfe, in this their Convocation, as we may see in the 36, 48, and 50 Canons: And for refu∣sing to worship them in these things, ma∣ny are put back, and those that formerly have been ordained, for refusing so to do, (which they call revolting) have had their penall Laws executed upon them; which is Suspension, Degradation, and Excom∣munication, and after these many other afflictions in body, goods and name; be∣ing accounted factious and seditious per∣sons, that have no right to buy or sell their Wares. Concerning the people, whereof the Church of England consisteth, it is neces∣sary that we finde them such as the Scrip∣tures do require, otherwise they can be accounted the Church of Christ, and to this end observe these few places fol∣lowing: Ezeck. 44.19. Thus saith the Lord, no stranger uncircumcised in heart, and uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter into any San∣ctuary: And the people of Israel for suf∣fering
such uncircumcised strangers to en∣ter into the Sanctuary of the Lord, hee calleth them a rebellious people, that had po∣luted his Sanctuary, and broken his Covenant; And in the 23 verse, The Lord teacheth his Ministers to put difference betweene the holy and prophane, the cleane and un∣cleane; And according to this was the practise of the Apostles in the Primitive Age, who by preaching the Word, gathe∣red none but such as beleeved, and volun∣tarily submitted themselves to walke ac∣cording to the profession of the Gospell; and if any did cunningly creep into the fellowship of the Saints, and not walke accordingly, they were to be cast out by the Church, as in the 1 Cor. 5. Likewise the Apostle Paul, he separated the Disci∣ples of Ephesus from those that beleeved not; so the Apostle taught the Corinthi∣ans, 1 Cor. 6.14, 15, &c. Be not unequally yoked together with unbeleevers, for what fel∣lowship hath righteousnesse with unrighteous∣nesse, And what communion hath light with darknesse? And what concord hath Christ with Belial? Or what part hath he that be∣leeveth with an Infidell? And what agree∣ment hath ehe Temple of God with Idols?
For ye are the Temple of the Living God, as God hath said, I will dwell in them, and walke in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people; Wherefore come out from a∣mongst them, and be ye separate, faith the Lord, and touch not the uncleane thing, and I will re∣ceive you. Now if we compare the Church of England with these Scriptures, we shall finde that the practise and proceedings thereof, hath been, and is contrary. The people thereof (for the most part) are such as visibly and apparantly live in all kinde of licentiousnesse, and in their workes deny God, being abominable and diso∣bedient. For these Lordly Prelates be∣ing armed with the Sword of Civill au∣thority, and having the Law of their side, they have not laboured by painefull preaching to draw men to the obedience of the faith, and to the fellowship of the Gospell apart from the prophane and wicked, that speak evill of the waies of the Lord, but they have compelled and inforced all sorts of people, both religious and prophane, not onely such as feare God, but also such as feare him not, by bodily punishments to be conformable
to the profession which is by their Canon Law, established in this Church: As if the Word of God, that Sword of the Spirit were not mighty enough in opera∣tion for the gathering together of the Saints. That this is their practise is plain by the 90. and 114. Canons, where it is said, that Ministers and Church-wardens must present all persons above the age of thriteen years, that come not to the Church and receive the Sacraments, after which presentation, if they doe not con∣forme, they shall bee excommunicated, imprisoned, and have their goods atta∣ched: This is the means which hath been used for the gathering of this Church of England, whereby they have confounded and mingled them together, whom God hath commanded to be separated: wherein what do they lesse then think themselves wiser and stronger then God? The Word of God is the seed whereby the Church of God is begotten, and those that are begotten by any other means are bastards, and not Sonnes: for as that Woman is an Harlot which hath Children by any but her law∣full Husband: so that Church whose
members are gathered by any other way or means, then by the Word of Go per∣swading and moving their hearts, the same is not the Church of Christ: But this hath been the manner of gathering the Church of England, and therefore it is unworthy to be adorned with the title of the Church, but ought to be accounted the Image of the first Beast before spoken of, that is, of Great Babylon, which is an habitation of Di∣vels, an hold of foule Spirits, and a Cage of every unclean and hatefull Bird. And for confirmation hereof, by the te∣stimony of their own mouthes, let us but consider the estimation which the mem∣bers of this Church have one of another: Some there are amongst them, who for making more conscience of their waies then the rest, are in dirision called Puritans or Precisians; these on the contrary seeing the ungodly conversation of the rest of their brethren, esteeme them as wicked, prophane, carnall, and unregenerate men, such as (for the most part) are mockers, contemners, and evill speakers of the truth, and in whom is no appearance of Religi∣on, and the feare of God; and therefore they distinguish the better sort from these
prophane persons, by the name of Pro∣fessours. This is the estimation which they have one of another, which is a ma∣nifest note that they are not come into the order of the Church of Christ. I deny not but there are many amongst them, that are the Saints and Servants of Christ, that are godly and zealous people, which so far as they know, they labour to yeeld obedience to the Commandements of Christ; and although by meanes of their Guides which make them to erre and go astray, keeping them in ignorance of this doctrine, yet it shall go well with them: Such persons (I say) as fitt stones for the building of the Church of Christ, but so long as they remaine in this confu∣sion, they can no more be said to be the true visible Church of Christ, then a heap of stones fitted for a building can be said to be a House, therefore they must be separated from the wicked, and placed together, according to the order prescri∣bed by Christ Jesus, and practised by his Apostles, as in the New Testament, before they can be so esteemed. As these Prelates will have this Church of England to be accounted the true
Church of Christ, so they will have the true Church of Christ to be accounted false, schismaticall, and hereticall, as in the 9. 10. and 11. Canons: by which it doth appear, that if any people separate from this corrupt Church state, and joyne toge∣ther apart from the wicked and prophane, to walke in all the waies and ordinances of Christ prescribed in his Testament, ac∣knowledging Christ Iesus to be the onely King, Lord, and Law-giver, in matters of Religion, and the worship of God, which is the true and right rule whereby Gods people ought to walke, and by so doing, they become indeed, the true Church of Christ, to whom he hath promised his pre∣sence and blessing: yet notwithstanding, such persons, are for this to be accounted Schismatikes, and to be excommunicated, ipso facto, as holding wicked errours. Thus they open their mouthes wide, to speake evill of the waies of God, whereby also they appeare to be the very Images of the Beast, that blasphemed the Tabernacle of God, as is shewed before, upon the sixth verse. Further, whereas the Apostles did or∣daine divers Elders in every Church, to
whom they gave charge to feed the Flock of Christ, whereof the Holy Ghost had made them Overseers: On the contrary, these Prelates, in stead of Elders to feed one Flock, they do ordaine one idle priest to be fed of divers Flocks; that is, some to have two, some three, and some foure Benefices; and this they are not ashamed to publish, as appeareth in the 41 Canon, by which it is allowed, that Licences and Dispensation shall be granted to Masters of Arts, and other Graduates, to have plu∣rality of Benefices, so that they be within the compasse of 30. miles. Concerning their Copes, Surplices, Crossing in Baptisme, and other their foo∣lish Ceremonies, which they themselves acknowledge to be things indifferent, yet those that refuse to use them, through the tendernesse of their consciences, are there∣fore greatly afflicted and persecuted, so far are they unlike the Apostle (who would not use necessary things, that were offen∣sive to his brethren) as that they themselves will, not onely use those things which are unnecessary, but also in their use, justly scandalous and offensive; yea, and com∣pell their brethren also to use them, which
if they refuse, they shall enjoy neither li∣berty, nor worldly possessions. How un∣worthy this their practise is, for those that would be accounted Christians, let the world judge: certainly, it is so, contrary to Christian charity, as that it is to be ac∣counted Heathenish impiety, and beastly cruelty, and it is a Marke in their foreheads to testifie unto the world that they are those which our Saviour Christ speaketh of, that should come in Sheeps clothing, (that is, pretending themselves to be the Mini∣sters of the Gospell, and such as desire peace and unity) but inwardly are ravening Wolves: such as do sow strife and conten∣tion, and by this meanes they grow rich, filling themselves with the spoile of their Brethren, whom they persecute, as Lions, Beares and Leopards, fill themselves with their prey. These, and many other evils by their Canon Law established, and to the disho∣nour of God, and vexation of his people daily practised, have been much opposed, and the iniquity of them sufficiently ma∣nifested, but as yet it remaineth like unto the Decrees of the Medes and Persians, that may not be changed: yea, they boast
and say (like their old Mother) that with∣out their Laws, the Church of Christ would run into confusion, as if the Testa∣ment and Laws of Christ were not suffi∣cient for the government of his Church and Kingdom. Thus they open their mouthes, and reproach the Almighty: But he who sitteth in the Heavens laugheth them to scorne, and will vexe them in his sore displea∣sure, if they repent not. By these few examples of their wick∣ed practises, I have briefly shewed, that this Church of England still remaineth under the bondage of Antichrist, and is ruled and governed by the Image of the Beast, mentioned in this 13 Chapter, which usurpeth that power, which is onely proper to Christ Jesus. And whereas it is objected in the behalf of the Church of England, that it is fallen and separated from Babylon, the universal Church of Rome, and therefore it is the true Church of Christ, and needs no other separation. To this I answer, that true it is, that that great City is now divided into three parts, as was foreshewed in the 16 Chap∣ter of this prophesie, and the Cities of the
Nations (that is, the Nationall Churches, whereof the Church of England is one,) are fallen from it; but this is no argu∣ment that therefore they are the true Churches of Christ, that are divided from Rome, unlesse they be united and joyned to Christ, and framed and built together, according to the patterne prescribed in his Testament. It is indeed an argument, that this king∣dom shall not long stand, as our Saviour Christ teacheth, Mat. 12. Every kingdom divided against it selfe, is brought to desolati∣on: and every City or House divided against it selfe, shall not stand. And if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself: how shall then his kingdom stand? Thus by the division of this Great City, Gods people may receive comfort, and rejoyce in assu∣red hope, that the fall and destruction of Babylon is neare, and that the Lord will shortly be avenged of their iniquities, which should teach us, to come out from a∣mongst them, that we partake not of their sins, and so receive of their plagues, and to have no fellowship with their unfruitfull workes of darknesse, but rather reprove them, and sted∣fastly resist and fight against them. So shall
we receive the Crown of righteousnesse, which God the righteous Iudge shall give at his ap∣pearing. To whom be glory and Dominion for ever and ever, Amen. REVEL. 20.4. And I saw the soules of them that were be∣headed for the witnesse of Iesus, and for the Word of God, and which had not worshiped the Beast, neither his Image, neither had re∣ceived his Marke upon their foreheads, or in their hands, and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years. FINIS.
