18598.5 38160705 29301
No body loues mee. To the tune of Philliday. NOw all my mony is gone, how should I swagger? Now may I sit alone with woodden Dagger, Robert and honest Iohn with mine Host Kster, Could drinke a dozen Cans out of a Tester: If now I wash my throat Needs must I pawne my coat, And sing this ea te, Nobody loues me▪ quoyne lasted, w that my ir loue's blasted, e and hee with his  kindly, hilst I could pay my  me blindly: Now that I haue no C, With the Duckes may I inke, All my friends from me shrinke, Nobody loues me. y Hostis with a smile would entertaine me, Now like a varlet vile doth she disdaine me I had the Parlor before ding, Now in the kitchin I take vp my ding: Now all my reuell ruffe, Is turnd to kitchin stuffe, And I sing, Marry mffe, Nobody loues me. When as I had no want, each one would lend me, Now that my mony is skant, they say▪ God send yee: They leaue Pee-penniles, with high disdaining, And all are pittiles, to my complaining: Their words are guilded faire, Their deedes bace copper ware, Now I am waxen bare, Nobody loues me. Faire Mayds would follow me fast for a fayring, I was good company, Purse was not sparing: The finest roe in this towne, I might haue kist her▪ And perhaps layd her downe, now I must misse her▪ Now that my money is lost, They bid me kisse the post, Was euer man thus crost, Nobody loues me. Top of my kin I thought, would not deny me, When I to aske them ought, strait they passe by me Nought but old prouerbs on me they denter, Saue nought in summer and starue in winter, Did Prouerbs flye about, No money pull they out, Their hands haue got the gout, Nobody loues me. Faith Ile goe dig for more and if I find it, Like rich Cobs hand and foot, fast will I bind it. And hide it in the hay vntill it canker, Then farewell thriftlesse play, and good Ale Tanker: Ile drinke plaine whig and whay, Vntill my dying day, Black pots brings all away, Nobody loues me. Ile saue my money I, to make a purchas Or else before I dye, for to build Churces▪ Like worldlings euery hower will I be scraping, Or like hel sil for more wil I be gapig: Ere I doe spend my coyne, Ile let my Carcas pine, And eate beanes from the swine. no body loues mee. If I be once rich againe. I wil be wiser, And learne of money-men to be a Miser: Rather then lend a groat to one or other, Ile helpe to cut his throat, ere he my brother. I will shut vp my doore, Alwaies against th poore: So Karls doe get eir store. No body loues mee. FINIS. Printed at London for E. W.
The Second part of No body loues me. A new Ballad that praiseth good company, sent vnto Peter Ply-pot, and Cutbert Empty-can. To the tune of Dainty come thou to me. THeres no comparison, of folly to be made, To the meaner sort of men, such as liue by their trade: Vaine pleasure so doth lead, their light-braine wits awry, That spend and bring themselues, to open beggery. Company asketh cost, Company wasteth gaine: Let him that meanes to thriue, Much company refraine. Such as so wary be, to spare and not to spend: Thy wastfull quality, he shall mock in the end. For such as haue no care, a penny for to keepe: Shall neuer be worth a pound, but liue in danger deepe. Company asketh cost, &c. In a torne ragged coat, commonly shall he goe: His wife with sorrow fild, his children full of woe. Their stomack seldome shall be fild with flesh or fish: On his bord shall be seene, alwayes an empty dish, Company▪ &c. To the Wine Tauerne sure, and victling house likewise: You seeme to bee good friends, but your owne enemies▪ For all that you doe spend, no thanke they doe you giue: But in your beggery, they laugh to see you liue. Company, &c. Female content with sin, for once a day will come, When you that laugh shall weepe, this is Christs dreadfull doome: Before Lent fast and pray, your death you doe not know, Thus ere you doe depart, starue not your soules with woe. Company, &c. Though thought will pay no debt. yet euery honest man▪ To pay each debt is due, wil doe the best he can: For when a man for debt in prison  do lie: Small helpe then shall he haue of merry company. Company, &c. The merriest man on earth, is ouercome of death: Repenting with much paine, his mirth that was so vaine. Blest may he be and glad, that for his sinne is sad: Great ioy shall be obtaine, in heauen where Christ doth raigne. Company, &c. Sith vaine all pleasures are, then voyd loud company: Good company thers is none, but in Gods Church alone▪ Siluer and gold will rust, and friends will proue vniust: Let then thy pleasure be, to sing Christs veritie. Company, &c. The best fellowship I say, is for to spend the day Among thy familie, at thy worke merrilie. Then happily shalt thou speed, hauing corne at thy need: Full well then maist thou fare. thy purse shall nere be bare. Company asketh cost, &c. The world may iustly then teach all such foolish men, To prouide while they may. against their sicknes dey And cease their Ale-house songs, the which their credit wrongs, Leading more ciuill liues, with these true wedded wiues. FINIS. Imprinted at London for E. W.
