3892 99849100 14233
Two little workes defensiue of our Re∣demption, That our Lord went through the veile of his flesh into Heaven, to ap∣peare before God for vs. Which iourney a Talmudist, as the Gospell, would terme, a going vp to Paradise: But heathen Greeke, a going downe to Hades, and Latin, Descendere ad inferos. Wherein the vnlearned barbarous anger God and man, saying, That Iesus descended to HELL: and yeelde vnto the blasphemous Iewes by sure consequence vpon their words, That he should not be the Holy one of God. BY HVGH BROVGHTON. If any man love not the Lord IESVS, let him be Anathema Maran Atha. 1. COR. 16. 1604.
To the Reader. BY knowing that Hades, a terme vsed in the Creede, is the place generall, where soules are before Gods throne, diuided there, fat enough, by heauen & hell, so that in speach of the holy, Hades the generall, by difference of the Person, is Heauen, and in the wicked, Hell, as we cōmonly terme Hell: which place is on high, out of this world by Apo. 14. & all Iewes in Cether Malc. fol. 11. by knowing of this great light cometh to Religion. First their opinion falleth, who thank God for sending his sonne to redeeme the Fathers from Hades, to Paradise: that is, from Paradise to Paradise. So Limbus Patrum and Purgatorie fall: when Hades hath onely two partes, Heauen and Hell. So our madnes falleth, who in the Creede, put for that Part of Hades, which holdeth the faithfull, and is heauen or Paradise, the part which holdeth the wicked, and put for Hea∣uen, Hell, to which they that goe, perish for euer. Here standeth the Article: Our Lord being in body crucified, dead and buried, had a soule immortall, as all men, which went hence to God: & being in Hades, holy, had not hell but heauen. This is all. When the Gospel began scant any held soules immortall. Pliny sheweth that. Ther∣fore it was needfull the Creed should haue it. When the immortali∣tie was graunted, very many Creedes did omit the article: because in speach of a man, to die & to go to Hades is all one. Of an horse, Grekes would say, he is dead. Of a man, more: He is dead & gone to Hades. This matter vnknowen hath vexed the world by ignorāce of one Greeke worde. And two Bishops vexed their owne. Against whom two smal writings folow: besides much otherwise printed & written to them. The style is not of their gall, but it may gall, in mildnes. The argument of the Admonition following. BR. wrote vnto Queene Elizabeth, that King Edward the sixt and her Maiest. swearing to the Gospell, sware to this, That to goe to Hades in the Creede, was to goe to Paradise, euen by Heathen Greeke: to whom Hades is the world of soules: in which the holy haue Paradise, and the godles, Gehenna. Both be on high before Gods throne. And Br. commended the cause to Q. Elizabeths M. and the King of Scots Maiestie. Against that a libell was allowed to scoff the Scottish mist, penned by some Belial Bar Lo: and against saluation Bilson raged: as this short worke telleth.
A lye resumed of D. Bilson. DOctor Bilson in his sermon booke against Mai∣ster Iacob, folio 419. fumeth thus: First then tell your abettor that all the Realme will take him not onely for a rayler against all honestie, but a lier against all duty that voucheth so cōfidentlie: King Edward the sixt and his subiectes helde that Christ his soule never went to Gehenna: and the Realm knoweth the Qu. oath, as also the Q. adventureth her eternall state. These be no states to come within his vncleane mouth. He may doe well to remember who they be of whom it is written: They despise governe∣ment: and speake ill of them that be in authoritie, as raginge waves of the sea, foming out their owne shame. Thus the D. writeth. Marke now the Zurich confession, which K. Edw. and Queene Eliz. allowed. Per inferos intelligimus non locum sup∣plicij designatum impijs, sed defunctos fideles, quemadmo∣dum per superos adhuc superstites in vitâ. Proinde anima Christi descendit ad inferos, id est, delata est in sinum Abra∣hae: in quo collecti fuerunt omnes defuncti fideles. Ergo cum Latroni secum crucifixo dixit, hodie mecum eris in Pa∣radiso, promisit ei consortium vitae, & beatorum spirituum. Licet enim Dominus descendisse dicatur, fit tamen ex more loquendi. Confitemur in hoc articulo animas esse immor∣tales, easq́ue protinus à morte corporeâ transire ad vitam. This is the Zurick confession, allowed by King Edward and Qu. Elizabeth: So Descending must be graunted to be Ascending, and
Hell to be Paradise. If our Bishops misse in termes,t o sim∣ euer inke that ell, as men mmonly ak is hea∣n▪ But if  foole put ll, by his gue where auen is in∣eed: a foole not by vn¦rnedship rne heaven  Hell The arbarous anslation f the Greek reede wt ceaved D. on i bla∣ed: not the e Creede. they must blame them selves: and not rage with hereticall Satanean madnes vpon such as force them to faith. Now what grace the D. hath in his wordes, all may soone iudge: considering what him selfe graunteth: and how in his escape afterwardes he differeth from all the worlde. This was the question: Whether our Lords soule went hence to Gehenna: or hence to Paradise: Iohn Cant. and all vexed by him know that, and for one of these two opinions the Princes religion was to be esteemed. And if I. C. had invented a going from Paradise to Gehenna, Geneveans would haue renowned him over the world. Now marke how rightly the right reverend Father and Doctor ta∣keth of him selfe the lye vnto him selfe, fol 219. We haue no war∣rant in the word of God so to fasten Christs soule vnto Hell for the time of his death, that it might not be in Paradise be∣fore it descended into Hell. Now Iohn Cant. will graunt, that he damneth them both: and iustifieth the adversary, as a Greeke E∣pistle printed at Hannawe required Sir Iohn Fortescue once Queene Elizabeths greek Reader, to determine, whether both Bishops were not condemned most certeinly by their owne graunt. The ridi∣culous feigning of a new Satanean fable that our Lord went from Paradise to Gehenna: and to Hades, as from Paulls to London, from Winchester to England, from England to Europe, frō Europe to this world, from part to the whole: and againe, the fable that he went not to Hades, that is, in trueth, to the world of soules, till his body was bu∣ried: and again his feigning thrise, at Paules, Hades in S. Matthew, cap. 5. twise, with 10. once, where Gehenna is the text, perverting the originall with wresting Scriptures and Fathers to an opinion that neuer came into holy mindes, this excuseth not his Lye, but augmenteth his impiety: that befooleth all Scriptures of God, and all Divines that ever have bene in the world. Cursed be he that maketh the blinde wander out of the way, and let all the people say, Amen.
The argument and effect of the Epistle following. I. C. was advised in a worke dedicated to Queene Elizabeth and to the most Noble, our King now, That he should not burne for Gehennaes honour, least he burned in Geheaenaes shame for ever and ever: At the first he skoffed all trueth of God and the King: but being taught how he was caught in his owne syllogisme thus: The place which our Lordes soule went to hence, telleth what Hades (his HELL) meaneth in the Creede: But Paradise is the place which our Lord went to hence: Therefore Paradise is the HELL of the Creed, being taught how he was caught, he sent his Chaplayne M. Greffrey King, obteyning the Queenes hand for his leaue, to agree with his adversarie: and he vpon agreement, returned presently, saying that he should be sent againe: but presently after he came home, hee would write. Conditions were not kept. The libell was still solde: and Machmadisme was in it: and a contumelious mockage of Christ and all Christians & Iewes: when he said Ruben the Iewe his Ebrew Epistle was forged: whereby he hindred the defence of Christiani∣tie, and deserved rooting out▪ Besides that, after the King was ours, Paules sold the treason of the libel. For not stāding to his covenant, three Greeke Orations plaid vpon him: and one dedicated to the King and Brettish nation in Queene Elizabets dayes: And after all, this Epistle. At the first sight he laid the blame on Bar Lo, that vsur∣ped his auctoritie, as being guiltles: yet when at the Court a Duke shewed what he had done, he fell as dead, & soone died. The party greeued was much greeued at his death: because he had protested he never spake against him. Yet as Ely, so he by softnes paid for o∣thers blame: while he repressed not bad soules. And his Gentlemen wished Bar Lo vnborne: as more griefe to the Archbishop then all that ever were his adversaries: not only for his libel against the Scottish mist: full of most deadly treason: and full of blaspemy and lying against God and man: But also for his Satanean declamation at Paules against the best Nobilitie, and the best bent for the good of the State: against whom the Iscariot railed and raged: whereby the Nobilitie iustly terme him: The vilest that is this day vnder the cope of heaven: as bent against God, the King, the Nobilitie, and all humanitie. So Bar Lo will be his notation.
To the aged Sir, IOHN of Canterb. Arch∣bishop, grace and truth. MAISTER Francis Hall told that your G. de∣priued M. Pickaerd and him of their benefices, and gaue both to Bar Lo (whom he described after his name, a babe most bad) for defending your Gehenna: which haeresie of yours was vsed for a barr, that you were not fit to confirme o∣thers, who so erred your selfe: against all the Bible, all Greekes and Hebrewes. That the children whiche you would haue confirmed and you together may be truly firmed here∣in, behold your owne graunt in D. Bilson: to whom in Bar Lo his booke, your grace & wisedome referreth the vnlearned for a lear∣ned defence of your minde: which held that the Creed telleth whe∣ther our Lordes soule went hence. And this is your Proposition & myne too: and you will aduenture your eternall state vpon it, and I myne. This it is: The Place into which our Lordes soule went hence, is Hades or Hell of the Creede. This position is built vpon a rocke: that no storme, windes, nor waues can shake it. And if we agree to what place our Lord his soule went hence, we agree what Hades or your Hell is in the Creede. Nowe to your Proposition, this assumption D. Bilson layeth downe, folo 219. Paradise is the place to which our Lord went hence. Therefore by your owne graūt Hades or Hell in the Creede is Paradise. Seeing then the whole tenour of Moses and the Gospell, cannot mooue you: seeing the vniversall iudgement of the Hebrewes for their owne tongue, can not mooue you: seeing 3000. yeares heathen Greeke cannot mooue you: and Eulogines Patriarcha 1200. yeres old, with all other Chri∣stian Greekes which doe place Abraham in Hades, can not mooue you, and seeing the Zurick confession, which sayth, per Inferos in∣telligimus non locum supplicij designatum impijs, sed defunctos fide∣les, & sinum Abrahae can not mooue you, let your owne confession mooue you: and publish it in print, that the simple deceaued by you, may know how you led them to deny that our Lorde went through the vaile of his flesh into the most holy. Which they that will denie, may as well denie all religion and trueth of God. You haue most highly iniuried the Maiestie of God: pretendinge that
Sheol Psal. 16. was the Devils lodge, which no Ebrew euer thought, neither suffreth Moses to thinke: contemning the Gospell for the hand of God receaving the holy soule of our Lord: pervertinge so∣rowes of death into the second death, Act. 2. to befooll all Christi∣anitie, turning Saint Paul to Gehennean darknes: where he purpose∣lie speaketh of the Gospells brightnes: in these three iniuries you staine all the Bible, while you make some iarr from all the rest, and befoole the most holy Writers. This your sinne is haynous. So your despising of Ebrew DD. For their owne tongue, wilbe holden of the Scottish mist and Brettish nation, and all nations a brutish parte. and no lesse the reiecting of Heathen Greeke, for the Creede penned for heathen: and your restrayning of Greeke only to Poets: and your teaching as generall that Hades in them is vgly, this your learning wil be holden babish. Also where D. Bilson reiecteth the world of soules, as checking all Iewes in their owne tongue, his wrangling was senseles: that he knew no place where soules were togeather. Hath he euer seene in this world all bodyes togeather; other saw them not, yet the speach, this world is currant with all men. And for Hades Macedones call it Heaven. Portus Dictio∣narie would haue taught you so much, though you sought no dee∣per Graetians. And in Clemens Alexandrinus, Hades is Iuppiter. To your blame for denying the lxx. in Psal. 110. a warrant for the New Test. Greeke, you say nothing, as damned. And D. Bilson saith: the Greeke Fathers vnderstood not Josephs Haden. Such owles you bring to Athens: and make your Witgifte a scoph to all learned. Also you answer nothing to your blame for saying, that it were better the trueth of Daniel were hid, then antiquitie should be disgraced for missing. Others thought it a gracelesse speach. So when you condemne Saint Paul for cursing Ananias, which thing he was bound to doe, by expresse lawes, for stryking treacherouslie, and misleading the blind, you check Christ that promised a mouth that no adversarie could resist, and befoole Moses for making a de∣fence for an open impudent iudge. The blind, the deafe, the officers may not lightly be cursed: but in open wilfulnes they be cursed, as Saul of Dauid, and Sedechias of Ezechiel, and the Pharises. Mat. 23. Herein you stand at the mercy of God. Moreover touching. Abra∣ham Ruben the Iew, you haue iniuried Christ our Lord, & all Chri∣stians most wickedly. If he had not bene answered, all Christians
had bene worse thought of. Now he & all the Iewes in the Empire speak better of Christianity. And some by that haue bene baptized: and one D. told that he would be baptized and come to Englande: he is the man that prefaced to Aruc. So a rare learned Iew, to whō at Basil one gaue Rubens epistle, and shewed the apostles Thalmu∣dicall rare skil, he made request to the Professours, when the party was gone, to desire him to returne to instruct him more fully: (but the party could not) and afore requested his teacher to translate in∣to Ebrew, as he spake to him, the new Testament. This deserued bet∣ter then your language. You say the party feigned that whiche is written of his praise: and scoph his skil in Ebrew and Greeke: and terme him an asse, and offre all disgrace. For all, Christians & Iewes should thinke you vnworthy to haue the benefit of Christian poli∣cie. And as you know you haue the Anathema maran Atha giuen you. It returneth to the giuer if you deserue it not. If your desert be doubtles, you are surely miserable: as in your perpetual vntruthes and misvsing of the Realmes authoritie to Satans slavery. So when you scophed the hope in the Scottish mist, and the Brittish nation, what meant you but to endeuor to set millions to kill one another. Six yeres Beza noised a Testament bent badly, and Geneua meant to kill one for leaning on the Scottish mist: as three Scottes there then tolde the party: and Beza wrote much alike to your old head. Yet the party boldly printed the Scottish mist then to be his King. And now with what face can you looke for any good subiect, who knowes the blessing of the Scottish mist turned to a shyning sunne ever to wish you well: after your so great endevour to overthrow your owne nation; The Brettish nation would, as Davids 37. wor∣thies, haue layde their life in their hands for their lefull Prince, then and now most deare King. And wisheth you, after pardon, to be an harty subiect. Great cause you haue. To the Reader. AS Britanie conteyning England with Scotland, a Scott is not born in England because he is borne in Britanie: So Hades conteyning Heauen and HEL, our L. his holy soule going to Hades to his holy ioy, can not be sayd to goe to HEL, because his went to Hades. But the barbarous translation should be lothed of al wise & such as would not descend to HEL, to their eternall woe.
