A97 12885793 95023
THE ABOLISHING OF THE BOOKE OF COMMON PRAYER, By Reason of above fifty grosse COR∣RVPTIONS in it, As also for that it commands the use of such Cere∣monies in the WORSHIP OF GOD (namely Sur∣plice, Crosse, and Kneeling) which man hath devised, and which are notoriously knowne to have beene of old, and still to be abused to Superstition and Idolatry, and are of no necessary use in the CHVRCH. Being the Substance of a Booke which the Ministers of Lincoln Diocesse delivered to King IAMES, the First of December, 1605. Well worthy of the serious consideration of the High COVRT of PARLIAMENT. Reprinted, and are to be sold by SAMVEL SATTERTHVVAITE in Warwicke Lane, 1641.
THE ABOLISHING OF THE BOOKE OF COM∣MON PRAYER. WITH Exceptions against Subscribing to it. EXCEPTION I. FIRST, IN that by the Order it appoints for the reading of the holy Scrip∣tures, the greatest part of Canonicall Scripture is never to be read to the Congregation. Contrary to the practise of the Church of the Jewes before Christ, and of the Primitive Church in the Age next succeeding after Christ, and his Apostles, and of all the best Reformed Churches at this day; in none of all which, any part of the Canonicall Scripture was ever commanded to be left out in publike Reading. And contrary to the Opinion of Bishop Jewell, who affirmeth Reply art. 15. Divis. 16. pag. 543. that to limit and diet the people what they ought to reade, and what they ought to leave, was sometimes the Superstitious discre∣tion of the Rabbins; herein, saith he, wee may say, as Hilary saith,
the Sonne of God hath revealed to us no such thing. 2. And that by the Order it appoints many of the first Lessons are to be taken out of the Apocryphall Books and that under the name of the holy Scripture of the old Testament, without any note of difference from the Canonicall, and Commands the Sto∣ry of Susanna to be read under the name of Dan. 13. In which Sto∣ry the Jewes in Babylon are said to have had Judges of their own, and power to put offenders to death, and Daniel is said to have beene a young childe when hee executed judgement upon the two false witnrsses; and this is said to have beene done immediatly before the reigne of Cyrus, and to have bin the meanes wherby Daniel grew famous: all which doe evidently shew this Story to be fabu∣lous and untrue, as is observed by Iuntus Lubbertus, Dr. Fulke, Dr. Whitakers, Dr. Willet, and others. In like manner also sundry of the other Apocryphall Chapters that are thus apointed to be read, doe containe manifest errours and corruptions, as are observed by the foresaid Authors. 3. In that the Booke of Common Prayer appointeth such a Trans∣lation of the Psalmes to be reade in the Churches as leaveth out of the Text sundry words and sentences which were given by Divine inspiration for the profit of the whole Church, as the titles of the Psalmes, and these words Higaton, and Selah, and Praise; yet the Lord is omitted at least seventeene times, which is contrary to the Deut. 4. 2. Rev. 22. 19. word of God, who hath expresly forbidden to take ought from his Word, and, said he, will take their part out of the Booke of Life that shall presume to doe it. 4. In that the Booke of Common Prayer misapplyeth sundry places of Scripture, and that to the countenancing of some points of un∣sound Doctrine; as for example, to instance in one for many, that in Rev. 14. 15. is applied to those children whom Herod murdered, which is also made more plaine by the Collect which calleth them the witnesses of God, which confessed and shewed forth his praise. EXCEPTION II. In that the Booke of Common Prayer commands the use of such Ce∣remonies in the worship of God, as man hath devised, and which are notoriously knowne to have beene of old, and still to be abu∣sed to Idolatry and Superstition, and as are of no necessary use in the Church. And as this might be made manifest by Arguments drawne from holy Scriptures, so also is it confirmed by the judgement of the godly learned of all Churches and ages, to wit, that Chri∣stians
are bound to cast off the Ceremonies and Religious Cu∣stomes of Pagans, Jewes, Idolators, and Hereticks, and are care∣fully to shun all conformitie with them therein; as we might in∣stance in the testimonies of ancient Fathers, and Counsells; but we will onely produce the judgements of moderne Writers. 1. It was the judgement of the Church of Scotland, as appeareth in a Letter written from a generall Assemblie held at Edenbrough 1566. unto the Bishops of England, in which, besides many other sentences to this purpose, thus he writ; If Surplice, Corner-cap, and Tippet have beene badges of Idolaters, in the very act of Ido∣latry, what have the prayers of Christian liberty, and the open rebukers of Superstition to doe with the dregges of the Romish beast, and more plainely in the generall confession of their faith, whereunto King James, with other of the chiefe States of that Printed at Lon∣don by Thomas Man, 1603. Kingdome, did solemnly sweare and subscribe, where wee finde these words, Wee detest all the Ceremontes and false Do∣ctrine of the Roman Antichrist, added to the Ministration of the true Sacra∣ments, wee detest all his vaine Allegories, Rites, Signes, and Traditions brought into the Church without the Word of God. Occolampadius writing to a Minister of the Church of Scaphusium, 1. Lib. Epist. pag. 129. requireth him utterly to cast off all the Ceremonies of the Papists in the celebration of the Lords Supper, which cannot (saith he) be continued, but they will nourish the Superstition and impiety whereunto they served of old. Calvin in one of his Epistles having spoken of some moderation that is to be used in reforming and remedying abuses in the Epist. 87. pag. 167. Church, yet, saith he, I doe no lesse constantly affirme that great heed is to be taken, lest under this pretence any thing be tol∣lerated, in the Church which came either from Sathan or from Antichrist. Musculus writeth thus, It is not fit that those things, which are ra∣ther Laricom. p. 421. Superstitious than Religious, or have so much as a shew of Superstition, should be received in the Church, God forbid that I should maintaine any Tradition Rites or Worships which are Popish, which either of their owne nature, or by abuse doe serve unto Popish impiety. Peter Martyr saith, that Order ought to be kept in Administrati∣on of the Sacraments, which is most sincere, and differeth most In an Epist. to the Ministers of Po∣land. from the toyes and Ceremonies of the Papists, and commeth nearest unto that puritie, wherein Christ and his Apostles did first adminster it. Of the same judgement was Beza, Bucer, and many other be∣sides
of the most famous Divines of other Nations, which for bre∣vity sake I will not so much as name. Our late Queenes injunctions, require that all Monuments of Injunc. 23. Idolatry and Superstition, be so utterly extinguished and destroy∣ed, that there may remaine no memory of them, either in our Churches or houses. Bishop Jewell speaking to the Papists of their Ceremonies, saith, Confuta. of the man of Chester. You have so misused these things, or rather so defiled and bewray∣ed them with your Superstitions, that we can no longer continue them without clogge of conscience. Bishop Pilkinton misliked that we were so like the Papists in marriage and many other things. Dr. Humphry professeth plainely, both his desire and hope of the utter abolishing of the Ceremonies, and of all Monuments of Po∣pish In Epist. Dedica. vit. Iewell. Superstition that yet remaine in our Church. We abhorre, saith Dr. Fulke, whatsoever hath but a shew of Po∣pery, we might also produce the judgements of Dr. Andrewes, Mr. Greenham, and others of our English Moderne Divines for the proofe of this point in generall. But it will better appeare if we shall con∣sider these three Ceremonies in question severally. 1. The Surplice is notoriously knowne to be by the Papists a∣bused Missal. Rom. 3. part. 1. pag. 100. to Superstition and Idolatry, for the Bishop when hee hal∣loweth any of them, he useth to pray thus, that the Priest wearing this holy Vesture, may deserve to be shielded and defended, from all assaults and temptations of wicked spirits. And this garment is injoyned to all that are admitted to the very lowest degree of their Clergie, which they call primam tonsuram, and this was it which first brought in that custome into the Uni∣versities, that every Student should at certaine times weare the Surplice in Divine Service, because they did in their matriculation receive this Primam tonsuram, and first entrance into the Clergie. Neither is the Surplice, onely a badge and ornament of their Priesthood, but the use of it is also injoyned in their Idolatrous Masse. For all Priests that are at Masse must needs have their Sur∣plice on, and indeede some Priests cannot say Masse without it, yea they glory in it, as a garment peculiar to their Religion. And therefore have the most learned and Judicious of our Divines judged the Surplice to be a Popish Massing garment, and by this Reason they have condemned the use of it in those Churches that professe the Gospell, as namely Peter Martyr, Bullenger, Brentius, Beza Gualther, Zanchius, Bishop Hooper, Bishop Farrer, Mr. Rogers, Bishop Jewell, Bishop Pilkinton, Dr. Humphry, Dr. Reynoilds, and others.
The Signe of the Crosse also is notoriously knowne to be abu∣sed to Superstition and Idolatry by the Papists; for both Stapleton, and Bellarmine, doe make it the speciall badge of their Idolatrous Religion, and professe that it is one of the Images to which they give Religious Adoration, yea, they teach, that it is to be worshipped but they doe no where more abuse it to Idolatry, than in the Sa∣crament, for in Baptisme they hold that the water hath no spiri∣tuall vertue till it be sanctified by it, they marke the childe with it as a meanes to drive away the devill, they hold that none can be rightly Baptized, nor have his perfect Christendome without it; and this hath caused many of our chiefe Divines to condemne the use of it in Baptisme, as Beza, Zanchius, Polanus, Napier, Dr. Pulke, Dr. Reynolds, Thomas Rogers, and others. The gesture also of kneeling in the very act of receiving the Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper is notoriously knowne to have been of old, and still to be abused unto Idolatry by the Pa∣pists; for it grew first from the perswasion of the Reall pre∣sence. And for this cause also have our Learned Divines, condemned that gesture, as namely, Calvin, Peter Martyr, Bishop Hooper, Mr. Beza, and others. And besides this, that these Ceremonies have beene abused to Idolatry, the evill of them is manifest in that they are neither need∣full nor profitable in the Church, neither unto edification, nor unto the more comely and orderly performance of the duties of Gods Service, and this may appeare, both by the experience of many yeares, whereby it is found, as Mr. Bucer also observed in his time, that there hath been farre lesse growth of Knowledge and pie∣ty in those Congregations; where they have beene most precisely observed, yea though they enjoyed a Ministry of greater learning and gifts, then in those where they have beene wholely left, and especially by this, that neither Christ nor his Apostles, who doubt∣lesse did performe every thing in their Ministry in that manner that was most decent and fit for edification, did use them. And it cannot but grieve many of the godly to see these things brought into the Service of Christ, which have beene so defiled by Antichrist: and of this judgement, is both Calvin and Bucer, yea many of our owne Bishops, and that of late dayes as Dr. White∣gift late Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr Chaderton Bishop of Lincolne, and Dr. Vaughan Bishop of London, and others in Ecclesiasticall dignity, doe professe that the Church might well be without them, and that they could wish they were taken away, and have spoken
very basely of them, and in their owne Congregations have beene accustomed oft times to omit the use of them; by all which they have evidently declared, that they doe not in their conscience thinke them fit or profitable to edifie the Church by the more de∣cent or orderly performance of the Service of God. Furthermore, besides the commanding the use of these Ceremonies which you see are so neddlesse and offensive, the Booke of Common Prayer con∣taineth in it sundry things that are contrary to the Word of God. The Booke of Common Prayer containeth in it, sundry things (besides those handled in the Abridgement) that are contrary to the Word of God. For, 1. It appointeth a Leiturgie, which in the whole matter and forme thereof, is too like unto the Masse-booke. 2. It appointeth a Leiturgie which by the length thereof, doth in many Congregations oft times necessarily shut out Preaching, viz. When Baptisme, the Communion, Marrying, Churching, and Buriall concurre all together (as oft times they doe) in great Congregations. 3. It approveth of a Ministery as lawfull, which wanteth abi∣lity to Preach. 4. It containeth in it sundry Popish errors of such things (at least) as tend strongly to the maintenance of Popish Superstition. As, 1. The Minister of the Gospell is throughout the Booke cal∣led Priest. The name Priest. 2. It commandeth the observation of many Holidayes, and requireth the Minister to bid them, and preferreth them (in some Holidayes. sort) before the Lords day, For the ordinary Lessons appointed in the Calendar for the Lords Day, must give place to the proper Lessons of that Holy-day that falls on the Lords Day, and Athana∣sius Creed is appointed to be read only upon certaine Holi-dayes. 3. It appointeth Saints Eves to be kept as Fasting-dayes, and commandeth the Minister to bid them so. 4. It appointeth the time of Lent to be kept as a Religious Fast, and perverteth both the Example of Christs Fast, and sundry o∣ther Lent. places of Scripture to the justifying thereof. It prescribeth a speciall service for the first day of Lent and appointeth the Com∣mination, and other speciall Prayers and Exhortations tending to Repentance, to be read upon that day onely, and it affirmeth that It was a godly Discipline in the Primative Church, (the restoring whereof is much to be wished) that notorious sinners at the beginning of Lent were put to open Penance.
5. The weeke before Easter, onely of all weekes in the yeare, hath prescript Service appointed with Epistles and Gospels for e∣very Weeke before Easter. day, as solemne as the Holy-dayes are wont to have. 6. The Fryday before Easter is called Good Friday, and hath Good Fryday. three speciall Collects appointed for it, as hath no one day of the yeare besides. 7. It commandeth that every Parishioner shall receive the Com∣munion at Easter. Receiving the Communion at Easter. 8. It appointeth the Congregation to pray that God would give them that, which their prayers dare not presume to aske. 9. The Catechisme (in delivering the number of the Sacra∣ments) Diffidence in Prayer. Number of the Sacraments. Necessitie of bap∣tisme. saith, there are two onely, as generally necessary to salva∣tion. 10. The Minister (as if Baptisme were of absolute necessity) is allowed not onely to Baptise in private, but to use the words of Institution, and the element, though hee have not so much time as to say the Lords Prayer. 11. The Minister is allowed and directed to administer the Private commu∣nion. Communion to one sicke of the Plague, though there be not one more to communicate with him. 12. Interrogatories in Baptisme are ministred unto Infants (as Interrogatories in Baptisme. if repentance and Faith were requisite in them, before they may be Baptized) and it is said in the Catechisme. That infants performe faith and repentance by their Sureties, who promise and vow them in their names. 13. Every child baptized (as if outward Baptisme did conferre Baptisme confer∣ring of grace to all that receive it. grace to all that receive it) is said to be regenerate; and in the Ca∣techisme, it is said, that we are by Baptisme made the children of grace, and (in the Rubricke immediatly before Catechisme) that it is certaine by Gods Word, that children being baptized have all things necessary for their salvation, and be undoubtedly saved. 14. The Minister is appointed to command that children be brought to the Bishop to be confirmed, yea none may be admit∣ted Confirmation. to the Communion till he have beene confirmed. In confirma∣tion children are said to be certified (by the signe of the imposition of the Bishops hands) of Gods favour and gracious goodnesse towards them. And confirmation is said to be ministred to them that are baptized, that by impo∣sition of hands and Prayer, they may receive strength and defence against all tentations to sinne, and the assaults of the world and the devill. Yea, con∣firmation is dignified above Christs Sacraments, in that none may administer it but a Bishop. And it is said to be administred after the example of the holy Apostles, and warrant thereby.
15. It saith that Matrimony, doth signifie unto us the Mysticall uni∣on betwixt Christ and his Church, and that God did consecrate Matrimony. the state of Matrimony to such an excellent mystery, that in it is signified and represented the spirituall marriage and unitie betweene Christ and his Church. And the Ring in Matrimonie is appointed to be laid on the Booke, and the Priest to take it, and deliver it to the man, and to teach him to say thus, With this Ring [thee wed, &c. And the Priest is appointed in his Prayer unto God to say, that the Ring is a token and a pledge of the Covenant and vow made in marriage. 16. The Priest is appointed to absolve every sicke person (that Absolution. findeth his conscience troubled with any weighty sinne, and ma∣keth speciall confession of it) in this forme, by Christs authoritie com∣mitted to me, I absolve thee from all thy sinnes, in the name of the Fa∣ther, &c And in another place the people are appointed to come to the Minister, to receive the benefit of Absolution. 17. Buriall is made a ministeriall duty, and a prescript Leitur∣gie Buriall. is appointed for it to be said at the grave, and we are appointed to pray thus that God would hasten his Kingdome, that we with this our brother, & all other departed in the true faith of thy holy name, may have our perfit consummation and blisse, both in body and soule. 18. Churching of Women is commanded and made a Mini∣steriall duty, and a prescript Leiturgy appointed for it, and the wo∣man Churching of women. is appointed to kneele neere to the place where the Table stands, and the Priest to stand by her, when he Churcheth her, and that he must offer her accustomed offerings. 19. Both in that place and elsewhere in the booke, offering Offering days and Offertory. dayes and an Offertory are allowed. 20. In the Catechisme it is said, that the Sonne of God hath re∣deemed all mankinde, taking that phrase in a larger sense than for all Vniversall grace. the elect, as is evident by the words immediatly going before, and following after. 21. It appointeth sundry things that tend directly to the profana∣tion of the holy Sacraments, either by prostituting them to unwor∣thy persons, or administring them unreverently. For, Profanation of the Sacraments. 1. All Priests and Deacons in Collegiat Churches, are com∣manded to receive the Communion, every Sunday at least. 2 Every communicant may chuse whether he will give notice of his purpose to receive, till after the beginning of morning Prayer on the same day that he is to communicate. 3. All new married persons must receive the Communion the Manifest un∣truths. same day they are married.
4. Private Baptisme in some cases is allowed to be administred without any Prayer, Doctrine, or Exhortation. 5 It avoucheth sundry, manifest, and apparant untruths. Manifest un∣truths. As 1. That in the Calendar (so much as may be) the reading of the Scripture is so set forth, that all things might be done in order without breaking one piece from another. 2. That nothing (by this Booke) is ordained to be read, but the very pure Word of God the holy Scripture, or that which is evidently grounded upon the same. 3. That this booke is so plaine and perfit, as that the Curates shall neede no other bookes for their publike service, but this booke and the Bible, and yet it injoynes him to read Homilies. 4. That all our Ceremonies pertaine to edification, and are apt to stirre up the dull minde of man, to the remembrance of his duty to God, by some notable and speciall signification. 5. It calleth certaine Chapters of Esay, Ieremy, Ioel, and the Acts, Epistles. 6. It appoints us to say every, day from Christmas day, to New∣yeares day in a Collect, that Christ was borne this day, and upon whit∣sunday, Munday and Tuesday, God which on this day hast taught, &c. 7. It affirmeth that Michael (mentioned, Rev. 12.) is a created Angell. 8. It peremptorily affirmeth sundry things that (if they be not Doubtfull mat∣ters. manifestly false) are doubtfull. 1. That the Infants whom Herod murthered, were Innocents, and Gods witnesses; and that they confessed his praise by dying. 2. That there are Archangells. 3. That every one that is buried is a brother, That God hath taken to himselfe his soule, that we commit his body to the ground, in sure and cer∣taine hope of Resurrection to eternall life. 4. It appointeth sundry things that bring great disorder and Disorder and con∣fusion. confusion unto the worship of God. As 1. That the people should say after the Minister, whole senten∣ces of prayer and Scripture; yea the Minister one part of the prayer, and the people another. And in sundry parts of the Letany, the people make the prayer, and the Minister onely directs them what to pray for. 2. That the Minister is appointed to say some prayers kneeling, some standing; some in one part of the Church, some in another. 3. That one of the people is allowed, to make the generall con∣fession of sinnes at the Communion in the name of the whole Con∣gregation.
4. That at some one meeting of the Assembly the Lords Prayer is to be repeated eight severall times, and Gloria Patri twelve times. 5 That the holy Scriptures are so mangled into shreds and pieces, in the Epistles and Gospels. 6. That the words of the Institution are to be pronounced and repeated to every severall Communicant. 7. That the Churchwardens are appointed to goe about on Com∣munion-dayes togather the Devotion of the people in the midst of Divine Service. 8. It containes sundry things that are ridiculous and absurd, Absurdities. and such as no reasonable sence can be made of; for 1. It commands the reading of such Homilies as shall hereafter be set forth by publique authority. 2. It commands every parishioner to communicate at Easter, and also to receive the Sacraments and other Rites. 3. It ministreth Interrogatories to Infants, which their God∣fathers answer unto, and saith, that Infants performe faith and re∣pentance by their Godfathers. 4. It appointeth (in some cases) Baptisme to be administred con∣ditionally in this forme, If thou be not Baptised already, I Baptise thee, in the name of the Father, &c. 5. It requireth that every husband be taught by the Priest to say to his wife, (in the solemnization of wedlocke) With my body I thee worship. 10. It containes in it sundry evident contradictions. for 1. In the second Article of the Rubricke after the Communion, Contradictions the Minister is forbidden to celebrate the Communion, except there be a great number to communicate with him; and in the third Article of the same Rubricke, hee is allowed to celebrate it, if there be but three to communicate with him. 2. In one place it is said, that it is thought good to follow the custome of the old Church (in ministring Baptisme, but twise a yeare) so neere as conveniently may be, and yet elsewhere, it al∣loweth Baptisme to be administred not only every day of the yeare in publike but also every houre, either of day or night in private. 3. In the Catechisme, it is said there are but two Sacraments, and in another place, the booke giveth to confirmation whatsoe∣ver (by the definition of a Sacrament set down in the Catechisme) belongs to the nature and essence of a Sacrament. 4. In one place it is said that children should be brought to the Bishop to be confirmed, so soone as they can say the Lords Prayer, the Creed, and the ten Commandements. In another it saith, that
our custome is agreeable to the usage of the Church in times pat. wherby it was ordayned, that Confirmation should be ministred to them that are of perfit age. The 35. Article of Religion touching the two Tomes of Homi∣lies, is not to be allowed, nor acknowledged to be agreeable to the word of God. For, 1. By it the reading of Homilies in the Congregation, is appro∣ved Reading of Ne∣milies. to be a Ministeriall duty, and so an unpreaching Ministery al∣lowed of. 2. The Bookes of Homilies containe sundry things that are evidently false and untrue. As Manifest un∣truths. Tom. 2. pag. 305. 1. That the Apociyphal Bookes are every where called holy Scripture. And (two onely places being alleadged, both which are taken out of Toby and Ecclesiasticus, that tend dangerously to the justifying of the merit of Almsdeeds) it is said, the Holy Ghost speak∣eth so in the Scriptures. 2. That the place of the Psalmist, Psal. 51. 5. is thus alleadged, Tom. 1. pag. 18. wherefore he saith, Marke and behold, I was conceived in sinnes: he saith not sinne, but in the plurall number sinnes. 3. That it is said, our Saviour did Sweare so oft as he said verily, Tome 1. pag. 51. and 87. verily. 4. Where it is said, that plurality of Wives was by a speciall Tome 2. pa. p. 303. Prerogative suffered to the Fathers of the old Testament, that they might have many Children, because every one of them hoped, and begged oftentimes of God in their prayers, the blessed seed might come and be borne of his stock and kindred. 5. In them are affirmed (and that as by way of Doctrin publique∣ly Doubtfull points and of dangerous construction. taught in the Church) sundry things that are doubtfull, and of dangerous construction; As, 1. When it is said, That though manslaughter was committed Tome 1. pa. 22. before, yet was not the world destroyed for that: but for whor∣dome all the world (few only excepted) was overflowed with water. 2. When the fact of Ambrose in Excommunicating Theodosius is Tome 2. pag. 22. justfied. 3. When it is said, by keeping your Churches in good repaire, Tom. 2. p. 160. ye shall not only please God, and deserve his manifold blessings: but also deserve the good report of all godly people. 4. When it is said, that all Adams posterity by his fall were be∣come Tome 2. pa, 365. plain reprobates and cast-awayes, being perpetually damned, to the everlasting paines of hell fire. 5. When it is said, that it is not to be born with, but a great Tome 2. pp. 483. shame for an honest man to beat his Maid-servant, though she be a bond servant.
The 36 Article of Religion. Touching the Booke of Conse∣cration of Archbishops and Bishops, and of ordering Priests and Deacons, it is not to be allowed, nor acknowledged, to be agreea∣ble to the Word of God, For 1. Not one Minister of forty, doth know what that booke con∣taineth, nor how to come to the sight of it. Few have seene the Book Defects. 2. It doth not (whereas that Article saith it doth) containe all things that are necessary, but omitteth sundry things which (by the Ordinance of God) ought to be observed in the Ordination of Ministers. For 1. The examination of the life and learning of the Deacon and Priest, is committed onely to the Arch-deacon. 2 The voices and consent of the people, over whom the Minister is to be set, is not (by this Book) required to his election and calling. 3. The Ordination of the Deacon by imposition of hands, is permitted to one man, viz. the Bishop. 4. The Priest receiveth in his Ordination no authority to go∣verne the flocke and exercise the Discipline of Christ, but onely to Preach the Word, and administer the Sacraments. 5. Some manifest untruths are avouched in it, (whereas the Article saith, it hath in it nothing that is of it selfe ungodly.) As 1. When it is said, that it is evident to all men diligently reading Manifest un∣truths. the holy Scriptures, and ancient Writers, that from the Apostles times, there have beene these Orders of Ministers in Christs Church, viz. Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. 2 Where it is said, that this Realme hath received the Disci∣pline of Christ, as the Lord hath commanded; whereas God hath commanded there should be governing Elders to exercise the dis∣cipline of Christ in each Congregation, which our Realme hath not as yet received. 3. Where it is said, that God did inspire the holy Apostles to choose S. Steven into the Order of Deacons which is mentioned in this Booke, and that the Deacons, then to be ordered, are called to the like Office and administration that Steven was called unto. 4. Some places of holy Scripture are perverted in it. As Scripture perver∣ted. 1. When Acts 6. 17. is applied to warrant the Ordination of our Deacons. 2. When the Bishop is appointed, in the ordering of a Priest, and the Archbishop in the Consecrating of a Bishop, to use these words, Receive the holy Ghost, as our Saviour did at the sending forth of his Apostles. 3. It containeth sundry Popish errors and Superstitions, (where∣as Popish errors and Superstitions. the Article saith, it hath in it nothing, that of it selfe is Supersti∣tious. As
1. That it alloweth and establisheth the Offices of Archdeacons and Archbishops. 2. That Deacons, Priests, Bishops, and Archbyshops are made severall Orders, and degrees of Ministery. 3. That the Minister of the Gospell is usually called Priest. 4. That it ordaineth an Office of Deaconship with charge to read Homilies, preach the Word, and administer Baptisme. 5. That the Lords Supper is dignified above Baptisme, and con∣firmation above both, when the Deacon is permitted to baptise, and not to administer the Lords Supper, the Priest to Minister both Baptisme and the Lords Supper, the Bishop only to confirme. 6. That private and secret prayer is preferred before publike, and that in a publicke place and action. For the Congregation is desired (even in the midst of the solemne action in Ordination of a Priest) secretly in their prayers to make humble Supplications to God for the foresaid things. For the which Prayers there shall be a certaine space kept in silence: that done, the Bishop is appoin∣ted to pray againe. 7. Sundry things in it are absurdly spoken and directly against Absurdities. that which is done and practised (and to speake so specially in so holy and solemne an action is a wicked thing.) As 1. When in the Ordination of a Deacon, it is said, Take thou au∣thority to preach, if thou shalt be called thereunto. 2. When both in the Ordination of the Deacon & of the Priest, the B. requireth the Congregation to deliver whether they can say ought against the party to be ordained, whereas it is wel known, that the Bishop useth seldome or never to give orders in a publike Congregation; and if hee doth at any time, it is in such an one, where the people is altogether unacquainted with the conversa∣tion of them that are to be ordained. 3. When the Priest is asked whether he will give his faithfull diligence alwayes to minister the Doctrine and Sacraments, and Discipline of Christ, as the Lord hath commanded, whereas it is well known that no Minister is allowed to exercise the discipline of Christ, as the Lord hath commanded. And these faults there are in that Booke of Ordination which is of the last Edition and most reformed. In the former Edition (which seemes by the words of the 36. Article to be, that we are required to subscribe unto, and which it may be, some of the Bishops doe still use) there are other corruptions, As 1. That the Cope, Albe, Surplice, Tunicle, and Pastorall Staffe are appointed to be used in Ordination and consecration. 2. That the Oath of Supremacy is thus concluded. So helpe mee God and all Saines, and the holy Evangelists. Soli Deo gloria. FINIS.
