s1965 12092667 53913
PROCLAMATION PROCLAMED Throughout the Kingdome of Scotland: August 24. 1643 Commanding all Persons in the said Kingdome of whatsoever Quality, Ranke, or Degree be∣twixt sixtie and sixteene yeares of Age, to provide themselves with fourtie dayes provi∣sion, with Ammunition, Armes, and all other warlicke provision; for the safety of his Majesties Person, the defence of Religion in both Kirks and of the rights & priviledg∣es of Parl. of both Kingdomes respectively. Vnder the penalty of Confiscation of their whole Estates and to be punished as enemies to Religion, King, and Kingdomes. First Printed at Edinborough, and now reprinted at London, for Peter Cole neare the Royall Exchange. Anno Dom. 1643.
ent danger, of the true Protestant reformed Religion, and of the peace of thi our Kingdomes from malignants: and theire Adherents; Have after mature delibera∣tion thought expedient to enter into a solemne and mutuall Covenant with our Kingdome of England, for the defence of the true Protestant reformed Religion in the Kirke of Scotland; and the Reforma∣tion of Religion in the Kirke of England according to the Word of God, the example of  Reformed Kirkes; And such as may bring the Kirke of God in both Kingdomes to the nearest Conjunction, and vniformitie in Religion and Church Government. And siclicke to preserve and defend the Rights and Privileges of our Parliaments, and Liber∣ties of our Kingdomes respective. And to preserve and defend our Person and Au∣thoritie, in the preservation of the said true Religion: and Liberties of our said Kingdomes▪ And to observe the Articles of the late Treatie and Peace betwixt the two Nati∣tions. And to assist, and do send all that shall enter into this Covenant, in the maintain∣ing and pursuing thereof, as the same more fully proports. Which as it will be a comfort, and in∣couragement
to all Christians who feare God, and love true Religion, to all good loyall Subjects, who truly honour Vs, and to all true Patriots, who ten∣der the Liberte of their Country: So doubtlesse it will exasperate and en, rage the said Papists, Prelates, Malig∣nants, and their Adherents, to practice and execute all the mischeife and cruelty they can against Kirke and Kingdome, as they have done in our Kingdomes of Eng∣land and Ireland. For preventing thereof, the Estates of this our Kingdome (according to the pract∣tise of our Councell, Convention of our Estates, and of our Parliaments in former Times of the like exigence) have re∣solved to put this our said Kingdome▪ with all possible speed in a present posture of defence. And for the better safetie and security thereof have Statute and Ordained, and hereby Statutes and Ordaines, that im∣mediatly after publication hereof, all the fencible persons within this our King∣dome of Scotland betwixt sixetie and six∣teene yeares of Age, of whatsoever qua∣litie, ranke or degree, shall provide them∣selves with fourtie dayes provision, and
with Ammunition, Armes, and other Warlike provition of all sortes, in the most substanstions manner, for Horse and Foote, with Tents, and all other furnishing requisite. And that the Horse-men be Armed with Pistols, broad Swords and steell Caps. And where these Armes cannot be had that they provide ankes, or Secrets, Lances, and steel bonnets: And that the Foots men be armed with Musket and Sword, or Pike and Sword, And where these cannot be had, that they bee furnished with Halberts, Lo∣quhaber axes, or Jedda-Staves, and Swordes. OVR WILL IS HERE∣FORE, And wee charge you strait∣ly, and Commands, That incontinent thir OVR, Letters sedue, you passe to the Market Crosse at Edingborough, and severall Burrowes of this our Kingdome, and Parish Kirkes thereof and there by open Proclamation make publication hereof, where through none pretend ignorance of the same. And that you Command and charge all
and sundery our Subjects foresaid being sensible persons, betwixt sixtie and six∣teene yeares, to provide themselves in man∣ner foresaid, and to be in readinesse to make their Randevous thus Armed, at the places to be appoynted by our said Estates or Committees having power from them within eight and fourtie howers after they shall be lawfully warned from them to that effect, as they will testifie their affections to the true Protestant Religion, the Liberties of our Kingdomes, our owne Honour and the Peace, and Safetie of that their native Countrey, and under the paine to be estee∣med and punished, as enemies to Religion, Vs, and our Kingdomes, and their whole goods to be confiscate to the use of the Publicke. Given under our Signet at Edingbrough, the eighteenth of August, and of our Reigne the Nineteenth Yeare. 1643. Per Actum Dominorum Conventionis. Arch. Prirose Cler. Conven. August 29. 1643. Imprimatur IOHN WHITE.
