14724a.3 99843596 150988
¶ THE BATHES OF Bathes Ayde: Wonderfull and most excellent, agaynst very many Sicknesses, approued by authoritie, confirmed by reason, and dayly tryed by experience: vvith the antiquitie, commoditie, propertie, knovvledge, vse, aphorismes, diet, medicine, and other thinges therto be considered and obserued. Compendiously compiled by Iohn Iones Phisition. ANNO SALVTIS. 1572. At Asple Hall besydes Nottingam. Printed at London for william Iones: and are to be solde at his new long Shop at the west dore of Pauls Church. 13. Maij.
TO THE RIGHT HONO∣rable, Henry Earle of Penbrooke, Lord Herbert of Kayerdid. &c. DEMOCRITVS the most auncient Philoso∣pher of Abdera, Reader to the prince of Phisicyons Hippocrates, (right hono∣rable Earle) most learnedly in his Epistle De natura hu∣mana, to the same Hippo∣crates recounteth hovv ne∣cessary it is for all men to knovv the arte of Phisike: bicause it is not onelie an vnderstanding most honorable and profitable to lyfe, but al∣so for that of all other it most manifestely setteth forth to the sences, the vvisedome, povver prouidence, and vnmeasu∣rable bountie of our almightie creatour, of vvhich to be ig∣norant it is greate impietie, as Galen testifieth in his thyrd booke De vsu partium. Hieronymus Montuus therefore in his epistle to Ana∣sceue morborum, dedicated to Henry the last French Kinge to whom hee was not onely cheefe Phisicion, but also one of his priuie counsaill, affirmeth that of all sortes, Phisike is to bee embraced, and of them cheefely which are endued with honorable dignities, and waightie affaires of the common
wealth. For, as wysedome (sister to Phisicke) dooth deliuer the mynde from euill affectes, and maketh vs to liue for euer in perpetuall ioye with aungelles: So Phisike maintayneth health, and expelleth sicknesses from the body, makinge vs liue a longe and lustie lyfe, as Galen in his workes▪ De sanitate tuenda, most reasonablie teacheth. Furthermore, vnderstanding, Science, and al actiuities, by health are encreased, as by sicknesse the contrary of necessi∣tie ensueth, wherof (my good Lord) it behoueth all men too haue a due consideration, which be louers of vertue and ho∣nestie, and for their sakes loue things that be best. For when the state of the body is sicklie affected, the partes not doinge their offices, the mynd it self although it be a particle diuine hath no chearfulnes pleasure or delight in the meditacion of vertue eyther deuine or morall. Seeing that sicknesse darke∣neth the mynde dulleth the sences, and depriueth, demini∣sheth, or depraueth the partes accidētaly of their operations. VVherefore (Noble and prudent Earle) not sparing any paine, nor fearing the reprochefull wordes of the enuiouse Momus, and his capciouse rable, setting aparte all colours of Rhetorique for the auoyding of prolixitie, and bicause, Ve∣ritatis oratio simplex, I haue published an Ayde, moste pro∣fitable for all them that neede it, and that suche an ayde, as god hath blessed our coūtrie with, cōparable to any elswher, if in euery respect throughly it bee considered. Seeing that amonge all the most maruaylouse workes of nature, there is none more wonderfull, none more excellent, none more a∣uayleable to the helpe of the disseased, and amendmente of the enfeebled partes of man, then the Bathes naturall of the Cittie of Bath, if they be rightly vsed, orderly obserued, and as need requireth, frequented (the efficient cause of this oure enterprise) as here in may appeare, as well by the authoritie of the most sage Philosophers, most renowmed Phisicyons, and most auncient Historiographers, as by reason it selfe ap∣proued by arte, confirmed by vse, and dayly tried there by
practise for these 2460. yeares, or thereabout. And for that the founder Blaeydin Doyeth, or Bladud the wyse and elo∣quent Philosopher .xi. yeares student in Athenes, a Brittayn the ix. King of this Monarch after Brute, was the firste that vttered the vertue of the water, and that erected the Cittie (whose Genealogie we haue rightly ascended to Adam and may lineally be descended to your Honour, and many other of the race of the most worthie Nobles of this lande, howe soeuer the iniuries of tymes haue altered and obscured the same. So likewyse of dutie to your Honour erde of the same graine, I dedicate these my willinge labours of the South Bathes of England, entytuled Bathes Ayde, cōtayning fower bookes in one volume (as I haue my treatise of the North Bathes, to the Noble and puissant Earle of Salope.) The first of these bookes probablie proueth, the discent of Bladud, antiquitie of the Brittaines, the certaintie of the monuments, the sicknesses the bathes helpe, the accidents they take away, wherof they proceede. &c. The second sheweth the diuersi∣tie of opinions concerning the cause of these and such lyke waters, how and wherein the Phisicions and Philosophers resulte, what minerals bee in them, of what qualities they be, by which they worke their effectes. The thyrd expresseth thinges naturall, not naturall, thinges annxed to nature, and things against nature, withall the signes shewers of the state of the sicke and whole, through the which the better consul∣tacion may be had, not onely whether these bathes will helpe or not, but also the Chyrurgians, Students in Physike, and al other capable of reason, may fynde a most apte trade of vn∣derstanding comprehended in few wordes. &c. The fourth and last declareth Aporismes, and brief rules how, in, and at the Bathes, they shall vse them selues, what meates, what drinkes, what cordiall confortatiues, with moste excellent purgations, clisters, suppositoures, &c. meete for euery com∣plection, and purging humoures abounding, with all other
remedies, against such accidentes as growe by reason of hote bathes, and to what infirmitie euery of the bathes serue beste seuerally &c. Hoping that your Honour, of your Noble nature will accept in good part my willing endeuoure, al∣though in desarte it be farre vnwoorthy the credite or pre∣ferment, that Anthonius yeelded to Apianus, for his booke written of the properties of Fishes: or that Adrianus did to Arianus for his booke of the Gestes of Alexander: or that Alexander Magnus did to Aristot. for his worke, De anima∣libus. Howbeit in desire to profyte the vniuersall people of God, I truste nothing inferiour, assuring your Honour, as tyme and leysure will permit, to present your Noble boun∣tie with greater workes hereafter, for that your honorable disposition euidently appeareth as well most readie towardes the furtherance of all vertuous attemptes, as the aduaunce∣ment of the common commoditie of your Countrey: wher∣in you plainly expresse a perfit effect of very Nobilitie: the continuance wherof (as I nothing doubt) so I humblye be∣seeche the almightie to endue your good Lordship, and the right honorable Lady Kateryne, your noble and moste vertuouse vvife, with Galens health, Nestors yeares, Craesus welth, and Augustus hapines. Your Lordships alwayes, Iohn Iones.
Christophori Carlili ad Lectorem. Hexametra. IOnsus vt audiui retegens mysteria magna Naturae, sanat morbos, miracula rerum Pandit, quae latuere diu, Plutonis ad antra: Sub terras penetrat, Theophrasti lustrat, & ornat, Tartara, terrarum venas ruit atque meatus. Thermarum caussas aperit, quas Anglica tellus, Ebullit, quas ante illum nemo herculè nouit. Iis ergo in rebus superat mira arte Galenum, Hippocratem ingenio, Cardanum effingit, eum{que} Subsequitur studio, iurares esse magistrum Ionsi, Ionsum discipulum, cur non et rite putetur Discipulus Dominum qui ad viuum totus adumbrat, Moribus, arte, theourgia, conamine philtris, Hippocrates sordet, Celsus nil nouit, ab omni Longè disiunctus fuit agnitione Galenus. Quantum Sol Lunae praestat, Lunae{que} tenebris, Tantum alijs Medicis Cardanus, Ionsus ab illo Res didicit medicas, ab eo vos discite cuncti, Est quoniam effigies, Cardani expressa figura. Ioannis Ludi. Archidiaconi Nottingha∣miensis,  in laudem, & vsum thermarum nostrarum. BAlnea sunt varijs calefacta salubria morbis, Ad multos{que} vsus,  valent. Non externa valent curare pathemata tantum, Ast interna etiam tollere posle scio.
Si bene quis nouit thermis cautissimus vti Proderit ille sibi: sin male: damna ferent. Ni prius euacues, pletorica corpora laedunt, Nec minus & succis corpora farta malis. Gens sua quaeque solet plenis extollere buccis, Anglica sed cunctis sunt meliora duo Altera rex Bladud nobis, comes altra Salopae Exornata dedit, sumptibus ipse suis. Tot bona (Lector) habes magno tibi parta labore, Praeter sudorem nil tuus Author habet. FINIS.
Thomas Churchyarde to the Reader. JF still my pen in silence slept, when wit the world awakes, And willing mynds with weary workes, great toyle & trauel takes: My frendes might think I had forgot to honour learned men, And dulled spirites did daintie waxe, through piuish slouth of Pen. Wherfore though simple sight I haue in Bathes & boiling Springs, I prayse the head that here vnfoulds, the force of secrete things Though sundry sercht by iudgements deepe, to hit the marke before, At rouers they but shot theyr Shafts, and dribbed wyde a skore. For Bathes did breede an heape of doubts, and few disclosed the same, Till he that wrote this skilfull booke, a forme therof did frame, And tells vs how, and when we ought, to vse the Bathes a right, Which frutes who skornes to know and keepe, is blind of sence & sight. And seeking help he findeth harme, yea sometimes death withall, As doth the young babe that warmes his hand and so in fyre fall. Or as a chyld in sommer tyme seeking his thyrst to coole, Doth slip vnwares down cruel streams, & drowns him self in poole. So men that seeke for medicine sweete, may sometime myschef finde, If they obserue not seasons due, to take eche thing in kinde. I wade no further in this case, read what doth follow heere, And robbe no spark of fame from him, that makes these douts so cleere Who thinks this labour well bestowed if thou therby mayst gaine, Or if in busie babling world, his works may shape disdaine. Thomas Lupton to the Reader. JF such are worthy of reproche that neuer cease to toyle, For priuate gayne, their country men therby to hurt or spoyle, Then they deserue great prayse and fame, whose study watch & payn Do profet them they neuer knew, wyth dayly welth & gayne, And if the greater common good, the greater prayse doth craue, Then they that publeck welth procures, deserues the more to haue. For though wyth many worldly welth, is chiefly now preferd, Yet syck and lame and yrcksome soore do health much more regard. For who, though he haue Cresus welth in sicknes can be glad, Wher health is not, though welth be there, what Ioy can ther be had. Yet doth the poore and healthfull wretch oftymes reioyse we see, But if that sicknes dwell with welth, then myrth from thens doth slee. If this be trew, then Iones deserues both double prayse and fame, That tooke such payns for comom helth, this Ayde of Baths to frame.
¶TO THE GENTLE harted Rear, all he wisheth. IF Galen, chéefe iudge of the most excellent Philosophers, and worthily Prince of all Phisicions (louing Reader) doubted not only the enuie of Momus, with the route of tatling Sophisters, as may appeare in hys fowerth booke, De sanitate tuenda, writinge the arte or trade of maintaining health: which knowledge was (as Tullie affirmeth) so highly estéemed, that it sée∣med to procéede from the immortall Gods, and not from man, but also to loose his labours: Shall I then suppose, iudge you in this yron age (wherin al men, except the ho∣norable and godly affected, for the most parte gréeuouslie disquieted eyther with pleasure, couetousnes, enuy, pryd, ambicion, and such lyke passions, mocions of the mynde not obaying reason, gréedily gape after worldly gayne, whyles in the meane tyme the members and the mynde fall into such lappes, as they neuer may recouer agayne, so that then good night at Algate) to be voyde of doubte, disdayne, or feare to loose my laboures? When as Galen was so afrayde both to lose his labours, & also to incurre the enuie of maliciouse cauillers, albeit hee well knewe that day would appéere at a litle hole, and that the Sunne with his bright beames, wold at length perse thruogh the foggie and dark mistes, and consume them away. For al counterfeyte vertue in the presence of true vertue, is no more able to abyde, then the snow is able to withstande the heate: howbeit for a time it may. Therfore Galen séeing most aswell of the Romaines as Greekes, spending all their tymes in vanities, few re∣garding the substances, altogither gyuen to the accident, as if a flocke of shéepe, a droue of fat ware, a number of fermes, leas, Lordships, Manours, Offices, &c. were the
chiefest good, most studiously to be desired and earnestlyest to be sought for, hauing no care, whyle tyme serued, of the health of their bodyes, which is the very thing that conti∣nueth the tyme of their lyfe: but all settinge greatest store by their painted sheath, as if a gaie or guilded robe were better or more to be desired, thē an healthy body in playn cloth, or a lame iade betrapped with pendentes of golde, more laudable and seruiceable then a sounde and lustie courser in a stéele sadle: or a weake witles heade couered with a cappe of aglettes, better then an heade furnished with liberall disciplines, of lyuely mynd, and noble lyfe, bent altogither vppon Vertue, couered with a playne bonnet. What seruice I praye you (if I may be so bold) doth a man affected with the sléeping sicknesse, vncured, or a man numme depriued of al his limmes, the same truly that a paynted man doth, except perhaps more gréeuouse to him selfe, his friendes, and the worlde, as was hée that was conuayed vnto mée on horsebacke frō Maister Guil∣bies, whome I healed at Louth, An. 1562. What should I stand here expressing infinite millions, that throwe the noble arte of Phisique haue ben preserued, I can testifie of a thousande, and not so fewe that I haue cured in all partes, for these fouretéene yeares: some frantique, Apo∣plectique, Epileptique, Melanchollique, Paralitique, Goutie, Pleuritique, Hydropique, some with {per}tisique, Stone, Strangurie, Consumpcions, Suffocations, Con¦mulsions, Obstructions, Ouerflowinges, Barrenes, Des¦cendings, Ascendings, the partes wasted, one part eaten, another vlcerated, the body distempered, as well the spi∣rites, humours, as members, with moste vehemente a∣gues: all the which fieuers you may finde in my Diall of Agues, and others in Methodo nostro ad. &c. be it no more vayne gloriously published then Hippo. the popular infir∣mities, or with Galen the effectes which hée wrought by Purgation: or that Montan. doth shew in his Consulta∣cions, or Amatus Lusitanus, in his Centuriis, and a thou∣sand other of the learned and expert Phisicions.
Notwithstanding, if any man shall take in hande, as many good mē do, to shew the way of restoring thē again to their naturall health (being a most excellent acte) their shall not be wanting sume, that if they can not disprayse it for blushing, yet they wil at the circumstances, or some other thing bée carping, or else the sicke them selues for want of learning wil gyue credite rather to the ignorant then to the skilfull, aproued and expert. To bée briefe, they shal haue good leaue for my part, séeing it is, and hath among so many ben a commune euil, and the wysest sort thinke it a booteles matter to perswade the forlorn hope, suche as haue decréed to caste awaye them selues, and contemne all vertuouse diligence, eyther taken for the preseruation of soule or body, albeit for the weale of the godly, I will not staye but procéede forwardes (in so reasonable maner as I may in so doubtfull matters) too showe how the Bathes of the Citie of Bathe, will ayde such as néede them: and therefore I suppose it is worthi∣ly termed Bathes ayde, if onely to your ayde for wante of other remedy you will vse them, and not as brutishe & senceles persons frequent them. For as the learned Lac∣tantius sheweth in steede of things defensible, against out ward chaunces, gyuen vnto the vnreasonable beastes: vnto man as a farre more excellent gyfte, the vnspeaka∣ble wisedome of our creatour hath bestowed reason: ther∣fore accordinge to reason in tyme if thou haue néede, fre∣quent them. This treatice therefore onely is atchieued, wherin if you hestowe some labour, most things doubtful you may finde discussed at the least so into your remembrance de∣stilled, that no question néedfull is, least vnremembred. In which if any thing I haue bin ouer bréefe, consider our trauayle, gyuing vs time, and wée wil amplifie it, if not, doe it your selues if you can, if you can not, it were no good manners, to finde faulte with an other, for that you can not or will not amende your selues. If it be to te∣diouse or ouer curiouse, I doo not knowe why therefore
you shold greatly mislyke it, for if you be bidden to a ban∣quet, and ther be more varietie of dishes then you be ac∣customed, or can away withal, it wer no reason that ther with you should be offended, seeing the cost is others, and the delicates ordeyned for you. But it may be that you thinke it neyther to briefe nor to long, and yet not alto∣gether after your mynde. No meruayle, for I vse myne owne veine and not yours. Neuerthelesse I would not that you should take my words as the sacred scriptures, or to thinke that whatsoeuer I shall speake sure and cer∣tayne, but as the sayings of some simple man following that which is probable by coniecture, for further then likelyhode I can not go. It is enough for them to tell cer∣taine and sure thinges which saye those thinges may bee knowen, and do also professe them selues wise, but for my parte to be a louer of wysedome if is very requisite. Thus (gentle Reader) while I labour to proffet thée, I am fayne to submit my workes to euery curiouse car∣per, howbeit I craue this at theyr handes with Apelles, who when he had made a most excellēt picture, insomuch that it rather séemed a liuing thinge then the counterfayt of any, offering it to the world to be vewed, (to thend that if any found fault therwith, he might amend it) ther was amongst many other, a shoomaker which founde faulte with the show latchet, which Apelles hearinge (in a se∣cret place for the purpose attending) with his pencil forth with amended, as I shall gladly if reasonably therto I bée admonished. But hée not contented therewith (as one by lykelyhoode somewhat proude, that he could fynde fault with Apelles workmanshippe) dispraysed further the sha∣dowing of the tippe of the nose. To whom Apelles auns∣wered, no farther then thy show souter. And true it is that of arte no man can iudge but the artificer. No tem∣perate man will take in euell parte, the trauayle of good natured persons for the vniuersal profet, seeing Tullie in his fyrst booke of his Tusculane questions, and also in his Offices, as all other carefull of the wele publique, affir∣meth
that they be of best nature which think themselues borne to helpe, saue, and comfort men. But when such lacke estimacion, ther is small cause of diligence to attain perfection, honour bréedeth artes, all men are stirred to studie by fame, and alwayes those things are litle set by, which few or none do aduaunce. In fine, as in pleasing the godly, vertuouse and indifferent Reader, I account my paines abundantly recompenced: So for the reprochfull woords of the backbiting Zoilus, (a number of which this our age is notwithout, as neyther the corne without chaffe.) I passe not a strawe, so that I may well conclude with Erasmus saying. Nil moror aut laudes dabis aut conuicia vulgi: Pulchrum est vel doctis, vel placuisse piis. Thus cōmitting thée good Reader to the giuer of all good∣nes, who endue thée with whatsoeuer thy gentle harte desyreth remaine thine to the vttermost of my power as thou findest. FINIS.
CATHALOGVS AVTHORVM quorum frequenti testimonio in hoc opusculo vsi sumus. Aristot. Auicen. Auerhois. Archigenes. Albertus Magnus. Ambrosius. Aetius. Baptista Montanus. Beda. Basilius. Balus. Democritus. Dares Phrigius. Empedocles. Erasmus. Fallopius. Fernelius. Galenus. Georgius Agricola. Hippocrates. Ioannes de Dondis. Iacobus Siluius. Ioannes Almenar. Lactantius Matth. VVestmo. Martinus Roland. Mileus Melancthon. Montuus. Martinus Curtess. Oribasius. Plato. Plinius. Pausanias. Rentiphilus. Razis. Seneca. Strabo. Scribonius Larg. Sauonarola. Tullius Thesmophilus. Theophrastus. Vitruuius. &c.
¶ The First Booke, of Bathes ayde. WHEN as one kynde of knowledge leadeth as well to expell sicknesses, as to mainteyn health, as Galen affirmeth libro primo, de sanitate tu∣enda: It behoueth him, that would eyther pre∣serue a whole man, or restore a sicke man, per∣fectly to knowe the one and the other, before eyther bée at∣tempted▪ & neyther of those can be performed, when as the subiect his perfecte state is not considered, the medicinall matter thorowly examined, neyther by any skill applyed. It shalbe therfore not in vain, to make a pathway that may leade and direct, in briefe rules, aswell to the one as to the other of the last ententes, at Bathe desired. But least there might more in this work be sought, then the méening ther∣of doth extend: you shal not onely finde what sicknesses the Bathes of Bath helpeth, but also, by what reason & meanes the same is obteyned, how it may be acquired, & therewith approued. A doctrine of sundrie Clarkes elswhere attemp∣ted, and in diuers tongues, countries, and sortes handled: Some hath shewed the benefite of the Bathes in Italie, some in Germanie, some of Spanie, some of Afrike, &c. and that diuersele for diuers causes, and sundrie effectes. But there is not one that hath written of ours in England, Brytayn, sauing Doctor Turner, who in his brief view, (as he him selfe confesseth) and discourse of sundry Bathes, hath re∣membred ours onely of Bathe, albeit, so barely, as fewe, or none, is put therby to the consideracion, of the full entents. For he hath neither shewed, the antiquitie, cause of theyr heate, reason of theyr force, &c. Nor what the persons that vse them, ought to know, and obserue, all the which in this worke, shal beneficially be noted. But forasmuch as euery thing that is entreated of, must fyrst be defined, and distin∣guished,
seing that the propertie of euery definicion is, to shew apparantly to the sences, the matter entended, & that in such compendiouse fourme, and ordre, as what is néed∣full it contayneth, and what is superfluouse it leaueth: as euery distinction, in his propre braunches spreadeth, there∣fore of Tullie chéefe of all latyne elegancy vsed: ye which al∣though we be far inferyor, yet in wyll, to do that myght bée profytable, nothing behynde. Naturall bathes be those, which flow thorow the bow∣els of the earth, taking theyr effectes, of the vertue, of such things, as they runne by, and receue power of, for many in∣firmities most auaylable. Of these, some be feruent hot, some luke warme, some betwene both, some not at all, some of Brimstone, some of Allume, some of Salt, some of Copper, some of Iron, some of Lyme, some of Leade, some of Gould, some of Siluer, some of one kinde of commixtion of myneralles, some of another, and sundry of these are found with vs. Artificiall Bathes be those, which bée made by know∣ledge in Phisike, eyther for the dispersing of humours, loc∣ked in the parts, or els for the strengthening of the mem∣bres weakened, eftesones to be renued, of these also there be diuers kyndes, of diuerse qualities, and temperatures. But bicause our entent is, especyall to entreate of the ba∣thes, of the citie of Bathe, in ye countie of Somerset. Albeit we wyll briefly touch Buckstones, sainctt Vincents, & hal∣lywell. Fyrst edifyed by Bladud, calling it after his owne name, Kayer Blaidin, and after Kayer Bathe, as Matheus Westmonasteriensis sheweth agreing to our fyrst natiue tongue. Brittysh, now improprely called Welsh, for Kayer signifyeth fortres or walled citie, as is easye to be gathered by the monuments themselues, in all partes of this lande, of which for the better testimonie, we shall recyte one or two (omitting sixe hundred) as they come fyrst, too our re∣membrance,
beginning at the vttermost cōfyne, in the bor∣ders of Scotland: although then, and long after, it was one monarche, and tongue: Kayer Leil, the which as yet hath not lost the name, of his founder Leil, as if you would say, Leils forte. Likewyse Yorke was named after his fyrst builder Ebranck, Kayer Ebrancke, Ebrankes forte. West∣chester was fyrst called, & is yit with the Brittaynes, Kay∣er Leon Gaur are dur dur, of Leon Gaur, that mightie Gy¦ante, ruler then of that soyle, as if you would saye, Leon Gaurs fortres, vppon the water, that is on the Riuer Ha∣uon, or water, which the Sea ther ouerfloweth, all yt which the Brittish tongue, and maner of the place confirmeth. Moreouer fyrste, more then two thousande yeares passed, Excester was, and yit is named, in theyr Records, Kayer pen Hoel coyd, Howels chéefe fortres, Kayer pen sant, the forte of the head Sainct, Kayer pen Ruthe, the forte on the read head, and lastely Kayer Yeske, fortres, on the Ryuer Yeske, which now corruptly they call Exe. All the which at the request of maister Whoker of the sayd citie, (a gentill man not only of great learning, but therewith for his ver∣tues, of great credyte) I turned as you haue hard, forth of the Brittish, into the Saxon or English tongue, at my fyrst being ther, as may appeare in his hystorie, dedicate to the same, most elegātly penned, which before that, was of none of the Saxon or English citizens vnderstanded, nor of any other that I could learne. Thus much I thought good to note, albeit some perhaps wyll thinke it vnpertinet, to the purpose propoūded, leaping ouer the style before they come at it, varyeng farre from our mynde, in so doinge, for we thinke it a matter very requisite, as doth moste sort of the learned, that such notable monuments be reuiued, bicause some haue ben so doubtful of the Analogie of words, which often be corrupted, and no meruayle, for vppon some parte of vs Brittaines, fyrst tryumphed the Romaynes, calling
many things as them lyked. Then the Pictes, after them the Saxons, then the Dans, and lastly the Normains, all sence Iulius Caeser his tyme, euery sort séeking theyr owne fame, and continual glory, as they might. The chéefe Spring of Bathe, is in the Churchyarde, then dedicated to Minerua, and after constituted the Abbay, of the Monkes of the order of sainct Benedict, as saith Bede, Basyl, and Bale, in historiarum libris: Erected first by Blaeidin Cloyeth, or Bladudus Magus, that wyse Magicyan, a Brit∣tayne, the nynth king after Brute, about the yeare of the world, according, to the accompte of the Scripture .3080. before the Incarnacion of Christ .890. Helisaeus Prophet then in Israel, the sonne of, 1 Ludhurdebras sonne of 2 Le the sonne of
3 Brute Greaneshild the sonne of 4 Ebranc the sonne of 5 Memprice the sonne of 6 Madan the sonne of 7 Locrine after whom the Britaines or welsh mon call England, Loygar the sonne of
8 Brute the fyrst reducer of this lād to a monar. which arriued at Dodnes now called Totnes, he builded London & na¦med it Troy neweth althogh our cōmon cronicles cal it troy nouāt for lack of skil in ye brittish tonge as they do totnes, for ye one signi¦nifieth set nier in welsh brittish or corni. ye other new troy. which was the sonne of 9 Siluius posthumus the sonne of 10 Ascanius the sonne of 11 Tros builder of Troy ye puissant state which after held warres with all the mightie princes of Greece for .x. yeares .vi. monethes &c. The sonne of
21 Erictonius the sonne of 13 Dardanus cauled ye sonne of Iupiter (as Dares Phrigius the Greake writer te¦stifieth) as I cōiecture for a syr name of vertue by ye name of god as ye aūciēt poets & philosophers wer wont to cal good princes & such others as their countreies did profet wt some new be∣fit for the cōmon welth. &c. The sonne of 14 Cambablaston the sonne of
15 Altheus the sonne of 16 Tuscus the sonne of 17 Labien the sonne of 18 Messerain the sonne of 19 Cham the sonne of
20 Noe of whom sprang. 72 generacions of Iaphet. 15 of Sem. 27. of Cham. 30 of Cham and Iaphet dis∣cended the Gentiles on whome this Genealogie, hetherto standeth. The sonne of 21 Lamech the sonne of 22 Mathusal the sonne of 23 Enoch the sonne of 24 Iared the sonne of
25 Malalel the sonne of 26 Cainan the sonne of 27 Enos the sonne of 28 Seth the sonne of 29 Adam and Eua. From Noe we haue followed the Septuaginta, as wee did the most probable histories vntil Nos.
Concerning the noblenes, genealogie, of the founder, antiquitie of the Brittaynes, and origyne of these our Ba∣thes of Bathe, we haue spoken somewhat. It resteth, that in a word or two, be declared, theyr excellent properties, & worthie effects, aydefull in déede, to the most sort of infir∣mities, accidents, and gréefes, which as saith Galen, Lib. de symptomatum differencijs, is the fealing of a thing cōtrary to nature, and after Auicen, in canonibus, they be these. Stryking. Breaking. Lewsing. Ytching. Smarting. Pricking. Shrinking. Streatching. Persing. Beating. Greauouse. Heauy. Byting. Tyring. Stunning, or Sléeping. And for these disseases following, &c. 1 Morphewes 2 Scales. 3 Scabs. 4 Scurfe. 5 Wheales 6 Pustles, 7 Byles. 8 Apostemes, or swellings. 9 Vlcers. 10 Letters. 11 Ringwormes 12 Lepryes. 13 Pockes 14 Goutes 15 Ioyntaches 16 Paulsye 17 Apoplexyes. 18 Faulling sick∣nesses. 19 Shakyngs. 20 Numnes 21 Crampes 22 Destillacions. 23 Rheumes. 24 Poses 25 Whorsenes 26 Coughes.
27 Running of the eyes. 28 Running of the eares. 29 Singing and ringing of thē. 30 Dropping of the vryne. 31 Diabetes which is the ouer ma¦king of water. 32 Tenesmos whi¦ch is a desire of going to the stole, without doing of any thing, or very lyttle with great paine. 33 Collycke 34 Flyres 35 Hemorhoydes 36 Pyles 37 Feuers inter∣polate, yt come of melancholly or fleame: en∣tring the Ba∣the ii houres before the fit. 38 Hardnes of ye Splene, & swel¦ling thereof. 39 Swelling of ye matrice, or pla∣ce of cōcepcion 40 Hardnes of ye Liuer, & cold∣nes therof. 41 Wyndines. 42 Hardnes 43 Barenes. 44 Ouer slipperi∣nes. 45 Coldnes 46 Wasting of Seade. 47 Gréene siknes 48 Hydropsyes 49 Coldnes of the brayne. 50 Lack of me∣mory 51 The sleapinge sicknes. Now, as you haue harde the disseases & greafes, which it helpeth. So I think it not impertinent, to shew the causes of the paynes before declared, that you may the réedyer cō∣sult, with your Phisicions thereof, as of all other thinges, heareafter to bée mencioned, béefore ye séeke the ayde, of
the Bathes, & therfore, that preordinate Phisicion, by pro∣uidence diuine, Hippoc. the prince of Phisike, saith, that ye way by which the sicknesse is vnderstanded, is the perfect pathe to the curacion therof. Galen lykewise, the worthiest Doctour, in Natures schole, wylleth that before the cause be iuged, no remedy be geuen, whose councels herein, I wysh you to follow. 1 Ytching, payne cōmeth of a tarte or salt humor. 2 Smarting, of an eger humor. 3 Pricking, of a sharpe humor. 4 Stretching, of windines, that stretcheth out the Sy∣newes, and muscles, contrary to nature. 5 Compressyue, cōmeth of matter, or wyndines, that ma∣keth narrowe, or constrayneth, the membre or part. 6 Concussiue, or shaking paine, procedeth of matter, that is resolued betwene the muscles, and panycles: which by extending the panicle, causeth solucion of continui∣tie. 7 Wearyeng, is cause of humors, or wyndines, enclosed betwene the panicle and the bone: or of colde, drawing the sayd panicle togither. 8 Lewsyng paine, is caused of matter, stretching the flesh and the muscles, and not the chordes. 9 Persyng, is caused of humors, or grosse windines, retai¦ned betwene the tunicles, of an hard and grosse mem∣bre, as in the gut Colon, which without ceasing pearseth as it wer boring thorow with a gymlet. 10 Actual is caused of humor retayned in a member, when solucyon of continuitie is made. 11 Stupefactiue, is caused of vehement cold or hete, and by stopping of the pores, retayning the sensible Spyrites: as by strong binding, or ouerfilling of the wayes. 12 Beating, or quapping, cōmeth of a hot Aposteme: for a
cold neuer causeth pain except it turne to heate, neither is byting paine in hot Apostemes, but when it proce∣deth of inflamacion, sensibilitie of the place, and multi∣tude of beating vaines. 13 Heauy or grauatiue paine is caused in an Aposteme in a membre not sensible as in the Lungs, kydneys, and in the splene, or mylt. 14 Tyring paine, cometh of a laboryouse exercyse, or tho∣rough an humor, vehemently stretching the membre. 15 Biting payne, is caused of sharpe and eger humor. But now let vs returne again, to the propreties of the Bathes the which in some anoye the stomache and in the most sorte byndeth very much the bodie if they drynke not of the wa∣ter as in the last booke shalbe handled. The which water, many suppose, hath not ben accustomed, to be appoynted to be dronke, by the most auncient phisicions, of the Greakes, the reason is, they saye, for that Galen (whose maner was to passe ouer nothing worthy to be entreated of) hath so slightlie, skypped ouer theyr aydes, vertues, vses, & effects, which, if they had ben effectuall, to be accompted, he would as sone, haue wrytten a booke of it, as of Tryacle, or of the facultie, of simple medicines, &c. This cōiecture I deny not may cause some to thinke so, who haue not wel digested his mening, in all his workes: whose whole scope is, to wryte of nothing at large, but that wherein reason preuayleth, with experyence. But bicause, these Bathes were the me∣dicines of Empyrykes, he left them at large, howbeit, in dyuers partes of his woorkes, we fynde mencion made of Bathes, and especially in his fourth booke De sanitate tuen∣da, wher he hath these words: ther be some waters, in vse to be dronke, for the purging of the body, as the waters, in which Nitre, bitumen &c. Againe, he saith in his fyrst booke De sanitate tuenda, that all waters, representing the force of medicine, as the waters of Allume, Sulphur, or Bitu∣men,
haue force of drying, by the which, it is more then ma¦nyfest, that he commendeth them, when as he calleth them medicinall. Moreouer to proue that they were in vse to bée dronke, both before Galen his tyme, and since, by the dys∣course following, it may most euidently appeare. Scribonius Largus, who was Galens auncient, appoyn∣ted to be dronk for the vlcers, and swellings of the bladder, water, wherein Iron was quenched, & this he did, as he af∣fyrmeth, to imitate the propreties, of the Bathes of Ferra∣ria as you may reade in his .146. ca. Archigenes also proueth, as testifyeth Actius lib. 11. that waters of bathes, were vsed, to be appointed to be dronke, for thaffects of ye bladder, of the most auncient Phisicions. Oribasius lykewyse, appoynteth the vse of drinking, both of hot and cold bathes, In collecta∣neis ad Iulianum imperatorem. Pansanias doth shew, how that the people Cynethensis, vsed to drinke of the medicina∣ble Wel called Alisson for the byting of madde dogges, in Archadicis suis. Vitruuius, entreating of the waters of Ba∣thes, proueth, that by reason of Bitumen, and Nitre, they were dronke, for purging of the body plentifully. lib. nono, what néede many words? In the tyme of Augustus Caesar, the waters of bathes, wer in great vse to be dronk: at what tyme, Phisicions flourished, not onely in the hye courte of Rome, but also, ouer all, as preciouse stones, set in goulden ouches. Finally Plinie sheweth, that the waters of bathes, of Nitre, and Allume, were often dronk, for the purging of the bodie. lib. iii. hist. nat. The which Gabriel Fallopius, most reasonably confirmeth. lib. de mediatis aquis. Howbeit none of all these writers, nor any other yt I can heare of, do make any mencion, of our bathes in England, Brittaine, or if a∣ny do, it is vnknowen, and also vnsufficient, without pro∣bable reason, why such vertues, shold proceade from them: consydering it wer thargument of blunt wits, and also of féeble vnderstāding, to iudge the nature of our Bathes, for
any cause yt they haue vttered of theirs, not knowing ours: Seing Plato wylleth, as may appeare by hys reasoning with Socrates: that euery matter probable, must be reaso∣ned to and froe, that so by our sences it may be knowen, if for Philosophers we wyll be accounted & not for rude Em¦pirykes in phoedo, the which thing also Tullie affyrmeth in these woordes, Speculator, vaenator{que} naturae, Physicus: the Phisicyon is a viewer, and sercher out of Nature. Wher∣fore according to my capacitie, desyrouse of the originall causes of things, a louer of wysedome, may not be so satis∣fyed, but rather, séeke further, for the efficient causes yme∣diate, mediate, and material causes, with the commixtions of myneralles, qualities and temperatures, faculties, and degrées, aswell by authoritie, and reason, as by experyence, as in the next bookes shall appeare, seing they be accounted most happy, which do best attayne, to the knowledge, of the causes of things, for, Foelix, qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas, otherwise, myght phantasie stand, for vnderstāding, and wilful opinion, for absolute reason. ¶ The ende of the fyrst booke.
¶ The second Booke of Bathes ayde. FOR asmuch as in euery kynd of profession, the vse, benefyte, and knowledge of the cause is so necessarie, that without it knowen, it is in a maner impossible, that any Scyence may con∣sist, sure, and certayne. If so bée that science it∣self is nothing else but an intelligence habite, knowinge things, by their causes and effectes. I thought it conueni∣ent to speake in a worde or twoo, of the efficient, immediat, mediate, and materiall causes, of the heate of Bathes: that so the ende, which is the vse or profit of the thing, for which wée labour, may more manifestly appeare, and the abuse which is the improper ende of things, may bée auoyded: an argument, as I suppose, not impertinent to this our present purpose. In describing the which, diuers Philosophers haue bin of diuers mindes, as hereafter shall more playnely ap∣peare, and certainely this disagréeing of so wyse men, may present, argumentes of most waighty questions, to you ve∣ry doubtefull, vntill they be discussed. Therfore, that I may not séeme ouer tediouse, nor yet ouer briefe, I will alleage the chiefest, aswell of the most auncient, and of the midle sorte as of the later, in our tyme. Mileus the Philosopher, hath spoken in this case, and hée said ye cause through which the waters of Bathes be heated, is none other, then a winde, heatinge in the depth of the earth, and in the hollownesses which be in the bowels of the same. Wherefore, that heat reboundeth vpon the water, & so it commeth forth hot. Rentiphilus and Thesmophilus in this point bée contrary to Mileus, and the world folowed them: who sayd, the earth in those places is very thinne, and not of coniuncte partes, so that the heate of the sunne entring, heateth the water, in
the hollownesse of the earth, and in the caues, and trenches, which be in the depth, by means wherof it cometh forth hot. Democritus contrariwise, sayd that the cause of the heate, of hot Bathes is, for that in the holownesses of the earth, there be mountaines of Chalke, and heapes of ashes, which when the water doeth runne vpon, it is heated, and so the water passeth out hot, vpon the face of the earth, and of this mynd, haue béen many that I haue consulted with, concer∣ning the hot welles at Buckstone, which opinion is altoge∣ther vayne as hereafter shall appéere, left vnhandled, in our woorke dedicated thervnto, wishing therfore, all those that will knowe, the reason at large, why, and how, waters be∣come hot, to reade this our woorke, where I doubt not, they shall finde wherwith to content them. Seneca, and Albertus magnus, affyrme, that the imediate or efficient cause, of the hot Bathes, is for that they runne vpon a Myne of Brimstone, and thorow it are heated. And this opinion, they, and also Sauonarola, wyth many other would father vpon Aristotle. Howbéeit, so great a Philoso∣pher, could not so much as thinke it, the reason is, bycause they had read, in a certayne booke ascrybed to Aristotle, de proprietatibus Elementorum, that the waters of the Baths, flow hot, bycause they passe through a Mine of Brimstone, which booke to haue béen none of his, it may appéere by o∣ther places, in his woorkes, wherein hée fréely protesteth a contrary iudgment, as in secundo meteore et in problematū 24, sectione 17, probl. The last, and truest, is the opinion of Aristotle, who sup∣posed, that the waters of Bathes, were made hot, of a most strong, and seruent cause, which hée supposed, to bée none o∣ther, then fyer included in places vnder the earth: and that fyer is vnder the earth, it may easely appéere at Eclam, in the Isle of Iseland, and at Varigazzo and Florence in Italy, and also in Sicilie, and betwéen the great seas, also in Dar∣byshire,
with infinite other places beside. Now, that the truth, & falshode, of the aforesayd opinions, may more cléerely appéere, the diuine godhed, first called vp∣on, we wil lay this foundation, that all simple water, essen∣tially challengeth, vnto it selfe especiall cold, for it is of cold elements the chéefest, as the prince of Philosophers decla∣reth, and as hereafter it shalbe made manifest, in the table of the things naturall, in the third booke. Moreouer let this be a principle, that all water heated, must be supposed to be by vertu, & essence, cold, for al such so demisse of nature, returneth to cold, as by experience we do proue, for if it be takē in a vessell out of the spring, it waxeth cold, whereby it is inferred that the waters of Bathes, by some other meanes become hot, must be by proper essence and nature, virtualiter cold, accidentaliter hot. Furthermore séeing water is so cold, as in the last degrée the qualitie especially disproporcionated, with so great a de¦grée of heat, as is the degrée of feruent heat, cannot be indu∣ced, but by an especial heat. So that, likewise it is inferred, that it is not so heated by a wind heating it, as it pleased Mi¦lene, nor by the heat of the Sun, as it pleased Reutiphilus & Thesmophilus, nor yit bicause it runneth vpon a moūtayn of Chalk or ashes, as Democritus supposed: séeing these can bring nothing to passe, beyonde their owne proper degrée, while they work according to nature, except it work vpon some subiect, which is like to the worker, & so by affinity re∣ceue the impression, as the light by the brightnes & cléernes of Diamonds, Saphirs, & Cristal, or such like, strengthning the same, but in these, of thē afore aledged, ther is no such apt¦nes of heating, cooling, moystning or drying, or by any other meanes furthering the same, as you may perceue by your own outward senses. Beside these heat preserued, becometh more mighty, being ioyned to drynes, then to moysture, sée∣ing drines doth whet & sharpen heat, contrariwise moisture doth dul it, as you may also easely gather.
Lastly, actuall fyre, working vpon the water it self, can not put into it a greater degrée of heat, the water it self re∣mayning, then the degrée of feruent heate: Experience doth verifye the supposition whereby it may be inferred, that the waters of Bathes can not be brought to so great a degrée of heate, by whot vapoures vnder the earth, nor yit by their dashing from hyghe places, and craggie, for then the wa∣ters, descendinge out of the cragged rockes, in the hyghe hilles, in Kayer Naruayne shyre, there called VVithua, and out of the rauen cragge in Cumbreland, shuld through their longe course and violent tossinges become hote. But ex∣perience proueth the contrarie, therefore dashinge togy∣ther, and passage of the waters, through stony places, is not the immediate cause of the heate, of the waters of Bathes: Séeing that effecte, lastly is fyre, neyther be such vapours, or dashinges, matchable to fyre in heate, so that from them, such an heate can not procéede. Wherefore it shalbe shewed that if it be heated, their heat shal bée by none other means, but of fyre. And séeing fire doth so heate, it ensueth, that in the bowels, of the earth, fire may be found. Which, as wée haue sayde, shalbe farther approued, both by experience, and reason. Auicen and Auerhois do permit, that Elements are for∣mally in things mixed, which thing we leaue worthy to bee graunted by their authoritie: so that then thus wise we wil argue: It is an harder thing for nature to be able to bringe forth in the bowels of the earth, a thinge mingled perfyte, then a thing simple perfecte, when as a thing mingled thus wyse, can not be produced without the simple, séeinge it is presupposed: but nature can do the first, séeing it bringeth forth Golde, Siluer, Brimstone, Salt peter, Alume, Iron, and all other myneralles, Ergo, it can do the seconde: ergo it can bring foorth fyre also. And the cause of the beginninge of this fyre, is none other then that which is assigned of A∣risto.
in secundo meteo capite de terraemotu. And it is an ex∣halacion, hot and drye, included in the concauities of the earth, where it séeking a passage out, and not fynding, it is laboured, being so laboured, it is rarified, and beinge rari∣fyed, is kindled, bycause great rarefaction standeth with great heate. If therefore it happen that where such vapour is included, and after the maner as is sayde, inflamed, if I say it happen, that there be metal of Bitumen, or Sulphur, it is also kindled, and the fyre is so longe preserued, as the matter féeding it, shal not fayle, which matter féeding, must now be searched out, bycause it is not yit euident, what it is, and also many of those which doo followe the opinion of Aristo. concerning the cause, preseruing the fyre vnder the earth, do disagrée, although all do confesse, that this fyre vn∣der the earth, hath some subiect preseruing it, and that thys fyre, is the cause of the heate of the waters of Bathes, here∣after shall appeare more euidently. Iohannes de Dondis, an excellent learned man, and a pure Peripatetique, hath made a very goodly treatice of the hot welles, in the fielde of Padua, and there amongst other que∣stions, hée moueth this: Whence it is, that the waters of Bathes doo springe hote? hée aunswereth at the length with Arist. and sayth, that the cause is fyre vnder the earth, and that such waters doo flowe perpetually hote, bycause the fyre is perpetually preserued, in those places vnder the earth: after hée demaundeth what is the cause preseruing, and aunswered (wherevnto very ignorauntly Sanonarola cleaueth) that it is heate, excitated of the Starres, in the face of the earth, which heate hée affirmeth to bée, not onely the cause preseruing, but also the efficient, as it were: and the materiall and subiect of the fyre, hée supposeth to bée an exhalation hote and drie, that is wynde. And bycause the wynde is still ministred, therfore that especially fyre, is per∣petually preserued, and perpetually heateth the waters.
Afterward he demaundeth, of the place, of that fyre vnder the earthe, & sayth, that it is not nye the centre of the earth, bicause then, it would easily bée corrupted, for the earth, is ther most pure and therfore, the vertue doth more florish, so that it is most colde, neither is the place of the fyre, vnder the brimme of the Earth, for if it were ther conteyned, it would burne vp the plantes, and whatsoeuer is in the face of the same, and therfore he concludeth, that it is in the mid∣dle hollownesses, betwene these two extremes, that is, bée∣twene the centre, and the face of the earthe, & he addeth, that this place, where the fyre lyeth, is distant from the face of the earth .xxx. Myles, whereby it appeareth, that he woulde haue the Sunne, to perse the earth, by the space of .xxx. My∣les. But this opinion is false, bicause, if the beames of the Sunne, should kéepe fyre vnder the earth: it must fyrst passe, thorough the face of the earth, & then passe, part after part, vntill it come, to that especiall heate, and so afore it come to that fyre, it would burne, whatsoeuer is found on the super∣ficies of the earth. But admit that this heauenly heate, pas∣sing thorough the superficies, of the earth, do not burne all that it encountreth, yet it wyll not preserue that fyre, by∣cause, seing it is .xxx. myles distant from the superficies of the earth, as he sayth, toward the centre before the heate ex∣citated of the Sunne beames, come thether, it will bée so flacke that it wyll not bée warme, therefore, the opinion of Ioannes is false. Againe, if fyre vnder the earth, that is this flame, and especiall heate, were perpetually preserued, of the heauenly heate, it would ensue, that in colde Regions, waters of Bathes wold not be hot, but in hot Regions, they would be most feruent hot, bicause in colde regions, ther is but small reflexion of the beames of the Sunne, for which cause they be cold. Therfore the heate of the Sunne, in them can not bée so hot, that it should minister too the fyre, vnder the earth so strong an heate, but in the hot Zone, ther shold
not only be so great an heate, that those waters should bée most hot, but also, all things should bée burned. But dayly ex¦perience, proueth ye contrary, & also the authoritie of Matten Curtesse, in his booke of Nauigacion, to Charles the fith Mo∣narche. If therefore, the heauenly heate, were the cause of heate, vnder the earth, in cold climates, hot waters wold not flow, but alwaies cold, & in hot regions, they wold burst out most hot, yit the consequēt is false, bicause ther are found hot Ba∣thes, in the cold countreyes, as is shewed afore. Also, in the féeld of Lukes, ther be most hot bathes, although that place, all the yeare, for the most is couered with snow, as testifieth Fallopius, what néede we séeke examples so far of? our coun∣trey is colder then Italy and yit at Bathe, S. Vincents, and Buckestones, alwaies they flow hot. But if ye heauēly heat, wer ther so reflected, snow would fyrst be melted. But that is not so, for ye snow, sometime continueth longer, sometime shorter. Let it bée, that the Sunne beames, may be hot in the face of ye earth, by Antyparistasis, yit ther can not be so great Antyparistasis, that so great heat should be excitated, for that ther is not such Antiparistasis, made in the sommer. Agayne, if ye opinion of Ioannes should be true, ye discōmodities which are aforesayd, should ensue of the opinions, of thē which did say, that the waters of Bathes were hot, thorough the heate of the sunne, and wynd. Moreouer the opinion of Dondis ap∣peareth false, by that that he supposeth, one thing very false, that the heate of ye sunne, heateth vnder the earth xxx. miles, which thing is most false. For at our being in Wookie hole, besydes Wels, and in Poole hole, besyde Buckstones, in the chéefe of sommer, those places were ryght colde, yet not half a myle, from the Sodde, or turphe of the earth. Also Theo∣phrast in his history of plantes, affyrmeth that the rootes of trées, or plants, do stretch so far into the ground, as ye heate of the Sunne, doth perse, where also hée sheweth, that some
sayde, that the rootes of trées, did counteruayle the length of one foote and an halfe, which opinion there also hée confu∣teth worthely, for it is more then manifest, that many trées, do take deaper root, as the oke trées, pyne trées, larnix trées, fir trées, ash trées, & plane trées, with infinit others, howbeit of ye lēgth of ye roots of ye plane trées, he reciteth for a miracle, bicause it stretcheth, direct dounward, vnder ye earth. 33 foot, which in other trées do not, although they bee perhaps lon∣ger. Therefore, séeing the rootes of trées, do descende, no dée∣per then 33. foote, and that also to be miraculouse, it plainly proueth, that the beames of the sunne, can not perse déeper, séeing the heat of the sunne, vnder the earth, hée would make the cause of their length, and of the heat of the waters of Bathes, which are proued, to flowe out of déeper places. Therefore, the opinion of Iohannes de Dondis, is altogi∣ther false. Other some there bée, followinge the Peripate∣tiques that would the cause of the fire to be a subiecte, fée∣ding such fyre perpetually, which alwayes preserueth itself, but afterward, what that féeding should bée, their is a dis∣cord betwéene them. Some of them saye, it is Allume, and the reason with which they are moued, is, bicause the fyre is perpetuall, and necessarely ther is required, some sound nourishement, which should last longe, and that they saye, is Allume, bicause it is hard, and compacte of substance: It can not easely be consumed, Vitruuius was the Authour of this opinion, in his eight booke. But this opinion is false, for there is onely a double substance, which may bée the nou∣rishement of this fyre, one truly oylie, and fattie: and the other thin orye, replenished with much ayer, but the one easly catcheth fyre, & long kepeth it: & ye other although it be easly kindled, yet it keepeth not ye fyre long, as it appeareth in styxes, strawe, & chaffe kindled, and like matter. Let vs now sée whether Allume (as some would haue it) may bée reduced to the one or the other, or noe; truely I can not see,
how it may be reduced to the firste, séeinge it hath no oylie thing in it, nor fattie, nor to the second, because allume is of a stonie substance, although it bée drie, yit that dryenesse is earthy, not ayery. And if it should be in the fyre xx. yeares, it would neuer be inflamed, as you may proue if you will not beleue mée. Wherfore the opinion of Vitruuius is false. Georgius Agricola in his booke which hée hath written, De subterraneis, which is truly, a very fayre, and most learned booke, as be all the other, which that learned man hath di∣uulgated, sayeth, that the subiect preseruing fyre vnder the earth, is Bitumen, for to this, he sayeth, some thing muste be subiect, and the féeding of this fyre, is required to be fattie, that it may easely be taken with fyre, and this is not desired in bitumen, as it appeareth of Naphta, wherof commeth our petrae oleum, which is a kinde of bitumen, and if it shall bée new, it catcheth the flame from farre, so that in the fields of Mutina, sayeth Fallopius, where it is gathered, plentifully, it is necessary for them which gather it, to leaue their candle farre from the place, wher they do gather it, and they gather it in certayne places vnder the earth, vnto which they goe downe by many steps, and they be most darke places, so that they are constrayned to carrie with them a light. Therfore séeinge bitumen may easely be kindled, and is plentifully found in places vnder the earth, as plenty of Naphta gathe∣red in the aforesayd place doth shewe: it is very like that it is the subiect, féeding such fyre. Secondly, Agricola addeth, and this marke yée, sayeth Fallopius, that when the heate, of waters of Bathes, is so great, and sometyme, they burst out most plentifuly sayeth Agricola, we can not saye, that the fire which heateth them, should be vnder the conduytes, of those waters, (for they would not so waxe hote) but it is necessary to saye, that the fire is in the conduytes, where the bitumen it selfe is. Of which thing it is an argument, that no matter can be found
which may be kindled, & burne in water, sauing bitumen, which also if you powre on water, burneth neuer the lesse: you may also trye this with Camphyre, which according to some, is a kind of bitumen. For if you kindle it, and caste it kindled into the water, you shall sée, that it will burne no worse, then if it were without water, wherefore when Bi∣tumen doth burne in water, it séemeth to be sayde, that fyre heating the waters, is in the conduyts, and not vnder them. Likewise this opinion may bée confirmed, of the propertie of bitumen, bycause it doth not onely burne in the water, but is also nourished of the water, for it draweth a certayn humiditie of the water, which it turneth into the nature of it selfe, and it is the cause, that it doth endure longe, prooue you this, I pray you, taking a droppe of it, and you shall sée the Naphta kindled, and dure so longe, that it may be mar∣uaylouse, which could not be, except the féeding of that flame were encreased by the humiditie of the water, which Nap∣tha draweth, and chaunging to his own nature, ministreth féeding to the flame long. And that you may proue of Cam∣phyre, and such other things, whence it is no maruayle, if waters of Bathes bée alwayes hot, séeing the fire, thorowe which they ware hote, hath for a féedinge and propre subiect plentie of bitumen, conteyned in the places vnder the earth, and longe preseruing the flame. This opinion of A∣gricola, although it bee very like to bée true, yit it hath a dif∣ficultie agaynst it, bicause both experience, and also the au∣thoritie of the most learned men, is agaynst it. For Vitru∣uius, which was a great searcher out of thinges vnder the earth, willeth that the fyre is vnder the conduyts, and yit Agricola sayeth, it is not necessarie. It is also agaynst the experience of the olde Romaynes, who as they were moste wealthie, least nothing vnproued, & amongest other things of those which did séeme vnpossible, they practised to make a well, whose water might continually slow hot, and the mat¦ter
succéeding, according to their desire, for they framed bra∣sen pypes which they rouled into many roūdnesses, so yt the pypes did resemble the Spyres of a Dragon, and for this cause, they called the pypes dragons: these pypes so framed had in the one part an hole, by which cold water entred in, and by another hole, which they had belowe, the waters of the fountayne did enter in, and afterward vnder the spyres of the pypes, they made fyre, by which the water of the first spyre was skarcely heated, the second more, the thyrde yit more, and so in all, the water was more hote, and so conti∣nually the water of the wel flowed hote, and would alwais haue broken out hote, if they had kepte the fire still, vnder those spyres, which thinge also you may perceyue by stil∣linge: therefore séeing both experience, and also authoritie teacheth, that water can onely ware hote, through fyre vn∣der it, without bitumen, it is false which Agricola hathe sayde, that it is not necessary, that fyre should be vnder the conduytes, which thing also is hence euident, bicause in the Bathe of S. Bartholomewes, in the fielde of Padua, as te∣stifieth Fallopius, their is a certayne well, into which cold water entreth, yit as soone as it is ther, it waxed hote, and this is not done bicause bitumen is there, as sayth Fallopi∣us, but bicause fire is vnder that place. Also in the Valley of the same bath, there are two places, out of the which ther is drawen clay and in the place, wher clay was drawen out there is found Glarea, and most hote marble, and that heat procéedeth not of bitumen, but of fyre vnder that Glarea. Furthermore, if waters were hote, of fyre nourished of bitumen, béeing in the conduytes, as Agricola sayeth, it would followe, that all waters in theyr passage, shoulde haue in them selues some fattynesse, and also, smell and taste of Bitumen, yet this is false, bycause there bée ma∣ny in which there are none of these, as the waters of the Bathes of Buckstone.
And those waters which haue Bitumen in déed, as ther are some found, which haue in them fattines, and smell, and taste of bitumen, and all things, as is the clay of S. Bartho which in déed tasteth of bitumen iudaicum, as affirmeth Fal∣lopius, bicause that in that Bathe, Bitumen burneth, and therefore representeth smell, and taste, and all things of bi∣tumen. But some man will saye, note you, that fattines is not in all waters, bycause perchaunce, the bitumen which they conteyne, is sound, so that it can not bée melted. This I graunt, yet both the smell, and also the taste, ought to bée perceyued, if it were true, besydes that in such waters, ther ought to bée vapoures of bitumen. Therefore the matter of bitumen, is not necessary in all waters, that by reason of it, they should be hote. Therefore, let vs omit the opinion of Agricola, and come vnto another which is true, and it is the opinion of Aristot. and of them which doo followe Arist. which is, that the matter preseruinge fyre, is Brimstone, and that this was his opinion, it is euident of him selfe, in the 24. section of his Problemes, and the last Probleme: for there hée demaundeth the cause why hote Bathes were cal∣led holly, and aunswereth, bycause they wer made of things most holly. And things most holly, hée calleth Brimstone, & lightening: and hée called Brimstone moste holly, after the maner of the auncient persons, which vsed it to clense their sacrifices, wherevpon, in Gréeke it is called theion, as it were diuine: of this place therefore it is clearely gathered, that the mind, and opinion of Aristo. is, that the matter pre∣seruing fyre, heating water, is sulphur, which séeinge it is not méete to be burned out, in the conduytes of the earth, it is necessary, that it be burned out elswhere: Hée sayeth besyde, that lighteninge, is the cause engendring such fyre, and by the worde fulmen, you maye not vnderstande Bitu∣men (as amisse Ioannes de Dondis did) that he might cleaue to the common opinion, but Aristo. hath accustomed in hys
Problemes: first to assigne the cause naturall, then some common, and the common opinion was, that lightening dyd heate waters. But let vs omit this, and let vs come to the naturall, and it is that the matter féeding fyre vnder the earth, is Sul∣phur, as experience it selfe teacheth. For at Bath, sensibly it may be proued, that brimstone, boyleth in the water, yet I not deny, that Bitumen also, is not the continuall féeding of fyre, but I affirme, that fire in some places, is fedde by brimstone, and in some places by Bitumen. So that I will conclude, howe that necessarily, the waters which doo waxe hot through Sulphur, haue smell and tast of Sulphur, as the bathes of Bath hath, of which folow∣ing more largely shalbe entreated, and those of Bitumen, haue smell and tast of Bitumen. But when as al bathes, haue not immediatly thone of these, hence it is, that some waters be found, which doo represent neyther Sulphure, nor Bitumen, as at Buckstone. And when they passe through stonie places, they doo lose straight way, if they haue Sulphure or Bitumen, bicause some waters do not boyle in Sulphur, do waxe hot in the iorney. Therfore such waters tast not of Sulphur, the same I say of Bitu∣men, séeing there be some waters, which doo waxe hote through it, that they passe through places, in which Bitu∣men burneth, and those which doo waxe hote, thus wise, doo not of brimstone nor bitumen. Howbée it these waters if not immediatly, yet mediatly they wax hote, by reason either of brimstone or Bitumen, preseruing the heat, as in my benefite of Buckstones bathes may appeere. But here ariseth a doubt, why these fiers goe not forth, séeing fier consumeth all things, this is true, if it be not still fed, but Sulphur or Bitumen, be quickly regenerated again, therfore it is no dout, that fier hauing matter to burn on, is preserued alwayes. That it quickly ingendreth again,
Strabo testifieth, so that the digging of it, béeinge intermit∣ted, for the space of fower yeares, they shal finde agayne, as great plenty as afore, whereby it is sufficient to feede fyre continually, when as continually it is engendred, and by the same reason, for euer preserueth the bathes. Lastely, if it be obiected, that if so great fyre be preserued vnder the earth, that it may cause the waters to come forth so hote, it should followe, that where such hote bathes were, there should bée vomica and a chimney, out of whiche that flame shuld bée expelled: I say, it is not néed to ymagine, that this flame, is equall in all places, but in some places is great, in some small, and therefore where it is greatest, there it bur∣steth out, and where it is small, the smoke passeth out, to∣gyther with the water, as at bathe, which smoke smelleth there of the nature of sulphur, howbeit in other places, it may bée of bitumen, and that smoke is made bothe bicause the sulphur and bitumen haue in them, a porcion of earth melted, and hence it is, that this fyre may be longe preser∣ued bicause it is a sound matter, I call it sounde, bycause both brimstone and bitumē, be it neuer so pure, and myn∣gled, haue alwayes earth mingled withall, wherevpon, al∣though in some places, the fire bée not great, bycause it is in a sounde subiect, which with his soundnes, doth long en∣dure, the flame also endureth longe. Therefore, the matter by which fyre is fed, in places vnder the earth is sulphur, eyther pure, or else commixed with his owne earth, or else bitumen, or some kinde thereof, as Fallopius moste reaso∣nably affyrmeth, where you that bee learned, if this suffise you not, may reade further to content you. That the me∣talles of bitumen or Sulphur, doo take the beginninge of their heate, of wynde inflamed in the places vnder the earth, it is shewed. But howe the waters do waxe hote, thorowe that heate, receyued in the Metalles, and where
that flame is conteyned, wée muste nowe séeke, séeing it is not euydent enough. Therefore, there bée in this thinge two opinions, one of Agricola that the waters waxe hote, bicause there is in the same conduite, with the waters, both fyre and coles, by which they do waxe hot: and the opinion is most lyke to be true, and partly true, bicause we sée, with the water passing forth, that some of the metal passeth forth, and remaineth on the froth, in which the water boyleth at Bath, and this could not be, except the fyre and water, wer contayned in one and the same conduite. The other is the opinion of Empedocles, propounded vnto vs of Seneca, that the waters be hot, not bicause they passe thorough the bur∣ning metall, as Agricola supposed, but bicause, they passe thorough places, vnder which there is fyre kyndled, togi∣ther with the metalles: Which opiniō séemeth good enough. For we haue in the springes of Buckston, certaine well springes, into which water entreth cold bicause they come not of one conduite, but when it is ther commixed, it wax∣eth hot, which thinge, wée can not saye too bée done, through brimstone or bitumen, there kindled, and burning, séeinge there appeareth neyther any metal, nor fyre, but wée must suppose, that this is only done, bycause the metall burneth vnder those conduites the water there is altogyther puta∣ble, and yet do breake out hote, as you haue heard, which thing should not be, if they waxed hote through their pas∣sage, through metalles fyred, but they would necessarily, haue the smell and taste, and some substance, of that metall which as I haue saide they altogyther lacke, therfore wée must say that they be not only in vse too bée dronke, and to make meats, of, but also they wash their finest linnen whit, and be more whyter than with the Ryuer water harde by, and yet they breake out whote: bycause they gette heate of the Stones, by which they passe, vnder which Stones,
ther is fyre kindled in any of the mettalles aforesayd. This opinion of Empedocles, Vitruuius a man of greate expery∣ence confyrmeth, what then must we suppose in this thing? I lay that the meane, by which waters do wax hote, is two foulde, both already propounded, one verily propounded of the mynde of Agricola, and the other of Empedocles, for some are heated, bicause they passe thorough stonie places vnder which ther is fyre kindled, and burning in the me∣tall, of brimstone, or bitumen, neyther are these stones ther¦fore, turned into chalke, that one myght iudge, or into ashes bicause they can not be disgested, or bicause the heat is slack and lytle, and so greate onely, as may heale the stones, and waters, or bicause if it be much it is farre distāt, from those stones. And other doe waxe hot bicause they passe thorough the mettall it selfe fyred and burning, as Agricola suppo∣sed: you may gather of these two wayes, by which waters, doe waxe hot, the cause why, some of the waters of bathes, break out most hote, as ye hote bath at Bath, other meanly hot as the crosse bath, other betwen both, as the kings bath, other warme, as Buckstones, other cold, as at Halliwel in Flint shyre, called in brittish, Fannon Onen, Freny, which yit be bath waters, and haue a medicinable force, & facultie. Therfore the causes of these differences, are two: that is, smalnesse, and distance of the fyre, for if heate being in the conduytes, be much and strong, and that water, maketh his iourney, not very long, before it breake out of the earth, it wyll flow most hote, but if the fyre be lytle, and the iourney long, it wyll be warme. If the fyre be much, & the iourney meanely long, it wyll be meanely hot, as contrarily, if the fyre be lytle, and the iourney most short, bicause the water should keape the whole heate, which it hath receaued. And the contrary happeneth, if it take a long iourney, bicause in the passage, some heate euaporateth continually. After the same maner you may saye of water, which doth not waxe
hote, thorow fyre béeing in the conduytes, but by reason of hote stones, vnder which, there is fyre kindled, in the me∣talles, and that may be little or much, and neare or farre of those stones, and so the heate of the waters shalbe varied, by reason of the next situation, or the flame farre of, as also, by reason of the smalnesse or muchnesse, of the same, to which you must adde the long or short iorney, which the water it selfe maketh, before it breake out of the earth: for it may be, that fyre to be much and neare the water flowing ouer, and yit the water wil passe forth warme, or lue warme, or cold, bicause the water hath lost all that heat in the long iourney, as in Buckstones bathes benefyte you may reade. Hither∣to we haue shewed, that Bathes be hote alwayes, bicause the fire is continuall, and that the fyre is continuall, bicause new féeding may be ministred, and that the féeding is al∣wayes ministred, bicause in places vnder the earth, there is matter, of which it may be engendred. Moreouer, it hath appeared, how that fyre hath bin kindled, what it is, & wher the heate, heating the waters is contayned: wée haue like∣wyse shewed the cause why some waters do breake oute hote, some colde more or lesse, and wée haue confuted the o∣pinions of diuers Philosophers, and haue shewed how they resulte, &c. Nowe it followeth that we shewe of what na∣tures such waters be, and after what sorte they be cōmixed. I finde thrée maners of mixtions, in waters of bathes, for there be some which haue so farre commixed with thē, those things which they containe, that those things are made one body with the substāce of the water, & one forme hath resul∣ted out of thē, & such things, whether they be metallique or other, cā not be seperated frō ye substance of ye water, but in a very long tyme, & a most strong cōcoction or mutacion com¦ming out, such maner of mingling is yt which doth giue gret integritie, & maketh thē durable: this therfore is ye first ma∣ner of mixtiō, which may be cōsidered in ye waters of bathes.
Another is, that there are some waters, which haue recei∣ued metalles, in the concauities of the earth, as they flow, yet those metalles are not wel commixed, as we presuppose at Buckstons, so that of the metalles, and the water, there resulteth one body, by one forme, as we haue said in the first maner of mixtion, but they bée rather confounded with the waters. The thirde is meane betwéene both, for there are some waters which are partly mixed in déede with the wa∣ters, which they do containe, partly not commixed, as S. Vincents, but confounded, as we haue sayd aboue. But we haue not decréed to speake at large of the commixtions of al bathes, but onely in a word or two, of our baths of Bathe, and what the mineralles be supposed there, commixed or in∣funded in the course of those waters, by the qualities wher∣of, procéedeth their effectes medicinable, which in my iudge∣ment can in no way, more certainly bée approued, then by the properties, and that the collour, smell, and taste, best ap∣proueth. The colloure of the waters of the bathes of bathe, is swartie, greene, or marble yellowe, the yellownes of the brimstone, mingled with the water, making a sussible cou∣loure. Albeit, coulour maketh little or rather nothing to the knowledge of the facultie, as Montan. hath most excellently shewed, libro de componendorum facultatibus. For many things of coulour whyte, be found mere contrarie in opera∣tion, as for example, Snow is very cold, and chalke is very hot, yet eyther of them is most whyte. The smell of the bathes of Bathe, and S. Vincents is of brimstone, as the artificiall bathes, that bée made thereof, howbeit neyther smell also, maketh much, to the knowledge of the propertie, for it litle forceth, whether they smel swet∣ly, or otherwise, for of swéete smellinge and ill sauouringe things, ye shall fynd many of diuers natures altogither, ne∣uerthelesse, of these some coniecture may be made, yet that is vncertayne, and not perpetual: of tast therefore shall wée entreat.
Theion, chibur, sulphur, is sharpe, and stinging of taste, especially if you (as the Chimistes do, destill it into oyle or water) of qualitie whit & drie in the fourth degrée, as partly by his quicke burning may appeare, and of thynne essence. And vnto this taste (sayeth Montane) we must onely trust, for thorow it may be perceyued not only the temperaturs, of simple medicines, in heate, colde, moysture, and dryenes, hauing strength from the first faculties, as Galen sheweth, but also all other vertues, as of wiping, deuiding, opening, cutting, expelling and such lyke, the fittest instrument, the truest touchestone, of all properties, trying both toucheable and tasteable qualities. Taste, I saye, therefore aboue all other senses, as all the learned Phisicions affyrmeth, is too bée trusted, of which so great occasion being gyuen, wée can not but speake somwhat with that worthy scholler Melan∣cton, lib. de Anima. First defyning what taste, organ and obiect is. Taste truely, is a sense of féeling, which in the tongue or ruffe of the mouth tryeth sauours. Sauour or smacke is a perfect straining of the drie part of the humoure wrought by heate. Instrument or organ is a skinne pellicle, or philme, stret∣ched in the ouer part of the tongue, vnder the roufe, and hallowe fleshe, full of holes like a sponge. Obiect of taste is a qualitie in iuyce, in which moysture ouercōmeth dryenes, earthy heat, digesting them both. Of tastes ther be seuē simple, iii. hote, & iii. cold, the eight which the gréekes cal apoios, tasteles, without qualitie, is rather a priuacion, then that it might séeme to be taken any kinde of taste, as for the wine & fattie tastes, they are applyed to the swéetest, althogh Plinie in hist. plant. addeth vnto these suauē & acutum, albeit in my iudgement, dulcis, contayneth sua∣uem and acris acutum, of this iudgement is Theophrastus, Montan. Mont. & vi. C. other, & truly they be in nūber these:
, Dulcis, calid. , acidus, frigid. 1. , Salsus, 1. , austerus,   2. , Amarus, 2. . acerbus,   3. , Acris, 3.       gradu.     4.         Swéet, hote 1. de∣grée. Sooner cold 1. de∣grée. Salt, in 2. in the 2. Bitter, the 3. Rouge. 3. Sharpe,   4. Harshe. 4. The swéete taste is, sayeth Montane in comen. de simpli. medicament. qualit. that which is lightly gathered, deligh∣ting and pleasing the sense of the instrument, arguinge an earthy dryenes, temperatly excocted, and not parched, some∣time with an ayrie moysture, & sometime with a watery, therfore moderately warming, not much moysteninge, or drying, nay it shall easely be turned to nourishement, and alwayes, such kinde of strength, or vertu shall procéed from the swéete taste, if it be simple: but if it bée ioyned with o∣ther tastes, as to the bitter or sharpe, it shall bringe foorth mingled vertues, the scope of our purpose, for the quali∣ties of the Bathes. The Salte taste is that, which perseth and byteth the tonge, bringing a certayne kinde of féeling of heate, by rea∣son of earthy dryenes, in a watery moysture, thorow much heate deminished, and by such a qualitie, you may haue the force of heating, drying, and persynge to the depth, bicause of much watery moysture, mingled therewith. The bitter taste is that, which séemeth to shunne away from the tongue, something arguing, a farre greater demi∣nishing of earthy substāce, thorow heate, thā in the salt tast, & therfore it shall haue a greater force of heating & drying. The sharpe taste, is that which not onely doth byte the tongue, but also dryeth, setteth on fire, & as it were, burneth arguing an earthy drynes, perfectly diminished by heat, and
almost turned into the nature of fyre, therefore it heateth, thinneth, and dryeth exquisitely, also burneth & consumeth. Now for example of the swéete taste, Sugar, honie clarifi∣ed, or destilled, honie suckles. &c. Of the salt tast, Salt, salt péeter, Sal gemme, salt water Bryne, the salt sea. &c. Of the bitter, Aloes, Wormewood, Gaule. &c. Of the sharpe, Pellitorie of Spayne, Brimstone, Arse∣mart otherwyse called water pepper. &c. The sower taste, doth manyfest an earthy substance, not wholly ouer boyled, by heate, yet somewhat deminished, which substance, is mingled with very much earthy moy∣sture, therfore such a medicyne, doth coole and drye. The rough taste, shall temperatly set on edge, and stoppe, declaring, that in earthie substance, cold and drye hath soue∣reignitie, in this simple qualitie, yet somewhat lesse thē the harrish taste. The harrish taste, shall expresse great vneauenes, in so much, yt it may seme to cōsume the moysture of the tongue, arguing a manifest force, of earthie substance, in that sim∣ple, very litle ouerboyled by heat, worthily therfore termed cold and drye. Now for example of the harrish taste, we must trye it, in vnrype hedge peares, vnrype medlers, sloes, &c. Of the rough taste, in Mirtilles, in vnrype Gaules, in the rindes of pomegranates. Of the sowre taste, in vnrype Grapes, in Sorrell, in Vergis, Syder made with wyld aples. &c. But héere I would wyshe, that you should not thinke I meane so abso∣lutelie, of the simple tastes, but yt they may be ioyned, with any one of the other tastes, one, two, or thrée, more tastes, as in the waters of the bathes. Neuerthelesse, we giue the name, to the tast most sensiblie felt, which compound tasts, as briefly as is possible, we will expresse.
If the harrish taste, be adioyned to the sharp, that medi∣cine at the fyrst dash, shall séeme a litle to heate, bicause that power of heate, is buryed, or hidde, in much earthie and grosse substance, but when thorough inward heate, it shall be perfectly brought to acte, then moste strongly it heateth, so that it consumeth, and corrupteth, the flesh and partes, which chaunceth bicause heate, ioyned too a grosse and ear∣thy substance, is most stubburne, and seruent, as in red hot, Iron. But if this harsh taste, bée mingled with the swéete taste, then it shalbe meane betwen heating and cooling, and shall so much enclyne to the one or the other, as it shal haue the more, of eyther of the tailes. And this strength it shall haue, of the harsh tast, that it may stoppe, and make strong: of the swéete taste, it shall haue the power, that it may lin∣now, smooth, and fynely lewse and so it shalbe compounded, of sundry contrary qualities, yealdinge therfore, sundrye effects. But if the harrish taste, be adioyned to the bitter, it can not excede, in the extreemest excesse. And by reason of harrish∣nes, it shall haue power of strengthening, and binding, by reason of swéetnes, power to clense and open, &c. But if the rough taste, be ioyned with sharp, bicause thone is found in a grosse, and earthy dry, the other in ayery and fyry earth, it shall haue the power, of vehement heatinge, dryeng, persing, and burning &c. All the which operations, wher they be apposyte, we ought alwayes to vnderstande that the one or the other is done more or lesse according, as the one or the other, haue preheminence, which rule, in eue∣ry taste ought to be kept, aswell in euery simple, as in any compound, which Montane most excellentlie (as he doth all things) hath expressed. Commentario primo de simplicium medicamentorum facultatibus. But now, bicause those our bathes of Bathe, receaue theyr chéefe vertues from Brim∣stone, whose taste is sharpe, a woorde or two of the sharpe
taste, and so to the other myneralles therein. Sharpe taste as saith Cardanus de rerum varietate, lewseth the hould of the tongue, thorow the distemperance of heate, by reason wher¦of, of al tastes it most molesteth, not as taste, but of the qua¦litie therein, but so doth not the swéete, salte, nor the bitter. For simple swéete, is but meanly hote, or rather temperate, in the fyrst degrée. Simple Salte in the second degrée. Sim∣ple bitter in the thyrd degrée. Simple sharpe in the fourth degree. And there be no more degrées, nor no more tastes, ye argue heate. The fyrst degrée (as sayth Montanus commen¦tario primo de simpl. med facult.) sensiblie changeth. The second, a féeling payne, payne bringeth. The thyrd effectual∣lie changeth, with manifest signe of greefe. The fourth, both sence and temperature fynisheth? These things this ex∣pressed, verye easilie, and most sensiblie aproueth, the pro∣preties of these bathes, which thorow theyr operacion, draw corrupt humours, from the deapthe of the sound membres, expelling them forth in vapours, heating, concocting, and dissoluing spéedilie as Hippocrates lib. de internis affectibus, and Dioscorides, and Galen do testifie. But hauing therwith Copper, Iron, and Marquesite a litle. (Whose qualities and substances we haue séene, seuered, and tried, aswell by the Chimistes and Fyners in London, Cornewall, Cum∣breland, and Ireland, in the company of our Q. Maiesties Secretarie of Irelande, Iustice of the Admyraltie, & War∣den of hir highnes Mynes, Iohn Challoner, a gentleman, not onely excellent in all the Mathematicall Sciences, but also in Chimistie Phisike and euery part of Phylosophie, as also by our owne industrie,) as is on the hilles, betwene Marshféelde, and Bathe, and other hilles about Dunkerton (a lordship of the ryght worshipfull M. Bamféeld of Palte∣more, in Deuonshire certainly a worthy housekeper whose prayses, all the countreys sounde, so that it wer but in vain for me to extol thē) from whēce it may be presupposed, run∣neth
vnder the hilles this natural spring, of the Baths. For heare & there, as they haue digged of late for stones in their Quarries, on the hils sydes, they haue found thē so hot, that they were not able to abyde to digge, any deaper, by reason of fyre in the depth, the onely efficient cause of ye hot bathes of Bathe, the which most sensiblie, confyrmeth the opinion of Arist. Sauonarola and Fallopius and ours concerning the fyre in the earth, and not to be thorow Magique, as ye long receaued errours, of certayne wryters, hath sought to per∣suade, that by magical coniuracion, those Bathes wer made hot, a persuasiō most detestable & vaine, as by that you haue hard may be perceaued, & altogither ye illusiō of the infernal, & wicked spirits, to the end to peruert vs frō god, & to giue the glory, from our merciful redeamer, to thē moste wicked sins, continuing in theyr damnable destructiō, of theyr fyrst offēce, frō whom the holy Trinitie defend vs, to whom beal laude, power, dominion, & Empyre for euer & euer. Amen. These mineralles, séeme yet to requyre some thing, to bée spoken of theyr qualities, tastes, and effects. Fyrst of Cop∣per, which of taste is bitterysh rough, arguing therefore a fretting and drying force, and therwith clensing, in the bée∣ginning of the second degrée. Secondly Iron, roughish harsh doth bynd and dry, as it appeareth not only, by the electuary dayly in vse, named Scoria ferri, but also by the Smithes water, that they quench theyr Iron in, which is good to bée  of thē, that haue an issue of bloud. By the which you may gather that we meane not, for that wer absurd, ye those mineralles, be melted & commixed, with the water. But we affyrme, that theyr qualities are through boyling of ye fyre inunded, discussid, cōmixed, & dispersed by ye waters rūning forth, as may be wel approued, ye which also D. Turner te∣stifieth, what néede many wordes. The water tastles of his own nature, absolutly cold, & moderatly moist (as it is said, & shal be better in ye Table of the things natural) is in these Baths per accidens made hot, sharp, bitter, harsh, rough. &c.
Therefore, 1 Heating. Warming the colde. 2 Concocting, Concocting the crude. 3 Persinge, Opening the stopped. 4 Dissoluing, Dissoluing the harde. 5 Attracting, Attracting the cloyde. 6 Clensing, Clensing the foule. 7 Binding, Binding the seuered. 8 Drying, Drying the moyst. 9 Stopping, Stopping the flowings. 10 Consolidating, Consolidating the broken. Comforting the weake members, euen as if therin na∣ture had bestowed artificially, hir highest cunning, why say I not the God of Nature? for truly passing great be∣nefites, are to bée looked for, of passing great bountie. By meanes whereof, it helpeth not onely, all the manifeste gréefes afore specified in the fyrst booke, but also many other hidden and vnknowen sicknesses, which be least vnnamed: for if hidden sicknesses any where doo procéed, it is necessary sayth Fernelius lib. de abditis rerum causis, contrarie to them hidden remedies too consiste, as it dooth appéere, as well by authoritie and reason, as by experience, if you con∣sider with aduisement and councell, which is (as Plato sayeth, the very keye of wysedome,) the diuersities of qua∣lities, temperatures, properties, and naturs of ye Bathes. The which yet, in them selues are varied, aswell in heate as in nature: For the Kinges bathe is hote betwene both the other, and in curing most of the aforenamed sicknesses best. But the hote for many colde sycknesses, iointaches, pockes, rotten vlceres, more auaylable then the fyrste. But the crosse bathe is least hote, and therefore for chol∣lerique persons, & such as are easely disposed to feuers, more
commodiouse. All the which differences, may bée gathe∣red, by that which is already declared, leauinge too speake any further of them, to the learned and expert there, acknowledging with Aristot. that it is not possible for one man to know all things, although euery man ought to know as much as hée might: For Omnis homo nascitur, vt sapiens fiat. The ende of the second Booke.
¶The third Booke, of Bathes ayde. IN our first booke, the antiquitie, ayde, and commodities procéeding of the Bathes are at large described, with a confutation, of all those as reproueth the drincking of it. In the second, the causes of the heate, of the waters of bathes, and also the properties are reasonablie, and appa∣rantly to the senses approued. Now it resteth, that in this thyrd booke be declared, when the sicke come thither, what ought to be considered, and how, and by what meanes it may them profit: without which very litle could the former bookes benefyte. First therefore, afore any person doe re∣payre thither, it is conuenient that hée bée purged, if not a∣fore hée come thither, at the least wyse, before hée enter the bathes, according as 1 Sicknes, 2 Cause, 3 Accident, shall require. Sicknesse is an affecte, (but not euery affecte) for this woorde with Galene, is pronounced of many and dyuers thinges, but contrarie too Nature, by whom the action is fyrste hurte, eyther depraued, deminished, or taken away, libro de morborum caussis, libro prim. Therapentices, libro secund, comentariorum in libr. Hippo. de natura humana. Cause of sicknesse is that, vnto which any thing follow∣eth, which is named effecte, as sayeth Galene libro de symp∣tomatum differenciis. Accident is that, which the Gréekes call Symptonia, and wée properly in English, to fall and with fall, & is what so euer happeneth to the bodye, sicknesse, and cause excepted.
Of the which larger to entreate, were but friuelouse, for the sicknesses be already the chéefest shewed, and the out∣ward causes are to be sought, in the Table, of the things not naturall, and the inwarde of the table of the things na∣turall, the coniunct of them both, and of the accidents, notes of sicknesses, which is the argument, to knowe, whether ye néede adding, or empting, and that thorowe the consultation with the wyse and learned in Phisicke, the neglecting wher¦of, hath caused many a one to come thence, worse then they went. Some with the Goute in euery ioynte, which had it afore but in one or two. Some other full of byles, some of vlcers, and scabs, &c. And therefore, in the behalfe of my Countrie, not without aduisement, and censure to speak it, what letteth? but for such a one, as so deserueth, that there might not be a méete stipend appointed or some impropriat benefyce or parsonage, or prebend, at Salisbury, Worce∣ster, Herforde, Gloucester, Bristowe, Excester, Wels Landathe, &c. the furthest of not past a dayes iourney, as well for the poore, as the ryche: yea if in euery Cathedrall church in the lande, there were a promocion, for a graduate in Phisicke, that hée might be there to gyue both councell, medicine, and ayde, to the better setting forth of Gods glo∣rie, and the magnificence of the Maiestie, séeinge the liuing onely prayse the Lord, and not the dead, and also the healthy serue best the princely dignitie in all cheualry: considering further herewith that woorthy piller of Christian veritie, S. Ambrose, who sayeth, that the bodye is the tabernacle of the soule, and the condicions of the minde, as sayth Galene, in temp. Hippo. Platonis, &c. doo followe the tempera∣ture of the body: the which thing to be true, daylye experi∣ence proueth, as we knowe, and you also that vse too visite the sicke (a déed of charitie) how some dote, some bée fran∣tique, some starke madde, some numme, some loose, some disioynted, &c. then vnfit for any kynde of seruice, arte, mi∣stery,
facultie, counsell, or prowes, much lesse refourmable by sermons to pitie, and godlines, vntill they bée restored a∣gayne according to nature: the scope of Physike, if so bée Phisyke, as the prince Hippo. defyneth lib. de flatibus, (and as all Vniuersities, this 2000. yeares hath receyued it, as well Gréekes, Arabians, as Latinistes) is prothesis, kai aphasesis, an adding and taking away, and addinge of that wanting in the Spirites, humoures, and membres, accor∣ding to nature, and a taking away of that contrarie to na∣ture, in the members, humours, and spyrites. According to Na∣ture is 1 Health. 2 The cause of Health. 3 The effect of health. 4 Strength. 5 Custome and 6 Complexion. Health is an affect, according to nature, apte to perfourme, the actions of the same. Now, the Table of the .vii. things Naturall, you may vnfoulde, bearyng well all thinges in your memorie, vnles you meane to perfourme the pro∣uerbe. In at the one eare, and out at the other.
THE TABLE OF THE SEVEN THINGS NATVRAL, OVT OF THE VVHICH THE ACTIONS according to Nature doe spring, may be perceiued in this Table: howbeit not so often deuided as it might be done: supposing these will serue to giue the wise and learned patient matter sufficient to consult with the Phisition of, wherby that which is according to nature may be preser∣ued and ayded: and those things which be against Nature expelled, the scope of Phisicke as is shewed. Elementum is a simple and most pure bodie, and the best parte, of that wherein it is, can not be deui∣ded into any other kind: and of it all things naturall haue their be∣ginning without al generacion or corruptiō. Howbeit of Fire made thicke, commeth Ayre. Of Aire made thick commeth vvater. Of vvater made thick, cōmeth Earth. And yit here is neither corruptiō nor generation of the whole. For this is but a mutation of the parts onely. And the consent and agre∣ment of them is, the fyre with the Ayre in heate, in drynes with the Earth, in moisture the Aire with the water, & in heate with the fire, in coldnes the water with the earth and in moisture with the ayre, the earth in drines with the fyre, and in coldnes with the water & as the water to the fyre is extreme con∣trary, so is the aire to the earth. Elementes foure. Fyre. Absolutelie hot, and moderately dry. Ayre. Absolutely moist, and moderately hot. vvater. Absolutely cold, & moderatly moist. Earth. Absolutely dry, and moderatly cold. Temperamentum, is a tēpering of diuers qualities of the foure E∣lements in one body. Tempera∣ments or complec∣tions .ix. Simple Hot. Actiue. Cold. Actiue. Moist. Passiue, Dry. Passiue, Compound Hot and dry. Hot and moist. Cold and moist. Cold and dry Tēperate Of all alike, as it were by waight, the very trew and iust complection: but as hard to be found as Plato his Idea, or Arist. summum bonum, or as the the prouerbe is, a black Swan. Neuer∣theles, he that will iudge trew of complexions must alwayes haue in his imagination, the a∣foresayd perfect temperament. Humors (which may be called the sonnes of Elements) is a part con∣tained subsisting the bodie. Humors. foure. Naturall. Blud. Temperate, norishing the body contained in the vains swetish raigning in the spring. Flewme Cold and moist, sowpling the drie and hard parts without proper mācion, tastles, raigning in winter Choler. Hot and drie, clensing and quickning conteined in the gall bitter raigning in sommer. Melācholie Cold and dry, staying and binding, contained in the Splene, sower, raigning in haruest Vnnatural (as) Blud distempered with other humors. Flewm, waterie, glassie, slimie, plastoie, salt, sower, harsh, rugh Choler, Citrine, yelkie, like, cankrie. And eueri day they are thus moued as the blud betwen the ninth houre at night, and iij. in the morning. Choler betwen iiij. & ix afore none. Melācolie, betwen ix. and .iij. Flewme betwen iij. & ix. at night.
Membres, are bodies that are in∣gendred of the fyrst commixtion of humours. Members Spermatike (as) Braine, synewes. Kells, bones, grissels &c. Simple, as Skin, fatte, flesh, muscles, fillets, guts, veins, artires, Sy∣nowes, chords, gristles, bones, tunicles, &c. Sanguine, as Liuer, hart, kidnes. Milt, fatte flesh. &c. Compound, as Hed. Armes. Legs. Principal as Hart, braine. Liuer, stones. Officiall. as Synowes, seruing the brain Artires, seruing the hart. Veins, seruing the Liuer. Vessels spermatike, seruīg the stons Instrumē¦tall, as Stomake. Rayns. Bowels. Great synewes. &c. ¶Herewith see that you consider the composition, the complexion, the substance, the quantitie, the number, the figure, the operation, the vse & the disease, in part & in all the mēbres. Facultas, facultie, or power, is the cause of doing thas which is don: as the vvater is the cause of the while going about. Faculties or powers. Animal Ordeineth, discernith, composith. Mouith by voluntarie will. Sentith wherof procedeth the fiue wits. Vital. working, delating and wraining the artires. vvrought which is stirred by an exterior cause wherof com̄mith subtiltie & prouidēce. Natural. Doth minister. Apetite. Retaineth. Digestith. Expelleth. Is ministrid. Ingendreth. Norishith. Feedeth. Actio et opus, doing & working, is that which by the power is don: as the wheate conuerted to meale, is the grist of the mill. Action or operation, Vital. Mouith mirth, sadnes, hope, trust, feare, dispaire, loue, hatred, mercie, enuie, wrath, wodnes, wildnes, stobernes, humanitie, Empire, glorie, victorie. &c. Natural. Altereth. Ioineth. Formith. Animal Aaprehendeth. Fantasieth. Imagineth. Opinioneth. Cōmonsenteth In the two former ventricles. Iudgeth. Estemeth. Thinketh Disposith. In the middle vētricle. Remembrith. Knoweth. calleth to memory in the hinder part. Spiritus, is an ayrie substance, sub∣tile stirring the powers of the bo∣die to performe their operation: euen as a prince doth his counsel, and as the counsell doth the sub∣iects, euery one according to hys vocation and to that is limited by nature, wherin was neuer sene re∣bellion, but euery inferior redy to serue his superior, a paterne of a heauenly common weale, and for euery reasonable bodie to note & obserue, although he were an E∣themek: how much rather then of Christians, euery faithfull manne knoweth. Spirits. Natural. From the Liuer taketh his beginning and by the veines which haue no pulse dis∣persith in to all the hole bodie. Vital. From the hart procedeth and by the artires or pulses is sent in to all the hole body Animal. From the braine is ingendred, and is sent by the sinewes throughout the body and maketh sence or feeling. &c. ¶Now that you haue here in this Table noted vnto you, the things wherof the Natural bodies is made, with the powers and ac∣tions of the same: so likewise folowith the things not naturall, (so called) bycause they be in parcel of the natural body, and yet by the temperance of them, the body being in health so consisteth, and yet by the distemperance of them, sicknes is induced, and the body dissolued
THese things well waied, being ye things wherof we are framed, & the subiect of phisike, as ye frame of an house, is the subiect of the Carpēter, wyl vs to looke, in the Table of the .vi. things not natural, by what meanes we are héere cō¦tinued, & maintained, as therin further is shewed, for other wise, what auailed a lump not of an howers life, to be produ¦ced or so many good lawes, and holsome precepts, appointed, for the good preseruacion, & educacion, bothe of ould & yong, and auoyding of contagiouse infection, aswell from prince∣ly mancion, as from citie, towne, and Garrison, prohibici∣on, and admission of victualles, fit and vnfyt, for nourysh∣ment, the which, if all were hab nab, as fooles vse, to comyn & other ouerbould, in abusing theyr eloquence, to take from vs, in indifferent thinges, our frée election, seing God & na∣ture, to them that be framid according to nature, not impe∣dited in the actions of the partes, to them belonging, may as the wyse man sayth, vse fyre and water, at theyr discresi∣on, with eche other thing, in this lyfe, to them in euery sort méete, and decent, not forgetting, to giue God chéefe prayse, for all things, yet not in such sort, as the Puritanes, but bet∣ter we may terme them, pinis precisians, vse, who would haue, yt no man deserueth, be his acts euer so good, any thāks for them, wherby consequently, they would defraud Prin∣ces, of dewtie to them belonging, for theyr wel gouerning, of theyr subiects in vnitie, and equitie (Gods appointment, & so gradatim, frustrat ech man of merite for his wel doing, in his calling, not remēbring, ye god therby is more glorified, & yit puritanes are they named, pure I wold they wer: But how puretie & they may agrée, ye distain al ye works of men, as filthie, they thē selues being men, you may easely sée, we graūt, yt ther is not one so pure as he shold be, yit in puretie al do not agrée, neither is pureti therbi, excluded frō ye saints of god, he is pure, to whom god imputeth not his iniquitie: & he is pure in worldly pollicie, who offendeth not the laws of any maiestie, god graūt that so pure we be found, when
we are called to the one or the other for tryall of our pure∣tie, and then shall we be happy, the which kinde of puretie, euery man that feareth God and loueth honestie will séeke to obserue most vigilantlie. BVt now, fearing least all sortes, can not attain to the perfect meaning, of these our Tables, and they in especiall, who altogither bée igno∣rant in Phisike, therefore wée haue prouided, these signes folowing in compendiouse order, forthe of the Table, which in euery sicknes, are taken, as sayth Ioannes Almener lib. de lue. Hisp. eyther of things not naturall, of things naturall, or of things against nature. Of thinges not naturall, as in what ayer the pacient hath remayned, what meates and drynkes hée hath vsed, what exercyse, he hath practised, what filling, what empting, what sleape, what watch, hée hath sustained, what ioye, what so∣row, and so lykewse of other things. Of thinges naturall, as of what complexions, humours, membres, powers, operacions, and spirytes. To these may may bée added, the inquierie of the things annexed to na∣ture, as age, region, custome, climate, strength, arte. &c. Of things against nature, sicknes, cause, and accident, and that thrée maner of wayes, of the operacion hurte, of the qualitie altered, of things expelled, changed. Of the operacion hurte, by thrée meanes, eyther animall, vitall or naturall. Of the animall two wayes, motiue, and sensitiue. Sensitiue also two wayes, inwardly and outwardly. Example of the motiue as how it may be moued according to the whole, and according to the partes. Example of the outwarde Sensitiue, as bow hée dothe sée, heare, smell, and touch, as what gréefe he féeleth, what taste
THE TABLE OF THE SEVEN THINGS NOT NATVRAL, Aire. Good. Bad. Owt brethid from the North prolongeth lyfe, Out of the East purging ill vapours. Ouer sandie, grauelie, chalkie, chempie soyle. Needfull therefore to a Phisicion that hee bee a Cosmographer well traueled and an Astronomer. Out of the Sowth with filling vapours. Out of the VVest, causing mutation which na∣turally dryeth and Thorough the inflammation of sundrie starres, as when the pockes first preuayled at the siege of Naples, 1494. when the planets Saturne, Mars, & Venus wer in cōiunction with Scorpio. Also great standing waters neuer refreshed, dichis vnclēsed, corps of liuing things vnburied, many people in places vnclensed, ly∣ing remayning in small roome. &c. Meats and drinks Good. Bad. Of light digestion and holsom norishment. as Bread of vvheat. Drinke of Ale, Beere, Gascoine vvine. &c. Neither to new nor to olde, to thick nor to thin, to sweete or to sower. &c. Flesh of meane age neither to rammish nor vnclenlei. &c. Fowles clouen footed. Fish scalie of fresh water and that be firme and sound of the salt water. Frewts ripe, that be neither to sweete nor to sower, to harsh nor to bytter, to sharp nor to rough, and herbes in like maner. Of hie disgestion and of euill norishment. as Bread of pulse and other vnholsome graine, pawled drincks and others to new or to stale. Fustie and musty wines, old flesh, muddy fishe, whole sooted fowles, raw herbes and frewtes. Meates of sundrie qualities excessiuelie vsed how they hurt. as Cold doth congele and mortifie. Moist, do putrifie and hasten age Dry, sucketh vp naturall moisture. Clammie, stoppeth the vrine waies and the powers ingendringe tugh fleame and grauell. Salt, and oilie swimith long in the stomacke, causing lothsomnes. Bitter, doth not norish. Salt, swelleth more the stomacke. Harrish doth stop and restraine. Sweete, thicketh and chafith the blood filling and stopping the vaines ingendring corrupt sicknesses. Sower cooleth nature, hasting age. &c. Meats of sondrie qualities moderately vsed how they profit. as Cold asswageth burning choler. Moist, moistenith that which is dried Drie consumeth superfleus moisture. Clammie, thickith that which is subtile and persing. Bitter clensith and wipeth of, also molifieth and expellith fleme. Salt relentith fleame clammie and drieth it. Fatte norisheth and maketh soluble. Rough and stiptike bindeth and comforteth apetite. Sweete doth clense, dissolue and nourish.
Sleepe and vvatch. Good as That which agreeth with the cōplexion of the bodie, and that which is done in dewe time, manner, and length. &c. Sanguine vi. houres. Flegmatique vii. houres. Colerike v. houres. Melancolique foure houres at the least. profita∣ble to Concoction. Distribution. Aglutenation. Nutricion. Consolidation. Bad as That which is more than agreeth with nature, cause, time, age, region, sicknes, diet, custome. &c. In the day time, for both if they excede, be euill, saith Hip. as well sleepe as watch. Immediately after meate. On the backe afore digestion causing many disseases, by reason those things that should be auoyded by the proper clensing wayes called Emunctories be let slippe (contrarie sayth Montanus) engendring the stone, pal∣sie, goutes, crampes, numnes, forgetfulnes, &c. Labour and rest. Vehement labour. That which prouoketh panting, as any bodily labor, &c. Moderate labour That which trewly altereth breth &c. Profitable as After vehement labour, great euacuation, long sicknes, immediatly after meate, at times accustomed, and accor∣ding to the strength of the body. Hurtfull as Refusing labor at times accustomed, the meate disgested, body clensed, and the actions requiring it. Emptines & repletion Emptying naturall. as According to custome and complexion. as By the vertues, ac¦tions, powers and faculties. as The excrements of the first digestion by the bowels, the excre∣ments of the seconde digestion by the wayes of vrine, the watrie parte: seperated by the Reynes, the earthy part by the ways of the Splene, and the Sperme by the side wayes: the excrements of the third digestion by the powers of the skin, which wee call sweate, fumes, vapours, &c. Emptying contrary to nature. as The vertue, accustome, complection, lost, diminished, or depraued. VVhen the sicke knoweth not their departure. VVhen he knoweth, and yet can not retaine it. VVhen it keepeth neyther accustomed tyme, qualitie quantitie, nor order. &c. Emptying artificiall or not natural by Diet. Medicine. Chirurgerie by Diet in absteyning from nourishing things. Medicines hauing power of purging. Chirurgerie thorow opening the veynes, artiers, skin, flesh, &c. Scarifying, pricking, launsing. &c. Repletiō or fulnes two wayes. Qualitie. Quantitie. simple without humor, as excesse of heat. Excesse of meats. Reserued to the Vessels. Vertu or strength. Of humor in All filled, and that also is ii. wayes. reserued to the vessels. Bloud. Flewme. Choler. Melancholie to the strength one alone. Affectiōs of the minde. Healthfull, as Merie companie, Musike, enterludes, games of pastime, &c. as you may finde in Buckstones Bathes Benefite. Vnhealth∣full, as Great cares, much studie, vnquiet conscience, troublesome societie, thought, feare, anger, enuie, wrath, sodein ioye, sodem sorrowe. &c. Iohn Iones.
hée perceyueth in his mouth. Example of the inward sensitiue, as what imaginacion hée hath, what iudgement, what memorie, what dreames. Example of the vitall, as what pulse hée hath, what brea∣thing. Inquisition may be made of the passions of the mind in the sixe thinges not naturall. If it be taken of the opera∣tion naturall, that is two maner of wayes, of the operati∣on of the vertue ministring or ministred. Example of the first, as what appetite hée hath, howe hée doth retayne things receyued, how hee doth disgest, how he draweth & expelleth, how he had done afore, how he maketh water, how she hath hir terms, how thei vse venerie, al these things are cōprehended vnder the things not naturall. Example of things ministred, as how he is nourished, & searching of all these operations, whether the operation bée deminished, corrupted, or quite taken away. Of the qualitie changed, as of what sauour the breath of the weake person is, of what sauour the sweat is, of a woūd or vlcer, of filth, also of what colour the tongue is, the eyes, & whole body, what maner moysture, what dryenes, rough∣nes, smothnes, hardnes, softnes, of the tongue, belly, & whole body, &c. Of things expelled altered, as how great, of what quali∣tie, the superfluities of the eyes, nose, mouth, of the eares, of what quantitie, likewise of what quantitie the vomit, spit∣tell, knesing is, & also of what qualitie the vrine is, what e∣gestion, what snot, what sweates of the whole body, what gapings, wamblings, and subuersions, all these may be re∣duced to the naturall operacions expulsiue, bycause they are by nature expelled, whervppon to conclude, things fol∣lowing be signes, of bloude abounding. Of thinges not naturall, as by reason they vse thinges multiplying bloud, or bicause they bée of a ioyous & pleasant arte, as be singing men, enterlude players, or bicause they
vse meates and drinkes multiplyinge bloude, as bée poched egges, and the stones of cockes, pleasant foules, nourishing fleash, confected meates, very good wine, and such like. Of things naturall, bicause they be fleshye, of sanguine complexion, yong naturally merry, and such like. Of things against nature, and first of the operation hurt, heauines in the rootes of the eyes, and in the forepart of the head, beating of the temples, sweats, gapings, wamblings, much déepe sléeping, troublinge of the senses, slowenesse in cogitation, wearines of the partes without labour, great∣nesse of pulse, swiftnes and oftenes of the same, repletion of the vessels, whether they be veynes or arteyres. Of the qualitie chāged, as rudines of the whole body, & es∣pecially repleciō in ye veynes, of the eyes pushes in ye mouth. Of things expelled altered, as vrine, red, grosse, obscure, darck red, or rose red. In egestiō no signe doth appeare▪ spit∣tel is swéet, somtime mingled with blood, bleading by ye nose, frō the gums, mouth or priuy ways, ye hemorhoydes, or els in other places, sweat rāmish as of a gote, also many bloudy pimples, & to this is added, bicause ye patient doth dreame, yt he sawe red things, or blood, to flow forth, & that he did swim in it, whervpon the fowerth collectiō is rehersed of Galene, how he cōmaūded a certayn mā to be let blood, who dreamed that he was bathed in a tunne of bloud, but other swaruing appointed him an exercise which nothing auayled, as Galen afore had iudged, for shortly hée dyed, bycause the veyne (as Galene willed) was not opened. Signes of choller in the thinges not naturall, bicause of the vse of much exercise, or aboade in a hote ayer, vse of hot and drye meates, multiplying choller, &c. Of the things naturall, bycause the person is a yong mā chollerique, and such like. Of things contrary to nature, and first of the operation hurt, bicause the weake much thyrsteth, hath no rest, gréef in
the right syde of the forehead, & much light doth anoy them, sometime thei swonne and haue weaknes of appetit, wam∣bling, tingling as it were prickinge of nedles, madnes, by∣ting in passing forth of the ordure, & likewise of ye vrynes, swiftnes of pulse, with hardnes, and stretching: here conse∣quently may be placed of dreames, bicause they doo rather appertaine to the action hurte, as bycause they sée yellowe things, fyery which cause skaldinge, and sometime, they dreame that they flée. Of the qualitie changed, as yellownes of the face, and of the hote body, yellownes of the eyes, as it happeneth in the ioundies, bitternes of the mouth, drienesse of the tongue, roughnes, with rednes of the nose. Of things expelled altered, vrynered, citrine, yellow, sa∣fraine, egestions, safron yellow, bitter, spittle chollerique, vomit gréene, saffron yellow, bitter, sharpe moysture of the eyes and nose. Signes of fleume, of the things not naturall, as reple∣cion of meate, idelnes, length of sléepe, &c. Of things naturall, as bicause the parte is of a phleg∣matique complexion, a fisher, fat and such like. Of a thinge against nature, as of the action hure, little thirst, froning when the fleume shal be salte, weaknesse of disgestion, yea, in time of health, much sléepe, slouthfulnes, idelnes, lewsenes of the parts, heauines of the eyes, obliui∣on, gréefe in the hinder part of the head, the turning in the head, darknes, losse of appetite of sharpe things, wambling, knéesing, colde in the head, heauy or grauatiue gréefes, cold in the stomache, notable gréefe in the same, bycause muche fleume is gathered there, saith Auicen in Canonib▪ rarenes, slowenes, and gentlenes of pulse. Of the qualitie chaunged, as colde taken, whyte col∣loure in the face, and bodye: Superfluouse whitnes of the tongue, superfluouse softnes therof, scuruines of the bodye,
also swelling of the face, with softnes. Of thinges expelled changed, as vryne whyte, vncoloured chaffie, or subcitrine coloure, phlegmatique egestions white, slimie, or filthy wa∣tery, and such lyke, spittle slimie, waterie, multiplication of spittle, not bitter, but pontique or harshe, muche super∣fluities, passing out by the nose and mouth, and it is added to dreame of water, snow, or rayne, or such lyke, which may be reduced to operations, or actions hurte. Signes of melanchollie, fyrst of things not naturall, as bycause of ouer much cares, thought, feare, melanchollique meates, &c. Of thinges naturall, bycause hée is of melanchollique complexion, and accustomed to incurre melancholique dis∣eases, and such like. Of the thinges contrarie too Nature, and fyrste of the action hurte, bycause in the heade their is heauinesse, and that most in the lift syde, burning in the mouth, corrupt de∣sire of the stomacke, and sometyme doggish appetite: much watche, much solitarinesse, sicknesses of the spelne, as ache, heauines, hardnes, stillenes, many cogitacions, teares, or will to wéepe, staring, groning, slouthe, stretchinge of the, waste, little sléepe, if sharpnesse shall not bée with phlegme or sowernesse of the mouth, Illenes of the pulse with hard∣nesse, extenuacion, or deminishinge of the body. Of the qualitie altered, as brownes, or blacknesse, ap∣pearing in the body, much heare, the blacke Morphewe, which is a moste stronge signe, as sayeth Auerhois in Col∣lectaneis. Blackenesse in the nether eye lidde, especiallye blacknes of the eyes, and clearenes of them. Of things expelled changed, as vryne black, or blackish, tending to blackenes, gréene, wan, blackenes or brownes of egestiō, or stoole, spitle harrish, & bitter withal, sower knée∣sing, black bloud, & crudded, if it passe forth, dreames fearful. Also heare may be added, of dreames profiting or hurting,
yet wée must note, that those thrée kindes of signes, which Galen putteth of things, substanciallie sticking, of to fals and with fals, & operacions must be reduced, to these thrée, or these thrée to them, of all the which, reade Iacobus Siluius in his Tables vppon Gal. de caussis morborum, et sympto∣matum. entreating at large. And if it bée thus noted, you may as in a glasse, behould, things natural, not natural and against nature, also thinges helping & hurting, which may of you be supposed, by that which is already shewed. Yit all may be reduced, to those thrée of Galen, as it also appeareth by Hippocrates, comment. 1. de offic. who wyll haue the In∣dicatiues to be vnderstanded afore any other works of art, and they must be taken, of the knowledge of affects, for cu∣racion doth follow intellection, as euery man knoweth gui¦ded by reason, yeuen as, euacuacion of the similer parts, as made by indicacion, taken of situacion, as Galen plentifully declareth, De locis affec. To conclude, whatsoeuer thinges we doe take any knowledge by, we doo take them by sence and vnderstanding, & with those two powers, do we onely know sayth Arist. lib. de som. and according to Oribasius. 4. Aph. all knowledge dignostike, is had by signes, causes, or interrogacions, so that their follie is clearer then middaye, which vse the bathes of what so euer nature they be, doing it without consideration, of all, or the most things, menci∣oned in these thrée bookes, with the Aphorismes, medi∣cines and other things, contained in the last booke, accomplished, for the better intelligence of such as vse theyr help, which ayde, God graunt them, according to their owne hearts desyre. Amen. ¶The ende of the thyrd booke.
¶The Fourth Booke, of Bathes ayde. LAstly we shall place in this booke, certaine Apho¦rismes, of the preparacion vnto Baths, of entring in, comming out, diet, sléepe, and accidentes, with curacion of them. &c. Acknowledge your selues, with the holy Apostle Paul, to be in the Lords hands as the pot, is in the potters, saying beefore you goe in, altogither on your knées deuoutlie the prayers appointed in the ende of this booke. Such as bée disquieted, with any Feuer, being weake, slen∣der, and leane, must abstaine from Bathes, as saith Rol. lib. de Med. aquis. They whose temperature, is hot & drye, chil∣dren, springalles, yong men, leane, consumed, also women great with chylde, must eschue the bathes, yet I am not ig∣norāt, of ye youth dayly frequenting the bathes, which thing not only reasō forbiddeth, but also experiēce, for their skins therby, become not only wrinkled, but also tawnie, especi∣alli if they enclin, any thing to choller. Euery person going into the bathes, must fyrst clense ye bodies frō supersluities. All persōs affected or gréeued by iourney, shal not forthwith enter the bathes, but shal fyrst rest their bodies, by the space of a daye or two, yea or more. That day which shalbe ouer cold, windie, & rainy, ye bathes shal not be approched, neither in the pestilent seasons, saith Agricola lib de peste. and also Raza lib. de peste. neither in ye ful of the Mone saith Rolandus. Neither in ye leape yeare, sayth Sauonarola, bicause it is the yeare of Saturne, therefore in the leape yeare, you may not without great danger, vse them, for Saturne amongst all the Planets, is enemie to ge∣neracion, mans nature & good state of the bodie, bicause the state of the liuing bodie, consisteth in heate, & to proue, yt it is the year of aturne, this they say. The Saturnal yeare is
moued from .iiii. to .iiii. But ye leape yeares is moued from iiii. to .iiii. bicause euery fouerth yeare is leape yeare, ergo, the leape yeare is the yeare of Saturne, this opinion is not only false, but also rude, and vnlearned. The leape yeare is not the worke of nature, but the inuencion of man, for Au∣gustus Caesar deuised it, to make the yeare euen .365. dayes, vi. howres and odde minutes. But the leape yeare is the cōstitucion of man, and man hath not force to alter nature in the Theorikes, ergo, the leape yeare to hurte the nature o man, hath no more force, thē any other yeare. In the mo∣nethes of April, Maie, Iune, September, & October, when the ayer is temperate, be the best tymes. About an howre after sunne rising, in the morninge, if the dissease require, drink the water out of the spring, the body afore purged, the digestion fulfilled, and the bath fyrst clen∣sed, remaining cleane .vi. houres before. So much of the water, as shall not be gréeuouse to the sto∣mache, may be dronke. The water being dronke, the partie must walke gentlie, a few paces, in a temperate ayer. After the Sunne rysing an hower, enter fastinge intoo the Bathe, the disgestion fyrst being fulfilled. And euery person entring, shall fyrst emptie his bellie, and make water, if so be that he can not do that euery day, yet euery second or third daye. Any person going into the Bathes, shal sit in a place, some∣what distant from the spring, and so by lyttle & little, draw toward the spring. If ye parts vnder ye midrife be gréeued, sit vp to ye nauel, but if ye parts aboue the nauelbe disseased, sit in vnto the necke. The fyrst dayes vse it temperate, a small space: the dayes following, hoter, and a longer space. Vse the bathe, aswell in the morning, as in the euening, if the state of your bodie and strengthe shall require.
Such as be hot, weake, thinne, leane, and slender, must auoyde long tariance in the bath, it shall suffice in the mor∣ning from .v. vntil almost .vi. & so lykewise in the euening. Such as be fat, strong, cold, moyst, & women, do sustaine longer taryance in the Bathe, yt is two howres in the mor∣ning, an hower and a halfe in the euening. In the bath, you shall neyther eate, nor drinke, neyther by the space of an hower and an halfe, after theyr comming forth, except necessitie constrayne. Such as bée full of meate and drinke: muste abstaine from bathes. Before you be readie to faint: auoyde the bathes. When you come out, couer your selues with clothes, then go to bed, and sweat, for sweat sayth Galen de sanitete tuenda, euacuateth from al partes, an hower afterward you must be dryed, and put on warme clothes. Sléepe also, after sweate is conuenient: but in the bath abstaine from slumbring. When ye arise out of your bedde, moue with some light exercyse, or walke in a closset, or in a place, frée from distem¦perature of the ayer, especially the cold, and from the blasts of wynde. If you be either weake, or haue the ioyntache, vse a place of exercyse, and fricacion of the outward partes. If fricacion (which heare shalbe rubbing with a nettel clothe) shall not bée made (of which you may fynde more largely, in my booke of Buckstones bathes benefyte) wée must vse a suppositour, of honie, or of the roote of white lil∣lie, or larde, or sope, or els a fygge, and that before meate, of all which meanes to euacuate, shall heareafter follow. The head, at your comming forth of the Bathe, must be diligently dryed. So much meate as is conuenient, which wil bring vnto the stomache, neyther heauines, nor wambling, may bée in
due tyme receyued. Repletion muste altogither be auoyded, so muste the Bathes in pestilent seasons, and that for two causes in spe∣ciall: the one by reason it filleth the body with ouer muche euill ioyce: by reason whereof, it may enduce a spasme, and many other euilles: the other bycause it openeth the pores, making it readie to receyue the ambient infection. Such meates and drinkes must bée vsed as bée of light disgestion, good nourishment, not grosse, not stopping, not ouer cold nor vehemently hote. Héere we might enter into a large and ample discourse of Diete, if thorowly we should make mencion of all things nourishing, but our intente is not so farre as reason reacheth, to shewe, how all thinges a∣gréeing and disagréeing, of the Gréekes called simpathia, & antepathia, doth eyther assiste and strengthen our bodyes, or that doo alter and corrupt our bodies, séeing it would make the volume not onely ouer hughe, but also burden the Rea∣ders, that breuitie couete, and therefore, that we may bée ra∣ther pleasant, and compendiouse, then gréeuouse, or tediouse with some little entrance, that your senses may take some smacke of our méening, shall suffice, vntill an other place, more méete, considering also that in our Tables of thinges naturall, such things are distinguished. This truely, I ap∣point with Fernelius lib. secundo de abditis rerum causis. That nothinge at all can nourishe vs, which is not it selfe nourished & endued with lyfe, for stones or metals ar no eli∣ments, or nourishments for vs, but only either plantes, ly∣uing creatures, or such as haue procéeded from thē: bycause our life & health can not be sustained but by the lyf of other, & it heateth not the substance of our bodies, but by ye matter of them, & whatsoeuer of thē liueth most excellēt, is most hol∣some for our nourishmēt: for ye bodies of birds & foure foted beasts, doth better nourish then fish & them both, better then frutes or herbes, if ye referre like to like, of which peraduē∣ture
it is comprehended that nourishment is familiar vnto vs, first truly in spirit & diuine heat, afterwarde in matter, which receiued preparation vnto these thinges, & these wée call the whole substance. But if ye wil therfore séeme to say how yt the Scorpion & the Hemlocke, bicause they both lyue & be nourished with an ayrie substance, & heauenly heat, nou¦risheth vs, then ye are far deceyued, for it foloweth not by & by contrarily, euery liuing thing to be a nourishment, but it is beside necessary that the heat of the liuing thing be agrée∣able & familiar vnto vs, as in Buckstons bathes benefyt it is briefly shewed. But the heat & heauenly spirit of many, is against ours, altogither pestiferous, & deadly: that substance which is of things expelling poyson, & things veneming, is plased cōtrarie to the substance of nourishments, for, as the one is ioyned vnto vs in great familiaritie, so is the other hurtfull & pestilent: wherfore in the kinds of the whole sub∣stance, extréeme nourishmēts & things expelling poyson be contrarie. Betwene these as it wer, purging medicine take place, which neither nourish nor corrupt, as after shall bée handled, for now we will prosecute the Diete at bathe best to be obserued. The bread shalbe onely of wheat, leauened and good, ney∣ther hote nor stale: drink of cleane ale, or rather béere clean∣ly brewed, not ouer hopped, and stale. Fleash of Muttons, Kiddes, Rabbettes, and of all clouen footed foules, as well wild, as tame. Of fishes, Trught, Creuis de dulce, Breane, Barbill, Pike, Cheuan, Perch, Roche, Bret, Gurnet, Whi∣ting, Smelt, Cod, Millers tumbe: all the which bée good for chollerique persons. But they muste be boyled, not rosted, nor fried, or poudered, eyther with spices or salt, as Rolādus affirmeth in Hidri. Pottage made with chickens, or with the aforesaid flesh, may be very well vsed, & poched egges: but neither quayles, stares, pigeons, sparrows, nor any such bot & filling meats. Fruits, as almondes, raisons, damaske
prunes, & quinces baked, or any waydressed, be permitted. After meat reste or sleepe an hower, or more, but not by and by. If it shall be necessarie for the affect of any parte, anoynt the place, or emplastre it with the clay of the bathes, where continually the water floweth: but this shall moste auayle legges swollen thorow a colde and moyst cause, & vlcerated. Before the entring into the bath at euentyde, vse exercise for the strengthning of the partes, of the which I wishe you to looke in Buckstones bathes benefyte. The Bathe must bée dayly changed, receyuing newe or fresh water. Sée that altogither whyle ye be there, and lenger, yée a∣uoyde copulation, that is, the vse of women. In the euen tyde, let them enter the bathes vi. vii. or viii. howers after dinner, the disgestion béeinge fulfilled, as is sayde. Tariatice in the Bathe in the morning may be longer, in the euening shorter. If in the fyrst daye, the belly by the bathe be shronken, togither toward the backe bone, it is a good and wholesome signe. But if the wombe be puffed vp, or affected with ache, or else on whyle it is hote, and another whyle colde with other gréefes, it is an euill signe. If after certaine dayes the body beginneth to be better then afore, and the naturall operacions, shalbe a signe of cu∣ration or not curation. There bée .x. accidentes which vse to happen by bathes, as Rolandus testifieth, fainting, comonlie called swowning, immoderate watch, thirste, payne of the heade, costifenes, immoderate sweate, burninge of vryne, losse of appetite, rheume and feuers. The weaknes of the spirites which we al swowning, is
amended, if vineger of Iuniper, or that in which graines of Iuniper be macerated, and applied to the mouth, and nose∣thrilles. Likewise, confection of Buglosse or Borage, or Corrall of perles or preciouse stones, of the flouers of Rose∣mary, of Roses, or a sop in Gascoigne wine be taken. We do attribute watche, to the heate and dryenes of the Bathes, bicause it drieth the humidities of the skume, especially in chollerique heades, which take awaye, wyth things cold and moyst, or with this liniment in Latine, for the Apotecaries, in English, for your better vnderstāding. R. Vnguenti popul. Olei Nemipharis, Croci, Opii, ana. s.d. ointmēt of po∣pular buddes, of water lilies of saffron, of opium. eche halfe an vnce, eyther thrée graines. analsr. z. Mingle them, and anoynt the foreheade, but if that suf∣fice not, anoynt the wristes, and the palmes of the féete, an hower after supper take this drinke. R. Serapii de papauere, ana. s.d. Nemipharae,   Aquae lactucae, one vnce. Syrupe of Poppie, of eche halfe Of water Lillies, an vnce, Of water of Lettuse, one vnce. Commixed, take it going to sléepe, milke warme. Thyrst is thus remedied, thrée partes of water, one of wyne, but better with Barlie water, or with prunes boy∣led well, in the water of Violettes. The payne of the head is thus eased:
Assatae radicis Chamomillae,   Bellidlis, Ana. manip i d. Sweat Assa Chamomill,   Dasis. of eche halfe a handfull. Those boyle in Lixiuium or lie, and applie it, eyther too the head, or wash it therwith, rouling with warme clothes your head, suffering it to drie of it selfe. To make the bodie soluble, take the cleare whey of milke, after the chease is made, mingling therwith honie, and suger, or els decocte them, and drink the quantitie of a Gill, or a pinte fasting, eschuing the bath for that daie, pot∣tage of the meate of Gromell, Gotes mylke and wyne of mirtles, doth meruailousely profet, which is thus made. Receaue the toppes or buddes of the leaues, the fruite of mirtilles, of eche an handefull brused, boyled in Gascoigne wyne, to the consumpcion of the thyrd parte, being stray∣ned drinke a draught, so that the wether be not hot, nor the partie chollerique, nor apt to feuers. But what purgeth e∣uery humour chéefely by thée are to be ministred, if to Hip. as we ought, we giue best credit, as appeareth in his booke, De medicamentis purgantibus. Bolus to purge choller is thus made. R. Cassia newlie drawen Electuarium Lenitiuum of eyther z.v. drammes commixed with suger, in the morning fasting aboute foure or fiue of the clocke, not sleaping after, nor entring the bathes for that day, but kéeping your chamber, and within one hower, supping the broth of a chicken. Bolus to purge fleame, shall this wyse be compounded. R. Of the Electuary of Dates, of the apotecaries called Diaphaenicon, halfe an ounce, of the powder of Hiera sim∣plex, z.d. mingled with suger, obseruinge all thinges afore∣sayde. Bolus, to purge melanchollie. R. Electuarij indi, a dram and an halfe, of the confection of
Hamech thrée or foure drams of luger, as much as shal suf∣fice, taken as you know. A Clister to clense the Chol∣lerique. R. Of Mercurie, Mallowes, Centorie, Harts tongue, vi∣olets, Liuerwourt, of euery one halfe a litle handful, of the iiii. great cold séedes, of eyther .ii. drammes prepared, shall be boyled in a pine and an halfe of running water vntoo a pinte, then adde of Diaprunis Electuarie, of the iuyce of Ro∣ses, of eche half an ounce, of oyle of Violets, and fallet oyle, of eche one ounce, it first being strayned, minister it not o∣uerhot, nor ouercold. A Clister to purge the Phlegma∣tique. R. Of Mercury, Margeram, Minte, Orgaine, Byssope, of euery one halfe a little handfull, both brome rootes of the apotecaries called kneholme, and polipoodie rootes, of eyther one ounce, séedes of persnéep, and Dill, of euery one half an ounce, all prepared, boyled, and strayned, adde of the electu∣arie of Dates .iii. drammes, of powder of Sene prepared, i. dramme, and an halfe, of the oyle of Chamomile, oyle of Lillies, of eyther .i. ounce, and an halfe. A Clister to purge Melan∣chullie. R. Borage, Bauhne, Bassill, Mawes, Sauory, Tyme, of eche .i. handful, Sene Lawry, i. ounce, Carret rootes .ii. ounces al as is aforesaid boiled, in the broth of sheappes heads, adde of Diasenue in electuarie, i. ounce, Syrupe of Epithimum,
foure ounces, oyle of Iuniper, swéete Coste. of eche one ounce, of honie, and salt a little. A Clister to mundifie the bloude. R. Of hoppes, fumitorie, scabiose, endiue, cichorie, of eche halfe an handfull, rootes of perselie, and fennell, the inner pithe taken out, of gourde séedes, of eche the waighte of a Shilling. Boyle all these in a quarte of wheye vnto almost a pinte, all things ordered, as afore is shewed, adding there∣vnto Hiera piera, the weighte of sixed. Diacatholicon, sixe drams, honie, and salte, a pretie quantitie. A Clister to breake wind, and to clense all partes, without daunger, in any complexion, & there∣with comforting. R, Floures of melilote, of Chamomile, and Hissope, of eche a little handfull, of maydens heare, of dill, of eche halfe a little handfull, of the séedes of Anise, and cumine, eche one vnce, raysons the stones piked oute, a handfull, boyle all these in a sufficient quantitie, of the brothe of a cocke chic∣kin, euery thing first thus prepared, the which I wishe you to note also, in the reste: the herbes chopped, the rootes bru∣sed, the séedes broken, and boyled to a pinte, adde of cassia two vnces, of hiera picra iiii. drams, of the oyle of Dyll, of the oyle of chamomile, of eche an vnce, and half ministred after this sorte, so warme as you may suffer, at the towell knéelinge, the buttockes hygher then the reste of the bo∣dye, turninge after on the backe, then on the bellie, after, on euery side.
For the burning of Vrine, a perfect remedie. R. Séedes of Purselane, of Lettuce, of Endiue, of eyther one dramme, white Poppie two drammes, Henbane halfe a dram, Sebestens, thrée drams, Saffron a penie waighte, Licorishe foure drammes, Pine, ten drammes, fountaine water, thrée quartes, boyle all vnto the consumpcion of the third part, then straine it and take .vii. or .viii. sponefulles in the morning with one ounce, of the syrupe of Violets, and assure you before the fourth day, you shall sée worthie effectes. The Rheume, or destillacion of the head, is thus taken away. R. Sene leaues .vi. drammes, Rocket .iiii drammes, long Pepper .ii. drammes, make therof a powder, of which mor¦ning and euening, receaue a dramme, eschuing the Bathe, vntil the Rheume be slakened, this is also good, to kéepe you soluble, taken in a thinne alebury, fasting, or in whit wine if the partie be flegmatique, or hath the stone, last going to bed. The losse of the appetite, is recouered with this medicine, or with the ioyce of Pome∣granates, as saith Mesue. R. Cardui benedicti .iii. handfuls, clarret wyne, fountaine water, of eche a quarte boyled, vnto the thyrd, & strayned, vsed fyrst in the morning, a Gill or two, sweating after. If a feuer happen auoyde the Bathes, vntill you be amen∣ded. But you may sweate, if you be fat of bodie, and drinke your Cardnus benedictus drinke, or that which we haue ap¦pointed to quench thyrst. Things strāger, or of more force, I would not medle with, knowing how easilie the igno∣rant
may erre, and how bolde they bée, to put in experience euery recepte, without the aduice of them that can yéeld the reason and caues, of eche thinge mencioned, often to their great hurt, for who I pray you, who is so bold now a dayes as blind Bayarde, goodwyfe Margerie, and dame Siblie, Thomas Tinker, and Pierse pedler: oh lamentable cace, oh arrogant people, oh lawes where are you executed? Be ye therfore circumspect, seeke not for euery matter the bathes, but for such diseases, as the Phisicions doute any waye else to cure: nor gyue not councell in arte, wher the wysest hath néed to be sought you ignorant. In conclusion, I wishe that you leaue a note of the commoditie receyued, and a know∣ledge of your condition, and calling in the recorods of the Mayor of the citie, wher it shall be registred, vntill a Phisi∣cion ordinarie be appointed, who then shalbe ioyned wyth the Mayor paying to the poore mans boxe, as in Buckstons is appointed, and foure d. for registring your benefite re∣ceyued there, and for other things, some of the which, I wish you to looke in the latter ende of Buckstones benefyte, that the better ease may be found, the deuiding, of the male from the female, so that they may not sée, and embrace eche other, it being a thing not onely so vndecent, in the commendaci∣on of forraine nacions, but also a thing moste vnciuill, and barbarous. Therefore, I beséeche you, séeke in all thinges the glorie of God, magnificence of the state, and suf∣fer ayde for them, that shall come after. The which ayde, helpe, and benefite, I beséeche God, to graunt all them that bée fa∣uorers of the Gospel, obeyers of the Prince, and louers of their Countrie. AMEN. FINIS.
A Prayer made by the Authour of this ayde, to be saide of all persons disseased, méekely knéeling vpon their knées, be∣fore they enter into the Bathes. AS thou hast (most mercifull Father) through thyne infinite goodnes and grace, vouchsafed to permit vs to come vnto these thy Bathes naturall thyne appointed ayde, for the bene∣fite of vs wretched creatures. Euen so, wée acknowledge most iustely, that for our sinne and wickednes we are thus molested, disseased and vexed. Neuerthelesse, wée incredible reioyce in these our afflicti∣ons, knowing, that whom thou punishest, the same moste mercifully remembrest: wherfore wée hope and certainly trust, for that thou doest remember vs with these our gréefs and disseases, that thou wilt likewyse vpon these our pitie∣full petitions, pardon all our misdéedes: and aswell renew in vs the fruite of good workes, as also the iust health agrée∣able to our creation, and wée doo promise forgyuenesse too all them that haue offended vs, so fréely as wée doo looke for the health of bodye, lyfe, and Soule, at thy moste mightie handes, for wée certainly knowe, and the same faythefully beléeue, that as the blessed bloud of our redéemer thy onely sonne, coequall with thée in power, and maiestie, was shed for our sinnes: so these thyne Elementes of water and mi∣neralles, may thorowe thy mighty operacion, clense aways the lothsomenesse, paynes and miseries of these oure féeble bodyes, thy mysticall body, thorow the comforte of thy pure spirit, of grace, the holy Ghost, who with thy sonne our sa∣uiour, and thée our maker, raigneth, one God, in personnes thrée: alwayes more ready to helpe vs thy féeble creatures, then wée bée able or ready to desire the same: and therefore once and once agayne, holding vp our handes to the heauen
of heauens, beséeche thy almighty Godheade of Trinitie, too comforte and strengthen vs all, that in thy fayth and vnitie be come hither, for the benefytes of those Bathes, that wée may returne whole, safe, and sounde, to the better expressing of thy glory, to the posterities, for euer. AMEN. God saue the Quéenes Maiestie, and encrease the fayth of thy Flocke, preserue the Councell, and all the Nobilitie, Spirituall, and Temporall. FINIS.
A Table of all the principall mat∣ters conteyned in this booke of Bathes ayde, to direct the Readers after the order of the Alphabet to finde any notable matter conteyned in the same. AVgustus Caesar deuised the leape yeare. Fol. 28. pag. 1. Antiquitie of Bathe. fol. 1. pag. 2. All men going into the bathe must clēse theyr bodies. fo. 27 pag. 2. A prayer to be sayd of all them that enter the Bathe. fol. 34. pag. 2. B BLadud edified the citie of Bathe. fol. 1. pag. 2. Bath fyrst called Kayer Blaeydin. fol. 1. pag. 2. Bathes of Bath not made hot by Magick. fol. 20. pag. 2. Bathes in pestilent seasons must be auoyded. fol. 29. pag. 1. C CAuse of the heat of Bathes. fol. 9. pag. 1. Cause why some waters be hotter then other. fol. 16. pag. 2. Colour of the bathes of Bath. fol. 17. pag. 2.
Clisters to purge chollerique. fol. 32 Clisters to purge phlegmatique. fol. 32 Clisters to purge Melanchollique. ibidem Clister to breake winde. ibidem Camphyre a kinde of Bitumen. fol. 13. pa. 2 Counsayle the kay of wysedome. fol. 21. pa. 1 Cause defined. fo. 22 pa. 2 D Definition of naturall Bathes. fo. 1 pa. 2 Definition of Science. fo. 9. pa. 1 Definition of Artificiall Bathe. fo. 1. pa. 2 Degrees of medicines defined. fol. 20. pa. 1 E Exercise before entring into the Bathe. fo 30. pa. 1 Effectes of Diet. fo. 29. pa. 2. Euery matter probable muste bee reasoned too and, &c. fol. 8. pag. 2 F Fyre vnder the earth. fo. 9. pag. 2 Frication meet to be vsed. fo. 28. pa. 2 H Hote bathes in cold Regions. fol 12. pag. 1 Hot Bath for colde sicknesses. fol. 21. pag. 1 How you shall vse your self before you enter, &c. fol. 28. pag. 1 I Ioannes de Dondis confuted. fol. 11. pa. 1 K Knowledge of causse necessarie in euery profession. fol. 9. pag. 1
Kings Bath, hote betweene both. fol. 21. pag. 1 N Nothing can nourish whiche is not norished. fo. 29. pag. 1 P Puritanes better termed qrecisianes. fo. 24. pa. 1 Purgations for euery complexion. fo. 31. pa. 2 Propertie of euery definition. fol. 1. pag. 2 R Rules to vnderstande the first Table. fol. 26. Rootes of trees do enter so farre into the earth, as. &c. fol. 12. pag. 1 Repletion to bee auoyded. fol 29. pa. 1 Remedies for payne in the head. fol. 30. pa. 2 Remedies for burning of vrine. fo. 32. pa. 2 Remedies for the Rume. fol 33. pag. 2 Remedies for the appetite lost. ibidem S Subiect preseruing fire vnder the earth. Sicknesse defined. fol 22. pa. 2 a Stipend benefyce or prebende in euery Cathedrall church for a graduate in Phisike. fol. 22. pag. 2 T Three manner mixtions in bathes. fol. 17. pa. 1 The Taste of bathes. fo. 18. pa. 1 The smell of the Bathes. fol. 17. pag. 2 Tymes fyt to enter the Bathes. fol. 27. pag. 2 Taste defined. fol. 18. pag. 2 VV VVhence it is that waters spring hot. fol. 11. pa. 1 VVhy the fyre goeth not foorth. fo. 15. pa. 2
VVaters of bathes. fol. 16. pag. 2. VVhat the sick ought to do when he commeth to the ba∣thes. fol. 22. pag. 1. VVomen vvith childe must eschue the bathes. fol. 27. pag. 2 VVhat bread, vvhat flesh, vvhat fish, vvhat fruite, is to bee permitted. fol. 29. pag. 2. Y York first named Kayer Ebrank. fol 2. pag. 1. Youghts dayly frequenting the bathes of Bathe. fol. 27. Pag. 2. FINIS.
TO HIS FRIENDS, KINSFOLKES, and Alies, of Bath Bristoll, welles, &c. Iohn Iones, Gentleman, Graduate in Phisike, sendeth gree∣ting. AS a lostie Style and longe discourse vnto them that desire playnnes, and couet breuitie, is a thing irkesome: so a plain sence and an hartie affection vttered to friends (as mee semeth) is most alowable. And for that the manifold cour∣tesies and great commodities receyued, as wel in youth, as of late yeares at the handes of diuers friends, kinsfolkes, alies, &c. In the Counties of Gloucester, Dorset, Deuonia, Worcester, & Sumerset, were one principall cause, which emboldened mee to take in hande this myne enterprise. I could not but signifie the same vnto you (myne assured good friends) especially hauing (without offence be it spoken) in the goods of Fortune few equalles, in the douries of Nature fewer, in furniture of mynde none, and chiefly in the vn∣derstanding of the holy Scripture, as good sheepe, followers a good sheepheard, the right reuerend Father in God, Doctor Barkley, my very good Lord and singular Moecenas of all the learned. I may not here forget my singular good Lady, the Lady Syden∣ham, nor hir worthie Sonne Mayster Henry Sydenham, in wyse∣dome comparable to Cato, in valiantnes nothing inferiour to Hec∣tor, whose singular good will forced mee for their sakes, to deuyse somewhat that might benefyte vniuersally: which (whatsoeuer it bee) I beseeche you all to accepte gratefully as a small presente of myne vnfayned hart towardes you. Fare yee well. ¶From London. Anno. 1572.
Faultes escaped in the printing. Fol. 3. Pag. 1. Line. 3. For Mempria reade Memprice. fo. 3. pag. 1. lin. 5. For Lorine, read Locrine. fol. 3. pag. 2. li. 2. For Monar, reade Monarch. fo. 3. pa. 2. li. 10. For corni, cornish. fo. 8. pa. 1. li. 28. For mediatis, medicatis. fo. 10. pa. 1. li. 22. for milene, read Mileus. fol. 12. pag. 2. lin. 32. for stixes, reade flare. fo. 16. pa. 2. lin. 21. for succéeding, read succéeded. fo. 17. pag. 2. li. 28. for fannou guen freni, reade Funnon Gwen frewy. fol. 18. pag. 1. li. 3. for sussible, sussible. fo. 23. pa. 2. li. 2. for whyt reade hote. fo. 23. pag. 1. lin. 7. for pittie, read pietie. fo. 24. pa. 1. li. 21. for Aphasesis, read Aphayresis. fol. 24. pag. 1. li. 11. for pinis, pinish. fol. ibi. For hote body, whole body. fo. 26. pag. 1. li. 17. For Spelne, read Splene. fol. 29. pag. 1. lin. 25. read Aluments for Eliments. fo. 30. pa. 2. li. 19. For Nemipharae, read Nenupharae. fol. 31. pag. 2 lin. 7. for pine, read pinte. Faultes in the Table of the six things not Naturall. For hye disgestion, reade hard disgestion. For salt and oyle, read fat and oylie. For salt swelleth more, read salt fretteth much.
¶Printed at London by Thomas East, for VVilliam Iones: and are to be solde at his new long Shop at the westdore of Pauls Church. 1572.
