E438_16 50811956 161656
THE ANSVVER OF THE Lords and Commons TO THE ESSEX PETITION FOR A Personall Treaty, disbanding the Army, and setling the KINGDOME. ALSO, A Commission from the Prince of Wales, for securing and fortifying the town of Berwicke, and other places in the North. And a Letter of the whole passages from thence. With a message from the Parliament of Scotland, to the Parliament of England, debated in the House on Thursday last. may 5th London, Printed by B.A. Anno Dom. 1648.
A LETTER FROM BARWICKE SIR, VVE are here in a very sad condition, for the town being ungarrisoned, and lying open according to the Articles of agreement betweene both King∣doms, a party of English Cavaliers have taken advantage thereby, and possessed themselves thereof, imprisoned the Major, and others wel-affected to the Parl. They brought in some chattel, and other provisions with them, and more is expected. Wee hope the parliament wil take some speedy course therein, or else this town is likely to bee utterly rui∣ned. I was told yesterday by a man of good repute, that not∣withstanding the forwardnesse and present posture; yet one
of the chiefe of the Nobility told him that many was Ca∣ping and gazing for preferrment, and swore they would be all disappointed of their expectations, for they durst never warr with England, & the Parliament against them, this you may take among the rest; but I can assure you the report still goes of an army amongst them, the English daily flock into them, and the streets of Edinburge are now more over spread with English then Scots: No newes of the Prince his being there as yet, but dayly expected, divers Troopes lie in the Border of Scotland, what their aime is God knows, but their pretence is for levying of the excize in those parts, they are dayly puarrelling amongst themselves, the Kirk as they call it of Scotland still holds out and will not yeeld to an Army, but its feared that this day they resolve, I mean the Parliament of that Kingdome to vote and enact with∣out the Clergy, the Scots heritours adjacent are for certain endeavouring to get Souldiers for money, they have to my knowledge offered pretty sumes to diverse for going along with them; I can assure you for truth That at this time there is greater divisions in Scotland then was at first, they are now in three factions, for a Generall, viz. Hamiltons fact∣ion, Argyles and Callenders, Its said the Hamiltons carry it away. The Declaration of the Parliament of Scotland being perfected, was put to the Vote, whether it should be sent to the Committee of Divines before it past, or not, was carryed in the Negative: when it was Voted 81 were for it 38 against it, who protested and entred the protestations; the thing will be Printed, and had by this time been abroad had not the Church delayed their answer to Tuesday, but have now declared their dissent fully and unnanimously, being sensible of the swords getting into such hands, as when they see time, will make nothing of Covenant, nor o∣ther
assurances given, and that they who have been esteemed hitherto the most religious there, and in Englard, will be∣come a prey to both popish and prelaticall party; This is believe it, the apprehension of those in Scotland, many of whom stick not to say, they see no visible deliverance from ruine, but the Army in England, what ever you think and say in the South of it making good the old maxime of the multitude, to dislike what ever is present; and if there were none other arguments to ground the former expressed feares Scotland this one were enough that 250 Barons or Lards have met at Lithgow, and other places, within view of Parliament, and so no doubt approved by many, within view of Parliament, and so no doubt approved by many, who write Letters to the Inhabitants to rise for the defence of the King, Religion, and the Church, the two latter being the golden out side of all risings: one of them was sent for to Parliament who was not afraid to come; the other sent to him not to answer without them, they justifie their pro∣ceedings by an old act of Parliament; The businesse for∣merly mentioned of a Ministers refusing to read the Mini∣sters Declaration is grown to that heighth, They to have sentence past, others to have it forburn; That its like to bring in question, whether the Church Sanc Parliament, can publish or injoyn; the dissent of so many of Parliament, and the Divines all of them, to the great Declaration, not at all im peding the publication, but out it comes. Barwick 1. of May, 1648.
Die Iovis 4. May 1648. The Parl. had some debate on a Declaration and Proposi∣tion from the Parl. of Scotland, brought by Col. Marshall, the particulars whereof are reduced to these heads. 1. That his Majesty may come to London, or some of his houses neer the City, and there to remaine in ho∣nour, freedome, and safety. 2. That reparations be made for his carrying away from Holdenby; or satisfaction, by punishing them that did it. 3. That the Presbytery be setled, and Sectaries pu∣nished. 4. That the Army under command of the Lord Fair∣fax be disbanded. 5, That the City of London have all priviledges made good to them. 6. That the Covenant of both Kingdomes be injoy∣ned universally. 7. That all Members of Parliament, who have faithfully served, be restored. Letters came further out of the North as followeth. Sir I Beleeve you have heard that Barwick is secured which we heare to be thus Sir Thomas Glenhm with a party of Horse came to Barwick and the Town perceiving them aproaching be∣gan to gather to the bridge, and make some opposition asking him who they were for &c. and why they aemped to come into that town, to which it was answered they had a commission from the Prince of Wale whereupon they had present admittance and there are come to them since and have brought in provision, which is all for the present from, Your affectionate Friend. T. S.
Thursday 4. May. 1648. A petition was this day presented to the Lords by Sir VVil∣liam Hix, in the name of the Gent. and Free-holders of the County of Essex; at the presenting of which petition, the said Sir VV. Hix made a short speech to this effect. That there was a petition of about 20000. of the Inhabitants of that County, to which there would have been many more hands, if more time had been spent therein; the petition was grounded upon these generall heads. That the Country might be eased of their heavy taxes and burtheus, and that the King∣dome be setled in a firm and lasting peace, and as the meanes conducing thereto, they pray, that there may be a personall trea∣ty with the King, and the Army disbanded, &c. This petition was read in the House, and after the Petitio∣ners had withdrawn, they were called in again, and the Earl of Manchester gave them an answer to this effect, viz. Gentlemen, I am commanded by the Lords to return you thanks for your good affections expressed in your petition to the Parl. and Kingdom; and they do assure you, that they ll speedi∣ly and effectually take the said petition into serious considerati∣on and do what is possible for setling the Kingdome in a firme and lasting peace. Wherupon Sir William Hix gve their Lordships hum∣ble thanks, in the name of all the Petitioners, and did assure their Lordships, that whatsoever had been said, or conceived of that petition, yet the sense and intent of that County was to assist and maintain the Parliament and priviledge there∣of, according to their Covenant. The petition before mentioned was also read in the house of Commons, and after some dbate, the petitioners had an¦swer there to the same effect, as they had from the Lords, as as you will perceive by these ensuing Lines.
The Answer from the Commons was thus. Gentlemen, THis house gives you thanks for expressing your good affection and desires for setling the Kingdom, which is the present businesse of the House, and in which they are resolved with all possible speed to go forward, and the rest of the petition relating thereunto; the petitioners were desired, being by estimation personally there about two thousand, to depart, with assurance, that the several par∣ticulars of the said petition should forthwith be taken into serious consideration. Imprimatur G. M. FINIS.
