H32A E799_21 50796680 167781
MER LINUS ANGLICUS: OR, ENGLAND'S MERLIN. Prophetically fore-telling, The Admirable Events, and Wonderful Effects, that shall befall the King of Scots, the States of Holland, and the Parliament of England, in all their Consultations, Warlike Actions, and Naval Designes, both by Sea and Land, for the Year of our Lord, 1653. WITH The most exact Predictions, and Monthly Obser∣vations, touching the great Rising of the European Na∣tions against England; and the success that will attend them in all their Motions, Enterprises, and Attempts; As also, the Causes of these strange Revolutions, Mutations, Inclinations, and Eversions of Em∣pires, Kingdoms, and Common-wealths. LIKEWISE, The Astromical Calculations of the Eclipses, Lu∣nations, and conjunctions; portending a great Change of Government, Religion, and Law, in England, Scotland, and Ireland; together with the taking off all Taxes, Assesments, Burdens, and Oppressions; and cal∣ling to a severe Account all Committees and Treasurers; with the executing of many great Ones. Octob. 26. COllected out of the most elaborate Works of Captain George Wharton, Esquire, Mr. William Lillie, Mr. John Booker, Mr. Vincent Wing, and Mr. Nicholas Culpeper, Students in Astrology and physick. London, Printed by R. WOOD, 1653.
To the Reader. ONce more I again appear in publique (notwithstanding the late publishing of an irre∣ular and counterfeit Pamphlet, called, The Dutch bloudy Almanack) presenting you with the great Revolutions, Positions, Passions, and Prediction, with every Moneths Observations, for the year of our Lord, 1653. to ether with sundry Judgments Astrologi∣ca: Calculated from the influence of the first Opposition upon Saturn and Jupiter, 27 Feb. 52, and 53, 7 h. 16. P. M. as also from the superlative Actions signified by the last two years Lunar Eclipses, and by the Solar Eclipse of the 29. March, 1652. But before I enter on this years Judgment, I conceive it most requisite and pertinent, to rollect and commend to the Ingenious contemplation, the Causes of the Mutations, Inclinations, and Eversi∣ous of Empires, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths; and the rather, because (as I sup∣pose) Time never produced an Age so full of Prodigies, nor a Generation of Men so enclin'd to Novelty, as now the present; wherein every day presents a New Enquiry, every Month a fresh vicissitude. The Causes are thus distinguished: The first Cause is God, the Creator & Governor of all things, who hath set certain Intervals, and periods of Times, to  ∣rors, &c. amongst which periods, the 500 and 700th year are accounted most fatal A the Natural Reason hereof, is, for that in this space of time, there elapseth the 6 Generan of Men; which abateth of, and more and more declineth from, the simplicity, strength and fr∣titude of those Men, who at first obtained and preserved Empires, by such Veriues: Fo  the as the Bodies of men become weak and feeble in the 4th and 5th Generation, even so also decreaseth the strength and fortitude, whereby Kingdoms are acquired preserved and pro∣pagated. Secondly, The superior Natural Cause, is, the motion and influence of the planets and stars; touching which, learned Keckerman gives this Canon: Heaven (saith he) most effectually operates upon a humane Body, best agreeable to it self, and so also on the Body both of the Prince himself and his subjects: to wit, as that it changeth the Temperaments of mens bodies, and with those Temperaments their manner or conditions; and the manner or conditions of princes and subjects being changed, a Mutation of the Commonwealth fol∣loweth. And with him agrees that excellent Astrologer, Origanus, who saith, We observe not onely fundry changes and translations of Kingdoms, whilest these planets raign, and bear Rule with others; but also that upon the whole surface of the Earth, there is nothing perpetuall. Thus not doubting, but that thou wilt vouchsase thy friendly acceptance, to these my weak Indeavors, I humbly devote my self, Yours, G. H.
Merlinus Anglicus, &c. Januaries Observations. THe year seems to begin pleasantly; our States promise fairly; and long-look't for comes at last; for the heavy burden of the people is removing; the honours of many great Ones are eclipsing; and the souldiery begin to be highly elevated, whilest the poor Countrey Farmer (whose condition I pity) complains and sads his heart, in regard his Cattle are like in many places to perish for want of fodder and meat. A great change threatens the Lawyer: Sad∣ness seems to possesse the spirits of many great Ones. The year initiates fair, but seasonably cold and frosty; and so continues for the most part, until the 15 day, from whence (especially about the 18, 19, 20, & 21 dayes) look for abundance of snow or rain, and dark unwholesome weather. Observations on Feb. GReat are the Designs now in Consults, and such as may (by Gods blessing) make us happy for some succeeding years; Angels of Gold please the saints on earth, else why are some zealous spirits now calmed? Remiss cold fair wea∣ther for the most part till the 10 day; from whence expect cold winds, Rain or snow, until the 14. The 15 and 16 days fair and seasonable. About the 17, 18, & 19 dayes look for more rain and snow. The latter end of this month (especially the 26 day) will produce impetuous storms of Rain and Hail. Full moon the 2d day. New moon the 17 day. Observations on March. THe Hollander is as busie as a fly in the hony-pot, and great preparations are making against us; but alas! I could wish Noah's Dove might appear with glad tydings of peace, after these late, long, and terrible wars, which are stil like to be for some years universal. Some small snow the first three days. Much Rain or snow about the full Moon, and so for the most part till after the 6 day; and thence the Air will be more serene (though very cold and frosty-mornings] un∣till the 15 day. The rest of the month will be fair but windy. The 4 day full Moon, but she's totally eclipsed all England over. The 19 day full Moon. A word in season to the Lawyer: Gentlemen, to deal ingeniously, the divine Aspects of heaven promiseth fair; ballance your Wisdom in the Skales of Equi∣ty, and do justice to all men; for there are a people that will swell with invec∣tives against Thee neer these Times. The Term commences with the Lawyer's grief [Curt Fees, and they deserve as Curt relief:] Lawyers prefer the sharpest Lawes, as best To keep a Common-wealth in peace and rest: If so; why should the Gown-men frown and puff To see the Courts of Justice lyn'd with Buff? No Plea e're moved as a Sword can do; For that ore-ruleth Judge and Jury too.
Observations on April. FOur times shall the Inhabitants of the earth behold the Luminaries eclipsed this yeer, twice the Sun, and as oft the Moon; but we in England, as also Ire∣land, France, Spain, and Scotland, shall not see any of them, except one, & that total of the Moon, which will happen on the 4. of March; it will begin at one of the clock, 48 min. past, in the morning; the beginning will be at one min. before 3 of the clock, the greatest obscurity at 53 min. past 3 a clock; the end of it at 17 min. past 4, and at 57 min. past 5 the Moon will have sully recovered her bor∣rowed light: the whole duration will be 4 ho: 9 min. the colour of the Eclipse at the greatest darkness will be black, with a greenish ash-colour. The effects wil operate about the 26 of Octob. about which time, up goes some great Ones in Authority Rain, Thunder, and Lightning, most part of the month. Full Moon the 2d day. New Moon the 16 day. Observations on May. O Save all, save all, save all; never more need; for the month seems to begin with bloud; and some eminent Gentlemen are expos'd to the mercy of the merciless. Heavens defend the City and Country from Oppression and Tyranny; for violent seavers, the small pox, and a great sickness or pestilence threatens the people. Violent and bloudy sea-fights all along our Coasts, and great prepara∣tions in Scotland to invade us. The month bgins with storms, but ends fairly, with a full Moon the 2d day, and a new Moon the 16. day. Whither an Army now? well! I could say Who 'tis will get, or who shall lose the day, Thrasillus like inform you, who shall prove Victsrioas in's Ambition, who in's Love: But I am silent, nay, I must be dumb, 'Tis Treason, now, to pray, Thy Kingdom come. Observations on June. SAd news from several parts; & our Grandees begin to be somwhat amused, oy reason of the vehemency of an extreme pstilence that threatens to remove them from their Judicature at Westminster: Gods will be done; but my ardent desire is, That Divine providence may divert this sore and heavy judgment; and that hunger and sickness may not afflict the poor: Few Kings and Princes in Europe but shall taste of the sury of the Eclipse before cited; and those that do∣mineer like little Lords ought to look about them: but mum! I dare say no more. July's Observations. A Sad time! All Europe are up in arms, and the people stretch their wits, even till they break them, to sight against the Decrees of Heaven. The Common∣wealth in general is foreseen to be in a good condition, and the States receive good news from their servants at sea; Which produceth an attonement from the poor Hogens of Holland, but without a miracle no peace proceeds; so that they swarm like Locusts in our seas, yet return home handsomly beaten. Here is much snarling and tugging again about the Laws and Tythes by discontented souls, whilst our superiors are also amongst themselves divided in their consul∣tations, how to appease the demands of Thousands, whom nothing will serve or satisfie but a new Election. Oh Heavens! the elaborate Works of many are slighted, and their great policy is not now worth three leaps of a Louse; Some great Ones are called to an account by man; others by death; and so the Month ends pitifully with the Clergy-mans cry, Good people, ye are all gone astray.
August's Observations. THe Lord defend this Nation from pestilential Ayrs, ill Weather, Thunder, Lightnings, likely to happen about the beginning of this Month; but it ends with sundry cross sea-fights, much bloud, and great tribulation in many parts, occasioned by violent Feavers and Abortions. Spain, Rome, and Italy, are much afflicted; and so are some great ones in England; which make the Farmer smile, to see some Oppressors lited higher then ever their fore-fathers were; but I dare not declare what I think; whet your wits about it: onely thus much by the way, some will prove headless. Very hot weather begins the month. Store of Rain about the 4th day; after which the air will be very calm and seasonable: The 13 day New moon. The 16 day Thunder and Lightning. The 23 day wind and rain. The 28 Full Moon. Some Thunder about the 29 day. September's Observations. WHat! more Knaves yet? beware Mr Treasurer; the souldier now begins to whet his sword, and having found out your Foxes holes, resolves to leave you not worth a groat. Ah brave souldier! act fairly, down with Oppres∣sion, and according to thy promise restore us to freedom: Oh that I could but see that time when Taxes might be taken off, and the Poor might not complain for want of bread! Be of good comfort, fellow-Commoner, it will come, and that quickly too. In the mean time, our Naval Affairs are not pleasing; the sea∣man wants money (and so do I) he threatens a return with the Navy, but at the last returneth again to his duty. The first 3 days fair and seasonable. From the 6 to the 14 cold rain and hail. New moon the 11th day. From the 18 to the end of the month much rain, and variety of winds. Full moon the 26 day. Rare Missives nw arriv: Our hearts grow strong, Wee'll do no right, nor yet will suffer wrong: Our ships are shatter'd, and their Tackling tore, The Sea men grumble, and desire the shore, But what of that? Large prize, and London pay, And two Nights Wiveing, make them hyst away. Octobers Observations. THe first week of this mouth fills our hearts with joy; Oppression growes odious, and afterwards insupportable, A fair riddance. Divers of our Merch∣ants ships with safety return from the western parts, from the Straights, and Le∣vant seas. Great preparation throughout the European Nations, for C. Stuart, and that young valiant son of Mars his brother James seemes ready for action, France and Holland combines against us, and many other Princes promise assist∣ance. Fair weather from the 3d to the 6. From the 6. till the 10 cold showers and bitter blasts. New moon the 11 day. More winds and rain about the 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, & 22 days, after which the weather will be better untill after the full moon; and thence you shall have very turbulent winds to conclude the Month. The Ocean swelleth with inveterate hate, Nor France nor Holland brook our Infant State: But she is daring, and lets bullets flye, (Th' Accents of her supreme Authority:) Hard hearts have they, and most lascivious thoughts, That would deflour her in her swadling clouts.
Novembers Observations. A Merry Age, but a mad World: No peace amongst the Pulpit-men, or unity at the stern of Affairs. I fear an universal rage of the people will ere long cut down Cedars, and levell Mountains; A pitiful time, self-ends undoes all, by which means the poor Countrey-man is still squeez'd out of his estate. But alas! if we thus rancounter each other farewel Englands Commonwealth. The month begins with wind, bringing Rain about the 4. day. Snow or Rain about the 8, 9, & 10 days; but from thence till the 17 day the Ayr will be more serene, but cold and frosty, afterwards you shall be troubled with great and dangerous winds. The Nation mournes because of monstrous Oathes, Her scarlet sins cause want of bread and cloathes: Diseases rage and strongly multiply; Our new Republique's sicke, and like to dye: London bewailes, beshrews her lewd pretence Of begging for A posture of Defence. Observations on December. GReat is the increase of onr enemies abroad; and divisions heighten our dis∣contents at home: New Lords, new Laws; yet the year ends with discon∣tent, and the people stand fully resolved to proceed a step higher unto a suture Election. Cold and frosty for the two first dayes, violent showers of Rain about the 6 days. Snow about the 8 days. Frost and cold nipping weate from the 12 to the 16. Fair and seasonable from the 16 day till the 23. after which you shall have more snow or rain for the most part of the rest of the dayes; but frest con∣cludes the year. Before the year concludes fresh ills arise, Few Discontents, but old Idolatries: Our strength impaires, our enemies increase, And all contribute to obstruct our peace: W'are yet divided, and possest with feares: We must have better hearts, e're better years. Astrological Judgments for the year, 1653. THe Lord of the Ascendent in this Annual Revolution is divolved now by motion into the Cusp of the 8th house, which signifies Exile or slaughter of some famous King or Prince, great Discontents and Insurrections, an universall hatred and malice betwixt the people and their Governors; cruel and bloudy wars both by sea and land; the sacking of Cities and Towns, House-burnings, Roberies, Rapes. Depopulations, violent and unexpected deaths, pestilent Sediti∣ons, long and grievous infirmities, the plague, and a general Mrrain amongst Cattel: Abortive births, acute feavers, Coughs and Plurisies, with other diseases proceeding of bloud; vehement Cold, a dearth of corn and fruity, abundance of Rain and Worms: New Religions, new Governments, new Laws, new Customs. In a word, a general madness and confusion to all such Kingdoms, Common∣wealths, Cities, and Towns, as are under the division of Arles, Cancer, &c. that is
to say, England, Scotland, France, Germany, Zealand, Spain, Portugal, &c. The present King of Spain hath the Sun in the 18 deg. of Aries, with the Dragons Tayl, and the Moon in the 28 of Sagittary, in conjunction with Saturn, the Sun in the 5th, and the Moon in the 2d house of the Radix; and therefore let him expect some harm or loss to befall him either in his body, children, or revenew, if not all. Another King I know (and truly honour) which Horoscope is within 3 deg. of the point eclipsed, Mar. 3. 1653. which bodes him some infirmity of bo∣dy, what, I say not: because I suppose the progression of the Horoscope to the Terms of Jupiter, may frustrate the evil thereby signified. But I wish we may find it otherwise then is here premonished; I desire peace and not war; but I fear it much, though I hope the contrary; for I see mens hearts more obdurate thin ever, every man in these iron days looking after his own by ends, and not at the common good; but what need I mention this? Doth not every man that hath eyes see how miserably this Nation hath already been wrackt and poled by a company of beggerly cheats? Sub. Treasurers and Sequestrators look about you, & all you, that have unjustly converted the Trea∣sure of the Commonwealth to your own uses; of what place and condition so∣ever you are of, you are fore threatned, the time will come, and is meer approch∣ing, when you must render an account of your actions; your riches may prove your ruine, if you make not a timely account to the Common-weal. I pray God make the Parliament wise, the Body of this Fabrick standing upon a very totte∣ring foundation: for if this Authority under which we moun, after this Op∣position of Saturn and Jupiter, shall inforce us to some new and illegal assesment, or by way of raising money upon any pretence whatsoever (except against the Dutch) I am confident, we of the Commonalty joyning with the souldier, shall assume so much librty to our selves, as to choose and elect such Members as hereafter shall be more tender of our purser, and more liberal of their own; and we shall indeavor so strictly to call unto account each member of this Parl. who hath fingured our Treasure, that we shall leave many of them as naked as when they came out of their mothers wombs, or when first to be members of Parlia∣ment Thus Changes come, thus Changes will ensue (Till these corrupted Bodies change for new And put on Incorruption) Men and Things, Whole Countreyes, Cities, Beggers, Princes, Kings; He who but lately wore a Crown of Gold, Crown's now with thorns, exil'd, or basely sold: He clad in Rags and fed with scraps before, Now throan'd in's stead and surseting with store: A glorious Church and Kingdom, but to day, To morrow both the Wolfe and Foxes prey: All, all to change, and Dissolution tend, Poor Almanacks, ev'n they! must have AN END.
