A417A R43590 42474997 151098
An ACCOUNT of the TRYAL OF THE LORD MOHUN, For the MURTHER of Mr. William Mountford, (As to the Manner and Form thereof,) Who was Tryed in Westminster-Hall, the 31th of January, 1692. Before the Right Honourable the Marquess of Carmarthen, Lord President of the Council, Constituted Lord High Steward on that Occasion. 2. febr. 1692/3. THE Place for the appearance of the Lord Mohun, was the great Hall at Westminster, where there was a Throne Erected for the King, on each side whereof, is a Cabionet enclosed a∣bout with Boards, and within, with Arras, be∣fore that, are the Seats for the Peers or House of Lords, and Sacks of Wool for the Judges, (who were there present, not as Judges of the Noble Lord, the Prisoner, but to assist with their Council in matters of Law that may arise) before them were Ten Stages of Seats extending further than the midst of the Hall, for the Members of the House of Commons, and other Gentlemen, to whom the Peers gave their Tickets, each Peer having Eight Tickets to dispose off as he thought fit; at the end of all, was a Desk closed about, and set apart for the Lord Mohun and his Council. His Grace, the Marquess of Carmarthen, as Lord High Steward of England, sat apart by himself. Tuesday, The 31st. of January, between the Hours of Eight and Nine, the Lord Mohun came from the Tower in the Lord Lieutenant's Coach, accompanied with his Lordship, and a sufficient Guard; and being brought into Court, The Serjeant at Arms makes Procla∣mation in the following manner. O yes, O yes, O yes. My Lord High Steward of England, his Grace, doth straightly charge and command all manner of Persons to keep silence, and to give ear to the King's Majesty's Commission to his Grace my Lord High Steward of England, upon pain of Imprisonment. Then the Commission is Read, his Grace and all the Peers standing up Bare-Headed. Then the Staff being carried between Garter King at Arms, and the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod, is with three profound Reve∣ences delivered upon the Knee to his Grace, nd by him re-delivered to the Gentleman∣Ussher of the Black Rod, to hold during the service. Then the Serjeant at Arms makes a Second oclamation. O yes, His Grace my Lord High Steward of England, doth straitly Charge and Command all manner of Persons here pre∣sent, except Peers, Privy-Councellors, and the Reverend Judges, now assistant, to be Un∣covered. Then the Serjeant at Arms makes a Third Proclamation in this Form. O yes. My Lord High Steward of England his Grace, straitly Chargeth and Commandeth all Justices, and Commissioners, and all and every other Person and Persons, to whom any Writ or Precept has been directed for the cer∣tifying of any Indictment or Reward, before his Grace my Lord High Steward of England, That they do certify and bring in the same forthwith, according to the Tenor of the same Writ and Precept, to them or any of them directed, upon Pain and Peril shall fall thereon. Then the Lord High Steward his Grace, orders the Lieutenant of the Tower to be call'd for, to return his Precept, and bring his Pri∣soner to the Bar. Serjeant at Arms. Lieutenant of the Tower of London, Return thy Writ and Precept to thee directed, together with the Body of thy Prisoner forthwith, upon Pain and Peril shall fall thereon. The Peers give in their Verdict to the Lord High Steward Siratim, beginning with the Puisne or Youngest Peer, and so forward. The Verdict being Recorded, and the Tryal over, the Serjeant at Arms makes Proclamation in the following Form. Serjeant at Arms. O yes. My Lord High Steward of England his Grace, straitly Will∣eth and Commandeth all manner of Persons here present, to depart hence in God's Peace and the King's; for his Grace, my Lord High Steward of England dissolves his Commission. God Save the King and Queen. At which Words, his Grace taking the White Staff from the Ʋsher of the Black Rod, held it over his own Head, and broke it in two: Thereby dissolving the Court. London, Printed in the Year, 1692.
