A911 E175_13 R4392 99872670 157081
A COPY OF A LETTER CONCERNING THE TRAITEROVS CONSPIRACY OF THE REBELLIOVS PAPISTS in IRELAND: Being a true Relation, written by a Gentleman of good worth, who hath suffered by them much dammage and losse in his estate, and hardly escaped with his life. LONDON, Printed in the Yeare, 1641.
The Copy of A Letter sent from Ireland. Sir, I am glad to heare of your health by your Letter of the second of this moneth. And for the Conspiracy in Ireland it is so certaine, that I can assure it unto you by my owne ex∣perience of the evills, for on Sunday was a sennight last, when it was to have beene ex∣ecuted generally throughout the whole king∣dome, I was then at my Country house some 26 miles from Dublin, and some murmerings there was of an insurrection, but privately whispered, But at a place called Kells a Mar∣ket Towne within a mile of my house, a mighty Concourse of Papists were at Masse, which was said that day, for the good successe of the Plot, and a pardon to all that should goe boldly on in the Adventure. I was at Church that day in the Towne, (and I praise GOD) served him without any
such feare: but yet recollecting some things from all these matters of suspition, I set a watch in my Towne, and went to bed, and at midnight there was an allarum given, as if the Rebels had beene come to Kells, but it was my owne neighbours of Kells, that were the Rebels indeed. But that intimation needed not make me goe, for my wife and I in that extremity (having eight good gel∣dings in the stable) shaked on our cloathes, and so many servants as we had horses for within the doores, tooke our flight for our lives, and got , or 12 miles by breake of the day, when all the Townes∣men of Kells came to my house, and thence drove away some 13 hundred faire Eng∣lish sheepe, two hundred Milch Cowes young and old, some worth five pounds, and most worth foure pounds a peece, some twenty or two and twenty horses, Mares and Colts, that were abroad young and old, twenty Swine, and as much houshold-stuffe, plate and Iewels, Linnen and such like goods, as was not so little worth within doores as Six hundred pounds. And thus in two houres space I was made
two thousand pound the worse in my estate. But the safety of my wife, and childrens lives, and of my owne, who was especially desig∣ned to have my throat cut as a leading man, hath so sweetned my crosse as (I thanke my God) I suffer it with much patience and cheerfullnesse, and so doth my wife also, and God be praised we are all now gotten safely to Chester, where I beleeve all the Ladies and Gentle-women of Dublin and neare thereabouts are come, that the Towne is full. I meane to place my wife, and chil∣dren here, till we heare how things will goe, and I purpose God willing to be at London with you ere it be long, in the meane time if the party be come, pray tell him I must not faile of my monies for my owne supply, for I protest we escaped with the cloathes on our backs and of 500 pound rents now due at all Saints, I feare me, the Kingdome now stands in such a condition, as not a penny will be gotten of it. For the plot it was this, that in one day the Castle of Dublin and all the Kings forts in Ireland should have beene taken, and all the Protestants throats cutt throughout all that Kingdome.
The Intelligence I received since I came away is thus written. viz. The newes cer∣taine is that there hath beene a designe for the blowing up of Christ-Church in Dublin, but by the mercie of God deafeated, and certaine barrels of Gunpouder found under the Church. Divers Rogues have endea∣voured to fire the Suburbs, but are taken and two Gibbets set up for their sudden executi∣on. Lieutenant Britteridge though out∣wardly a Protestant hath Combined with the Papists in both designes and is fuddenly to be hang'd, I am surprised by the Poast who is going or I had written more. Chester the  sixt of November, 1641.\
