B3731 E10_14 99860366 154775
A Rope Treble-twisted, FOR JOHN TAYLER THE WATER-POET. Or Rather For his Malignant friends in London, which make use of his to Name to slander and abuse the PARLIAMENT, and well-affected party, in their Pernicious Pamphlets; and particularly, Mr. JOHN BOOKER, a Man of known honesty, and one who scornes to Calculate for the Meridian of OXFORD. Snarle not, Malignants: If you doe, here's Rope Enough for you, and all that love the Pope. LONDON, Printed according to Order, of G. Bishop. Septemb. 27. 1644.
A Rope Treble-twisted, FOR IOHN TAYLER THE WATER-POET, &c. THere is another vile Pamphlet come abroad under the name of John Tayler, the Title running after this manner: John Tayler being yet unhanged sends greeting to John Booker, &c. Now you must sup∣pose that this Pamphlet came from Oxford, or from some such desperate place, that dares owne a Treasonous Calumnie against the Parliament: But I am confident, that if you wander through those many confused sheets of audacious Auli∣cus, or those infinite other pernicious Papers, the very vomit and filth of Malignant Presses, throwne at the very faces of the most High and Sacred Senate in Christendome, and you shall finde that this peece of Ribaldry fra∣med in London, (I dare boldly say in London) hath out-stript them all: For whereas others have delivered themselves more mysteriously and closely, yet plainly enough; this wretch is more down-right than any, and spirits his venome most contemptibly, without feare or wit. I petition The most High and Honourable Court of Parliament, to take this into consideration, and give order that enquiry be made concerning the Author and Printer It is supposed that the Author of the many-leav'd Pamphlet called Sacra Nemesis, should pen it: But whosoever it be that made it, it is evident enough that a London Presse sent it abroad: I shall name no body, lest be∣ing fore-warned they be fore-armed, but remaine in silence till a fit op∣portunity. This I have said in earnest; but because it is good now and then in these sad times, to be in jest; we will suppose that very Knave, not merry Knave, John Tayler, to be the Author, and that it might be Printed in Oxford, though it be known it was in London very featly, and madly, and odly, and
ungodly penned and contrived. For it seemes this Fox, this Daniel int¦den, this Scar-crow Iack Tayler, strives not so much to clip Mr. Bookers credit with his Popish Sizzars, as o wound the Parliament, and all those that are well-affected to their Cause and just Quarrell. First he calls the Parlament, A meere Conventicle, or not the shade of a shadow of what it should be My Masters, is it not time to look about us, and visit our new, Oxford in London, I meane the Viperous Nursery in Aldrsgate street, and her Si∣ster in iniquity upon Holborn-Hill? It seemes the Belialists have left off prying into the Controversies of Purgatory, and Limbus Patrum, and the reconciling of Luther, and Calvin, to Bellarmine and Maldonat, Pro∣testantisme to Popery, the Church of England, to the Church of Rome and unrtaken another Bellum Episcopale, a ware with paper-pellets against honest Mr. Booker, in the behalfe of John Tayler, the Water-Poet; or ra∣ther in the behalfe of Poperie: But how can they hope for successe now Canterbury their Reverend Father in — halter is like to be hanged? Me thinkes his very Diary should be enough to convince the veryest Sot in Fly or Peter-House. Well, well, Jack Tayler, thou art a brave fellow; for thy Water-workes being now of some standing in Bolley's Library the Divines will are long begin to quote thee; for they maintaine Controver∣sies for thee already; but their false Comments are too too obscean and railing against the State, savouring more of scurrility and malice, than rea∣son or wit: And on the other side, according to former custome, and the later of Maximes of Parasiticall Theologasters, (one whereof was this; That it was better to be a Spaniell at Court for a while, than to Kennell in a Colldge all ones life time) their flattering of the King, Qeene, and Court in wic∣ked wayes, is as shamefull and ridiculous as ever. But I must let them alone (it seemes) and sticke close to my Single Water-man in the Title page; for it seemes the best heads in Peter House will amount to no more but John Tayler. I will not aske you, John Tayler, of how long standing you have been in the Malignant Corporation of Peter-house, nor whether you are the Rat that was hanged lately in a Boat upon a ar of Oares, or the Ghost of that meanest of watery inhabitants, poor John at Oxford; but I perceive thy writing relishes of his Malignant spirit: Thou strivest to delude, and make as beleeve the King, the Queene, the Lords, (when I mention them I doe not reckon Harry Jermyn) Clergy, University, Army, Magistrates, and Commons, are true Protestant pen-proofe. But why then was his Majesties Signet in a Commission to the Irish Rebells, to cut the throats of all true Protestants there? and another Commission sent to the Marquesse of Or∣mond to make a Cessation with those wretches, which to any man not void of sence and reason, did at the first, and since also Experimentally hath ap∣peared
most destructive to the Protestant Cause? For the Rebells by this meanes, have had leisure so to furnish and provide themselves, that they appeare now in the Eield more in number, and better armed, than ever they could possibly have been. How can the Queene be pen-proofe, after all these Murderings and Massacrings perpetrated in England and Ireland, by her Counsells, wherein also she was and is a principal Agent, when as in the very height of her pompe and power, shee was neither pen-proofe, nor tongue-proofe, even amongst her owne Courtiers and Parasites? How many drie jests have been broken upon Her and Harry on the Publique Stage? As, I prethee where shall wee finde Jermyn? — At the Queenes Armes; Adde to this the bandy Songs sung ordinarily at Court, wherein Hall and Mall met to make Rime; and another beastly Song, not fit for a womans eares; which if any of that Sex can delight in, a man may guesse at the Constitution without Calculating her Nativity: And because now it is no time to dally, when they dare be so impudently abusive on the other side; as they unjustly charge us with many falshoods most basely; I think it cannot be amisse to repay them againe with trueth, though I in∣tended for Honours sake, if there were any hope of returning, never to have put it to the common view: I will therefore Print Harry's delight, the limber Gentleman (I meane) that rode away hence in Spanish-leather bootes, with a little more haste then ordinary, having a Parliament Spurre in his Conscience. JERMYNS SONNET. Poxe take your Philters, and your Charmes, No Witchcraft like a Lovers Armes; Nor any fond device to bind So sure, as cling, aad lie close twin'd: A certain Spell, that will Enchaunt, Is off r home, and keep the haunt. Then Chymists, out upon your trash, Your letter-coniur'd Balder-dash, Your Amulets, charm'd bracelets, rings Valued with the Crownes of Kings; Your Calcin'd, parcells of dead men, Sperme caught from Cockes treading the Hen, And us'd I know not how: Pull downe Your Stills, and ease to cheat the Towne. But let them stand to make Elixr For us Madams that cry Quick-Sir, Or you'll hare on't; because we then Shall find no differences in Men.
And will it not be strange alacke, That since my Lord has a weake backe, We may not diet him or his Page! T'will put us all into a rage, And make us take our Groomes, by stealth, To breed base blood ith' common wealth. 'Tis fit (Sirs) then, you let them stand, To keepe the Gentry of the Land In able plight, that they may serve, As men of the more solid Nerve, And strenuously goe thorow stitch Without a Lever at the breech. I hope John Tayler, you will not be angry that I have broached this peece of Closet-conversation: I have printed thus much to shew you that her Majesty is not altogether pen-proofe: And I could also make a long Discourse to shew you, that neither you Peeres, Clergy, Ʋniversity, Army, Magistrates, are Pen-proofe, because they are neither Parliament-proofe, nor Reason-proofe: But my principall aime is to take notice of the ma∣ny villanies, and intolerable abuses, heaped up in thy vile Pamphlet against the Parliament, and those that are well affected: But as you have a tricke of Vilifying such men; so also of Magnifying those of your owne partee, though never so bloody and desperate. And therefore thou art in great wrath with Mr. Booker for calling Rupert plaine Rupert, without addition of His Highnesse, and for giving him the tearms of Saladine and Sarazen, which thou sayest are Turkish Titles; and therefore I say, they are the fittest for him, who hath Murder'd and Plunder'd himself into a capacity for the worst of Titles, to expresse his Cruelty. Thou railst against Mr. May, Wither, Britannicus, the Scout, the poor innocent Dove, and say'st that they are not able so much as to scratch or touch thy reputtion, or Aulicus and Naworth. Alas, thy reputation is neither to be scratch't, nor touch't, it was lost long since upon the Banke∣side: And as for thy Abetors in Ely-house and Peter-house, the wretched unchurched Priests there, they never were in repute any where but at Rome, and the Court; which (by none of the Simplest Conversions) might ver well have been called the Court of Rome: Aulicus has utterly lost his credit both with friends and foes, in so basely belying the busines at Yorke, and setting them to make Bon-fires in Oxford for a victory, when the Ma∣lignant Forces were shattered into an impossibility of re-uniting, and qui e beaten out of the Field, which hath made the Planet Mercury very dull ever since in his Influence, and given a Quictus est to George Na∣worth,
for ever daring to Prognosticate againe in the behalf of Popery, Ty∣ranny, and Rebellion against the State. Thou say'st that Naworth never knew of the Printing thy former Book answered by Mr. Booker; but that Pamphlet was part of the fruits of hungry George's old malice, inspired into thy detestable braines: And if thou shouldst faile, every Centurian, that is, every scandalous and Malignant Priest, that deserves a Name in another Centurie, can finde a Pen to Apologize for Naworth, and vilifie honest Mr. Booker: But it is no small argument of his Integrity, to be ill-spoken of by thee, and them. But I shall leave taking notice of any thing else in thy vile, base, and scandalous Pamphlet, besides that filth and venome which thou, (thou Counterfet John Tayler) hast vomited out against the Parliament. I much wonder that any Presse in London should dare to be defiled with such lewd, and abominable stuffe, and with what confidence any durst write these words, under the Name of John Tayler, against the State. Your Nick name Parliament doth not onely maintaine and retaine a scattered heard of scribling villaines, but also they doe allow must respect, favour, countenance, and meanes, to him that can lie, raile, and slander most: therefore I conclude, if they were a Parliament, the Sacred Name and Honour of His Majestie should not be suf∣fered to be abused so transcendently (beyond all precedents) but that they would by Law and Parliamentary Authority, send ye all to Gregories market, and feed Crowes with your traiterous mischievous heads, and filthy, treacherous, rebellious, stinking quartered Carcases; therefore no Parliament. And then a little lower these words follow: But as they are, and the condition they now are in, they have no other way of supportation, but what proceeds from the blacke mouthes of your zalous, Atheisticall long winded Preachers (or Tantologicall prating Lectures) with the aide of your holy Tribe of accursed Pamphlet∣mongers: It is you that, with your spirituall and temporall damnable devoti∣ons, and infernall practises, doe uphold the usurped dignity of that Idoll. Dagon-Senate, &c. Therefore it is no marvell, if they maintain you, for you are the onely props that uphold them; when you give over lying, them their Ho∣nour will lie in the dust, and when they fall you will be in danger of sterving: For as Phocas by the murder of his Master (Mauritius the Roman Empe∣rour) gate the Empire to himself, but was held in an odious estimation amongst all good men, so that his usurped ill got Estate stood tottering, and his life in dai∣ly hazard (by the friends of the assassinated Emperour) at the same time, the Bishop of Rome (Boniface) ambitously sought to be chiefe and Ʋniversall Bishop over all Christian Churches, which pride of his was opposed by all the Godly and zealous Bishops in the world: But at last the Murderer Phocas, and the aspiring Pope made a bargaine, which was, that the Pope should by his dreadfull thunder-bolts of Excommunication, aff ight the people into obedience
with the Emperour; so the Emperour (by force of Armes) would bestow the Primacy of the whole earth upon the Pope; this match was made, and the most significant application of it is, that by as good right as Phocas reigned, by the like right doth Bookers Parliament rule, and by the same right doe those fore∣mentioned villaines, and they may defend each other by murder, Sacriledge, Am∣bition, Treason, Rebellion, and ruine of this auncient, famous, late flourishing, and now most wretched and miserable England. Was ever such language as this vented against the honour of a Parlia∣ment! I once more petition that Honourable Assembly, that Order may be given, for the enquiring out the Author and vender of this unreaso∣nable railing paper; and I question not, but they will be quickly found out, to be made an example to others, who drive a trade with these, and such like pernicious Pamphlets; which usually sell so much the better, by how much the more audaciously they dishonour the Parliament. I thoughts Master Booker had set forth a Cordiall sufficient to cure all their Malignant sits: But I perceive that the best Physick a vailes little without a Method and orderly course: Therefore upon better advice, it is thought convenient, that all desperate Malignants should be thus handled; first, because the Signe is in the Heart, let them blood in the Basilicke veine, Afterwards, Rs. Half an Ounce of Spanish Figgs, codled at Court in an Italian Skillet. Of the quint-essence of Cock-sparrowes, according to the Queen Mothers prescript, one scruple and a halfe. Gelly of Harts-horne, of Iermyns owne making, one Dram. Protestant Religion, Root and Branch, ana. one handfull. Plundered Penny-Royall, one bagfull. Of Time, no lesse then Three yeeres Rebellion in Ireland, and as many in England. ana. Boyle these in as much as you can get of His Majesties teares of Repen∣tance for blood-shed, over an Oxford Bon-fire, the length of a Cathedrall Letany: Then straine it through the Cape of Cottingtons Cloake, and at length season it with a graine or two of Northerne Newes, and so make a a cleere purging Potion: Let every stubborne and stupefyed Malignant, that is troubled with a Congelation of Popery in his Braines, drink three ounces of this with due observance, and I question not, but it will purge so effectually, that their bodies will ever hereafter, be the better prepared for Master Bookers most considerable and wholesome Cordiall; the use whereof I still commend unto them, as most convenient after this so ne∣cessary a Purge. FINIS.
