D585a R226660 99895664 153167
A Declaration from Oxford, of Anne Green, A young woman that was lately, and unjustly hanged in the Castle-yard; but since recovered, her neck set strait, and her eyes fixed orderly and firmly in her head again: With her Speech touching four Angels that appeared to her when she was dead; and their strange expressions, apparations, and passages that happened thereupon, the like never heard of before: Being a more full and perfect Relation of the great handiwork of God to the said Anne Green, Ser∣vant to Sir Tho. Read, who being got with Child, and delivered of it in a house of Office, dead born, received an unjust sentence to be hanged, and after half an hour, was cut down, and carried to the Colledge of Phystians, where all the learned Doctors and Chyrurgions met to anatomize her; but taking her out of the Coffin, and laying her on a Table, she began to str; whereupon Dr. Petty & others, caused a warm bed to be prepared for her; and after 14. hours, she came to her self, uttering these words, Behold Gods providence, in raising me from death to life: With an excellent Prayer used by her morning, noon, and night, fit to be read in all Families, throughout England, Ireland, Scotland, and Wales: Whereunto is annexed another strange Wonder from Ashburn in Dar∣bishire, shewing how a young Woman dying in Child-bed, was buried, and de∣livered of a young Son in the grave, the strange things that befell thereupon, at the taking her out again. Licensed according to Order. depiction of the hanging of Anne Green presenting various stages of this narrative: her illicit affair with her employer's grandson; her dropping to her knees at the base of the ladder; and the actual hanging, with a friend pulling at her feet, and another poking her to be certain that she is dead Behold Gods Providence LONDON, Printed by J. Clowes. 1651.
A Word to the judicious Reader. DIvine Providence having been pleased to illustrate to the World, its great power and magnificence, in former Ages, for the relieving of the oppressed, and righting of the poor and innocent, hath now in our days, most wonderfully and mira∣culously vouchsafed to look down from Heaven, with a bright, unspot∣ted, and All seeing Eye, upon the unwarranted proceedings, and free corrupting juglings, of the wicked men on earth; and to the end, that this great work of God, may be made known, I shall here present thee with an infallible Narrative, touching one Anne Green, (sent from Oxford by an eye and ear witness) who unjustly reeived sentence to be hanged in the Castle-yard, on the 14. of Decemb. last; the manner, charge, and particulars whereof follow. This Anne Green, Servant to Sir Thomas Read, being very busie at turning of Mault, over-reaching her self, found her self to be ve∣ry ill; whereupon she imediately went into the house of Office, remaining about a quarter of an hour, full of pain; at last, a Child, about a span long, sprung from her, but abortive, which much im∣paird her health and strength; but being exceeding fearful, that a discovery should be made thereof, she laid it in a corner of the a∣foresaid house, and covered it with dust and rubbish.
During which time, one of her Fellow-Servants, admiring that she staid so long, and hearing many heavp groans, went to see what was become of her, who found her in a very sad and deplorable condition, and asking her what the matter was? she reply'd, she was utterly undone, undone, undone; Why Anne, I hope thou art not with Child? Alas, alas! Mary, that ever I was born, to live and die in shame and scorn: I was, but now I am clear of it; Why? what is become of it? she answered, look yonder, where it lies; and going to the place, casting off the dust, ran shrieking out into the house, acquainting her Master and Mrs. with this sad accident; in so much, that they presently sent for her in, and demanded who it was, that had committed that foul act, and contemptible crime with her? who answered, a Gentleman of good birth, and Kins∣man to a Justice of Peace. But after half an hours discourse, she was carried before a Ju∣stce, who upon examination, confessed that she was guilty of the Act, in committing of the sin; but clear and innocent of the crime for murthering of it, for that it was dead bor; yet notwithstand∣ing, after further examination, the Justice caused her Mittimus to be made, inditing her to answer it at the next Assizes, and forth∣with sent her to the Castle-Goal at Oxford, where she remained tll the Sessions; at which time she was arraigned for her life, who being brought to the Bar, pleaded not guilty; but after a short tryal, she was convicted for her life, and received sentence to be hanged on Oxford Gallowes, which was accordingly performed; and being brought to the place of execution, she fell down on her knees at the ladder foot, humbly desiring of God, that his Dvine Majesty would be pleased, to shew some remarkable judgement on her, for a signal and testifiation to the world of her innocency, which most miraculously was evidenced to her, to the great and wonderful admiration to all that shall either hear of, or read these ensuing lines. But before I insist upon this miraculous deliverance, it is requisite that I should communicate her speech and deport∣ment upon the Ladder, which was with great comfort, and un∣dauntedness of spirit, by this poor soul performed, to the great ad∣miration of the spectators. At the going up the Ladder, she fixt her eyes on the Executioner, saying, God forgive my false accusers, as I freely forgive thee; and then turning her self on the Ladder, utter∣ed these words.
Dear Friends, YOur business hither to day, is to see a sad spectacle, an innocent woman to be in a moment cut off, in the prime of her years; which sudden change doth not in the least strike dread or terror to my heart, but rather incites me to a motion of eternal joy and happiness; for I con∣ceive, there is no more then this Rope and Ladder between me and Hea∣ven, and I doubt not but that I am now going to receive that blessed Portion, which my blessed Saviour and Redeemer Jesus Christ hath purchased for me, by ransoming my soul with his precious blood, and bitter passion. And as for this untimely end, I do unfained acknowledge and cor∣fess, that it is Gods just judgement and wrath upon me for sins long un∣repented, of many judgements withstood, and mercies slighted: there∣fore God hath whipped me by his severe Rod of correction, that he might not lose me. One thing more I desire, and to you dear Cousen, (being a young man, standing at the foot of the Ladder) I represent my suit, That when the doomful turn from off the Ladder comes, that you would use all possible means to dispatch me of my pain; and then casting up her eyes to Hea∣ven, being prepared for a new change of life, breathed forth her last words, saying, Sweet Jesus receive my soul; upon the uttering of which words, the Executioner did his Office: and being turned off the Ladder, her Kinsman took hold of her feet, and hung with all the weight and force of his body on them, that so he might the sooner rid her of her pain. A Souldier standing by, gave her 4 or 5 blowes on the brest, with the but end of his Musket; and having hung half an hour, she was cut down, (being quite dead) and put into the Chyrurgions Chest, who had beg'd her for an Anatomy) and carried to Mr. Clarks house, an Apo∣thecary, where the Physitions met to try their skill; and having pre∣fixed a time for the reading a Lecture over her, (being usual upon the anatomzing of either man or woman.) When they were all met, her body was taken out of the Coffin, and laid upon a large Table, where in the presence of them all, she began to breath, which was no small terror nor admiration to all that were then present: whereupon a large dispute arose about her, and one amongst the rest, Dr. Petty by name, went to her, took her by the hand, and laid his ear to her Temples, and perceiving life, declared that there was a
great hand of God in the business, and imediatly let her bloud in three places. After which he caused a warm bed to be prepared for her, and a wo∣man to lie with her, and applyed several Oyls unto her, using many o∣ther circumstances of art, until she recovered, which was within 14. hours: And even in the last minute of the 14. hour, she opened her eyes, uttering these words. Behold Gods Providence, and his won∣der of wonders, which indeed, is a deliverance so remarkable since the ceassing of Miracles, that it cannot be parallel'd in all Ages, for the space of 300 years: And withall, it may remain upon record, for a pre∣sident to all Magistrates, and Courts of Judicature, to take a special care in denounsing of sentence, without a due and legal process, accord∣ing to the known Laws of the Land, by an impartial and uncorrupted Jury, either of men or women, &c. This poor Creature is now well recovered, and in perfect health; since which time, being asked what apparisions she saw during her Trance, she replyed, That being (as it were) in a Garden of Para∣dice, there appeared to her 4. little boyes with wings, being four Angels, saying, Woe unto them that decree unrighteous Decrees, and take away the right from the Judges, that the innocent may be their prey. Upon which words they vanished, &c. And being further asked, whether she felt any pain at the place of execution; she replyed, That she never felt when her Irons was knockt of, nor how she was brought out of prison; but remembred the time of her being upon the Ladder, and what she spake to the People; fur∣ther alleaging, that she saw her chief enemy dead before her, (which is observable, that within some hours after, Sir Tho. Read died.) Since her recovery, she hath uttered many worthy expres∣sions, glorifying of God, and magnifying his great name, for these his wonderful mercies bestowed upon her; and withall, morning, noon, and night, doth not cease from acknowledging his divine goodness and deliverance vouchsafed to her, calling upon his great name in these words. O most gracious and merciful Father, who art the Lord of health and sikness, of life and of death, who killest and makest alive, who bringest down to the grave, and raiseth up again; who art the only preserver of all those that trust in thee: I thy poor and unworthy Servant, having now felt the grievousness due unto sin, and the greatness of thy mercy,
in forgiving sinners: and perceiving with what a fatherly compassion thou hast heard my prayers, and restored me to my health and strength again: do here (upon the bended knees of my heart) return with the thankful Leaper, to acknowledge thee alone to be the God of my health, and salvation; and to give thee the praise and glory of my strength and deliverance out of my late grievous malady: and for thus turning my mourning into mirth, my sickness into health, and my death into life. My sins deserved punishment, and thou hast corrupted me; but hast not given me over unto death: I lifted up mine eyes unto thee O Lord, and thou didst comfort me; and when I found no help in my self, nor in any other Creature, (saying, I am deprived of the residue of my years) then didst thou restore me to health again, and gavest life unto me; I found thee O Lord, ready to save me: And now Lord, I confess, that I cn nver yield unto thee such a measure of thanks, as thou hast deserved at my hands. And seeing that I can never be able to repay thy goodness with acceptable works, Oh that I could with Mary Magdalen, testifie the love and thank fulness of my heart with abounding tears! Oh what shall I be able to render unto thee O Lord, for all these benefits which thou hast bestowed upon my soul? O Lord I do hare offer up my self un∣to thee, beseeching thee still to assist me with thy holy spirit, that the re∣mainder of my life may wholly be spent in setting forth thy praise and glory. O Lord forgive me my former follies and unthankfulness, that I was not more careful to love thee according to thy goodness, nor to serve thee according to thy will, nor to obey thee according to thy benefits. O Lord, with my new health, renew in me a right spirit, which may free me from the slavery of sin, and establish my heart in the service of grace. Work in me a greater destation of all my sin, and increase my faith in Jesus Christ, who is the Authour of my health and salvati∣on. Let thy good spirit lead me in the way that I should walk; and reach me to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this world: that others by my example may think better of thy truth. And therefore O Lord, I do here from the very bottom of my heart, acknowledge to be due unto thee, O Father, which sitteth upon the Throne, and to the Lamb thy Son, who sitteth at thy right hand; and to the holy spirit, all praise, honour, glory, and power, from this time forth, and for evermore, Amen.
Another strange passage worthy of observation, lately happen∣ed at Ashborn in Darbishire, where a woma being in sore travel, after many hours, died in Child-ded, and having lain dead for some certain time, according to usual custom, her Corpes was buried, and within an hour after, a Country Virgin passing by the Grave, over the Church-yard, she heard a young Child cry, who going to the place, and laying her ear close to the ground, perceived that her Neighbour was there delivered: whereupon she imediately ran to the Clark, and acquainted him therewith; the Clark hast∣ned to the Minister, and both came together to the forecited place, where, taking off the moulds, and opening ehe Coffin, they found that the woman was delivered of a Sonne, but both dead, which did not a little cause great admiration; and to the end, that a fur∣ther examination might be made concerning the business: other Neghbours were called to testifie the truth and certainty of this great work of God; where at present, I shall desist from further insisting thereupon; by reason, that there is preparing for the Press, a full and infallible Narrative, touching the same, with a subscription of divers Knights, and Gentlemens hands there∣unto. FINIS.
