D537 E83_18 R5000 99872765 125211
THE DECLARATION AND Propositions of the Lord Maior of London to the Kings most Excellent Maiesty and and both Houses of Parliament, concerning a Treaty for Peace. Together with the House of Commons Answer to the said Declaration. Also a true Information of 800. Danes lan∣ding in Lincolnshire, Decemb. 20. And how the Trained-Bands of rhat County gave them Battell neer the Towne of Lee, ond obtained a happy victory over them. Together with the Resolution of the hous of Commons concerning the Danee. Also a second Victory obtaind by Sergeant Major Skipton and Col, Browne at Chichester Decemb. 22. against the Kings Forces that lye there, Decem. 24. Printed for Henry Liech.
THE LORD MAJOR OF LONDON His Propositions to the Kings most excellent Maiesty at Oxford, Decemb. 22. THE Lord Major of London, together with divers Citisens, having serious∣ly weighed and considered the present E∣state and condition of this Distressed Kingdom, occasioned by those wicked and Malignant Spirits, that are enemies to the Common-wealth, and Adversaries to the
publike good, having agreed upon certain propositions to be presented to His Ma∣jesty for a reconciliation of these differen∣cies between his Majesty and both Houses of Parliament, upon Tuesday last the said Lord Maior accompanied with divers of the Aldermen and Citizens went up to the House of Commons and propounded these following propositions in the name of themselves and the whole City, it be∣ing directed to the Lords and Commons, which propositions were to this effect: 1. They gave the Parliament hearty thanks for their unwearied paine and care to settle the present distractions of this Kingdomc, and their severall addresses to His Majesty for the same, desiring His Majesty to come and ioyn with his Par∣liament for the establishing and setling of firme peace. Then seeing His Majesty hath often de∣clared, that hee could not with safety re∣turne to the Parliament, by reason of the tumults raised in the City, they have drawn up a petition to his Maiesty expressing
their loyalty and obedience towards him, to be as great as any of their predecessors, and they were ready to give His Maiesty all further assurance of the same if His Maiesty would be graciously pleased to come to His Parliament, &c. Which pe∣tition they also presented to the Com∣mons, desiring them to consider of a way how the same might be sent unto his Ma∣iesty. Upon Wednesday last Letrers came to the House of Commons from Lin∣colnshire, intimating, That on Sunday last there was 500. Danes landed in that Coun∣tie; But the Trained Bands there imme∣diately arose, and being in number about 400. they marched toward them, and gave them Baitell neer the Town of Lee, where they slew about 50. of them. The House of Commons have Ordered, that some good Commanders shall be speedily sent downe to oppose the said Danes.
The Parliaments Answer to the fore∣said Propositions. THese Propositions being read, the Sheriffes and Aldermen were called into the House, who returned them great thankes for their Petitions, and then their Petitions being communicated to the Lords, they also gave them thankes, and promised to joyne with the Commons concerning the same. The Parliaments Propositions to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty. IT being often debated in the Lords House, concerning the framing of cer∣taine Propositions for an Accommodation of Peace to be presented to His Majesty, their Lordships at last having drawne up
the same, desired a Conference with the Commons, at which Conference the said propositions were read, and the Com∣mons desired to consider of the same; and the said propositions were to this effect: 1. That His Majesty would be plea∣sed to give his Royall consent to such Bills as have already been agreed upon by both Houses of Parliam. amongst which is the Bill for taking away all Innovati∣ons out of the Church, a Bill against scan∣dalous Ministers, a Bill against Pluralities a Bill for the Assembly of the Clergy, for setling of Church Government, the Bill against Bishops, Deanes, and Chapters, &c. 2 That His Majesty would passe a Bill for the better establishing of the Rights, and priviledges of Parliament, and the li∣berty of the Subject. 3 That Delinquents might be delive∣vered up, or left to receive such punish∣ment as is agreeable to the Lawes of the Land, amongst which are nominated the Lord Digby, Wilmot, and others.
4 That His Majesty would passe a  for the clearing of the Lord Kimbolton a the 5. Members that were accused of the House of Commons. 5 That all Ministers of State, Judg and other Officers that have beene recei∣ved since the difference between His Ma¦jesty and the parliament, may bee resto¦red. Col. Browne having sent his prisoner which he took at Winchester to Portsmouth he and Sir W. Waller marched with these Forces to Chichester, where they met with a great party of the Kings Army, & draw∣ing their men into a great Field, they be¦gan to charg each other, wher they fought for the space of seven houres very coura∣giously, and at the last. Ser. Maj. Skipton came with 11. Troops of Horse and fel on so couragiously, that the Kings Army was put to flight, taking prisoners and killing about 200 men with the losse of 40, And after the Fight they possessed themselves of Arundel; and took Sir Rich. Rochford, and Mr. Rochford prisoners. FINIS.
