D747 e450_6 99864560 161895
A DECLARATION OF The proceedings of His Highnesse the Prince of Wales, and the Marquis of Newcastle, concerning their comming from Callice to Dunkirk, and from thence to Barwick in the North of England, with an Army, for the defence and preservation of the Kings Majesties Royall Person, and to joyn with Sir Marmaduke Langdale. Likewise, His Highnesses Speech at Paris in France, before his depar∣ture from the Nunneries, And the Duke of York's comming from Zealand to Campheer, and from Campheer to Goring; His Highnesse to be Lord High-Admirall of the re∣volted Ships, and the Lord Willoughby of Parham Vice-Admirall. Sent in a Letter from Burlington-Key in Yorkshire, Iune 29. 1648. Printed for the generall satisfaction of  Majesties Loyall Subjects, 1648.
A DECLARATION OF The proceedings of His Highnesse the Prince of Wales, and the Marquesse of Newcastle, concerning their landing in the North of England. Honoured Sir, VPon Sunday last being the 25. of this instant June, a Dutch-man struck into this Harbour, and the Master comming ashore, imparted se∣verall things of great concernment touching this King∣dome, carryed on by the Marquis of Newcastle, the Lord German, and divers others; and amongst the rest it was intimated, that there are divers Forces raised in the Kingdom of France, and in the Provinces of
Holland, Zealand, and other places, most of them being English, and that the Marquesse of Newcastle is ap∣pointed Generall, and hath received Orders for their transportation into England. He further intimated, that the Prince of Wales, and the rest of the English Gallants hath taken their leave of the King of France, and are departed from the Court, with a resolution to passe from Callis to Dunkirk, & so with their new Army to Barwick in the North of England. It is said, that before the Princes departure from Pa∣ris in France, his Highnesse went to the grates of seve∣rall Nunneries, and there gave the Nuns a visit, where they appeared unveiled; and in the presence of seve∣rall Lords and Ladies of Honour, His Highnesse de∣clared, That for their many respects and favors vouch∣safed to Him, since His comming into that Countrey, he were much obliged to them, and thanked them for their great respects to his Mother, the Queen of Great Brittain, with many other civill expressions; and ha∣ving expressed himself in these, or the like words, took his leave, and departed. Some report, that there are four Regiments raised in Holland, to joyne with the aforesaid Army under the command of the Earl of Newcastle, and to be trans∣ported over with them to joyn with Sir Marmaduke Langdale in the North. It is further said, that when the forraign forces are u∣nited and joyned, they will amount to betwixt four or five thousand; which report causeth a great feare and jealousie amongst the Inhabitants in these parts, being
sensible of the inhumane cruelty of Newcastle and his Adherents, greatly fearing, that they shall be left to the mercy of a forraign Enemy, if not timely prevent∣ed by the great wisdome and providence of the high and honourable Court of Parliament. Wee also hear that the seven revolted ships (which lately revolted from the obedience of Parliament) are gone into Helfer sluce in Holland, and another of the revolted ships (called the Flying Buck struck into Brill, who meeting with a Parliament ship, boarded her, and turned out captain Nickson, the captain thereof, and divers of the Mariners, and manned her with his own men; and the Captain of the Flying Bucke hath declared, That such ships as he meets with that is not of his side, he will tye the men back to backe, and turne them into the Sea. And about the 22. of this instant June, the Duke of York came from Zealand to Campheer, accompanied by the Lord Willoughby of Parham and divers other English Gallants; from Campheer they came to a place called Goring, where some of the revolted ships lay; and from thence he returned again to Campheer, with his English train. We further hear, that the Duke is made High-Ad∣mirall of the revolted Navy, and the Lord Willoughby of Parham Vice-Admirall, and that if his Highnesse can obtain from the Prince of Orange Money and Am∣munition, they intend for England; for the Captain of the Flying Buck doth speak as if they intended for Yar∣mouth. It is likewise reported, that above 100. of the English Royalists are gone into the revolted ships that ly at the Brill. Burlington-Key, 26. Iune, 1648.
SIR, THis morning a party of the Enemies sallyed forth at the South gate, and approached neer our horse Guard, but were quickly beaten back, and pursued by our party to the turn-pike, where they kept a Court of Guard, who upon our approach gave fire and fled away. So we entred this Guard, took such arms as were left there. This Guard of theirs was kept neer the Almes-houses, at the entrance of the Sub∣urbs of the town: in this action three of the enemy were killed, and many wounded. We also took 12. priso∣ners, and 15 or 16 horse with arms, two horses of our were killed, and one man cut in the head, but the wound not mortall, nor any one of the rest of our men recei∣ving any hurt at all. Provisions begin to grow scarce in the town, especially bread, & how they are provided with corn I know not, but I am certain they are ill pro∣vided of mills to grind it if they have any. For this day we have fired and burnt down their Wind-mils to the ground, divers souldiers steal away from the enemy daily, and come into us, especially since the Lord Ge∣nerall sent in a Letter, proferring conditions to such as should come to him, and unto all, if they would em∣brace and yeeld up the town, which conditions were. 1. That within 24. hours after the receipt thereof, the officers laying down their armes, should have passes to travell beyond Sea, &c. 2. That the common souldi∣ers, and all men of that rank, shall have liberty to de∣part to their own homes, submitting to the authority of Parliament. 3. That the Inhabitants of the towne shall be free from plunder and violence. These conditions not being accepted of, the Lord Generall is resolved not to offer so good again to those
which are the chief in action amongst the Enemy. Our army is in a very good condition and full of resoluti∣on, and although the Gen. is very unwilling to storme the town (for that as much as in him is, he would a∣void the shedding of bloud. Abot four of the clock this morning another party of the Enemies forces sallyed out of the towne vpon the Suffolk forces on the North-East side, but Col. Whaley joyning with them, charged them, killed two, & put the rest to a disorderly retreat, took ten prisoners, and some very good horses. This Evening another par∣ty of the Enemy attempted to go out on Harwich road, to fetch in provisions, and were fallen upon by a par∣ty of ours, which routed them and took divers priso∣ners, one of which that was wounded saith, that they begin to be exceedingly straightned in the towne for provisions, especially for horse meat: three of their Wind-mills are burnt downe, they have two Water¦mils which we are cutting off, and have scaling Lad∣ders ready to storme, but the Morter piece is not yet come up. Yesterday morning 3 troopers came out of the town with horse and arms, and proffer'd their service to the General, they report there are in the town about 600. horse, and 3500. foot. and about 3 of the clock in the afternoon, Sir Charles Lucus drew out 8. companies of foot, and 4 troops of horse, close under their Workes, whereupon a party of ours were commanded out to charge them, and after some exchange of shot, our for∣ces beat them in, set their Guard house on fire, killed two, and took some prisoners. From the Leaguer before Colchester, June 28. 1648.
POSTSCRIPT. SIR, VPon the close of this Letter, here hapned further action; A party of the Enemy returning from Tendring Hundred with much plundred provision, were intercepted by a considerable party of the Gene∣rals; at sight whereof they fled into the Hundred, lea∣ving the provision behind them, which was convoyed into the Leaguer, and the aforesaid party are advanced into the Hundred to engage them, if possible. This day the Suffolk Forces had another sight with the enemy, killed two and took ten prisoners. From the Leaguer, 28. Iune, 1648. On Tuesday June 27, a paper was read in the House, subscribed by divers Citizens and sent to Dr. Burgesse, desiring him to give God thanks (in his Pulpit) for pre∣serving his Majesty from poysoning, and to pray for the forces under the command of the Earl of Norwich, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale, and after some debate thereupon, it was ordred that the parties whose names were subscribed should be sent for. FINIS.
