E2442 V708A E113_8 R22110 99871590 124002
VOTES CONCERNING THE POST-MASTER. ALSO RVLES OF DIRECTION FOR The Government of Souldiers, made by Captain DOVVET, and delivered to his Troopers. With his Speech for their Observance. LONDON: Printed for H: Blunden, August 22. 1642.
VOTES. VPon Mr Prideaux Report from the Committee, for the Post-Masters, It was resolved up∣on the Question, That the Taking of the severall Letters in this Case from the seve∣rall Carriers, and the severall restraints, im∣prisonments of Dover, Chapman, Cot∣ton, and Mackcarell, is against the Law and Libertie and freedome of the Subject. Resolved, &c. That these severall persons ought to have Reparations and Damages, from Sir Iohn Cooke, and Sir Francis VVindibanke, then Secretaries of State, and Master VVitherings respectively. Resolved. &c. That Sir Iohn Cooke, Sir Francis VVindibanke, and Master VVithe∣rings are Delinquents.
AN ORDER MADE BY CAP∣TAIN DOWET, FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF HIS SOƲLDIERS. GEntlemen, being as it hath pleased his Excellencie, the Earl of Essex Gene∣rall, to appoint me to be your Captain. Therefore I humbly desire you all to do your endeavours to observe my Commands; which Command shall never be but for the good and service of His Maiestie, and High Court of Parliament, and your own safeties, against those malignant parties which doth im∣ploy their industries to breed dissention be∣tween his Maiestie and his great Councell, which at length will prove a destruction to his
people, if God doth not put his hand to the Cause. Therefore to render you more capable for this imployment, I have here set part of the Rules which you are to observe under me. 1 First, That no man shall take the Name of the Lord in vain, or any other prophane Oath. 2 That all men shall observe the Lords day, excepting when you are upon dutie. 3 That no man shall be drunk or disorder himself. 4 That no man shall bring, or cause to be brought, any lewd or uncivill women in his Quarter. 5 That no man shall abuse his fellows by ill language, or stroke, or give them the lie. 6 That none shall play at Cards or Dice, or any Game which is not lawfull. And if any playes above half a Crown at any game which is lawfull, both winner and looser shall be pu∣nished, and the money distributed to those that gives notice of their gaming. 7 That every man shall give notice to his Officers, what quarrell there is amongst the Troopers; and in case that any knows of the quarrell and doth not hinder it, and give intel∣ligence to the Officers, both quarreller and spe∣ctator shall be punished.
8 That all men shall repair to their lodging after the setting of the Watch, which will be performed by the sound of the Trumpet or the touling of the Bell. 9 That no man upon a March shall offer to stay behind, or march before the Troop, or go out of his Quarter without licence of the Offi∣cers. 10 That no man shall offer to steal one from another, or any bodie else, especially any Tack∣ling belonging to Horse or Armour. 11 That no man shall abate the allowance of his Horse, or sell or pawn any of his Armor. 12 That no man shall give any uncivill lan∣guage in the quarters where they lodge, or as they march, especially to a woman or maid. 13 That all men shall pay for whatsoever they call for, or have from their Landlord or parts where they are billetted. 14 That none shall offer to shoot his Pistoll or Carabine upon exercising, especially upon the Watch without command. 15 That all men shall give notice to their Officers, if they hear of any that means to fall off from the service. 16 That all men shall obey the command
of the Officers from the highest to the lowest. 17 That every man shall take notice that he is bound to do his endeavour to bring to con∣dign punishment any that transgresseth in these Articles; And if they know and do not give in∣telligence of it, they shall be as guiltie as the offendours. Gentlemen, I am confident that he which desires to do his Countrey service, and expect hereafter to deserve to be a Commander, shall not find this Rule hard to be observed; he that is nobly minded shall find it easie. One thing more which I desire of you all is, that you may love one another; for where there is a true love and unity, there is a blessing of God: And where there is a blessing of God; there can happen no evill. Secondly, that you be carefull of your horses and armour; for if you neglect that, you can do no good service. Thirdly, that you live peaceably with all those that stands for King and Parliament; flie discentions amongst your selves, and be con∣tented with your pay, and extort upon no man. Flie from vices, and no doubt God shall blesse
all that you shall undertake. And more assure your selves, if you do your endeavours to fol∣low these rules here mentioned, that nothing shall be lacking of my part to do you good, and to further you in it. If there be any of you that thinks he shall not be able to observe this, and that this is too ex∣act, let him freely speak before his name be list∣ed, and he shall have free leave to change Troop, and to put himself under the Command of any other Captain. FINIS.
