E2956 e412_33 99873565 161263
ENGLANDS Deadly Disease to bee Sick of a KING. OR Religions iust Complaint against her Enemies the Hereticks, who call the Diety into Question. AND Revoke their Covenant, scornfully to have it hanged lower in the Steeple-houses, for Dogs to pisse upon &c. Licenced according to Order of both Houses of Parliam. LONDON, Printed for George Lindsey, and are to be sold at his Shop over against London-stone, 1647.
A Iust complaint of true Religion against ENGLAND. O England! England! To thee I do direct my speech, against thee I do complaine. Then heare mee thou filthy adulteresse, hast thou no other pretext, but me to au∣thorize thy treacheries? None else but me to colour thy Treasons? Shall I beare the blame of thy disobediences to God and thy lawfull King? Say strumpet wilt thou make mee a mother to thy whore∣domes, wilt thou that I support thy shamelesse Apo∣stasies, art thou not ashamed to say, that it is for my cause that thou committest such robberies? Is it for my honour (as thou sayest) that thou commit such murthers, and bloodshed? Have I been at any time, the mother of oppressions? Or the upholder of Sedi∣tions? Or the consenter to Conspiracies, dost thou not know the contrary? That all these things bee a∣gainst my heart? Doth not kingdumes stand by mee? Doe not I Onely I, make man acceptable to God? There can bee nothing more hatefull to mee, then thy filthy defections. Hath any of thy neighbour Nati∣tions done such affronts to mee as thou hast done? For thou hast stript mee naked, rob'd mee of all my Ornaments, pulled downe and dishonoured my state∣ly dwelings: killed my servants▪ banished all my wellwillers, and now dost thou go about to banish my selfe.
Unparalleld ingratefull consider, and remember of the happy estate all the time that I was maintained and re∣spected by thee. So long as you did honour me, didst thou lack for any thing? Wast thou not admired? For thy beauty, riches, glory, strength, and manhood. Was there any of thy neighbours could compare to thee in these things? Could any Nobility compare with thine for glory? Could any Gentry compare with thine for richs? Could any Marchants compare with thine in gaines by their traffique? Was not England honou∣red, respected, and made welcome to all Nations? Was not England both loved and feared of all her neigh∣bours? But now open thine eyes and look upon thy dis∣figured estate. Thou art become frantick and out of thy wits. Thou art now become miserable, infamous, ty∣ranized and oppressed by thy own selfe? Doth not thy own Sword (which of old was a terrour and a conquer∣our of others) now pierce thy owne bowels? Doth not thy own homicidiers mrcilesse hands make thine own children fatherlesse? Thou stopst thine eares at the pittifull cries of the poore widdowes and oppressed. Thou disdainest the lamentable cryes of the poor. Thou hast opened thy dores to all detestfull Vice and hast ba∣nished Vertue, thou art become barbarous, and dost hate all civility, thy onely pleasure is to commit murther: and thou takest delight to disobey and tread under foot the holy Lawes of my God, thou art drunk with inno∣cent blood, and yet thou dost still thrust forward, thou dost esteeme it thy greatest praise to oppresse thy neigh∣bours, and thou art not ashamed to proclaime unto the world, that it is for my sake, that thou committest sacri∣ledge. Filthy apostat look upon thy self and consider thy
estate now what it is, and what it was when I was main∣tained in thy territories, where thou wast then beautifull. Thou art now filthy, stinking, and loathsome, thy glory is turned to shame, thy riches are turned to penury, thy strength is turned to feeblenesse, and thy manhood to cowardice, and thou art become a by-word and laughing stock to all Nations. When the children of Israel did fall frō God and me, with the gold and Iewels they took from the Egyptians they did convert into a golden Calf, and for this the Lord my God did plague them. Hast thou not done the like with thy Gold and Silver, thou hast bought a sword to kill thy own self. Remembr what hath been done in thy sister Germany for her co∣tempt of mee, looke for no better no, and if it were not for the honour and respect that I carry to that godly well inclyned Prince thy King, thy case should be worse then hers. For I do know that that King shall restore mee to all my rights, and apparell, and that hee shall re∣edify my ruined houses, and restore my exiled se vants and welwillers to their wonted liberties. Let not toe thy dissmbling seducers look for a better reward, then such as Baal his Priests had, for deceiving Israel. And bid them remember that visibe destruction that came upon them who did strive against Gods Ordinance and against A on. Do not think that the al-seeig eye of my God sleepeth. No, no: the innocent blood f thy mur∣thers cryes (from the earth, as did that of Abell) for a vengeance against thee. Thy inhumane of pressions of the poore, of the widow, and fatherlesse, whose pitious cryes thou disdaines: the Lord my God doth hear, & my Sister Iustice, whom thou hast banished, is now in heave, plea∣ding for the Poore against thee. Hath not my God forbid
to touch his Annoynted and do his Prophets no wrong? But thou respectlesse strumpet makes no Conscience to abuse the Lords Annointed, and to kill the Prophets. For since the time of thy filthy backslidings from mee, thou makest no Conscience of thy wayes. Thou canst do no more to fill thy cup full to the brim with thy abomina∣tions, but woe bee unto them when it shall be full, for thou shalt be forced to drink up all thy filthy perjuries, blasphemies, abominations, murders, and poysonable he∣resies, allowed of, invented, forged, & maintained by thee, to the dishonour of my God, and dispraise of mee, thou art become sencelesse, and thy understanding is departed from thee, Dost thou not remember that when the evill spirit did undertake to perswade Ahab to fall by the sword of the children of Ammon, was it not by beeing a lying spirit in the mouthes of his Prophets? And hath not thy Prophets seduced thee to fall upon thy own sword dost thou not perceive that there is a heavy judgement comming from the Lord my God upon thee? Art thou blind, or dost thou not regard the visible threatnings of the Lord my God for the contempt of mee? Art thou become so insolent, as to slight the wrath of the Almigh∣ty? Thou hast and dost proclaime thy self open enemy to all civility and civill government, denying thy duty to God, and thy King, refusing all Religion and right rule, suspending, subverting, and suppressing all spirutall Pastors and godly learned men, maintaining heresies, A∣theisme, and ungodly livers in their roomes, dost thou look for a fearfull end, and that thou shat be made a spectacle and a visible example to all Nations for this, a ke but those of thy commerse what difference there is between thy estate now, and the time that I had my
peaceable habitation with thee, aske thy tradesmen, what alteration there is now of their estate? And those who got their living by their handwork, I say aske them what losse they find at the weeks end. Let every one in their severall callings beare witnesse with mee to this truth. And since thou hast cast mee off, following after thy inchanting, seducing lovers. What hast thou gained? any thing else, but that thou hadst purchased hundreds of yeeres before, thou hast spent all in these 7 yeeres of thy licensious living, denying thy duty to God and thy King, and forsaking mee. Thou mayst be compared un∣to an adulteresse woman who had spent all her husbands riches with her new lovers. And now when thou begin∣est to be poore, thy lovers who hath inriched themselves with thy goods, doth now disdaine thee and laugh thee to scorne, if thou have no more monies, they shall strip thee, and rather pitty thy nakednesse, then commiserate thy estate, but shall utterly undo thee, if thou disassent to their desires. Art thou bereft of sence, or depraved of eyes, that dost rather fall then see thy own wreched e∣state: that (those whom thou hired to bee the executi∣oners of thy malice against them whom thou intended to undo) are now become thy shame like unto Hamans gallowes, that hang'd his master: be not thy hirelings become thy masters, thy bond srvants, thy Comman∣ders: hath the like been done in any other Country that is done in thee? It is a thing to be wondered at, that thou hast such heart to do such unlawfull things, as to presse to depose thy lawfull Prince, to subvert Religion, and to kill thy selfe, and hast not the courage to with∣stand the cruelties of thy domestique enemies, nor to gainsay their imprisoning Ordinances, nor to refuse their unreasonable demands.
O miserable wretch! more then miserable, how long wilt thou halt between two opinions? If the Lord be God follow him, if Baal be God follow him. Thou hadst once wit: thou hadst judgement, thou hadst un∣derstanding, thou hadst once valour to withstand the power of Nations: call to mind the prosperous suc∣cesse thou hast had to resist the invasions of Kingdoms, and not only to resist, but overcome victoriously, wit∣nesse France and Scotland, where in one day thou hadst the glorious victory of two battels, and took both their Kings prisoners, art thou not England now as thou wast then? The number of thy fighting men and armes be rather augmented then diminished. Thou lackest no∣thing but courage. Then heed, and take my counsell, I love thee, and am sorry for thy disaster, for all thy rigour used against mee, returne then to thy wonted obe∣dience to God and to thy lawfull King and to mee. And try if the Lord will not give thee a blessing, and will make good all thy losses, and restore thee to thy won∣ted happinesse, so that thy withered branches shall yet bud and bring forth the wonted pleasant fruits, stop then thine eares at thy seducing inchanters, hearken no more to their flattering alluring intisings, but take courage, and shake off the heavy intollerable burden of slavish bondage, and turne to the Lord thy God, and let mee have my own accustomed liberty, that my sister justice come againe and injoy his wonted Prerogatives, and thou shalt see how the Lord shall cast thy scourge into the fire, and ease thee, as the loving father did his forlorne child. The Lord my God give thee eyes to see, a heart to unerstand, judgment to discerne, and to chose the best that thy fall be not perpetuall. Amen. Imprimatur. JOHN DOVVNAME. FINIS.
