G1144A R230279 99896242 153964
A BREVIATE Of the Distressed Suffering Case of William Goodridge, Somer∣set, ss. Mentioned in his APPEAL now depending before the HOUSE of LORDS. JAmes Crossman, Vicar of Banwell, sued William Goodridge, by Bill in the Exchequer for Small Tithes, caused him to be Imprisoned about Twelve or Thirteen Years; and then on a new Bill exhibited against him in the said Court, in the Year 1687, which, in regard of his tender Conscience towards God, he could not an∣swer upon Oath; The said Crossman taking advantage thereupon, swears he believes his Tythes to be worth Six pound ten shillings per Annum (which in Twelve years amounts to Seventy eight pounds,) when indeed worth but about Forty shillings per Annum. And then the said Crossman procures an Order of Court for the Se∣questring the said Goodridge's Estate, and did Levy One hundred and fifty pound Seven shillings and Six pence, of the said Goodridge's Personal Estate, as by the Plan∣tiffs own shewing in an Order of Court, by him obtain∣ed the Third of Novemb. 1688. doth appear. And by a Writ of Assistance out of the said Court, the said Cross∣man also had Possession given him by the Sheriff, of the said Goodridge's Real Estate of Sixty pound per Annum; and seized Goods and Chattels of one Avery, the said Good∣ridge's Tenant, to the value of Ninety four pound, and turned him out of Possession, and keeps the said William Goodridge Prisoner, and hath turned his Wife, a Lae Woman, out of Doors, and left them both in a ruinous Condition, as more at large doth appear in his Appeal Presented to the House of Lords: by whom, he Hum∣bly hopes to be Relieved. Observe from the foregoing Relation   l. s. d. Value of Goods of W. Goodridge Seiz'd 150 7 6 Value of Goods of his Tenant Seiz'd 94 0 0   244 7 6   l. l. s. d. Value of Tythes sworn Cost of Suit 78 20 98 0 0     l. s. d. Taken more then the said demand 146 7 6 Also dispossest him of his Real Estate of Sixty pounds per Annum, and he still kept Prisoner
