P3676 E339_10 R200857 99861483 113620
PROPHESIES. The 15. September 1645. THe whole Earth is now set to Conspire and Plott one a∣gainst each other, new Conspiracies break out weekly; the danger is great, like to be the utter ruine of some; If there be not a speedy Remedy, England will be sore troubled this next Summer, if there be not a removing the Northern storme, which secretly threateneth to arise, with the black Clouds of couching Coun∣sells, full of misty Darknesse, cloathing secresies of wrath, and Trouble against England; (It's strange, that Englands Friends should so craftily and suddenly turn themselves from it;) It is espied, as secret as they areThat is, they should not doe wrong unto their King, and now Emperiall Soveraigne, C. R. Also wee judge Charitable, That England will not doe wrong un∣to him; Therefore the Spirit by us Propounds for them; But if gland, or any Nation, should proffer to hurt their King, then they are accursed, If with evill they shall touch the LORD'S Anointed. 1 Sam. 9.11. Psal. 21.8.9, 10, 12. Psal. 89.23. Eng∣land shall not, and will not doe wrong to the Royall House of Emperour-CHARLES STƲART, onely the Mal∣lignant that trouble him and us, shall be brought down, because they Oppose the Holy Covenant of Reformation. Scotland, although one of the Three2 Esd. 12.22, 23, 24. Dan. 7.24, 25. Heads, and now turning it self about, shall not too much Oppresse England, though wee have given them the weapon in their hand, they shall not utterly destroy Us, for wee see and know all their Counsells; wee are as true for Emperour CHARLES STUART, as they can bee, although Mallignant Persons, who never could be truly his friends, (for their evill,) are opposed of us. There is one raised up, that can, and will ere long discover all the Plotts of the Nations, which wee see and know are against Us; There is
no reason why our English Nation should be so abused, seeing tht Christ's Court,Micha. 4.3. ch. 5. 4, 5. Hag. 2.7. our High Court of Parliament, and the Reformer,  man of Peace for all Nations, are lawfully called of Christ out of the English House, and behaved our selves humble, loving and faithfull unto our Bre∣thren the Scotts, hearing them when they complained, undertaking their Cause for the worke of Reformation, as it was our bounden duty, wee did obey. Now therefore, our High Court for our North Dominion, be∣ing truly called in, of, & by the English blood, and Royall Prerogative of our English Nation; Therefore our Court of Parliament,At present now sitting at rest; but how soon to be removed to East-South, or High-North, the Lord knoweth. sitting now in Our Citie of Westminster, is the High Court for our North Dominion, and shall not be craftily troden downe, see∣ing the Rfrmer is their Sonne andHee is their Servant, if hee finds them true for Reformati∣on, but if they are not true to the Covenant. Then be is free for other Nations,Hse. 10.2, 3, 4. ch. 6.6, 7, 8, 9. who shall be found more true for Reform∣ing. Servant, who knowth by the Spirit of Prophesie, all the Plotts that are a∣gainst us, bth at home and abroad, and shall and will ere longThat is, if they are found worthy of private Counsell, and if Christ will let him speak, as be can if he will. discover them, their matter, manner, in turning and windings against us; In their Coun∣sells, wee are shewed it all, to discover in due time for God, Amen. There are sprung up newly against our English Nation, great Con∣federacies in the North; the Counsell of some very craftily begins to turne themelves against our Royall Court of England;God causeth his Rod to bud and blossome in secret Coun∣sell, because prid hath flourish∣ed, in violence rd oppressing the Innocent, Poore, and helpe∣less. Ezek. 7.10, 11. it shall previl but for a little time. O England! that time is too long, they will doe sme mischiefe, their Counsells are so ripened: whilst thou, O England, hast slept, they have awaked, and watched, but their labour shall be brought toTht is, if the Princes, Priest, to and People of England, turning unto the LORD, obey∣ing the Covenant of Reformation, in executing Mercies, being willing to receive the Gospel of Peace unto all; casting away their Hypocrisies; Perfectly Proclaiming Liberty of Conscience to the letting goe such Services in State and Church, which goe seeking the LORD. To wit, a Jew, [Mall. 2.10.] or Jewises, namely a spirituall minded Christian, their Brother; Set those free, or else destruction will be your Ruine. Jere. 34.9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16.17, 18, 19, 20. Nothing whereunto they have Laboured.
There will break out an evill in the North, ere long againe upon Eng∣land, it will not be like the former: Who shall deliver us from Troubles that are comming afresh upon the Earth? Our JEHOVAH is able, and sheweth himself willing. There is the gretest Evill comming, that ever was yet upon the earth, in certain yeeres proceeding, appointed for it: There are after this Michaelmas now comming, the greatest things to be done in all Na∣tions that ever was yet manifested, (A time of Trouble, such as never was since there was aDan. 12.1. Matt. 24.21. Luke. 21.26.32.22. Nation; Six yeeres after this Michaelmas, will manifest the great Power and Glory of God, in rising with a high hand of Judgement against his Enemies, and a High hand of Power and glo∣ry for the Deliverance of Sion. The greatest Good that ever was manifested in the Love of God un∣to all his whole Creation, ariseth presently, and meeteth this most greatest of Evills; there are yeeres continuance of conflict between this great Good, and this great Evill; but yet, Woe to the Inhabiters of the Earth, and of the Sea's, for they will be sore troubled; but the In∣habiters of the Heavens in Faith, and truth, who are come out of Babylon, they will have cause to Rejoyce spiritually. Note that 6. yeares, begin∣ning at Michaelmas, 1645. will bring forth the great signes of our God for Sions Deliverance; The Good which doth conflict, and spiritually fight with the Evill, doth promise unto us, that in JEHOVAH'S Power, it will tread downe the Evill, and trample upon it, before 3. yeeres are fully ended, and that for 4. yeeres after, it will spread it self in the glory of it's JEHOVAH, and good Power, so that in the yeer 1652. Sions Deliverance will beThat is, the great Power of our God will be seen in concourse un∣to that Yeere, in the working of things Ʋniversally ever the whole Earth. Glo∣riously manifested, In the first degree, for pas∣sing on in Deliverance.
But this is the Circumfluence which JEHOVAH casteth before us, the voice of the Great Evill will be heard, crying out unto all Nati∣ons very loud and shrill before 42. Months are ended, after this Mich∣elmas. But the good hasteneth, and will lift up its voice very loud and comfortable, before 10. Moneths are ended, after this Michaelmas, 1645. but notwithstanding the Conflict will goe on, (the Good tells us, that hee will prevaile before 18. Moneths are ended;) JEHOVAH our LORD standeth to decide the Case between them. The Evill hath on his side the fulnesse of sinnes, Iniquity, and the Curse, to stand upon his part, in theEzek. 7.10, 11. Amos 3.1, 2, 7, 10, 11. Hos. 6.7, 8, 9. Jere. 6.26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. Deutr. 32.19. Violence of theEzek. 7.10, 11. Amos 3.1, 2, 7, 10, 11. Hos. 6.7, 8, 9. Jere. 6.26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. Deutr. 32.19. Time, therefore hee cryeth for Increase of Venge∣ance, and prolonging of the time. Therefore judgements having the wickednesse of the wicked in blasphemies against Christ, and Truth in Antichristian Ministries, to side with him for totall Destruction; (but JEHOVAH our God doth much oppose him, although the cryes are lowde for Vengeance;) Woe to the wicked, that take part with Ba∣bylon. The Good standeth up much encouraged to Conflict for a speedy De∣liverance of the whole Creation, threatning the Evill, and Triumphing against him, that he will Prevaile with JEHOVAH for his Love and Mercies to the whole Creation, to the treading downe Sinne, Curse and Confusion, nd all the power of Babylon, and Antichrist, threatning evill, and comforting the Friends of Zion, in Promising speedily to take away Tophet, Tumults, Malice and Wickednesse, and to cut off Warres from off the face of the Earth: The Good Promiseth, that before five moneths are fully ended hee will prevaile in the first Incounter in the Conflict against Evill. The Powers that side with the Good, are great; (JEHOVAH harkeneth unto the lowde Cryes of Good, for Wonderfull Mercies, his Great Mercies. (The Good hath a Conditionall Promise of Victory,There is no Absolute Promise to the Saints, that there shall as yet be Peace, because the Earth is full of Antichri∣stianisme, and our God is infinitely provoked to jealousie. Ezek. 8.3.5.17. Ezek. 14.22.23. not Absolute as yet.
(The Good hath the most mighty Sonnes and Daughters of God to stand on his side, for speedy and Present Peace unto the whole Creation, Triumphing for the Exaltation of Truth; (Christ the Spirituall Micha∣ell, and Captaine over his Saints, is preparing himselfe for the defence of Good, and for hisYet there is a seeking for Peace. Dan. 10.21. ch. 12.1. Michaell his Prince; whom he hath chosen for his Peo∣ple, who houldeth with spirituall Michael his LORD CHRIST, in all these things wherein no Mortall else is Illuminated and Confirmed. Blessed are those that take part with JERUSALEM and SION, none knoweth Mysteriall Secrets of the LORD, but JEHOVAH Himself, and those his Servants the Prophets; hee walketh according to his good pleasure, His Wayes are Wonderfull, Unsearchable, (His Counsell is in himself,) and of himself; Our God is neere at hand, to come in his Power and Glory; Blessed are those his SAINTS, that watch. Blessed are those that are for Truth, Mercy, and Peace.
The swords of the North are drawne against the South of England, theirThey endeavour, but it is a Question, whether they can obtain at such their appointed time, but they are wise to observe their best oportunities, for the which they ore sealed in all subtill watchful∣nesse, and their Counsell is of the LORD, for judgement against Transgressours, which have sworne falsly, in making a Covenant. Hos. 10.4, 5. Jer. 11.9, 10. chap. 34 18. Plott is layed, to come against the South of England the next Sum∣mer; but England hath one way leftThat is if they attaine the blessings of the Spirit by JAH, as also the Person and Counsell, for Zions Good; else the flourishing of some will be but for a short time. them to prevent and bring to nought their secret Conspiracie. O England, awake, look to thy self, make use of time; stand well upon thy watch, maintaine thy owne; thou shalt have Counsell ere long to pre∣vent the North Conspiracie. Hee that Prophesied of Rmes destruction, namely a Studient of Eng∣land, as Bight as he was, he was deceived, JEHOVAH'S Mercies hath Pardoned, but for this none ought to be angry; 'tis the mercies of Om∣nipotent JEHOVAH: In the yeere 1652, the Sea of Romane Papacie shall be seen no more, they shall be converted, turned unto Christ, and washed from all their Idolls; this good work appearing sooner, no one, though outwardly never so Bright, hath cause to be Angry. Prophesie. Shee that Prophesied of Londons Destruction, was very confident when she spake the word, as seeing the swords that are drawne now in the North, Pointing at the Citie of London; Shee and them are now like to beThat is, God proffereth mercies, if they will receive them, to make good use throf  time. deceived, both in Prophesie & Plott. London shall not be Destroyed, if the White Stone stand fast, though her sinnes be great, and the Plott is strong, both at Sea and Land, in great Se∣cresies, couching Counsells, with Clouds as black as Egypts Darknesse, and almost fully ready to break forth in fiery storme; O England be swift in Counsell, hold out for a time in Battell; Watch well upon thy Guard, Turne thy face towards the North, examine well thy pretended Friends; be not secure to trust them. JEHOVAH'S Power in Mercies doth increase, The Time drawes neer for Everlasting Peace.
What is the Number of 12. dayes? JEHOVAH can finish great Worke in Three dayes. This in Exposition, 28. of September, 1645. By dayes are meant yeers. Elijahs Confirmation, by addition on the 28. of September, 1645. ex∣pounding for Manifestation concerning our Brethren the Scotis: Of whom Jehovah, in a Generallitie of Prophesie, toucheth in the first Page, upon the turning of the Head. Our most faithfull Brethren the Scotts,The beleeving Scotts, who wiih us seek the LORD in truth of the Everlasting Go∣spel, and stand for the Cove∣nant of the Gospel, and Ge∣nerall Reformation, are here spoken of; as for the Mal∣lignant Scotts, English, and other Nations, who transgresse against God, and his true Gospel, let them turn from their evill with speed, for the LORD is bathing his sword of vengeance in Heaven, to come downe upon Idumea. That is, the People of his Curse to Judgement. Esay. 34.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. who are by the Seer approved true Cove∣nanters; Those, to wit, our Brethren the Scotts, are not spoken of by JEHOVAH, in the first Page: No, they are faithfull, and the most true Covenanters, Precious unto us, as the apple of Our eye. Such our Brethren to their Powers have endeavoured to be our safe∣guard; Their Christian Obedience unto Emperour King Jesus Christ, and to Us his Servant of Rulers, and our High Court for Christs Dominion, at Westminster, and also for the lawfull Emperour of the North Dominion, CHARLES REX, their Obedience in faithfulnesse, is approved of by Christ, JEHOVAH, and his Servant: They are most Royall Co∣venanters, Therefore let none who cannot comprehend Prophesie, mis∣construe: Neither let any our Faithfull Brethren the Scotts be troubled who are approved True Reformists: They are some of CHRISTS and Our best Friends, in opposing the great Anti-Christ. Those who are taxed in Hosea, for swaring falsly in the Covenant, are the Malignant in Scotland, England, and Ireland. Now therefore let not security turne away our eyes from the North; Let us look streight for∣ward on those things comming out of the North, towards the South: Why should our Faithfull Brethren the Scots, secretly have their sides Pierced with the swords of Malignant Neighbours? seeing the Christian Scott, the True Reformist, the most faithfull Covenanter, is so precious and dear unto us in Faithfulnesse of heart, and truth of Love in Christ Jesus, who is Emperour of Heaven and Earth.
Wee know and maintaine, that Charles Rex is Emperour for the North Dominion, so Chosen of our GOD, to Rule with his Emperiall Fello Brethren, and our High Court: but not Chosen to Rule of Himself. The Foure Emperours, are Servants unto Christ, in his High-Court: The Court and they must Rule together in Love, to exalt Christ's Kingdom, and pluck down Antichrist. Wee know and see, that 20000. of Danes, French, and the like, h Love conjoyned together, may Trouble Scotland next Summer, if the Sea's Roare. Portugall and Spaine, with many more their Friends, are very much in love with each other of late: But wee have seen sometimes the winde to turne about of a sudden, and Sayles clap'd downe in great haste.England hasten to turne from the Abominations of ly∣ing vanities, in which thou art exercised in forsaking thy owne mercies, else the LORD will take away the defence of his Spirit, which is prepa∣ring to remove, and thou shalt finde thou wantest the Charriots and Horsemen of Israel. 2 Kings 2.12. Eng∣land, watch well toward the North; let the Noble Scott watch well within his owne Land. Wee know Swords sometime out runne Counsell; they were somewhat nimble, too soon, for some faithfull Friends. Their Counsell is as Blackness, and more horrid. Ere long they thinke to manifest themselves in Triumph. JEHOVAH Calleth for Reforming, That hee may give his Blessing for Unity, and Everlasting-Peace. FINIS.
