Q8 E1017_2 R203351 99863325 115517
Quaesumus te, &c. OR, THE SUPPLEMENT TO THE NEW LETANY For these Times: Being a further EXPEDIENT In order to the perfecting of a REFORMATION IN THE THREE NATIONS; But chiefly of the City of LONDON. LONDON, Printed for Cauda Draconis: in En∣glish, the Rump. 1660.
To the Reader. Gentle Reader, HAving some weeks since published the for∣mer part of this Letany, entituled, A new Letany for these Times, &c. and finding that it was very acceptable (for what worth I know not) to many of the ingenuous, I am bold to present thee with this second part; wherein, if there be any thing that shall please thee, I shall think my small paines well bestowed. And if ought be dis-relished by thy over-nice and cu∣rious palate, I must entreat thee to be so candid as to pardon it, since I wrote not to please one, but many. However, if thou art humor'd in some things (which I do not question but thou wilt be) thou mayst bear with others. Let the Hare's Head and Goose Jublits go together. And so Farewell.
THE SUPPLEMENT TO THE NEW LETANY for these Times. THat it may please thee to uphold Th' Religion of our Fathers old, Which now for novelty is sold: Quaesumus to, &c. That it may please thee to adorn Our hearts with grace, that we may mourn, Cause we have been so oft forsworn: Quaesumus te, &c. That it may please thee to defend us From th' Gallows, which doth now attend us, Unlesse we do with speed amend us: Quaesumus te, &c. That it may please thee to restore Our Trading, as in times of Yore, And when w'are well, we'le winch no more: Quaesumus te, &c.
That it may please thee t' hear our Pray'r, And turn foul weather into fair, And send us once an honest Mayor: Quaesumus te, &c. That it may please thee to espouse Us to thy Truth, let's keep our Vows; And may our Wives not branch our brows: Quaesumus te, &c. That it may please thee not t' degrade The Priests, though Brethren of the Blade Are gifted in the preaching Trade: Quaesumus te, &c. That it may please thee not to blast's, Nor with thy Plagues and Judgments wast's, Who tire thee with pretended Fasts: Quaesumus te, &c. That it may please thee us t' unite, And make us of one heart and sp'rite, Not hooting after each new Light: Quaesumus te, &c. That it may please thee to withdraw From us such Pow'rs would keep's in awe, Who are for Gospel, and no Law: Quaesumus te, &c. That it may please thee to pull down The pride of those who great are grown By th' ruines of our Church and Crown: Quaesumus te, &c. That it may please thee to dispence With our long-wasted Conscience, Whose Godlinesse is meer pretence: Quaesumus te, &c.
That it may please thee to content Us for our Plate and Moneys, lent On Publick Faith to th' Parliament: Quaesumus te, &c. That it may please thee co restore Our Churches Glory, as before, And hedge it as the Forrest Boar: Quaesumus te, &c. That it maay please thee to afford Us such Dividers of thy Word, As may not cut it with their Sword: Quaesumus te, &c. That it may please thee once to heal Our breaches, and to us reveal Better's a King than Commonweal: Quaesumus te, &c. That it may please thee in due season, To let us all be rul'd by Reason, And leave Rebellion and Treason: Quaesumus te, &c. That it may please thee to asswage The force of Tyrants and their rage, And bring us Charls upon the Stage: Quaesumus te, &c. That it may please thee to out blot That error in our mindes begot, That only Treason prospers not: Quaesumus te, &c. That it may please thee, 'bove our merit, To grant our Sons may not inherit Our dastard, dull, and flavish spirit: Quaesumus te, &c.
That it may please thee to subdue The Dipping and the Quaking Crew, The Turk, the Jesuite, and Jew: Quaesumus te, &c. That it may please thee t' have compassion On this our sad distracted Nation, And bring plain Honesty in fashion: Quaesumus te, &c. That it may please thee to bestow On us such wisdome, as to know A faithfull friend from flatt'ring foe: Quaesumus te, &c. That it may please thee to remove Those Plagues that hang our heads above, For want of Charity and love: Quaesumus te, &c. That it may please thee to compose Our differences, and silence those Zealots that twang it through the Nose: Quaesumus te, &c. That it may please thee to abate The rage of those who deadly hate All Order both in Church and State: Quaesumus te, &c. That it may please thee to declare To those that trayterous Rebels are, That 'tis in vain to use long prayer: Quaesumus te, &c. That it may please thee us t'advise What good to th' Nation may arise From Taxes, Custome and Excise: Quaesumus te, &c.
That it may please thee to reduce Our ancient Laws, grown out of use, Unto their pow'r without abuse: Quaesumus te, &c. That it may please thee to refrain Us to destroy, although 'tis plain, Our godlinesse is all for gain: Quaesumus te, &c. That it may please thee for to smother Our bloody rage 'gainst one another, Since Cobler Huson flew his Brother: Quaesumus te, &c. That it may please thee keep's from stabs Of Ruffins, and from dirty Drabs, And turn our Lobsters into Crabs: Quaesumus te, &c. That it may please thee to fulfill That Prophecy, That England will, Ev'n by a Monck be freed from ill: Quaesumus te, &c. That it may please thee to appear In our defence: let's keep good cheer, And drink good Sack, strong Ale and Beer: Quaesumus te, &c. FINIS.
