S5452 E940_1 99866590 168516
VINDICIAE FƲNDAMENTI: Or a threefold defence of the DOCTRINE OF Original Sin: Together with some other fundamen∣tals of Salvation The first against the exceptions of Mr. Robert Everard, in his book entituled, The Creation and the Fall of man. The second against the Examiners of the late Assemblies Confession of Faith. The third against the Allegations of Dr. Jeremy Taylor, in his Unum Necessarium, and two lesser Treatises of his. By NATHANIEL STEPHENS Minister of Fenny-Drayton in Leicestershire. LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Edmund Paxton in Pauls Chain, right over against the Castle-Tavern, near Doctors Commons. 1658.
THE PREFACE TO THE Reader, Shewing the Reasons of publishing the present Treatise in these times. ALthough we are fallen into an age, where books of all sorts do abound; yet in two cases (as long as the Lord hath a Church upon the earth,) there will be still need of writing more. The first, when many divine mysteries do remain still inclosed, and sealed up in the Scriptures, no man will doubt (upon such a supposal) but it is the duty of those that read (according to ability) to bring the truth to light. I did in order to this, publish a Tract concern∣ing the Beast, his name, mark, and the number of his name, &c. Here if any will say, shall we be wiser than our fore-fa∣thers, to endeavour the discovery of that, which they could never finde out? The answer is cleare, truth is the Daughter of Time: A Pigmy upon a Gyants shoulder, may see farther than the Gyant himself: Even so we standing upon the shoulders, and enjoying the labours of those that have gone before, may see as farre as they did, and by wading into further depths, may go further than they. Upon this account it doth more peculi∣arly
belong to us, to continue the  where they left it, to adde to the stock of knowledge, to be clear, where  were confused, to turne into the way, where they went , and to bring those things to light that have been, either totally, or in part obscured from them. Some are of the judgment that we are come to the very Zenith, and top of all kinde of learn∣ing, and that we know already, all that we need know. But an hundred, and a thousand ensamples, may be shewed to the con∣trary: We are dark in many of those things that are reserved for the industry and diligence of the latter times. If men would convert the course of their studies this way; as they would make a better return of their labours, so they would be lesse prejudicial to the writings of former times: At least all must ac∣knowledge that there will be just occasion of printing  books, as long as new matter remains to be published to the world. A second case of new writing, is; when the plain, fundamenal, & common truths of God, are made dark by the new fangled o∣pinious, and brangling queres of each age; In such a case a ne∣cessity doth lie upon us; and woe is unto us, if we do not plead for the truth, when it is notably and eminently endan∣gered by others. In the present case I have not to do so much with that which is darke, and abstruse in its own nature; but with that which is made so, by the devises and subtilties of men. The doctrine of original sin, and the natural servitude of the will (at least to any spiritual good) is plainly enough set forth in the Scriptures, yet there are more than too many in these times, who endeavour with all their might, to draw a cloud over this cleerenesse. I cannot see but as a Minister is to preach, and to live according to the truth; so it is his office and duty also to clear the same truth, from the errours, and intanglements of his own age. As evil manners occasion good Laws, so evil opinions, and evil interpretations of Scripture, (specially) where gain-saying spirits do endeavour to puddle the stream) should make us more skilfull in the mystery of salvation. Whatsoever the reason is, many of the friends and followers of the separation with us, do not rest satisfi'd with the denyal of In∣fant Baptism, but they proceed also to deny al infants to be born
in original sin: The confession of the faith of the thirty separate Congregations, hath not (as farre as I can perceive) any one word of the sin of the nature: Some do more apparently deny the thing, and others are more close in what they hold. But Master Everard in his Book entituled, the Creation and the fall of man, containes the substance of all their arguments. Which Tract of his, seeing it is spread farre and neare, to the deceiving of many poore soules, and to the troubling of others. I have thought it necessary to examine all the material passages, and to detect the subtilties and fallacies thereof. The chief points he doth insist on, are these; whether had Adam the Spirit, or was he a spiritual man before his fall? Secondly, how farre do obedient actions proceed from the operation of the Spirit: and how farre are they a mans own act? Thirdly, he treats concerning the contrariety of the two wills, the se∣cret, and the revealed will of God. Lastly, he cometh to the maine point, to assert the innocency and the purity of the natural birth. And for this he seemes to himselfe, and others of that way to have some coulourable reas∣sons. When I had done with him, there came to my hand the Examen of the late Assemblies Confession of Faith: I am un∣certain whether one, or more are the Authours: Some cir∣cumstances do not obscurely insinuate it to be the act of more than one man, and therefore in the ensuing Discourse, I do speak of them in the plural number; Because in the points of free will and original sinne, they do concord with Master E∣verard, and the Antipedobaptists of our Vicinity. I have taken them into the Company to which they do belong. Now this last year (considering the State of our Affairs) when certain friends of mine, Ministers as well as others, did desire me to publish what I had written: At the same time did Doctor Jeremy Taylor set forth his Ʋnum Necessarium. In that Book of his Chap. six, as also in two other small Treatises, the answer to the Bishops letter, and The Further Explication, doth the Au∣thour fall upon our differences: alleadging the same things, in effect, which our Antagonists for certaine yeares past, have
alleadged against us. Onely this difference is to be made, he doth ascribe much to the Testimonies of the Fathers, and other Ancient Authours; They do slight all such kindes of authority: He doth owne (for ought as I could ever hear) the Baptisme of infants: They more securely to deny in∣fant Baptisme, do seeme also, upon the same reason, to deny all Infants to be borne in original sinne. His Writings are like to have a free passage in all the parts of the Land: Theirs for ought as I can heare, are received more chiefly in their own society. His Writings, considering the greatnesse of his learning, the Ele∣gancy of his stile, and the favour he beares to the Episcopal cause, are like to passe with those that are Friends of that way: They (whatsoever their interests) their Principles do not go in that streame. He in many cases, is too much for that which is old: and they contrarily, are too much for that which is new: What reasons did first move him to enterprise the businesse, he himselfe doth relate, in his owne words. These things (saith he) have I chose to say and publish, be∣cause I finde that the usual Doctrines, about original sinne, are not onely false, and presumed, without any competent proofe, but because as they are commonly be∣lieved, they are no friends to Piety, but Patrons to idle∣nesse, and dishonourable to the reputation of Gods goodnesse and justice, and more to that purpose he hath fur∣ther explicated, page 502. Here I do willingly agree with him, that great circumspection ought to be used in the right handling of these things. But then on the otherside he hath special cause to beware that he do not turn to the more dangerous extreame. Original sinne (in that sense as we define it) cannot be denyed, but upon the denyal many desperate absurdi∣ties will ensue. We had a conference with the Brethren of the separation at a Neighbour-Towne, Anno 1654. February the 22. Because they occasioned the dispute by disturbing the Minister of the place, and were so te∣nacious of the point; We did put it upon them to
answer the question as followeth. If all infants be born free from original sinne, when do they beginne to be sinners, that we may call them so? They told us when they did act sinne. We replyed, then in all that space of time from the conception in the wombe to their acting of sinne they are all free? They an∣swered; they are all free: we demanded, why is it then the peculiar prerogative of Christ, if infants in all the forementioned space do partake of the same privi∣ledge? To this they said, that infants are as free from all sinne as Christ himselfe. We told them that we did much admire at the boldnesse of such an asser∣tion: They answered, set his Godhead aside, they are as pure as Christ himselfe was pure. We rejoynd, why was the Lord Christ conceived of the Holy Ghost, and borne of the Virgin Mary? To this, they made no great Answer: And the standers by did seeme to looke upon such a position with a kinde of hor∣rour. But as strange as the Tenet is, I finde that Doctor Jeremy Taylor, the Authour above named, doth not shun to say the same thing in effect, at least he seemes to go very neare to that coast. For in his answer to the Bishops letter, he bringeth the Bishop speaking after this manner. If there be no such thing as original sinne transmitted from Adam to his posterity, then all that sixth Chapter is a strise about a shadow, a Non ens. Answ. It is true my Lord, (saith he,) The question, as it is usually handled, is so: For when the Franciscan and the Dominican do eternally dispute about the conception of the Blessed Virgin: whether it was with or without original sinne, meaning by way of grace, and special ex∣emption, this de non ente, for there was no need of a∣ny such exemption: And they supposing that commonly it was otherwise, troubled themselves about the exception of a rule, which in that sense, which they supposed was not true at all: she was borne as innocent from any impu∣rity and formal guilt as Adam was created, and so was
her Mother, and so was all her family. In which words of his, if he had said that his owne answer to the Bishops letter was a meere non ens, he had spoken more truly: for where there is no such thing as the Bishop of Rochester at all, what answer can be gi∣ven to his letter? But whereas he stands upon it, that the impurity of the natural birth from Adam the root of corruption, is a meere non ens, what will you make of regeneration, and of Baptisme the washing of regeneration? Where there is no sinfulnesse in the natural generation, what need of Baptisme or regene∣ration at all? Besides, the Scriptures do speak abun∣dantly of the putting off of the Old man, and of the mortification of the sinne of the nature, if there be no such sinne of the nature from Adam the root of corruption this whole work will be de non ente, for that which is not true in any sense, cannot be mortified at all. And whither will this conceipt go at last? Further, the Saints have been deeply humbled for their birth sinne. I was borne in iniquity, and in sinne did my Mother conceive me: What is man that he should be cleane, and he that is borne of a woman that he should be righteons, &c? If there be no such sinne at all, these confessions and humiliations will be de non ente. The Saints shall be humbled for a sinne, and yet no such sinne is to be found. In for∣mer times there were Thanksgivings for victories over enemies, which indeed and in truth were de non ente. But here we have Confessions and Humiliations of the same kinde, innumerable other absurdities will ensue up∣on the denyall of such a truth, which as I may so say, is one of the first magnitude among the principles of the Faith. It were good that this learned man and others that are concerned in the point would timely think upon it, and be better advised before they go to farie. Againe, on the otherside, I do not deny, that the points of original sinne, and free-will, have been so handled in some systems of Divinity, Commenta∣ries,
and Polemical Discourses, that maintaines there hath been a want of consideration, sometimes a want of truth. What they bring out of the Scriptures (tru∣ly understood) to prove the substance of the Doctrine is sound and good, but what is alledged out of the Schoole-men to confirme the same, is not alwayes au∣thenick: Pauls words do binde the conscience alwayes, and at all times, but not alwayes as they are delive∣red in the notions, in the tearms, and in the method of Aquinus. Suppose that Saint Paul was now alive upon the earth, and it were laid as a task upon him to reade the whole body of the controversie, as it now lyeth between the Dominicans and the Jesuits, the Jansenists and the Mo∣linists; such a case being imagined, we may easily con∣ceive what his judgement would be. As he would con∣demne one part for their dangerous setting up of free-will in derogation to the grace of God: so he would not al∣together approve the other part for the mingling of spiri∣tual truthes with strange speculations of Philosophy, and with Metaphysical quiddities, notions, and conceptions of their own commenting. Doubtlesse he would finde many things in them that would not hold weight with the shekel of the Sanctuary. Among our selves also there are some pas∣sages that might have been uttered with greater caution. The Treatise of Luther de servo arbitrio is questionlesse in it self a worthy work, yet I think that Calvin in his an∣swer to Albertus Pighins did not speak amisse, This also is true, some things which Luther wrote in a Scholastical kind of way, and in a lesse popular style; Philip Melan∣cthon by his prudent and dextrous bending it to the milder part, did more fitly apply to the ordinary capacity of men, and to the common use of life. Yet for all this in other places that great instrument of reformation doth so a∣bundantly speak of the freenesse of the grace of Christ, to every broken-hearted sinner, that he doth satisfie all tender consciences, and leave a solid foundation for the endeavour of man. Now every one cannot do this, for they that follow the asperity and the rigour
of Luther in some positions of his, cannot with the same spiritu∣al evidence set forth the grace of the Gospel: And so it comes to passe that the harshnesse and the incongruity imputed to the doctrine, is indeed and in truth no other but the sole defect of the Teacher. By right spiritual truths should have spiritual Teachers, and spiritual hearers, and then a true judgment may be made of the real excellency and worth of them. These things considered, I do intend to observe these rules in the ensuing discourse. First, laying aside all nice and curious speculations, to retain so much of the termes of the School-men, that will serve onely to explaine the doctrine of the Gospel, that spiritual things may be set forth in a spiritual manner. Secondly, my scope (the Lord enabling) shall be as to speak the pure truth, so likewise the whole truth of God. When I speak of the impurity of the natural birth, then I will take oc∣casion to shew also how this doth referre immediately to the grace that doth regenerate; and when I shall have occasion to speak of Adam as a root of corruption to all his branches, I shall as carefully remember that this is a counterpane to Christ, being a root of grace and spiritual life also to all his branches. When it shall come in my way to mention the imperfection of man, and the spirituality of the command, I shall be as careful to in∣culcate that which doth answer to it (viz.) that all help is to be had from the Word of promise. When I shall say that a man hath no free-will by nature to that which is spiritually good, I shall be as willing to recite the true cause where the freedome is to be had, to wit, from the Son of God, if the Sonne will make you free, you shall be free indeed: Further, where I shall speak of a certain number of elect which the Lord doth decree curtainly, and infallibly to bring to glory. I shall demonstrate also that this necessity of infallibility doth not, nor cannot (whatsoever men may think) overturne the liberty of the will: For those that the Lord hath certainly appointed to salvation, he will as certainly, first or last, sooner or later, draw their wills so effectually that they shall freely choose the way and meanes that lead to salvation as the end. Those and such liketruths that are usually misunderstood through in∣considerate
handling, I shall endeavour to represent them in their true beauty: For as it is with the members of the body, so it is with these myseries of salvation; Being considered apart, they seem to be deform'd, but being put together, there is an excellent correspondence and symetry in the whole. Finally, according to our Saviours rule I shall endeavour (I hope without detriment to either part) to give to grace that which doth belong to her, and to the will that which doth be∣long to her; I would not take the least dramme from the true grace of God, so on the otherside I would have the will to work under the grace received. These are the reasons of pub∣lishing the treatise in these times. I rest thine in the Lord N. S.
The Arguments of each Book. The first Book in Mr. Everards Method. Chap. 1. WHat were the causes, that gave Adam his being? Chap. 2. Wherein Adams abilities did consist? Chap. 3. Whether righteousnesse, and holinesse be Gods i∣mage? Chap. 4. Wherein that image did consist, that God did create Adam in? Chap. 5. Concerning the power that God gave Adam, and what is the definition thereof? Chap. 6. Adams entertainment in the garden. Chap. 7. Free-will in the nature thereof unfolded. Chap. 8. How far God assisted Adam, or assisteth other men, that they might be such free-willers, as hath been de∣scribed? Chap. 9. Though God gives power, he gives not the actions of obedience. Chap. 10. Concerning divers questions, with their so∣lutions. Chap. 11. Whether Adams sinne, or any other mans sinne, doth produce death in a natural way? Chap. 12. What Adam retained of his forfeiture, till his death?
Chap. 13. Whether Adam did dye the same day that he eate of the forbidden fruit? Chap. 14. Whether Adam did dye a spiritual death, yea or no? Chap. 15. Whether Adams posterity were guilty of his trans∣gression? This point is more fully debated. The Second Book in the method of the Examiners. Sect. 1. WHat places of Scripture they bring to prove the purity of the natural birth? Sect. 2. What answer they endeavour to make to the texts al∣ledged by us? The third Book in the method of Dr. Taylor. Sect. 1. OF Concupiscence, and Original sin, and whether or no, and how far we are bound to repent of it? Sect. 2. A consideration of objections, against the former do∣ctrine. Sect. 3. How God punishes the fathers sinne upon the children? Sect. 4. Of the causes of the universal wickedness of mankind. Sect. 5. Of the liberty of election, remaining after Adams fall.
The first Book containing the Answer to Master EVERARD concerning the Creation and fall of Man, SIR, OCcasion being given to me to read over your Treatise concerning the creation and the fall of Adam, I shall now endeavour to give you an account what I judge of your doctrine. I shall not stand upon every point, but onely upon that which is of special moment. In the end of your Introduction you signifie the cause of your undertaking, in these words, Whereby we may be the more enabled to vindicate the Righteous Creatour from ma∣ny misconstructions which have been for a long time nourished for want of due consideration. For the vindicating of the Righ∣teous Creator I shall be no enemy to you, so farre as you go according to the rule of the Word and the analogy of faith. But I fear under the colour of this pretended Vindication you drive a designe to put Christ out of place. Through the whole body of your Treatise you stand upon the purity of nature, the denial of Original sin, and the improvement of natural abilities. We will go in your method, and begin with your first Chapter. CHAP. I. What were the causes that gave Adam his being? HEre you debate the efficient, material, formal, and final causes of that being which he had in the beginning, and tell us that God saw all that he had made, and behold it was
very good, Gen. 1.32. From whence you draw this Conclusion, doubtlesse these words were spoken to take off some future ob∣jections, or to prevent mens sayings, that Adam consisted in creation of two sorts of people, one being assigned for heaven, the other for hell. And lest we should judge that God made a∣ny part of him for damnation, at that time he assures us that he made all things very good. When I read this passage of yours, I do call to minde a kinde of torment used in the Primi∣tive times: when the persecutors would expose the bodies of Christians to wilde beasts, they did sometimes cover and dis∣guise them with the skins of other living creatures. So do you here, and in other parts of your book with the doctrine of Gods free election. When you see that there is such a Majesty in the truth it self that you cannot well oppose it, you do draw an ugly visage and forme over it, to the end that you may baite and encounter it more easily at your own pleasure. The Lords making all good in the beginning, doth not infringe the electi∣on of some, and the non-election of others, if these things be rightly construed. And therefore whether you consider men in that first state made after the image of God, or in that state as fallen, in both these I conceive all mankinde to be equal. The difference of elect or non-elect is immanent onely in the De∣cree of God, and election doth onely so farre forth begin to be manifest as men living under the meanes come to be called, justified, sanctified by the Spirit, Rom. 8.30. 2 Thess. 2.13. We have no other way to take notice of election but this onely. For that saying of yours that Adam consisted of two sorts of people in creation, the one part being assigned for heaven, and the o∣ther for hell. We willingly acknowledge that the number of the elect were known to God before the foundation of the world, yet this difference between man and man in the Lords secret intention did make no difference between man and man in the creation or in the fall. The nature of all men, elect and others, was equally good before the fall, as it was equally cor∣rupted and depraved after the fall. As in the like case, Jesse was the father of many sons, of which one was designed in the se∣cret counsel of God to rule the Kingdom of Israel: As they were the sons of one parent they were all equal, made of one blood,
partakers of the same education, though one was specially de∣signed for the Kingdome. So in the present case, the nature of all men may be equally good before the fall, all may have one and the same image of God, all may fall in one and the same parent, yet God may in a special manner intend to bring some to salvation, and to leave others voluntarily to run their own ruine; he may have mercie on whom he will have mercie, and he may have compassion on whom he will have compassion. You do then plainly impose upon us with your sophistrie, when you fetch arguments from some temporal acts to overturne the Lords eternal Decrees. But this is a passage onely by the way, we will go to the next Chapter. CHAP. II. Wherein Adams abilities did consist. HEre you define ability, that it is a fitnesse in the subject commanded every way answerable to performe any action that the Creator is pleased to call the creature to, pag. 5. In this I do agree, that originally God did proportion the abilities of Adam to the commands that he gave him. I do also willingly acknowledge with you, that he had first a capassity to receive intelligence; secondly, directions; thirdly, abilities in present pos∣session; and fourthly, time. But whereas you say, p. 7. that our Lord the Creator afforded all these aforenamed accommodations as a sufficient means for every man to obey his commands. In this I beleeve you do not onely equal, but go beyond Pelagius him∣self. For you say in effect that man hath as great abilities after the fall, as before. But lest that any may think that these are the consequences of mine own making, and that they are not the true result of your doctrine, let him go to the fourteenth chapter of your book, and there let him see how you do expe∣dite the question. You propound the quere what Adam re∣tained of his forfeiture after his death? and here you determine that his power was inwardly as great to keep the commands of
God as before. You say if in that service of God which Adam had to do he was compleatly furnished by God, why should I judge that he would employ him in a more hard service and not aford him sutable accommodations? seeing God was as willing that his commands should be obeyed after as he was before the fall. For I judge the work that God set Adam about before the fall he had ability to do after the fall if God had given him a com∣mand to returne into the garden, page 110. Let any man who readeth these words judge in his own heart whether Pelagius himself could have spoken more to the derogation of the free grace of God in Christ, then you have done. To this if we adde the several passages in your Treatise concerning the im∣provement of nature, and the freedome of infants from origi∣nal sin, and compare all together, we shall finde the whole te∣nour of your doctrine to be manifestly destructive to the Cove∣nant of Grace. We will therefore endeavour on the contrary to shew the positive truth. And therefore, seeing God doth require obedience of man after the fall, I do freely assent that he doth give sutable accommodation. But how? the accom∣modation doth not consist in the presence of any natural abili∣ty, but in the promise since the fall there is an ability to obey the Lords commands, but that ability is out of man, in Christ one∣ly: To him they must go to supply all their wants, and he must help them to performe all the duties enjoyned: If you stand up∣on the proportion of abilities to commands, then say that the ability is in Christ onely to be had, and we shall easily agree. He of God is made to us wisdome, righteousnesse, sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. In him all the treasures of wis∣dom and knowledge are hid, Col. 2.3. Of his fulnesse have we all re∣ceived grace for grace, John 1.16. It shall never be denied by me, nay, I will maintain it, that now since the fall there is a pro∣portion betwixt the ability and the command, but then the abi∣lity must be had from Christ onely, and the immediate supply of his Spirit. In this sence Saint Paul had abilities in a meet temper and correspondence to his duties; for he saith, I can do all things through Christ that strengtheneth me, Phil. 4.11, 12, 13. And in another place, my grace shall be sufficient for thee, my strength shall be seene in thy weaknesse, 2 Cor. 12.7.8,
9, But the way to come by this ability is not in your me∣thod to set up nature, but to die to a mans self, and to be empti∣ed of all natural abilities. Most gladly therefore will I glory in mine infirmities, that the power of Christ might rest upon me, 2 Cor. 12.9. The Authors of the Confession do seeme to speak more fairly for the grace of God then you do. They do not shun to affirme that we have all from Christ, and that of our selves we have not ability to think a good thought, and much to the same purpose. But by this affirmation of theirs how can they possibly agree with their own principles of the purity of nature? For where there is no depravation of the na∣tural birth, what need or what use is there of the grace of re∣generation? They conceale themselves, and you openly pro∣fesse your judgment: they seeme to speak more fairly, but you are more true to the principles and positions of the Separate Churches. CHAP. III. Whether righteousnesse and holinesse be Gods Image. HEre you endeavour to prove the Negative, to wit, that righteousnesse and holinesse in man was not the image of God in the first creation. Because this is not your own single opinion, but also the doctrine of the thirty Congregations, who place the image of God onely in dominion over the crea∣ture, we will debate the point more fully. And so much the rather, because you did urge me at Earle-Shilton in Leicester∣shire, Anno 1650. Decem. 26. before a multitude of people to answer this question, what place of Scripture have you to prove that Adam had the Spirit of God, or that he was a spiritual man before his fall? I did then cite three several texts, the na∣tural sence and import of all which is to shew that God made man after his own Image, and that this Image did principally consist in spiritual and inward holinesse. For that place, Gen. 1.26. Come let us make man after our
Image, in our own likenesse. There is none doth doubt but this is the speech of the three persons in Trinity. Onely the question is wherein did this Image principally consist. The se∣parate congregations and you also affirme, that it did ap∣pear onely in Dominion and Lordship over the creature; these words do immediately follow in the text, let them have do∣minion over the fish of the sea, over the fowle of the aire, and over the cattel, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth. But herein both they and you are deceived, for primarily and properly the Image of God was resplendent in the conformity of the soule to the spiritual Law of God. Secondarily, the Image of God was resplendent in that external priviledge of rule and dominion o∣ver the creature. Now that it may appear that the principal part of the Image of God is in inward holinesse, and that the soule so inwardly and spiritually endowed, doth more lively expresse his simili∣tude, for this, reade that Scripture, Put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the Image of him that created him, Col. 3.10. Here note, what it is that the Apostle would have the Colossians to put on, Put on the new man. By this he doth mean the Christ-like and spiritual disposition, set in immediate opposition to the old carnal disposition of the flesh, which they had already in good measure begun to put off. Secondly, the word (renewed) doth note a repaire or renovation of that which formerly was decayed. So the Psalmist prayeth, Create in me a clean heart, and renew within me a right spirit, Psal. 51.10. He doth pray for the returne of the same spirit which formerly he had, but now seemingly had lost. So thy youth is renewed like the Eagles, Psal. 103.5. As much in sense as that he makes thee vigorous like an Eagle, who by casting her beak and feathers, renews her former agility. And so in the present case where∣in it is said, Put on the new man which is renewed in knowledge, this noteth the repaire and renovation of that spiritual disposi∣tion which Adam had, but lost it by his fall. Thirdly, for the matter of the renovation, venewed in knowledge, doth signifie spiritual knowledge in the nature thereof, and that which comes from the Spirit of God as the cause. Fourthly, for the pattern
of the renovation, it is expressely said, after the image of him that created him; Therefore the first man must be made in a state of spiritual knowledge and holinesse. If this be not so, how could the beleeving Colossians be renewed after this ex∣ample as the Prototype? Let us go to the next Scripture, that ye put on the new man, which after God is created in rigteousnesse and true holinesse, Eph. 4.24. This Scripture also doth plainly shew that Adam had the Spirit of God before his fall. For first, why is it said be renewed in the spirit of your minde? This implieth that we were sometimes such. Secondly, the expression of righteousnes and true holinesse is opposed to feigned, and hypocritical sancti∣ty. Thirdly, the whole tenour of the speech is to this end, that the Ephesians should put off the old Adam-like disposition with all the deceitful lusts thereof; and that they should put on the Christ-like nature which is renewed after the similitude and pat∣tern of the image of God in man before the fall. The argument is thus grounded upon the text. What the Saints are by reno∣vation, such Adam was by creation; But by renovation the Saints are just and holy: From all which we do conclude that Adam was a spiritual man, and had the Spirit of God before his fall. Now to the Scriptures let us adde a few reasons. First, it is a Maxime generally received, that the Law was made for man before his fall. Now how the first man could be conformable to so spiritual and divine a Law, and he himself be destitute of the Spirit, it is not within the compasse of my understanding to discerne. If we will argue a posteriori, from the event, we must necessarily conclude that he must not only be spiritual, but also have a great measure of spirit to keep such a divine and spiritual Law. Secondly, the Apostle saith, you hath he quick∣ned that were dead in trespasses and sinnes, Ephes. 2.1, 2. If all be dead in trespasses and sinnes, this spiritual death must begin at the fall, and so by consequence the first man must have the spirit, and spiritual life before his fall. For what is spiritual death, but a privation of the life of the Spirit of God? These and many more reasons might be brought to prove Adam to be a spiritual man as long as he stood in that state in which God had placed him. Now let us hear your arguments to the con∣trary.
You say that Adams righteousnesse and holinesse was not in beleeving a Saviour, because be was not in a lost condition, pag. 10 Suppose all this be granted, that Adam was not to beleeve a Saviour, because he was not in a lapsed or fallen con∣dition; how doth this prove that he was absolutely carnal and destitute of the Spirit? He was to beleeve the Father as Lord Creator, he was bound to love him, to delight in him, and how could he possibly do all this but he must have some measure of Spirit? Therefore Adam had the Spirit, and was a spiritual man before his fall. You go on, and say, whatsoever qualifica∣tions the children of God have attained unto, in, and through Jesus Christ their Lord, by remission of sinne, or the hope of a resurrection, and the attainment of a better life, Adam was not capable of. To this I answer, though the difference may be in circumstances, the substance is the same. For if you reck∣on all that Adam had in present possession, and all that he might have had if he had stood; if you compare his whole state with the state of the Saints, with that which they have, and that which they shall have, you shall finde an excellent corre∣spondence betwixt both. For what if Adam was not capable of remission of sinne by Christs blood, it is all one if he be made in a state free from sinne? What if he was not capable of re∣generation because he had no pollution of nature? yet he was created with a pure and spiritual nature in original righteous∣nesse. What if he was not capable of the resurrection from the dead, because he died not a natural death? yet he was ca∣pable to eate of the tree of life, to keep himself from death, and so to live for ever. Your whole way of reasoning is meer∣ly fallacious, because Adam had not spiritual life every way the same in circumstance, therefore he had not the spirit in the sub∣stance and being thereof. You go on and tell us, If men will hold this opinion, that righteousnesse and true holinesse is the I∣mage of God which the Lord created man in, and is not to be found there residing, then it is very requisite that this holinesse and righteousnesse be released. But how do you prove that this holinesse and righteousnesse did not reside in Adam? If you shall say, that he was not capable of such Evangelical holinesse as is set forth in the second Covenant; what of all this, not∣withstanding
the difference in circumstance, he may have the same in substance. Saint Paul saith, I delight in the Law of the Lord after the inward man, Rom. 7.22. He had the same spiritual delight in the Law by Renovation, which Adam had before his fall by Creation; where then is the difference? A∣dam had no rebellion, no law of the flesh warring against the law of his minde, as Saint Paul had. There was the same spi∣rit of love in both, but in the one it was with the love of the flesh, and with conflict with the love of the flesh: but the o∣ther was absolutely free: He did not know by experience what it was to have the flesh rebel against the spirit. Because the Law requires entire obedience of bodie and soule, inward and outward, throughout all the parts of our life; because it is spiritual it self, and requires that the thoughts, words and deeds be spiritual; we must necessarily conclude, that the first man must be spiritual in a large degree, seeing the Law was tem∣pered and proportioned in the beginning to that ability he had. But you have another evasion, you say, that at the Creation Adam was not made conformable to the Image of the Sonne, see∣ing he had no such lawes to be conformable to. Here you still harp upon the same string. Because Adam was not conform∣able in the same manner, therefore he had not the conformi∣ty to the Image of Christ in substance. I pray you tell me the meaning of this Scripture, Come let us make man after our own Image. Is not this the speech of Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost? You cannot deny it. No more can you deny that Adam was made after the Image of Christ as Lord Cre∣ator. In this point we must necessarily say that Adam had the same Image of God, and the same spirit in the general nature of it, as the Saints have in the state of Regeneration, only the difference lies in some circumstances. He might also have the same faith in the general nature of faith; though it was impossible for him in that state he stood to have justifying faith: Seeing he was absolutely without the guilt of all sin, he needed no pardon by Christs blood. Suppose all this be granted, that Adam was not to beleeve in a Saviour, because he was not in a lapsed or fallen condition, yet all this doth not
prove him to be a carnal man, or absolutely destitute of the Spirit before his fall. He might beleeve in God the Father, as Lord Creator, to prevent that misery which should ensue by the fall. And to such a kind of faith it is necessary, that he should have some measure of spirit Upon this ground also we may con∣clude him to be spiritual, and to have the Spirit before his fall. But whereas the Scripture saith, That God made man righte∣ous, you put off all with this shift, That God made Adam with∣out any stain or blemish in the beginning, page 13. This we wil∣lingly confesse to be true, but it is not the whole, nor the principal part of truth. For uprightnesse in the Scripture-lan∣guage, doth not only signifie a freedome from evil, but also a positive habit of righteousnesse and holinesse, and in this state did God make man in the beginning. But admit that be granted, What do you gather from hence? you say, If those that would have holinesse and righte∣ousnesse, to be entituled the Image of God, and shall mean by it a condition without sin, simply so considered, then the whole Creation of God might be said to bear the Image of God, page 13. Answ. Your consequence will not hold, That Adam was without sin at the time of his Creation, it was from hence, that God made him a holy creature after his own Image: That other crea∣tures are without sin, is meerly from incapacity, seeing they have neither an understanding to know the Law of God, nor a will to embrace good or evil, therefore they cannot sinne: For that speech of yours, page 14. It will appear that the I∣mage which Adam did bear, wherein he represented God, lieth in some other place, where none of the creatures are in acapacity to come, it being beyond them all. Though in the general, I do ac∣knowledge this to be a solid truth, yet you do not rightly ap∣ply it. What think you of that saying of our Saviour, There are some Eunuches that are so borne from their mothers wombe, and there are some made Eunuches of men, and there are some that have made themselves Eunuches for the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 19.12. Here are three sorts of Eunuches, but one sort only is so made by grace, and the mortifying work of the Spi∣rit. So in the present case, the creatures were free from sin as well as Adam, but their freedom was meerly from incapaci∣ty,
because they were not able to receive a spiritual Law; And Adams freedome was from the holinesse of that state in which the Lord had made him. Therefore in the point of non∣transgression, Adam was put into such a state as none of the creatures could come to. Next you enquire, Whether the Image of God did consist in light? These are your words, If the light that Adam had, was the Image, then it must be a light spiritual or natural, or both. Now that it was not the light of the Gospel that Adam had, is clear, there being neither malady nor remedy which were in being in the time of this light, page 15. Though there was neither malady nor remedy at that time, yet he might have spiritual light in the substance thereof, and the Image of God might principally consist in this. The Apostle speaking of the rege∣nerate, hath this expression, renewed in knowledge after the I∣mage of him that created him, Col. 3.10. This sheweth plain∣ly, that man in the beginning was created after the Image of God, and that Image did chiefly consist in the spiritual light that was in the understanding. But because there is a great controversie between the Arminians and us about the nature of this light, viz. Whether Adam had a power before his fall to be∣leeve in Christ? and because this is a point pertinent to our purpose, I will briefly recite three Arguments used by Cor∣vinus, in his Answer to Du Moulin. First, saith he, Adam was not bound to beleeve in Christ, therefore he did not receive a∣bility to beleeve in him: such an ability would be unnecessary and unprofitable, where there was no use of it at all. Chap. 11. sect. 4.5. page 156. Answ. The Argument doth not hold; God did not require Adam to beleeve the Stories written in the five Books of Moses, the Books of Josbua, Judges, Samuel, &c. But will any man be so void of reason to argue, that he had no power to beleeve these Stories, in case they had been revealed to him? so God did not require Abraham to beleeve in Christ, as he was revealed and exhibited in the last dispensation of the promise: shall we therefore argue that he had not ability to beleeve, or that he had not the same spirit in substance which the Saints now have? He that doth so judge, let him answer
the meaning of this Scripture, We having the same spirit of faith, according as it is written, I beleeved, and therefore have I spoken, we also beleeve, and therefore speak, 2 Cor. 4.13. It is clear from hence, that the Patriarchs Prophets, and Apostles, had all of them the same spirit of faith in substance; yet all of them have not the same revelation of the promise, in the cir∣cumstances thereof. Secondly, Corvinus saith, that before the fall the Gospel was not credible, because in the Gospel a sinner is commanded to believe himself to be a sinner, and that by himself and his own works he cannot be saved, and that all salvation is placed in Christ the Me∣diatour. And further he addeth. It was so far from man to be able to believe all these things, that he was then bound rather to believe the contrary, to wit, himself to be upright, and that he should be blessed if he did persist in his uprightnesse. p. 154, 162, 164, 165. Answ. To this we willingly agree, That the way to salvation, as now it is, doth differ very much from that state wherein Adam stood. But the question is not concerning the diversitie or contrariety of the states; but concerning the power and ability that Adam had, whether it be one and the same in substance with that which the Saints now have. White and black are two contrary colours, yet the same eye doth see both. Heat and cold are two qualities in the ex∣tream, yet they are tangible objects to one and the same sense of seeling. So in the like case, though the Word of the Law, and the Word of the Gospel, are two contrary wayes to salva∣tion, yet there is nothing doth exclude, but they may be ap∣prehended by one and the same spirit of faith. The Word may be one and the same in the general notion and nature of the Word, and it may be apprehended by one and the same spirit of faith, yet it may differ in circumstance. But because the force of the Argument doth lie in the contradictory nature of the two states, we will come to instance in a case or two. A∣dam before his fall could not shew mercie, if we look to the outward act or the performance of the duty, for where there is no misery, what mercy can be shewed? shall we therefore argue that he had no such affection in him as mercy? So in the like case, it is not compatible with the state of the blessed
Angels to beleeve in a Christ to recover them out of their fall, for they that never fall, have no need of a recovery: what then shall we say that they have no ability to understand the Myste∣rie of the Gospel? This cannot be, for so the Apostle reason∣eth, By them which have preached the Gospel unto you, with the Ho∣ly Ghost sent down from Heaven, which things the Angels desire to look into, 1 Pet. 1.12. Though the blessed Angels have no need of salvation by grace held out in the Gospel, yet they have ability to understand it, they have a desire to pry and gaze into it. So in the like case, though Adam had no need of sal∣vation before his fall by the Mediatour, yet he might have abi∣lity to understand that way of salvation, in case it had been re∣vealed. Thirdly, Corvinus saith, that greater abilities are required to faith in Christ, then that ability which Adam bad before his fall. Answ. I cannot see possibly how he can consist with his own principles. For seeing he doth stand upon it in his Treatises against Moulin, page 159.165. that God doth proportion abili∣ties to commands; and seeing also he saith, that God did promise life to Adam, under the condition of most perfect and absolute obe∣dience. By the position of these two, he must necessarily af∣firme Adams abilities to be exceeding great before his fall. For seeing the work required was to yield such a perfect obedience, as none else can perform since the fall but Christ alone; it must necessarily follow that Adam must have a large portion of spirit fitted for such an employment. As in some Monuments of Antiquity, we do argue, how strong such a Prince was, that died many hundred yeares ago, from the greatnesse and weight of his sword: so from the spirituality of the Law given to A∣dam before his fall, we do infer his abilities to have been ex∣ceeding great. And thus much out of Corvinus his own prin∣ciples. Now Mr. Everard, let us return back again to you. And here, to deal plainly with you and the Churches that do depend upon your Institution, I must tell you, that neither Ar∣minius nor Corvinus, nor any other of that party, (to my know∣ledge) did ever spin such a course thread as you do. For though they stand upon it, that Adam had not abilities to beleeve in Christ, & to raise himself from his fal, yet none of them do utter
such speeches as these, that Adam was altogether destitute of the Spirit of God, and that he was a meer carnal man before his fall. This to my understanding doth cast a blurre upon the Creator himselfe. Now I would intreat you to shew some further rea∣son, wherefore the Image of God did not stand in spiritual light. You say, it remaineth yet to prove that Adam had a supernatural light, Which they will never be able to do, unlesse they will prove that he was set about some spiritual employments. For God giving light suitable to the employment he sets his creature about, so suit∣ably God proportions his light, that it might be just suitable for his works and no more, page 16. And for the works wherein Adam was employed, you tell us what they were, p. 17. He was to look after the Garden, to dresse and keep it, and to settle names and titles upon every creature, to eat and drink, with such like works, as also to bear rule and dominion over the creatures. But Sir, in this point you are wonderful fallacious. For first, what war∣rant have you to take the height, length and breadth of A∣dams abilities from his present employments? There is many a true Christian man in these times, that doth beleeve some truths, who hath ability to receive more if it would please the Lord to reveal them. So we may say in the like case concern∣ing Adam, he was able to receive more truths if they had been revealed, and to do more duties if he had been commanded. We are not absolutely to tie and confine mens abilities to their present employments. Further, what ground have you to af∣firm, that Adams employment was only in those externals of keeping the Garden, and giving names to all cattel, &c? Will you argue, because you reade of no more, that therefore he had no more employment? Thirdly, suppose it should be granted to you, that Adam was wholly taken up in these out∣ward actions, this doth not prove that he was destitute of spi∣ritual abilities. When the Apostle speaks to servants, to obey their Masters according to the flesh, Eph. 6.5. There is no man doubts but he speaks of an outward work, but when he saith, that they should do it with singlenesse of heart, as unto the Lord Christ, and not unto men: Here is the performance of an out∣ward service in a spiritual manner. Even so, Adam might be spiritually employed in those works of his, of dressing the Gar∣den,
and of giving names to all cattel, &c. And thus we have tried your Reasons, how far you are able to prove that the Image of God in Adam did not consist in righ∣teousnesse and true holinesse, and that he was not a spiritual man before his fall. This also is the doctrine of the Thirty Separate Congregations, who place the Image of God only in Lordship and dominion over the creature. Next you come to enquire, Whether the Image of God in dam did consist in degrees of light? And here say you, if this be admitted, upon such a supposition, not one in all the world can tell what it is to beare the title; for how can they tell of what height, length and breadth this knowledge should be of? page 17.18. To ease you of all the pains of searching out the several de∣grees of longitude or latitude; I say, precisely at that time, when a man doth receive the true light of the Spirit, he doth resume more or lesse that Image of God which Adam lost. And look by how many degrees this light doth increase, by so many degrees proportionably this Image of God is renew∣ed. The Apostle speaketh very properly to the purpose, We all with open face beholding as in a glasse the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.19. Here these foure things are to be noted. First, the pattern or the Idea, we are changed into the same Image, to wit, into the Image of the Lord Christ him∣self. Secondly, the degrees or the several stages: we are changed from glory to glory. Thirdly, the mean or the instrument of the change, we all with open face beholding as in a glasse, the glo∣ry of Christ revealed in the Gospel, by prying into it, and ga∣zing upon it we are altered and translated into the same image. Fourthly, the principal cause of the transmutation, even as by the Spirit of the Lord, by the inward work of the Spirit men come to be enlightned, and so more and more to put on the Image of God: From these several particulars it is clear, that the Regenerate are renewed after the Image of Christ, and the excell noy thereof doth stand in spiritual light. And this light in substance we say that Adam had before his fall. They are the words of the Apostle, as we have formerly said, renewed in knowledge, after the Image of him who created him.
Further, you endeavour to shew that the Image of God did not stand in holinesse: You say, If it had layen in holi∣nesse never so Evangelical and spiritual, surely the woman that be∣leeved in the Lord Jesus would not have been deprived of that title, but the Apostle expostulateth the cause of the difference, 1 Cor. 11.7. where he clearly ascribeth that title. scil. the Image of God to reside only in preheminence, page 23. But this will not serve your turne neither, for when God created the woman in the be∣ginning, she was not only created after his Image in righte∣ousnesse and true holinesse, but she was also created in a state to have Lordship over the creature. These are the words of the Text, So God created man in his own Image, in the Image of God created be him, male and female created he them. And God said unto them, be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the sea, Genes. 27.28. These words were not only spoken to the first man, but to the first woman also, and to all mankinde whether male or female that should come of them, that they should people the world and bring it in subjection. If this be so, the man and the woman were both created in that state to have pre∣eminence over the Creation. And for the words of the A∣postle, they do not deny the woman to be made after the I∣mage of God, though this Image was more immediately and fundamentally in man the head and lord of the Creation; If you look narrowly into the text, you shall finde a reason wherefore man doth more immediately bear the Image of God, and is a more lively representative of his Majesty, be∣cause the woman was made for the man as an help meet for him. Now we proceed to the next Chapter. CHAP. IV. Wherein that Image did consist that God did create Adam in. IN this Chapter you endeavour to prove that the Image did consist in dominion and rule over the creature, page 24.
In this I will be no adversary to you. But the question is, whether did that Image only or principally consist in the a∣forementioned dominion, as the Separate Congregations, and you in this Treatise do labour to prove. This I deny. For the words that follow, Let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and the fowl of the aire, they are spoken only to the vulgar capacity of the Reader. For in the ordinary way the Image of God is more visible and easie to be discerned in the external dominion over the creature, then in the spiritual and inward endowment of the soule. Further, whereas you say, That Magistrates in the Scri∣pture are called gods, and that in respect of their dominion they do carry the Image of God, page 24, 25. From these words of yours you may be condemned, for it is too apparent in the next Chapter, that you vilifie and slight all kinde of Magistra∣cy, and make it a matter of nothing. And for the proof out of Daniel and the Revelation, you do shew your rudenesse in that kinde of learning. By the head of gold (say you) Daniel plainly sheweth to the King, thou art the head of gold. This King was an image in reference to his preheminence, otherwise he had not differed from other men, page 26. That Nebuchadnezzar was a King, and a mighty King, and that in his Kingly power he did carry the Image of God, I do willingly confesse. But I pray you tell me, whence is it that you call him an image? To say the truth, he is typed and set forth by some part of the image. By the same Law you may call the Counties of Devon∣shire and Cornwall a Map of all England: whereas these Coun∣treys are described as some parts in the Mappe. Further, if we should grant that the Babylonian Empire in Nebuchadnezzar, might be said to be the image by a Synechdoche, because it is some part of the image; what is this to the Image of God; and to the Creation of man after his Image? For the image spoken of in the text, it is only a type and a figure which the Lord did use to set forth the foure Tyrannical Empires, which in their several successions one after another should afflict the Church. These foure great Empires be doth set forth by so many beasts, chap. 7. as they are described by the foure regi∣ons and parts of the image, chap. 2. But what reference hath
this description to the Image of God in the Creation of man, I cannot discern: I think as good a resemblance may be found between a shepherds dog, and the dog starre, as be∣tween these two images which you parallel and compare to∣gether. But if to mend the matter you shall say, that Rulers are signified by the several parts and regions of the image; I will answer, in propriety of speech, the Lord by this figure doth represent so many successions of tyrannie rather then of lawful dominion, and why he should do this by the foure parts of the body of man is from his own institution. Neither is that other place more fitly alledged out of the book of the Revelation, for though it be true in the general, that Rulers in respect of their preheminence do carry the Image of God; yet how can you conclude anything from that text, The Dragon gave life to the image? Rev. 13.15. The scope of the Spirit in this Prophecy, is mainly concerning the sufferings of the Church under two formes of Roman dominion, under the tyranny of Rome Imperial, and Rome Papal, and so it was when the persecuting Empire was destroyed, there was a re∣novation and repaire of that Majesty, and a reviving of it, as it were, from the dead. This the Spirit doth expresse, when he saith, that the beast had a wound in one of his heads: this wound was cured, and the second beast made an image to the beast that had received a wound in one of his heads. The scope of all is to shew the repaire of the Roman Tyranny in the Popes, that was formerly lost in the Cesars. Now how do you gather from hence that Magistrates do carry the image of God, in respect of their authority? Indeed, in these words there is mention made of an image, but none of Gods Image: of the image of the beast, which had received a wound in one of his heads. Again, here is mention made of a vice-gerent, but none of Gods Vice gerents upon the earth. The Dra∣gon gave him his power, seat and great authority. Now Sir, I leave it to any ordinary understanding, to judge what woful havock is here made of the Word of God. I do the more willingly put you in minde of these things, because now a days so many bold and ignorant men intrude themselves into the place of the Ministry, and take so much upon them to expound
the Revelation, Daniel, Canticles, and other hard Scri∣ptures. CHAP. V. Concerning the power that God gave Adam, and what is the definition thereof. TO the end that we may understand what power Adam lost, and what he retained, you do well in the beginning to define what his power was. You say, you do not take power for ability, or the use of ability, but for a word of command, issuing from the great Commander, with reference to man: or a lawful Commission given to men, whereby they are enabled to justifie their actions, in case they neither adde nor diminish. And then you conclude, so much command a man hath from God, so much power he hath of God, page 29, 30. Here you seem to me to affect a way by your selfe. For though sometimes power is taken for authority, for that which a man may warrantably and lawfully do, yet I think in the present case, when you speak of the power which Adam had before his fall, it had been more proper to insist upon his ability, what he was able to act according to the Law that was given to him. Second∣ly, if we take power in the latter sense. Adams freedom did not stand so much in what the Lord did positively command him, as in that which he did not precisely and strictly forbid him. And therefore you must needs erre in the definition of that power that Adam had before his fall. But these improper speeches of yours might passe, if you did not turne them a∣gainst the Civil power. These are your words, from Rom. 13.1. If the soul must be subject to such Powers as are the Ordi∣nances of God, and there be no Powers but Gods Ordinances, then Gods Word or his Command are his Ordinances. And from hence you infer, if Rulers come as Gods Ministers, they must produce his Word for the power of Ordinances, page 30. Here I would have you to assigne the difference between the power appertaining to a Magistrate, and the power belonging to e∣very
private man; for if that be true, as you say, that Ru∣lers are to be obeyed, so far forth only as they bring the Word; I pray you tell me, must not every man be obeyed upon the same termes? what do you make then of the power of the Ma∣gistrate? when Pilate boasted, Knowest thou not that I have pow∣er to crucifie thee, and power to release thee? The Lord made him this answer, Thou hast no power, but it is given thee from above, John 19 10 11. It is plain then, that Pilate as a Ma∣gistrate and a Judge had a power given him of God. Now then if that be true which you say, that the Magistrate hath no power but the Word it self, then it will follow that these are co-incident termes. For to speak properly, the power of the Magistrate and the Word are not one and the same, but the Authority of the Magistrate doth depend upon the Word, from whence it hath its Original and Institution. You go on, and argue, Are not all men Gods creatures, if so, how cometh it to passe that one should be in subjection to anothers will, and that upon such sore punishment? page 30, 31. Here in these words you come very near the doctrine of the Levellers: Can you make no distinction between subjection to the lawful power, and mans illegal will? And then turning off from this digres∣sion, you conclude, that the Command of God is the Power, and therefore so far as the Lords Command did extend, so much power Adam had. But for this matter we are content to let you passe with your own peculiar way of expression. Let us now see how you describe Adams entertainment in the Garden. CHAP. VI. Adams entertainment in the Garden. IN this Chapter you discourse how Adam was placed in the Garden, how Eve was made an helper meet for him, and how the Lord brought all the creatures to him, that he might give them their several names and titles. Because these are
Plain Scripture-truths, I will not be an adversary to you here. But then two questions are to be demanded; First, whether was his chief emploiment in these externals? Secondly, whether he did act in them as a meer carnal man? For the first, if you shall say that Adam was only employed in these externals, then shew why was the Law of God written in his heart? None can imagine but that it was engraven and written there, to that end, that he should yield proporti∣onable obedience: he had spiritual abilities that he might be proportionable to a spiritual Law. If you shall deny this, you will unavoidably be cast upon that rock, that Adam had the Law put into his heart for no use or end at all. Secondly, though he was taken up in externals, in giving names to all creatures, and in tilling of the ground, yet in this you must look upon him as a man that was spiritual, able to do these things in a spiritual manner. These two points I thought good to re-minde you of, because you did a little be∣fore affirme that Adam was a meer carnal man before his fall, and that his occupation and employment was only in exter∣nals. Let us go to the next Chapter. CHAP. VII. Free will in its nature unfolded. HEre in the beginning, you define free-will to be a cheer∣ful putting forth of those abilities which the Lord hath gi∣ven us to action. And this you prove by many Scripture-in∣stances, to clear the nature of freedome. By this account it will follow, that a natural man, as such, without the help of the Spirit hath no free-will at all: he is so far from a free, voluntary, and cheerful putting forth of abilities, that in spi∣ritual things he is utterly void and destitute of all ability. But as in the former Chapter you had your digression to turne out against the Magistrate, when you spake of the power of Adam before the fall; so now speaking of his free-will you have your vagaries and excursions against the Ministry. These are your words, Paul preached the Gospel freely, he stood not
upon such punctilio's to have the tenth of the labours of the people, page 40. The Separate Congregations also agree with you here. For, say they, the maintenance of the Ministers which labour in the Word of God, ought to be the free and chari∣table benevolence, or the cheerful contribution of those that ac∣knowledge themselves members of the same fellowship, page 22. And the ground they have to prove it is from that place of the Apostle, while by the experiment of this ministration they glorifie God for your professed subjection unto the Gospel of Christ, and for your liberal distribution unto them, and unto all men, 2 Cor. 9.13. It is clear that the Apostle in these words speaketh of the di∣stributions, and the voluntary benevolences of the Churches to the necessities of the poor Saints at Hierusalem. But by what Logick the brethren of the Separation can apply this to the maintenance of the Ministry, in the time of the New Testament, for my part I cannot discern. Sure I am, when you and they shall go about to make the people free-willers, in so doing you will make a servile and a slavish Ministry. As for the due in the payment of the tenth, it doth as truly ap∣pertain to the Ministers, as any mans possession or inheritance doth belong to him. And therefore if either you or any man else shall endeavour to take away the tenth from the Mini∣stry, it is all one as to endeavour to take away the proprietie from other men. Having gone so far along with you in your digression, let us now come to that freedome of will which Adam had before his fall. And here I do agree with you, that he had libertie to put himself forth chearfully and freely to action, by vertue of such abilities as he had received from God; yet when you come to the negative part, to pluck that down which is built by other men, you plainly shew, that your definition is not proper to the case in hand. For thus you conclude, Now some have conceived that free will had been a mans being, left to his choice whether he would do the Will of God or no. But I know no such freedom given by God, that a man should have liberty to dispose of himself, unlesse you will call that freedom of will, which a man is prohibited from upon penalties of death; but God gives no man freedom to sin, but preventions; To this I answer, though the Lord gave Adam no freedom to
sin, but rather tied up his liberty by a contrary command, yet it is a sure rule, that he made him in such a pendulous estate that he might stand or fall. And though in that state he had freedom and power to will that which was good, nay, chear∣fully to put forth his ability to act, yet for all this, his condi∣tion was but mutable, he might fall if he would, as appeareth by the event. Now that the libertie of Adam did stand be∣tween these two, between the choosing of the good, and the refusing of the evil, it is clear from the signification of the two trees. The Tree of life signified what happinesse he should enjoy if he stood; the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, what misery should attend him if he fell. Therefore the liberty of Adam stood betwixt choosing of the good, and refusing of the evil. For your definition of free-will, that it is a chearful issu∣ing forth to action by vertue of abilities received, this might in some sort be applied to the blessed Angels and Saints in the state of glory. For though they be established and confirmed in their holy and happy estate that they cannot fall, yet they do most freely, voluntarily and chearfully put forth their abilities to the glory of God: but Adams freedom was otherwise for the trial of his obedience. He was made in a mutable and changeable condition, in which he might stand or fall by his own free election, not only because the Lord would be obey ed by a free choice, but also that through his fall, a door might-be opened to the sending of the Sonne, and that salvation might be had upon termes of grace only, to the fuller decla∣ration of the glory of God. CHAP. VIII. How far God assisted Adam, or assisteth other men, that they might be such free-willers as hath been described. TO the performance of duty you tell us, that God doth give, first, a capacity to understand; secondly, ability to perform;
thirdly, time; fourthly, he doth use exhortations and reproofs. And then you adde, that he giveth these rich accommodations as a sufficient means, for all men to obey every one of his commands; and he goeth no further for effecting any mans actions in the world,☞ page 42, 43. In these words of yours you do plainly eliminate and extinguish Gods peculiar grace by and through which he doth infalliblie and certainly carry on his own peo∣ple to salvation. But that we may joyne issue with you, we do freely yield, that God giveth greater abilities and helps to men then they ordinarilie make use of. Yet I know no rea∣son in the world you have to confound the abilities that Adam had before the fall, with the abilities that every man now hath in the state of nature. Again, if you look upon all men as lapsed or fallen, how can you affirm that the abilities which the Lord giveth are equal to all. Is not this contrary both to Scripture and experience? you tell us how far God goeth with every man in the conferring and bestowing abilities upon him, and then peremptorily and magisterially determine, that he doth not go further to the effecting of any mans actions in the world. Thirdly, it is a point well worth the searching, what you mean by these abilities. Pelagius himself did stand much upon this, that he was a patron and a great friend to the grace of God. But how did he maintain it? he had a clancular and a reserved sense, he conceived the minde, will, and other natu∣ral abilities to be the gifts of God, and called them by the name of his free grace. This Augustine of old did acknow∣ledge to be true in the general, but he did blame him for his obscuring and darkning the inward special grace of God, through which he doth effectually work upon the hearts of men. And I would we had not too much cause given to us to judge the same of you. For though you speak much of the ability which God doth give, yet when all is done, you go no further then the natural faculties. Let any man consi∣der what you have written concerning this point, in the denial of Original sin, in the advancement of the purity of nature, in the emprovement of natural abilities, in asserting that A∣dams ability was as good after the fall as it was before. By the collation of all these, let any man judge whether you do
not advance nature, and depresse the grace of God; and whether in these assertions & affirmations of yours, you are not a down∣right Pelagian. You cite that place, Is. 5 Judge I pray you now be∣twixt me and my vineyard, what could I have done more to my Vineyard that I have not done? From whence you infer, Where are those disputers against God, that will say be made a man able to oppresse and do unrighteously, and left him destitute of ability and power to do those things which he commanded. Because this text, as formerly, so now, is much alledged by the Patrons of free-will; I shall endeavour the more diligently to shew the meaning thereof; I see no reason from the Lords peculiar bounty to the Jewish Church, that we should conclude so ge∣nerally that he gives the same ability to every man, in the same degree and the same measure, and that in point of Con∣version and turning to God. There is nothing in the parable, but (if the Scriptures rightly be compared) you shall finde the truth of the thing will answer the emphasis of the words. For that expression, What could I have done more to my Vineyard that I have not done? the truth of this will appear, if you con∣sider all along what God had done for them, in chusing them above all the people of the world, what he had done for them in Egypt, in the wildernesse, in bringing them into the land of Canaan; how he had been present with them in all the times of the Judges and the Kings, how he had delivered them from great dangers, how he had taught them by afflicti∣ons, how he had raised up Prophets in several successions of time to turne them from the evil of their evil ways; and many such like passages of his grace and goodnesse to that people, which plainly seal the truth of that saying, What could I have done more to my Vineyard which I have not done? This is true in particular of the Jewish Church. set forth by the figure of the Vineyard: but how doth it prove the question that doth lie before us? your task is to shew the general assistance that God giveth to every man to make him a free-willer, yet here I do in sense agree with Dr. Mayer and others upon the place, that at seasons the Lord by sending in of light doth so loosen the will that is bound, that then a man hath some power to will that which is good. And hereupon they inferre,☜ that the fault
is in man himself. For although by nature he be not able to will the good, yet when he heares outwardly, and the Spirit moves inwardly, he is able to go the next step, and his con∣demnation is in this, that he doth not act according to the abi∣lity administred. As for that saying of yours, that God giveth a man ability to oppresse, but not to obey his Commands: This is none of our positions, but it is one of your calumnies. We hold that God hath put so much light into the heart of the Gentiles, to know that they must not steal, that they must not defraud or oppresse: the Lord also doth give them power to act according to their light in these and such like outward moralities. This is clear from the first and second Chapter of the Epistle to the Romanes; and it is evident also by that Scripture, that God was indeed much dishonoured by their not emproving their abilities which he had bestowed upon them, to the bringing forth of such actions of obedience as he had required of them. He was angry with them because they did not walk after the light, because they held the truth in unrighteousnesse, because by oppression and other sinnes they did not answer the Law written in their heart. Though in these externals the Gentiles had abilities some way propor∣tionable to the Commands, yet in the case of true repentance, and turning to God, the same Apostle doth drive the Gentiles from all confidence and dependance upon natural ability. The whole tenour of his speech is to shew, that the proper use of the light which God giveth, is primarily and immediately to help a man to judge himself, and in judging, to see his owne emptinesse, that so in the sense of his own misery he may make out for mercy. The whole scope then of the Apostle is to shew, that Jewes and Gentiles are all under sin, that they have no ability of their own: and the end is to drive them to a Christ to make up all. Next you go to the Parable of the Talents, Matth. 25. You reason, Our Saviour comes and bears witnesse to the world that he desires no more encrease then the benefit of what he had first given means sufficient to bring forth, no more then was an∣swerable to the seed he had first sowen; if one Talent, then the encrease of one, verse 18. The slothful man hides the Lords
treasury, but verse 30, the Lord presents to us what course he will take with such servants who use such kind of sayings (as too many do in these dayes) that God would be gathering where he scattereth not: but that must needs be a lye, for what plea∣sure could the Lord himself take in any such increase where himself is not the planter? page 45. I have often found this Scripture cited by the Arminians, yet among them all I never met with any that made so corrupt a use of it as you do. Not many years since the learned Chamier, treating of the point of free-will, did endeavour to shew the difference betwixt the Philosophers and the Jesuites; They (saith he, meaning the Jesuites) do admit some kind of grace, which never entered into the thought of Aristotle; they acknowledge the corruption of nature by sinne, which the Philosophe's did never so much as dreame of, Tom. 3. lib. 3. cap. 2. sect 9. If this Author were now alive, I would gladly know what difference he would set betwixt the Philosophers and the Brethren of the Separation, who hold that infants are free from all natural corruption; what difference he would set betwixt Aristotles Ethical Philo∣sophie and your Moral Divinitie, when you teach that Adams abilities were as good after the fall as they were before. But now let us come to clear the Parable of the Talents. First, sup∣pose by sufficient means you understand onely the supply of the Spirit of Christ, how can you justifie this to be a true interpre∣tation, that Christ requires no more encrease then the benefit of what he had first given sufficient means to bring forth? Will you say that it is absolutely necessary to have the ability in pre∣sent possession before the command can be given? If this be your opinion, you must needs block up the right and the true way of bringing a soul to Christ. We preach the Law in the spi∣ritual nature of it to a natural man, to what end is all this, but that by the sight of his own emptinesse, by the convicti∣ons of the guilt of sinne he may look after a Christ, first, to justifie and to pardon; secondly, to sanctifie and to cleanse the pollution of his nature? We do not preach the Law to him, supposing that he hath ability, but the immediate end of our preaching is by and thorough the inward working of the Spirit to empty him of all ability, that so he may look to the promise,
where true ability is onely to be had. For the words of the Parable, that he gave to every man according to his ability, ver. 15. We are not strictly to adhere to the letter, as though the Lord doth give his grace according to every mans natural ability, but it is spoken after the manner of men; he giveth his grace in a different measure, to some more, and to some lesse; yet all the ability is from Christ himself. And therefore when he that received one Talent accused the Lord for an hard man, for reaping there where he did not sowe; the answer was, thou shouldest have given my money to the exchanger: that is, though thou hadst no ability of thine own, yet if thou hadst gone to the exchanger, to the Promiser, he was able to make profit of the money, he was able to help thee with forreign supply where thine own natural and domestical ability was wanting. Second∣ly, whereas you affirm, that there are many in these dayes that use such hard kinde of sayings, that God would be gathering where he scattereth not, and that one day he will call such servants to account; I do acknowledge, as heretofore, so now, there are more then too many who do neglect their talent, and cast the blame upon God himself. But your aime is not so much at these, as against others who oppose free-will, and your way of setting up the natural ability of man. Though some passages in their writings are hard, yet if you would com∣pare one thing with another, you should find that they do speak of abilities that do answer duties; of a word of promise that answereth the word of command; of the fulnesse of Christ set in opposition to the sinfulnesse and misery by Adam. Doctor Twisse disputing against the Arminians, lib. 3. errat. 9. pag. 211. doth of all others seeme to tread something hard, yet he doth shew many pithie reasons wherefore the Lord may give a command where there is a want of abiliy. First, saith he, men are too apt to trust in their own work to bring them to salvation; therefore that they may know the common conta∣gion of Original sinne, and thereupon the impotency and weak∣nesse that hath ensued to all good, the Lord taketh this course to shew them their misery. Secondly he addeth these words, If by the grace of God we know our selves to be no way fit or able to do those things which the Lord commandeth, yet
by his just counsel he doth command us, and by his commands he doth shew what we are indebted to him as Lord Creator, and that which we are not able to performe our selves we may beg help of him that we may performe it. And from the words of Augustine he inferreth that therefore the Lord com∣mandeth us that which is impossible, that we may know what to aske of him, for that which is impossible to be done by na∣ture, is not impossible to be done by grace. And to come to you more particularly, he addeth, It is not necessary that we should have this grace before the Lord doth signifie and make known to us by his commands what our duty is. And so in the close of all in the end of the Section he concludeth. And therefore though they could not (speaking of the Jewish Church compared to the Vineyard) rightly use those outward means by their natural abilities, yet they could by the helps of grace. So farre the Authour aforenamed. I have stayed the longer upon this point, that you may see that they who have most strongly asserted the grace of God, are no enemies to the endeavour of man, and though they do teach every where that there is a want of ability to performe the commands, yet they shew also where the true ability is to be had, to wit, in the Lord Christ, and in the freenesse of his grace. And this is the true meaning of the parable of the Talents and of the use of them, and how in the case of non-ability we should go to the Lord Jesus Christ the great exchanger. CHAP. IX. Shewing that though God afforded means whereby men have abi∣lity and power to do the things he requires, yet he gives them not the actions of obedience. IN this Chaptuer you dispute the point very largely that God giveth ability to act, but not the action. For the clearing of the matter, I will first state the question, and then I will try the strength of your reasons so farre forth as
they are of force against us. For the state of the question, there are four principal opinions. The first is of them that stand upon the power of nature, as the Pelagians of old, and you now endeavour to prove that mans ability is as good since the fall, as it was before. The second is of them who do ac∣knowledge the need of grace to heale the sinfulnesse of nature, but (as they define it) it is such a general, weak and common grace, that it is only made efficacious in and by the concurrence of the will. This doctrine is maintained by the Jesuites and Ar∣minians. The third is of those who stand so much for the effi∣cacie of grace, that they wholly take away the endeavour of man. The Enthusiasts in these dayes are so for the immediate workings of the Spirit, that they make us passive, as though we were meere blocks and stones in the work of our salvation. The fourth is of those who turn from these dangerous extrems, they hold a need of the grace to carrie on the whole work to salvation, yet so, that man is a free agent, who works under the grace, or by the help of grace received. This is the doctrine of our Divines. And therefore when Bellarmine layeth it to our charge, as though we should teach that men are moved as meere inanimate and dead instruments. Doctor Ames maketh this answer, Bellarminus hic luctatur cum larvâ à seipso cor∣sictâ, Bellarmine doth here fight with a man of straw of his own making, Ames. Tom. 4. cap. 3. Sect 4. And truly Sir, when you stand so much upon the point, that obedient actions are not the gift of God, if you think that we hold that men are not free agents under grace, in this you fight against your own shadow, and not against us. Your arguments, some of them, if they were rightly alledged, would be of good use against the Enthu∣siasts of these latter times. Let us now see how you do pro∣ceed. Reas. 1. First, say you, if God do engage himself to perform these acti∣ons, as certainly as he gives the means for that purpose, then where actions are wanting, and meanes in place, God may be said to fall short of finishing his own work. Then that reproach which befel the man which began to build, and finished not, will fall hea∣vie upon the glory of God, page 46.
Answ. This Argument is of force against them who hold that God doth work in us as inanimate creatures. For where actions are wanting, I cannot see but by the tenour of this doctrine the defect will lie upon God, and to this passe are more then too many brought in these dayes. For, do they not say, are not all the Promises of God our portion? what if we neglect such Ordinances, such means of salvation? are we not above all? Are not all the Promises of God ours, for keeping, guiding and preserving of us? We will not look to Paul, or Apollo, or the outward meanes, but to Christ himself to do all in us and for us. Thus men separate Gods Promises from his wayes and prescri∣ptions. But let this be observed, though God doth all by his Spirit, yet he doth it mediately by instruments, and our own endeavour is not to be excluded. For instance, to shew the first work of grace upon the heart, let us consider that pas∣sage of the Apostle, and there we shall see the concurrence of Gods grace, and mans endeavour. In meeknesse instructing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, and that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the devil, who are taken captive by him at his will, 2 Tim. 2.25, 26. Though gain-sayers are the furthest off from the Kingdome of Christ and of God: the Apostle would have a Minister of the Gospel to shew all meeknesse and patience, and brotherly to exhort them? and here layes this for a ground of encouragement, Perad∣venture God will give them repentance to come to the acknow∣ledging of the truth. The Minister of the Gospel must set forth the truth in evidence and demonstration, and leave it to the Lord to sanctifie the work. Here then is an excellent agreement between the grace of God, and the endeavour of man. Further, after the feeling of the first grace man is not to lie idle; for, it is plainly expressed, after God hath given them repentance to come to the acknowledging of the truth, which is Gods act, then these words immediately are added, that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the devil. The word in the Original is , that they may awake out of the snare of the devil. It is a metaphor drawn from mens
awaking out of their drink: For as long as they are in their natural estate, and do oppose the truth, they do not know the peril of their condition; but when the Lord gives repent∣ance, then they begin to recover themselves out of their former miserable condition, and look for further supply of grace. And so here also is an excellent concord betwixt Gods grace, and the endeavour of man. But yet for further proof of this, let us consider that text, I am perswaded that he who hath begun a good work in you, will performe it to the day of Christ, Phil. 1.6. Here the Apostle speaks of a work that is spiritual∣ly and theologically good. Secondly, concerning the person that doth begin the work. Thirdly, the persons who they are in whom this good work is begun. Fourthly, the accom∣plishment and performance thereof, I am perswaded that he who hath begun a good work in you, will performe it unto the day of Christ. Here some may say, if the Apostle had that per∣suasion, that the work of grace would go on in the Philippians hearts, whether they did eat or drink, sleep or play, why did he not bid them be secure, and refer all to God? He had no such meaning, for when he saith, I am perswaded that he who hath begun a good work in you, will performe the same, he doth speak in relation to his own prayer, in the words immediate∣ly going before. Alwayes in every prayer of mine for you all, making request with joy for your fellowship in the Gospel from the first day until now. In relation to this prayer, and their parti∣cular striving and looking after further degrees of grace, he was confident that the Lord who had begun the work, would bring the same to perfection. Let us consider the words in the following chapter, ver. 13. Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling; for it is God that worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure. Here the Apostle doth attribute the whole work of mans salvation, the will and the deed, to the powerful working of the Spirit of God. And that which is more, he doth ascribe it to his good pleasure to work when he will, how he will, and upon what termes he will. If any shall say, seeing God doth all, what is here left for man to do? doth not this utterly drown and extinguish endeavour? No: for upon this ground he exhorteth them
to work out their salvation with feare and trembling, seeing they have no natural ability and free-will of their own, but must meerly depend upon the grace of God for the supply of his Spirit to carry on the work; therefore they must walk humbly with him, and take the season of grace as it is offered. Because the husbandman cannot make the Sunne to shine, and the raine to fall at his own pleasure, therefore he doth wait upon God for the seasons. Even so because in the work of mans salvation, the will and the deed doth meerly depend up∣on Gods good pleasure, to work it when he will, and how he will, we are to apply our selves to him only. When he admi∣nisters the grace, we should be careful to make use of the sea∣son; seeing the matter is wholly in his hands we should walk humbly with him. And thus Mr. Everard, you see that though the action is mans, yet the ability to will and to do is only from God, and nothing from man. And so the natural abili∣ty which you endeavour to set up is nothing at all. Now let us see what you gather from the parable of the talents. I observe, say you, that Christ sets no man on work whom he hath not enabled to perform it: for he giveth out his work answer∣able to abilities, Matth. 25.25. Comparing himself to a Mer∣chant he straight way went from home, as if he had said, I have so ordered my family, that I have seen my servants furnished: such a course have I taken to give every one employment not exceed∣ing their abilities. And what could I have done more for them? do but name it. Is it not sufficient that I have made men and women fit for my work? I gave them light to direct them, and they wanted for no materials, for time they had enough. They had my commands and persuasions, and also threats in case they did neglect, page 48. These collections of yours from the parable of the Talents I might let passe, seeing I have some way hint∣ed at these things before. But because the Pelagians, Armini∣ans, and you of the Separation do so triumph in the words of this Scripture, I will take the more pains to clear the meaning of the text. And I will do it the rather because of one particu∣lar passage, which if it were clearly understood, would break the great design of all those who endeavour to set up the will of man: They would quickly perceive that they have no such
colourable ground from the words of this Scripture. First, I do willingly agree that the command doth stand in proportion to abilities, but how? not in proportion to natural abilities, not in proportion to abilities of grace in present possession, but in proportion onely to the supply of the Spirit, as it shall please the Lord to administer to them that shall work out their owne salvation, and by the prayer of faith wait upon the Lord for the performance of the promise. Now whereas the slothful servant did complaine against the Master for requiring more then he gave him ability to do, the Lord tells him plainly, though he had no ability of his own to husband the talent, yet he might have put the money to the exchanger. The force of which words is thus much, that though in these su∣pernatural works which men have to do in and toward the working out of their salvation they have no ability of their own, they may go to the exchangers, to the word of promise, to the prayer of faith, and to the continual supply of the Spirit of Christ. As the ability did lie in Adam before the fall: so now all ability is to be had from Christ onely. To him there∣fore all that are weary and heavie laden must go for help. And the Apostle when he had exhorted the beleeving Ephesians to the performance of many duties, for matter of ability he shut∣teth up all with this conclusion, Now unto him who is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we can aske or thinke according to the power that worketh in us, Ephes. 3 20. Here it is plaine, that Christ giveth forth work answerable to abili∣ties, but these abilities are not inherent in men, or in the natu∣ral power of mans own will, but they are wholly to be had from the supply of the Spirit of Christ. They who pray, seek, and aske they onely shall receive. We come now to your second reason. Reason 2. Secondly, say you, If God giveth us these good actions which we performe, by confequence this will make void all the com∣mands of God, page 49. Answer. In this I am of your judgment, for if any shall say that the Lord doth all by the inward working of the Spirit, and doth
not leave so much to man as to be a free agent by the power of grace received, to what purpose are counsels commands and di∣rect one given to him who is to perform the work. This may pro¦perly be applied to the Enthusiasts, but it doth not any way ex∣tend to us. For though we wholly ascribe all to grace,☜ yet we ac∣knowledge man to be a free agent, who worketh and acteth by the help of grace administred. Though God himself be almighty & often doth work so almightily, that none can or shall resist him, yet his way of working in the soul in the excitings and mo∣vings of his grace are not always in that almighty way. Some∣times men do resist, nay the very elect themselves do oppose the workings of his Spirit, though they do not, nor cannot finally resist. We constantly affirme that the grace is Gods, and the act is mans. For proof of this let us consider the meaning of that expression, By the grace of God I am what I am, and his grace in me was not in vaine, but I laboured more then they all, yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me, 1 Cor. 15.10. Here he doth ascribe all to grace, when he saith, by the grace of God I am what I am. Though he doth attribute all to grace as to the Architectonical and principal cause, for all was done by the vigour and efficacie of that grace which was in him, yet for all this he doth not deny himself to be a free agent. He did instrumentally work by the power of that grace which was in him. Therefore in the work of his Ministery there is a truth that grace did all, and Paul did labour more then any of the Apostles: Grace did it principally, and Paul did it organically and ministerially. And thus you see though the action be mans, the vigour spirituality and efficacie is whol∣ly from God, and nothing from man. This is the substance of our doctrine. Now let us see how you concord Gods grace with mans endeavour. Without further controversie, say you, let it be confessed that the teachings of God come in to the sons and daughters of men as the tillings and manurings of God, to provoke them to produce obedient actions, page 50. This passage of yours we might let go for present, were it not for a Pelagi∣an sense which it carries with it. For from what Scripture or experience have you this similitude, that mans nature is to be compared to a fruitful soile in such things as concern salvation?
A fruitful soile though it do want due culture, hath a natural aptnesse to bring forth fruit: will you say that there is the same aptnesse in the nature of man to produce actions of obedi∣ence? doth not this go against the scope of Scripture? and do not the Saints for the production of obedient actions finde need of a daily and continual supply of the Spirit of Christ? All shall turne to my salvation through your prayer and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.19. Though the Saints do bring forth fruit, and though it be the act of their own free obedience, yet it is not from nature as a fruitful soile, but from Christ the Vine, John 15.1, 2, &c. Our Saviour doth plainly shew that every branch abiding in him, brings forth fruit. But if you will needs argue from hence the goodnesse and fertility of the branch in it self, he saith in expresse termes, without me ye can do nothing. Further you add, If this opinion should take place, that God giveth our actions, it would as well dismisse the office of the Spirit of God, and so destroy the internal meanes. The Spirit standeth at the doore of the heart, and calleth, provoking us with a multiplici∣ty of allurements, that we would put forth our abilities to a present performance of action, p. 51. Here, Sir, as I have formerly said, we have nothing to do with that idle opinion, that obedient actions are only the gift of God, we have nothing to do with them who demolish the endeavour of man; let them bear their own burden whosoever they be. But on the other side we must needs blame you for running into a contrary extreame, for whereas you say, that the Spirit standeth at the doore of the heart, provoking us with a multiplicity of allurements to put forth our abilities to present per∣formance; here I would entreat you to define what those abilities are which the Spirit doth provoke us to exert and put forth? If you mean our natural abilities (as you can mean no other, seeing they stand contradistinct to the allurements of the Spirit) then you will ascribe the chief work of salvation to mans nature, and the part of the Spirit shall be onely to allure and perswade. By this account not onely the action, but also the ability and the power to act will be from man. But because the Pelagians of old, the Arminians of late, and you now have such frequent recourse to this Scripture, Rev. 3. 17, 18, 19, 20. let us read the words. Because thou sayest I am rich, and increased in goods, and have need of nothing, and
knowest not that thou art poor, miserable, blind, and naked: I counsel thee that thou buy of me gold tryed in the fire that thou mayest be rich, and white rayment that thou mayest be clothed, that the shame of thy nakednesse do not appear; and anoint thine eyes with eye-salve that thou mayest see. As ma∣ny as I love I rebuke and chasten, be zealous therefore and a∣mend. Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man heare my voice, and open the door, I will come in and sup with him. From the words these Corollaries may be deduced. First, not onely the Church of Laodicea, but also all men else are spiritually dead and miserable, if we look upon them as considered in the state of nature. Secondly, men by their natural ability do not discern the miserie of that condition. Thirdly, such as Christ doth intend to bring to salvation he will begin with them in the opening of the eye of their understanding to see that in them∣selves they are poor, miserable, blind and naked. Fourthly, by the conviction of his Spirit he will shew them that he hath a supply for all their wants: for their blindnesse he hath eye-salve, for their nakednesse he hath white raiment, for their poverty he hath gold tried in the fire, and for all their wants he hath a pro∣portionable supply. Fifthly, the Lord Christ at sundry intervals of time doth stand at the door & shew these things to the hearts of the sons men: if therefore they see them, receive them, and in the sense of their own emptinesse go to him for all, they shall have more large and full communications of himself, he will come in and sup with them. This is the natural sense of the text, and what is here to set up the ability of man: The whole scope of the place is rather to pluck down his abilities that the Lord Christ may be all in all. But in case you stand upon these words, if any man hear my voice, and open the doore, we grant that in the matter of salvation man is a free agent; when God sends the Spirit into his heart to reprove him of sinne; he is then able to judge himself, when the Lord also discovers the love of Christ to the heart, by the teachings of the Word without, and the Spirit within, he is then able to beleeve. Fur∣ther, when God giveth a Christ-like disposition, he is then able to shew son-like affections towards God, and make expression that the Law is written in his heart: In a word, he hath power
so farre to open the doore as he hath ability from Christ, he cannot go one step further. And therefore when the Spirit stands at the doore and knocks, to speak properly, there is no natural ability in us, all ability is from grace; we must look to Christ onely, and the more we look to him in the sense of our own weaknesse, the more we shall have. All that may truely be gathered from this Scripture is, that a man is a free agent in the work of his salvation, but the ability is onely from Christ and not from us. Now we will consider the force of your third Reason. Reas. 3. If God, say you, giveth men actions of obedience, then were he to be obeyed by men no otherwise then the winds and seas o∣bey him. In this case there can be no talent, no neglect of duty on mans part, no more then there is in the axe or saw in dividing of a piece of timber. Answer. This argument I confesse is of force against them who give all to the Spirit, that they make man himself meerly passive, as a stupid block. I am against them as well as you. But you do not onely strike at these, but against them also who are for the Lords free election, and the special communication of his own grace infallibly to bring his people to salvation. And thereup∣on, say you, such an obedience may thus be compared, as if God should come and put a purse of gold into the hand of men and force it upon them, and call that their obedience; and to many other men give them not a penny-worth, and demand some of them, and because it was not there dispose of their persons to everlasting ruine, page 53. Here you endeavour to misre∣present the doctrine of the Lords free election, and make it o∣dious to your own ends. But we will make it clear that mans obedience may well consist with the doctrine of election, and his disobedience also may consist with the doctrine of non-ele∣ction.☞ For the first, let us consider the meaning of that place, I will make an everlasting covenant with them, I will never turne away from them to do them good, I will put my feare into their hearts, and they shall never depart from me, Jer. 32.40.
That which is here spoken must needs be a promise to the elect, because it is expressely said, I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, I will never turne away from them. These words do note the communication of an infallible grace, but yet not so as any kind of way to diminish and empaire the endeavour of man: for this is not wrought immediately by the Spirit alone, but mediately by the Spirit upon the heart of man. And therefore these words are immediately added, I will put my fear into their heart, and they shall never depart from me. Because the Lord had an intent to keep them from back-sliding, de did resolve to infuse a son-like fear into their hearts to avoid all spiritual dangers, and to keep themselves from falling. And so we may see how the infallible administration of the grace may stand with the free act and endeavour of man. But let us go to another Scripture. I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and will give you a heart of flesh, I will put my Spirit within you, and will cause you to walke in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do them. Then shall ye remember your own evil wayes, and your doings that were not good, and shall loath your selves in your own sight for your iniquities, and for your abominations, Ezek. 36.25, 26, 27. Here in these words also there is a promise to the Lords peculi∣ar people, that he will bestow his special grace upon them; in these words, a new heart will I give them, and they shall keep my commandments; I will wash them with cleane water. Secondly, here is their particular act, by the power of grace received, they shall freely walk in the Lords statutes when he shall give them a new heart; they shall loath their abomina∣tions when he shall wash them with cleane water. The more subtile sort of Arminians in several Treatises do seeme to a∣scribe much to grace, onely they make the point of the question to stand in the modus rei, or the manner of the grace, that God doth not so infallibly work upon the heart ut eventus non possit non sequi, that the event cannot chuse but follow. This is the stumbling stone and the rock of offence that they stumble at. Now let us consider what is alledge in their Apology to the forementioned Scripture, First, say they, this promise is pe∣culiar
to the last times, therefore it cannot be applied to the conversion of the elect, which is one and the same in all times. Answ. Though the promise is specially to be applied to the call to the Jewes, yet it doth strongly inforce the point. For the question being onely de modo rei, concerning the manner of the thing this Scripture plainly sheweth the certainty and in∣fallibility of such a grace, by and thorough which the Jewes shall be brought home in the last dayes. If we look to the di∣spersion of that Nation over all Countreyes of the world, we may conceive it a thing impossible to natural reason for them to be gathered together, yet God hath promised to gather them into one body, and that David shall be their King in the latter dayes. Even so, if we look to the enmity and perversenesse of a people against the Gospel of Christ, there is no Nation un∣der the whole heaven for these many hundred years that hath been such desperate adversaries as they have been. There are neither English, nor Spanish, nor French, nor Italian, no not Turks nor Tartars that are greater haters of the Gospel then this people have been, and yet are: Yet notwithstanding all this antipathy they shall be called, and thorough the call they shall be infallibly brought home in the latter times. Though according to natural reason this may seeme very improbable, God will certainly performe his promise, and no obstacle or hindrance shall be able to obstruct the work. From hence then it is clear, if we go to the modus rei, or the manner of the thing, we may easily collect that the way of God in working the con∣version of his people may be after a certain and infallible manner. Secondly, they argue, If God will do all by his power, why are men commanded to make themselves a new heart and a new spirit? This were irrational to do on mans part, see∣ing God hath already decreed and promised to do the work himself.☞ Answ. Though God doth resolve certainly to bring a thing to passe in his decrees and purposes, though he doth promise also that it shall be certainly done, yet this doth not hinder the endeavour of man, seeing it is his manner to bring things about by mans endeavor as the chief mean or instru∣ment. As for example, when Saint Paul and his company were
in danger of shipwrack, the Lord did tell him by night in a vi∣sion, that there should not be the losse of any mans life, but of the ship onely, Acts 27.22. Here was a certaine promise, and thereupon the Apostle did certainly conclude that they should all come safe to land. You will say then, did not the certainty of the promise, especially seeing God would performe it by power, hinder their endeavour? No: For when they came in∣to a place where two seas did meet, and the ship did stick fast in the sand, every man did shift for his own life, some by swim∣ming, and some upon broken pieces of the ship, God had pro∣mised that there should not be the losse of any mans life,☜ and this he did effect by making every one of them careful to pre∣serve his own life. So in the case of those men which God doth intend to bring to eternal salvation, he will first or last, sooner or later, and that by his own power make them careful of their own salvation. As in the words of the text, he first pro∣mised to give a new heart, that is, the spirit of love into the heart, and when this is done, then they shall keep his command∣ments. So then it is cleare that the infallibility of the decree of election, and the certainty of the promise of God do not make void the free obedience of that people which he doth in∣tend to bring to salvation. But thirdly, they object, Though he doth give a new heart, it is not absolutely necessary that he should give it cum effectu, with the effect. He may give it with great efficacie, yet ne∣verthelesse the grace may be resisted by the malignity of the will of man. Answ. It is confessed that God may give grace, and men may resist, and by resisting may lose the grace that is offered. But the question is, whether the new heart or the new spirit may finally be resisted, ye or no? If any man beleeve that it may, let him answer the words of that promise, Jer. 31.31, 32. Behold the dayes come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, not according to the Covenant which I made with their fathers when I tooke them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt, which Covenant they brake. But this is the Covenant that I will make after those dayes, saith the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. In the present case
then, the writing of the Law in the heart must be meant only of an effectual inscription; if this be not so, where will be the dif∣ference betwixt the old & the new Covenant, betwixt the Co∣venant that God made with the people when he brought them out of the Land of Egypt, and the Covenant that he will make in the latter days? For the covenant that he made with them at their coming out of Egypt they brake, but the new Covenant shall not be broken: when the Lord shal write his Law in their hearts, then all shall know him from the greatest to the least. Therefore, if we go to the manner of the thing, the work of conversion may be wrought with efficacie and infallibility on Gods part, and yet there be no detriment or dammage to mans obedience. Master Everard, I have stayed the longer upon this point, to to shew you the inequality of your similitude, as though God did deale with his elect in forcing a purse of gold upon them, and then call that their obedience. We say the contrary, God may infallibly work upon the hearts of his people, and by his necessary and infallible workings bring them on to a free and a chearful obedience. Their free endeavour must needs stand with a subordination under his decrees and workings. Now let us go to the harder case of the Non-elect; and here the decree of God, and the certainty thereof doth not a∣ny way free men from being the children of disobedience. Let us take a view of that Scripture, What if God willing to shew his wrath, and to make his power known, endured with much long-suffering vessels of wrath fitted to destruction? Rom. 9.22. From hence it is cleare that there are none destroyed but such as are prepared and fitted for destruction; and for the preparation the Lord in the ordinary way doth endure men first with much long-suffering. For the clearing of this, let us consider that passage of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 3.19, 20. By which spirit also he went and preached to those spirits that are in prison, which sometimes were disobedient when once the long∣suffering of God waited in the dayes of Noah. Therefore let the decree of non-election be what it will be in the purpose of God, yet we are sure in the ordinary way it is not put in execu∣tion,☞ but the Lord doth endure men first with much long-suffer∣ing. We may proceed with this gradation, None are destroy∣ed
but those that are made fit for destruction: None are made fit for destruction but such as he hath endured with much pa∣tience; and there is none that he hath endured with much pa∣tience, but he hath striven with them from time to time with convictions of his Spirit, and they have shewed many acts of disobedience against such inward motions and workings. There∣fore the decree of non-election, (as it is to be put in execution) may well stand and consist with the disobedience of man: so that he himself shall be the cause of his own condemnation. If this be so, I know no just cause you have to complaine; for say you, I wonder how they can call it our duty, while they af∣firme that God never intended that we should do that work, and so never furnished us to that purpose, page. 55. If you ap∣ply these things to us and our doctrine, (as it is probable you do,) then I must tell you that you heap up calumnies; we do not maintaine any such position, that the Lord doth not surnish the non-elect with abilities; there is none of them all but he hath more ability then he useth. And for the temporary beleever, we hold that he hath very great qualifications, and is able to go very sarre. Here onely lies the point of the difference, that the Lord doth not give him such abilities as will infallibly carry him on unto salvation. This is his peculiar dealing with the elect, as may be proved from divers Scriptures.☜ But here perhaps will lie a great question between the grace administred to the elect, and to the non-elect, where doth the way part, and how shall we distinguish them? In this case we may not look so nicely to every punctilio, there is a day appointed in which God will judge the world, yet for the particular time no man can tell when it shall be, that all may be prepared for it. So in the pre∣sent case, it is confessed by all serious and sober-minded men, that God doth administer his grace to bring the sonnes of men to salvation, yet for the manner, why he should administer it to some this way, and to others that way; why he should continue it to some notwithstanding all resistings, and on the contrary take it from others when they have resisted such a certaine time. For these various & several ways of administration, I think they are of set purpose kept secret in the will of God that men should work out their salvation with fear and trembling, that
they should strive to enter in at the strait gate, that they should not neglect the day of their visitation. We now come to your fourth reason. Reas. 4. If God, say you, were so the giver of actions that our not performing of actions were for want of his gift, then our not acting could not be transgression, pag. 56. Answer. Let them consider this to whom it doth belong, it is none of our doctrine: but you are as faulty in the other extreame, when you say that God requireth action of none but those whom he hath furnished with present abilities. This (if my judgment be any thing) is the grand fallacie that hath not onely imposed upon you, but also upon many others of your way. But seeing you will needs have it that God calleth men to act according to present abilities, I pray you tell me what present ability had Moses to bring Israel out of Egypt? what ships had he prepared to transport them over the red sea? shew me also what provision he had laid up in store for fourty years march thorough the wildernesse? what councel of warre had he to judge when it was fit for the campt to move. Nay thorough the whole story of the Bible make it appear what abilities any of the Saints had,☞ if you speak of their own abilities to do the greatest works of faith. In these cases I think rather that Gods Word of command is given in mutual relation and correspon∣dencie to his Word of promise, and not to abilities which any man hath in present possession. If we attentively consider the meaning of the Scriptures we shall finde when the Spies return∣ed from searching the Land of Canaan, the great sinne of the people of Israel was, that they measured all by present abilities. Because the sonnes of Anach were there, they did conclude it was a thing impossible to bring that Land into subjection, they never considered that it was the Land of promise, and that the Lord himself would do all by his own power, Num. 13.27, 28. Josh. 1.2, 3. Psal. 44.1, 2, 3. And for that speech of yours, that Christ never blamed the unprofitable servant for want of abilities; Though he did not blame him for that, yet he did condemne him for not putting his money to the exchanger. In
this case though he had no ability of his own, yet he might have it from another, if he had looked after the grace and the power of God. And further, whereas you say that Christ calls for action of them onely whom he hath already furnished; this is not so, he calleth for action of those whom he either hath furnished, or will furnish. The Martyrs have been called forth to great sufferings in times of persecution, yet the whole stock of abilities was not put into their hands at one time: they did beleeve what God did call them to, he would make them able to bear. And that which they had not for the present, they did beleeve they should have, seeing he was faithful that had promised. As for that instance which you aledge, that Jethro, Moses his father in Law did blame him for doing of that which he was not able to do. Consider the case aright, Jethro did question whether the thing which Moses did, was commanded of God or no, and therefore he did debate the matter with him, why he did undertake a businesse beyond his strength. But it is not so in the matter that concernes our salvation; we are to do that which is commanded of God, and to look to him for supply of Spirit for the performance of his own work. But a∣gainst this you let fall a desperate speech; Such a neglect of action (say you) will never deserve to be called sinne, because it is a forced waiting and staying the Lords leasure. But where men are entituled offendors for not putting forth to action, is not because they stayed for Gods acting, but rather God for a long time waited for them, pag. 57. I answer, men are entitu∣led offendors both wayes; first, because they come not in to God when he calls them. Secondly, when they do not waite upon him for the performance of the promise. The Israelites in the Wildernesse may be an example; they sinned in this, in that they came not in to God when he waited for them; and it is as true also that they sinned in not putting forth to action when they had so many promises of the presence and assistance of God to go along with them. The Psalmist did assigne this as the chief cause of their grand rebellio, they alwayes erred in their hearts, because they knew not his wayes. They would have all in present possession, and God would have them also to live by faith in the promise.
Reas. 5. We must (say you) take heed of harbouring such a doctrine, which in the very nature of it breedeth such conceits, that God is a respecter of persons, if he should give some men meanes to act and actions, and not give them unto all whom he bath com∣manded to act, page 60. Answ. In this I do agree with you, that they do involve themselves in many difficulties whosoever they be that teach that obedient actions are so the gift of God, that man is meerly passive with∣out life or motion. There are more then too many in these dayes that are of this belief, and there are a multitude of ab∣furdities which follow that doctrine. But whereas you admo∣nish us of harbouring such a tenent as in the very nature of it breedeth such conceits that God is a respecter of persons; this imputation, as of old, so now of late, in your apprehension doth seeme to lie heavie upon them that maintaine the doctrine of Gods free election. But in this case the Apostle himself doth make a plaine and an expresse answer, he hath mercy on whom he will have mercy, and he hath compassion on whom he will have compassion, Rom. 9.11, 12, 13. The sense of the place is briefly this, If God chuse Jacob, it is an act of his meere mer∣cy, he is not bound to it by any rule of distributive justice: and if he hate Esan, that is, if he do not love him with that pecu∣liar love infallibly to bring him to salvation, he hath no obliga∣tion upon him, he may do with his own as he pleaseth. His pur∣pose is in the salvation of the elect to magnifie the riches of his grace, as in the condemnation of the non-elect to set forth the glory of his justice. But let us more attentively consider the words of the Apostle, What if God, willing to shew his wrath, and to make his power known, endured with much long-suffering vessels of wrath fitted for destruction, Rom. 9.23. Camero up∣pon the place hath this good observation: Which difference, saith he, the Apostle hath prudently noted, for when be doth discourse concerning them whom God hath called, he doth use these words, whom he hath before prepared to glory, to wit, that he may here decipher the effectual work of God. But when he doth speak of them whom he doth not call, he doth not say
that they are such vessels which God hath before prepared, but simply vessels prepared and fitted, according to that saying, thy destruction is of thy selfe O Israel. Upon these grounds we do conclude, in matter of election and non-election there can be no respect of persons with God: for the elect are saved meerly by grace, and the non-elect are damned and cast away justly for their sins; nay, for the slighting, neglecting, and most wilfull abusing of the patience and long-suffering of God, and the voluntary hardning themselves in sin. Reas. 6. Further you argue, If God were simply the worker of obedi∣ent actions in men, or for men, as be doth with other crea∣tures, then there were no use for repentance: the ground of that work were wholly prevented. For should they repent because God hath not acted, it were all one as to repent because God hath made no more worlds, pag. 60. Answ. This argument of yours, if it were rightly applied, would be of good moment against that kind of men who are for enthu∣siasmes. For if it be a good reason to affirme that there are no more worlds in being because God hath made no more; the reason must be one and the same, according to their doctrine, such and such a man doth not repent because God did not work repentance in him as an inanimate instrument. For our parts we plainly affirme, that though God doth work repentance in men, he doth it congruenter, as in rational and intellectual crea∣tures. For we are to suppose that men have principles to act them, and therefore when the Lord doth enable them to re∣pent, they have power to turne from their evil way. In this case as repentance is Gods gift, so it is mans act; man doth freely re∣pent by the power of grace received; Many also voluntarily do harden their own hearts in neglecting of that grace wch should bring them to repentance. From all which we do conclude, that obedient actions do belong to men as the power, ability and grace is wholly from God. We will go on, & consider the Scriptures which you do pervert to a contrary sense. To begin therefore with that place of the Apostle, work out your salvation with fear and trembling, for
it is God that worketh in you the will and the deed. Here say you, If God doth work the will and the deed, what is here left for man to do?☞ Answ. Such a good proficient you are in your way of wrangling against the Priests (as you call them) that now at last you are come to except against the words of the Apostle. Doth he not say in plaine and significant terms, that the Lord doth work in us the will and the deed? and doth he not upon this ground exhort men to work out their salvati∣on with fear and trembling? But that we may clear the cohe∣rence and connexion of the text, we will note three things in special. First, we are to distinguish betwixt Gods dealing in the work of creation, and his dealing in the working of mans sal∣vation. For his dealing in the work of creation, he made man in a moment of time; but for the work of salvation, he doth carry it on step by step. Againe, in the work of creation the Lord did make man without any act of his own, he did not know when he was in making: but it is otherwise in the act of salvation, this work is carried on by mens own acts, and by the concurrence of their own endeavour. And hereupon though the Apostle doth affirme that God doth work the will and the deed, yet it is mens duty also to work out their own salvation. Secondly, we are to note that the act of man in working out his own salvation must be by a supernatural power; he may govern families, he may build Cities, he may learn arts and sciences without the communication of any special grace from God: but he cannot do so in the working out of his own salvation; God must first work the will and the deed, and then man will be able to work out his salvation, and not till then. Thirdly; these words are added, with fear and trembling, to shew that man must do it humbly, carefully, and with dependance upon the grace of God, seeing he hath not the power of inspiration in his own hand. But more fully to set forth the meaning of the Apostle, we will cite another Scripture which is parallel to this. These are the words of the Lord to the children of Isra∣el in the wildernesse, Behold I send mine Angel before thee to keep thee in the way to bring thee into the place which I have prepared. Beware of him, provoke him not, for he will not par∣don your transgressions, for my name is in him. But if thou
shalt indeed obey his voice, and do all that I speak, then I will be an enemy unto thine enemies, and an adversary to thine adversaries, for my Angel shall go before thee and bring thee unto the Amorites, the Hittites and the Perizites, and I will cut them off. Exod. 23.21, 22, 23. Here, if you diligently ob∣serve the text, do ly first a promise, secondly a Precept. For the promise the Lord doth tell them, That he will send his Angel before them as a Convoy, to guide them in the way, and to plant them in the land of Canaan. And for the way, because they were to be in the Wildernesse fourty years, without fields, without clothing, without means to sustain the life of man, therefore they should be more immediately under the custody and tuition of the Angel. This Angel must needs be Christ, he was the pillar of cloud that went before them by day, and he was the pillar of fire that was their leader by night, he fed them with Manna, and supplied their want with water out of the rock. To this the Apostle seemeth to allude, they did all eat the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink, for they drank of that rock which followed them, and that rock was Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4, 5. Further, after the fourty years pilgrimage were ended the Lord doth promise that their Convoy should not leave them, but that he should go before them and drive out the Canaanites, because it was not in their own power to bring the land into subjection. This is the Lords promise, and therefore in sense and substance the Angel must do the whole work. Secondly, let us consider what is the duty of the people, and that is contained in these words, Beware of him, obey his voice, provoke him not, &c. Because they did wholly depend upon him for all, therefore they should be careful to observe him and to follow him in his leadings. The force of the reason is the same in the words of the text, work out your salvation with fear and trembling, because God works in you the will and the deed; because his Spirit is all in all the cause of mans salvation to carry on the work; because his Spirit doth convince, reprove, teach, com∣fort, seal, and guide the Saints, therefore they should walk tenderly and carefully toward him; The Apostle saith, grieve not the Spirit of grace by which ye are sealed unto the day of Re∣demption, Ephes. 4.30. In case they do with him as disobedient
children do with their parents, when they give them good coun∣sel, the Spirit will neither comfort nor seal them any more, but will leave them to a state of darknesse and discomfort. And this is the true meaning of the text. We may hereby understand how God doth carry on the whole work of salvation, and this doth no way impair or diminish the endeavour of man. In the close of all you tell us, Let us say with the Apostle, in our hearts, that we desire to strive with dayly labourings, according to the mighty workings whereby he worketh in us, Col. 1.29. And do not say any more it is God that worketh our actions, but be thank∣ful to him that giveth us sufficient means, Page 63. You have heard before that the Lord doth work in us the will and the deed, and therefore the spirituality of the action is wholly from God, though we are free workers by the help of his grace. But let us take your words in the fairest construction; If you will stand firmly to this principle, that God gives sufficient means by a power working in us, you need not fly to the purity of nature, to natural free-will, and to such like beggerly rudiments to salve the endevour of man. In this place you seem to speak for grace, when elsewhere through your whole treatise you drive the bar∣gain altogether for the natural abilities of the will. But seeing you have offered this text to our consideration, we will endea∣vour to draw from it the concord betwixt the grace of God, and the endeavour of man. The words are these, Whereunto I also labour, striving according to his working which worketh in me migh∣tily. The Apostle speaketh of the work of the Ministery, whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all wis∣dome that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus, where∣unto I labour according to the mighty workings that he worketh in us. Here it is plain that the Apostle did work in teaching and in∣structing every one, and it was not so much his work as the work of the Spirit in him and by him. When he was at Athens his Spirit was stirred up in him, when he saw the City wholly gi∣ven to Idolatry. Why are not the like excitations of spirit in men in there dayes who travell to Constantinople, to Ligorn, to Rome, seeing hose people are wholly given either to Mahume∣tan superstition, or Popish Idolatry? The reason is manifest, the
same spirit doth not work so mightily in the hearts of men as it did sometime in the heart of Paul; because he was filled with the Spirit he did shew abundant sympathy and bowells of affection towards all the lost sonnes of men. But to come to instances in these last times, when the Gospel was plucked down, and the Mass was set up in Queen Maries dayes, the Martyr being in a journey, declared his intention, that he would preach in his charg the next Lords day; and when he that journeyed with him, told him, then he would certainly be cast into prison; his answer was, I am in prison, till I am in prison. He was bound in his spi∣rit to preach the Gospel to the soules which he had taken charg of; he could have no peace otherwise then in the discharge of his duty. He did labour freely, yet so as his labour was by the inward moving of the Spirit. But of all other places that passage of our Saviour is most used by the Enthusiasts, Ye shall be brought before Kings and Princes for my sake, but when they shall deliver you up, take no thought how or what you shall speak, for it shall be given to you in that houre what you shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father that speaketh in you, Mat. 10.18, 19, 20. Though this promise is made to the Martyrs and Con∣fessors in times of persecution, yet it is not made to them in that manner as to extinguish and drown all endeavour of their own; as though God would do all, and they should be discharged of their duty. The promise is only made to such as should engage themselves for Christ, and should humbly in the use of the means depend upon him for the supply of his Spirit. And thus we see that the Spirit does all, and yet in the most spiritual actions man himself is a free-worker. It shall be given you in that houre what you shall speak. This expression, what you shall speak, sheweth plainly that the Saints are free Agents. Let us now consider that place, Ephes. 2.8, 9. For by grace ye are saved through faith, not of your selves, it is the gift of God.☜ Here you yield that salvation as purchased by Christ, is the gift of God, but you will not have faith it self to be the gift of God: you grant one part of the text to deny another. If you consider the words, you shall finde that not onely salvation, but also faith it self is Gods free gift. If this be not so, how could the Ephe∣sians come to beleeve? The Apostle saith, that they were dead in
trespasses and sinnes, they walked according to the course of the world, they fulfilled the lusts of the flesh and of the mind. Therefore they could not come to beleeve by any natural ability, but meerly by the quickning work of the Spirit. Further, this expression is added ver. 10. We are his work manship created of God unto good works. By nature they were dead in trespasses and sinnes, and if that now they could perform any spiritual act they were made able to do this by the new creation or workmanship of God. Further, if faith be not the Lords gift, the believing Ephesians must be supposed to have it from their own ability. If this be so, how shall we agree with the scope of the Apostle? who saith in expresse termes, You are saved by grace through faith, not of your selves, it is the gift of God, not of works, lest any man should boast. Truly Sir, if your faith be not Gods gift, it will be of your self, and you will have cause of boasting, as though you did make your self to differ from other men, and what is this else but to go point blanck against the scope of the Scripture? And though I do plead this truth against you, in affirming faith to be the gift of God, yet I say also it is the act of man. God gives the grace, and man beleeves. These two are not so parted asunder, but that they may be joyned toge∣ther. For your third Scripture, concerning the striving for the faith given to the Saints which S. Jude speaks of, this is not meant of the grace or habit of faith in the heart, but of the doctrine of faith onely: That men should strive to preserve the Gospel in its purity and integrity against the heresies of the times. But you go further to shew the absurdities that will follow upon the holding of that position, that obedient actions are the gift of God you say, If God should give the actions as sure as he giveth means to act, then a mans conscience might and would as well ac∣cuse him for want of means to act, as for want of action. But I never heard (say you) that any mans conscience accused him for want of means to performe his actions, but because be made not use of the means. In this passage of yours as ther eare some things which I allow as true and sound: so there are others which I do reject as false and unsound, For, as I have said before, they who deny a man to be a free Agent, I cannot see by the tenor
of their doctrine how their conscience can accuse them for non∣performance of action; seeing they hold that both the act & the means to act are onely from God, and man is meerly passive. So far you & I are agreed, but whereas you oppose the carrying on of the work of salvation by the power & the grace of God, in this you contradict the Scriptures, and by name that place of the A∣postle We are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. That the Saints do persevere, it is mainly from the power of God who carries on the work: But how? not without their own endeavour. Ye are kept by the power of God through faith. Men must apply the promise of God, and that will en∣gage his power to carry them on to salvation. And yet further, God speaketh of his elect, I will put my Spirit in them, that they shall keep my Commandments and do them. But most plainly in that place, 2 Thes. 2.13. We are bound to give God thanks for you brethren, that he hath chosen you from the beginning to salva∣tion, thorough the sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth. In the Words going before, he doth speak of the great Apostacy that should be in all Anti-Christian times; that because men did not receive the truth in the love of it that they might he saved, ther∣fore God should deliver them over to strong delusions to be∣lieve lies. By way of opposition to these Apostates, the Apostle comforts the beleeving Thessalonians with the infallibility and certainty of their salvation. But how would he bring them to salvation? thorough the sanctification of the Spirit, and the belief of the truth. These two means he doth name, to shew that God will bring none to salvation as the end, but he will first justify and sanctifie them in the use of the means. Though he will car∣ry on the work by his own power infallibly and certainly in the hearts of his people, yet their act endeavour and obedience shall go along with the working of his grace. Many such like places might be brought to shew that the infallible workings of God may stand with the endeavours of his own people. Secondly, whereas you affirme That you never heard any mans conscience ac∣cuse him for want of means, but for want of using the means: Oh Sir, in what corner of the world were you brought up, that the fame of this never came to your eares! I think it is a truth well known in the Church of God, that mens consciences do accuse
them not onely because they made no use of the means, but also because thorough their own default the means are not administred to them, or that they are taken from them. If it had been your lot to visit men in trouble of conscience, in agonies and gripes upon their sick-beds, there you should have heard such words as these, again and a∣gain repeated, Had I sought God, had I prayed in faith of his pro∣mise, had I walked humbly with him, had I fruitfully used the grace administred to me as a good and profitable Steward, I had ne∣ver wanted the means to subdue the power and rage of such and such corruptions. It is meerely from mine own defect that there is such a strangenesse betwixt the Lord and me. These are the or∣dinary complaints of men who neglect the day of their salva∣tion, and you tell us you never heard any mans conscience ac∣cuse him for the want of the means: when the talent was taken from the unprofitable servant he was deprived of the means: but was not that deprivation through his own fault? but you further add, If conscience be so well informed, that it must and wil bear wit∣ness, then of whom shal it bear witnesse? against God? No marvail that there be so many corrupt sayings, if God had given me abilities, pow∣ers and actions, then I would have done it. Nay do not many say, I must be contented to stay Gods time? Hath God commanded you be∣fore his time? Nay do not you discharge your self of duties in saying it is not his time? page 72. Such a dextrous faculty you have in cavilling against the main truths of Christianity. But when I read this and such like passages thorough your whole Trea∣tise, I cannot but compare the state of the Church in these times to the ship that carried Saint Paul to Rome, the forepart of it stuck in the sand, and the hinder part of it was broken with the waves. Into such desperate extreams are we now fallen. For if we speak of actions of obedience, if the power be not placed chiefly in the will of man, you and the whole nation of the Free-willers do tell us that we be discharged from duty, seeing we are cast upon a necessity of waiting when the matter is not in our own hand. On the other side there is sprung up a genera∣tion of fanatical men which are so opposite to the freedome of will, that they think the Spirit must do all: they will not give thanks at meat, nor pray in their families, nor hear the Word, nor perform any other spiritual duty, untill they have a motion
of the Spirit. Indeed the Waiters in this sense do come to your pitch, they think themselves to be discharged from duty till the coming of the Spirit. But is there no middle between these des∣perate extreames? Is there no discharge of duty in obedience to the Commands of God? There is no man that lives in the Kingdome of grace, but in some one thing or other he must be contented to stay the Lords time: what then, shall we say be∣cause he is necessitated to wait, he is therefore discharged of all duty? Not so: he is still to act in a lower spheare, and to wait for further communications as it shall please the Lord to impart them. These are the words of the Apostle, let us therefore as ma∣ny as be perfect, be thus minded; and if in any thing you be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you. Neverthelesse where∣unto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, Phil. 3.15, 16. The meaning of the place is this; every man should walk according to his present attainments and abilities,☜ and in walking, doing and discharging his duty wait upon God for fur∣ther discoveries. A natural man is furthest off from God: what then? is he absolutely discharged from duty? Is he not to come to Church, to hear the Gospel, and to wait upon the means? peradventure God may give him repentance to con∣vince him of the evil of his ways. Though it is not in his own power to repent, yet thereby he is not acquitted and discharged from all performance of duty. And so in sundry cases, men are to discharge their duty according to present abilities, they are to walk in those paths that he hath appointed, and to wait up∣on him for the supply of spirit. It is the voice of the Church in her great tribulation, I will look unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of my salvation, Mic 7.7. Now tell me I pray you, seeing the Church was compelled to stay Gods time, to wait as it were on a Watch Tower (for so the word in the Original doth signifie) will you lay that in this whole interval she is discharged from all duty? This is not so; she did discharge her duty in praying, see∣king and looking to God onely, and in the performance of all these she waited upon him for comfort; she had none else in all the world, no father, no brother, no friend, no wisedome of the flesh, no other refuge but God onely. When she had darknesse and no light, she had a firme perswasion that at last he
would plead her cause, execute judgment for her, that he would bring her forth to light, and she should see his righteousnesse. But you go on, do not other men say of God, that he so pitied the world, seeing their hard cold frozen hearts, therefore of his own goodnesse did he provide fewel enough to warm and melt them, but when that is done, with-holds the right hand of his power from putting the few∣el into a flaming fire to succour them in their distresse, and then comes to them, and saith be warmed and comforted? likening God to that hard hearted man spoken of Jam. 2.15, 16. And more such like passages you have page 72. Who these other men are whom you here intend I cannot certainly tell; if you mean the friends and followers of this Church from whom you have de∣parted, I must tell you, you do charge us with that which we do not maintain; It is not the result of our doctrine, to re∣semble God to that hard hearted man, Who bids them be warmed, and gives them not wherewithall? We say there are promises to give faith, as well as to faith given; to give love, as well as to love given; to put fear into the heart, as well as to fear which is put into the heart. There are sundry promises given to that end, that men may go chearfully about the performance of action, that doing their duties they may feel the power and presence of the Spirit to go along with them. Therefore we do not say that God keeps the fewel in his own hand, and that men are frozen for want of heat. These are your calumnies, but not our doctrine. But to aggravate the matter, you further adde, The Physician openeth the mouth of one in a hundred, and poureth it in by force, as for all the rest they are not alotted any share or part therein, and yet shall suffer deeply for not taking it, it being prof∣fered, but not given them. page 73. How hard a thing is it for you to leave your old custome of corrupting our sayings before you do confute them? We hold that there is a peculiar number which God hath chosen from the beginning to salvation; these in time he effectually calleth, justifieth and sanctifieth; but we never teach that he poureth his grace into them by force. A∣gain, for others, we hold there is a grace given to them: nay, temporary believers have very great degrees of grace which they fall from by their own desault. It is an Impudent calumny then to affirme of us that we should say there is no share or part
alotted to them; that grace is proffered, and not given. For my part I do believe in the ordinary way God gives more abili∣ties to men by the convictions of his Spirit then they do profi∣tably use. All the difficulty of the point will come to this issue, touching the peculiarity of this grace which carries some infal∣libly and certainly to salvation, when others are left for their resisting of the Spirit. If then you list to go further, and ask after the reason why God doth deal so unequally with men; here the Scriptures doe confine you to the Lords good plea∣sure. This I am sure they would not do if a substantial reason otherwise might be given from any thing in man himself. Why else should our Saviour say, Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent and hast revealed them unto babes; even so, O Fa∣ther, because it pleaseth thee. And yet further,☜ they who do with judgment maintain the doctrine of election, do not think that this mystery is to be propounded to all men, and at all times, as some unadvised and inconsiderate men have done. To let passe all that may be said, if you will go to the Doctrine of the Church of England in the seventeeth Article, you shall finde that the main sense and import of the Article is this, that such persons onely should have the consideration of their e∣lection in Christ propounded to them, who feel in themselves the Spirit mortifying the works of the flesh. As for curious and carnal persons it is more proper for them to look to the threats of God that they may be humbled; and for others also when they come to be humbled, it is not for them presently and imme∣diately to meddle with election, but with Gods promises in such wise only as they are generally set forth to them in holy Scriptures, and that will of God they are to follow which he hath expressely declared and revealed in his own Word. This is the substance of the Doctrine of our Church concerning e∣lection, and how by several stages and degrees we are to come to the assurance thereof. We will adde a few words more to the clearing of the point, that we may see how the endeavour of man doth runne paralel with the grace of God and doth work under the grace. To this end let us distinguish the two states of man; his state before conversion, and his state after. For the state of man before
conversion,☞ though of himself he cannot think a good thought, yet by and thorough the convictions of the Spilt he may be helped to judge himself and to see the misery of his lost condi∣tion. Many solid and judicious Writers do acknowledge ante∣cedaneous works before conversion. Secondly, after conver∣sion, when a man is brought so farre as to apprehend the pro∣mise, and hath a real work wrought upon his heart in feeling the love of Christ to the lost sonnes of men: when he is come so farre the work is not at an end, for these two reasons. First, there are higher degrees of grace which a Christian is to follow after: for so saith the Apostle, not as though I had al∣ready attained, either were already perfect, but I follow after to apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus. Brethren, I count not my self to have apprehended but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, I presse towards the mark, for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.13, 14 Here these particulars are observable. First, what was the goal that the Apostle did drive at, it was for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Secondly, with what affection did he follow after the mark of the price; he did forget the things that were behind, and did presse forward to the things that were before. As poor people in a dear year do presse forward, and reach over one anothers heads to receive a dole of meat or money. Thirdly, what was that which moved him to be so vehe∣ment in his pursuit, it was not from any natural instinct, but from the drawing of the Spirit of Christ, which did whet on his desires. I follow on to apprehend that for which I am ap∣prehended of Christ. Here is an excellent agreement betwixt the grace and the Spirit of Christ that did first apprehend Paul, and his endeavour that did follow on to apprehend. And thus we see from the beginning to the end, that the grace doth all, and the endeavour of man is never idle. I have been the more full in this Doctrine, because the Enthusiasts on the one side, and the Arminians on the other side lie in camp against the Church. On either side they have some colour of truth to usher in their damnable Positions, by and thorough which the simple are en∣snared. And as many subtill Merchants, when they have bad
corn to fell, put the best upon the top of the bag: even so do these seducers begin with very taking considerations, that by some preceding truths they may bring in their subsequent er∣rors. The Enthusiast will speak against a notional faith, and against idle speculations of Christ without power; and stand strongly upon it that there must be a real and an inward work wrought upon the heart, or else all is nothing: and so farre he goes fair. But this is not enough with him, he is not contented onely to condemne them that make an Idol of the means, but also he will sleight all means whatsoever; all reading of Scrip∣tures, all frequenting of Ordinances, all striving in prayer, all endeavour whatsoever with him are empty figures and bare ex∣ternals. Now you on the other side turn unto another extream, and in your way you have also the best corn upon the top of the bag. You stand strictly to maintain that a man is a free-worker in the matter of his salvation, otherwise exhortations and ad∣monitions would be of no moment; and so farre you go very right. But this will not satisfie you unlesse you may set up the natural ability of man, maintain free-will, and other such like Pelagian positions. For these reasons I have taken the more pains rightly to define and to state the truth betwixt the grace of God and the endeavour of man, to avoid the detestable er∣rors on both extreames. Now I will proceed to your next Chap∣ter. CHAP. X. Containing divers questions with their solutions. HERE in the beginning you raise two questions concerning the ability which Adam had before the fall; and then pro∣pound a third, whether the fall was decreed by the secret will of God? For the ability which Adam had before his fall, I do willingly acknowledge that men may raise intricate and thorny questions about this, though to small purpose. But touch∣ing this point I do desire to lay down some necessarie observations, because I will not stand upon every punctilio;
And then I will come to the solution of your chief questi∣on. First, for the true cause of the fall, we do affirme that our first parents being seduced by the temptation of Sathan, did vo∣luntarily and freely eate the forbidden fruit. Their own de∣fective will was the immediate cause of their fall. Secondly, God was pleased according to his wise and just Councel to per∣mit the fall, that thereby a doore might be opened to the sen∣ding of Christ for the more full declaration of the glory of his grace in the salvation of man as fallen. Thirdly, for the power that Adam bad to stand or fall, as on the one side we must ne∣cessarily say that he was made in a state very good and free from all sinne: so also it must needs be affirmed, that he was made in a mutable state, farre different from the state of the blessed Saints and Angels confirmed in grace, and farthest off from the immutability of the Creator himself. Fourthly, if the question be put, how farre did the Lord go in the fall of Adam? we must needs affirme that he created the first man in such a ho∣ly state that he might freely obey all his commands: only he did not sustain him with that special and infallible grace to pre∣serve him from falling. These foure observations, if they be rightly understood, will help to expedite and clear many hard questions that may be propounded concerning the abili∣ty of Adam before his fall. We come now to your chief question. Had not God appointed that Adam should fall by his se∣cret will, before by his revealed will he commanded him to stand? Here you endeavour in the beginning to shew that the reveal∣ed will of God before it was first communicated, was his secret will; and being once revealed, it loseth the title of a secret will to them to whom it is revealed. page 77. In this passage of yours there are some words of truth, though, after your manner, you make an ill use of them. I yield in the general, that the revealed will of God was sometimes his secret will before it was revealed. But the question in hand is this, when Adam knew his duty that he should not eat of the forbidden fruit, was not that part of the will of God concerning the permission of the fall, and sending
of the Son, part of the secret will of God? and whether by right ought it not to be secret so long as he was upon the triall or his obedience? for the clearing of the point we will speak somewhat more largely concerning the secret will of God. There is one part of his secret will absolutely secret, that never shall be known either in this life or in that which is to come. The Apostle speaking of the casting away of the Jewes, and their wonderful calling again, concludeth, O the depth of the riches, of the wisdome, and the knowledge of God! Rom. 11.33. There is then a part of the secret will of God, especially in the reasons of his decrees, which none either can or shall know. Secondly, there is a part of his secret will which though it shall be revealed in the world to come, yet it must be concealed in this life. Now are we the sonnes of God, but it is not yet manifest what we shall be, 1 Joh. 3.1, 2. Though the Saints know much of the mind of Christ, and feel his love in their hearts by the teaching and demonstration of the Spirit, yet the excellency of their future glory is hidden from them. Thirdly, there is a part of the secret will of God which though it be hidden from some, yet it is revealed to others, even in this life. The A∣postles did see those things which the Prophets and the righ∣teous men could never see. The Lord shewed Peter by what death he should glorifie God, but he did not shew this to other men, no not to John the beloved Disciple, Joh. 21.20, 21. Fourthly, to one and the same man that part of the will of God which was secret heretofore by the event or revelation may prove to be his revealed will; and so in the particular case of Adam, the permission of the fall and the promise of the sen∣ding of the Son were the concealed will of God for a season, and were afterward made known by the event. If this be grant∣ed, we have as much as we do desire. But you put the question, How God could decree by his secret will that Adam should fall before in his revealed will he commanded him to stand? As hard a case as you make it, I believe there is no man but will easily understand, that that which the Lord had decreed concerning the fall of A∣dam in his secret will from all eternity, must needs go before his temporal commands and injunctions. But that which offends you is the seeming contrariety of the two wills. You say,
is it a small thing that the righteousnesse of God should be questioned upon such low termes, as to imagine that when, in his revealed will he shall say, eat not, in his secret will he shall say, thou shalt eat? This opinion that renders God to have two wills, renders them divided in their nature when they are but differing in termes. For the exter∣nal will is not another will, but the same made manifest. page 79. That the will of God is one entire will in substance, we do affirm as well as you, yet we would have you to observe that one and the same will may be discriminated and distinguished by divers relations. As one and the same fire that hardens the clay may soften the wax: so one and the same will may be distinguished according to divers operations. Let us note the distinction be∣twixt Gods will of decree and his will of command. That such a distinction must be made between these two wills is clear and manifest from many Scriptures: Joseph said to his brethren, Gen. 45.7, 8. Ye sent me not hither, but God. His sending into Egypt was by Gods will of Decree, to save much people alive; yet none can say that Josephs brethren did the Lords will of command; they went against his cōmand, when they sold their brother as a bond∣slave. So it is expressely said of the sons of Eli, that they would not hearken unto the voice of their father, because the Lord would slay them, 1 Sam. 2.25. These disobedient children in not hearkning to the voice of their Father did fulfill the Lords will of Decree, who had a purpose to judge the house of Eli for their sinnes. But we cannot say that they did obey the Lords will of com∣mand, unlesse such a command may be produced that children ought not to obey their parents. So in the case of crucifying the Lord Christ, the Apostle speaketh, they did whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done. Herod, Pilate, and the Nation of the Jewes did perform the Lords will of Decree to crucifie Christ, yet we cannot say they did perform his will of command. These and many other examples may be brought to prove the necessity of such a distinction. And though the Arminians (Corvinus by name) do cavil at words and ex∣pressions, yet they cannot rationally deny the substance of the thing. And therefore to the point in hand we say, it is true in a sense that God did not will the fall of Adam, that is, he did not approve that sinne by his will of command; yet in a sense it
is as true, that by his will of decree he did permit it. As in the like case the Apostle saith, There must be heresies amongst you, that they which are approved may be made manifest. 1 Cor. 11.19. if there must be heresies, this is spoken in relation to the will of God, not in relation to his will of command, for then God would have given men a command to raise heresies and dam∣nable doctrines in his Church, which none will imagine. But there must be heresies, this is in relation to his will of Decree, to tolerate such things for the clearer tryal of those that are syn∣cere. So in the present case, God did will the fall of Adam, not by his will of command, for he gave him no command to eat of the forbidden fruit, but by his will of Decree he was pleased to permit the fall that it might be subservient and conducing to his more excellent end of sending the Son for the full declara∣tion of the glory of his grace; which otherwise would not have been so conspicuous if the first man had not fallen. So then, to gather up all into one sum, you may easily understand, if you will, how God in his will of command may say eat not, and yet in his secreet will permit him to eat. These two are not so put asunder, but they may well be joyned together. But still you take offence at the contrariety of the two wills. You say There is an impossibility for Adam to serve two Masters, es∣pecially when one commands him to stand by a revealed will, and the other hath determined the fall by his secret will at the same time: unlesse he could serve the one in the forenoon,☞ the o∣ther in the afternoon. And yet further, to amplifie the difficulty, you say, The secret will is the controuler, for let the revealed will command any thing, we are to center in the determination of the secret. And then you pathetically call upon man to bewail the time that ever be had a being in this world, because he is sure to come to ruine which will soever he obeys. If Adam did obey the secret will of God, then the penalties inflicted by the revealed will would fall upon him. And then you conclude in these words, Might we not say farewell all hopes of another life, and so hang down our heads, crying out, alasse we are undone! our Lead∣ers are not agreed? for what the one sayes do, the other determines that he shall not do. And much more you have to the same effect, page 80. But all may be answered in a few words. We plain∣ly
affirme, in matters of obedience men have nothing to do with the secret will of God, according to that determination, Secret things belong to God, but those things which are revealed be∣long to us, and to our children for ever, that we may do the words of this Law. Deut. 29.29. This also is the doctrine of the Church of England, That men should not meddle with predesti∣nation and election, but those only who have the fruits of election, who are called, justified and sanctified. For the ordinary sort of men, they only are to look at the general threats that they may be humbled, and to the general promises, that you may beleeve, Artic 17. And so in the particular case of Adam, we say that he had nothing to do with the secret will of God concerning the permission of the fall, his duty only was to look to the command. That was the Cynosure or only rule which he was to be guided by. And it is the duty of us all to do that which the Lord commandeth, and to rest upon him to make our Leaders to agree. It doth not ap∣pertain to you, nor me, nor any man living to make a recon∣ciliation betwixt these two wills in their seeming differences, let us keep the ordinary path. But if you will say, that the secret will is that which doth prevail; though this doth prove true in the event, yet neverthelesse the revealed will of God is the onely rule or cannon which we must walk by; as for example, the Lord in his revealed will required Abraham to offer up his son Isaac in sacrifice, when in his secret will he had decreed that I∣saac should not be sacrificed. If we go to the event, the secret will was the more preponderating and prevailing will of the twain. Though it was, yet the obedience of Abraham had its special testimony in this, that he had regard to the revealed will of God, Gen. 22.2, 12. So in the case of Hezekiah, the Pro∣phet was sent with a message to him, set thy house in order, for thou shalt dye and not live, Isa. 38.2. and yet we finde that the Lord in his secret will had decreed that he should not dy at that time: fifteen years more were added to the dayes of his life. In the present case then, though the secret will did carry the sway, yet the commendation of the obedience of Hezekiah did ly in giving assent to the threatning of God denounced by the mouth of the Prophet. Though the denunciation was meerely conditional, spoken onely in relation to second causes,
thou shalt dye of the present disease, unlesse thou humble thy self, and by fervent prayer seek the face of God. Though this declaration of the will of God did imply a condition, yet because it was the will declared and outwardly revealed to Hezekiah, he was to have respect to this onely. He was not (whatsoever you sug∣gest to the contrary) at a dilemma or strait, which of these two wills ought to be obeyed, he never lamented the day of his birth because his Leaders were not agreed. He never faulted the con∣trariety of the two wills, that the revealed will should say thou shalt dy, and the secret will imply thou shalt live. What God had revealed concerning his present death he did beleeve the sen∣tence outwardly made known to him; as for Gods secret De∣cree, he had nothing to do with that, which did meerely lie hid in God. We read indeed after his humiliation when the Lord had made known so much of his secret purpose that he would adde fifteen yeares more to the dayes of his life, then he was bound to believe and to live in faith of that particular promise which was made. I might go further with the example of the Ninevites, the Lords revealed will or his sentence outwardly denounced, was, Yet fourty dayes and Nineve shall be destroyed, Jonah 3.4. Now in his secret will or absolute Decree the Lord had not purposed that Nineveh should be destroyed, but that that people should escape by true repentance at that time. Though the secret will did prevaile, or to use your language, was the will that did controll, yet for the time being the Nine∣vites had nothing to do with the will of Decree, no further then this, Who can tell whether the Lord will return from his fierce an∣ger? verse 9. The will which they were immediately to believe, was the sentence denounced by the mouth of the Prophet; they were bound to believe that their sinnes were so great that they did deserve destruction, and that the Lord would certainly de∣stroy them within the space of fourty dayes unlesse they did re∣pent in that limited time. Their beleeving the revealed will of God, and their trembling at his Word was one principal mean to bring about his secret will, and what he had decreed in his secret will concerning their preservation. And though the de∣nunciation by the Ministery of Jonah came not to passe, it was no false message, because it was reversible upon a tacite con∣dition,
which the Lord was pleased for a season to conceal from the Ninevites, to drive them more effectually out of their carnal security. I might adde more examples to prove the vanity of your exceptions; but I will go neerer the matter, and that in a harder case then any propounded by you. We read touching the wast of the Church in the latter times, The outward Court cast it out and measure it not, for it shall be given to the Gentiles, and the holy City shall they tread under foot fourty and two moneths, Rev. 11.2. Here it is plain that the Lord speaketh concerning the desolation of the Church that shall be in all Anti-Christian times. Now seeing the Lord hath reveal∣ed these things to his people, to the end that they should believe them and prepare themselves for the tryal, upon the supposal of this what should a believer do living upon the borders of the Anti Christian desolation? should he build the Church accor∣ding to Gods general Command of preaching the Gospel, or should he believe that the Church should be destroyed accor∣ding to the Prophecies. Here are two crosse wills in appear∣ance, yet it is certain that it is the duty of such a one to preach the Gospel according to the Commandment, and to leave the vicissitudes and changes of time unto the Lord himself. The A∣postle saith, We are a sweet savour in them that are saved and in them that perish, 2 Cor. 2.15. And the Prophet Jeremy foreseeing the captivity of Babylon, that it should certainly come to passe, did himself believe it, and blame the people for their incredulity. Yet neverthelesse in the ordinary way he did ex∣hort them to repent, and to turn from their Idolatry and other sins that would be the cause of their captivity. By all that hath been spoken, I now leave to your own conscience to judge what cause you had to raise such tragical out-cries against the contra∣riety of the two wills, and the inevitable misery of man which will soever he obeyed. When wise men shall come to the hear∣ing of the matter, I believe they will judge that it is rather a pang of your ignorant and blind zeal then of right knowledge. And such an horrid expression you have, That if a man should study many years for a destroying Principle to dishonour his Creator, he could not parallel this, which is the sharpest Sword that ever was drawn against the righteousnesse of God. pag. 80.
Pray Sir, be pacified, there is no harm done. As I have told you before, so I say again, leave it to God to reconcile his own wills, and let us follow that which he hath revealed in his Word. But you say, The voice of this destroyeth all the testimonies which God giveth of himself. What shall we do with those Scrip∣tures where he saith, he alters not, if there be a secret will of his that controuls his revealed? page 81. In this also you may hold your self content, for the Scriptures which say God alters not, are understood concerning his will of Decree, which for the most part is secret to us. But for his revealed will, in the de∣claration of mercies and judgments, he doth many times and upon sundry occasions alter his promises or threats. For these are not made according to his absolute and eternal Decrees, but are suspended upon outward conditions, as in the case of the Ninevites, & Hezekiah forealledged. In this case the outward re∣velations of the will of God are but subservient to his eternal Decree. And though they seem to our understanding to differ, yet they do excellently agree among themselves. Now last of all you come to your chiefest argument. You cannot see, say you, how such a wil can agree with the death of Christ and the general tenders of grace. These are your words, I fear me too many have a hand in nourishing and maintaining this opinion, and then no marvail that so many cannot beleeve the record that God gave of his Son. So when God sweareth by himself, as he liveth, he desireth not the death of him that dyeth, and that he would have no man to perish, but that he gave his Son a light unto the world that all men thorough him might beleeve, for which purpose he tasted death for every man, and not for the Saints onely, but also for the sinnes of the whole world. But these sayings are but the re∣vealed will, and the same people that hold this revealed will to be a guide to themselves, do yet hold a contradiction in the wills of God, saying, it is true, God saith so, but his meaning is not so. Now this sort of people should not beleeve the revealed will at all if they hold his secret will to be the Superiour, pag 81 82. I say the same as formerly, though the secret will of God be the Superiour, yet we are to look to that which is revealed. As for those who affirme that the Lord hath chosen a peculiar num∣ber of people from the beginning to salvation, If you go to them man by man, I think you will scarce finde any one of solid
judgment that will tell you we must begin at the knowledge of the secret will of God. They all say, that you must begin first with the general threats and the general promises; and when men are once brought thorough the convictions of the spirit to see their miserable and lost condition, then they say they are sit auditors of the doctrine of the Gospel in the tenders and the offers of grace. When the promise is apprehended by a true and a lively faitht, he next work they say i, to attain the  and full assurance of faith. And then last of all after many ex∣periences cometh the assurance of election. In this method they proceed in the discovery of this mystery, and not otherwise. Though election be first in the Lords intention, yet they hold that the assurance thereof is and ought to be the last in our feel∣ing. And so they expound the words of the Apostle, give all diligence to make your calling and election su e, 2 Pet. 1.10. And further, though they maintain an assurance of election, yet they do not hold an absolute certainty, but such a one as is lyable to many temptations, desertions, and eclipses. Neither do they hold such an immediate assurance as though the elect by intuition did look into the Decrees of God; onely they stand for a mediate and discursive knowledge of the grace of election by the necessary effects and fruits thereof. As you know the ri∣sing of the Sunne by the dawning of the day. What other knowledge is this of the secret will of God, but that which he himself hath first made discovery of by the fruits? As for the secret will of God in the Decree of non-election, though they do beleeve according to the Scriptures that there are a great multitude of men that the Lord doth intend to passe by, yet if you come to singulars, neither you nor any man li∣ving can shew who they are in special. If you shall say that such and such a one is a notorious evil doer, and therefore a repro∣bate. Ananias thought but little better of Paul, Lord I have heard of this man how much evil he bath done. But the an∣swer was, go thy way I have made him a chosen vessel unto me, Act. 9.14. If such a one hath continued many years under the means of grace, and doth yet stand out in impenitency and hardnesse of heart: this is no infallible argument of non-e∣lection, for men may come into the Vineyard at all houres. So
farre forth as men live wickedly we may preach hypothetically and conditionally, according to the revealed will of God, that their courses are damnable, and as long as they so continue they are in the way to damnation: yet we cannot absolutely pronounce concerning the persons themselves, it belongeth onely to God to judge of their final and eternal condition And for that place which you alledg that God sweareth that he de∣sireth not the death of him that dyeth, I pray you now tel us the par∣ticular man in our method and way of teaching hat is not a cap∣able hearer of this doctrine. Whatsoever God doth intend in his secret Decrees concerning the eternal state of men what is that to us? We must make the tenders, proposals and offers of grace according to the termes set down in the Gospel. Indeed, as men do submit to the promise and do take Christ for their Head, so God doth bring about that which he hath determined in his secret will. And therefore when you speak concerning this sort of people, That they should not beleeve his revealed will at all, if they hold his secret will to be the Superiour; what good reason can you shew for that? for though the secret will of God touching the salvation of his elect be the Superiour, yet all the tenders of grace, all faith in the promises are but the ordinary way to bring us to salvation. Here is no contrariety of will against will, but an excellent subordination. Because the Lord had many people in the City of Corinth that did belong to him in the determination of his secret will, therefore the A∣postle had a command to preach the Gospel in that City, and he did continue there the space of a year and six moneths, Acts 18. ver. 10, 11. But if it be further objected, how can you pray for the salvation of all, seeing that the Lord doth determine to passe by a great number of men? I answer, though it be so, we are to do the duty. Paul did know that a greater part of the Jewes should be hardened, and that a remnant onely should be saved; yet for all this he did preach the Gospel, and use all means that he might save some of them, Rom. 11.7, 8, 9, 10. Augustine, one of the greatest assertors of the prerogative of free-grace, in his book de correptione & gratiâ hath these words, We not knowing who belong to the number of the predestinate, and who not, ought so to be moved with the affection of cha∣rity
that we should will all men to be saved. And so far as it doth appertain to us who are not able to distinguish the predestinate from them who are not predestinate, for this very thing because we ought to will all men to be saved, we must medicinally use sharp reproof to all men to save them from perishing. Dr. Twisse also hath these words, moreover of those who are now alive, though the greater part of them should be reprobated, seeing this is not known to us, there is nothing doth hinder but we may make supplications for all. Vindic. grat. lib. 2. Crimin. 4. Sect. 9 Page 91. Many more testimonies I might bring of that kind of people as you call them who maintain the secret will of God to be the more prevailing, yet in order to our understanding they shew that we are to look onely unto that which is revealed. They do with one heart and with one mouth declare that you must begin at the lower end of the ladder before you can come to the top. As for the secret and the revealed will of God, though this seem to us to be contradictory, there is no contradiction. The river that in appea∣rance seemeth to go another way, if you follow it by divers ma∣zes & turnings it will bring you to the Sea at last. But if you fur∣ther urge, how can the sending of Christ into the world to dy for the lost sonnes of men stand with the Decree of election, where some onely are chosen to salvation? Answ. This point is solidly handled by Dr. Davenant, in his answer to that book that bears the title Gods love to mankind; and in another Treatise of the death of Christ. The scope and tenor of the whole dis∣course is to shew that the non-elect may be partakers of many fruits of the death of Christ, though they are not partakers of that grace which will certainly and infallibly bring them to sal∣vation;☞ and so he doth concord the general attonement with the peculiar Decree of election. But because this point is exceed∣ingly controverted in these times, and is as it were the very rock of offence, I will particularly shew how farre I can go along with you. First, I do agree that by his death the Son hath re∣moved the bar out of the way that hinders the salvation of man. For God having once made a Law, in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt dye the death, according to the rigour of the Covenant of works and the strictnesse of divine justice there
was no possibility for any mans salvation. But the Lord Christ having once satisfied the justice of God and removed the barre, there is now a possibility for all the lost sonnes of men to be sa∣ved, they are brought into a savable condition, notwithstand∣ing all the strict demands of satisfaction according to the first Covenant. And this I take to be the natural sense of that place which you and others stand so much upon, Who will have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth. For there is one God and one Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransome for all to be testified in due time, 1 Tim. 2.4, 5, 6. The scope of which words is briefly this, that seeing the Lord Jesus Christ did give himself as a ransome for all men, there is a possibility of salvation forall upon termes of repentance and faith. Se∣condly, I do agree with you, that by the death of Christ the Lord doth shew patience and long-suffering to the rebellious to invite them to repentance, Rom. 2.4. And though since the fall of man the thoughts of his heart were evil from his child-hood; yet respect being had to the Mediators blood, typed in the sacrifice of Noah, the promise to the whole world was that the Lord would no more curse the ground for mans sake, but seed time and harvest, winter and summer, day and night should continue to the worlds end. Thirdly, I do also agree with you in this, that the Lord Jesus by the shedding of his blood hath not onely procured a possibility for the lost sonnes of men, but also at seasons he doth give them some portions of spirit, enabling them to judge themselves. And for temporary believers they go so far in the participation of the fruits of the death of the Son as to tast the good Word of God and the powers of the life to come, Heb. 6.5. These are the general fruits of the death of Christ; and in this sense we may say, that he tasted death for every man. In what sense then doth Christ dye for the elect on∣ly? He did shed his blood not onely to obtain a possibility for them, but that they may be certainly and insallibly brought to glory. Hence is it that he speaketh concerning his sheep (for whom he dyed in a special manner) My Father that gave them me is greater then all, and none can take them out of my Fa∣thers hands, Joh. 10.29. And in another place, who shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is God that justifieth, who is he that condemneth? it is Christ that dyed, Rom. 8 33, 34. The death of Christ for the elect is not only to obtain sal∣vation upon termes of repentance and faith, or other general fruits of his death, but it is certainly and infallibly to bring them to salvation. In relation to this peculiar love the Apostle saith, Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Rom. 8.35. And our Saviour, John 10.28. I will give them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man be able to take them out of my hand. He speaketh these things of his sheep for whom he had layed down his life in that special sense mentioned before. Having thus cleared all your Objections in this Chapter, we proceed to the next. CHAP. XI. Whether Adams sinne, or any other mans sinne doth produce death or condemnation in a natural way. TOuching the manner of the thing, how sinne doth cause death, whether death be the natural fruit of sinne, or whether it doth meerly depend upon the will of him who hath threatned to punish sinne with death, is much disputed. But, Mr. Everard, leaving that which may be supposed, it is too too plain in this Chapter that you mainly drive at this, to prove that sinne is not the meritorious cause of death, and that Adams sinne was no cause of his condemnation. And then afterwards going to discover the causes of judgment; you tell us for the efficient cause, God is onely the contriver who doth inflict pun∣ishments. For the material cause, the creatures are the onely instruments. For the formal, it is the manner of judgment coming upon men, the fire by burning, the water by drowning. For the final, it is the declaration of the justice of God upon the contemners of his grace. And so you conclude, That sin
sinne is no cause of punishment neither efficient, material, for∣mal, nor final, page 95. 96. And for the meritorious cause, You say also, that sinne doth not merit death, but it doth onely prepare, fit and qualifie a man for death, as grace doth for eternal life. page 106, 107, 108. You do not shunne to tell us in the last two lines of the Chapter, speaking of eternal life and eternal death, That God is as simply and entirely the Author of the one as of the other. Page 108. In opposition to all this, I do affirme that sinne is the meritorious cause of death, and death is the fruit of sin. Let us consider the Scriptures and let us vindicate them from your cavils. First, it is said the wages of sinne is death, but the gift of God is eternal life, Rom. 6.23. From hence it is plain that e∣ternal life, sanctification of the Spirit, belief of the truth, and all other things that tend to salvation, are the meer gift of God, but the wages of sinne is death. If death be the wages of sin, then sinne must be the meritorious cause of death. But say you, Though death be the wages of sinne, yet it is not the fruit there∣of, page 91. Though in some cases we may call that the fruit which is not the wages, yet in the sense of the text, the wages and the fruit are all one. Read but the words going before, What fruit had you then in those things whereof ye are now a∣shamed? the wages of sinne is death. The fruit and the wages are all one, and the sense of the whole text is this, that sinne is the meritorious cause of damnation. For the second Scrip∣ture, Rom. 8.6. To be carnally minded is death, but to be spi∣ritually minded is life and peace. Here say you, If it be death it self, it cannot be the cause of death. But, Sir, you are to look to the sense, and not to the strictnesse of the letter. In strict termes you cannot say, that to be spiritually minded is life and peace. In this life many that are truly spiritual, that have the reality of grace in their heart, have not the peace of grace. The meaning of the text is briefly this, that as peace and life doth follow a spiritual mind, so death doth follow the carnal mind as the wages and fruit thereof. But here you shew your skill at catch-ball. I confesse, say you, that he who walketh carnally to his end shall receive eternal death; so he that lives a spi∣ritual life, shall enjoy everlasting life: But neither the death nor
the life were any branches produced by either, for they came both from God. And as God hath no desire that any man should sinne, so sinne hath as little desire to receive punishment. pag. 92. Still you go on in the same way of sophistry. We willingly a∣gree, that he who walketh spiritually to the end shall receive e∣ternal life, because such walking is the way to eternal life. But the carnal walking is not only the way that leadeth to death; but (by a Metonymie, the effect being put for the cause) it is death it self; or, in the way of causality, a carnal mind is that which produceth death, and death is the fruit thereof. But whereas you affirme, that neither death nor life are branches produced either by carnal or spiritual walking; in this you erre. For though a godly walking is not the meritorious cause of eternal life, yet a carnal and sinful walking is the meritorious cause of eternal death; Why else should it be said, The wages of sinne is death? Masters use to pay their servants their wages at night in relation to that which they have deserved in the day; and for a weeks work, they pay them commonly at the end of the week. The payment of wages hath near relation to the labour of the hire∣ling that hath deserved it. And therefore the Scriptures do use this expression, the wages of sinne is death, shewing that sinne is the meritorious cause of death, and death is the desart of sin. And for that expression of yours, that death is no branch pro∣duced by sin,☞ but it cometh meerly from God who inflicteth death; this I think no pious man can look upon but with a great deal of horror. What is this but to transfer the cause of death upon God onely? But if to mend the matter you shall say that God doth inflict death as the just punishment of sin; in so saying you contradict your self, and blow up your own position. For if God doth inflict death as the punishment of sin, then it will follow that sinne is the meritorious cause of death; and death doth not onely come from God, but also from the sinner who hath deserved it. And so you lose your cause. Thirdly, the Apostle saith, Lust when it hath conceived, it bringeth forth sinne, and sinne when it is finished bringeth forth death. Jam. 1.13, 14. To avoid the force of this Scripture you tell us, That sinne doth not bring forth death as lust doth bring forth sinne, sinne is lusts natural seed, but death hath no con∣ceptions by any seed of sinne. page 94. But Sir, I would
entreat you to leave all windings and shifts, deale plainly with the words of the text. The Apostle saith, sinne when it is finished bringeth forth death. I do here put it upon you to give a down-right answer, seeing the words of the Apostle are so plain. If sinne doth any way bring forth death then we must needs conclude that sinne is the cause of death; and this is the true meaning of the Apostle. But seeing you bind so much upon the Lords institution, who hath threatned death to the sinner, let us come to the original text, In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt dye the death. And here, setting the Lords prohibition aside, I do willingly yield that there was no evil in the tree of knowledge of good and evil, if we go to evil in the intrinsecal nature thereof; but the Lord having forbidden it, it was evil to go against his Command. In this sense I say, though death was threatned by God, yet Adams own personal sinne was the meritorious cause of death to himself and to all his posterity. And this is the ground of the Apostles speech, By one man sinne entred into the world, and death by sinne; and death hath past over all men unto condemnation. You labour in many pages together to prove that Adams sinne was no cause of his condemnation; and when all comes to all, This is your chief ground, that the Lord in his institution did ordain to punish sin and sinners with death; and therefore sinne is not the meritorious cause of death. Good Sir, may not both stand together as social causes? what do you think of the two Malefactors that were han∣ged upon the Cross, the one on the right hand, and the other on the left hand of our Saviour? Were they not both put to death by the sentence of the Law, yet for all this they were the cause of their own condemnation. The converted thief will tell you as much, Doest thou not fear God, seeing thou art in the same con∣demnation? And we indeed justly suffer, for we receive the due re∣ward of our deeds. Luke 23.40, 41. In like manner I say, though death was inflicted upon Adam as the just judgment of God, yet Adams sinne was the cause of his own condemnation. Now whereas you call death a righteous branch. It is true if you look to the sentence of the just Judge, who hath appointed death as the punishment of sinne; yet if you look unto the na∣ture of death, he is an enemy: The last enemy that shall be de∣stroyed
is death. 1 Cor. 15.26. Further, in the book of the Revelation, we read, that after the Beast, the false Prophet and the Dragon were cast into the lake of fire, then death it self was cast into the lake of fire. Rev. 20.14. What is the mean∣ing of this, but that the Lord Christ is Head and King of the Church, and will tread down all his enemies in the several and respective times appointed for their destruction, and then last of all, death it self shall come to be destroyed? If death then be an enemy, the last enemy, and shall be destroyed as an enemy, how can you affirme that it is a righteous Branch? Further you argue, That death cannot be the fruit of sinne, seeing God hath pleased to punish sinne with death; sinne, and punishment for sinne agree no more than light and darknesse, page 91. If this be your opinion, I pray you tell me what do you think of that case where God doth punish one sinne with another? He gave up the Gentiles to vile affections, that they might receive in themselves that recompence of their error which was meet. Rom. 1.23 24. If one sinne may be the punishment of another, why do you put such a difference betwixt sinne and punishment as betwixt light and darknesse? you have another evasion to help you our, you say, The very voice or death is enough to scare a sinner from his sinnes, therefore death is not the natural fruit of sinne, page 95. Give me leave to observe the same way of reasoning. The Devil, if he should visibly appear, the ve∣ry sight of him would be enough to scare a sinner from his sins: Therefore a wicked sinner when he doth commit sinne, doth not fulfill the lusts of his father the Devil, which is to go point blank against the Scripture, John 8.44. After this you come to answer a weak and incongruous objection of your own ma∣king: you feign an adversary to reason in this wile, If there had been no sinne, there had been no punishment, therefore pu∣n shmext must be produced by sinne, page 949. In this you deceive your self, we do not argue so loosely, to make every antecedent a necessary cause of that which cometh after for then by the like reason you might argue as you do. If there had been no Law, there had been no transgression; therefore transgression is produced by the Law. We say, that sin doth not go before death as a meet antecedent or occasion only, but
as the meritorious cause of death; the Apostle saith, sinne bring∣eth forth death as the cause doth the effect, and the wages of sinne is death: when the work is done, the wages is to be paid. Last of all you come to the particular examples of Corah, of He∣rod, of Ananias and Sapphira; and from thence you reason, If death be the natural fruit of sinne, why are not all Rebels pu∣nished as Corah, all proud men as well as Herod, all guilty of the sinne of equivocation as well as Ananias? This is the sub∣stance of your argument, page 99, 100. To all which I make this answer, unlesse they repent they shall meet with the same righteous judgment of God. The Lord is free in the execu∣tion of judgment as upon those eighteen on whom the Tower in Siloah fel; yet that it may appear to you that death is the na∣tural fruit of sinne, and that sinne is the meritorious cause of death, our Saviour shuts up the matter with these words, un∣lesse you repent, you shall all likewise perish, Luke 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. But you go on, and strike still upon the same string, If I should allow as much demerit in Adams disobedience to bring death, as Christ had merit in his obedience both active and passive to bring life into the world, yet it would not amount to such a pitch to be the onely cause. For though the obedience of Christ was the cause of the coming of life into the world, yet the appointment of God was as principal a cause as the obedience of Christ. And so, though sinne had been ten thousand times more sinful, yet without an Ordinance from God death could never have seized upon the world, page 101. 102, 103. What is all this but a palpable and grosse mistake of the question, or as Logicians call it, an ignorance of the elench? We do confesse, as shrist brought life into the world he brought it in by the institution of his Father; so when sinne brought death into the world, it was by the just appointment of God to punish sinne with death. The question that is in debate betwixt us is, whether sinne be the  cause of death as the obedience of Christ active and passive is the meritorious cause of life! If you yield this, (as yield it you must we have as much as we do desire. Next, you enquire, how sinne may be the cause of condemnation? supposing that it cannot be the principal cause, you demand whether it may be a cause in subor∣dination? And here you tell us, that sinne will not be found nei∣ther,
seeing such causes are good in their own nature, Well then, what is the cause? you tell us, seeing sinne is an invention of man and the Devil, a meere accident that cleaveth to the sub∣ject, man; we may call sinne an accidental cause of condemnation seizing upon man found sinful. page 105. If this way of rea∣soning be good, why may not I proceed in the like manner? Heat is an accident in the subject, fire; therefore the heat of the fire is a meere accidental cause of the boyling of the water. The force of your reason is no better when you say sinne is a meere accident in the subject, man; therefore it is onely the ac∣cidental cause of condemnation. If you well observe the expres∣sion, you shall find it to be very absurd to call sin a meere acci∣dental cause of condemnation. Condemnation is alwayes set in relation to the guilt of some sinne that doth deserve it, how then can you call sinne an accidental cause of condemnation? The Scriptures say, that the Lord will render to every one ac∣cording to his works, that they who commit such things are worthy of death; And many passages of the like kind. What will you say to all this? Here you have a pretty shift to help you out. Sinne (say you) puts a man in a sutable disposition and qualification for death. page 106. Indeed our Divines when they speak of eternal life, that the Lord will render to every man according to his works, they take the word (worthy) onely for a sutable qualification: According to that of the Apostle, he hath made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1.12. Though this may be affirmed of the Saints, that they are made meet for eternal life, it were too short and too diminuent an expression to affirme that wicked men onely are made suitable to receive vengeance, for then the wicked are no more worthy of eternal death then the Saints are worthy of eternal life;☞ which is plainly to crosse the Apostle, the wages of sinne is death, but the gift of God is eternal life. I cannot then but mention your words with a kind of horrour with which you close the Chapter: speaking of the wicked, they are, say you a sutable matter to receive vengeance, as Gods peo∣ple are sutable to receive all the joyes of eternal life. Now the joyes of eternal life are the free-gift of God. All qualifi∣cations, dispositions, frames of spirit, though never so evangeli∣cal
in the abundance thereof, do not abate the worth of an hair of eternal life to be the free-gift of God. For there was not the least desarts in a holy life to the procuring of eternal salva∣tion, but onely it was the will of God to make eternal life as a Crown to put upon the head of those men that lived holy here, which were fit or sutable for the Crown of honour. So men that have lived never so notoriously wicked, rebeling and blas∣pheming against God day after day to their lives end, are no o∣therwise worthy than persons fitted as the true subjects sutable for wrath, and God is as simply and intirely the authour of the one as the other. And so farre you. Now I leave it to all tender consciences to understand and to give sentence. We do willingly confesse that we cannot merit any thing by our own works in the way to salvation, there being such a disproportion between them and the glory to come. But I do detest and ab∣horre that speech of yours, when you say that the greatest sinner, who continues so all his life long is no otherwise worthy of death than a person fitted or a subject made sutable for wrath; and that God is as much the cause of the damnation of the one as the salvation of the other. If this doctrine of yours be sound and Orthodox, why may not the wicked in hell cast all upon God, as the sole Authour of their misery, as well as the Saints in heaven ascribe all to the glory of his free grace? I will use your own words though to farre better purpose, If a man should study many years for a destroying Principle to dishonour his Creator, he could not parallel this, which is the sharpest Sword that was e∣ver drawn against the righteousnesse of God. I have staid the longer upon this point, because you have u∣sed so many arguments to prove sin to be no meritorious cause of condemnation, I have more carefully endeavoured to vindi∣cate the truth because this is one of the first fundamentals that is put into the heart of the Gentiles: They knowing the judg∣ment of God against them which do such things, that they are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them, Rom. 1.32. That sinne is the meritorious cause of death, and that a sinner is worthy of death, is graven in the heart of every man alive: and God at seasons doth stirre up the confideration of the guilt of sinne in the conscience of
the Gentiles, to look after pardon, and to make their peace with God. The first convictions of the Spirit do begin with considerations of the Godhead and the guilt of sinne, that so men may be brought to see their misery. And yet you teach us here in this Chapter, that sinne is not the meritorious cause of condemnation. Now we proceed to your next Chapter. CHAP. XII. What Adam retained of his forfeiture till his death. HERE also you teach such things as do little lesse then strike at the foundation. You tell us, that Adam after the fall, for his body had all the parts and lineaments thereof: He had his senses, and retained his knowledge. And further you adde, I make no question but God had so ordered the imployments, that he had for Adam some of them to be more spiritual than ever he had to do before his fall; and then that he should utterly disable him from the performance thereof, will never be made good by any man under heaven, page 110. I do fully agree with you in this, that the employment which God had to do for A∣dam after the fall, was as spiritual as before. But then consider the ability does not lie in man, but onely in the Lord Christ, and in the Word of promise. The true Church doth hold and ever hath held, that the imployment which God hath now for every true believer, is a spiritual imployment. Yet they hold it also as a truth of the foundation, that Adam lost all ability to spi∣ritual good. But here you think you have an unanswerable ar∣gument, for say you, in that service which Adam bad to do, if he was compleatly furnished by God, why should I judge that he would employ him in a more hard service, and not afford him sutable accommodation? Had God no other way to give Adam and his posterity sutable accommodation to obey his commands, but there must be a necessity in it for him to re∣tain the same abilities after, which he had before the fall? when you thus endeavour to proportion abilities to commands in a natural way you overthrow the scope of the Gospel and
the main sense of the Scriptures, which shew that all abili∣ty is to be had from Christ. God hath tempered salvation, and hath so put it into the hands of Christ that all that want abilities should go to him in the sense of their own misery. And to this end he hath suffered the first man to fall, and to lose all natural abilities, that supply and help may be had from Christ onely in the Covenant of grace. This is the main scope of the Scriptures. And judge you now whether you do not go against the main foundation of the doctrine of Christ when you teach such things as these, The Exami∣ners of the late Synods confession of faith in the Chapter of free-will, Sect. 2. are (in a manner) as foule as you. For the Synod having laid down this truth concerning Adam in the state of innocency, that then he had a power and free∣dome to will that which was good and pleasing to God, but yet mutably; the Censors are not contented with this, but they seem to plead for the same liberty still in man after the fall. These are their words, That, man in the state of innocency had freedome and power to will and do that which was good, seems to us in some sort to hold true still of all men as they are now borne till they have personally and actually sinned. If this be so, what need is there of a Christ to sanctifie and to regenerate, and to take away the sinne of the nature? But now we will go along with you. You say, I judge the work that God set Adam about before the fall, he had an ability to do after the fall, if God had but given him a command to re∣turn into the garden again, page 110. By this account then he had an ability to keep the Covenant of works after his fall. The Covenant of works was that wherein life was promised to Adam, and in him to his posterity upon con∣dition of perfect and personal obedience. Will you say then that he had ability to keep this Covenant if God had gi∣ven him liberty to return into the garden? Let us hear what ground you have for this God: (say you) knew well e∣nough that Adam had not lost his understanding nor his me∣mory, for he could tell the use of the tree and where it stood, that should have cured him of his deadly wound: otherwise, the Lord would not have made so strong provision to prevent
him, page 111. True indeed, we read that the Lord pla∣ced at the East of the garden of Eden Cherubims and a flaming Sword which turned every way to keep the way of the tree of life. This Provision in the general shew∣eth that Adam knew the particular place where the tree of life stood, and in general what was the use of the tree, yet for all this he might be bereaved of his spititual know∣ledge. Natural men may altogether be destitute of the knowledge of the Spirit, yet judge of external objects re∣presented to the senses. A Temporary believer who hath lost his feeling may tell the time when, the place where, and the instrument by whom he was first wrought upon. Therefore if we take it as granted that Adam knew the way to the tree of life, and the general use of the tree, this doth not prove him to retaine the same spiritu∣all and internall knowledge which he had before his fall. Let us heare the Inventory of Adams losses as you make the account. You tell us that Adam forfeited his body and his limbes, and that God would bereave him of all after that nine hundred thirty years were expired. And you further adde, that God cast him out of that pleasant place of accommodation, that neither he nor his posterity had pow∣er to do the will of God in the garden any longer, page 111, 112. This is the total which you bring in of his losses, and this is a very short reckoning. As for A∣dams being cast out of the Garden, it was a part of his misery to be deprived of that earthly mansion, but it is the least part of his losse. The principal damage which he met withall was internal, in his soul, which was more than the losse of a thousand gardens. But we go to your next question.
CHAP. XIII. Whether Adam did dye in the same day that he did eat the for∣bidden fruit. TO the clearing of this point you begin with the divers acceptions of the word day. And then you come to eavil against the Lords day, in these words.☜ This day some affirme that it was the first day of the week, but there is little to be shewn for that. It is a very private Interpretation, because there is no publick manifestation by the Word, but that men are willing to strengthen the opinion and practise of a first dayes Sabbath with a reference to the changing of Gods Commands, and setting up of their own thoughts, page 114, 115. By this it is clear what your judgment is concerning the Christian Sabbath, but we will briefly clear the point. First, it is of the Law of nature that a due proportion of time be set apart for the worship of God. Also the Lord in his Word by a positive and perpetual Command, binding all men in all times, hath ap∣pointed one day in seven to be kept wholly unto him, Exod. 20 8, 10, 11. Now this from the beginning of the world to the resurrection of Christ was the last day of the week, and from the resurrection, and so downward, it is changed into the first day. Upon these grounds, therefore if the question be put to us, wherefore do you keep one in seven? we plead the morality of the Command. And if it shall be surther alledged, why keep ye the particular first day in memory of the resurrection of the Lord? Our ground is the perpetual use of the Church, found∣ed upon expresse Apostolical practise, and implicite Apostolical precept, which we are sufficiently able to prove and evince by the collation of foure Scriptures if we were put upon that argu∣ment. But this would be too larg a digression from the matter in hand. Next, you come to shew the sense of the commination. And here you tell us that Adam did not dye the same day, if the day be taken for the space of twelve or twenty four houres. This is in plain termes to contradict the scope and sense of the
text. For there it is expressely said in the very same moment and instant of time in which our first parents did eat the forbid∣den fruit their eyes were opened, and they saw that they were naked, Gen. 3.7. If you take this for the eyes of their mind, it is most clear that their eyes were opened not onely to see their in∣ward nakednesse in the losse of the image of God, but also to feel the guilt of sinne as the just fruit of their disobedience. If the opening of the eyes be taken for the eyes of the body, then their eyes were opened to see that, which they did not, nor could see before. Their nakednesse before was a nakednesse of ho∣nour, innocency and righteousnesse, but their nakednesse after was a nakednesse of dishonour, of misery, of sinne, of provo∣cation to sin. And for the particular time it is expressed in the Comination, in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt dye the death. And accordingly in the same instant of time when they had eaten the forbidden fruit, the eys of them both were opened, & they knew that they were naked. Therefore death & misery did seize upon them the same day according to the Commina∣tion. But because you are so peremptory in it, that Adam did not dye the same day if the day be taken for an ordinary day of twelve houres long: For the clearing of this I would intreat you to answer me this question, why did God appear to Adam in the evening in the cool of the day? If you shall say, it was to call the man and his wife to account for their disobedience; I grant this to be true, but it doth not satisfie the question, for the particular time. He might have called him to account at any other time; and what necessity was there that it should be left upon record that he came to judgment the very same day? The Lord had said, in the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt dye the death, and the same day that the forbidden fruit was eaten at evening in the cool or wind of the day (as the Hebrew hath it) the Lord came to inquire after the fact to give sentence and to execute judgment. In Scripture where promises or threats are declared to be fulfilled in such a particular time there the Holy Ghost is punctuall in the observation of the time. The children of Israel should be in bondage soure hundred years according to the promise, Gen 15.13, 14. And when that time was fulfilled the very same day they came out of the land of
Egypt with their Armies, Exod. 12. 41, 42. So our Lord and Saviour did signifie to his Disciples that he should be crucified and slain, and the third day rise again. Mat. 16.24. And how careful are all the Evangelists to repeat the time of the resurrection, that it was on the first day of the week, the third day after his passion? And so in the present case, when it is said in the day that thou eatest thereof shalt thou dye the death, to the fulfilling of this the eyes of our first parents were opened the very first day: And the Lord came to execute judg∣ment upon them for their disobedience the evening of the same day. After all this let us now hear what exposition you do give of the text. Though Adam (say you) did not dye the same day as he did eat of the forbidden fruit, yet he forfeited his life to the Lord of the great Charter of the world, he was then in a capacity to dye, he did then fall under the expecta∣tion of death. As in the English, such a man is a dead man because he is condemned by the sentence of the Law. That which you say is true, and it is in effect that which I teach: but according to your sense it is not the whole truth. For when the Lord saith in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt dye the death, he doth not speak this onely of a capacity of dying but of an actual seizing of death: for he was struck with spi∣ritual death the very same day he sinned. And for a temporal death likewise, though there was not a present dissolution of the soul from the body, yet presently he fell under the curse, to conflict with Armies of diseases which should never leave him till they had brought him to his grave. In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread untill thou return unto the ground, for out of it was thou taken, for dust thou art and unto dust thou shalt return. Chap. 3. ver. 19. But now you further adde, If Adam had dyed the same day he could not have tilled the ground, he could not have lived so long as to see a son of his own. To all this I agree, if you take death in the most strict sense for the actual dissolution of the soul from the body, but what ground have we so to limit the words of the text? I have said before that God did smite him the same day with spiritual death, and for a temporal death he came under the dominion and reign of it. In that famous place
when the Apostle saith, by one man, sinne entred into the world, and death by sinne, and death hath passed over all men to condemnation, Rom. 5.12. He doth here speak of the im∣mediate reign of death. Death reigned from Adam to Moses over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, ver. 14. And in the close of all, as sinne hath reigned to death, so might grace reign thorough righteousnesseunto e∣ternal life, v. 21. Therfore the same day that Adam sinned, though he lived to till the ground, and to beget children after his own image, yet he and all his fell immediately under the reign of death: so that all who are now born into the world, infants as well as others, are under the reigne of death by the disobe∣dience of the first man. Having given the true sense of the Scripture, we will take a view of your interpretation. And here you say,☞ that Adam did dye the same day, though he lived nine hundred thirty nine yeares after. And to make good this strange glosse of yours you tell us that God did not prescribe any quantity of houres, but hath declared that a thousand yeares are as one day in his account, page 118. I must indeed ac∣knowledge, that a day is taken sometimes for a year, sometimes for a greater revolution of time, as may be seen in the Prophe∣tical Scriptures. But the scope of the text is plainly to be ta∣ken for a literal ordinary day, as we have formerly proved. And strange it is that the Lord in the denunciation of judgment should go to the typical and parabolicall ex∣pressions used in Daniel, and the Revelation, and Peters E∣pistle. After this you come to enquire, whether Christ by his suffe∣ring did not prevent the falling of death upon Adam? And you resolve it in the negative. For say you, either Adam must suffer, or the Word of God, seeing God had once declared the sentence, thou shalt surely dye. In case then he should give his Son to prevent the death of Adam, there had been a clear contradiction, page 119. In the commination there are some things which I do acknowledge to be infallible as the Laws of the Medes and Persians, which alter not; and therefore to make good the sen∣tence, all that are now born into the world after the course of natural generation, are borne in the state of spiritual death, sub∣ject
to the miseries of nature, and shall inevitably be brought to temporal death at last. All these things do hold by vertue of the first sentence: yet you must take heed that you go no further, because the second man hath all fulnesse of grace to repair the losses brought in by the first. By his intervening patience and long-suffering is extended to all the sonnes of men. And therefore whatsoever you suggest to the contrary, there is indeed and in truth no contradiction between the sentence in the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt dye the death, and the delay thereof in a qualified sense. In some particulars long-suffering may be extended, and yet in others there may be a speedy exe∣cution of the sentence. But you go on, seeing God would not have Adam to come near the tree of life, therefore he would not have him to be free from death that way, page 119. Neither do we maintain that it was the purpose of God to free Adam in that manner that he should not taste of a temporal death. He came under the dominion of that death the same day he sinned, and the most holy Saints that are must all dye before they can be raised again, to set forth the truth and cer∣tainty of the Lords commination. Yet for all this at present the stroke was stayed by the Mediators blood, and long-suffer∣ing was extended to men, that salvation might be had by the Covenant of grace. As for the tree of life, it is most true, that God did forbid Adam accesse to that tree, not absolutely be∣cause he would not have him to recover life, but because he had provided another way for the restoring of man by Christ the promised seed. He would not come to the most extream and final execution of the sentence, because his purpose was to have a posterity upon the earth, and a seminary for the Church. Further, you argue, there was a necessity for Adam to dye, o∣therwise Christ could not make him alive, page 119. Here you mistake the state of the question, we agree that Christ did not dye simply to free man that he should not fall into the dust, but only to raise him from the dust again. It was necessary to fulfill the truth of the commination, that Adam should return to dust, but it was not necessary that he should return to dust the very same day. It was necessary that he should fall under the reign of death, and under a necessity of dying the same day he
sinned, and this to continue to the resurrection of the just: Then this mortal shall put on immortality, and this corrup∣tible shall put on incorruption. 1 Cor. 15.53. The Apostle al∣so saith, when he shall change these vile bodies that they may be made like his glorious body. Phil. 3.21. All the bodies of the Saints shall be made like the body of Christ as now it is in glory. But how did the bodies of the Saints begin to be vile bodies? By vile bodies he doth mean these corruptible ta∣bernacles of the soul, lyable to diseases and to all the miseries of nature. But when did this vilenesse and misery begin seeing they were not made vile by creation. They began to be vile bodies the same day that Adam did sin, they have been so ever since, and they must continue such unto the resurrection, and then the bodies of the Saints shall be made con∣formable to the bodie of Christ in glory, Philip. 3 Ʋlt. CHAP. XIV. Whether Adam did dye a spiritual death yea or no? IN the discovery of this point you observe this method. First you shew what spiritual life is. Secondly, you resolve upon the question. For your description of spiritual life, though you miserably confound the Scriptures, we will take it in the best sense, for such a life as hath the Spirit for the cause, Gal. 4.19. John 6.63. Col. 33. But you erre in your application, when you use such an expression as this, that Adam had not such a cup of water in all his foure Rivers. You say also, that he could not savour the voice of the resurrection from the dead: for the goodnesse of a Saviour must be resented by those that are lost, but Adam knew no such need. page 122. Your ar∣gument is fallacious, because Adam had not spiritual life in the same way as the Saints now have, therefore he had no spiritual life at all. He might have ability to love Christ as Lord Crea∣tor.
Further you say that the voice of forgivenesse of sinne was a stranger to him. Well, let this be admitted, it doth not prove the point neither. Sicknesse it self was a stranger to Adam before his fall, will you inferre then that there were no herbs for medicine, and that the Lord did not create the herb of the field with a medicinal vertue? So in the like case, what if remission of sinne and the way of pardon of sinne by Christs blood was a thing hidden from Adam, as being not compatible with his condition; will you inforce from hence a want of ca∣pacity in him to understand the mystery of salvation by Christ? or will you affirme from hence, that he was a meere carnal man before his fall? Take heed that by these and such like positions you do not reflect upon God himself. The Apostle saith, the carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the Law of God neither indeed can be, Rom. 8. ver. 6, 7. If you go to the Original of this enmity or non-subjection, and say it did proceed from the fall of Adam, you do agree with us. But if you go higher, and stand upon it that Adam was a meere natural man by the condition of his creation, then you will lay the blame upon God that set him in such a state of enmity; and whither will you go in the issue if you maintain such positions as these? But to make good your assertion you argue, The first man is of the earth earthy; the second man is the Lord from heaven. So though Adam was the first man, & a living man yet it was not a living soul that proveth that Adam had a quickned Spirit. page 12. But in this you do miserably soobisticate. For though the Apostle doth draw a parallel between both the Adams; If you do well ponder the Scripture, you shall finde that the parallel doth not stand so much between Adam before his fall as between the first Adam & the second after the fall. 2ly. upon good consideration you shall finde that the Apostle in this Scripture doth not speak so much concerning the Spirit of God in the soules of the Saints as con∣cerning the spirituality of their bodies that shall be at the resur∣rection. It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption, it is sown in dishonour, it is raised in glory? it is sown a na∣tural body, it is raised a spiritual body. There is a natural body and there is aspiritual body, 1 Cor. 15.43, 44. If then you will
needs conclude Adam to be a carnal man before his fall, because his body was not made a spiritual body; by the same reason you must conclude all the Saints that have ever been since the crea∣tion of the world, to be carnal men, and absolutely destitute of the work of the Spirit. For the bodies of the Saints are yet car∣nal, and must abide in their incarnality till the resurrection of the dead. But whereas you build so strongly upon that ex∣pression, the first man Adam was made a living soul the last man Adam was made a quickning Spirit, verse 45. This doth not prove the first man to have been meerely carnal or absolutely void of the Spirit before his fall. For it is not the scope of the Apostle in this Scripture to speak of the excellency of man made after the image of God, but onely of the corrup∣tible state of the body as it standeth in immediate relation to that immortal condition which it shall have at the resurrection of the dead. And whereas it is said the second man was a quickning Spirit, this is meant principally of the divinity of Christ, by and thorough which he will raise the dead. So then, if you will build upon this ground, and argue from hence, that the first man was a meere carnal man, because he was not a quickning Spirit, by the same principle you must conclude that all the Saints living are carnal men. For of what one of them may it be affirmed that he is a quickning Spirit, who by his pow∣er and divinity is able to raise the dead? But if you will make a right analogy, let us compare the things that ought to be compared. First, let us consider what the first man was before his fall, and what the Saints are as renewed by grace. Second∣ly, let us compare what the first man might have been if he had eaten of the tree of life, and what the Saints shall be at the re∣surrection of the dead. For the first of these, if you speak of the Saints as renewed by grace, though their bodies be natu∣ral, they are spiritual in respect of the inward man. The same may be said of Adam before his fall, though his body was made of the dust, yet by grace and special favour he did carry the image of God. For the second, if you shall affirme that all the bodies of the Saints shall be made immortal and spiritual at the resurrection, consider what the body of Adam might have
been if he had continued in his obedience and eaten of the tree of life. If you would make a right collation between state and stat, ethe parallel should runne in these termes. But because you stand so strongly upon this expression, that the first man is of the earth earthy; the second man is the Lord from heaven; seeing you will have all this to be applied to Adam before his fall, I pray you resolve me this question, seeing the Apostle saith, as we have born the image of the earthy so shall we bear the image of the heavenly, Who are they that bear the image of Adam before his fall? I think if you were put to it, you could not produce any one instance in all Europe, Asia, Africa, or America that ever stood up after this similitude. The scope of the text is onely concerning man after the fall, and how the resurrection of the dead doth take away that death which is brought in by the fall. In the close of the Chapter you pro∣pound this question, whether was not Adam to have dyed an e∣ternal death for eating of the forbidden fruit? For the clearing of the question let us distinctly set down how the three kinds of death did seize upon Adam, and how they come upon all his branches. First, for spiritual death, it is evident that he died this death as soon as he did eat of the forbidden fruit. For the temporal death, he fell under the reign of it the same day he sinned. And for eternal death, though according to the truth of the commination, Adam and his posterity should have dyed, the Lord Christ stepping in did set a stop to the sentence. And therefore for the cause of the condemnation of man, it is now principally and immediately for the neglect of the grace of God that should lead him to repentance. But you adde further, I can safely say, that if Adam was to have dyed an eternal death, and that by the appointment of God, then Christ neither would nor could have stept in; nay he could not have lifted up his little finger to have helped Adam or his posterity. page 125. I answer, If God had decreed in his secret purpose that Adam and all his posterity should have dyed the death, in such a case Christ neither would nor could have stept in to cross the Decree of God; but Sir, who is the man that doth maintain that po∣sition? For my part, I take the Decree of God to be one thing, and the outward denunciation of judgment to be another. For
the Decree, that cannot be changed, but the sentence may re∣cieve alteration according to divers outward circumstances and conditions that may occurre. Besides, if you should build ne∣ver so strongly upon the letter of the text, we can easily recon∣cile the truth of the commination, in saying that Adam might dy the death the same day he sinned,☞ though the Lord was not pleased presently to inflict death in all its kinds. From all which we do conclude, if the Lord Christ came to free men from the reign of death, Heb. 2.14, 15. We may easily gather that Adam brought himself and all his posterity under the dominion of that syrant: and so he and all his should have dyed that kind of death if the Lord Christ had not stepped in. But you go a∣bout to deface this speech in the end of the Chapter, for if in case that Christ had not stepped in there had been no recovery, this were to exclude all other means, and to limit the holy One of Israel. page 126. Sir, I would intreat you not to make the doctrine of salvation odious by picking quarrels against words. For we do not peremptorily define that there was no other way possible to save man unlesse Christ had stepped in; we leave it onely to the Lord himself to judge of the several pos∣sibilities of the salvation of man. This onely we affirme, so far as it is revealed to us, the present is the most excellent way to satisfie the justice of God and to shew abundant mercy. And though you now, as others before you, go about to cast an hatred upon the doctrine of the Church in the points of the fall of Adam, original sinne, free-will, and the like; I must tell you, if you and they would not tear those things asunder which should be joyned together, if you would compare one thing with another, you should find that there is nothing so deformed in the state of the first man, but there is that in the second which will answer all. But here is the misery, you look upon the mystery of salvation in some broken pieces and parts onely, and do not consider the whole compages or sum of the truth in one body. We will now proceed to your next Chapter.
CHAP. XV. Whether Adams posterity were guilty of his transgression, IN this Chapter you endeavour to make good the purity of na∣ture, and the freedome of all infants from original sin; you do not, as the Jesuites and Arminians, extenuate the matter, but after the manner of the ancient Pelagians you deny the sinne of the nature. And here you do not go alone. The Confession of faith, lately set forth by the thirty separate Congregations, doth not speak one word of this sin of the nature. If we go to the beginning of their book, (where all other Chatechismes do shew the misery of man by nature) they are altogether si∣lent in the point of original sinne. In the middle where they speak of the grace of Christ there is not one syllable concerning the grace that doth regenerate or purge out the sinne of the na∣ture. In the third and last part of the book when they come to duties after regeneration they speak nothing of the great work of the mortification of the Old man and the putting on of the New man, but onely of dipping, and baptizing Disciples, and of the manner of living in their way of Church-membership. And thus one great errour at the foundation doth in a manner overthrow the whole building of the Christian faith. And this is the wofull state of the separate Congregations with us. Neither are these Churches in so bad a condition, but the Ex∣aminors and Censors of the late Confession of faith set forth by the Assembly of Divines, these clancular Authours (who∣soever they be) have further swarved from the truth.☜ For they in their late Examen do not onely maintain the purity of the natural birth, but also have many other positions and dam∣nable tenents. I will therefore take the liberty to joyn all to∣gether. And therefore, Mr. Everard, where you and they do agree one answer shall serve both, and where they have a∣ny
thing which you have not touched I shall begin with them as assoon as I have ended with you. Before I come to answer your arguments, let me put both you and them in mind of your sophystical dealing.☞ For neither you in your treatise, nor they in their Examen do men∣tion our chiefest argument drawn from Job. 3. These are the words of our Saviour to Nicodemus, Jesus answered and said unto him, verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born again he cannot see the Kingdome of God. Nicodemus saith unto him; how can a man be born when he is old? can he enter the second time into his mothers womb and be borne? Jesus answered verily, verily, I say unto thee except a man be born of water and of the Spirit he cannot enter into the Kingdome of God. That which is born of the flesh is flesh and that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit. Marvail not that I said unto thee you must be borne again, verse 3.4, 5, 6, 7. These words are most plain and significant to prove the impu∣rity of the natural birth, and the necessity of the new birth, as every one that readeth may easily understand. I do mar∣vell then that you should overpasse this place in si∣lence. But let us now come to the meaning of the text; to prove the necessity of Regeneration our Saviour doth use this medium, that which is borne of flesh is flesh. Because man is polluted in his natural birth, therefore he needs have a new birth. By flesh we do not understand that masse and lump of the body which we carry about us, for in it there is neither good nor e∣vil; but our Lord Christ doth here intend the corruption of na∣ture as it is opposed to the sanctifying work of the Spirit: for so flesh and Spirit are commonly opposed in Scripture. This may more particularly be seen in Rom. 8. in the beginning of the Chapter. Therefore our Saviours argument is much in effect, because the nature of man is defiled with original sinne from the very birth the remedy must be proportionable to the disease,☞ it is necessary that every one that shall enter into the Kingdome of heaven must be new born. There be divers cause? that do bring men to a habit of sinne, and there are divers means to be used to break of such habits. First, men are brought
to a custome in sinning by example; and therefore the Word commands that we should turn away from such evil communi∣cations as will corrupt good manners. Secondly, men are brought to a habit in sinne by long custome, which is as it were a second nature: and therefore the Scripture speaks that we should break off such kind of customes by a kind of violence. Thirdly, men come to a practise of sinne by temptation, as A∣chan saw the wedge of gold and the babylonish garment and coveted it: and therefore the Scriptures do every where say that we should resist the temptations of the world, the allurements of the flesh, and to pray unto the Lord that he would not lead us into temptation. These are in part the causes of the habit and practise of sin, but they are not the original & the principal cause; that lies higher, in the natural birth: There is a ne∣cessity of Regeneration by the Spirit because all that are borne in the natural way are defiled with sinne. They then who maintain the purity of the natural birth as the Examiners, Mr. Everard, and the separate Churches do, overthrow the doctrine of the foundation of Christ. Now, Mr. Everard,☞ let us come to your arguments. First, you say, we could not sinne in Adam, our souls and bodies were not together in him, and how we could commit sinne you know not, therefore believe not. page 127. But Sir, if you would seriously consider the words of the Apostle, Rom. 5.12. by one man sinne entred into the world, &c. You should finde that all then were in one publick man, and sinned in him; and this is the reason which the Apostle giveth why death passed universally upon all men, because in one all have sinned; his one act was the act of all. But for more abundant confirmation let us consider the scope of the text. The drift of the Apostle is to draw a parallel between both the Adams, Frist in those points wherein they do agree. Secondly, in those wherein they do disagree. For the points of agreement, the most remarkable to the purpose in hand are these. First, the two Adams are described as two persons which are the roots to their several and respective posterities. The first Adam is a root to all his branches, and the second Adam is a root to all branches. I marvail then what delusion hath seized upon the
Examiners, who do positively maintain, that the first Adam is not here intended as he was the Father of us all. Secondly, they are described by the plurality of branches, as the first A∣dam had a multiplicity of branches out of him, so the second A∣dam had a plurality of branches out of him. And therefore the Apostle doth elegantly proceed in the collation: as by the of∣fence of one, many be dead; so the gift of grace which is by one man Jesus Christ hath abounded unto many. As by one mans offence death reigned by one: much more they which re∣ceive abundance of grace shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ. And so the Apostle doth compare one Adam to one Christ; Adam the root of all his branches, Christ the root of all his branches. Thirdly, they are set forth by the passage of the common sap out of each root into its branches, respectively. And therefore the Apostle speaketh concerning the first Adam, by one man sinne entred into the world, and death by sinne, and death passed over all men. The common sap then that passed out of the first man into all his branches, is first sinne, and then death by sinne. By sinne is here principally meant original sinne and all other sinnes that flow from this as the fountain. But if further enquiry be made concerning the passage of sin & death into all the branches that come of Adam, the passage is not all at one and the same instant. It is now five thousand six hundred years since the fall of Adam, and in all this time original sinne hath been in continual flux and succession. As in several generations men come to be born, so they actually participate of the sap that comes from the first root. The like may be said of the second Adam and of his branches. They which receive abundance of grace and of the gift of righteous∣nesse shall reigne in life by one Jesus Christ. ver. 17. The sap then that cometh from Christ as the common root, is grace and spiritual life; this doth flow out of him into all his branch∣es. And for the passage thereof, it is not all at one time, but as men come to receive the gift of righteousnesse and to be born anew they come to the actual fruition thereof. For, let the death of Christ be never so largely tendred to the lost sonnes of men, there is no actual participation of him till he be received by faith. The words of the text are most emphatical and sig∣nificant,
They which receive abundance of grace and the gift of righteousnesse shall reigne in life. As who would say in plainer termes, they only shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ who do particularly receive the gift of righteousnesse which is generally offered. This is the undoubted meaning of the text. And therefore for you to say that we could not sinne in Adam, our soules and bodies not being in him, how do you answer the scope of the text? by the disobedience of one, many were made sinners, by one man sinne entred into the world. Adam, is here set forth as the root of all his branches, and al the branches were in him as the first publick man. What can you or the Examiners say to this? 2ly. you say that we had no Law in Adam. Now where there is no Law, there is no transgression; & if we had received any Law, it must have been made known to us, but there was none made known to us, and therefore there was no Law. page 127. To this I rejoyn,☜ if there was no Law given to us in Adam, how come we to be guilty of his transgression? how come we to bear the burden of his sinne? why doth the Apostle speak so plainly, by the diso∣bedience of one, many were made sinners? We must then ne∣cessarily come to affirme this for a truth, that the Law was given to Adam as a publick man, and in him to all his posterity. And, whereas you say, that there was no Law made known to us at that time, therefore we had no interest in the Law: why do not you infer by the like reason, when the second Adam, the Lord Jesus Christ, suffered death upon the Crosse, because at that very time the merit of his death was not made known, you had no part or portion in that death which was one thousand six hundred years before you were born. If you will be loth to stand to the latter, to lose your priviledge by the second Adam, I pray you give us leave to maintain the dammage that was brought in by the first Adam. And yet further; to take away all scruples from tender consciences, if it might seem harsh for all the sonnes of men to perish by the disobedience of one man, especially when the Law was not made known to them in their own individual persons, but in the common root of all man∣kind, let us consider how the second man came as a remedy to free the same miserable sonnes of men from the state of sinne
and death, especially when they neither thought nor knew a∣ny thing concerning the means of their salvation. The great∣nesse of our misery by Adam, doth amplifie and set forth the mer∣rit of Christ in the fulnesse thereof. Now then when the Ex∣aminers and you both go about to extenuate the misery of the fall, you do rob Christ of the glory of his grace. You say, The branch hath not any thing, but what it hath by dependance upon the tree. Now it is not so with us; for that which we call the Principal part of man, his soul or spirit was not dependant upon Adam, but had his dependancy from the very same fountain from whence Adam received his, even from God himself. p. 128. Here I confess there is a great question concerning the manner of the propagation of Original sin, and men do wearie themselves very much to find out, whether the soul be by infusion or by traduction? But I see no cause why we should intangle our selves in that difficultie.☞ For, whether the soul be infused, or whether it be traduced, or which way so∣ever it be conveyed, we must necessarily affirme in the continu∣all flux of original sinne from father to child, each father doth propagate it to his child, as Adam did to the whole posterity. If this be not a real truth, what shall we make of the speech of our Saviour, that which is born of the flesh is flesh? Joh. 3.6. The Father then doth propagate the corruption of nature to his child as he himself did first receive it by propagation. We must needs then yield the truth of the thing, though there be some difficulty in the discovery of the manner. But that which doth very much satisfie me in this point is the consideration of that speech to Adam, and in him to all mankind; be fruitful and multiply, replenish the earth and subdue it, Gen. 1.28. From whence I gather, that the propagation of mankind doth chiefly depend upon this promise established in the beginning. And therefore suppose that be true which you say, that the soul doth come immediately from God, the question is whether in matter of generation, in matter of union of the soul with the body, in matter of propagation of the kind, the child doth not depend upon the father as the branch doth upon the root. And doth not the Lord continue still to performe that promise that he made in the beginning? Surely, by what power the
earth doth continue to bring forth herbs, and every thing doth fructifie according to its kind; by the same ordinance, blessing and promise of God doth the father beget the child, to con∣tinue a posterity upon the earth. To the right solution of the question then, we must give a double answer. For if it be de∣manded in the first place, why a man doth generate a man? It is from the Ordinance and blessing of God, and from that fun∣damental Law, increase and multiply. But if it be further in∣quired, why a sinful father doth continue to beget a sinful child? the traduction of original sinne is from Adam, the common root of the corruption of nature ever since the fall. For the fountain being corrupted the corruption doth go down the stream, and is in perpetual flux and succession from the Spring head. But to make the matter good, you go on, If the soules and spirits of all that stock that came from Adam should have been lineally derived, then they must have returned again to him, page 228. This doth not follow for by the like reason, why do you not argue concerning the branches and leaves of all the trees and forests in the world, because they have their deriva∣tion from the root therefore they must return into the root a∣gain; But you adde further, admit (say you) we had such a being in Adam as the branches had in the tree, and produce actions in a natural way, being prone thereunto, yet that which is to be expected must have been such fruits as were natural to the tree and no other; but sinne was no natural fruit, but an accident, page 129. Indeed if you take nature in its first essence and institution, it is good, and all sinne is unnatural and acci∣dental; but if you take nature in its vicious qualities, as it is since the fall, then it is depraved in Adam, and our immediate parents are so many conduit-pipes of the corruption of nature. If this be not so, what can be the meaning of our Saviours words, that which is born of flesh is flesh? This sheweth plainly that Adam is not onely the root of nature, but also since the fall a root of the corruption of nature; and upon this ground lyes a necessity of regeneration, or having a new nature from Christ the second Adam. Thirdly, you say, If we must own all Adams actions sinful, as our acts, then pray give me leave to appropriate as large a
portion in all his good actions. For why should I not plead for as much propriety in all his good actions, as some will per∣swade me I have in all his evill actions, seeing I was as much in him before the fall, as since? And then I might say as well, that I walked in the Garden, and drest it, and gave names to all creatures, page 129. If this will give you content, I know nothing to the contrary but we may affirme, that all mankind were in Adam when he walked in the Garden, and gave names to all cattell. And without question you should have had as great a part in his good actions if he had stood, as now you have a share in the evil of that action, by which he fell. To make this appear, in that state as we are now restored by Christ, Man hath Lordship and Dominion over the creature. If you will fetch this dominion from that great Charter, Let them have dominion over the fish of the Sea, the fowle of the aire, &c. Gen. 1.26. Then you must needs conclude, that the priviledge which was given to Adam, was given to all his posterity. Yea, in that particular case, when the Lord brought all creatures to Adam to see what names he would give them, he did bring the creatures to him, as to the head of all man∣kind; and he not onely in his own private, but in their publick right did give names to all cattell. The like may be said of the institution of marriage in the beginning, & of a mans leaving his father and mother, and cleaving to his wife: This did not so immediately concern Adam in his own person, as all mankind that should come of him in succeeding generations, Mat. 19.4. Fourthly, you say, If all men did sinne in Adam when he did eate the forbiden fruit, why might it not as well be said, when Adam beleeved, I beleeved; when Adam repented, I repented? page 130. I answer, the case is not equal, for when Adam did eate the forbidden fruit, he did this as a publick person, as the root of all mankind: but when he did believe, he did that as a particular member of Christ. I may say on the other side, when Christ suffered upon the Crosse to satisfie the justice of God, this was all one as if Adam and Paul themselves had satis∣fied the justice of God. What Christ did, he did for them, and when he did it, they did it in him and by him. The like
answer may be given to that question, why do not the regene∣rate propagate grace as well as original sinne? The answer is plain, piety is not hereditary, as original sinne is, neither doth holinesse come into us by nature, but by grace; not generation but regeneration doth intitle us to salvation. And therefore in the aforementioned case, when Adam did beget Cain in his own likenesse, he did not beget him as the sonne of his faith, but the sonne of his corrupt nature. The same may be said of the natural Progeny of all believers, they are born in original sinne as well as the children of Infidels. The Jew that was cir∣cumcised himself, begat one that was uncircumcised. It is there∣fore a poor and a weak shift of the Examiners, (who, to il∣lude the force of that Scripture, I was conceived in sinne and born in iniquity,) do not shunne to tell us that Davids father was a pious man in Israel, and his mother was a godly. Ma∣tron, and being both of them well grown in grace before they begat this their youngest sonne, they were more like to convey grace and holinesse (if that be communicable) than sinne unto him. Be like then, these new Divines think the grace of God runnes in a blood, at least wise, that it is a more probable truth than to beleeve the propagation of the sin of the na∣ture. Now you come to open the text, and here say you, If we had all committed sinne in Adam, then of what use were these words (by the offence of one?) I do not finde such a saying parallelled, viz that one mans offence can be called all mens act that followed him, and that without their knowledge and consent. page 131. If in this point you would seriously ponder the Scripture, you will have your doubts resolved. The words of the Apostle are plain, by the disobedience of one, many were made sinners. How came they to be sinners, to have the guilt of sinne imputed, and original sinne derived with all the effects and fruits thereof, but by the disobedience of one man? If that be true which is affirmed by you, that one mans disobedience cannot be called all mens act, by the strictnesse and rigour of such a position, you will take away the very ground and strength of the Apostles argument, and destroy the parallel which he doth draw between Adam and Christ. The whole
tenor of his discourse is turned upon this hing, as the disobedi∣ence of one man is the act of all the posterity that came after him: so the obedience of one man is the act of all the post∣erity that beleeve in him. And whereas you say, you cannot finde such a passage as this parallelled in Scripture; I would entreat you to consider the temporal judgments of God as they have been poured upon several families. The house of Eli were to suffer for many generations, when all that came of that linage did not know what Eli did, neither did they give con∣sent to the sinnes of Hophni and Phinehas; yet for all this it is clear that the sinne did redound to the posterity. 1 Sam. 2.32. Now you come to acquaint us with some of your observa∣tions, and you tell us, I have heard say, and true it is, that what being we had in Adam, we had it assoon as himself, and so, if we had done the same actions, he had done nothing before us, page 131. In this I do agree with you, that it is true that the whole nature of man, as it hath in time subsisted in thousands and millions, did originally subsist in Adam as in the common root. I do agree also that what Adam did as the first publick man, he did it in our stead, yet, if you will go to moments and scruples of time, we must say also that in order of existence, A∣dam had a being before us; we must say that Adams personal sinne was before the pollution of nature, but our nature is first polluted in the corrupted masse before we come to commit sin in person, nay before we come personally to exist. You have a second answer to the words of the text, you say, If we had all committed that sinne in Adam, that he was called to account for, then we should have sinned after the same si∣militude: but we sinned not after the same similitude; and so we committed not the same sinne. And here also I yield, ac∣cording to the strictnesse of termes, that we could not siune af∣ter the similitude of Adams transgression: for Adam sinned by a deliberate will and by a free choyce, so could not we. Yet neverthelesse, though we could not sinne after the same simili∣tude, we might sinne in him as the first publick man. For proof of this, read but the words of the text, Neverthelesse death reign∣ed from Adam to Moses even ever them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, verse 14. The A∣postle
speaketh of Infants for two thousand five hundred years, from the fall of Adam to the giving of the Law upon Mount Si∣nai. Here I demand, how could death reign over the Infants aforesaid? No Law was then publickly given upon Mount Si∣nai, and the Infants had no understanding, neither could they give any consent of will: How then could death justly reign o∣ver them, seeing they never committed any sinne in their own persons? Though they did not, yet they sinned in the first man, and by the reign of death universally over all men, over Infants as well as others, the Apostle proveth this assertion. How weakly then do the Examiners of the late Confession ar∣gue, when they say, surely, If the Apostle had beleeved any such thing as the reigning of death over all men by the first mans sinne, he would not have omitted that, and onely men∣tioned from Adam to Moses? page 81. Though he doth mention the reign of death from Adam to Moses; this doth not imply any thing to the contrary, but that death hath reigned ever since. The words are plain, death hath passed over all men to condemnation. But there was lesse reason for it, that death should reigne from Adam to Moses, when the Law was not publickly delivered, especially over Infants, that never sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression. But seeing experience hath plainly shewed in this whole interval of time that death hath reigned over Infants; by this medium the A∣postle proveth them to have been guilty of sinne. How guilty of sinne? Not in their own persons, for they never committed any; but onely in Adam the common root of all mankind. And so that universal affirmation is made good, by one man sinne entred into the world and death by sinne, and death hath passed over all men to condemnation. The universality of death doth prove the universality of sinne in the first man. But you further stand upon a priviledge to interpret the words of the text, why in such a case as this (say you) may not I have the same priviledge to give an exposition of these words (in whom all have sinned,) seeing no sound Scripture can be given to e∣vince the conscience of any certainty of committing sinne in A∣dam? page 133. For that freedome of expounding one Scrip∣ture by the accounts of another,☜ by my consent you shall have
it; for I think the strongest Demonstration in divine matters is drawn from the harmony of Scripture. And upon these grounds we do proceed, because the whole Gospel in a manner is con∣cerning the regenerating work of the Spirit. Hence we do ar∣gue that the nature is defiled. And because the promise is to beleevers and their seed in the last dispensation, we do hereupon conclude the right to the seal: as I have already proved against you in my Treatise of Infant Baptisme. But seeing you are so confident in it, that no sound Scripture can be given to evince the conscience of any certainty of our committing sinne in A∣dam; I pray you deal ingenuously, and according to your own principles, do you not beleeve that Infants do bear he punishment of Adams sinne? How could they justly bear the punishment, and be no way guilty of the transgression? The scope of the Apostle is plainly to the contrary, because death reigneth over all, over Infants as well as others, from hence he concludeth, that in one all have sinned. If you do well consider (by denying original sinne, and by taking away the corruption of nature as derived from the first man.) you do in effect call in question whether there be any regenerating grace to be had from the second man. And so when you tell us that no sound Scripture can be given to prove the certainty of our committing sinne in Adam, you do as good as say, no sound Scripture can be given to evince the certainty of satisfaction made to the justice of God by the suffering of Christ. In this matter the Apostle sheweth, that the first man is the figure of him that is to come. If that be true then which you and the Examiners teach, that the guilt of the first mans sinne doth not redound to his posterity, you must say also that the obedience of the se∣cond man, and the free guilt do not redound to those that ap∣pertain to him. And this is point blank to go against the scope of Scripture. Now let us hear what your interpretation is, and what ac∣count you do give of the Apostles meaning. I will repeat your own expressions more largely, that the world may both read and give sentence. These are your words, I shall take some pains in opening that place, 2 Cor. 5.21. He made him to be sinne for us, who knew no sinne. By this meanes we may more
fully understand in what sense we were made sinners in Adam, and knew no sinne. Wherein it will appear that we were as guiltlesse of that act, with reference to the fact committed by us, as Christ was guiltlesse in committing the sinnes of the world. Therefore take notice that Christ was said to be made sinne for us, in no other sense but this, viz. He hath laid up∣on him that punishment which was due for sinne; he was wound∣ed for our transgressions, he was reckoned amongst transgressors. But for any man so to affirme it, would be as large an untruth as men and Divels could devise. For it is one thing to be made sinne, and another thing to act sinne. Now Christ was said to be made sinne as one that had taken upon him such losses as did accompany sin. So those dammages that were to befall the world for Adams sinne, Christ is said to bear them, not in their essence or being, but in the demerit of them. As he was made sinne, not knowing a deceiving heart in himself, so we were made sinners by Adam, who knew no such sinne. And many such passages you have to the same purpose, page. 133, 134. Now I leave it to the Reader to judge to what passe you are come. And here so farre as you affirme that Christ himself was free from sinne when he did bear the penalties of our sins, we do agree with you. And we further also assent, that all the Children of Adam do bear the punishment of his disobedi∣ence. But whereas you say, that we are onely made sinne in A∣dam after the same manner as Christ was made sinne for us, I do here admire at your boldnesse in many respects: First, when Christ was made sinne for us, by his own voluntary un∣dertaking he was made a surety and a propitiation for to satisfie the justice of God for our sinnes. Will you say the like of all the Infants that come of Adam, that by the merit of their sufferings they should propitiate his transgression? Secondly, when Christ was made sinne for us he knew no sinne, he ne∣ver committed sinne, he had no natural pollution from the birth. Now it is not so with us, we bear the guilt of Adams sinne as copartners with him in the common pollution of na∣ture. Thirdly, when the Apostle saith, he made him sinne for us that knew no sinne; here you must necessarily understand that he speaks of the peculiar prerogative of the Lord Jesus
Christ, that he did bear the burden of sinne when he knew no sinne in himself. Now then, if that be true which the Exami∣ners and you do affirme, that Infants are free from the natural pollution, and you here mainly stand upon it that they onely bear the burden of Adams sinne when they knew no such sinne; I would entreat you to judge in your own conscience, whether by such a position of the purity of the natural birth you do not make all Infants equal with Christ, and if it be true, as you affirme, that they bear the burden of Adams sinne when they knew no sinne, why doth the Apostle speak so peculiarly, so emphatically, so singularly of Christ above all other men, that he was made sinne for us when he knew no sinne? By this er∣ror you do intrench upon the sovereign prerogative of the Lord Jesus, and I fear, (unlesse you and the Examiners repent) you may one day dearly answer for it. But you have an evasion, for say you, we are as guiltlesse of that act with reference unto the fact committed by us as Christ was guiltlesse in committing the sinnes of the world: But this restriction (as the act committed by us) will not mollifie the matter. For though the sinne of Adam was not committed by any act or will of ours immediate∣ly in our own person,☞ yet it was mediatly committed by the free act of our first parent. In this case, according to Scripture, the will of the first man doth passe for the will of the whole na∣ture, and of all that do partake of the nature. And this is the meaning of the Apostle, by one man sinne-entred into the world. By sinne he meaneth original sinne, or the sinne of the nature, and this saith he entred into the world; but how? not by the proper private and particular will of every individual man, but by the common parent of all mankind. And for that expression of yours, that we are as guiltlesse of Adams sinne, as Christ is guiltlesse of the sinnes of the world; I do ad∣mire that you did not tremble when you wrote such things as these.☞ For we can plainly prove from the scope of the Scrip∣ture, that Adam by his disobedience did not only fasten guilt up∣on his posterity, but by that act of his he did taint and defile the whole nature of mankind. Will you say the like of Christ, that he did not onely bear the guilt of the sinnes of the world, but that his nature was also defiled with the lusts of the world. This
were (to use your own language) as large an untruth as men or Devils could devise. Now let us make enquiry into the true original of your mistake, you think the words by the disobedience of one, many were made sinners, Rom. 5. Do allude to that other passage, He made him sinne for us who knew no sinne, 2 Cor. 5. And from the collation of both you conclude, as Christ was made sin for us who knew no deceiving heart in himself: so we were made sinners by Adam who knew no such sinne. But here you are grossely mistaken, when you take these two for parallel Scriptures which are not parallel. The text in the Corinthians is meantionely of the punishment of sinne, that Christ did bear the burden of our iniquities. But the text in the Romans is not onely meant of the punishment and the guilt of sinne, but also of the depravation of the nature of man. The scope of the place is plainly to shew that by the disobedience of one, many were constituted sinners or sinful men. And the word in the o∣riginal is ordinarily taken for men who have the habit and the nature of sinne in them. Peter said depart from me I am a sinful man, Luke 5.8. And our Saviour in another place, whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words in this adul∣terous and sinful generation, Mark 8.38. And the Apostle in the Epistle to the Romans, that sinne by the Commandment might appear exceeding sinful. Chap 6. verse 13. In these and such like places the word  is taken for such a one as is a sinner by intrinsecal denomination. And therefore in the present case when the Apostle saith by the disobedience of one many were made  sinners, as our translation hath it, his meaning is, they were made sinful men, that is, they had the nature and the habit of sinne derived to them from the dis∣obedience of the first man. And thus you may plainly see that the two texts which you put for like are very unlike; and this is one chief ground of your error. Again, your deductions are every was as unsound, for say you, at Christ was made sinne for us when he knew no sinne: so we are made sinners for Adam when we knew no such sinne. And to confirme this, you further tell us, it is one thing to be made sinne so as to bear the burden of Adams sinne, and ano∣ther
thing to act sinne. But whereas you speak of two things onely, you should have mentioned three. It is one thing to be made sinne, and another thing to be made sinful, and a third to act sinne. If you speak of being made sinne, so Christ onely was made a sacrifice for sinne, to satisfie the justice of God. But if you speak of being made sinful, so is the whole race of mankind, by the disobedience of the first man. And in the third place, if you speak of committing the act of sinne, this onely men can do when they have the use of reason and under∣standing. From all which we conclude, though Infants can∣not be said to act sinne, yet neverthelesse through the disobedi∣ence of the first man they may have the pollution of nature. Further, you say, as we are made sinners by Adam, so we are made righteous by Christ, and yet had no hand in those astions that made us righteous; In the like case, we were made sin∣ners by Adams disobedience, and yet had no hand in his so act∣ing. To say the truth, if you go to the personal act particular∣ly and individually, we had no hand either in the obedience of the one, or the disobedience of the other; yet in a general sense the acts of the two Adams are the act of the whole posterity that come of them. As for example, the first man by his diso∣bedience did defile the whole nature without the knowledg, wil, motion, or act of any of the persons that were to come of him; yet so really and effectually, that none can come by propagation from him, but they partake of the guilt of his sinne, and the pol∣lution of his nature, ver. 12.14, 17. So in the like case, the second man did satisfie the justice of God, and sanctifie our na∣ture without any personal knowledge, will, motion or act of ours; yet so really and effectually, that none of us can truly be∣leeve but we must some way come to partake of that nature. To as many as received him hath he given this power to be cal∣led the sons of God, to them that do beleeve on his name: being born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of man, but of God, Joh. 1.12, 13. Further, you say, we had as little capacity to act in Adam, as we had to act in Christ. For this must be granted, that when God makes the creature capable to act, he makes him as capable to act for himself as for the Devil; Else he had bet∣ter
provided for his enemies than for himself, page 137. These also are the whimsies of the Examiners of the late Confession. For they (speaking of the indifferency of the will) tell us in plain termes, that as Adams will before his fall did hang in an aequilibrium to good or bad, and enclined more to that which was good than that which was evil: so they hold the same of the will of all men else before their personal fall. To all which I answer, that these are dangerous speeches, which derogate much from the grace of God in Christ. For whosoever they be that do either lessen the misery of nature, and cry up the na∣tural ability of the will, they do in sense take that away from Christ, which they give to men. As for that objection of yours, that God should better provide for his enemies than for him∣self, hold your self contented, God is able to secure his own glory, though all men are born in original sinne; and the A∣postle doth plainly give the reason, the Lord doth quicken us when we are dead in trespasses and sinnes, when we walk ac∣cording to the course of this world, when we serve divers lusts and pleasures, when we are by nature the children of wrath as well as others. He doth quicken us when we are in this estate, that in the ages to come he may shew the exceeding riches of his grace towards us in Jesus Christ, Ephes. 2. ver. 1.2, 3, &c. Therefore the declaration of the glory of Christ in giving spi∣ritual life to them that are dead, must necessarily suppose men to be by nature dead in the passes and sinnes, that they may be the greater objects of mercy. If you go in this method, though all Infants are involved in original sinne, though all are mise∣rable by nature, yet God hath better provided for him∣self than for his enemies; when his grand designe is through the miserie of man to shew the riches of his grace. We will now proceed to Psal. 51. ver. 5. And here let us see how many shifts you have to elude the force and manifest sense of this Scripture. In the beginning you agree that we bear the punishment of another mans sinne. But say you, that children have any spawn of sinne cleaving to them, as seed to hatch and gender in, and by any thing received from Adam as we sprang from his loynes, this I deny, page 136. This al∣so is the judgement of the Examiners in many pages together.
Now if this be so, that infants have no such spawn of original sinne in them, why do the Scriptures speak so largely of the pollution of nature? why is it said of man in general that the thoughts of the imaginations of his heart are onely evil from his childhood? Why doth the Lord Christ so earnestly presse a necessity of regeneration? Why doth he urge it upon such a ground as this, that which is born of the flesh is flesh! There is nothing more clear than that the nature of man is wholly de∣filed from the very birth. And for the Psalmist in his particu∣lar, though it be true that he did bear the burden of Adams sinne, yet it is not the whole, nor the full truth. The full truth is this, that he was conceived in sinne, that in the conception his nature was defiled, and the natural defilement was the cause of the two great sinnes of murther and adultery. And here∣upon in relation to his natural pollution he doth pray unto the Lord to give him a new heart, he went to the true root and cause of all the evil. I must needs acknowledge that the Au∣thors of the Examen when they speak of fallen man, they ren∣der true causes of his not willing of good. First, the ignorance of that which is good; the second, a depraved judgment; the third, a want of due remembrance; the fourth, the power of temptation; the fifth, the habit and custome of sinne, page 132. These are indeed true causes, but they are too short and too narrow in their determination, they do not come to the root of the evil, to the inherent perversenesse of the will it self, and the pollution of the natural birth. When the bottome of a wound is not searched such Mountebanks must needs make a palliate cure. Next you say, If you will take from Davids particular ex∣ample the general condition of all infants, why do not you take the text concerning John his being sanctified from his mothers womb, and argue that all the children of the world are sanctified in that sense as John was sanctified? And if this were so, there would not be so many lazy Priests and others in the world as there be, page 135. For the parallel between David and John, there is no equality betwixt them in the pre∣sent collation. For whereas it is said of John, that he was sanctified from his mothers womb, this was by a peculiar privi∣ledge
granted to him; And whereas David saith, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sinne did my mother conceive me, he doth not speak this as a King, or a Saint, or an Israelite, but in the most general relation as one of the lost sonnes of men fallen in Adam and born in the corrupted masse; and this is the reason why from the particular example of David we draw a general conclusion of the pollution and the defilement of nature in all. But the Authours of the Examen do stifly maintain, that the na∣ture conveyed from Adam to all his posterity in the way of or∣dinary generation is not defiled with sinne. For, say they, some are sanctified from the womb, as Jeremiah and John the Baptist were, and the Virgin Mary might possibly be, page 65. Though this may be admitted, that some of the Saints may be sanctified sooner then others, and the work of sanctification may begin in them from their childhood; yet what is all this to the purpose? It must necessarily be supposed that corruption will have a being in certain moments of time before the grace of God can have its being. Jeremiah was sanctified from his mothers womb, yet he did curse the day of his birth, he did resolve to speak no more to the people in the name of the Lord, he did shew many fruits of the flesh as well as he did manifest many fruits of the Spirit. And therefore to the par∣ticular case, as he did consist of flesh and spirit, in him the flesh & the Old man had its being before the Spirit and the new man. This I beleeve none can rationally deny, though they will ac∣knowledge also that he was sanctified from his mothers womb. But, Mr. Everard, to return to you again. For the trouble you have with the lazy Priests, I fear Sir, the more godly, the more conscientious, the more laborious any Minister is, the worse he is in your opinion, and in the opinion of such as you are: if he oppose the innovations and errors of the times. But I pray God give you repentance, else you will have an heavy account to make one day for all your hard speeches a∣gainst the godly Ministry. For the text, Mat. 18.3. Except ye be converted and be∣come as little children ye cannot enter into the Kingdome of heaven. Here say you, If infants be so filthy, why doth our Saviour set such a pattern before us? And the Authours of the
Examen also, page 70, speak much to the same effect? doth not our Saviour (say they) declare the state of children both to be innocent and blessed, when first he makes it terminus ad quem, the mark unto which in our conversion and regene∣ration we must return? And then tells us, that the Kingdome of heaven belongs to such, and is replenished with such? I answer, in parables and similitudes we are to look onely to the scope. Our Saviour speaketh of the unjust Steward of putting the talent to the exchanger, of his own coming like a thief in the night. What then, is it his intent to approve of the evil of these wayes? No: he doth onely point to something wherein the force of the similitude doth stand? And so in the present case, when he speaketh of humbling our selves, and becoming like little children, it is not his purpose to ascribe such perfection to them, as though all infants were free from original sinne, or that their innocency were the terminus ad quem, the terme to which our conversion and regeneration must return. These are very strange deductions. The words of our Saviour are therefore to be taken only in a restrained sense, that in affectation of worldly glory we should be like little chil∣dren. There is no such distance between the children of Prin∣ces, and the children of beggars, but all are one. The mind of the Lord is onely this, that we should come to act the same things by the power of grace, as little children do thorough the weaknesse and infirmity of age. We should not look upon Lords and Ladies, upon learning or parts, or upon any other external excellency in comparison of the grace of God. Com∣monly men that have these things are very proud of them, and do look upon them too much; and to these the exhortation is given in special, that they should be humbled, and become as little children. There lyeth then a palpable and grosse fallacy in your whole discourse, when you take the words absolutely that all infants are free from sinne, when our Saviour speaketh in a particular sense only of the act and execution of this or that particular evil. Now you proceed, and tell us, it was never heard that children had any sinne by way of act; and by way of omission, you cannot make it good that they ever received a command
or were capable of any command from God, page 138. Answ. What we have learned we are willing to acknowledge, and though we never heard that infants had any sinne in them by any act of their own, yet we have learned from Scriptures, yea from the very first principles of the faith, that they have it by contagion, and the disobedience of the first man▪ The words of our Saviour are plain, Joh. 3.8. That which is born of the flesh is flesh: And that of the Apostle, Rom. 5.12. By one man sinne entred into the world, and death by sinne. And many such places there are to prove infants to be guilty of sinne by the disobedience of the first man, and to be involved in the pollution of nature by hereditary contagion. But because you and the Examiners are so strict upon the point, I pray you re∣solve me in this one case. When the promise was made, the seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head, was not this the promise of Christ to Adam after his fall? If infants therefore are absolutely acquitted from the guilt of Adams sinne, as being another mans act; if they be free from the pollution of nature, to what end was the promise of Christ? How did he come in the nature of a Physician to cure when there was no disease? Where there is no malady, there needs no remedy. And whereas you go about to free infants from the sinne of omission, because they are not capable of a command, I pray you shew the reason why the Lord was so strict in his command to the Jewish infant that he should be circumcised upon the eighth day? and that the uncircumcised man-child should be cut off from his people? Gen. 17.11.12, &c. For my part I know no reason of the strictnesse of this Law, but that the Lord would signifie to beleevers under this dispensation that there infants were born in original sinne, and that it was not safe to omit the remedy for that disease. And though in strictnesse of termes we will yeeld so farre to Corvinus and to Julian the Pelagian, that there is no particular command that forbids an infant to be born in original sinne; yet for all this they must needs allow, that the Law was given to reveal, to convince, and to discover the sinne of the nature, and by the discovery thereof to drive a man to Christ, to look to him onely for sanctifying and regenerating glrace, S. Paul saith, the Law is spiritual, and I am carnal, sold under
sinne. And in the same text, I had not known sinne, except the Law had said, thou shalt not covet, Rom. 7. You go on, for this sinne called original, if infants had committed it, God would have called them to repentance for it, when they had come to years at least wise; but I can safe∣ly say, that there is no man living that to this day ever made it appear to be the mind of God for any man to repent of that sinne. Truly Sir your confidence is very great, and you have more boldnesse than truth on your side. For we may beleeve that you never heard of the promises nor the commands mentioned in Scripture when you dare affirme such things as these. When the Lord promiseth in the new Covenant, I will take out of their bowels a heart of stone, and will give them a heart of flesh, Ezek. 36. By the heart of stone he means a hard heart, and a sinful nature that every infant did bring into the world; he doth promise to take away the corruption of nature, and that he will sanctifie his people by his Spirit. So for the com∣mands of God, we read every where that men are exhorted to put off the Old Adam-like disposition. That ye put off con∣cerning the former conversation the Old man, which is corrupt ac∣cording to the deceivable lusts, Ephes. 4.22. By the Old man he doth mean the carnal disposition which we have from Adam by natural generation. This corrupted disposition of the flesh he would have the beleeving Ephesians, and in them, all others, to subdue and mortifie. And further, if you look to the right use of Baptisme now, as of circumcision of old, you shall finde that the institution of these things doth primarily intend the do∣ing away of the sinne of the nature, as I have already shewed in my Treatise of Infant Baptisme. Therefore I cannot but admire at your boldnesse, when you stand so much upon it that you can safely say, that God never called men to repentance for o∣riginal sinne. I am so farre from your judgment, that I think the greatest part of repentance lyes in the mortification of the sinne of the nature. But you have an evasion, this sinne called original sinne, if infants had committed it, God would have called them to repentance. Here you put that upon us which we do not speak, and I know no solid Writer in the world that doth use such an expression of committing original sinne. It is proper
onely to men of ripe years to commit sinne. For original sin, we say that is onely by propagation, thorough the disobedi∣ence of the first man, and when men come to be sanctified by the Spirit of God they are qualified with inward principles to purge out the sin of the nature. Neither doth your argument drawn from the example of Christ any whit promote your cause. You say, If this prin∣ciple should finde a being in the world, that every infant was born in sinne, because lineally derived from Adam, then where will you get water to wash your hands of that grand absurdity, to wit, that Jesus Christ was not free from origi∣nal sinne? for then he must have a share because he came from the loynes of a woman the Daughter of Adam, page 139. To this I answer, if you will make Christ and all Infants to run parallel in the purity of their natural birth, then why did Christ die for them? why did he sanctifie their nature? There is no need of salvation by the merit of Chri,st where there is no guilt of sinne. There needs no sanctification of the Spirit, where there is no pollution of nature. Why do not you exclude all Infants from these as you do from the water of baptisme? For your Argument drawn from the example of Christ. If you build so much upon that, I would entreat you to consider two things; First, why he did assume our na∣ture? Secondly, assuming our nature, how came he to be ex∣empt from original sinne? For the first, he did assume our na∣ture with all the miseries thereof, sinne onely excepted, that he might make expiation of sin in that nature that had sinned. He did not take the nature of Adam before his fall nor that hu∣mane nature which the Saints shall have in the state of glory, but meerely the nature of man clothed with all the infirmities thereof, to sanctifie that nature, and to satisfie divine justice. To this purpose the Apostle speaketh, Rom. 8.3. What the Law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh, God sent his Son in the similitude of sinful flesh and for sinne condemned sinne in the flesh. In these words we may note, that because Christ came in the similitude of sinful flesh, all flesh besides his, of infants as well as others was sinful flesh; onely Christ came in the similitude of sinful flesh. He had the reality of our nature with all the
miseries thereof, onely he was born in the similitude of our sin∣fulnesse, that he might satisfie the justice of God. And for the second point, how he came to be free from original sinne, this is plainly expressed in the articles of the Creed; He was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary. For his conception, that part of the Virgins flesh was so sanctified, by the overshadowing of the Holy Spirit, that it might be free from the natural contagion, and that the nature of God and the nature of man together might make one person. And that which may further amplifie the truth of this, Christ was not born by vertue of that promise, increase and multiply; for this since the fall hath filled the world with sinners: but he was born by vertue of the special promise, the seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head. And this is the true reason, for though Christ was born of the Virgin Mary, a Daughter of Adam, though he had the common nature of all mankind for truth and substance, yet he was made free from original sinne by the mean of a wonderful generation. And in this matter by way of retortion we may turn your own weapons upon your self, and upon the Examiners. For if that be true, that all infants are free from natural pollution, what need was there that the Son of God should be conceived by the Holy Ghost, and be born of the Virgin Mary? His conception needed not to have been by the Holy Ghost in case the natural generation did not necessa∣rily inforce the propagation of original sinne. These extraor∣dinary means would have been superfluous in case he might have been exempt from all sinne in the ordinary way. The arguments which you further alledge are as invalid as the former. You say, If we were in the transgression assoon as Adam himself, how come we to derive it from him? page 139. To the satisfying of this doubt, I would entreat you to distin∣guish between the things that are attributed to Adam as a pub∣lick man, and the things that are ascribed to him as a particular person. If you speak of his publick relations as the root and head of all his posterity; It is true, what he did, we did in him, we were in the transgression assoon as himself was, his sin was not so much his own as the sin of the humane nature. But if
you speak of him as a particular person, according to the order of existence he is the first of the race, and so in succession of generations all that were in the corrupted masse, as they come to be born severally and individually, to derive from him. In a sense therefore it is true that we were in the transgression assoon as himself was. It is the Apostles own expression in whom all have sinned. Yet in flux and succession of generati∣ons it is as true that he did go before, and all others did follow after in their respective times. Next you argue, If we sinned in him, why might not we have sinned without him? how came we all to be of one mind? page 139. You may I confesse make such a supposition, and a thousand more of the like kind, and there will be no end of your cavil∣ling. But the Scriptures tell us plainly that one man was made in the beginning, he was the root of all mankind, and by this one man sinne entred into the world: If this seem harsh to you, to the Examiners, and to others, that all should be brought un∣der a necessity of sinning and perishing by the disobedience of one man, this should pacifie your minds, that all are brought under a pos∣sibility of salvation by the obedience of the second man. This is the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles. Take heed then, lest by diminishing the sinne of the first man you do not take away from the grace and the blessing brought in by the second. If your nature was never defiled, what need have you of a Christ? What need of a new nature? What need of regeneration of the Spirit. I hope the Examiners and you will not say that these are onely for the purging out of actual sinne, or the habit of sin got by imitation. Let us now come to hear your ad∣mirations. I strange (say you) at your hard thoughts of Adam that he had more pronenesse to sinne after the fall than before. If you can bring no proof for what you say for this, or for the like case, then you must excuse my infidelity in the point. You proceed after that manner as your brethren do, they desire to have their infidelity excused, because they do not read in so many letters and syllables of the Baptisme of infants in the new Testament. And so here, you do not read of such and such particular sinnes which Adam did commit after his fall, and
therefore you desire to be excused for your unbeleef in that point. But Sir, If you would look to the harmony of Scrip∣ture you should finde that this testimony is not onely given of Adam, but also of all his posterity. God saw the wickednesse of man that it was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thought of his heart was onely evil from his childhood, Gen. 6.5. If every imagination of his heart was evil from his childhood, then there must be some particular time assigned where this u∣niversal corruption and depravation of nature did begin. If it did begin at the fall (as there begin it must) then you must also necessarily conclude that Adam had a greater pronenesse to sin after the fall than he had before. But say you, If it could be proved that Adam sinned ten thousand times afterward, must we therefore set all his sinnes upon the first sinnes score, page 142? As difficult a point as you make of it, the Apostle doth set all up∣on the disobedience of the first man, as he doth put all upon the obedience of the second man. As by the disobedience of one, ma∣ny were made sinners; so by the obedience of one, many were made righteous, Rom. 5.19. The comparison would be of no value at all if that which is peculiarly spoken to Adam, might be ap∣plied to any other parent whatsoever in respect of his posterity. And of the sinnes which Adam did commit, we are not to ad∣mire why all are set upon the score of the first sinne. When he received original righteousnesse in the beginning, he received it not onely for himself, but also for his whole posterity. And therefore if he had stood, he had conveyed it to all his branches; but falling, he lost it from himself and all his off-spring. And this is the reason why all is charged upon the first sinne, because that was the sinne of a fiduciary or trustee. The parent was entrusted with the whole stock, which was not only his own peculiar, but also the publick losse of all his posterity. If we might suppose that Adam did commit ten thousand sinnes af∣terward, the hurt could not redound to any other but to him∣self onely. For how could he bring dammage to small or great by any disobedient act, seeing he was trusted no more? You now come to declare your judgment, why (say you) might we not have thought it more safe, that that which gave the first occasion to sinnes being, was yet the original cause of all
other sins committed by him? What need we yet to say that sin had any other father or mother than its first parents viz, the Devil and temptation, Joh. 8.44. Answ. I do not de∣ny but in a sense the Devil and temptation may be called the pa∣rents of sinne, because wicked men are led by the temptations of Satan, and do imitate his example. But strange it is that you would have no other parents but the Devil and temptation. This is in plain termes to excuse men, and to make them with∣out blame, when any sinne is committed. The Apostle doth otherwise state the true cause of sinne, every man is drawn a∣way with his own lust, and enticed, and lust when it hath conceived, bringeth forth sinne, Jam. 1.13. The sinful will of man and the lust of his heart, may be a cause that doth procreate sinne as well as the Devil and temptation. And more specially to speak in the case we are now upon, concerning the sinne of the first man; and the traducing of original sinne to all posterity, I do not doubt but the Devil and temptation had a great stroak in the fall of man, but we must go to other causes as well as to them; Adams own defective will was a chief cause: And therefore we read of the great judgments that were inflicted upon him for his disobedience to the command. And for that place of Scripture which you alledge, Joh. 8.44. He that com∣mitteth sinne, is of the Devil; it is most true that men commit sin by the temptation of the Devil, but how doth this prove the point which you undertake, that the Devil is the onely parent of sinne, and that we need go to no other but to him onely? Besides, in the case of original sinne, as the corruption of na∣ture doth passe by propagation, the Apostle saith we must go to one man as the fountain; by one man sinne entred into the world, and death by sinne, &c. And therefore if to salve your Tenet, you shall alledge that speech, you are of your Father the Devil, & the lusts of your father will you do: By this I do confesse that the Devil is proved the first parent of sinne by infusion and sug∣gestion; but he is not the father by generation. And there∣fore when the Apostle saith, put off, as concerning the former con∣versation, the Old man which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts: Ephes. 4.22. Here, by the Old man we are to understand the Old Adam like disposition, as it hath passed from Adam to
all his posterity. This old disposition the Saints are to put off, and they are to endeavour to put on the Christ-like nature. So then, if you will say that the Devil was the first father of sinne by temptation and seduction, we will not gain-say it. Onely we do intreat you to remember that Adam is the cause of the conveying of original sinne to all his posterity by genera∣tion and traduction. You have yet more evasions if it might be possible to illude the truth. If Adam (say you) had sinned afterwards, how can we say that he had a way to communicate it to all his po∣sterity? It is more then the Devil can do to infuse sinne into any man without a mans consent, page 142. This is true if you speak in the case of actual sinne onely, but for the deriva∣tion of original sinne, the case is otherwise. The corruption of nature is derived from the disobedience of the first man. His personal disobedience was sufficient to deprave and vitiate the whole nature.☞ This may be proved by the harmony of Scrip∣ture, and there is no harshnesse in the point so long as there is such an effectual remedy prepared by the second man for the lost sonnes of men. And yet further, though the first man by his fall did vitiate the nature without any individual or personal consent of ours, yet the lying and living in the sinfulnesse of nature is not without our deliberate and free consent. This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men love darknesse more than light, Joh. 3.18, 19, 20. God doth at sundry seasons open the eyes of men that they may see their natural pol∣lution; but they have not a desire to see that which they may see. Further, you adde, some say the want of pure nature is the cause of our sinne, but it is plain that the purity of na∣ture exempts not a man from sinne, for if it had, then Adam had not sinned, page 142. We would not have you to mistake our meaning, we do not stand so much upon the want of the purity of nature, as upon the pollution and depravation of nature. And this since the fall is no onely the cause of sin∣ning, but also is the true cause why we can do nothing else but sinne. And this begins to appear to those who are sanctified by the Spirit, and therefore the Apostle saith, in me, that is, in my flesh, dwelleth no good thing. For other kind of men they do not
feel the burden of a carnal mind. As a bucket of water weighs nothing in the Well, but when it is removed from its proper element, then the weight thereof is discerned. Pride of heart, and other secret lusts, are not burdensome to a carnal man who is in his proper element, but a spiritual man feels the enmity of these against the command of God, and sees by experience that according to the flesh he can do nothing else but sin. Further, you alledg, that it is like that Adam would not have sinned again because he sped so ill, page 142. I beleeve it was with him after his fall as it was with David after his two sinnes of murder and adultery; David when he had committed those sinnes did look to the fountain of his misery as it did lye in the pollution of the natural birth, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sinne did my mother conceive me. Hereupon he did pray unto the Lord that he would create in him a new heart. Even so, Adam after his fall was able to see his miserie when his eyes were opened; but he was not, as you suggest, like a burned child, able of himself to take heed of the fire. All the ability that he had, was by look∣ing to the promise, and the same ability we now have to help us out of our natural corruption. Our Saviour told the Jewes, if the Sonne will make you free, ye shall be free indeed, Joh. 8.36. By freedome we are to understand not such a civil immunity as Emperors and Kings do give, but a freedome from the bondage and vassalage of corruption. And therefore when the Jewes made him this answer, that they were Abrahams children, and never in bondage to any man, his reply was, he that committeth sin, is the servant of sin, v. 33, 34. The slavery of sin is the bondage that is here meant, and there is no other way to be freed but by Christ onely. Further, you say, we cannot prove that Adam did subject himself to any temptation after the fall, pag. 143. What if we do not read in so many letters and syllables that he did subject himself to temptation? can you therefore probably col∣lect that he was free from all sinne, and that he did resist all temptations? Again, suppose that after his fall he did resist many temptations, yet as the strongest Christian may fall when God doth leave him, and the weakest may stand when the Lord will uphold him with his supporting grace; Even so, Adam be∣ing without all original sinne, being left to himself to try what
free-will could do, might fall in a state of natural purity. And being supported by the Spirit, to shew what grace could do, might be able to stand in a state of natural corruption. There∣fore all that you have said doth not any way inforce an equality of the states, or that a mans ability was as great after as it was before the fall. Now let us go to the third Scripture, and were by nature the children of wrath as well as others, Ephes. 2 3. Here, to support the purity of nature and to avoid the force of this text, you have many evasions and shifts; let us hear them as they come in their order. There are (say you) natural men that discern not the things of God, neither can do; for a man cannot go East and West at one and the same time, neither serve two Masters to be true to them both, page 145. I confesse it is true that a man cannot go East and West at one and the same time, but our question is, whether any natural man, meerely as natural, without the inspiration of the Spirit can go any other way but that which is meerely enmity against God? The Apostle saith, the natural man perceiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, be∣cause they are foolishnesse to him, neither can he perceive them, be∣cause they are spiritually to be discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. He speak∣eth this of the Philosophers and other Grecians who had im∣proved nature to the highest: To these the preaching of the Crosse was foolishnesse. They could discern the wisedome of Plato, and the depth of Aristotle, but the wisedome of Christ they were not able to discern. Hereupon in the three first Chapters of the Epistle the Apostle doth largely dispute that the knowledge of these things doth meerely come by the inward teaching and revelation of the Spirit. And then he shutteth up the dispute with this coronis, If any man seem to be wise in this world, let him become a fool that he may be wise. A fool is one that hath no wit, he is not able to speak for himself, or to help himself. The way then to know Christ is not by the advance∣ment of natural abilities, but rather by the true sight of inabili∣ty and the lost condition we are fallen into, Aristotle was a Philosopher of great name amongst the Grecians, yet of all the books that he wrote, of all the speeches that he spake in none of them all he came nearer to God than in that speech which he
is reported for to speak, O ens entium miserere mei, O thou being of beings, have mercy upon me. The first step to salva∣tion doth beginne with the sight of misery, and the next is to looke after the free grace and mercie of God. But you go on, and tell us, nature, simply so considered as it is created of God, cannot oppose any spiritual light, but comply with those things which God holds forth unto it, page 146. Here we desire you to keep to the state of the question, we are not upon the debate of nature in its purity, but of nature as it is since the fall. If you speak of nature created in the beginning, nature is good; nature cannot oppose any spiritual light, and it is ser∣viceable to those ends for which God made it. But as strictly as both you and the Examiners stand for such a natural purity, I would entreat you to shew the man in all Asia, Africa, Eu∣rope, or America that hath this purity, this integrity of nature. But if you speak of nature vitiated and corrupted, the Scriptures do every where make mention of such a nature that it is enmity against God, that it is not subject to the Law of God, nor can be. And therefore when the Examiners in the Chapter of free wil do plead so strongly that there are some good things in natural men, as in Herod and Balaam, and that all natural men are not equally corrupt; what of all this? this doth not prove the goodnesse of nature. For that some natural men have some inward workings in them, it is from the convictions of the Spirit, and that some are lesse evil then others; it is from the bar of restraining grace. Otherwise, take a natural man as meerly na∣tural, he is not subject to the Law of God, nor can be, Rom. 8.7. As it may be seen in this familiar instance. When men are ene∣mies to the State, and will not have them to reign over them, all the money, horses, armour, Cities, Castles that they can get into their power, are employed to set up another Law, and to supplant the power that is over them. So all the endeavours of a natural man, all his principles and his reasonings are to pluck down Christ, and to set up his own excellen∣cy. And therefore the natural mind is enmity against God. Next you cite two Scriptures concerning sins against nature
Backbiters, haters of God, despitefull, proud, boasters, inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents, without understanding, Covenant-breakers, without natural affection, Rom. 1.30, 31. 2 Tim. 3.3. From hence you draw this conclusion, to be na∣tural (say you) were to have acted such actions as might have testified to the world that they had been lovers of God, be∣cause those actions were wanting, they are said to be unna∣tural. So it may appear that nature was not improved to those ends to which God assigned it, page 146. It is true that in these Scriptures the word nature is taken in the better sense, yet not in such a sense as will furnish your intention. First, I do acknowledge that God hath left reliques or remaind∣ers of his Law in the hearts of the Gentiles. This is common∣ly called the Law of nature, and by this men know that God ought to be worshipped, that parents ought to be honoured, and that every man is to have his own, &c. Secondly, I yield also that they who go against this Law may rightly be called unnatural, because they go against the dictates or principles of of nature. Thirdly, they who do thus deviate from natural prin∣ciples do not improve nature to those ends which God hath made it. All these things I do allow, & so far I wil go along with you; But how do you prove from hence the purity of nature, and that a meer natural man, as such, is able to understand the things of the Spirit of God? You do in the next page distin∣guish natural men into two kinds, these are your words. Who requireth no other way to be glorified but by those principles that he had furnished them withal. And because they opposed their own nature, resusing the counsel of God, they are called unnatural, because they imployed their nature wholly to satisfie their lusts. Such natural men percieve not the things of God. The same matter in substance is spoken by the Examiners in the Chapter of free will, for the Synod ha∣ving rightly determined according to the Scriptures that a natu∣ral man being altogether averse from that good, and dead in sinne, he is not able by his own strength to convert himself or prepare him∣self thereunto. Against this passage the men take great offence, and, as their manner is, accuse the Synod for their defects and falshoods. For their defects, they blame them because they
do not distinguish the several kinds of natural men; and for their falshoods they accuse them for saying that the fallen man hath lost all ability to spiritual good. They distinguish also several kinds of will, and tell us in the third place, as the will of our first parents, so of all men else doth stand in a kind of aequilibrium pag. 128.129, 130. Now to take off these several Objections, I would entreat both you and them to consider these two points. First, if you look to the better sort of natural men, to those who are no Backbiters, no Covenant-breakers, &c. Whether may not many of these in the most essential, vital and spiritual parts of the Law, be great enemies against God, and be lovers of themselves more than lovers of God? If the most refined natural men may be secret enemies, why do you and they speak of pure nature, and of the improvement of natural abilities when it is certain that men can do no good without the help of the Spirit? Natural men may be distinguished into a thousand kinds according to the different circumstances of time and place, yet all of them do a∣gree in this, that they are natural, and without the help of the Spirit they are not able to judge of the things of God. Secondly, when the Apostle speaketh of the Gentiles, who having no Law, do by nature the things contained in the Law, their thoughts in the mean while accusing or else excusing one another, Romans 2.14. When the Gentiles do make use of the Law written in their heart (as they do at certain seasons) to judge themselves, doth not this proceed from the general convictions and workings of the Spirit? If the act of self-judging be from the conviction of the Spirit, this is no praise to natural abilities, but the glory be∣longs to the grace of God. And the words of the Confession are very sound, that a natural man cannot convert himself, or prepare himself thereunto. In which words they do distinguish between conversion it self, and the antecedaneous works before conversion. In neither of these they say that a natural man is able to do any thing of himself, but all his ability is from the help of the Spirit. I wonder then what reason the Examiners had given them to cavil at such an innocent expression. But if you shall stand upon the letter of the text, that the Gentiles do by nature the things contained in the Law. Here you may ob∣serve
that the Apostle doth onely oppose the natural Law to the Law written in tables of stone and communicated to the Church by revelation. He never meant that any of the Gentiles meer∣ly by their own strength were able to keep that Law which was made known to them. Only at seasons the Spirit did excite and stirre up strong convictions in their consciences, to apply those principles and dictates which they had by the light of nature. The most common and universal maxime of all men in the world, is this, that there is a God: Why then doth the conside∣ration of the Godhead so forcibly and powerfully awake at some intervals of time more than at others? We can give no other reason but this, that the truth in the hearts of the Gentiles is like a cinder in the Smiths forge, which by the operations and stir∣rings of the Spirit is enlivened, and being once enlivened, men have more power to judge themselves, and to look after God in those seasons than at others. And from hence also we might take occasion to answer that great difficulty in the Epistle to the Romans. The Apostle in the first Chapter speaking of the knowledge of the Gentiles, and how naturally they hold the truth in unrighteousnesse, and that for this cause the Lord doth give them up to a reprobate sense; yet in the next Chapter he doth shew that the Gentiles do by nature the things contained in the Law, and do shew , the work of the Law written in their hearts when their thoughts do at sundry times accuse or excuse one another. To the resolution of the difficulty we say, that the Gentiles so farre forth as they are principled by the corruption of nature are prone to no other but to imprison the light; but as they are un∣der and do submit unto the convictions of the Spirit, they are helped sometimes to go so farre as to judge themselves, and to cry out in their misery, O being of beings, have mercy upon us. The main drift of the Apostle, is to shew that Jewes and Gentiles are both under sinne, and how by the sight of the misery of nature such of them as are saved come to be saved onely by looking after the grace and the free-mercy of God. If this be the meaning of the Spirit what shall we think of pure nature, or the emproving of nature to those ends to which God had assigned it? These are the Chimera's and fictions of mens own
devising. For if we will go to the utmost that a natural man can do, at seasons he hath ability to judge himself, this is not from himself, but from the convictions of the Spirit. And it is never better with him in the way to attain salvation than when he is beaten off from all his own abilities; when in the sight of his own misery and emptinesse he doth rely upon the mercy of God. Now we will go on to the meaning of that expression, and were by nature the children of wrath as well as others. Here you distinguish betwixt that wrath which is due by the appoint∣ment of God for Adams sinne, and the wrath which is due for despising the riches of grace. Concerning this text (say you) we were by nature the children of wrath as well as others; if it be universal, it must be meant of the first condemnation which came by Adam. But if it be meant of the second wrath, then it belongs to such persons onely as are dead in trespasses and sinnes; that is, such as have been in actual defiance, which walked after the course of the world, after the Prince of the power of the aire in opposition to the Spirit of truth, page 150. Here I do agree with you, that distinction is to be made between the wrath due for the sinne of Adam, and the wrath due for the actual refusal of Christ in the tender of grace. Though this distinction be admitted, yet it doth not disanul that truth we were by nature the children of wrath as well as others. For infants, so farre forth as they come out of Adams loynes in that precise and single consideration they may be the children of wrath by nature, though the cause why wrath doth not seize upon them, is from the shedding of the blood of Christ. Se∣condly, let us take this expression, and were by nature the chil∣dren of wrath as well as others, that it is meant onely of those who have been in actual defiance, this will avail nothing so long as it is clear from the text that men by nature can do no other than live in actual defiance against God. Neither do the Examiners mend the matter by their Intepretation, when they say, it is one thing to be sinners from our first nativity, and another in time to become the children of wrath by our per∣sonal fall and actual disobedience, which also coming to pass in our natural man, and by his default we may truly be said
to be by nature the children of wrath, especially when sinne by custome becomes a second nature to us, page 78. Here we will be no adversaries to them so farre as they say that men become the children of wrath by their own personal falls and actual disobedience. But the question is, whether this diso∣bedience doth not radically and originally proceed from the default of the nature. They seem to say so much in sense when they do oppose it. Secondly, though it be true which they say, that the evil doth come upon men throught heir personal fall, yet the Apostle doth especially look unto the sinne of the nature: And therefore doth amplifie the grace of God in quickning and enlivening again when he saith you hath he quickned that were dead in trespasses and sinnes. They were not onely truly dead in sinne thorough custome and sinful conversation, but also thorough the state and condition of their natural birth, they were by nature the children of wrath as well as others. Upon these grounds he tells them that God who was rich in mer∣cy did quicken them, when they were dead in trespasses and sins. Next, you come to open the meaning of the expression, dead in trespasses and sinnes. You say, a spiritual death must be meant of a declining from spiritual things, which is a resistance of the spirit, or a dying, that is a forsaking the truth of God made manifest in them. Now such a death as this cannot befall any who never had that spiritual life; for it is the losse of life that must prove a death, or otherwise we may say that all other creatures besides man are spiritually dead, page 151. In this point you and I do agree that the losse of life must prove a death; and this to me is the great rea∣son why not only the Ephesians, but also all mankind had some∣times spiritual life before they became to be dead in trespasses and sinnes. It is plaine from the scope of Scripture and the A∣nalogy of faith, as I have proved before, that this death came in by the fall of Adam, therefore he had spiritual life before his fall. And for that expression of yours, otherwise we may say as well that all other creatures are spiritually dead; I answer, not so neither: other creatures can not properly be said to be spiritually dead because they never had a capacity of spiritual life. And
though men are dead in trespasses and sinnes, they are not dead as stocks and stones and other sencelesse creatures, but they are dead as they who sometime had spiritual life, and may have the return of the same life again in and thorough Christ the way, the truth, and the life. So also the Examiners in the Chapter of free will, page 130. do but calumniate, when they say that we teach, that a man is a meere passive block or a dead trunck with∣out a willing or a nilling faculty. This is an odious imputation of their own devising; we hold that man is a rational creature, and he hath those natural and essential properties of the soul, though in spiritual things he be altogether dead. And for spi∣ritual things also he may be said to have a remote capacity when blindnesse shall be taken away from his understanding, and per∣versenesse from his will. It is an excellent speech of Augustine, posse credere naturae est hominum, to have a remote ability to be∣leeve, is of the nature of men, for stocks and stones have no such capacity. And in opposition to natural men, he saith, velle credere gratiae est fidelium, to have a will to beleeve, is of the grace given to beleevers: shewing that no natural man hath an immediate power to beleeve till he come inwardly to be en∣livened by the Spirit. Let us hear then what you can say; how the sonnes of men may be said to be dead in trespasses and sinnes. If you shall mean that every man, or all mankind in that sense is dead be∣fore the light or the life of the Gospel is made known to them, then I shall grant it. But I shall deny that such a death is any sinne: For, where no Law is made manifest, there is no transgression. But all children, if you mean infants, have no Law, or Law made known, page 152. This is true in the case of actual sinne, that there must be a Law, and a Law made known, or else there can be no actual transgression. And for this reason we say that all Infants are exempt from the guilt of actual sinne, because they are not capable of the knowledge of a Law. But this is not our question, the point in hand is con∣cerning the guilt of original sinne. Suppose there were no Law given personally and individually to infants, yet the Law once given to Adam, is sufficient to involve all his children in the sin of the nature till they come to be freed by Christ. There∣fore
in sense we affirme that not onely the Ephesians, but also all others are dead in trespasses and sinnes. But let us further enquire into the meaning of the words, and were by nature the children of wrath as well as others. Doth not the Apostle go here to the corruption of nature as to the Fountain? and whereas you say, that the Ephesians by the course of their lives living in rebellion against God, were natu∣rally the children of wrath; Do not you by this affir∣mation yield the cause? For admit that the Ephesians did by their own free act live in disobedience against God, yet all comes to one issue, when they did it by a natural pro∣pension received from Adam, the common root of the cor∣ruption of nature. But you further say, It cannot be ex∣pected that those who never committed any actions of disobedience should have this text applied to them; but infants neither did nor could commit any acts of rebel∣lion; Therefore this will not prove that infants were so the children of wrath by nature, page 152. This ex∣pression, that infants were not so the children of wrath by nature, is, as Logicians call it, an ignorance of the elench. For we do not say that Infants in every respect are so the children of wrath as those Ephesians who lived in wilful disobedience. It is enough for us to affirme that they are any way the children of wrath, so farre at least as they do partake of the corruption of the nature. For the clearing of the point, let us distinguish three sorts of men that are lyable to wrath. The first are such as reject Christ in the publick tenders of the Gospel. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they should have had no sinne, but now they have no cloak for their sinne, Joh. 12.48. In this sense we say that not onely In∣fants, but also the natural Ephesians themselves were free from the guilt of sinne. For if infants (as you affirme) cannot sinne, nor men neither, if they can truly maintain that they rceived no Law; In this sense the Ephesians themselves, who served divers lusts and pleasures could not sinne, because the Gospel was not preached, and Christ was not tendered to them. The Apostle saith they were at
that time strangers from the Common-Wealth of Israel, and aliens from the Covenant of promise. Secondly, they are lyable to wrath, who, though they never had the Gospel preached, yet do wilfully hold the truth in unrighte∣ousnesse, Rom. 1.19.20, 21. In this sense the Ephesians before their conversion did serve divers lusts, and were by nature the children of wrath as well as others. The sinnes of their lives, though they were their own voluntary acts, yet they were the proper and genuine fruit of their sinful and depraved nature. In this as in the former sense, I do willingly yield, that infants cannot sinne as those that disobey the Gospel, because they have no discoveries of Christ in the publick Ministry of the Word. Neither can they sinne as did the Gentiles, which went against the general convictions of the Godhead in the conscience, and wilfully held the truth in unrighteousnesse. Thirdly, they are lyable to wrath, who, though they never committed actual sinne, yet do partake of the sinne of the nature, and of the guilt of that sinne. If this be not so, what is the meaning of the words, and were by nature the children of wrath as well as others? In a sense then it is true, that so farre as men are by nature, so far they are the children of wrath. Here then two objections come to be answered, the one in respect of infants, the other in respect of them who live out of the bounds of the visible Church. First, in the case of infants, some may say, they must unavoidably lie under wrath, if this once be admitted, that by nature they are the children of wrath. I answer, the consequences is not good, for though by nature they are lyable to wrath, yet they do not unavoidably lie under a necessity of perishing. As for example, David by his murther and adultery, Peter by the denial of his Master, and Paul by persecuting of the Church, did fall under wrath, yet wrath did not seize upon them. So infants, though by nature they are the children of wrath, yet that wrath due unto the sinne of the nature doth not lay hold upon them because Christ hath satisfied the justice of God.
Secondly, if it be further alledged, that they which live out of the bosome of the visible Church must lie under a necessity of perishing, not onely because by nature they are the children of wrath, but because they want the Gospel; the means of their salvation. Here I answer, though they want the most effectual outward means, yet they do not simply want all the means. Nay, I may affirme there is no man whose eyes are truly opened thorough the conviction of the Spirit to see his lost condition who is under an absolute necessity of perishing. For God who is a God of grace and mercy, is ready to help them that come to him in a sense of their misery. We have a proof for this in the words of Hanain the Prophet, to Asah the King, the eyes of the Lord run to and fro through the whole earth to shew himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect towards him, 1 Chr. 16.9. He doth not speak in the case of Asah, or of the family of Da∣vid alone; but the words are more general; the eyes of the Lord go thorough the whole earth, to help all those whosoever they be, that have perfect hearts toward him. From whence I ga∣ther, that men are not left under an unavoidable necessity of pe∣rishing. Thus I have gone thorough all the arguments, brought by Mr. Everard, to prove the purity of the natural birth; and where the Examiners have pitched upon the same reasons, I have taken them in for company. What is proper and peculiar to them a∣lone, shall be handled in the ensuing discourse.
The second Book containeth the An∣swer, to the Examiners of the late Assemblies Confession. SECT. 1. IN the Chapter concerning Original sinne they do first endeavour to bring such Scriptures as seem to make for their own purpose. And here they pitch upon that image of God, that man is said to retain since his fall, Gen. 9. Our answer is, though men may be said to have that image, and may carry the resemblance thereof, yet this doth not disprove their being born in original sinne. Notwithstanding such a polluted birth they may have the remainders of that image which was by creation, and a possibility of the recovery of the same image by Christ. That this truth may more clearly appear, we will distinguish betwixt the image of God which is external, and the image which is in∣ternal. For the image that is external and stands in Lordship and dominion over the creature, man hath not this image by natural generation, but by covenant promise, and the Mediators blood. And therefore we read, that the Lord after the flood did revive the great Charter once given to man before the fall. Be fruitful and replenish the earth, and the fear of you, and the dread of you shall be upon every fowle of the aire, upon all that moveth upon the earth, and upon all the fishes of the Sea: into your hand are they delivered, Gen. 9.2. The same priviledge is here granted to Noah and his sons, which was given to Adam before his fall.
But how did Noah, his sonnes, and in them all mankind come to partake of it? Not by generation, but by the promise and Covenant. In the former Chapter we read that Noah offered up a Sacrifice, and the Lord smelt a savour of rest in and tho∣rough the Mediators blood. Hereupon he made a solemn pro∣mise that he would no more curse the ground for mans sake, though the thoughts of the imaginations of his heart were evil from his childhood. By vertue of the promise doth man come to be re-invested with that part of the Image of God which stands in Lordship over the creature, and he hath not this priviledge in respect of his natural birth. Secondly, if we look to that part of the Image of God which is internal in the soule, in this sense, though man be born in original sinne, and though he hath lost the spiritual knowledge, righteousnesse and holinesse wherein he was most like his Creator and doth now carry the image of Satan, yet neverthelesse he hath still some remainders and reliques of the former Image, he hath an immortal soul, an understanding, will and other natural powers, and in and thorough Christ he hath a capacity to receive that spiritual part of the Image of God which was lost. According to the tenor of this doctrine we may expound the precept that doth inhibit the shedding of mans blood, whoso sheddeth mans blood, by man shall his blood be shed, for in the Image of God made he man. The same answer may be given to that text which they alledge in the twelfth and last place, therewith curse we men, which are made after the similitude of God, Jam. 3 9. Here we say the same in substance, that though men are born in original sinne, yet they have some reliques and remainders of the former Image that was lost, and a possibility by Christ to come to the fulness of that glory. The second Scripture to be considered, is that place, Deut. 32.4, 5. Where, say they, we have two argnments more to prove Israel, and consequently all men to be still crea∣ted innocent. The first is from the perfection of all Gods works, ver. 4. He is the rock, his work is perfect; for all his wayes are judgment, a God of truth and without iniquity, just and right is he. How then can he, who is holy, righteous, and pure, create any thing that is unrighteous, unclean or im∣pure?
The second is taken from Gods complaint there a∣gainst mens personal fall and corrupting themselves, whom God had not brought forth with any such spots, ver. 5. They have corrupted themselves, their spot is not the spot of his children, they are a perverse and crooked generation, page 67. But neither of these two arguments will prove the purity and the innocency of mans natural birth. For though all in∣fants through the fall of Adam are born in original sinne, this is no impeachment to God, he both is, and ever was righteous in all his works. Though all mankind hath fallen through the disobedience of the first man, yet he was pure, righteous, and holy in the work of creation. And though the greater part of the Israelites did rebell in the Wildernesse, this did not di∣minish the goodnesse of God to that people in bringing them out of Egypt. Secondly, whereas it is said that they did cor∣rupt themselves by their own personal disobedience, this must needs be so, because they were a rebellious generation. Moses speaketh remarkably to this purpose in the latter end of the former Chapter. I know that after my death you will utterly corrupt your selves, and turn aside from the way which I have com∣manded you, ver. 29. When he saith I know that ye will utterly corrupt your selves; shall we argue from hence that they were free from all corruption for the present, and that the corrup∣ting of themselves should meerely be their own personal act for the future? This cannot be the force of the argument. For Moses did conclude that they would shew the fruits of their corruption after his death, because he did perceive such a rebel∣lious and corrupted nature in them for the present. Behold, while I am yet alive with you this day, ye have been rebellious a∣gainst the Lord: How much more after my death? And for that expression, their spot, is not the spot of his children, it is true in∣deed, Gods children have many staines and spots, as Noah, Da∣vid, Peter: But because they have a living fountain of grace within, they do daily purge out the sinne and corruption of nature, 2 Cor. 7.1. Now it is not so with others, or with those Apostates, to whom Moses spake, because they had no living principle within; they would totally fall from that good which they seemed to have. This is the sence of
the text, and how doth this prove the purity of the natural birth? A third place they bring to assert the innocency of man, is the eighth Psalm, where ver. 4.5, 6. the Psalmist speaks thus of all mankind, what is man that thou art mindful of him, and the sonne of man that thou visitest him? for thou hast made him a little lower than the Angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honour. Say they, the Psalmist shewes that man is still set in honour by his first state of production, though he doth not long retain the same, but falls therefrom. But if a man had been created so corrupt as you speak, he had not onely been lower than the Angels, but below all ereatures here, page 67. For the general sence of this Scri∣pture, we do agree that man hath still dominion, Lordship, & preheminence over the creature, & in this dignity & honour, he doth carry the lively effigies, resemblance and Image of God, as he is his vicegerent upon the earth. There is none who doubts of the truth of this in general, but the main question is about the ground of the vicegerency, whether it be from the state of man in his natural production, as these Censors do affirme. This we deny, for according to the course of natural generation, as it is since the fall, manhath lost the image of God in dominion and Lordship over the creature; the earth is accursed, & the crea∣ture made subject to vanity. You will say how then doth he enjoy this priviledge still? I answer, by Christ the second Adam, and therefore it is observable that the Apostle doth apply the passages of the Psalmist more immediately to Christ, thou madest him a little lower than the Angels, thou crownest him with glory and honour; and diddest set him over the work of thy hands, thou hast put all things in subjection under his feet, Heb. 2.7, 8 9. The whole creation then immediately is put under Christ, and in and thorough him all men now come to have dominion and Lordship over the creature. And therefore though all are fallen in Adam, and have lost this priviledge in their natural birth, yet it is repaired and renewed by Christ. A fourth place which they bring to evict mans uprightnesse by the creation, is that of the wise man, God hath made man up∣right,
but they have sought out many inventions, Eccles. 7.29. Here they insist especially upon two particulars. First, that this is spoken of all mankind. Secondly, that every mans fall is by his own personal and individual act. These are their words, he ascribes it not to their first fathers alone, but to the in∣dividuals of their posterity likewise, saying, but they have sought cut many inventions, page 68. Neither do we affirme, that the blame is onely to be laid on Adam, for others also, born in o∣riginal sinne, and having the corruption of nature within them, do personally and individually shew the fruits of their own corruption in seeking out many inventions. The Israelites, as we have formerly heard, did corrupt themselves, yet this was from their own natural corruption as the fountain. Secondly, when God made Adam in the beginning, he made him, and all mankind in him, upright; but they have sought out many in∣ventions. For what the first man did, all his posterity did in him and by him. Neither is it improper to ascribe the particle [they] to the relations, actions and conditions of the first man. As for example, when the Lord said let us make man in our own image, and let them have dominion over the fish of the Sea, and the fowle of the aire, Gen. 1.26. These words are more immediat∣ly spoken to Adam, and mediatly to all his posterity, to the whole species of men, Let them have dominion over the fish of the Sea. So in the present case, it may be said of Adam primarily, that God made man upright, but he and all mankind in him have sought out many inventions. The deed of the first man, is the deed of the species or whole kind. As in a parallel case, the act of the first woman and the promise made to her are as∣cribed to the whole sex: she shall be saved by child-bearing, if they continue in the faith, 1 Tim. 2.15. Thirdly, that no blame may be cast upon God, we may say since the fall also, though men are born in original sinne, God doth from time to time send inward convictions into their hearts to inable them to dis∣tinguish betwixt good and evil. If therefore they will not see what they may see, but will fallaciously endeavour to finde out many inventions, the fault is meerely their own. All these passages are true, and being put together they shew the scope of the text, but they do not prove the purity of the natural birth.
For the sixth, seventh and eighth places which the Examiners do bring out of the Prophets, Isa. 1.21.22. Jer. 2.21. Isa. 5.1, 2, 3. Jer. 8.4, 5. I do not see how these or such like do any way make to the purpose. For we will easily grant that Hie∣rusalem was a faithful City in the beginning, and that the faith∣ful City did become an Harlot. We will grant also that the Jewish Church was the Lords Vineyard, planted with the choi∣cest Vine, and thorough her own default she turned into the degenerate plant of a wild Vine, and brought forth wild grapes. These and many more texts may be alledged to prove the pri∣viledges of that Church in her first institution; but how doth this prove the purity of the natural birth, seeing that Nation had all these priviledges meerely by promise and Covenant? If they stand upon Analogy, and say that it is rational for God to do with all men as with that people. To this we answer though all are born in original sinne and in the corruption of nature, yet they are not left in a helpless or hopelesse condition; Thorough Christ men have a possibility of salvation though thorough their own default they neglect this great salvation (as the people of Israel did,) and are justly lyable to the same reproof. Ninthly, they go to that famous place in Hosea, thy destru∣ction is of thy self, O Israel, but in me is thy help, Hos. 13.9. Here say they the Lord layes Israels destruction upon her self, and not upon her first parents, page 70. Neither doth this any whit promote their cause, for if we do read the stories of the Judges and of the Kings, all along for the space of nine hundred years, we shall find that the Church and state of Israel were liable to a total & final destruction, for theird Iolatry & other great sins; In this respect therefore the Prophet saith thy destruction is of thy self, O Israel. And when they were at the brink of de∣struction many times, and under the power of the enemy than the Lord did wonderfully come in to help them. And this is the meaning of the Prophets words, but in me is thy help. Thorough their own sinne many times they were at the brink of ruine, but the Lord of his great mercy did deliver them. We may apply the case more generally, though Adam did fall and all mankind by his personal disobedience, the de∣struction
is of themselves, yet in and thorough Christ it may be said in me is thy help. Secondly, this speech is to be applied to Israel, a people in covenant with God, that they are the cau∣ses of their own destruction, but their help is immediately from him. So we, by our personal disobedience do many times what lies in us, procure our own destruction, but our help is meerely from his grace. This is the full meaning of the place, and how doth this prove the purity of the natural birth? Fa∣thers and children and all are the meritorious cause of their own destruction, if they be considered in immediate oppo∣sition to the goodnesse of God, the cause of their delive∣rance. We will go on, and see whether they be more happy in the places which they cite out of the new Testament: For the tenth place, which they cite out of Mat. 18.3. Except ye be converted and become as little children ye shall not enter into the Kingdome of God; Because we have examined this text already, and the Censors say no more but that which Mr. Everard hath in substance spoken before, we are content to let them pass in this matter. From the eleventh place they do conclude absolutely, that infants are free from all kind of sinne. These are their words, doth not the Apostle remove, not onely from children, mal∣ice, but also all evil of iniquity, when he would have the Corin∣thians in that behalf conformed to them, 1 Cor. 14.20. saying, Brethren be not children in understanding, howbeit  in malice or iniquity be children, page 70. Here, as I have formerly touched is a palpable sophisme a dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter, as Logicians terme it. For though the word  in the general notion thereof may signifie all e∣vil of iniquity, yet in the sense of the text it noteth the particu∣lar evil of malice onely: and therefore he saith in malice be ye children. Neither is it his purpose to acquit children from all kind of malice or envy, for they have seminally and vertually the seed of all this in their hearts. Do ye think that the Scripture saith in vain, the spirit that is in us lusteth unto envy? Jam. 4.5. We see by experience that this is no fable, that envy is natural∣ly seated in the heart of man; one child many times doth envy
another for a little coat. And though God doth give to the Regenerate more grace to purge out the sinne of the nature, as it is afterward expressed in the next verse, but he giveth more grace, wherefore he saith, God resisteth the proud and giveth grace to the humble. Notwithstanding all this the nature of man doth lust to envy, and it is vertually and, eminally in infants. You will say then, why doth the Apostle exhort, in malice be ye chil∣dren? His meaning is this, that they should do as children, who are apt to forget the wrongs and injuries that are done to them, and to look-upon them as though they had never been. And therefore the Apostle saith, be angry but sinne not, let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, Ephes. 4.26. This is all one, with that expression, in malice be ye children; that is, do not retain heart-burnings and hatred one against another, but for∣get the wrongs and injuries that are done to you as children do. It is but a comparative speech. These are all the places of Scripture which are alledged by these Censors to prove the purity of the natural birth, and how well they have done it, we leave to any indifferent understan∣ding to judge: and yet how do they glory when they utter such words as these, page 71? Thus we have proved that neither the guilt of our first parents sinne was imputed, nor their spiritual death in sinne and corrupted nature was con∣veyed to all their posterity, or to any one of them by ordi∣nary generation. And directing their speech to the Assembly after this manner, do thus insult, though this your doctrine (say they) hath gone from hand to hand a long time by tra∣dition, yet neither did the Scribes and Pharisees, nor yet the disciples of Christ, and much lesse Christ himself, hold forth any such doctrine, nor were any of them leavened with this opinion of yours, and your long mistaken Predecessors. For the Pharisees with the Jewes being highly displeased with him, who was borne blinde, and whose eyes Christ had ope∣ned, for defending his Saviour and blessed Oculist, said thus unto him, John 9 34. Thou wast altogether born in sinne, and doest thou teach us? Whence it is evident that they did neither conceive all men in general, nor yet themselves to be by propagation conceived and born in sinne, page 71. What
apprehensions and conceptions soever the Pharisees and other Jews had, I will not dispute. Sure I am, they who do rightly understand the doctrine of the Jewish Church, could not well be ignorant of the sinne of the nature. For when our Saviour did discourse of the necessity of regeneration, and Nicodemus did admire at the strangnesse of that doctrine, our Saviour made him this answer, Art thou a Master in Israel, and knowest not these things? John 3.7. In which words it is plain that the pollution of the natural birth, and the necessity of regeneration, were then points easie to be known; and a wonder it was to our Saviour that any could be ignorant of such fundamentals. And I cannot but admire that these men, Mr. Everard, and the thirty separate Congregations, should professe themselves to be members of the Christian Church, and be ignorant of these things. But our Examiners build upon our Saviours words, neither hath this man sinned nor his parents, but that the works of God should be made manifest in him. Where ac∣cording to your doctrine (say they) our Saviour should have answered positively, that both he and his parents with all his progenetors, even as farre as Adam, had sinned. What need was there at all, that our Saviour should speak of the common cause of the misery of all mankind, seeing the Disciples question was more immediately touching the particular blindnesse of this man? They were not ignorant that original sinne was the common cause of all diseases; onely they did put the question, what was the proper cause of the blindnesse of this individual man, whether it did lie in himself or in his parents, that he was born blind? In relation to this particular question, for any eminency or singularity of sinne above other men the answer is plaine, that neither he nor his parents have sin'ned. This was the presumption and singular opinion of the Pharisees, as it appeareth in the aforementioned words, Thou wast al∣together born in sinne, and dost thou teach us? The whole Pro∣cesse of this argument is a meere fallacy, à dicto secundum quid addictum simplicietr. They go on, and from the Lords appointing the Cities of refuge for the Man slayer to flee unto, when he had killed his Neighbour unawares, they reason, The Lord commanded by Moses that Cities of re∣fuge
should be set apart in all the coasts and habitations of Israel for such to flee to; and will he pursue the innocent seed of Adam, and hold them guilty for their fathers sinne, per∣petrated ere they were born? Yea, will he himself be the a∣venger of the blood against these innocents? page 70. In answer to this, I say, did these men seriously consider the whole truth, they would not raise such tragical cryes against this do∣ctrine. The Cities of refuge anciently appointed for the Man∣slayer, were types and figures of Christ to come: To him on∣ly the soul is to fly, when she is pursued by the curse of the Law, as by an avenger of blood. So then, if all the children of Adam were lyable to the guilt of his sinne perpetrated, before they were born, there is no harshnesse in the saying, if we beleeve that the fall of Adam doth open a door, to the grace that comes by Christ, and that the grace of Christ is a City of refuge, for the lost sinner to fly to; And for infants, though we hold them guilty of sinne by the disobedience of the first man, what detri∣ment or dammage is this to them, as long as mercy is extended through the obedience of the second man. By all that I can understand, these men are afraid of nothing more than that Christ should have too much honour given to him in releeving the miserable lost sonnes of men, otherwise they would never stand so much as they do upon the purity of the natural birth. SECT. 2. NOW let us heare what answers they return to our argu∣ments. And here I say they are extreamely fallacious; for as they do not produce some of our arguments, which have most cogent proof, so they do mention others, which are of small moment, which is scarce honest dealing. But for the places which they do alledge, there are four in number, which do car∣ry some weight with them. First, from that place Gen. 8.21. for the imagination of mans heart is evil from his youth, they gather thus much,
Even as Esau or Edom, though he had a birth-right, yet sold it in his youth to satisfie some strong desires kindled in him: so men, though created innocent, do in the time of tempta∣tion and tryall too often, and too soon, yield unto the temp∣tation, and sell or forfeit that their innocency and birth-right, and so their imaginations become evil from their youth, but are not so from their birth, unlesse you here understand a spiritual conception or birth in sinne by our personal fall, page 71. In this I do agree with them, that men in time of their tempration too often and too easily fall from God tho∣rough their own actual disobedience. This is a part, but it is not the whole truth, for if they had compared the text as they should have done with Gen. 6. ver. 3.4, 5. they would finde that both Scriptures speak of the sinne of the nature. First, the Lord saith, my Spirit shall not alway strive with man for that he also is flesh, ver. 3. As who would say in plainer times, be∣cause his nature is defiled I will destroy him from the earth. Secondly, the whole nature must needs be depraved, because the principles and lively fountaines are corrupt, every imagina∣tion of the thoughts of his heart are evil. Thirdly, the univer∣sality of the depravation, it is not spoken of this or that parti∣cular imagination, but every imagination of his heart is evil, and that which is more, it is onely evil, without the combinati∣on, connexion and commixture of any good. Fourthly, the perpetuity of the time, in the one text it is said the thoughts of his heart are onely evil continually, and in the other the i∣magination of mans heart is evil from his childhood; If we put altogether, we may plainly see that there is a depravation of nature, that this depravation is generally in all parts, and in all times from the very birth and conception. And for that ex∣ample of Esau which they alledge, that he sold his birth-right, that primogeniture was a special priviledge in the family of the Patriarchs, but what is this to every mans natural birth-right? can he forfeit that natural innocency which he never had? A∣gain, Esau did sell his birth-right at a certain time of his age, by a deliberate and a free choyce, when Jacob and he were come near to mans estate, and therefore the Apostle saith, Let there be no profane person among you as Esau, who for one morsel of meat
sold his birth right, Heb. 12.16. Now it is otherwise with the the words of the text, there, it is expressed that the thoughts of the imaginations of his heart are evil from his childhood. As much in sense as that the whole nature is depraved, and that depravation doth beginne from the very birth. Secondly, for the texts cited out of Job, I do agree with the Examiners in the general, that those wise men speaking of the purity of God in relation to the imperfection of the creature, do oftentimes use an hyperbolical way of expression. As in that passage of Eliphaz, behold he putteth no trust in his Saints, yea the heavens are not clear in his sight, Job. 15.15. I do agree also that men do voluntarily corrupt themselves; how much more a∣bominable and filthy is man who drinketh iniquity like water? ver. 16. Though these things be true, yet they do not contain the whole truth nor the Emphasis of that Scripture, for the words immediately going before, are concerning the natural generati∣on of man, what is man that he should be clean, and he that is born of a woman that he should be righteous? ver. 14. The same in substance is spoken by Job himself touching the natural birth, who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one, Chap. 14 4. Both Scriptures do plainly shew that the nature is defiled, because it doth proceed from so unclean a fountain. And this doth agree with the doctrine of our Saviour, when he presseth a necessity of regeneration, that which is born of flesh is flesh, ther∣fore there is a necessity that man should be born again. The whole force of the argument is thus much in effect, from the greater to the lesse; If the heavens and the Saints which are the more perfect creatures, are not pure in the sight of God, what righteousnesse is in man, who is defiled with original sinne even from the very birth? This is the natural sense of the words of Eliphas. Thirdly, to that place, Psal. 51.5. behold I was shapen in iniquity and in sinne did my mother conceive me, they answer, We would (say they) First, gladly know of you, whether it be not Davids scope in this confession to aggra∣vate his sinne. But if he here pleadeth the inevitable cor∣ruption of nature, which you hold forth, his words will be
found a meere extenuation of his offences, if not a throwing off all or most of the blame upon God, who had brought him forth so corrupt and averse to all good, and so propense to all evil, and that without hope of an absolute cure while he was in this world, page 75. Where is the honesty and con∣science of these men when they patch that upon others, which is none of their doctrine? For where can they shew that either the Assembly of Divines, or any other serious Authors, did e∣ver teach that the nature of man is corrupt and propense to evil, without any hope of cure while he is in this world, and that in this case man doth lie under an inevitable necessity? Do not the Assembly of Divines, and all other Authors almost speak of the Covenant of grace, after they have shewed the misery of nature? For though the nature of man is wholly defiled, yet from Christ there is hope to have the nature cleansed. Though David was born in original sinne, yet he was not destitute of a remedy, he beleeved the grace of God made known in the pro∣mise, and therefore prayeth, create in me a clean heart, renew in me a right spirit. He did desire that his defilement by natural generation might be done away by the work of the new creation. And whereas these confident men would desire to know whe∣ther it be not Davids scope in his confession to aggravate his sinne, I answer, it is, and therefore he doth cry out against the sinne of the nature, he doth use the same expression in effect as Paul doth, Rom. 7. I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwelleth no good thing, ver. 18. And O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death? ver. 24. Where we may observe these three points. First, they who are inwardly and truly enlightned, do feel the burden of a carnal mind, which they have by natural generation, whereas other men ac∣count the liberty of lust their greatest freedome. Secondly, they feeling the propension of their nature wholly to sinne, do here∣upon aggravate the sinfulnesse of their nature. Thirdly, by this means they do more highly prize the grace of Christ, and that freedome which he doth bring to set them at liberty from the bondage of corruption, and the reigne of their lusts, Joh. 8.31 32, 33. Isa. 61.1, 2, 3. Mat. 12.20. The promise of Christ is, that a bruised reed he will not break, and the smoaking flax he will
not quench untill he have brought forth judgment unto victory. By judgment is here meant deliverance from under the tyranny and reign of original sin, when men serve divers lusts and pleasures. The deliverance from the power of corruption is the judgment meant in the text. This deliverance is not wrought in an instant, but by degrees, and our Saviour is ready to help the weakest that flie to him in a sense of their own misery. There is nothing more weak than a bruised reed, and the least degree of fire will make flax to smoak. Even so, if there be the least grace to feel the bondage of corruption, the Lord Christ is ready to cherish it, and never to leave till he have brought forth judgment unto victory, to make men conquerors of their lusts. But the ground of all this, is, to feel the burden of a carnal mind, which it is most probable, these Censors are strangers to, or else they would not so extenuate the sin of the nature, as they do. Now let us heare what interpretation they give of the Psalm∣ists words. It was, say they, the lie, or lying promises of Sathan, with the folly therein contained by which he was shapen in iniquitie, or conceived in sin. pag. 74. And they ground themselves upon that passage, that the devil is the father of sin. These are their words, besides our natural parents, we have spiritual fathers and mothers, whether for our begetting in evil and iniquity, or for our regeneration in grace and goodnesse. Concerning our procreation in sin, our Saviour speaks thus unto the Jewes, Joh. 8.44. Ye are of your father the Devil, and his lusts will ye do. Now this father makes use of a twofold mother to beget men in wickednesse, besides their own lust, which when it is enticed and drawn away by temp∣tation, conceiveth and bringeth forth sin. Jam. 1.14, 15. And here first they reckon the lying word or promise by which Sathan de∣ceiveth men; and secondly the false Synagogue which thorough Sathans helps begets men in a false faith, Page. 75. 76. But this glosse will not serve their turn neither, for though the Devil be the father of sin, he is so onely by temptation and sug∣gestion; but the Psalmist speaketh of sin by derivation and pro∣pagation: I was shapen in iniquitie, and in sin did my mother con∣ceive me. And for that which they alledge out of the Epistle of St. James, he doth onely speak of the order of generation
of sin in the heart, every man is drawn away of his own lust and enticed, and lust when it hath conceived, bringeth forth sin. But what is this to the purpose of the Psalmist, he doth not speak of the generation of lust or of sin in his heart, but he doth speak of his own generation. This is evident from the words themselves, I was shapen in iniquitie, and in sin did my mother con∣ceive me. Secondly, it is manifest from the words that follow, because he was defiled with the pollution of the natural birth, by way of opposition he prayeth unto the Lord to create in him a clean heart; because his old was defiled, therefore he did beg a new nature. Fourthly, to that place. Eph. 2.3. And were by nature the children of wrath as well as others, they answer by a distinction, It is one thing, say they, to be sinners from our first nativity, and a∣nother thing in time to become the children of wrath by our personal fall and actual disobedience, which also coming to passe in our na∣tural man, and by his default, we may truly be said by nature to be the children of wrath, when sin by custome becomes a second na∣ture to us, Page. 78. Here I yield, that the Ephesians before their conversion, and all other natural men do thorough their own actual disobedience serve divers lusts and pleasures. This is the truth, but it is not the whole truth. If they were only defiled by custome, which in a sense may be called a second nature, by good custome then they need onely a remedy of the evil of their nature; and we need not the knowledge of Divinity, but onely of Moral Philosophie toward the recovery out of our misery. For that which is now the judgment of these Censors, was sometimes the opinion of Aristotle: He did beleeve that man in his birth was like a white sheet of paper, and that there∣upon the habit of vertue was attainable by many acts. But the Apostle doth not deal upon such weak beggerly and Ethical grounds, because the Ephesians were not only sinners by con∣versation, but by nature also were the children of wrath, here∣upon in relation to their natural corruption, he saith, you hath he quickened which were dead in trespasses and sinnes. Their quic∣kening by the spirit a posteriori doth shew the pollution of their natures a priori. But if they were the children of wrath only by custome a second nature, by breaking off old customes they
might reduce themselves to their ancient purity of nature. And this is the Moral Philosophie of these Censors and the separate Churches of this way. Fifthly, for that place of the Romans, by one man sin entred into the world, and death by sin, Chap. 5. v. 12. That we may more orderly proceed, let us consider how they plant their own interpretation, and then how they oppugne ours. This one man say they by whom sinne entred into the world is not our first parent Adam, but our own earthly or natural man, which is called Adam and Edom from the earth of his foundation, pag. 78. Here I do plainly and openly confesse I do not know what they meane by this Adam, neither can I see how possibly they can apply such a sense to this Scripture. First, seeing they will not have the nature of man to be defiled in Adam, how is this common nature called by the title of one man, seeing it containeth such an infinite number of men? Secondly, how did sin by this one man enter into the world? For this common nature of one man must either be nature pure, or nature impure. If they will have this to be meant of nature pure, then this necessarily must be the meaning of the text, by one common pure natural man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, &c. As this is a strange and wild interpretation in it self, so it doth cast the blame only upon God for making such a nature that by it generally death should passe upon all men to condemnation. But if to amend the matter they shall say that he made the nature of Adam in crea∣tion, and the nature of every man pure in natural generation, but it is their own fault that they corrupt themselves. Here the plaister is not wide enough for the sore, for the Apostle gives the reason why death passeth upon all men, because in one all have sinned. But now if it be true, as these Censors say, that in one common nature all have not sinned, but those only that fall through their personal disobedience. Here I would have them to shew why doth death passe upon all men, and how will this satisfie the sense of the Apostle? By their account then only they should be lyable to death who were guiltie of disobedience in their pure nature. But let us suppose that they say by one common nature impure sin entred into the world, and then this will be a grosse tautologie. Besides, if the whole nature of
man be impure, there must be some cause of the general depra∣vation of nature, which will bring us to the disobedience of the first man, and so they will lose their cause. Further, I demand, if by one man they understand the common nature of all, how will they preserve the Emphasis of the Apostle in opposing one man to all men? He plainly saith that death hath passed upon all men, but how? thorough the means of one man. Again, how will they make it good, that by the disobedience of one many were made sinners, in case they take one man for the common nature of men. The acts of obedience or disobe∣dience are usually attributed to particular persons that live un∣der some Law. But they have a better faculty to cavil at the truth than positively to maintain their own heterogeneal do∣ctrines. Let us hear then what cavils they have against the true in∣terpretation of the words. First, say they, this one by whom sinne entred into the world, is not meant by our first parent Adam, for the Apostle shews that he was not the origi∣nal or first sinner, 1 Tim. 2.14. For Adam was not decei∣ved, but the woman being deceived, was in the transgressi∣on. According to your doctrine then, the Apostle should have said, by one woman sinne entred into the world, page 78. Indeed the scope of his doctrine, in that text is to shew that the woman was more immediately tempted by Satan, and she was first in the transgression; yet in the matter of propagating original sinne, it is as true also, that by one man sinne entred into the world. For Adam and Eve make but one root in the propagation of the kind: and therefore in the institution of marriage it is said, for this cause shall a man leave father and mo∣ther, and cleave to his wife, and they twain shall be one flesh, Gen. 2, 24. In the case then of Propagation, Adam and Eve go but for one, and Adam is here immediately opposed to Christ, so farre forth as he is the root of all his posteri∣ty. Secondly, say they, these words, And death passed upon all men , are thus to be rendred, in as much or so farre forth as all have sinned, page 78. Well, let the words be rendred, which way they will, the scope of the text, and the
connexive particle, for, do plainly shew that they contain the reason of the general passage of death upon every individual man. And therefore we must necessarily and unavoidably come to the disobedience of the first man, in whom, as in the common root all have sinned. Thirdly, they thus except, If the Apostle had beleeved any such thing, as the reigning of death upon all men by the first mans sinne, he would not have omitted that, and onely mentioned from Adam to Moses, page 81. Though he doth speak of the reign of death from Adam to Moses, he doth not hereby re∣strain it to that particular time onely. For he plainly saith, that death passed upon all men, absolutely and universally in all times, but he doth mention the time from Adam to Moses in special, because then it seemed to be more rational and congru∣ous, that sinne should not be imputed, because no Law was then publickly delivered; yet in this time he affirmeth, that all universally were under the reign of death: not onely Cain, the builders of Babel, the people of the old world, and the Cities of Sodom, all which were destroyed for their personal sinnes; but he plainly affirmeth, that death reigned over in∣fants in all that interval of time, though they never sinned af∣ter the similitude of Adams transgression. If infants be under the raign of death, we must necessarily suppose, that sinne must be the cause thereof, but infants cannot commit any sinne personally. Therefore they must be supposed to be guilty of sinne through the disobedience of Adam. And this makes good the main argument of the Apostle, by one man sinne en∣tred into the world, he doth argue from the effect to the cause; because death hath universally past upon all, by the disobedi∣ence of one, therefore all were involved in the guilt of that disobedience. Fourthly, say they, the nineteenth verse is more plain against universal corruption by the first mans disobedience, for there the Apostle useth the word (many,) and saith, by one mans disobedi∣ence many (not all) were made sinners; therefore all did not fall in the first individual Adam, page 82. Though the word (ma∣ny) be equivocal, yet in the sense of the text it must necessarily be meant of every individual man, because death hath abso∣lutely
passed upon every man, no one excepted, therefore it necessarily followeth that this passage, by the disobedience of one, many were made sinners, must be meant of every indivi∣dual man. But here they have a cavil, the word [many] in the latter part of the verse must have the same latitude al∣lowed, for the Apostle setteth down a full comparison of e∣quals in that verse. Here the verse must be thus interpreted, that as by one mans disobedience, all were made sinners, so by one mans obedience, all were made righteous, page 82. Neither will this help the matter, for it is not necessary that there should be the same latitude in the collation betwixt the first and the second man; onely this is sufficient that the first man is the root of all his branches, and all that come of him were made sinners by him; and the second man is the root of all his branches, and all that are ingraffed into him, are made righteous by him. Secondly, some of them that stand for the universal redemption do not plead an absolute or universal justi∣fication of all men by the obedience of the first man; but onely plead for a general impretation or possibility of salvation, which then onely comes to be applied when men believe and receive the promise by a lively faith. Thus, we have passed through all the arguments of the Examiners, and we have seen their cavils against the se∣veral Scriptures alledged by us. As for those similitudes, of punishing the posterity of Traitors, for the treason of their parents, and the killing of the young vipers with the old, by reason of their poysonous nature, &c. forasmuch as these are onely illustrations of the truth, so all the pains which they take here is onely to cavil at illustrations. Other passages they have of lesser mo∣ment, which we have answered before, onely they have one argument in the Chapter of free will from that place, Isaiah 7.14. Before the child shall know to re∣fuse the evil, and chuse the good, the land which thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her Kings. Here they would have us observe two points, First, that though this place be commonly understood of our Saviour, yet it is meant of the common state of man. Secondly, this
child from his infancy, according to the common state of mankinde; should have the knowledge and ability to re∣fuse the evil and choose the good. From hence they do inferre, that a natural man can both will and act ac∣cording to his first integrity, untill he disables and cor∣rupts himselfe. Further, they stand upon it, that a man hath a power to choose the good, and to that pur∣pose they cite the words of Moses, Deuteronomie 30.19. I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing, therefore choose life, page 126, 127, 128. If they did well understand the meaning of these Scrip∣tures, they would not pervert them to so strange a sense. For the Text in Isaiah, we do acknowledge, that the children in an ordinary way have a power to choose the good, and to refuse the evil, when they come to yeares of discretion. But what kinde of good is here meant? not that good which is spiritual or di∣vine; for this they cannot chuse without an inward work of the Spirit; but that good onely which is mo∣ral and civil, and this at yeares of discretion men are able to make choyce of. And for the words of Moses, I have set before you blessing and cursing, therefore choose life, &c. To the clearing of this, Let us di∣stinguish; First what he speaks of, and Secondly, the persons to whom he speaks. First, if by choosing the good, be meant the true God in opposition to all the Heathen gods of the Gentiles, here Moses speaks to the Israelites, as to a people that had cleare evi∣dences and convictions, that there was no other God in all the world but theirs onely. And therefore he doth exhort them to chuse the true God for their God. Secondly, if by choosing the good be meant the lo∣ving of the Lord their God with all their heart, and with all their soule, as it is implyed, verse 10. then this word of command is given onely in relation to the word of promise, verse 6. And the Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed to love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and
with all thy soul that thou mayest live. In immediate relation to this promise, Moses saith, I command thee this day to love the Lord thy God, to walk in his wayes and to keep his commandments that thou mayest live, verse 16. So then we do conclude that the ability to choose the good, is not from any natural power, but from the grace of God, and the word of promise. Thus I have gone thorough all the reasons which are al∣ledged either by Mr. Everard, or the Examiners, the late Pa∣trones of the purity of natural birth. If they have any thing more to say for this, my desire is that they would shew their strength, or else confesse their wicked errors, and submit to the clear evidence of truth. Now let us consider the several and respective arguments of Dr. Jeremy Taylor, and what hath been lately said by him concerning the same sub∣ject.
The third Book containeth the An∣swer to several Arguments of Dr. Jeremy Taylor in his Ʋnum Ne∣cessarium and two smaller Treatises of his. Forasmuch as this Learned man doth tread in the foot∣steps of our Antagonists and doth plead the same things against the Doctrine of original sinne, as they have pleaded against us for certain years last past. And see∣ing also, that many are like to be taken with the purity and elegancy of his Style, that probably are not able to judge of the foulenesse and impurity of his Doctrine; We have thought it worth our labour, to provide an antidote to secure the soules of men, and if it may be possible in a peaceable and brotherly manner to reduce him from the evil of his opinions. And so we come to the several Sections of the sixth Chapter in the treatise aforesaid. SECT. 1. Of Concupiscence and original sinne and whither or no, and how far we are bound to repent of it. ORIGINal sinne is so called  or figuratively, meaning the sinne of Adam, which was committed in the o∣riginal of mankind by our first parent.
Answ. We deny not, but the sinne of Adam may be called the original, or the first sinne, because it was the first that was committed. But then we must take heed, that with our Authour we do not deny also the pollution and the corruption of the natural birth. In so doing we must needs destroy rege∣neration or the new birth; we must needs also evacuate the Baptisme of the Spirit, so farre as it doth seal regeneration: humiliation for the birth, sinne will be a meere non ens and the mortification of the sinne of the nature will be a nullity. In a word, one of the chief ends of the Christian faith (which is to put on the Christ-like disposition) will be frustrated and great∣ly impaired. For what need I to put on the new disposition, as it is from Christ the root of all grace and spiritual life; if there be no pravity and sinfulnesse of nature, from Adam the root of corruption? In Scripture the one is set forth as the immediate opposite to the other. But he further shew∣eth. This sinne brought upon Adam all that God threatned, but no more, a certainty of dying, together with the proper effects, and affections of mortality. Answ. Besides the affections of mortality, and the certain∣ty of dying, this sinne also brought upon Adam, the deprava∣tion of original righteousnesse; and the depravation of his na∣ture, as afterwards shall be shewed. Next he seemeth to speak more fairely. Man being left in the state of pure naturals, could not by his own strength, arrive to a supernatural end, for eternal life being an end above our natural proportion, cannot be acquired by any natural means. Answ. In this, and such like passages of his, he doth seem to me, to crosse his whole undertaking. One chief end of entit∣ling his book (as may appear by the preface; The Doctrine and Practice of repentance, rescued from popular errours; is the scand∣al & offence that he seemes to take at our Doctrine of original sinne. For thinks he, if the nature be depraved, a necessity of sinning will be introduced, and the natural liberty of the Will, will be taken away: and therefore in much compassion and tendernesse, he seemeth (to himself at least) to vindicate the
truth, to make Religion more reasonable, and intelligible: and to rescue the Schooles, and Pulpits, from the rigour, and au∣sterity of the doctrines of such a nature. But when all is done, he speaks the same in effect, that we do. For if man being in his natural condition, by his own strength, cannot arrive to a supernatural end, but needs the help of the Spirit: This being suppos'd, I will put it upon him, seriously to consider, whe∣ther the same Spirit that helps a man out of this imaginary de∣ficiency, privation, and imperfection, is not as able also, to rescue him from that inherent defilement, pravity, and cor∣ruption of the natural birth? The Spirit can do as much in the one, as in the other. And exhortations will be as useful in the one case, as in the other. What need then hath our Authour to raise up all this dust? But he further ad∣deth. What gifts and graces or supernatural endowments God gave to Adam in his state of innocency we know not, God hath no where told us. Answ. Though he hath no where told us in so many letters, yet by collation of circumstances, we may gather that Adam had the Spirit, and was a spiritual man before his fall. In the creation it is expressely said, come, let us make man after our own image, Gen. 1. The Apostle doth declare wherein this image doth consist, That concerning the former conversation, ye put off the Old man, which is corrupt according to deceitful lusts, and that ye be renewed in the Spirit of the mind, and that ye put on the New man, which after God is created in righteousnesse and true holinesse, Ephes. 4.22 23, 24. In these words there are four particulars that seem to speak faire for Adam, that he had the Spirit, and was a spiritual man before his fall. First, it is said that they should put off the Old man, corrupt according to deceitful lusts; Cor∣ruption is of a different nature according to the condition of the subject-matter; there is a corruption of seeds, of graines, of metals, of the members of a mans body, but here the Apostle must needs speak of the corruption of that which is spiritual. From whence we collect that the Old man, or the disposition of the flesh, is but the corruption of that holy and spiritual state n which Adam was made.
Secondly, it is said, be ye renewed in the spirit of your minds; The word renewed doth import the restoring of a thing to that perfection, which sometime it had in its first institution. An house is renewed, not when it is built new from the ground, but when it is amended. When an infant is born into the world, it is not proper to say that he is renewed, but a man doth re∣new his strength, when he doth recover it by degrees after a long sicknesse. So in the present case, when the Apostle saith, be renewed in the spirit of your mind, he speaketh of the renovation of that knowledge, holinesse and righte∣ousnesse that Adam sometimes had, but lost it by his fall. Thirdly, it is said, after the image of him that created him. Though this is specially meant of the new creature, yet it is with respect also to that passage in the old creation, let us make man after our own image. For , secundum Deum, according to God, is as much in effect, as after the likeness, simili∣tude and image of God who upon this account must needs be the pattern in both creatio'ns. Fourthly, to put all out of question it is expressely said, which after God is created in righteousnesse and true holinesse. What difference soever there may be between Adam in innocency, and the Saints in the state of regeneration, certain it is, that holinesse and righteousnesse must needs be the morality of the Law, and none can rationally deny, but that Adam was endued and invested with these two before his fall. By his righteous∣nesse he was enabled to deale justly with man, and by his holi∣nesse he was carried out to know God, to love him, to delight in him, to fear him, and to take him as his chiefest good. All these particulars (expressing the spirituality and purity of the Law) do signifie to us that Adam had the Spirit, and was a spiritual man before his fall. Now let us go on. Receiving more by the second Adam, than we lost by the first, the sons of God are now spiritual, which he never was that we can finde. Answ. That which he writes here, doth manifestly contra∣dict what he speaks elswhere, for page 383. He plainly shew∣eth
that original righteousnesse in Adam and habitual righte∣ousnesse in the Saints; are all one. These are his own words, if one sinne (saith he) could naturally, and by a physical causal∣ty destroy original righteousnesse, then every ones sinne in the re∣generate, can as well destroy habitual righteousnesse, because that, and this differ not, but in their principle, not in their nature and constitution. And why should not a righteous man as easily and as quickly fall from grace, and loose his habits, as Adam did? natu∣rally it is all one, so farre he. To which we answer, Adam fell from original righteousnesse, because he stood onely by the covenant of workes, the Saints do not fall from habitual righ∣teousnesse, because they have their standing by the covenant of grace. But as to the point in hand, original righteousness in Adam, and habitual righteousnesse in the Saints, he tells us, that both are one, and the same in essence and constitution and then again, he tells us, the sons of God are spiritual, which Adam never was that he could finde. So great a faculty he hath to blow hot and cold in the same breath. Now he comes to explicate that Scripture, by one man sin en∣tred into the world, Rom. 5. &c. That sinne, saith he, entred into the world by Adam, is there∣fore certaine, because he was the first man. It must needs enter in him, because it first comes in by the first. Answ. It is true that sinne entred into the world by Adam, as the first man, but it is not the whole truth, for in such a sense (as he understands it) the old Pelagians may make good that position of theirs, that original sinne is by imitation they that come after, do onely imitate the ensample of him that went before. Of the entrance of death by sin he speaketh as followeth. Death by sinne, that is death, which at the first was the conditi∣on of nature became a punishment upon that account, just as it was with the Scrpent to creep upon his belly, and the woman to be subject to her husband. Answ. In these words of his, he doth distinguish between death as a meere condition of nature, and death as a punish∣ment. The former he will have to be in the state of innocency,
latter only to be introduced by the fall. But against this I have many things to alledge. First, if Adam should have dyed in innocency, and that meerely by the condition of his nature, what can we possibly make of the sense of that commination, in the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt dye the death? what propable interpretation can we give of those Scriptures, by one man, sinne entred into the world, and death by sinne. The wages of sinne is death, Rom. 6. Ʋlt? Surely all this plainly sheweth, that death came into the world, meerely by the sinne of man, and if he had not sinned he had not dyed. Further, the Apostle said, the last enemy that shall be destroyed is death, 1 Cor. 15.16. The question is, when did death begin to be an enemy, and from what time are we to fetch the date thereof? If Adam should have dyed in innocency, than the enmity of death must begin in Paradise, we must fetch the date of it from the creation and not from the fall. And so consequently death will be rather the work of God, than the fruit of sinne. But let it be supposed in this low and dimuni∣tive sense, that death came into the world as a punishment and began to be penal at the fall onely. If we take the matter in this sense it will not serve his turn neither, nor will other pas∣sages of his doctrine, abide the rigour of this interpretation. For how often doth he plead after this manner? In other cases, saith he; Lawes be not given to Ideots, infants, and persons uncapable: why should they be given here? In all cases of the world, it is unjust to lay the sinne of the father upon the children, and is it otherwise in this case onely? And if the answer may be admitted, any man may suffer for the sinne of any father, because it may be said here as well as there, that although the innocent must not perish for a∣nothers fault, yet the son is not innocent as being in the fa∣thers loynes when the fault was committed, and the Law calls him and makes him guilty? Many such Aphorismes he hath, where he sheweth or at least endeavours to shew how contrary it is to the justice and mercy of God, any way to bur∣then the posterity of Adam with the guilt of his sinne. And yet here he confesses plainly and openly, that death quatenus, a punishment in the penalty of it, came into the world by the
disobedience of the first man: How he can make one part of his doctrine to agree with the other, it passeth all understan∣ding of mine to discerne? In his answer to the Bishops letter he seemeth to me to let fall a strange contradiction: I have (saith he,) the plain words of Saint Paul, death passed upon all men, forasmuch as all have sinned, all men, that is, the generali∣ty of mankind, all that lived till they could sinne; Others that dy∣ed before, dyed in their nature, not in their sinne, neither Adams, nor their own, save onely that Adam brought it upon them, or ra∣ther left it to them, himself being disrob'd of all that could hinder it. Answ. let page 49. Here in the former part of his words, he saith, that infants dye in their nature, not in their sinne, neither Adams nor their own; and yet he tells us again, that Adam brought in death upon them, and through his disobedience they were disrobed of all that could hinder it: If he did bring in death upon them, then they did not dye purely in their own nature; they must some way die in or by his sinne. Again, if they dyed purely in their own nature, and not at all in his sin, how can he be said to bring in death? Can he bring in death, and can he not bring in death? and all this upon one sort of people, at one and the same time? Neither can I see, how he will acquit himself, if it should be put upon him to shew the true reason why infants are lyable to burning feavours, convul∣sion fitts, and passe through the pangs of death at last: Are these the infelicities of nature? Then God hath made them in this state, and their misery will be purely the work of his own hands. Are these the punishment of Adams sinne? then the in∣nocent child will bear the burden of his fathers iniquity, in such a case where it is not possible for the son to follow the fathers ensample, which is plainly to give up the cause. Now let us con∣sider what he saith of the quality of the persons upon whom there hath been such a passage of death. Death (saith he) passed upon all men, that is, upon all the old world, who were drowned in the flood of divine vengeance, and who did sinne after the similitude of Adam, and therefore the A∣postle St. Paul addes that for a reason, inasmuch as all men have sinned. Ans. Though the word all in it self hath an ambiguity in it, yet
the scope of the text, & the condition of the subject, doth plainly demonstrate that the passage of death from Adam as a common root must be absolutely upon all men, as men so farre forth as they are his sonnes, and not upon all to the flood only. But con∣cerning this matter we have his meaning more fully in the next passage. If all men (saith he,) have sinned upon their own account, as it is certaine they have, then these words can very well mean that Adam first sinned, and all his sonnes and daugh∣ters sinned after him: and so dyed in their own sinne by a death, which at the first, and in the whole constitution of affaires is natural, and a death which their own sinne deserved, but yet was hastned and ascertained upon them for the sin of their Progeni∣tor. Answ. In these words of his, as plausibly as he seems to speak of the cause of death, he puts that for the cause which is not the cause, and where he speaks of the true cause, it doth not answer the sense of the text. First, he puts that for the cause, that is not the cause. For, from what Scripture, or from what consequence of Scripture doth he prove it, that Adam and his sonnes in the whole constitution of affiaires should have dyed a death that is natural; The Scripture doth every where make death to be the fruit of sinne, as we have formerly proved. Againe, it is most true, that men dye, because by their own sinne they deserve death, but the scope of the Apostle is here onely concerning the disobedience of the first man, and the passage of death upon all by the account of his sinne. That which is the principal cause of death, at least to the purpose in hand, he looks upon it as a businesse by the by; In the next words he cometh to deliver himself more clearly for speaking of the fall of Adam he addeth. Sin propagated upon that root and vicious ensample, or rather from that beginning, not from that cause, but dum ita peccant, & si∣militer moriuntur. If they sin so, then so shall they die, so Saint Hierom. Answ. This passage, though it be clothed with the words of Hierom, it hath the sense of the Pelagians: For observe what
he saith sin is propagated from that vicious ensample, it doth de∣scend from Adam not so much as a cause, but as a beginning, and so far as men tread in his steps they are lyable to the same punishment. In his answer to the Bishops letter, he brings in an ensample to confirme this way of exposition, these are his own words: To this purpose we have an ensample of Gods transmitting the curse from one to the other. Both were sin∣ners, but one was the Original of the curse or punishment. So said the Prophet to the wife of Jeroboam, 1 Kings 14.16. He shall give Israel up because of the sins of Jeroboam, who did sinne and made Israel to sinne. Joroboam was the roote of the sin and of the curse: here it was also, that I may use the words of the Apostle, that by the sin of one man, Jeroboam, sin went into all Israel, and the curse, captivity or death by sinne, and so death went upon all men of Israel  inasmuch as all men of Israel have sinned. So far he, page 32. By this instance of his it is cleare, that Original sin must passe into the world, not so much by propagation as by imita∣tion. The Kings of Israel did walke in the wayes of Jeroboam that made Israel to sin, and thereupon the curse, captivity and death came upon all the whole succession, and upon all Israel so far forth as they did walk in his waies and did follow his en∣sample. If this be a parallel case we must say, sin, the guilt of sin, and the curse for sin came into the world only by the insti∣tution and command of the first man, and all his posterity are so far forth involved in his sinne, as they walk after such an injun∣ction, and imitate that ensample. Now if this be so, I will leave it to any man to judge whither this gloss will go at last. The Apostle saith that the first man is the figure of him that is to come. If therefore we are implicated in the sinne of Adam no otherwise, but by obeying his command, and following his ensample. Our salvation by Christ will chiefly consist in our imitating of him, and in obedience to his commands. As for the merit of his blood, the worth of his passion, the imputation of his righteousnesse, all this must be set apart as a matter of little use and small profit. Having done with his own he cometh to paraphrase upon the exposition given by us.
They think these words —forasmuch as all have sinned, ought to be expounded thus; death passed upon all men, in whom all have sinned, meaning that in Adam we really sinned, and God doth truely and justly impute his sin to us, to make us as guilty, as he that did it, and as much punished and lyable to eternal damnation: and all the force of this great fancy, relyes upon this exposition of  to signifie in him. Answ. We do in substance own the interpretation to be ours, but that all the force of it doth depend upon  to signifie in him, this we plainly deny. Our interpretation is grounded upon the scope of the text. For let us suppose the words to be con∣strued in his sence. Forasmuch as all have sinned, when he hath done all that he can, he must come to the interpretation given by us. For the drift of the Apostle in the former words, is not only to shew that sinne hath past upon all men, and death by sin; but he speaks of such a passage of sinne and death upon all men out of one man; If therefore, there be such a general passage of sin and death upon all out of one man, then virtually, and interpretatively all must sin in one man. Againe, in the subsequent verses the Apostle saith, that the first Adam is the figure of him that is to come, If you ask how and wherein, we must needs say from the whole series of the text, that they are two publick persons, and two representatives of the kind. By this account then the disobedience of the first man, must be virtually the act of all, and what he did they did in him, and by him: So then our interpretation is founded upon the whole scope of the context. As for his Critiscismes we will leave them to such who have more leasure to busy themselves about words, we will follow him as he goes on in expounding the sense of the Apostle. Neverthelesse death reigned from Adam to Moses even over them that bad not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, who is the figure of him that is to come: By which discourse it appears that St. Paul doth not speak of all mankind, as if the evil occasion by Adams sin did discend for ever upon that account, but it had a limited effect and reached onely to those that were in the interval between Adam and Moses. Answ. But if the matter be well considered there is no such
collection to be made from the discourse of the Apostle. Indeed he speaketh of the reigne of death over those that lived in the interval between Adam and Moses; but shall we argue from thence that the evil occasioned by the fall did discend to them onely, and go no further? This cannot be, for afterwards the Apostle drawing a parallel between both Adams, hath these words: If through the offence of one, many be dead, much more the grace of God; and the gift by grace, which is by one man Jesus Christ hath abounded unto many. Now then if we shall say, by the offence of one, many be dead, and understand this many, or mul∣titude in a limited sence; namely, of such only that lived in the interval between Adam and Moses, by this account, such a number alone will stand opposite to the many that have life and grace by Christ. Nay, that which is more, the fore-mentioned number might in their time only look to one man the Lord Jesus for recovery out of sin and death, and so the Gospel will be delivered to the consolation of such only that lived in the fore∣mentioned interval between Adam and Moses; And so we that live in the latter ages of the world, shall have nothing to do with the Gospel, nor the Gospel with us. But of this I have formerly spoken in my answer to Mr. Everard and the Exa∣miners: There I have shewed the reason why the Apostle doth mention the reigne of death in the interval between Adam and Moses. He goes on. This death (saith he) was brought upon them by Adam, that is, death which was threatned to Adam only, went forth upon them also who indeed were sinners, but not after the similitude of Adams transgression, that is, who sinned not so capitally as be did. Answ. This expression death threatned only to Adam, hath some ambiguity in it: If he speaks of Adam as a particnliar person, death was not only threatned to him, for in the present case he is to be looked upon as the common roote of the nature, when he fell, all mankind fell in him, from him death passed upon all, not only as sinners in their own person, but in that formality as made sinners, or sinful by his disobedience. Of infants it is true as well as others, in Adam all dye, and so death passeth upon all. Next he telleth us what it is to sin like Adam.
To sin like Adam (saith he) is used as a tragicall and high ex∣pression: so it is in the Prophet, they like men have transgressed: so we read it, but in the Hebrew it is, they like Adam have trans∣grest, and yet death passed upon them that did not sin after the simili∣tude of Adam. Answ. For the text in Hosea, our English translation may well passe by an Enallage of the number. They like man, that is, like fickle and inconstant men have transgrest my Covenant. Or, if this will not satisfie, that of Tremellius may obtaine Tan∣quam hominis transgressi sunt faedus; They have played fast and loose with me, as if it were no other but a meer Covenant of man. But let us take the words in the sence that is most pro∣pitious to him, viz. that the Prophet here looks to Adam as the head of all Apostates, and that the Israelites had sinned in as tragical a manner as Adam did: what doth he infer from hence? he tells us, that death reigned from Adam to Moses over those that had not so tragically sinned as Adam had done. Truely the old world that was drowned in the flood, Sodom and Gomor∣rah, that were burnt with fire, the builders of Babel, whose lan∣guage was confounded; these, and such like sinners (though they lived in the interval between Adam and Moses) were none of the least. But let us take it in his own sence, that death reigned over Abel, Seth, Noah, and others that did not sin so capitally as Adam did. If this be well considered, it doth make more for our purpose, than it doth for his: For these holy men that lived in the interval between Adam and Moses were under the reigne of death. Here I demand how came they to be under this reigne? If he will say their own sinne was the principal cause, how will he answer the words of the Apostle, who ex∣pressely tells us, by one mans offence, death reigned over all, ver. 17. Againe, if he shall say they came under this power by the sinne of Adam, then he makes good the interpretation given by us, that by the sinne of Adam infants as well as others, in all that interval between Adam and Moses came under the power and sovereignty of death. He further addeth. God (saith he) was so exasperated with mankind, that being angry, would still continue that punishment, even to lesse sinnes and sinners,
which he only had first threatned to Adam, and so Adam brought it upon them. They indeed in rigour, did themselves deserve it, but if it had not been for that provocation by Adam, they who sinned not so bad, and had not been so severely and expressely threatned, had not suffered so severely. Answ. By the tenour of the Doctrine we may understand, that men by their own sins do deserve death; as for the sin of Adam, by this account it is only an aggravating circumstance, and a cause meerly of the severity of the sentence. Now if this be so, how shall we expound the meaning of the Apostle? By one man sin entred into the world and death by sin, and death passed upon all men. He speaketh of the entrance of sinne, of the en∣trance of death, of the entrance of sin and death, upon all by the sin and disobedience of one man. Is all this only to make Adams sin a meer accessory, or aggravating circumstance? away with such a conceit. The text doth pitch upon it as the principal and general cause of death. Againe the Apostle saith, by the offence of one, death reigned by one: If all men fall under the reigne of death by the offence of one, then certainly his offence is not the cause alone why they are more severely dealt with: but it is the very cause why they fall under the power and dominion of death it selfe. Shall we make a circumstance of that which is the principal cause: Further, what is the reason that infants dye, seeing personally and individually they are guilty of no sin of their own to deserve death? in his answer to the Bishops letter he doth not shunne to affirme, that death comes upon infants meerly by right of dominion. But then (saith he) the evil of punishment may passe further than the action. If it passes upon the innocent it is not a punishment to them, but an evil inflicted by right of dominion, yet by reason of the relation of the offlicted to him that sinned, to him it is a punishment. But if it passeth upon others that are not innocent, then it is a punishment to both, to the first principally to the descendants or relatives for the others sake his sinne being impured so far: and more he hath to the same purpose, pag. 43. Here he plainly delivers his opinion that death is inflicted upon others, because they do partake with Adam in his sinne, but it descends and comes upon infants meerly by way of prerogative and absolute dominion. And if
their death be a punishment it is so only to Adam in as much as they stand related to him as being his descendants and rela∣tives. Against this I have some things to oppose. First, in his Ʋnum necessarium, pag. 403. He layeth down this as a sure axiom. When Godnsing the power and the dominion of a Lord, and the severity of a Judge doth punish posterity, it must be so long as the Parents may live, and see it, and so out of Chrysostome he doth ex∣pound it to be to the third and fourth generation and no longer. Now here I argue, if God punisheth Adam in his infant chil∣dren, this is not to the third and fourth, but to the hundreth generation. Againe, why should he be punished in his infant∣children when he hath been dead many hundred, nay certaine thousand years agoe! shall he only be punished and never survive or live so long, as to see the punishment? againe, the words of the Apostle are cleare: as by the offence of one, judge∣ment came upon all men to condemnation, ver. the 18. If it came upon all men? it came upon infants as well as others, and if it came upon all to condemnation, then infants beare the guilt of sin, the infelicities, miseries and paines of death, not by way of sovereignty, but as a punishment and judgement laid upon them for their sin and disobedience of the first man. But to colour the matter, he hath a restriction in his answer to the Bishops letter. Now then your Lordship (saith he) sees that what you note of the meaning of  I admit, and is in∣deed true enough, and agreeable to the scope of the Apostle, and very much in justification of what I taught. The word  signifies a punishment for sin, and this sin to be theirs upon whom the condemnation comes. I easily subscribe to it: but then take in the words of St. Paul  by one sinne, or by the sin of one the curse passed upon all men to condemnation; that is the curse descended from Adam; for his sake it was propagated  to a real condem∣nation, viz. when they should sin, for though this  or curse of death was threatned only to Adam, yet upon Gods being angry with him God resolved it should descend: and if men did sin as Adam, or if they sin at all, though lesse than Adam, yet the  or the curse threatned to them should passe  unto the same actual condemnation which fell
upon him, that is, it should actually bring them under the reigne of death, pag. 45, 46. By these words of his it is cleare that the curse doth descend upon infants, not when they are borne in sin, for he doth own no such sin of the nature, but it descends only to their real condemnation when they come to act sinne. Here I would entreat him to consider the words of the Apostle, so by the righteousnesse of one man the free gift came upon all men to justification of life. If it came upon all men, it came upon infants & if the blessing of Christ doth come upon infants, surely the curse also must descend upon them. For we cannot imagine any to be made partakers of the blessing, bene∣fit, grace, and life by the second man, but he must be some way involved in the guilt, misery, death, and condemnation, brought in by the first. On the contrary if he will say that the curse doth not descend upon infants, by the rule of proportion it will fol∣low that infants shall have no part in the comforts, priviledges, and blessings that come by the Gospel. And truely this must be the upshot of this dismal doctrine. Now let us consider what exposition he giveth of those words, by the disobedience of one, many were made sinners. But that (saith he) which I dwell and rely upon, is this: sinne is often used in Scripture for the punishment of sinne, and they that suffer are called sinners, though they be innocent; so it is in this case, by Adams disobedience, many were sinners, that is, the sinne of Adam passed upon them, and sate upon them with evil effect. Answ. We do not deny but the word sinne may be taken for the punishment of sinne, and to that purpose what he speaketh of Bathsheba, I and my sonne Solomon shall be sinners, but more especially that of our Saviour, he made him sinne for us, that knew no sinne: These, and such like passages which he hath, page 368, &c. We do not deny the truth of them in the general: Only this we say, that we are not onely made sinners by imputation, but also we derive a sinful nature from Adam by propagation, and by contagion. For First: If there were onely an imputation of guilt, and no inherent corruption, men would bear the bur∣then and punishment of sinne without cause, and God would punish sinne where none is. Our Saviour indeed was made sin,
who knew no sinne, because he came in the nature of a Surety: But the sonnes of Adam are no sureties, they must be some way sinners themselves, if they will righteously bear the burthen of Adams sinne. Again, the words of the Apostle are most em∣phatical, by the disobedience of one, many were made sinful, for the word , doth note, one that hath the habit of sinne, that is, a sinful man as I have proved in the former part of the Treatise, from whence we collect, that the sonnes of A∣dam are not onely made sinners by imputation, but sinful also by hereditary contagion. Further, the word , are con∣stituted sinners, or sinful. This expression, if it be seriously considered, is set in immediate opposition to the constitution of things in the creation. If a reason be demanded concerning the Sun, Moon, and Starres, of the ebbing and the flowing of the Sea, of the vicissitude of Winter and Summer; The an∣swer is easie, all these things have their being, because God made them and constituted them so in the beginning. But if a reason be demanded, how all men came to be sinners by im∣putation, and sinful by propagation? the answer is as easie: They are made and constituted, as by the disobedience of the first man, so by the just judgment of God upon that disobedi∣ence. If the sinfulnesse of nature be not by the fall, it must come by creation, or some other reason must necessarily be assigned to make all men so unanimous and universal in matter of sin∣ning. Lastly, the Apostle draweth a parallel between both the Adams, as by the disobedience of one, many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one, many shall be made righteous. Now it is evident none are made righteous by imputation in the or∣dinary way, but they do in some measure or other partake of the life and spiritual nature of Christ, as the seccond Adam. Therefore we say on the contrary part, there are none that have the guilt of the sinne of Adam imputed to them but they must also derive the pollution of nature from him as the root of corruption. But to this he hath a solution, (as he pretends at least) in his answer to the Bishops letter. This is sufficient (saith he) for the Apostles argument, and yet no necessity to affirme that we are sinners any more than by imputation: for we are by Christ made just no other wise than hy imputation, page 38, &c. To
which we reply, the question is not about the formal reason of our justification, which we acknowledge to be by the alone im∣putation of the righteousnesse of Christ: But the point in hand is, whether any be justified by the blood which are not sancti∣fied by the Spirit. So in the present case, we say none have the guilt of Adams sinne, but such onely that partake of his na∣ture; For in the next Chapter, when the Apostle cometh to speak of sanctification, he hath these words, know ye not that our Old man is crucified with him, that the body of sinne might be de∣stroyed, Rom. 6.6. By the old man, he means the sinful dispo∣sition of the flesh derived from Adam the root of corruption. So then the Scripture plainly doth shew that the opposition be∣tween both the Adams, doth not onely stand in imputation of guilt, but also in the propagation of the nature. And it is a great wonder that any exception can be made against so plain a truth. Thus, I have passed through all the material objections, and we have seen all of moment that can be said, if it might be possible to take this Scripture out of our hands. Now he comes to forme the state of the question, to shew how farre he al∣lowes original sinne, and where he differs from us? Because this is the foot of the work, let him deliver himselfe in his own words. Adams sinne (saith he) was punished by an expulsion out of Paradise, in which was a tree appointed to be the cure of diseases and the conservatory of life. There was no more told as done, but this and its proper consequents. He came into a land lesse blessed, a land which bore thistles and bryars, &c. And then he addeth thus, death came in not by any new sentence or change of nature: for man was created mortal, and if Adam had not sinned, he should have been immortal by grace, that is, by the use of the tree of life; and now being driven from the place where the tree grew, was left in his own natural constitution, that is, to be sick and dye without that remedy. And he further explaineth himselfe, pag. 372. This evil which is the condition of all our natures, viz. to dye, was to some a punishment, to others not so. It was a punishment to all that sinned both before Moses and since, upon the first it fell as a consequent of Gods anger upon Adam, upon the latter it fell as a consequent of
that anger threatned in Moses his law. But to those that sinned, not at all as infants and innocents, it was meerly a condition of their nature, and no more a punishment than to be a child is. It was a punishment of Adams sin, because by his sin humane nature came to be disrobed of their preterna∣tural immortality, and therefore upon that account they dye. But as it is related to the persons, it was not a punishment, not an evil inflicted for their sake, or any guiltinesse of their own properly so called. And then going on, he saith, we finde no∣thing else in Scripture exprest to be the effect of Adams sin, and beyond this without authority we must not go. Turning his style against us, he addeth, other things are said, but I finde no warrant for them in that sence as they are usually supposed, and some of them in no sence at all. Then he cometh to particularize, The par∣ticulars (saith he) commonly reckoned, are that from Adam, we derive an original ignorance, a pronenesse to sin, a fomes or nest of sin imprinted and placed in our souls, a losse of our wills, liberty, and nothing else left, but a liberty to sin; which liberty upon the summe of affaires is expounded a necessity to sin, and the effect of all is, we are borne heires of damnation. These are the particulars which he excepts against, and these he endeavours with all his might to oppugne: we will go in the same method as he doth; be∣ginning with original ignorance, he thus speaketh. It is true (saith he) that we derive it from our Parents, I meane, we are borne with it, but I do not know that any man thinks, that if Adam had not sinned that sin, Cain should have been wise as soon as his navel had been cut. Answ. We cannot so precisely determine what Adams chil∣dren should have been in innocency, because he did not con∣tinue so long to beget a child in that pure estate, yet I think none may doubt, had he begotten children in that estate, he had conveied the same image of God, the same knowledge (respect∣ing the kind of it) that himselfe was created in. And though in respect of actual knowledge, Cain should not have been wise as soon as his navel was cut, yet in respect of potential know∣ledge he should have been borne in a capacity, and by degrees should have attained the same knowledge as Adam himselfe was created in. But he further argues.
If he had so great knowledge (saith he) it is likely that he would not so cheaply have sold himselfe and all his hopes out of a greedy ap∣petite to get some knowledge. Answ. The Apostle St. Jude tells us. The Angels that left their first habitation, are kept in chaines of darknesse to the judge∣ment of the great day, v. 6. Shall we say then, because they did so cheaply leave their first habitation, was there no such dignity or excellency in it? The way of reasoning is one and the same in substance. He goeth on. The state of ignorance we do derive from Adam as we do our na∣ture, which is a state of ignorance, and all manner of imperfection, but whether it was not imperfect, and apt to fall into forbidden in∣stances, we may best guesse it by the event. Answ. We may guesse by the event, that he was made in a state from which he might fall, but this doth no way hinder his being a spiritual man, or that endowment of spiritual know∣ledge which he had before his fall. First, by his fall he did lose in his judgement, he and all mankind did fall from faith to unbelief; and hence it is, that ever since for happinesse all men rely upon their own wit, learning, beauty, strength, friends, riches, nobility, &c. This plainly sheweth, that Adam at the first was made in a state of dependance upon the true God, which could not be, but he must be endued with a great measure of spiritual knowledge, and in his judgement at least he must discerne that excellency that is in God. Further, the Apostle speaketh, ye have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him, Col. 3.10. By knowledge he doth not point so much to that which is literal, hystorical, and textual, but to that which is spiritual, by which the Saints come to be cloathed with a new nature. Secondly, (he saith) is renewed, which importeth the restitution of that knowledge that man once had, but had lost by his fall. In a sence therefore we may say, that the knowledge of the Saint is a kinde of remembrance, and that saying of Plato is not to much out of the way. Thirdly, is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him. This plainly sheweth, that in the old and the new creation a man is made after the image of God, and this image doth principally stand in the di∣vineness
of the light. Some differences there are between the knowledge which Adam had before his fall, and the knowledge that is renewed in the Saints, Adam had it by creation, they have it by inspiration: Adam could propagate it to his posterity, they cannot propagate it to posterity: Adams knowledge was without the sight of his misery, their knowledge when they do begin to know as they ought to know, doth begin with the sight of their misery: Lastly, Adams knowledge was not so perfect, but the Saints knowledge shall be most perfect in de∣gree, when they come to live in the state of glory. These cir∣cumstances considered respecting the manner, there is some difference to be made; yet in substance both kinds of knowlege is one and the same. For though it did not belong to Adam to know his misery, and to believe in a Christ, yet the righteousness of the moral law did appertaine to him. It did belong to him to love God, to feare him, to trust in him, to obey him, &c. Now how could all this possibly be done, but he must know him, and believe him, therefore his knowledge must needs be spi∣ritual before his fall. We come now to the next point, he endeavours to prove that infants by the sinne of Adam are not heires of dam∣nation. We need not in this matter be careful to give him an answer. If it be a question de jure, we say the sin of Adam is such, and Original sin in its own nature is such, that it doth deserve dam∣nation: But if it be a question de facto, there is no such need that we should possitively affirme the actual damnation of infants. They that be saved, we may safely affirme are saved by the mercy of God; and they that are damned, God can cleare his justice in their condemnation: though in all things the reason of his proceeding is not so intelligible to us. And our Author himselfe, I beleeve, when he hath well pondred the businesse, will finde it to be more safe to rest in such a deter∣mination. But as for his arguments, they are fallacious in many particulars: For most of them I have answered in the for∣mer part of the treatise; And for the residue I shall have occa∣sion to speak of them afterwards. Here only foure things are to be noted in the general.
First, by the same reasons as he doth overturne damnation by the sin of Adam, any Jew or Turk may overthrow salvation by the merit of Christ. For why may not such a one argue the death of Christ was an act of his, and none of ours, he suffered many hundred yeares ago? What he did, we cannot be said to do, either vertually, or interpretively, in him or by him, we had no being at all, that our wills should be contained in his. His sufferings were without any knowledge, and consent of ours, and wherefore should any benefit arise to us? If there be any such thing, why should it so many ages together be con∣cealed from the greatest part of mankind? Most of his argu∣ments do go after this way, and by the same reasons that he takes away the guilt of sin by the disobedience of the first man, by the same he doth destroy all possibility of salvation by the second. Secondly, other of his reasons do go too far in question∣ing the absolute power, justice, and sovereignty of God. As he would have men to be temperate in such speeches that seem to condemn infants to hell for the fault of another, so he also should be more moderate in those sayings, that question the power and the justice of God. What is, or what shall be the whole course of the Lords proceeding against infants that dye in original sin, is variously disputed: some speak of a Limbus infantum, whither those infants go that dye without baptisme: Others speak of the penalty of losse, without a penalty of sense: A third sort dreame of I know not what common receptacle, where infants as well as the souls of others do still remaine in expectation of the resurrection. But sure I am, none do speak more dangerously and desperately, than they that except against the justice and the mercy of God, now in this our Author is too bold. Thirdly, in all his reasons, he goes against that which he teacheth elsewhere. For in sundry places he sheweth, that without the infusion of supernatural grace, no man, neither infant nor other, can enter into the Kingdome of heaven. Againe (he saith) that by the fall of Adam mankind came to be divested and disrobed of those supernatural excellencies that formerly he had. Now by the position of these two, I leave it to any man to judge,
infants, as now borne in their natural condition, whether are they capable of salvation? whatsoever he may say in words, he and we as to this point may agree in the same principles. But in his answer to the Bishops letter, he seems to be of opinion, that infants went neither to heaven nor hell, at least such a col∣lection may be drawn from his words. Just so it is (saith he) in infants: Hell was not made for man, but for devils, and there∣fore it must be something besides meere nature that must beare any man thither: meer nature neither goes to heaven nor hell, pag. 17. In which words of his we acknowledge it to be true in a sense, that meer nature doth not carry a man to heaven or hell, for that which is not true at all, cannot carry a man any whither. The Sophisters do indeed speak of the creation of man, in puris naturalibus, in his pure naturals, but I no where finde that God did ever make, or did intend to make any man in such estate that was neither good nor evil, I know no such meer nature to be found in any part of the habitable earth; and therefore it is some way a truth (in this abstract consideration) that a pure nature carries a man no whether. But he hath another meaning in which he is greatly mistaken, for under that notion and consi∣deration, as infants are now borne, this nature depraved carry∣eth only to hell. We were by nature the children of wrath as well as others, Eph. 2.2, 3. But here perhaps he will except by such a tenet as this, all infants will be necessitated to damnation. Not so neither: they will be borne only in a nature lyable to damnation. But by our doctrine, we do not say that they must be all damned. I see nothing to the contrary, but Christ is as well able to save them from the pollution and corruption of the natural birth, as well as if they were all reduced to that imaginary state that he speaks of. Concerning this matter, he delivers his judgement in his answer to the Bishops letter. When I affirme that infants, being by Adam reduced and left to their meer natural estate, fall short of heaven, I do not say they cannot go to heaven at all, but they cannot go thither by their natural powers, they cannot without a new grace and favour go to heaven: But then it cannot presently be inferred that therefore they go to hell, but this ought to be inferred, which indeed was the real consequent of it, therefore it is necessary that Gods grace should supply this defect if
God intends heaven to them at all, and because nature cannot, God sent a Saviour by whom it was effected: so far he, pag. 15. Now I leave it to any man to judge, whither the same mutatis mutandis may not be said of our opinion, though infants are borne in Original sin, and are by nature the children of wrath, yet they may be saved by grace. By all this it is evident, that we are as faire for the salvation of infants as he is, and by the same doore as he goes out, we will go out at the same. And for the sayings of our writers, I have three things to answer. First, some speak more mildly in the point, rather inclining to the salvation, than the damnation of infants. Junius in his collation de naturâ & gratiâ, hath these words: Nemo nostrum it a fuerit aut furere compertus est, &c. There is none of ours that is so mad, or was ever found so void of reason, who would simply affirme infants to be damned. They which teach otherwise, let themselves look to it by what right they moy do it, and by what authority it may be done. For although in respect of their own selves, and that common nature of ours, they may be in a state lyable to damnation; it follows not that we should passe the sentence of damnation upon them, &c. In the processe of his discourse he giveth sundry reasons: First, the promise of God to believers, and their natural seed. Secondly, his mercy to thousands, and that through many descents, where the Ancestors have some∣times belonged to the Covenant. Thirdly, The judgement of charity, seeing it is the Lords pleasure to take them away in their infancy, we may presume that by that fatherly act of his he intends to receive them to mercy. Other testimonies may be brought of such that have gone in the milder way, but these shall suffice. A second sort of our Expositiors there are that do pitch more hard. They say that some infants may go to hell, yet they mo∣derate their sentence, as Chamier. Non abhorret a verisimilitu∣dine paenas eorum esse mitissimas, It is very probable their punish∣ments are most mild. A third sort leave the matter wholly in suspence; they think it sufficient to believe that all infants are borne in a state lyable to damnation; they have in them the seeds of all evil, yet for
all this they conceive that God may shew mercy in and through Christ, specially to the infants of such that do belong to the Covenant, specially where conscience is made to enter them into the outward visible Church by baptisme. And this is all that we will say of this question. Leaving this businesse of the state of infants, and reserving to God the secrets of election or non-election, we will come to the point that is more useful and more easie to be understood. And here he questions, whether Adam did debauch our nature, and corrupt our will and manner by his fall? And if he did it, he further enquires after the manner how it was done? First, whe∣ther it was done by a natural or physical efficiency of sin it selfe? Secondly, whether was it because we are all in the loynes of Adam? or, Thirdly, whether was the sentence and the de∣cree of God the cause thereof? he hath foure arguments against a physical efficiency, which we have in part handled already, and shall have occasion to speak afterwards. And therefore to avoid repetition we will come to the second branch, whether Adam did debauch our nature, because we are all in his loynes. Against this he hath sundry reasons that follow in order. By the same reason (saith he) we are guilty of all the sins that he committed while we were in his loynes, there being no imaginable reason why the first should be propagated, and not the rest. Answ. As I have formerly shewed, so I declare againe, the pollution of nature can only be propagated from the first sin, because in that only Adam did act as a publick man, in which sence the Apostle calls him, the figure of him that is to come. But of this I have spoken already. Secondly, upon this account (saith he) all the sins of all our pro∣genitours will be imputed to us, because we were in their loynes when they sinn'd them. Answ. Not so neither, for though we were in their loynes when they sinned, yet in a strict sence they are only vehicula, so many conduit pipes of the conveyances of the nature from the first root. To speak properly, there are only two roots of the nature: Adam the root of corruption to all his branches, Christ the root of grace and spiritual life to all his branches. If
any question be made of the truth of this, there is every where in the doctrine of St. Paul, an antithesis between the flesh and the spirit, between the old man and the new, betwixt generati∣on and regeneration, betwixt Adam and Christ. Between these two there is a plaine opposition in three things in point of justification. Secondly, in point of sanctification. Thirdly, in point of the resurrection from the dead. And therefore, whereas the first man by his act brings us under the guilt of sin, the second washes away the guilt of sin by his blood: and whereas the first man pollutes our nature, and is the root of the corruption of nature; the second man sanctifies our nature, and is the root of a new nature to all his branches: And whereas the first man did bring in death, and all the miseries of nature upon our bodies that lead to death, the second man frees us from all these by the resurrection from the dead. But he further alledgeth. Thirdly, Sin (saith he) is seated, in the will it is an action, and so transient, and when it dwels or abides, it abides no where but in the will by approbation and love, to which is naturally consequent a readinesse in the inferiour faculties to obey and act accordingly, and therefore sin doth not infect our meer natural faculties, but the will only, and not that in the natural capacity, but in its moral only. Answ. Though it be true that sin is principally seated in the will, yet we shall finde all along, that the Scriptures do lay great weight upon the blindnesse and the perversity of the judgement; and as in the old creation, so it is in the new. The first work that is done is the creation of light: Besides the Christ-like disposition is begun and carried on by degrees, and all this by the renovation of light. The understanding is first en∣lightned, and then the will comes to choose the things of God. Further, let it be supposed, that sin is only seated in the will. Great difference is to be made between the will of other sinners, and the will of the first man. The will of other sinners doth only redundare in personam, it doth encrease the habit of sin in their own persons alone: the will of the first man did redundare in naturam, it did vitiate and deprave the whole nature as we have formerly shewed. And yet thirdly, whereas he saith, that
sin doth infect the will, not in its natural capacity, but in its moral only. This expression of his must (under favour) be taken with a graine of salt. We do willingly yield, that the will is moral∣ly, or rather spiritually corrupt because she wents that holinesse, that purity and righteousnesse which the law requires; yet if we look to the reasons of things, the corruption was brought into the will by the fall of Adam. They then do not speak im∣properly, that call the corruption of the will pravitatem physico∣moralem. It is a moral depravation, because it is against the rectitude of the moral law: it is a natural depravation, because it flows from the first man as the root of corruption. For the proofe of the latter, let us have recourse to that place of the Apostle, ye have put off the old man with his deeds, and have put on the new man. In these words of his, there is a direct opposition between the old man and the new. By the old man he meaneth the pravity and corruption of nature, which though it hath had its being in hundreds, thousands, and millions of men, yet originally all comes out of one root. In this regard the whole nature is called by the title of the old man. So proportionably the Christ-like disposition, though it hath been diffused into infinite persons, who have lived in several ages of the Church, yet the whole nature doth originally proceed out of one root, and therefore in this regard is elegantly called by the title of the new man. Secondly, the opposition is between  their being uncloathed, and their  their being cloathed upon. By this way of expression the Apostle doth insinuate, the corrupt disposition of the flesh is that which the soul is cloathed upon, which cloathing she had from Adam the root of corruption. Now the believing Colossians, because they had a living principal within, and had begun to put off, and did so continue in putting off the old man, he speaks of it as a work already done, ye have put off the old man with his deeds. So likewise the new nature, or the Christ-like disposition is here resembled to a garment, with which they were cloathed upon, because they had begun and did so continue to put it on by degrees, he doth speak of it as a matter already effected, ye have put on the new man. From all which we gather the pravity of the will, though it be in its own nature a moral, or rather
spiritual obliquity. Yet respecting the cause, it proceeds from Adam the root of corruption. If this truth be not admitted, we shall crosse and hinder the very chief designe of the Gospel: For the corruption of nature being laid in the first Adam, it doth cast us all upon the seeking, longing, desiring the new nature that is to be had from the second. Fourthly, (saith he) to him that considers it, it will seem strange and monstrous, that a moral obliquity in a single instance, should make an universal change in a natural suscipient, and in a natural capacity. Answ. This is no more strange then true: we say that Adams disobedience was a moral obliquity, and he by that single act of his, did cause an universal change in the whole nature of man: By it the souls of men come to be cloathed upon with the habit of sin, and their bodies with corruption. And if he or any man else shall marvel at this, they must upon this account wonder at the chiefe foundations of the Gospel. For we will not doubt to say in the parallel case, as the Lord Christ did humble himselfe to the death of the crosse, it was in genere mo∣ris, a moral obedience, he did obey the command of his Father. Yet by this one act of his, he did make a change, not only in a moral, but also in a natural suscipient he did a thing by, and through which the souls of the Saints may be freed from inward pravity, and corruption, and their bodies raised from the dead at the last day, Phil. 3. ult. Fifthly, He reasons, no man can transmit a good habit, a grace, or a virtue. By natural generation, as a great Scholars son can∣not be borne with learning, &c. and how can it be, that a naughty quality should be more apt to be disseminated than a good one, when it is not in the goodnesse, or badnesse of the quality that hinders his dissemination, but its being an acquired, and superinduced quality that makes it cannot naturally descend? Answ. We willingly yield, that a good quality is as apt to be disseminated as a bad: and therefore had Adam stood, he had disseminated the image of God, to the posterity that did come of him. But seeing that he fell by his fall, he doth now disseminate Original corruption to all his branches. Further, though Adam doth disseminate corruption by natural genera∣tion,
mankind is not left under an absolute necessity of perish∣ing, as long as a second Adam is prepared to disseminate grace and spiritual life by regeneration, Excellent is that speech of Hillary upon the fourty eighth Psalm. Quoniam animarum medicus non venit vocare justos, &c. Because the Physitian of souls came not to call the just, but sinners to repentance: therefore he ordained, that whatsoever was worst in every company, should be soonest called. Of all men living upon the earth, the heathen were the worst, yet they were the soonest called. Further, whereas our Author saith, that a great Schollars son cannot be borne with learning, and the child of a Judge cannot upon his birth-day give wise sentences; the reason is plaine, personal priviledges and acquired habits do not naturally de∣scend. But with the two Adams the case is far otherwise, for they have a nature to communicate to all their branches. The first doth communicate it by generation, the second by regene∣ration, as we have formerly proved. And whereas he argues. How can a quality morally bad, be directly and regularly trans∣mitted by an action morally good, and since that, neither God that is the Maker of all, doth amisse, and the Father that begets, sins not, and the child that is begotten cannot sin, by what conveyance can any positive evil be derived to posterity? To this we say that the body and the soul are both the work∣manship of God, yet both may be made the subject, and the seat of sin, through the temptation of Sathan, and a vitious propagation. Neither is the evil any way to be ascribed to the Creatour, but to the temptation of Sathan, and the disobedi∣ence of the first man. Augustine speaks to good purpose, Sic ego tibi rectissime dico malum cum quo nascitur homo, &c. Thus I do most rightly say to thee, that the evil with which a man is borne, is not of the fruits, bodies, sexes, conjunctions, of which goods the Lord is the Author, but of the first sin which is to be ascribed to the devil. Here he doth distinguish between the work of creation, and so God is the Author of all that good that was made in the beginning: and the sinfulnesse of nature; that he will have to spring only from the devils temptation, and the dis∣obedience of the first man. Sixthly, how can it be (saith he) that the Father that contri∣butes nothing to the production of the soul, should contribute to her
pollution, and he that did not transmit life, how should he transmit his sin. Answ. Though the Father doth not contribute to the soul in her production, yet he doth contribute to the soul in her union with the body: So by this account, the action of God is terminated in the simple being of the soul: The action of the Parent is her being in the body, that is, in her union with the body. But if it be here alledged, that a man is principally a man in respect of his soul, and therefore if the Parent doth not contribute to the soul, he doth not contribute to the being of a man: the answer is plaine. A man is not a man, neither by the soul apart, nor by the body apart, but by the whole humane nature which doth consist in the union of both: we see in or∣dinary experience, as children derive their inheritances, privi∣ledges, nobility, and such like from their Parents, so also their Parents miseries, infelicities, poverty, and ignobility do natu∣rally descend. In the present case I demand, how do they descend? will any man be so curious to hold a dispute, whether they do descend from the body, or the soul of the Parent? Or whether is the soul the first seat, or receptacle of nobility, or ignobility? or doth the right to the fathers inheritance descend from the fathers body or the soul? In the affaires of this life, it is not usual with men to spin out themselves with such philosophical niceties. The skilful in the laws, conceive it is enough in the general to say, that such a Son did come out of the loynes of such a Father. Why then should the learned man, with whom we have to do, be more curious in the conveyance of original sin? why should it not be enough for us to say, that that which is borne of flesh, is flesh, Joh. 3.6. Suppose, for the manner of the thing we are not able to satisfie the doubt, shall we deny the thing, because we are not able to explaine every punctilio? why, by the same reason doth not he himselfe deny the motion of the Sun, the ebbing and the flowing of the sea, the organizing of the infant in the mothers womb? in these and a thousand more the thing is cleare, when the manner doth lye in the dark. Seventhly, saith he, If in him we sinned, then it were just that in him we should be punished, for as the sin is, so ought the punishment to be.
Answ. If he will stand to this rule, he both doth, and will make good that which is asserted by us. The disobedience of the first man must be imputed to all his posterity, because he is the head, the root and the representative of the whole nature. But if he thinks this to be a meer non-ens, then let him say, that the obedience of the second man as the head-root, and the representative of the whole nature, is a non-ens and a nullity also, and so he will raise the Gospel to the foundation thereof. Now we come to the third question to enquire, whether Adam did debauch our nature by the sentence and the just judgement of God, and here he layeth down this for a sure ground. He and all his posterity were left in the meer natural estate, that is, in a state of imperfection, in a state that was not sufficiently in∣structed and furnished with ability in order to a supernatural end, whether God had secretly designed mankind. Answ. In this expression of his, we know no such state of meer imperfection, which is not also a state of corruption. Againe, in this expression he seemeth to me, to pluck down that natural ability of the will which he endeavours to set up. For if a man since the fall is not instructed and furnished with abili∣ties in order to a supernatural end, he must come to Christ only for the supply of all. Why then doth he raise all this dust a∣gainst the rigour and severity of our doctrine, when he him∣selfe doth here plainly teach, that the will can do nothing with∣out the help of the Spirit? He goeth on. It cannot be supposed, (saith he) that God did inflict any ne∣cessity of sinning upon Adam or his posterity, because from that time, even unto this day, he by new laws had required innocency of life, or repentance and holinesse. Answ. The consequence is not good, for now since the fall, the Lord doth not give laws in proportion to natural ability, but in relation to his own word of promise, and his free mercy in the Covenant of grace. So far then it is a testimony of di∣vine favour that God will employ us, and require more service of us, that where we have no strength of our own, we may in the sence of our own natural weaknesse go to him for help. And
whereas he bringeth us speaking in this wise: that it is just with God to exact the law of man, even where he is unable to keep it, because God once made him able, but he disabled himselfe: True indeed, this is an answer given by us, but it is not the whole, nor the principal part of that answer which may be given. For secondly, where God doth require subjection to his law, man being not able to performe it, his demand is not irrational; For though man is not subject, nor in himselfe can be subject to the law, Rom. 8.7. This non-subjection doth not so much arise from the want of judgement, will, or any other natural faculty, as from a perverse sinful habit that doth reside in the faculty. That a drunkard cannot stand, walk, nor performe acts of reason, as an other man is not simply for want of ability, as from an evil distemper that doth suspend the operations of the faculties, so it is in the present case, men need no new faculties, but they need new habits to set the faculty aright. But our third answer is, though a man naturally can∣not be subject to the law, (respecting the evil habit that disor∣ders the faculty) yet if he go to Christ in the sence of his own misery, all ability is to be had from him: God is so infinitely gracious, that he is ready to help all that come to him. A bruised reed he will not break, Mat. 12.20. Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, Mat. 11.28. Will not your hea∣venly Father give his Spirit to them that ask it? Luk. 11.13. and many more places of the like nature: This is the whole answer which our Divines do commonly give, when they speak of the necessity of sinning, and of the inability which is brought upon man by the fall of Adam. In this case they do not simply and absolutely deny all abilitie, for then of what use would exhortations, reproofes, and commands be? Only they deny a natural ability, and such an ability which our Author seems to plead for. Next he tells us. It is all one with the case of voluntary and affected ignorance. He that refuseth knowledge, lest he should understand his duty, and he that disables himselfe that he may not do it may be punisht, not only for not doing it, but for making it impossible to be done. But that was not Adams case so far as we know, & it is certaine that it was not ours in the matter of his sin.
Answ. We confesse, that we did neither personally nor in∣dividually disable our selves in the matter of his sinne, but he that stood in our stead, did voluntarily disable himself and us too. And therefore his will doth interpretively, virtually, and potentially go for the will of the whole nature, as we have formerly proved. Perhaps he will say, how can we be justly punished, if we are disabled by the act of another? This would have some colour, provided, that there were no Christ, no grace, no mercy to be had. Our great fault is, that we do not seek for help, where help is to be found. But (saith he) If a man commits a fault, that doth accidentally disable him, as if he eate too much, and be sick the next day, and fall into a fever, he may indeed, and is justly punished for his gluttony, but he is not punishable for omitting that which in his present weaknesse he can no way per∣forme. Answ. Here he speaks, as if we did leave men to strive with an unavoidable necessity, whereas the necessity of sinning is not absolute, for that which is unavoidable by nature, may be avoidable by grace. And to the particular case, suppose a cen∣tinal drink too much, and through his default a great party of the Army come to have their throats cut, will he say that he is onely to be punished for his drunkennesse, but is not punishable for the omitting of that which in his present weaknesse, he was not able to performe. By the laws of the land he should onely pay five shillings, Next he saith, In lawes to be imposed afterwards, the case is otherwise because the persons are not capable of any such law, and God knowing they cannot performe, cannot intend they should, and therefore cannot justly punish them for not doing, which himselfe did never heartily intend they should do, because he knew they could not. Ans. If this be so, let him give a reason why the old world was drowned in the waters of the flood. All flesh had corrupted their way, and if he himself may beleived, the reason was not so much from the corruption of nature, but because Gods laws did command such things which were a restraint to the indiffe∣rent, and otherwise lawful inclinations of nature. Besides he
tells us that they had no spiritual promises in those times. The commands were heightned above all natural abilities, spiritual promises were denyed; God never intended (if he speak true) that his Laws should be obeyed; he knew they could not. Let him fairly tell us the reason then why the old world was drow∣ned? Now on the contrary, we say, no such thing, the com∣mandment was given to Adam in proportion to the abilities he had in possession, he falling, all ability is to be had from Christ in the covenant of grace. And there was a cove∣nant of grace sutable to the times that were before the flood, Jesus Christ yesterday, and today, and the same for ever, Heb. 13.8. But now in the close of this Section, we will speak a little practically to the purpose in hand. You will say, why doth God give commands above natural ability? It is to this end, that in the sense of their own emptinesse men should go to Christ, when they so come, they shall be graciously received. You will say, how doth that appear? I answer. As by the ge∣neral tenders of the Word, so specially by that place, Ho, e∣very one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that hath no money, come ye buy and eat, yea, come by wine and milk without money and without price, Isaiah 55.1. Here many things are to be observed; First, by wine and milk are understood the spi∣ritual comforts and excellencies of the Gospel, for as wine and milk are truely refreshing to the bodies of men; So are these really sweet to their spiritual taste. Secondly, by buying of wine and milk, is meant, the earnest seeking after these things in all those wayes that the Lord hath sanctified, and in all those means where they may be found. Thirdly, without money or price. It would be thought a solecisme in merchandizing, to buy a Cow and Horse, and a parcel of Sheep, and give no mo∣ney for them. Usually men buy, when they give an equivo∣lent price. But in matter of salvation, we have no ability of our own, all ability is to be had from the freenesse and fulness of the promise. Fourthly, the persons invited. Ho, every one that thirsteth, come to the waters, &c. In matters of the world, men may have a great desire after riches, long life, ho∣nours, favour of Princes, popular applause, and yet they may
never attain what they desire, nay, the thing desired (as their own shadow) may flee from them. But in matters of salva∣tion, the case is otherwise. If men truly desire, and continue desiring, praying, longing, waiting, they cannot misse what they desire. The greatest part of the work is done already, and all the residue doth remain upon the fidelity, and the truth of the Promiser to make good. Lastly, it is spoken to every one that thirsteth. There are divers degrees and kinds of spi∣ritual thirsting, some that are scorched with the feeling of the wrath of God, earnestly desire salvation and remission of sinne by Christs blood, and these commonly are the first desires of those that are babes in Christ. Others, feeling the bondage of corruption, do as earnestly long for that spiritual freedome that is to be had from the Son. A third sort go higher, they desire the excellency of Christ purely, for that excellency that is in himself; they do not love him so much for his portion, as for his person. I count all things but losse, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, Phil. 3.8. A fourth sort go to the highest point. They love the appearing of the Lord Jesus, which others do tremble at, and the Spirit and the Bride say, come, and let him that heareth say, come, and let him that is athirst come, Revel. 22 17. &c. All these desires are the fruit of the Spirit. He that comes to the first, doth not come to the second, at least not to the third or fourth degree. However the whole course of Christianity is unum continuum sitis, one continual succession of spiritual desires. And in immediate op∣position, there is unum continuum auxilii, an interchangable supply of auxiliary grace, this latter answering the former, as the one part of the deed doth answer the other. So then, though the Saints have no ability in themselves to supernatural duties, yet they may have it from Christ and the freenesse of the pro∣mise. These things I have drawn out more at large, because I see, as formerly, it hath done to others; So our doctrine doth seem to give great offence to our Authour. It seemeth strange to him that we should exhort men to spiritual duties, and yet teach that all mankind through the condition of the natural birth, lye under a necessity of sinning. Whereas, if he did well understand the grand designe of the Gospel, he should finde
that all ability to do these things, is to be had from Christ a∣lone, and that upon termes of beleeving, desiring, longing, and waiting for them. The Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and other holy men, have in their several times done their duties, and served their generation. But how? not by any ability of their own, but by the continual supply of the Spirit of Christ, as the Scriptures and all experience do abun∣dantly testifie. Now we come to the next Section. SECT. 2. Consideration of the objections against the former Doctrine. THE first Scripture which he insists upon, is, Gen 6. E∣very imagination of the thoughts of mans heart are onely evil continually. Here he doth end avour to frame sundry answers, First, it is true (saith he) they were so, but it was their own fault, not Adams; for so it is said expressely. All flesh had corrupted their way upon earth, and the earth was filled with violence. Repl. It was their own fault, and Adams too. It was their own, as they corrupted their own wayes, it was Adams as they were flesh, for he brought them into that sinful condition by his fall. So then the force of our argument stands thus. First, the thoughts of man were evil. Secondly, they were all evil. Thirdly, they were onely evil. Fourthly, they were continu∣ally evil. Fifthly, they were evil from his childhood. Now such an universal effect cannot be without some universal cause from whence all this evil must necessarily spring. And where shall we look for the cause, but in the text it self; My Spirit shall not alway strive with man, because he is but flesh. Because he is but flesh, and borne in the sinne of the na∣ture, therefore the thoughts of his heart are evil from his child∣hood.
Secondly, (saith he) if this corruption had been natural and unavoidable, why did God punish all the world for it, except eight persons? Why did he punish those that could not help it? and why did others escape that were equally guilty? Repl. That which God did punish in the old world in ordi∣nary men, was the violence of their hands, and in his own people was the breach of covenant. Though these two did naturally flow from original corruption, as all other evils do, yet we cannot say, that they are absolutely unavoidable; for the act of violence and of marriage with the daughter of a strange god, men have a liberty to forbeare the outward exe∣cution of these evils. And for the lust of the heart, though it is unavoidable by nature, yet it is not simply unavoidable, for God is so full of mercy, that he is ready to help all those that flee to him, in the sense of their own misery. He hath declared himself to be a Physician, ready to cure all broken-hearted sin∣ners. The men of Nineveh, did turne from the violence of their hands, and how ready was he to forgive them. The people in the dayes of Ezra and Nehemiah did repent of their Idolatrous marriages, and how did he passe by their iniquity? Of all the Authors that ever I met with, Luther in his Tract de∣servo arbitrio, is most severe against the liberty of the will; yet in the end of the treatise, he bringeth in Erasmus thus speak∣ing. Why doth he command us any duty, seeing all things are done by necessity? His answer is, he doth command that he may ad∣monish and instruct us what we ought to do, that being humbled in the sense and feeling of our own evil, we may repair to his grace for help, as we have abundantly spoken. And as for the Lords pu∣nishing of those that could not help it. We say in publick, so∣lemn and exemplary judgments he hath alway reserved a liberty for the exemple of others, and the declaration of his justice and mercy. It is true also that they that were equally guilty did not perish in the waters of the flood. What of all this? though they did escape that judgment, they were lyable to the judgment of God. Thirdly, (saith he) God might have as well punished all the world for sleeping once in a day, or for being
hungry, as for sinning, if so to do, be natural and una∣voidable. Repl. The cases are not equal, mankind cannot live without meat and drink, sleep and such other refections of nature, when they were made in the beginning, they were made in such an estate, that they had need of these things, I trow they had no need of sinne? Againe, for sinful acts, though they come from the corruption of the flesh, as the sparkes do out of the Chim∣ney, yet in externals, man hath a liberty to commit or not commit such an evil. Also for the lust of the heart, that which is unavoidable by nature, is avoidable by grace. The guilt of sinne may be taken away by the blood of Christ, the power of it by the Spirit of Christ; and the very being of it, when the Saints shall be made partakers of the adoption or the redempti∣on of their bodies. Fourthly, if God in these words complained of their natural and original corruption, why did he but then as if it were, a new thing, complain of it, and repent that he made man since he proved so bad? Repl. God did then complain of original corruption, because in a most eminent degree it did put forth it self in oppression, breach of covenant, and other evils. He did complain in those times, because iniquity was then come to a ripenesse, and the years of his patience was almost runne out. Fifthly, (saith he) this malice and corruption was such, that God did send Noah a Preacher of righteousnesse, to draw the world from it. But no man supposes that it was fit to send a Preacher to dehort them from being guilty of original sinne. Repl. So farre as we may gather, Noahs message to the old world was the same in effect, as that of Jonah's to Nineveh, he was to exhort them to turn from the violence of their hands, as being one fruit of original sinne. Moreover, he was sent to admonish the people of God in those dayes of their sinful con∣federacies and marriages with Idolaters; and whereas he saith, no man supposeth it fit to send a Preacher to dehort men from being guilty of original sinne. Though the best as long as they live here, are subject to that sinne, yet I hope he will allow that
a Preacher may be sent to exhort men to mortifie the lusts of their nature, and to fly to the mercy of God for the pardon and forgivenesse of that sinne, as well as others. What the Economy or dispensation of grace was in those times. I will not take upon me to define, sure I am the Lord himself saith, My Spirit shall not alway strive with man. The best Scholars, according to the original, have it, My Spirit shall not alway di∣spute reason, or plead with man. It argues then that as the Spirit was in the Ministry of Noah, so it was some way operative in the consciences of the people of those times to bring them to repentance. Compare with this, 1 Pet. 3.19, & 20. Now he comes to lay the blame of all upon evil-custome, which is the very height of Pelagianisme. Blame not nature, (saith he) but thy own evil customes; for the neglect of thy fields will make fearne, and thistles to grow. It is not onely because the ground is accurst, but because it is neglected it bears thornes. Thou art de∣ceived if thou thinkest that vices are born with us. No, they are super-induced, and come upon us afterward. To which we reply, These strange expressions he hath not from any of the Prophets or Apostles, but from Horace and Seneca. As these things are scarcely tolerable in them, so they are not to be born with in our Authour, and others which have had their being and edu∣cation in the Church of God. Because in these dayes, there are more then too many which cannot distinguish between E∣thicks and Divinity, between that which is moral, and that which is spiritual; we will insist upon this point a little more largely. The chief principals and foundation of moral Philosophy, are such as these. First, that nature is pure. Secondly, that nature hath the seed of all vertue. Thirdly, there is a natural freedom of the will. Fourthly, by the repitition of many vertuous acts men come to the habit of vertue; These and ma∣ny such like rules there are in the treatises of the learned Gre∣cians and Romans. And according to this sense the aforemen∣tioned sayings of Horace and Seneca are to be understood. We deny not but toward the attaining of a Philosophical good, a man hath some power (by general assistance) he may do some duties of the first and second table. He may containe
his hands from the outward acts of murder, adultery, theft, and the like. But for the spiritual and theological good, to love God a∣bove all, to delight in him, to beleeve in him, to trust in him. In order to these, plaine experience sheweth that he hath no ability, nay, the contrary is evident, that he hath a down-right enmity. The wisdome of his flesh is alwayes prone to reare up some earthly excellency or other, and to set it in the place of the true God. Therefore these are the true principles of The∣ology. First, the nature of man is depraved from the polluti∣on of the natural birth. Secondly, that he hath no freedome to spiritual good. Thirdly, in this miserable estate, the first step to his recovery, is by the reproving work of the Spirit, whose office it is to convince the conscience of the guilt of sin, and of the bondage of corruption. Fourthly, the conscience being so convinced, it is prepared and fitted for the grace of the Gospel, and the freenesse of the promise, that he which hath no help in himself, may have it from Christ. Fifthly, When he is come to Christ, and united to him by faith, he hath ability from him, as a root of all grace, life, heating spiritual nature, and in a word, all that we have lost in the first man, is to be re∣covered in him. This is the very scope the Gospel. By these things it is evident, that the endeavour of man is not de∣stroyed by the principles of Theology; Onely he is more soundly directed to the attaining of that good which is spiritu∣al. There be many passages in moral Philosophy concerning the liberty of the will, which we may well admit of; and a∣gain, others there are which will scarce hold water. As in the young man in the Gospel, our Saviour did not disallow his outward moralities, onely he convinced him that he fell short of the holinesse, purity and spirituality of the Law. When he was put upon it to love God above all, to leave all for him, by this he was brought to understand his own imperfection, and that he had need of some power from a∣bove. But that this matter may be the more fully understood, we will referre our selves to that place of Scripture, which is com∣monly called Saint Peters Ethicks. There we may distinguish
between the Ethicks (as I may so say) of the Apostles, and those of the ordinary moral Philosophers. These are his words, According as his divine power hath given us all things that pertaine to life and godlinesse, by the knowledge of him that hath called us to glory and vertue. Whereby are given to us exceeding great and precious promises, that by these we may be made partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the pollution of the world through lust. And besides this, giving all diligence, adde to our saith ver∣tue, and to vertue knowledge, &c. 2 Peter Chap. 1. ver. 3, 4, 5. As in our ordinary books of moral Phylosophy, so these words of the Apostle may conveniently be divided into two parts; into that which treateth of the divine nature and vertue in general, and into that which speaketh of particular vertues: For the divine nature, these particulars are to be observed. First, the Apostle calls it a nature, as there is a nature of Birds, Beasts, and Fishes; so there is a nature peculiar to the Saints, which they have, and none else. Secondly, it is called the divine nature, though in a more peculiar sence; Father Son and holy Ghost are said to have the divine nature, yet in a more general acception, the new creature is said to have the divine nature, because he comes in the nearest similitude to the nature, purity, and holinesse of God, because he derives it from Christ as the root of the nature. The Apostle hath a like expression that ye may be filled with the fulnesse of God, that is, with the fulnesse of the grace, and the love of God, Eph. 3.16, 17, 18, 19. But the chief thing in the Apostles words, is, concerning the meanes how we may come to this nature. As in moral Phylosophy, great regard is had to the natural liberty of the will, to the towardlinesse of the disposition, and too much exercise, by and through which men think to come to the habit of virtue: So on the contrary part, let us see what principles the Apostle doth lay down for the attaining of the divine na∣ture, and let us compare them with those which our Author brings out of Horace and Seneca. First, the Apostle points to the promises, there are given to us exceeding great and precious promises, that by these ye may be made partakers of the divine nature. What these promises are, we
finde mentioned in the Scripture. I will put my law in their heart, and write it in their inward part, Jer. 31.33. A new heart, and a new spirit I will give them, I will take out of their bowels the heart of stone, and will give them a heart of flesh, Ezek. 36.26. These are called exceeding great promises, because they containe the greatest things, for what greater thing is there than to change the nature of a man. It is as great a work, as to bring Israel out of Egypt, to divide the sea, and to make the sun stand still. They are called also honourable, or precious promises, to a spiritual understanding they are of an higher value than the greatest treasures of the earth. Secondly, the way to come to the divine nature, is not by the promises alone, but by faith in the promises. The Apostle doth direct his speech, to such that had obtained like precious faith with us, verse the first. And againe, his divine power hath given us all things pertaining to life and godlinesse. But how? not absolutely, but through the knowledge of him, that is, through faith in him that hath called us to glory and vertue. And, as it is in another place, we are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, 1 Peter 1.5. We are kept by the power of God to salvation, but through faith. Thirdly, the way to come to the divine nature, is by the power of God; there can be no coming to the divine nature, but by the divine power: his divine power doth give us all things that doth pertaine to life and godlinesse. So then the inward work doth proceed after this method. First, the promise is freely made. Secondly, faith apprehendeth the promise. Thirdly, the promise being apprehended by saith, doth engage the power of God to performe that which is promised, and so the Saints come to be partakers of the divine nature. Lastly, the encrease of the nature is by mortification of lusts, having escaped the pollution of the world through lust. If we speak properly, it is neither profit, pleasure, honour, or any thing else that can corrupt the soul, were it that she were free in her selfe. These are the particulars that concerne the divine nature, or the nature of vertue in general. The Apostle after this, speaks of particular vertues, adde to your faith, vertue, and to
vertue, knowledge. By all these particulars we may discerne for the cherishing of endeavour, what little need we have to fly to the rudiments of heathen Philosophy, to the purity of the na∣tural birth, and to such like dictates of Seneca, and Horace. These are the things which the Apostle doth admonish us. Beware lest any man spoile you through Phylosophy and vaine deceipt, after the rudiments of the world, Col. 2.8. They that do this, do not hold Christ for a head, but do go directly against the principles of baptisme and circumcision, as all do that deny original sin, and plead the purity of the natural birth, having gone so far, we will returne to our Author againe, as he expounds the words of the text. By this (saith he) we may the better understand the following words, I will not againe curse the ground for mans sake, for the imagination of mans heart is evil from his child-hood, Gen. 8.21. Concerning which, note, that these words are not two sentences. For this is not the reason wherefore God gave over smiting, for if it had been the reason, it would have come to passe, that the same cause that would have moved God to smite, would also move him to forbeare, which were a strange Oeconomy. Reply There is no such strange Oeconomy in the words, if the scope of both texts be diligently considered. In the sixth of Genesis the Lord saith, that he would destroy the world, because the thoughts of the imagination of mans heart are evil continually. Here we have a plaine reason given, why the world is destroyed, all flesh had corrupted their wayes, and this corruption did arise from the common pravity of nature from the first root. But in the eighth of Genesis the matter is otherwise. The Lord did not look so much to that which man had deserved, as to the merit of the blood of Christ, figured in the sacrifice of Noah. And therefore the words do best go after this tenour, I will not curse the ground any more, although the thoughts of mans heart are evil from his childhood. And therefore we agree with our Author, that these words are an aggravation of the kindnesse and mercy of God, as if he had said, though men be continually evil, yet I will not for all that drown the world for mans being so evil. The former text doth shew what God might do, respect being had to his justice:
The latter doth shew what he will do with reference to the merit of his Son, and his own mercy. These things are no way contrary to our assertion. We come to the second Scripture. I was borne in iniquity, and in sinne did my mother conceive me, Psalm 51.5. To this, he doth endeavour, to frame sundry answers. First, (saith he) These words are an Hebraisme, and signify nothing, but an aggrandation of his sinfulnesse, and are intended for an high expression, meaning that I am wholly, and entirely wicked. Rely There are (I confesse) as in other Authors; so in the Scriptures, some such formes, and wayes of expression which are true in the figure, but false in the letter. But whether this expression is of that nature, we cannot easily admit: For he prayeth that God would create in him a cleane heart. This plainly sheweth, that the evil was in his heart from the very beginning. Besides, other Scriptures do abundantly confirme the litteral interpretation of the words. That which is borne of flesh is flesh, Joh. 3.6. Borne, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, Joh. 1.13. were by nature the children of wrath, as well as others, Eph. 2.3. All these plain∣ly expresse the impurity of the natural birth, and that the words of the Psalmist are to be taken according to the letter. And that Scripture (which he seemeth to build so much upon) if it be well considered, doth not make for his purpose one jot. The like (saith he) is that saying of the Pharisees. Thou wert altogether borne in sin, and dost thou teach us, Joh. 9.35? Which phrase and manner of speaking, being plainly a reproach of the poore blind man, and a disparagement of him, did meane only to call him a very wicked person: but not that he had derived his sin origi∣nally, and from his birth, for that had been their own case, as much as his. To all which we reply, the Pharisees might think him or his Parents to be some great sinners, because he was borne blind, for the disciples themselves did put such a kinde of question, to our Saviour himselfe, did this man, or his parents sin, that he was borne
blinde? verse the second. Further, suppose that the Pharisees had been of the judgement, that it had been this mans peculiar infelicity; and that it was not the common misery of man to be borne in original sin, must their errour be a prejudice to the truth? Nicodemus himselfe was darke in the point of regenerati∣on, must his ignorance be a rule to us? Secondly, (saith he) if David had meant it literally, it had not signified that himselfe was borne in original sin, but his Father, and his Mother sinn'd when they begot him. Reply Its very rational to conceive, that his Father, that went for an old man in the dayes of Saul, and his Mother that bare him (specially he being the youngest) were both dead, at the time of the making of the Psalm. To what purpose should he confesse the sinne of the dead, and pray for the dead? But suppose he did confesse the sin of his Parents, he must needs look upon them as the conduit-pipes, and the conveyances of the corruption of the nature from the first root. This doth strengthen the truth of our interpretation; and therefore he doth devoutly, and pathetically pray, Create in me a cleane heart, renew within me a right spirit: wash me with hysop, and I shall be cleane. Thirdly, (saith he) if it did relate to his own person, he might meane that he was begotten with that sanguine disposition, and libidinous temper that was the original of his vile adultery; and then, though David said this truely of himselfe, it is not true of all, nor of those whose temper is flegmatick, and unactive. Reply By this rule we may gather, that the phlegmatick, and unactive (whatsoever the sanguine be) are free from original sinne; and that it doth not belong so much to Divines, as to Physicians to judge of the sin of the nature. But in this, he is greatly deceived. David doth not confesse the sinne of adultery alone, but the sin of murther; deliver me from blood-guiltinesse, thou God of my righteousnesse, verse the sixteenth. Nay, that which did principally affect him, was his unbeliefe, unthankfulnesse, neglect, and contempt of the goodnesse and mercy of God; and his making the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme. And therefore he saith, Against thee, thee only have I sinned, verse the sixth. Though he had sinned against
Ʋriah, against himselfe, and against the Church: yet the most aggravating circumstance was, that he had sinned against God. This we may see in the parable of Nathan, who thereupon did argue with him, upon the considerations of mercies received: so then when the Psalmist saith, I was borne in iniquity, he hath not respect only to the libidinous temper, but also to a sinful temper, of a more general nature. Fourthly, (saith he) if David had meant this of himselfe, and that in regard of original sin, this had been so far from being a peni∣tential expression, or a confessing of his sinne, that it had been a plaine accusation of God, and an excusing of himselfe. As if he had said, O Lord, I confesse I have sinned, in this horrible murther, and adultery; but thou O Lord knowest, how it comes to passe, even by that fatal punishment; which thou didst, for the sin of Adam, inflict on me and all mankind, above three thousand years before I was borne. Thereby making me, to fall into so horrible corruption of nature, that unlesse thou didst unresistibly force me from it, I cannot abstaine from my sin, being most naturally enclined to evil. Reply To all which we rejoyne, though there was a necessi∣ty laid upon David, as upon other men, to be borne in original sinne, and this three thousand years before he was borne; yet neverthelesse it will be no plea to excuse his murther, and adul∣tery: For howsoever he was borne in sinne, his murther, and adultery were his own voluntary acts. Ordinary experience shewetn (by the common assistance of God) that men have a power to avoid many outward evils, to which their natures are enclined. Further, for the inward lust, though it was inflicted as a punishment upon him, as upon all mankind, this can be no charge upon God, seeing he hath provided a remedy, to help men out of their misery. David had rather cause to accuse him∣selfe, for fulfilling the lusts of his nature, and for the neglecting of that grace that was promised to him, and to other believers in the Jewish Church, to cleanse out the sin of the nature; I will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, that thou mightest love the Lord thy God, Deut. 30.6. So then, though David was born in original sin, the fruits of that sinne, were his own vo∣luntary acts, and the living in that sinne also, was his own free
choise. Bernard in his Homily 81. on the Canticles, hath an excellent passage to this purpose, Homo interveniente peccato, patitur quandam vincet ipse, &c. Man by the intervening of sin, he himselfe doth suffer a kinde of necessity from his will, not from nature, that so truely he may not be deprived of his inbred liberty: For that the soul cannot rise of her selfe, the will is the cause, who languishing, and laying prostrate with the vitiated, and vicious love of a corrupted body, doth not withal admit the love of righteousnesse. It is so I know not by what wounderful meane, the will being made worse, she her selfe, doth make a necessity to her selfe; That the necessity while its voluntary, may not be able to excuse the will: Neither the will while tis drawn, may have power to shake off the necessity: for truely after a sort, this is a voluntary necessity. In these words of his, he doth elegantly set forth the truth of the thing, and therein he doth liken the soul to a man grovelling upon the earth, he cannot rise because he will not; He will not rise because his nature doth encline him to lye down under the power of his lusts. And this was Davids very case, he was born in iniquity, and he did freely and voluntarily bring forth the fruits, that were the very product, and result of a sinful nature; he did too much neglect the grace by which he might be cured, and though his necessity was natural, respecting the inclinations that came from his birth, yet also it was a voluntary necessity; All natural men do account the liberty of lusts, to be the greatest freedome, and therefore they be not captives so much against, as with their wills. The first step therefore to salvation is, as to understand the guilt of sinne, so also the spiri∣tual captivity, and bondage of the soul, under the tyranny of a carnal mind. Sixthly, He addeth, that David thought nothing of this, or any thing like it, we may understand by the preceding words, which are a preface to these in the objection, against thee only have I sinned. Reply. We willingly yield, that it was the purpose of David to cleare the justice of God, but here is no need to call his justice in question, for though David was borne in sin, the act of murther and adultery were the deeds of his own will, besides, the lust of his heart might have been cured by the grace of God.
Seaventhly, (saith he) if this had been natural and unavoid∣able, God, who knew perfectly well, would have expected nothing else of him. For he will not require of a stone to speak, nor a fire to be cold, unlesse himself be pleased to work a miracle to have them so. Repl. The case is not all one. It is not in the nature of stones to speak, but men may avoid many outward acts of sinne, and the evil of their natural disposition may be mortified by the Spi∣rit. The Apostle speaking of certain, that had eyes full of adul∣ery, that cannot cease from sinne, 2 Pet. 2.14. Our Authour in his answer to the Bishops letter doth expound,  eyes full of the adulteresse, therefore they cannot cease from sin. This sheweth how hard it is to escape adultery, when men have received the beauty of the adulteresse into their eye. Why then are Laws made against this sinne? It is in their power out∣wardly to fly such occasions that lead thereto. The wise man saith, remove thy way farre from her, and come not neare the doore of her house. Is not this too precise and strict a point? No, some mens natures, are like tinder to the fire; they must not onely fly sinnes, but all occasions that lead thereto. Now it is plain, that in these things, men have a power to forbear the evil; and therefore the wise man accordingly doth temper his exhortati∣on. And for the lust of the heart, though a man cannot flee from it, yet God is able to give more grace, which he is alway ready to do to those, who in the sense of their own emptinesse do flee to him for help. Where is the man that did ever truely desire, and continue desiring helps against his infirmities, that God did ever neglect? If this could be proved, then something may be said to the purpose. Now we go to the next Scri∣pture. Among whom we in all times past had our conversation in the lusts of the flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, and were by nature the children of wrath, as well as others. He hath many observations upon the words of this text.
This therefoore (saith he) as appears by the discourse of the Apostle, relates not to riginal sinne, but to actual. Repl. It relates to both, as the Ephesians had their conversa∣tion in the lusts of the flesh, and did fulfill the lusts of the flesh and minde, so it doth relate to actual sinne: But as they were by nature the children of wrath, this is with reference to original, sinne. And whereas he doth bring in Justin Martyr arguing upon this ground, that therefore it cannot be extended to Christ, we willingly yield that Christ is an exempt person, by reason of his extraordinary birth, and conception, but then in Justines sense, all else, infants as well as others, will partake of the sinne of the nature. But he further addes. Heires of wrath signifies persons liable to punishment, heires of death. It is an usual expression among the Hebrewes; So sons of death in the holy Scripture, are those that deserve death, or are condemned to dye. Repl. It is true that the Hebrews call a man the son of death, that hath deserved death, specially when he is condemned to die. Though all this be granted, it doth not void the force of our rea∣son, for we do not argue so much from the Apostles words, that the Ephesians before conversion, were the children of wrath, but from those words, [were by nature the children of wrath,] The scope of all which is to shew, that they were not onely subjected to wrath, through a sinful conversation, but through an evil na∣ture, the root of that evil conversation. If therefore, our Au∣thour, or any man else, will make use of the Hebrew Idiotisme, the words will go fairely in this sense, that the beleeving Ephesi∣ans, both by the condition of the natural birth, and the whole course of their conversation, as they did serve divers lusts, and pleasures, were liable to wrath, and the onely mean by which they did escape, was the quickning, and enlivening work of the Spirit, by and through which they were brought out of that estate, in which they were born. But he hath another evasion. By nature is here most likely to be meant, that which Galen calls  an acquisite nature,  customes, and evil habits. Repl. If we would apply our selves to authours, and to the or∣dinary
speech of men: custome, and nature, are usually oppo∣sed, each to other. In some cases a man may be said to have a thing both by nature, and custome, very rarely or never, we say that custome is nature. Sometimes men speak in a more ge∣neral sense, that custome is as it were a second nature; But be∣cause he stands upon it, that it is most likely that the words of the Apostle, are meant onely of custome, and acquired nature (for so he desires to speak) then by this rule we must say, that the beleeving Ephesians, before conversion, were by ill cu∣stome onely, the children of wrath. If this be so, why doth the Apostle say, you hath he quickned who were dead in trespasses and sinnes: What need of the infusion of a new life to bring them off off an ill custome? In such a case it were onely requisite, to re∣duce nature to her original purity; and to amend that by good usuages, which ill customes had marred. Besides, seeing several Nations have their customes, was it a peculiar custome to the Ephesians? Or was it common to all Nations to be the children of wrath? It was peculiar to the Ephesians, then they onely had need of the infusion of a new life. If it was common to all Nati∣ons: How did they all generally agree in such a custome? And what was the cause of the agreement? Besides, seeing there are some in their tender years, of whom we may presume, that they are neither quickned by grace, nor hardened by ill custome, whe∣ther such may be saved without the infusion of a new life, yea or no? If they may be saved without the infusion of a new life, this will be against the scope of the Apostle, who tells us they were saved from wrath, by the inward quickning. But if he will say, that such cannot be saved without the infusion of a new life, then 'tis plain that by nature must be meant more than acquired na∣ture. Infants are born in a sinful nature and do need the sancti∣fication of the Spirit. But he hath a passage out of Suidas, when the Apostle saith, you were by nature the children of wrath, he means not that which is the usual signification of nature, for then it were not their fault but the fault of him that made them such. To which we rejoyn, In men of ripe years, it is both their fault, that they do abide in the sinne of the nature, and it is also the fault of Adam, that did vitiate and deprave the nature, at his fall. That men do fulfill the lusts of the flesh and mind, is their own volunta∣ry
act. And though indeed and in truth, it is not their personal fault, that men are born in original sinne, yet it is their fault that they fulfill the lusts of their nature; and continue in that state, at least that they do not use, and hearken to those pre∣cursory motions, and previous workings of the Spirit, which the Lord doth administer to them, at some seasons at least; The end of all which is to bring them out of the evil of that state. The first workes of the Spirit are to reprove, to convince, to accuse, to terrifie men, to humble them for their evil deeds, that so they may come to Christ for pardon of their sin, and for the heal∣ing of their nature. But here they wilfully shut out the light, will not see what they may, and this will be the great condemnation, Joh. 3.18, 19, and 20 verses. He goes on, By nature the Apostle (saith he) means not by birth, natural extraction, or any other original derivation from A∣dam. Rep. By the same reason he might argue, that the Ephesians, when they were quickned, had not a new life by regeneration, or spi∣ritual extraction, out of the second Adam, which is immediatly op∣posed to the other, as the counterpane or the other part of a deed. In seeking to deny the misery by the first, he must take away the happinesse, grace, and life that comes in by the second man. But he gives his reason, The Ephesians were no more guilty than e∣very one else, and no more before their conversion than after. We say the same in effect, and it is the force of our argument, be∣cause all need a new life, a new birth, a new extraction out of the second Adam, as well as the Ephesians, therefore all are equally by nature the children of wrath, and do partake of the sinne of the nature as well as they. But whereas he addes, that the E∣phesians were no more guilty of this sinne before conversion than they were after, in this he is monstrous absurd: For after conver∣sion, the guilt of that sinne was done away, and the power of it was broken by the inward work of the Spirit; now he cannot say that this was done before their conversion. He further addeth. By nature the children of wrath, must be expounded, as much as , really, and truly, the children of wrath, it is agree∣able to the usuage, of the same phrase, Galatians 4.8. Ye did
service to them, that by nature were no gods, that is, which really are none. Repl. We may understand the meaning of the Apostle, in this Scripture, by comparing it with others, God that made the world and all that is therein, dwelleth not in Temples made with hands, Acts 17.24. The invisible things of him are clearly seen from the creation of the world, even his eternal power and Godhead, Rom 1.20. So in the present case, when the Galatians did ser∣vice to those that by nature were not gods, his meaning is no o∣ther but this, they did service to them that had not the essence, and the being of the Godhead. As in a little case, the nature of Birds, Beasts, and Fishes, is taken for the essence, and the being it self. As in the expression of Saint James, every kinde of Birds, that is, every nature of Birds, Beasts, and Fishes is tamed, and hath been tamed by mankind, or according to the original by the nature of man. So in the present case, when the Apostle saith that the Ephesians were by nature the children of wrath, he doth not say onely that they were really, and truly, the chil∣dren of wrath. For so they might be by ill-custome, when their nature was good, as the water is really and truely hot, though it be not naturally hot: But his meaning is this, that their very essence, and being was sinful, and that their corruption was in the very nature it self, as they did derive out of Adam a common root. The scope of the text, doth plainly shew that this is the meaning: the sinfulnesse of nature, immediately opposed to that life, spiritualnesse, and new nature they had from the second A∣dam. And whereas he saith, as these Ephesians were before their conversion, so were the Israclites in the dayes of their rebellion, a wicked stubborne people, insomuch that they are by the Prophet called children of transgression, a seed of falshood. All this doth confirme the truth of our interpretation he calleth them a seed of evil do∣ers, meaning that they were not onely sinners by custome, and evil ensample, but by propagation of the kind. Let him grant this in the case of the Ephesians, and the question is at an end. This is all that he hath in his Ʋnum Necessarium. Now let us consider what further he saith, to this Scripture, in his answer to the Bishops letter,
Here he tells us, that these words do not at all relate to the mat∣ter of original, but to the state of Heathens sinnes, habitual Idola∣tries, and impurities; in which the world was dead, before the great Reformation by Christ page 74. Repl. By this account when the Ephesians had a new life infu∣sed, this was onely to cure them of their heathenish Idolatries, and superstitions: In which sense the Jewes (free from such I∣dolatries) needed no new life at all Besides, how is it possible that the words are to be understood, onely of heathenish Idola∣tries and impurities, when the Apostle himself expressely saith, among whom we all had our conversation. Did he live in heathenish I∣dolatries before his conversion, or was he an Idolater before his calling? But seeing our Authour tells us, how the Bishop did admonish him to remember how often the Apostle calleth concupis∣cence, sinne; we will urge the text a little more closely, and con∣sider what is the value of his answers. To ground the businesse, we argue thus. If the Ephesians were accounted the children of wrath, because they had their conversation in the lusts of the flesh; by this reason then, the flesh must needs be evil, because it was evil, to converse in those lusts. Further, to come to the point, If the lusts of the flesh be evil, it must be true in a sense, that the flesh it self must be more evil, because it is the very foun∣tain from which the lusts do streame. When he hath said all that he can, when he hath accused the Ephesians of an evil con∣versation, of evil customes, of evil acts, of evil desires, he must come to an evil nature, that lies at the bottome, and that which is worst of all, he will find it to be the very root, and cause of the the mischief. The Apostle doth very elegantly call all lusts, the works and effects of the flesh, because they are the effects, that the flesh doth produce, in opposition to the effects and fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. This ground being laid, let us come to his exceptions as they follow in their order. First, (saith he) I know Saint Paul reckons con∣cupiscence to be one of the works of the flesh, and con∣sequently such as excludes from heaven, Col. 3.5. [Evil concupiscence] concupiscence with something superadded, but certainly, that is nothing that is natural: for God made no∣thing
that is evil; and whatsoever is natural and necessary cannot be mortified. Repl. That which is natural and necessary by creation, we confesse cannot, nor ought not to be mortified. Of this kind is the lust after meat, drink, sleep, &c. but that which is natural, and necessary by corruption, ought chiefly to be mortified; nay, it is the prime work of Christianity, to put off the Adam-like, and by degrees to put on the Christ-like disposition, Gal. 5.24. He proceedeth. I come (saith he) to consider that by concupiscence either must be meant the first inclinations to their object, or the proper acts of Election, which are the second acts of concupiscence. If the first inclinations be meant, then certainly that cannot be a sinne, which is natural, and necessary? Repl. We do willingly admit such a distinction, concupiscence is sometime taken for the habit, or the root it self, and some∣times for those second acts that do flow from the root. Now in such a case it is to me a great wonder that any should own the second acts of concupiscence to be sinne, and yet own no sinfulnesse in the concupiscence, that is more radical and funda∣mental. Acts do flow from the nature, and therefore where acts be bad, the nature cannot be good. It is our Saviours own argument, Men do not gather grapes of thornes, nor figs of thistles. And whereas he stands upon this subtilty, that the first inclinations are unavoidable, therefore they are not sinful. If he means that they are absolutely unavoidable, this we deny. For that which is unavoidable by nature, may be avoided by grace. The guilt of concupiscence may be taken away that it be not imputed, the power of it may be broken by the Spirit, and the remainders of it may be clean extinguished in the life of glory. Now he proceedeth. To desire that to which all men tend naturally is no more a sin, than to desire to be happy is a sin. Desire is no more a sin, than joy or sorrow is. Repl. If he speak of the natural tendency of desire, as it is by creation; We willingly subscribe, and so it is no sinne to desire to eat, drink, or to long after an happy estate. But if he speak
of natural desires, as they are now since the fall; The de∣sires of the flesh do wholly rend to evil. The flesh lusteth , against the Spirit, and the works of the flesh are manifest, adultry, fornication, &c. Gal. 5.18, &c. He further argues. Then there can be no reason told, why it is more a sin to will evil than to understand it: and how doth that which is moral, differ from that which is natural? For the understanding is first, and primely moved by his object. Rep. The Scripture doth testifie of the blindnesse of the minde, and the perversity of the judgement, as well as of the pravity of the will. Not to go far for an instance, the words of the text are plaine. The Ephesians are said to be the children of wrath, under this title, and formality, because they did ful∣fill the lusts of their minde; or according to the original, the wills of their cogitations, and their reasonings. They are tearmed the wills of the cogitation, because the choise of the will, and the disorder of that choise, doth arise commonly from the blindnesse of judgement. As for his question, how doth that which is natural, differ from that which is moral: We need not trouble our selves in the businesse. For the blindnesse of the judgement, and the perversity of the will, are natural and moral both. They are natural, so far forth as they come by propagation from the first root: they are moral, in respect of the anomy, and irregularity, as being contrary to the spiri∣tual, holy, and pure law of God. He goeth on. I cannot but wonder saith he, why men are pleased where-ever they finde the word concupiscence in the new Testament, presently to dreame of original sinne, and make that to be the summe total of it: whereas concupiscence, if it were the product of Adams fall, is but one small part of it. Rep. There is a double reason may be given (as I conceive) where men finde mention made of concupiscence, they do thereby understand original sinne; First, because that sinne is commonly called by the title of concupiscence. Secondly, Those derivative concupiscences (as I may so say) which are by choice and election, do all flow from the mother concu∣piscence, and do exceedingly symbolize with her. As in that
famous passage of the Apostle. Every man is drawn away with his own lust, and enticed, and lust, when it hath conceived, it bring∣eth forth sinne, and sinne when it is finished, bringeth forth death, Jam. 1.14, 15. By sinne he must needs meane, the open act of sinne, as it is in the publick view of man. After this he speaks of finishing of sinne, when men have filled the measure of their iniquity, then death comes at last, as the wages of sin. Though this be so in the end, yet at the first, all sin is brooded in the lust of the heart. All secondary acts of concupiscence do spring from the original concupiscence, which is the cause of all. Upon these grounds. The sinful disposition of the na∣ture may well passe under the name, and notion of concu∣piscence; because the operations within, do chiefly consist in lusting, and all the acts of sinne do flow from the lust of the heart within. Concupiscence (saith he) is but one of the passions, and in the utmost extension of the word, it can be taken but for one halfe of the passions, for not only all the passions of the concupisci∣ble faculty can be a principle of sinne, but the irascible doth more hurt in the world: that is more sensual, this more devilish, pag. 94. Rep. It is true in moral Philosophy, the usual distinction is into , et  the irascible and concupiscible faculty, but what need is there of such a difference in the case that we now speak? for the Apostle reckons up the lusts of the flesh, adultery, fornication, uncleannesse, hatred, variance, emulation, &c. Gal. 5.19. There is no man will doubt, but in this list or catalogue, he hath respect as well to things that belong to the irascible, as to the concupiscible faculty; yet all is contained under the notion, and name of concupiscence. For in the verses immediately going before, he exhorteth, walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. According to the original, it is, ye shall not accomplish  the concupiscence of the flesh. In the present case then when the Galathians did live in malice, envy, hateful, and hating one another, they did fulfill the concupiscence of the flesh. And so by this account the lusts, both of the concupiscible, and the irascible faculty are comprehended (more generally)
under one name and title of concupiscence. And all his contrary reasoning is just nothing at all. Now let us come to his last Scripture. The natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, be∣cause they are foolishnesse to him, 1 Cor. 2.14. Here he bestows much paines, to weaken the force of the text. An animal man (saith he) that is a Philosopher, or a rational man, such as were the Greeke and Roman Philosophers, upon the stock and account of the learning of all the Schooles, could not discern the excellency of the Gospel-mysteries as of God, incar∣nate, Christ dying, the resurrection of the body, and the like. Rep. Its true, that the Philosophers aforementioned, were such natural, or animal men, but it is not the whole truth; For they that come to Church, and publickly professe, may be animal men also, and in their animality may be far from receiv∣ing the things of the Spirit. A schoole-boy, that is able some way to make a Gramatical construction of the Greek of Euclide, and Ptolomy, is not presently capable, of the mysteries of Geometry, and Astronomy. That requireth the skill of an Artist, as well as of a Gramarian. And, if the laws of the land were translated into English. I think we should not be all Lawyers out of hand. So in the present case, though all may outwardly own, and some may preach the Doctrine, and mysteries of salvation, this doth not presently entitle them, to that kinde of learning that comes only by the teaching of the Spirit. Many may speak much of the love of Christ, that never had the feeling of it in their hearts. Moses tells the people in his time, ye have seen all that the Lord did before your eyes, yet the Lord hath not given you an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and eares to heare unto this day, Deut. 29.24. They did see, and they did not see, they did outwardly see the works, but they did not inwardly believe the truth, wisedome, goodnesse, and power of God. For had they seen these things, as they ought, they could not but have loved the Lord their God, and have lived
in obedience to his laws. So then, not only the Greek Philosophers; but many Christians also, may be called natural, or animal men. He further sheweth what anima∣lity is. Animality, which is a reliance upon natural principles, without revelation is a state privatively opposed to the Spirit, and a man in that state cannot be saved, because he wants a vital part, he wants the Spirit. Rep. What he saith here, and in the words immediately following is the same in substance, that we speak, and is extream∣ly contrary to the designe that he derives at. For if in the state of animality, a man cannot be saved, because he wants the Spirit, the chief vital of salvation; Why doth he (to make religion intelligible) deny original sin, plead for the freedome of the will, and establish the purity of the natural birth. We say, because a man is borne in original sin, and dead in trespasses and sinnes, therefore he cannot be saved, without the infusion of a new life. He saith that a man in his animality cannot go to heaven, without the Spirit, the chiefe vital of salvation. Let a wise man now, judge where we and he do differ. But to blind the businesse, he hath a subtle distinction between carna∣lity and animality. Carnality, (saith he) or the state of being in the flesh, is not only privatively opposed, but contrarily also to the spiritual staee of grace. Rep. This expression of his, might passe well enough, were it not for that which followeth. First, speaking of the state of animality, and then of carnality afterwards, he hath these words. The first is only an imperfection, and a want of supernatural aides, the other is indeed, a direct state of sin, and hated by God, but su∣perinduced by choice, and not discending naturally. Rep. In this expression of his there are two things, that need a better enquiry. First, how doth he prove that the state of animality is only a state of meer imperfection, and no more? St. James tells us, the wisdome from beneath, is earthly, sensual, devilish; or according to the original, earthly, animal  devilish. I think none will say, that the animality of this wisdome, is a bare imperfection, and no more. Its positive∣ly opposed to the wisdome that is above, and can there be a
greater enemy, to the wisedome above, then that which is be∣neath? The Apostle St. Jude also saith, that Mockers should come walking after their ungodly lusts. These are they that sepa∣rate themselves, sensual, not having the Spirit. ver. 18, 19. the word is, they are , animal, not having the Spirit. Now in this case will any man be so void of understanding, to affirme that these in their animality, were meerly defective, and that they were not in a direct state of enmity against God? I think none will easily assert it. Sure I am many ensamples may be brought, to prove the distinction between animality and carnali∣ty to be a meer non-ens, or nullity. Secondly, we agree that the state of carnality, is a state of sin, and hated of God; but whereas he saith that it is only superinduced by choice, as also that it doth not naturally descend. Herein we crave liberty to depart from him. The Scriptures all along (specially the writings of St. Paul) speak of the flesh, in opposition to the Spirit. Now will he, or any man else, assert that this is a state meerly super∣induced, and that men come to be flesh, purely by the choice of their own will? If this be so, how do all come to agree in one and the same choice? All do not agree to be Souldiers, to be Scholars, to be Merchants, to be Mariners, yet all are flesh, before they come to be sanctified by the Spirit. Seeing he will not have this state naturally to descend, let him assigne some general cause, how all do agree to be carnal. Necessarily some general cause must lye at the bottome; but he further saith. Adam did leave us all in an animal state, but this is not a state of anmity, of direct opposition to God, but a state insufficient, and imperfect. Rep. This state of meer imperfection, which he speaks so much of, both here and else-where, is only a notion of his own commenting. For when God made man in the beginning, he made him in a state very good, but when he fell, he left all his posterity, not only in an imperfect, but in a sinful condition. As for that middle state of deficiency, which he imagins, I know not where it is to be found, unlesse it be in the Atlantis of Plate. Besides, if animality be only a state of deficiency, why doth the Apostle so plainly tell us, that the animal man receives
not the things of the Spirit, they are foolishnesse unto him. This cannot be a state of meer imperfection, but a state of direct opposition, the principles of animality diametrally opposite to the things of the Spirit, Michal scoft at Davids dancing before the Ark. Lot seemed to his sons-in-law to be as one that mockt, when he told them of the destruction of the City; the preaching of the crosse seemed to be very meane matter to the Philoso∣phers, and learned Grecians. Now shall we say that all these were only in a state of animality or imperfection, and no more? I think none will easily believe it. But in the close of all he hath these words. In the state of animality (saith he) a man cannot go to heaven, but neither will that alone carry them to hell, and therefore God doth not let a man alone in that state, for either God suggests to him that which is spiritual, or if he doth not, it is because himselfe hath superinduced something that is carnal. Rep. We are told here of a state, that carries neither to hea∣ven nor to hell: and I beleeve if we go to men of ripe years, there is no man lives in this estate in all Asia, Africa, Europe, and America. Why then doth he trouble us with that which is not? Further, we do agree, that the Lord doth (at seasons) suggest something that is spiritual to animal men; by this they are enabled to see their own misery, and to judge themselves. Now this doth rather strengthen the force of the argument, for if an animal man could purely of himselfe, perceive the things of the Spirit, what need had he of the suggestion of the Spirit? But for that which he addeth, that the animal man doth superinduce something that is carnal, I think this cannot reason∣ably be denyed, and therefore I do not see, but the state of animality and carnality both are equal estates of enmity against God. Thus have I been more large in clearing those Scriptures which concerne the maine of the question: in others of lesse moment I will be more briefe.
SECT. 3. How God punisheth the Fathers sin upon the children. THe end wherefore he is so willing to dispute this point, he himselfe doth expresse, pag. 40. Ʋpon this account alone (saith he) it must be impossible to be consented unto, that God should still under the Gospel, after so many generations of vengance, and taking punishment for the sinne, after the publication of so many mercies and so infinite a graciousnesse, that is revealed to mankind in Jesus Christ, after so great provisions against sin, even the hor∣rible threatnings of damnation still to persevere to punish Adam, in his posterity and the posterity for that he never did. Rep. In this passage of his, he doth shew how much he doth mistake the scope of Scripture, for it is the chiefe designe of the holy Ghost, to amplifie the sin of Adam, and all the evil that comes thereby, to the end that all might be humbled, and that they might come to Christ as to a Sovereigne remedy to help them in their misery. And in very deed, whatsoever he thinks to the contrary, the Doctrine of the Gospel cannot be so clear∣ly preached, without the knowledge of that misery that came by the fall. The knowledge of the one, doth as it were open a doore to the knowledge of the other. Againe, in the whole processe of the discourse he is very faliacious. Suppose ordinarily God doth not now punish the fathers sin upon the children, is this a good argument to prove that the sin of Adam is not rightly imputed to posterity? Other Parents (comparatively) are but private persons, and their sins are but the sins of private men, but Adam was the root of the nature, and his sin was the sin of the whole kind. As on the other side, the suffering of Christ upon the crosse, was not the suffering of a private person, but the suffering of the whole humane nature. By this the lost sons of men have a doore of grace opened, the tender of grace is made to all, and the great condemnation is for unbelief. Now we will consider what the rules are which he doth lay down. First, (saith he) God may and doth very often blesse chil∣dren,
to reward the Fathers piety, as it is notorious in the famous descent of Abrahams family. But the same is not the reason of favours and punishments. Answ. Here we would entreat him to observe that it is true, that for a long descent, God did shew kindnesse to the family of Abraham: but if he well observe the matter, this kindnesse was extended, not so much for Abrahams piety, as for the Lords own promise, and for his truth in keeping the promise. Againe, whereas he saith, There is not the same reason of favours, and punishments: let him shew why the Jewes are cast away, why they have been little better than out-casts of the Covenant, now above one thousand five hundred years? Questionlesse, as God will magnifie his mercy in their call: so for many ages together, they have stood and do yet stand under the burthen of that heavy curse, which they did wish upon themselves, his blood be upon us and our children, &c. Secondly, (saith he) God never imputes the sin to the son, or re∣lative formally making him guilty, or being angry with the innocent eternally. Answ. Though we should say, the sin of Adam is imputed to all his relatives, and that also to their eternal damnation; this in the whole were no hard assertion: as long as we teach, that a second man is provided for eternal salvation. We wil∣lingly yeild, as the case now standeth, the great condemnation is for the neglect, and the contempt of that salvation, mercy, and grace that is to be had by Christ. If men run out the years of the patience, and long-suffering of God; if they continue in unbelife, and hardnesse of heart; if they resist the convicti∣ons, and operations of the Spirit, as they are administred in their respective seasons. I think it is but just, that they should fall, not only under the guilt of their own actual sins: but under the eternal damnation also, that was brought upon them by the sin of Adam, the root of the nature. All the hurt of such a position (if it be a hurt) is more vigorously to drive men to Christ. As for infants, though they are fallen into all kinds of miserie, temporal, and eternal by Adams sin: what harme, as long as so faire a probability may be extended to them in Christ: God is a gracious God, and he is able to shew mercy where
the sin was the act, and deed of another. Of believers infants, we have a more special ground of hope. So then the matter will come to this issue; Though infants may be miserable by A∣dam, nay may be made eternally miserable through him: yet here is the comfort, that mercy may be extended to them in Christ. He further addeth. Thirdly, when God inflicts a temporal evil upon the son for the fathers sin, he doth it as a Judge to the father, but as a Lord only to the son. Answ. Suppose this were granted, it makes nothing to the purpose; all other Parents in comparison, are but private men: but Adam as a publick person, did represent the whole nature. That may be asserted of him, which cannot be of any other: The Apostle expressely saith, by the disobedience of one, many were made sinners. If they were made sinners only by the im∣putation of Adams sin, this is enough to put a difference be∣tween him and other progenitours. Againe, in the fame place it is expressely said, by one mans offence, judgement came upon all men to condemnation. If it came upon all men to condemnati∣on, all are under the sentence of the Judge, for the sin of one man. And whereas he saith. If God inflicts a temporal evil upon the son for the fathers sin, he doth it not as a Judge, but as a Lord only to the son. Upon this account I demand, the Lord inflicting evil upon the sons of Adam for his sin, doth he only inflict it in a prerogative way to the son? then it will follow, that Christ must dye, and by shedding of his blood, he must take away such evils (from infants at least) that are brought upon them in the way of prerogative. This would be a strange sound, to such eares that have alway heard, and believed that we come to be sinners in Adam, and Christ came to take away the guilt of that sin. Fourthly, God using (saith he) the power, and dominion of a Lord, and the severity of a Judge, did punish posterity, it was but so long as the Parents might live, and see it, as Chrysostome saith, to the third and fourth generation, and no longer. Answ. If this be so, why do the Jewes at this day beare the burthen of that sin, committed many hundred years ago? why
did God inflict judgements upon the house of Ely, of Saul, of Ahab, of Jehu, and of others, when the Parents were dead? Besides, if God should have such a purpose to punish the Parents in the children, that thereby the Parents themselves might be brought to repentance; this is not a parallel case, to that which we are upon. God suffered Adam to fall, and in falling, to involve himselfe, and his posterity under all miseries, tempo∣ral, and eternal; that so a doore might be opened, for the grace that comes by Christ. In this regard the Apostle expressely tells us, that the first man is the figure of him that is to come. This must not, nor cannot be said of our immediate Parents. Fifthly, he addeth, this power and dominion, which God useth, was not in ordinary cases, but in the biggest crimes only. Answ. Let this be admitted, it doth abundantly confirme the truth of our assertion. For the case of Adam was more than ordinary, there is no such ensample like his, from the beginning of the world. He stood as a publick man, as a root of the nature, the whole stock was put into his hand, he had but one only way by which he might fall; and therefore he falling, it is no such irrational thing to conceive, that all his posterity should fall with him. Sixthly, (saith he) Although God threatned this, and hath a right and a power to do this; yet he doth not often use this right, but only in such notable ensamples, as were sufficient to all ages, to con∣signe, and testifie his great indignation against those things, for the punishment of which he was pleased to use his right or rights of dominion. Answ. True, there are some special ensamples of the Lords judgement upon whole families, for their fathers sin; this may be seen in the cases of Corah, Achan, Saul, Jeroboam, Ahab, and others. Neither do we doubt, but the Lords end was to testifie to all ages, his indignation against sin, by such like instances of his severity. But what is this to the purpose in hand? the end wherefore the Lord did lay such an heavy burthen upon the sons of Adam, was not so much that the children should take heed, by the ensample of their father, for there were some par∣ticulars
that the children could not possibly imitate the father; but a prime end of the misery of the sons of men, by the fall of Adam, is to open a door, for the grace that comes by Christ. The knowledge of the one contrary doth exceedingly conduce to the knowledge of the other. Seaventhly, (saith he) his goodnesse, and graciousnesse grew quickly weary of this way of proceeding. They were the ter∣rours of the Law, and God did not delight in them. There∣fore in the time of Ezekiel the Prophet, he declared against them. Answ. This passage of Ezekiel the Prophet, doth of all others singularly make for our purpose. For though Adam did eate of the forbidden fruit, and all his posterity did, and do bear the burthen of his sinne: yet they are not left, in that state irrecove∣rably, without all kinde of help. A doore of grace is opened for the lost sonnes of men, by the coming of Christ; upon this ground, the truth of Ezekiels speech is founded, the soule that sinneth, that soul shall die. His meaning is, the soul that sinneth and continueth in his sin, through impenitency and unbelief, that soul shall dye. Eighthly, (saith he) something extraordinary, was then need∣ful to be done, to so vile a people, to restrain their sinfulnesse; but when the Gospel was published, and hell-fire threatned to per∣sovering, and greater sinners, the former way of punishment was quite left off. And in all the Gospel, there is not one word of threatning passing beyond the person of∣fending. Answ. I marvell how it cometh to passe then, that the Jewes do beare the burthen of their Ancestors sinne, as we have former∣lysaid. Besides, if we diligently look to the scope of the Gos∣pel, we shall finde that the Lord doth punish the posterity for the sinne of Adam, that so thereby a way may be prepared for the grace that comes by Christ These things are not opposite, or contrary, but subordinate and subalternate, the miseries by the fall do prepare the way for the grace that comes by Christ. But he further addeth. Either this evil (saith he) that falls upon us for Adams sin, is in∣flicted upon us by way of proper punishment, or by right of
dominion, if by proper punishment to us, then we understand not the justice of it, because we were not personally guilty. Answ. If we cannot understand the justice of it, because we were not personally guilty, why by the same reason doth he not wholly exclude us from having any part of share in the benefit of the death of Christ. For what personal act or concurrence have we to the suffering of that death. And whereas he alledgeth the ensamples of Pausanias the Grecian General, Avidius Cassius, and others, that would not punish the children for the fathers of∣fence: We acknowledge the rationality and the equity of such proceedings, but what is this to the case in hand? The Law was so given to Adam, that was never given to any else but to Christ alone. It was given to him as the Headman, and the root of the nature. If he fell, all must fall with him Neither is there any hard∣nesse or harshnesse in this doctrine as long as the misery by one doth open a door for the grace by the other. He goes on. If God (saith he) inflicts this evil upon Adams posterity by using his own right of power, and dominion, which he hath over his crea∣tures; then it is a strange anger which God had against Adam that he still retaines so fierce an indignation as not to take off his hand from striking after five thousand six hundred years; and striking him for that of which he repented him, and which in all reason we beleeve he then pardoned or resolved to pardon when he promised the Messiah to him. Answ. If he would but remember himself what he speaks else∣where, he shall finde that he saith the same in effect as we do. For though in his further explication, page 453. He affirmeth that Adam was made mortal, and proves it by his eating, and drinking, his sleep, and recreation, by ingestion, and egestion by breath∣ing, generating, and the like, which immortal substances never do. Though by these and such like mediums, he endeavours to prove the mortality of the state in which he was made, yet in the same and other places he doth acknowledge that the untimelinesse and infelicity of death, came in by the fall. By the fall he tells us that Adam was cast into a place of labour and uneasinesse of bryars and thornes, ill aire, and violent chances. The woman was condemn∣ed
to hard labour and travell, and that which troubled her most, obe∣dience to her husband, &c. Now let us take the misery brought in by the fall in such a low and diminutive sense that he would take it. It is now above five thousand six hundred yeares that mankind hath been under the miseries and infelicities of death, all this while they have continued in a place of labour and unea∣sinesse of ill aire, and hard chances, the woman also besides the paines and peril of child-birth hath been subject to her husband for five thousand six hundred years, and yet she knows no end of her apprentiship. As strange as the anger is against Adam and his posterity, he must needs say the same in effect as we do. But to give a positive answer. These miseries brought in by the fall of Adam have continued, and must continue to the end of the world. Neither is it a strange thing that the Lord should con∣tinue his anger, seeing by the continuation thereof he doth con∣tinue to drive men to Christ. If he pleased he could immediately take away all these miseries brought in by the fall. But for most excellent ends to humble men to pluck down their pride, to beat them out of their carnal security, he doth rather suffer them to abide. And for the case of the woman. The Apostle doth not deny her pains and perill of child-birth to come in by the fall, but then he addeth, they shall be saved in child-bearing if they continue in the faith, 1 Tim. 2. last. Notable to this purpose is that speech of Augustine to Julian the Pelagian, est enim aliquid in b∣dito & alto ejus consilio, &c. There is therefore a reason in his hid∣den and deep counsel, why so long as we live in this mortal flesh, there is something in us against which our mind may conflict, there is some∣thing that we may say forgive us our trespasses. And a little after therefore it is done in the place of our infirmity, that we should not live proudly, but should live under a daily need of remission of sinnes. Much more to the same purpose. What he addes is monstrous false. It is not easily (saith he) to be imagined, how Christ reconciled the world unto his Father, if after the death of Christ, God is so angry with mankind, so unappeased, that the most innocent part of mankind may perish for Adams sinne; and the other are perpetually punished with a corrupted nature, a pronenesse to sinne, a servile will, a filthy concupiscence, and an impossibility of being innocent; that no faith,
no Sacrament, no prayers, no industry, can obtain pardon from this punishment. Answ. It were a very happy thing, if this learned man would once think that there were a ninth commandment, and that he would make conscience of bearing false-witnesse against his neigh∣bour. We say, as the case now standeth, men are pestred with a corrupted nature, with a pronenesse to sinne, with a servile will, but that there is no remedy to bring us out of this evil, this was never affirmed by us. There is in the blood of Christ that which will take away the guilt of sinne, in the Spirit of Christ to free us from the bondage of corruption, and also in his power to raise our bodies at the last. Onely it is the good will and pleasure of God in the whole Oeconomy of the salvation of man, that we should wait till all these things be fulfilled. That is a most sweet passage of Bede taken from some ancienter Authour. No man (saith he) taketh away sinne, which the Law, although holy, and just, and good, could not take away; but he in whom there was no sin. Now he taketh away sinnes by pardoning those that are done, and by assisting us that they may not be done, and by bringing of us to the life where they cannot at all be done, and so we are come to an end of this Section. SECT. 4. Of the causes of the universal wickednesse of mankind. In the beginning he doth take upon him to propound an ob∣jection. If there were not some common principle of evil introdu∣ced by the sinne of our parents upon all his posterity, how should all men be so naturally inclined to be vicious. To this he endeavours to frame many answers. First (saith he) if we will suppose that there must be a cause in our nature determining us to sinne, by an unresistible necessity, I de∣sire to know why such a principle should be more necessary to us, than it was to Adam? Repl. As I have said before, Adam had onely a possibility to
sinne, he did sinne so, that he had liberty, and freedome not to sin; But as the case now standeth, we can do nothing else but sin. It is true in the particular, every man is free in the committing of this, or that particular sin, though it be true in the General, an evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit. It is possible that an healthy man, by disorder, may fall into great sicknesses, but a man of frail, and infirme constitution, is wholly enclined to sick¦nesses and diseases. As great, nay, a farre greater difference, was between that liberty that Adam had before his fall, and what we now have. He had a freedome to choose the good, and to re∣fuse the evil; so have not we now. But to take away the force of this answer, he further argueth. That we can choose the good, and as naturally love good as evil, and in some instances more. A man cannot natu∣rally hate God, if he knowes any thing of him; a man natu∣rally loves his parents, he naturally hateth some sorts of un∣cleannesse. Repl. We do not deny, but (by the general concurrence and assistance of God) man since the fall, hath some ability to choose, and love the good: But what kind of good? that which is ethical and moral, but not that which is spiritual. In the very best actions that a natural man doth, when he gives alms, when he observes promises, when he doth performe any good, he sins in the manner; because his actions do not proceed from sincere love, neither are they directed to a right end. The end of the commandment is love out of a pure heart, a good conscience, and faith unfaigned, 1 Tim. 1.5. Because a natural man wants these principles, his best actions are stained with sinne. As strange as this doctrine seemes to be, there is none of us all, but may finde a truth of it in our own ex∣perience. For let us heare, reade, pray, meditate, give alms, dispute for the truth, reforme errours and abuses, and do much good for the Church; yet we can have no comfort if our con∣science once tell us, that we do not these things for God, but for our selves. This is the very case of every natural man besides the sinisterity of ends, his actions do not proceed from right principles. And whereas he argueth, that a man cannot naturally hate God if he knowes any thing of him. If he speak of the excellen∣cy
of God, and his holinesse? In such a sense if men did know him they could not hate him. For that they love him, fear him, obey him, trust in him, do all for him, leave all for his sake, this is grounded upon the right knowledge of that excellency, and goodnesse that is in himself. And therefore since the fall, the blindnesse of minde is the cause of a great part of the mischief. The will is perverse in her choice; the affections are out of order, because the judgment is not rightly informed. In a lower sense we do acknowledge, that men may know some things of God, and their knowledge may be the ground of their hatred of God. It may be with some wicked men, as with the Devils, they be∣leeve there is one God, and tremble. But as to the choice of spiritual good, he further saith. Neither was Adams case better than ours in this particu∣lar. For that his nature could not carry him to heaven, or indeed to please God in order to it seems to be confessed by them who have therefore affirmed him to have a supernatural righ∣teousnesse. Repl. If the collation be between state and state Adam had a power to understand that good which is spiritual, tolove & choose it more than we now have since the fall. The wise man saith, God made man upright, but they have sought out many inventions, Eccles. 7. ult. He must needs speak of a spiritual uprightnesse contrary to the deceits that are to be found amongst thousands of men and women. And whereas he saith that Adams nature could not carry him to heaven. If this be so, God provided worse for him than for the rest of the creatures. The rest of the creatures were made with such natures sutable to their ends. If therefore God did not make Adam in a state someway fit for heaven, why did he create him with an immortal soule? This state plainly sheweth that had he stood or eaten of the tree of life, he should have lived for ever. But falling, he did runne the hazard of the losse of that life that might have been had. Lastly, if Adam coald not have gone to heaven in that nature that God had made him, the falling short of eternal life could not have been any fault of his own; and the blame would have laid on the creation. Were it rational for God to require Adam to go to heaven, and yet no way to make him sutable or fit for such a con∣dition.
This were to require the whole tale of bricks, and to give no straw. And for that Tenet of the Romish Doctors, I wonder that he should stand upon it that Adam was endued with supernatural righteousnesse in that sense, at least, as they under∣stand it, for look what righteousnesse Adam had, it was by crea∣tion. The had stood he had propagated it to posterity. The reliques of the image of God do plainly shew in what state he was made in the beginning. In the creation of man it is said, he made all things very good, Hearbs, Trees, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, all these may be good in their kinde, though they were not made in a state fit to go to heaven. But it is impossible that Adam could be made in a state very good, but he must be some way fit for union with God, in which all spiritual and eternal good doth consist. Now he comes to the main objection, and here he tells us that it is certain there is not only one, but many common principles from which sin derives it self into the manners of all men. This he undertakes to prove in opposition to our assertion, who hold that the pravity and corruption of nature doth flow from the disobedience of the first man. But let us heare him speak in his own words. The first great cause (saith he) of an universal implety, is, that at first God had made no promises of heaven, he had not propounded a∣ny glorious rewards to be as an argument to support the superiour fa∣culty against the inferiour, that is, to make the will to choose the best & to leave the worst, and to be as a reward for suffring contradiction, And going on, he further addeth this to be the reason of the ge∣neral corruption of the old world; Because (saith he) there was no such thing in that period of the world, therefore almost all flesh corrupted themselves, excepting Abel, Seth, Enos, and E∣noch, we finde not one good man from Adam to Noah; and therefore the Apostle calls that world , the world of the ungodly. It was not so much wonder, that when Adam had no promises made to en∣able him to contest his natural concupiscence, he should strive to make his conditions by the Devils Promi∣ses. Reply It is true the Apostle calleth the old world , the world of ungodly, but that there were no spiritual promises in
those times, this we utterly deny. What shall we make of that promise, the seed of the woman shall breake the Serpents head? What shall we make of the sacrifices? were they not all figures of the blood of Christ to come? Saint Peter also plainly tells us, That the spirits of the fathers were dis∣obedient in the times of the old world. In what sense then doth he call them disobedient? Their disobedience must be expounded in reference to the teachings, convictions that they had by and through the Spirit of Christ, whether in Noahs Ministry or other∣wise. Many more reasons might be alledged to prove that the fathers were not altogether destitute of spiritual promises. If our Author will prove it, let him shew how they were too blame for their disobedience. But he is as strange in assigning that which he tearmes the se∣cond cause of the general impiety. A second cause (saith he) of the general iniquity of the world is, because our nature is so hard put to it in many instances. Not be∣cause nature is originally corrupted, but because Gods laws command such things which are a restraint to the indifferent, and otherwise law∣ful inclinations of nature. And then going on, he doth in the same page explain himself more fully. Our unwillingnesse and averse∣nesse came by occasion of the Law coming crosse upon our nature: not because our nature is contrary unto God, but because God was pleased to super-induce some commandments contrary to our nature For if God had commanded us to eate the best meats and to drink the richest wines as long as they could please us, and were to be had, I sup∣pose it will not be thought that original sinne would hinder us from obedience. But because we are forbidden to do somethings which na∣turally we desire to do, and love, therefore our nature is hard put to it, and this is the cause of the difficulty. So farre he, page 413. 414, 415, 416. Reply. From these and such like speeches of his, I would entreat him (that is so apt to condemne others) to observe the rigour and the severity of his own principles. First, he tells us that there was no proposal of spiritual promi∣ses to the old world, and then Secondly, God laid such com∣mands upon them, that were altogether above their natural a∣bilities, and from the position of these two, he sheweth us that
the world did so generally overflow with all kind of wickednesse. These things are so extreame hard, that I do not finde their pa∣rallel in any of our writers. They do indeed say that God giveth commands farre above natural abilities, but not farre above that natural ability that Adam was furnished withall in the begin∣ning, neither above that gracious ability which God hath enga∣ged himself to bestow in the Word of promise. But to amplifie commands upon feeble flesh, and to make no spiritual promises answerable to the command, is plainly to make the Lord himself extreamely severe to the sons of men. None of our Authours ever would allow such a severity. Of all the Ancients, Augustine is the Authour that seems to be most rigorous in the points of original sinne, and the natural ser∣vitude of the will, yet if we consider the whole scope of his do∣ctrine, he doth not come near to the severity of the position a∣bove mentioned; when some did reason with him, If there be no free-will, to what purpose exhortations and commands? I answe, this, he purposely wrote his book de correptione & gratia, the effect of which is to this purpose, In commands know what thou oughtest to do, in reproof know what thou hast not done through thine own default, in prayer know whence thou mayst receive what thou wouldst have. And when the Pelagians did vehemently inculcate that which our Authour doth so much stand upon; Peccatum voluntatis an necessitatis est? si necessitatis est peccatum non est: si voluntatis vitari potest. Sinne (say they) is either of the will, or of necessity,) If it be of necessity, it is no sinne, if it be of the will, it may be avoided. To this he hath a double answer. First, (saith he) Ʋt sanemur, in vccamus eum cui dicitur in Psalmo de necessi∣tatibus educ me. That we may be healed, we call upon him to whom it is said in the Psalme, bring me out of my necessities. His second answer is, vitari posse peccatum si natura vitiata sanetur gratiâ Dei per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Sinne may be avoid∣ed in case our corrupt nature may be healed by the grace of God through Jesus Christ our Lord. There would be no end if we should cite all the passages that he hath to this purpose. In which he doth acknowledge that we lie under a natural necessity of sinning, but yet that necessity is not absolute and irrecoverable where there is a want of ability to keep the command, there he
doth referre us to the ability to be had from the word of pro∣mise. Of all our Authours in these latter times, Luther in his treatise de servo arbitrio, seemeth to speak most hard, yet for all this in the case of commands above natural abilities he alwayes incourages men to go to free grace. He alwayes testifies that the Law is to be preached to kill and undo a sinner, to put him under the curse and under wrath, that so he may come to Christ. To let passe all ensamples, we will come to that one instance in the beginning of the book, when Erasmus did argue in this wise. What profit or necessity is there to divulge such things, seeing from thence so many evils may seem to arise. To this he hath a double answer. Prima est humiliatio nostrae super cognitio gratiae Dei, alteraipsa fides Christiana, &c. The first is the humiliation of our Pride, and the knowledge of the grace of God, the other is the Christian faith it self. First, God certainly hath promised his grace to the humble, that is, to those that are cast down, and are without hope. Now a man cannot be throughly humbled, untill he know as wholly out of his own abilities, councels, studies, wills, workes: so his salvation altogether to depend upon the disposal, councell, will, work of another that is of God alone. For as long as he is per∣swaded that he can do the least for his salvation, he doth remaine in the trust of himself, neither doth he wholly dispaire of himself. Therefore is not humbled before God, but presumeth upon place, time, or some work for himself either doth hope or at least wish for that by which he may come to salvation. He therefore that doubteth not wholly to depend upon the will of God, altogether dispaires of himself chooses nothing, but expecteth God to work it in him, and for him, he is nearest to salvation. More he hath to the same purpose, Concerning the second reason, he hath these words, therefore saith he, that there maybe some place found for faith, it is needful that all things which are believed may be hidden out of sight, and they cannot be further hidden than under the contrary object, sense, experience. So God when he quickneth, he doth it by killing, when he justifieth, he doth that thing by convincing men of the guilt of sin, when he lifteth up to heaven, he doth it by bringing down to hell, and much more to that purpose. All this is but a specimen, or handsel of the doctrine of Luther, though he doth every where teach that there is no ability in man to obey the command, yet
all ability is to he had in the word of promise. He doth abun∣dantly shew that the use of the Law properly is to bring men to despair, that despairing in themselves, they may be driven to Christ. He doth marvellously expresse the doctrine of Saint Paul, in the Epistle to the Romans and elsewhere. Now on the contrary, Doctor Jeremy Taylor tells us a contrary tale, that the Lord did encrease his commands above the ability of men in the times of the old world; and gave no spiritual promises in answer to the commands given in those dayes, and this he doth avouch to be the true cause why iniquity did abound in that age. Now how he can make Religion intelligible by the position of such principles, for my part I cannot understand. I think never any of our Divines was ever found to come to such a high pitch of se∣verity. Now we go to his next Section. SECT. 5. Of the liberty of election remaining after Adams fall. HEre he doth make it one chief part of his work, to prove the liberty of the will, to this purpose he bringeth many argu∣ments against us, whereas (if he did well consider the matter) we do not deny such a natural faculty. Man hath a power in naturals and externals of Religion to use a liberty, and in spiritu∣als when he is made free by Christ. Bellarmine bringeth in this as one chief point of accusation. They deny (saith he) free-will, so excellent and worthy a gift of God, and the best of all that are in man, by which alone we may be distinguisht from bruit beasts, and may come nearest to the nature of Angels, and may beare the image of the Godhead it self; which also the whole race of mankind upon the earth do testifie with great consent of minde: A thing (I say,) so clear that almost every moment it cometh into the view of our eyes and minds: yet neverthelesse with incredible madnesse, and fury, these men do most obstinately refuse, confute, and reject it. So far Bellarmine. In which words of his, if he speak of liberty of
will, so farre as it is a faculty we do not deny it, we would as soon deny the fire to be hot, or the water to be moist. Onely this we deny in things spiritual, in matters that concerne salvation, a man hath no free will. Neither do we absolutely say this in spi∣ritual things, for though he hath no freedome by nature; he may be made free by grace. Grace doth not destroy the faculty, but doth perfect and adorne it. But of all our Authours let Doctor Ʋsher in his answer to the challenge made by a Jesuite in Ireland, lay downe our judgement, and then we shall see how fairely and honestly Bellarmine, and now last of all, our Author himself does deal with us. That man hath free-will (saith he) is not by us gain-said: though we dare not give him so large a freedome as the Jesuits presume to do. Freedome of will we know doth as essentially belong unto a man as reason it self: and he that spoileth him of that power, doth in effect make him a very beast. For this is the diffe∣rence betwixt reasonable and unreasonable creatures: as Damascene rightly noteth. The unreasonable are rather led by nature, than themselves are the leaders of it; and therefore do they never contra∣dict their natural appetite, but assoon as they affect any thing, they rush to the prosecution of it. But man being endued with reason, doth rather led nature, than is lead by it: and therefore being moved with appetite, if he will he hath power to restraine his appetite, or to follow it. Hereby he is enabled to do the things which he doth neither by a brute instinct of nature, nor yet by any compulsion, but by advice and deliberation: the mind first taking into considerartion the grounds and circumstances of each action, and freely debating on either side what in this case were best to be done, or not done, and then the will enclining it self to put in execution the last and conclusive judgment of the practical understanding. This liberty we acknowledge, a man may exercise in all actions that are within his power to do whether they be lawful, unlawful, or indifferent, whether done, by the strength of nature or of grace. For even in doing the workes of grace, our free will suspendeth not her action, but being moved and guided by grace, doth that which is fit for her to do, grace not taking away that liberty which comes by Gods creation, but the pra∣vity of the will, that ariseth from mans corruption. So farre Dr. Ʋsher, page 465. In which words of his, if we speak of the na∣ture of free-will, we do not deny it to be a free faculty both un∣der
corruption and under grace, & why should we be upbraided, then with that which we do not maintaine? but if we speak of the strength and ability of free-will, it is our constant doctrine that naturally a man hath no freedome to that which is spiritu∣ally good till he is made free by grace. And so far as he is made free by grace, and the way to obtaine this freedome, the first step is to see his slavery and his bondage-under corruption. These things being premised and the state of the question made cleare, we will now come to see what our Author can alleadge to the contrary. He proceedeth as followeth. The objection (saith he) hinders not, but choice still remaines to a man, and that he is not naturally sinful, as he is naturally heavy, and upright, apt to laugh and weep. Answ. Though in a sense it is true, that a man is not naturally sinful as he is naturally heavy, yet it is from the corruption, and pravity of his nature within, that he is still apt to choose that which is evil. For though every man doth not choose the same sin, nor for the same cause, neither doth he alwayes choose it, yet it is apparent that our wills are in a state of servility, and that the power to choose the things that are good is naturally lost. But he further addeth. This doctrine is destructive to all laws, it takes away reward and punishment, and we have nothing whereby we can serve God, and precepts of holinesse might be preached to a wolfe as well as a man, if men were naturally and inevitably wicked. Answ. These tearmes naturally and inevitably wicked are fallaciously coupled together. The Ephesians before their conversion were naturally wicked, they were by nature the chil∣dren of wrath as well as others. But will any man say, that they were inevitably wicked? how then could they be quickned and made alive againe by the infusion of a new life? Further, it is not destructive to all laws to say a man is naturally wicked, for by the help of restraining grace, he may outwardly sorbeare many evils which are forbidden in the law, onely his sinfulnesse lyes in this, that of himselfe he cannot come up to the purity and spirituality of the law in the denyal of his lusts. Againe, though naturally he be under the reign of lust, he doth not
inevitably lye under that bondage. That reign may be broken, when he shall come to be acquainted with the liberty of the Spirit. The law of the Spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus, hath made me free from the law of sinne and death, Rom. chap 8 2. Neither upon such a supposal is it true, that precepts of holiness may be given to a wolfe as well as a man. A wolfe is no way capable of precepts for want of faculties, he hath neither under∣standing will, nor any other power of the soul as a man hath. That of Augustine is true. A man doth not believe the impe∣dement is not in the faculty, but in the vicious habit that doth hinder the faculty. Posse credere naturae est hominum velle cre∣dere gratiae est fidelium: to have a remote power to believe is of the nature of men, to have a will to believe is of the grace of belie∣vers. But a wolfe hath neither nature nor grace to be∣lieve, and therefore he hath no precepts given to him to believe. Upon this account (saith he) it is so far from being true, that a man after his fall did forfeit his natural power of electi∣on, that it seems rather to be encreased. For as a mans know∣ledge grows, so his will comes to be better attended, and ministred unto. But after his fall his knowledge was much more than it was before; he knew what madnesse was, and had experience of the difference of things, he perceived the evil and mischief of disobedience. Answ. I willingly yield, that as a mans knowledge grows, his will comes to be better attended and ministred unto. But that his knowledge should be much more after his fall than it was before: this goes against the whole scope of Scripture. For one chief cause of the servility and vassallage of the natural man under sin, doth arise from the blindnesse and darknesse of his judgement. This is most lively set forth in the words of the Apostle. The wisdome of the flesh is enmity against God, be∣cause it is not subject to the law, nor can be, Rom. 8.7. We will explaine the particulars in order. The wisdome of the flesh in the Original is , the Saplence, prudence, and minde of the flesh. That which the eye is to the body to direct and guide it, the same is this  or minde of the flesh to the will, and other faculties: it teacheth them what to choose, and what to
refuse, what to love, and what to hate? Now a man cannot choose the things of God, till he doth see the excellency of them. Further, to shew the misery of the natural man, the wisdome of his flesh is said to be enmity against God. He doth not say, an enemy in the concrete, but enmity it selfe in the abstract; that is, an enemy in the highest degree. God is an enemy to such a minde, and such a minde is an enemy to God. And therefore in the third place he gives a reason of the enmity, it is not subject to the law of God, for the chief designe of the minde of the flesh, is to set up other Gods in place of the true God; other Lords in direct opposition to the law of the Spirit. When men should trust in the Lord alone, this wisdome doth prompt them to trust in horses, and armies for victory, in good husbandry for riches, in friends for preferment in the world, &c. And this is the reason wherefore the wisedome of the flesh is called enmity against God, because it is alwayes tempting, and allur∣ing men to love the things of the world, to delight in them, and to trust in them more than the true God. Nay, the Apostle goes a step further, he doth not say that it is not subject, but it cannot be subject to the law of God. He doth not deny only an actual subjection, but that which is more, he denyes a potential sub∣jection also. Among several kinds of birds and beasts, there are many that are not actually subject to man, yet there is nothing doth exclude, but they may be brought under sub∣jection. But the wisdome of the flesh is such, that it cannot be made subjection by art, or industry, or any outward meanes till grace comes. If this be so, it is strange to me that any man should so far forget himself, to affirme that a mans knowledge is more after his fall than it was before, seeing a great part of his misery lyeth in the blindnesse of his judgement. And therefore as in the old creation, so it is in the new. The first work is in making of light, God that commanded the light to shine out of dark∣nesse, hath commanded the light of his grace to shine in your hearts in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4 6. By the same argument as he proves Adams knowledge to be greater after, than it was before his fall, he may prove us to have more knowledge than Christ. Of Christ it is peculiarly said, he made him sin that knew no sin, we have an experimental knowledge of sin that Christ
never had: so Adam had an experimental knowledge of sin and misery, after which he never had before his fall. But he fur∣ther addeth. We may (saith he) as well suppose an understanding that can never understand, and passions that can never desire nor refuse, and a memory that can never remember, as a will that cannot choose. Answ. Though it be a preposterous thing to imagine a will that cannot choose, yet there is no strangenesse to conceive of a will that cannot choose the things of the Spirit. To choose is natural to the will, as it is to fire to burne, to the memory to remember; but to choose the things of the Spirit of God, this must be from supernatural operation. When the rich Marchant found the pearle hid in the field, for joy he went and sold all that he had, Mat. 13.44. But he saith, As sin is the action of a free faculty, it can no more take away the freedome of that faculty than vertue can, for that also is the action of the same free faculty. Answ. Neither do we say, that sin takes away the freedome of the faculty, for all that do commit sin, do freely commit it, only it takes away the freedome to that which is spiritually good. In this sence our Saviour saith, He that commits sin, is the servant of sin, Joh. 8.36. While they promise themselves liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruption, 2 Pet. 2.19. But he further saith, Men sometimes by evil habits, and by choosing vile things along time together make it morally impossible to choose that which is good, and to love that in particular which is contrary to their evil customes. Heraclitus saith, custome is that devil that bringeth in new natures upon us. Answ. It is most certaine true, that many fall under the power of evil by long custome. But the maine question is, Whether is evil custome the whole and adequate cause of the evil? This we deny: men by ill custome may intend the habit of original sin, as varnish may make colours more orient, and God in his just judgement may justly harden men in their sin, so that they may be worse than the ordinary sort of natural men. This we do willingly confesse, but then also we must consider
that the bottome, and the ground of all the evil doth lye in a sinful nature. This doth naturally descend upon us all from Adam, the root of corruption, and is only to be done away by Christ, the root of all grace, life, spiritual nature, as the Scrip∣tures do abundantly testifie. Next, he cometh to the testimony of the Philosophers. Seneca saith, nature doth not engage us upon a vice, she made us entire, she left us free, but we make our selves prisoners, and slaves by vicious habits. Answ. It is no way to be doubted, but we make our selves slaves by vicious habits of our own acquiring. But whereas Seneca saith, nature hath made us free, nature hath left us free, these are those rudiments of the world of which the Apostle speaketh, beware least any man spaile you through Philosophy, Col. 2 7. If nature hath made us free, what need is there of Christ, of the freedome of the Spirit, of the grace of regeneration, of all those things that are held forth to us in the principles of baptisme and circumcision? In this sence the Apostle is to be understood, when he saith, beware lest any man spoile you through Philosophy, he doth not speak of the knowledge that the Philosophers have of the motions of the heavens, and the measures of the earth, and such like speculations, but he speaks of Philosophy as it doth not hold Christ the Head, and is contrary to the very principles of baptisme, and circumcision, as may be see by the context. Of this kinde are those sayings of Seneca, nature hath made us free, nature hath left us free, such doctrines are contrary to Christ the Head. He further pro∣ceedeth. The Saints (saith he) love God so fully, that they cannot hate him or desire to displease him. And in hell the accursed spirits so perfectly hate him, that they can never love him; But in this, that is, status viae a middle condition between both, or a passage to one or the other it cannot be supposed to be so, unlesse a man here also be already saved or damned. Answ. We do agree, that the Saints in heaven do so perfect∣ly love God, that they cannot hate him, and the damned spirits in hell do so absolutely hate him, that they cannot love him. But what of all this? The case of sinners upon the earth, is not
all one with the damned in hell. The damned in hell do ab∣solutely and irrecoverably hate God, but so do not sinners upon the earth. Though they are borne in sin, and lye under a na∣tural necessity of sinning, yet they do not hate God absolutely and irrecoverably, but so far only as they are naturally corrupt and do remaine in their natural condition. Though Mini∣sters in the general do know that all shall not be saved, yet personally and individually no Minister can say that this or that man shall not be saved. They can say, as long as men continue in such wayes they are in the way to damnation, but cannot cer∣tainly and infallibly pronounce of the final, and eternal estate of this or that particular man. Now it is not so with the damned in hell. But he further saith, Men can choose that which is commanded, and abstaine from that which is forbidden, for if they could not, they ought no more to perish for this, than infants for that. Answ. Though we stand upon it, that a man cannot naturally choose that which is spiritually good, yet his case is not all one with the state and condition of an infant. For an infant cannot actually understand, will, nill, choose, refuse, but a natural man hath a power to will that which is in his own compasse, he may performe many outward duties, abstaine from many outward evils, and fly many occasions of sin. And for his willing the good that is spiritual, though he cannot choose it so far forth as is natural, yet doubtlesse his condemnation shall be, that he did not go so far as he might go by the help of the Spirit. At some seasons the Spirit doth convince, accuse, reprove, terrifie, and put him upon a way of judging and condemning of himself, that so he might look after pardoning and healing mercy. But his fault is, that he will not see that which he may see, and doth obstinately harden himselfe against the light. But he further sheweth, This is so necessary a truth, that it is one of the greatest grounds and necessities of obedience and holy living; and if after the fall of Adam it be not by God permitted to us to choose or refuse, there is nothing left whereby a man can serve God or affer him a sacrifice. Answ. Though the Divines do maintaine a necessity of
sinning, and the losse of the liberty of the will, to spiritual good at least; they are not cast upon such a strait as our Author thinks they are. Indeed some of them are more cleare, and distinct, and do give lesse offence than others do, yet I know none do absolutely take away the power from the will to choose or refuse. To what purpose then would exhortations, admonitions, and reproofes be given? But leaving all others, we will cite a testimony out of one of the chiefest of our Au∣thors, for he may serve as a patterne for the rest. Mr. Calvin in his book of Institutions, Lib. 2. Chap. 2. doth shew, that the foundation of all sound learning is grounded upon the know∣ledge of a mans selfe. But how? not upon the knowledge of a mans own excellencies, perfections, natural liberties, for so the Philosophers do vainly trifle: But upon the knowledge of his own misery, thraldome under sin, and this he affirmes to be the bottome of all saving knowledge to bring men to Christ. By the former kind of learning men are set up, and by the latter they are pluckt down. He speaks of two dangerous extreames to be avoided on either side, some when they heare that a man hath no ability, no freedome of will, they give over all care of piety and godlinesse: On the other side, others trusting in their own ability, liberty of will, and the like, they bereave the Lord of that honour that is due to him. He sheweth that a middle course is to be taken between these two extreames, and that the rocks on either side are to be declined. For the clear∣ing of this, he sheweth how far a natural man may go in all na∣tural, civil, ecclesiastical actions, and how (by the general assistance and concurrence of the Spirit) he may do great things in all Physical, Mathematical, Ethical, Oeconomical, and Poli∣tical kinds of learning. Only when he cometh to that which is spiritual, here he plainly tells us that a man hath no power, and to use the words of the Author, he hath no ability to offer a sacrifice to God. What is then to be done? here he tells us, that we must have recourse to the freenesse of the promise where all fulnesse is to be had. To that end he cites the words of the Pro∣phet Isaiah, I will poure water upon him that is thirsty, and floods of water upon the dry ground, Isa. chap. 44.3. And againe, Ho, every one that thinsteth, come ye to the waters of life, chap. 55.1.
Having cited these and such like passages, he comes to close in these words: Quae testantur ad percipiendas dei benedictiones, nullos admit ti nisi suae paupertatis sensu tabescentes. Which testifieth to the receiving of the blessings of God, no others are to be admitted, but such only which languish with a sence of their own poverty And then he addeth. Semper sanè mihi vehementer illud Chrysostomi placuit; Fundamentum nostrae Philosophiae esse humilitatem. That of Chrisostome hath alwayes pleased me exceedingly. Humility to be the foundation of our Philosophy. Or rather that of Augnstine, even as the Retoricion saith, when he was demanded, what was the chief thing in the precepts of eloquence, answered, pronunciation, what the second, pronunciation, what the third, pronunciation: So if thou mayest ask me concerning the precepts of Christian Religion, first, second and third, alway it would please me to give this answer, hu∣mility, and more he hath to the same purpose. I have drawn out the words more at length, because the Author himselfe is a chiefe leader in the reformed Churches, and because indeed, they are the patterne of whole some words. By this our Author may understand, though Original sin be asserted, the natural liberty of the will denyed, and the necessity of sinning intro∣duced, yet neverthelesse according to the tenour of these prin∣ciples, men may have a sacrifice to offer, and exhortations may be of good use. Dr. Preston in his Treatise of humiliation, pag. 224. doth propound the question, who is able to practise according to his knowledge? His answer is, and I will appeale to any mans experience, let him look back to the course of his life and examine himselfe, was there any particular action in all thy life from which thou wast so hindred that thou caust say, that thou couldst not do it? was there any particular sin of which thou couldest say, this sin I could not abstaine from? And howsoever we may make it a matter of dispute in the Schooles, yet the worst man, in whom we may think corruption of nature to be most strong, when he comes to dye, doth not excuse himselfe, but acknowledges he is guilty. In the next page he propounds the maine objection. How can a man he condemned for not believing and turning to God, when naturally he hath no power to do these things? To this he answers. Though a man hath no power to believe and repent, yet he is condemn∣ed for the neglect of such precedent actions which he had a
liberty to do, &c. Our Divines in the Synod of Dort, in the Suffrage of the Britans, do distinguish betwixt regeneration, and those antecedaneous acts that lead towards regeneration. These antecedaneous acts, a natural man (by the help of the Spirit) may do as to see sinne, mourne over it, judge himselfe for it, he may go further, he may taste the sweetnesse of the promise, and have some beginnings of joyes, all which he may fall from: many other testimonies may be brought to shew that our Authours, by the tenour of their principles do not extinguish the endeavour of man, but do rather more truely direct and instruct men to follow the right course. I shall stay too long upon this point, because I perceive that it is the chief rock of offence that our Author doth stumple at: he fur∣ther sheweth, All things else are determined, and fixed by the divine providence even all the actions of men, but the inward act of the will, is left under the command of laws only and under the arrest of threatnings, and the invitation of promises. Answ. Its true, that laws, threatnings, promises, are made with special respect to the will. But that the inward act of the will should be so under laws, that it should not be under the decree of God: this Tenet doth exclude the chiefest part of the world from being under the care of God. Nay, if the matter be well considered, here is the very height of the Atheisme of the ancient Philosophers. To maintaine the ab∣solutenesse, independency, and sovereignty of the will of man upon the earth, they do deny the providence of God in heaven. Cicero upon this reason, did deny the infallibility of the pre∣science of God. And our Authour seemeth to me to come too near to this coast. In the next words he gives his reason. And that this is left for man, can no way impede any of the divine decrees, because the outward act being over-ruled by the divine pro∣vidence, it is strange that the Schooles will leave nothing to man whereby he may glorifie God. Answ. If it be supposed that the inward act of the will be un∣der the decree of God, as well as the outward action, this doth
not take away that by and through which we may glorifie God. For it is not all kinds of necessity that are contrary to liberty, but some onely. The necessity of nature, the necessities of a bruit instinct, and outward compulsion cannot stand with liber∣ty: but the necessity of the decree of God, the necessity of in∣fallibility, the necessity of the creatures dependency can be proved to consist with liberty. For God usually brings his de∣crees to passe by the free act of his creature, which work under his decrees, and are subservient to those ends that he hath ap∣pointed. And for the inward motions of the will, innumera∣ble examples may be brought to prove that they are under the decrees of God. The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, and he turneth it about as the streams of water, Prov. 21.1. God hath put it into their hearts to hate the whore, and to burne her flesh with fire, Apoc. 17.11. And speaking of the Egyptians, he turned their heart to hate his people, Psal. 105.25. Besides the promise. A new heart and a new spirit I will give them, Ezek. 36.26. The Psalmist prayed, create in me a cleane heart O God, and renew within me a right Spirit, Psal. 51.10. All these places of Scripture do abundantly prove, that the inward act of the will is under the decree of God, as well as under laws, and that the certainty of the decree doth not overturne the liberty of the will, but both do go together. Next he tells us: That Augustine in his zeale against a certaine errour of the Pelagians, made him take in auxiliaries from an uncertaine and lesse discerned errour, and caused him to say many things which all antiquity disavowed, and which the following ages took up upon his account. Answ. The following ages, specially since the times of Lu∣ther, have adhered to the doctrine of Augustine. But that the Sager sort have done this meerly upon his account, we cannot easily admit. They have followed him so far, as his interpreta∣tions have come nearer to the natural and genuine sence of Scripture. What hard speeches he hath concerning original sin, the natural servitude of the will, the spirituality of the law, and the imperfection of man; the rigour and austerity of them will be well allayed, by comparing them with other sweet say∣ings of his concerning the fulnesse of Christ, and the freenesse
of the promises. His scope is no way to hinder the endeavour of man, but to ground and settle it upon such principles that are more solid and divine. And whereas our Author in his Ʋnum Necessarium, and his further explication, doth commend the Fathers before the times of Auguistine for their temperate speeches concerning free-will: Here many things are to be ob∣served. First, who will assures us that he may not do the same with their authorities about free-will, as he doth with the doctrine of the Church of England, and the sence of the Article in the point of Original sin? If he will pervert the plaine sence of that which is open in the view of all men, what may he not do with the testimonies of the Ancients? Besides, what he alleadgeth for free-will out of Justin Martyr, Cyril, Hierome, and others, those speeches may admit of a benigne interpreta∣tion. All Divines do agree that a man hath free-will, he hath a power to understand, to choose, to refuse, to act by counsell, he were not a man if he could not do this. The speeches of the Fathers may be taken in such an absolute sence: in relation also to a particular state, Adam had free-will in innocency; and the Saints have free-will to that which is spiritually good in the state of grace: Further, suppose some things have escaped from them that have been lesse authentick, let us consider that many of them came new out of the Schooles of the Philosophers, and therefore together with the truth they might mingle some errours of Philosophy. Their conflicts also were with the Philosophers, and the Maniches, and therefore it was necessary that they should speak something more than ordinary for the liberty of the will. But enough of this matter, which is so largely spoken and so plentifully by others. FINIS.
A Catalogue of some books printed for, and sould by Edmund Paxton, over against the Castle Taverne, near to the Do∣ctors Commons. THe holy Arbor, containing the body of Divinity, or the summe and substance of Christian Religion; for the benefit and delight of such as thirst after righteousnesse; wherein also are fully resolved, the questions of whatsoever point of moment have been, or are now controverted in Divinity, By John Go∣dolphin, J. C. D. fol. The holy Lymbeck, or A Semicentury of spiritual extractions: wherein the Spirit is extracted from the letter, of certaine emi∣nent places in the holy Scriptures. By John Godolphin, J. C. D. 12. The Temple measured, or a brief survey of the Temple mysti∣cal, which is in the instituted Church of Christ, wherein is solid∣ly and modestly discussed, most of the material questions, touch∣ing the constitution and Government of the visible Church-militant here on earth, &c. By James Noyes of New-Eng∣land. 4. Lawes and Ordinances of War in 4. Englands compleat law-Judge, and Lawyer by Charles George Cock. The method of grace in the justification of sinners being a reply to a book written by Mr. William Eyre of Salisbury: by Benjamin Woodbridge Minister of Newberry.
