T1666 E339_1 99861479 113616
Die Martis, 26 Maii. 1646. IT is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, That the Remonstrance and Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Com∣mon Councell of the City of London, this day exhibited to the House of Peeres, and their Lordships Answer thereunto, shall bee forth∣with Printed and Published; And that the care for the true Printing thereof, is hereby spe∣cially recommended unto Colonell John Bella∣mie; who is by this Order authorized and re∣quired to Print and publish the same accord∣ingly: And none else are to presume to Print and publish the same, as they will answer the contrary at their perils. Jo. Browne Cleric. Parliamentorum.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS ASSEMBLED IN HIGH COVRT OF PARLIAMENT: The Humble Remonstrance and Petiti∣on of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London, in Com∣mon Councell Assembled. Together with their LORDSHIPS ANSWER thereunto. LONDON, Printed by Richard Gotes, for John Bellamie. 1646.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS Assembled in High Court of PARLIAMENT: The humble Remonstrance and Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London, in Common Councell assem∣bled. OUR duty, In the first place, doth lead us to be∣gin all our Addresses, as wee most heartily and humbly doe these, with all due and humble acknowledgement of the great Labours and endeavours which Your Lordships have, these many years, employed, in Reformation both of the Church and Common-wealth, and in preservation of both, with the humble tender of our constant devotion to serve the Parliament, according to our Covenant made before Almighty God.
In the next place, wee most humbly crave pardon, although wee doe presume to returne againe unto your Lordships, and humbly, yet plainly, lay open the sorrowes and feares of our hearts, even in this season, when as God hath blessed your Ar∣mies with the greatest successes, and that Man might perswade himself that the Warre is almost at an end. For first,Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdome, pag. 19. when wee remember that it hath been long since declared to bee farre from any purpose or desire to let loose the golden Reins of Discipline and Government in the Church, or to leave private persons, or particular Congregations, to take up what form of Divine Service they please, when wee look upon what both Houses have resolved against Brownisme, and Anabaptisme, properly so called, when we meditate on our Prote∣station and Covenant. And lastly,The Parlia∣ments Declara∣tion, upon his Majesties De∣claration after the Battaile at Edghill. p. 659. when wee peruse the Directory, and other Ordi∣nances for Presbyteriall Government, and yet finde private and separate Congregations daily erected in divers parts of the Ci∣ty, and elsewhere, and commonly frequented (and Anabaptism, Brownism, and almost all manner of Heresies, Schismes, and Blas∣phemies, boldly vented and maintained, by such as, to the point of Church-Government, professe themselves Independent) wee cannot but bee astonished at the swarmes of Sectaries, which discover themselves every where, who, if by their endeavours, they should get into places of Profit and Trust, in Martiall and Civill affaires, it may tend much to the disturbance of the Pub∣lick Peace both of the Church and Common-wealth. Wee also cannot but call to minde what Vowes wee have made to God in the same Covenant, as well as our former Pro∣testations, to preserve the Rights and Priviledges of the Par∣liament, and the Liberties of the Kingdomes, and to preserve and defend the Kings Majesties Person and Authority▪ in the preservation and Defence of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdomes, that the world may bear witnesse with our Consciences, of our Loyalty, and that wee have no thoughts or intentions, to diminish His Majesties just power and great∣nesse, and doe humbly rest in the assurances wee have recei∣ved in the many former Declarations of both Houses, concer∣ning their intentions towards his Majesty, his Royall Posterity,
and the Peace of this Kingdom, which wee doubt not but your Lordships will pursue with all speedy dispatch of Propositions to His Majesty, now whilst God doth so mercifully and mira∣culously goe along with your Armies in all the parts of the Kingdome. Wee may not in the next place forget our Brethren of Scot∣land, how first they were invited to engage with this King∣dome in Gods Cause, when yet they were at Peace at home, in what Covenant this Nation is mutually linked with them, at what time, in relation both to the weak condition of our Forces then, and the season of the year, they adventured up∣on an Enemy warmly lodged, and well armed, and prepared; what they have since suffered for this Cause in their own Kingdom, how successefull ever since God hath made our For∣ces in suppressing the Common Enemies of both Nations, and what present hopes wee have of a well-setled Peace, while wee continue in this mutuall Amity; And then cannot but lament the many jealousies which the Enemies of our Peace, Union, and good Government, doe now strive to beget between both Nations, and tremble at the sad effects thereof, if not timely prevented by the wisdome of the Parliaments of both King∣domes. Wee cannot also omit humbly to represent unto your Lord∣ships consideration, how many Citizens have already suffered, and how many more will bee undone, if your Lordships shall still make use of that ancient Priviledge, to protect your Selves, the Assistan of this Honourable House, and the Servants of both, and others from being proceeded against in any course of Law for Debt, which now because this Parliament hath alrea∣dy sate so long, and is likely by reason of the unsettlednesse of ffaires to sit much longer, would especially require some expe∣dient for relief of so many as otherwise must daily suffer under this Priviledge. And now that the Kingdome is almost reduced, by which meane the Revenues of the Kingdome wil be unburthened, and the Customes and Excise increase, and the publike charge of the Kingdome decrease, now that Delinquents doe daily come in and compound, and now that the Enemy hath but few Holds
left, we hope that the great and extraordinary Taxes and bur∣thens on this City and their Trade, shall be in the future abated; that the Debts owing to the City and Citizens of London, ei∣ther by particular Assurances of the Parliament, or upon the publike faith of the Kingdome, be taken care for and dischar∣ged, as wel as those assigned upon the Excise, and may not be di∣verted from the uses appointed by former Acts and Ordinances. And we humbly crave leave to present to the consideration of this Honourable House, the Committee of Haberdshers-hall, as being one of the greatest grievances of this City, and which; so long as it is continued, doth hinder the concourse of people thereunto, and tendeth much to the destruction of the Trade, and Inhabitants thereof. And now also wee doubt not but God will give the Parli∣ment some better meanes and opportunity for the reliefe of our bleeding Brethren in Ireland, and the suppressing of those hor∣rid Rebels, and reducing of that Kingdom, wherein, besides the publick and common interest, we are particularly concerned. Lastly, we should have much to say for this City, if we could imagine that its fidelity & constant services and devotion to the Parliament could either be questioned or forgotten, that little we shall expresse on the part of the City, is, not to repeat how zealous we have been in the cause of God, and this Parlia∣ment, how we have spilt our blood and spent and laid out our selves and our Estates in maintenance thereof; how many pub∣like acknowledgements we have by us of the favourable accep∣tance of them, and promises to leave Testimonies thereof to all future ages; but only to beseech your Lordships to consider how much our hearts may justly bee dejected, now that God hath followed your endeavours, and our prayers, with so many suc∣cesses, and brought the Warre to a probable period, as to the sense of Man: That the Enemies of our Peace should strive now to sow jealousies between the Parliament and this City, as hath been too evident of late, and particularly should so far prevaile, as to bee able to render the chiefe Magistrate of this City, the Lord Major, suspected; unto whom wee cannot but give this just Testimony, that he in his place hath faithfully be∣haved himself, and carefully discharged his Office.
We could adde much more of the daily invectives against us from the Pulpit, and other places where the Boutefew's of these Sectaries are admitted, the scurrilous and seditious Pam∣phlets daily broached in, and against the City: And the great contempt of, and discouragement unto the Ministers of the Gospel, who adhere to the Presbyteriall Government: But we shall conclude with this briefe and humble representation of our Petitions and desires to your Lordships in the name of the whole City. I. That some strict and speedy course may bee taken for the suppressing of all private and separate Congregations. II. That all Anabaptists, Brownists, Hereticks, Schisma∣ticks, Blasphemers, and all such Sectaries as conforme not to the publike Discipline established, or to bee established by Parlia∣ment, may be fully declared against, and some effectuall course setled for proceeding against such persons. III. That as we are all Subjects of one Kingdom, so all may be equally required to yeeld obedience unto the Government set forth, or to be set forth by the Parliament. IV. That no persons disaffected to the Presbyterial Govern∣ment set forth, or to be set forth by the Parliament, may be em∣ployed in any place of publike Trust. V. That your Lordships will please to hasten Propositi∣ons to his Majesty, for setling of a safe and well grounded Peace amongst us, after so long and unnaturall a Warre. VI. That your Lordships, according to the Covenant and Treaties, will please to study all meanes to preserve the Vnion between the two Nations of England and Scotland, and to remove all jealousies which may endanger our mutuall agreement. VII. That your Lordships will please to consider of some meanes wherby the priviledge which the Members of this Honourable House, and their Assistants, and the Servants of both, and others enjoy by being protected and exempted from being proceeded against for their Debts, may be so quali∣fied, as that the Subject may be able to recover his owne in some due time.
VIII. That all publike Revenues and Receipts may be em∣ployed to publike uses, that so the Taxes of the City may bee abated. IX. That the Estates and Compositions of Delinquents, may, according to the engagements by Ordinances of Parlia∣ment, be applyed to discharge the great summes owing to this City and Citizens. X. That the Plymouth Duty may be taken off the Trade, espe∣cially now that the West is reduced. XI. That the Committee at Haberdshers-hall may be pre∣sently dissolved; or at least so limited and regulated, as that the City may have no cause of complaint. XII. That the reducing of the Kingdome of Ireland may be taken into consideration, before the good party there be too farre wasted and discouraged. XIII. That the Lord Major of this City may bee fully vin∣dicated. XIV. And lastly, and above all, That your Lordships will please not to look upon any expressions of this our Remon∣strance & Petition, as charging any thing upon your Lordships, or as intended to intrench upon any priviledge of this Honora∣ble House, but favourably to accept thereof, and so to interpret the same, as from a single and humble heart it is sincerely, and without any by-ends, or to comply with any Party whatsoever, intended and breathed forth from the sad heart of the Petitio∣ners, who are overwhelmed with many feares on all sides. And who call God, the Searcher of all hearts, to witnesse, that ac∣cording to their Covenant and duty, their zeale, devotion and obedience, is as fervent and prostrate as ever to serve the Parli∣ament with their Lives and Estates, against all the Enemies of our Peace, and to conjoyn the City more and more to the Par∣liament, and to maintain the Vnion of both Nations against all Opposers whatsoever. All which we humbly submit unto the wisdome of this Honourable House.
26 Maii. 1646. THE Answer of the Lords in PARLIAMENT TO THE Remonstrance and Petition of the City of LONDON. THE Lords are very sensible of the great fidelity and constant services of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Councell of the City of London, to this present Parliament, which they shall never forget; They acknowledge their zeale, expressed up∣on all occasions in the Cause of God and this Parliament, and how readily they have spilt their blood, and spent and laid out themselves and their Estates in the maintenance thereof. They are well satisfied with your Expressions and Care to set∣tle the true Reformed Protestant Religion, according to the
Covenant, and with your desires to have all Heresies, Schismes, and Blasphemies suppressed, as also with your respect to pre∣serve the Rights and Priviledges of Parliament, the Liber∣ties of the Kingdomes, and to preserve and defend his Maje∣sties Person, and Authority in the preservation of the true Re∣ligion, and the Liberties of the Kingdomes, his Royall Poste∣rity, and the Peace of the Kingdomes: As also for your de∣sires for the continuance of that union between us and our Bre∣thren of Scotland; Of whose Services and sufferings wee shall not only hold a gratefull memory, but upon all occasions give a Retaliation. Unto all which wee hold our selves equal∣ly with you obliged, by our Solemn League and Covenant. As to the Person of the Lord Major, the Lords hold a high esteem of him, according to his merit, and have commanded mee to let you know, that nothing hath passed this House at any time in prejudice of him; And when the particulars wherein hee findes himself agrieved shall bee made known unto them, they shall bee ready in a Parliamentary way, to do him right. The Lords will take the other particulars of your Petition into serious and speedy consideration; And have comman∣ded mee to give you hearty thanks for the Reall Testimonies of duty and good affections, which not oly by your words, but by your Actions, you have constantly manifested unto them. Jo. Browne Cleric. Parliamentorum. FINIS.
