T2892 E620_1 R206374 99865535 117780
A TRUE RELATION Of a Second VICTORIE Over the Scots at Hamilton, comman∣ded by Col. Kerr, who is taken by the Parlament's Forces, with other Pri∣soners of qualitie. Certified by an Express from my LORD GENERAL. Hereunto is annexed The Remonstrance of the Western-Scottish Forces to the King, and Com∣mittee of Estates, Octob. 25. 1650. And in Answer thereunto The Declaration of the King, and Committee of Estates against the said Remonstrance, Nov. 25. 1650. With other Censures thereupon. LONDON, Printed by W. D. by the appointment of the Council of State.
SIR! I Have now sent you the Re∣sults of som Treaties a∣mongst the Enemie, which came to my hands this daie; The Major-Gene∣ral, and Commissarie Ge∣neral Whaley marched a few daies ago towards Glasco, and the Enemie at∣tempted his Quarters in Hamilton, were entred the Town, but by the blessing of God, by a very gra∣cious hand of Providence, without the loss of six men as I hear of, beat them out, kill'd about an hundred, took also about the same number, a∣mongst which are som prisoners of qualitie, and neer four hundred Hors (as I am informed) the Major General beeing in the Chase of them, to whom I have also since sent the addition of a fresh partie. Colonel Kerr (as my Messenger this night tel's mee) is taken, his Lievtenant Colonel, and one that was somtime Major to Col. Straughan, and Kerr's Capt. Lieutenant; the whole partie is shattered, and give mee leav to saie it, If God
had not brought them upon us, wee might have march't three thousand Hors to death, and not have light on ten of them: and truly 'twas a strange Providence brought them upon him: for I mar∣ching from Edinburgh on the North-side of Cloid, appointed the Major General to march from Pee∣bles to Hamilton on the South-side of Cloid; I came thither by the time exspected, tarried the remain∣der of the daie, and until neer seven a clock the next morning, apprehending the Major Gene∣ral would not com by reason of the waters; I beeing retreated, the Enemie took encouragement, march't all that night, and came upon the Ma∣jor Generals Quarters about two hours before daie, where it pleased the Lord to order as you have heard. The Major General, and Commis∣sarie General (as he sent mee word) were still gon on in the prosecution of them, and saith, that ex∣cept one hundred and fiftie Hors in one bodie, hee hear's they are fled by 16 & 18 in a Companie, all the Countrie over. Robbin Montgomerie was com out of Sterling with four or five Regiments of Hors and Dragoons, but was put to a stand when hee heard of the issue of this business, Straughan and som other Officers had quitted som three weeks or a moneth before this business; so that Kerr commanded this whole partie in Chief. It is given out the Malignants will bee all (al∣most) received, and rise unanimously and expedi∣tiously; I can assure you that those that serv you here finde more satisfaction in having to deal with men of that stamp, then others; and it is our comfort, that the Lord hath hitherto made it the
matter of our praiers, and of our endevors, (if it might have been the will of God) to have had a Christian understanding between those that fear God in this Land and our selves; and yet wee hope it hath not been carried on with a willing failer of our dutie to those that trust us; and I am perswaded the Lord hath looked favorably upon our sinceritie herein, and will still do so, and up∣on you also, whilst you make the interest of his people yours; Those Religious people of Scot∣land, that fall in this Caus, wee cannot but pitie and mourn for them, and wee praie that all good men may do so too; indeed there is at this time a very great distraction, and mightie workings of God upon the hearts of divers, both Ministers and people, much of it tending to the justification of your Caus: and although som are as bitter and as bad as ever, making it their business to shuffle hy∣pocritically with their Consciences and the Cove∣nant, to make it lawful to joyn with Malignants, which now they doe, as well they might long before, having taken in the Head of them; yet truly others are startled at it, and som have been constrained by the work of God upon their Con∣sciences to make sad and solemn accusations of themselvs and lamentations in the face of their Supreme Autoritie, charging themselvs as guiltie of the bloud shed in this war, by having a hand in the Treatie at Breda, and by bringing the King in amongst them; this lately did a Lord of the Session and withdrew; and lately Mr James Le∣viston, a man as highly esteemed as anie for pie∣tie and learning, who was a Commissioner for
the Kirk at the said Treatie, charged himself with the guilt of the bloud of this War, before their Assemblie, and withdrew from them, and is retired to his own hous. It will be very necessarie to encourage Victuallers to com to us, that you take off Customs and Excise from all things brought hither for the use of the Armie. I beg your praiers, and rest Your humble Servant, O. CROMVVEL. Edingburgh 4o Decem. 1650.
To the Right Honorable the Com∣mittee of ESTATES. The humble Remonstrance of the Gentlemen, Offi∣cers, and Ministers attending the Western Forces. ALthough wee do not judg of the under∣takings of the Lord's People by the success, and bee not shaken by the dis∣sipating of our Armie, nor brought to question our Caus; yet wee think our selvs and all the People of this Land called, by these late dispensations, to search and trie our waies; wee do therefore esteem it our dutie, while wee are about to adventure our lives against the Enemie, as Providence shall give opportuni∣tie, freely and faithfully to make our thoughts known to your Lordships, concerning the causses and remedies of the Lord's indignation, which hath gon out against his People; wherein, as wee suppose, wee need not insist upon the sins con∣teind in the late causses of the Fast, published by the Commissi∣oners of the Kirk, relating to the conduct and carriage of our Armie, and other things; but wee shall to that which most directly concern's your Lordships. 1. That which is obvious in the first place, amongst the sins of the Land, is in our late proceedings with the King; where∣in that wee bee not mistaken, wee shall distinguish betwixt our Dutie and our Sin. Wee own and acknowledg it for our Dutie, to use all law∣ful means for reclaming the King, and to own his interest,
according to our vocation, so far as hee own's and prosecute's the Caus. But wee are convinced that it is our Sin, and the Sin of this Kingdom, that, when the King had walked in the waies of his Father, in opposition to the work of Reformation, and So∣lemn League and Covenant, until hee had gon the length of confirming a peace with the Irish Rebels, for pardoning of all the bloud shed of so manie thousand Protestants, and allowing them the exercise of the Popish Religion; and till hee had given Commission to that Apostate Rebel James Gra∣ham to invade this Kingdom; that, after all this, Commissi∣oners should have been warranted to assure him of his pre∣sent admission to the exercise of his Roial Power, upon his profession to join in the Caus and Covenant, not onely without anie further evidence of his repentance into, and removing of the Lord's controversie with his Father's Hous, and without convincing evidences of the realitie of his pro∣fession, and his forsaking his former principles and waies, but when there was pregnant presumptions, if not clear evidences of the contrarie. 2. That there was so great haste and precipitation, and a se∣cond address to the King, after the first had been rejected, as appeared in the publick motion of it, without anie previ∣ous consultation about it, in the sudden election of Com∣missioners for the solemn Address, and in refusing to delaie the matter till the meeting of the Parlament, then very neer; and all this haste made, when there was information given, that his Majestie at the same time had given Commissions to invade this Kingdom, and without seeking the Lord's dire∣ction in a matter of so high consequence to the work and people of God. 3. That the Treatie was continued after the Lord had clearly discovered the King's unright dealing in the actual In∣vasion of this Kingdom, by his Warrant and Commission during the Treatie. 4. There was too great forwardness in som of the Com∣missioners to close the Treatie without satisfaction approven by the Parlament, and the employing instruments to per∣swade
the King, who were either open enemies to the Caus and Covenant, or had dealt deceitfully therein; from whom nothing could bee exspected but to teach his Majestie dissi∣mulation and outward compliance, rather then any cordial conjunction in the Caus and Covenant. 5. When the Parlament of this Kingdom was acquainted with the transactions of our Commissioners with the King at Breda, and had declared their dis-satisfaction with several things therein, and had made the same known to our Com∣missioners; yet plainness and freedom was not used with the King, to declare unto him before hee came from Holland the sens of this Kingdom upon the Treatie; but his Majestie was brought to Sea with a wicked companie of Scots and English Malignants, expresly contrarie to the directions of the Parlament. 6. When the Lord had, in a wonderful Providence, brought to the view of the Parlament his Majestie's bloudie Com∣missions to James Graham, and several Letters discovering his firm adherence to his former principles, even when hee was proposing a Treatie with his Kingdom, and of his re∣solution to make use of the Forces levied by James Gra∣ham, for the subduing of this Kingdom, during the time of the Treatie; notwithstanding all this, they proceeded to close in Treatie with the King, and admit him to the present exercise of his Power, and that before any trial had, or evi∣dence of any real change in him. These things wee look upon as high provocations before the Lord, threatning no less then destruction to us and to our King, notwithstanding this sinful waie of agreement, for which wee and many of the Lord's people in the Land have mourned, finding nothing in all the progress of the bu∣siness that might give us any sure ground of hope that the Lord's controversie was removed from the Roial Familie; yet having been willing to wait until the Lord should make som discoverie whether the King had really joined in the Caus and Covenant, or had onely com in for worldly ends and designs, and had reclaimed his old enmity with the work of God, and friendship with the enemies thereof: but now
there beeing clear evidences that the Land hath been deceived and ensnared by his dislembling in the Lord's work, as may appear 1. By his countenancing and entertaining the Malig∣nant partie in this Kingdom, his cleaving to their companie, and following their counsels, who have abused him and taught him to continue in his former opposition to the work, and in his late compliance that hee might winde him∣self into power to prosecute his former designs. 2. By his keeping correspondence with the notorious enemies of the work of Reformation and Covenant abroad, such as the Marquess of Ormond, and the Earl of New-Castle, and others. 3. By his refusing to sign the Declaration offered to him by the Committee of Estates, and Commissioners of the General Assemblie, until hee was necessitated by Declara∣tions concerning him, and till it was in a kinde extorted from him. 4. By his pursuing this same design since the Treatie as before, endevoring to have the Malignants of this Kingdom in Power and Trust, as appear's by his frequent conversing and correspondences with them, notwithstanding they are discharged the Countrie by Act of Parlament, by his writing to the Commission of the Kirk to that purpose, and when it was denied by them by his Instructions to the Lord Chan∣cellor communicated to the Committee of Estates the 26 of Septemb. last, pleading for a conjunction with the Malignant partie; And at last when neither Kirk nor State did give their concurrence therein, hee deserted the Counsels of the King∣dom, and privately did conveie himself away to join with the Malignants, who had ever since his coming to the King∣dom waited for that opportunitie, and with whom hee had corresponded, carrying on a design to rais them again in arms. By these things it beeing now manifest that the King is not prosecuting the Caus of God, and walking in subordinati∣on to God, but rather in opposition to the work of God, and to the Covenant, and cleaving to the enemies thereof;
according to the Declaration of Kirk and State of Edin∣burgh 13. of August 1650. wee disclaim all the sin and guilt of the King, and of his father's hous, both old and late, and declare wee cannot own him, nor his Interest in the state of the guard betwixt us and the enemie against them, (if the Lord will) wee are to hazard our Lives; And further for the re∣medie of what is past, and preventing of our own sin and dan∣ger of the work of God in this land; wee humbly offer to your Lordships, that, besides the repenting of, and humbling of your selvs for these things, your Lordships would bee pleased, according to the Act of the seventh of Sep: last, judging it necessarie securitie for the caus, that the King forsake coun∣sels and Counsellors that hath been opposite thereunto, and according to the Act of Parlament, explaining the invitation which approve's thereof onely in this sens, hee performing satisfaction to the four demands, and according to the Act ratifying the Treatie, and putting him in the exercise of his power, with the like restrictions and conditions usual, and according to the Counsels of this Kingdom and Kirk, to consider that the King not having forsaken the Coun∣sels, and companie of Malignants, but still cleaving to the same, notwithstanding all the endevors of Kirk and State to the contrarie; and not having performed the sa∣tisfaction promised by him in the Treatie, and not ruling according to the Counsels of the Kingdom; but forsaking the same to join with malignant Counsels and forces which hee was bound to abandon, whether this bee not such a breach of his condition, to perform the satisfaction promis∣ed, and such a discoverie, that hee hath not joined cordi∣ally, and heartily in the caus and Covenant, as give's good ground, not to entrust him with the exercise of his power, till such time as there shall bee convincing, and cleer evidences of a real change in him, and that your Lord∣ships should take an effectual cours for preventing of the King's conjunction with the malignant partie, for the time to com, and for the trial of the late malignant design of his deserting the publick Counsels, and of all those who have had accession to it, and for disabling malignants, and who
have by the late actings discovered the deep hypocrisie, and mocking of God by a profession of repentance) till they bee out of capacitie to hurt the work and people of God. 2. Albeit the publick Judicatures of Kirk and State have in their Declarations sufficiently cleered themselves of that guilt which is unjustlie charged upon them by the adversarie, to wit, an Engagement to the King, and a design laid down to invade England, and force the King upon that Nation by Arms, and although wee can purge our selvs before the Lord, that wee never had anie such design, which wee can profess with the more cleerness, becaus neither the lawfulness nor necessite thereof, nor our calling thereto was ever so much as debated in the publick Judicatories, all which was de∣clared to bee necessarily previous to anie such resolution, and to which wee still purpose to adhere: yet wee beseech your Lordships to consider, whether in God's sight, who will not bee mocked with Declarations contrarie to intenti∣ons, there bee not just caus to charge som eminent persons in our Counsels, and forces with such Engagements and de∣signs, to invade England for the enforcing of the King on that Nation, and for enriching themselvs with their spoil, and that the Lord is righteous in doing to this Nation, as manie in our Armies did to England, when wee were called in to their assistance, and as was now intended by manie to bee don again by a new invasion. Let it therefore bee ex∣amined, how great a provocation this is in anie person, to have entended an invasion, and forcing of the King on ano∣ther Nation not subordinate to us, without anie previous de∣bate, and determination of the lawfulness and necessitie thereof, by the Parlament and general Assemblie, or their Commissioners, and without the previous cleering of our calling to it, and without the previous removing of the Lord's controversie against the King, whom justly the Lord hath removed from the government of the Kingdom, what∣soever injustice was on man's part; And what an intended conjunction with the malignant partie, so far contrarie to the publick Declarations of the Kingdom, and attestation of
God, that wee had no such designes. If it bee sin in us, to have put into the King's hands the exercise of power in this Nati∣on, before evidences had of a real change in him, how much more sinful must it bee to have designed, or endevored the putting of more power into his hands in England? Wee can∣not judg otherwise of such a design, then to bee a preferring of man's interest to God's, and a betraying of his caus, and people into the hands of one, who had not laid down his enmitie against both. In the next place, the great and Mother-sin of this Nation wee conceiv to bee backsliding breach of Covenant, and en∣gagements unto the Lord. It hath been our manner in all our troubles, to take vows and resolutions against these sins, which have been looked upon, as causses of our affli∣ction; wee have so often lied unto the Lord with our tongues, and flattered him with our lips, that wee deserv to bee no more trusted by him. And as wee purpose not to forget our own breaches of Covenant, and sins of that sort; So wee humbly desire your Lordships to laie to heart 1. How unanswerably you have walked to your solemn Engagement, to purge Judicatures and Armies, and to fill the places of power and trust, with men of known good affecti∣on to God, and of a blameless and Christian Coversation. Have not som among you been the chief obstructers of that work, by retarding conclusions, by sending to make them ineffectual when they have been taken, by your partial dealing, differencing of men according to your interest, countenancing, favoring, keeping in, and helping in∣to places of power and trust, such malignant and profane persons, as might bee subservient, to your designs, by your reckoning of qualification good enough, as a man was free from accession to the Engagement, though hee were otherwise malignant or profane? by your sparing those of eminent place, and trust in Judicatures and Ar∣mies, and taking no trial of their qualification, according to your vows, while you were doing som devoir upon those of lower degree, whereby it hath com to pass, that there remain yet spots in your Judicatories, which diminish
your credit and autoritie, and occasion is given to the ene∣mie to blaspheme the caus of God. For remedie whereof, may it pleas your Lordships to take yet an impartial waie of removing from the King, the Judica∣tories and Armies, such persons, as have not the qualificati∣ons conteined in the seventh desire of the Kirk to the Par∣lament 1648. and in the tenth and twelfth pages of our so∣lemn Engagement, for keeping of the Judicatories and places of Trust free from corruption, that your Lordships bee not found walking still in the same waie sinning yet more and more, when wrath is gon out upon the whole Land; Let it bee far from your Lordships to hold fast deceit, and to refuse to remove from you everie sin, which hath been publickly acknowledged by you, and all this Kingdom. 2. Albeit, nothing can bee added to that which is spoken of the madness and sinfulness of complying with malig∣nants, in the first and sixth pages of the solemn acknowledg∣ment and engagement: yet manie of your Lordships have re∣moved and slidden back, to the waie which not long since you called sinful before God, by receiving Malignants into inti∣mate fellowship with your selvs, admitting them to your counsels, and bringing in som of them to the Parlament, and Committees, and to bee about the King: so that there are manie pregnant presumptions of a design in som of your Lordships to set up and emploie a malignant partie, at lest, there are demonstrative evidences of a strong in∣clination to entrust them again with managing the work of God. When wee compare together the assurances that were given to malignants, that were with the King in Holland, the bring∣ing of these home, the studious endevors that have been used to keep som of them about our King, and about our Covenant, the admission of all the malignant partie to re∣sort to the Court, without anie effectual restraint, the fore∣flowing of, and grudging at the purging of the Armie from malignant persons, the obstructing of the purging of the King's Familie, and Life-guard of hors. The pleading of som in Judicatories for persons that
are secluded from trust by the publick resolutions, the pro∣fession of others in the Committee of Estates, of their desire and resolution, to put power in the hands of eminent and known malignants in Scotland; And of raising the malig∣nants in England in arms under the name of the King's partie, in the connivances of som amongst you, at the correspondencies with the enemies of the caus abroad, in the leaving out upon debate the qualifications of the Act of Parlament for the levies and posture, the endevors that have been used to hasten the King's Coronation, and for put∣ting him in the exercise of his power, notwitstanding hee hath not forsaken his evil counsellors, and companie of ma∣lignants, according to the Treatie; And lastly, when wee join with all these, assistances and endevors of manie, in the Committee of Estates, for carrying on the King's late Propositions of a conjunction with the malignant partie, and with the Clanns and Highlanders, who have been in rebellion, wee wonder that your Lordships are not ashamed, so quickly to have turned aside and forgotten your late vows, and the manie bonds that are upon you, to abstein from such waies; and wee humbly think that your Lordships give too great occasion to the enemies, that have invaded our Land, to charge you with a malignant design, and setting up your old malig∣nant interest; for remedie whereof, wee humbly propose, not onely that all such backslidings may bee repented of, and all such conjunction with the malignant partie for∣saken, and abhorred; but that a speedie and accurate waie bee taken by your Lordships, for discoverie, and removal of all such persons, as shall bee found to have contrived, and active∣ly promoted the foresaid design from the Committee of Estates, the Court, the Armie, and all other places of Trust, that the Lord's work, and the Kingdom may not bee in ha∣zard through their influence upon the publick Judicatories, or upon the Armie. Whereas the sins of oppression, Covetousness and self-seek∣ing have been often reproved in your Lordships, and are enu∣merated with the iniquities of this Land, and confessed, and
vowes taken for avoiding these sins for the time to com in the solemn acknowledment and engagement; yet wee con∣ceiv, amongst other sins, for the iniquitie of your cove∣tousness, the Lord hath been wrath, and hath smitten the Land, and for your self-seeking and studying your own in∣terest, becaus, notwitstanding you and wee have said to the Lord and sworn, that denying our selvs and our own things, and laying aside all self-interest and ends, wee shall above all things seek the honor of God, and the wealth of his people: yet who know's not that som of your Lordships have made your power, places, and emploiments rather mat∣ters of gain, and interest to your selvs, then seeking the good of the caus, and the wealth of the people? where is the de∣nying of your selvs, and your own things that was pro∣mised to the Lord? Hath not your little finger been hea∣vier then the loins of that worthie ruler that would not eat the bread of the Governor, that hee might eas the people's burden? How few are there amongst your Lordships, who will emptie themselvs for the good of the caus? For remedie whereof, wee beseech as many of you as have greedily gained, and made advantage of the publick, and of the poor of the Land, and by the Levies, King's Revenues, Fines, and borrowed Monies, and by-waies of fingering summes, have drawn in to your selvs and friends that which belonged to publick use; that you would clear your hands of your dishonest gain, at which the Lord will smite his hands, and which will bee a moth to consume your houses; and let the extortioner and oppressor oppress no more; and let it bee looked on as your Lordship's dutie, impartially to bring all men to an accompt for the past summes that have been mis-applied, and known oppressors brought to con∣dign punishment. 4. Notwithstanding wee have acknowledged our sin in fol∣lowing, for the most part, the counsel of flesh and blood, and walking more by the rules of policie then pietie, hearkening more unto men then unto God; and albeit wee have solemnly engaged our selvs, that forsaking the counsels of flesh and blood, wee should depend upon the Lord, and walk by the
rule of his Word, and hearken to the voice of his servants, yet it is too manifest that the Lord is exceedingly provoked by the politick waies wherein many of you walk still, not onely mixing your private ends and interest with those things that concern the publick good, but many times preferring them by opposing and retarding Gods Work, till you may carrie along with you your own interests and designs. Wee beseech your Lordships to laie to heart your politick waie of walking, and as before the Lord to examine your selvs, whe∣ther your waie have not been full of policie and carnal wis∣dom in the matter of bringing home the King, disposing of places of trust about him, and ordering the chief conduct and other inferior officers in your Forces. Let your own hearts prick, whether the rule whereby you have walked in all these, hath not been, how to establish your selvs, rather then the Work of God, King, and Kingdom; and how som of you might have a great and predominant interest in all these; it is too evident, som of your Lordships have not ca∣red much how few friends the Lords Work had in these places of trust, if so you might have many friends to espous your interest, and politick ends and waies. Wee cannot forget how som amongst your Lordships who have vowed to the Lord in the daie when the friends of your caus were low, and when som of your Lordships also were brought verie low, that you should cleav unto your trust, and employ such persons in the Land as feared God, & were truly religious, and should never divide from these; yet for all that, som amongst you have looked upon all, or most of these in whom the power of godliness hath appeared, with an evil and jealous eye, and have not onely neglected to counte∣nance and encourage such, but rather have rendered them and their actions odious and suspected; for which things the wrath of God hath gon forth, and is like to continue till your Lordships and wee shall learn to put a difference betwixt the precious and vile, and till wee have the power of godli∣ness in greater estimation. Wee would not have your Lordships to think that wee look upon these things wee have remonstrated to you, as
the onely causses of these sad things that are upon the King∣dom, or that wee think our selvs not guiltie or accessarie to the procuring or drawing on these bitter things that are up∣on us. The Lord know's, wee are so far from such thoughts, that although your Lordships were innocent of all these transgressions, wee are convinced that in us there is as much guiltiness as make's us fear it hath been the wors, and may yet fare wors with the Lord's People, that wee are amongst them, and with his Work, that our hands are about it. In the sens whereof, as wee have desire to humble our selvs, so wee purpose to take new occasion for a free acknowledgment of our sins, and to bee humbled for them, and to renew our engagements unto the Lord, to bee more real and sincere in preferring all the ends of the Covenant, and duties therein contained, according to our vocation. Neither would wee have your Lordships to think, that in our free dealing with you, wee have been led with the spirit of bitterness, or desire to discover your nakedness to the world, or to strengthen the hands of the adversaries. Hee who knoweth our hearts, knoweth wee desire to carrie our selvs respectively and dutifully to the publick Judicatories, and to tender their autoritie and credit as our lives. Nor is it in our hearts to provoke your Lordships to unlawful cour∣ses, but earnestly to desire you to avoid them; nor have wee anie design to follow the footsteps of a Sectarian partie, and change the fundamental Government of this Kingdom by King and Parlament, or any levelling waie, as wee hear som would falsly calumniate our honest intentions; the Lord, before whom all things are naked and manifest, know's wee detest and abhor such courses; onely wee hold our selvs bound humbly to hand forth of persons in the Govern∣ment, and to desire to bee more tender of the good of the Caus and Kingdom, then of any person whatsoëver; and to chuse rather to hazard the displeasing of men, then to in∣cur God's wrath through our connivance at their corrupt waies in their places of power. Yet wee shall freely tell your Lordships whence this hath proceeded: wee beeing perswa∣ded in our consciences of the unrighteous dealing of these
who have invaded us, and wasted our Land, and trodden down the precious Ordinances of Jesus Christ, and shed the blood of the Saints, and that the necessitie of the fainting people of God calleth us to the uttermost adventuring a∣gainst the Enemie, beeing also sensible of our own conditi∣on, and dis-proportionable strength for attempting of any thing, except wee bee mightily helped, and assisted, and coun∣tenanced by the Lord; but, above all things, beeing afraid of sin and wrath, least that should meet us now when wee are resolved, according to our capacitie, and as God shall give us opportunitie, in his strength to venture our lives against the Enemie; and not knowing whether som of us, or any of us, shall see your Lordships in the face, or hereafter have any occasion to speak for the discharge of our consciences, wee have therefore, and for our own exoneration, thought it ne∣cessarie to leav this Testimonie of our sincere detestation of these sins, and of our desire to bee found free of them, if the Lord shall suffer any of us to perish in our dutie, and to laie these things at your door, as in the presence of the Lord, who onely can make you and us repent and reform our waies, declaring to your Lordships, that wee shall desire un∣feignedly to mourn for these sins, and that there are engage∣ments in our hearts before God, if hee shall lengthen our daies, and take pleasure in us, to make us any waies instru∣mental in his Work, and for his people's good and safetie, wee shall, to the utmost of our power, endeavour to get these things removed, according to our places and calling.
The Declaration of the Committee of Estates concerning the Remon∣strance of the Gent. Officers and Ministers of the West. and their sens thereupon. 25 of Novemb. Post meridiem. THe King's Majestie and Committee of Estates having taken into Consideration a Paper presented to the said Committee at Sterling the 25 of October, in name of the Gentl. Of∣ficers and Ministers attending the Western Forces, and likewise a Petition presented unto the said Committee at Pearth the 19 of Novemb. instant, desiring a satisfactorie answer thereunto, do hereby declare. That they have alwaies been, and are still willing that all faults and miscarriages of any, as well their personal carriage, as in discharge of their publique trust, may bee discovered, re∣dressed, and punished, according to the Lawes of the Kingdom; and that they finde it their dutie to shew their dislike of many things remonstrated and held forth in the said paper: yet being desirous to follow the waies of Gentleness and Lenitie, rather then to look upon the Paper vvith that acute inquirie which otherwise might have been don; they have resolved in General to declare as followeth: That they finde the said paper, as it relate's to the Parlament and Civil Judicatories, to bee scandalous and injurious to his Majestie's Person, and prejudicial to his Autoritie, and, as it relate's to Religion and Church-Judicatories, they are to desire the Commissioners of the Church to give their sens thereupon, and that in regard of the effects it hath alreadie produ∣ced, and those that are like to follow thereupon, if not prevented, it hold's forth the seeds of division of a dangerous consequence, and that it is dishonorable to the Kingdom in so far as it tend's to a breach of the Treatie with the King's Majestie at Breda, approved in Parlament and General Assemblie: That it also strengthen's the hand of the Enemie, giving him to justi∣fie his most unjust invasion, and the bloodshed and oppression committed by him in this King∣dom; and weaken's the hands of many honest men: And likevvise the said Paper hold's forth in the close of it a Band of high and dangerous Consequence, and albeit the said Paper hath been wickedly and subtilly contrived, yet becaus som honest, faithful and religious Gent. Officers and Ministers, and others of approved fidelitie in the Caus, of whom they do not harbor the least thought to their prejudices, have been thereby insnared; Therefore the King's Majestie and Committee of Estates do hereby declare the said Persons free of any imputation upon their names, or censures upon their Persons or Estates, excepting herefrom all such who shall adhere to the former Remonstrance by persisting in and prosecuting of what is therein contrarie to the Laws of the Kingdom. Sic subscribitur Lowden Cancell. This Declaration was also produced the 25 of Novemb. in the Commissioners of the Kirk by the Marquess of Argile, the Kings Advocate, and James Sword, Provost of St Andrews, and read. The sens of the Commissioners of the Generall Assemblie upon the foresaid Remonstrance. 28 Novem. 1650. ante meridiem. THe Commission of the General Assemblie having received from the honorable Com∣mittee of Estates a Paper declaring their Lordships sens upon a Paper given in to them, intituled, The humble Remonstrance of the Gentlemen, Officers, and Ministers attending the Forces in the VVest, and desiring withal that the Commissioners of the General Assemblie would give their
sens upon the same; Therefore the Commission having taken into consideration the said Remonstrance, doth finde and acknowledg therein to bee conteined many sad truths, in rela∣tion to the sins charged upon the King his Familie, and the Publick Judicatories, which also wee are resolved to hold out, and press upon them in a right and orderlie waie, together with such other fins as wee finde by impartial search, and the help of the Lord's Spirit upon our endevours therein, that they may take vvith them, and bee humbled before the Lord in the sens thereof. Wee do also finde it our dutie to shew that in respect there seem's to bee there∣in intrenching upon som Conclusions and determinations of the General Assemblie, and in re∣spect of inferences and applications made therein in relation to the King his interest and Ex∣ercise of his Power and Government, and in regard of the Engagement which in the close thereof they declare to bee upon their hearts before God, in relation to endevours for reme∣dying things conteined in it; Wee are dissatisfied therevvith, and that wee think it apt to breed division in this Kirk and Kingdom, and as vvee do alreadie finde in part by Experience, and that the Enemie hath taken advantage thereat, and becaus of the tender respect and love wee owe and most cordially carrie to the Gentlemen, Officers, and our Brethren of the Mini∣sterie, who have concurred in the said Remonstrance, as beeing religious and godlie men, and such as have alvvaies given proof of their integritie, faithfulness and constancie in the Caus of God, and for entertainment of love, unitie and communion among the people and servants of God in acting according to every mans calling and station against the publick Enemie, the breach of all vvhich Satan is at this time eagerly driving at, and the Enemie greedily desiring and exspecting; Wee do resolv to forbear a more particular examination of the said Remon∣strance, exspecting that at the next Diet of the Commission these worthie Gentlemen, Offi∣cers and Brethren will give such a Declaration and Explanation of their intention and meaning as may satisfie both Kirk and State without any further enquirie or debate thereupon. FRom this Act of the Committee of Estates the persons following dissented, but almost all upon several grounds, most being in their Judgments against the Remonstrance; but som more, som less, and therefore som pleaded for a present answer to the Paper; but would have had it after calling in of the Presenters of it to be heard there anent; others were for a more modest and charitable construction of it; and a third partie was for a delaie till time should clear som jealousies, and at least all parties interest have a Dyet assigned to them, to have been heard: All which being refused, they dissented; yet som knowing since somwhat of the nature of a dissent, as it differeth from a simple Negative Vote, do profess that they had not anie such thought, and yet upon all adventures resolv not to desire to bee deleted. Dissenters in the Committee of Estates: Earl of Casiles. Viscount Arbuthnec. The Lord Burley. Lord Register Warristown. Sr Dan. Carmighell Lo. Treas. Dep. Lord Holmby. Lord Hopton. The Lord of Freeland. Sr VVil. Scot. Crake Darrock. Busby. Sr Rob. Adare. General quartermaster Stewart. Robert Lockhart Bailiff of Edinbrough. John Denholme. John Jeafrey. Patrick Rosse Dissenters in the Commission of the Kirk upon such grounds as is expressed anent the Dissenters in the Estate. Mr James Guthrie. Mr Sam. Rotherforth. Mr Andrew Kant. Mr Alex. Leviston. Mr Hugh Pebles. Mr David Bennet. Mr Hugh Keneday. Mr VVil. Row. Mr Tho. Ogill. Mr Rob. Lockhart. Mr Hugh Archibald. Beside these Mr Patrick Gilespie, Mr Gab. Maxwell, Mr Alex. Dunlope as being Remon∣strators were removed in the time of the vote,
but protested against this Procedure of the Commission, that in due time it might not hinder or prejudg them to seek redress in the waie that Christ allow's, and to them did adhere of Ministers present, though not members for the time of the Commission, Mr Tho. VVyley, M. VVil. Adar, Mr Alex. Movereif, and a number of others, and in name of the Generall and Officers did Geö, Porterfeild Provost of Glasco enter a Protestation, all the aforenamed persons did rise and desert the Commission upon the next day, and many from that moment of passing the Vote, deplorable by this Kirk. THe Commission of the Kirk met, and being desired to concur in the Remonstrance from the western Forces, did refuse untill they should consider of the severall parts there∣of, to which purpose there was a Conference appointed, wherein Mr James VVood and Mr Rob. Dowglas were eminent for opposing and impugning as well of the manner as matter and appli∣cations therein made, but it did not close till the day you see above mentioned, in which the vote was passed there anents, though very much pains was taken by men that did hope Recon∣ciliation, whereof there neither was, and now much less is there anie appearance, it having been publickly affirmed by som in a Conference with the Committee of Estates, that they did hold the Admission of the King to the Exercise of his power without the Qualifications expressed in the Remonstrance, and the continuance of him in it, notwithstanding of his breaches of all to bee sinfull, yea, and to bee a sin of that nature, that did oblige them necessarily to separate themselves from such as would stand for him, and this hath been renued to severall since, I know by and to whom, hovvever after these remonstrances vvere gon the Commission hath opened the door to Malignants a great deal wider, and the Estate is now to make use of many formerly refused, som at the desire and recommendation of the Kirk; the Kirk did at this time fall upon invitation of severall ingagers to com and serv, as the Lord Yester, Col. Lockhart, and Col. David Barkley, the Earl of Dumferling vvas set dovvn in Parlament, being recommended by the Kirk; amongst many others received into the bosom of the Kirk Capt. Augustine a Germain is one, vvho was in England with Hamilton, and heretofore refused any service by them; since our coming to Edinburg hee hath made Moss-trooping his Trade, and such of our men as hee hath taken hath in cold blood murther'd, yet this man is now, enterrteined by the Kirk. The King's Coronation is now by Act of Parl. to bee upon the first day of Januarie next, the beginning of our nevv year, that it may bee auspicious, it is to bee at School. The Parl. hath sitten since the 26 of Nov. but it is very uncertain how long they vvill continue, only it seem's there is nothing els to do but the settling of the command of the Armie, which will prove diffi∣cult enough, except Dav. Lesley bee continued, vvho is novv ordained to give an account of his carriage since the English Armies coming into Scotland, until the 4th of Sept. but this is only for formalitie, it is feared by the most of the Parl. and Commissioners of the Kirk; that at least those in the West shall disband, and then the number of our Armie will bee eighteen thousand foot only, and 6000 hors vvhich is hoped for vvill bee readie against the Coronation to bee in a posture for acting; but every one is not of that minde, that it can bee so soon: for hitherto the great business hath been the Remonstrance, and the endevours to unite those forces that are on foot hovvever ineffectuall; the Coronation is delaied to the abovementioned daie, becaus of an humiliation to go before for the contempt of the Gospel, on the 22. of Decemb. and for the sins of the Kings Familie at his own desire upon the 26 of Decemb. As concerning Middleton, and those of the North, they are disbanded, according to the subjoyned explanation, Middleton hath assigned to him the next Diet of the Commissioners for swearing him anent his Repentance in order to Relaxation from his sentence; but in the mean time it is represented by the Com∣missioners to the Committee of Estates, that they did fail in giving them the benefit of an act of Indempnitie, they accepting of it only upon the King's desire. WEe do hereby oblige our selvs upon our Honors, that this present Act of Indemnitie shall stand firm and valid to all who are in Arms, and shall presently disband, and others their adherents who shall accept of the same. As likewise wee do declare that the words (with reservation of anie. Act of Parlament concerning the same) doth no waies
weaken the Act of Indemnitie, but that ful assurance of lives and fortunes is conteined therein, not onely for the persons rising in Arms, but for all plots and former rising in Arms, or for accession to the late unlavvful Engagement against England, as is expressed in the Act of Indem∣nitie. And further vvee declare, that the reserving and excepting the persons and person vvho shall bee found actors in killing of Robert Mackerton and Captain Sharren is onely extended to those vvho shall bee notably knovvn to have been the real killers, and that is not to bee un∣derstood that men shall bee put to a legal trial, or inquisition for the same. Subscribed the first of November, 1650. David Lesley, Robert Mountgomery, Jo. Brown. I Do hereby give assurance to the Officers and Souldiers, either of the Recruits, or others of our Armie, that they shall have the benefits of the Act of Indemnitie, and shall bee receiv∣ed to their several Troops or Regiments, vvith their Horses and Arms, as witness my hand. Subscribed David Lesley. By another undoubted hand, That the Committee of Estates, and Commissioners of the Kirk have both declared against the Western Remonstrance. That the Committee of Estates have declared that scandalous to the Government of the Church and State, injurious to the King's person, prejudicial to his autoritie and divisnie: That it weaken's the hands of honest men, and give's occasion to the Enemie to justifie their unjust Invasion, and that it is of a dangerous consequence; yet for those that have been in∣snared in it, beeing honest and faithful men, they do harbor no thoughts to their prejudice, and declare's them free of anie imputation in their names, persons, or estates, excepting such as shall adhere thereunto by persisting to prosecute anie thing therein against the publick Re∣solutions, and the Lavvs of the Land. There vvas 17 in the Committee that did protest and dissent from this Vote; The Lord Casiles, Lord Arbuthnet, Lord Burley, Lord Register, &c. The most of those that did dissent, did it not so much that they did approve of the Remon∣strance, but disagreeing from the Committee's minde in censuring of it. The Committee did it by a most high hand. It is thought none of the Remonstrators will bee suffered to sit in Parlament, and it is thought also those that did Protest. Manie in the Committee did Vote the Remonstrance treasonable, The Comissioners of the Kirk have declared against that paper, but vvithal have acknovvledged, that there are manie sad truths in it, vvhich they vvill press against the King and State in an orderly and right vvaie. This Vote of the Commission vvas also dissented from, and protested against, by several Westland Ministers and others. The Westland Gentlemen are required to let the Parlament knovv vvhat they must exspect of these Forces in the West, vvho did excuse themselvs that they knevv not, till they met vvith those Officers that do Command those Forces. That the Parl. is to send one expresly to them to knovv peremtorily vvhat they may exspect, The Kirk have vvritten to the Gentlemen of the West, to dehort them from such Counsels, and as formerly, still to bee faithful to the Caus of GOD. Mr Jo. Leviston did publickly in the Commission of the Kirk declare his great sin for having a hand in bringing home the King into Scotland, and presently left them, and retired to his ovvn home. THere are no question, in the Remonstrance manie sad truths laid down; use whereof would bee made, and a remedie thereof sought in a right waie; but under a pretext thereof to make a secession from the Publik Council and Forces of the Kingdom, and to gra∣tifie the wicked Invaders of the Land, by laying open the nakedness of our Ruler's, exag∣gerating everie miscarriage or appearance thereof, as if they had been hired by our Enemies to agent the business, cannot but bee grievous to the Godlie, who are not preoccupied with prejudices; and this is so much the more grievous, as that the cunning sleight of som male∣content, well acquainted with publick consultations, hath intangled not a few worthie Gen∣tlemen in the West, whose constancie in the Caus of GOD is well known. These contri∣vers
and penners of this piece, perceiving what strange language, mis-beseeming their ut∣tering, faw it necessarie to take off manie objections that laie in the waie, and that both in the entrie and close there of, assuring that success of the Enemie had not altered their mind. That they judg not themselvs free of the provoking Caus of Calamities, That in uttering of these things they have not been led with the spirit of bitterness, or desire to discover the nakedness of others, and that they have not the least desire to follow the footsteps of the Se∣ctarian partie, &c. They may well saie (I mean the Contrivers of the Remonstrance) they had not the design, for in their Essaie they have out-acted the Sectaries: These did much in order to publick good, before they spake bigly, But these doing nothing, save that they have drawn away considerable forces, raised at vaste charges for the Publick defence, speak's no less then abanding to carrie on their design in the last words of their papers. And that their discours might bee the more taking, they put on the person of those who are speaking their last words, being yet sure enough from all danger. It is hard for anie man to take upon him to judg with what hearts and intentions these things were contrived, I speak not of the Gentlemen and Ministers whom I durst absolv, but by the projectors and penners of the Pemonstrance, but let their own spirits judg, if the most real and cordial our Enemies hath, could have acted otherwaies, to powr out content on us, and to hearten and encourage un∣dertakers amongst us; and if they bee all constant in the Caus, what mean's the bleating of so loud Queries sent to the Adversarie, (an odious crime and audacious to private persons to correspond with an open Enemie, that has shed the blood of God's People, and to receiv answers to the same) If they concern not them all, how is it that those who are constant and faithful, declare's not against these as hath falsified their trust, but whet their tongues and pens against King and Committee, whom they should obey in all things in the LORD. A further Relation of the Action against the Scot's Forces in the VVest of Scotland, Commanded by Collonel Kerr: made by a Captain who brought the former, and was at the Action. THe 27th of November in the Evening, the Lord GENERAL marched from Edinburgh with eight Regiments of Hors, having given Order to the Major General, who then laie at Peebles with four Regiments of Hors, and one of Dragoons, to get beyond the Enemie. The next daie, after a verie extraordinarie ill march, the Lord General came near to the Town of Hamilton, which is situate on the South side of the River Cluyd, himself beeing on the North side, and beeing before with a smal number of Hors, discovered som Bodies of the Enemie on this side the Town, who immediatly drew into the Town. Our Hors all that daie staying near the Town, and having no newes of the Major General, were that night quarte∣red conveniently thereabouts. The next daie wee finding no waie to com at the Enemie, and unwilling to wear out and incommodate the Hors with the inconveniences they must there suffer to no purpose, which would render them more unable for real and effectual service, when wee might leav it: It was resolved to march homeward, the waies and vvether beeing extreme ill, and on the 30th vvee came to Edinburgh. Upon this our Retreat, the Enemie according to their manner, grevv extreme insolent and proud. And having before quitted the Tovvn of Hamilton vvhile vvee vvere near them, And vvhich the Major General (of vvhom vvee had heard nothing at our march off) had taken up for his quarters; They novv resolv to fall upon that Tovvn, and into our quarters there, vvhich accordingly they did on the first of December about tvvo of the clock in the morning, vvith three thousand Hors, and one thou∣sand Dragoons they attemted the quarters, and over-povvering the guards, entred the Tovvn, and that they might bee sure to have a full execution of all our partie, vvhom they accounted alreadie in their povver, and had destin'd them to destruction, that had, by cutting dovvn of trees so Barricadoed the vvaies tovvard Edinburgh as must have hindred our Retreat. But it pleased God so to bless the diligence and dexteritie of the Major General, and Commissarie Ge∣neral, and to give such Courage and resolution to our smal partie, vvhich they could sudden∣ly get together, that in a short time the enemie vvas routed, The particulars have been re∣lated in the Lord General's Letter, and need not bee repeated. Thus God still appear's for the carrying on that good vvork, vvhich vvee have reason to hope vvill end in a setled peace and lasting securitie to this Nation. FINIS.
