j40b 52612416 179478
The Merry MANS Resolution Or, A LONDON Frollick. He goes a wooing yet the matters so, He cares not much whether he speeds or no, Cause City Wives and Wenches are so common He thinks it hard to find an honest Woman Ben't angry with this fellow, I protest, That many a true word hath been spoke in jest. By degrees he lays a wager money's scant, Untill five Shillings out, then ends his Rant. T. J. The Tune is much in Request, Ile hold thee five Shillings. IF young Men and Maidens will listen a while, Ile sing you a Sonnet will make you to smile, Then come my own Dearest and be not so coy, Whatever thou fearest ile get thee a boy. Ile hold thee a six-pence 'tis silver compleat. If thou art but willing I can do the feat. Then be not so scornful but loving and kind, If thou wilt but kisse me ile tell thee my mind, For I am a Gallant that's vers'd in the trade, I know what belongs to Wife Widdow and Maid, Ile hold thee a shilling as round as a Ring, Those Lasses that kisse well, loves the tother thing. Then Dear let me feel if thy flesh it be warm, For I vow and protest I will do thee no harm, But huddle and cuddle, wee'l toy and wee'l kisse, What hurt honest Neighbours can come of all this, Ile hold you three six-pences in ready Coin, Most Girls when they'r pleased with young Men will join. The Second Part, to the same Tune. BUt when they are sullin ne're matter't a pin, But rouxe'um and touz'um 'twill please um again: And when you have done it, this story is true, If you do but kisse um they'l straight ways kiss you. Ile hold you two shillings, lay with me that can, The fairest i'th' Nation will lie with a Man. Then why should young Fe∣males Continue so nice, When Ladies of pleasure do count it no vice To be kind to their Neighbours as well as the rest, For kissing and courting is still in request, Ile hold two and six-pence that's just half a crown Highest Girles in all Europe, Are easiest blown down. To talk of complections too tedious it were, Or to know their conditions by th' colour of hair; Yet this ile assure you, either Black, Red or Brown When they'r in the humour they'l freely lie down. Ile hold you three shillings who 'gainst me dare lay That women delight much with young men to play. There's Mary and Betty, with Nancy and Jone, They'l lie with a Tinker ere they'l lie alone. There's Peg, Dol and Bridget Rebecca and Kate, They laugh when they hear on't but long till they hav't Ile hold three and six-pence Maids love Men the best, When they come a woeing in earnest not jeast. Fine Susan and Sarah, brave Lasses indeed, Yet they'l ly with a Broom-man if they stand in need, Likewise pretty Parnel, and simpering Sisse When young Men imbrace them how kindly they kisse Ile hold you four shillings the nicest that be, At one time or other makes use of a P— Then dear be contented for thou shalt have one, And shalt be prevented of lying alone. For I'm stout and lusty and fit for delight, Ile hug thee and kisse thee ten times in an night Ile hold four and six-pence Ile hold thee no less, Ile bore a hole through thy coat even by guess. For I am an Archer, Well skil'd in that art Though I shoot at young Dam∣sels they nere feel it smart Ile hold thee five shillings, ile hold thee no more, I'le bore a hole through thy smock even before. This Song throughout England on purpose I send, To make young Men merry, and there is an end. Finis. LONDON, Printed for R. Burton, at the Horshoo in Smithfield,
