s1069 52529444 178885
C R HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms ACT Concerning the Imposition ON TOBACCO. AT EDINBURGH, the 2. of December, 1673. THe King's Majesty, considering the prejudice that doth, and may arise to the Trade of Tobacco, by, and upon occasion of, the late Imposition upon the Tobacco, and the Gift of the same given under His Majesties great Seal, to Sir John Nicolson of Nicolson, of the date the second of De∣cember, 1671. Therefore His Majesty, with advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament, doth discharge the said Imposition upon the Tobacco: and Declares the said Imposition, and Gift thereof granted to the said Sir John Nicolson, to be void and extinct in all intents, as if the said Imposition and Gift had not been imposed or granted. And His Majesty, with consent foresaid, doth allow the importing of Tobacco in all time coming free and without payment of any other Custome and Imposition but the ordinary Custome; conform to the book of Rates, and the Excise. It is always Declared and Ordained, that such sums of money as have been payed to the said Sir John, or to any person in his name, for and upon the account of the said Imposition, and all bands granted upon the account foresaid, shall pertain to His Majesty, and the said Sir John shall be accountable for the said sums, and shall be obliedged to deliver the saids Bands to the Lords of His Majesties Thesaurie, for His Majesties use; Excepting alwayes, the Band given for the Tobacco, imported in the Ship called Kathrine of Glasgow, whereof John Philips is Master, daily d  upon Clyd,in the West, which His Majesty doth discharge, and Ordains to be given back to those who granted the same: And sicklyk, excepting any other Bands granted upon the account of the said Imposition, where the Tobacco is not vented, as to such proportions thereof, as the Merchands shall declare upon their oath, are not sold by them; They alwayes paying the ordinary dues, viz. Custome conform to the book of Rates and Excise. And His Majesty, with advice foresaid, doth hereby Declare all Tobacco already imported, to be free of the said Imposition, where money hath not been payed, or bands granted for the same; and Discharges any Arrestments laid thereon upon the account of the said Imposition. EDINBƲRGH, Printed by Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most Excellent MAJESTY, Anno DOM. MDCLXXIII.
