s1513 52612433 179572
LETTERS Of Inter-communing against the Rebels in the Bass. WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great-Britain, France, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith. To  Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute, Greeting: That where upon the twelfth day of May instant, Lieutenant Collonel Graham, and Michael Middletoun two of the Rebels in the Bap, James, John, and William Middletouns Brethren to the said Michael, Duncan Mcqueen, Thomas Hepburn, John Turine, Mr.  Henryson, John Mcclain,  Morrein an English man,  Nicolson, John Gladestones, Gawin Johnstoun, Lieutenant John Halket, and John Halket Seaman, two Irish Seamen, two Hoboyes that belonged to the Earl of Le∣ven, Collonel Grahames Servant, and three or four more Servants, were orderly de∣nunced Our Rebels, and put to Our Horn, by vertue of a particular Act and Order of the Lords of Our Privy Council, used and execute at the instance of Sir James Stuart Our Advocat for Our Interest, against them for not delivering up themselves to Our Mercy, and the said Island of the Bass for Our Service, whereto they were Charged by an Herauld with his Coat displayed with a Trumpet, under the pain of High Treason, as the said Act of the date foresaid, with the Executions thereof due∣ly Registrat at length bears: At the which Process of Horning, the forenamed Per∣sons Rebels, do still ly and continue, taking no regard thereof, nor of Our Autho∣rity and Laws; and are incouraged to continue in Rebellion by the Recept, Supply, and Intercommoning which they have with several of their Friends and Acquaintances, to the high Contempt of Us, Our Authority and Laws. Likeas, the saids Lords of Our Privy Council, by their Act of the day and date hereof, have Ordained these Our Letters of Intercommoning to be direct against the saids Rebels, and to be Pub∣lished at the Mercat-crosses under-written, as the samine at more length bears. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incon∣tinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-crosses of the several Burghs and Towns upon both sides of the Water of Forth, and other places needful, and there∣at, in Our Name and Authority, Command all and sundry Our Leidges and Sub∣jects, that they, nor none of them, Presume nor take upon Hand, to Reset, Sup∣ply, or Intercommon with any of the saids persons Our Rebels, for the Causes fore∣saids, nor furnish them with Meat, Drink, House, Harbour, Victual, or any other thing useful, or comfortable to them; nor have Intelligence with them, by Word, Writ, Message, or any other manner of way, under the Pain to be repute and esteem∣ed Art and Part with them in the foresaids Crimes, and Pursued therefore with all rigour, to the terrour of others. Requiring hereby all Sheriffs, Stewarts, Baillies of Regalities, and their Deputs, and Magistrats of Burghs, to Apprehend and Commit to Prison, any of the Persons above-written Our Rebels, when they shall be found within any of their respective Jurisdictions, according to Justice, as ye will answer to Us thereupon. The which to do, We commit to you, conjunctly and severally, Our full Power, by these Our Letters, delivering them by you duly execute and indorsat again to the bearer. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the thirteenth day of May, and of Our Reign, the fifth Year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concili. In Supplementum Signeti. GILB. ELIOT Cls. Sti. Concilii. God save King William and Queen Mary. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most Excellent Majesties, Anna Dom. 1693.
