150 99887606 183229
The Batchelor's Triumph: Or, The Single-Man's Happiness. A Hen-peck'd Husband's like a Slave, who wears His Masters Fetters, whom each whisper scares; His thoughts are all to please his Wife, nor knows He other Hell, then what her frowns disclose: What Mad-men then will be such fools, when they Without controul, may Love and Freedom sway. To the Tune of, For what is Man, &c. With Allowance. FOr what is Man confin'd Vnto a Woman kind? But a Slave, Cuckold, and Drudge; that must work and toyl, whilst her Amors beguile, And deprive him of what he gains: but we will live a Single life, and free from care and strife, We tip their Fortunes for their pains. Royot we all the day, they bound and must obey, Wives they will curb'um and make 'umgrow Sots; But we are free from this, Are not oblieg'd to Kiss, Keep Ladies company just when we please: Pass the whole Year away, Merrily as the Day, Revel like Princes with pleasure and ease. Treated whole weeks are we, they love Variety, There's not a woman but will have her friend; Poor silly Idle Knaves, their wives we make our slaves, Court 'um to taverns, to Ball and to Plays; Whilst the poor Fool at home, Patient sits like a Moam. What they want nightly we give 'um a day. TAke Coach and to Hide-Park, There Revel till 'tis dark, Then with all speed the next tavern we find; Whither we straight repair, treated with sumptuous fare, And whatsoe'r we want have at command: Oysters and wine are free, Or whatsoe'r we see, Sil when we call for it's ready at hand. Poor Husbands they know not, their Money pays the Shot, While that in Horns we return it agen; Ignorant of the case, Whilst we their Fore-heads grace, And do adorn their Brows with a high Crest; They'l not at Beer repine, Whilst their wives feast with wine, But think that all they do is for the best. Whilst their Dames Rant and sing, And close about us cling, Panting long time we lye in loves imbrace For which their Gold they spend, nd what we askt 'um lend, Free without Bond or scruple resign, And empty all their store, Let Husbands work for more, Friends shall be surely supply'd with their coin. VVhilst they keep on their pace, And the Moams saddles grace, Of what they possess there's noug then who would be Marry'd, Continually wearied, When loves sweet accents so ple that Pastimes and Pleasures, we take at our leasures, And can abridge them when wea VVe live free from those cares that a Husband still fears, Frownings and poutings from till the fools Monies give, that they quiet may live, Which on their Gallants so kind, For the which we embrace, And set Horns on their face, Whilst the lov'd silver procures The poor Mopus confides, And for Christening provides, And by the Cradle a Rocking h Then let Sots be confin'd Vnto false women kind, But we'r resolv'd to Court sing And to pitty his case, Who with Hornny-fy'd face, Slaves for his wife both by day Printed for  at the Golden-Ball, near the Hospital-gate in West-smith
