C1250 R171041 [ocm]61296911 180492
CASTOR and POLLUX: OR, An Heroique Poeme Ʋpon his Majesties Victorious, and Princely Generals, The Dukes of Cumberland, and Albermarle. TO equal You, Great Heros, we must fly, And fetch a Constellation from the Sky. Castor and Pollux are the fittest Pair To make a Parallel, For as They are The most admird Example how one Mind May rule two Bodies, and their Judgments bind, So in this Martial Expedition Two Heads, two Hearts concenter all in one. That Heavenly Twin bear also chiefest Sway Upon the Ocean, and his rage allay: For when They cast their Influence, and look clear, The doubtful Pilot needs no Shipwrack fear: They Lorde it ore the Maine, And so do you, Beating the German waves from white, and blue To a Red-Sea, while the Batavian Boor Swim's in's own bloud, and runs for life ashore To fire his Beacons, and to make the bells Ring backward in confusd alarming knells Which made the Rebel Provinces all quake, And Foggy Holland like a quagmire shake A Country questiond in Geography If of Gods making or of Mans it be Forcd from another Element, (And King Where Fish shold spawn, And Spain shold spread her wing.) Poor Boors, presume no more Great Charles to Face, Unless it be to impetrate his Grace That you may fish for Herring, Cod, and Cunger To keep your Vrouws, and Kinderen from hunger: Take heed of English Oke, and let your Broom With the Red-Cross no more to grapple come, Lest that your Lion which you bear half drownd Sink to the bottom quite, and nere be found. Go on Brave Amirals, may You have still Like that Celestial Pair one Mind and Will:Cast. Poll. May They still steer your Cours on Sea, and Strand Till you compleat the Mighty York in hand: May Heaven with Trine Aspect  air and clear To keep Charls Wayne still glorious in his Sphear, The Famous Prophecy of Grebnerus (Reflecting upon the Norwest Iles) paraphrasd in Verse, and Englishd. A Carolo Carolus, si quid Presagia veri Contineant, Magno major erit Carolo. Charles, Son of Charles, if Prophecies containe Some truth, shall Greater be then Charlemaine. J. H. London: printed for Samuel Speed at the Rainbow Fleetstreet, 1666. 1o 7bris
