C6473a W38820 [ocm]62369130 187853
A Meet help. OR, A Wedding SERMON, Preached at New-Castle in New-England, June 19th. 1694. At the Marriage of Mr. John Clark, AND Mrs. Elizabeth Woodbridge. By Mr. Iohn Cotton, Pastor of the Church at Hampton. Heb. 13.4. Marriage is honourable in all, and the bed undefiled: but Whoremongers and Adulterers God will Judge. Hos. 3.3. Thou shalt not play the Harlot, and thou shalt not be for another man, so will I also be for thee. Cant. 2.16. My beloved is mine, and I am his. Boston, Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen. Sold by Michael Perry, at his Shop over against the Town house, 1699.
To the Candid READER. THis small Tract had come to light before now, had it not been for the averseness of the Author thereunto. The Audi∣tory to whom it was Preacht, were so satisfied and pleased with the Discourse that they did generally in the season of it, desire it might be made publick; the unwillingness of the Preach∣er (whose design was wholly to have stifled it) hath hitherto hindred and delayed it; but be∣ing overcome at last, others that got the perusal of it, do judge that whether in season, or out of season, it may be useful. Marriage is one of the most considerable Changes that befal the Children of men in this World; and though it be so, that some spend a considerable age, and live and dye without tasting the sweets of it; whether frighted by an apprehension of imagi∣ned and insuperable sorrows attending it, or
from a natural frigidity, or a morose unsociable temper, or on religious grounds or pretences, or perhaps on other reasons not mentioned, must be left to themselves; but the generality of the Children of men do so far answer the Law of their Creation, and the end of this Institution that they do incline and desire, and in time act∣ually enter on this Change, without which the World would cease; and we cannot easily see, how the great things that God hath yet to do on the Stage of the World, would be accom∣plished. Marriage then being of such general concernment to the Sons and Daughters of A∣dam, and to the Church of God; it is good for every one to be advised about it, and when they engage in it, so to do it as may best an∣swer all its ends; and wisdom in this as in all other weighty Concerns, must be sought of him who giveth liberally, and upbraideth not: it being God alone that can guide into ways that are plain and easy, or sweeten any Change or Condition to us, and render that State that would be otherwise thorny and perplexing to us, to be comfortable and pleasant. Hence its requisite, that not only his presence be sought, but his Oracles consulted; which some neglect∣ing, and driving on furiously, having their heat kindled by some secular Interest, have run them∣selves into such intanglements and intricacies, that they could afterward find it easier to be∣wail
themselves in; then extricate themselves out of. The Sac  its Counsels in reference to this Affair; the Apostle spends a large Chapter upon it. 1 Cor. 7. and though he gives liberty to the Unmarried to pitch on whom they will, yet he limits it with that re∣striction, only in the Lord, which some not obser∣ving, it may be said of their Matches, as God sometimes speaks of Israels Kings. Hos. 4 8. They have set up Kings, but not by me, they have made Princes, and I knew it not; on which account it was sometimes spoken in reference to one of them: That he gave him in his anger, and took him away in his wrath This is enough to shew us, that Truths of this nature, are sometimes to be managed, opened, unfolded and applyed by the Ministers of the Gospel; and the Ensuing Sermon being at such a time, was pertinent to the purpose in hand, and a word in season; and is thereupon commended to thy perusal, with sincere wishes, it may prove to thy benefit. Per Auditorem.
A Meet Help. Or, A Wedding SERMON. WE are invited this day (to a Wedding Supper, I can't say) but to a Wedding Sermon. Marriage as well as meat is sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer. 1 Tim. 4.5. It is the worst Clandestine Marriage saith oneFuller when God is not invited to it; when he is by Prayer and the Sanctification of his Word sought with it, as it is nobly Pub∣lick, so may we expect it will be lastingly pros∣perous. That Word of the Lord which may he bless to the Sanctification of this, and so rendring it, you may nd Written,
Genesis II. 18. And the Lord God said, it is not good that the man should be alone; I will make him an help meet for him. VVHEN the Maker of the World had finished his glorious work∣manship, the Heavens and the Earth, and all the Host of them, and had assign'd man, who was as an Epi¦tome or Compendium of the Creation (a Mi¦crocosm in this Macrocosm a lesser World in thi greater) a convenient domicil or habitation, to¦gether with a Calling, in a Garden of his own planting; He takes notice yet of something wan¦ting, at least for mans conveniency and comfort and resolves upon the providing of it. Indee Junius, Piscator and Diadoti apprehend this done before man had his place assign'd him in th Garden; and I do grant it was on the Sixth Day, and before God took a Survey of his whole work, and pronounced thereon, That it was ver Good: Though I do at present concur with Pa¦reus, that it was after he was brought into the Garden. Then is the want of a Meet Help most seen, when a man is fix't to any certai place, or in any particular Calling, and it is goo at such a time to look out for that which Go did not see good that man should be without
God Himself look't out for the first man, as good Parents sometimes do for their Children, and so he does indeed for all ever since, Matches are made in Heaven, and God brings to every Man his Wife that has one, verse 22. He consults the good of man more than man doth his own; un∣grateful he, if he doth not consult Gods Glory. God consults his pleasure, as well as his profit; ungrateful he, if he content not himself in the bounds that God hath set him; and if he con∣tent not himself to drink waters out of his own Cistern. Prov. 5.15. There cannot an inconveni∣ency attend mans condition but God spies it sooner then man himself: it was not Adam said, It is not good that man should be alone, but it was the LORD GOD said it: nor is man more ready to remedy his own inconveniency then God is, I will make him an help meet for him, saith God. It is great folly, unbelief, and ingratitude for man not to rest contented with God's care of & provision for him, and disposal of all his con∣cerns: all a mans own care is inopportune and insignificant without it, & misplac'd where that is distrusted. The Apostle teacheth better, when he saith, Casting all your care upon him for he careth for you. 1 Pet. 5.7. Though I find man imme∣diately upon his Creation, and in innocency in the Garden of Eden; I may not now stand to pick and present you with the many and various roses and flowers I find him surrounded with, for
the time I am confined to, will permit me to gather no more than I can hastily catch at, growing upon these two Stalks, scil. The Observa∣tion that the Lord God, mans Maker, makes of the man he had placed in the Garden, and his resolution thereupon; (for of these two parts do the words we have read consist) the Observation he makes is, That it is not good that man should be alone, his resolution thereupon is, I will make him an help meet for him. I say first, the Observation he makes, is, that it is not good the man should be a∣lone, and therein he doth recommend it as an Observation unto us, Scil. Obs. That it is not good that the man should be alone: This is what the Lord God hath said, and we may safely say it after him; and the Lord God said, said, whether in so many words and syllables, or in the mind of man, or reveal∣ing it, by an Angel, or any other way saith Au∣stin, there is no need to seek, but rather that we understand what he did say; (be sure it serves to represent the Counsel of God in this matter (the same which he took in the Creating of man) or as acting by Counsel, and manifesting i in the execution thereof.) These are then the questions proper here to be enquired into: Scil. 1. In what sense we are to understand the phrase alone? 2. In what respect it is not good that the man should so be?
Quest. 1. In what sense we are to understand the phrase alone? Sol. Not of any solitude or solitariness; for in some sense it is good for a man to be alone, and at some times, as when he goes to meditate, &c. and at such a time as the Philosopher said, he is never less alone, then when he is alone; but by alone here we are to understand, without a Compeer, Consort, Companion as other Crea∣tures had, without a woman, without a Wife, without a Meet Help, which it is therefore add∣ed, shall be prepared: It is not good that the man should be alone in this respect; which is to be understood again of the species (of mankind) not of Individuals, for it is granted of some In∣dividuals, it is good of them to be alone, even in this respect, as of such as them mentioned. Mat. 19.12. and so such as are of an unsociable nature, are like brambles and briars, will tare and afflict all that come near them; and so likewise at some times, as in times of persecuti∣on it is good for a man not to touch a woman, saith the Apostle Paul. 1 Cor. 7.1. but then he speaks only of that particular time, as he explains himself, v. 26. I suppose therefore that this is good for the present distress; and there may be yet other things that may render it convenient to this or the other individual to be alone, or for the present time, but in general, and for man∣kind it is not good. That is then the Second Enquiry, Scil.
Quest. 2. In what respect it is not good that the man should be alone? Sol. 1. In that it doth not answer the end in mans Creation. As, 1. The propagation of mankind; had man been or continued alone, how should mankind in a natural way, and regularly have been pro∣pagated? and should every man now do so, what would become of the whole world in one Age? God could indeed have Created at first such a number of men as he did of Angels, but it was Gods pleasure to make of one blood, all Nations of men to dwell on all the face of the Earth. Acts 17.26. and in order to the obtain∣ing of that end, it was not good that man should be alone. 2. His gathering a Church out of mankind, that was Gods end we see, in that it is done, but that could not have been, had mankind not ex∣tended beyond one individual. 3. The Glory of his Mercy and Justice in Sending his Son in the Flesh, born of a woman which would never have been, had the man been alone, or had there been no woman; In these respects it don't answer Gods end in mans Creation, and therefore is not good that the man should be alone. 2. It don't answer mans immediate end, nor indeed any end of man; it is not good, i. e. neither bonum, jucundum, or utile, it is neither
pleasant nor profitable, nor indeed honourable. The od that man enjoyes in this world (not to eak of that which he doth, which is bonum estum, the good of honesty) is either easure, profit or honour, but for man to be a∣e doth not make for either of these. 1. It doth not make for his pleasure; solitariness  very uncomfortable the Wife man tells us, cles. 4.9, 10, 11, 12. Man is a sociable Creature, d to such an one a solitary life, though aboun∣ng with all other good things, would be tedi∣s and unpleasant; it must needs be so to him o is alone in a wide world, and has none of  kind with him, though the Creatures should  subjected to his dominion. 2. Nor doth it make for his profit; profit is mmonly aim'd at in marching as well as plea∣re, and there are more ways then one where∣ it is obtained, it doth not then make there∣re to lead a single life; you know the proverb, at he that would thrive, must first ask his ifes leave, and if so, he must have one to ask;  doth not besure make for the profit of the nd, if by accident it should to the profit of this dividual; as that the man should be alone oth not make for his profit, so neither 3. Doth it make for his honour; Marriage is onourable in all, it is said, Heb. 13 4. that doth ot then make for his honour which is contrary o it; Thus we see in short then, that for man
to be alone in the sence said, doth neither answer Gods end, nor mans, and therefore it is not good. I might have been larger in shewing it, but con∣sidering the Occasion, I shall content my self with what has been said, and proceed to the Use we should make of it. USE 1. Is it not good that the man should be a lone, or without the woman? this condemns Mi∣sogynists, such as cry out against all women, hate woman kind (if there be such among mankind) are bitter, and full of spiteful invectives against them; they hate and inveigh against them, whom it is not good that man should be without, and indeed that they are without them is com∣monly the reason why any do; their quarrel with them is, that which the Fox in the fable had with the Grapes, they are out of their reach: Women are Creatures without which there is no comfor∣table Living for man: it is true of them what is wont to be said of Governments, That bad ones are better than none: They are a sort of Blasphe∣mers then who dispise and decry them, and call them a necessary Evil, for they are a necessary Good; such as it was not good that man should be without. Prov. 18.22. Whos findeth a Wif findeth a good thing, and obtaineth favour of the Lord▪ And they are spoken of as the desire of the eye Ezek. 24.16, 21. It is with a more than Fem∣nine impotency, that any declaim against th whole Sex for the infirmity of some, and it may
be without that cause either: they should all remember, that they are Sons of Women, that their Mothers were Women, and that otherwise they had never been Men; Yea, that the Lord JESUS CHRIST our Blessed Saviour, was born of a Woman, and that Blessed was the Womb that bare him and the Paps which gave him suck. Luk. 11.27. And that the Apostle Paul who was not for the cumbrances that attended a Married E∣state in times of Persecution, yet calls Marriage honourable in all. Heb. 13.4. And another Apostle, would have honour given unto Women as the weaker vessels, and as being heirs together of the Grace of Life. 1 Pet. 3.7. Nay the Hebrews err on this extream, while they say, There is nothing good but a Woman, and that he who lives without a Wife, re∣mains without good &c. They think hither looks that of Solomon, in Prov. 18.22. 2. This Condemns them who condemn or contemn Marriage; it condemns them who live a Monkish life, so much in request among the Pa∣pists; and it condemns that Popish conceit of the Excellency of Virginity, as if it were more per∣fect and compleat than a Married State: whence many among them are devoted to it, as in their Nunneries &c. God was of another mind, It is not good, said God; they are differently minded then it seems from their Maker, the All wise God; they don't say after him, who thus practically say, It is good for man to be alone. How Monks
who professedly live alone (and thence have their name Monks) will acquit themselves of be∣ing of a different Judgment, in this matter from their Maker, I do not presently see. I remem∣ber in Church History, I have read of one who immediately upon Marriage, without ever ap∣proaching the Nuptial Bed, indented with the Bride, that by mutual consent they might both live such a life, & according did sequestring themselves according to the custom of those times, from the rest of mankind, and afterwards from one another too, in their retired Cells, giving themselves up to a Contemplative life; and this is recorded as an Instance of no little or ordinary Vertue; but I must be pardoned in it, if I can account it no other than an affort of blind zeal, for they are the dictates of a blind mind they follow therein, and not of that Holy Spirit, which saith, It is not good that man should be alone: Nor can I from the same principle be an advocate for such who lead a single Life meerly through Mo∣roseness or Aversation to humane Society, or where there is no sufficient lett to a double one, and the Maturity of years call for it. Indeed where there is a sufficient cause, there is nothing to be said against it, though what is so, to be duly considered: And though Batchelours as Mr. Fuller saith of them in his holy and prophane State, may be the strongest Stake in the Hedge of the Common wealth, and the best work, and
the greatest merit, for the Publick have some∣times proceeded from such, while both in affecti∣on and means they have Married and Endowed the publick; yet were there no other Stakes in the Hedge, it would soon fall to the ground, for when these are pluck't up what would uphold the Hedge? They do nothing honestly towards the worlds continuance, encreasing God's Sub∣jects or the Kings; and they come under the Condemnation of that Vulgar Sentence, Nascitur indignus, per quem non nascitur alter, that they are unworthy to Live themselves who are not in∣strumental of giving life to others. 3. They do well who in the season of it seek a suitable Companion, and so do they who ac∣cept being suitably sought to; both do well: they enter into an Estate, wherein there are more hands to labour, more wits to advise, more means to comfort one another; and otherwise to do good. They both do well, and there∣fore should not be discouraged in it: Parents should not be too hard in giving their consent, though the Match is not alwayes to their minds, they should remember that they are made in Heaven, and that there is a Secret Providence inclining the Hearts of Persons in this matter, which they should be wary how they withstand, least they should do as Sampsons Parents did, who for a while opposed his motion of that nature, Not knowing that it was of the Lord. Judg. 14.3, 4▪
Having faithfully and discreetly advised their Children, they should not too Tyranically im∣pose upon them. We know by long Experience that forc'd Matches any way seldome do well: the Persons sought too should not be too hasty in their rejections, even there where they don't see reason presently to accept; nor indeed is it prudence to be too hasty any wayes in that to which deliberation is called for. It is often seen in the World, that they who are forward to reject the Marchantable are at last glad of he refuse. They should not be too hasty, I say, in rejecting. He that giveth his Virgin in Marriage, saith the Apostle, doth well. 1 Cor. 7.38. And so doth She who gives her self with her Parents leave; and though he adds, but he that giveth her not in Marriage doth better, he only means in some respects, and at the present juncture, as he said before for the present distress, and to avoid trouble, as he saith, verse 28. If a Virgin marry she hath not sinned, nevertheless such shall have trouble in the flesh, and that so she might have liberty for things of a Spiritual nature, verse 34. But in other respects and according to the common order appointed by God, she doth well. They have done well both in seeking and accepting, who are the Occasion of our Assembling here at this time; and it is with great Approbation, I suppose, on all hands that we meet to Ce∣lebrate it publickly: That they may go on
to do well, let it be our united Prayers. 4. Let not them who are not alone, but united in Wedlock, be as if they were alone; though in some respects I grant they should be so, and that according to Apostolical pre∣cept; they that have Wives, should be as if they had none. 1 Cor. 7.27. i. e. in respect of their mind∣ing Spiritual and Heavenly things: but let them not be as if they were alone in respect of their duty to each other; let not the Husband be so in neglecting the duty of the Husband, nor the Wife in neglecting the duty of the Wife: let not the Wife be so by the Husbands neglect, nor the Husband by the Wives: let them not be un∣sociable after they have Covenanted and Vowed a consortship, and solemnly plighted their Troth to each other: better be alone in reality than live so, or as if they were so, after they are wed∣ded. I here add, let their Company with each other, be better than their being alone: Solitari∣ness is better than some Company: Yoke-fel∣lows should endeavour to endear one another by their mutual sweet Society. A Minister by vertue of his Calling indeed is to be much alone, if he is so in his Study, he should not be so when he comes out of it too; and he should alwayes find that of his Companion to be instar Omnium, in the room of and beyond all other. To these who are now to be put together, I pray they may never be alone more but when
occasionally asunder, they may yet be present with each other in Spirit and Effigie, that God may be alwayes graciously present with them both, and that they may draw out the thread of their lives with an equal extent here, and inhe∣rit life eternal together in the other world. It is not good that the man should be alone. We come now in the Second place to the resolution here∣upon. I will make him an help meet for him: which doth resolve us in what God did, that he did make such an help; and in that as an Observation. Obser. That God did make the Woman to be an help for the man. So did Adam call the person God brought to him, to be a meet help: con∣text verse 23. I shall speak to this in a very few words, as few as it can be shown in: in what respect the Woman is an help meet for the man, and hint the use that is to be made of it. The Woman is or should be an help meet for the man in these following respects. Scil. As She answers natural, oeconomical and Theological ends; and how she doth each, I shall show presently: but I must first take notice, that the word here rendred Meet, is in the Origi∣nal, As before him. Jerom reads it, Lake to him: the Seventy, According to him: as before him. i. e. In his Image of his own kind, like to him, which should be as it were, a Second self, Graceful in his eyes; grateful to him, alwayes as it were
in his sight, and assistant in the work of his life; lifting as it were over against him, as the word is rendred, over against him. Josh. 5.13. So that it issues in what it is here rendred, Meet for him. Brutes are an help to man for many ends, whence they are called Jumenta, but they are not a meet help in this sence; they don't a∣gree with him specie, they be not associated with him. &c. The woman is made to be and is a meet help to man. 1. As She answers natural ends, and so is, 1. A most sweet and intimate companion, and an entire friend; there is no stricter or sweeter friendship than conjugal; as it was the first in the world, so it is most natural. 2. Is helpful in the propagating of mankind. Ruth 4.11. She helps build up the House. 2. As She answers oeconomical ends, and so is assistant in Family affairs, in the Government of the House, ordering things within doors, es∣pecially (for the house is her Center) and she should be an help as before him, should be a keeper at home. Tit. 2.5. Not a rash wrambler abroad: the Shell-fish is an Hierogliphick hereof, which carries her house on her head: like which there∣fore the painter drew Venus. The woman should keep at home, Educating of her Children. Prov. 1.8, 9. 1 Tim. 5.14. Keeping and improving what is got by the industry of the man. The wise man finds a glass wherein good Wives may see themselves. Prov. 31.
3. As She answers Theological or Divine ends. 1. And so is an assistant to him in his Piety, and Honesty, a promoter of that; the Apostle supposeth them Praying, yea & Fasting together. 1 Cor. 7.5. 1 Pet. 3.7. So the man and woman, as one saith, are a Domestick Church. Indeed Julian the Apostate, Scoft at the Womans being a meet help in this respect, in that she was the person that drew man into Sin, that seduced him: It is true, She being seduc'd her self, se∣duced him; but it doth not follow, but that She was given for another end, and often attains it, and the missing it then should make Women the more wary for the future: And though the Apostle doth suppose them in a Married Estate, more involved in the cares of this life. 1 Cor. 7.32, 33, 34. Yet he supposeth them like∣wise helpers forward of each other in Faith & Love. verse 16. & 1 Pet. 3.1, 2. 2. So an helper of his Infirmity, a remedy of unlawful Love; to avoid Fornication, saith the Apostle, Let every man have his own wife, &c. 1 Cor. 7.2. So that Satan tempt not for incontinen∣cy, verse 5. The woman is a meet help as she answers these ends. USE. Did God make her for this end? Hence first man needed her, and therefore now should not despise her.
2. She was made for man, and therefore should not despise but honour him, and yield Subjection to him as her Head; the Apostle in∣fers this from her being made for man out of man, after man, and yet falling before him. 1 Cor. 11.8, 9. 1 Tim. 2.12, 13, 14 3. Hence of the more publick Service the man is, the greater helper is the woman called▪ to be, that becomes his Wife; And the more Service she doth to God and her Generation, while she doth the duty of her place, and is the more happy therein; a good encouragement to Marry good Ministers, though they should live but poorly, and not have their reward in this Life. 4. Hence they who be not meet helps, do not answer their end; they who are an afflicti∣on and scourge to man, pervert the Order of God, and nature, and of such an one (saith Chrysostome) adjutorium Diaboli non viri 5. Hence man is to use her as a meet help, as a companion, not as a Servant, and should a∣gain be an help, and an head to her. Eph. 5.28. 6. Hence men may see what Yoke fellows they are to choose, and what help to expect from them, and they who want may be encou∣raged for to seek: Si qua voles apte nubere nub pari, every good man won't suit every good woman, et e contra.
7. Let the woman be what she was made for, a meet help, not an unmeet hindrance; that is the description given of the woman in the Text, God might have said, I will make a woman, or a wife, but he rather chose this Periphrasis expressive of her Character, show∣ing what she should be to her Husband. And this is the blessing that I wish to the Bride, who now appears here, that she may every way answer this Character: And to you Sir, who are now seeking a Title, or rather the Con∣firmation of your Title in such an one, that you may experience according to your desires and expectation, and may acknowledge God in his Love hath brought her to you. I shall Commend you further to his Blessing, when that Office is done you, for which you are now come hither. Tibi Domine.
