S3209BA [ocm]69648940 185089
PROPOSALS FOR THE PRINTING A GRAND ABRIDGMENT Of all the Common and Statute LAW of England to this present Year, 1674. By W. Sheppard Esquire. Allowed of by Authority. THE above mentioned Author formerly published an Essay in this kind, entituled, An Epitome, &c. which Book had so good a reception from the Learned in the Law, that the Author had encourage∣ment to undertake a more Comprehensive Work of the same nature (being an Abridgment of all the Old and New Law, as well Common as Statute to this present year 1674.) and hath imployed the greatest part of his time these Fourteen years last past, in compiling this so great and necessary a Work now finished. And that the said Book might be of general use, it is Writ in the English Tongue, and so methodized in an Alphabetical Order under proper Heads with Quotations out of the Common and Statute Law, for confirma∣tion of what is writ, that not only the Professors of the Law, but all others, may have a Sure Guide upon all occa∣sions readily to find out what is in the Common or Statute Law of England. And whereas the said Book (now Printing at three Printing-houses) will consist of two Volumes Print∣ed according to the Specimen; the Charges whereof will be very great: Therefore the Undertakers, for an invita∣tion to all those that will Assist in carrying on so Great and Necessary a Work, Propose as followeth: 1. That whosoever will subscribe, and pay into the hands of any one of the Persons here undernamed, the Summe of 27 s. in manner and form following, shall be intituled to a complete Book in Quires, viz. 10 s. in hand to be im∣ployed towards the present Charge, and 17 s. more when the said Book shall be finished and delivered accordingly. II. And for the Security of all persons that shall subscribe to any of the parties here under-named, the party who shall receive such subscription will give a Bill under his hand and seal for the delivery of the said Book when Printed, upon payment of the said summes in manner aforesaid. III. Note, That the said Book will not be sold for less than 40 s. Bound to any but the Subscribers. Henry Twyford, in Vine Court, Middle Temple. Thomas Bassett, at the George, near St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet-street, and in Westminster-Hall. William Lee, at the Turks-Head in Fleet-street. Francis Tyton, at the Three Daggers in Fleet-street. Thomas Parkburst, at the Three Bibles in Cheapside. Rob. Horne, at the South-Entrance of the Royal-Exchange. Henry Brome, at the Gun, West-End of St. Pauls. Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Pauls Church-Yard. Samuel Heyrick, at Grays-Inn-Gate in Holborn. Robert Boulter, at the Turks-Head in Cornbill. Thomas Passenger, at the Three Bibles on London-Bridge. William Battersby, at Thavies-Inn-Gate in Holborn. Will. Leake and Jo. Leake, at the Crown in Fleet-street. Thomas Archer, under St. Dunstan's Church, Fleet-street. Thomas Burrell, under St. Dunstan's Church, Fleet-street. Edward Berry, in Grays-Inn. Jos. Robinson, at Lincolns-Inn-Gate. John Leet, at Chancery-Lane end next Fleet-street. Nich. Cox, over against Furnivals-Inne in Holborn
