G2278 [ocm]08153384 204218
GOOD NEWES FOR ENGLAND: OR, Comfortable Tydings from Ireland, to all true hearted Protestants. BEING A REAL RELATION HOW SIR Simon Harcourt, Sergeant Major Berry, and Captain Paramore, with the joint Assistance of divers other Protestants, obtained a fa∣mous Victory over the Rebels at Kildare. As also how the Lord Dulon was grievously wounded, and a Kinsman of his taken prisoner, with the number of those that were slain on each side. Sent from the English Quarters at Lyons, within four miles of Dublin by Alderman Guy his Son of Bristoll, Cornet to Sir Richard Grenvile, Mar. 10. London, Printed for ROBERT WOOD, 1641.
THE PROTESTANTS LAST LAST VICTORY OVER FHE REBELS IN IRELAND. DEAR BROTHER: I Received your Letter of the 10. of Febr. but had never opportunity or leasure to recommend my true re∣spects to you, untill this fit occasion prof∣fered; for we have bin so busied upon strict duty ever since, that we have had scarce time to eat our small victuals we get, for the Rogues are up in every place about us, so that we are every day upon some march or service; but this Bearer hath faithfully promised to deliver this with his own hands unto you: and
therfore I will to satisfie your request, relate to you such Occurrents, and passa∣ges, as have lately fallen out here; for my own part, I have not bin well ever since our businesse at Ashinhanon, by means of a fall I got homewards. Yet on monday morning I made a shift to get to Horse, and marcht with our troop towards Kildare; upon a Re∣port of a skirmish at Lunderston between the Rebels and Lieutenant Col. Hurcliffi where the Rebels were put to slight, and thereupon the L. Dulon removed from Caterlaff, and came towards Woodstocke, that night we lay at Clanmor, and the Rebels at Bolton. On Tuesday morning we had a Com∣mand from Sir Simon Harcourt by three a clock to march towards Kildare, we were in all 180. Horse, and 1300 foot, at our going forth, and by 8. of the clock in the morning we had intelligence by the people of our Party, that the Rebels had marched all night, and were in num∣ber at least 6000. horse and foot, which
made us somwhat pause upon the mat∣ter, and at a place of advantage (within a mile of Kildare) to make a stand. But within half an hour, we had News that Serieant Maior Berrie, and Captain Parramore were within an hours march of us and made all the hast they could from their quarters towards us, with their Companies, and two pie∣ces of Ordnance, which we found to be true, which put a great deal of courage unto us, and so wee marcht onwards to∣wards Kildare, where we understood the Rebels were at Water, a little Town four miles off, and that they were in∣trenching themselves there. Which to prevent, we made all the haste we could to them, and about four in the Afternoon we perceived them. Captain MARRO was the first Troop appointed to fall on, and Ser∣ieant Maior Berrie of the Foot, which was bravely seconded by all our Forces there, playing against them couragiously
But the sport lasted not above half an hour before a great storm of Raign fell on us, which hindered our play, and the Rebels retreated into a wood, near Water Town, where they rested untill 7. a clock at night; at which time our sire-locks gave them such a salutation, that being seconded by the rest of our Forces, they were enforced to leave the wood, and fly towards Woodstock, which gave us such contentment, that we failed not to pur∣sue them, untill they came to Bernee, where we fell upon their Carriages, and provision, Sir Richard Grenvile took a Kinsman of the Lord Dulons with his own hand, in the Chase we also took 35 of their horse, amongst whom was one Lieutenant Fitz-James, whose horse and furniture came to my lot; we also took three pieces of Iron Ordinance, four wag∣gons of Ammunition, seven waggons of Bread, Cheese, and Butter (which made us very merry) 700. Cattell. 3000. sheep, and above 200. Swine, with above 400. mens Armes; with which we bravely
marcht towards Kildare where we mer∣rily cheer'd our bellies, and last night came home into our quarters. We lost in all this service about 97. men, amongst whom was Lieutenant Cannock, and Captain Marroes Quarter∣master, and of our own Company Will Parker, and the Cutler, and no more, Fitz-James saith, that the Lord Dulon received a shot in one of his thighs, and was in great danger, and that they lost above 1000. men in the skirmish and flight, and some other News upon hear∣say I could write, but that I leave till the next conveniency, and to the Relation of Sir Richard his man, and desire you to hasten him away to my Mother: for I cannot be quiet till I hear from her, pray if you come not over, let me hear from you at every opportunity, and what News at home, for we hear a 100. lyes. You shall not fail to receive Letters from me by every Post that comes from us, as long as I am able to write to you. Commend me to Edward Seamor, Mrs.
Kate, and her Mother, and with my true respects commended to your self. I com∣mit you to the protection of the highest, and will ever remain Yours in what I may, WIL. GUY, From Lyons, Mar. 10. 1641. FINIS.
