I898 807.g.5.[7] R232327 99888848 196360
English version of royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT By the Lords Iu∣stices and Council. Maurice Eustace Canc. Orrery. Mountrath. WHEREAS the Duke of Albemarle General of all his Majesties Armies, and the Duke of Ormond, Lord Steward of his Majesties house-hold, have by writing under their hands and Seals bearing date the se∣cond of March 1660. Pursuant to the Authority unto them given, by his Majesties gracious Declaration of the thirtieth of November in the aforesaid year appointed the Right honorable Henry Lord Viscount Moo of Droghedagh, Arthur Lord Viscount Valentia, Iohn Lord Viscount Massereene, Francis Lord Angyer, Iohn Lord Kingston, Richard Lord Baron of Colloony, Sir Iames VVare Knight, Sir Theophilus Iones Knight, Col. Arthur Hill, Col. Marcus Trevor, Cap. Robert Fits-Gerrald, Sir Robert Newcomen, Baronet Sir Arthur Forbess, Bart. Sir Richard Lane Rnit. and Baronet, Sir Patrick Weyms Knight, Sir George Lane Knight, Sir Iohn Stevens Knight, Sir Audley Mervin; Knight, Sir William Flower Knight, Col. Chidey Coote, Col. Francis Fowke, Serjant-Major Thomas Harman, Serjant-Major George Rawden, Cap. Hans Hamilton, Cap. Robert VVard, Cap; Richard Gething, Brian Iones Esq; Doctor William Perty, Richard Stevens, Iames Cuff, and Samuell Bthurst Esqs and Alderm. Daniel Bellingam, or any five or more of them to be the Persons intrusted by virtue of the said Declaration, who are to do every Act and thing intrusted to their care by the said Declaration, and to let, and set, for the best advantage, and to the ends in the said Declaration expressed the several securities appointed by the said Declaration, for the satisfying the respective personal Arrears of all Commissioned Officers, their Heirs, or Assigns, who were in Regiments, Troops, and Companies, raysed in Ireland, or transported out of England, and served his Royal Majestie CHARLES the first of blessed memorie, or his Majestie that now is, in the Wars in Ireland, at any time before the fifth day of Iune 1649 other then such who have received Lands for their ay due unto them since the fifth day of Iune 1649, And whereas all former Leases or Contracts for Leases, made by the late u∣surped Authority for any of the said securities are now void. It is therefore hereby declared to the end all Persons who are in posses∣sion of any of the Lands and Tenements, or of any of the Houses and Lands, thereunto belonging, which are by the said Declara∣tion set apart for the satisfying of the Commissioned Officers as aforesaid, as also such Persons who are desirous to become Te∣nants unto the said Trustees, to any of the Premisses aforesaid, may have timely notice given them when to attend the said Tru∣sees, for the makeing of agreements with them for the same, that the forfeited Lands and Houses, in the Respective Counties, Towns, and Corporations hereafter mentioned, are appointed to be sett and lett by the said Trustees, on the several dayes here∣after set down at the Custome house in Dublin (viz.) The Town of Droghedagh Friday the 26. April 1661. The Town of Naas Friday the 26. April The County of VVicklow Munday the 29. of April. The Countyes of Longford and Lerim Wednesday the 1. of May The County of Donnegal, and the forfeited Lands within the mile line, Thursday the 2. of May. The city of Kilkenny, Friday the 3. of May. The Town of Trim, Navan, and Athboy, Munday the 6. of May. The Town of Kells, Thomas town, and Callen, Tuesday the 7. of May. The Towns of VVexford, Ross and Inesteag, Wednesday the 8. of May The citty of Waterford, Thursday the 9. of May. The Town of Clonmel, Wednesday the 15 of May. The Towns of Dungarvan, Feathard and city of Cashel, Friday the 17. of May. The citty of Limerick, and the Town of Kilmallock, Munday the 20. of May. The Town of Galway, Wednesday the 22 of May. The town of Athlone, Thursday the 23. of May. The citty of Dublin, Munday the 27 of May. And whereas it is supposed that there are many persons who upon Leases or contracts for Leases, from the late usurped Au∣thority, have made considerable Improvements upon Houses in the Towns aforesaid, As also others who had Leases or Con∣tracts for Leases granted unto them by the said usurped Authority of several other of the Houses within the aforesaid Towns, who made a considerable advantage thereby by setting and letting the same to under Tennants, who likewise made Improve∣ments thereon, It is therefore hereby Declared that it is the intention of the said Trustees, that the Person or persons who have made such considerable Improvements upon any of the Houses as aforesaid, shall be preferred unto the Tennancy of the same whe∣ther he or they be head Tennants or under Tennants. And to the end likewise that the Persons concerned as aforesaid may not ut themselves to an unnecessary charge in attending the said Trustees, and soliciting there business themselves when the same annot betimely dispatcht, they are directed by the said Trustees; to Authorize: (if they think fit) by Letters of Attourney uch Person or Persons in whom they can repose trust to solicit the dispatch of the Premises, whereupon the said intrusted Persons nform us that Leases shall be perfected for the same to all intents and purposes, as if the same had been done by the Persons them∣elves. Provided that the said Letters of Attourney be duely perfected before the cheif Magistrates of the Towns wherein such Letters of Attourney are to be made, or before two of the next Iustices of Peace, and certificates produced before the said Tru∣tees from such cheif Magistrates or Iustices of the Peace, that the said Letters of Attourney were so perfected before them as afore∣aid, nd it is further Declared by the said Trustees, that if any of the Persons concerned as aforesaid shall neglect to give their attendance on the said Trustees either by themselves or their lawful Attourneys at the respective times appointed as aforesaid the said Trustees will proceed to the disposing of their several houldings to such Persons as will give most for the same, And all Majors, Sheriffs, and other the cheif Magistrates, and Officers, in the several Towns and Counties aforesaid respectively are hereby required to publish this Proclamation immediatly after sight thereof in the most publick and remarkable places in the several Towns and Counties aforesaid, Dated at the Council-Chamber the 17. day of April 1661. Io. Armachanus Massereene. VV. Caulfeild. R. Coote. Hen. Tichborne. Tho. Pigot. Io. Bisse. Fra. Hamilton. Art. Forbess. Robert Forth. Arthur Hill. GOD SAVE THE KING. Dublin Printed by William Bladen, by special Order. Anno Dom. 1661.
