M20B C.112.f.9[50] R231355 99888635 195854
THE Vniversal Scorbutick Pills, AND Radical Purifier of Nature. Operating by Purgation and Vrine, with the greatest ease and success in various Diseases and Infirmities: gently cleansing the whole Body (by those two principal evacuations) from all Scorbutick, Corrupt and depraved humours: thereby casting out the Seeds of Diseases; restoring decayed Parts, and rectifying disordered Faculties; correcting and quickning the Digestions, opening Obstructions, and relieving the Head, Stomack, Spleen, Kidneys, Bowells, &c. pained or otherwise distempered: purifying the Bloud and Nervous juice, procuring thereby a sound habit of Body. Thus working as a true Catholick Purgative and Diuretick; the provoking matter that causeth Pains, Oppressi∣ons, Gripes, Fluxes, Feavors, Convulsions, &c. is discharged by Stools and Ʋrine. The seminal and continuing Causes of the Scurvy, Consumptions, Dropsies, Jaundice, Agues, &c. is hereby daily diminished and rooted out. Salt Rheums, itching, sharp, and cor∣roding humours, the foundation and supply of Rheumatisms, Gouts, Inflammations, Tumors, Impostumes, Ʋlcers, Kings Evil, deformities of the skin, &c. is hereby gradu∣ally drained out and exhausted, by the use of this wholesome abstersive, and balsamic cleanser; lightning and freeing the Body from all impurities and superfluous humours, from whence Diseases take their rise, and receive their growth. These Pills are durable in full vertue many years; most necessary provision for all Country Inhabitants, Travellers, Souldiers, Seamen, Planters, &c. ready upon all occasions for prevention or curing: successfully proved upon divers persons of Honour and Quality, for many years in a constant Practice, by the Author an eminent Physician: And fortu∣nate are they that are provided with this singular medicine for their help. The Antivenereal Pills, or Magnetick Remedy. Being a Specifick Antidote against the spreading virulency of the Venereal Lues, or French Disease, running of the Reins, and other dangerous symptoms arising thence. The most secure and private Remedy, now in great request and use, against this surpri∣zing and deceitful lurking Malady. Prepared by the same Author, most expert in these Cures, as by his History and Mystery of this Disease, lately Printed, fully appears. LONDON, Printed for the Undertakers, 1675. Who faithfully procures these choice Medicines sealed up, from E. M. Dr. of Physick; with directions for their use in all Cases: Sold by Mr. Horn, at the South Entrance of the Royal-Exchange; Mr. Basset, at the George in Fleetstreet; Mr. Hensman in West∣minster-Hall; Booksellers.
To the judicious and discreet Reader. THE Honour and Esteem of Physick in former Ages was so great, that Kings and Princes did own and allow Medicines (of which they were Authors and Inventors) to be called by their own Names. And Physicians of the greatest fame, as they were diligent in the preparation and tryals of Medicines; so were they ambitious their names should give Title to Medicines of their own invention and industry. But this last Age revolting from the ingenious labours of the Ancient Heroes, resigning the Art of Medicines (the most excellent and necessary part of Physick) into the hands of Tradesmen; Medicines thereby fell much lower in repute; now ac∣counted a vulgar business, that some of our Doctors (not the wisest) think it too inferiour for them to own or meddle with. But the vanity of these men, and the villany of those that betrayed this Noble Art into a Trade, does manifestly appear in a late serious Tract, intituled the Ancient and Modern Practice of Physick, examined and compared, &c. By the Author of these Medicines. Illiterate men of mean and broken fortunes, (taking advantage upon this absurd neglect of the Professors) have craftily and gainfully obtained the Custom of setting forth their trivial slight Medicines, so that some worthy Physicians now reviving the primitive practice, are at present discouraged from offering the products of their Art to the World, for fear of scandal, and being accounted in the number of those Quacks. But the publishing of Medicines thus shamefully de∣famed by ignorant pretenders, must be restored into esteem by the learned, which will prove most advantagious to the people: and it is their interest to incourage skilful experienced Artisti, that they may not lock up their rare inventions, and fortunate experiments, confining them within the narrow compass of a private practice; but rather that they expose their Arcanum' to publick use, that all who stand in need may partake thereof. Thus the meanest of the people, may purchase the best of Medicines: and such as travel abroad, or live remote from able Physicians, may be furnished with able Curing Medicines. Those who will not undergo, or cannot bear the charge of a course of Physick, may receive great relief by a single Medicine. And such as languish under the means, the places of their abode does afford, will have help brought to them from far. Physicians then will be stimulated to out vye and excell each other in the rarity and excellency of their Remedies, being to undergo a publick Tryal. And when men of the greatest knowledge and experience shall thus produce their Comprehensive Ca∣tholicks and appropriate specifick Medicines; a treasury will be laid open, and what is most ex∣cellent and rare, will be known and conveyed through the Nation, for the ease and relief of the Infirm and languishing. These publick great advantages, as great reasons being considered; the learned Physician need not be ashamed to publish an extraordinary Medicine of his own designment and elaboration (although ignorant bold fellows have abused the Custom) for if Physicians must shun all that they do, then must they leave their practice too. And if a Printed Sermon, or any piece of learning, cried about the Streets, be no disparagement to the work nor the Author, why the publishing of a Medicine? If a Treatise of Diseases, of Anatomy, &c. be laudable; why not a discourse or dis∣covery of an incomparable Medicine? If speculations and notions of the Head; why not works of the Hands and Head, being serviceable to many thousands that are not at all benefited by learned discourses? If Persons of Honour and Quality expose their Cattle and produce of their Land, at Market and Fair, why not men of Arts, the products of their learned ingenious la∣bours, being useful to the people? He that picks straws all day is as serviceable to the publick▪ as he that studies and labours many years to acquire a noble Medicine, and then conceals it. And thus much by way of Apology and Defence, to obviate the rash Censure of some inconsiderate men, and si∣lence the reproachful tongues of others, envious at this undertaking, as being contrary to their interest. Now concerning these Medicines, they are not asserted infallible (since man is mortal) but as certain▪ efficacious, and full of help as lies in the power of natural means: and this experience for many years fully confirms: and allowing one in ten may miss of their hope herein; yet it were great imprudence to refuse the tryal hereof (at  rate) not knowing whether you be one of the nine to be Cured, or the tenth that may fail: and th ery  will not have cause to complain, for as much as a mitigation or intermission will be gained even bm. , if you will trust learning and experience, Art and indefatigable industry, for a safe and powerful  ed and improved by long Practice, you have it here.
