R1147 [ocm]12248565 197469
THE RESOLUTION Of the Earle of ESSEX To the King most Excellent MAIESTIE. WHEREIN Is declared his Honourable Intentions to attaine nothing but what shall tend to advancement of His Majesties honour and the good of the Common-wealth. Whereunto is annexed, The Declarations of the Lords and Commons concerning the Actions of the Malignant Partie of this Kingdome. Ordered that this be printed and published, Hen. Elsing, Cler. Pal. D. Com. August 13. Printed for T. Rider. 1642.
The Resolution of His Excellency the Earle of ESSEX. THE Lords and Com∣mons assembled in Parliament, having practised by severall endeavours to sup∣presse the actions of the evill affected part of this King∣dome, to which end they cut off all Mono∣polies and Taxes that lay heavie upon the Subject, withall seeking to reforme all
those misdemeanours which were lately crept into the Church and Common∣wealth, bringing to condigne punish∣ment all such as were offenders, that their examples might deterre others from com∣mitting the like wicked crimes and Mis∣demeanours. Which the Malignant partie seeing and knowing that their painted dissimulation would not endure the test if brought to tryall they by all meanes that possibly they could, endeavoured to cause a divi∣sion betweene the King and Parliament, striving to foment jealousies and Feares, which were not thought of, and there∣fore causelesse not of any dangerous con∣sequence, either to His Majesties Honour or Person. Neverthelesse so farre they prevailed with His Majestie, as that he absented him∣selfe from His parliament, and withdraw himselfe into the North, where after some Moneths residence they caused His Ma∣jesty to ingage himselfe in a warre against
His Parliament, and so consequently a∣gainst His Subject. To which end by His Majesties com∣mand the Gentey and Commonalty of Yorkshire were caused to bring in their Horses and Armes. Which being effected, these new raised Forces was cau ed to march against Hull, where they besieged it, using many Ho∣stile Actions and attempts against the In∣habitants of the said Towne. Which the Lords and Commons being informed of, and finding the great detri∣ment that such actions and warlike at∣tempts might doe to the Subject, if suffered to goe on; wherefore they sent to his Ma∣jesty a Petition for Pacification. Which Petition was received by His Majesty with little or no show of Love or kindnesse, as may appeare by the se∣quell of His Answer to the said Petiti∣on. Which the Lords and Commons find∣ing, thought it high time to secure the
whole Kingdome, His Majesty being re∣solved to proceed in the course which he had begun, wherefore they resolved that an Army should be raised under the com∣mand of His Excellencie the Earle of Essex. Which he according to his Allegeance to His Majesty, and duty to his Countrey, with willingnesse accepted of it, for which cause they wrought His Majesty to be in∣censed against him. Which caused His Excellencie to de∣clare his Resolution, that he is resolved to put nothing in Act, but what what shall tend to His Majesties Honour, safety and security, and the good both of Church and Religion. Likewise the Lords and Common doe declare, That they will alwayes preferre the generall good before their owne lives and fortunes, for the defence and mainte∣nance whereof they are resolved to hazard the same.
The Declaration of the Lords and Com∣mons assembled in Parliament. THe Lords and Commons doe declare, that they only aime at, and desire no∣thing more then to maintaine the pu∣rity and power of Religion, and to honour the King in his just and Regall Prero∣gatives, esteeming nothing like the Liberty, Peace, and Safety of the Kingdome, nor think∣ing any thing to be too good to be hazarded in discharge of their consciences for obtaining it: Alwayes reposing themselves in the protection of Almighty God, which they are confident will never be wanting in his blessing towards them, while they seeke his glory, as they have found him wonderfully going along with them in all their proceedings.
WE the Lords and Commons are resolved to expose our Lives and Fortunes for the defence and maintenance of the true Protestant Religion, the Kings Person, Honour and E∣state, the Power and Priviledge of Parliament and the just Right and Liberties of the Sub∣ject. And Wee doe require all those who have any sence of Piety, Honour, or Compassion, to help a distressed State, and to come in unto our aid, and assistance: This being the true cause for which we raise an Army, under the Command of the Earle of Essex, with whom in this cause wee will live and dye. Ordered that this be printed and published, Hen. Elsing, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
