P47A [ocn]318212165 208393
A Copy of a LETTER Which was sent to one call'd a QUAKER, Occasion'd by a Book lately Publish'd, Intituled, Moderation exciting to Reconciliation amongst that People. 22th (Month call'd) June, 1698. My Friend, I Have Read over the Book of W. R's. you sent me last Night, and thank you for it; I perceive it is of the same tendancy for a Reconcilement, with that of Benjamin Cole's, Charles Harris, and others, formerly Printed, which was, by the other Party, greatly Rejected: and in∣deed they had great reason for their so doing, if what they had Printed concerning them were True, viz.
That John Story, John Wilkinson, and that Party, were Ministers of the Devil, and Ministers of Antichrist, Answer to W. Rogers, in Postscript and that a Cursed Spirit was entered into their Hearts and Souls. See their Epistle of Caution, p. 4. 1681. And charged W. Rogers, in particular, To be Sealed down under Eternal Judg∣ment and Condemnation, from GOD, for ever, except he Repented. And also said, In this State (exceptthou (W. Rogers) canst find a place of Re∣pentance) thou art reserved in Chains of Darkness, unto the Judgment of the Great Day. Answer to W. Rogers, &c. p. 4. & 16. Printed 1682. And that the said W. Rogers, and others of his Friends, were Betraying Judas's, Wolves, Doggs, Devils Incarnat, G. White∣head's Judg∣ment Fixt, &c. Preface, Printed 82. and that He, and They, were Hea∣thens, Athiests, and the like. I say, these things Considered, they could not accept of any offers for a Re∣conciliation without Repentance; especially considering how their great Apostle and Prophet, viz. George Fox, (who said, when Living, He had Power to Bind and to Loose whom he pleas'd,) had Sealed up their Doom, (and which he ordered not to be Opened till after his Death) in these words, viz. And as for this Spirit of Rebellion, and Opposition, that hath risen Formerly, and Lately, it is out of the Kingdom of GOD, and Heavenly Jerusalem; and is for JƲDGMENT and CONDEMNATION, with all its BOOKS, WORDS, and WORKS. This was Printed in their Yearly Paper, 91. And Reprin∣ted in George Fox's Jour∣nal. 1694. p. 616. Thus you may plainly see, how 'tis Impos∣sible there can be any true Reconciliation whilst these their Testimonies are upon Record, (and, as they pretended, given forth by the Spirit of GOD) until they come to Repentance themselves, and Acknowledge that they have been greatly Mistaken, and that they have been Acted, and Guided by a Wrong,
Lying, and Deceitful Spirit; I say, till this be first done, there can be no true Peace, Unity, or Reconciliation a∣mongst you; for the great Divisions of your People were not chiefly, nor indeed at all, as in the Apostles Days, some were for Paul, and some for Apollos, &c. (as W. R's. Book seems to intimate) for they were owned to be Good Men, on all sides, and Ministers of CHRIST; but your Preachers have Sentenced one another to be Ministers of the Devil, and Ministers of Antichrist, and that a Cursed Spirit was enter'd into their Hearts and Souls, and that they were Devils Incarnate, and the like: Now, if your Mini∣sters and People be such, What Man that truly fears GOD, can have any Fellowship, or, in the least, desire Union with them? I believe not any. And therefore my Advice is, That before any Proposals for an Accomodation, or Reconcilement be made amongst you, that a Solemn FAST be Proclaimed throughout all your Tribes, and begg of the ALMIGHTY (as Ezra, of old, did) That HE would shew them the RIGHT WAY; and no doubt, if they did Truly, and Sincerely Humble themselves, and Implore HIS Divine Assistance, but it might be Granted to them, as it was to those that Fasted and Afflicted themselves, in days past. Ezra 8. 21, 23. But till this Humility, and Sencible State be come to, [by both Parties] all their Unities, and Felowships, will be but as so many Combinations, and Poli∣tical Designs, to keep up their Reputation and Esteem a∣mongst the People, and to advance their Trades and Worldly Interests; Which are, and ought, to be Rejected, and Testi∣fied against by all that truly Fear GOD, and that hate Hypocrisy, and every Evil and Deceitful Way, as doth Your True Hearted Friend J. P. What Peace; so long as the Whoredoms of Jezebel, and her Witchcrafts are so many. 2 Kings 9. 22.
