O203 [ocn]489263224 208658
The Old Gentlewomans last Legacy o her Sons and Daughters upon her Death-Bed, a little before she departed out of this World. With her good Instructions, that she gave them to live a godly sober Life, for the good of their own Souls, till God call them out of this VVorld. Tune of My bleeding Heart. Licensed according to Order. woodcut of a man and a woman at the bedside of an elderly woman woodcut depicting angels in heaven MY own dear Children understand, I would wish you to obey your Mother's command You see my Sickness in my Bed, Think on my words when I am dead; Fear God and keep up his Command, All things will prosper you take in hand. Avoid bad company and make no strife, And be rareful how you lead your life; And be charitable to the poor, Then God's Blessing will ne'er depart your door, Fear God, &c. Keep God's Commandments night and day, Then you'll be out of danger every way, And serve him truly in your heart, Then of Heaven you'll have your part. Fear God, &c. In your Maker ever put your trust, And forsake all works that are unjust, And defraud not any man I say, But know your own then every way. Fear God, &c. Keep a clear Conscience that is pure, Then Gods mercy will to you endure, Slander no man in any case, For a lying tongue is ever base. Fear God, &c. Be not pufft up with that Sin of Pride, That Evil the Lord cannot abide: If ye do any good to any man, Do not hit him i'th' teeth with it agen. But fear God, &c. Do not be drunk in any thing, The Scripture says it's a wicked Sin, And serve the Lord and lose no time, While you are in your youth and prime: But fear God, &c. Wrong not the Widow nor the Fatherless, But relieve them in their weak distress, The Lord will repay you ten times more, 'Tis a step to Heaven to relieve the poor: But fear God and be at his command, All things will prosper you take in hand.
woodcut of three women pallbearers TRust not your own will every day, Nor of your Neighbour make a prey, But what God Almighty he doth send, My own dear Children be content: Fear God, and keep his true Command, All things will prosper you take in hand, Don't be too proud in your own ways, Nor seek not for to get a praise, Do not a flattering Tongue believe, 'Twill fail you, and will you deceive: But fear God, &c. Give reverence to the Ancient sort; For by that you'll gain and get report; And do not use to mock and jeer, It's a cursed thing, pray have a care: Fear God, &c. Be carefull of the Sabbath-day, And be sure you go to Church and pray, And mind the preaching of the word, Great comfort it will you afford: But be sure to keep the Lords Command, All things will prosper you take in hand. Do not Blaspheme the Lord of might, To swear and lye it will sink you streight; Take counsel of your dying Mother, That has care of you above all other: But be sure, &c. Be not too fluent of your Tongue, Vain speeches they will do you wrong, He's a wise man that speaks the least, Till a Man be call'd, that is the best: Fear God, &c. He's a fool that hates good counsel sure, That with itching ears will not endure: There's but one way that we can have, And but one true way our souls to sve: Take Counsel of your Mother dear, My own dear Children have a care. Now at the last be sure stand fast, that Gods Words may be your chiefest guide, And have a care you be not cast, for our manifold sins we must be try'd: And fear God, &c. My Children I'll bid you adieu, these words I speak pray bear in mind, Love one another, and to God be true, then you need not fear what Man is unkind, And obey Gods Word and his Command, Then he'll bless all things you take in hand. Printed for P. Brooksby at the Golden-Ball in Pye-Corner.
