P2600A 489263237 208672
PLOT OR NO PLOT OR, Sir W—m and his Spy foil'd. A New BALLAD. Y Lords, and ye Commons, give Ear to my Ditty, ile I tell of a Plot lately hatch'd in the City, You have heard how Mountain once brought forth a Mouse Such a Labour I sing—No Offence to the H— Derry Down A Sett of True Britons, who've ne'er sold a Vote, And scorn'd for Court-Favour to alter their Note, Met together at Dtnner, as thinking with Reason, Roast Beef in Old England cou'd ne'er be deem'd Treason. Derry Down. Tho' they met, as they tell you no Mischief intending, Yet the Proof of the Pudding is found in the spending; For as Children are frighten'd with Tales of a Ghost, So our Courtiers they're scar'd with the Sound of a Toast. Derry Down. Nor think this Alarm of our Ministry strange; For who knows what's meant by the Royal Exchange; Thed the Words Ahsent Stewards smell strong of Rebelling, Since to make 'em High-Treason—wants only the Spelling Derry Down. Sir W—m suspecting some horrid Design, That endanger'd his Place and the Protestant Line, Dispatch'd a Court-Engine, whose Ear and whose Eye, Might remark what was doing—some call him a Spy. Derry Down. But some, who were surely no Friends to the Crown, Not liking the Face of our Spy, knock'd him down: The Knight sore enraged at this cruel Disaster, Thought a Plot for his Noddle would prove a good Plaister Derry Down. Besides, as he held, in such dangerous Times, For Tories to eat and to drink were high Crimes; So no Meal-Tub or Harlequin uppy before, Produced such a Plot as this Dinner, e swre. Derry Down. To the He he complain'd then, and straight was appointed To search out this Scheme 'against the Lords High Anointed But like Scrub, when his Plot he reveal'd to Friend Martin Knowing not what to make on't, he thought made it certain Derry Down. For so closely these Tories their Project had smother'd, That the more he enquir'd the less he discover'd: So finding not one Wrinkle more in his A—, The H—e all concluded this Plot but a Farce. Derry Down. Our Statesmen then cried, since we've made such a Pother And this Plot's too young, let us cook up another; For altho' our Knight's Credit has chanc'd to miscarry, Sure all will believe Honest Gentleman Horry. Derry Down.
