P627C [ocn]489260618 208664
Mr. Patric-h's PROPHECY: OR A Prognostication of the Year 1690. WHEREIN The most considerable Mutations and Events like to befall the Kingdoms of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, and of the States of the Netherlands, &c. are foreshewed. ALSO An Account of the Proceedings of all the Twelve Months; and of the Happy Affairs of the King of Great Britain, and the States of Halland, and the great Damages likely to be∣fall France and Ireland. By J. P. Prefessor of Astrology. Licens'd according to Order. LONDON, Printed for W. W. in White-Fryers. 1690.
Mr. Patric-h's PROPHECY: OR A Prognostication of the Year 1690. &c. THat there is an excellent direction for Mis∣chief this Summer, to a Great Person in Ire∣land, (the Sun to Oppose Jupiter) which will touch about the middle of July, 1690. But in Zodiaco it toucheth not until November following. That his Friend the French Tyrant hath also this year his Sun to Square Saturn in Zodiaco, at 52 years and four Months end. But because all Directi∣ons of the Sun do generally touch six Months before the measure of time expires, therefore we may judge the first to Operate most part of the Summer; and this last of the Frenchmans in July, when Saturn comes to be Sta∣tionary on his Ascendent, and to be in Square to the Sun. in Leo, on the Radical place of his Moon. The face of Affairs is hush and private in most parts of Europe; and that they are in Dehate and Council about things of War and Peace, relating to Nations and Kingdoms, and how they shall be managed when the Season of the year shall point and require Action. And these Debates will be about some Embassador to be sent out, and to be received into a certain Kingdom now in Distress, and in order to reconcile some Differences be∣tween
Kingdom and Kingdom. But a certain Prince who hath Saturn in his Nativity, in exact Trine to Mid-heaven, or agreable to the Position of Saturn, in Trine to Mid-heaven in his Figure shall prosper well in his Affairs; but a certain other King shall be in great Distress and discontent of Mind; and much Damage shall come to the Inhabitants that are subject to the Signs Virgo and Taurus. But about the beginning of March, in Countrys subject to Aries and Libra, or their Quadrangles, there will be accomplished some design ot action of Violence, so as where Souldiers of diff∣erent Armies are near each other, there will be sudden Attacks, Eruptions and Inroads, made by Enemies into those Countries and Quarters adjoyning. That there shall be committed great Offences in Se∣cret, under pretence of Religion and Conscience, but in¦deed intended for Rebellion and Disturbance to the Go∣vernment; but these in the end, shall gain perhaps a just and plenary reward. And in the Publick will be Effusion of human Bloud, upon account of the Publick Quarrel, and mischief and discontent among the People, who because they will not be obedient, these things will tend to a far∣ther Mischief. And men pretending to Zeal and Religi∣on, will raise Murmours, and privately and maliciously spread them among the People. There is a great Blessing of advdntage towards, which none but one King of Europe can pretend unto, whom Jupiter in the Tenth House in Aries, in the radical places of their Sun, Moon, part of Fortune, Mid∣heaven, and Horoscope doth affect: And there is a King in Europe, which this Position doth exastly affect. And he and his whole Nation will find the advantage of it, which God of his Mercy grant. Yet the Common sort will have some difference with their Superiors. And per∣haps some Great Man may be Seized, and Committed, or
Impeached of notorious Crime, or Crimes. There may be some secret and private Caballing and Plotting, for which some of them may come to the Gallows in October or November following. And many Robberies and Thieve∣ries may follow in the end of these actions. But what is most remarkable, there will be great destruction of Man∣kind where Armies are near; and in next July you may expect to hear some effects of that nature. Quarrels and Differences among Great and Noble men, Violence and Confusion among the Common sort; Plundering of Cities Towns, taking Captives, with destruction bloud and ruin. That there is like to be a great Confederacy of Coin∣ers and Clippers, and other unlawful dealers in Metal; and perhaps the French Tyrant's Worship may do somthing to quadrate with this Conjunction. (2.) There may be a Plot, but whether it shall be of the First or Se∣cond sort of People, they are sure to be Punished for their Vilany according to their deserts. The observations of the 12 Months. JAnuary. This Month not cast out for Action or pub∣lick Business, it is crowned to purpose with private Consultations. A Ground-work for some new Eruptions, or Differences in Germany, and the Countries East∣wards. Some Conferrences or Treaties by Commissioners, or Ambassadors, about settling affairs and differences of those States and Princes to whom they belong. The end of this Month, or beginning of the next, will undoubtedly introduce something of Violence, or violent Actions, or perhaps private Murthers. February. This Month crys Bloud, Bloud, as it were some Warlike Musick sounding an Allarum. And not unlikely Teague-land Rebells may pay for it. Des∣ruction, Mischief and Ruin, and expence of much Bloud
also, and this in Ireland. And I think a Popish Rlot a brewing. Towards the Months end, we may hear of the taking some Towns, Castles, &c. by Surprize; and the Destruction of some others; attended by some Fight, or brisk Action by Land. A deserving Person Preferr'd and others turned out. Saturn looks Sowerly upon the French King, and sends him loss of Honour, Treachery and ill Success. March. Mighty Councils shewn in the Month of March. A wet and foul Season. Death and destruction of Common People, by War and Sedition. A Consult of great and considerable Affairs; and methinks it looks untowardly, and with on angry Face towards the Do∣minion of France. What think you of an Association there to give him a Remove? 'Tis probable, if that Peo∣ple have but Courage. It cannot kill him, but I presume it will give him a defect answerable to his Merit. April. Great and eminet Service done to the Affairs of Great Britain and its Government. Now some Plot discovered, and some of considerable Note therein concer∣ned, and perhaps some taken defacing the King's Coin, or some unlawful practice about it. Some considerable Action by Sea, or Land, the early of the year; and most probably by Sea. Danger of Death to a Great Lady. Danger of Death by Gout, to some Eminent Great Man; and loss of Hononr to others. Ireland not ye Reduced, it goes very bad with those Rebels at this time, both by Want and Destruction. May. The Season is ripe for Action now, and those whose imployment leads them to be concerned therein, seem ready, brave, bold and resolute Men. The Dutch are promised great advontage of Success both by Sea and Land against theirs and Europes Enemies; and so is England too, but not like them. But Ireland is in a bad condition, and the Rebels therein: The Country Ruined by those ru∣inous
courses they have so long lain under. Some Cities and Castles both distressed and delivered, after some Contest, and dispute about Conditions. And the French Tyrant ill and out of order, partly with Melancholy, fretting and vexing, and partly his old Disease. June. Beware London, this Month bespeaks some difference among the Governors, or some discontent about Preceedency and Order. It will be short and easily accom∣modated. A Souldier for his Merit receiveth considerable Honour and Preferment: But I think he will not long keep it, without some blemish by ill report; and it will be well if he shall not deserve it too. However. at the Month's entring there is great probability of some Mar∣tial action considerable. Great Anxiety, Mischief, and trou∣ble of mind, shall befall seme King in Ireland; and his Subjects will not be Obedient; and there will be many and great Thefts. July. The French King frets and fumes to see himself crost in his designs and enterprizes: But let me tell him, it will be worse with him yet. Holland and Scotland are to have good Success, especially the former, who will be blest with considerable advantage upon the troubler of Europe, and of his Accomplices. England also must have a share in these Actions. Honour attends the Law and Lawyers, and advanceth the Interest of England: And now look for Forreign Ambassadors, and Compliments to the King of England. August. The bloud of Europe craves revenge upon the Gallick Tyrant. Great Intelligence flyes about from King∣dom, to Kingdom, and very considerable, but not very welcom to some, though much concerned in it. Now two Kings vexing each other, and judge, for they are in a miseradle condition of Vexation and Misery. Various Re∣ports because of whipping work at hand. September. Now Fighting and Courage, falling and
running away. Arms and Violence, the effects of Rage and Vengeance. Blood and Destruction of Mankind. France is threatned with Invasion, or Insurrection in her own Bowels, to deliver from the Burthen of Tyranny. For a King shall do much mischief to the People, and it will be true. England and its King rarely favoured, all this Year, and particularly this Month, the affairs of France go ill in all parts, concerned either as Principal or Assistant. And so let it continue with them. October. This Month will be as violent as any in the Year; violence of Divers kinds where Armies are near. More Murthers and attempts of Murthers, in this than in any Month of the year; and in England as well as elsewhere▪ England has welcom News from the East parts of the World, and her Allies in those parts. November. In this Month, those who have caused much Bloudshed in Europe, will be enclined to Peace, if it may be attained. Now Armies begin to retire, and yet at parting, some Town or Principality, either Seized or delivered up, without much loss of Bloud. The French Tyrants Councils are divided, his mind disturbed, being uneasie under present Affairs: And suddenly after wretch∣ed effects shall befall him, and put him upon some action that will be an advance unto his Enemies. December. War and much Bloud spilt, and much Ague and Feaver in the French King's Territories. Let him look after the Particulars, for he will feel a large share thereof. Great news from some Territories of France; that King still sues for Peace, but it hardly takes: Some Petticoat Ambassadors in the work too. Difference be∣tween a Clergy man and a Courtier, but soon ended. FINIS.
