R1791 [ocn]767839752 212299
ROGER and MARY: Or, the loving Couple in a great Engagement, Rogers true love to his Mary Did not in the least miscarry; He Souldier-like besieg'd and enter'd, And had the prize for which he ventur'd. Tune of Moggies Jealousie. depiction of a man depiction of a woman AS Roger and Mary were toyling The length of a hot Summers day A Raking and swetting and broyling, And shaking and turning the Hay, Quoth Roger, I prethee dear Mary Lets lay us down under this Cock For I do begin to be weary And there let us take a sweet nog But first they examin'd the bottle Before they begin to repose And Mary was scrathing his noddle And he was got under her cloths: Good faith quoth he Mary i'le tell thee. Tis woundy full hot in this place For thou art ene all of a jelly As plain as the nose on my Face. Quoth Mary to help out the matter The weather is hot you know that Besides I am plumper and fatter Then Sarah that little starv'd Rat In all the hard Frost I can tell thee The very same slippery place Was never without a great jelly As plain as the nose on your face. I thought the low Countries, quoth he then Was all the time frozen i'le swear: But you were mistoken,, quoth she then, The devil a Frost e're came there, when all elsewheee was frozen from rowing And in a most pitiful case That alwayes was open and flowing As plain as the nose on your face. I'm sure yet (quoth Hodge its all Boggy, A Quagmire like shivering ground, And still it is fulsome and foggy, And for ever the place may be drown'd. Quoth she, if a Sot have comandidg The Country-may come to disgrace And drown'd for a time notwithstanding, As plain as the Nose in your Face. As all this time Mary was groping And fumbling about Rogers Head The slures began for to open. The gates of themselves they did spread: Gods bobs then quoth Robin il'e tell it And swear to it in any place, The low Countries drown'd, I do smell it As plain as the Nose on my Fae. Then Roger his courage did rally, And manfully fell to his work, And at the main breach made a sally And ply'd on his thrust like a Turk; But Roger Alas was confounded. The breach was so deep at that place, That poor Roger quickly was drowned, As plain as the Nose on his Face. When Mary had sound the disaster, That Roger could do no more work, For Hodge decay'd faster and faster And sneaking away he did lurk: For which she was wondrous civil, She would not the Lobcock disgrace, But bid him go pack to the Devil, As plain as the Nose on his Face. LONDON. Printed for P. Brooksby at the golden-ball in Pye-Corner.
