1022 S100552 99836389 657
THE COVRT OF THE MOST ILLV∣strious and most Magnificent JAMES, the first; KING Of Great-Britaine, France, and Ireland: &c. WITH DIVERS RVLES, MOST PVRE PRECEPTS, AND SELECTED DEFINITIONS liuely delineated. Principibus placuisse viris, non vltima laus est. To please the Best, best praise I doe it iudge; Let Grill be Grill: I passe not Enui's grudge. LONDON Printed by EDW: GRIFFIN, in Eliots-Court in the Little-old-Baily, neere the Kings-head. 1619.
TO THE RIGHT HONO∣rable George, Marquisse Buckingham, Vicount VILLIERS, Baron of Whaddon, Lord high Admirall of ENGLAND, Iustice in Eyre of all his Maties Forrests, Parkes, and Chases beyond Trent, Master of the Horse to his Maiesty; and one of the Gentlemen of his Maties Bedchamber: Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, and one of his Maiesties most honourable  Counsell of England, and Scotland. Right noble and most honoured Lord, AS an humble and most ob∣sequious Stranger, ha∣uing spent diuers yeares in this flourishing King∣dome, and receiued many comforta∣ble and worthy fauours, from sundry honorable and eminent personages, in this renowned Court, whose rare
and famous PRINCE, are divulged and dispersed ouer all the principallest regions of the Chri∣stian world: I could not but distast the perverse petulancie of many Poets, which laid fo many odious aspersions vpon Courts, as if no ver∣tue had in them any residence, but that like dangerous shelfes & rocks, they should be shunned and avoy∣ded, by all those that meane to square their liues and actions, by the rule of true vertue and piety: whereas ra∣ther their owne insufficiencie and weaknesse, making them incapable of high action and employment; and being altogether vnable to resist the infinite obiects of worldly temptati∣ons,
they are inforced to retire them∣selues to a certaine vnprofitable con∣templation, wherein they studie to barke and snarle at the honourable labours and indeuours of others, be∣ing in themselues absolutely immeri∣torious, to discharge the noble fun∣ctions and offices of such high places, & dignities. And because your most honoured Lorpship doth truely ex∣emplifie, what I haue vndoubtedly by long experience obserued, I haue presumed to shelter this my briefe and sincere treatise, vnder the wing of your Honourable protection. VVhose rare and admired vertues hauing to the ancient Nobility of your bloud, added the accumulati∣on of many honours and great digni∣ties, my vnworthy humble selfe in
and glorious  in all humble seruice and Your Lordships most humbl devo and ection, A. D. B.
TO THE COVRTIER OR KINDE READER, HEALTH. COurteous Courtier, and gentle Reader, hauing heere in a plaine manner, and direct method described certaine rules and precepts of a Cour∣ly and Politicall life; I must craue thy friendly censure and courteous connivence, in that I haue not in this Treatise ouer curiously or nicely tied my selfe to the obseruation of logicall rules and prescriptions. Let him who slights mee, learne this one docu∣ment, from mee, That it is the condition of truely generous and indicius men, not captiously to carpe and catch at the shaddow of words, but wisely to fasten on the substantiall matter it selfe. Now as touching the matter I doubt not, but that I haue so composed and compiled the same, as to
giue, if not plenary satisfaction, yet at least, sufficient con∣tent to the expectation of euery indifferent Courtier, espe∣cially of the vnexperienced and newly initiatd thereinto. I purpose not heere to discourse of the infelicities or (as I may so tearme them) the Gay-greivances of a Courtiers life; Neither yet to write of the immunities and commodities of the contrarie to this, a priuate life: This I suppose hath beene done by others, as cunningly and skilfully as their wit could stretch vnto: who indeed seeme to haue made this the full scope and end of their studies: namely, contumeliously to disparage the renowme of Princes; and ignominiously to in∣veigh against and calumniate the liues of Courtiers. To which Fellowes (doubtlesse) if we should giue credit. Courtiers would a great deale rather follow the Cart than Court, and more desire to liue in base and ignoble Shepheards cottages, than in or about their Princes noble Palaces. But sie vpon the ridiculous speeches of such idle Idiots; Avant, such fond opinions of men so ignorant and meerely besotted: Whose iudgement if it were not most corrupt and vniustifi∣able, we might quickly for all ciuill gouerment wholy dimo∣lished, and the Courts of Kings disgracefully relinquished. This then we must both hold and know for a truth; which al∣so is especially advertised and intimated in this litle worke, that there is no estate or condition of life whatsoeuer, but hath in it, the thornes of many miseries and shackles of in∣carcerating encombrances. And if the credit of the most wise Philosopher may gaine any credit with vs, Nihil aliud in humanis rebus magnum, nisi animus magna despiciens. This his noble Sentence will declare vnto vs that there is no∣thing in the whole world, that may iustly be termed Great, except the minde lightly regarding Great-things. Whither then thou be a Courtier, or a Country-man, 'tis neither this
nor that condition of life, which can make thee happy: but the minde well formed and informed by nature, and as it were watered with the diuine dew and grace of GODS gracious Spirit. In briefe (kinde Courtier and friendly Reader) Quam∣cunque Spartam fuerimus nacti &c. Whatsoeuer estate or office we haue obtained, from the great Steward, or rather the suprcame Prince of heauen, let vs so carry our selues therein, that to the vtmost of our power, we may adorne and beautifie the same. But if we will needes be carping and biting at, those things which appertaine not to vs; let vs on Gods name hate mens vices but not their persons: Let vs not kicke against that politicall regiment and ordination, whose originall is from God himselfe. For, hereunto we are invited by the precepts and counsells of the grauest and most wise, especially of that Poet: Parcere Personis, dicere de vicijs; That is, 'Tis wisedome, wisely, in these sinfull times Mens Persons not to harme, but charme their crimes. But to conclude in a word, for I desire to be briefe; I grant (indeed) that some Courtiers are too immoderately and ambitiously prone, to hunt after honour, preferment, rule and riches, and (which doe as it were naturally grow out of them) to pleasure and voluptuousnesse; and that they do more highly estimate these externall vnconstant and slippery things, than is consonant, or convenient either to time, place or persons: Yet notwithstanding it is no consequence that for some particular ill addicted and vicious Courtiers, the Court and Courtiers in generall who officiate good and neces∣sary
services to their Prince, should be vtterly condemned, or that such infamous aspersions should be so generally cast vpon them all. The opinion therefore, of Lucan we vtterly dislike and re∣e as must absurd: Exeat Aulâ Qui volet esse pius; virtus & summa potestas Non coëunt, &c. Depart from Court, if thou wilt pious be Goodnesse and Greatnesse will not, there, agree. It is a flash, a gow-gaw, a meere fervolous trifle; vnlesse we haue respect onely to those Monsters of men, Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Iulian the Apostata, Phocas, and such like fire-brands of fury, and Patrons of impietie; Never casting our eies vpon, nor rightly recogitating the most noble and renowned actions of those truely pious and prudent Courtiers, the most profitable and comfortable organs and instruments both of Church and Common-wealth; in the number of whom I may first ranke, the most pious Pa∣triarch Ioseph, who at Court became the Prince and prime of all his Brethren, the Establisher of his people, yea the very Basis, and (vnder God) the Atlas of his Nation; to whom I adde Moses, Abdias, Dauid, Daniel and Mr∣docai, who with great prudence and providence hauing, wa∣ded through and vanquished the various stormes and i∣pardous casualties, of the turbulent sea (as I may so say) of the Court; haue euen therein most gloriously atcheiued the eminent and euer-permanent renowme and excellencie of vertue; wit, dignitie and perfect piety, yea and haue showne
themselues the maine props and pillers of the Church of God, and their Weale-publike. And doubtlesse (indicious Rea∣der) vnlesse we wholy delight in ancient, forraine, and far∣fetcht examples, and doe vilipend or reiect new and dome∣sticke patterns hereof. May we not most apparantly behold and perspicuously perceiue a liuely, reall and royall patterne of maiestie, grace, wisedome, learning, mercy, iustice, pittie, and piety, in that most renowned Courtier, our most sacred Soveraigne King IAMES? Yes doubtlesse. And none, I dare confidently a vouch, except he be a periur'd enemie to all truth and equitie, will, or can if he would, deny this truth. Let Lucan then, in this respect, with all his lunaticke Com∣panions go shake their eares; who so vniustly iudge, and vn∣truely doe teach, those things to be so reluctuously repugnant, which here we see are so harmoniously consonant. But be it as twill be, heer's my determinate resolution and firme conclusion: Ire, redire, sequi Regum sublimia tecta▪ Eximius status est— The noblest state of life vnder the sunne Is, for my King, to liue, to ride, to runne. And this, to thee alone (ingenuous Courtier) doe I hearti∣ly desire: Vntill thou shalt be translated from this transitory and momentany Court, into that celestiall Palace eternally blessed and blissefull, without all sighes and sorrowes, toile and turmoile, euen the mansions of the heauenly Ierusalem. And this Christ Iesus grant, who sits at the eternall ternall sterne of his heauenly kingdome; vnder whose banner all Christians whether Kings or Subiects, Courtiers or Coun∣trymen, do all fight, are all Conquerors, are all crowned.
To Momus his owne Murtherer. HEalth also to thee Momus, who whiles thou bereaust thy selfe of the sweete fruite of Good both receiued and sought for; dost dilacerate, wound and deadly wound thine owne heart, with the infectious fangs of Enuy: And, which is far the worst, dost denudate and strip thy selfe bare of the soueraine grace of God: Thou I say, who thus dost pine and punish thy selfe in sense, in soule; take thou this one Disticke from mee, and, if thou canst fare∣well, farwell. Non legis, & carpis; quae nec capis, inuide, carpis: Inuide, quae carpis, fac meliora, legam. That is, Read, Momus; raile not; trie, ere thou taunt, mine: Commend, or, mine come mend; then, Ile read thine, Thine if thou be thine owne. A. D. B.
TO HIS WORTHY AND well-deseruing friend Master A. D. B. MOst truly hast thou showne the diffrence great Betwixt a Country life and Courtly seate, That euery calling subiect is to Fate, As well the Priuate life as Publike state, By vice or vertue, Both, to trie and chuse; Good, Bad; Best, Worst; as we them vse, abuse: To teach all men, since, all mens states are such, Nor Court, nor Cart, to loue, to loath, too much. I. V.
ILLVSTRI ET GENEROSO D. D. GEORGIO BVCKINGHAMO viro familiâ & virtute nobili. INgenium, virtus, probitas, & forma decora, Seu placeat verae Nobilitatis honos. BVCKINGHAMVS adest, qui cuncta haec possidet vnu, En, facies certis iudicat ipsa notis. O nimium foelix, ô fausta sorte creatum, Cui tam constanter, sors magis aequa fluit? Hane DEVS omnipotens dedit & Natura, GEORGI, Firmauit magni mox tibi REGIS amor. Quem tua promeruit virtus & gratia Opto tibi REX hunc continuare velit. The same in English. WIt, vertue, beauty, sincere honesty, True reall badges of nobilitie. All met in One, to make a man of Fame All shining bright in noble BVCKLNGHAM: O happy, ô thrice happy by blest Fate, Whose starres, his honors, thus accumulate. GOD and the KING, yea Nature, all concurre, To grace great George with Honors golden-spurre. O, neuer may thy King, to loue thee, cease, But thy rare parts, his hearts true loue encrease. A. D. B.
THE Court of King IAMES. AFter that I had resolued, and with my selfe determined (Illustrious and thrice Noble MARQVESSE) toA preamble wherein is briefely dis∣coursed the cause of this Treatise. diuulge and set forth vnto publike view, somewhat concerning the life of a Courtier; And hauing spent much most serious and incessant de∣liberation, and constant consideration, to whom I might exhibite and present, this of-spring and tender Infant of mine, the fruite of my Labors; at last I most fortunately thought vpon your Right Ho. Lordship, for which I most submisly craue your Lordships pardon: and most humbly desire that you would vouchsafe to entertaine so courteons a perswasion, and fauourable an opinion of me: that I haue not either with any impudence, much lesse Imprudence, attempted ought herein. Many of my neerest and deerest frendes, assuring me that it would bee worth the labour; perswaded yea constrained mee, by
this most, humble Present. The  most Royall King, vnto your Honour: In  you (right Noble Lord) for your ex∣ce singular, both internall and externall vertues and endowements, doe most resplendently glister and shine, like a most pretious Iewell richly garnished in the purest Gold. Therefore it cannot, doubtlesse, bee Im∣pudencie in me, thus to endeauour and desire, that these my labours, may haue your Lordships worthy approba∣tion; whose daily endeauours are most industriously em∣ployed, in the negotiation of the profitable affaires of your King and his common-wealth. And to this end & purpose, and for this speciall cause, do I most prostrately proffer and present vnto your Honour, this small volume  title of the Court of IAMES King of Great Britaine. Neither yet doe I doubt, but that this my labour herein, will receiue a gratefull acceptation from all those who not so much with their Corporall, as their Mentall eyes of Intelligence, do see and throughly see into the generosity of your linage, the great and most graue wisedome, which doth inhabite in so greene and young a Breast, your modesty, affabilitie and great hu∣manitie. A figg for enuious Criticks, therefore, of most deiected and degenerous condition; who practise no∣thing so much, as basely and malignantly to censure mens persons, faults, and infirmities. But the iudge∣ment of the most iudicious and iust iudges may giue both  and all good men full content; principally the great loue and our of our most potent and prudent King, who back graciously elected and made choice of your Honour, as a man most excellent most accomplisht: on whom (many others being neglected) hee might con∣ferre,
yea accumulate the fauourable effects of his Princ∣ly beneuolence, bounty, and benignity. This your Ho∣nours louely lot and felicity, no doubt may bite to the quicke, and euen (as it were) boyle the harts of the malici∣ous: but good and honest minded men, who are the lo∣uers and embracers of your Honours virtue and integri∣ty, doe contrariwise vndoubtedly reioyce at, and harti∣ly congratulate the same. Thus haue I, (I hope) freed my selfe from suspect of Impudence. Now againe if any accuse me of Imprudency, to auoide this imputati∣on, I thus answer. That I vndertooke not this worke by mine owne authority, motion, or instigation, but as ha∣uing beene vrgently solicited thereunto, by the vehe∣ment perswasions of some worthy personages, who themselues haue obserued diuers Pamphlets, touching the Court to haue binne formerly published, which see∣med rather to haue beene composed, in the disgrace of Princes, and derision of their followers, then soundly or sincerely to instruct or shew them, what is to be followed what to be auoided. I also (for mine owne part) do assu∣redly know, that there are and haue bin, both in our owne and in the memorie of our fore-fathers, such men, who are as it were naturally borne, to peruert and depraue things, both well spoken and as well performed: whose custome and counsell I vtterly detest, and in this treatise, do faithfully protest; that I haue endeauoured what in me lay, to lay hold on the goulden-meane; for what soeuer I haue iudged commendable, I haue accordingly com∣mended, and what soeuer I haue contrariwise thought to bee culpable, I haue likewise condemned. Which my impartiall and indifferent dealing herein, I hope no good man, no honest hearted man will disallow; as for disho∣nest
followes, whether they praise or dis∣ herein, neither I, nor any wise man shall  our selues hurt, or take it to the heart. Yet this  confidently avouch, that if I had an intention to  ouer all things, that haue bin promiscuously and confusedly, both said and written by many men against Courtiers; the Court would (I am perswaded) be most distasteful to many, to whom I know t'is now most plea∣sant and delightfull. But this my little volume (I hope) shall be profitable to many, gratefull to the good, hatefull to none but to the Impious and Enuious. I doe herein frequently admonish those Courtiers, who haue a deter∣mination to hoyce vp saile and to lanch out, into the deepe of this difficult and turbulent Sea; that wisely and  they saile with a fortunate and fauourable Gale of winde, least by the Syren-like allurements, or rather the most violent & tempestuous stormes of immoderate de∣sires they be desperatly driuen vpon Scylla or Charibdis, or be dasht against the wrath and indignation of their Prince, as against a dangerous death-threatning Rocke. These admonitions haue I (for this cause) thought most pertinent and necessarie, because now a dayes, almost all things vniuersally are full yea too-too-full, of brazen fac't boldnesse and precipitate haire-braind, heed-lesse, rash∣nesse. Doubtlesse young men, yea all subiects ingene∣rall, when they shall vnderstand and consider, the diffi∣culties and dangers of preferments, and the burthen of a Courtiers life, will, I am perswaded, lesse emilate and hate either Courtiers or Magistrates; yea and these will hence learne better to rule, and those to obey. But e∣nough of this. It now remaines that I endeuour to purge and put away, one other note of Imprudence in mee, to
wit, that too like vnto Phaëton. Nimis magna peto, et quae non viribus illis, Munera conueniunt &c. Ambitiously I take a Taske in hand, Whose greatnesse with my weakenesse cannot stand. If any doe sound such a note in mine eares, and thinke thereby, to deterre me from my purposed progresse; I wish him to take this for his answer, that I am not igno∣rant of mine owne calling and condition of life, which is Priuate: neither againe is that vnknowne to mee, which is related by Cicero, of a certaine Peripateticke Philosopher, whom Hanniball had in derision, calling him a Dottrell and a giddy-headed fellow, that he was not afraid to dis∣pute a bout militarie discipline, in the presence of him so potent and politicke a commander. Yet not withstan∣ding, this seemes not to mee, a sufficiently important, or iust cause, why I should in this regard acknowledge in myselfe, any Imprudencie or Temeritie. This I say in modesty and humility (that your Ho∣nour may hold me excused) for the equity and protecti∣on of my cause now in controuersie; that I doubt whe∣ther Hanniball, as great and egregious a commander as he was, thus contemptuously disdaining this man of Greece, who notwithstanding that he neuer saw the face of his Enemie, nor euer was in a pitcht feild, yet deliuering precepts of martiall prowesse) did not disdainfully cast his eies vpon, and that with iust cause, though with bar∣barous arrogancy and haughtinesse of minde; did not I say behould and cast his eies vpon those reasons & rules (what ere they were) of that so excellently learned Gre∣cian: for t'is scarsely probable or credible, but that by▪
the way he deliuered somewhat, which might mislike and displease, so skilfull and soundly experienced a Captaine and commander as hee; since that (vnlesse wee will too much extenuate the credit of that old Prouerb) which is, sometimes the blind may hit the marks. It was there∣fore snapish and impudent disdainefulnesse, yea beast∣like and Inhumane Insolence in that Carthaginian, that, That which he (forsooth) would not approue or allow of▪ he must furiously bndy and forth with reiect. But the issue and eent did euidently declare, that Hanniball was no  superexcellent or inuincible a Captaine, as that it should seeme vndeniable, that he could be admonished of any ouersight in any warlike affaires. Furthermore, they whose whole knowledge and experience of milita∣ discipline, doth wholy consist, in custome, practise, and exercise, and are so opinionated, that the power of wit and experience▪ gotten and gathered by industrious diligence, from learned authors writing to that purpose, is not of any moment or validity; that one example of L▪  onely, mentioned also (by Cicero) in that booke of his, which goes vnder the name and title of Lucullus, may iustly refell and repell, the opinions of such men. Indeede I doe ingeously acknowledge and confesse, th the prince and principall furtherance to the perfor∣mance of high Actions and notable exploits, is, that a an e (as it were naturally) addicted and adapted there∣vnto▪ But yet beleeue me litterature or learning (if that of the  ) in a generous and Heril Spirit, Vim∣pl doth promote and much enlarge, that  and pollicie, which is  and genu∣ine. In which respect, if vnto naturall promptnesse and proty, learning and experience be associated; then
indeed, may a man perfectly performe any noble, emi∣nent, and excellent act or imployment. But perempto∣rily to auouch or affirme, that men Famous for their ex∣cellent parts of vertue, learning, and intelligence, cannot be able soundly, exquisitely, and considerately, to dis∣cusse or discourse of, euen those things, whereof they ne∣uer were personall Actors and Agents, is, doubtlesse the badge & cognizance, of an ignorant & illiterate man; yea of one who neuer knew the maiestie and excellencie, the light and delight of Science, and intelligence, which, An∣tiquitie was wont to call the Muses; nor, a Limine Salu∣tarunt (as it is in the old Adagie) did they euer stand at the threshold, to bid the Muses Good-morrow. And He∣siod hath left this testimonie in writing, that Hee him∣selfe got al his knowledge and experience in Nauigation, from these Tutors and Teachers. But whither runs all this prolixitie? Euen hither (Right Ho.) this is the end thereof; that your Honour would vouchsafe to hold me excused, if peraduenture (as hath bin foresaid) I do not in its proper colours, pourtray and delineate to the life, that plat-forme and similitude of the life, of a Courtier, which either your Lordships noblenesse may require, or those courtiers may expect, whom, in this point, much time & practicke experience (the best School∣master) may more firmely haue informed in the rules and customes of the Court. But as for others, happ, what hap may, when the dice are to bee cast, and my chance to be chosen, I had rather with some impeach to my name, write and say something (according to my weake Ta∣lent) which might be truely acceptable to you right Honourable Marquesse; then vnseasonably or vnciuilly to be wanting in my bounden duty. Therefore this one
thing  submissiuely and earnestly desire, that you  would be pleased courteously to respect  heart, most faithfully and affectionately ho∣ing and duely reuerencing your venerable and no∣ble vertue; and that in your accustomed courtesie, you would fauourably accept and protect this my peculiar Dedication to your Lordship; of which your Honoura∣ble fauour, I am most confidently perswaded, whose worthy and meritorious actions, not only towards your owne Countrey and kingdome, are by the Trump of ame blazoned abroad; but euen your Lordships mani∣fold fauours and benificent courtesies towards stran∣gers also, are euery where extant, which blessed Britaine with most due and deserued praises, doth publish and lgate, and euen wee that are strangers, yea all neighbouring Nations both farre & neere do most wor∣thily wonder at. Nor need I feare, least what I haue herein writ, should rather seeme to sauour of gnathoni∣call flattery, then reuerently to loue and embrace your Honours noble vertues with true integrity: for, All that know your Lordships Excellency, your so great grauity and Temperance, all (I say) which doe neerely and throughly looke into them, do know that I speake, but what is most sincerely true and faithfull. Finally that I may omit nothing, which may conduce to the accumulation of your Lordships worthy praises, the elegancy and gracefull pleasancy of your Honours Behauiour, is such and so singular: that not onely these present times, but euen succeeding posterity, will doubt∣lesse with a cheerefull voice commemorate and immor∣talize the same. And, than this, what, Greater, Better, Trulier can be said? This is it which hath purchased and
procured vnto your Ho: the reputation, approbation, loue, and singular supportation, of our most religious, gracious, potent, and most prudent King; whereby we may and that with very good reason, most duely and truely heere take vp that verse, as true as auntient. Gratior est pulchro veniens è corpore virtus. Virtue is more louely, much more acceptable, Proceeding from, a Bersonage amiable. But I stray to farre, time cals vpon me, now to set vp∣on the Subiect it selfe, before I proceede, to any other matters. First then let the Courtier or whosoeuer els, which hath determined with himselfe, to bestow and dedicate his endeauours, to the seruice of Princes, often deliberate, & thinke vpon this one thing, that the CourtThe Court compared to a warre-fare. in some sort, doth represent and resemble, loue, or a war∣fare, and louers we know, will diligently remoue euery rubbe, obstacle, or impediment, whereby they may con∣tent and please their beloued: Souldiers also do labour, and endeauor, with all care and diligence, and make thisCourtiers to Souldiers. the marke, whereat, they wholy leuell and ayme, name∣ly to follow their Captaine or leader; and as much as in them lies, to do what he commandeth: so should an ho∣nest Courtier, adorned and endued, with wit and discre∣tion, bend and incline, all his studie and industrious inde∣uours, not onely with diligence, to entertaine his Kings, or Princes commission and command; but promptly, speedily, and with all care and fidelity, to discharge the charge, which is committed vnto him: And he which layes this foundation of a Courtiers life, shall doubtlesse
; in the sight of his Soueraigne.  soeuer▪ well nurtured, and generously co man, will deuote and consecrate him∣sel  follow the Court, let him not presently ima∣gine, or conceit with himselfe, that hee is to lead a soft, delicate, easie, or calme kind of life; but now must hee learne to beare patiently, the courts encombrances: yea to digest and swallow downe many leasings, much enuy, greiuous contumelies, and malicious detractions. Assu∣redly tis no fiction I tell thee, but let euery Courtier, which doth aspire and desire, to attaine vnto that celes∣tiall and eternall court of Heauen, and which intendeth, both constantly, and sincerely, to say and to doe, that which may be gratefull to God, and the common weale;  addresse himselfe, to this point, to this resolution. For, that Courtier is in a great error, and very much mistaken, which hunts, and hopes, for no∣thing els in the Court, but honour, riches, pleasure, pow∣er, and authority, and long before hee enters into the Court not seriously, consider with himselfe, that e∣uen in these seeming sweet, and odoriferous roses of Courtly delights, full many thornes and thistles doe pri∣uily grow vp: for, if wee doe but iudge and examine one thing by another, and let truth take place, we haue both knowne and read of, in the memory of antient and moderne times, many noble and worthy men; yea such as haue exceedingly well deserued, both, of their Prince and common-weale, who in Court haue wasted & spent the most flourishing time of their youthfull yeares, with great praise, and applause of their Prince, and all good people; who not with standing all this, haue oftentimes, euen for triuiall or small causes, yea sometimes none at
all, bin most lamentably molested, and with enuy and de∣traction, subtilly circumuented: yea which is more and most miserable haue bine either wofully deiected, and clapt vp into Prison, banisht into bitter calamity, or e∣uen vnto death it selfe, punisht and condemned. Whereof, that we may not wander farre for exam∣ples, call to remembrance (good Courtier) the memo∣rable, and remarkable examples, of such like dolefull and vnfortunate misfortunes, in Papinian, Comineus, Moore, Bussonus, Consalnus, and innumerable more, whose name, and fame, as well for that they haue most profitably spo∣ken, and learnedly written, as for their many imploy∣ments very honourably performed, is most excellent, eminent, and permanent. Wee haue especially in the Courts of the Princes of Germany, very many demon∣stratiue arguments, and pregnant documents hereof, both ancient and fresh in memory, which heere I had rather wrap vp in silence, then with tedious prolixity, too much wrong my courteous Readers patience. But yet I cannot by any meanes, omit, or let slip, that which at this present, for the newnes, and late performance there∣of, is fresh, and frequently obiected to the eyes, eares,Ambitious & perfidious Barneuelt. and apprehensions of all men, namely the Tragicall Catas∣trophè of that great Aduocate, Statesman, and stately Courtier of Holland, who was that Phaëton, who for ma∣ny yeares together, was (as it were) the Waggoner and Sterneman, yea the King and Keeper of all Holland. This was hee, who with the bridle of his authority, and with a certaine confidence, or rather foole-hardinsse, and pre∣sumptuous rashnesse, did reyne & restraine, as in a Char∣ret, violently drawne, by force of most fierce horses, the various motions, and commotions, of the mindes of all
men. This was he who audaciously and aduenturously, without due consideration, attempting many matters, by making as it were a confused Chaos of heauen and earth, by confounding and mingling sacred and profane things together, turning all things topsie turuey, with a most impious and pestiferous intention, would haue wrought his Common-wealths detriment and destruction, but (and that most iustly) receiued his owne vtter decay, and worthy confusion. What needs many words? This was I say that Phaëton, who was the Waggoner or Coach∣man of the current and swift gliding affayres of the Common-wealth of Germany. And I say not that he was for his Phaëtonicall insolence dasht out of his Charret, and tumbled downe headlong into the Riuer Padus, by Iupiters furious and Sulpurious lightning: but being by the iust iudgement of God, and vpright sentence of con∣demnation after iudiciall proceedings, conuicted and condemned, at the Hague in Holland, his high aspiring head was cast downe to the ground, and his ambitiously consulting and insulting heart receiued its deserued finall and fatall wound. And thus this politique Pilot, and Prince of Holland, Magnis tandem excidit Ausis. Was tumbled head-long from his Chaire of State, Who sought his Countrey thus to ruinate. I here let passe that other late and liuely example, which happened also in this famous kingdome; together with that in France, of that most factious and filthie Italian, a man most deboyst in his whole life and conuersation.
Whosoeuer sees not and considers not these, I hold him to be euen pore-blind, and to haue no smacke or taste of wisedome or vnderstanding in the least degree. Courti∣ers then may learne by these exemplified reasons, drawn out of these famous Kingdomes, as out of the most spa∣cious and specious Theatre of the whole world, how al∣ternate and variable the vicissitudes and alterations of things are in a Court, and if not alwayes, yet for the most part that they which being puffed vp with excessiue co∣uetousnesse and inordinate desire of hauing riches, and are violently carryed away with the spirit of ambition, being vtterly vnmindfull of those damages and dangers, which doe begirt and hedge in Courtiers on euery side; that they I say do but ride post and make haste vnto some disasterous and sinister fate or destinie, and in the interim whiles they thus repugne the sweete sayings, sentences, and suffrages of the most wise and prudent, Propositum{que} premunt, flagrant{que} Cupidine Currus. They quite destroy the End of their desire, And burne Hopes Charret, with lusts furious fire. These and such like, which onely  we briefly touch by the way, laying hold on the vtmost tops as it were of these matters, may euery Courtier reiterate and ruminate againe and againe in his minde, and vnlesse he haue a heart well fortifide and confirmed, to endure ma∣ny euils, inconueniences, and mis-fortunes, let him for∣sake the Court, and betake himselfe to a retired and pri∣uate life, which also, though it may haue its owne diffi∣culties, distresse, and scarsitie, yet if the reputation of
most excellent and considerate men may haue any cre∣dit or estimation with vs, nothing, as they truly hold, is more happie, or more blessed then a priuate kind of life, moderated and decorated with the Golden meane andThe prayse of a priuate life. mediocritie. Hee then whose portion or condition of life is neither too high erected, nor too low deiected, but indifferent betweene both; hee certainely (if any thing in this wretched worldmay be termed a Summum bonum, a speciall and principall Good-thing) is the Heire, ow∣ner, and true possessor thereof. Very elegantly and elo∣quently hath Politian painted out, and expressed the tran∣quillitie and sweete securitie of a Countrey-mans priuate life, whosoeuer therefore doth loue to liue the same, to wit, a free, calme, and quiet life, I wish him to read and diligently to obserue these his verses following; O dulces Pastoris opes! O quanta beatam, Quam tenet hunc tranquilla Quies? vt pectore tote. Laetitiam, tota{que} fouet bona gaudia mente! Nempe edij, fraudum{que} expers, exemtus nani. Ambitione, vacans{que} metu, ipse liber & insons, Natiuo cultu, & Gaza praediues agresti, Ipse sibi viuit, Nullo sub teste, suo{que} Pendet ab arbitrio, suusipse est censor, etalto, Calcat opes animo, ac summes deridet honores. Which thus may be Englished. O the rare riches of a Shepkeards life! O how much blest is he from stormes of strife! O how he liues in peace and quietnesse! Free from annoy, full of all ioyfulnesse;
He feares no fate, no hate, nor foule deceit, Nor striues to be ambitious-vicious Great: He's guiltlesse, guilelesse, fearelesse; he's most free, His Corne and Cattell, his rich Treasures be; T'himselfe he liues, vnder nones ouer-fight, By none contrould, performes his owne delight, With deepe disdayne, he kickes at gold and pelfe, And scorning Honours, thus contents himselfe. Assuredly Politian thou doest most truly, and egregi∣ously confirme, that which before thy time, learned and graue Seneca did also affirme in his Hippolitus, concer∣ning a priuate life: Non alia magis est libera, & vitio carens, Ritus{que} melius vita quae priscos colat: Quam quae relict is moenibus, campos amat, Non illum auarae mentis inflammat furor. Quise dicauit montium insontem iugis: Non aurae populi; et vulgus infidum bonis, Non pestilens inuidia, non fragilis fauor: Non ille regno seruit, aut regno imminet. Vanos{que} honores, sequitur, aut fluxas opes, Spei metus{que} liber. That is; There is no life more free; More void of vice and blame, Or in their Rites the same, Which former Times did see: Then that which sweetly's led, In fields remote, and farre
From Townes and Holds of warre. Wher's nought but feare and dred. The greedie hope of gaine, Sets not his heart on fire, He harmelesse doth desire, On Mountaines to remaine. Mens fawning flatteries; Or Common-Peoples traine, Which doe good men disdaine; He wholly doth despise. Enuie pestiferous, Can haue no place in him, No fauour fraile, though trine, Makes him ambitious. He serues not to a Crowne; Nor's eminent in State, He seekes not vaine renowne, Fraile riches he doth hate; And feares not Fortunes frowne. Wherefore, that we may be at libertie, and void of all feare; let vs haue this in continuall contemplation, and consideration, that the sorrowes, difficulties, and distres∣ses wherewith euery Christian in this wretched life is in∣uironed, are manifold. Let vs therefore with heedfull hearts coniecture and cast in our minds, by what especi∣allA remedie to auoid danger in the Court. meanes we may subiugate and ouercome them. Art thou then (kind Courtier) willing to receiue a remedie against them? then let this be thy sweete and soueraigne Antidote, that with graue Cato, you be of an honest and vncorrupted life and conuersation; that with inuincible Vertue, modest bashfulnesse, and innocent abstinence,
thou striue to get the maistery, and to be good in deed, rather than seeme so to be, whereby it will come to passe, that by how much the lesse thou shalt seeke after honour and preferment, by so much the more thou wilt vndoub∣tedly atcheiue the same. Now all this while, it is not vn∣knowne to me, that it is a generall rumour and report, that there be not many good men to bee found in the Court, and that according to the opinion of many, few men doe bring good Arts and Sciences to a Campe or a Court; and therefore some no doubt may say, that I doe but wash an Aethiopian-Blackmoore, in inuiting and inciting Courtiers to such integritie of life: God forbid, yet indeed, I confesse, that it is extreame hard and diffi∣cult, for one perticular man alone, at a delicious, sump∣tuous, and bountifull banquet, at which there is extraor∣dinary great prouision of meate and drinke, to bee sober and satiate, and yet some one of a more sage and tempe∣rate condition then the rest, may so moderately and dis∣creetly gouerne himselfe, that he doe not either in meate or drinke exceed the bounds of modestie and competent satietie: Euen so (kind Courtier) although in Court, thy vertue, integritie, and sinceritie, may be disquieted, dis∣heartned, yea, and that it may seeme to liue in exile or ba∣nishment; yet if thy mind bee well formed and confor∣med therein, it will assuredly cause, that amongst manie fawning smooth-bootes, false hearted flatterers, and crooked perverse minds, thou shalt still be of a right and vpright courage and condition; yea, and from this foun∣taine thou shalt deriue all those siluer streames, and com∣fortable currents, whereby thy Calling, whether Court∣ly or otherwise, though formerly obnoxious to grieuous and dangerous defects, shall yeeld backe and repay vnto
thee gracious and prosperous effects. If hereupon thou firmely fasten thine Anchor, then feare no Ship wracke, but with vnconquerable courage and animositie, Launch out into this turgent and turbulent Sea of the Court, and vndoubtedly thou shalt vanquish and ouercome the in∣sinite swarme of amphibious and prodigious monsters of impietie, which may make incursions, and encounters vpon thee. Therefore (generous Courtier) start not backe at these euils, but step forward against them, with a bold Spirit, proceed I say, and put this counsell in prac∣tise, and let not the Philosophie of effeminate and faint∣hearted men distract or disturbe thee from thy purpose, and determination, which of it selfe is most honest and laudable; reiect and cast from thee vnprofitable and im∣probable speeches, and hearken to God the fountaine of infallible and inuincible veritie it selfe. Maledicta Terra in opere tuo: In sudore vultus tui vescer is pane tuo. Cursed is the ground for thy sake; in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eate thy bread. From whence we may inferre and firmely beleeue, that euery estate and condition of life whatsoe∣uer, hath in it the Thornes and Thistles of losses, crosses,That no estate is free from trouble. and calamities; especiall fince this sentence denounced against man, euen from the worlds originall, being regi∣stred and recorded in the Booke of God it selfe, is most authenticall, is most vndeniable true and faithfull, and is of euery aswell priuate man as Courtier to be according∣ly receiued and beleeued. Now whereas many men, of no meane rancke and qualitie, doe learnedly magnifie, and with much wit dignifie a solitary and priuate life, as wasThe disprayse of a mecre priuate life. formerly intimated, they erre exceedingly, and are in my iudgement marueilously mis-taken, which are of opinion, that a priuate life is in it selfe happie and blessed. For, if
that be true, which the most eloquent Orator and excel∣lent Philosopher hath left in writing, in the first Booke of his Offices, according to the opinion of diuine. Plato. Non nobis solum nati sumus, ortus{que} nostri partem parentes, partem amici, partem patria sibi vendicant; that is, We are not borne onely to our selues, but our Parents, Countrey, and Friends, doe challenge vnto them a part in our being. Then no oc∣casion questionlesse, whereby a man may deserue well of the Weale-publike, can be wanting to any man so much as to them which lead a priuate, obscure, and solitary life, liuing vnprofitably, to themselues alone; being nothing at all beneficiall to the Common-wealth, whereinto, and whereunto they were borne and brought vp. He therefore which is by propagation and education, generous, liberall, and free-hearted, doth rightly vnder∣stand and know that true glory, reputation, and renowne consisteth in Vertue, which also is especially illustrated and made famous by worthie and meritorious actions, and imployments in a Common-wealth. So that Salust that excellent Writer, not without iust cause, left vs also this his testimoniall in writing. Pulchrum est benefacere Rei-publicae. It is a very noble and worthy thing, to doe good to the Common-weale. Furthermore, let euery Courtier, and honest man whatsoeuer, consider thus much in his minde, that to deny to dedicate, and deuote his best ser∣uices to God, his King, and Countrey, is nothing els in deed, than as if he would wilfully expose himselfe to ex∣ile and banishment. That true and auncient Adagie, which wee frequently vse, doth verifie and ratifie this truth,  Euery good is that which distri∣butes, imparts, and Communicates it selfe to others. Againe, . A good man (as the saying is)
is a vniuersall good. For shame therefore, let vs neuer prayse, or approue that meerely imaginary and erronious opinion, that in those things, which are commonly and customarily contingent to Nature in generall, any man should therein promise to himselfe, beyond all others, any particular or priuate felicitie; vnlesse hee can per∣swade himselfe, that he is able (by a certaine incredible and vnheard of magnanimitie of minde) to curbe and correct all Fortunes and Mis-fortunes whatsoeuer. Wherefore, let vs neuer suppose, that true Fame or Fe∣licitie, doth consist, in a priuate or retyred life, which is both full of craftie fetches, and faint-hearted feareful∣nesse: No nor in the vaine-glorious bragges, of bagges of Gold and great possessions, but rather in the good and gracious constitution and condition of a mans mind. Whosoeuer then frequents and followes the Court, let him carefully, and very circumspectly, consider these things. Neither let him be led to beleeue those sottish and vnsauourie fellowes, by whose silly aduise, or rather shallow deuise, such a kind of absolutely blessed life, were to be desired and enquired after, in seeking whereof, a man should farre sooner forsake the world, than finde it in the world. Auaunt, all such absurd and witlesse fel∣lowes, of whom I wish all wise men would beware: and with the ingenious Poet, would sing vnto them this their due Dittie; Stulti dum vitant vitia, in contraria currunt. Fooles voyding Vice, the contrary commit, Like ships that scaping Gulfs, on Rockes are split. But thou (kind Courtier) which either art alreadie en∣tred,
or shortly intendest to enter and aduenture thy for∣tunes in the Court, with a considerate and constant cou∣rage spurne at, and despise those partiall speeches of the Common people, and wisely apprehend and entertaine the words of the most wise: yea, euen Philosophie and Wisedome it selfe: embrace this in thine armes, as theThe Courtier must endeuor to get Wise∣dome as his best guide. Founder and Fountaine of all Vertue, and as the soue∣raigne Salue against all corrupt concupiscence: for, this will conduct and instruct thee, in the true knowledge of that which is iust and honest, teaching thee what is to bee followed, and what is to be refused. Out of this pure well-Spring of perfect wealth, thou shalt draw out such true knowledge, as shall cause thee perspicuously to per∣ceiue, that too much dignitie, riches, and authoritie, be∣ing little better than the very Hang-men, and tormen∣tors of mens minds, are of wise men to bee contemned, and despised. This Instructrix and faithfull Mistresse, will demonstrate vnto thee, what a multitude of men do fondly admire and much wonder, what should be the cause, why they are so greatly and grieuously day and night vexed and perplexed. Finally, He which is well fraught, and furnisht with the wholesome precepts of Philosophie, shall in conclusion bring himselfe to the King of Kings, and Prince of all Princes, that is, he shall be reduced from the vnlimited and illegitimate worship of the Creature, to the Creator himselfe; and sure, I thinke, that he which is thus prudent and prouident, is not wise in the least degree; for, euery Christian Courti∣er ought especially to take care, and make a Conscience hereof, namely, that he be so exercised in the Court of his Prince here, that hereafter hee may without Ship∣wracke of Conscience, atcheiue and arriue, at the Hauen
of the Heauenly Court, and Kingdome of Iesus Christ. Now then after the studie of Wisedome, let not theLaw, Lan∣guages, Elo∣quence. Courtier by any meanes omit, or neglect the Studie of Law, Languages, and Eloquence; and let him especi∣ally, bend his best endeuours, to attaine vnto the prompt, perfect, and most commendable Knowledge of Histo∣ries,Historie. and Antiquities, to which, indeed I cannot suffici∣ently moue and admonish him: For, this Knowledge is the Testis of the Times, the Light of Truth, the Life of Memorie, the Mistresse of Life, and the Messenger of An∣tiquitie. Yea, this same Historicall Knowledge (if wee may beleeue Polybius) is a most sound and sure directi∣on, instruction, and preparatiue, to all well managing of politique affayres, and is, indeed, a singular tutrixe, and faithfull informer, how to abide and suffer patiently the inconstancies, and mutabilities, of brittle and fickle For∣tune. If therefore (friendly Courtier) thou wouldst not continually, shew thy selfe a childe, and Non-proficient, in the Court of thy Prince, be not (I say) rude, but well read, and a skilfull Antiquary in Histories and Chroni∣cles. Thus the Courtier, being adorned and dignified, with these wholesome precepts, and also fortified with Gods gracious ayde and assistance, and being lawfully elected and incorporated, into the Societie of Courtiers, let him thus proceed, and leaue the issue and euent to God, who doubtlesse will direct and protect, all his affaires so for∣tunately, and effectually, that he shall with prosperous successe, wade ouer, and wisely wind himselfe out of all difficulties, and disturbances whatsoeuer. A rush, there∣fore, a straw for the witlesse words of vnwise men.
Aula domus feelerum, Nutrix est Aula malorum, Exeat ex Aulâ, qui cupit esse pius. The Court's the Stage, and Station of all ill, Let none come there, who hath a gracious will. Tis trash, trumpery, and meere foppery, for (as wee haue alreadie specified) he which will in this sence be good and godly, must not onely leaue the Court, but e∣uen the whole world. For, if we loue and beleeue, if weNothing in this life is ab∣solutely good. will heare and beare the Truth; Is it possible I pray, that any thing can be absolutely cleane and pure, in this vn∣cleane and obscene Scene of the world? No, no, but be thou (good Courtier) vrgent and instant, euen as it were, to straine and constraine Almightie God, by thy ardent and feruent prayers, in inuocating his diuine Goodnesse, and saying; Duc me, nec sine me, per me, Deus optime Duci, Me Duce, nam, perco; Te Duce, Fausta gero. Lord, not without me, by me, bee my Guide, Thou Guide, all's well; I Guide, I deadly slide. Againe. Vt viuas bene, viue Deo; Patriae{que} & Amicis Vtilis: haud vlla est, viuere vita, sibi. Wouldst Liue well, liue to God, thy Countrey, Friends, That Life's no Life, when led to priuate Ends. And that. Vna est in dubiâ mihi re medicina Salutis, Cor patrium, os verax, omnipotens{que} manus.
One thing I'm sure will Health procure, And with my Credit stand: A Country-louing heart; True Tongue; An all-assisting Hand. Finally, let this most memorable Verse also, like and delight euery Courtier, and honest Christian. In manibus Domini, Sors{que} Salus{que} mea. In Gods Almightie Hand of Prouidence, Lies all my Lot, Health, Wealth, Inheritance. What if the Courtier also, after this fraile and transito∣ry Court, seriously desiring and aspiring, vnto the Cele∣stiall Court, should in pious feruencie, breake out into these holy and heauenly words. Benedictus Dominus De∣us, miserator & Redemptor meus, in te solum confido, non erubescam: that is, Blessed be the Lord God my Consolation, and Saluation, my hope and helpe is in thee, therefore will I not be ashamed. Now then the Courtier, being thus sound∣ly and sincerely furnished and garnished, with the feare of God, and Precepts of Pietie and Philosophie, needs no longer dread or be affraid, of any iniquitie, impietie, or grosse enormitie, which like hideous Hydra's, or mortife∣rous Monsters, the Court may feed and foster; but with a hardie and heartie courage, to wit, a blotles and spot∣lesse Conscience, and innocencie and integritie of life, and conuersation, may boldly enter into the Palace of his Prince. But whosoeuer (not being as yet entred thereinto) doth honestly and discreetly desire to prouide for, and to
forecast his owne well fare and future felicitie. Him I admonish, that he be inquisitiue and carefull, to seeke out the Court of a most potent Prince or Monarch, ratherTo liue in greatest Cous. than of an infirme, weake, and lesse puissant King or king∣dome: and according to the counsell of the olde Pro∣uerbe, Ad faelicem se inflectat parietem. Let him leane and trust to a strong wall. Yea, and let the Courtier, no lesse wisely and willingly, search out, and desire to serue, a most prudent, than a most potent Prince, or Potentate: for, this is a Maxime as true as Truth it selfe, that the Offices and dutie of Seruants is euermore adorned and illustrated, by the honour and dignitie of their Maister: let him there∣fore be perswaded, that to liue vnder a most wise and mightie Monarch, is not thraldome and seruilitie, but freedome and libertie. Wherefore he which findeth such a Court, to wit, a good, a great, and a gracious Prince: a Prince, for his sound iudgement and much experience, most Prudent, and for his great dignitie and authoritie, Potent, and Puissant, I counsell and aduise that Courtier, by all meanes to follow such a King, such a Court. And And let not any fleeting or flying tales so moue thee, as to remoue, separate, and alienate thee, from so good a Prince. If in the meane while, any sinister, distastefull, or aduerse accident, oppose or oppugne thee, beare it pati∣ently, harden thy selfe against it industriously and con∣stantly, and doubtlesse Time will (in due time) demul∣ceate, mollifie, and mitigate those things, which former∣ly seemed most obdurate, difficult, and intricate. For, euen as a Souldier in his kinde of life, and a Mariner, or Seaman, well seasoned with skill for all seasons, percei∣uing dangers as iminent as euident, knowes which of them, will proue most perillous, hurtfull, and pernicious.
Euen so ought euery Courtier, so soone as euer hee hath cast and contriued, to lay the platforme, and foundation of a Courtly life, to see and foresee, what in the Court is hopefull, what hurtfull, what is profitable, what vnpro∣fitable; Yea, what is seasonable and befitting, and what is vnseasonable and vnbefitting: For, they are fooles, and by no meanes to be endured, which will hope beyond and against hope, that is, being altogether anxious and vncertaine, doe depend vppon an obscure, blind and hopelesse hope. Let him then which is wise, beware of this, least thus he lead, and mis-lead himselfe and others. And indeed, how is it possible for him, who with such vaine hope, brings himselfe into a fooles Paradise, to or∣der and frame his counsels and affaires, to a direct and desired end and conclusion? Let the Courtier therefore, with all conuenient expe∣dition, endeuour and desire to know, whither he bee to settle his hope, vpon the rising, or declining estate of his Prince. Moreouer, let the Courtier apply, and bend all his power, so long as he continues in the Court, that as much as in him lies, he be very morigerous, and grate∣fully officious to his Prince, but yet so, as that hee doeObseruance or obedience. nothing with pricke of his owne Conscience. By obe∣dience I here vnderstand piety, or an honest, reuerent, and religious care, whereby wee heedfully heare, and duti∣fully finish, and accomplish, the Commandements of one lawfully commanding. For, what can such a man doe or well performe, which is not of a quicke, and nim∣ble hearing, but is so dull and vndiligent, in vnderstan∣ding and apprehension, that hee doth not rightly con∣ceiue, nor is duly and truly capable of what is either commanded or demanded. Be thou therefore (good
Courtier) very well affected to this Vertue, if thou de∣sire to insinuate, and creepe into the fauour and affection of thy Prince. Thinke with thy selfe, that there is no∣thing more vnindifferent, vnreasonable, or more void of discretion, than for a man to desire to be reuerenc't, and obeyed by his Inferiors, who himselfe is most way-ward, and vndutifull to his owne Superiors: therefore hee is surely a happie and fortunate man, who vnto his facilitie and easinesse in hearing, and apprehending, doth couple and conioyne promptitude and readinesse in perfor∣ming, but alwayes with this Prouiso, and exception, that he vndertake not to finish or effect, any dis-honest, vn∣iust, or vnlawfull Command whatsoeuer; but let him kindly and courteously entertaine, that excellent saying of Aeschylus, . Obedience is the Mother of felicitie. Let the Courtier then which right∣ly and honestly desires, to decke and adorne the forme and fashion of his life in the Court, and to make his Prince his friend and fauourer; as also to bee expert and cunning in counselling himselfe, & contryuing all his ac∣tions and affaires. Let him (I say) diligently ponder, and seriously consider these things. But after that his labours haue beene with prompt expedition, sustained and con∣cluded, since the estate and condition of Courtiers is very slippery and vncertaine, as they, who indeed are too of∣ten and too easily circumuented, and enuironed, with the fraudulent accusations, and malicious detractions of wicked men: Let the Courtier therefore, well and wiselyTo demand his Pardon. shift for himselfe, and prouide a remedie against them: let him (I say) in his first entry or ingredience into the Court, Couenant, or Compact with his Prince, that hee will vouchsafe vnto him a generall pardon; and let him
diligently take heed, that this Patent of his Purgation be not by the necessitie of the Time, subtilly, or violently taken from him. Now as touching Liberty, and Freedome in speaking,Of libertie of speech. which Princes (for the most part) doe take very distaste∣fully, I must herein also admonish the Courtier, because indeed they are but few, which freely and faithfully doe aduise, admonish, and aduertise Princes; Thou therefore whosoeuer thou be, which wilt shew thy selfe not to be a counterfeit, false hearted, or sained, but rather a faith∣full seruant to thy Prince, follow not so fast, seeke not so much the glittering splendour of fickle Fortune, & thine owne priuate commoditie, as the Truth, which by noTruth. meanes should be concealed, but honestly reuealed, whensoeuer it may redound, and be conducible to the commoditie, and honest vtilitie of thy KING, and his Common-wealth; therefore thou being wise, wisely for∣beare to speake, vntill fit time and occasion, be happily offred vnto thee. Heare what Salomon sayes to thee. Mars & vit in manu Linguae. Life and Death are in the power of the Tongue. Wherefore, be thou neither a futile, or vnprofitable babler, by vnseemely Loquacitie, Neither contrariwise, let thy Tacitarnitie or secrecie, be vnhonest, but iust and ingenuous: And esteeme that Silence neces∣sary and sufficient for thee, whereby without either con∣tempt of God, or the common good, thou dost retaine, and keepe vnto thy selfe those things thou knowest; least they be dispersed and spread abroad, to the preiudice of thy Prince, or any other person. But now that I may returne to speake of the studie of Veritie or Truth, whereof (kind Courtier) I heartily de∣sire,What Truth is. thou wouldst be a heartie-louer: and wherein I wish
thee, not only a studious Practitioner, but a perfect Pro∣ficient, which that thou maist the better vnderstand, I thus define. Verity or Truth I take to be such a Vertue, whereby we speake of, praise and promote any thing, so, as the Person, or thing praised or spoken of, is, absolute∣ly of it selfe. Hence then is commanded that we speake no otherwise of any thing, than as the matter is plainely in it selfe. But thou wilt peraduenture obiect, thou fea∣rest danger or despight thereby: feare it not, for tis far better, and much more commendable, to suffer death it selfe, than either to oppresse or suppresse Truth or good councell, And questionlesse a good Prince, doth much more highly estimate, and valew a faithfull Councellor though dead, then a false-hearted flattererand disembler, though aliue. For, no vaine counterfaite or prophane, thing can be of long continuance▪ wherefore, let neither the time terrifie, nor necessity dishearten, nor wicked and malici∣ous men, moue, curbe, or disturbe, the good and faith∣full courtier, from truth and honesty; but with constant Socrates, let him be still the same, immutable, immoua∣ble. Excellently saith Cassidore, concerning Iustice, Iu∣stice (saith hee) knowes no father, nor mother, it knowes Truth, but makes no difference of persons, it directly immitates God. Doe thou the same, (kinde courtier) and that thou maist come, very neere to the nature, condition, and disposition, of God himselfe; loue Truth: And if thou desire, that others should speake the Truth to thee, do thou hate and abhominate, vn∣truth in thy selfe: But perhaps, thou wilt say with the Co∣micall Poet, Veritas odium parit, Truth hatcheth Hatred. And what hatred I pray thee Cōmedian dost thou meane?
why man, Truth brought euen death it selfe to Pollodo∣rus, that noble Architector, to Papinian the Lawyer, to Socrates, that famous Philosopher, yea and to many others besides, what then? shall wee therefore, maintaine a lye against truth? God forbid. Indeede tis true, I confesse it, that truth, is oftentimes abused, misused, troubled, & tormented; yet for all this, as Salomon testifies Labium veritatis, firmum erit in perpetuum, The lips of truth, shall endure stedfast for euer. And Cicero, in his Oration for Cae∣lius saith Omagna veritatis vis &c. O the admirable power of truth, which can most easily, sustaine and maintaine it selfe, against all the sagacity, and most acute subtilty, craft, and col∣lourable treachery, of mans braine, or brest whatsoeuer. E∣steeme it then a greater glory and grace, to suffer disgrace for truth and verity; then to receiue much honour, and present preferrement, for falshood and flattery. It may bee, the hatred, which thou pretendest that this truth wil ingender, is with the vulgar sort, or common-people; well, be it so, yet assuredly, amongst true and faithfull frends, nothing is more acceptable, nothing more de∣lactable, than truth and sincerity, if it bee not imbittered, with churlish, or vnciuill asperity, and improper or ill proportioned, with rigid roughnes and seuerity, which euermore should be absent from amiable truth. But I am the more willingly inclined, more copiously to in∣culcate, and intreate of this virtue, which, since it cannot by any meanes bee kept in corners, but will abroad into the light; may not slightly be glanc't at, or lightly be pas∣sed ouer. Vnto all these sound and solid arguments, some Cour∣tier may peraduenture, yet farther obiect and say, that it is dangerous, all waies to speake the truth in a Court, es∣specially
in difficult, doubtfull and intricate matters: In∣deede I cannot gainsay it, and I know assuredly, that in such cases, a man had need of a more than vulgar or common with and iudgement, and that in such astraight exigent, if a man will keepe and conserue, good will and reputation, and auoide the infamous blot and spot, of disloyalty, he hath now something, to set his wits a worke on. Goe to then, put case it be thus, yet not witstanding I will (as God shall enable mee) take away the obstacle, and remoue the rubbe and scruple, which may in this case, seeme to trouble thee. Of this then I first of all ad∣monish thee, that it is more correspondent, and agreea∣ble, to wisedome and discretion, alwaies stoutly and manfully to deliuer thine opinion, then with pusillanimi∣ty, and vnseemely fearefulnesse, to hold thy peace and say nothing. If the matter, about which the question growes, be absolutely true, and perspicuously apparent, then I know thou art not mou'd with it: but if it be vt∣terly vnknowne to thee, and more intricate, than that thy present intelligence, is able to winde into; then thou ma∣kest a demurre, and art peraduenture at a non-plus: Thou maist then, with these and such like formall speeches, iust∣ly excuse thy selfe to thy Prince. As touching this matter, or counsell, as a thing both profitable and honest, I thus deli∣uer my minde, so farre as the matter is manifest vnto mee, As I coniecture, as it seemes to mee, So farre as I can gesse, apprehend, and vnderstand. These and such like formes and kindes of speeches, being honestly vsed, and mo∣destly deliuered; the Prince, may receiue very sufficient content and satisfaction: and if his counsels and con∣sultations, obtaine not a happy and hoped issue and e∣uent,
the Courtiers iust excuse and purgation, need not be to seeke, which also a gracious Prince, will doubtlesse accept and take in good part. Now it followes that wee speake somewhat concer∣ning the deliuering of our suffrages, iudgement and opi∣nion, in publike, serious, and important deliberations & consultations; Obserue this, that in many other matters,Rash speech Condemned. delayes are dangerous and vnprofitable, but here, pro∣crastination or discreete deliberation, is very behoofeful, beneficiall, and comfortable. Beware therefore that with the hasty and furious Dogg; (as the Prouerbe is) thou bring not forth blind whelpes, & that thou bee not too for∣ward, to vtter any vnsauory, vnreasonable or vnseason∣able words, which are indeed irreuocable. Haue this also in frequent consideration & often remembrance, that the entrance and beginning of all things, is at the first on-set, hard and difficult; And euen after the same manner, the the formost voice, in all councells and deliberations of importancy, is most hard and hazardous. Therfore hee doth wisely, which makes one more wise than himselfe, his President and Precedent, and discreetly adheres and cleaues to him; and yet so, as that he doe especicially de∣pend and rely, vpon his owne opinion, iudgement, and arbitriment, not altogether vpon an others, for, as almost in all other things: so likewise heere. Alterius non sit, qui suus esse potest. Hee's not anothers man, Himselfe, which counsell can. So likewise the Courtly Counsellor, in matters of mo∣ment,
in graue and great affaires, must be both eloquent and euident, plaine and intelligible, that he may descend and come neere vnto the matter in hand; and not with friuolous circūstances, or superfluous circumlocutions, to goe about the Bush. Neither must he, according to that ould saying, Wrest an Interpretation hiter & thither, as if he would be the breake-necke thereof; nor must he dis∣sipate or spread abroad anxious vncertanities: but, euen as becomes a sage, graue, and iudicious man, must pre∣cisely, and inexpresse tearmes, speake both of matters & men,  in plaine words call, a Ship a Ship, and a Spade a Spade. Furthermore heere may arise another question, as that, if the Courtier comming into the Court, findes other Courtiers at variance, dissention, and controuersie a∣mongstvariance or dissention. themselues, whither he may partially take part with either side, or keepe himselfe neutrally indifferent betweene both? I answer, that Neutrallity or partiallity, is rather to be fled then followed; what then? Choose me out (kind Courtier) him which is most wise, most intel∣ligent, most capable of reason and vnderstanding, and this man, euen by the vprightnesse and equity of his cause, will easily breake the passion and power, and al∣lay and qualifie the hot courage, of his Corriuall and en∣uious competitor. To which purpose saith Ouid. Frangit & attollit, vires ni milite causa, Quae nisi iusta subest, excutit arma pudor. The Souldiers cause erects, deiects his might, Which, if vniust, shame shakes of force to fight. Euen so do thou also: ioyne thy selfe to that party
which maintaines a iust cause, for as for Neutralitie (as they call it) we must so assigne and define it, that it res∣cues or redeemes no man from the snares or ambush of his enemies; neither doth long keepe or conserue, loyall or faithfull friendship; let Neutralitie therefore goe picke a Sallet, as the saying is, but not mistrust or Suspicion, without which indeed, a Courtier cannot liue; Let him not therefore bee too credulous, or apt to beleeue euery one, for although the old vulgar verse tels vs; Fallitur in multis suspiciosus Homo. That iealous men we see, Oftentimes deluded bee. Yet (friendly Courtier) let not this much mooue orNot to be too credulous. molest thee, but take heed whom thou trustest, for in trust is treason. And in this regard, let euery Courtier be most curiously circumspect and vigilant, and what Homer re∣quires in a Prince, namely, that he be quick sighted, and watchfull, , hauing eyes both behind and before. Let the wise Courtier (I say) prescribe vnto himselfe the same rule. And let him not inconsiderately, lightly, or sleightly, put confidence in a glauering, croo∣ching, and deepely protesting or swearing Friend. If thou any thing at all, esteeme me, heare and beleeue this from me, else thou wilt soone or late repent, that ere thou didst trust a Saint-like saluation and protestation. Let E∣picharmus his wisedome be forcible and effectuall in thee. Nulli Fidere, To trust none. Vnlesse thou doe so, tis a thou∣sand to one, but that craftie Vlysses, will at one time or o∣ther, encounter chollericke Aiax. And thus thou shalt
be a debtor to thy selfe, to condole thine owne folly, and to others also, to laugh thee to scorne. If therefore thou wilt couer thee with a Shield, against this sharpe Dart, I admonish thee Courtier, and that most seriously; that thou neglect not this counsell: for, it will then vndoub∣tedly confound thee. Furthermore, in whatsoeuer Court thou liuest, let this also be thy care, and a cautelous obseruation vnto thee, that thou striue not either to ascend too high, or to des∣cend too low. What then? Beware of Extreames, and perswade thy selfe of the truth of that which the Poet sings; Medio Tulissimus ibis. To keepe a vertuous measure, Is surest, purest Treasure. Let then (I say) Mediocrities golden Rule, which isMedi, or a Mean. so frequently, so vehemently pressed and praised, and that most deseruedly, by the most ingenuous and iudici∣ous, both Poets and Philosophers, be euermore thy loue and thy delight. Excellent is that of one Pallas, who thus wished. Vtinam ego neque, nimis faelix, ne{que} miserabilis es∣sem.. O would I might be neither too mightie, nor too mise∣rable; because indeed Mediocritie or a Meane, is the most desiderable and delectable thing in the world: and places of highest Honour, doe cause and procure the greatest dangers. And contrariwise, Experience it selfe, which nener deceiues, teacheth vs truely, that a most deiected and low estate, ingenders disdaine, contempt and con∣tumelie: they therefore are truly wise, which both say
and doe, as Phocylides did: . I desire to be an indifferent Cittizen: for, many most excellent things consist in Mediocritie. To shut vp all in a word; They, which in all their endeuours, desire to keepe the Golden meane liue most sure, most secure from feare of distresse and danger. Such a soft and sweete kind of life therefore, which Salomon the worlds wonder for Wisedome, sought and besought of God, giuing the rea∣son of his request, which was to a most honest and holy end, as is excellently set forth Pro. 30. Such a kind of life (I say) if thou be wise, I wish thou wouldst especially de∣sire and delight in. And assuredly, if thou greedily gape not after more, or more necessary things, than are com∣petently sufficient; this may very well satisfie and con∣tent any man to liue an honest, wise, and blessed life. Moreouer, if the affayres of thy Prince call thee to the expedition, of any great, notable, and important em∣ployment, be not too highly conceited or affected withOf employ∣ments. this honour, or preferment. Neither be thou of opinion, that thy reputation, or authoritie, cannot well consist in safetie, vnlesse actions of such consequence, relie and de∣pend vpon thy performance. Auoid rather (good Cour∣tier) if I may aduise thee, by the examples of others, the too much intermedling in the difficult affayres, and se∣cret counsels of thy Prince; but so farre forth as they are iust and honest thou mayst, vnder goe them; yet I say do not greedily desire to haue the specially hand in them. For, if those employments (though neuer so great im∣plicit and intricate, doe not gaine and obtaine a happie and hopefull issue and successe, then thou, who building Castles in the ayre, hadst purpos'd thereby to haue set vp the plumes of thy fame and renowne, shalt contrariwise
now become a grieuous and egregious consumer and bankrupt, as it were, of thy former hoped fame, by a fu∣ture hapning shame. Now also as touching Matrimony or Marriage, I firstOf Matrimo∣ny, or Marri∣ages of Prin∣ces. of all and especially admonish thee, that vnlesse thou be thereunto solely or singly constrained, thou put not thy selfe forward in such a businesse, for wee finde it true by experimentall proofe, that many men (others being de∣barr'd and kept out) haue beene admitted, or rather haue intermingled and inuolued themselues into the secrets, and matrimonial negotiations of Princes; as if they were the onely ominous Augours, and solid South-sayers of Nuptialls and Marriges; but haue thereby euen plunged and ouer-whelmed themselues, into great and grieuous dangers, especially when the euent hath not fortunately answered the intent. Againe, let the Courtier take heed in this respect, andOf Hum . embrace the good counsell of Polypus, which is, that hee highly esteeme Sobrietie, & Humilitie, least being by any thing puffed vp with pride, the Prince doe not onely per∣ceiue, but punish the same, in that such a one would seeme and be esteemed, more wise and prudent than his Prince. This is an infallible truth, that Princes indeede doe delight in, and loue men famous for their learning, vertue, long grounded and graue experience: but they will, by no meanes, admit or permit with a patient mind, any whomsoeuer, that goes about to promote and pre∣ferre themselues aboue him; nor those who for cruill go∣uernment are more highly prized or praysed than him∣selfe: Assuredly it hath beene in times past, is at this pre∣sent, and will be in time to come, most faithfully true; that,
Nulla fides regni socijs, omnis{que} potestas Impatiens Consortis erit, &c. A Kingly Throne or Crowne will neere permit, Corriuall or Copartner there to sit. But I speake not this, to that end and purpose, that all  all freedome and libertie of speech, should bee taken from Courtiers, being both graue, wise, and vn∣derstanding men; For, neither is it befitting, nor doth it stand with reason, that they should so low deiect and a∣base themselues, as either to allow and approue of the illiberall and seruile opinions of others, or themselues to speake vnfaithfully; which absurditie and impietie (if wee will beleeue Plutarch) is most worthy to bee reproued, and reprehended of all men. Let not then the Courtier, if an honest, graue, and discreet man, feare the displeasure of his Prince, whereby he should be restrained, not freely to deliuer those things, which he hath truly and wisely conceiued in his heart. Moreouer, let both Simulation and Dis-simulation,Simulation & dissimulation in speech. that is, all counterfeiting or colourable dissembling, bee farre from the Courtly Counsellour, whensoeuer hee is to giue his Iudgement, or deliuer his opinion, concerning any matters alreadie propounded. Let him not then so much desire to insinuate, and creepe into the fauour and gracious acceptation of his Prince, by fraudulent cozen∣age, vnhonest trickes, or false tales; as by vertue, wit, e∣loquence, excellencie, and integritie, with all which not∣withstanding that he may be enriched and richly garni∣shed, yet let him not for this cause deride and laugh o∣thers to scorne, or basely esteeme and vilifie them; Nor
so admire and magnifie himselfe, that by this meanes, he as it were pessndate and tread em vnder his foote. But what then? Why assuredly whosoeuer treades this path, walkes hastily into the high-way of his owne ruine and destruction, which happily hath not haped to any one in our, or our Auncestors knowledge and remem∣brance. Doubtlesse this same Philautia, or selfe-loue ne∣uer makes mention or motion to any goodnesse. Neither is it repugnant to reason and equitie, that he which onely desires to please and content himselfe, and contemptu∣ously scornes and contemnes others, should semblablie be of others disdained, reiected, and scorned. Furthermore (kind Courtier) I would here admonishHonest aduise in Counsell. thee this one thing also, That if peraduenture, by the au∣thoritie of thy Prince, thou be to sit in Counsell about matters of great Consequence; that thou seriously and sedulously ponder in mind, and strictly examine, whe∣ther the Counsell or businesse to be then vndertaken, in the name and right of thy Prince, be pleasing to God, profitable to the Common wealth, befitting the fame and reputation of the Counsellours themselues, as also easily and harmelesly to be affected: For, those Counsellours doe very badly aduise and counsel their Prince, who ma∣ny times are the speciall causes, that they erect and build Townes, Towers, Trenches, Bulwarkes, or Warre-like Rampiers, and such like, little or nothing profitable to them, and by this meanes omit others more necessarie and commodious. In these, and such like affayres, let the Courtly Counsellour be alwayes most ready prest to ap∣poynt such workes, as may be propice and profitable to his Prince and Countrey: Herein I say let him be verie discreet and prudent in counselling, as also most cunning
and quicke witted, to display and lay open, what he hathDelay, dis∣commended. to that purpose, in his heart excogitated: For, Princes e∣specially are of all other men most impatient of delayes. Therefore to vse delay or protraction of time, and either by reason of the dullnesse of wit, or slow motions and conceptions of the minde, or else through want of ma∣ture Iudgement, to procrastinate and put off from day to day businesses, and imployments of great importance, and especiall moment, will not onely be very preiudici∣all and obnoxious to thy credit and estimation, but euen to thy Prince himselfe most vnpleasant and vnaccepta∣ble. Againe, let the Counsellour or honourable Embassa∣dour,Not to disco∣uer Secrets. mind and marke this, that he be not too forward to divulge and make knowne the waightie and important affayres, committed to his trust and fidelitie; but what in him lies, let him couer and conceale them vntill such time, as they be effectually dispatched and concluded. But if otherwise, some with enuie will speedily so prose∣cute and persecute thee, as very much to hurt and hinder thy noble actions, or else others will not sticke to accuse thee of remissenesse, and want of wisedome, that such and such businesses were not with more celeritie, and expedi∣tion performed. Be carefull therefore without any ru∣mour or noyse, speedily to strike the stroke of thine in∣tended actions, yere any man haue time, so much as to muse or thinke thereon. Furthermore, I would here suggest and put into theTo be alwaies in action. minde of the wise Counsellour, this needfull and necessa∣ry admonition: namely, that like the Sun he be alwayes as it were in continuall action; that is, That as much as in him lies, he liue not without employment; this is the
meanes to acquire and get a noble name, renowne, and reputation, especially if he doe speedily and fortunately officiate the affaires of his Prince. Now in the true and due deliberation and execution of such actions, let the Courtier be hereof most aduised∣ly carefull, that he wrap vp in silence, whatsoeuer may either be hurtfull, or not helpeful therein. For, in this case, as the saying is, Grau is iactura loquelae est, Great damageSilence is com¦mendable. and detriment ariseth from vndiscreet speech; but commen∣dable and comfortable is Silence, and Secrecy: For, as Bablers are in euery businesse very vnnecessary and vn∣profitable, so especially, in high, great, and important affayres. Excellently therefore doth that most wise King reproue and reprehend sutilitie, or foolish babling. Pro. 20. Non admisceto te cum illo qui arcana detegit, Keepe not company with him which reuealeth secrets. That, therefore, which thou wouldst not haue another to blab, doe not thou thy selfe blaze abroad. Now after all this, these subsequent considerations willTo doe no∣thing without the Princes knowledge. also deserue thy frequent meditation, to wit, that thou attempt not any thing, though thou assuredly know it neuer so profitable, without the priuitie and consent of thy Prince, especially if he be not farre remote and ab∣sent from thee: for, what may he thence collect and con∣clude, but that thou didst contemne his Princely prero∣gatiue; neglect him not therefore by any meanes, neither determine any thing, though in the smallest matters, or most easie and commodious manner, thy Prince not be∣ing therewith first acquainted. Likewise, if the Courtier haue commission to executeRules for an Embassadour. the place and employments of an Embassadour, let him not either by his owne authoritie, or by occasion of more
commodious managing of his Embassage, alter or change any part of his charge therein contained: but letTo tie him∣selfe to the rule of his Commission. him referre all his proceedings to the rule and forme of his Commission, or else vpon some new and inopinate accident, let him speedily aduise and consult with his Prince: For although it be determined and concluded by the Ciuill Lawes, that sometimes an Embassadour may exceed the bounds and limits of his Commission, if more amply and orderly the Embassage may be executed, than was therein commanded. Yet notwithstanding (kind Courtier) that, is not to be vnderstood of publicke, but of priuate affayres. That of Valerius, may giue thee sa∣tisfaction herein, Romanos Legationem, quibus acceperant verbis, peregisse. That the Romanes deliuered their Embas∣sage in the selfe same words, wherein they had receiued it. And that also, of that most famous Father, diuine Ber∣nard is in this case worthy remembrance, and deepe me∣ditation, Non attendit (sayth he) verus obediens quale sit, quod praecipitur, hoc solo contentus, quod praecipitur. The truly obsequious and obedient Embassadour, considers not what kind of Commission or Command he hath receiued, be∣ing onely satisfied with what he is commanded. Heare this (kind Courtier) and performe the same: and acknow∣ledge thy Prince lawfully, vsing his imperious preroga∣tiue, thy supreme Superiour, to whom thou oughtest to be most morigerous, and dutifull. Againe, whither thou be sent as an Embassadour, O∣ratour, Interpretour, or Ledger, in time of Warre, or of Peace; either for the present, or for long continuance; for parle or performance of any affayres whatsoeuer,Not to vnder∣take matters aboue his power. thou must now most diligently enter into consultation with thy selfe, and examine thy power and facultie, what
in such a case, is thy habilitie, or debilitie soundly and substantially to effect and accomplish the same. For, there is not a greater token of foolishnesse, or foole hardinesse, than for a man to take vpon him the execution of such a Function or Office, as he is not able safely to vndergoe. Beware therefore I say, and that seasonably, that thou do not at any time, affect or desire those things, which either thou knowest, or at least shouldst know, will be by thine impotencie, infirmity, and debility most obnoxious, most pernicious vnto thy selfe, or others, be heedfull herein IWhat is requi∣red in an Em∣bassadour. aduise thee, and with a iudicious heart, poyse and consi∣der in mind, the possibilitie, and efficacie, as well of thy bodie, as of thy wit and diseretion; What thou art able to compasse by thy wisedome, learning, and eloquence: as also how expert and circumspect thou art to contriue any thing. Neither is it impertinent, that I added the ha∣bilities of the Bodie: for, it is vndoubtedly without all controuersie, that in an Embassadour is required a faire and comely constitution of Bodie, that is, such an exter∣nall beautie, and pleasant personablenesse, as may be most amiable, and louely in the eyes of his beholders. For, no wise man surely will gaine-say, but that euen in the maie∣sty or gracefulnesse of the body is a certaine genuine and imbred honour, and reuerence represented. Dost thou desire examples? They are pregnant. For, we read that Alexander the Great, was most coyly and disdainefully beheld by the Queene of the Amazones, for no other rea∣son, than that shee found not in that so potent and migh∣tie Monarch, such beautie & comelinesse of bodie, as she expected in him; whose not able fame of admired deedes of prowesse, had beene from farre bruted and divulged vnto her. Very memorable also is that of the Stoick Cato,
who derided & iested vpon those Embassadors of Roome one of whome, had a very foule and vnseemely scarre vpon his head, caused by a blow with a stone: the other being lame The Senate of Roome (sayth hee) haue sent an Embassador, which hath neither head nor feete. Heere also (least wee proue a most thanklesse and in∣gratefullA Briefe me∣moriall of that most memo∣rable Queene Elizabeth. Posterity) let me step one foote out of the way, & adde one more as a personal patterne, and liuely exam∣ple hereof; How great and gratious heroicke imperiall, and specious maiesty, was in that most magnificent, and royall Elizabeth, so long as she liued Queene, of this famous and flourishing Iland? our neighbors, The Low countrymen Germans, French, Itallians, Spaniards and Polonians, knew thee well, o thou neuer sufficiently praised Princesse! yea, I say the Grecian and Barbarian Embassadors, held it an especial cause of exceeding great reuerence, only to see thy beauty, & no lesse then an ad∣mirable wonder to heare Thee speake. But, of thee, thrice noble Princesse, in whose body and soule, was sea∣ted and setled diuine Grace and Maiesty, what can I say without thee? saue only this that so long as any state and condition of mortall men shall remaine; thy name, and fame shall remaine▪ and freshly flourish; neither shall a∣ny age, or posterity smoother vp in silence or cast into the pit of obliuion, the worthy praise of thy Maiesty, Gra∣uity and magnanimity, which was most illustriously gar∣nished, and as it were varnished, with vnspeakable and vnheard gratious courtesie, and affability, Farewell then, thou celestiall and imperiall Princesse, the most excel∣lent, and eminent Phoenix, fautrix, and fauourer of lear∣ning, and all vertuous Arts and Sciences: Thou art now blessedly ascended, from this momentany and tempo∣rary
Court, into a heauenly Palace; into that place wher thou now enioyest eternall ioy without annoy or bitter∣nesse, and euerlasting quietnesse without all care or di∣sturbance. Thou o Angelicall Sanited soule, yere thou wast old, wast carefull to liue well, that when thou wast old▪ thou mightst dy wel. Wee also in the interim whiles here wee as it were, creepe vp and downe on the obscene Scene of this wretched world, doe all of vs bend our course thither, doe all hast and runne to that goale. But what doe I, whither doe I run, by digressing too far from the end, where vnto I intend my iourney? I must there∣fore now returne, from that Court to this Court. After all these things, which wee haue admonished, and demonstrated, to the Courtier, Let the Courtly em∣bassador, doe his best endeauour, so to dispatch and per∣forme his embassages; and so discreetly to order and dis∣pose of all his seuerall actions therein, that he may notIpudency or  to be auoided in an mbas∣sador. with many others before him, feare that; Legato deesse os, The Embassador hath no face, that is, hee is such a one, as is not a sham'd at any thing hee does. Therfore (kinde Courtier) that thou maist be gratious in the acceptance both of thy Prince, from whom, and to the Prince, to whom thou art sent; be by all meanes furnished with a quicke and nimble wit, that thou maist answere subtilly and eloquently, together with a certaine grauity, grace∣fullnesse, and delectable sweete vtterance, both to say & doe matters premeditated, or not premeditated, with solid polisht and acute iudgment for many times (be∣leeiue me) such accedentall matters may in thy imploi∣ments bee contingent and fallout, as will not admit de∣lay, nor time for consultations. Let the courtly Embassador or Orator obserue and
marke this also, that although, eloquence in speaking beNot to be too Rhetoricall very excellent and commendable; yet not withstanding hee must discreetely, moderate his speech from too ma∣ny Rhetoricall glosses, and figuratiue illustrations; I de∣ny not, but that such like painted amplifications, being, as it were, the most beautifull lights of an Oration, may haue their most pertinent, & exquisite vse in the Schooles, Temple, and Seate of Iudgement, but not before a Prince Let therefore thine Oration or speech to a Prince be e∣laborate and well fraught, and furnished with graue rea∣sons, and pithy and substantiall sentences, rather than with the waight of words onely; a pure, simple, smooth, and plaine speech, is certainely most pleasing to a Prince: And contrarywise, an intricate, coullerable, and curious∣ly, contriued speech is most displeasing. Furthermore, let the Embassador be well seene in theTo be expert∣in the lan∣guage of that Country whi∣ther he goes Embassador. Language of that Country, or Kingdome, whither he is sent; but especially, in that which he may vnderstand, the Prince; to whome he is sent, is most delighted with∣all. The Latine Tounge, vndoubredly is very accepta∣ble every where: wherefore let him be most skilfull there∣in, that he may bee able to speake it most promptly, fa∣miliarly, and exquisitely. Thou hearest not any Nicephe∣rus speaking to thee, who most in considerately, would haue a man learne perfectly all languages. Neither can I bee perswaded that of Mithridates was true, that he was euer able to speake 22 seuerall languages; But wee here doe only, and especially, perswade vnto an Idioma, or most propper forme of speech. Againe, it is not so much desired in any Embassador,To be a good Historian and Antiquary. that he bee a meere Philosopher, as that he be an excellent Antiquary, and well red Historian, for things to come are
for the most part, like vnto those which are already past and performed, which an Embassador must also know, as beeing indeed a Polititian. Vnto these foresaid cautions I add Temperāce, whichTemperance in an Embas∣sador very re∣quisite. also I, as a speciall ornament recommend to the Cour∣tiers, or Embassadors, prudent consideration; Send I pray thee (friendly Courtier) into perpetuall exile or banishment, all the vnreuerent rabble, of inordinat lusts and desires, which are indeed at vtter defiance, and open warre with Temporance and Reason. If thou be inuited to Banquets, or Feasts, let amode∣rate and indifferent prouision, of meate and drinke satis∣fie, content and please thee, let thy Sermocination, or conference, be sweete and pleasant, and the good will & cheerefull acceptance of the guests, be hearty and faith∣full and be not ouer come with wine, or strong drinke; for, what soundnesse of wit and discretion, can bee in the head, braine, or minde of that man, which doth as it were stuffe, glut, and gorge himselfe, with immoderatly de∣noured meate and drinke. Neither is it to be imagined, that Circes did Metamorphise, the companiōs of Vlisses in∣to Swine, by any other meanes than this; which, hir Sor∣cery or witchcraft (as the Poets faine) could take no ef∣fect vpon Vlysses himselfe, he being a sober, satiate, and moderate man. Let the Courtier obserue, and heedfully marke this, least by too indulgent freenesse and forward∣nesse to drinke, being by the fables and false tales of o∣thers, prickt forward and prouoked, hee take such a fall as may vtterly ouer-throw, the high building of all his former credit and reputation. These things I could hear∣tely desire, euery Courtier would at all times carefully ruminate, consider and recogitate, but especially then
when as e is to haue Audience, and to deliuer the Summe of his Ambassage. To this purpose let him thinke vpon Xenocrates, who being by the Athenians sent Embassador, that he might not in curre the the least sus∣pect of intemperance, is said that he would neuer so much as touch or taste any the least quantity of meate or drinke, vntill he had vttered, and deliuered the effect of his Ambassage. Honorius and Theodosius the Emperors were of opinion,To bee ac∣quainted and to reueale the secrets of the place where they were Em∣bassadors that it is not fit to search and pry into the secrets of for∣raine Kings; yet in my iudgement, I cannot see any iust reason why it should be blameable in an Embassador, if when he be returned, he know and make knowne, those things which may seeme and that most iustly, to apper∣taine into the common-wealth; I meane those things e∣spicially, which belong to customes, Religion, Natio∣nall lawes, situations of Kingdomes, Castles, Cities, Rayments, Ornaments of Princes, Conditions of Coun∣sellors, Originals, Families, power, possession or ri∣ches, forme and fashions of Architecture or buildings and such like. For, what can be more disgracefull to an Embassador than when his Prince doth question him concerning those things, to finde him ignorant of them, the greatest parte whereof or at least the , That whereof himselfe was an eye-witnesse hee might easily haue vnderstood and haue had ample information? Let the Courtier be the first in perswading his Prince,Of dismission of Embassa∣dours. that he would be pleased (notwithstanding that the Em∣bassadours for diuerse reasons may be distastefull vnto him) yet both royally and magnificently to respect and entertaine them, and to giue them a gracious and Prince∣ly hearing, and with a large & liberall reward to dismisse
them; that they may not haue any iust cause to com∣plaine of his parsimonie, vngentlenesse, and inhumani∣tie. The Embassadour and Courtly Counsellour must notOf the dis∣patch of an Embassage. (by any meanes) be remisse in his affayres, & yet let him be as fearefull as hopefull of the prosperous issue and e∣uent of them: least being onely led with a precipitate con∣fidence of good successe, he doe the more negligently and carelesly, put in execution the charge committed to him in his Commission. Let him also in all other matters, hate and auoid curio∣sitie,Curiositie. and not excruciate himselfe with care for those things which hee ought not: for, as Plutarch testifies, , Curiositie is a vile and seruile vice or wret∣chednesse. Therefore, though in Courts, curiosities tick∣ling and inticing motions be pleasant and delightfull, yet let euery discreet, honest, and wise Courtier neglect, and reiect it. Let this caution also be carefully imprinted in the mindVerbositie. and memory of euery Courtier, that in his speech he ex∣presse more Prudency than Verbositie, and with the most sage and graue, to be briefe & compendious, in the hand∣ling and dispatching of any his actions and employments whatsoeuer. For, there is nothing can be more irke some to a Prince, nor in deed to any other prudent man, than to listen to those men, which like a mightie flood of words, or an emptie Barrell, doe make a huge sounding noyse, without any soundnesse of iudgement or discreti∣on; who are, as the Countrey-man sayd of the Nightin∣gale, Vox tantum, praeterea nihil, Nothing but words and wind. Moreouer, let the Courtly Counsellour obserue, that
when he  or intendeth any matter of momentOpportunity. with  Prince, he carefully watcheth a it opportunitie, and that he begin the same from some new gratefull , which he may thinke will delight, or giue content to his Prince. But if at that time, his Prince be exercised about other serious affayres, let him desist, and wisely watch a more seasonable and conuenient occasion: how much opportunitie is auaileable, Pindarus in his Pythies doth excellently declare, . Time (saith he) in euery thing hath the supreme place. Let the Courtier therefore know, and know assuredly, that such is the validitie and efficacie of time and opportunity, that it is able to translate and transmutate, that which is honest into dis-honestie, profit into dis-profit; and a good turne into a shrewd turne, and the contrary. Finally, time is able to alternate, and quite change the face, fashion, and nature of any thing: this did Salomon that most wise king vnderstand and teach, Pro. 15. Laetatur homo in sentemi ris sui, & serm oportunus est optimus. A man hath ioy (saith he) by the answere of his mouth, and a word spoken in due season; is most excellent. But enough of these things, now to the matter. In the vndertaking and handling of any publike em∣ployments, let the Counsellour haue an especiall respectA foure-fold Caution. and regard of his honour and dignitie, which hee may safely prouide for, by this foure-fold rule and direction, maugre all the malice, fretting; and furring of all his en∣uious enemies. First of all, let him endeuour what in him lies, to liue well, and well to vnderstand the Truth, which is a most luculent and euident argument of Sapience. Se∣condly, let him administer, and giue good & wholesome counsell to his Prince, which is a point of Prudence.
Thirdly, let him both desire and endeuour that which is good vnto him; which is a propertie of Iustice. Fourth∣ly, let him delight to doe good, which is a token of con∣stancie and perseuerance. And he certainly which is ar∣med with this Quadruple Shield or Target, shall not easily be ouer throwne from the hight of his honour and digni∣tie. But (kind Courtier) in euery deliberation and con∣sultation,Inconueni∣ences. which appertaines to publike businesses, consi∣der well, whence either greater or lesser inconueniences may arise, and make choice (as the chiefe) of that de∣termination, whence the smaller discommodities doe a∣crew, and which come neerest to the Lawes and written word of God: Let the Courtier settle his aboade here as in a most exquisit, smooth, and plaine way, namely, that he meditate, and muse on the most excellent things, that he speake the best, and but few things, that he execute and performe the most singular and substantiall things, and these, all, such as may be most honest, lawfull, and beneficiall either to the Church, or Common-Wealth. Such a man as this may easily be discerned, to differ from the forme, figure, and similitude of a Seruant, or slauish Vassall. Neither shall he be of necessitie constrained to take all he needs from the Casket of a Womans Nurcery,Not to relie too much vp∣on others. or from the braine and inuention of some Courtly Chap∣laine. For, what hath neerer relation to the condition of Seruants and bondmen, than meerely to depend and re∣lie vpon simple Women, or Ecclesiasticall Courtiers, in Courtly affayres? What is more base and abiect, than, least we should be depriued of our office and preferment, to consent and subscribe to the opinions and purposes of others, though neuer so wicked, or vnequall, yea, and
that, sometimes in matters of Religion, and Saluation? Oh woe! oh shame; alas, What pen, what tongue is a∣ble to expresse, how shamefull, grosse, and grieuous it is? That a man should thus mancipate and beslaue himselfe to others? That whatsoeuer wrong, and iniustice, they allow, we must approue? Whatsoeuer impietie, or dis∣honestie they affirme to be good, we must say and sweare tis so? Let Courtiers in this case call to mind, that nota∣ble and remarkable example, which Theodorick Afrus hath left as a patterne to posteritie, who commanded all such Gnathonicall Sycophants, to be put to death, saying: Si Deo fidem non seruastis, quomodo homini sinceram conscienti∣am seruabitis? If yee be not faithfull to God, how is it possible yee can be faithfull to man? Marke this I pray thee (good Courtier) and thou whosoeuer thou art, whom Heauen hath aduanced to I know not what Scepters, Pallaces, Courts, Kingdomes, and Empires, he certainly which is not faithfull to God, or by such deceiueable and fraudulent meanes, gets a Crowne, or a Kingdome, hath vndoubted∣ly Subiects scarcely faithfull, and a Kingdome scarce constant, or durable to him, and in stead of renowne, and I know not what maiestie, which he sought for, findeth nothing, but a meere shaddow, smoake, and vanitie. I, of set purpose here let passe a most terrible and lamentable example, which, alas, not many yeares since did truly teach vs, and the very fact it selfe of the murtherer did ap∣parantly proue to be most true; which , wee doe but touch by the way. For, to desire either to rip vp or rub ouer a fresh, the memorie of which said most sad ex∣ample, were to do nothing else than to renew our griefe, sorrow, and lamentation, and to touch that Vlcer, where∣with that most prodigious Monster of men had stricken
this whole Christian Orbe, yea, vs and all good men, with a most detestable, vnhappie, and vnluckie blow. But to the purpose: Fly, O fly I beseech thee (good Courti∣er) this infamous blemish, yea this dishonest and disho∣nourable staine afore-named; seeke not daintie delights, by such dangerous endeuours, to vphold the Nobilitie of thy Auncestors; doe not too higly extoll or magnifie thy Pedegree, and the smoakie images of thy Progeni∣tours. Neither doe thou vaine gloriously bragge & boast of thy valiant or victorious deeds of Chiualrie, truly tis thus, the glorious renowne and fame of thy Forefathers, is a true and vnextinguished light to posteritie, and (to speake with Crispus) suffers not their good or euill acti∣ons to lie buried in obliuion; yet heare and beleeue this one thing, which I shall tell thee; since all men had no∣thing but Dirt and Slime for their first and great Grand∣father, as well they which loftily and haughtily brag and vaunt it out in purple and scarlet robes, as they which are prest and opprest with pouertie, and sicknesse: As well they which with wide mouth'd ostentation, do crake and boast of stately Statues, Trophees, Triumphs, and Consull-Ships of their Auncestors, as those who haue most pri∣uately, penuriously, and very hungrily led their liues in poore Countrey-cottages: Doe not therefore proudly, and disdainefully glory in thy Grand fathers, or great Grand-fathers Eminence, but if thou desire to mount and to surmount others, excell and exceede them in ho∣nestie and integritie of life and conuersation; Let thy no∣bilities originall and foundation be founded and groun∣ded on Vertue, whereof assuredly tis farre better to haue beene the first Author and Occasioner, then either being well begun by others, to be ouerthrow thereof, or at
least to arrogate and vendicate the same vnto thy selfe, by disgracefull frowardnesse, vntowardnesse, and petulan∣cie. Let then (I say) thy deedes be more worthy than thy words; and shew not thy selfe such an idle, or vnman∣ly Noble man, as onely to vaunt of voluptuousnesse, ease and idlenesse, which thou hast especially got from the many worthy employments of thy generous, industri∣ous, and vertuous Progenitours. These things (kinde Courtier) though I thus obiect vnto thee, yet is it not my mind or intention, to counsell thee, that in the nar∣row straights of Fortune, thou shouldst debase or abuse the Noble Linage of thine Honourable Auncestors, by subiecting thy selfe to slauery, or basenesse; but that thou shouldst endeuour by all vertuous and laudable meanes; to conserue and keepe it inuiolate, vnspotted, and vndisgraced, and not suffer it ignominiously to sinke into the pit of blacke obliuion, or vtter forgetfulnesse. Here againe take heed to thy selfe, that either by hau∣tinessePride and hautinesse of mind. of mind, or pride of life thou doe not exasperate and prouoke to anger, other men more noble, excellent, and eminent than thy selfe, and so kindle the furious flames of fierie wrath, and enuie against thee, especially israised from a plebean & most meane estate, thou stretch out and extend thy plumes so farre, as to excell and sur∣passe the noblest and most renowned men of honour and nobilitie, chiefely if thou attaine to this hight of honour and celsitude, by meere grace and fauour, or as some (somtimes doe) by illegitimate and dishonest stratagems, not by famous facts, or meritorious atchieuements. Let not therefore the immodest or immoderate care, & eager desire, or rather ardent fire of ouermuch ambition, with∣draw thy mind from modestie, from equitie, neither en∣rich
or ennoble thine estate by hooke, or by crooke, by right or wrong. Wilt thou Courtier win a Kingdome, or gaine a Crowne? then hate hot lust, and base couetousnes, Yea, wilt thou enioy all things, then I say thirst not after, couet not any thing? Heare and beleeue Seneca, that famous Philosopher, and excellent Schoole-Maister of mans life, Hos est Regnum, nolle regnare cum possis; This is a Kingdome, to refuse a Kingdome, when thou mightst raigne as King. Finally if thy mind prouoke thee to inordmate desire, let that of Lucan in his first booke, revoke thee; Inuida fatorum series, Summis{que} negatum stare diu. Th'emperiall and impartiall Fates-decree That highest Thrones shall ruinated bee. But, since all things which now seeme old haue binneAll things haue their be∣ginning and end. new and did not once want their originall and first be∣ing, let no wise and discreete Courtier hate or emulate a∣nother for the honor which he hath lately, and that de∣seruedly got and attained vnto; for if thou land or com∣mend any man, for his riches, dignity, and prosperity, thou praisest such externall matters, as not being a mans owne, but as the Philosopher calls them Bona fortunae the Goods of fortune, are therefore due to fortune: but if thou extoll and magnifie, a noble man who is of singular parts, and excellently qualified; a great Scholler, passing eloquent, famous for councels, at home; or conquests at warre; heere then indeede thou dost praise the man him∣selfe, & nothing but what is his owne. Let such a Cour∣tier,
that he may the better maintaine his honour, digni∣ty, and Nobillity, be a man of most exquisite carriage, beautified with sweete and delicate, constitution of bo∣dy; his ornaments of Apparell very honourable rich and sumptuous, for if that be true which Homer said. Nam{que} viro magnum vestis decus addit honesta A mans rich clothes and sumptuous ornament, Addes no small honour to his high descent. This, indeede is in some sort true, and befitting euery man, but especially him which is attendant at Courte. Now to these external ornaments, let him adde the mag∣nificence and noblenesse of other things, which as in all others so especiallie (as Aristotle testifies) are in a noble Courtier, most conueniently to bee prouided; other∣wise he looseth the reputation and renowne of his mag∣nificence and excellency. Furthermore euery Courtier must in the Court carryOf behauiour. about with him a cheerefull countenance, a tongue slow of speech, and a heart that can as it were imprison and locke vp his secrets; but let him especially take heed of ridiculous or wanton gestures: for what can be more absurde fond and foolish than in conference to vse mi∣micall and idle behauiour, winding, wagging and wrest∣ing the body to and fro like a vice or foole on a stage, whereby beyond all grauity and decent sobriety, they seeme to iet or dance vp and downe casting their heeles, hands, & feete, hither and thither and looking another way, as if they were talking with some others. These things as they doe very much deface and disgrace euen
the best speechees a man can deliuer: so, are they most patent and apparent arguments, of a light and vncon∣stant mind, which none surely but euen a meere sot, or one that hath not so much as one eye of vnderstanding, but most certainly knowes to be true. Againe I heere aduise euery Courtier, that if at anyA Caution. time, he desire to shun, and avoide the danger and dis∣pleasure of his Princes indignation, that he suffer not his offices, Place or dignities to be taken from him, by any others, than by his Prince himselfe: for doubtlesse it can∣not but be very silly and absurd, for any man to expect a remuneration and recompence from any others, than from him to whome he desires, and endeauours his la∣bours may worthily bee approued; therefore I wish & aduise thee, (kind Courtier) that thou bee not alwaiesNot to be too frequent with or absent to long from thy Prince. present with thy Prince, nor too long absent from him, dost thou desire to know my reason? tis this, the one procures hatred and wearisomenesse of thee, the other causeth vnmindfulnesse & forgetfulnesse of thee, be not therefore I say so absent from the presence of thy Prince as that he vtterly forget thee, neither do thou so often & importunately intrude thy selfe into his presence, as that thy person proue irkesome, and vngratefull vnto him, but that thou maiest to thy speciall benefit and with his fauoure and affection, be absent from him thou maist la∣bor to compasse and procure such fauourable and hono∣rable Embassages, as thou maist imagine obserue and perceiue, will be gratefully acceptable to thy Prince; by this meanes, though absent in body, thou shalt be still present in the heart, and affection of thy Prince, and as a new and lately entertained fauorite, mayest with ioy and alacritie comfortably returne vnto him.
Let the Courtier warily, and blamelesly learne, pati∣entlyOf enuie. to beare, contemne, and set light by Enuie and Ha∣tred, and let him in the interim both say and doe whatso∣euer is iust and equall, for by this meanes, as sure as what is most sure, it will come to passe, that thou shalt vn∣doubtedly foyle and fell thine Enemies, and enuious e∣mulatours, what ere they be. Also let the Courtier most assuredly perswade himselfe hereof, that Enuie doth not so much harme, to the partie enuied, as to the Author thereof, or partie enuying, but by all meanes haue thou a care, that thou thy selfe hate and repudiate this most o∣dious and shamefull vice in thy selfe, which assuredly proceeds from no other fountaine or spring: nay, rather from no other sinke, or muddy pit, than a loath some and sauage motion and disposition of rancour and malice, most true therefore is that Greeke Elegie, translated into Latine. Iustius inuidiâ nihil est, quae protinus ipsum Auctorem rodit, discruciat{que} animum. Enuie most iustly doth himselfe destroy, Hurts his owne Heart, procures his owne annoy. Thou, Courtier, then whosoeuer thou art, that art sicke of this enuious disease, breake the fury, vanquish the fellnesse thereof I aduise thee. For, as a vessell which is mustie and vncleane, at the first, doth quickly and most easily putrifie, spoyle, and defile whatsoeuer good liquor or moysture is put therein: So a minde vitiated and con∣taminated with this shrewd, lewd, and dishonest disposi∣tion, and inclination to enuie, can neuer purely possesse
perfect quiet, and tranquillitie. Wherefore either let the Courtier neatly, and pleasantly, frump and flout the bi∣ting and despightfull speeches of the enuious, or else as wisely and wittily retort them, as they are maliciously darted against him, but neuer let him with violence, or vehemence, repugne or repell them, especially if they proceed from a Prince, Primate, or principall man of au∣thoritie. For tis Wisedome with patience to endure and suffer, not to reuenge and reproue that which cannot be otherwise altered. Let Courtiers also vnderstand and know this, that enuie is (as it were) the cōmon pestilence and infection of a Court, which as it is connatiue with man, so doth it with man (either amongst them of equall or inferiour condition) arise and grow vp. Notwith∣standing (kind Courtier) dost thou desire a preseruatiue against it, and to haue a salue to heale this dangerous sore; I desire thee at least to abate & extenuate it by court∣tesie, graciousnesse, and affabilitie. If in the meane season any chance or mischance befall thee, by the enuie of the impious and vngodly, thinke thus with thy selfe, that all men cannot (at all times) continue excellent & eminent: for, in short time many may be erected to the top of pre∣ferment, and the same men be as suddainly deiected to the depth of distresse and calamitie, and those especially which liue in Princes Palaces. For, can any man possi∣ble be so ignorant of this our humane case and conditionThe conditi∣on of a Cour∣uer. as not to know, and to bee vndoubtedly assured, that Courriers according to the will and pleasure of their Prince, are sometimes happie, sometimes vnhappie, som∣times mightie, sometimes miserable? What if this should come to passe, which also is a humane casualtie, and in a Prince, as he is a man excusable, and to bee endured,
namely, that without any great respect of iudicious con∣siderations, he magnifie and lift vp this or that man, to the highest step of honour and dignitie, or contrariwise that he vilifie and thrust downe to the very bottome of basenesse, a man famous for his noble linage, vertue, and literature; and whose merits haue beene most meritori∣ous in the Common Wealth. Thou maist hence (I say) learne (friendly Courtier) by this and such like, to endure that which thou wilt hardly approue: yet feare and for∣beare to censure thy Prince, if thou meane not to deceiue thy selfe; for so farre forth as he is pleased to vse his owne Princely power and authoritie, let his will be thy rule of Iustice. Neither let the old or new examples which hap∣ned in Germany, France, and Polonia, put any other me∣ditations and considerations into thy heart. But let thisThe Princes will the Cour∣uers tule. just and vpright Law satisfie and content thee; Principis tui voluntas tibi sit firma, rata & grata. Let the pleasure of thy Prince settle, firme, and confirme thine. Wander not farther then this I aduise thee, if thou be wise. It may be some subtil violent and immoderate motion of the mind may disswade, and perswade thee otherwise; but I say still, let reason and experience rule thee, and iudge not that to be rashnesse or dishonestie, which seemes to thy Prince right and equitie; For surely that Courtier which by this meanes suffers shipwracke, in the sea of the court, shall, Improbe & iniqne (as the Prouerbe is) Neptunum accusare, Accuse Neptune vniustly. For, as the Mariner which once or twice hath suffered Ship-wracke on the Sea, if when he approcheth neere dangers, he striue not to auoid them, wants not opportunitie and fit occasion, ha∣uing entred into the Sea againe, to fall into, and dash him∣selfe vpon the same misfortune. After the selfe same man∣ner,
that Courtier which hath suffered diuers and sundry sinister mischances, and disasterous slips, in this slippery way, and vnconstant fauour of Princes, hath no cause to promise to himselfe any certaintie, nor can he in such vio∣lent and turbulent ouerflowing floods, assure vnto him∣selfe a calme sea, or a sure and secure seate, I meane a peaceable and contented minde. Furthermore (kind Courtier) if thou hast resolutely resolued, and determined to vndertake any large pro∣gresse, course, and continuance vnder thy Prince, enforce thy selfe to the vttermost of thy power, to expresse thyPromptitude. promptitude and industrious diligence in thine office or calling. For, as rash malapertnesse and disobedience, doe hurt, hinder, yea, and vtterly breake off Courtly procee∣dings; so assuredly obedience, prompt, and readie prest obseruance and diligence, doe commend, promote, and aduance the excellent endeuours of an honest Cour∣tier. Let the Courtier also which desires and aspires to ho∣nour and preferment by his Prince, haue this care & dueTo be exerci∣sed in his Princes presence. consideration, that as much as ere he may, he be euer oc∣cupied & exercised in his Princes sight, that he may take notice of his diligence, yet let this be done very seasona∣bly, and not too importunely: Let him therefore in this respect obserue the most seasonable times; for vsually suddaine and vnexpected employments are iminent and ingruent to Princes, which they (for the most part) will credit, and commit to their dispatch and performance which come next into their presence. Let the wise Courtier also obserue and note this, thatTo preferre things present before future things. alwayes he preferre things present, and not perillous, be∣fore future and feareful things, if so be that which is good
and honest doe not prohibit the same; for, he which puts not a period and iust limitation to his rouing & rauening lusts and desires, or preferres future things, which many times proue bitter, and distastefull, before things present, greedily gaping after new offices, and imployments; doth seldome or neuer gaine much thereby, but like Aesops dog, while they couetously snatch at a double doubtfull commoditie, they most commonly loose their single cer∣taintie. Wherefore I againe and againe exhort the Cour∣tier, that he herein be aduised, and that he loose not cer∣taine, for vncertaine things: for to vse a measure in our desires, is a speciall point of wisedome, and modestie, and not Spem praetio emere, to buy our hope at too heauie or deere a rae, as Terence his Sannio well and wittily doth admonish vs. Let vs also know thus much, that although yong Cour∣tiers be for the most part very rude & foolishly insolent, yea, in many things much to be reprehended; yet they not being grossely defiled with any haynous offences, or capitall crimes, are therefore in some sort pardonable, and to be excused: For tis good that euery one should haue this in due consideration; Nam vitijs nemo sine nascitur, optimus ille est, Qui minimis vrgetur. Sin, from our Birth hath all our hearts possest, He then which hath least sin, is blest and best. If then in that more licencious life, which for the most part, Courtiers doe enioy in a Court, there be ouer much and immoderate loosenesse of life and conuersation, it is
better (but no farther than we may with a good consci∣ence) in some measure wisely to excuse them, than by putting oyle and fire together, to disquiet and trouble them with ignominious and bitter speeches. Let vs bee guided with this rule, through the whole course of our life, that we may (what in vs lyes) haue Peace with all men; and wage Warre onely with their vices. Now in the meane while, euen those Courtiers which, as much as they are able, doe couer and conceale the outward appa∣rances, and demonstrations of their inward conditions, and inclinations, doe, notwithstanding soone or late breake forth, and discouer what is in them: so that they which with so great care and circumspection, would haue cloaked and kept close, what manner of men they were, haue (at length) in one vice or other, bin openly detec∣ted. Let Courtiers therefore in this regard, looke to themselues, and although they may fondly say, and so saying deceiue themselues, That no man sees or can wit∣nesse against them, yet let them know and know assured∣ly, that the All-seeing eye of Gods knowledge doth (as it were) through the Looking-glasse of Heauen, presently behold and discerne whatsoeuer the heart of man, most priuily and priuately conceiueth. Wherefore it can no∣thingNeither great∣nesse nor pri∣uacie of place, can hide our sins from God. at all profit or auaile the Courtier to be great in grace, and great fauour and authoritie, or to seeke out the most retired, or solitary places that may be, whereby he may the more eagerly, and conueniently without distur∣bance or discouery, thinke vpon and put in practice, the high displeasure, dissimulation, and other priuate moti∣ons and machiuations of his mind: God I say, who, as the Prophet testifies, Scrutatur corda & renes, Is searcher both of the heart and reines, sees & fore-sees all the most se∣cret
thoughts and intentions of thy mind. Neither be thou of opinion, that the impious imaginations which thou hast excogitated and ruminated in the depth of thy heart, though in most secret and obscurest places, if a∣gainst the expresse rule of Gods word and truth, can euer haue a good end and prosperous conclusion. Thou maist paraduenture (occasion being offered) broach them a∣broad, but either wrath, rage, dissimulation, or faction, and such like, will assuredly crosse, if not vtterly con∣found thee. For, tis as true as old a saying, Qui foea alteri fodit, incidit in illam. Hee which digs a pit for another fals into it himselfe; So likewise after the same manner, he that puls downe his Neighbous hedge, is oftentimes by deceit, as a lurking Serpent, sorely wounded, if not by his venimous and mortiferous sting, stung, to the death: so I say, they which machināt or inuent any treacherous destruction to their King or prince (not only because they contest with one more mighty) are themselues cō∣founded; but especially because God himselfe hath com∣manded that the Maiesty of a King, being as it were his representation and Vice-Gerent on earth, shall be held most holy and inuiolate; And that he therefore will so surely, and seuerely, be the reuenger of such impieties, asAn admoniti∣on to perfidi∣ous Traitors and bloody Iebusites. that scarcly any I say not gratious Kings, but euen grace∣lesse Tirants, shall be peraduenture destroied or supplan∣ted by them, but that after the same manner, a like re∣uenge shalbee retaliated and paide home into their owne Bosome. Thinke vpon this then, you Courtly Polititians, ambi∣tious Swash-bucklers, and Blood sucking Traitours, which thinke to shroud and shelter your selues, vnder the most holy & immaculate name of Iesus. tis not your
solitary, or retyred places, tis not your couzenage and e∣quluocation, tis not (I say) the authority of your great High Priest▪ or the dignity of a Cardinall, no nor the fai∣ned and false Vizarde of your Catholike, Apostolike, Re∣ish Religion, that can make such euill to bee good, Tis better, yea I say tis farre better, if perchance thou be ex∣pelled from the presence of thy Prince or remoued from thy due dignities and preferments; not onely to couerNot to re∣uenge our owne wrong and dissemble thine iniuries and greiuances, but euen patiently, and with a contented mind to sustaine and en∣dure thē. Neither should any wise or vnderstāding man nor any that hath the feare of God before his eies, thinke that he may iustly reuenge his owne wrong, and either in word or deede intende or attempt any thing, that may re∣dound to the preiudice of his Prince. Furthermore thou (kind Courtier) which art a man,Not to be ru∣led by women and borne to bee of a manly spirit and disposition, suffer not thy selfe to be ouer rulde by women, especially sim∣ple and ignorant women; for, nothing almost can be to any man more wretched and slauish, then to abase and indignifie himselfe so far, as to obay the rigid rigorous & many times vniust command, of imperious and impetu∣ous women: whereby indeede he doth no better than apparently seeme to neglect, reiect, and refuse, that Ho∣norable prerogatiue wherewith God his all blessed Crea∣tor, had from the beginning honoured him. Now come we to lay downe some few directions and instructions, how the Courtier may carry himselfe in the change and alteration of a King or kingdome. As in all other things, so likewise in this, a meane is the best.How to carry himselfe in the change of a Prince. Wherefore a new Prince being inaugurated and inuest∣ed into his Crowne & kingdome, shew not thy selfe too
sad and sorrowfull, nor too glad pleasant and ioyfull; what then? heare; and make vse. Let thy countenance be modest and graue, and when thou maist without harme to thy credit and reputation, temper thy ioyes with some teares of sorrow, and soberly and discreetely intermingle some sighes and lamentation with thy present obsequi∣ous obseruances. When the Courtier perceiues that his Prince in his be∣nigne, bountifull, and liberall disposition, is forward and ready to conferre and bestow vpon him, any honest and Princely profer or present pay of ready mony; let him vse no delayes but with all celerity and expedition, let him (yet with an honest minde and carriage) receiue and accept of it; for, assuredly tis farre better to haue in pre∣sent possession, than to hope with long expectation, and once tene, tene, is better than an hundred times Cape, Cape. The Courtier endeauouring to compasse a courtlyOf the Prin∣ces liberality. life and being promoted therevnto, must giue out and report abroad that he did not so much gaine the same by his owne proffered Seruice, but rather that, that his office or place of preferment, was conferred and imposed vp∣on him, by the especiall and free election and choice of his Prince▪ for, thou being by this meanes, admitted and placed therein mayst deale with thy most intimate frends as touching thy Prince, or his administrations and em∣ploiments, alwaies directing thy words to such a sence as that they may not maliciously be wrung and wrested to the worst; if thou bee not carefull herein, tis likely that one subtill Vlisses or other, will circumuent and in∣trapp stupid & hasty Aiax, and thereby shalt thou greiue thy selfe, and make others scorne and scoffe at thee. Let
the Wisedome of Epicharmus therefore, I wish thee, be thy Wisedome, especially in Princes Palaces, Nulli fide∣re, To trust no man. For it cannot be Wisedome or discre∣tion in any man to put confidence in Courtiers rewards, gifts, and faire promises: because indeed many of them wil seeme euen to load those men with rich gifts and pre∣sents, onely out of meere pride of mind and vaine glori∣ous oftentation, to whom notwithstanding they beare in∣testine hatred and rancorous displeasure. And what then? Why euen those will counterfeit and dissemble, that they reioyce at thy prosperitie and well-fare, where∣as indeed they enuie the same, and doe inwardly grieue, when they seeme outwardly to smile. Neither are these the trickes of Courtiers onely, but euen of the whole world, which indeed makes those that desire and looke for that better life in heauen, to despise and hate this here on earth. And who indeed that hath any sparke of grace, or is possessed with any contempt of the vanitie and villa∣ny of this present life, is not ashamed to thinke, that he can gather Figs from Thistles, Grapes from Thornes, or pure Wheat out of drosse and Darnell. But I proceede, and here admonish the Courtier, that he beware of those dignities and preferments, which by reason of too eager desire, to bring his friends also into office and promotion, are a great hindrance to the better performance of his owne proper, and peculiar affayres. Beneficence is indeed a noble vertue, whereby we accor∣dingOf Benefi∣cence. to our power, doe assist, and do good to those which are worthy the same. To our power, I say, because it is not fit I should water another mans ground, mine owne being dry and thirstie; for, perfect Charitie beginnes at home. Let vs therefore be very wary and carefull, that
our good Deedes ill plac't proue but bad Deedes, which certainly then comes to passe, when wee immoderately and vnlawfully seeke the good of others, and bring there∣by much harme to vs and ours. Wherefore let the Cour∣tier, yea, euery one take heed, that when he stifly intends to doe a pleasure to his friend, he doe not as great, or a greater displeasure to himselfe, and those which apper∣taine vnto him. But if thou haue a desire to enlarge thine owne estate, be most sedulous therein, especially when thou shalt perceiue thine enemies or emulators, eyther drowsey or lazily disposed to sloath and idlenesse, or fol∣lowing their owne lusts and pleasure, or busily exercised, about toyes, trifles, and vaine sports, then is a fit occasi∣on offred thee, which to neglect, and not to lay fast hold on, were exceeding great folly and imprudence; yea, and then also not to confront and oppose those thine aduer∣saries, but to the preiudice of thy selfe or others, were an apparant token of grosse and egregious negligence, and inexcusable carelesnesse. They which tread this path, they I say which follow this Counsell, shall not (I am confi∣dently perswaded) haue need of any vngodly and indi∣rect meanes or proiects, to sollicite and suggest their Prince, that he would incite, induce, and winne those their enemies whom (by no other deuise or meanes they could resist or remoue) to marry their kindred and Al∣lies, that by such vnequall and subtill slights and shifts of affinitie, they may ruinate and ouerthrow thom. When the discreet Courtier shall perceiue, that he hathWhat the Courtier must doe when he hath in∣considerately displeased his Prince. inconsideratly and vnaduisedly displeased his Prince, let him without all delay, by all the best meanes hee can, stu∣die and endeuour to mitigate and asswage his wrath and indignation. For, assuredly displeasure and iniuries done
to Princes, doe take a farre deeper impression in their hearts, then one would thinke they could▪ if therefore in the meane season, thou doe not expiate & pacifie their conceiued anger, they'le find a time most lamentably, to lay open thy finall and fatall confusion. Againe, if by negligence or imprudence thou haste pro∣uoked thy Prince to displeasure against thee, endeuour an atonement, and a reconcilement into his grace, and fa∣uour againe, either by price or petition; make such Per∣sonages thy friends, who thou knowest (either for their place or person) can doe much with him. Such are for the most part his Allies, his Wife, Mother, Sister, Daughter, and such like, all these and each of these as much as may be, let the wise Courtier, by his honest life, manners, and meritorious demeanours, make to be obliged and linked in loue vnto him, whereby the Courtier may safely sayle through the dangers both of Scylla and Charybdis, or any other courtly stormes, or tempests whatsoeuer; but (after this) if he perceiue that for the redintegrate fauour and friendship of his Prince, he be prosecuted with enuie and malice, let him then againe take heed of his emulatours or enemies: for the continuance of a new reconcilement, into the grace and fauour of thy Prince, will againe most easily and most vehemently, exasperate their hatred and despight towards thee. Moreouer, since it is the order and obseruation of Hi∣storiographie, that we therein especially set forth, and commend the truth of things, doe thou also good Cour∣tier, if thou wilt be truly politike, follow loue & embrace the same. Doth the consideration of the times perswade thee otherwise, and uite and incite thee to fabulous and fained matters, then for forbeare to write Hystories, for tis
farre better to desist from such a labour, than with sham∣full imprudence or impudence, eyther by flattery or for∣gery, to blemish and wrong the reputation of thy name and credit. And indeed it is very conducible to the good of the Common Wealth, not to commit any thing to the pervse of posterity, but what we haue euen by experience it selfe, soundly and assuredly found faithfull and true. He which doth otherwise, that is, which doth not place the loue of Truth before his eyes, respectlesse either of good will or hatred. Fumum quidem, ad tempus vendet, sed tandem fumo peribit. May indeed sell smoake for a time, but at last shall perish himselfe like smoake. Rude and ignorant are those Courtiers, which con∣demneThat learning & eloquence are excellent in Courtiers. and disprayse, the studie of eloquence, and other most excellent Arts and Sciences: this doubtlesse is most true, that there haue beene in all ages, politicall Courtiers most illustrious and famous, for their learning and elo∣quence; such idle drones therefore are not by any meanes to be heard, much lesse credited, no nor the base and ig∣noble opinions of the Common people, who disallow of and much discommend mens excellent parts, noblenesse and renowne, whose originall being deriued from a most honest & honourable foundation, hath spread abroad many admirable effects, to the health and prosperitie of all mortall men. This is it (good Courtier) to wit, Lear∣ning and Discipline, which comforts the comfortlesse, makes the fearefull, fearelesse, which bridles and pacifi∣eth the Seditious, & makes rude rustickes & vnciuill peo∣ple, both gentle and courteous. These and such like no∣ble fruits and effects of learning and eloquence, if Cour∣tiers would wisely examine and consider, they could not choose, but vtterly detest and cast away so hard & harsh
an opinion of so excellent things, and would freely and ingenously confesse and acknowledge, the excellent & wonderfull efficacy of Rhetoricall Eloquence.Commotions among the common peo∣ple how to be appeared and by whom. Now as touching the vehement concitation of the multitude or common people; this wee must hold and beleeue for truth, that they'le spare no man, though nere so noble or eminent a Courtier, and which also is not sel∣dome, they are incensed and inflamed with fury, euen a∣gainst magistrates and men of especiall place and autho∣rity; wherefore let him which is wise, giue way to fury & an vnciuill multitude. But to the appeasing hereof and pacification of tumults and outrages, those courtiers are most fit, who for their excellent parts and Arts, are most affected and reuerenced, by the vulgar sort, who indeed since in the Court they are rare and seldome seene, are therefore, with so much the more care and diligence to be elected and made choice of. But in the interim the speediest meanes to suppresse a sedition, is, that the Courtier with all expedition, cut off the heads of Com∣motions, and not by procrastination or too long delayes, to permit them to a greater and more dangerous head & augmentation. And in such a case let the wise Courtier shew himselfe very ciuill and courteous of behauiour, for questiōlesse thou canst not (by any meanes) more as∣suredly or speedily winne, the harts and affections of the common people than by gentlenesse, and sweete huma∣nity, wherefore let all , all Rusticall or rude chur∣lishnesse bee farre from him, yea let all peeuish and testy frowardnesse be banisht, whereby a man doth most bit∣terly and grieuously contradict others, and vtter many things with vnseemely wrath and indignation. Let him call to mind the counsell of Solamon, Patientia Lenietur
Princeps & Ling  nfringe duritiam. By patience will a Prince be pacified, and a soft answere puts away strife. That also of P: Mimus is very pertinent to this place, Pars beneficij est, quod petitur; si belle neges. If a thing de∣manded be denied with courtesie & gentle behauiour; it comes very neere to a good turne. Wherefore let the Courtier (by all meanes) so accustome himselfe to a ciuill, courteous, and most gentle demeanout, that it may seeme habituall in him. Let him also here remember, that he put far from himWomanish altercation vnbeseeming a Courtier. all womanish altercation, or chiding: for, many times it fals out, that womens quarrels and contentions, doe set both their husbands & neighbours together by the eares: therefore I say, let him beware thereof; and in any case let him take heed, that he seeme not to strip him selfe (as it were) and to doffe or put off a manly courage and con∣dition, by wrangling about effeminate, triuiall, and idle occasions. And although as oftentimes it fals out, many Cour∣tiersCourtesie and humanitie. being descended of honourable parent age; haue as it were by inheritance, high and haughtie Spirits, yet for all this, let them incline to a more humble, courteous, and noble disposition, than to be so busily intermedling in litigious and womanish chidings and brawlings, where∣fore let euery wise Courtier shun and auoid all kinde of strife and contention whatsoeuer, as also all priuate, and intestine dissention of Subiects one against another: which assuredly doth most commonly bring no small damage & detriment, not onely to the aduersaries them∣selues, but euen to the common Wealth. Let then these three bonds or chaines (euen when greatest disturbance and discord is raised) bridle, deterre, and terrifie euery
Courtier, yea, any whomsoeuer from doing euill, name∣ly, Religion, Shame, and Punishment. For, in good sooth I am of opinion, that the Courtier, or Gallant whosoeuer he be, doth no better than grossely abuse & vtterly cast away himselfe, who by this threefold cord will not be re∣strained from doing ill, nor constrained to true obedi∣ence, and due performance of that duty which may iustly be exacted from him. In Court also he whose words and deeds doe not a∣gree,To be faith∣full in pro∣mises. is not to be trusted, no though he sweare and pro∣test nere so deepely; but a wise and religious man will al∣wayes be as good as his word. And let the wise and vn∣derstanding Courtier, againe and againe consider this, that it is a most shamefull, yea, in many respects a most abhominable thing, which also Salust laments in the men of his dayes, Aliud clausum in pectore, aliud promptum in lingua habere &c. To haue one thing hatcht in the heart, ano∣ther thing coyn'd vpon the tongue, not to estimate and value Amitie and Emnitie, according to their true propertie, but according to commoditie; and rather to carry about with vs, a faire face than a faithfull heart. O but doe thou (kinde Courtier) feare and forbeare these things, and desire ra∣ther to be than to seeme to be. Be carefull also herein, namely, that thou be faithfullTo be faith∣full in dea∣ling. to others, if thou wilt find others faithfull to thee, for that man in my iudgement, vniustly, yea, fond and falsly complaines he is deceiued, who himselfe did first deceiue others. As for example, There are vnhonest minded Courtiers, who peraduenture, desire to displace their ene∣mie; and that, no doubt many times, vnder a colour of higher and greater preferment, will seeme to prayse him for his learning, iudgement, and vertue, that thereby,
there may be committed vnto him, some greater and hea∣uier charge and office, than formerly he had, where his employments and affayres are much more dangerous, troublesome, & intricate than before. Now what if thou in like manner (that thou maist vntie one knot by ano∣ther) shouldst as subtilly circumuent and ensnare such a like aduersarie, with as craftie and slie stratagems as his owne, and so shouldst retaliate and repay his deceit with deceit, craft with craft? What if against an insnaring and dissembling enemy, thou make simulation thy safe shield to protect thy selfe, and deiect him? What if in Creet thou play the Cretian? Yet vnderstand me not amisse (kinde Courtier) I lay thee not downe rules to deceiue and cou∣zen; God forbid, I should; but euen as Physicians by poy∣sons, doe wisely expell poyson, not to hurt but to heale the sicke and diseased. Euen so when I here obiect vnto thee small and innocent wiles & subtilties, I intend them not, for the ensnaring or abusing of other men, but as an opportune couerture, and protection of thine owne e∣state and Fortune. And finally, I onely vrg'd it to this end, that if occasion were offered, thou mightst repay craft with craft, and recompence the malignant subtiltie of thine enemie, with Serpentine fallacy. Furthermore, as touching matters of great moment,What is to be done in doubt full matters of moment. which we cannot aptly and exquisitely vnfold, or lay o∣pen to our Prince, we must demonstrate and declare to him those things, wherein custome and much vse hath made him most familiar, & best acquainted; make choice therfore with all care and curious election of such a one, who is faithfull to thee, whom thou knowest well, and dost assure thy selfe is free from flattery. For, assuredly as the ordination & institution of a Courtiers life is most
auncient, so is flattery an inueterate and venimous euill, both to the Court and Common-wealth, yea, this euill (if we will beleeue Curtius) is perpetuall, it doth oftner more priuate harme, to the well-fare of a Prince, than a war-like open enemie can doe. Truly tis a thing very much to be lamented, that so many worthy men, so ho∣nourably borne, so aboundant in all wealth and prospe∣ritie that a Court or King can afford, should notwith∣standing all this, vtterly banish from them amiable Veri∣tie, and most freely giue entertainment to falshood and flattery. For, certainely to speake the truth with AristotleOf flattery. the chiefest and most sage of all the Philosophers, in his fourth Booke of his Ethicks, Nusquam plures qui familiari sermone, et conuict u blando, gratiam Principum aucupantur; quam in aulis. Neuer were there moe knowne, which with familiar speech, and smooth behauiour, did so hunt after the grace and fauour of Princes, as in Kings Courts. There, whosoeuer followes the Court, doth vsually ap∣proue, and prayse all things at their owne pleasure, thin∣king, and iudging that it is not fit they should trou∣ble or molest those whom they alwayes flock about, and are daily fed at their Trenchers. Hence I collect, and not without iust cause conclude, that flatterers like impious impostures are most worthy of hatred, for whiles this most pestiferous kind of creatures doe thus carrie them∣selues,Flattery hin∣ders the offi∣ces of sincere friendship. all sincere offices of faithfull friendship are vtterly forsaken, whose speciall property amongst many others, is to admonish, and be admonished, to doe the one free∣ly without bitternesse, and to indure the other paciently, without resistance, which friendly offices whiles they be thus entertained, they are sincerely and faithfully done, and friends hereby doe not easily runne headlong in sin
and wickednesse but are contrariwise sweetely and sea∣sonably reduced and preserued from grose inormities. Examples I know more clearely, illustrate and confirme the truth; tell me therefore I pray thee (kind Courtier) What made Nero so cruell who was so gratiously edu∣cated? Flattery; that is, that most filthy and slauish sinne whereby for his bellyes, pallats and Lucres sake he as it were sould himselfe to the perpetrating and commiting of any, most atrocious, and inhumane impiety whatsoe∣uer▪ what made Caesar rebell, against his owne natiueOther effects of Flatery. Country? Flattery: What made Rehoboam a Tyrant. Flattery; what needs many words: Is it not extant in hi∣stories that Dionisius his flatterers did call his cruelty, ius∣tice, and equity? did not the flatterers of Assuerus as is specified in the sacred Scriptures; cry out and say. Iustae est Regis indignatio, the wrath of the King is vpright and iust. But peraduenture thou wilt obiect and say, a Courtier must haue a cloake against euery winde that bloweth: In∣deede I heare it, and it griues me that I heare it, yet I can hardly, and in truth very hardly, denie and gainsay it. For Courtierrs had neede to apply and confirme them∣selues, to all occasions, and to the conditions of them with whome they liue; to bee subtill and craftie both in their Genius and disposition, and more mutable and vari∣able than Proteus himselfe. But heere I must intreate the reader that he would not entertaine such a thought of me, as that, what is now to this purpose said or written is out of any enuie; peraduenture I haue writ somwhat too freely, (which if so) yet truly tis free from all malignant bitternesse. And indeede if wee will consider one thing with another, who is hee that knowes not that there be
those in a Court, who at the first sight doe seeme to haue in them much grauity, literature, and singular humanity, and yet for all this being deepely diu'd into, and narrow∣ly obserued are knowne vnder these beautifull, and spe∣tious outsides and vales of vertue, to couer and keepe se∣cret the deadly poyson of flattery? And with good rea∣son, for the Court is the flatterers stage or Theatre where∣in hee still doth practise, to adapt and fit himselfe to all assayes excelling Polypus farre, yea and the Cameleon in change of coullours & mutability of conditions. Peren∣nius endeauouring to enlarge and amplifie his pomp and power, brought Commodus the Emperor to his vtter ouer∣throw, yea many other, haue by this hellish inchanting poyson, of flattery infatuated and finally ruinated many mighty monarches, potent and powerfull Conquerors of kingdomes and nations. But that I may briefely contract all in a word, that, of Gnatho, hath especiall residence atThe perfect picture of a flatterer. Court: Quicquid dicunt laudo; id rursum si negant, laudo id quo{que}: Negat quis nego; ait, aio: Postremo ita comparaui e∣gomet mihi, omnia assentari, is quaestus nunc est multò vber∣rimus. that is, Whatsoeuer they say I praise it, if againe they deny it, I praise that also; does any one deny a thing, so doe I; does he affirme a thing, I doe the like, to bee briefe, I can so carry my selfe as to flatter all, and why? O this is now a dayes the most thrifty kinde of life. This is assuredly the true picture of a Courtly life and Cōditiō, this is the most beautifull behauiour of many, if not most Courtiers, whereby without all controuersie or Contradiction wee may take vp that of Ouid. Agmen adulantum media procedit ab Aula.
The Truthlesse Troopes of flatterers proceed, From Courts of Kings, and there they breede and feede. All this not withstanding, bee thou (kinde Courtier) which intendest to leade this life, a louer of honesty, ius∣tice, & integrity. we deny not, but that flattery may haue his haruest (& for a time) may reape his commodities in the Court. But this againe I say with a most constant & immoueable perswasion and assurance, that the commo∣dities, acquired and obtained by flattery, are alwaies, for the present, most odious and opposite, to true credit and reputation, and will vndoubtedly in processe of time, bring deserued discredit and defamation. Let all Cour∣tiers therefore eschew this Scylla, and Charibdis; which surely all that are wise and intelligent will doe, conside∣ring that; Nihill simulatum Diuturnum, No counterfeite thing can long continue. Let that Courtier take great heed to himselfe, who pre∣sentlyInsolence and Arrogance. hopes to haue honoures heap't vpon him, for his arrogant and vaine glorious pride and presumptuous in∣solence, yea rather let him carry & behaue himselfe more submisse more lowly, for hence shall acrew and arise vn∣to him a twofould benefit and Commodity, first he shall be sure thereby to continue the respect and fauour of him from whome his hope of preferment is deriued; se∣condly he shall by this meanes be free, from that com∣mon pestilence (I meane Enuie) wherewith the Court of Kings are euer infected. Moreouer, let the Courtier be mindfull hereof that all wordly dignity and honour is most fraile and transitory, especially in courts. Let that also be had in frequent and serious consideratiō, which Cicero left not only to Cour∣tiers,
but to vs all, Quantò sumus superiores, tantò submis∣sius nos geramus; by how much the more eminent we are, so much the more lowly and courteously we should carrie our selues. Let therefore I say, proud ostentation and inso∣lent arrogancie, be farre and finally expell'd and banished from euery Courtier. And let him not, attributing and ascribing too much to himselfe, ouerconfidently, but ra∣ther anxiously and doubtfully, attempt the highest things. And when the Courtier hath by his Princes bountieGratitude or thankfulnesse. and liberalitie, obtained any benefit or commoditie, let him (setting apart all proud ostentation, and vaine glori∣ous selfeflation) make knowne, and tell abroad by whose bountie and benignitie he receiued the same, and he must by all meanes endeuour to retribute all condigne thank∣fulnesse to him alone for the same. For it were very vniust & vnindifferent for any man to seeme to haue atchieued, and deriued that, though nere so little, from another, which hath onely flowed from the fountaine of his Prin∣ces fauour. Now furthermore, as touching money, he that knowesOf money & couetousnesse thereof. not how to vse a measure in the hauing & crauing there∣of, let such a Courtier be expelled the Court, as hauing vncleane hands, and a corrupted heart. For, can there be any present good hap, or future good hope in a greedie couetous man? He as Salust sayth, neuer endeuours to tread the paths of truth and equitie, because as he is alto∣gether vnfurnisht of all good Sciences, and honestie: so is he totally filled and fraught with craft and meere kna∣uery. Auarice is expert in the trade and studie of fingring money, which no wise man will immodestly desire or seeke after, and with great reason, for, this, as being im∣brued
and wholly infected with deadly poysons, doth make both the soule and bodie of man most degenerous, foule, and effeminate, tis alwayes infinite and insatiable, tis neuer abated by plentie, or pouertie. Worthy Salust, thou sayst most truly and wisely indeed. For, doubtlesse as gold is try'd by the Touch stone, so is man try'd by gold. What then, canst thou expect from a Courtier dedicated and vtterly addicted to an insatiable and greedie gaping after gold, and filthie gaine? In whomsoeuer this is found be sure to find these also, to wit, hard-heartednesse, a trou∣bled mind, violence, craft, and knauery, trecherie, de∣ceit, rapine, disloyaltie; And what if we hereunto adde, with that excellent Oratour. Tam sanctum esse nihil vel solenne, quod non auaritia violare solet et comminuere. That there is nothing so sacred, soueraigne, or solemne, which aua∣rice doth not violate and extenuate. I deny not, but that it is honestie and discreet prouidence, for any man to pro∣uide, and furnish himselfe with all vsefull necessaries for him and his; but haue we not seene and knowne, that these haue beene by many Courtiers got and gained with a foule, spotted, and stained conscience: by such I say, who neuer had learned wisely to limit the vnlimmitted bounds of insatiable couetice. Wherefore be most assu∣redly perswaded hereof (kind Courtier) that if thou multiplie thy Riches, and amplifie thy Fortunes by the ruines and wrongs of other men, thou wilt not spare nor feare to be iniurious to thy Countrey, Prince, and neerest or deerest friends. And though Kings and Princes (the estate and condi∣tion of things so requiring) are most liberall and bounti∣full to this or that man, paying vnto them, and confer∣ring vpon them most large stipends, and rich reuenues;
yet be not thou (good Courtier) so auaritiously minded as to desire and indeuour to wrest, and violently (as it were) to extort from thy Prince his wealth and treasure, whither he giue or denie what thou desirest: heare and make vse of this counsell and wholesome admonition, which that I may more perspicuously and euidently illu∣strate, take by the way this short example: I suppose that no man is ignorant, that euen at Feasts, and most sump∣tuous Banquets, there is alwayes some one or other which is not so respectiuely entertained as the rest: so is it in Courts, wherin some haue what they hope for; other∣some leape short of that they long and looke for. Let Courtiers consider this, not the new vpstarts, or those which were lately initiated into the Court, but which haue spent and bestowed the greatest part of their Age in this kind of life, and then I doubt not but they will inge∣nuously and freely confesse, that what we haue herein said, is most infallibly faithfull and true. Let the Courtier also indefatigably striue and ende∣uour,To be indu∣strious and diligent. that he may not seeme to his Prince idle, lazie, or too remisse and negligent in the speedie dispatch of busi∣nesses and employments: for such a seruant certainly will he not vouchsafe (and that deseruedly) so much as to looke vpon, holding him no better than a troublesome burthen, or an vnprofitable drone, and as not worthie to liue amongst industrious, laborious Bees, wherefore let the Courtier be carefull to expresse himselfe profitable, diligeent, and euer readie prest to performe what he is commaunded, let him I say shew himselfe a labourious Bee, not an idle drone, sleepie dormouse, or pernicious waspe, in his Princes Palace. Now I make no question, but that Courtiers are (and
indeed with speciall good reason, as chiefly appertainingHow Cour∣tiers may be∣come wise & politique. to them) very inquisitiue, and desirous to know by what meanes they may best acquire and attaine vnto Courtly wisedome and policie; I therefore thus answere both the Courtier and Politician, namely, that the knowledge of them both, is thus especially obtained, by much reading, frequent employments, long experience, processe of time trauaile into fortaine Countries wisely disposed, diligent obseruation of the liues and conditions of men; and fi∣nally, by wise contemplation of Kingdomes, Courts, and Common-wealths. Now whosoeuer is graciously and egregiously furnished with these; shall not onely, in hope, be profitable to himselfe; but also in deed most accepta∣ble to his Prince: And whatsoeuer Courtier shall haue purchased this prudence to himselfe, shall assuredly find himselfe intentiuely and readily prepared for all occasi∣ons offered. And indeed, to say the truth, without fit opportunitie, euen vertue, or whatsoeuer excellencie may consist in any Courtier, yea, in any man what ere he be, doth pine, lanquish, and lie dead in him. Moreouer, let the Courtier indeuour by all possible meanes, that by some honest office or other, he shew him∣selfe, louingly respectiue of all Princes, so that they be not his enemies, whom he is most neerely and necessarily obliged vnto, otherwise he will be contemptible and hatefull vnto them. And if he cannot performe offices of obseruance to all, yet at the least let him not contemne or disdaine them, and let him wisely auoid, and free him∣selfe from the suspicion thereof, for in such and so mani∣fold changes and chances of humaine affayres, he which to day was great and mighty, may suddenly sinke down, and a meere stranger succeed him. Let Courtiers there∣fore
waigh and well consider in minde, that euen the shortest houre of mans life, can alternate, change, and o∣uerturne the lowest and highest things topsie turney. Truly I cannot sufficiently incite and stimulate Cour∣tiers,Obsequious pliantnesse. to the exquisite and readie performance of due and true pliantnesse, and humble seruice; for this is, as I may so call it, the bait and birdlime, whereby he vndoubted∣ly purchaseth and procureth to himselfe, the fauour and affection of all men, and once gained firmely, keepes and conserues the same. To this purpose, that noble Histo∣rian Tacitus sayth truly, Quanto quis{que} promptior obsequio, tanto citius honoribus & opibus extolletur. By how much the more readie a man is in obsequiousnesse, by so much the sooner shall he be raised to Dignitie and Noblenesse. Excellently also saith Austine, Quid iniquius, quam velle sibi obtempe∣rari à minoribus, & nolle obtemper are maioribus? What can be more vnreasonable, than for a man to desire to be reueren∣ced and obeyed of his inferiours, and yet himselfe to neglect and disobey his superiours? Therefore let the Courtier, like a Souldier, readie at an instant, to giue the on-set to Bat∣taile, be most prompt and readily prepared to put in spee∣die execution whatsoeuer things are giuen him in charge, but euer with this law condition and consideration, that what he is commanded, be not dishonest, or illegitimate, for such vndiscreet facilitie is vnsufferable, and most cul∣pable, both in Courtiers, and all other men whatsoe∣uer. Furthermore the Courtlie Polititian must preferre theA publike good to bee preferred be∣fore a priuate. Publike prosperity of the common wealth, before all his owne priuate commodities, affections or iniuries what∣ere they be, yea and must in this respect no other wise e∣stimate his priuate affaires, then he would a nut shell
or asmall locke of woll. And to this purpose let him heere take (by the way) that verse most auntient and true. Publica priuat is anteferenda bonis. A Publike good, must euermore take place, Before a priuate or Peculiar case. Now he which is possest with so honest an inclination, may hence learne to brooke and beare with many mo∣lestations and griping grieuances, vntill hee happily a∣riue at the hauen of his hope, and haue hit the marke he aimed at, namely, vntill he patiently and peaceably, as∣cend the right and direct steps, vnto honour and desi∣red dignities. But let him especially, in all his actions and attempts, checke and correct the fire of fury and heat of his hot af∣fections,Not to bee furious and Chollericke. for it is farre more fit and conuenient, to doe what wee intend, when the chollericke heat of the mind is cold or quenched, then in the hot spurd heate thereof. Wherefore let the Courtier very courteously take heed least his vnbridled furie, force him violently from tem∣perate reason and constant moderation, either in right gouernance or due obseruance in his accounts and em∣ployments; the end and reward of which, eronious temerity or rashnesse is, shame and late repentance. Moreouer let the Courtier heedfully endeauoure to follow the ensample of an ingenuous generous souldier,To propound vnto himselfe a paterne for imitation. who intending to imitate some noble and victorious Captaine in the warres, frames and confirmes, his qua∣lities, and practises, his fortitude and magnanimity, as
much as in him consisteth, to the similitude and equipa∣ration of his Leader or Commander: Euen so, what Courtier soeuer desires to excell, or to be excellent in a∣ny thing, let him wisely make some worthy, eminent and excellent Courtier his patterne for imitation, and studie and striue, to follow euen to a haire (as the prouerbe is) his honest and laudable Arts and exercises, this course shall the Courtier see and obserue to be most succinct & compendious, whereby he may exceeding much, and in a short space, promote and propagate his fame and for∣tunate affaires. Now as touching taking of reuenge, although theOf taking re∣uenge. Court especially, doth oft times minister fit occasion therevnto, when the state and affaires of thy foes may be for diuerse reasons, in anxious and sinister case and condition: Yet not withstanding, an honest and true∣ly generous gentleman, should then especially curbe and correct himselfe. For it were a foule shame and grosse absurdity, in any man that is honestly, and hono∣rably bread and brought vp, by wrathfull reuenge to perpetrate any heinous and vnhonest action, most vn∣beseeming his birth and breeding. Let all Courtiers therefore know, and know for certainty, that such is the vicissitude, alteration and mutability of mans minde, that although fortune smiling vpon a man, his goods like floods flow into his lap, yet let not his wrath and rage, seeme as it were now presently to breake prison and to range a broade, but let him wisely tame, and temper the same with the bounds of moderation, and with the bridle of wit and discretion, let him curbe and keepe in the same; for, to pardon and forgiue, is to a wise and wor∣thy man the best reuenge; and tis enough for a man of a
true and noble spirit, not that hee takes reuenge, but that hee can reuenge. Ouid. in his 4. de Trist. Elegie. 5. confirmes the truth heereof. Quo quis{que} est maior, magis est placabilis irae, Et faciles motus mens generosa capit. Corpora magnanimo satis est prostrasse Leoni, Pugna suum finem cum iacet host is habet. At lupus & turpes instant morientibus vrsi, Et quaecun{que} minor nobilitate fera est. Great spirits though prouokt are soone appea'sd Their noble hearts, soone mou'd, are soonest plea'sd The Lion leaues the corps that lyes prostrate, And when foes yeeld the fight doth terminate; But Wolues and Beares and other beasts most base, Spare not to spoile the corps in dying case. Therefore I wish that euery Courtier or who soeuer else, that hath a vindicatiue or reuengefull minde would call to mind and consider these things, for many times (as is manifest) it hath fallen out to great and verie famous Kings, that either they haue stood in need, of the fauoure and frindship, or else haue bin forced to feare the furie of euen the meanest and most base Peasants. Wherefore it is not good, no truly not for those thatNot to pro∣uoke to an∣ger. are more mightie and powerfull, to giue occasion of dis∣content, or displeasure to any in Courts. But now adaies this is the common practice amongst men, that as the Prouerbe is, The thred is euer broken on the weaker fide, that is, where the hedge is lowe (as our English Prouerbe
is) the Cattell quickly tread ouer it, neither is it, was it, or ere will be any new thing, but still fals out most true, that Might ouercomes Right; and the weakest goe to the Wall. And this is also as true as Gospell, that he which liues with one more mightie than himselfe, had need many times out of meere necessity, to yeeld vp vnto him that which indeed is his owne right; Yea, though he neuer had committed against him the least discourteie, or iniurie that might be. Let the Courtier therefore take heed, that he displease not, nor prouoke to anger, one more potent, and powerfull than himselfe. Againe, those malignant and maleuolent Courtiers, areFalse and slaundrous accusations. to be detested, abhominated, and out of the Court to be vtterly extirpated, which studie and indeuour, by false, fained, and impious accusations, of mischieuous deedes, or trecherie, to hurt, excruciate, and incarcerate, an ho∣nest, honourable and harmelesse man, a man that is a true louer of learning, vertue, and pietie: such nefarious, facti∣ous fellowes, which strugle and striue to trouble a Com∣mon Wealth, to supplant the good, and to hold the Scep∣ter of all soueraigntie, in their vnworthy fists, doe most commonly linck & knit vnto them, a knot of such despe∣rate Knaues, as formerly hauing thirsted after glory, and dignitie, yet could not by vertue, and the Kings hie way, that is, by discreet or honest courses, acquire the same, or grow great in the common weale. Let euery Courtier that will be wise, flee the companie of such Catelines, and that speedily; For, experience it selfe doth truly tell vs, that such seditious swash-bucklers, doe very often, yea, most customarily, receiue the wages and reward due to such deedes of impietie: And whats that? marry a mise∣rable, lamentable, & tragicall Catastrophe, or conclusion.
Let the wise Courtier also be slow to beleeue, and notNot to relye too much vp∣on, nor hope after Courti∣ers promises. ouer-hastie to hope; neither let him take, and interprete all things, in the best or in the worst sense. Yet seldome shall he be deceiued, if he beleeue but the least part of those things which are promised: For, let him euer thinke this to be true, that in euery kind and condition of life, it vsually comes to passe, and most commonly in the court▪ that; Pollicitis Diues quilibet esse potest. Each man's a Craessus, promises hath store, But in performance, who's not Irus poore. Let not such a Court too much content and please theTo beware of too much li∣centiousnesse, or libertie. Courtier, where without controulement, men may too li∣centiously & contemptuously vpbraid one another with dishonest defamations, wrong one another, with contu∣melious detractions, gnaw in peeces (if it were possible) the fame and reputation of Magistrates deceased, and taunt and tare in peeces the credit of their fellow officers, yet liuing. He whose hap it is to liue in such a Court, and will not as much as he is able honestly and speedily relin∣quish and abandon the same, such a man I iudge not wor∣thie to be hated, but much to be pittied, and commise∣rated. In the expedition of his Princes affayres, let the Cour∣tierPerseuerance in diligence. with all constancie, and courage presse forward the perfecting, and finall performance of those businesses which are committed to his charge; for, it is a matter of nothing, to begin a worke fortunately, vnlesse we with industrious perseuerance, prosecute the same to absolute perfection: most agreeable therefore to this purpose, is
that which is excellently mentioned in the Gospell. Non satis esse manum admouere aratro, si respiciamus at{que} opus in∣choatum deseramus. It is not enough to put our hands to the plow, if then we looke backe, and leaue the worke vnperfec∣ted. Wherefore let not the wise and discreet Courtier too suddenly set vpon a worke, nor too soone set it away. For, many things (as the Historian can tell vs) as they are not to be enterprised, so neither (being once attempted) are they by their Agent to be easily refused, because in∣deed the shortest space of remisse and vnsetled incon∣stancie, is able oftentimes to marre, and vtterly to deface the grace, credit, and reputation of a mans whole life. Hence then maist thou see, that industrie and constancieConstancie. are marueilous vsefull, yea, that constancie and perseue∣rance is a most noble vertue. This teacheth vs, that things necessarily vndertaken, are with inuincible courage and a safe conscience to be finisht and effected. This is that vertue which armes and prepares vs to beare, and beare to the end, crosses, losses, and mis-fortunes, least feareful∣ly fainting, and yeelding to dangers, and distresse, we of∣fend against the vpright rules of reason. Finally, this ver∣tue tels and teacheth vs, that he is not a man whose heart is highly mounted, and puffed vp with pride, and selfe∣flation in prosperitie, or, is stricken dead, and lowly de∣iectedTo suffer for well-doing. with aduersitie. But that Courtier is in a most happy case, if he suffer either for the exact obseruation of the constitutions, and iniunctions of his Prince formerlie deceased, or for the constant confession or profession of his faith and religion, this Courtier may with Ioseph, Da∣uid, and Daniell, reioyce, and be heartily glad in his owne behalfe, that he doth patiently endure violence and of∣fence, for the defence of his inuiolate and imaculate faith,
that for his pious opinions he suffers punishment, and de∣spightfullNot to be a∣sham'd to suf∣fer for well doing. dealings. Such a Courtier I dare boldly say, may arrogate and assume vnto himselfe that of Cicero; Nihil esse laudabilius, quam memoria recte factorum & li∣bertate contentum negligere humana: Si secuta fuerit, quae debet fortuna, gaudebimus, sin minus, ego tamen gaudebo, quamuis qui fuerim, & qui esse potuerim, esse non possim. That there is nothing more commendable, than for a man to be truly content with the memory of his good deeds, and perfect libertie, and to contemne and set at naught the things of this life; if that good fortune which was expected haue fallen out, we shall be glad; but if otherwise, yet I reioyce, although what I haue bin, and what I might haue bin, I cannot be. If thou therefore shew thy selfe such a man, and be for the same despised and hated, yet notwithstanding kicke at and contemne euen this contempt; if so be that thou haue set downe this certaine resolution, to persist and perseuer in doing those things which are honest, iust, and true. Moreouer, let the Courtier be carefull, least whiles he indeuoureth to ouer come by pliantnesse and observance, he slip into Adulation and flattery, whose picture alrea∣die we haue indifferently painted forth. If a Courtier be∣ing degraded, and displaced from his hight of honour and dignitie, doth for all this liue more contentedly, so that his wealth wil beare it, in enioying a peaceable & pri∣uate state & condition, let him rather so cōtinue; then ei∣ther afterward to accept of prefermēts inferior to the for∣mer, or to adhere to the court of a more meane & lesse po∣tent Prince, then the first, vnlesse by his wisedome, autho∣ritie, iudgement, equitie, & such like vertues, he be able to win vnto him the loue & affection of one more mightie. Let euery wise Courtier indeuour to be the feedesman
of amitie and vnitie betweene a Prince, his Brethren, Si∣sters,Vnanimity. and such like; not the bellowes to blow the fire of brawlings, and dissentions, let him consider, that Peace is most precious, let him I say againe and a∣gaine recogitate, that they which are louers of discord and disquiet, haue seldome or neuer any good and ex∣pected issue, or euent of such their impious and nefarious plots and purposes. He therefore whosoeuer which will sowe the seed of Sedition, or Dissention, shall reape the crop of cares, and a vexed and perplexed mind. Let not the wise and intelligent Courtier affect or effectSincerity. any enormious or dishonest thing, though with nere so faire a colourable pretext or intention, whereby he may steale into the fauour and affection of his Prince, lest here∣by he blemish, yea, vtterly blot out the noble fame and glory of his progenitours, with the blacke coale of igno∣minie, and with the maculation of most infamous asper∣sions: for, they erre, and erre most grossely, which for hope of gaine, greedie desire of reuenge of their honour, by slie trickes and trecherous deceit, haue a desire to ex∣alt and aduance their fortunes. But alas, whats the issue of these in the end? assuredly this, that their trecherie and villany once finisht and effected, they receiue the due and iust reward of their treason and disloyalty, which all aun∣cient and moderne Histories can easily confirme and rati∣fie. But it is vndoubtedly to be suspected, that no stron∣gest fortifications, precepts, or exhortations are with wic∣ked and vngodly Courtiers of any such force, as to force them from, or to fortifie them against this impious act or artificiall impietie. For, wicked and vngodly Courtiers, by pretending and counterfeiting the contrary of what they intend, do many times purchase to themselues great
power and authority and by this meanes very much in∣crease and augment their owne meanes, yea and by bribes all and such like courses, doe warily make or the greatest part of the principall noble men, & magistrates, their great friends patrons and protectours, and doe creep or steale into places separated, onely for princesses and great Ladies, there to pry into the secrets of Prin∣ces wherein as in many other such like matters most fit to be wrapt vp in silence, they vse Seianus as their best tutor and Schoole-maister, whose horse they seeme to haue in keeping; a very propper praise I warrant you! If thou deuise or inuent any craft or couzenage against an other, ò I wish it may light reside and abide, vpon thine owne pate. Cornelius Tacitus paints out in their proper colours, and delineates to the life these goodly fellowes, Corpus aulico sit laborum tolerans animus audax; sui obtegens, in ali∣os criminator iuxtà adulatio & superbia palam compositus pudor, intus summa adipiscendi libido, eins{que} causae modo lar∣gitio & luxus, saepius industria ac vigilantia, haud nimis nox∣iae quoties parando regno finguntur. A Courtier saith hee, must haue a body strongly enabled to vnder goe labors and paines taking; a stout heart, he must be a concealer of his owne matters, and a censorious and cri∣ticke carper at others; of a condition partaking both of pride and flattery; in outward shew form'd and adorn'd with mo∣dest bashfullnesse, but inwardly most libidinous couetous and greedy to haue more, & to this purpose, to counterfeite some∣times liberality yea to be prodigall or profuse in his expences, and oftentimes to be industrious and vigilant, which things are not hurtfull but very helpefull, to the sly and ambitious obtaining of a kingdome. But they which are instructed in
these kind of Arts, being once obserued of their Prince, let them in due time be remoued for they are indeed no better then the plague and pestilence of men, infectious and pernitious to themselues and all others with whom they haue commerce and dealing. Whensoeuer the honest Courtier shall heare (as of∣tentimes he may) any thing vttered against his Prince, there being no certaine author or ground thereof, let him by all meanes endeuor to confute and represse such e∣uill and calumnious reports. For, many vnhonest vaine and prophane fellowes willNot to permit his Prince to be ill spoken of. scatter abroad false rumors & reports of excellent Prin∣ces, that at one time or other the Courtier may not want occasion, to iustifie and maintaine the estimation and re∣putation of his Prince, that (by this meanes) he may pur∣chase and procure to himselfe his Princes fauour and af∣fection. Furthermore let the Courtier very carefully cover andTo keepe his owne secrets. conceale from knowledge, the exordium, beginning and increasing hopes of his Princes grace & fauour towards him, otherwise, that, which was likely to haue bin pecu∣lierly appropriated and appointed to himselfe alone, will be conuerted or communicated to his emulators or cor∣riuals; which were neither wisely nor warily done: wher∣fore Taciturnity is mee thinkes in this case very behoofe∣fullTaceturnitie. profitable and necessarie, as being indeed the best, sa∣fest and surest vniting coard of the well managing of all our affaires. And to this purpose let him remember that of the witty Poet. Sed tacitus pasci si possit coriuus haberet, Plus dapis et rixamulto minus inuidiae{que}.
If Aesaps Crow had fed in priuate place, Hee well bad far'd, not shar'd of hates disgrace. Let all, both inueterate and lately conceiued rancor &To auoid all rancour and heart grud∣ging. hatred, be farre remote and remoued from the Courtier, for it cannot otherwise be, but that he which retaines and maintaines them within his bosome, should in the end be the speciall cause and procurer of his owne ruine, downe∣fall, and destruction. And as it is not fit he should nurse vp any intestine or secret malice in his heart, so must he be most vigilant and circumspect, that he quench and vtter∣ly extinguish it so soone as ere tis forged and subborned within him. Assuredly, I easily see and foresee, that that will come to passe, if a man know and doe not hate the manners and conditions of Courtiers; Let him then which will eschew and auoid the malice of other men, a little decline & giue backe in himselfe. Let the Courtier also very carefully obserue this, that when as he hath happily and fortunately, according to his hearts desire, obtained the grace and fauour of hisTo obserue his Princes inclination. Prince, he do not regardlesly neglect or abuse it; in which respect it is most fit he should most curiously & through∣ly learne to know the nature, condition, and inclination of his Prince, so that as much as in him lies, he may whol∣ly accommodate, and apply himselfe to his customes, and conditions: for, as equalitie and paritie of inclination doth nourish and cherish amitie and friendship: so con∣trariwise, disparitie and vnequalitie therein doth dimolish friendship, and in place therof builds vp hatred and con∣tempt. Let the Courtier haue an especiall care, and make prin∣cipall
obseruation of the lawes, customes, offices, condi∣tionsTo frame himselfe to the condition of the Court he liues in. and dispositions of that Court wherein he liues; and vndoubtedly it shall free and secure him, if not from the malice of all, yet at least from the most. Let him also con∣sider and call to mind, that if (as now and than by the malice of time, it is like enough to fall out) he be con∣strained to put vp, to digest and beare patiently any grie∣uous and troublesome matters, yet let him euer attribute and ascribe more to the loue of Iustice, than to the feare of malice and mischiefe, for whosoeuer out of a feare of hatred flies Iustice, shall be sure to be sensible of the pu∣nishment of iniustice, but seldome or neuer shall he taste the sweet fruits of equitie in himselfe. Wherefore kinde Courtier let me aduise thee, that in a good and iust cause thou be patient, and harden thy selfe against aduerse acci∣dents, so shalt thou be a victorious conquer and ouer∣come; for, this is most certainely true, that he which can weare out the time of aduersitie, and according to the mutabilitie of various occurrents, can as occasion serues, contract, abreuiate, & prorogue or procrastinate delayes in himselfe, may vndoubtedly reserue and fit himselfe for the expectation of a better time. Now since the vulgar sort of common people is euerNot to relye on or trust vn∣to the loue of the common people. variable, vnconstant, and murable, let the wise Courtier neuer put any trust or confidence in them. For, assured∣ly the common people is a Hydra with many heads, or ra∣ther a strange creature without either head or sound vn∣derstanding, this is apparently knowne, and Antiquities of all Pristine times, doe testifie the same, that many men haue perished, and made a tragicall end, who haue ioyned themselues vnto, and taken part with the common peo∣ple. Therefore he whosoeuer he was, said most truly and wisely;
Qui pendet ab errore & opinione vulgi Pendet magis, at{que} arbore qui pendet ab alta, Nam quod semel euenit & abijt, id nocet nil, At quod dubijs articulis stat, instat, vrget, Vanescit, adest: esse malum id putabo solum. He which on common Peoples voyce depends, Hangs worse than he, that's hang'd vpon a Tree, For, that which quickly comne and gone, we see; No dire effects, or lingring harme extends: But that which doth of doubtfull parts consist, Which moues, remoues; which straines, constraines, per∣plexeth Which comes and goes; which vanisheth and vexeth; That, that's an Ill, or I the marke haue mist. Phocylides also hath very exoellently painted out this Beast, with many heads. Populo ne fidas, vulgus enim est varium & mutabile, Populus certe, aqua, & ignis nequeunt plane contineri. Ith' common People put no confidence, For, they are vaine, profane, and variable, To curbe or keepe them in, thou art not able; No more, than fires or waters violence. Let euery not onely Courtier, but iudicious vnder∣standing man whatsoeuer, thinke, & assuredly perswade himselfe, that this is a most slauish condition of life, that a man should seeme to deuise vnto himselfe any proper or peculiar estate and fortune, out of the disposition and behauiour of him, to whom he is in bondage and thral∣dome;
and he which obserues and obayes the couetous enuious, and ignorant common people, who are altoge∣ther prone to mutability, and inconstancy, yea, and which is the head and worst of all, to those which are most in∣gratefull; let him I say consider with himselfe, whither tis likely, that he can euer be happie or fortunate with such men? Or shall he not rather, as often as he remembers and cals to mind, his owne estate and condition by Na∣ture, so often lament and complaine of his slippery For∣tune and calamitie? Finally, let him know this also, that he whom he com∣monly serues, is himselfe most miserable, and in that re∣spect let him haue a great care, that in the whole course of his Courtly life, be cleere and free himselfe from his Princes iealousie, and sinister suspition of him herein, e∣specially from the rumours and reports of the vulgar sort, and from that infectious pestilence of a Court, I meane Enuy. Wouldest thou inlarge the limits of thine honour and authoritie, then hate and contemne the com∣mon peoples affection, who value nothing almost accor∣ding to veritie, but many things according to their owne opinions vnindifferencie. Marke this (kind Courtier I desire thee) that thou maist approue these things, whereof there are extant few or no documents in the memory of any Annales, Chro∣nicles, sayings, or auncient writings of the wisest authors. By this meanes I say, thou shalt easily gaine credit and authoritie, and maintaine and keepe it being once got∣ten. Moreouer, let Courtiers take heed, that they loose not the beginning or first entrance into fauour and affection; by being with their Prince at vnseasonable houres, that
is, if they let slip, and doe not alwayes watch most care∣fully, a mature, most fit, and conuenient time, but this we haue alreadie at large discussed. But this one thing, which we haue not hitherto admo∣nished,To be aduised what employ∣ments he vn∣dertakes. may not by any meanes be here pretermitted, namely, that the Courtier not being heedfull, but verie heedlesse, is oftentimes the cause of his owne downe-fall and subuersion, to wit, when he affects and makes choice of such a kind of seruice and employment, as is hatefull and distastefull to his Prince. Againe, let the Courtier as farre as he is able, most ac∣curately tread in the direct footsteps of his Prince, andTo obserue his Prince in all things is very great wisedome. obserue most diligently, what he allowes, what he disal∣lowes. If the Courtier expect any benefit or commoditie as the fruit of his labour, let him be assured, that not the least part thereof is to be expected and sought for out of this foresayd treasurie or store-house, as I may so terme it. Let him also be hereof assured, that there is no betterBy his actions to expresse his loue to his Prince. meanes to purchase his Princes grace and affection, than that he by due actions expresse vnto his Prince, that he is more neere and deere vnto him, then his owne life, and that he would be content to suffer death it selfe, for his Princes life and safetie. Whatsoeuer Courtier is of this mind, though peraduenture he may haue a iust occasion, for some priuate respects, to complaine of his Prince, yet shall (he by this meanes) easily auoid and put away fro∣ward and peruerse speeches, which otherwise he mayTo couer and conceale dis∣content. breake forth into, and shall duely consider, that his su∣periours are of him alwayes reuerently to be regarded. Truely he spets against himselfe, which spets against hea∣uen, he is scarcely wise who notwithstanding that the
power and authoritie of his King or Prince is extended ouer him, yet will not obey him; But the greatest power of a Prince is apparent in this, that with his word onely he can take punishment, as well on him that is absent as present, as well of a fugitiue Traytor, as of any other ma∣lefector, according to that; An nescis long as Regibus esse manus. Each Subiect vnderstands, That Kings haue longest hands. He therefore shall enioy much peace and tranquillitie, which is submissiuely obedient to his King or Prince, who thus as we haue heard, is able euen by his word one∣ly, to manifest his maiestie, power, and authoritie, when as on the other side, wicked malefactors, and vngodly transgressors, doe not a little prouoke and procure to themselues the sharpnesse of his maiesticall edict or com∣mandement. Let the Courtier therefore studie with all diligence andTo get ac∣quaintance with the best in the Court. care, to know the inclination & disposition of his Prince, and to be well knowne himselfe of those which customa∣rily are neerest about him, and so shall he vndoubtedly acquire the end of his honest and iust desires. Hee then which is thus resolued, must especially depend vpon himselfe, and his vertue, and as formerly was said, must reuerently respect his Princes speciall fauorites and at∣tendants, but must not (by any means vndiscreetly) disco∣uer or impart his actions and intentions to any. Let the Courtier therefore shun and auoid vndiscreet futillitie, and blabing loquacitie, nor must he vnlocke the closet
of his hearte and so discouer his secrets no not vnto those whom he esteemes his most intimate freinds and famili∣ars, vnlesse in cases of necessity, for let him be assured that the reward of secrecy is safety, which also we haue already largely dilated. Now therfore as the Courtier must keepe to himselfeTo be secret both to him∣selfe & others. his owne secrets; so also must he not like a barrell full of refts and clefts leake out on euery side, or like a pratling Iay, tell abroad the secrets of other men committed to his fidelity: for, such as these are deseruedly termed cu∣rious and audacious bablers; And if we beleeue Plutarch, this Idle spawne and brood of Sycophants, is bred from the family and tribe of idle and curious Questionists. men for the most part of ignoble and degenerous condi∣tion and such as loue to broach abroad into open view, the misery and missortunes of other men. But do thou (kind Courtier) refraine and abstaine from this so per∣uerse a molestation and meerely pedanticall a vice, and bee neuer vnmindfull of that notable Distich, touching that once great Courtier, Te cura, et tua, Looke to thy selfe, and thine owne office. Disce meo exemplo mandato munere fungi, Et fuge seu pestem Thine owne charge to discharge, learne by my fall, Hate like a plague to be Pragmaticall. If at any time wee fee a man exalted and erected by hisNot to hate him whom the King will honour. Prince, to great possessions and honourable reuenewes, let vs also attribute vnto him due honour reuerence and respect, and let vs not set him at naught as an vpstart &
vnworthy man, or as if he were neither renowned or noble by birth, nor adorned with learning or any excel∣lent parts; if thou hate and dishonour such a man whom thy King will honor and dignifie, beware that thereby thou incurre not the hatred of thy Prince himselfe. But peraduenture thou wilt tell me, he is a man much vnwor∣thy the same, and his end will proue it true: put case he be so, And I deny not but sometimes it may be so; yet, all this not withstanding, I wish thee, with that Author of most exquisite and profound iudgment I meane Taci∣tus, to vse these and suchlike speeches; Great Prince, al∣though thou hast elected & chosen, before other men much more worthy than hee, a man scarce knowne vnto vs & vnworthy thy Princely grace and bounty; yet I enuy not his felicity, nor hate him for his dignity, but as a fellow counselor &, as executing thy great affaires in the Common wealth I honour and reuerence him. Hereby (good Courtier who are thou art) thou maist consider that it is not fit thou shouldest exasperate the indignati∣on of thy Prince against thee, though he be pleased to magnifie or extoll this or that man, though vnworthy or vnlearned, and respectlesly neglect and passe by thee, per∣aduenture a more worthy person; thinke with thy selfe that this is a rule obserued euen by Heathen, yea practi∣sedTis lawfull for euere man to doe what he will with his owne amongst priuate and meane men. Qui iure suo vtitur nemini iniuriam facit. That he which vseth his owne prero∣gatiue, power and authority does iniury to no man. Now if in this regard it be permitted to any priuate man to enioy his owne liberty: how much more ought it to be yeelded vnto, that a Prince may conferre his fa∣uours vpon this or that man in such or such amans opi∣nion and iudgement vnworthy the same, adn to passe o∣uer
(if he please) other noble men esteemed and reputed more worthy than the other. Yet not withstanding I am of opinion that the excellent or graue counsellor is not to be blamed, but doth very wisely & aduisedly which solicites & incites his, Prince to promote & preferre good and honest men, men that are louers of learning and vir∣tue, and profitably exercised about the benefit and good of their country and common wealth. vndoubtedly a good and Godly Prince, cannot but highly approue and allow of without suspect of error or impudence, the ho∣nest exhortations of so wise a Councellor. A Prince may do well to thinke vpon that of Antiochus,A good obser∣uation to Princes. who twice was the Leader and commander, of an Armie against the Persians; who as in a hunt hee was chasing a deere and happening into a homely cottage of a poore countryman, did there learne; Regs & Principes rare veru áudire, That Kinges and Princes doe seldome heare the truth. Therefore a wise King should not lesse estimate and valew his Courtiers, which are prudent pious and lo∣uers of truth, than those which only practise and accus∣tome themselues to tickle his eares, with smoothing and soothing speeches, not withstanding we must know this for a truth, that although truly honest and religious men know not how to lye; yet liuing in the Court, they are forced sometimes against their will, euen in the bosomeSimulation & Dissimulatiō. of the Court, to vtter many euils yea false and fained o∣pinions and rules much sauouring of Simulation: yea Princes themselues (witnesse Tiberius) doe loue and al∣low of dissimulation, which oftentimes for one cause or other cannot almost by any meanes be wanting in a Court. What say you to Dauid, who being both a King and a Prophet, yet he also made vse of dissimulation, nei∣ther
is that of the Emperour Sigismund vnknowne, who was wont to say, Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit imperare. He that knowes not how to dissemble, knowes not how to rule and gouerne. All this notwithstanding (if thou be wise) take the counsell of the Philosopher, Nec dissimula, nec simula. Neither counterfeit or dissemble, nor simulate or speake vn∣truly; Let not the ill custome of more euil men seduce or induce thee to be as euill or worse than themselues. And that thou maist not be intangled in this snare, nor shack∣ledTo hate filthy Lucre. in these gyues, reiect and despise foule, and filthie Lu∣cre, and let not the accursed hunger of gold and gaine at any time too much please thy palate, or delight thine ap∣petite. For, he which is, and will be of this mind, shall neuer be able to keepe his conscience vnclogged, his tongue cleane from vntruths, his hands pure from bribes, or his heart vndefiled with filthie and impious imagina∣tions. Againe, let the Courtier learne to be his moneys mai∣ster, and commander, not his moneys minister to bee commanded by it. Yea let him learne of the Comicall Poet, Pecuniam in loco negligere interdum lucrum esse maxi∣mum. That sometimes the forbearance of money is especiall great gaine. Let him also incessantly obserue this rule and direction, so long as he resides and remaines in the court, that as much as in him lies, and so farre forth as he may with a safe conscience, keeping his honour and repu∣tation vnspotted, and vntainted; that he I say so farre forth as time serues, and occasion administers various andTo obserue the time and place. diuers conditions and alterations, doe iudiciously and circumspectly make vse hereof; If his Prince and the af∣fayres at Court be cheerfull and merry, let him also bee merry and ioyfull, but if they be sad and sorrowfull, let
him in like manner be the same, tis not almost to be ex∣prest and vttered in words, what prosperous and fortu∣nate successe, many Courtiers haue obtained by this one especiall obseruation. But aboue all things let him be most mindfull and carefull herein, that whensoeuer he is to dispatch any waighty or important affaires, in forraine Nations, he accommodate himselfe to the customes and manners of the same places, so long as he there remaines. I cannot compendiously comprize or epitomize the large discourse and dilatation, which this part of Prudence, this excellent Decorum, and most gracefull behauiour might iustly exact and require of me, excellently therefore sayd he; Si fueris Romae, Romano viuito more, Si fueris alibi, viuito sicut ibi. When th'art at Rome, put on a Romanes face. Liue as they liue, whersere thou come in place. But here kind Courtier, thou must vnderstand, that this admonion concernes especially the lawes and insti∣tutions of those Kingdomes and Countries, wherein we most properly liue; O how ingenuous is that man which vnderstands this aright! ô how prudent is he which is duely circumspect therein! Moreouer, the free borne Courtier, that is, he which either by his owne power and industrie, or by some espe∣ciallHow to carry himselfe in his prosperitie. and singular grace & fauour of his Prince hath floa∣ted aloft, & ascended vnto some indifferent hight of ho∣nour, let him not beare himselfe too hautily and lostily towards his superiours, too arrogantly with his inferi∣ours,
nor too malepert and vncourteously amongst his equals. I haue alreadie incited and inuited thee to humi∣litie and modestie, therefore I omit to insist farther there∣on, one onely word by the way, let me adde thereunto, namely, that if humilitie be linkt and knit together with authoritie, it makes it exceeding acceptable, yea, and to be had in wonderfull admiration; Melius est vt tibi dica∣tur, ascende huc, quàm vt humilier is coram Principe; It is farre better, and much more credit (as that most prudent King Solamon admonisheth) that it be sayd to thee, come vp hither, than to be deiected and set lower in the presence of thy Prince. Finally, take and make vse of that of the wise Philosopher, whereof he very excellently aduiseth thee. Insecundis nemo confidat, in aduersis nemo deficiat, alternae sunt vices rerum. Let no man be presumptuous in prosperity, nor desperate in aduersitie, for various are the vicissitudes of all things. Let this then I say, make the Courtier circumspectlyTo prouide for his owne well-fare in due time. wise, that if at any time it so fall out, that he perceiue his Princes fauours to be turned into frownes, and that the enuie of his enemie begins to take growth against him, let him then with all conuenient maturitie desire an honest dismission, to depart from the Court, and of himselfe to lay aside his Courtly dignities, rather than to expect when he shall be by others enuiously eiected. The rule is this. Praestat praeuenire quam praeueniri. It is farre better to pre∣uent, than to be preuented. Which whensoeuer occasion is offered, to prouide for thine honour and reputation, I wish thee to make good vse of. But since there is nothing in the Court of Princes more perillous, or pernicious to Noble Peeres, and great Statesmen, than are backbiters and slaunderers. And the assistants and suggesters vnto
slaunder, are ignorance, iealousie, hatred, traps, and tre∣cherie. Therefore tis not amisse euen for the Prince him∣selfe in this respect, to be very aduisedly carefull and cir∣cumspect, that such worthy men and wise Counsellours; men I say of most worthie merit & desert, of their Prince and common Wealth, may not by such base and ignomi∣nious men, of whom we haue formerly made mention, be so iniuriously defamed, abuied, and euen Butchered. A Prince therefore should by all meanes endeuour, least by liftning to back biters, the person accused being vtterly prohibited to make answere for himselfe, he be not in∣quisitie about the controuersy, nor giue sentence against him, vntill he haue first iudiciously and impartially heard the other partie also speake for himselfe. Now an ambitious Courtier is he, who vnder pretenceAn ambitious Courtier. of amplifying and enlarging the royalties and dignities of his Prince, in all his actions followes the line of his owne lust, displaceth his auncient; honest, and approued Col∣ligues, or fellow officers, substituting, and suborning o∣there, whom he pleaseth in their places. If any thing be by the Prince mentioned, or profferedOf marriage. to the Courtier, as touching Matrimony, he shall doe ve∣ry vnwisely, if he refuse to be directed therein by him. But let him rather so farre incline himselfe, that he make no contract or agreement, without the good liking, con∣sent, and pleasure of his Prince; What good, and how great profit may hence arise vnto him, no wise man but may well perceiue, and vnderstand. Let the Couriter also contemne and scorne those ho∣nours,Not to vse in∣direct courses to rise to honour. which he cannot attaine vnto, without the perpe∣trating of grosse impietie; for, as Violentum nihil diutur∣num, Nothing violent is permanent: So questionlesse, what∣soeuer
is gotten by wilinesse and wickednesse, can neuer be fortunate or durable. Obserue good Courtier, what is preposterously repugnant to reason, what is wicked, what vniust, and hate the same. And whither in time of Peace or War, thou enterprise any thing, accomodate thy wit, thy will, thy power, and policie to the full per∣formance, and diligent dispatch thereof. And since the affayres of great men are very vnstable, anxious, & variable, trust therefore rather to thine owne power and vertue, than to any others. Let not that moue or molest thee, which no wise man wonders at, that in the Court sometimes illiterate Idiots proue great men. Truly it oftentimes comes to passe, that such as these do for a season, enioy the fauor & friendship of their Prince, and doe fondly perswade themselues, that they may free∣ly without controulment or correction say, or doe any thing, what ere they please, but alas, they quickly come downe, and so doe all those that are not ruled by vertue and reason, but by their owne vile and vitious affections, administring to themselues occasion of their owne de∣struction, and running headlong into the pit they had prepared for others. Consider these things (kind Cour∣tier) I aduise thee, and when thou seest such a one plac't and grac't aboue thee, though thou doe not approue it, yet doe not resist, but beare it contentedly. And in the interim, be vigilant and prouident, that base fellowes make thee not as bad as themselues. Be alwaies in all things very cautelous and circumspectA caution for rich Cour∣tiers. when thou art to deale with thy Prince, but especially if thou be wealthy and rich, least afterward thou be forc't to say, & to say too truly, my village goods & good for∣tune, wherein I once inebriated my selfe haue now vn∣done
mee. This assuredly happens to many men, especi∣ally to Courtiers couetous and desirous of domination ouer others, which makes them estimate and valew ho¦nour, shame, truth, body, soule, and all, but base and beg∣gerly to a kingdome. But these I say are most worthy to be detested and hated of Princes, and euen to be thrust out by th'head and shoulders, and vtterly banisht the Court. Furthermore, let the Courtier so modestly, wisely, & aduisedly, behaue himselfe that as neere as may be, he be able to approue and iustifie his actions and imploi∣ments to his Prince; nor let him vndertake any thing ap∣pertaining to the Court wherein he liues, his Prince not being acquainted there with; so shall he repell and beate backe the deadly darts of enuie, which otherwise vpon light and slight occasions, may be either from his Prince or others leueld and shot at him. Let the Courtier also take heed, that he wrong not suchTo take heed whom wee prouoke to anger and in∣dignation. a man whose brethren or kindred, may iustly be feared will be furious and fatall reuengers thereof. He that is in∣iured writes his wrong in marble not in dust. resist not therefore but beare with patience that which cannot by any meanes be altered, be perswaded that he which yeilds to time, serues and obeyes honesty, and that they doe excellently beare their misfortunes, which wisely couer and conceale them. Magnifie not thy selfe, against those which can suppresse and pull thee downe, and striue not to stand vpright, there where thou art constrained to fall downe flat. This one thing remaines, that thou hurt no man, but if thou thy selfe be hurt or molested with petty iniuries, tis farre better contentedly to endure them, than with any the least danger to indeauoure to repell them.
Againe, let the honest and religious Courtier who is of equallity in power and authority, indeauour by all meanes to establish vnity and concord, and let him vt∣terly reiect and cast a way all iarres, grudges and seedes of dissention, which are indeede more pernicious than the tooth of a fierce dogg, or the sting of a poysonous Serpent. Let him also which attempteth or enterpriseth any thing, discreetely and prudently, recogitate yea and premeditate the same, that so his imployments (a meane being euer obserued) may gaine and obtaine a happy and hoped issue or conclusion; for we shall seldome see a prosperous euent of those thing, which are in conside∣rately and precipitately attempted: wherefore let him againe, and againe, cast in mind with what councell with what conclusion any thing is to be done, is to be left vndone. Seeing that Courtiers set councell at saile and sell theirAn admon∣to Princes. Princes secrets, it were very materiall that he would take aspeciall care that nothing at Court might be vendible, and that therby hee open not a gap to ambition and corruption. More ouer let the Courtier be very carefull that hee swell not in heart nor ouer highly lift vp his head, be∣cause peraduenture he hath abundantly receiued, much honour and dignity, from the hands of his benigne andNote this bountifull Prince, for it may so come to passe, that all those dignities and preferments, which through the whole course of thy life thou hast acquired, thou maist in a moment of time, through thine ill vsage and abuse soone loose them, and be vtterly bereaued of them, and what then; thou shalt be thereby the only occasioner, of thine owne vnrecouerable detriment and damage, and
giue thine enimies if thou haue any (as thats not to be doubted) a iust cause to laugh thee to scorne. The con∣troullers of a Court and Tutors of young Princes, must conuiue and winke at some matters, in that their minori∣ty & tender age, especially if no man be damnified or hurt therby, that in matters of higher import and greater consequence, they may the better rule and rectifie them. Furthermore because the necessity of a mans Country,To traine vp and bring vp Horses. the greatnesse of renowme, and abundance of riches doe all require that a courtier should be very forwardly in∣clined to bring vp horses, and by how much the more noblely, and generously minded a man is: so much the more willingly doth he spare no cost, vpon a beast of a stout stomacke, tractable to be trained vp to warre, and fit for the defence of his person. Therefore I say the Cour∣tier should not be pinching & sparing, but most forward & ready, in the buying & bringing vp of such a Beast, esp∣ecially if he perceiue his Prince to be delighted with the view & exercise of the most generous stoutest and stateli∣est Horses. What needes many words? he must not only traine vp horses, but himselfe oftentimes backe them & exercise his body to riding. For assuredly that of Crisa∣neas in Xenophons fourth Pedia is very remarkeable and worthy obseruation, who so highly commended the cunning and skilfullnesse of riding of horses, that he thought assuredly he could fly like a bird, had be bin aof the excel∣lency of ri∣ding Horses. good horse man; and certainely this Horse-riding is a warrelike exercise and most befiting a Prince or Noble Peere. To this purpose also we read in Plutarch, that Iulius Caesar was so exquisite and skilfull a rider, euen from his childhood, that turning both his hands behind him to
his backe, he would oftentimes vse to put his Horse to the most furious & swiftest Carreers that possibly might be. If againe, thy Prince take especiall delight in hunting,The prayse of Hunting. doe thou also (kind Courtier) highly allow of the same, and let neither labour, cold, no nor the loue of thy wife at home withhold thee from it. Heare what Cicero sayes to this purpose, Tuse: Quest. 2. Consuetudinis vis magna est, pernoctant venatores in niue, in Montibus se vri patiuntur. Great (saith he) is the power of Custome or ex∣ercise, it inureth Hunters to watch all night in the Snow, and to scorch and burne themselues by day in the Sunne, on the hie Mountaines. And no maruaile, for, Hunting is an exer∣cise, as pleasant, as profitable, and commendable. The Spartans in times past vsed to instruct their youth therein. And it was an auncient custome and practice a∣mongst the Romanes, to exercise their young men, not onely to handle their weapons, to ride horses, and such like, but euen to hunting and running of Races, to exer∣cise the agilitie, and the nimblenesse of their bodies: For this laborious kinde of exercise, puts vigor into the ten∣der minds of young men, it corroborates their strength, accustomes them to courage and fortitude, increaseth the powers and faculties both of the bodie and minde, yea, and it especially causeth nimblenesse and patience to en∣dure many brunts and difficult exigents. This is the exercise which very much preserues the health of the bodie, and amongst Noble and renowned Princes, begets much honour and reputation, & this doth that most acute and ingenuous Poet, in his Epistles plainely ratifie.
Romanis solenne viris opus, vtile famae vita{que} & Membris. Amongst the Romanes Hunting was a game, For pleasure, health, and mirth of noble fame. Since therefore not onely in auncient times, but euen in these our dayes, most potent, and magnificent Kings and Princes haue euen from their child-hood most desi∣rously and with wonderfull commendation vsed and delighted in this noble exercise; those Courtiers doe not misse the marke, which indeuour to imitate their Prince in so famous and worthy a recreation, and with all dili∣gence vse it, and take especiall delight in it. Neither may I wrong this so excellent an exercise, as with silence to passe ouer the notable effects thereof, namely, that the Prince, or any other honourable Courtier, hauing his mind and thoughts busied, nay, euen ouerwhelmed with the various waues of cares, & distracting encumbrances, may euen in the midst of these ouerflowing floods of trouble and molestation, relaxate and recreate himselfe with hunting. For, who is so Stoick or stone-like, as that in the very pursuit, and chace of the Deere, Yea, and in the striking and piercing thereof, may not with great boldnesse and alacritie, with the Liricke Poet say; Quis non malarum, qua amor cur as habet, Hac inter obliuiscitur? What's be whom loues or labours-cares so fright, As, once to mind them, in so much delight? Nay, to whom I pray you is it not a remedie against all
his grinding and deuouring troubles, if with Ascanius; —— Medijs nunc vallibus acri Gaudet equo, iam{que} hos cursu, iam praeterit illos, Spumantem{que} dari, pecora intermertia, votis Optat Aprū, aut fulvum descendere monte Leonem. Amidst the pleasant shadey Vales and Dales, He be well mounted on a stately Steed, Out-runs the best which in the Race preuailes, Or with his blade makes foaming Boares to bleed; Or from the Mountaines meets a Lyon strong, Whom with his Sword he vowes to lay along. This then is the summe of all we haue sayd hereof, namely, that the auncient Romanes had hunting in espe∣ciall vse and exercise, as a certaine . Praeludium, or Introduction vnto Martiall Prowesse. Touching which matter he that desires to know more, let him read Cicero. lib. 2. De natura Deorum, toward the latter end thereof. There shall the Courtier finde such things as are not by any meanes to be condemned or contemned by any wise or discreet Courtier, especially when he shall perceiue that his Prince is so highly delighted with so noble and maiesticall a pastime, which as was aforesayd, doth won∣derfully augment and increase the strength, and manly vigour of the bodie and minde; Wherefore Salust is not worth the listning vnto in this regard, who though other∣wise a most renowned, flourishing, and politicke Author, and relator of the affayres of Rome, yet seemes to liken Hunting, to Countrie husbandrie, and other seruile exer∣cises.
Concerning trauaile into other Kingdomes or Nati∣ons,Of trauelling into fotraine Nations. I say thus much, that it is very vsefull and necessary for a Courtier, for the time to come; the reason is both waightie and iust: For, first by this meanes, he vnder∣standing the customes and conditions of other Nations, by experimentall knowledge and much vse, he growes more cautelous and circumspect ouer himselfe, he there∣by also is instructed in the knowledge of tongues, and shall behold (as it were) the mirrour or looking glasse of all mortall men, and both discerne and learne many most important and profitable matters, out of the strange va∣rietie of Nations, and their manners and conditions. I doubt not, but there are many of a cleane contrary opi∣nion, who certainly in mine opinion are not in this case to be credited, for if we doe compare one thing with ano∣ther, what excellent knowledge and experience shall he possesse, both of affayres, customes, and tongues, beyond him which neuer saw any others, than such as himselfe, nor ere lookt farther than his Fathers cottage, or into his owne Parish Church; Trauaile therefore cannot questi∣onlesse but be very profitable and necessary for a Cour∣tier, yea, for any generous or ingenuously educated gen∣tleman whatsoeuer, especially if it be ordered and vnder∣taken, not onely for priuate pleasure and delight, but for a publike profit and vtilitie. The prudent Courtier to whom this wholsome coun∣sell may be effectuall, & who can be with Vlysses, , a Proteus, to temporize or frame himselfe to all times, manners, and conditions, may contemplate, search out, and learne the conditions, or manners of men, and the scituation of many Townes and Citties, that is, he may perfectly vnderstand, and truly know, how to trauaile
with fruitfull commoditie. Now then that Courtier which is fraught and furnisht with such experience, I thinke cannot easily disrobe himselfe of that due, true, and auncient obseruance, whose grace and excellent comelinesse euer takes place, least by negligent remisse∣nesse, a way be opened and made readie to others, euen vpstarts, to ascend the steps to dignitie and honour be∣fore him: Out of this ware-house, or rather sweet strea∣ming spring, the Courtier may both exhaust, and learne to thwart and crosse the counsels of his craftie enemie, and to retort the Darts and Arrows which were directed against him, into the face of their enuious Archer. This caution is in this place very pertinent and vse∣full, because that notwithstanding thou maist perceiue and see into the crafts and subtilties of thine aduersaries in Court, yet it is not conuenient alwayes to disclose or discouer them, but farre better wisely to dissemble, couer and conceale them vnto some fitter time, which occasion may happily administer vnto thee. Now also (kind Courtier) touching wanton, wan∣dring,Of lasciuious or wanton Loue. and vnlawfull loue, receiue some admonitions, but as briefe as may be. Auoid it, I say (kind Courtier) by all meanes auoid it, wouldst thou know the reason, one is not sufficient, Ile giue thee more. First, thy fame is ther∣by confounded, thy riches or substance is therby (as with a spunge) suckt vp and drawne dry, thy reputation, name, and shame is left to the pleasure, fancie, and will of a wo∣man, and the vigour, vertue, and worthinesse of wit is vt∣terly lost. Prettily saith Plautus to this purpose, Vbi sum, ibi non sum: vbi non sum, ibi est animus, cum amant is anima sit in re amata. Where I am, I am not: where I am not, yet there my mind remaines, when the Louers mind is on the
thing beloued. Heare I pray thee good Courtier, and be∣leeue this one thing, he was no vaine, idle, or adle headed fellow, neither did he sing a meere fiction, or fained tale, who ere he was that left these verses in writing; Quicun{que} ille fuit puerum qui finxit Amorem, Nonne put as mir as hunc habuisse manus, Is primum vidit sine sensu viuere amantes, Et leuibus cur is multa perire bona. Whose Fiction sere it was that loues a lad, O, what strange hands I pray, doo'st thinke he had? For, first he sees how Louers sencelesse liue, And how slight griefes, him from much good doe driue. This is certainely most true, and therefore if thou de∣sire a salue for this sore, and to see or to seeke an end of lewd Loue, take and make vse of this counsell. Cedit amor rebus, res age tutus eris. Flie idlenesse and Cupid hath no might, Vse exercise, and hee'le be put to flight. Auoid idlenesse therefore, which thou maist easily doe, since actions of honest and laudable employments canTo hate Idle∣nesse. neuer be wanting in a Court; if any man misdeeme or censure the worst of thee, let it be thy care to depell and put from thee his sinister suspicion, and to conuince the care and feare wherein thou wast, the most artificiall meanes hereof is vsing all affabilitie in speech, flickering enticements, and presenting honourable gifts. For, he
which will ouercome his enemies, with least detriment or danger, and most assurance of safetie, must with many benefits, faire promises, and such like artillery, assault and vanquish him. Neither is this counsell causelsse; for, vnder correction be it spoken, All Courtiers are eyther by nature so formed, or by education so addicted, that they hold it a speciall poynt of wisedome, or policie at least to couer and coullour their hatred with false, fained, and faire concealments, and thereby doe oftentimes put forth and proffer their hand, to those whom in their heart they hate, and giue them the most smooth and glauering termes they can deuise, with out any true or sincere inten∣tion. I may easily confirme what I here affirme, by a most probable and obseruable example. That triple headed Cerberus, of inhumaine Tyranny, Caligula, Claudius, and Nero, hauing destroyed many famous and most vertuous men; whose crueltie and Butcherie a certaine auncient,Marke this. and graue Courtier hauing wisely and very subtilly auoi∣ded and escaped, and it being demanded by what meanes he amongst so many escaped such and so many ineuita∣ble dangers, and traps of their tyranny, his answere was, by often enduring iniuries, and by shewing himselfe most thankefull, though he had small cause for the same. Let the Courtier by all means follow his footsteps, & though he liue not in the Court of any tyrannicall King, yet though he reside and abide in the Court of a most cour∣teous and iust Prince, let him either so fit and prepare himselfe, as that he may be alwayes readie to swallow downe, and disgest many, yea, any molestations and dis∣contents, or else let him without delay depart from the Court, as most vnsit to liue therein. The reason question∣lesse why many Courtiers doe make no progresse in their
proceedings, hath no other originall than because their hopes are dubiously & diuersly distracted, and vnsettled in that they cleaue not firmely to some Patron or Protec∣tour of them, and their fortunes. But be thou (kindNote this. Courtier) prudent and abstinent, as also most confident that vertue is most valiant and inuincible being vnited to a strong adherent. And doubtlesse tis farre better, to combine and conioyne himselfe, with some Primate or chiefe Peere as his Patrone and to follow him, then to be a follower of many and yet firmely affected of none, cer∣tainely as he is no where which is euery where, so questi∣onlesse, he that serues & seeks after many, shall not soūd∣ly or sincerely finde any; for that which is diuerse and se¦perate cannot chuse but be feeble and very desperate. Let the Courtier neuer be obuious or opposite to the pleasurs of his Prince, so they be honest and warrantable, for otherwise he may quickly fall from the fauour and af∣fectionNot to be op∣posite to his Prince. of his Prince, & in vaine does a man striue against the streame. And certainely a man must sometimes yeild & submit to time, place, and the person, of friends: yea, he that liues with his Superiors had not need to con∣tend and striue but to winke & conniue at many matters and rather sometimes to loose his owne right, than with lost labour, or rather eminent danger to contest or con∣tend with his Prince or superior. And yet as I haue for∣merly said, this is to be considered with this Prouiso that it be so farre forth, as he may with a safe conscience, ex∣cuse himselfee and the renowne of his Prince. Furthermore some other impious and ignominious Courtiers, haue a tricke to try their fortunes, and toSlanderous accusations. hunt after the fauour and affection of their Prince by be∣ing most inquisitiue to search, and finde out, those with
whom they vnderstand the Prince is offended, that they may most malitiously and pernitiously, accuse them to their Prince with vniust accusations, infamous lyes, and slanderous imputations; examples heereof are extant both auncient and moderne in Germany, France, Spaine, and els where, but that which was most conspicuous and sensible to Seneca is most memorable. If in the Court, the Prince haue 2. 3. or more in sus∣pence for such and such matters of ill demeanor, let such then as will shew themselues wise, intermit and leaue off frequent conference & much priuate talke or whispering amongst themselues; which if they doe not they may chance to ad fuell to the fier, or put flax into the flame; & farre better it is to cease & asswage, then to foster and increase the ielousie and suspition of the Prince; for, since as hath formerly bin toucht, the suspitious man is most commonly deceiued; why may not a Prince also erre and be deceiued, in his suspicious imagination; which his er∣ror I could wish that thou (kind Courtier) wouldest be the cause to discouer, vnlesse by thy wisdome and vp∣right dealings, thou canst openly and boldly annshilate the impulsiue or primary cause thereof. Let the Courtier addict himselfe vnto, and decke him∣selfeTo bee of ci∣uill and curte∣ous behaui¦our. with vrbanity and most ciuill demenour, and be fur∣nished with merry pleasant and witty conceits in his con∣ference or talke, but let him by all meanes auoid both in iest and in earnest, all quippicall taunts and satiricall bi∣ting tearmes. For, hee which indeauours and desires to purchase and procure the beneuolent respect of others by rudenesse rusticity and barbaritie of speech, doth ra∣ther discouer his owne simplicity, than any smooth or facile humanity, but that which is neatly and trimly con∣triued,
being indeede the fruite of a witty inuention doth most delight and recreate the hearers, and is more sound∣ly and sooner approued of by thy iudgement of the most indifferent, wherefore let thy merry iests and witty spee∣ches be gracefull and honest, not bitter or biting scoffsOf iesting & merry spee∣ches. not deliuering the bare truth of things, which indeede were an occasion to bite to the quicke, the party touched therein. Let the Courtier also put farre from him all Clownishnesse which in iesting and merriment shewes but a dull wit and slownesse, yea is very vnsauory and meerely foolishnesse. Let him no lesse set packing all Scurrility or saucy and malapert derision, which mirth is very shamefull and vnseemely. Finally let him hate as a capitall enemie, vnciuill snapishnesse, which also in merriment is no better then dogged snarling, and virulent or enuious biting. The faults and offences of imprisoned, m incarceratedOf Courtiers committed to Hould. Courtiers are not to be extenuated by any others in the Court, but are to be buryed at least, in the depth of si∣lence, & not mentioned at all by them. Neither yet must they priuily whisper, or avouch openly, that such men are blamelesse and innocent, whom for enuy hatred and displeasure, they apparently perceiue to be imprisoned: For certainely if it be our humaine condition to erre, and to be apt to slip by naturall infirmitie, euen the Prince himselfe being violently carried away with a certain pre∣cipitate heedlesnesse, and heat of spirit, may in some one case or other commit an errour, yet notwithstanding he is not bound to giue an accompt thereof to any priuate or particular Courtier whatsoeuer. Let not the Courtier therefore rashly, and inconsiderately miscensure, or dis∣allow what his Prince may be pleased to like of & allow.
Let him not excuse or account such a man as guiltlesse, whom his Prince doth accuse and condemne as guiltie of some notorious or publike offence; Princes haue their secrets, which who so ere dares or desires to peepe or pry into shall hardly be free from danger, and giue most palpable and apparant signes of his grosse impru∣dence. In this case therefore let the Courtier be very cau∣telous & circumspect, that he diue not too deepe into this dangerous gulfe, but that he keepe neerer the shore, and that he wisely conceale much more than he shall dare to reueale, and that he depresse and keepe in what he should not expresse; yea, let this be the period of all, that silence is a safe & sure reward to him which imbraceth the same. Though peraduenture the Courtier may perceiue, thatA wise cau∣tion. he is vilipended, and not much respected or regarded of his Prince, yet let him very aduisedly take heed, that he expresse not the least semblance or appearance of indig∣nation or discontent against him, but let him euery where carry himselfe with all signes of obsequious obseruance. He may freely thinke whatsoeuer he pleaseth, for (as our English Prouerbe sayes) thought is free; but let him take heed that he speake not openly, what he hath in his heart conceiued priuily. In matters also of pietie and Religion, the CourtierNot to trou∣ble himselfe about mat∣ters of Re∣ligion. shall doe exceeding wisely, if he superficially meddle not with too nice inquisition after vnprofitable and vnneces∣sary things, as about the innouation or alteration of Phra∣ses in the sacred Scriptures, yea, and let him endeuour to preuent all such like actions, that hee may shew hee ap∣proues not the leiutie and inconstancie of such vaine and fleeting fellowes, by answering and subscribing to their conditions, and thereby shew himselfe a companion and
copartner in their vnbeseeming curiositie. I would not (good Courtier) that thou shouldst be too strictly bound with this indissoluble bond of Religion, from which thou maist easily vntie and vnlose thy selfe, without the prop and protection of others thy teachers and instruc∣tors. And that this admonition is not friuolous or fruitlesse, the vnhappie times of our Forefathers, yea, and this present and most turbulent time in the Low-Coun∣tries, doth most truly testifie. If any discord and dissentions happen in the Court, let the courtly Chaplaine be very sedulous to appease andOf Chaplains in the Court. qualifie the same; to reconcile them as brethren, to ad∣monish them as men, to reprehend and reduce them as wanderers, and going astray, and with the sauory and wholsome sweetnesse of courtesie and gentlenesse to dis∣solue and bring to nought the arguments of the oppo∣nents,They must be Peace-makers not to increase wrath, but to make peace and ap∣pease wrath, not to foster faction amongst the contenti∣ous, but to lull it asleepe, yea, into a dead sleepe, that it may not be easily awakned againe. Finally, not to plant the yong sprigs, or to sow the seeds of litigious discord, & grudging betweene them, but with the sickle & sword of Gods word, to supplant and eradicate the same. Cer∣tainely such an Ecclesiasticall Courtier will hereby appa∣rently approue indeed, that he is the Disciple of that great Doctour, that he followes the footsteps, and treads the pathes of that fruitfull Pastor, which once sayd, Peace (not Discord) be vnto you. Wherefore as that Prince of the Celestiall Palace did especially loue Peace, and liue in Peace; let vs also in this vale and dale of teares, in this mansion of misery and mortalitie, do the same and be the same. In the occupation and possession of Kingdomes
and Prouinces, it is no small aduantage for a Souldier to make vse of a well spoken Prelate, or Preacher of the Court, for if he be one that is excellently Rhetoricall, and subtill of speech and arguing, he shall assuredly doe muchA politicke note. more good thereby than a Souldier by his weapons in warre. The actions of those most factious Iesuites in the siege at Paris, and obtaining and taking in of the King∣dome of Bohemia, by George Podibradius ratifies and con∣firmes the truth hereof, who for all his faire and smooth tales had neuer attaind or enioyd the end of his desires, if he had not vs'd the vaile and vizard of Religion, & made Roikiranus the Priest his spokesman in the businesse. Fre∣quent examples also may we finde in other Kingdomes, and Nations, which here I willingly let passe, but this counsell although indeed it may peraduenture take ef∣fect, yet for all that if any should demand of me whither such a proiect were to be practised, or prayse worthy, my answere should be, that such counsell is not alwayes to be administred to a Prince, by a pious, religious, and honest Courtier. This question also hath beene vrged by some prudentArt and Na∣ture. Courtiers, namely, whither a Courtier furnished with ex∣cellent naturall parts be to be preferred before him which is adorned with Arts and Sciences, without the former. Truly, to speake with Hippocrates, Illud optimum quod à natura; That is best, which is established and perfected by Nature. Nature alwayes workes more perfectly; and as another sayes by a certaine imbred and secret Law, is able to take reuenge. These things surely we must needs say, and hold for truth. And yet we doe not vtterly repudiate that Axiome, as a thing of no import or consequence, Ars certior dux est; Art is a more sure and certaine Guide.
The Courtier which hath spent the flourishing spring time, and Summer of his Age in the Court, and which al∣soOf giuing o∣uer to follow the Court. by the gracious aspect and respect of his Prince, hath atcheiued much honour, wealth, and dignitie, must not for light and slight occasions relinquish the Court, but if so be that the times proue dangerous, if his trauailes and paine, be ouer-great and grieuous; Finally, if sicknesse or such like, doe iustly moue and admonish him to another kind of life, let him honestly & discreetly desire a dismis∣sion from the Court, rather than to change the continued course of his life, with a too suddaine or scarce honest and seasonable alteration. Let the wise Courtier industriously and diligently con∣siderOf entring in∣to familiarity. in mind, whom and what a one he is whom he en∣tertaines in to intimate societie and familiaritie, yea, into his administration and seruice. Touching thy Friend (kind Courtier) this is my aduice, that thou be not ouer∣hastieOf Friends. in making choice of him, and whom thou hast cho∣sen doe not rashly put from thee. Now herein there is need of sound iudgement, and curious choice, for if we will credit the Comedian, Pauci ex multis amici sunt homi∣ni qui certi sient, There are but a few friends amongst many, that are truly faithfull to their Friend. Finally, let that friend be neere and deere vnto thee, whom vertue and paritie of honest qualities and conditions, hath congluti∣nated and knit vnto thee. Now also concerning thy Seruant, thou must sedu∣louslyOf seruants or attendants. take heed, and seriously thinke vpon that prouerbe as true as auncient, Quot seruos habem us totidem habemus hostes, Looke how many seruants we haue, so many enemies we haue. Let no man therefore too farre trust his Ser∣uant, nor be so conceited, that he can heartily loue thee,
which serues thee more for feare then affection; And what man is he which is ignorant and knowes not, that there are and haue bin many men, who instead of a faith∣full freend and seruant, haue found a faithlesse and mer∣cenary hired witnesse against them, yea a traitor vnto them? wherefore the wise Courtier had need to bestow no little care and paines taking heerein. But let him espe∣ciallyTo take heed offeruants in matters of se∣crecy. take heed, that if at a feast or banquet or else where hee intend to speake somewhat more freely then ordina∣ry of any matter whatsoeuer, let him as neere as possibly may be, exclude his seruants from the hearing thereof; For, how many discommodities & inconueniences those Courtiers haue incurred, which haue heerein been re∣misse and carelesse, is I am sure, so sure and certainely knowne, as that there needes not any proofes thereof by superfluous or needlesse relations. Those Courtiers by how much the more potent and powerfull they are in regard of their Princes fauour, and affection toward them, are for the most part so much the more hated and contemned of others, vnlesse they haue fortified that fauour and affection, with singular kind∣nesse and affabilitie in themselues. Certainely if any re∣medie may be found against this mallady, or if their be a∣ny liquidity or moysture, which can extinguish or at least diminish this furious flame of enuie; it is the sweet iuyce of gentlenesse & courtesie. Memorable & remarkable is that which Alphonsus, that most renowned King of Ar∣ragonMarke this good Cour∣uer. was wont to say: Canibus frendentibus proijciendum esse frustum panis. Thou must cast a peece of bread to a snar∣ling dogg, insinuating and signifying that wrathfull out∣ragious and enuious people, must be pleased and appea∣sed by smooth humanity, and that they cannot by any
meanes be pacified, with bitter nesse and rough dealing (kind Courtier) I desire thee therefore to obserue and to follow the tract, and trace of that mostnoble King. Princes newly established, haue for the most part liti∣grous seruants, and contentious officers: and common∣ly they vse to contend and seperate themselues into di∣uerse factions for chiefe place and priority in their con∣tentions: In this regard, I aduise and counsell the Cour∣tier that he take heed of those, who for their owne ad∣uantage and profit like Aesops base and turne coat Batts, doe leane sometime to this faction sometimes to that. But concerning neutrallity we haue already deliuered our opinion. Although the Prince may in his owne peculiar loueHow to con∣tinue and en∣crease a Prin∣ces fauour be∣gun. and affection, haue made choice of the Courtier, yet let him, all this notwithstanding, indeuour to procure vnto himselfe an honest and faithfull propitious Patron, who may still kindle and increase the fier of his Princes affec∣tion, to his farther felicity, fauour, and welfare: now in the interim let the Courtier little or nothing regard how hee be estimated, or accounted of by others, especially the vulgar sort, so that his Prince, by whom he may be promoued, and aduanced to dignitie and honour, doe approue and duely praise his fidellitie, painfullnesse and industrie. excellent and very considerable is that which is recorded of Steuen King of Polonia, of whom it is re∣ported that he should say, to Castelanus at that time his high Chancellor, standing by him according to the fash∣ion and custome of his ancestors, Faciam vt breui possis sedere, I will make thee shortly sit downe by mee. Esteeme as nothing therefore (kinde Courtier) others that would seeme to pull thee downe, so long as thy Prince intends
to promote and preferre thee; feare not I say, if (maugre all the malice of any others) thy Prince be pleased to set thee downe by him, who lately didst but stand, attending on him. Concerning vestures and apparell, I aduise thee (kindeOf apparell. Courtier) let it not be thy least care, for it may easily be that either by excesse or defect therein, may be ingendred and occasioned either thy prayse or disprayse, obserue this also, that thou follow such a habit, apparell, consul∣tations, and actions, as may bring credit and commenda∣tion to thee, and breed enuie in thine emulators. This also is the true nature and propertie of Court-lyers,A forget of lies in the Court. that when they once begin; first a flying and vnfaithfull rumour is spread abroad, which by flying farther, like a snow-ball rowld in the snow, growes bigger and bigger, then some others, not of the meanest but highest ranke and order, affirme and auouch it, which thereupon is di∣vulged, promulgated, and made common in the mouths of all men, and by this meanes, doe blabbing and lying Courtiers begulle & delude the credulous common peo∣ple. This vndoubtedly is euident enough, and more than sufficiently apparent to all, which we might by most ex∣presse and faithfull examples more liuely illustrate, but that examples of this kind are alwayes most odious. Wherefore I will now goe forward and here I also ad∣uiseWhat one a Courtier should be. the Courtier, that it is not sufficient, that he be voyd of all vices, and free from foule enormities, and grosse de∣formities, vnlesse he be adorned & beautified with those vertues, whereby dignitie, grace, and authoritie, may be purchased. Let him not therefore be carelesse of his same & good name, not couetous of other mens goods, but honestly sparing and thriftie of what is his owne▪ and
a prouident keeper and maintainer of the common good. The Courtier being aduanced and extolled to someOf his carri∣age in turbu∣lent affayres, his Prince being absent. great and egregious height of honour, and dignitie, and in the absence of his Prince being (as it were) president or principall Agent, in an intricate employment, and af∣faires of great consequence, being also desirous to fru∣strate the expectation of the common people; since he is not in himselfe able to bridle, curbe, and keepe them vn∣der, when they vniustly importune the death, captiuitie, or imprisonment of any one; let him wisely dissemble his anger and displeasure, and let him affirme and protest, that he will do more good for them than they desire, and thereby shall he in the interim set the innocent party at libertie, from vndeserued danger and calamitie. This kind of Art or subtiltie, whensoeuer opportunitie admi∣nisters occasion thereunto, is very highly to be commen∣ded in a Court. Now the pious, prudent, and intelligent Courtier shallOf disputati∣ons in mat∣ters of Reli∣gion. doe exceeding well, to sollidite and moue his Prince, that he would not frequently permit publike disputations, or altercations in matters of Religion, the case is plaine; Nam seruare modum laus est, nimium{que} mouendo, In dubium trabitur religiosa fides. A measure is prayse-worthy; but true Faith Ost mou'd, remou'd, doubtfull disturbance hath. Doe not those examples which we haue in that famous Empire of Germany, in France, and some of the Prouinces of the Low Countries at this day, ratifie and confirme
this truth? How many Oceans of euill and Troian-mise∣ries, haue flowed from this fountaine? Alas, forsooth e∣uery illiterate water-man, and paltry Porter must now a∣daies proue a disputant, must be shewing forth the super∣ficies, and out-sides of his wit and wilinesse, and must first teach, before he himselfe haue ere learned, or bin taught, and all these notwithstanding (shame and sorrow tis to speake it) they themselues doe vtterly neglect to liue pi∣ously, soberly, and vprightly. Gaine they not a goodly commendation? Get they not I pray a huge haruest, and a copious crop of pietie, and religion thereby. O light leaues voyd of fruit! O smoakie shaddew without any true substance! Wherefore let the Courtier be such a lo∣uer of pietie and true Religion, that he may be a speciall means to his Prince, that refractory and obstinate irregu∣lar men, may by his authoritie be forc't and constrain'd to liue in order and true obedience. Let the honest Courtier be euer of this honest minde, and neuer let him desire or endeuour to fish with the fro∣ward in the waters of wilful obstinacy, contention, or dis∣sention. And indeed what other effects doth difference in Religion bring forth, but that euen subiects also be at variance and vtter defiance one with another. Let the Courtier I say, vnderstand and know this, let him freely and faithfully put his Prince in mind of this, namely, that this Anchor cannot so easily be moued, but that the whole ship of the Common-wealth must needs be remo∣ued, and assuredly I am perswaded, that hatred for the most part doth inhabite the hearts of the common peo∣ple (through dissention and difference in Religion) to∣wards those whom they hold and esteeme either per∣uerse or aduerse therein; nor be they afraid to doe harme
and iniurie to those whom they imagine & suppose here∣by to hurt euen God himselfe. Now whensoeuer the Courtier conferres with his Prince, concerning these and such like matters of great moment, let him endeuour to vse a reuerent, respectiue, and moderate kind of speech, and not vncomely or vn∣seemely alter his countenance: For, doubtlesse such a kind of gesture and demeanor cannot but be very accep∣table, delightfull, and forcible in a prudent Prince, yea, and thereby thou shalt (as it were) euen set before him a mirrour or looking glasse, wherein to contemplate, and behold thy modest mind, and sweete conuersation. It is almost vnutterable, how much it concernes eueryAffability and courteous be∣hauiour in a Courtier most excellent. Courtier to be, both by naturall disposition, and artifici∣all acquisition, fashion'd and made sit in the alluring and delighting men with his externall carriage and behauiour. Whosoeuer therefore is by the goodnesse of Nature or Art best garnished and furnished herewith, and can with speedie expedition bring his affayres to a perfect end and finall conclusion; Such a Courtier whensoeuer occasion is offred wherein he may without all Thrasonicall brag∣ging, manifest and declare the efficacie and power of his wit and learning, ought euer most circumspectly, and considerately to make vse of the same. As for example, If he be to vndertake a businesse of great import and con∣sequence with his Prince, let him very attentiuely listen thereunto, not being defatigated or tyred with any other affayres, least that which should be seasonable and ma∣ture, become hereby vnseasonable and immature, that which thou wouldest haue acceptable, proue vnaccepta∣ble, and least thou find that which should be profitable and commodious, vnprofitable & obnoxious vnto thee.
Let him therefore (if he be wise) as was form erly ad∣uised, diligently obserue a fit time and opportunitie, least he, both suffer his talke to be vnperfected, and his pati∣ence and hope proue vaine and be fondly frustrated: for, this is euer as sure as sure may be in the Court, Campe, and whole condition of a mans life, that Hope & Rewards are euer most anxious, and vncertaine, which as much as may be, it is very fit and conuenient to correct and recti∣fie by a kind of Art, and perspicuitie of wit and vnder∣standing. What herein I haue affirmed is truly confirmed by one, who so euer he was, both most learned and verie well acquainted with the varieties and vicissitudes of Courtiers conditions. Vita quid est hominum? nisi spes incerta metus{que} Haec inter dubij, viuimus & morimur. O What's mans life? but, Hope, Feare; anxiously, Betweene both which we doubtfull liue and die. Not much vnlike vnto this is that elegant Distich. Vita quid est hominum, spes & formido futuri, Multum tristitiae, Laetitiae{que} parum. Alas what's life? Hope, Feare, of future things, Whence little pleasure, much displeasure springs. Assuredly, tis most true, that all good men, whether Courtiers, Nobles, Commons, yea, all of vs of what so euer condition we be, doe spend our space and terme of life, in good hopes, and ill haps.
Moreouer, that Courtier which hopes after greatestA good ob∣seruation for Courtiers. matters in the Court, can neuer make any great pro∣gresse therein, if he cannot brooke and is impatient of contumelie, or knowes not how to indure scoffs, taunts, or mockerie. Let him therefore with patience vndertake this iourney, and weaue the web of this life with these manners & demenors, namely, let him please al men; part with what he hath, obserue the times and seasons, let him learne to couer, & discouer his nature, yea, let him turne and wind himselfe hither and thither, which way soeuer occasion requires; to be sorrie with those that are full of sighes, merry with those that are full of mirth, graue with old men, and gratefull to young men. And vnlesse the Courtier be skilfull in this Art, he can neither grow great nor long continue therein. But wretched and miserable are those Courts of Kings wherein no man indeuours eyther by honestie, learning, or industrie, to ascend the steps to honour and dignitie: but where all men, either lawfully or vnlawfully, by right or by wrong, they care not how, no man by his owne merit or desert, striues to attaine vnto dignitie, power, and peferment. Indeauour not thou (kinde Courtier) to creepe into office and authoritie, by any other meanes than onely by vertue, and laudable courses. If thou receiue a repulse, and another inferiour vntoPatience in the Court is an excellent endowment. thee, both by linage, vertue, and learning, be preferred before thee, yet notwithstanding take it patiently & with a contented minde, and do not reuenge thine owne quar∣rell, by impious wrath, or perfidious, and nefarious tre∣cherie. It is very behoofefull, for a wise Courtier to fol∣low euermore the most mightie and powerfull persona∣ges; and (as it were) to follow the very tracts and foot∣steps
of the most fauor'd and fortunate, but euer with this caueat, that he doe it no otherwise than will stand with honestie or equitie. Let the Courtier neuer hunt after o eagerly desire ofThe sutes and desires of a Courtier must be honest. his Prince, any such things which cannot be had without infamy, and ignominious disgrae; with whatsoeuer shew or vaile of honestie, or vtilitie, they may seeme for a sea∣son to be ouerspread and couered. Peraduenture it may seeme pleasant, delicate, and delightfull, being varnisht ouer and garnisht with a beautifull, and probable collour of profit or pleasure, but it cannot long continue so, for, twill quickly be turned to shame and bitternesse. It may perchance (as I said before) admit some certaine mantle of modestie, or cloake of honestie, and so deceiue and de∣lude thee, but be assured, that Quod per se turpe, nunquam erit honestum. That which in it selfe is filthy or shamefull, can by no meanes be honest. Let the Courtier therefore take heed that hee delight not or delude not himselfe with goods ill got, which will in th'end vndoubtedly turne to his owne destruction. Let the Courtier also especially consider and meditate this one thing, Improbum at{que} hominem infamem aliquando habuisse latendi fortunam nunquam fiduciam. That notwith∣standing, that the wicked and dishonest man may couer and conceale his actions from publike view, yet his conscience within will like Cain neuer suffer him to trust himselfe. Againe, let the Courtier know thus much, that indeed wicked and vngodly malefactours, may by fauour or good fortune escape the punishment of their villany, but not from the terror and guiltinesse thereof in their Con∣sciences: for proofe whereof let these true and excellent ensuing verses, giue thee full satisfaction and assurance.
Honesta siquae feceris Cum maximis laboribus Cedentibus laboribus Due is manebit gloria. Si turpe quid commiseri Cum gaudijs amplis simi Abibit omne gaudium Turpi manente infami. If thou doe ought, laborious, Yet if it honest be, Thy name and same most Glorious Shall rest from paines most free: But if with pleasure & delight Thou worke a wicked fact, Thy pleasure soone will take his flight Shame staies and Credit's crackt. But let the wise and cautolous Courtier, diminish orThe Courti∣ers ioy or sor∣row must bee measured by the weale or woe of his Prince. measure out his pleasures, cares, troubles, or molesta∣tions, according the health safety sicknesse or bad condi∣tion of his Prince, and let him not (his Prince being dead) like certaine proud Pseudopostles and bloody fac∣tious, and nefarious Iesuits (farre from any shew of sor∣row and lamentation) Sing, A Te deum laudamus, for his departure. But let him rather in a lawfull, honest, and re∣ligious manner condole his death and immature depar∣ture, in whose only life consisted (as many times it fals out) the liues of an infinite many more, by whose death an entire region, yea a whole Kingdome, Church and Common-weale, haue endured an vnspeakeable losse and detriment.
In an vngodly and an vngratious Courtier ouer muchWealth disco∣uers what men are. prosperitie, doth vnlocke and lay open to publike view, his Auarice, Pride, and all other intestine hideous vices whatsoeuer, that formerly lay lurking with in him, tis therefore no meruaile, though they hauing beene lifted and mounted vp to the top of honour and preferment, possessing to much riches and worldly felicity, are sud∣denly ruinated and precipitated, into the bottome of bitter calamitie. Examples heerof are too many and too manifest, both in this blessed Iland, and in France, both ancient and moderne, I say not left in the registers of Antiquity or reports of people, but fresh and palpably obiected to our eies and vnderstanding. Wherefore in this respect let the Courtier be wise and wary, to consider that he which too hastily, and to highly climbes vp, is likely most lowly and lamentably to tumble downe, And to this purpose heare what a great and most learned Doctor saith. — Quicquid in altum, Fortuna tulit, ruitura leuat, Modicis rebus longius aeuum est. What euer fickle Fortune lifts on high, She soone throwes downe; I'th Meane's most safety. Moreouer, let the Courtier attempt all his enterprisesTo be priuate or secret in his intentions. and emploiments smoothly, currently, and priuately, without any the least rumors, or reports, of what he in∣tends to doe, let him I say vse all diligence, hate all arro∣gance, and in the very act it selfe, be as priuate and silent as a man a sleepe. The reason heerof why thus he shall
performe his actions, I haue already declared which here (with the readers patience) I shut vp in silence. I only add thus much and it is indeed a shame to be spoken: yet such is the propertie and vngodly guise of most Courts, that gifts and bribing presents, are the present and cheife preparations to remooue all the rubs, and to make the way plaine to grace, fauour, and preferment, But the truely noble and illustrious Courtier which hath learned by vertue (a better way then by fawning fauour, & insinu∣ated frendship) to rise and raise himselfe to honour and dignitie, were better to want both place & grace, than to acquire or desire his honour, by guifts and rewards yet tis true which Salust that most graue and learned Histo∣rian saies, especially of the Court of Rome. Romae omnia esse venalia. That all things are set to saile at Rome, so are they for the most part at many other Courts, where lit∣tle or nothing is giuen with out Gold or Gaine. And therefore, Nauigat infaelix qui caret huius ope. His suite must needes be cold, That wants the helpe of Gold. Nay if we will belieue Aeneas Syluius, ipsae manus im∣positiones & Spiritus sancti dona venduntur; quin-imo ipsa peccatorum venia nummatis in aula Romana impenditur.The impious abuses of the Court of Rome tou∣ched. Euen the imposition or laying on of hands▪ and the guifts of the Holy Ghost are sould for mony; Yea I say the very Pardon and forgiuenesse of sinns is in the Court of Rome made only a mony matter: They which know the Court of Rome, and that monstrous great hireling of Rome himselfe, doe
know that I tell no fabulous fiction, but know too well to the cost of many of them, that he and his Courtiers are of Titus Vespatians opinion, Lueri odorem esse bonum ex re qualibet: That the sent and sauour of gaine is sweete, by what meanes soeuer it be gotten. This imposture, deceiueable iugler, and pesantly Pedler, doth foster & fauour vnder him such cunning cozners, & sharking shifters, as scarcely with a good conscience or credit, doe, vse not from vrine or stale, but euen from Strumpets, Iewes, Grecians, and Barbarians to, scrape together and euen wipe their noses of myriads and millions of gold and treasure. I here o∣mit the epicurious gluttons, the reffuse offals and scum of all men, who when they once, like rauening Harpies begin to hunger and gape after gaine, will bring the weal∣thiest men (though neuer so honest) within the danger of their deuillish Inquisition. But let euery wise and dis∣creet Courtier hate and repudiate all such vnhonest wiles and iuggling trickes, and whatsoeuer fauour, moneyes, or stipend, he shall by any meanes procure and store vp in Court, let him not for the present greatly regard them but in such a manner respect his riches, and expect his re∣muneration or reward, euen as though he were not much troubled with the thought thereof. Since riches (as the Philosopher sayth) Non nunquam comitentur in∣dignos, Doe sometimes accompany the vnworthie. And Di∣nites vel sint impij & iniqui, vel iniqui haeredes, Rich men (as the Prouerbe is) are eyther impious, or vniust; or else vniust heires of what they possesse. Whatsoeuer wealth or riches therefore thou dost desire to acquire in the Court, let thy eager appetite or solicitous endeuours for them be vnknowne rather than seene and showne forth, that is, seeme rather to haue sought, than to seeke them.
Moreouer, that Courtier or any els whatsoeuer he be,To put our hopes in prac∣tise. is not to be commended, which hopes for great matters, and yet attempts very few: Let such a one know, that the saying of that most sage Philosopher, and sweet Oratour is most authenticall and true. Non in verbis sed in actio∣nibus virtutem consistere. That, vertue consists not in words, but in workes. That Courtier therefore which desires and indeuours to promote and raise his estate and fortune, must seriously and sedulously consider, and haue a care that he be sparing of speech, and most diligent and indu∣strious in the expedition of his affayres; for, a mans mind and his matters taken in hand must euer go together, and agree in one, if he expect any prayse thereby. As eueryStupiditie. worke therefore which the Courtier vndertaketh must be farre from stupiditie, or remissenesse: so also from teme∣ritieTemeritie. and rashnesse, and he certainely which is thus care∣full, needs not deiect and reiect his hopes, though perad∣uenture the Prince whom he serues doe not presently re∣pay his honestie and diligence with a princely beneuo∣lence. For, many times tis with him as with others, Quod desert non ausert, Forbearance is no acquittance. And how knowest thou, or why shouldest thou not hope, but that he may in his Princely Magnificence reserue a greater be∣nefit or reward, for a wise and faithfull Courtier; where∣fore faint not, feare not, for, although else-where delayes may proue dangerous, yet here tis otherwise, where oft∣times procrastination proues commodious; nor indeed is it fit we should prescribe bounds and limits to a Prin∣ces bountie and liberalitie, but rather patiently to expect; For, Beggars (as our English Prouerbe is) must be no car∣uers. Such a contented Courtier, questionlesse howsoeuer the case stands with him for the present, yet he euer re∣taines
in his consultations, reason and honestie; And let both these be alwayes as a light to direct him, yea, let these be the pathes he meanes to tread in, not turning out of them to the right hand or to the left. But take thou no pleasure in the conditions of craftieNot to prayse any action by, the euent. and subtill Courtiers, who in their liues and conuersati∣ons doe so carry themselues, as that, by the euent they will highly prayse & approue prosperous things, though nere so shamefull and dishonest, and contrariwise will disprayse and disproue aduerse things, though nere so honest and vnblameable. But let all honest hearted Cour∣tiers, I say, eschew and auoid such vile and seruile quali∣ties, and base conditions, and let them with me thus hear∣tily wish and desire. —Careat successibus opto, Quisquis ab-euentu facta notanda putat. O, may he want a hopefull happie end, Which by the Issue doth the Act commend. The wise and well experienc'd Courtier hauing to doeTo know mens conditi∣ons and to be, well read in Histories. with diuerse and sundry men, must as variously as warily beare and behaue himselfe with them all: which he may easily do if he be well acquainted with their qualities and conditions; but especially if he be wel seene in Histories, out of which he shall learne and discerne, that the Genius and disposition of the Spaniard is different to the nature and inclination of the Italian, the Italians to the French, and the French to the Germaines, and thence may the wise and politicke Courtier see and perceiue their variety and diuersitie. But what I now admonish and aduise
thee of, I wish may be laid vp and kept safely in the most secret closet of thy heart and memory, namely, that there are a most pestiferous kind of Courtiers, who for filthie Lucre's sake, will auouch and confirme falshold for truth, who will prayse any thing which they haue by relation or report, either from the Prince, or Common people, whither it be honest or dishonest, yea, and which on the other side will with the Prince or people vilipend and dis∣praise any thing whatsoeuer, be it nere so commendable, changing like Polypus not their superficies or outward collour, but euen altering their mind and vnderstanding with the change and mutation of their places of aboade. Certainly such Courtiers as these, do neuer take any care to keepe a pure or vnspotted conscience to God, nor a good report toward their neighbours. But let vs consider both Kings, Princes, & courtiers, yea al men both publike and priuate whatsoeuer, that there is aboue and about vs, an eare to heare, an eye to see, and a Booke wherein all our words and deedes are writ and recorded: and that therefore in whatsoeuer kind and condition of life we liue we especially choose and make choyce of pietie and in∣teglitie, as our chiefe guides therein, and let vs be most cautelous and carefull that when we labour by all means to gaine the grace and fauour of our earthly Soueraigne, we thereby loose not the loue of our celestiall Sauiour. O let vs marke and remember this, that the conscience being maculate, and contaminated with sin and impietie begets a worme, which will gnaw there eternally: but contrariwise, that the conscience which is beautifull, spe∣cious, and free from grosse enormities, doth wonderful∣ly conserue, nourish, and cherish in vs the speciall grace and fauour of the Almightie.
Whiles I aduise and admonish these things, me thinks those vnconscionable, vntutred, and vnlearned Cour∣tiers, and such as are ignorant of this humaine condition, may and that most iustly listen to me, who to the end they may intercept and stop vp the way from better and more learned men than themselues, by cunning craft and subtill stratagems doe imagine mischiefe and destruction, yea, and as much as in them lies, doe presse and oppresse men, most worthie eternall laud and memorie. For, there is nothing doubtlesse more vsuall and customary in the Court, than with malice, lies, & calumniations, to curbe, keepe vnder, and ensnare, most excellent and eminent men, yea, such as haue marueilously well deserued of the Common wealth; by whom (alas) too often, and there∣fore the more lamentable, euen the good, discreet, and wise Prince himselfe is by them sold for gold and gaine. Furthermore, vnlesse I be much deceiued, I haue no∣tedDifference be∣tweene a Courtier and a Souldier. & obserued this difference betweene a Souldier and a Courtier, namely, that the Souldier for the most part vseth plainely and apparently, to expresse and exercise his hatred & displeasure, and to speake that with his tongue which he intends in his heart: but contrariwise, the Cour∣tier (I meane the slie, subtill, and deceiueable Courtier) will cogge, counterfeit, couzen, and dissemble his hatred if time and occasion doe giue him leaue: wherefore such as these in time of peace, and in a calme and quiet estate and condition of things, may easily supplant & ouer∣throw the plaine and vnarmed Souldier. Moreouer, let the Courtier remember this one thing, to wit, that he, very  and carefully carry himselfe, as well against iniuries alreadie receiued as against those which are offered, and that he keepe and protect himselfe
safe and secure from them both: Let the Courtier alsoOf giuing Councel in doubtfull matters. know that to be able to giue councell in vncertaine and doubtfull affaires doth purchase the fauour and affection of others; which doubtfull businesses if they be so anx∣ious and intricate that thou canst not deliuer thine opini∣on of them, without manifest danger and detriment, than tis farre better and more safe to confesse thy wants, and honestly and soberly to excuse the same, than either to plunge thy selfe into error or them into pernitious danger. Let the discreet Courtier also speake of his PrinceHow to carry himselfe to∣wards his Prince being absent. when he is absent as though he where present; wouldst thou know the reason? with patience heare it, and I shall willingly shew it. Assuredly this is vndenyable, that al∣most in euery Court, Enuy and Auarice, doe stand vp in a corner behind the painted cloth, but flattery, and Ambition will confront and out face thee, let the Cour∣tier therefore I say be aduisedly vigilant, and that I may againe speake with Homer as formerly, a fronte & a tergo, that is, watch on all sides, For such will seeme in shew to be thy freinds, who indeed are nothing lesse, who artifi∣cially and enuiously will coine and forge new termes & quaint phrases, thereby to induce thee to say somewhat touching thy Prince, all this while aiming and leuelling at no other marke, than that thou maist be induced either to make some ill report of him, or to intrap thee by some craftie or captious apprehension of thy speeches, where∣in thou maist seeme to offend him absent, whereof had himselfe bin present to heare, he neuer had made any ill construction. Wherefore let the Courtier be of Poly∣pus mind, to take vpon him diuers conditions and dispo∣sations, seuerall shapes, and shewes as time and place
shall repuire, yet neuer digressing from equitie and honestie. Againe, let the maiesty, dignity and authority of thy Prince, be alwaies so reuerently had in remembrance by thee, that euen being absent thou so behaue thy selfe to∣wards him, as if he were present, and suffer not thy tongue at any time to let slip the least sillable, which may be either disgracefull to him or preiudiciall to thy selfe. Modesty in an other kind of life doth excellently sea∣sonOf modesty or Bashfull∣nesse. & set forth virtue, but in Court to be bashfull, & not tocarry himselfe boldly (as if he came of a base or meane parentage) is most distastefull and disgracefull in the Court, yet let the Courtier then take heed that he besot not himselfe with ouer much modesty, which the Ethicks do not improperly or imprudently call Frigiditie or coldnesse of courage, pusilanimity or faint heartednesse, for he which thus vndiscreetly withdrawes or pulls him∣selfe backe, being neuer called to the execution of im∣portant affaires, nor in any notable or excellent emploi∣ment assistant or seruiceable to his Prince, shall neuer be capable of promotion or preferrement. Let the Courtier likewise wisely auoide to much shamefastnesse, that is, such an excesse or extremitie therein as comes most neere to rusticitie and sottishnesse, whereby we can scarsely do almost any thing but that we blush and seeme to be a sha∣med thereat, notwithstanding that the thing which we doe be honest and laudable. Certainely this disposition or motion of the mind, is a silly seruant to regall or ma∣iesticall gouernment, and surely if euer this affection or disposition be to be put away, tis as well heere in the Court, as in the Martiall-Camp.
Certainely that Courtier shalbe esteemed truly noble and renowned amongst the most eminent and illustrious, who in all the actions, and offices of his life shewes him∣selfe immoueable, constant, a contemner of riches, a firme keeper and maintainer of what is iust and honest, and which can with a constant & couragious spirit, passe by and beare patiently the vniust menaces, taunts, and threatnings of any what ere they be; The Courtier which thus behaues and carries himselfe, and may peraduen∣ture at one time or other, incurre the displeasure of his Prince and be inuironed and hedged about with the de∣ceipt and subtilty of his enuious enimies, yet let him still by all meanes entertaine a good hope and honest cogita∣tions of his Prince; for it may so come to passe that he who to day was incensed with anger against thee, may to¦morrow be reconciled to thee; and to this purpose let the notable examples of Mordochai and Haman, of Ioseph, Dauid, Daniell, and many such like, moue and admo∣nish thee heerein. It is almost vnvtterable, how much, a good and iustOf a cleare Conscience. cause, that is, a cleare conscience may preuaile. Listen vn∣to and learne this (kind Courtier) I advise thee that in euery estate and condition of life thou make vse of that rule which was prescribed by that wise and witty Poet. Sirecte facies, hic murus a-heneus esto, Nil conscire sibi nulla pallefeere culpa. To do well, is a wall of Brasse within, Aguiltlesse heart, not blam'd, or sham'd with sinne. A good conscience is indeed likened to a brasen Wall,
for, Bias that famous Philosopher, being asked by one, Quid esset in vita metu expers, what it was that could be ab∣solutely free from feare in this life, made answere that, it was a good conscience. Wherefore let a man haue euer a reputation or report, and a cleare conscience, as it were two strong wals of Brasse, to opugne & oppose all the ca∣lumniations, contumelies, and detractions of his malig∣nant enimies, yea I adde this also that a man that is faith∣fully conscious of his owne innocence, should not be mo∣ued or molested with vniust slanders or backbiting: nor should he thinke it a matter of more import and conse∣quence to heare himselfe ill spoken of by another, than to beare in himselfe the testimony of his owne integrity and vprightnesse. And let not only Courtiers but euen all men of whatsoeuer place and condition of life, as well Peeres as Pesants, Fathers as Children, as well the rich as the Poore, haue recourse to this hauen of happinesse, and fly to this Sanctuary for sauegard. Finallie who soe∣uer intendeth wisely and discreetly, to manage and or∣der his life either in Publike affaires. —Petite hinc iuuenes{que} senes{que}, Finem animo certum, miseris{que} viatica Canis. Let him what ere he be or young or old, Make this prouision, hereon take fast hold. But I stray to farre, therefore I come to the matter; let not the wise and vnderstanding Courtier be too vrgent, or instant for the vndertaking of such ambiguous rigid orTo take heed what busi∣nesses he vndertakes. intricate matters, which he knowes or feares may proue distastefull and contrary to the desire and expectation of
his Prince, notwithstanding that he can yeild some rea∣sons and probabillities for the same, but let him rather either vtterly be silent, or at least deale therein very spa∣ringly and indifferently. And to this purpose let him learne in obscure anxious and doubtfull businesses to ex∣presse a more benigne dulcide and gentle opinion, and (all rigor being remoued and set a part) let him so farre forth as the thing it selfe will admit, worke and win his Prince to the most soft and smooth sence or significati∣on thereof, especially if he himselfe be voluntarily incli∣ned there vnto. Now let the Courtier know and vnderstand this to beThe Court neuer emptie of falshearted∣nesse. most true, which hath bin else where formerly touched, that Courts are neuer empty of fained frindship and se∣cret snares and subtilties, which doe for the most part lurke and maske themselues either in the simulation of Courteous offices, or in some bond of incroching famili∣aritie and acquaintance; but be very watchfull to be∣ware of these ensnaring inuolutions entrapping turnings and windings, & of these perilous and pernitious Rocks: For truly heer's need not only of wisedome, but euen of good lucke as I may so say, and a fortunate estate and condition. In the interim if any fortifications or protections, mayMunition a∣gainst false∣heartednesse. sheild succor or desend thee, goe forward to arme and fortifie thy selfe with this munition, and excellent furni∣ture heere following, first enrich thy mind with know∣ledge, variety of matter and languages, but especially be expert in histories, a skilfull Lawyer, and a wise polititi∣an▪ furnished with solid counsell and a discreet and sweet vtterance of speech, as also an exquisite, and excellent penman, be courteous of speech. graue in thy stile, rarely
garnished with the liberall Sciencs, neat in apparell and a bountifull house keeper. Assuredly, that Courtier which hath furnisht himselfe with these instruments and orna∣ments, if he atchieue not hereby the amitie and affection of the most, yet may he certainely auoid the slie collou∣rable and counterfeit snares, and trecherie of many; and with much prayse and commendation to himselfe wisely and iustly delude his enemie. The Courtier also being desirous to free and cleareOf gifts or Presents. himselfe, from the least occasions of offence by him gi∣uen, may make the way cleere to him by giuing gifts and presents, and indeede the olde Prouerbe testifies this to be true, which sayth, Muneribus vel Dij capiuntur, That euen the Gods are won by gifts. And Seneca relating the A∣pothegne, or wittie saying of a certaine Philosopher sayth thus, Accipere omnium est dulcissimum, To take or receiue is the sweetest thing of all. Nor are these things repugnant or contradictory to those afore specified. And this is in∣deed most certaine, that the sores & swellings of a Court▪ must of necessitie be mollified and softned with those like poultesies, and healing plaisters, wherby we may asswage and mitigate the wicked and peruerse qualities and con∣ditions of men, and the most vicious and pernicious cu∣stomes and practises of this our Age. Wherein as the Po∣et testifies; Munera crede mihi placant homines{que} Deos{que} Placatur donis Iupiter ipse datis. Men are by gifts beguild, the Gods appeas'd, Yea Iupiter himselfe by gifts is pleas'd.
of Plat is worthy remembrance. Cum Diis flectu veerados munera reges. The Gods, the greatest King, Loues him which gifts doth bring. Wherefore let the Courtier vse sometime this benefi∣cence and liberalitie, especially towards those whom he knowes he hath offended▪ and whom he is perswaded his riches and possessions may very much resist and with∣stand, questionlesse, if there be any hammar or wedge wherewith to pierce, penetrate, or cleane in sunder the most obdurate & stubborne heart of man, tis this, name∣ly▪ Gifts or Rewards. Yet here againe it is not idle, but worth the questioning, whither the Courtier himselfe may also receiue gifts againe, we may answere with An∣ the Emperour, Ne{que} omnia, neque quou is tempore,Obserue this. ne{que} ab omnibus, Neither may he take all things, nor at all times, nor from all men▪ but each of these discreetly and wise∣ly; For, as in all other matters, two extreames are to be a∣uoided, namely, Excesse and Defect, euen so it is here, for the extremitie of defect, is, not to receiue ought from any man, which were very inhumaine and vnciuill; and the extremitie of excesse, is, alwayes to receiue all what∣soeuer is proffred, which is most vile and auaritious. Those Courtiers are to be highly commended, who receiue small rewards, and that very sparingly from menOf abusiue bribery. of meane estate or condition, especially for the propaga∣tion and necessary execution of equine and Iustice, but let them rather with a free heart, and a gratefull mind, ac∣cept of what is, for that cause, conferd vpon them by their
Prince himselfe: But those Courtiers are contrariwise most worthy detestation & bitter execration, which doe sell Iustice and Truth for gold and gaine. Let the Cour∣tier therefore thinke vpon that, which that most wise O∣tatour and Philosopher Cicero makes mention of in the second Booke of his Offices. Fundamentum perpetuae com∣mendation is & famae est Iustitia, sine qua nihil potest, esse lau∣dabile. The Basis or Foundation of eternall Fame and Com∣mendations is Iustice, without which nothing can by any meanes, be prayse worthy. Excellently also said that Noble Historian. Ius aiunt nimis saepe a veritate laborare, extingui unquam. Tis sayd, that Equitie is often forced from Veritie, yet it can neuer be vtterly extinguisht or put out. Let not therefore any gaine, any gifts, though neuer so sweete, neuer so sumptuous, no pleasant enticements or induce∣ments of honour, fauour or affection, moue the honest and conscionable couttier from the loue and true delight of Iustice and equitie. Let young men also, and such as are but newly initia∣tedNot to admit too young men, too soon into offices in a Court. Courtiers, be disposed of in the more inferiour places of office or employment; Nor is it indeed fit that any one should be mounted vp to the high steps of dignitie, except he haue by vertue, fidelitie and industry ascended the same. For, this we doe firmely hold, and constantly conclude, that Arcadius and Honorius were of an honest and vpright opinion, who sayd, that whosoeuer did rise to dignitie and honour, should not by any meanes ob∣taine it by Ambition, but by much labour and industrious acquisition. Meere drones therefore are those Courtiers, yea, dry Spunges, and blood-suching Hore-leaches, who neither being decked with any eminent vertue, nor ador∣ned with the beautifull flourish of elegant Learning, no,
not decorated with any pleasant delicacie, or delightful∣nesse of manners and humanitie, yet for all this doe inter∣cept, forestall, and incroach into those dignities and pre∣ferments those riches and commodities, which by due desert and merit belong and most truly appertaine to o∣thers, more worthy and more learned than they. Againe, let not any Courtier of whatsoeuer conditionOf proud bragging or ostentation. order, and ranke shew himselfe a vaine glorious Bragga∣dchi, in the presence of his Prince; and if he know that by any exquisite seemelinesse, dexteritie, grace, or fauour, he be excellent, preualent, and powerfull, yet let him nor arrogate the same to his owne singularitie, but wholly a∣scribe all things to his Princes fauour, bounty, and benig∣nity, as hauing receiued them from him, and rendring due thankes to him for the same. For it may so come to passe, that thy Prince for thy ambition and vaine-glori∣ous ostentation, may say to a stranger, Come vp hither, but to the Thrasonicall, and fondly insulting Courtier, Goe downe lower, and learne to humble thy selfe. Now whither of these two be the better and most plea∣sing speech, let the wise and vnderstanding Courtier iudge and heedfully consider. Doubtlesse these things cannot be too much moued, nor admonished in vaine, because as Martiall sayth, Arduares hec est opibus non tradere meres, Et cùmtot Croesos viceris esse Numam. Rich  can brdly hide their qualities, And few be thriftie, when to wealth they rise. Thinke vpon, yea, and in time ruminate and recogi∣tate
that of the most wise King Solamon. Pro. 29. Super∣bum sequitur humilitas, & humilem spiritu suscipiet gloria. A mans pride shall bring him low, but honour shall vphold the humble in Spirit. Intimating thereby, that the Lord will cast downe and punish Pride, but that he will magnifie and exalt the humble and meeke. Furthermore, it is most decent and befitting the wiseOf drunken∣nesse or sur∣feiting. Courtier or Counsellour, especially to abstaine from the immoderate, or rather beastlike abuse of wine; because where drunkennesse raignes, there assuredly can no secret be kept secret: excellent indeed is that Greeke and Latine sentence, and worthy here to be remembred, Quod in cor∣de sobrij, id in lingua ebrij, That which is in the heart of a so∣ber man, is in the tongue of a Drunkard. I will not here re∣cite the large description which Horace makes of the ef∣fects of Drunkennesse, but yet I cannot omit nor let passe the Distich, which Virgill hath to this purpose in his Epi∣grams, Vina sitim sedent; natis Venus alma creandis: Sed fines horum transilijsse nocet. For procreations sake, and Thirsts iust vse Drinke Wine; but more ingenders grosse abuse. Touching this also Ouid writes thus. Aut nulla ebrietas aut tanta sit, vt tibi curas Eripiat, si qua est inter vtrum{que} nocet. Drinke not too much; or if so, be it such As onely cheeres the heart, for, more hurts much. Let the Courtier therefore in this respect manage or
demeane himselfe according to the direct rules of rea∣son, and let him alwaies containe himselfe within the bounds of modest sobriety, and firmely keepe and con∣serue this wholesome and healthfull forme and demea∣nour of his life and conuersation, that he do not any o∣therwise cocker or pamper his body than onely is suffi∣cient to the conseruation of the health & strength therof. Let his meate onely satisfie hunger, and his drinke only quench his thirst. But I shoote beyond the marke, therefore I returne toOf Petitions. the matter. It is a very customary and vsuall thing in Courtiers to delay and put of the answering of petitions, from day to day, And wee read that this was the practise of Roboam, who vsed to say to his sutors and petitioners Ite vs{que} in tertium diem & reuertimini ad me, Depart till three dayes hence, and then come againe to mee. Hee doubt∣lesse which takes notice of this delay and procrastination and yet persists to petition to such a one, doth for the most part, but loose Operam & oleum (as the Prouerbe is) both his cost and his care. Let that Courtier therefore which is wise, in due time desist from such fruitlesse exhi∣biting of petitions, and so vnprofitably to solicite and moue them with helpelesse importunity. Dost thou pro∣ceed to petition and intreat? what canst thou expect or hope to obtaine? assuredly nothing, but either no answer, or, at the most, a harsh and vnsauoury answer, which in∣deed is most commonly held in Courts, to bee a fit and sufficient answer to poore mens petitions. Furthermore, like as many men are such blabs and bablers that euen those things which haue long time ly∣en hid and vndiscouered, yet they will at one time or o∣ther broach, and spread them abroad, as things most fresh
and newly reuiued so let not the honest and discreet Courtier presently publish what he hath conceiued in his heart, but then also let him very aduisedly watch and ex∣pect a conuenient time and an occasion most fit for his▪ intended purpose. Moreouer, The Courtier which hath now spent muchThe reward of many Cour¦tiers. time, made a large progresse in the Court and hath there suffered and set lightly by many molestations, yea much toyle and trauell, let him not much admire or wonder that hee hath with a courage & immoueable mind done well therein; because the reward and remuneration of Courtiers labors is, for the most part. Sapere & paenitere, to grow wise and repent what they haue done. He therfore which writ these witty and true verses, was doubtlesse sensible of the truth of them by experimentall proofe. Contrini misere miser tot annos, Gustando mala, gratias agendo, Sperando, ingenu{que} seruiendo Tantorum mihi premium laborum, Sunt sapere at{que} pnitere. I silly wretch most wretchedly haue spent, Much time at Court, in tasting euils many In thankfullnesse, in hope but small content, Yet yeilding due obseruance vnto any. And now, for all my labours, what's the Prize? But late repentance, and to grow more wise. Certainely tis most miserable and lamentable, which I heerein write and yet ost true notable and too well knowne. For how many haue there at all times bin, are
there  there bee, whose condition iumpsIngrati e oft times in the Court.  with th that where as they haue bin excellent ; and haue most worthily deserued of their common-weale; yet for their notable and meritorious actions, haue vndergone most disgracefull and immeri∣ted requitals: Let vs consider and call to mind, in what reputation liued Parmenio with Alexander, Eusenides with Ptolomie the King; Pannonianus with Alcimenides, Aratus Sigonius with Phillip of Macedon? let vs also re∣member what a most illustrious and renowned Captaine and commander was Aetius, in grace and greatnesse of authority in the dayes of the Emperor Valetinian; nor may I heere omit that famous Warrier, and most valiant Commander, Bellisarius, against whome alas what other cause of so great, crueltie could Iustinian euer find out, saue only meere surmises and vniustly suggested suspiti∣ons, who heerevpon (after the Vandalls and Persians were by him discomfited and ouerthrowne) being dis∣gracefully degraded from all his honour and dignity his eies lamentably put out, was thus forced to get his li∣uing, by begging on the high way, by many other exam∣ples I could amplifie, and exemplifie this truth, which for diuers iust cses I hould sit in silence to be preter∣mitted, as being very vnwilling to giue offence, by too largely describing the inconstancy of a courtly condi∣tion and fortune, yet that I may not seeme also too much to sooth and dissemble with thee (kind Courtier) but to deale plainly and faithfully, I will heare onely adde that most worthy sentence of Plutarh, in the life of Aratus, which indeed I hould most worthy due respect, credit e∣ternall memorie & obseruation amongst all great Peeres and flourishing potentaes whatsoeuer. Amicitiae Regum
feruentes sunt arepentine, & ardore quodam amoris sabitò incendtur; sed labefactari expugnari{que} facile possunt, & ve∣luti ventis inuidiae at{que} flatibus calumniae assidue agitantur. The friendship & affectiō of Kings, is for the time, very hot & hasty, & they are as it were inflamed with a certain repentine and suddaine heate of Loue: but soone alas and very easily may it be extinguished and quite quenched, and themselues be dayly driuen or blowne to and fro, with the winds of enuie and blasts of backbiting emulatours. Wherefore (kind Courtier) since the case stands thus with thee, and that Solamon in his Prouerbes seemes to hit the same Wight, when he sayth, Cùm sedes vt Comedas, cum potente, sis cautus & ponas cultrum inguttere tuo, vt serues animam tuam. When thou sittest downe to eate with a ruler or mightie man, consider diligently what is before thee, and put a knife to thy throat, that thou maist saue thine owne life. With very great reason, sayth the same King also, Iram Regis nuncium esse mortis, That the wrath of a King is the messenger of Death. Yet notwithstanding all this cour∣teous Courtier, I aduise thee, circumspectly and warily to wade through all these, with a good and a gratious hope, and doe not (at any time) so far distrust thine owne vertuous endowments, and immaculate conscience, but that notwithstanding, some aduerse & crosse times, thou mayst easily ouercome the danger-obuious familaritie and affection of a Prince, especially, if thou happily happen to liue with a Prince that is pious, prudent, vertuous, and a louer of honestie. Neither be thou herein too low deiected with feare and doubt, but that although through defect and want of iudgement, or by erronious vnaduisednesse, thou mayst haue both sayed and done somewhat contrary to the
will and pleasure of the Prince: and he therefore preuen∣ting thy hope & determination, may let loose the seines of his power, and authoritie to take reuenge vpon thee: yet for all this it may so come to passe, that he may re∣turne to himselfe be better , and in the end, submit himselfe to the rule of Gods word, to iustice, equitie, and reason, especially I say if he be a Christian Prince, but as touching those which haue reiected and cast from them the sweet and easie yoke of Christ Iesus, which doe all by this rule; Sic volo sic iubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas. Thus will I haue it, this is my command, My lust is iust, my will for law shall stand. But as they (I say) haue nothing to doe with Christ,Helpefulnesse to others re∣quired in a wise Courtier. so we haue nothing to say to them. Here also I aduisedly exhort the wise Courtier, that if God haue giuen vnto him more wisedome, dignitie, authoritie, vertue, and such like excellent endowments, than to many others, that he then consider with himselfe, that he is so much the more obliged and bound to be helpefull and assistant to his neighbour, yea, and that both God and nature, yea, all wise men doe consent herein, that it is very behoofefull and befitting all men, to be profitably helpfull one to a∣nother. Let not any Courtier therefore in this respect, exalt and magnifie himselfe, or set vp the plumes of his pride aboue others, but let him in the feare of the Lord, make a modest and right vse of Gods gifts, namely, that by how much he excels others, and is more excellent and eminent than they in the exquisite ornaments of wit, or
some other singular vertue, so much the more lowly let him prize and esteeme himselfe, being alwayes mindfull hereof, that to whom much is giuen, of him will the great Master and Prince of heauen, exact and require much againe. Let the Courtier therefore be very modest, gentle, and beneficiall to others, or apt to pleasure and doe good to all men; for, herein shall he indeed most neerely imitate God himselfe. But since the Courtier (according to the opinion of the common people) liues a soft, sumptuous, and deli∣cate life, and is continually conuersant and exercised a∣bout some noble subiect or other; namely, in doing ser∣uice to his Prince; Who is he, that can truely terme that man a good Courtier, in whom the vertues and endow∣ments, as well of the body as of the mind, doe not duely concurre, namely, a desire to be in action and employ∣ment, furnisht with noble thoughts, excellent qualities and conditions, heroicke exployts, and of a speech well seasoned and tempered with wit and facetious pleasant∣nesse? Assuredly let him which perchance is either igno∣rant hereof, or vnfurnisht herewith know and vnderstand thus much from me, that tis not enough for a man to swell and puffe himselfe vp with pride▪ of some vaine and bare name of a Courtier, or with the Image and stocke of honourable progenitours, yea, or with the title and in∣deed tittle of Nobilitie, or fleeting dignitie, and finally, that I may speake with Grispus the Historian; To seeme, but not to be the same he makes shew of; But this rather I say is the thing which is especially required, that he which de∣sires to be honoured and adorned either by the Court, or any other estate or condition of life, let him first adorne and beautifie it in himselfe. But neuer shall he acquire or
attaine  (I meane with due desert) this ornament, this excellencie, if he addict and deuote himselfe to ignoble and base loath and idlenesse, to voluptuousnesse, vaine and vnfruitfull pleasures, to toyes and fooleries, yea, and if he shew himselfe an vnprofitable burthen to the earth he liues on, and Catterpiller-like liues, onely to deuoure and destroy the fruits thereof; but if he be beautified, a∣dornd, and decorated with those excellent parts aboue specified. Furthermore, let not a Courtier striue beyond measureOf prayse. to extoll and magnifie his Prince, with glorious prayses, and glosing phrases; for, as wise men will certainely be offended, if thou too bitterly and sharpely taunt and re∣prehend them: so questionlesse, will truly wise men take it in exceeding ill part to be too extreamly & vehement∣ly commended. Prayse all things therefore sparingly, indifferently, & in due season, for as it is in other things, so here also to obserue  a decorum, is alwayes very profitable, and prayse worthy. Now euen as a Physician in healing a sicknesse, and in curing a maladie or diseased member hath a speciall care, that whiles he applies the plaister or medicine to one member, he hurt not the other: euen so let the Courtier or courtly counsellour so aduise his Prince, that he would so prouidently and prudently prouide, and take care for his Common wealth, as that in protecting the one part thereof, he destroy not the other, especially by exacti∣ons of moneys, and heauie taxations. Let him also put his Prince in mind of that of Tiberius, if at any time a fitAn excellent obseruation. and opportune occasion happen, to wit, Boni esse pastoris tondere pecus non deglubere, That it is the propertie of a good Shepheard, to take his Sheepes fleece, but not to flea their skin
ouer their eares. So likewise, when he sees any Collectours of moneys, too eagerly or oppressiuely exacting and ex∣tracting from others; let him then imitate Alexander the Great, who being mou'd and vrg'd by some about him, that he might very well impose larger mulcts, tributes, and subsidies vpon his Citties, thus answered, Olitorem odi, qui radicitus herbas excidat. I hate that Gardiner, whichA Princely saying. puls vp the herbes by the rootes. Assuredly it was a most pious, Prince-like, and renowned saying, yea, it was a speech most befitting so regall and royall a Prince as him∣selfe was. For, what can be more shamefull and absurd in a Prince, or any other great Peere, than with Vespatian to desire Gaine, yea, though it were out of foule and fil∣thy stale or vrine? Moreouer, it is a foule shame for a Courtier to be ig∣norantWhat a cour∣tier must not be ignorant of. of, and vnacquainted with the state, condition, and potencie of Princes, the Science and knowledge of Counsellours, the originall of Families, and especially, all the true tokens and badges of honour, and such like, of those Regions, Kingdomes, or Countries wherein per∣aduenture vpon his Princes command, he is to liue, and to execute any honourable Embassages. Againe, it is ve∣ry pertinent to the knowledge of a prudent courtier, that he vnderstand and know, how many Castles, offices of e∣minencie, Woods, Ponds, and such like, are belonging to his Prince, what, and how many Souldiers they traine vp in military discipline, how many and how well fortifi∣ed Citties, as also how many worthie men, who haue bin educated in the most famous Academies of Europe, and are exquisitely instructed in all the Sciences. Truely it is vnspeakeable to declare, what especiall meanes of honor and aduancement it is for the Courtier to be throughly
insighted and experienced in these thing?; and  disgrace and discredit it  him to  and dumbe, when he is questioned concerning all  of these. Now the chiefe and especiall meanes to know these▪ things very perfectly, is out of Histories, and Antiqui∣ties, nor am I able indeed sufficiently to exhort, stiv,Antiquities. and stimulate the Courtier, to the most serious, sedulous, and constant reading of them. For, out of this ouhtaine, especially out of the Store-house of the sacred Scrip∣tures, Courtiers may collect and draw forth this know∣ledge;Sacred Scrip∣tures. that, it is not sufficient onely to know what is iust and right, but that they must of necessitie doe the same.Note this. For so sayes the Text of holy writ, Nequequam sufficit Dei voluntatem  nisi illum ipso fact  opere praeste∣mus. It is not enough onely to know the will of God vnlesse indeed and action we performe the same. And to this pur∣pose I thought it worth my labour, to adde this Distich of an vncertaine Author, most worthie due obseruation of all good men. Quid inat innumeros scire at{que}  casus Si fugienda facis, & facienda fugis. What proffits it to read much, much to know, If Badnesse thou embrace, Goodnesse for-goe. Furthermore, let the Courtier contemne and abstaine from all lying, cheating, simulation, and dissimulation, let him here listen vnto that most graue and godly Father Saint Augustine, giuing him honest and religious coun∣sell,A good note. Quiescat, mi bomo lingus, & vit interroga, My friend
let thy tongue be silent, and be carefull to examine thy life. And why? because indeede, it is more assuredly knowne and discerned what a man is by his fruits, that is, by his workes then by his wordes. That Courtier (which the tearme of his aboade inNot to de∣pend wholy on princes. this this transitory and fraile Court on earth, being ter∣minated and expired) doth looke and long for a place in that perpetuall Palace in heauen, after that he hath seene obserued and collected both out of sacred and profaine writings, what soeuer the wit of man is capable of and a∣ble to comprehend, yet let him call to minde that of the Psalmist, and sweet Singer of Israell and with him conclude that. Tutius est, praestat{que} Deo considere soli, Quam se principibus credere mille viris, Tis better farre to trust in God alone Than in a thousand Kings in regall Throne. And againe. Qui Domino fidit, felici nanigat vnda Fidere Principibus, ventus & auraleuis. He which on God depends, sayles with best winde; For, Princes blasts of loue, proue most vnkind. Now before I put a period and full conclusion to this my labour and little treatise, I must truly tell thee (kind Courtier) this one thing, namely that the Court makes not a man better, but men rather may make the Court it selfe better, whereby I would intimate thus much, that
tis not enough to liue in Court, to goe to bed at mid∣night▪Marke this. to rise the next morning at ten a clocke, and then what with apparelling himselfe, with frizling and curling his haire with his curling pin, with poudring and turning vp the fame, this way and that way, about his eares, con∣tinuing thus in his bed chamber, euen till noone at least, and then to spend the rest of the day in feasting iesting▪ and many such like toyes and triuiall exercises and prac∣tises; assuredly I say (and let euery Courtier beleeue me) that he which is onely occupied and busied in cropping these roses, shall vndoubtedly finde then but pricking thornes on these trees, shall finde nothing but fruitlesse leaues; shall find these vines both wilde and barren, in these garners shall find nothing but chaffe; and finally, in these treasuries, shall be possest of nothing but meere counterfeit mettle. The Courtier (I say) which adheres, cleaues, and is inclined to these things aboue mentioned, cannot rightly vndertake, excogitate, doe, or begin to doe any thing, much lesse perfectly finish or effect the same; he also which cleares not himselfe of these things, shall finde many defects in himselfe, and such, as that, if hee mend not his manners, will giue him iust cause to weepe and lament. Let not that Courtier therefore thinke himselfe a hap∣pie and fortunate man, which in the Court hath power to liue as he lists. For if Courtiers were (which I would to the Lord they were) the most absolute happy and perfect of all men, then assuredly, they which would not pre∣sently professe, and embrace a Courtiers life, might wan∣der (as the saying is) all the world ouer▪ since we all know that there is no time of a mans life▪ that can be better spent than that which is spent, and bestowed in the sweete fel∣lowship
of wise and learned men, yea, of such as are fa∣mous for their wisedome, and excellent parts, and em∣ployments. Therefore that I may once for all (more per∣spicuously) vnfold and lay open my full scope, meaning, and intention herein, this I say is the thing which I espe∣cially ayme at, to admonish thee (kind Courtier) name∣ly, that since euen Courts also haue their brambles, bry∣ers, and thistles, no man should therefore put too much confidence and hope in himselfe, notwithstanding all the glittering and glorious shew and resplendent lustre of a Courtly life, and so (by that means) alienate and estrange himselfe from his God; but that he should alwaies beare in remembrance, how many at all times in Kings Courts haue beene pressed, yea, with lyes, detractions, and enuy oppressed, and that much sorrow is sheltred and hid vn∣der that glorious misery; and indeed who can terme it o∣therwise than a glorious misery, when a man shall so liue, & in such a place, where (for the most part) he is still sub∣iect either to the danger of other mens malice and hatredThese are not onely the con∣ditions of Courtiers, but of this age in generall. or else himselfe to haue others in hatred and detestation; where a man in outward shew of reuerence, with cap and knee makes bare his head to him; whose head (in his heart) he desires, were smitten off; Others againe to be seene to bow themselues low, and euen make a legge to him, in the working of whose destruction, they could be better content to breake their leg. Againe, is it not a thing much to be lamented, to see men daily to frequent each others company, to laugh and reioyce together; and yet all this while to foster within their brests most cruell and capitall enmitie and hatred each against other▪ Is it not intollerable, yea, in∣credible dissimulation, that a man should i his heart bid
a mischife goe with him, to whom he outwardly alneth much worship and reuerence. O misery (I say not now) glorious, but most grosse and grious, yea, most vnbefit∣t an  and generous Noble-man. These things (kind Courtier) are most true, nor yet doe I flie from the iudgement and censure, which I know you your selues may vrge and inferre herein. But this we must hold and be assured of, as an infallible truth, that nei∣ther the Courtier nor any what so  he be, may well leaue of to complaine of himselfe, vntill such  as  doth begin to amend himselfe; For, certainely as it is a great folly, and meere madnesse, Frm, qui intra  delitescit, extra andem  & perfequl, Without  to  pursue the Thft, which , and is close hid i  of the house: so it is a manifest token of great want of experience in vs, that when we see our selues  ult, we blush not, nor are a iot asham'd to lay it vpon others, and to iustifie our selues. To ke it appeare yet more plaine by example▪ howEuery man is the cause of his owne misery. comes it to passe, that we so trauaile vp and downe, both at home and abroad, that we so pine, pinch, and punish our selues, that we so often breake our sleepe by rising vp early, and going late to bed, what necessitie vrgeth, or constraines s hereunto, but an insatiate desire to satisfie our un-bridled lusts? who I pray makes vs so proud, but euen our owne madnesse? Who is it that fetters our  in the gyues and shackles of enuie and malice, but our owne naturall defects? Who is it, that (as it were) en∣flames and kindles the fire of wrath and fury, in all our inward parts, but our owne impotence and impatiencie. In breefe, that I may abstract abreuia and epitomize the subiect and argument, of this whole treatise into the
narrow lists and limits of one line: Let the Courtier here∣of bee most wary and heedfull, that out of himselfe hee draw a rule to rectifie and gouerne his owne life, that hee bee content to taste the sower with the sweete; and in Court to expect as well, burthen-some blame and iniu∣rie; as beautifull fame and dignity, yea let him know & know assuredly, that he which enters into the Court, en∣ters into such a kind of life as comprehends much more labour and care, than ease and quietnesse. Finally, let him thus conclude, that our whole life doth ouerflow and abound with various, yea great and greuious cares, affaires and emploiments, from which that the Courtier may at last be set at liberty, let him ac∣cept and make vse of this my counsell, if at least which I hope it may proue honest and wholesome vnto him. When soeuer hee determines to bid farewell, and toWholesome admonition. for euery Courtier. take his Vltimum vale of the Court, let him be wholy ex∣ercised and emploied in pious readings, and diuine me∣ditations; with a constant and couragious minde, let him deride and laugh to scorne the vanities of this world, and send backe this newes to hope and fortune it selfe; and hauing once found the hauen of rest and quietnesse, let him with a free heart and a cheerefull voice say, Iuuem portum spes & fortuna valete, Nil mihi vbiscum est, ludite nunc alias. My hauen's found; Fortuen and Hope▪ adew; Mocke others now▪ for  haue done with you, And truly since it is so excessiue hard for any man to carry and demeane himselfe in euery kind of life so, as
that he  in any thing: therefore (kind Courti) recei these other most short remedies herein. First th be thou  of firmely assured that then thou hast found out wisedome, When thou dst truly lament thine owne euills past; dost wisele viliped all seeming good thingsSt. Barnard. presant, and dost hartily  and desire the best things to come. Also if thine affections and desires be truly setled and fixed them, where our head and heauenly King our Lord and Sauiour Christ Iesus, doth rule and raigne in blissefull eternity. If then (kind and courteous Cour∣tier) thou be of this mind and blessed resolution, thou shalt easily and truly vnderstand, that it is not the safest way, to rely and onely to trust to the world or any Prin∣ces palace. For, the world passeth away, and all the pleasures thereof, but he which doth the will of the Lord, hee shall en∣dure for euer. Be aduised then, o bee aduised (good Courtier) I exhort the, which shortly dost desire to re∣linquish and forsake this sickle▪ fraile, and impure Court on earth, and to be thence stated and transported in∣to the eternall most pure and perfect Court of Heauen. Hould fast this resolution▪  by wayes, obstacles, ob∣structions, and impediments; hinder or with hold thy progresse, and constant proceeding in this right rhode, & Kings high-way; nor let any thing reduce, or seduce thee, from that life to come, in which, is that day which admits no night and out lasts all eternity of time. Now that thou maist elect and make choice of a holy and hap∣py course of life, consider with thy selfe, What thou now art; whence and for what cause thou art, and then thou shalt find, that obliuion was our first originall, our middle being is labour, and our end is sorrow? And what are all these being knit and conioyn'd together, assuredly no∣thing
else than most apparent and manifest Errour. What needs many words, mans whole life is spent and past o∣uer, in hoping well and hauing ill. Now therefore (courte∣ous Courtier) here will I conclude with these three briefeThe conclu∣sion of all with three briefe notes. obseruations, which I desire thou wouldst alwayes keepe in perpetuall remembrance, and in Court alwayes beare about thee; namely, that in Heauen aboue, there is an Eare which ouer-heares thee; an Eye which ouer-sees thee; and a booke whereinto all thy words and deeds are most cu∣riously, and carefully written. THese are the things (thrice Noble and Renowned MAR∣QVESSE) which I haue humbly presumed, and thought good to deliuer and set forth in writing, touching the life of a Courtier, which I haue especially done for the honour of the Court of the most magnificent IAMES, King of great Bri∣taine, &c. Indeed I know and doe ingenuously agnize, that I haue omitted aboue a thousand things, which might worthily haue beene expressed, concerning the dignitie, honour, and grauitie of this argument; yet howsoeuer, hereof I am most confidently perswaded and assured, that I haue herein accom∣plisht and collected those things which may in some measure, delineate and display the life, manners, and demeanours, yea, the liuely image, similitude, and portrature of a Court and Courtier. And I hope, not altogether obscurely demonstrated to euery Courtier, what he is to follow and embrace, what to flie and vtterly contemne. And vnlesse I be most grossely and palpably deceiued, the Courtier, if he doe not vnkindly neg∣lect and reiect these rules, precepts, and prescriptions, but brings them to practicke proofe and triall, by daily custome and exercise; shall haue some matters obiected to the eyes of his vnderstanding, wherein, as in a mirrour or looking-glasse,
,  of all  intended  the Court of our most  and  KING, I here  deuote vowes, and  prayers▪ most heartily wishing and desiring that his Palace and Princely Familie, may euer be desolate, destitute, or distressed, but that he may alwayes haue, such, to loue him, & to  with him, as may euer be assistant to him; with their loyaltie, comfort, and good Counsell: Yea, that he may euer haue about him, such consiable Cadtrs, as Iethro aduised Moses his soe i  to ioy vnto him, in his counsels and consultations, namely, Men of approued in∣tegritie, wise, fearing God, speaking the truth, pure and vn∣corruptd. Such Courtiers and Counsellours I say doe I hear∣tily desire, may alwayes happily attend in our most gracious, and sacred Soueraigne, who will honestly preferre a Pub∣like▪ before a pri Good, who had rather religiously to enioy a meane estate, than to relinquish or forsake vertue and ho∣nestie, which are not inclined, nor addicted to lust and volup∣ts▪  and which can be content to put vp a priuate displeasure, but are most rdie prest to punish a publike iniu∣ry. And finally such  are not selfe-flaed, or affected with insolent  disloyaltie, and couetousnesse. Which that the great King of Kings, the eter∣nall Lord of Hsts, would graciously  to confirme and ra∣tifie, I hbly pray, and most hrtily desire. FINIS.
